A COMMENTARY UPON THE DIVINE REVELATION OF THE APOSTLE AND EVANGELIST JOHN.

BY DAVID PAREUS: Sometimes Professor of Divinity in the Universitie of
HEIDELBERG.

And specially some things upon the 20th Chapter are observed by the same
Author against the MILLENARIES.

decorative device

Translated out of the Latin into English, By ELIAS ARNOLD.

AMSTERDAM. Printed by C. P. ANNO. MDCXLIV.

To the Christian Reader:
IT is an usual saying, A good thing cannot be too common: the worth and
profitablenesse of this Book is well known of the learned every where: being
(and indeed deservedly) esteemed one of the best and choicest Commentaries,
that is now extant upon the Revelation. And if we consider the perilous times
wherein we are, I know no work more seasonable for our instruction and
comfort touching the present Commotions and uproares in the world. For here we
shall find, that it is necessary, that such things come to pass, to the end
the words of this Prophecy may be fulfilled: we have all need (as the Apostle
says) of patience: now what will more persuade us to be quiet, contented,
comforted, then to look into the Revelation of Jesus Christ, where we shall
find all the conflicts and combats of the Godly, against the Dragon, Beast, and
False-prophet most clearly set forth, and none of our sufferings in any way or
kind to be otherwise, then what was fore-appointed in the unchangeable decree
of God. Moreover here we have set down with the finger of God, the certain
event and issue of the whole war: namely Antichrists destruction, and the
glorious and happy victory of the Saints. A man of a weak and cowardly Spirit,
will cheerfully fight, if he know before hand that he shall surely overcome.
This assurance all true Believers have, that they shall be more then Conquerors
through him that loves them, and therefore they have cause enough to stand
fast, hold their own, fight the good fight of faith: seeing it is without
question, that they shall overcome in the blood of the Lamb: But of this I
need not here speak, considering how largely and sweetly this matter is
treated of in this Commentary.

It is not my purpose to speak any thing in the behalf of the Translator, or
in the praise of his work: least that in the Proverbs Chap. 27.14. should be
applied to me. Wherefore what is here done, I leave to the trial and judgment
of all sober and godly minded Readers. Only I must needs say that it would be
a singular benefit to our Nation, if there were more of Pareus his works
translated into our English tongue. And for ought I do perceive, the Translator
of this has some purpose so to do, if this (which is the first) do find a
fair and friendly acceptance. And I have no reason to think otherwise:
Considering how well Mr. Brightman on the Revelation is approved of: Now
howsoever I will not speak any thing in the least to his disparagement:
notwithstanding seeing Pareus was a later Writer, an Interpreter one among a
thousand, a man of an acute and deep judgment, and one that had his thoughts
and meditations on the work 30. years: in these and other respects the Reader
may well make account to meet here with many things, more for his satisfaction
then hitherto he has ever had: and that he may the sooner see with his own
eyes the truth of what I speak, I shall advise him in the first place
carefully to read Pareus his Preface: for it will much help him, to the better
understanding of the following Commentary.

And thus committing the work to the favorable acceptance of religious and
judicious minds, beseeching the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ to bless and
prosper it for his glory, and for the consolation and edification of all those
that seek his favor, and desire to fear his Holy Name, I rest

Thine in JESUS CHRIST. J. C.

THE AUTHORS ADVERTISEMENT TOUCHING THE Publishing of this COMMFNTARY.
I Had thought indeed never to have set forth this Commentary upon the
Revelation, long since expounded in the Academie in CLXXXVIII- Lectures, but to
have left the same unto my children for their proper use: and this for diverse
causes: especially finding that as yet I had not touched the height of the
mysteries, neither should easily satisfy others, having in many things not
satisfied my self. In the mean while I thought it requisite with all
diligence to search out the judgments of more learned Interpreters in the
harder matters: and not to neglect whatsoever might seem in the Commentaries of
ancient and modern Interpreters to conduce for the polishing of the work: as
not being ignorant of the admonition of Horace, (Membranis intus positis,
delere licebit,
Quod non edideris: nescit vox missa reverti.)
That a man may alter or blot out his private writings, which are not made
public: but the word that is out cannot be recalled. Notwithstanding it
happened of late (I know not by what providence) that at length I assented to
the publishing thereof, at the earnest request of friends: who judged it a
thing unfit, that the Church, (no weighty reason hindering the same) should any
longer be deprived of this treasure: be it whatsoever it be: persuading
themselves that by me something more would be published touching these
mysteries, then as yet was extant. And that the things yet hid, are perhaps of
that nature, which either God has reserved unto his own power, or are better
not to be known, then known by us: of which kind some things are, Enchir. cap.
17.
according to Austin.

They added that now there was special use to vindicate this Prophecy, it
being publicly depraved by new feigned Oracles and false Glosses, as if it did
establish Romish Idolatry, and Patronize Popish Tyranny, from which
notwithstanding it portendeth nothing but sad evils unto the Godly, and most
miserable calamities unto the Church, the which the Revelation sets forth by
lively colors, as it were the very Kingdom of Antichrist himself, under the
type of a Beast and False-Prophet: All which they affirm is made appear
throughout this Commentary: by which reasons being over-swayed, I gave way to
the publishing thereof, yet so as this Sacred and last (...) or grateful Gift
should be dedicated unto none, save unto my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

If therefore so it be, that in the opening of these mysteries I may seem unto
some in any place to come short: these I lovingly desire to supply my defect
with their greater diligence: pardoning in the mean time what is not yet
attained to, and being tha^kfull for what is found out. But and if there shall be
any, who wrest my expositions touching the beast, or his head, or horns, or the
like mysteries, unto the offense and injury of any man's person: to these I
testify, that I have written nothing to the reproach or scandal of any man: but
truly and heartily expounded what our Savior Christ reveald unto John, not to
the injury, but rather instruction and Salvation of all such as desire to be
saved, nor unto the offense, but admonition and amendment of such as will not
perish.

Neither am I the first who have thus expounded the Beast. What speak I of my
self? Neither was the Apostle John the first who showed Antichrist at Rome:
for before him Paul testified, that the Son of perdition should sit in the
Temple of God as God, that is, claim the principallity in the Church: for even
then the mystery of iniquity was a working, except it had bin for that which
did withold, that is, as Chrysostom, Ambrose, and Ierom interpret it, the
Roman Empire: which first being translated from the mountains of Rome to some
other place, and weakened, should as it were be abolished.

After both Irenaeus a most ancient Writer said, that the numerall name of the
Beast in all likelihood should be ((...)) Lateinos, Lib. 5. c. 25
and as if he had bin a divine Prophet foretelling the apostasy of the Latin
Church, he expressly adds these words: But in this we will not boast.

Gregory himself I. Romish Pope confidently affirmed that that Priest should
be Antichrist, Lib. 4. Epist. 38.
or Antichrists forerunner, who styled himself UNIVERSAL: pointing as with
the finger at Boniface III. his Successor: for, says he, the king of pride is
at hand, and that which is not lawful to be spoken, an Army of Priests is
prepared.

Neither will I now allege any more (reserving it till afterward in Chap. 13.)
Bellar. lib. 3. de P. R. cap. 21.
who after the time of Gregory I. have demonstrated Rome to be the seat of
Antichrist, and the Pope with his double-sword Antichrist. Wherefore it is said
not of ignorance, but malice, that by us Protestants the Pope first began to be
Antichrist. De velandis virgin.
Good things scandalize no man, unless an evil mind, says Tertulian, But
truth is the best thing. Therefore this truth, that Antichrist does now reign
at Rome, can scandalize none but evil-minded men. Wherefore thou, O Pope, hear
this truth and repent, Rev. 19.10
before the hand of the Heavenly Conqueror lay hold on thee, and cast thee
into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone.

Neither let Parasites deceive thee, who from the Revelation promise unto thee
the whole Empire of the World: one while denying thou art a man: another while
they feine thee an halfe-god, one while Gods Vicegerent, yea a God: who paint
out thy Church gloriously sitting on a throne, (I sit a Queen, and am no
Widow, and shall see no sorrow) treading under her feet the Protestant
Heretics with their Bibles. Rev. 18.7.
These cosen thee with vain words. Hearken to Clemanges a man of ancient
credit, De corrupt. Eccles. Statu. cap. 26.
he shows what the Revelation promises thee: What think thou, says he,
of thy Prophecy, to wit, of John's Revelation? do not thou at least think,
that in some part it belongs unto thee? Thou have not so lost shame and sense
to deny these things. Therefore look into it, and read the condemnation of the
great whore, sitting upon many waters, and there contemplate thy worthy acts,
and what shall befall thee. Has not the Apostle Paul sufficiently noted that
thou art he that sit in the temple of God as God? why then should thou
not suspect all that thou do, and have? Thy two horns like the Lambs: thy two
keys, and the two swords in thy hand: the Triple Crown on thy head: the
mystery in thy forehead: the Image which thou causest the inhabitants of the
earth to worship, killing them that refuse to do it: the name and the number of
thy name: the Mass and Latin Leturgie: the whorish woman sitting upon Seven
Mountains: now ought thou not to suspect all these?

And ye O unwise Kings: when will ye understand, whom to serve and what ye
should do? when will God put it into your hearts to do his will, that is, to
make Rome the whorish woman desolate? Oh serve the Lord with fear and
trembling, kiss the Son least he be angry, and ye perish in the way: let the
Lamb conquer you, not unto destruction, like as the Beast overcommeth, but
unto conversion: do it (o kings) speedily, least it be too late. For God will
not be mocked. He has begun to put into the hearts of diverse good Kings to do
this willingly: He will also put into the hearts of others, when it shall
please him, according to the oracle of the Angel. Rev. 17.17.
And already has he persuaded the hearts of some Emperors deceased, even in
their agony, to approach before the Tribunal of God not by invocating of
Mary, but by imploring the divine mercy, and so rendered their souls to God
their Savior, not in confidence of the Churches treasure, but the alone merits
of Jesus Christ. He put also into the heart of another great Zelot in his sick
bed, to turn his face from the Priest, chanting prayers to the Virgin Mary,
and promising him Salvation by his own and the Saints merits, thereby
testifying, that he desired to be raised up by the intercession and merits of
Christ. They that cease to do thus shall not be partakers of Salvation. They
which do it seriously, verily they are overcome by the Lamb unto their
Salvation, and they make the whore desolate late indeed, yet not too late. But
let no man tempt God: for ye know not how soon ye may be taken away. While
therefore it is time walk in the light, least the darkness come upon you.

Neither let flatterers deceive you, who say, that it seems harsh,
dishonorable, and unbeseeming, that so many Princes war against the Lamb,
follow the Beast, are Antichrists Vassals, that the greatest part of the Empire
consists of Antichrist, who is to be cast into the Lake of Fire. This is the
deceitful song of Sirenes. To begin with the last particular, How I pray shall
the greatest part of the Empire consist of Antichrist, if our truth does stand
that the Pope is Antichrist, unless either the Pope be said to be the greatest
part of the Empire, then which nothing is more false, and opprobrious to the
Empire, or that these men do merely triflle? But will they deny them to be
Kings touching whom the Revelation has foretold such things? Or will they
accuse the Revelation to cast dishonorable aspersions upon Kings?

They say: that Pagan, not Christian Kings are spoken of. But this is neither
agreeable to the Revelation, nor to their own fiction. For the Kings, who
shall give their power to the Beast and fight against the Lamb, shall be the
same, into whose hearts God will put it to hate the whore and make her
desolate. Now this argues that they shall not be Pagan but Christian Kings, who
before being deceived through ignorance, shall sin in fact: but at length being
overcome by the Lamb, that is, brought to repentance; they shall, forsaking
their error, turn their hearts and power against the whore. Neither can any
man except he be deprived of understanding deny, that these things are couched
in the Text.

And if credit be given unto their fiction, Ribera in Apoc. c. 12. Number. 11.
etc. 13. Number. 10.
there shall at Antichrists coming be no more then ten Kings in the whole
world, signified by the horns of the Beast, and of these, three being slain,
seven shall fight for Antichrist. Therefore either these shall be Christian Kings,
or else there shall then be no Christian Kings under the Sun, the falsitie
whereof the Revelation does show Chap. 21.24.

Now tell me, what harshnesse or dishonor is there in it, that (as Paul
confesses he was sometime a blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious, but
ignorantly, and so obtained mercy:) the ten Kings have given their power unto
the Beast against the Lamb: but of ignorance: and being overcome by the Lamb
have repented: God putting it into their hearts to hate the whore? Tell me, I
say, should this be to the dishonor of Kings, which is to their great glory,
to have sinned indeed through ignorance, but repented through the mercy of God?
Or is not rather the fiction of these Prophets very reproachful, scandalous
and fatal, who say, that toward Antichrists rising there shall be no where any
Emperor or Roman Empire: that there shall be no King in any place save those
seven (that remain of the ten) fighting for Antichrist. And seeing they every
hour expect their Antichrist, to arise (as they say out of the tribe of Dan)
what do they but threaten an utter destruction both to the Emperor, Roman
Empire, and all Christian Kings? For according unto these men's doctrine, as
then there shall be no Emperor, no Empire: so neither King of France, Spain,
England, Poland, Hungary, etc. or if there be any they shall be Antichrists
Life-gard and vassals. Now tell me, who they are that cast reproaches upon
Christian Kings, set their Crowns awry, and menace them with eternal
damnation.

Wherefore blessed shall ye be, if ye hear and keep the Commandments of this
Prophecy, that ye may have right to the tree of life, and may enter through
the gates into the City: But he that will hurt, let him hurt still: and he that
is filthy let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be
righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still. Amen. Even so come
Lord Jesus: and sanctify us in truth. Thy word is truth. Amen.

PROVERB. 27.6. Better are the wounds of a friend, then the deceitful kisses
of an enemy.
The Authors PREFACE UPON THE REVELATION OF THE APOSTLE AND EVAGELIST JOHN:
HAPPILY BEGVN AND PROPOVNDED UNTO HIS AVDITORY IN THE UNIVERSITY. Ann. 1608.
IF any of you (my Hearers) admire, wherefore, after the Exposition of Paul's
Epistle unto the Hebrews, I should pass by so many excellent Books of the New
Testament, and take in hand the Interpretation of the last, viz. the
Revelation, the Author and Canonical authority whereof has long since
variously bin disputed of: and which being replenished with great secrets,
types, and dark sentences, is scarcely intelligible unto any: The Objections
against the Revelation
and though it be entitled a Revelation, yet seems not in the least to be a
Book revealed, but rather shut up and sealed: which seems also to be the
reason that it is placed at the end of the New Testament: from the
interpretation whereof because of its obscurity, not a few of the ablest
Divines have hitherto abstained: and lastly seeing it has long since bin held,
that it does contain some things contrary to Apostolical Faith, and favor the
heresy of the Chiliasts. If I say, any man wondreth at this my purpose, such a
one I would have with me to acknowledge, that these very objections (besides
other causes which now are not requisite to be related) with which this most
Heavenly Book is injuriously charged, offers occasion unto me to interpret
the same, that ye might understand that the Revelation of John is so far from
the guilt of these accusations (which do not a little weaken the Canon of our
Faith) that we rather may say of it, what Jerome most truly said of the
Prophecy of Isaias: Whatsoever is in Holy Writ, whatsoever can be uttered by
the tongue or received by the senses of mortal man, is contained in this
Book: which least it might seem to be spoken by me without ground, Prooem. in
Isa.
I thought good to praemise a few things in way of Preface: in which I will
handle somethings more briefly, by other Interpreters more largely handled: and
somethings properly belonging to our purpose, I shall more diligently explicate.

CHAPTER. I. Of the Author of the Revelation
WHo was the Author of this Book, Lib. 7. hist. c. 25. Haer. 51.
would never in our times have been questioned, unless Eusebius and
Epiphanius had left in writing, that some of old time did scruple the thing.
For Eusebius records, that in his time it was diversely on both parts disputed
touching the Revelation. Afterward he says, there were some who supposed from
the Books (called De Repromissionibus) of one DIONYSIUS an Alexandrine Bishop,
and also from one Caius an old Writer, that the Revelation was not written by
John the Apostle, but forged by the Heretic Cerinthus, who feined an earthly
Kingdom to Christ, in which the Saints should have their fill of corporal
pleasures a thousand years: into which sense, some whom they called Chiliasts,
men in other respects of note in the Church, drew the twentieth Chapter of the
Revelation. But other Divines and worthy Fathers have always demonstrated,
that there is no such thing in that Chapter: and we also will show it on the
place.

But so far is it from truth, The Revelation not written by Cerinthus.
that the blasphemous Heretic Cerinthus could be the Author of this Book, as
nothing is less credible, or more unlikely. For Cerinthus blasphemously
maintained, that Christ was not before Mary. But the Revelation throughout
teaches and proves the Eternal Deity of Christ by such evident Arguments
against Cerinthus, Ebion, Photinus, and such like enemies of Christ, as almost
no Scripture affirms the same more clearly.

However therefore it is no marveile, Lib. 4. adversus Mar.
that the Marcionites (as Tertulian records) as also the Alogian and Tatian
Heretics (as Epiphanius, Augustine, and Philastrius testify) did reject the
Revelation as being contrary to their heresy: Yet the Grecians of old had no
reason, neither to this day has any man a just or probable cause, John the
Apostle author of the Revelation.
to call into question the Author, or Canonical Authority of this most Sacred
Book.

That John the Apostle (whose Gospel and three Canonical Epistles are extant)
is the Author, may be proved by solid and undoubted reasons.

First the Title it self shows that he is the Author: The Revelation of John
the Divine. But thou will say, it is not said, John the Apostle or Evangelist:
Lib. 3. hist. cap. 13.
but John the Divine: touching whom it seems to be uncertain who he was:
because, as Eusebius records, there were two John's, whose Monuments were then
at Ephesus, viz. John the Evangelist the Writer of the Gospel, and of one
Canonical Epistle: and John the Presbyter or Elder, the Author of the two
latter Epistles, and of the Revelation: unto which opinion also Dionysius
Alexandrinus in the fore-alledged place does assent.

But verily that Presbyter is not called the Divine, which Title (...) in way
of eminency was most deservedly by the Ancients attributed unto John the
Evangelist, The title of John the Divine whence it arose.
because none of the Apostles or Divines wrote more heavenly of the Deity of
Christ. Therefore the Kings Copy of Montanus expresses the whole Title thus:
(...) The Revelation of the Holy Apostle and Evangelist John the Divine, the
which, whither it were prefixed by John himself or afterward by the Church, is
of no great consequence: seeing it sufficiently appears, that it is taken
from ver. 1 and 2. Besides it is not credible, neither can it be proved that
the Lord Jesus after the death of the Apostles, sent his Angel unto another
John, then unto John the Apostle.

But that a certain upstart Interpreter supposes that John beginning with
that other Title (The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him)
would not have the Title of the Book to bear the Name of the Author, Alcasar.
Vestigat. Not. 4. prooem.
almost after the same manner, by which, says he, the Author of our Society
would have the same to be called the society of Jesus, not of IGNATIUS: I doubt
not but all sound men do understand, that this is not only more then
insolently spoken: as if forsooth there could or ought to be an equality
between the Apostle John, and Ignatius the Soldier: the Revelation of Jesus
Christ, and the Jesuitical Society of Yesterdayes hatching, but that also it
is altogether inconvenient and contrary unto the purpose of the Author. For
John in the very first verse saying: The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which he
signified by his Angel unto his servant John: does put too his name: and the
Church hitherto has always called this Book, the Revelation of John, and not
the Revelation of Jesus. The Jesuits therefore ought not by this example to
dissemble the Name of their Author, but should be called the Society of
Ignatius, and not the Society of Jesus.

The Periphrasis of the Author confirms the same thing, Chap. 1. ver. 2. who
bare record of the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ: which
shows plainly that the Writer of the Revelation and of the gospel was the
same: for who has more clearly borne record of the word of God, and the
testimony of Jesus Christ, then the Apostle John in his Gospel, which
begins: In the beginning was the word ((...)) etc. and in his first Epistle
Chap. 1. v. 1. That which was in the beginning. etc. touching the word of God,
etc. we have seen it and bear witness: and Chap. 5.9. This is the witness of
God which he has testified of his Son, etc. like unto which, is that in
Chap. 19.13. where he calls Christ's coming unto judgment ((...)) the word
of God: and the style of John the Apostle (whatsoever others may judge) does
plainly appear throughout the whole Book, as we shall observe in the course of
our Exposition.

Add, that this Author saw and wrote the Revelation in the I Will Patmos, was
says he, Chap. 1.9. in the I Will, that is called Patmos, for the word of God,
John banished into patmos. Lib. 3. hist. cap. 18.
and the testimony of Jesus Christ, which Circumstance does not obscurely
denote the Apostle Ioh. Neither read we of any other John banished into Patmos
for the word of the Lord, and the witness of Jesus Christ, then John the
Apostle, who, as Eusebius records, was condemned for the Gospels sake, and
banished into Patmos by the Emperor Domitian.

Lastly, Justin, Martyr. Dial: cum Tryph. Irenae: Lib. 4. Cap. 37. Clemens
Alexandrin. Paedag. Lib. 2. Cap. 12. Origin. Homil. 7. in Iosu. Athanas: in
Synops. Epiphanius Haeres. 51.54.76. Chrysostom. Homil. 5. in Psalm. 5.
Damascen. Lib. 4. Orth. fid. Cap. 18. also of Latin Writers: Tertullian. Lib.
4. contra Marcio. Cyprian. de exhort. Martyr. Cap. 8.10.11.12. Ambros. in Psalm.
50. and Lib. 3. de Spir. Sanct. Cap. 21. Augustine Tract. 39. in Ioh. and Lib.
2. de doct. Christ. Cap. 18. and de Haeres. Cap. 30. Et Lib. 20. de C. D. Cap.
7. Hierom. Catal. Script. Illustr: etc.

The Arguments usually alleged to the contrary, I will not now for brevity
sake set down. Erasmus has painfully collected the same: And by Theodore Beza
in his Annotations upon this Book are solidly refuted. One thing only I will
touch, Whither the style of John be diverse.
which some do pretend touching the difference of the style of the Revelation,
and the writings of John the Evangelist, but with no great reason: for an egg
is not more like an egg, then John's style is like to himself here and there.
How often (to pass by other things) does he say that we are washed from our
sins by the blood of Christ, which also he says 1. Epist. Chap. 1.7. But to
grant, what they say, that the style does differ, was the same kind of speech
to be used in writing the Gospel, and a Prophecy? what marveil, that an
unlike matter is explicated by a different style. Besides it is to be
observed, that John wrote most part of the Book not in his own words, but in
Phrases and words dictated by the Angel. Where he uses his own, he plainly
retains the Phrase, which he has in his Gospel and Epistles, as we shall
see in its place.

Besides some do observe, Ioh. Foxus. in Apoc. page 458.
that although John indeed wrote the Prophecy in Greek: yet it seems the
Angel uttered the same in Hebrew, it being John's native language: This
appears by manifold Hebrew expressions throughout the Book, as Abaddon,
Harmageddon, Hallelujah, Gog, Magog, and the often Repitition of the number
Seven, touching the seven Spirits, seven Candlestickes, seven Churches, seven
Angels, seven Seals, seven Trumpets, seven Vials, seven heads of the Beast,
seven horns of the Lamb, etc. Lastly the whole Phrase or form of expression,
seems rather to incline to the Hebrew then the Greek: The Greek letters (...)
make 666. Romanus.
Hence the said writers suppose that the number of the Beasts name expressed in
Greek by (...) is to be interpreted by the Hebrew letters (...) precisely
expressing the number 666. But of this no more at present. And thus much of the
Author.

CHAPTER II. Touching the Canonical authority of the Revelation.
NOw by these things the divine Authority of the Book does necessarily follow.
For if the Apostle John be the Author: the Divine and Canonical Authority
cannot justly be questioned. For the Apostles writings are Apostolical.

Besides, the Author does again and again testify, that he received his
Revelation from Christ, and wrote the same by the Augels command.

This also the testimony of the Ancient Church confirms. Council. Ancyran, in
appendice.
For the Revelation is alleged under the name of John, and as Canonical
Scripture, by the most ancient Council of Ancyra, which was before that of
Nice: also in the Council of Carthage III. Can. 47. and some others following.

The Revelation also has bin always of Canonical authority with the Greek
and Latin Fathers: although certain Graecians before Dionysius Alexandrinus
did some what scruple the same: as of old some of the Latin Church had their
doubts touching the Epistle to the Hebrews, because it did seem to favor
Novatus, as Jerome writes unto Dardanus. But the scruple of one, or a few of
the Ancients can no more disanull the authority of any Canonical Book of
Scripture, then the scruple of a few now can do.

And howsoever Luther in his first Edition of the New Testament in the Germane
tongue, Published anno 1526. Sixtus. Senensis. Biblioth.

Ribera in Apoc. Prooem. cap. 1.


did not reckon the two latter Epistles of John, the Epistles also of James and
Jude, among the Apostolical and Canonical Scriptures: Not indeed (as some
Papists write) because he could not bear those words, Chap. 14.13. Blessed are
the dead, etc. because their works follow them (which verily do notably
overthrow their fiction of the Souls of the Saints going into Purgatory) but
rather because he thought that such obscure Visions and Figures were not so
well agreeable unto the light of the New Testament: notwithstanding in another
Edition Anno 1535. he speaks more liberally in the Preface touching these
Books: neither do they, who at this day are called Lutherans, any longer
question the Canonical authority of the Revelation. Alcas. Vestig. nota. 2.
Prcoem.


For our part we did not judge the Revelation was therefore to be received,
that we might abuse the dark and obscure sayings of the Book, to vomit out
the venom of our malice against the Pope of Rome: as that upstart Interpreter
before mentioned, has begun to calumniate us, but because the reasons before
laid down, and many more, do confirm our belief: and because by the Revelation
we are manifestly taught, that that son of perdition lifting himself up
against whatsoever is called God, and sitting in the Temple of God, as if he
were God, is no other but that Capitoline Jove, even to this day treading down
all powers under his feet.

But a man might justly wonder that Popish Writers do not tremble at the very
sight of this Book: and how they are not afraid to explicate the Prophecy by
their Commentaries: Why Papists write Commentaries upon the Revelation.
but that the thing it self speaks they chiefly do it (seeing they can
neither wholly extinguish it, nor keep it any longer from the people) at least
to deprave the oracles thereof by their false Interpretations: the which
notwithstanding they labor for in vain: seeing it is as clear as the Sun at
Noon day, that under the Image of the Beast and False-Prophet seducing the
Inhabitants of the Earth: and of the whorish woman committing fornication with
the Kings of the Earth: and of the great City on seven hills ruling over the
Kings of the Earth, is represented the Monarchical and Papal Sea of Rome: and
under the Image of Locusts the innumerable vermin of the Clergy and Monks:
under the Type of Merchandise, which no man, (Antichrist being discovered)
shall buy any more, are set forth Romish Indulgences, and buying and selling of
Souls, etc.

CHAPTER. III. Of the obscurity of the Book: What it is, and whence, with the
remedies of the same.
AUGUSTINE writing of the darkness of the Revelation, says: Lib. 20. de C.
D. ca. 17
In this Book, which is named a Revelation, are contained many dark things,
that the Readers mind might be exercised, and in it are a few things, by the
clearness whereof the rest with labor may be sought out, chiefly, because it
so repeateth the same things after a diverse manner, that whereas it may seem
to speak of different matters, by diligent search we shall find that they are
the self same things diversely expressed. And JEROME: Tom. 3. ad paul. Ep. 1.
In the Revelation (says he) is showed a Book sealed with seven Seals, which
though thou give it to a man that can rend, to read it, he will answer thee: I
cannot, it is sealed. And afterward: The Revelation of John has as many
Sacraments as words. I have said but little in regard of the worth of the
Book. It is beyond all praise. In every of the words are hid manifold
understandings. So indeed it is: for the sharpness of man's wit is blinder then
beetles in the true understanding, as of other divine Scripture, so of this
also, unless it be enlightened by the beams of the Holy Ghost: but the causes
of this obscurity are plain.

First, the whole Book is Prophetical touching future things: Write, The
causes of the darkness of the Revelation
says the Angel, the things thou have seen, which are, and which shall be
afterward. But future things as future, because they are not in any sense, are
either altogether unknown, or being foreknown are conceived not so much by the
understanding, as in hope.

Add, That these future things are not declared by plain words, The
difference of Visions.
neither defined by notes or marks of times, places, and persons: but are
revealed unto John (and so written) in dark and aenigmaticall Visions. It is
true, many Visions in Scripture were plain, as set before the eyes of the mind
or body, Dan. 5.5. 1. Kin. 6.17 Exodus 3.2. Act. 10.11 Act. 23.11
so King Belshazzar saw a hand writing upon the plaster of the wall: Elisha
saw fiery Charrets round about him: and Moses the bush burning before him:
Peter a sheet with foure-footed Beasts let down from Heaven unto the Earth:
Paul saw the Lord standing by him in the night, etc. In these there was no
great difficulty. But there are other Visions more intricate: when the Images
or Representations signifying some secret thing, are exhibited unto the minds
of men, either sleeping or awake: the mysteries of which except they be
revealed are so obscure, as that they cannot be found out by the understanding
of mortal man. Of this kind were the dreams of Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar: the
Visions also of Ezechiel, Daniel, and Zachary, unto which we worthily may
compare the Visions of the Revelation. The secrets indeed of the aforesaid
dreams, God not only revealed unto the singular benefit of them which dreamt
the same, but also would have them written for the understanding of all. But
the my steries of the Visions, although he revealed them to his servants and
Prophets, yet he kept them secret from all other men, namely, that indeed
profane men might always set light by things so obscure: but the godly even
by the obscurity thereof be the more stirred up to the searching out of divine
mysteries. The obscurity ought not to keep us from searthing.


And although we can scarcely, and with much difficulty come unto the
understanding of all the secrets of this Book: notwithstanding the difficulty
ought not to affright or to keep us from searching: but rather stir up a more
diligent enquiry into the same. Many things in the Book are without any
shadows of dark Types, as speaking plainly of the punishments of the
ungodly, of the blessedness and reward of the Saints, etc. in which lies no
obscurity. In many Types also the signification is plain, and the Analogy
with the things signified not obscure: as the Analogy of the seven
Candlestickes, with the seven Churches, of the Lamb with Christ, of the woman
with the Church, of the Dragon with Satan, of the Beast and False-Prophet with
Antichrist, of the Locusts with the devouring Monks, of Babylon and the Great
Whore with Rome, of the seven heads of the Beast with the seven hills of Rome.

In the other more obscure Visions we have three helps, by whch in some measure
we may dive into the understanding of them, viz. the Prophetical Scripture,
History, and experience.

For first, Remedies of the darkness
in special with Ezechiel, Daniel, and Zachary: we shall find a great
likeness in them, and thence receive much light: for example: In Chap. 4.5. it
is said, there were seven Lamps of fire burning before the throne: which
plainly appears to be taken out of Zach. 4.10. where the seven Lamps are
said to be the seven eyes of Jehovah running too and fro through the whole
Earth. By which undoubtedly is signified the ubiquitie of Gods power and
providence. Out of the same Chapter is taken, that in Chap. 11.4. two witnesses
are said to be two Olive trees, and two Candlesticks standing before the face
of the Lord of the Earth: Examples of which kind we shall observe many more in
the course of our Interpretation.

Eusebius records out, of EGESIPPUS, Lib. 3. hist. cap. 32.
that the Church did not long after the Apostles time, remain an undefiled
Virgin: but by little and little, through the ambition and contention of
Priests declined from Apostolical sincerity: But after CONSTANTINES time, In
vita Malchi.
says JEROME, she became greater indeed in wealth, but less in virtues.

After-Histories also testify, that the Roman Bishops by pride and subtlety,
namely under a pretense of the primacy left by the Apostle Peter, as also of
Christ's Vicar-ship bequeathed unto them, they, through the connivency or
neglect of the Emperors, not only usurped power over the City of Rome, but
also took into their own hands the very spoil of the Empire, and at last
established this Sacred Empire of the West, the direct or indirect power
whereof should wholly be in the Popes Holiness. All which things do not
obscurely teach us, what is meant by the opening of the Seals, The arrogance
and subtilty of Romish Bishops.
by the stars falling from heaven to the earth, by the Beast speaking great and
blasphemous things, what is intended by the Beast, False-Prophet, and Image of
the Beast, what lastly by the whorish woman sitting on the Beast, and ruling
over the Kings of the Earth in the great City upon seven Mountains.

Lastly, Beast and Purpled Whore to the Papacy: then the Locusts unto the
Popish Clergy: then the impure Frogs (proceeding out of the mouth of the
Dragon, Beast, and False-Prophet) unto the Popes Messengers, (being hooded like
to Frogs) viz the Jesuits cracking miracles, and running too and fro by Sea
and Land unto the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 16: 13: 14:
to gather them unto the Battle of that great Day of God Almighty. These
things, I say, will in some measure be remedies against the darkness of the
Book.

Unto which in the last place we must add diligent meditation, and ardent
prayer, that the Spirit of God who revealed these mysteries to John, do
enlighten the eyes of our minds with heavenly knowledge to find out the
wisdom of this Book. For blessed is he that reads: Rev. 1.3. and 22.7.14.
and blessed are they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep them,
that is, which diligently meditate, and labor exactly to weigh these oracles
in an equal balance, with the events past, present, and to come.

CHAPTFR. IV. Touching Ancient and Modern Interpreters of the Revelation, and
of the manner of Interpreting observed by them.
I Have spoken of the Author, and Canonical Authority, and obscurity of the
Revelation, and showed that in these things is nothing to hinder us from the
interpretation thereof.

The objection about the Interpreters is of no weight. I confess that not a
few Divines of great account, as Luther, Melanchthon, Bucer, Martyr, Calvin,
Beza, and others have abstained from the Interpretation of the Revelation. But
this neither does lessen the authority of the Book, neither does it prejudice
other Interpreters: for who knows, whither the darkness of the Book, or
their other weighty labors, or want of time did occasion the same, certain it
is, they no way questioned the authority of the Book.

In the mean while, in all Ages there have been excellent Teachers of the
Church, who have labored to illustrate the secrets of this Book by their
Commentaries.

The Ancientest that have written upon the Revelation, are Iustine Martyr, In
vita Iohannu.
and Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, and Melito of Sardis, as Jerome and Eusebius
record. But their Commentaries have not been preserved until our times: Eus.
lib. 5. hist. ca. 25.
save only that some few fragments of this nature touching the ten horns of
the Beast, the two horned Beast, of the image, Character, Number and Name of
the Beast arising out of the Sea, are found in IRENAEUS Lib. 5. Cap. 21.23.25.

Among Augustins works we find a few Homilies upon the Revelation, which
notwithstanding are ascribed to Ticonius by Bid, who himself also has
commented some things upon the Apocalypse.

But Austine in that divine Commentary de Civitate Dei endeavors to search not
a few mysteries of this Book, touching Gog and Magog, Lib. 20. de C. D. a cap.
7. usque ad 18.
touching the thousand years of Satan's binding and loosing, of the first and
second Resurrection, of the Saints reigning with Christ a thousand years, of
the fire falling from heaven and devouring the ungodly, of the casting of the
devil and his followers into the lake of fire, of the dead, which the Sea,
Death, and Hell, shall give up to be judged, and lastly touching the New Heaven
and the New Earth, etc.

We have also some what upon the Revelation under the name of Ambrose: but it
may plainly be gathered from the work it self, that it is later then
Ambrose.

In the latter Ages among Monks and Schoolmen, almost no Book has had so
many Interpreters, as the Apocalypse, seeing no man but thought it a fine thing
to exercise his wit in the opening of such dark Aenigmaes, either for
ostentation sake, or to delight himself with Allegories, a long Catalogue of
which, even above an hundred, as well of such as are extant, as not, Alcasar.
Vestigat. Not. 26. Prooem.
that upstart Interpreter, before mentioned, has reckoned up. And among these
he commends four Manu-scripts which he found in the Libraries of Spain.
Undoubtedly our Germany has more. I have seen a compendious Exposition of
John's Revelation written in the year 1486. by Johannes Hilten a Franciscane:
who also, (as they say) foretold many other things.

At Heidelberg in the Library of WISEDOMS College is extant a Commentary of
two big Volumes, written a little before that time by Richard Faber of
Laudenburg an Augustinian.

Luther also published a short Commentary upon the Apocalypse at Witeberg Anno.
1528. sent unto him out of Livonia, having no name unto it: the which Conr.
Gesnerus in his Bibliotheca ascribes unto John Husse. But it plainly appears
to be more ancient. The Postill of Lyra ascribes the prologue of that namelesse
Author, which begins thus, All that will live godly, etc. unto Gilbertus
Pictaviensis, who flourished under the Emperor Cunradus about the year 1140.
But by the 20th Chapter it appears not to be so ancient, for the Author there
disputing touching the thousand years, testifies, that he wrote in the year,
from the Incarnation of Christ, 1357. Which, says he, is our present date. He
often expressly interprets the Papacy for Antichrists kingdom, the Pope for
Antichrist: which therefore I rehearse, least any might imagine, that we were
the first Authors of this opinion. Yea Pope Gregory above a 1000. years ago
doubted not confidently to say, that that Priest should be Antichrist, or his
Forerunner, who should arrogate the Title of UNIVERSAL unto himself, which a
while after, as is known, the Bishops of Rome themselves did do. But of this
more in its place.

Alcasar also has raked together many latter Writers upon this Book, of his
own order.

But of ours not a few Divines of excellent learning, Protestant Interpreters
of the Revelation
have in the foregoing age put their hands to this Prophecy, among whom
notwithstanding in my judgment Henry Bullinger of Helvetia is most eminent,
whom almost all do follow, as David Chytraeus, Alfonsus Cunradus, Franciscus
Lambertus, Sebastianus Meyerus, Nicolaus Collado, Johannes Foxus, Benedictus
Aretius, Matthias Illyricus, Augustinus Marloratus, Petrus Artopoeus,
Franciscus Iunius: Daniel Tossanus. And of late in this our age John Napier a
Scotchman, Thomas Brightman an Englishman, Raphael Eglinus, Conradus Graserus a
Germane, Johannes Piscator, Matthias Hoe, Matthias Cotterius a French man, with
others whom I have not seen.

But thou will say, to what end are all these named? To wit to show what I
purposed, that nothing of the authority of this Book is hereby diminished,
because (as has bin objected) some worthy Divines have abstained from
interpreting the same.

Touching the manner of interpretation, which every of them has followed, and
whether, being so many, they have effected what they desired and ought to have
done: would be too long to explicate, neither is it to the purpose in hand.
This one thing perhaps may be affirmed without injury to any of them all, that
to this Book has happened, what the Evangelist Mark writes of the woman
diseased with an issue of blood: Mar. 5.26
that she had suffered many things of the Physicians, and it availed her
nothing, but she became much worse: perhaps not so much by reason of the
Physicians unskilfullnesse, as the incurablenesse of the disease, namely the
healing thereof being reserved for to illustrate the glory of Christ.

For while so many (every one following the force and reason of his own wit)
have uttered such various things touching these aenigmaticall Visions, piously
indeed, as I suppose, yet little cohering with themselves, or with the scope or
meaning of the Holy Ghost: it is come to pass, that indeed there are extant an
heap of Commentaries upon this Book, every of which promises a new light unto
the Prophecy, The different manner of interpreting.
whereas the obscurity thereof is not only not lessened thereby, but in some
places also more darkened. For some apply the Aenigmaes of the Revelation unto
the History of the Ancient Church: Others diversely unto the continued period of
the New Church: Others in every particular have imagined unto themselves
mystical meanings, thinking, as the saying is, that under every stone gold lay
hid: Others turned all things into tropes and moral Allegories: Others have
labored prophetically to praesage and find out future things, even more then
was lawful for men to know: yea hardly among so many (which commonly is said
of Chronicles) thou shall find two or three agree: which disagreement verily
argues that the difficulty of the Book is not yet by so great variety of
Authors wholly taken away, but rather increased: not so much by a blameworthy
ignorance of Interpreters, as in regard of the incomprehensible wisdom of the
Prophecy it self: the full revelation whereof is undoubtedly reserved unto
the manifestation of Christ our Lord.

Notwithstanding I write not these things touching Interpreters, as if I would
detract any thing from the labors of so many learned men, or thought that by
their labor nothing of these mysteries were brought to light or explicated:
and that I at length in all these Aenigmaes, had (as the saying is) hit the
nail on the head. Far be it: for I doubt not in the least, but that a great
part of these Types by foregoing and present events are so manifestly brought
to light, that the truth of them may daily be seen and felt, of such, who,
as the Holy Ghost requires ((...)) have understanding. Yea I ingeniously
profess that I have bin very much helped by the Commentaries of most of them,
especially Bullingers and Brightmans. Now what I further judge touching the
whole form method, and manner of interpreting the Revelation, I will by and by
show.

CHAPTER. V. Of the dignity, time, profit, and scope of this Prophecy.
I Have spoken of the Author and authority, of the obscurity and Interpreters
of the Revelation: and thus I have freed this Book from a threefold slander:
first as if it were not Canonical: secondly obscure, as not to be understood:
thirdly of neglect, as if for this cause the worthiest Divines had hitherto
shunned the interpretation thereof.

There remain two other scandals to be taken away: one of the order: that this
Book is the last of the New Testament: the other of error: that it contains
somethings not agreeable to Apostollical Faith: both these clouds will be
dispersed by the consideration of the dignity of this Prophecy, which (like
the Morning Star above the rest) shines most clearly among the other Books
of the New Testament.

What therefore respects the Order, so far is it from diminishing the worth
of the Book in any kind, as it the more commends the same. For it is in very
deed a divine Seal, by which the Holy Ghost was pleased, not without-reason,
to close up both the Old and the New Canon of the divine Scriptures: which
manifestly appears from that prophetical Protestation at the end of the
Book, by which such are pronounced blessed who observe the words of this
Prophecy: the falsifiers on the contrary that presume to add or take ought
therefrom, are threatened with curses: for unto them that add, Rev. 22.18
God shall add the plagues that are written in this Book: to them that take,
away, The Canonical authority of the Revelation confirmed from the order
thereof.
God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life, and out of the HOLY
CITY, and from the things that are written in this Book. What could be
expressed more honorable concerning this Prophecy: for if it be unlawful to
add ought thereto: then certainly in all respects it is absolute, perfect,
divine, and the word of God, unto which nothing without impiety may be added
by men. Again if nothing may be taken away from the same, then it is Sacred,
inviolable, divine, and the word of God, which only cannot be broken. Ioh.
10.35.
Thus we see that the Canonical dignity of this Book is established by the
order it self.

And hereby it is plainly made equal with the divine Books of Moses himself,
Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32.
the Prince of Prophets. For as those, because they are the first of the Sacred
Canon, are often confirmed with this Seal: Ye shall not add unto the word
which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it, etc. So this
Book as it were closing the Holy Canon, is confirmed with the like Seal: that
nothing may be added to it, nothing taken away from it: As Moses therefore was
the Chieftaine of the Prophets, leading the first ranks: So John was chief of
the Prophets, closing up, or leading the last ranks: and here I willingly
assent to Bezas opinion, most solidly and truly affirming, that it seemed good
to the Holy Ghost to gather into this precious Book, In praefat. Apoc.
those things which remained to be fulfilled after Christ's coming, of the
praedictions of the former Prophets: and also to add some things, so far as
concerned us to know. Praefat. in Daniel.
A like honorable Title that worthy Divine JOHN OECOLAMPADIUS gives unto this
Book: That it is the best Interpreter of all the Prophets.

Neither will I speak more touching the order save this one thing, that in it
appears also a manifest reason of time. When the Revelation was written
For it is the last Book of the New Testament, not because it is last in
dignity, but in time. For Jerome writes, that Domitian raising after Nero the
second persecution against the Christians, John wrote the Revelation in the 14.
year of his reign in the I Will called Patmos. In vita Iohannis.
With whom Irenaeus a most ancient Writer does agree, affirming, that John saw
the Revelation not long before his time, but almost, says he, in our age,
toward the end of Domitian his Empire. Lib. 3. c. 25


Wherefore the Apocalypse was written in the ninety sixth year of Christ, after
all the other Books of the New Testament were written. For John outlived all
the Apostles and Canonical Writers, and lived (as Sophronius records) until
the third year of Trajane, which from Christ's birth was Anno 102: and after
his passion (as Jerome records) 68. In vita Iohannis.
and from the destruction of Jerusalem 25. Now whereas some affirm that John
wrote his Gospel after the Revelation, it is without any probability. But we
come to speak of the utility of the Revelation.

This Book does excellently shine forth in point of doctrine: The
profitablenes of the Revelation.
or common places. In special it proves the eternal Deity of Christ with
such weighty arguments, as scarcely more excellent are to be found in any other
part of Scripture: absolutely ascribing unto Christ many attributes, which are
only proper unto Jehovah: viz. that he is Alpha and Omega, the first and the
last, the beginning and the end: the Almighty: that the Lamb standing in the
Throne of the Deity, equal in majesty with the Father, is worshipped by all
the Heavenly Inhabitants, that he judges the adversaries, rules the Nations
with an iron rod, that he is the King of kings, and Lord of lords, etc.

It plainly also maintains the Doctrine of Christ's Mediatorship, the
faithful Witness, the First begotten from the dead, Redemption of christ:
the Prince of the kings of the earth, the Lamb slain from the beginning of
the world, who has washed us in his blood from our sins, and made us Priests
and Kings to God and the Father, etc.

It sets forth the afflicted state and condition of the Church in this life,
latter times, by evident types, viz. that the woman bringing forth a Man-Child,
the Ruler of the Nations, shall be driven into the Wilderness by the Dragon
and the Beast, where she shall remain hid from the sight of men, when the two
Witnesses shall prophecy against the Dragon and the Beast, and shall indeed be
slain, but being again raised to life, they shall be taken up into Heaven,
etc. By which verily it is manifest that nothing else is signified, then that
the Church in Antichrists reign shall be obscure, and secret in the
wilderness, being oppressed in Babylon it self: the Seat of Antichrist, The
flight of the Church into the wilderness.
until at length Babylon decaying she being commanded to come out of her,
shall again come forth and be seen of men.

By which that cavil is easily answered: Where the Church was before Luthers
time, if the Papacy were not. The Papacy indeed was the Apostaticall Church, it
was Babylon, having nothing but the bare Name of the Holy City. But the true
Church lie hid as captivated and oppressed in the same, Where the church was
before Luther.
no more appearing in the world, then the woman lurking in the wilderness, or
the Seven Thousand in Israel that bowed not the knee unto Baall: or a sound
kernel in a rotten Apple, until it was brought to light and repaired by the
new prophesying of the two Witnesses. Christ therefore was not without a
Church, although the Papacy were not the same.

It represents also Bishops deserting the Orthodoxe Faith, The Apostasy of
Bishops.
and the study of divine things, and cumbring themselves with wordly affairs,
under the Type of stars falling from Heaven into the Earth: with their nature
and plottings against the godly: neither has any man, after the Apostle Paul,
2. These. 2, 3, etc.
more lively set forth the rising, person, reign, tyranny, seat,
manifestation, and destruction of Antichrist, then we have it in this
Prophecy: lastly it most clearly prophesies many things touching the
comforts of the Church under the Cross, of her deliverance, victory, and
glorification, with the punishments of Tyrants and all other adversaries.

By which we see, The explication of the Apocalypse necessary.
that this Book is not only worthy to be continually read in the Church and
meditated on: but also to contain very profitable and necessary Doctrines,
especially for this last age. For the Jesuits Antichrists chiefest Soldiers
are very ingenious to corrupt, and wrest the plain Oracles of this Prophecy
into a contrary meaning, as if they were not only not to be applied against
the Papacy, but also did make for the dignity thereof: wherefore also it is our
duty diligently to labor, that the Revelation may be familiarly expounded and
known: not suffering the same to be depraved: least we our selves be deceived
by the slights of Antichrist, or that by our carelessness we suffer others to
be ensnared by pernicious errors.

Now this we shall the more easily attain unto, if we always have the Scope
of this Book before our eyes, like as Mariners do the more safely direct
their course in the vast Sea, by looking up unto the stars. The principal
scope thereof was. The scope of the Revelation:


FIRST, general, That the Christian Church being forewarned of her future
condition after the Apostles time, even unto the end of the world, should not
promise perpetual delight and ease unto her self, but timely be prepared
manfully to sustain the battles at hand.

SECONDLY, special: least the Godly (even then groaning under the Roman
persecutions, and calamities which were to endure yet a long time) being
offended, should be discouraged: but know that it came to pass, because the
Lord had revealed unto his servant John that it should be so: and withal that
they might be raised up with sure comforts of an happy issue out of their
calamities: for this cause also Christ in the Gospel forewarned his Disciples
of the Cross and future sorrow, that when it came they might remember that it
had been foretold unto them: For the darts which are foreseen, strike the
less, and we do receive the evils of the world more tolerably, if we be
fenced against them through the shield of providence, says GREGORY.

Thirdly forasmuch as not long after the Roman perfecutions, Satan, through
the riot, ambition and contention of the Bishops of the Churches, was to erect
Antichrists throne in the Temple of God, the Holy Ghost in special would have
his form, nature, reign, and Tyranny to be set forth (as it were) in lively
colors unto us, that we might learn the better to know, resist, and take heed
of him.

Moreover he would have the destruction and punishment of Antichrist and all
other adversaries: as also the victory and future glorification of the Church
to be plainly described, least either we should envy the present prosperity of
the adversaries, or overmuch fear their Tyranny: but that on the contrary we
might be patient under the Cross, and constant in our Combats, retaining an
assured hope of victory, deliverance, and future glory, even unto the end.

Now that, besides these scopes that upstart Inquirer labors to wrest the
Revolation to this purpose, Aleas. prooem. nota. 14: etc.
as if it should teach, that ROME, of old the head of Pagan Idolatry, by an
admirable vicissitude was to be changed into the Metropolis of the Catholic
Church, that the Roman Church was gloriously to triumph both in respect of the
Roman City, and the whole Empire, and that the sovereign authority of the
Romish Pope should always remain in the height of honor: is such a filthy
and impudent depravation of this most sacred Prophecy: that even the Devil
himself ought to blush thereat: and I should wonder if these goodly trifles do
not cause laughter, or shame even to the Romish Court it self. But these
things a little after are to be more nearly examined, when we come to the
Argument. Enough touching the Order.

Lastly, The things which have been objected against the Book, as being
erroneous and contrary to the Faith: in special that it seems in Chap. 20. to
favor the brutish doctrine of the Heretic Cerinthus, touching Christ and the
Saints worldly and voluptuous Reign on Earth a Thousand Years before the
Universal Resurrection of the dead: does not at all trouble me. For if the
objections of Heretics or Pagans had presently been believed, we should long
since have had nothing entire in the whole Scripture: but all these things have
long ago been vindicated by ancient and later Interpreters: and we refer
the clearing of every of them to their proper places, least our Preface should
be too tedious.

CHAPTER. VI. Touching the Argument of the Book.
TO come unto the Argument of the Book, Rev. 1.3.
however by what has been said already, it is not obscure, yet I will handle
the same more nearly.

The principal and greater part of the Book is prophetical (hence in the
very beginning it is called a Prophecy) containing Typical Prophesies not
only touching the state of the Church and the signs of the last times, of
which Christ foretold his Disciples, Mat. 24.
like as Ribera thought good to explicate the Argument of the Apocalypse, viz.
that it is nothing else but certain Commentaries upon those words of our Lord.
For they extend themselves much larger unto the times next after the Apostles,
and thence from the giving of the Revelation, even unto the end of the world:
namely touching the present conflicts of the Christian Church, which already
were in John's time, and afterward should continually befall her: first, with
Roman Tyrants, afterward with diverse Heretics: and at length both with the
Eastern, and especially the Western Antichrist: as also of their insultings
and tyranny against her, by which as if she were forsaken of Christ her head,
they should grievously both inwardly and outwardly afflict, and almost wholly
oppress her. But withal on the contrary of the most sweet comforts of the
godly under the Cross, that those storms of afflictions should not befall
them at a venture, or only at the lust and will of the adversaries: but by the
ordering hand of God, for the exercise of the Church: neither yet should they
be perpetual or continue too long: but at length be changed with the heavenly
glory of the Saints: all the wicked being by the power of Christ the Conqueror,
cast into the lake of fire and brimstone for ever and ever.

This Book also is doctrinall and hortatorie mixing here and there with
oracles excellent doctrines, exhortations, and reproves: both particular unto
the seven Churches of Asia: which were committed to the care of John being
banished into Patmos: as also universal unto all Christians even until this
day, for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness. These things suffice touching the general Argument.

The upstart Interpreter of the Revelation (before mentioned) having thought
upon a new Stratagem, I know not whether to curry favor with the Pope, Alcasar
perverteth the argument.
or the more to harden him to his destruction, does hence forge to himself new
Oracles touching the Church, and the Monarchical Empire of the Pope of Rome,
and with his Hypotheses does wholly stray from the Scope of this Prophecy, and
to speak the truth, does foully deprave the Argument thereof.

His Hypotheses or Positions are principally four: One general: Three special.
Vestig. nota 6. preoe.


The general is of the Argument of the whole Revelation: that it describes a
twofold war of the Church: one with the Synagogue, the other with Paganism,
and a twofold victory and triumph over both adversaries.

But the former war with the Synagogue was already fought before the
Prophecy was revealed: and the Synagogue with the Temple lay in ashes. To what
purpose then should this war have been showed unto John as being to come
afterward? Like as, says he, things done are represented in a Comoedie. As if
forsooth, Christ would represent unto John things done, and not rather, which
were to come to pass afterward. As for the latter war with Paganism,
although it was then on foot very hot already, and was further to lie more
heavy upon the Christians: notwithstanding a more fierce conflict by far with
Antichrist was to befall them (not to speak of the Gogish War) by whom the
Church (as is praefigured in the Apocalypse) should grievously be oppressed unto
the very last times, and against whom victory and triumph is promised unto the
Saints, the which all Interpreters, the Papists not excepted, do confess.

Of his special hypotheses the first is, that in the first eleven Chapters is
represented the rejection of the Jewish Nation, and the desolation of the City
Jerusalem by the Romans.

The SECOND: That in the nine following Chapters is portended the Empire of the
Roman Church over Rome and the whole world, and the overthrow of Paganism:
the which forsooth should be that horrible judgment of the Great Whore and
destruction of Babylon, effected by Constantine the Great and his Successors.

The THIRD: That in the two last Chapters under the Type of the Lambs Bride
and the New Jerusalem, is set forth the glorious and triumphant state of the
Roman Church in Heaven.

But these most idle vanities will soon vanish away, if thou do but even put
them to the Touchstone, that is, the very Text of the Prophecy: Vestig. nota
14. prooem.
for Christ did reveal those things to John which should shortly be done,
Chap. 1.1. and afterward Chap. 4.1. whereas therefore the destruction of
Jerusalem, and rejection of the Jews, by Alcasars own confession was
fulfilled XXV. years before the Revelation was given. Who then should believe
that Christ would have revealed unto John for a great mystery, a History so
generally known, under such obscure Types: John's Revelation prophesies of
things present and to come, And. in Apoc. cap. 12.
says Andreas out of a Treatise of Methodius; entitled SYMPOSIUM or Banquet.
Therefore the first Hypothesis is undoubtedly false.

Neither is the second more true. For the judgment of the Great Whore, and the
ruin of Babylon is represented not as a grace of conversion, but as a
punishment of whoredom to be inflicted on the kingdom and seat of Antichrist in
the last times. Therefore to interpret this of the conversion of Rome and
Paganism unto the Faith of Christ, which came to pass three hundred years
after Christ under Constantine and his Successors, is to make a mooke of
reason.

The third is no better then the rest. The Spouse of the Lamb, and the New
Jerusalem, is the whole Church of Christ, gloriously triumphing in Heaven, from
whom God has wiped away all tears: in which shall be nothing that is defiled
and abominable, as shall be afterward showed in its place: but that the now
Roman Apostaticall Church, worshipper of Idols, mother of fornications, and
driver, not of Christ's ass, but of the Beast of Antichrist (while she remains
such on earth) should also belong unto the Spouse of Christ in Heaven; shall
then be true, when that of the Apostle is false: Be not deceived, neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, 1. Cor. 6.9.15.
nor Adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor blasphemers, nor extortioners shall
enherit the Kingdom of God. Shall I take the members of Christ, and make them
the members of an harlot: which shall be ad Calendas Graecas, that is, never.

But what need I trouble my self: This new fiction of the Inquirer is
abundantly refuted by the judgment of Ribera, Bellarmine, and other most acute
Doctors of his own order: although scarcely there be any one of them, whom he
does not most freely censure.

But of late a certain learned and judicious Divine seems to have set forth
in lively colors the argument of that painful and most polished INQUIRY, in
an Epistle, which I shall here annexe.

Unto thy two Letters, the Post hasting away, thus in a few lines. What was my
opinion perhaps thy father has heard long since: what now it is, I will not
easily say, (...): FOR I GROW OLD LEARNING MANY THINGS. The Argument of
Alcasars Vestigation, or Inquiry.
Lately one Alcasar a Jesuit has published an INQUIRY upon the Revelation, in
which he rejoices himself, and gratulates the Pope of Rome, affirming that the
dedication of this Aenigma was of old made to the Roman Church, touching the
future principallity of this Church over all Churches, and the majesty of the
Pope, which others should submissively worship and humbly adore, so as he first
has out of the darkness of the Apocalypse showed a light, by which the old
Prophesies hitherto by others not understood, may be enlightened, namely of the
authority of the Roman Church over all others, that she alone is the Spouse of
Christ, Cant. 6. Psalm. 45. at his right hand and married to the Lamb, Chap. 21.
Rev. 19. whose founders were Peter and Paul, whom Isaias sets forth by a
couple of horsemen, one sitting on an Ass, the other on a Camel, which two are
the Angels that in the Revelation denounce the ruin of Babylon: before whose
feet John fell down to worship: and other strange mysteries, which he having
first found out, does now flatteringly apply to the Pope, being lift up with
incredible joy, if not madness and folly: or to say truly, with blasphemous
impiety and sacrilegious boldness. I know not whither thou have seen D. N. I
suppose you have seen and read him, forasmuch as he adorneth Commentaries on
that prophecy. Its the work of a Spanish Divine of Granata fairly printed at
Antwerp An. 1614. the Author also being an eloquent Interpreter of his own
mind and sense: One thing I know: that of mad men he will make them more mad by
his glozing Exposition of Aenigmaes: such flatterers are the Jesuits of their
Antichrist, being void of truth, full of deceit, and wanting no words. The sum
is: a twofold war of the primitive Church: the first against Iudaisme in the
two first Chapters: the other against Paganism, in the eight following: the
City and world being converted to the Faith of Christ, and hence a fourfold
Hallelujah. Lastly a long during peace to the Church, Antichrist being to be
overcome under the names of Gog and Magog, and in the last place the most
glorious triumph of the Roman Church in the Heavens at the day of Judgment: a
worthy cover to the pot: March. 10. 1615. Yours to command N. N.

Behold a lively Idea of the Inquiry, the which being communicated unto me by
a friend, I thought good here to rehearse it, least happily the beautifulness
of the new work might deceive any one. For he coyneth new Oracles, hence I
call him an upstart: his work otherwise being of much labor, and more then
vulgar wit, and not unpolished: which I could wish, the Author had more rightly
placed. Enough both of the true and the false Argument of the Apocalypse. We
come to the Parts.

CHAPTER. VII. Touching the parts of the Revelation.
THe Book ordinarily is variously divided. I shall not much differ from the
common partition: but distribute the same into a Preface, Prophecy or Visions:
and a Conclusion.

I. The Preface contains the Title and Dedication of the Book, Chapter 1.
unto verse 9.

II. The Prophecy I distinguish into seven Visions, clearly enough and
distinctly showed by Christ unto John in the Spirit, in the I Will Patmos: from
thence unto ver. 6. of Chap. 22. But those that suppose, and urge that the
Book consists of one continued Vision, do wholly stray from the Scope, and in
vain weary the Reader, as I shall show by and by.

The first Vision is of Christ gloriously walking among the seven golden
Candlestickes, and commanding John to write certain Commandments unto the
seven Churches of Asia, and also the following Visions, for the perpetual
doctrine, instruction, and consolation of the Faithful: from ver. 9. Chap.
1.2.3.

This Vision is not prophetical of future things, as the six following, but
wholly doctrinall, confirming John in the function of teaching, and commending
his Apostolical authority unto the seven Churches of Asia.

The second is touching Gods majesty sitting in the Throne, and of the Lamb
standing in the Throne: and of the Book sealed with seven Seals, and of the
opening of the Seal and of the Book by the Lamb, and diverse wonders thence
proceeding: Chap. 4.5.6.7.

The third is of the seven Trumpets of the Angels, and wonderful apparitions
following thereupon. Chap. 8.9.10.11.

The fourth is of the woman in travel of a Man-Child, and of the Dragon
persecuting the Man-Child and woman: of the woman's flight into the wilderness,
and of the rage of the two Beasts against the Saints: Chap. 12.13.14.

The fifth is of the seven Angels pouring forth the Seven Vials of the last
plagues upon the adversaries, and throne of the Beast: Chap. 15.16.

The sixth is of the Judgment of the great whore, and ruin of Babylon, and of
the casting of the Beast and False-prophet, with all his followers into the
Lake of fire and brimstone: Chap. 17.18.19.

The seventh and last, is of the binding and loosing of the Dragon at the end
of a thousand years, and lastly of the Judgment of the Devil, Death, Hell,
and all reprobates that were not written in the Book of Life, and of the
figure and glorious state of the Heavenly Jerusalem: Chap. 20.21.22. unto ver.
6.

III. The conclusion of the Book commends the profitablenesse of the
Prophecy, and by an Anathema establishes the divine authority thereof: from
verse 6. unto the end.

CHAPTER. VIII. Touching the Form of the Revelation.
THe things hitherto praemised, have been treated of by many Interpreters.
That which remains touching the form and method of the Revelation, has as
yet been observed but by few, nay; to speak it with modesty, I scarcely find
the same explicated by any one.

The form indeed seems to be Epistolarie: having an Epistolarie Inscription
and Subscription, and is shut up with an Epistolarie wish common to the
Apostles: all the Acts also of the first Vision, are Epistle-wise.

But that which begins at the fourth Chapter (which is the first
prophetical Vision) and the following unto the end, if you well observe them,
have plainly a Dramaticall form, The Apocalypse a prophetical interlude.
hence the Revelation may truly be called a Prophetical Drama, show, or
representation. For as in humane Tragedies, diverse persons one after another
come upon the Theater to represent things done, and so again depart: diverse
Chores also or Companies of Musicians and Harpers distinguish the diversity of
the Acts, and while the Actors hold up, do with musical accord sweeten the
weariness of the Spectators, and keep them in attention: so verily the thing
it self speaks that in this Heavenly Interlude, by diverse shows and
apparitions are represented diverse, or rather (as we shall see) the same
things touching the Church, not past, but to come, and that their diverse Acts
are renewed by diverse Chores or Companies, one while of 24. Elders and four
Beast, another while of Angels, sometimes of Sealed ones in their foreheads,
and sometimes of Harpers, etc. with new Songs, and worthy Hymmes, not so much
to lessen the wearisomnesse of the Spectators, as to infuse holy meditations
into the minds of the Readers, and to lift them up to Heavenly matters. The
which thing not having been hitherto observed by most Interpreters, they have
wondered what was meant by so many Songs, Hymmes, and change of Angels and
Personages renewed in diverse Visions, and what by the often iterated
Representations of the Beast, Babylon, and the last judgment, which caused
them to seek and imagine Anticipations, Recapitulations, and unnecessary
Mysteries in those things, which either served only to the Dramaticall
decorum, or else had a manifest respect to the method of the Visions,
concerning which I will speak by and by.

What Origin therefore wrote touching the SONG OF SONGS: In Prologo Cant. and
Homil. 1.
that it seemed to him Solomon wrote a wedding song after the manner of a
Drama: which, says he, is a Song of many Personages, like as a Fable is acted
on the Theater, where diverse persons are brought in, some coming, and some
departing, that the Text of the Narration may be made up by diverse, and unto
diverse men: and he calls that wedding Verse a Spiritual Interlude of four
Personages, which he says the Lord revealed unto him in the same. viz. the
Bridegroom and Bride: with the Bride her virgins: with the Bridegroom his flock
of Companions: The same thing I more truly may say touching the Revelation,
that it seems unto me, the Lord Jesus revealed the same unto John by his
Angel, after the manner of a Dramaticall Representation, and that it is an
Heavenly Dramma or Interlude, not only of four, but of diverse persons and
things, by Typical Speeches and Actions, exhibiting to John's sight or hearing
those things in the Heavenly Theater, which God would have him to understand,
and us by continual prayers, meditations, and observations to search out,
touching the future state of the Church. And that ye may understand this to be
so, I will endeavor to delineate and pourtray the method of the Revelation,
now indeed briefly as in a Type, reserving the rest to the Preface of every
Vision: But the order of the Personages, by whom this Prophetical Interlude is
Acted, I will by and by set down in a short Table.

CHAPTER. IX. Touching the general Method of the Revelation
TO speak accurately of the Method and Order of this Prophefie: whither the
general, by which the prophetical visions do all cohere one with another: or
the special, by which the Apparitions of every of the Visions do follow each
other, is not for me to do, although I have employed my study more then thirty
years this way. Yet I will say (to stir up the endeavors of others) as much as
the Lord in mercy has for the present revealed unto me.

It is now fifty two years ago, since I first heard the Table-Propositions (as
they call them) of my Master Zachary Vrsinus that great Divine, in Wisdoms
College, out of the Old and New Testament. He for five years together, as
often as the Reader had ended with the Epistle of Jude, READ, (said he)
Matthew. I desired to hear the Revelation also, being ignorant of the
difficulties, which either my Master shunned, or else would not as yet commit
unto his Disciples. At length Anno 1570. being again come (in course of reading
of the Scriptures) unto the Revelation, he bade the Reader go forward. Then
the Revelation was read: which he illustrated with brief notes, in so many
days, yea half hours, as there are Chapters in the Book, yet accurately, as
he was wont to do all things: these his Observations I with all attention
gave heed unto, and as much as might be, set them down in writing, and thereby
I began to observe somewhat of the obscurity about the distinction and analogy
of the Visions.

Fourteen years after I my self being called to the Government of the said
College (wherein also I continued so many years) running over seven times at
least the explication of the Revelation, I at length seemed unto my self to
observe some kind of Harmony in certain Visions, and as it were some distinct
Acts of most of the Visions.

Here specially of the Ancients Augustine, and of the latter, Nicolaus Collado
a Divine of Lausanna, did most effect me. Lib. 20. de C. D. cap. 17


For Augustine in his Commentary de C. D. after he had taught that the last
judgment should certainly come to pass, both by other Scriptures, and largely
also by the Revelation, at length, he says: In this Book many things are
obscurely spoken, to exercise the mind of the Reader: and in it are a few
things, by the manifestation whereof the rest might with labor be found out:
chiefly because it so repeateth the same things after a diverse manner, as if
it seemed to speak of different things, whereas we shall find that it
speaks of the very same things, after a diverse manner. By which words
Augustine seems to me wittily and truly to say three things. First, that
many dark things are contained in this Book, to exercise the minds of the
Reader. Secondly, that some things in the Book are plain, by the
understanding whereof, the other more obscure things might with study be dived
into. Thirdly, that it principally conduces unto the searching out of the
mysteries of this Book, to observe that the same things are spoken of in
diverse Types after a different manner, although different things seem to be
spoken of.

The first of which touching the obscurity seems plainly so to be, as has
before been showed in Chap. 3. by which indeed the Holy Ghost has involved
this Prophecy of the New Testament, not because he would not have the same to
be understood by the Readers: but to have their minds and understanding
exercised with labor, study, and prayer: as appears Chap. 13.18. and 17.9,
etc.

The second does notably respect the special method. Augustines animadversions
touching the method of the Revelation.
For almost in every Vision there are some few (if not many) things, whence the
plain understanding of the other more obscure may be found out: either
because they are properly spoken: or because, the significations of the Types
are declared by the Spirit himself: or lastly because the Types themselves are
so manifestly agreeing to the matter signified, as they yield no difficult
understanding unto such as diligently mind the same. For example: It is plain
that in the very beginning it is said, that here those things are revealed,
which must shortly be done: Rev. 1.1.19. and 14.1 and 15.1. Rev. 14.14 and
19.11. and 20.11.
and John is commanded to write those things, which then were, and which should
afterward come to pass: and expressly those last plagues, and oftentimes the
last Judgment: whence two more dark things are easily dived into. First, that
the Types of the Revelation do not represent the foregoing History of the
Israelitish Church: but the future state of the New Church. Secondly, that they
shadow out, not a few Ages only after the Revelation: nor yet the last times
and Tragedy of Antichrist alone, but the whole period of the Church.

Thus it is plain, that the stars are the Ministers of the Churches, the
great stars renowned Teachers. Whence it is not obscure, what is meant by the
great stars falling from Heaven.

Moreover also it is plain, Ezech: 16.2: Ier. 3.1. Ose. 2.5.
that in Scripture a whorish woman does denote the Apostaticall Church. Whence
it is clear, that the woman clothed with the Sun, signifies the true Church:
the flight of the woman into the wilderness, her being out of sight, riding on
the Beast, and sitting upon seven hills, the adulterous and domineering Church
of Rome.

It is also plain, that most of the Visions do end with the last Judgment.
Hence it is manifest, that the periods of the Church are often ended: neither
is one only continued throughout the whole Revelation.

Which very thing the Third Advertisement of Austine does intimate. For by the
seven Seals and seven Trumpets different things seem to be signified, whereas
the same things are treated of after a different manner. Thus the Beasts
appear to be diverse, whereas notwithstanding they are but one. The rupture,
and ruin of Babylon is diversely set forth: and yet it always comes but to one
thing.

And this is that which also Nicolaus Collado seems to have observed in his
Exposition on the Revelation in the School of Lausanna, published Anno 1584.
For following this observation of Augustine he learnedly shows: that it
pleased the Lord to show a thing unto his servants in Visions, not once, but
twice, yea sometimes thrice, the more to confirm the thing: like as in Act.
10. when God would show Peter, that he should not refuse to go in to a heathen
man, it is said that he saw a sheet let down thrice to the Earth from Heaven,
and received up again: so also in the Revelation the future calamities and
changes of the Church are exhibited to John not once, but again and again in
diverse Visions: and indeed in such a manner, that by a certain gradation, the
latter do always add somewhat more clear and weighty to the former. Now
that the matter may appear more evidently, I will set down his own words.

After, Method page 19:
says he, horrible tyranny had oppressed even all the Churches, and that
indeed with a wonderful cloak of hid hypocrisy: and so all liberty was
either extinguished, or banished, or also more and more brought to nothing
through contempt, or did wear away through neglect: Hoc opus hic labor erat:
and therefore the Lord would have the servants of Christ to be forewarned of
such weighty matters in a threefold Vision, least through the universal rage
of wickedness they might be drawn away, or least being sometime drawn away,
they should never return into the right way again. This, I say, was chiefly
the necessary cause of foresignifying the same thing diversely: and the often
inculcating of it by seven Seals, seven Trumpets also, and seven Vials: Now in
these is a certain gradation most worthy of observation. For the opening of
the seven Seals stirs up indeed, and moves the eyes of the Beholders a
far off: neither does it suffer all the senses to be without a part: but the
most shrill sound of the Trumpets breaths indeed something more terrible, and
sounding in the ears of sleepy and dull persons, suffers them not to go on in
their sluggish drowsinesse. Yet these two may seem only to have respect to
the eyes and ears: But the pouring forth of the Vials may be said wholly to
take hold on the whole man, and with heat to scorch him.

It is also worthy of observation, that in this Book are gathered together
seven Visions of three sorts touching the same things, viz. of Seals,
Trumpets, and Vials, so as every latter kind is more full then the former,
(which belongs also unto the Narration of things) and propounds the things
themselves more nearly to the view of the eye, denoting, and more certainly
defining the same with more circumstances. For example: the opening indeed of
the Seals comprehends the whole matter, though summarily, yet significantly
enough: but all the same things much more significantly in the sounding of the
Trumpets: but the pouring out of the vials comprehends these very things most
significantly of all. So in those Dreams of Joseph it is more express, that
Joseph should be worshipped by the Sun, Moon, and eleven Stars, then that
his sheafe should be worshipped by his brethrens sheaves. So in the Dreams of
Pharaoh those seven ears of corn did more nearly serve to signify either
fruitfulness or dearth: then the seven kine. So also the Vision respecting the
four Monarchies in that Image, whose head was of gold, Dan. 2. and opposing
unto them the Kingdom of Christ, yet it less expresses the matter, then that
following vision in Dan. 7. propounding the same things in four Beasts: also
the vision of part of those very things in Chap. 8. is more plain: and in the
Ram, He-goat, and his four horns, etc. again special particulars he also
prosecutes more specially, Chap. 11. These things COLLADO.

Hence he after a new manner has fashioned his method into the form of an
Harmony, oppositely coupling the seven Seals of the second Vision, with the
seven Trumpets of the third Vision, and with the seven Vials of the fifth
Vision, by a singular study and praiseworthy diligence.

Now although I do not at this time dispute of his explication it self: On
Argument of Chap. 16. What seems to be required in Collado his Method.
and that the combining of the seven Vials with the seven Seals and Trumpets,
is not without scruple, as I shall show in its place: as also that he
restraines the whole Revelation unto the Tragedy of Antichrist, or those times
only which after the rising and growth of Antichrist felt the calamities
shadowed out: nor lastly does it from that combination or coupling sufficiently
appear, what is the meaning of many other wonders touching the measuring of
the Temple, and the two witnesses slain by the Beast, of the travail and
flight of the woman into the wilderness: of the Beast four times coming forth
on the Theater, The Revelation represents not a continued History.
of the last Judgment so often times represented, etc. and how these things
cohere with the Seals, Trumpets, and Vials: Notwithstanding I hence have drawn
two things which are sufficiently evident: First indeed, that they do err from
the scope, who with Lyranus, Antoninus, and others, imagine that a continued
course of the Ecclesiastical History, from the beginning of the Revelation
unto the end of the world is praefigured in this Prophecy: Unto which opinion,
besides those things Collado has noted, this in special is contradictorie,
that almost in every of the Visions, the whole period is so evidently ended by
the Type of the last Judgment, as it cannot easily be quaestioned, or
weakened by imagined Anticipations. Secondly, that of Austin in the
fore-alledged place: The Revelation does so repeat the same things many ways,
as it may seem to speak of different things, whereas it is found to speak
the same things only in a diverse manner: that is, it represents the future
condition of the Church, so far as it concerns the principal events, by
diverse Visions again and again, one while more obscurely, another while more
plainly.

Hence briefly I thus determine touching the general Method of the whole
Prophecy.

First, that we stray not from the scope, we must know, Revelation is not a
representation of things past, like as, for example, the History of Daniel,
That things past are not represented.
Susanna, or the Baptist, is represented in a Comoedie, as Alcasar affirms,
but that it is a Prophecy of future events concerning the Christian Church,
even from the time of the Revelation (which, as before I showed, was about the
14. year of Domitian, or the ninety sixth of Christ) unto the last deliverance
of the Church, and utter destruction of Antichrist with all the wicked. For
therefore it is called a Revelation and a Prophecy, which is only of future
things: and Christ commands John to write those things which must be done
afterward.

The which notwithstanding is not to be taken so precisely, as if there were
nothing at all of things past intermingled. For almost in three places, the
argument of the Visions so requiring, it could not be avoided, but some things
past should be mixed with things to come. The first place is in Chap. 12.
touching the woman in travail with the Man-Child, etc. where the beginning or
original of the Christian Church is plainly figured out by the Type of Christ's
Nativity and Ascension: which Vision therefore is more perfect then all the
rest, as we shall see in its place. The second place is in Chap. 17. where the
Beast, on which the whore sits, is said to have been in the five Kings
before the Revelation. Lastly in Chap. 20. touching the thousand years of
Satan's binding, that he might no more seduce the Nations, a few years, to wit,
twenty five, from the destruction of the Temple and Jewish Nation went before
the Revelation: for Satan did not cease through the Jews to deceive the
Nations, and keep them from the Gospel of Christ until the Synagogue and the
Jewish Nation was dissipated: as shall be showed in its place.

Secondly we must remember: Vision: The Revelation is not one continued vision
but distinct
yet indeed it is not one, neither revealed at one time, but are many distinct
Visions, to wit, Seven, as it were so many sights exhibited to John in the
Spirit, as was erewhile showed in the Partition of the Book: in which least I
should go too far from other Interpreters, I retained the sevenfold number,
which is familiar, and as it were peculiar unto this Prophecy: neither have I
varied save only in the seventh Vision, to which why I rather joined the
twentieth Chapter, then to the sixth, I will show hereafter.

Evident traces of distinction do sufficiently appear throughout in the Text,
as shall be showed Chap. 1.10. whither John saw them in seven times and
ecstasies, or in fewer. This is certain, that he was not once only, but
oftentimes ravished in the Spirit, neither saw he all in one place, but
somethings in Patmos, somethings in Heaven, somethings at the Sea-shoare,
somethings in the Wilderness, and lastly somethings in a high mountain, which
is to be observed partly against the new feigned consequence of the Inquirer,
partly against that received error, as if one continual History of the
Church, from the beginning even unto the end were observed in this Book: from
which supposition many things will necessary be confusedly explicated, and
contrary to the scope.

Thirdly it is to be noted, Austin has observed, That the Revelation speaks
the same things after a diverse manner, The Revelation says the same things in
a diverse manner.
that is, that diverse Visions by changed types do represent the same period of
the Ecclesiastical History. Of which thing that often iterated description of
the last Judgment is a most clear Argument, which is annexed unto every one
of the Visions, not by anticipation (as commonly it is imagined) but in a right
order of History. Now least this so often repetition of the same things, might
be thought to be idle or unprofitable, the following observations are to be
added.

Fourthly therefore it is to be noted, Collado has well observed) the former
Visions are for the most part more obscure, The latter Visions are clearer then
the former.
the latter bring clearer light to the darkness of the former, if you rightly
observe them. The opening of the seven Seals seem to be obscure in the second
Vision: But the seven Trumpets, especially the five latter, touching the great
stars falling from Heaven to the Earth: the Locusts tormenting, and yet not
killing men, the Armies of the four Angels of Euphrates, etc. are more clear
in the third Vision. The measuring of the Temple, and the Prophecy of the two
Witnesses seems to be obscure, in the third Vision: but it is illustrated by
the preaching of the three Angels against Antichrist, in the fourth vision. The
History of the Beast is obscure Chap. 11. and 13. but most clear, Chap. 17.
The last Judgment is more darkely shadowed out toward the end of the second
and third Visions: but more clearly toward the end of the fourth, by the Type
of the Harvest and Vintage, and of the fifth Vision by the Type of a great
Earthquake: sixth: and most properly in the seventh. The periods of the visions
are the same, but not the same histories.


Fifthly it is to be noted, that the same things are diversely spoken, not
because the same individual events are again iterated, but because the self
same period of the Church according to different Histories more known, and
sometimes also the same are shadowed out by more manifest Types. For example:
In the second vision the blacke-horse denotes the Church made black with
heresies after Constantines time: The pale-horse having death fitting on, and
drawing Hell after him, the Church sick even unto death, toward Antichrists
rising: In the third vision by the sounding of the third, fourth, and fifth
Trumpets the same state of the Church is indeed represented: yet more specially
the declining, corruption, and lastly the apostasy of the Sea of Rome: In the
fourth vision her Tyranny and Idolatry: In the fifth and sixth vision is
exhibited her ruin and judgment: and so of the rest, as we shall see in the
Exposition.

Sixthly, Also it is to be noted, visions do figure out the same period of the
Church, yet not all the whole: but some indeed the whole, The period of the
church is not whole in all the visions.
others some certain distances: For the whole period of the Ecclesiastical
History from the Revelation unto the end, is principally distinguished by
four distances: afterward I call them four periods in the same sense, for,
the four remarkable distances or state of the whole period. There are four
distances of the period of Christ's Church.


The first distance was of the Church flourishing and groaning under the Roman
Tyrants, until the peace brought in by Constantine.

The second distance was of the Church reigning and rioting under Christian
Emperors, until the rising of the Western Antichrist in Boniface III. Pope
of Rome: and of the Eastern in Mahumet six years after: Of which distance
HIEROM, after, says he, the Church came under Christian Princes: Tom. 2. in
vita Malchi.
in power indeed and riches she became greater, but less in virtues.

The third distance was of the Church troaden upon, and oppressed by
Antichrist, especially the Western, until the measuring of the Temple, which
began to be effected by the two witnesses JOHN Husse, and JEROME OF PRAGUE, who
were slain by the Beast in the Council of Constans Anno. 1414. and thence
until Luther, by whose ministry the measuring of the Temple (broken off, or
hindered through the Tyranny of Popes) began to be continued Anno. 1517.

Lastly the fourth distance is of the church reformed from Popery, and of the
declining of the Papacy, to endure until the end. For the Beast goes into
destruction, whatsoever the gates of hell attempt to the contrary, Lib: 3. de
P. R. cap. 21
and Bellarmin their Prophet said truly: From that time, that the Pope began
by you to be Antichrist, his Empire has been so far from increasing, as it
has always more and more decreased.

This whole period, I say, of the Christian Church, some visions do represent,
according to the fourfold state erewhile declared: and these I call UNIVERSAL
Visions, because they contain the universal History of the Church: but some
shadow out not the entire, Universal visions.
but only the two latter distances of the whole period, or the Tragedy of
Antichrist: and these I call PARTICULAR, because they praefigure not the whole
History of the Church, Particular visions.
but only the latter part thereof touching Antichrists rage and judgment, and
of the Churches warfare and victory against him.

UNIVERSAL Visions I find to be four: viz. the second touching the seven
Seals: and the third of the seven Trumpets: and the fourth of the woman in
travail: and the seventh (which is as it were a Recapitulation of all the
foregoing) touching the binding and loosing of the Dragon, etc. The PARTICULAR
Visions are two, viz. the fifth of the seven Vials of the last plagues: and the
sixth of the Judgment of the Great Whore, the overthrow of Babylon, and
destruction of Antichrist. And these things I suppose do suffice to the plain
understanding of the general Method of this Prophecy.

CHAPTER. X. Of the special Method of the Apocalypse.
WHat concerns the special Method, because it is more diligently explicated
in every of the Visions, I shall in this place speak the less thereof.

First, The form of every vision is tragical.
and at length the Tragical end also of the wicked themselves. Now Writers of
Tragedies usually mingle ((...)) feigned things with serious, both for
preparation, as for delight sake, and to distinguish their Dramaes, or
Interludes into Acts, Scenes, and Chores, the which also I find to be observed
in this Dramaticall Prophecy. For most of the Visions, besides the
prophetical things they treat of, have somethings (...) Praeparatorie: They
also contain certain distinct Acts of Prophetical Types: and diverse Chores
or Companies beginning, or coming in between, or ending the Prophetical
Action with musical accord, serving to the decorum and pleasantness of the
Drama.

Secondly,

I call that Dramatical which is preparatory to the visions: The Dramaticall
matters are to be discerned from prophetical.
of which kind is what we have in Vision first Chap. 1. from v. 9. unto the
end: in the second Chap. 4. and 5. in the third Chap. 8. unto ver. 7. in the
fifth Chap. 15. throughout. The Chores also, and their Prayers, Songs, Hymmes,
Praises, as are, the Chore or Company of the four and twenty Elders, in the
second, third, and sixth Vision: the Chore of the four Beasts in the second and
sixth Vision: the Chore of Angels in the second vision: the Chore of all
creatures, ibid: the uncertain Chore in the fifth and sixth Vision: the Chore of
Harpers in the fourth and fifth: whose Symphonie and Songs are to be read in
the said Visions, Chap. 4. ver. 8, etc. and Chap. 5.9, etc. and Chap. 6.12,
etc. and Chap. 12. ver. 10, etc. and Chap. 15.3, etc. and Chap. 19. ver. 1,
etc. All these properly serve for the decorum of the Prophetical Drama,
neither do they contain Prophesies, but propound Moral Doctrine, of
celebrating the works of God, and his Judgments unto the Church. But they
that search for other mysteries in these things, seem to labor in vain.

Prophetical, I call those Parts or Types of Visions, which by word, gesture
or action, represent future events concerning the Church, by a certain
similitude of things, whither open or hid: and for the most part are repeated
out of the Acts of the ancient Prophets: In the understanding and application
of which unto their events past, present, and to come, the true explication of
this Prophecy does consist, and principally aim at.

Thirdly, general of the whole Book, The distinct Acts of the visions.
and the special of the Visions in particular. The general Argument (as we
heard in the foregoing Chapter) is specially in two things. For the Apocalypse
forewarneth the Church of her condition and sorrows at hand: and arms her
with comfort against the same. The same we have in every of the Visions. For
they both foretell future evils, as also show the Godly the remedies thereof:
yet all show not the same things, nor in the same manner. For some praefigure
All, that is, both the first, and the second Battles, which I called UNIVERSAL:
some the second only and latter, which I called PARTICULAR. The former and
latter battles of the church.
By the first or former battles of the Church, I mean, the Combats she had
with Tyrants and Roman Adversaries, oppugning the Testimony of Jesus: as also
with Heretics diversely depraving the word of God. By the second and later,
her Combats with the Eastern and Western Antichrists.

Hence there are as it were four distinct scopes of the universal Visions:
The four Acts of the universal Visions.
but of the Particular two only: the which I for instruction sake do name Acts.

The first Act of the universal Visions has a proposition of the calamities,
with which the Church shall be assaulted by Pagans and Heretics until
Antichrists rising.

The second in way of parallel to the first, praefigureth comforts opposite to
the calamities of the Godly.

The third shadoweth out an amplification of calamities, or new and more
glorious Combats of the Church under Antichrist.

Lastly, the fourth parallel to the third, shows the Catastrophe of all
evils, viz. the declining of Antichrists Kingdom, and the casting of all
adversaries into the lake of fire: and on the contrary the Churches Victory,
and Eternal Glory.

The particular Visions are finished with the two latter Acts, The two Acts of
the particular Visions.
because they only represent Antichrists tragedy, rage, declining, and
destruction: the which notwithstanding the former touching the seven Vials does
more briefly: the later touching the whore riding on the Beast more largely and
clearly: therefore this also is to be distinguished into four Acts, yet
answering to the two latter Acts of the universal Visions.

Now although the Parallell-Acts both former and latter are not always divided
by whole Chapters (like as Tragedie-writers use to do) but sometimes are
joined together, and as it were mingled in the same Chapters, because they
shadow out Histories or things by the same periods, and walking (as the saying
is) with equal steps: yet every where (if thou well observe the Method) they
have traces evident enough, as we have diligently showed in every of the
Visions: where also we have noted the Marks and Periods of every of them.

CHAPTER. XI. The manner of interpreting observed by PAREUS.
FVrthermore by the things hitherto spoken touching the Argument and Method,
the manner of interpreting observed by us will not be obscure.

To every vision we have praefixed its proper dispensation or order, with as
much brevity, and light as could be: the Chapters we have illustrated with
Arguments, Parts, and Analysis.

The Doctrines which in this Prophecy are many and excellent: we have so
labored to expound and apply unto the Scope of divine Scriptures showed by
the Apostle: Romans 15.4. 2. Tim. 3.16. (being profitable, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, and lastly for the patience,
comfort, and hope of the Saints) that this Book may with no great labor,
profitablie be propounded unto the Churches by the Ministers of Gods word.

Now seeing in the beginning I said, that the eternal Deity of Christ is
thorowout in this Prophecy proved with such evident Arguments against
Heretics, as scarcely any other Scripture does it more clearly, I thought it
worth the labor to note above XL. Arguments of that nature in their several
places, vindicating them from the depravings of Eniedinus the Transsilvanian
Heretic (which he calls Explications:) that it might so much the more appear,
that those Ancients, who (as Eusebius records) denied the Canonical
Authority of this Book, as not written by the Apostle John, but the Heretic
Cerinthus, Lib. 7. hist. cap. 25.
did either not look into the Book, and so sinned through gross ignorance,
or else were carried away with more then humane affection.

What Method I have taken in explicating Prophetical things, has already been
said, and the Praefaces of the Visions shall show: in which I have not only
labored to declare the Argument, Scope, Coherence, Order, and Period of every
one, but in special clearly to show the Harmony and consent of the foregoing
and following Types, and of the darker and more clear each with other, and with
the Types and Phrases of the ancient Prophets, that so I might illustrate the
Revelation by the Revelation: It is most safe to expound the Revelation by the
Revelation.
which manner of interpreting cannot be but most safe and certain. For seeing
it is evident, that the darker Types go before, and the clearer follow after,
and are notwithstanding Analogicall or agreeing with each other: undoubtedly
the more dark must be sought out by the clearer. Now the more clear have no
extraordinary difficult application unto the things signified by them: And
therefore we may thence with some labor draw the understanding of the darker,
which also I have labored to do.

In sum (following Austines advice) I have showed these two things: that the
same things are so many ways repeated in this Book, as it may seem to speak
of different things, whereas we shall find that the same things are diversely
related: And: that a few (yea not a few but many) things are in the Book, Aug.
lib. 20. de C. D. cap. 17.
by the manifestation whereof the rest might with labor be found out: which
again I say not, as if I thought that all the mysteries of the Revelation were
by me unfolded: Far be it: I come short in many things. Throughout where I
stick, and where bounds seem to be set, Ephesians. 4.7.
there I ingenuously profess a man must stand and go no further. For here is
wisdom. 2. Cor. 12.8
To them that earnestly call upon God the Spirit is given according to the
measure of the gift of Christ. It befell even the Apostle Paul, that he
obtained not the thing he petioned of God. How much more may the same befall
us, and me the least of all: especially in these things, of which the Lord has
as yet reserved much in his own power.

Wherefore to interpret the Revelation, What it is to interpret the Revelation.
is not to untie all the knots of Aenigmaes, to leave unsifted or be ignorant
of nothing at all in the same, or by precisely interpreting the meaning of the
Image, Character, number of the Beasts name, the Beast himself, the woman on
the Beast, the eating of her flesh, the seven, the ten Kings that shall burn
her, Gog and Magog, to make all gainsayers to be silent. For who has ever
attained unto this by interpretation or commenting on any part of Holy Writ?
They therefore that require the same, are wiser then Christ, the Apostles and
God himself: And on the contrary such are wise against God who make a mock of
the Oracles they understand not, because of their obscurity, or because of the
diversity of Interpreters.

Many types of future things remain secret and are known to God only, until
they be fulfilled. The whole fourth Act with its accomplishment is secret:
because the seventh Trumpet has not yet sounded: neither is the seventh Vial
yet poured forth into the Air. A great part also of the third Act is reserved
unto posterity, which in time shall see the full gathering together of the
Kings of the Earth into Harmageddon, the devouring and burning of the whorish
woman, the desolation of Babylon, and the event of the Goggish War, etc. The
beginning we see, and further shall see.

In the two former Acts, and the better part of the third (the accomplishment
whereof hitherto Histories and daily experience do so plainly show, that if we
held our peace, the very stones would cry out) it is the part of a Faithful
Interpreter, not to draw the Readers from the scope, neither to send them from
those things which are done at home before their eyes, to seek for Chymeras in
the Hyperborean Mountains, which thing almost all the Jesuitical brethren at
this day do in their Commentaries, least happily Antichrist should be found in
the Mountains of Rome, for the discovery of whom the greater part of the
Apocalypse was of old revealed, and circumscribed with such apparent oracles,
that after the History and experience of so many Ages, we may justly question,
whither it were greater blindness in the Jews not to believe in Christ, then
for these to deny the Pope of Rome to be Antichrist.

Wherefore I shall seem to have performed my function sufficiently, not if I
discuss all the obscurities of mysteries so irresutably, that all do applaude
me: but if (so far as God has enabled me) by the help of my Method laid
down, I shall congruously, perspicuously, and without deceit (according to
scope and experience) explicate both the other Aenigmaes of this Prophecy, and
especially that part which contains the amplification and Catastrophe of the
Combats of the Church, and properly respects these last times. Now by doing
hereof, if I have not kindled a Torch, to take off the darkness with which it
seems to be covered, yet verily I have labored, and if I be not deceived,
have lighted a Candle, by the light and guidance whereof, as by Ariadne her
thread, other ((...)) Godly Divines shall after me dive more deeply into these
hidden mysteries, and more nearly point at that Son of perdition sitting in the
Temple of God as god, and exalting himself above all that is worshipped,
showing himself that he is God: And they shall say: This is he: O Romanist
beware of him.

AMEN.
THE APPARITIONS AND PERSONS MAKING UP THIS PROPHETICAL DRAMA, REVEALED IN
SEVEN VISIONS.
In Vision I. Chapters 1.2.3.
JOHN THE EVANGELIST, Actor, and interlocutor throughout. Christ in a glorious
form walking amongst the seven Candlestickes: The author of the Revelation,
and maker of the prologue.
In Vision II. Chapt. 4.5.6.7.
The majesty of God sitting on the throne. The first Chore of the four and
twenty Elders. The 2. Chore of the four Beasts. The Book sealed with seven
Seals in the hand of the sitter on the throne. A strong Angel desiring the
book to be opened. The Lamb as it were slain opening the book. The 3. Chore
of Angels. The 4. Chore of all creatures. A white horse with his Rider coming
forth out of the first Seal. A red horse and his Rider, out of the second
Seal. A black horse and his Rider, out of the third Seal. A pale horse with
death on him, hell following him, out of the fourth Seal. The souls of the
Martyrs under the Altar, in the fifth Seal. A great Earthquake, out of the
sixth Seal. Four Angels holding the four winds that they should not blow. An
Angel from the East with the Seal of God. The multitude of Sealed ones and
Martyrs.
In Vision III. Chapt. 8.9.10.11.
Seven Angels with seven trumpets, out of the seventh Seal. An Angel with a
golden censer at the Altar. An Angel sounding the first trumpet. An Angel
sounding the second trumpet. An Angel sounding the third trumpet. An Angel
sounding the fourth trumpet. An Angel sounding the fifth trumpet. Locusts
coming up out of the bottomless pit into the earth. An Angel sounding the
sixth trumpet. Four Angels bound and loosed at Euphrates. A strong Angel
clothed with a cloud, and having a Book in his hand. John eating up the Book,
and measuring the temple with a reed. The two witnesses prophesying. The Beast
out of the pit, killing the witnesses. An Earthquake overthrowing a tenth part
of Babylon. An Angel sounding the seventh trumpet. The first Chore of the
four and twenty Elders.
In Vision IV. Chapt. 12.13.14.
A woman clothed with the Sun, bringing forth a Man-child, and flying into
the Wilderness. The son of the woman taken up into Heaven. The red Dragon
persecuting the woman. Michael fighting for the woman against the Dragon. The
fifth uneertaine Chore. The seven-headed Beast ascending out of the sea. The
two-horned Beast ascending out of the earth. The Image of the Sea-beast. A
company of Sealed-ones standing with the Lamb on the Mountain. A sixth Chore
of Harpers. An Angel flying with the everlasting Gospel. An Angel publishing
the ruin of Babylon. An Angel denouncing punishments to the worshippers of
the Beast. Christ on the cloud with a sharp sickle. An Angel proclaiming the
last harvest and vintage.
In Vision V. Chapt. 15.16.
The seven Angels with seven Vials. The sixth Chore of Harpers upon the sea of
Glass. An Angel pouring forth the 1. Vial on the Earth. An Angel pouring
forth the 2. Vial on the Sea. An Angel pouring forth the 3. Vial on the
Rivers and Fountains, An Angel pouring forth the 4. Vial on the Sun. An
Angel pouring forth the 5. Vial on the throne of the Beast. An Angel pouring
forth the 6. Vial on Euphrates. Three unclean Spirits like frogs out of the
mouth of the Beast, etc. An Angel pouring forth the 7. Vial into the air.
The rupture of Babylon by an Earthquake.
In Vision VI. Chapt. 17.18.19.
The whore riding on the seven-headed Beast. The seven-headed Beast with his
description. The ten Kings waging war with the Lamb: afterward burning the
whore. An Angel publishing the fall of Babylon. An uncertain voice calling the
Godly out of Babylon. Kings, Merchants, Seamen, bewailing the ruin of
Babylon. An Angel casting a millstone into the sea. A fifth uncertain Chore.
The first Chore of the 24. Elders, and the second Chore of the 4. Beasts. John
intending to worship the angel. Christ with an heavenly army rushing upon the
Beast and the Kings of the Earth. An Angel standing in the sun, calling the
birds unto the prey. The judgment of the Beast, False-Prophet, Kings of the
earth, and worshippers of the Beast.
In Vision VII. Chapt. 20.21.22.
An Angel with the key of the bottomless Pit, and a great Chain. The old
serpent bound a thousand years. The martyrs and conquerours of the beast
reigning with Christ a thousand years. Satan let loose seducing the Nations,
and raising Gog and Magog against the Holy City. The casting of Satan into the
Lake of fire. The raising of the dead, and the last judgment. The new
Jerusalem coming down from Heaven: the Bride of the Lamb. God in the throne
publishing the judgment. John seeing all these things, and intending to
worship the angel. The Conclusion, the Lord Jesus putting an end to the Drama.
A TABLE OF THE Principal QUESTIONS which are expounded in this COMMENTARY.
In the Preface.
1. OF the Author of the Revelation. Page 5. 2. Of the Canonical authority of
the Revelation. Page 8. 3. Of the obscurity of the Book, what it is, and
whence, with the remedies thereof. Page 9. 4. Of the Interpreters of the
Revelation, both Ancient and Modern, and of the manner of interpreting observed
by them. Page 11. 5. Of the dignity, time, profit, and scope of this Prophecy.
Page 13. 6. Of the argument of the Book. Page 16. 7. Of the Partition of the
Revelation. Page 19. 8. Of the form of the Revelation. ibid. 9. Of the general
Method of the Revelation. Page 20. 10. Of the special Method of the
Revelation. Page 26. 11. Of the manner of interpretation observed by Pareus.
Page 27.
In Chapter I.
12. Of the word Apocalypse. Page 3. 13. A disputation about the words, from him
which is, which was, and which is to come. Page 7. 14. Touching the seven
Spirits, from whom John wishes Grace to the Churches, whither they be seven
created Spirits, or the Holy Ghost. Page 9. 15. Whither in verse 5. there be a
soloecisme, against certain Popish Interpreters. Page 12. 16. The Priesthood
of the New Testament, whither it be common to the Faithful, or proper to the
Clergy, Page 14. 17. Wherher Christ be, and how he calls himself Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last: against Eniedinus the
Samosatenian Page 16. 38. 587. 18. Of the Lords day. Page 20. 19. Whether he
that appeared among the Candlestickes were Christ, and what it teaches, and
whither the ubiquitie of Christ's flesh be thence proved. Page 23. 20. Whither
Heretics do rightly gather that Christ is not God, because he says that he
was dead. Page 26. 27. 21. How the Candlestickes are the Churches, and the
stars the Candlestickes, and of Sacramental phrases. Page 28. 29. 419.
In Chapter II.
22. A disputation about the Saints how far they may fall, or not: and of
their perseverance. Page 34. 71. 23. Whither the Church must suffer for the sin
of her Pastor. Page 35. 24. Of the Heresy of the Nicolaitans. Page 36. 44. 45.
25. Whither because the Papacy is not the true Church of Christ, there was no
true Church before Luthers time: and where it was. 43. and in the Praeface.
Page 19. 26. Of the woman Jezabel. Page 48. 49. 27. Whether, and how Christ is
called the Searcher of the heart and reins: which is proved against the
Heretic Eniedinus. Page 50. 51.
In Chapter III.
28. Whether, because the Saints are said to be worthy that they should walk
with Christ clothed in white robes, or from the promise of the reward of
works, or from the future judgment according to works, etc. it be rightly
inferred, that good works are the meritorious cause of Eternal Life. Page 58.
250. 357. 384. 29. Of the Book of Life, and of them that are written in the
same. Page 60. 384. 30. That the Pope of Rome, as Antichrist, lifts up
himself, and is lifted up by his followers above Christ. Page 63. 297. 298.
31. A dispute touching the grace and cause of conversion, differencing us from
others. Page 67. 68. 81. 32. Of hot, cold, and lukewarm persons in Religion.
Page 76.
In Chapter IV.
33. Of the four and twenty Elders, and of the four Beasts. Page 90. 92.
In Chapter VI.
34. Of the nine persecutions of the Church. Page 110. 35. A discourse touching
the blackehorse and his Rider. Page 112. 113. 127. 36. Of the pale-horse, and
of the mortal palenesse of the Church, whence it came, and when. Page 116.
117. 173. 174, etc. 37. Of the souls of the Martyrs under the Altar, and of
their crying. Page 119. 120. 38. Of Intercession and invocation of Saints. Page
122. 147. 39. Of the rising of the western and eastern Antichrist. Page 124.
125. 127. 144. 170. 186. 289. 290. etc. 304. 40. Of the pride, and tyranny of
Roman Popes against Emperors and Kings. Page 130. 163.
In Chapter VIII.
41. Of the Angel with the Censer at the Altar. Page 153. 154. 42. Of the
analogy of the seven Seals, Trumpets, and Vials. Page 137. 374 375.
In Chapter IX.
43. Of the Locusts and their application unto Antichrists clergy. Page 177,
etc.
In Chapter X.
44. Of oaths. Page 203.
In Chapter XI.
45. Whither the Church could, and may err. Page 213. 46. A disputation
touching the forty two Months. Page 216, etc. 47. Of the Fable and History of
the two witnesses. Page 221. 222. 48. Of the 1260. days Page 224. 225. 49. Of
Antichrists three years reign and an half. Page 230. 231. 240. 286. 50. Of
the great City Babylon, that it is not Jerusalem, but Rome, yea Popish Rome.
Page 235. 236. 343. 344. 349. 399. 443.
In Chapter XII.
51. Of the woman clothed with the Sun, and standing upon the Moon, whether
she be the same with the woman afterward sitting upon the Beast. Page 257.
258. 52. Of the battle of Michael with the the Dragon. Page 265. 53. Diverse
opinions about the woman's flight into the wilderness. Page 275 54. What time
is noted by time, times and a half time. Page 276.
In Chapter XIII.
55. It is disputed touching the former Beast ascending out of the Sea. 282
etc. And what the Author held about it. Page 287. 408. 409. 415. 56. A dispute
about the mortal wound of the Beast. Page 293, etc. 57. Of the second two
horned Beast. Page 304. 58. Of the Image of the Beast. Page 310. 311. 59. Of
the Character of the Beast. Page 313. 60. Of the number of the beasts name Page
316. 317. etc. 61. That the Pope of Rome did not now of late, begin to be
accounted the Antichrist. Page 318. 319.
In Chapter XIV.
62. Riberas disputation touching the Sealed ones, and of the Virgins standing
with the Lamb on the Mountain. Page 329, etc. 63. Of the Angel flying through
the midst of Heaven with the Eternal Gospel. Page 338. 64. A dispute touching
the great City against Ribera. Page 346, etc. 65. How the dead in the Lord are
blessed. Page 355.
In Chapter XVI.
66. Of the seven Vials, whether they be the same with the seven Seals, and
with the seven Trumpets. Page 375. 67. Of the seven Angels pouring out the
Vials, who they are, and what the pouring out of the Vials is. Page 376. 68. Of
the plagues following the pouring out of the seven Vials. Page 376. 377. 69. Of
the King of the East, and the drying up of Euphrates. Page 390. 70. Of the
three Spirits s^nt out unto the Kings of the Earth. Page 394. 395.
In Chapter XVII.
71. That the woman sitting on the Beast is Popish Rome, Antichrists Seat, and
Antichrist himself. Page 404. 409. 72. Of the Beast which was, and is not, and
shall ascend out of the pit: disputed with Ribera. Page 416. 73. Of the seven
Mountains of Rome and the seven Kings. Page 420, etc. 74. Of the Pope of Rome,
when he was made chief Pontife, the eighth King, and Antichrist. Page 428,
etc. 75. Of the ten Kings signified by the horns of the Beast. Page 433. 438.
76. Whether Rome according to Riberas fiction is to be burned before the
coming of Antichrist. Page 441. 77. How God gives into the heart, that is,
works in men's hearts, the liberty of their will remaining. Page 444. 78.
Whither God after the same manner gave good and evil into the hearts of the
Kings: and whether hence it follows that he is the Author of sin. Page 446.
79. How the Kings in eating the flesh of the whore, and burning her with fire
did the good pleasure of God. Page 449.
In Chapter XVIII.
80. Of the causes of the ruin of Babylon, that is, of Rome. Page 456. 81. How
the stirring up of the Saints to revenge: Render to her: is agreeable to the
saying of Christ: Render not evil for evil. Page 461. 82. How it stands with
justice to render double. Page 462. 83. Whether God in commanding to render the
double according to Babylons works: does command rapines, theft, wickedness,
etc. Page 463.
In Chapter XIX.
84. Whether Alcasar has sufficiently demonstrated that properly the Church of
Rome is the wife of the Lamb. Page 481. 85. Whether John did well in proffering
to worship the Angel: and whether the Angel did well to prohibit him. Page
484. 582.
In Chapter XX.
86. Of the binding and loosing of Satan, what, when, and how it was. Page 502.
87. A disputation touching the thousand years of Satan's binding. 506. whether
they be definitely to be understood. 507. where they take their beginning and
ending. 508. what was the condition of the godly in the thousand years. 511.
88. Who were the living and reigning with Christ. 514 89. After what manner,
and how long they lived and reigned with Christ. 516. 90. Who are the rest of
the dead, and how they lived not again. 517. 91. Of the first Resurrection,
how it is to be understood. 518. 520. 92. Of the Chiliasts opinion, the Authors
thereof, and its refutation. 520. 521. 93. Of the first and second death. 519
526. 527. 94. What Satan is said to do the thousand years being ended, and when
he was loosed. 530. 95. A disputation with Bellarmine and Ribera about Gog and
Magog. 539. 96. Of the old and new Goggish war, its occasion and beginning 536.
97. Of the perpetual torments of the damned. 540.
In Chapter XXI.
98. The description of the new Jerusalem, whether it be agreeable to the
Church-Militant on earth, or to the Roman only. 541. 99. Of the new Heaven
and the new Earth. 549. 100. Ludovicus his jest on Sophisters about the Lake of
Fire. 557.
In Chapter XXII.
101. A Disputation against Sophisters for the authority and perfection of the
divine Scriptures. 580, etc. 102. Of the doctrine of Justification by Faith.
584. 585.
decorative device
A COMMENTARY Upon the REVELATION OF JOHN THE APOSTLE.
The argument parts, and analysis of Chap. 1.
After the title, and Apostolical salutation, to the seven Churches of Asia.
John rehearses the first vision, namely the seven golden candlesticks, and
Christ his glorious walking in the midst of them, and how he was affected
with the vision: and received from Christ commandment for to write the same,
both concerning things present, and to come.

The parts of the chapter are two: the former contains the preface to v. 9.

The latter, the vision of Christ gloriously walking in the midst of the
seven candlestickes, from verse. 9, unto the last.

THe preface, contains the title, and the ^postolical dedication of the book.
The title shewet^ first the argument of the book, that it is a ^^velation of
things to come, and Christ the ^utho^ of it, as also the ministry of the
Angel verse. 1. Secondly it notes the person of the author by a periphrasis, or
description, verse. 2. Thirdly it commends the profitablenes of the book from
the necessity of it, verse. 3. The dedication contains the prosopographie, or
description of the persons, who, and to whom he writes, verse. 4. Secondly the
Apostles wish. viz. grace from God, and from the seven spirits, as also from
Jesus Christ: whose threefold office he declares, v. 5. Thirdly the
celebration of the praises of Christ, and giving of thanks, for a threefold
benefit received from him, v. 5, 6: His coming to Judgment is promised, by
the words of Zachary, verse. 7, and in the last place, brings him in
testifying his eternal Godhead and omnipotency, verse. 8. The vision contains
the preparation, and vision it self. In the preparation John shows the name,
how he was affected, the place of his banishment, and the cause, verse. 9.
Secondly the time and manner of the vision, verse. 10. Thirdly a command to
write the vision, and to send it to the seven Churches by name, verse. 11.
Fourthly his Gesture, verse: 12. In the vision are three things, first the form,
secondly the effects, and thirdly the things following. The form of the vision
which he saw is twofold: first the seven Golden candlestickes. Secondly the
form of the Son of man in the midst of them; whose habit, and clothing he
describes, verse. 13: His head, Hair, and eyes, v. 14: His feet and voice,
verse. 15: His right hand holding the seven stars, his mouth armed with a two
edged sword, and his face, shining like the sun, verse. 16. The effects are
first John's Great amazement, secondly his falling to the ground, v. 17. The
things following are, first a twofold comforting of John: first by Gesture, the
laying on of the right hand, verse. 17. Secondly by speech, bidding him not to
fear, and the reason is taken, from the person, and adjuncts of the speaker,
viz. because he is eternal God, the Lord of life, of death, and of hell, verse.
11: 2 The command of writing the present vision, and following prophesies. 3
The unfolding of the mystery, first of the seven stars, that they are the
seven pastors, and secondly of the seven candlestikes, to be the seven
Churches of Asia.

THE FIRST PART OF THE CHAPTER. CONTAINING THE PREface, title, and dedication
of the book.
THe Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto his
servants, things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent and signified it
by his angel unto his servant John,

2 Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ,
and of all things that he saw.

3 Blessed is he that reads, Exodus 3.14. 1 Cor. 15.21. Col. 1.18.
and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things, which
are written therein: for the time is at hand.

4 John to the seven churches in Asia. Grace be unto you and peace, from him
which is, and which was, and which is to come: and from the seven spirits which
are before his throne:

5 And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten
of the dead, and the prince of the kings of the earth: unto him that loved us,
and washed us from our sins in his own blood.

6 And has made us kings, and priests unto God and his Father: to him be glory
and dominion for ever and ever, Amen.

7 Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also
which pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him:
even so. Amen.

8 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which
is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.

A COMMENTARY UPON THE REVELATION Chap. 1, verse. 1.
THe revelation) this prophetical title, does express the argument of the
book, called in Gr. (...). Concerning the meaning of which word, there is
extant in a college called wisdom college (of which I have before spoken) a
manuscript in way of commentary on this book, which Gives us an example of
their monastical ignorance: the author tells us, a monastical exposition upon
the word Apocalypse.
that the word apocalypse is compounded, of apo, re, and clipsor, velare. O the
miserable barbarism of that age, attempting to unfold these high mysteries,
and in the mean time ignorant of the very name of the title. The verb (...)
signifyes, to reveal a secret, from which comes apocalypsis a revelation of a
secret, such as are all future things. For it is not man, but God, who
foreseeth, and reveals things to come. But the events which were to befall
the Church under the new Testament were hid both from John, and us, but are
revealed in this book: and therefore it is rightly called (...), to which we
may ad) (...), that is, a revelation of things to come. Afterward it is
sometimes called a prophefie, from the argument of it, which is a prediction of
future things revealed by God. And the title answers to the title of the
ancient prophets, as, the vision of Isaiah, the vision of Obadiah, the
prophecy of Niniveh, which Naum saw, the prophecy which Habacucsaw, the word
of the Lord that came to Hosea, to Joel, to Micah, etc. so that it shows the
divine authority of the book. For to reveal things to come, is from God
only: so that this book, being a revelation, is inspired of God, which
argument John afterward does more fully confirm. For as Ierom well observes,
this mystical book is entitled, a revelation, to give us to understand, that
we have need of the knowledge, and explanation of it, that we may say with the
prophet, open my eyes, and I will consider the marveillous things of thy law
Psalm. 119.18.

Of Jesus Christ) that is, which Christ revealed unto John. ^ argument of the
deity of Christ.
So that Christ is the author of the revelation, which is the first argument to
prove the Godhead of Christ, in this book. For God, by the prophet, does
assume it as a thing peculiar to himself, to reveal secrets. Isai. 42, 9, and
41, 23: Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I
declare, before they spring forth I will tell you of them: and confounds by
this argument all Idols, that they are no Gods, because they are ignorant of
future things. But the words following, which God gave unto him, seem to weaken
the argument. For to whom God does reveal things to come, he is not God: but
God has revealed these things to Christ, therefore Christ is not God. The
answer is twofold, first the whole may be granted, if it be taken in a good
sense, as namely, that Christ (albeit he is true God) yet wherein God his
father has revealed these things to him, that is, according to his humanity,
he is not God. For the humanity of Christ, not foreknowing things to come but
by revelation, is not God: but the man Christ Jesus, is God, because by his
divinity, he fore knows all things of himself, Secondly the assumption is
not in the text, and may be denied: for John says not, that God revealed
these things to Christ, but gave this revelation to him, as to our mediator,
that he might reveal the same to us his servants: for it is his proper office,
to reveal the will of the father to the Church. So that (...) speaks of the
office of Christ, as he is our mediator, which does not (...) the ^qualitie of
the son, with the father, but supposes it: because as he was mere man, or a
creature, of what power soever, he could not have performed the works of a
mediator: But it behooued him also to be God. But Thirdly, there follows no
absurdity, to understand it as spoken of the Godhead of Christ: for such as is
the order of existence, such also is the manner of working, betwixt the father,
and the son. For as the somexisteth not of himself, but as he is the first
begotten of the father, so the so^ reveals things to come, not of himself,
but as he receives from the father: and as the father Gives unto the son his
Essence: so is also his divine wildome communicated unto him from the father by
Eternal Generation. Lyra and others understand God, in this place ((...))
Essentially of the whole trinity: and taking it in that sense, then the
revelation is given to Christ by God, as unto a mediator only, but
understanding it of the person of the father, then God is said to give it unto
Christ both, as to the son, and mediator also.

To show unto his servants) the end, that God Gave the revelation to Christ,
was, not that he should have it for himself. But, as being the messenger of
the father, to reveal it to his servants. By servants is meant John, with the
pastors and teachers, yea all the faithful of all ages: to all which the
mysteries of this book were to be revealed by Christ.

First, to John that he should write it, and then to all the rest both to
read, and understand it, meditate, teach, and explain it to the Church of God.
The Gr. ((...)) his, notes the servants of Christ, for it cohereth with the
word ((...)) to show, which notes the office of Christ, and not of God. So
that Christ shows this revelation, 2 argument of Chapterdeity.
to his own servants, which is a second argument; proving the Godhead of
Christ. For he certainly is the Lord of the Church, yea God Eternal, to whom
John, the teachers, and all the faithful of the Church are servants: for God
alone is the Lord of the Church, according to that of the psalmist, Jehovah our
Lord, etc. Psalm. 8.10. For albeit Christ in that he is our mediator, is
exalted to be head, and Lord of the Church: notwithstanding (except he had
been God) he could neither have been mediator, or Lord of the Church. So that
we plainly see, that Christ Jesus, is God, seeing John and all the faithful
are his servants.

Which must shortly come to pass) this notes the subject of the book, which
contains an history of things not already past: but of things to come
afterward, both to the Church, and enemies thereof. Must come to pass, not by
a fatal or absolute necessity, 1. Cor. 11.19.
but hypothetically or supposedly, according to that of the Apostle, scandalls
and heresies must come.

Besides God has so decreed it, whose counsel is unchangeable: and therefore
the events must happen according to the same: as also because of secondarie
causes, as the malice of satan, and the rage of the enemies against the Church,
which though they be changeable in themselves, yet they are not changed: so
that if accidental events be not altered by the counsel of God, and
secondarie causes, they necessarily come to pass, though the contingencie be
not taken away.

Shortly) but how shortly? seeing after so many ages, they are not as yet come
to pass, and are for the most part to be fully accomplished near the very
last times, which is distant from the time this was revealed, more then 1500
years: some extend this to the whole time of the new Testament, which though it
were to continue more then a 1000 of years, yet is called short, both in regard
of the age of the world then al^ready past: John 2, 18. 1 Cor. 10 12 Psalm. 90
4. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
as also in regard of eternity, in which shall be neither shortness nor
length of time.

For this cause the whole time of the new Testament; is in scripture called the
last hour, the last times, the ends of the world. For the whole time and age
of the world is but a moment in the eyes of God, or as yesterday when it is
past, and as a watch in the night. Which is the reason that Christ says chap.
21. 12: that he will come to judgment quickly, or shortly: that is sooner then
men imagine, suddenly, in which sense the words following, come to pass, were
of necessity to be restrained to the full accomplishment of this prophecy,
which may not be, for it is to be extended, to the whole time, and current of
those things which were foretold. So that by shortly, is meant the beginning,
and progress of the fullfilling thereof. Shall shortly come to pass, that is
shall begin: for things are said to come to pass shortly, not which are either
already past, or else are to come a long while after, but which are beginning
to be effected, and are even in doing. Signifying that the storms of
afflictions were not to be differred to the last times, but that they were
suddenly while the Apostles yet lived to rush in by heaps upon the Churches:
Ioh. 16.12.
the which Christ also foretold his disciples, and histories manifest the
accomplishment of it.

For the first persecution of Christians, began straightways under Tiberius and
Nero, which took away Paul, and Peter: the other under Domitian, in whose time
John was banished. Wherefore he foretells them, not to terrify, but to animate
the godly against the dangers at hand, that it might not come upon them
unawares: as Christ says John 16, 1: these things have I spoken unto you, that
ye should not be offended: for the darts which are foreseen, are the less
hurtful: withal he teaches, what is the portion of the Church in this
world: namely to suffer afflictions, least we should fayn delights unto our
selves. So likewise he comfort us from the brevitie of the afflictions, and
certainty of the promised deliverance: For as afflictions must shortly come, so
also shall deliverance shortly, and certainly come: because Christ foretold the
one, as well as the other unto John.

Lastly it appears that the revelation treats, not of things past but to
come: wherefore they miss of the scope, who apply a great part of the types to
the state of the Jewish occurrences and Roman Empire then already past.

And signified it by his angel) that is, Christ signified it. He declares the
faithfulness of Christ in executing the charge committed to him of God, and
showing this revelation to John his servant, and dear Apostle, by sending his
angel, who instructed him in every particular of it. And signified, that is,
who also signified the same, etc. for so it is expressed in verse. 6 and 16 of
chap. 22: where the Lord Jesus says, that he sent his angel to show these
things to John, and to his servants in the Churches.

So we see, that the scriptures compared together, interpret themselves. We
need not restrain the word signified to a typical, and dark manner of
revelation, but rather it notes a plain, and manifest discovery, made unto
John: because that, which is here said to be signified: is in the fore
alleged place expounded by the words showing, and testifying, etc.

And he sent) Gr. sending, this whole verse retains the Hebrewe phrase: 3
Argument of the deity of Christ.
and is, as if it were read thus: who also sending his angel signified the same
to his servant John. Hence we gather a third proof of the Godhead of Christ:
much like to the second: for as John is a servant, so also is the angel, and
both are employed by Christ as his proper servants, who is Lord of them both,
and therefore God: for the angels are servants to none, but to Jehovah God, of
whom it is said, Psalm. 104.4.
who makes his angels spirits, etc. it is true, Christ is Lord of the angels,
in that he is the mediator, but unles he were God, he could neither be
mediator or Lord of the angels: by this argument, Hebr. 1.6: the Apostle
proves the Godhead of the son: because the angels of God adore him.

Verse. 2 Who bare record of the word of God) hence it appears, John the
Evangelist the writer of the revelation.
that the Evangelist John is the writer of the revelation: for he bare record
of the word of God in the very entrance of his Gospel, saying: in the beginning
was the word; this is the testimony of John, when the Jews sent unto him: and
ye sent to John, and he bare witness; which things though spoken of John the
Baptist, yet were written by John the Evangelist; who bare record to the word
in setting down of the testimonies of the word of God: besides none of the
writers of holy scripture, have more expressly testified the divinity of Christ
then the Evangelist John. For who but John names (...) of the person, office,
and benefits of Christ: Of the ministries of Angels and happiness of the
triumphant church, with the cross, and comfort of the militant: withal
teaching us to embrace Godliness, to be constant in afflictions, to hold fast
faith and love, to take heed of false prophets, to Go out of Babylon, and
beware of Antichrist, etc. To be short it contains many worthy, and
comfortable sentences, as, blessed are the dead, that die in the Lord. etc.
Promises also of the deliverance of the Church, of the marriage of the Lamb,
with threatenings of destruction to the enemies. All which things, how
profitable, and useful they are, it is manifest unto all.

For the time is at hand.) A reason to stir up a diligent care in us, to read,
hear, and keep this prophecy. Because the time, both of the fury of the
adversary against the Godly, as also of the deliverance of the Church, is at
hand. The knowledge of evil and Good things, even at the door is not to be
neglected: but the diligent reading of this prophecy, causes us to know both
evil, and Good things at hand: therefore it is not to be neglected. It
admonishes us therefore to watch, lest unawares, we be overwhelmed, with the
present troubles. It comfort us also that we be not disheartened for fear of
the present battles, but with full assurance of the presence of God, and
promised victory, we hold out manfully unto the end.

That the time was then at hand, histories make manifest: for John being
banished in the ^le of Patmos, began already to feel the fury of Domitian. And
here the dream of such is refuted, who bind the fulfilling of this prophecy,
to the last three years before the end of the world.

4 John to the seven Churches) Those things being forespoken of, which served,
to gain authority and attention to this book. John dedicates the revelation, to
the seve^ Churches of Asia, wishing Grace and peace unto them. By seven,
Andreas understands all the Churches: Because in scripture, the number seven,
is a number of perfection: but because the seven Churches in Asia, are as it
were nominated by a mark to be known, therefore I understand, that it was
purposely dedicated unto them: not that the revelation belongs not to others,
but because the first vision does directly concern them: the rest generally
belongs to the whole Church.

Of Asia) He speaks of Asia the lesser, or that part of Asia, Ptolo. lib. 5
geogra. cap. 2.
which is environed from the East, with both countries of Armenia, from the
west, with the Aegean sea, from the North with the Euxine sea, and from the
south with the Mediteranian sea. Here John had planted seven Churches of note,
whereof that of Ephesus was the greatest: but after he was banished, the
teachers carelessly performing their office, he is commanded in the first vision
to reprove, and admonish them of their duty.

Grace to you and peace) be, or be multiplied: as in 1 Pet. 1, 2: by a familiar
salutation, he seeks to gain the good will of those, whom he was afterward
more sharply to admonish. The Apostolical salutation has been opened in the
Epistle to the Romans, and Corinthians. Grace is that free favor of God, from
which does flow, all the mercies of God, and every good thing which we enjoy.
The Gloss does well understand it, of the free forgivenes of sins. Peace, the
effect of Grace, is the tranquillity, and joy of the conscience, Romans 1.2.
of which the Apostle speaks, being justified by faith, we have peace with
God. The Hebrews by the word peace, understand all manner of prosperity: and
hence the Apostles in the beginning all most of all their Epistles, do not
with out cause wish the same unto the faithful.

Which is, and which was, and which is to come) It is manifest that this is a
paraphrase of the name of God, who alone is the author and giver of Grace and
peace. But others do interpret it otherwise. Some of the father alone, from
whom the Apostles generally desire grace to the Churches. Romans 1.7.
Grace and peace be to you from God our father, he is called: which IS, because
he is from none, but the beginning of the deity is from him. And which was,
because he was before all time in eternity.

And which is to come, John. 5.12.
because he will come to judge the world by the son: that the father is said to
judge no man, is to be referred to the immediate judgment. For the father has
not so given over the judgment to the son: as not to keep the power of
judging still in his own hand. Others refer all to the person of the son: For
he is, he which is, because Christ is the same God with the father: and which
was: because the word was in the beginning; and which is to come: because he
will come in the clouds to judgment, verse. 7.

Others will have the three persons to be noted by three differences of time,
attributing the several times to the several persons, that is, which is, to
the father, which was, to the son, and that which is to come, to the holy Ghost
his coming in to the Church by proceeding from the father and the son: so
Andreas, grace be to you, and peace from the Godhead, which subsisteth in three
persons. To be short, others think that God is ((...)) essentially described,
and do apply all the words to every one of the persons: for the father is he,
which is, which was, and which is to come, so is the son, and so is the holy
Ghost.

What then? all these expositions were right, and godly, if John in these words
had ended his prayer, but he adds, and from the seven spirits, and from Jesus
Christ: by which he declares, that he directs his prayer in the behalf of
the Churches to the holy Trinity. But not indeed in words commonly used, yet
such as are convenient to his purpose: for the style of this prophecy has
many things proper and excellent, fitted to the argument of visions: which not
being observed by some interpreters, they vainly weary themselves, and go
astray: For seldom the name of God, or of the father, or of the son, or of the
holy Ghost is found in the revelation in express words: But John speaking of
God uses for the most part prophetical descriptions.

Therefore this prayer is set down in words agreeing to the excellent
proprieties of this prophecy, and in stead of the ordinary form of
salutations, used of the Apostles, Romans 1.7.
as grace and peace to you from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ:
or, the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion
of the holy Ghost be with you all: John uses this kind as more proper and
secret: Grace and peace from him, which is, and which was, and which is to
come, and from the seven spirits, and from Jesus Christ, etc. in which words
the true God, three in persons, one in essence is described, as the divine
attribute, and prayer of the Apostle do plainly manifest. Now I come to the
particulars.

From him which is) Thus he describes the person of the father, by attributes
proper to the divine essence, yet common to every one of the persons: Hereupon
Christ assumes the same to himself, verse. 7. which is a most evident argument
of his divinity. And it is a description of eternity, including and exceeding
the three differences of the time, present, past, and to come: that is, from
him which is, was, and shall be, the words which is to come, being put for
shall be: as in that of John 16, 13. He will show you things to come, Act. 18,
21.
that is, things that shall be: so, I must keep the feast that comes in
Jerusalem. And it seems that he altogether intended here to express that
name of God in Exodus, Exodus 3.14.
EHIEH I will be, from which comes the name Jehovah, in which word as Vatablus
well observes the Hebrews take notice of those three differences of time. It
serves for the great comfort of the Church, in that he prays for grace and
peace, not simply from God the father, but from him, which is, which was, and
which is to come, who always remains the same, and with whom is no
variablenes, Iam. 1, 17.
nor shadow of turning. Indeed in the world the Church has experience of
diverse changes: but in God alone, she finds constant shelter: because he
changes not with the world, but whom he once loves, he loves to the end.
Ioh. 13, 1.
Before I proceed further: here take notice, that some subtle ones, are
displeased, because of a soloecisme against the rule of Grammar: for it should
not have been writ, (...), as it is in the text, but, as they say, (...). But
what? are these men so sharp sighted, as to set rules to God: Let them
construe, if they can, that expression of God. Exodus 3.14. I am has sent me to
you. Or is the spirit of God tied, to speak as is pleasing to Priscian. Let
them therefore suffer God to pronounce his own names ((...)) without
declination: who himself is ((...)) indeclinable, immovable. 1 exposition.


And from the seven spirits] Who should be these spirits has so troubled
interpreters, that some for this very cause, have blotted this whole prophecy,
out of the canon of holy writ. Some refer it to the person of the son, in this
sense: peace be to you from the son of God sitting on the throne, before whom
are the seven spirits, which he holds in his hand: chap. 3.1. But they
observe not what follows, verse. 5. And from Jesus Christ. For indeed John
prays for grace, not from him that holds the seven spirits, but from the
seven spirits expressly. Andreas, Lyra, and Ribera whom others follow,
understand by the seven spirits, seven angels ministering before the throne of
God and they take seven either indefinitely for innumerable, because the number
seven is perfect: So Lyra: from the seven spirits, that is, from all the
angels, which are ministers of our salvation: or definitely, supposing there
are seven great Angels, which chiefly care for the safety of man: So Clemens
Alex. Lib. 6. Strom.
there are seven of greatest power, the first borne princes of the angels,
through whom God does provide for all man kind. Which seems to be backed with
a place in Tobie 12.15. I am Raphael the Angel, one of the seven, which stand
before the Lord. This opinion seems to agree, with the letter of the text.
Because the seven spirits before the throne of God are often mentioned, as in
chap. 4.5, and 5.6, and 8.2, etc. as if they were Gods special ministering
angels. But John in praying to the seven spirits for grace, confutes this
opinion: for it is contrary to scripture, and Christian religion, to pray for
grace unto created angels, Besides none but God is the fountain and giver of
grace, and peace, from whom, and through whom, and for whom are all things. To.
11.36.
Therefore we find, that the Apostles pray for, and desire grace from none but
God alone.

Alcasar says well: sound divinity admits not, that the grace, and peace of the
Gospel, be demanded of the Angels. For such praying is a part of that worship
spoken of, Matthew. 4.9, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve. And concerning grace that of James is most true, every good gift,
Iam. 1, 17.
and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the father of
lights. And therefore we may not understand, the seven spirits, to be seven
angels, in regard of the divine attributes given unto them. Neither will the
subtilitie of Ribera help the matter: we expect, (says he,) the grace, and
peace of our sanctification, from the angels, as from the ministers of God; for
the text speaks not of exspecting, but of a religious praying for grace:
which for to direct the same unto the angels, were great impiety: Collo. 2.18.
Because the religious worship of angels is expressly condemned in scripture:
and the angels themselves forbid John to fall down before them or to worship
them, chap. 19.10, and 22.9. To be short, the Apostle makes his prayer for
grace, jointly both from him, that is, and from the seven spirits, and from
Jesus Christ as working causes, or rather as from one only cause, to wit, from
one God, three in persons. Neither is that equivocation of Andreas to be
allowed, who says, the seven spirits are not, as equal in power, joined with
the most hie God, and blessed trinity: But are named, only, as Gods chief
servants, according to that of the Apostle, I charge thee before God, 1 Timothy
5.21.
and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels. But the particle (from) three
times repeated, does plainly show, that the seven spirits are joined with God,
as the giver of Grace. Whereas to call God, Christ, the angels and man together
to witness, is neither repugnant to scripture or sound divinity: For Christ
himself, chapter 3.5. says, I will confess his name, before my father, and before
his angels. And therefore that place in 1 Timothy 5.21: alleged by Andreas, is
not of the same nature, with this here treated of. For the literal sense
seems not fully to agree with the following places, (as I my self have
formerly minded) neither to confirm ought to angels as by and by I will it
make to appear.

The third and most common exposition, 3 Exposition.
both of ancient, and modern writers, understand by the seven spirits, the
holy Ghost, which only is agreeable to the scripture, Isa. 42.8.
and analogy of faith: according to that of the prophet, I will not give my
glory to another. But according to the letter it seems to be otherwise, for
these are said to be seven spirits, and the holy Ghost is but one: but we are
to mind the nature and prerogative of this prophecy is such, as if every
thing should be strictly urged according to the letter, we should of necessity
misaply diverse things. So that by seven being a perfect number, he speaks of
the holy Ghost who is but one, pouring forth seven, that is sundry gifts, and
graces upon the Church: which is a figurative speech, or metalepsis, when the
effects are put for the cause. Or else John wishing grace to the seven
Churches, attributes to each, one and the same spirit, as if there were seven
in all. Neither is it of weight that in some other places of this book there
is mention made of seven spirits, as of seven angels, for if the phrase be well
observed, we may perceive, that they are noted as diverse from these here
spoken of, who are absolutely called the seven spirits which are before the
throne of God, by which the unity of essence with him that sits on the
throne, Revel. 4.5, and 5.6, and 8.2.
is set forth by a divine attribute: the other are called the seven spirits of
God, sent forth into all the earth: the seven angels which stand before God,
not having any divine attribute: by which it is plain, that these latter places
speak of created angels, who are Gods ministering spirits.

Alcasar maintains against Ribera, according to the truth, that here the holy
Ghost is spoken of; and not, as the other affirms, that these seven spirits
should denote the seven powers of Gods providence, namely, his virtue, charity,
justice, wisdom, patience, threatenings, and wrath. Which is a mystery,
bringing along with it an inconvenience, which he desires to avoid; for he
makes question, whither sound divinity will admit, that grace and peace be
asked from the seven virtues, rather then from the seven created angels, yea
how grace and peace can be prayed for, from menacings, and wrath: so he.

And from Jesus Christ) In that he wishes grace, and peace from Christ in the
the third and last place, is neither against the former exposition, nor any way
derogateth from the dignity of Christ: for as the Apostle 2 Cor. 13.14, does
not derogate from the order of the persons in the trinity, though he put
Christ in the first place: so here our Apostle for weighty causes sets down
the holy Ghost, before Christ: because he treats of him, not simply as being
the son of God, but also as he is the mediator, redeemer, and revealer of this
prophecy. Notwithstanding great reason it is, that he should pray for grace
and peace from Christ, Ephesians. 2.14.
because it comes by him, John. 1.17. and he is our peace.

Who is the faithful witness) The following titles are so many reasons,
wherefore grace, and peace is prayed for from Christ: and they set forth (as
has been showed in the analysis) both his threefold office, with the benefit
thereof, as also declare his eternal Godhead. The first title respects his
prophetical office: that faithful witness: which seems to be taken from
Psalm. 89.38. witness, because he has brought forth out of the bosom of his
father the testimony; that is, the glad tidings of the redemption of man
through his death: and from heaven has opened to us the true knowledge of God,
and way of salvation.

faithful) Because he not only confirmed the heavenly truth by preaching, by
miracles, and meekly calling of sinners to repentance, and to the faith of the
Gospel; but also sealed the same by suffering on the cross, and by instituting
the ministry, he gave to the churches, Apostles, prophets, Evangelists, Pastors
and Teachers, who perpetually should be his witnesses, Ephesians. 4.12.
and preach the Gospel to after ages, for the perfecting of the saints, for
the edifying of the body of Christ, according to these scriptures Ioh. 17, 6. I
have manifested thy name to the men thou gave me out of the world, and 18,
37. For this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the
truth: Io. 1.18.
the son which is in the bosom of the father he has revealed God unto us. Who
before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession.

The father, and holy Ghost are also said to be witnesses: 1. Io. 5.7. Ioh.
5.37.
there are three that bear record in heaven the father, the word, and the holy
Ghost. The father, says Christ, himself, has borne witness of me. And of the
holy Ghost he says, when the comforter is come, etc. He shall testify of me:
the Apostles are called witnesses. Act. 1.18. And Antipas Rev 2.12. and two
witnesses are mentioned, called Martyrs for sheadding of their blood for the
testimony of Christ. Revel. 11.3.

But Christ only (...)) by way of prerogative is called, that faithful
witness: because he first brought with him the witness of the truth, down
from heaven, he first, and he only has shead his blood for his own
testimony, whereas all other martyrs suffered, not for their own, but for the
testimony of Jesus Christ. Yea also the witness which the father, and the
holy Ghost gave of him, was declared by himself; and therefore Christ as by a
special, and proper right is called, the faithful witness, that is, the true
and constant revealer of the doctrine of our salvation: whoever therefore
hearkens not to him, Deuteron. 18.19.
can not be saved: but who so hears him shall have life eternal. This also
confirms the authority of the revelation, because it was revealed to John by
Jesus Christ that faithful witness, who can notly, nor deceive: therefore
this book is truly divine, and we may safely trust, and believe all things
contained in it. It serves also to instruct us, that if Christ only be the
true witness, then those are not to be heard but avoided as Liars, which teach
the Church such things as dissent from the testimony of Christ. It may also
comfort us, because Christ the faithful witness will not forsake them who
suffer for the cause of his truth, but will at length reward them faithfully
according to his promise.

The first begotten of the dead] This title concerns Christ his priestly
office, who died for our sins, and was raised again for our justification. Romans
4.25.
For the word (dead) shows that he died: and being the first begotten of the
dead, it teaches us, that he was raised from the dead. And the whole scripture
testifies, that the end and use, of his death and resurrection, was not a bare
witness, (as Socinus blasphemeth) but chiefly a propitiation to purge us from
our sins, and to justify us before God. Paul calls him likewise the first
begotten of the dead, 1 Collo. 1.18. 1 Corinthians. 15.20.
and shows that Christ is become the first fruits of them that sleep. But how
can Christ be the first fruits of the dead, seeing the scriptures testify that
Elias, and Elisha raised up two persons from the dead, before the time of
Christ's manifestation in the flesh. Lazarus also, with the widows son, and
Centurions servant, were restored from death to life?

Answer: First Christ is the first begotten or first fruits of the dead,
because he was the first, that raised up himself from the dead by his own
power: whereas all before Christ, were raised not by their own power, but
Christ's alone.

Secondly, Christ was raised up to an immortal life, not to die any more: but
the other to an earthly life, and became subject to death again. He is said to
be the first begotten, or the first that did rise again: Matt. 19.28. Act.
13.13. Romans 1, 4.
because the resurrection is a kind of new birth; and so Christ calls the
last resurrection a regeneration. And Paul applies that in Psalm. 2. of the
father eternally begetting the son, to his resurrection from the dead: and
hence he is declared to be the eternal and omnipotent son of God.

This should greatly comfort us; that though we are borne, and brought forth in
a corruptible condition: yet when we rise again, we shall be regenerated unto a
state incorruptible: even while we are in this life, we are regenerated, but it
is spiritually only and in part: but when we shall by the spirit of God be
restored to eternal life, then we shall be regenerated both corporally and
fully, to wit, when our mortal bodies shall be made conformable, to the
glorious body of Christ: let us not fear therefore, though we should suffer
death for the testimony of Christ, because he who is the first begotten of the
dead, Ioh. 17.24.
will free us from death, according to that promise: Father I will also that
they whom thou have given me be with me, where I am and that they may behold
my glory, which thou have given me. Ioh. 16.11.
Again if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him.

And the prince of the kings of the earth] The third title of Christ declares
his kingly office, that he is far more powerful then kings, tyrants, and all
other adversaries whatsoever, and by his power can easily subdue them, for as
much, as he sits, at the right hand of God, and powerfully governs all
things both in heaven, and in earth: and hence in Chapt. 19.16: he is called,
the king of kings, and Lord of Lords: which serves for the comfort of the
Church, for if Christ be Lord over all the kings of the earth, why should we
fear their rage against us? Christ is chief of all, and stronger then all: and
therefore can easily stop their rage, Christ is the prince of all; and so
has the purposes and counsels of them all in his hand, 2 Timoth 2, 11.
and will order and direct them for the good of his chosen. Satan is called the
prince of the world, not by way of right, but of fact: because by Christ's
permission he has taken into his hand the principallity of the world for a
season: that he might powerfully work in the children of disobedience, to
their destruction. He falsely said, Ephesians. 2.2. Luk 4 6.
all the kingdoms of the earth are mine: for the father has appointed, not
Satan, but the son to be the heir, and king of all. He calls them kings of
the earth, that are powerful in this world, who for the most part oppose
Christ, and but few of them receive him: yet Christ is the prince of them all,
the rebellious he will break with a rod of iron as the potters vessel, Psalm. 2.
whose fury therefore is not to be feared: for they are the kings of the
earth, not of heaven, earthly power, is but frail, and of no force against
God. Afterward the kings of the earth more restrictivelie are called the
vassals of Antichrist.

Rupertus understands it allegorically, that is, kings of the earth to be
such as subdue their earthly mindedness, avoid sin, and are the servants of
righteousness: of such only (says he) Christ is prince, and all who will be
Christ's, must be such: but the former exposition is more agreeable to the text.
Furthermore, by these titles we have a fourth argument of the deity of Christ:
4 Argument of the deity of Christ.
he is the faithful witness, the author, and revealer of the heavenly
doctrine, he was raised again from the dead, by his own power: he is the
prince of the kings of the earth: all which confirms his omniscience and
omnipotency, that is, that he is true God.

Who loved us] in the Greek, to him that loved us, and washed us. Here
something is to be noted about the construction of the words in the original.
Gagneus a Papist insulting against the Greek copies, says, the Greek reading
is full of soloecismes, for these datives to him that loved, etc. can not be
referred to any thing in the text. Ribera the Jesuit also, applauding the
Latin version, above the Greek, says, by this it is manifest that the Latin
is much purer then the Greek that is now extant. And afterward, the Greek
copies that now are, are corrupt, and our interpreter has (according to his
usual manner) followed the true, and amended ones. And there seems to be some
thing in their exception, if the words, unto him that loved us, etc. be
referred, to what goes before. But Alcasar, although a Jesuit, yet does
justly reprove them, for the false construction they speak of, is not in the
text, but proceeds from their own fancy: there is no reason (says he) we
should suspect that the Greek copies are corrupted, for the vulgar Latin
admits the same construction otherwhere, as appears in their translation
on chap. 6.4: he which sat on the red horse, to him it was given that he
should take peace from the earth, in like manner the words here, who loved us,
are not to be construed, with the foregoing matter, but with that follows, to
him be glory, etc. This he takes out of Andreas, and Aretas, who from these
words to him that loved us understand the beginning of the following
thanksgiving. And indeed the construction is plain, if a period be made, and
the article (...) who, be put before (...) has made, so the whole thanksgiving
would thus be read. To him who loved us, and washed us from our sins in his
own blood, and made us priests, and kings to God his father, to him be glory
and dominion for ever, and ever, Amen. Thus much about the construction.

And who loved us] He concludes the dedication, with a thanksgiving in which,
(the threefold office of Christ being before spoken of) he now shows a
threefold benefit flowing from the same to us. First he gives thanks, that he
loved us who is the fountain of our salvation: for seeing the son of God loved
us: therefore he took our flesh, and laid down his life for us, Romans 5, 8.
and delivered us from death to life. God (says the Apostle) commends his
love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
Again, who shall separate us from the love of Christ: Romans 8, 35. 1 Ioh. 3 16.
Ioh 15, 3.
hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us.
So says Christ himself: Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay
down his life for his friends, etc. The scripture sets forth the love of
the father also in this thing: that he gave his son up to the death for us. The
love indeed of the son seems to be greater; because he loves more, that will
give his own life for others, then he that gives the life of another to the
death: but in this the father and the son have manifested one, and the same
philanthropie, or fullness of love to usward, the father, in that he gave the
son, and the son in that he became obedient unto the father. The consideration
of whose love ought to take away from us all opinion of merit, and selfe-trust.
For the father and Christ loved us, not because we were worthy of it, but when
we were enemies, and dead in trespasses. It should also stir up our
thankfulness, to love him again, who first loved us, and to consecrate our
selves wholly to him. And in the last place it is for our comfort: for those
whom he has thus freely loved, he will love unto the end, and not leave them
in the hour of death.

And has wushed us from our sins by his own blood] Here follows another
benefit, being an effect of the former, for seeing he loved us, therefore he
shed his blood, and gave his life for us: a golden sentence containing the
sum of the Gospel, and a principal fruit of the death of Christ. Besides it
yields us an argument, who was the writer of this book, Ioh. 5.8.
for this is the phrase of John the Evangelist: the blood of Jesus Christ the
son of God, does purge us from all sin: that which there he calls purging,
here it is called washing by a like metaphor taken from water which purges
away foulness. Now Christ cleanses us from our sins two manner of ways.
First by his merit: because by the shedding of his blood he has taken away the
guilt of our sins, and justified us before the judgment seat of God. Secondly
by the efficacy, of his sufferings: for by the virtue of his merit, he also
gives us the holy Ghost, and regenerateth us to newness of life, that being
dead to sin, we might live unto righteousness. So that John in fewwords, does
comprehend many great mysteries of the Gospel. Christ has washed us from our
sins. So then we were defiled with sins: we were guilty in the sight of
God: but he has washed us by his own blood: And therefore the shedding of
his blood is a price fully satisfying the justice of God for all our sins.
Contrary to the blasphemous falsehood of Socinus, affirming that the blood and
death of Christ is nothing, but a martyrdom, whereby he merited his own
exaltation. He has washed us from our sins, so then we are justified before
God, by the merit of his blood. Therefore it is false, that we are washed and
justified, by the merit of works. To be short, he has washed us, being
therefore once purged, let us not return to the wallowing again in the mire:
but rather seriously endeavor to be righteous, and acceptable to Christ our
Savior.

6. And has made us kings, and priests unto God, and his father] in the Greek
there is a defect of the relative (...), who, common to the Hebrews, and has
made, is put for, who has made. For the word (kings) the old interpreter
renders it, kingdom, and the reason of it may be, because two greek copies
have the word (...), that is a kingdom: but all other copies, yea the kings
bible reads (...), that is, kings, which also is repeated, chap. 5, 10.

Alcasar defends the vulgar translation with many words, but the general
agreement of all copies is against him, and though the sense may be the same,
yet it is more probable, that persons with persons, rather then persons with
things should be joined together; besides the one is a proper speech, the other
figurative. This then is the third benefit we receive from Christ, viz. that he
has made us priests, and kings: kings, not only, in adopting us to be heirs
of his kingdom, but also through the power of the holy Ghost, has made us
conquerors, over sin, Romans 8.37. Romans 16, 20. 1 Cor. 15, 57. 1 Ioh. 5, 4.
death, satan, and all other enemies, as it is written, in all these things,
we are more then conquerors, through him that loved us. And the God of peace
shall bruise satan under your feet shortly. Thanks be to God, which gives us
the victory through Jesus Christ. And this is our victory, that overcomes the
world even our faith. Lastly Christ has made us kings, hereby to show that he
will at length crown all his members with glory and honor.

And priests] to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Christ,
and to consecrate our selves as a living sacrifice pleasing unto him. John
here has reference to that in Exodus Exo. 19, 6 1 Pet. 2.5.9.
19, 6: and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation.
Which words the Apostle Peter thus explaineth: ye also as living stones, are
built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. And again, ye are a royal
Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the
praises of him, who has called you out of darkness into his marveillous light.

To God and his father] Whether we understand this of the trinity, or else,
(as generally it is taken,) of the person of the father, the sense is one, that
is, that we being reconciled to God by Christ, should therefore labor to give
up our selves to him, as an acceptable sacrifice. Indeed this our
reconciliation is a singular dignity, which God forbid, we should stain with
any spots of unthankfulnes.

The papists challenge the Priesthood, as proper to their clergy: but Christ on
the contrary, has made it common to all the faithful. They confess indeed
that spiritually all may be said to be priests, yet properly they only, who
are anointed with the holy Christme: but it may easily be proved that their
hierarchy, and order of Clerks priests and monks, were not instituted by
Christ or his Apostles, but were brought into the Church, by a preposterous
imitation of Jewish and heathenish rites.

Ribera on the contrary pleads, that the Priesthood here spoken of, is not to
be taken properly, but metaphorically. Now who does deny it? therefore seeing
himself striving herein with his own shadow, he changes his style, and
affirms, that the Priesthood in this place is properly spoken of, and
pretends a rule, that offentimes that which in holy writ seems to be spoken
of all in general, is not to be applied to all in particular, but only to
some of the number, whom it concerns. And he alleges for this, Exodus 19, 6.
ye shall be to me a kingdom of priests, an holy nation, Ioh. 3, 16. 20, 28.
Exo. 19.6.
etc. The rule we acknowledge, yet do deny, that it appertains unto this
place. For the words of the text compared with the place of Peter, cannot be
understood of some of the faithful only, but of all in general: for as not a
few of the faithful, but all are made kings to God by Christ: so also not a
few but all are made priests. It is likewise plain, that the speech in Exodus
respected all the people, for as they were an holy nation, so they were a
royal Priesthood, though afterward by a special privilege, God granted the
ceremonial Priesthood to one tribe alone: which privilege if it belong to the
Romish clergy also, let Ribera show it from the holy scriptures.

To him be glorie] the relative (to him) does plainly cohere with the foregoing
datives (...) that loved and washed. And therefore glory and thanks is
properly ascribed to Christ: Luke 23, 3. Isay. 2, 19.
for he gives thanks, and teaches us to give immortal praise to him, because
he has washed us, and made us kings, and priests to God, and his father. He
gives to Christ, that which he already has, that we should acknowledge that
he has it, and that it is his will, we should ascribe the same to him, and
therefore we are bound to render due praise to him, because what he has, it is
all for our good. Glory, that is, both the glory of his Godhead, as also the
exaltation of his glorious reigning at the right hand of the father. Dominion,
this respects both his omnipotency which he has from all eternity, as he
is God: as also his authority over all creatures, which he received in time, as
he is the mediator.

For ever and ever] The Hebrewe (ar golam) shows the eternity of Christ for
our consolation, Amen a particle confirming, so it shall be, or so be it: 5
Argument of Chr. deity.
from (Aman) to be faithful. Furthermore here we have a fifth, and most manifest
argument of Christ's divinity. For the effects attributed to Christ are divine.
For he is God, Ioh 3, 16. 20, 28. Exodus 19, 6.
whose love is the fountain and the cause of our salvation, it is God, who
has purchased the Church with his own blood. It is God who has made us
kings, and priests to himself: for none but God, can give the spiritual
kingdom and Priesthood: it is God to whom glory and dominion is dew: now all
those things being of right attributed unto Christ, it plainly shows that he
is God.

Verse. 7: Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him] This
confirms the former argument, that these things are certainly spoken of
Christ: seeing it is he which must come to judgment, it is he whom every eye
shall see to come in the clouds of heaven with power and majesty, it is he,
whom the soldiers pierced, and at whose coming all the kinreds of the earth
shall wail, and the wicked shall cry, saying to the mountains fall on us, and
to the hills cover us. Luke 23, 30. Isay 2, 19.
Hence it is apparent that John eve^ here attributes glory and dominion unto
Christ: for the words, to him be glory and dominion, and behold he comes,
do manifestly accord. But some may say, why is there here a promise of his
coming? not only to strengthen our faith touching his glorious returning to
judgment, but chiefly for the comfort of the godly, and terror of the wicked.
For now Christ being bodily absent, seems (as it were) to have forsaken the
Church in her affliction: but our redeemer will come in the clouds: now the
wicked rejoice, tyrants tyrannise, and Antichrist rages against the Godly, as
if they were left orphants. But they shall see the judge coming gloriously in
the clouds, him (I say) whom they have injuriously condemned, pierced, and
still daily do afflict in his poor members, yea and shall bitterly howl, when
they shall hear that sentence pronounced, Matthew. 25, 41.
go ye cursed into everlasting fire, etc. This seems to be the true meaning
of the place: the opinion therefore of Alcasar is absurd, who refers this to
the coming of Christ, for to make the Church victorious, in the conversion
both of Jews and Gentiles: for that which follows is contrary to his
exposition.

With cloudes] This is more, then in the clouds, which is spoken of us: for
we at the coming of Christ shall be caught up in the clouds to meet the
Lord in the air. 1 Thessalonians. 4, 17.
And it notes the divine majesty of Christ, for it is spoken of Iehova God,
Psalm. 97, 2: Clouds and darkness are round about him. This confuteth the
ubiquity of Christ's bodily presence, for he shall descend from heaven in the
clouds, and with the clouds, therefore his humane nature is not, nor ever
shall be every where. For how then could he possible come with clouds, which
are not every where: hence it is, when we celebrate the Lords supper, 1 Corinthians. 11, 26.
we are commanded to show forth his death till he come. So then he will come
visibly with the clouds, the which is a strong reason to prove that his body
is not the mean time invisibly hid in, under, or about their host, altar, or
chalice.

Every eye shall se him] Synecdoche, part being put for the whole, that is all
men both good and Bad, yea the very soldiers and enemies which pierced him on
the Cross shall see him, which serves to terrify all ungodly scoffers, who,
because they see him not here on earth with their bodily eyes, think not that
he reigns gloriously in the heavens. But to their woe, and condemnation they
shall see him coming, for they shall wayle before him, that is, horror and
trembling shall come on them, at the sight of the judge, and hearing the
sentence of their just damnation. This is taken out of the prophecy of
Zachary, 12.10: where Jehovah speaking of himself, says, they shall look upon
me whom they have pierced, they shall mourn for him: in that day there shall be
a great mourning in Jerusalem. A repenting mourning in the elect: but in the
reprobate of final desperation. This very text John the Evangelist alleged
upon the crucifying and piercing of Christ by the soldiers, Ioh. 19, 37: hence
we gather two things. First that John the Evangelist was the penman of this
book. For he alone, here and in his Gospel, applies that place in Zachary
unto Christ. The second is, concerning the deity of Christ, for that which
Iehova (in Zachary) speaks of himself, 6 Argument of Chr. divin.
they shall se me, whom they have pierced, John attributes it to Iehova Christ
pierced on the cross; who is neither the father, nor the holy Ghost. Therefore
the son Jesus Christ, crucified, and pierced in the flesh, is Jehovah. And this
is the sixth argument of the deity of Christ.

Even so, Amen,] The two particles, do strongly confirm, the coming of Christ
to judgment, to the end that the godly now in afflictions, and troubles may no
way doubt of their future deliverance: neither the wicked think to go
unpunished, who scoff at our faith and confidence. The word nae (even so,) with
the Greeks and Latins, is an asseveration. Amen with the Hebrews is a certain
affirmation, which two words usuallie put together, exclude al manner of
doubting, as if he had said, this is determined, confirmed, and can not be
altered. They are too curious, who in the words seek for a mystery, viz. the
calling of al nations unto Christ.

Verse. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending] Here some
interpreters begin the vision: whereas the preface here ends. For the
person of whom he before said, that he should come in the clouds, he presents
here before our eyes as present, and crying from heaven, for the comfort of the
Godly, and terror of his enemies: as if he should say, do ye doubt? behold I
am present: I, who am Alpha, and Omega, the beginning and the ending, the
Almighty, etc. who therefore shall hinder my coming to judgment, or call it
into question? Thus in the Gospel he cried out to the gainsaying Jews: Ioh. 8,
2.
I am the light of the world, etc.

Ribera supposes that these are the words of the holy Trinity. But the
cohere^ce shows, it is Christ that speaks, who is described in the
foregoing words, and the epithet Lord is to be understood of Christ as
appears also from the 11, and 17 verses, and more clearly, chap. 22, 13: so
that, without all question, Christ says of himself, I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the ending. Furthermore to be a and o is a proverbiall speech,
and meant of one that is first or chief in any thing: as in Martial, one
Codrus is called the Alpa of poor men, that is, poorest of men. Alpha is the
first letter of the Greek alphabet, and Omega the last. Christ therefore in
calling himself Alpha and Omega, the beginning, and end, and that absolutely,
therein does assume unto himself, absolute perfection, power, dominion,
eternity, and divinity.

The beginning and ending] The Latin version has not these words, neither
Montanus, but all other Greek copies have them. Besides they are also read in
Chap. 21.6, and 22.13: whereby it appears that they were not taken from the
margent, and put into the text, as some have thought.

Which is, and which was, and which is to come] Christ assumeth all those
epithites here to himself, by which John verse. 4. described God. Ribera
understands it of the trinity as formerly: but it has been showed, that
Christ speaks of himself, and so the fathers, Nazianzene, Ambrose, and
Athanasius interpret the place. And what marveile is it, if Christ who is God,
does take to himself, what ever is dew to God.

The Almighty] Another epithet proper to God, which Christ also takes to
himself, showing that he is the true eternal, and omnipotent God, in all
things equal, and coessentiall with the father, and the holy Ghost, and here
we see, who, and how great he is, which must come to judge the world. For the
adversaries must stand before Christ the judge, 7 Argument of Chr. deity.
not as he is simply man: but before Christ the judge, as he is the eternal,
and omnipotent God. This being the seventh argument of Christ's divinity, is
three times repeated. He is the first and the last: which is, was, and is to
come, and the Almighty, and therefore surely he is God eternal. For so
Jehovah says of himself: Isay 41, 4 and 44, 6. Genes. 17
I the Lord the first, and the last I am he: I am the first, and I am the
last, and besides me there is no God, I am God almighty. But Christ does
challenge as dew to him all these divine attributes, therefore he is Iehova,
that one eternal and omnipotent God with the father, and the holy Ghost.
Eniedinus samosatenianus denies these words to be Christ's, but will have them
to be the fathers only speaking of himself.

First because, it is not only said of Christ, that he is to come, but of
many others also, as Matthew. 17.11: Elias must first come. God the father is
said to come, Matthew. 21.40: When the Lord of the vineyard comes, what will be
do to those husbandmen. Christ says of himself and the father, Ioh. 14.23: We
will come to him, and make our abode with him.

Secondly because that description which is, was, and is to come is attributed
verse. 4 to the father alone.

Thirdly because that which John before spoke of Christ's coming, he afterward
confirms the same, by the testimony of God himself, after the manner of the
prophets, who used to add in the end of their sentences, thus says the Lord.
Answer, though some interpreters: yea, Lyra also and Ribera Jesuits, refer
these things to God absolutely, that is to the trinity as speaking in this
place: not withstanding I have already sufficiently proved the contrary. As for
the heretics reasons they prove nothing.

For first we insist not upon the participle, (...), which is to come, (whence
he vainly goes about to deceive) but on grounds formerly spoken off: neither
can it be denied with any show of reason, but that Christ speaks of himself
in verse. 11: J am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last; and therefore the
shift in this place is idle. For the strength of our argument stands not in
this: viz. that every one, who is to come is God, (as the heretic foolishly
imagines) but thus, that he is God, to whom all these divine attributes do
appertain.

Secondly though that description of God which is, etc. do in verse. 4: note out
the person of the father, from whom John first of all desires grace: yet
forasmuch as the essential attributes, respecting eternity, are common to the
three persons, therefore they are rightly attributed to Christ the second
person in the trinity.

Thirdly, howsoever we acknowledge, that the style is prophetical, yet it will
necessarily follow, that Christ here speaks these things of himself, both to
confirm John's testimony of him, as also that the godly might be comforted in
having so great, and glorious a judge. And lastly it is for the the terror of
all wicked and ungodly men. And thus much of the preface.

The other part of the Chapter, the preparation to the first vision: with the
vision it self.
9 I John, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the
kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the Isle that is called Patmos,
for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ.

10 I was in the Spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind me a great voice,
as of a trumpet,

11 Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, and what thou feast,
write in a book, and send it unto the seven churches which are in Asia, unto
Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamos, and unto Thyatira, and unto
Sardis, and Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea.

12 And I turned to see the voice that spoke with me. And being turned, I saw
seven golden candlesticks.

13 And in the midst of the seven candlesticks, one like unto the Son of man,
clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden
girdle.

14 His head, and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow, and his
eyes were as a flame of fire.

15 And his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace: and his
voice as the sound of many waters.

16 And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth went a sharp
two edged sword: and his countenance was as the Sun shines in his strength.

17 And when I saw him I fell at his feet as dead: and he laid his right hand
upon me, saving unto me, Fear not, I am the first, and the last.

18 I am he that lives, and was dead: and behold, I am a live for evermore,
Amen, and have the keys of hell, and of death.

19 Write the things which thou have seen, and the things which are, and the
things which shall be hereafter,

20 The mystery of the seven stars which thou saw in my right hand, and the
seven golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the angels of the seven
churches: and the seven candlesticks which thou saw, are the seven churches.

I John who am also your brother and companion in tribulation] Hitherto we
have treated of the preface, now follows the preparation to the vision, Lib.
7, hist. cap. 20.
with the vision it self. I John: Dionysius Alexandrinus, as Eusebius
witnesses, draws hence a reason for to weaken the authority of this book,
as if the author were excessive in publishing of his own praise: for, says
he, the Prophets and Apostles used not to mention so often their own names, as
John does in this book: saying many times J John, as if he had been writing
not a book, but an obligation or acquittance. But John herein does nothing
more, then what is very seemly, yea necessary. Five times indeed, he names
himself in this book, which will not seem strange, if we mind that it is one
thing, to write a history, another thing to write a prophecy. The truth of an
history requires not the authority of the writer, but so does a prophecy.
Therefore we read that the old prophets as Jeremie, Daniel, and others did
usually prefix their names to their prophecies, whose example John seems here
to imitate. Yea Paul himself expresses sometime his name in his Epistles, I
Paul with my own hand, etc. And touching the repetition of his name here, it
was very necessary. For otherwise it might have been thought, that Christ who
before called himself Alpha and Omega, had also spoken the words following I am
your brother, etc. therefore his name is seasonably inserted, I John who am
your brother, etc. by which epithites, he seeks to win their good will, and
also comfort the Churches to whom he writes.

Your brother] Not by blood, but by faith, and in the communion of Christ, for
there is betwixt the members of Christ a spiritual brotherhood, straightly
tying them together in the bond of love: he calls himself their companion in
three respects: because they who are the members of one head, must mutually
partake together in all conditions. First in affliction, for even then the
Christians were grievously persecuted under Domitian, and John himself banished
into Patmos. Secondly in the kingdom, that is, a spiritual kingdom: For we
being made kings and priests to God, do now with Christ our Lord maintain the
same against all enemies, and in the end shall fully enjoy it with him in the
heavens: by this fellowship John the beloved disciple does not a little raise
up the spirits of Christ's afflicted ones, because he requires constancy no
otherwise of them, but as he himself desired to be a companion with them in
their common sufferings: yea assures them, that after their afflictions, they
shall enjoy an everlasting kingdom. Thirdly he was their companion in the
patience of Jesus Christ: or sufferance, as the word imports, showing that in
the kingdom to come we shall not suffer, but reign, according to that of Paul
2 Timoth. 2 Timoth. 2, 12.
2, 12. To which purpose is that saying of Tertullian: we triumph being
overcome, being slain, we conquer, when we are kept down, we escape, howbeit
we are no otherwise esteemed then malefactors, and worthy to be burnt, etc.

Of Jesus Christ] this may be referred as well to the afflictions, and kingdom,
as to the patience or suffrance of Christ, which is very comfortable to the
Godly, for herein the Apostle gives us to understand, that not only he, but
even Christ himself also does partake with us in our troubles, and as the
kingdom is Christ's, so also is our affliction, and our suffrance. Thus is he
afflicted, and suffers with us, that we also might reign with him.

I was in the jle, that is called Patmos] He shows where he saw, and wrote
the Revelation, which adds authority to the history. Patmos is an Island in
the sea Aigeum in circuit 30 miles as Pliny writes. For what cause, Lib. 4,
chap. 12. Lib. 3, hist. cap. 14.
and in what condition he was, being there, he mentions not. Euschius,
Hier^m. and others say, that he was banished thither, in the fourteenth year of
Domiti^^, ^^d there he received this revelation from Christ.

Tertullian adds, that he was apprehended at Ephesus, by the governor of
Asia, Lib. de prescript.
and sent to Rome, where he was boiled in oil, but receiving no hurt,
afterward was banished into this Island. It is further reported, that Domitian
did cast him into a caldron of boiling oil, in way of scorn, because he had
heard, that the Christians took their name from Christ, that is, the anointed.
Domitian being slain, and his acts for their cruelty recalled by the Senate,
John (under the Emperor Nerva) returned from his banishment to Ephesus, and
ministered to the seven Churches in Asia, to whom he wrote the first vision.
Epiphanius records, that John was in Patmos in the days of Clandius Caesar:
But it is a manifest error, Claudius being put for Domitian, as the computation
of the time shows.

For the word of God] He closely notes the cause of his banishment, least it
might be scandalous, and taken as if he had been there as a malefactor: (for
not the punishment, but the cause makes a martyr:) whereas it was for his
constant profession of the doctrine of Christ, which the Romans would neither
suffer, in their city, or other territories, which caused the first great
persecution against the Christians under Nero: and the second under Domitian,
at which time many thousands of them laid down their lives, for the cause of
Christ.

For the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ] Both are joined, as
here, so in verse. 2. By the word, he understands the son, the essential
word of God, Ioh. 1.1: By the testimony he means the doctrine of Christ.
Thus by banishments, and sufferings, the primitive Christians did triumph over
their enemies, though scandalized as fools and Galileans by the men of this
world and esteemed worthy of nothing, but whipping, torturing and hanging
therefore (says Turtullian) that which the enemies challenge over us, is our
joy: who had rather be candemned then forsake God: this is the Palm of our
clothing: This is the Chariot of our triumph, and the reason why we submit not
to these, whom thus we have overcome. Thus much for the time and the place,
when, and where this prophesy was revealed to John.

I was in the spirit] He shows how he saw this revelation, viz. not with
mortal eyes, but being ravished in spirit, his mind was carried beyond it
self. So we read that Peter and Paul praying earnestly fell into a trance, and
conversed with God. Acts 10, 10. and 15, and 16.9, and 18, 9.
The which again confirms the divine authority of this book. For the
following visions, and the mysteries of them were revealed unto John, not by
the power of any humane wit, but by the holy Ghost.

Interpreters observe three kinds of visions. First corporal, when we behold
the objects preserved, with our bodily eyes. Secondly spiritual, when we
behold the appearances of things, either a wake, or a sleep, yet understand
them not thus did Phurao, Nebuchadnezar, and Peter. The third they call
intellectual, that is, when the mind being illuminated by the holy Ghost
understands the mysteries of those things which are presented. Thus Joseph
understood the vision of Pharao, and Daniel that of Nebuchadnezar, this John
saw the visions of the revelation in the spirit, that is, the holy Ghost gave
him to understand them. Others expound these words in the spirit, as opposite
to the being present in the body, not as if such which saw visions in the
spirit, did not still retain their real bodies: but being ravished, they seemed
for the present to themselves, as out of the body even as Paul in the 2 Corinthians. 12, 3: caught up to the third heaven, knew a man in Christ, whither in
the body, or out of the body he knew not.

This kind of visions, is one of the gifts of the new Testament, which Christ
ascending up on high poured forth upon the Church according to the oracle in
Joel. Joel 2.28.
Your young men shall see visions, etc. yet was this not given to all, but a
special grace and bestowed only, on such as the Lord pleased. Neither was it
perpetual, but ceased with the gift of miracles, after the doctrine of the
Gospel, was sufficiently propagated, and confirmed in the world: and hence we
must beware of such who now a days boast of visions, Isay. 8, 20. Luke 16, 29.
Ioh. 5, 39.
as if they were inspired, but they are deceivers, to the law and testimony.
For God has tied the church to the written word of the law and Gospel: they
have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them, search the scriptures, for
though an angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel, let him be accursed.

On the Lords day] He calls the first day of the week on which Christ rose
again, the Lords day. He saw the revelation, on this day, which Christians kept
holy to God, being by the authority of the Apostles set apart for Church
meetings, in stead of the Jewish sabbaths: as we way gather from 1 Cor. 16.1:
where the Apostle commands, that on the first day of the week, gathering be
made in the Church, for the brethren in Judea. So Acts 20.7. In one of the
sabbaths, that is, the first day of the week the Christians are said to come
together to break bread. So then the observation of the Lords day is warranted,
by an Apostolical tradition.

Hence Gagneus and Ribera infer, that the Church, besides, yea and contrary to
the scripture, may impose some things to the observed as divine: let no man
thinck, (says he) that those things only are to be observed, which are
contained in the scriptures: but they do err. For first there is great
difference between articles of faith, and the Lord, Mat. 15, 9. Isay 29, 13.
day: no man doubts, but the Church may lawfully appoint days, and outward
rites belonging to order and decency, so it be done, without scandal, opinion
of worship, and intruding upon the liberty, and conscience: But the question
betwixt us, and the papists is, touching points of faith necessary to
salvation, which they affirm, that the Church or Bishops may ordain, without
the authority of scripture, the which thing we deny: For God is worshipped in
vain by the commandments of men: Besides the authority of the Apostles is one
thing, and the authority of Bishops and the Romish Church is another. For they
were not only divinely inspired in their writings, but also in whatsoever they
instituted touching Church orders. Wherefore, they not only appointed the
Lords day to be kept, but also made it apart of scripture: now as for other
ministers, they have not the same authority, so that, it cannot hence be
gathered, that any thing should be believed as necessary to salvation,
besides what is contained in the holy scripture. For though the Lords day, is a
matter not of faith: but of fact: yet the observation thereof is according to
the word of God.

Here it may be demanded, whether John saw the whole revelation upon one Lords
day? Indeed it may seem by the coherence of the matter, so to be: not
withstanding I think, that Christ did not at one time burden the mind of his
servant, with so many different, and large visions: neither is it probable,
because the like distinctions of time, which other prophets had in their
visions, appears also to be in these visions of John: as in Chap. 4. verse. 1,
2: is evident. After this I looked, etc. and immediately I was in the spirit,
so that after he had seen the first vision, he was come to himself, ere he was
again ravished, and saw other visions: and in like-lihood this was upon another
Lords day. The like we may gather from chapter 17.3: So he carried me away in
the spirit, into the wilderness: and often it is said, after these things: But
I do not conceive all of them import a distance of time: but the things which
I specially mind are in: Chap. 4.2, and 17.3, and 21.1: besides all things
were not revealed to John in one place: but some things he saw in Patmos, some
in the heavens, some on the sea shore, and some things in the wilderness: But
seeing we cannot certainly determine of the thing, I will therefore leave it to
the readers choice.

Heard behind me a great voice] By this great voice, John (whither sleeping,
or waking) was stirred up to observe the visions, least otherwise he should
have neglected them, as vain fancies. The voice was great, either in regard of
the great mystery of the visions, or because it was the voice of the great
God, or lastly in regard of the lowdnesse, and shrilnesse thereof.

As of a trumpet] Whose sound is high, loud, and heard a great way off:
signifying that those things which John saw, ought continually to sound in the
ears, and hearts of Gods people. And hence the prophets were commanded, to cry
aloud, not to spare, but to lift up their voice like a trumpet: that all might
hear, and have no pretense for their ignorance.

Alcasar untruely affirms, that this voice, was altogether like unto the sound
of a trumpet. But the text says, it was the voice not of one founding, but
speaking. Again by this voice is signified, how we should be stirred up to
encounter with all our spiritual adversaries, as soldiers by the found of the
trumpet are imboldened to the battle. In that he heard the voice behind him,
is signified, that John added nothing to these visions, but that they were
altogether divine for the things which are behind us we see not. Or otherwise
he heard a voice behind, to denote how the things he heard, were suddenly to
come to pass even immediately upon John's departure.

11. Saying I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last] In this great voice
are contained three things. First the eternity of Christ is testified: Secondly
John's commission to write the vision: And lastly a commandment given him to
send the same to the seven Churches. And hence it is very clear, that Christ
is that Son of God, who spoke in verse. 8. For both there and here he takes the
same things to himself. And there is no question to be made, but that in this
place he speaks himself, and of himself. Eniedinus the Samosatenian
objecteth, that these words are not in all copies, nor yet in the Latin
version, and for this cites the Annotations of Beza.

I answer, though Aretas and Montanus have them not, yet Andreas, and the
Editions of Paris have them, with other approved copies. Beza also confesses,
that the repetition agrees well with the style of John, for Christ being to
command John to write this vision, declares his authority from his Godhead, to
the end he might not doubt, but what he did was truly divine. In these very
words Christ speaks of himself verse. 17. and Chap. 21.6, and 22 13: so that
it seems, some heretic adventured to blot this out of the vulgar version,
thereby to darken the divinity of Christ, or else some presumptuous person did
it, who thought this repetition needless.

And what thou see write in a booke] The command of writing, confirms the
authority of this book. For John wrote this prophecy, not of himself, but by
the commandment of Christ, for though here the commandment be particular, to
write this first vision, yet in verse. 19, it is General, not only of the
things which are, but which shall be hereafter.

Write, what thou seest] This serves for the authority of the book, for the
Apostle is to write, not the things which he thought fit, but what God gave him
to see.

And send it to the seven Churches in Asia] By seven, Rupertus understands
all the Churches: but it is to be taken restrictively of the seven greater
Churches of Asia the less, because they are expressly named, Chapt. 2, and
chap. 3. Mark. 13, 37.
and epistles directed to every one of the Bishops or Pastors thereof: yet so
as that saying of Christ appertains to this place: what I say unto you, I say
unto all.

Ephesus] Situated near the sea, was the head city of Ionia, a famous mart
town, and the more in respect of the temple of Diana, which perished with the
seven wonders of the world. Here a tumult being raised against Paul, the town
Clerk cried out: ye men of Ephesus, what man is there that knows not, how
the city of the Ephesians, is a worshipper of the great Goddess Diana, and of
the Image, which fell down from Jupiter. Here the Apostle Paul taught, and
constituted a Church: to whom afterward he wrote an Epistle.

And to Smyrna] A sea coast town in Ionia, and a colonie of the Ephesians:
taking its name from Smyrna the wife of Thessalus, and builder thereof. In it
was the porch, and temple of Homer, who as is said, was born here: it is
probable, that either John, or some other Apostle, gathered a Church to Christ
in this place.

And to Pergamus] Or Perga^^^, a city of Troas, or Phrygia, famous because of
the Trojane tower, Ovid. Lib. 13, metamor.
called Pergamus of which the poet mentions: it was the country of Galen the
physician: from this place came store of that paper, which we call parchment:
there is mention made no where, of this place in the history of the Apostles,
unles it be Acts 20, verse. 6: where Paul remained seven days at Trods, and
raised up Eutichus, being fallen dead through the window: so that it seems,
this Church also, was planted, either by John, or the Apostle Paul.

Thyatira] The Greek ((...)) is plural: it is a city of Lydia near Pergamus:
seated on the river Lycus. Act. 16, 14. Acts 20, 28.
Of this city, mention is made in the history of Lydia a seller of purple of
Thyatira: it seems that Paul preached the Gospel in the place: though when
Lydia was converted to the says, she heard him teach at Philippi.

To Sardis] Gr. to those in Sardis, a city of Lydia also, by the mountain
Tmolus, of old the royal, Lib. 5, cap. 29.
and famous city of Croesus. Pliny calls it Moeonia.

Philadelphus] A city of Mysia: there was also a city so called in Egypt,
another in Coelesyria, but this Philadelphia, was in Asia the less.

And unto Laodicea] A city as Ptolomie says, of Caria. But Pliny and Strabo
affirm it to be in Lydia. For diverse cities were so named, as in Syria, and
Caria, Lydia, and Media: but John was commanded to write unto Laodicea of
Jonia, which was near Ephesus: it seems that Paul had preached in this
place: because he wills, that the epistle, which he wrote to the Colossians,
should be read in the Church of Laodicea. The Angel or pastor of this place,
was an hypocrite, being neither hot nor cold, against whom Christ being highly
offended, threatens destruction, chap. 3.

But happily it may seem strange to some, (says a learned interpreter) where
Rome was at this time to which, for saving further labor, this epistle might
have been written in stead of all other Churches, seeing she boasts herself,
to be the head of all: indeed Christ seems to have forgot himself, in passing
by his viear, and not so much as in one word to mention him, who as it seems,
should only have been spoken to: but the answer, why Christ wrote not to him,
is at hand, he knew he could not err, neither had need of admonition:
therefore let this omission, be one of the prerogatives of the holy sea.

And I turned to see the voice] To see him who spoke behind him, to the end
he might obey his commandment. It is a figurative speech, the effect being
put for the cause (for a voice is not seen, but heard,) but John being turned
about comes to describe, who, and what manner of person he saw speaking unto him.

Thus much concerning the preparation to the vision: now follows the vision
it self, which first is described, afterward explained.

And in the midst of the seven oandlesticks] There appeared to John seven
golden candlestiks, and in the midst of them, one like unto the Son of man,
giving commandment to him, to write the following visions, and to send seven
epistles to the seven Churches in Asia: Christ himself propounding unto John
the arguments thereof: all which served, for John's encouragement in his
banishment, and that the neighboring churches might take notice of his
Apostolical authority. Interpreters dispute, who it was that appeared to John,
like unto the Son of man. Some take it indefinitely for any man: others for an
angel, and others for Christ: but the scope and drift of the matter does
manifest, it was Christ that appeared in this likeness, both because he
commands John to write this revelation, verse. 19: and revealed the following
visions to John, chap. 4.1, which only Christ did: as also because he is said
in verse. 18 to have been dead, but is alive for evermore, and has the keys of
death and hell: the which cannot be applied, neither to men nor Angels, but
only to Christ. The most of the description is taken out of Daniel, chap. 7,
and 10. Now whereas Christ stands in the midst of the candlesticks is
signified, that he is always present with his Church, by his word and spirit
to govern, direct, keep and preserve the same, according to the promise, where
two or three are gathered in my name, Matthew. 18.20. Matthew. 28, 20. Ioh. 14, 18.
I am in the midst of them. And lo I am with you to the end of the world.

This is for our comfort, we may not think that we are left of Christ, while
we are here in this troublesome world: for he has promised, that he will not
leave us comfortless, albeit we see him not with our bodily eyes. Therefore
being assured of his goodness and power, let us not regard the threatenings,
and cruelty of the adversaries. It is also for our admonition, if Christ be
with us, let us then live holily, justly, and soberly in his sight, least he
being offended at our ungodly walking, we provoke him thereby to wrath against
us. For as he is present for the safety of the godly, so also he will take
vengeance on the wicked, and on such as neglect their duty toward him: hence
it is, that he comfort some of those Churches in the midst of whom he
walks, others he reprooveth, and threatens to punish, if that they repent
not. Their argument is foolish, who hence maintain the Vbiquity of the humanity
of Christ. Christ (say they) stands in the midst of the seven candlesticks.
The humanity of Christ, is the son of man: therefore as man he is present in
seven, that is, in all places.

I answer: the assumption is false. For the words, (son of man) signify not the
nature, but person of Christ: we confess, and believe, that the person of the
son of man, which is God, is every where. And in the midst of two, or three,
yea seven, and in all places: to wit, according to his divinity grace, and
power, as Augustine speaks: though according to the flesh, and the nature of
a true body, he be in heaven, and there remain until from thence he come to
judgment, as the scriptures testify: otherwise it would hence follow also,
that the humanity of Christ, is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending,
that is eternal, because the son of man speaks this of himself also.

Secondly though the assumption were granted, yet it will not follow, that the
flesh of Christ, is every where, but only in seven places, and only within,
and not without the Church, which is contrary to the opinion of the
Vbiquitists themselves.

The contrary follows: for he was seen of John. But what is infinite,
Theod. dial. 2.
and every where, is not to be seen with corporal eyes, as Theodore us
witnesses, (...), that is, the incomprehensible nature is not to be seen. In
the last place no consequences contrary to the analogy of faith, may be drawn
from visions: for so there would follow many absurd things, as that the
humanity of Christ should have in his bodily hand, the seven angels, and
Churches: and that a real sword should proceed out of his mouth, and the whole
description necessarily to be taken, according to the letter. The which if it
were so, then Christ should be no longer true man, who took our flesh really
of the virgin: 1 Ioh. 5, 2. Philip. 3, 21.
neither should he be our brother. For we know, when he shall be revealed, we
shall be like unto him: but Christ at the day of judgment shall not appear
in such a manner, neither shall we be thus like unto him: so that no
conclusions contrary to the doctrine of faith, may be taken from allegories.

They are yet more foolish, which under the pretense of this vision, labor to
maintain the images of Christ, and the saints in temples, against the express
commandment of God: as if the son of man appeared to the end to be painted,
and set up in such a form in temples, or thus painted to be sent unto the
Churches: and not rather to this end, that by these his admirable attributes,
the divine authority of the following epistles might be confirmed, as by and by
will appear. Now let us consider the description. First John shows the
garments and habit wherein Christ appears. Secondly the admirable form of his
body and members, which plainly shows, that the man Christ did not appear
really, but typically, and the whole serves to make known to the Churches his
dreadful majesty and power.

Like to the son of man] This is taken out of Dan. 7, 13: where Daniel saw one
like the son of man come with the clouds of heaven. So says Paul in his
epistles, that Christ was found in likeness at a man. Philip. 2, 7, 8. Rom: 8,
3.
Made like (...) men, that he wa^ in the likeness of sinful flesh: not that
he had only the form of a true man, as the Marcionites do gather from this
place. But because nothing is more like to man, then he that is a true man, and
the Apostle seems to give a reason of this manner of speech, Heb. 2, 14.
where he says, that Christ himself likewise took part of the flesh, and blood
of the children. And again verse. 17. That in all things it behooved him to be
made like unto his brethren. So then he was like to us, in the truth of our
nature. Clothed with a garment down to the foot, as the Greek (...)
signifies, compounded of m^^ a foot, and (...) to take, or lift up, by this
kingly garment is shadowed out the royal majesty of Christ.

And girt about the paps with a golden girdle] Though there is a mystery in all
these things, yet we must not be too carious in searching after the meaning
of every thing therein: interpreters are diversely minded about it. For our part
it is sufficient we know, by what follows, that it is to set forth the
majesty of Christ. It was the manner of men in the casterne countries, to gird
up their garments, being long, that they might not be hindered, in their
travail or any other business: so that Christ's binding up of his garment with
a girdle, notes his care, and diligence, to accomplish the work, which his
father gave him to do. In that it was a golden girdle is showed his majesty,
Isay 11, 4
of which the prophet Isay speaks: righteousness shall be the girdle of his
loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins. Now in that Christ is
girded about the paps, not according to the ordinary Custom, is manifested the
love of Christ toward the Church, because the heart, which is the feat of love
is between the breasts.

Verse. 14: His head, and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow] So
the hair of the ancient of days was like the pure wool, Dan. 7, 9: This
reverend hoarenesse or witness of hairs, notes out prudency and wisdom, for
Christ is the wisdom of the father. So also eternity is signified by it. For
hoarenesse comes by multitude of years. And it is compared to snow, and to
the whitest wool: For snow is very white. Ps. 51, 9. Isay 1, 18.
Therefore David prays that he might be washed with hypose, and he should
be whiter then snow. And in Isaiah the Lord says, though your sins be as
searlet, they shall be as white as snow, though they be red as crimson they
shall be as wool. This color like snow, notes out purity, so that Christ
appears to John in hoarenesse venerable, in prudency reverend, in purity
innocent, and age eternal. Some by the head understand his divinity: others
the father, because God is said to be the head of Christ. But the allegory, is
not in the word head, (without which it would have seemed an imperfect body,)
but in the white and snowy hair.

His eyes as a flame of fire] From Daniel chap. 10.6: his face as the
appearance of lightning: and his eyes as lamps of fire, s^ery eyes do manifest
the fiery, heroic, and terrible motions of the heart: Hence in Chap. 19, 11:
Christ coming to take vengeance in a terrible manner on the enemies, his eyes
appear like flames of fire, because in his wrath he will consume the wicked,
like as fire does the chafe: but in chap. Rev. 2, 23.
2.23 the fiery eyes of Christ, do nore his alseeing presence entering into the
very hid things of man: And whereas he calls himself the searcher of the
reins and hearts: It shows that no ^^un can shun^ his presence, neither
debeive him.

15. His feet like unto fine brasse] Dan. 10.6: his feet like in color to
polished b^asse: some do take the word rendered fine brass, to signify a
kind of frankincense hard like copper, which they call (thus masculum) others
for such copper, as is dug out in the mountain Libanus. The old interpreter
renders it aurichalcum, a kind of metal, which comes nearest to the color
of gold, which in old time, was of a great price. The Germans, and so Luther
translate it Messing, fine brass. And it is apparent that by it the divine
power of Christ, his unparaleld strength, stability, and constancy is declared.
The fathers interpret it of the humanity of Christ, which was tried in the
fyery furnace of his sufferings, and at length advanced to the brightness of
his glory. Andrtas in those words searches deeply after diverse allegories, but
we pass by his subtilities, as having indeed but little solidity in them.

His voice as of many waters] Dan. 10, 6: the voice of his words, as the voice
of a multitude. First he heard his voice like a trumpet, and now like to many
waters, which violently running through rocks and stones, make a terrible noy^^,
neither can they be stopped, with any power or force as may be seen as the
swift fallings of the river Nilus, and the Ryne. It notes both the vehement,
and terrible voice of Christ, as also the power and efficacy thereof, piercing
into the very (...), and minds of the hearers, for the conversion of the
elect, and terror of the wicked. The which voice could not be hindered by any
adversary power whatsoever, but it was spread large, and wide unto many
peoples, which is signified by the many waters, Revelat. 17.15.

16. And he had in his right hand seven starres] The 20 verse. shows, that by
the seven stars the seven postors of the Churches are to be understood, they
are compared to stars, because they ought to shine like stars to their
flocks by the light of their life and doctrine. They are in the right hand of
Christ, because it is be th^^ gives them to the Churches, and governs them
by his word, and spirit, and preserves them by the right hand of his power:
and lastly works through them salvation for his Church: so that this
commends to us the dignity of the teachers of the Church.

Out of his mouth went a sharp two edged sword] This is explained Chap. 19.1^:
Revelat. 19, 5.
and out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it, he should smite the
nations: and he shall rule them, with a rod of iron (...) which serves for the
comfort of the Godly who confidently trusting on Christ the judge, ought not to
fear the power of the enemies: moreover the doctrine of the Gospel, may also be
understood by it: which Christ by the word, of his mouth has brought forth
unto us, Ephesians. 6, 17. Heb. 4, 22.
out of the bosom of his father, the which Paul compares, because of its
piercing nature, to a (...) edged sword.

And his countenance was as the sun] Dan. 10.6: his fare was as the appearance
of lightning, by which is meant either his divine majesty, or else that great
glory, unto which the humanity of Christ is exalted being set at the right hand
of God. which glory though it gives immortality to the flesh, yet takes not
away the nature thereof, as Augustine writes to Dardanus. The lightning can
not well be looked on without hurt to the eyes: So the brightness of the sun
as high noone day dazzels the eyes of the beholders: for the greater light
darkens the lesser: even such is the exceeding glory of Christ, as that it can
not be looked on. Matthew. 3, 43.
The just also shall shine as the sun in the kingdom of the father: but the
body of Christ does shine as the sun in his full strength, by which is noted
the excellency of Christ the head, above the members.

Alcasar does compare this brightness of Christ, to the admirable glory of
the Romish Church, after the conversion of the empire, saying, the Church of
Rome does properly, and truly set forth the meaning of that shining
brightness, which comes from the countenance of Christ: which exposition the
very lesuites (I believe) can not read without laughter. For then Christ did
forget, to write an epistle to this church, whereby to co^fer this glory upon
her: but I pass by this mercenary clawback, who perhaps in stead of
conversion, would have written the eversion of the empire.

And when I saw him] Now John shows how he was affected with the vision, by
reason of the glorious brightness of Christ's majesty: he falls down as
dead: the like we read of Daniel chap. 8.18: for such is the great weakness
of the most holy men of God, that they are not able to behold the divine
majesty: for God is a consuming fire, but how then shall the wicked stand
before his dreadful presence: surely they shall melt away as wax before the
fire. As for allegories, I pass them by.

And he laid his right hand upon me] As a hand touched Daniel (in whom there
remained no strength, when he saw that great vision) and set him upon his
knees, and upon the palms of his hands: even so does Christ lift up John, who
was sore amazed, first by laying his hand upon him, and afterward speaking
comfortably unto him. He touches John with the same right hand, in which he
held the seven stars. For by his divine power, and love (which never fails)
he upholdeth all the Churches, with their teachers, and every one of the
faithful.

Fear not I am the first and the last] He bids him not to fear, because
fear disturbeth the mind, and unfits men for instruction, and therefore the
admonition at this time was very seasonable. And that he might comfort John the
more, and lift him up, he expounds in order unto him the whole vision. First
who he is. Secondly what he would have him to do. And thirdly unfolds the
mystery of the stars, and candlesticks. He shows him who he is, to the end
he might know, that he saw no fancy, or spirit, but Jesus Christ his redeemer.
He again calls himself the first, and the last, that is God eternal, as in
verse. 8, and 11: which is a seventh argument of Christ's divinity, Isay 41, 40,
and 44.6, and 48, 12.
as we have already expounded. For that which the prophet ascribes to God
alone, Christ in this chapter three times assumeth unto himself.

But some heretics object, that Christ is called first, as being the first of
the Church under the new Testament. But I answer, that all the adjuncts
disproove this gloss. For Christ does absolutely call himself the first and
the last, by which very words, the prophets declare the eternity of Jehovah
God. Yea Christ says: that he was not only before the Church of the new
Testament, but also before Abraham: Ioh. 8, 58.

18. I am he that lives, and was dead] These words do clearly manifest, that
neither man nor Angel, but Christ alone is represented here in this vision.

(...) the living, or he that liveth] Christ takes unto himself not only the
glorious life of his humanity, Ioh 5.26.
but the essential also of his divinity, of which he speaks in the Gospel:
as the father has life in himself, so has he given to the son to have life in
himself. For chiefly he calls himself (...) (him that lives,) because even
then when he was dead, he lived. Therefore he says not, I did live, and
afterwarddy, for then there would not have been any thing remarkable in such
an expression, for no man can be said, to be dead, who formerly has not been
alive: but he says, J living, and was dead, that is, both together: for
((...)) I was, is but once in the text, and is referred to both words ((...))
living and dead. In which great and admirable expression, he does openly
declare his twofold nature, affirming that he lived, 1 Pet. 3, 18.
as he was God, and was dead as he was man at one time. According to that of
Peter, Christ was mortifyed in the flesh, but vivifyed in the spirit, that is,
both dead in the flesh, and alive in the spirit together. And this is the true
meaning of that place, which is the same, with that common tenet, that Christ
being dead in the flesh, raised up himself, by the power of his divinity. This
is also confirmed by the following words:

Behold, I am alive for evermore] He says not, and I lived again, but behold
I am living, or alive: by the particle (behold,) he attributes to himself an
admirable, divine, and everlasting life, to distinguish it from that life which
he received again after his suffering in the flesh. Therefore he says, he
lives for evermore, that is, both before his death, in his death, and after
his death: which I have expressed in these verses: Vivus eram, sed eram crudeli
morte peremptus
En vitam sine fine per omnia secula duco.
J was alive, and did a sore death suffer:
Yet lo I live, and so I shall for ever.
This is the eight argument, 8 Argument of Chr. deity.
of the Godhead of Christ, because he was dead, and lives for evermore.

Eniedinus the heretic objecteth, that Christ is not God, because he died, and
so ceased to be: whereas God dies not, neither can he cease from being God.
But it is a childish objection. For though God cannot die, as he is God? yet
Christ, as is he God ^^nlfested in the flesh, 1 Pet. 3, 18.
suffered death according unto the scriptures: mortifial in the flesh: Again,
God has p^^^sed the Church with his own blood. Wherefore this only does
follow, that Christ is not God according to the flesh, in which he sunffered:
which indeed it true, although it be opposed by the Vbiquitisis, who therefore
have need to consider how they will answer, to what is here by the here^ike
objected. Further more all this, that Christ does attribute to himself, is for
the comfort of the Godly: For Christ lives, yea is life it self, that we
also might live through him, according unto the prom^^, Joh. 6, he that eats
me, even he shill live by me, and again Ioh. 16, 28: I give lowy sheep eternal
life, and they s^^ll never preish.

And have the keys of hell, and of death] That is, I have power to cast the
enemies into hell. Keys are a sign of power, the which Christ, Matthew. 10.28,
does ascribe unto God: fear not them which kill the body, etc. but rather fear
him, to wit God, which is able to destroy both soul, and body in hell. This
power Christ here assumeth, by which he declares himself to be God, and Lord of
hell and death. 9 Argument of Chr. deity.
This therefore in order is a ninth argument proving the Godhead of Christ.

Verse. 19. Write the things which thou have seene] If this commandment be
restrained to the first vision, by a threefold division of the things, which he
had stene, which were, and which should come to pass: then by it the arguments
of the seven following epistles are signified; but I rather refer it to the
whole revelation: for he is required to write some things already past, which
he had seen, and somethings present, the things which are, and some things
which shall be hereafter. So that the matter of the revelation is distinguished
in^^ a threefold order by Christ himself: some things he had seen already from
the beginning of the Gospel under Nero, and the following Emperors unto
Domition, some things he now saw: but the greater part he was yet to see,
namely the things that were to come afterward. To these three heads, we must
have regard, all most in every one of the following visions. The Latin version
has which must be, in stead of which shall be. But the Gr. constantly reads
((...)) which shall come to pass. Moreover this proves again the divine
authority of the revelation, forasmuch as it is written by the commandment of
Jesus Christ. But why did he command it to be written? questionless that the
whole Church at all times should continually read it for their comfort and
instruction, which also is the end and use of the whole scripture: Rom: 15, 4.
2 Timothy 3.16.

Verse. 20. The mystery of the seven starres] After that the Son of man had
showed who he was, whom John saw, he comes to unfold the mystery of the
stars, and candlesticks, viz. that the seven stars are the seven angels, or
ministers, and the seven candlesticks, the seven churches of Asia, to whom he
was commanded to write, verse. 11.

The mistery] The vulgar has it, the sacrament of the stars, that is, the
thing figured by them: so again chap. 17.7, I will tell thee the sacrament of
the woman: but it is improperly used, for the mysticallsfignification of the
same.

Bishops] So he caleth the stars, because they ought to shine before others
in purity of doctrine, and integrity of life: like unto stars shining in the
firmament: they are said to be angels, because they are Gods messengers to the
Churches: and the Churches are compared to candlesticks, because like as the
candle or light, is set up into the candlestike: even so the Church ought to
hold forth, and preserve the shining light of true doctrine, that all may
behold it, least being in darkness, they stumble and perish through their
ignorance.

Hence we learn in the first place, that the scripture best interprets it
self: for what was before more darkly spoken, is now clearly unfolded. So
Christ opened the parables to his disciples, Matthew. 13, in like manner this
vision which at first seemed obscure, is now made plain by its own
interpretation. For albeit the scripture does not make clear every thing, that
is darkely spoken: not withstanding; if we diligently observe it, that of
Austin will appear most true, that there is all most nothing abscure in
scripture, which is not in some other place plainly expounded.

Furthermore we are to take notice of these figurative, and sacramental
phrases. The stars are Angels, that is, they signify the Angels: the
candlestiks are the Churches, Genesis 41, 27. 1 Cor. 10, 4. Cont. adim. c. 12.
that is, they signify the Churches: according to that in Genesis: the seven
kine, are seven years, that is, do signify seven years. And the rock was
Christ, for it signified Christ: as Augustine expounds it. For there is
nothing more familiar in scripture, then to name signs, by the things which
they signify, which manner of speech is not dark, but plain in regard of the
analogy betwixt the sign, and the thing signified: wherefore it was not
obscure, but familiar to the scripture, that Christ called the bread which was
broken at the institution of the supper, his body which was crucified for us,
seeing it was a sacrament or holy sign of the same: Hence Augustine opening
the etymology or signification of a sacrament, applies it to the Lords supper,
saying, that the Lord Jesus doubted not to say this is my body: when he gave
the sign only thereof.

And this is so clear a truth, that even Aloasar a Jesuit confesses it,
saying, that in the phrase of scripture touching dark sentences, and sacraments
the word which is used, is to be referred to the signification of it, and that
the bread and wine in the Eucharist (which they call the species) does signify
the body and blood of Christ: because Christ says: this is my body, etc.
Indeed he supposes there are two sorts of signs: some instituted only for
doctrine and signification: as in parables, and dark sentences: the other such,
as really include, and contain the things which they signify: as in baptism,
and the supper, in which (says he) is truly and properly contained, as the
cleansing of the soul from sin: so the body and blood of Christ: and he
proves it: First, because Christ instituted these signs to that end: Secondly
the Church so teaches: And lastly, because it were an easy thing for any one
to institute mere, and naked signs: whereas it is in the power of Christ
alone, to appoint such signs as are full of efficacy.

I answer first: Alcasars arguments answered.
that in the institution either of baptism, or the Lords supper, there is no
mention made of any including of the things signified in the signs.

Secondly the primitive Church taught no such inclusion, but the new popish
Church in so teaching is departed from the institution, and doctrine of the
primitive times.

Lastly though it be true, that the sacraments are not mere signs, yet it
follows not, that they are signs including the thing signified. For there is
in scripture another kind of signs, which as they are signs, so they are
seals confirming to the faithful the grace of Christ signified by them: For
properly the sacraments are signs and seals of the promise of grace, which no
creature could institute, or bring into the Church, but God alone.

Another expositor denies, Hoe in the Revel. chap. 1.
that these are figurative speeches, and why? because, says he, those
candlesticks do not signify, but are really the Churches: and the stars do
not denote, but are in truth the angels. But both is false, first because then
there should be no mystery in the candlesticks, or stars. Secondly if the
candlesticks, and stars were truly Churches, and Angels, then would not
Christ have required John to write his Epistles, as being absent from them, but
he should have delivered his message unto them, as there present with him in
Patmos. Thirdly because then the words (the candlesticks are Churches, the
stars, are Angels) should be regular expressions: But this he denies, and
truly: For they are terms of disparity. What then: the metaphor (says he) is
in the subject, which does not import that the copulative, IS should be taken
for the word signifies. And though it were granted here, yet would it not
follow, that the words of Christ at the institution of the supper were of the
same signification, because Christ did not expound to them a vision, but
institute asacrament. Now howsoever both be true, yet does not this take away
the metonymical expression; for in typical and Sacramental assertions, the
tipes and signs are said to be the antitypes, or things signified, partly
indeed by a metaphor, because of the analogy, or likeness that is betwixt the
signs, and the things themselves: but chiefly by a metonymia, Epist. 23. ad
Bonif.
because of the sacramental signification. For, as Augustine says, if
sacraments had not some likeness, with the things they represent, they should
not at all be sacraments: for in regard of that likeness, they have the name
of the things themselves. Therefore as in some sort, the sacrament of the body
of Christ, is Christ, the sacrament of the blood of Christ, is Christ's blood:
even so the sacrament of faith, is faith. Again: that is called the soul, In
Levit. lib. 3.4.5. Genes. 41.26. 1. Cor. 10.4.
which signifies the soul, for it is usual that the thing signifying be
called by the name, of that which it does signify, as it is written: the seven
ears, are seven years, with many the like places, hence it is said, that rock
was Christ; the Apostle says not the rock signifies Christ, but as if he were
that indeed which in substance he was not, but by signification only. In like
manner the candlesticks are called the churches, and the stars are said to be
Angels: the bread in the Lords supper, the body of Christ, not in substance,
but in regard of their analogy and signification. For Christ doubted not to
say: Chap. 12. cont. Adrm Did. 1. de consec.
this is my body: when he gave the sign of his body: says the same Austine:
and more clearly: the bread is the body of Christ, not in the truth of the
thing, but by a mystical signification.

The Argument, Analysis, and parts of the second Chapter.
CHrist walking in the midst of the Candlesticks, delivers to John the seven
Epistles, to be sent, to the seven ministers of the Churches of Asia,
commanding him to commend the diligence of some, to reproove the negligence of
others, and in the rast place by promises and threatenings, to exhort all of
them to their duty and constancy therein: so also he is commanded to write,
those things which he had seen, and which were; and which, should come to
pass, by which threefold distinction, Christ in the former Chapter declared in
general the arguments of these Epistles. For in commanding John to write,
those things which he had seen, he was to declare the glorious vision of
Christ, unto the Churches, that so they might receive the writing with
reverence and due respect. In bidding him to write, those things which were, it
shows how he was to manifest the qualification of the Churches and Teachers;
and whatsoever was either good, or evil in every one of them, that so they
might perceive; how Christ our Lord takes notice of all our actions. And
lastly, in bidding him to write, those things which should come after, John was
to propound to the godly a promised reward, and to the wicked judgment to
come, that all might acknowledge Christ to be the glorious, just, and
omnipotent judge of the world. But it is better to extend the three forenamed
heads, to the whole revelation.

To return to the Epistles, they are all exhortatory, and not much differing in
matter one from the other. The sixth to the Church of Philadelphia seems to be
the excellentest, next to which is that unto Smyrna. But the seventh unto
Laodicea, is the sharpest. A common inscription is prefixed before all, taken
from the foregoing glorious form of Christ: A general Epiphonema is added in
the conclusion provokeing them to attention by a special promise; by which is
understood, the end of that glorious, and magnificent apparition of Christ.

This Chapter does contain the first four Epistles; namely, to the pastors of
the Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, Philadelphia, and Thiatyra. The common
argument of the Epistles.
And therefore the Chapter has four parts. The Analysis of them all is plain,
and almost one and the same. For they consist of a Preface, Narration,
Exhortation, and acclamation of promises annexed: or that I may speak more
plainly, they contain three things. First, A description of Christ the author
of the Epistles. Secondly, The praise or dispraise of each Angel. Thirdly, Good
things are promised, to those that overcome; and destruction to such as fall
away.

The first Epistle to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus.
1 Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, write, These things says he that
holds the seven stars in his right hand, who walks in the midst of the
seven golden candlesticks:

2 I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not
bear them which are evil, and thou have tried them which say they are
Apostles, and are not, and have sound them liars.

3 And have borne, and have patience, and for my Names sake have labored, and
have not fainted.

4 Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy
first love.

5 Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works: or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlesticks
out of his place, except thou repent.

6 But this thou have, that thou hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I
also hate.

7 He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches:
To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the
midst of the Paradise of God.

THE COMMENTARY.
Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus] So he calls the pastor of the
Church; for they are Gods ambassadors to the church. A messenger is in Greek
((...)) that is, one sent: which properly is the name of those heavenly
spirits, which do the commandments of the Lord. With this title Christ here
honoreth the pastors of the Churches, yet not so much to commend their dignity,
as to set forth the weightinesse of their spiritual function. Heb. 2, 14
It is the honor of the Angels, that they are ministering spirits sent forth to
minister for them, who shall be heirs of falvation. Wherefore the Angels of
Churches ought not to be puffed up because of this dignity, but faithfully to
demit themselves to their pastoral ministries. Moreover touching these
Epistles, they concern not the pastors alone, but also (as appears by their
conclusions) all the Churches, it being usual, that such things as were to
come to the whole, were directed to the pastors, and by them afterward to be
brought unto the congregation.

The Church of Ephesus] He is commanded in the first place to write to this
Church, either, because it lay nearest Patmos, as Abraham Ortelius in his
ancient description of Grecia shows: or else for the eminency and greatness
thereof, and being better known unto John then the rest. Whither Timothy were
then Bishop of Ephesus
Histories mention not, who at this time was the Angel of that church: not
indeed does Christ name him, to the end it might appear, that he had not
respect so much to any one particular teacher, as to all others which should
succeed. Some think that it was Timothy, the disciple of Paul; but it is not
probable, that Timothy so much commended by Paul in his Epistles, should lie
under so heavy a censure; besides it is a received opinion, Quandoque bonus
dormitat Homerus.
that Timothy suffered martyrdom, before the time of John's exile. But if it
were he, as Alcasar maintains against Lyra, Ribera, and Pererius, it is an
example of the general rule: that sometime the very best do fail:
admonishing us of our infirmity, and whereunto the saints are subject. Again it
serves to stir up all teachers to care, and vigilance. But now whither the
fault in this Bishop (for which Christ threatens destruction) be not mortal,
but venial (as Aleasar pretends) let himself look to it.

Write] Christ tells John word for word what he should write to the Churches:
for he is the author of al these Epistles, and John his penman or scribe. Which
further proves the authority of this book: for without doubt after Christ had
made an end of revealing the mysteries of this book unto John, he faithfully
wrote to every one of the Churches according to the commandment of Christ.

These things says he that holdeth] The first Epistle has three parts:
namely, an inscription, a narration, and a conclusion. In the inscription
Christ is brought in speaking to the church of Ephesus, by a description of his
person taken from the foregoing vision; which serves both for the authority of
the Epistle, and to stir them up unto attention. The manner of the style is
prophetical. For so usually the prophets in stirring up to attention bring God
in speaking thus to the people; thus says Jehovah. So John: these things says
he that holds; etc. not simply, these things says Christ, but, these things
says he that holds the stars, etc. Thus by degrees two things are
repeated, which he saw before. One of the stars: another of the candlesticks.

Which holds the seven starres] That is, which holds the seven Pastors of
the Churches in his right hand, as chap. 1, verse. 16. This (as we have already
showed) may be taken either in the better part, that is, of Christ's loving and
caring for his faithful teachers, his governing, and preserving of them by the
right hand of his power, with precious promised rewards. Or in a contrary
sense, it signifies, that Christ detesteth, and by his right hand suppresseth,
and rejects all slowbellies, hirelings and wolves; And so much here he
threatens to some of these teachers, unless they did repent.

Who walks in the midst of the candlesticks] First he saw him standing, but
now walking in the midst of the candlesticks: signifying hereby, that Christ
our Lord sits not still in the heavens: but is present by his providence, in
the midst of the Church, beholding all things, proving our faith, and
obedience, and recompencing the same with great rewards: disliking our
slothfulness and other corruptions, punishing the ungrateful, by taking away
their talent from them, and bestowing it on others. Levit. 26, 24.
This walking therefore imports Christ's gracious presence with his Church
according to that promise, I will walk among you, and I will be your God. So
Christ: I will be with you at all times, unto the end of the world. This being
so, it is our duty, to walk reverently in the sight of God, and of Christ, that
so they not being offended, may walk, and abide with us, Ioh. 14, 23.
according to the promise, if a man love me, he will keep my words: and my
father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.

2. I know thy workes] In the narration are five things. First their great
diligence and constancy is commended, for Christ prayseth, and rewards the
labor and faith of his servants, because he delights therein.

I know thy workes] This he speaks not only to this Church, but to the rest,
yea to Laodicea also. Here I take works indifferently to be either good or
bad, virtues or vices, of which as nothing is hid from him, so nothing shall
pass without reward or punishment. For it is the part of him that is the
admonisher and judge, to pronounce sentence of nothing, but what is well known
unto him. He takes unto himself not only the knowledge of what is outward,
but also a clear and perfect sight of men, and all their inward actions, the
which John often in the Gospel ascribes unto Christ. He knew all men, Ioh. 2,
24, and 25. Ioh. 21, 17.
and needed not that any should testify of man: for he knew what was in man,
and so Peter said unto him, Lord thou know all things, thou know that I
love thee. But who knows all things, save God alone? for he sees all things,
searching the heart, and reins of man. So that this is the tenth argument, 10
Argument of Chr. deity.
(to be added to the former) proving the Godhead of Christ, taken from his
omniscience, or knowledge of all things.

And thy labor and patience] The first copulative (and) is put for to wit thy
labor and patience: so the like in verse. 9.13, 18. Moreover he commends
three sorts of virtues in this Bishop: labor in doctrine: constancy in
suffering: Zeal in discipline: which virtues he does in many words commend in
this and the following verse by a contrary order.

First his labor, that is, his sincere, and unwearied pains in preaching the
word: 1 These. 5, 12. 1 Timothy 5, 17.
For the scripture in many places calls the office of teaching ((...)) a labor,
as being full of wearisomnesse and trouble. This is the first and principal
virtue and honor of a faithful Bishop: the which Christ attributes, to this
teacher. But what would Christ now say of the mitred Bishops of these days,
who neither know the word of God, and for the most part regard it not. But
being idle and dumb are unfit to preach, and so spend their time, either in
war, sports, or following of their filthy lusts.

The second is sufferante, that is, patience in enduring, and constancy in
overcomming the dangers, injuries, and afflictions with which they were
exercised, both by the Jews and Gentiles, for the sake of Christ. For the
cross is an inseparable companion of the Gospel; 1 Corinthians. 1, 18.
and therefore is called the word of the cross: both because it shows us the
way to salvation through the cross: (esteemed foolishnes by the world:) As
also because satan does stir up his instruments, to hate, persecute, and put
to death, the constant professors and teachers thereof, as being the greatest
opposers of his kingdom. All which things the Angel of this Church patiently
enduring, Iam. 1, 12.
is for the same highly commended of Christ: for blessed is the man that
indureth tentations, for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life,
which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

And can not bear them which are evill] The third virtue, for which Christ
prayseth him, Matthew. 18, 17. 1 Cor. 5, 5. Apolog. 2. Apolog. chap. 39. Treat.
35. in Matthew. Romans 7.
is his singular Zeal in observing Church discipline, namely his strong
opposing of such vices, as violently brake in upon the congregation, and his
due administration of Church censures against scandalous persons, casting them
out of the communion of the Church, as Christ commanded. And indeed Church
censures were in full force in the primitive time, to the great good of the
Church, as Justin, Tertullian, Origin, and others of the ancient writers
testify.

And have tried them] Now he repeateth, and declares the particulars: showing
in the first place who those evil persons were, and wherefore he could not
bear with them: But vehemently withstood the false Apostles (seeking to creep
into the Church,) examined their false doctrine by the word of God, and
manifested and repressed their lies and deceit. For now at this time there were
many false teachers among the Churches of Asia, as Ebion, Cerinthus and others,
who though they boasted themselves to be Apostles: yet in truth were the
professed enemies of the Godhead of Christ, corrupting true religion, and
perverting the faith of many; Act. 20, 29.
of whom Paul had forewarned the elders of this Church. For it is the duty of
teachers, to defend the purity of faith, and strongly to oppose such devouring
wolves, and so to follow the example of the Angel of this Church, who for this
cause is greatly commended by Christ our Lord.

Verse. 3. And have borne, and have patience] He sets forth more clearly his
patience, pointing at some special kind of affliction (either imprisonment, or
stripes) which he had manfully sustained. Before Christ says, he could not
bear, and here says, he had borne: but there is no contradiction, for there
he spoke of his not suffering of impenitent sinners in the Church: and here of
his patient bearing of afflictions for the Gospels sake.

And for my names sake have laboured] The vulgar, as likewise Montanus do
somewhat differ from these words: but without all doubt this is the proper and
natural reading of the place, (agreeing with the greater and lesser copies of
Robert Stephanus, imprinted at Paris.) For it appears that his labor, and
unwearied endeavors in sparing no pains to preach, and maintain the faith of
Christ, is again commended, that all might imitate the like diligence, and
faithfulness in teaching: for in this Angel we may behold a true pattern of a
faithful Bishop. But now who would not think (hearing so great commendations
from Christ himself) that he had been perfect in every respect, and worthy of
deserved reward? Job. 15, 15
but the following reproof shows the contrary: and indeed God the heavenly
judge sees not perfection in the very best of the saints.

4. 2 part of the narration.
But nevertheless I have somewhat against thee] In the second part of the
narration he reproves him, because he had left his former love. Ambrose
thinks that he is blamed for a general remissness, and omission of his
former zeal and endeavor in holy duties. For security sometimes does lessen
the zeal even of the Godly, so that they have need to be stirred up, and
provoked to holy duties. Andreas understands, that he is in special rebuked,
for not showing, as he ought^ his wonted love, and charity to the poor. And
indeed it seems, that he began by little and little to be covetous, desiring
to heap up wealth, and so grew negligent of doing good to the strangers and
poor brethren; now covetousnes is the root of all evil, and most abominable
in the teachers of the word; for it is one of the principal virtues in a
Bishop to be given to hospitality, and to be a lover of it. 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 1,
8.
And this seems to be the reason, wherefore the cannon law allowed to Bishops
one forth part of the Church revenues, to the end they should be liberal: the
rest was given to the poor, and other uses. It is probable therefore that this
Angel otherwise an excellent teacher is here taxed for coveteousnes. From
whence we first observe, that the godly fail in many things, and have need to
be stirred up by admonitions and reproose, specially when either they grow cold
in their good affections, or are overcome with the cares of this present world,
and the desire of wealth and honor: For the devil does chiefly labor to
ensnare all teachers by such baits, and therefore they ought so much the more
to take heed, least hereby being overcome, they become a scandal to the
Church of God.

Observe secondly that ambition, and coveteousnesse in ministers are the most
loathsome vices that may be, and therefore they ought to be the more careful
for to avoid the same. We have an example of ambition in the disciples. For
when Christ spoke to them of the cross, they were troubled about preeminency,
asking who of them should be the greatest. Ciprian says wittily: that ambition
does sweetly sleep in the bosom of the ministers of the Church. And as for
coveteousnes, or desire of filthy lucre, by how much it is detestable, by so
much the more it does cleave, and deeply root it self in their hearts: hence it
is, that Creon in Sophocles says; (...) That is: The whole priestly generation
is given to coveteousnesse. And certainly all the sacrilegious sale of holy
things, simony, pride, and luxury, which reign in the Romish Church, was
engendered by coveteousnes, and at length, by little and little, overthrew the
truth of Christian religion: according to the Latin proverb, Religion begat
riches, but the daughter deroured the mother. For as Ierom well observes, In
vita Malchi.
after that the Christian Church had Emperors to be members thereof, it
increased indeed in power and riches; but decreased in virtue and godliness:
giving us to understand, that where coveteousnes, and pride have gotten the
upper hand, there virtue and religion is cast off and oppressed.

Observe thirdly, though Christ does commend the excellent works, labor, and
constancy of the Angel of this Church: yet he was so far from acknowledging
any merit in him: as that on the contrary he sharply reproves him for many
grievous evils, and threatens to cast him off except be repent: For Christ
does narrowly see and observe all our actions, and strictly weighs all our
works in the balance. Wherefore God forbid, we should imagine to merit by any
good we do: though indeed hypocrites commonly so think: whereas the word of
God does testify that all the works, even of the most holy men on earth, are
polluted with sin: and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isay
64.6.
if God should enter into judgment with us. Besides, we can do nothing, but
what we are bound to do: for we are debrors to the law. And therefore can not
by our good works, To. 8.12.
to which we are debtors, deserve any thing at the hands of God.

Observe in the last place, that it is not enough to begin well, but, if we
look for the recompense of reward, we must persevere in well doing unto the
end. For hypocrites at first seem very zealous, but afterward they grow luke
warm, and at last are altogether cold, and so receive not the crown of glory
at the last day.

5. Remember from whence thou art fallen] This is the third part of the
narration, being matter full of reproof. First the teacher is exhorted to
consider his fall. Secondly to repent of his many evils. Thirdly carefully to
practice all his former holy works of love and charity, now neglected. So that
in this exhortation, we have briefly the nature of true repentance propounded
unto us. First to take notice of the sin committed, A description of
repentance.
for how else should we sorrow for it, or amend the same. The 2 is to eschew
the evil, and do the good. And 3 to manifest our repentance by works of
piety, and love, both to God and our neighbor.

From whence thou art fallen] Hence it might seem to follow, that the saints
may fall away wholly from grace, and so perish eternally: for if so holy a
teacher fell from his first love, why may we not then conclude the uncertainty
of the grace of faith, Whither the saints may wholly fall away.
justification, perseverance and salvation? and why should we not doubt also of
these things and stand in fear thereof? I confess, had this Angel finally
fallen away, there had been just cause of such doubting: For no man can
assuredly believe the certainty of his faith and salvation, who doubts of the
certainty of his perseverance.

The exposition of Ribera, and Alcasar in this place is sound namely that he
had not altogether lost his love, forasmuch as he endured so great things for
the sake of Christ, but that he lost much of his former zeal. How far forth
the saints may fall.
In this we agree with them. For the saints left to themselves, will soon fall
from their faith, love, perseverance and salvation, if we only have respect to
secondary causes; to wit, the mutability of the will, the weakness of man, the
scandals of the world, and the subtilty and power of satan. For how should we
be able to withstand all these, who are weak men, and subject to the common
frailties of others, so long as we carry about us this earthly tabernacle?
Romans 11.10. Matthew. 26, 41. 1 Corinthians. 10, 12. 1 Pet. 5, 8.
For what says the scripture? be not lift up, but fear: least thou also be cut
of: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. Let him that thinks
he stands take heed least he fall: for satan walking about as a roaring lion
seeks whom he may devour. So that not only the example of this pastor, but
also the manifold slips and complaints of the saints do witness, that they
may languish and fail in the act of faith, and charity, greive the spirit of
God, to the present loss of a good conscience. But if, on the contrary, we
consider either the unchangeable counsel of God, touching the salvation of the
elect: or the most effectual intercession of Christ for their faith,
perseverance and salvation: or lastly the power of God, by which as the Apostle
witnesses, the elect are kept unto the end, 1 Pet. 1.5, then we may with the
holy scriptures firmly conclude, that the faithful cannot wholly and finally
fall from the habit, and act of faith and love, I say, so to fall as to become
Gods enemies, 1 Ioh. 3, 9. Matthew. 24, 24.
and perish for ever: because whosoever is born of God sins not (to wit,
with his whole will, and that unto death) for his seed remains in him, and he
cannot sin, because he is borne of God: for it is impossible the elect should
be deceived, (to wit, Ioh. 10, 28 Luke 22, 32. Se also Matthew. 7, 25. Psalm. 37,
24. 1 Pet. 1, 5
finally unto their damnation,) because no man can pluck Christ's sheep out of
his hand: but he gives unto them life eternal. And therefore Christ said to
Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. And God promised to put
his fear into their hearts, that they may not depart from him: which is, as
Augustine interprets it, that they might always cleave unto him: for they
are as mount Sion which cannot be moved, etc. These and many other such places
of scripture as they do plainly overthrow that Pelagian error of the saints
aposiasie: and the fear of being finally drawn away, and doubting about grace
and salvation decreed by the counsel of Trent: so also they do confirm in
regard of the free purpose of God, the certainety of our perseverance in grace
unto the end: howsoever I deny not, but the elect many times by their sins
disturb their peace and assurance, having their minds troubled with manifold
doubtings: for as men, we are subject to humane frailties, and shall be, so
long as we are here in this life.

So then we expound; From whence thou art fallen, to be, as if he had said, in
what thou art gone back from thy former zeal in godliness, fervencie and love:
and art become unlike to what thou wast before. So then Christ commends the
teacher of the Church of Ephesus for his constancy in the truth, and hatred of
heresy: but reproves him for his languishing, coveteousnesse, and ambition.
Hence we so that it is not sufficient to profess the truth, unless it be done
in obedience of faith, and humility.

Or else I will come unto thee quickly] This threatening is the fourth part of
the narration, being a most vehement exhortation, and shows the pernicious
effects of security, and coveteousnesse. Two things are threatened. 1: I will
come to thee quickly, that is, thou shall suddenly be punished before thou art
aware of it. Thus impenitent persons provoke Christ the judge against
themselves, whose wrath they are not able to bear: for he is a consuming fire.
Do we says the Apostle, provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger then
he? So that the first reason why we should repent, is because of the power and
justice of Christ and our own weakness. The second thing threatened, is the
removal of the candlestick, that is, Christ would not only thrust him out of
his office, but also remove the candlestick, that is, the Church it self by
the enemies thereof. Andreas: I will cast the Church into a troublesome, and
tempestuous condition, which punishment ordinarily follows security, and
contempt of the word. And indeed Christ did not in vain threaten this Church,
for afterward (they not repenting) he removed their candlestick, and overthrew
them by barbarous nations.

Here comes in a twofold question: first, how it can stand with equity, that
the whole Church should be dissipated for the sins of the teacher: secondly,
how the removing of this candlestick is threatened, seeing the Church is built
on the rock, against which the gates of hell cannot prevail: and the Apostle
calls this very Church of Ephesus, the house of the living God, the pillar
and ground of the truth: ^. Tim. 3, 15.

Ribera says, that the first is a difficult question: Because Christ
threatens not the pastor, but indeed the whole Church: whereas it seems
unreasonable, that the whole should be punished, for the impenitency of the
teacher. Hence he supposes, that the candlestick in this place imports, not
the Church, but the Episcopal function and dignity, unto which he was advanced,
to be a light before the flook: so that by the removing of the candlestick, he
understands a removal of the Episc^pal honor, and those things in which he
was wont to excel, as in the word and doctrine, and sundry other virtues and
gifts with which he was endued. This interpretation is not altogether
incongruous: however we need not alter the signification of the candlestick;
forasmuch as it is not unusual or contradictorie to divine justice, that God
should punish a whole congregation, for the sins of a few, yea for one
particular person in the same, as the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 5.6, and 11.30.
And the reason hereof is, because oftentimes the multitude follows the
examples of their governors: like priest, like people: as is the king, such is
the subject: wherefore it is probable that the Church had lost her first love,
as well as her reachertand hence the threatening is directed against him as
chief; and against the congregation as being corrupted also.

To the second, I answer by distinguishing the Church: which is either
particular, or universal. The universal is perpetual, unshaken, and built upon
the rock. But we believe otherwise of particular Churches, which oftentimes the
Lord for their security removes, by overthrowing whole cities, and countries,
as the Eastern Greek Churches of Asia and Africa do plainly witness. But
although particular congregations are dissipated, and the candlestick removed,
either for public or private sins; so that where formerly the light of Gods
word did shine, there afterward Paganism or Antichristianisme does reign:
not withstanding the church it self is not always removed: for the abode of
the Church is uncertain, Heb. 13.14.
the Lord sometime causing the faithful to wander as strangers, and exiles from
place to place, not having a continued city in this world.

That which is spoken, 1 Timothy 3.15, as it is most true of the universal
Church: so was it likewise true of these Ephesians, yea of every particular
congregation, I say in right, though not always in fact: for indeed every
congregation ought to be a pillar and ground of truth; though it be not so
still in truth: according to that of Mala. 2.7, The priests lips preserve
knowledge, that is they ought so to do, though they did it not, and therefore
are reproved by the Prophet, verse. 8, But ye are departed out of the way, etc.
so the Church is the pillar, that is, ought to be the pillar: according to that
in Tit. 1.6, Mat. 5.13.
a Bishop is, that is ought to be the husband of one wife: Ye are the salt of
the earth, the light of the world. viz. ye should be so: etc.

Hence we first observe, seeing the abode of the Church is uncertain, we must
not promise to our selves a continuance in one place, in regard we are citizens
of the Church. For it is in the power of Christ, to remove the candlesticks
from one place to another, and many times he does so for the sins either of
the teachers, or of the whole congregation: Now in this we must acknowledge our
own faults, as deserving it: Psalm. 2^.1.
yet ought we not to be altogether discouraged, because the earth is the Lords,
and the fullness thereof. For if the outward prosperity of the Church be
disturbed and taken away, yet our inward graces, as faith and charity remain
for ever. Let us therefore steadfastly persevere in our first faith, and amend
the evils, whither in pastors or Church, that so the candlestick be not
removed.

Secondly, hence we learn, that true repentance is the only way and means to
escape public punishment, and Church dissipation. For Christ says, I will
remove thee, unless thou repent: meaning if thou repent, I will not remove
thee.

Thirdly, observe, that in scripture, the threatenings of punishment are still
with a condition, either expressed or understood: viz. except men repent. And
therefore when the condition of repentance is declared, and the punishment
follows not there is no change at all in the decree of God.

Lastly, hence we may learn, how such as go astray are to be brotherly reproved
and corrected for their evils, and brought to true repentance: the obstinate
are to be terrified with threatenings: and the repentant raised up with comfort:
the which Christ does to this Church, as knowing this to be a most effectual
means to bring them to amendment of life.

6. But this thou have, that thou hatest] The fifth part of the narration,
contains a further commendation of them, for their hatred of the Nicolaitans,
and this he brings in after the reproof and threatening, as it were pouring
oil into the wound, and to draw them the sooner to repentance, and to show
that they were not in a desperate condition. Three things before he praised in
them: here he adds a fourth; Thus we see none shall want praise with God, for
any thing that is praise worthy: now they are commended for their encouragement
not as doing works of merit: but as exercising the gifts and grace; received of
God, in obedience unto him.

The deeds of the Nicolaitans] In verse. 15 their doctrine is mentioned, Lib. 1,
cap. 27.
but not fully expressed what they taught. Irenaeus writes, that they held it
no sin, to commit fornication, and eat things sacrificed to idols. And most
are of this opinion. But in verse. 14 it is said, Act. 6, 5.
that this was the doctrine of Balaam, and not of the Nicolaitans. However it
be, it is certain, they were a pernicious, and most wicked sect, both in life
and doctrine. Lib. 3, hist. cap. 2^.
Some will have Nicolas one of the seven deacons to be the author hereof:
Eusebius, Epiphanius, and Nicephorus do write of him, that being accused as
jealous of his wife, who was very beautiful, he forlooke her, and left her as
common to all. But Clement Alexandrine (as themselves testify) does commend
this Nicolas, for his piety and continency, Here Is. 25. cap. 15.
having daughters who remained virgins, and a son which lived holily. And
therefore it is more probable that some other Nicolas, was the author of this
filthy sect: and that these heretics abused the name of this man, as a cloak
for their abominable wickedness. Of these men Augustine writes largely in his
book of heresies.

A certain writer hence gathers, Hoe in Apoc.
seeing Christ calls these men Nicolaitans after the name of the first
author, that he also may justly name such men Calvinists (who have (alvine for
their author) to the end his hearers may the more carefully avoid them. Behold
here a notable imitator of Christ. But let him first prove, that the doctrine,
(which he falsely terms Calvines) has its original from him: or to be, as
this was of the Nicolaitans, filthy, impious, and damnable. Neither of which he
shall ever be able to prove. Whereas we might easily retort the very same fault
upon himself. For Christ calls these sectaries Nicolaitans, because they so
named themselves, the better to make way for their wicked errors: like as in
the Church of Corinth, some said they were of Cephas, some of Apollo, and some
of Paul; very few being contented, to be named after Christ. For our parts we
count it an evil to be named after Calvin, and not rather Christians of Christ
our Lord: whereas this Clawback himself delights to be called a Lutherane from
Luther. Therefore let him take heed least he be found with the Nicolaitans
among the number of the sectaries.

Verse. 7. He that has an ear let him heare] He shuts up the Epistle with a
singular promise, and an exhortation common with the rest of the Epistles, by
which he stirs them up to observe the things which formerly were written
unto the teacher of the Church of Ephesus: But chiefly to mind the reward,
promised to him that overcomes. The like advertisement Christ gives us Matthew.
13.9. And again chap. 19.12: He that is able to receive it, let him receive it.
By the ear, he understands the ear of the heart, and not so much intending
the outward hearing, as to teach us to lay up in our heart and soul, the
meaning of the holy Ghost in these prophesies.

What the spirit says to the Churches] That is, speaking unto us by the
prophets, for though Christ speaks, yet he calls it the voice of the
spirit, because the son works by the spirit. From whence we gather that the
holy Ghost, is properly called the spirit of Christ, as proceeding from him and
the Father: XI. Argu. of Chr. deity.
Which is the Eleventh argument to prove the Godhead of Christ.

Says to the Churches] So then these things, were not written to the Bishops
alone, but to all the Churches likewise.

To him that overcommeth will I give to eat] This promise is left out in the
four latter Epistles. He is said to overcom, who manfully unto the End, has
fought the good fight of faith against the Flesh, the World, and Satan. As it
is written: Mat. 24.13. 2. Tim. 4.7.
He that indureth unto the End, the same shall be saved, that is, they who have
kept the faith, and finished their course, shall have (with the Apostle) a
crown of righteousness which is laid up for them in the heavens: But here is
nothing promised, to Hypocrites, to time servers and apostates, who though they
at first fight well, yet afterward do faint, cast away their weapons, turn
their backs, leave the field, and forsake the battles of the Lord.

To eat of the tree of life] Christ is this tree, for he is the way, the truth,
and the life. Io. 14.6.
He typically alludeth to Paradise, in the midst whereof stood the tree of life,
of which if our first parents had eaten, they had lived for ever. It signified
also Christ our Lord, who was to restore us (being fallen) from death, unto
Eternal life. So then by giving us to eat of the tree of life, is meant his
communicating himself unto us, Io. 6.14.
raising us from death to life everlasting, according to the promise: Who so
eats my Flesh, has life eternal: for my Flesh is meat indeed, and my blood
is drinck indeed. XII Argu. of Chr. deity.
This is a twelfth argument of Christ's deity: for God alone does bring forth
the faithful into the battle, and gives to them that overcom eternal life,
but all this does Christ, and therefore he is God blessed for ever.

They who plead for free will, infer from these promises: To him that
overcommeth, that it is in our own power to overcom. But to conclude from the
thing conditional unto the condition it self, is absurd. The promise only
teaches, what Christ will give, unto the doers of his will, but shows not by
what power it is performed. The like also they vainly gather from these words,
he that has an ear let him hear, as if men had some power in themselves to
hear. Nay rather the contrary is true: for where as he calls upon us to
hear, it shows, that we are deaf, Ephe. 2.2.
unless he himself open the ears of our hearts: for such as are dead in
sins, are also deaf and blind by nature and so remain until by the grace
of Christ they are made able to hear and perceive the things of God.

The 2. Epistle to the Bishop of Smyrna.
8. And to the Angel of the Church in Smyrna write, these things says the
first and the last. which was dead. and is alive.

9. I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, but thou art rich, and I
know the blasphemy of them, which say they are Jews and are not, but are the
Synagogue of Satan.

10 Fear none of these things, which thou shall suffer: Behold the Devil shall
cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have
tribulation ten days: Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a
crown of life.

11. He that has an ear, let him hear, what the spirit says unto the
Churches, he that overcommeth shall not be hurt of the second death.

THE COMMENTARY.
Unto the Angel of the Church in Smyrna] Of Smyrna se chap. 1.11. The second
Epistle is directed to the pastor of this place, being nearest to Ephesus, and
it is probable, that it was written to Polycarpus John's Disciple: lib. 3. c. 3.
lib 4. hist c. 14.
for as Irenaeus and Eusebius write, the Apostles did ordain Polycarpus,
Bishop of this Church: for seeing all the Apostles, except John, dyed before
Domitians time, it is likely, that Polycarpus was pastor of Smyrna, even so
long as that Emperor reigned: and it seems the rather to be true, because
Christ reproves nothing in this Bishop, only incourageth him to be constant,
and foreshewes the persecution which should be raised against him by the Jews,
by whom also he was put to death: And indeed histories testify, that the Jews
with others were the principal agents in preparing the fire, wherein he was
burned, in the days of the Emperor Antoninus Verus. Now however the troubles
in Asia, in which Polycarpus was taken away, happened sixtie-and-seven years
after the writing of the Revelation, which was in the 14 year of Domitian: yet
does not this any way contradict what we said, for Polycarpus, when he
suffered, (testifies of him self) that he had served Christ eighty and six
years.

This Epistle howsoever it be the shortest, yet is it much more exellent then
any of the rest: in as much as the others are mixed with reproves, but Christ
here justifies this Bishop in all things: both in commending and comforting of
him.

It consists of an inscription, a narration, and Conclusion. The Inscription
describes Christ by two attributes before spoken of: chap. 1.17: 18. Thus John
goes forward to make known to the Churches, what he had seen.

These things says the first, and the last] se chap. 1.8, 11, 17. As there, so
here also, Christ takes to himself an essential property of God, viz.
Eternity. Esai 41.4. and 44.6. and 48.12. thus he repeateth, and again
confirms the seventh argument of his Godhead.

Eniedinus the Samosatenian confesses, that without doubt, Christ is here
called the first, and the last: but not absolutely, for says he, that belongs
to God the Father alone: whereas Christ is called the first and the last, not in
regard of essence, but as respecting his office, and because he was the true
Messiah, before whom there was no other, neither shall there be any after him.

But 1, Isai. 44.6.
the text shows the falsehood hereof: for as in Isai. Jehova calls himself
the first and the last absolutely: so here Christ speaks the same of himself
both absolutely, (...).
and with an Emphasis also; that is, with an express signification of his
person. I am that first, and that last.

2. Though it be true, that this belongs to God the Father, yet is it not
true that it belongs to him only. For the Son being one in Essence with the
father, assumeth it likewise unto himself, even as he says in the Gospel: I
and the father are one; For as is the Fat^er, so is the Son: because as among
men, the Father and the Son, Qualis pater talis filius.
are of one and the same essence: Even so as God the father, is the first and
the last; that is, Eternal: so also is God the Son, the first and the last;
that is, Eternally begotten before the world was. For the father who is
Eternal cannot have a son but, he must be Eternal also, forasmuch as the
Father is not without the Son.

Lastly we grant, that Christ is called the first and the last in regard of his
office, because neither before him was; nor after him shall be any other
Messiah: yet it is false, that Christ is only so called in regard thereof and
not chiefly in respect of his Essence. For the Word was in the beginning, not
in regard of his office only, but of his divine nature, for the Word was God:
In which respect Christ said to the Jews, before Abraham was, I am.

But the heretic further objecteth, that he who absolutely is said to be the
first and the last, that is, he whose essence is without beginning or ending,
he cannot die: For he that dies, cease to be. But Christ says of himself,
that, although he now lives, yet he was dead: therefore he is not absolutely
called the first and the last.

I answer. There is a fallacy in the argument as I have before showed in chap.
1.18. For Christ says not that he was dead simply, neither according to his
divinity, in which regard he is the first and the last absolutely, but as he
took Flesh: and in this regard he coulddy, as the scriptures testify. 1 Pet.
4.1 1 Pet. 3.8
Christ suffered for us in the Flesh, he was mortified in the Flesh, etc. which
limitation he himself propounds to us in the word ((...)) and lived; for he
says not ((...)) he lived again: nor in the present tense ((...)) he lives,
but in the preterperfect tense ((...)) he lived or was alive, to wit even then
when he was dead in the flesh, he lived as he was God. Now this could not
possibly be in respect of one and the same nature: Therefore there was in
Christ, being dead in Flesh, another nature, to wit divine, the which sustained
and raised up his dead body.

Thus we have freed the eight argument of Christ's godhead, from the cavils of
the heretic: the repetition whereof was not unprofitable, because of the
grievous trials, dangers, and martyrdoms which were to befall them of Smyrna,
for the gospels sake, now here Christ does encourage them, to be faithful even
unto death: because he once being dead lives eternally and dies no more, but
remains for ever to defend all his and to restore them from death to life.

I know they workes] The whole narration is full of praise and comfort, and
contains three things: 1 a commendation of their virtue: 2. a praediction of
the dangers at hand. 3. an exhortation to constancle. The Vulgar omitteth (thy
works) as here, so v. 13. But the words are in the greek copies: Works in
this place are not to be understood as before v. 2. indifferently either for
good or evil: (for Christ reproves nothing in this pastor, not that he was
without sin, but as irreprovable in his life and office, and blameless
before men: 1 Timothy 3.1. Tit. 1.7.
the which the Apostle requires in a Bishop.) But to be taken of good works
only, the which he commends in this Bishop and encourages him to
perseverance in the same.

I know] An hebrew phrase, that is, I approve by worker I understand in general
the moral virtues wherewith he was excellently endued as also his zeal, and
diligence in performing the work of his ministry. Hence we are taught always
to remember, that Christ beholds our actions, takes delight in whatsoever is
good, and what is evil in us he disliketh: let us therefore walk with reverence
in his presence that so he without being offended with us, may still walk
amongst us.

He adds three other things in special concerning his commendation.

Thy Tribulation] Which thou have sustained at the hands both of Jews and
Gentiles for my name sake.

And thy Povertie] that is, spoild of thy earthly estate by the adversaries of
the truth: for the Governors of Provinces persecuting (as they pretended, the
Christians for their religion, did chiefly thirst after their goods, and so
robbing them, made a public sale thereof: even as it is to this day the common
practice of the Romish harpies.

But thou art rich] this (being put in by a parenthesis) mitigates the misery
of his poverty, calling him rich: because the faithful (howsoever spoiled of
their outward estate,) are yet possessors of heavenly riches, Heb. 1.2.
which the wicked cannot deprive them of: for by faith they inherit Christ: Who
is the heir of all things: And in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge.

This is indeed one of the Paradoxes of our religion: that Christians are rich
in God, though poor to the world. Now this thing ought not to seem strange
unto us, seeing heathen philosophers could say, that only wise men are rich
men: in as much as wisdom alone suffices to make a man blessed: but how much
more then does the true knowledge of God and of Christ, enrich us with all
spiritual blessings, whatsoever becomes of our transitory goods in this life.

And the blasphemy of them] That is, the Jews, who persecuted the Christians,
blasphemed Christ, counted him a deceiver, a magician, and justy crucified
opbraiding the Christians to be idle and foolishmen, Apolog. cap. ult.
worthy of nothing but stripes, torments, hanging and the like, as Tertullian
records. Now these blasphemers named themselves (for honor sake) Jews, as
if they were the only people of God. But, Christ says, they are no Jews, but
a Synagogue of Satan, that is, a blasphemous congregation, led by Satan to
their destruction. Thus Christ applies the title of their Synagogue, wherein
they boasted, to their shame and approbrie.

And are not] For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh: but he which is one inwardly etc.
Here we see that titles avail not when men are degenerated, and forsake the
truth. The same may be said of the title of the Church, which the Papists so
much boast of; we, say they, are the Church, the Church: we grant indeed they
are so: but not a Church of Christ, but of Satan, who worship not God, but the
devil in their Idols.

Now whereas Christ is said to know these things, as it serves again to
confirm the tenth argument of his deity: So to comfort those of Smyrna, and
all the godly in their affliction: for it is as much as if he thus said:
Although I may seem to be afar of, and ignorant of your condition, in that I
take not away your poverty, and punish the blasphemers: yet nothing is hid from
me, but all things are naked and bare before me; he patient therefore until
the time of your deliverance come. And this may be added to Argum. 11. proving
the Godhead of Christ, namely his immensitie and providence.

10 Fear none of those things, which thou shall suffer] The other part of the
narration, is a praemonition of their troubles at hand: for howsoever they had
already suffered much; yet he foretells that they must endure greater things:
not in the least to disharten them, but that they might prepare themselves
before hand for the same.

For darts foreseen are the less hurtful: as also least they should be secure,
and imagine that after their former sufferings, they were to look for no
farther combats but on the contrary to fore arm themselves for them.

None of those things] Signifying, that they were to expect, not one, but many
forts of trialls, for through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom
of God. one soit of affliction be names, viz. that the devil should cast some
of them into prison.

In this persecution, he makes Satan the Author: who in hatred of Christ; and
man's salvation does stir up the wicked to persecute the godly with reproaches,
im^risonment yea and with fire and sword.

Shall cast some of you] He shall not be able to bring all into his snare: For
I will cast a bridle upon him. Which is for the great comfort of Gods people.
The Prison notes (by a Synecdoche) the adjuncts and consequences, as namely,
torments, banishments and martyrdoms: With which not long after under the
Emperors, M. Aurelius Verus, Antoninus and Commodus, Satan most cruelly
persecuted the Churches, at which time also Polycarpus the Bishop laid down
his life for the testimony of Christ. Hence briefly we gather three things.

1. In this we may behold the afflicted condition of the godly in this world,
and all that will live godly must prepare themselves for it: but if it so be,
that we have a more peaceable portion let us account it as a great mercy of
God, and enjoy it with thanckfulnesse, XIII Argum. of Chr. deny.
for own edification, and the setting forth of the glory of Christ.

2. Again Christ's Godhead is here confirmed, in that he fore shows the future
sufferings of the saints, now certainly this knows no one, but God only. So
that this is the XIII argument of Christ's deity.

3. The devil is the author of all persecution as for tyrants and their
executioners they are but his instruments: Whose fury though God permit for a
season: yet will he not suffer his to be tempted above what they are able to
bear: but at last will cast the Devil with his instruments into the lake of
fire and brimstone. Revela. 19.20.


That ye may be tryed] He ads a twofold consolation: the one, from the end and
use of afflictions; as being trials, that our faith and constancy may be the
more approved, and we the patienter in our sufferings: this end is generally
propounded that so we, knowing our selves to be tried of God may approve our
selves sincere and unblameable in his sight.

Be tryed] viz. of God: who both knows us, and also his own gifts and graces
bestowed upon us. Yet he tries us, that thereby the faith of his saints
should be manifested both to them that are within: and without the Church. For
to confess Christ in times of prosperity is not difficult, but when troubles
do arise, then is our sincerity made manifest: according to that in the
philosopher (...), that is, true virtue does shine forth in adversity. And
howbeit the Devil is said to cast us into prison: Yet it is God that tries us:
for Satan is Gods bayleffe or Serieant: so that the action of God concurres
with the work of Satan: yea God, and the Devil are said to do one and the same
thing, but in a different manner and end. For God does it as using his right and
power over us. But Satan usurpinglie: God does it to try us and make us
ap^^^ved: the Devil to afflict and destroy us. Howsoever therefore they do the
same thing, yet is not their action all one: for the work of God is good, but
that of the Devil, is most vile.

And ye shall have tribulation] The other consolation, is taken from the
brevitie of the affliction, being to continue but a few days. In Cael. sub fine.
Now all things of short continuance, though they be heavy, yet ought to be
tolerable, faith Cicero.

Ten days] Some take this properly for so many days: Others prophetically, for
ten years, in which the persecutions dured under the before said Emperors.
Others refer it to the ten years persecution under Trajane, which was the
twelf persecution of the Christians. To be short, some take it indefinitely for
many years: affirming with Augustine, Lib. 8. de doctrine. Christ. cap. 35.
that sometime in scripture a certain number is used for an uncertain. As we
may se not only in this place, but also in Chapt. 11.12.13. but again: others
(with Ribera) suppose that a long time of persecution is hereby fignifyed:
because the number ten contains all other numbers, as in Gene. 31.7. Laban
changed Jacobs wages ten times, for, many times, so 2. Sam. 19.43. Job. 19.3.
so Ribera: But this were rather to terrify, then to comfort them, by fore
showing so long during persecution. Wherefore (with Andreas) I understand that
by ten days in this place is meant the shortness of their trouble, which should
soon pass away as a cloud: for thus the scriptures encouraging us to
constancy, are wont to express: our light afflictions which are for a moment:
2. Cor. 4.17.

Be faithful unto the death] The third part of the narration is an exhortation
to constancy in the faith unto the death: which is to be understood
inclusively, and not exclusively: according to that in, Heb. 12.4. Ye have not
as yet resisted unto blood. Wherefore we must not be afraid to lay down our
lives for Christ's sake, and to cleave unto the truth notwithstanding all the
cruelty of Satan and his instruments: but stand fast unto the shedding of the
last drop of blood, that so we may obtain the crown of eternal life. For he
that shall endure into the End, the same shall be saved. Mat. 24.13.

And I will give thee] He propounds the reward for their greater
encouragement unto constancy. Soldiers will fight unto the death for a
corruptible crown, much more ought we to do the like, for an heavenly crown,
which fades not away. The crown of life here, as also in Jam. 1.12. 2. Timot.
4.8. 1. Pet. 4.5.
notes eternal life and happiness. It is otherwhere called the crown of
justice, the crown of glory, by a metaphor taken from runners in a race, where
there is a crown proposed as a reward to the conquerours.

Hence let us observe in the first place, that the crown of life is promised
only to such as are faithful to the death. 2. That one and the same crown is
promised to all that are faithful, no mention being made of any diversity of
reward. 3. That the crown is promised not of desert, but of grace, as a reward
freely bestowed on them that are constant in the faith. 4. That Christ is the
giver thereof. Which is the fourteenth argument proving his Godhead. XIV Argu.
of Chr. deity. Io. 10.28.
For God alone gives eternal life: Now Christ says, I give unto my sheep
eternal life, therefore Christ is God.

11. He which has an eare] The acclamatorie conclusion is again repeated: He
that overcommeth shall not be hurt of the second death: The sense is one with
the former promises, though different in words. What is meant by the second
death, is explained chap. 20.14. Death and hell were cast into the lake of
fire: this is the second death. and 21.8. Murderers etc. shall have their part
in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone: Which is the second death.

The first death is a separation of the soul from God through sin, and was the
cause of corporal death, Hebr. 9.27
which is common to all: as the Apostle speaks; It is appointed unto all men
once to die, but after this the Jugement.

The second death, is the casting of soul and body into the lake of
everlasting fire, wherein the wicked only shall be tormented: for to the godly
Christ has promised deliverance: for he that overcommeth shall not be hurt,
etc. Some take the first death to b^^neant of the dissolution of the soul from
the body: and then the meaning is thus; he that continues faithful unto the
first death, needs not to fear the second; for he shall not be hurt therewith,
but enjoy eternal filicity: but of this more hereafter. This great and
gracious promise, should stir us up, with courage to persevere in the fight,
until we overcom: for then we shall be free from the second death, and be
partakers of life eternal through Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be glory
for ever and ever, Amen.

The third Epistle to the Bishop of the Church of Pergamus.
12. And to the Angel of the Church in Pergamus, write, These things says he,
which has the sharp sword with two edges:

13. I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is, and
thou houldest fast my Name, and have not denied my faith, even in those days,
wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you where Satan
dwells.

14. But I have a few things against thee, because thou have there them that
hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stombling block before
the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit
fornication.

15 So have thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which
thing I hate.

16 Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them
with the sword of my mouth.

17. He that has ear, let him hear what the spirit says unto the Churches.
To him that overcommeth, will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give
him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knows,
saving he that receives it.

THE COMMENTARY.
TO the Angel in Pergamus] The third Epistle to the Pastor of Pergamus or Troy,
contains two things: first they are commended for their constancy in the
faith; Secondly reproved for maintaining amongst them the inpure Balaamites,
and Nicolaitans, and by threatening are exhorted to amendment of life. It
consists of an inscription, narration, and conclusion. The inscription
describes Christ by an Epithet taken from chap. 1.16. that he has (viz. in
his mouth) the sharpe-sword with two edges. The reason of this attribute
appears from verse. 16. where he threatens to destroy the sinners of the
Church of Pergamus, with the sword of his mouth, that is, by the power of his
divine word. For this sword, is the word of God sharper then any two edged
sword piercing and dividing asunder of soul and spirit, etc. Heb. 4.12.

Here we have the fifteenth argument of Christ's Godhead: XV Argu. of Chr. deity.
For the word of God, does properly proceed out of his mouth: and therefore he
is God. Because the word of God proceeds from Christ, not as the word of
another, or as it was in the mouth of the Apostles, Prophets and other
teachers, but in special as his own: hence he says, v. 16. I will fight with
them, with the sword of my mouth.

13. I know thy works, and where thou dwellest] In the narration, are three
things: he commends what is prayse-worthy: reproves what is amiss; and
lasty exhorts them unto repentance. First he says in General, that he knew
their works, to the end they might take notice, that they had to do with him
who tries and searches the hearts and reins, of which se v. 2.2. In
particular he commends their constancy in the faith, which with courage they
maintained, and confidently trusting on Christ, overcame all such tentations as
might any way occasion them to forsake him. The praise whereof is amplified
from the danger of their abode: I know where thou dwell, namely in a most
vicious and wicked city, being full of cruel enemies, both Jews and Gentiles,
and where Christians like sheep are continually exposed to the danger of
devouring wolves: Now to live Godly in such a place, and constantly to cleave
unto the profession of Christ's name, is a very hard thing: though it be not
so, where the condition of the place affords us freedom and liberty: the which
benefit God of his exceeding mercy, has hitherto granted unto us.

Where Satan's seat is] A further amplifying of their constancy is taken from
the infamy of the place: Pergamus is the throne of the Devil: Who in Hebr. is
called Satan that is an adversary: so that this city was full of naughty and
vile persons, haters of Christ, and his members, among whom Satan reigned, both
in the palace (for it was the abode of king Attalus) and in their senate, and
temples: forcibly drawing the magistrates and cityzens to horrible Idolatry,
and to commit all manner of outrage and wickedness against the Christians.
Nevertheles Christ had a Church in this evil city. And could he not do the
like, The Church preserved in the papacy.
though the Romish Papacy for a thousand years and upward, has been the
throne of Satan, and the seat of Antichrist, and under the name of
Christianity, abounds in all ungodliness, idolatry, and barbarous cruelty
against Christ? They object, that the Church of Pergamus was visible, and
separated from the Pagans: But in the papacy it was not so. I answer unless
there had been in some sort a visible Church among the Papists, the Romish
Clergy had not been so renowned, as they are, for their killing and martyring
of the saints. But be it granted: were not the seven thousand in Israel, who
worshipped God, a Church: because they were not a visible congregation
separated from the Balaamites, but for fear of persecution kept themselves
close, and were not known, no not to Elias himself?

Even in those days] Here he further amplifies their constancy by showing the
cruelty of the adversaries, who continually drew forth the Christians to most
cruel and barbarous torments, as appears by Antipas, a faithful martyr of
Christ, who undoubtedly not long before was put to death by those of Pergamus,
and so is named instead of many others, who also suffered. It is not certain by
history, who he was. Arethas supposes that he was the teacher of this Church,
who in the days of Domitian, for his constant profession of the truth was (as
some say) put into a Brazen bull and by fire tortured to death: Andreas writes,
that he had read sometime the hystory of his martyrdom. But it is certain that
Christ honors him with the title of his faithful witness. It is probable
that this Epistle was directed to the successor of Antipas, least he should be
drawn aside from performing his charge, for fear of the like punishment: who
as it seems was at this time in bonds, and threatened, to be tortured to the
end he might deny Christ: and therefore he is worthily commended for keeping
the faith. (...) Gr. (And) is to be rendered even, or also in those days, which
amplifies the former persecution, during which time he remained constant,
although Antipas had already suffered death; for it cohereth with the foregoing
words, and have not denied even in those days, wherein Antipas my faithful
martyr: to which we must ad, who was, or who denied me not: for otherwise the
article ((...)) who, would seem to be superfluous.

Where Satan dwelleth] The fourth amplification is from the danger of the
place, or a further declaring of what was before spoken of Pergamus: as if he
should say, Pergamus is not only the seat of Satan, in which he remains
sometimes, or for a season: but it is his proper nest, and where he continually
inhabiteth: for (as Arethas witnesses) Pergamus was more given to Idolatry,
then any other place in Asia.

Hell indeed properly is Satan's dwelling place; notwithstanding he also dwells
and reighneth in the hearts of the children of disobedience, who by their
filthy and abominable actions, do inslave themselves unto him. Thus the heart
of Judas was as a house for Satan, after he was entered into him: O what a
miserable condition is it, to live there where Satan dwells? how hard a
matter is it to worship Christ, where the Devil rules? Let us therefore
entreat the lord to dwell in the midst of us, and to make us the temples of his
holy spirit, that so Satan may not have any abode amongst us.

14. But I have a few things against thee] This second part of the narration is
a reproof of the Bishop of Pergamus. And here again we are taught that the
best in the Church are not without their faylings, the which Christ sees,
though men perceive them not, neither are we here to expect a Church perfect
and altogether free from errors and the mixture of evil men and good
together: for which infirmities albeit the lord does not condemn us, but in
mercy passes them by: notwithstanding he disaloweth and reproves them, and
requires an amendment thereof. He calls them ((...)) a few things
comparitively: not as being few or small in themselves, but either as respecting
the evils of ungodly men: or in regard of his own clemency, he accounting
them but as few. Thus the Lord lessens (as it were) our evils, yet so, not that
we should flatter our selves in them, but the rather amend them: for a few
evils are sooner reformed then many: lesser vices are more easily corrected,
then greater.

Now the evil for which they are blamed, is their remisnes in not exercising
Church discipline against such persons as were infected with the venomous
doctrine of the Balaamites, and Nicolaitans. Now whether these were diverse
sects, or but one, it is not certain. The common opinion is, that the
Nicolaitans followed the wicked way of Balaam, (mentioned in Numb.
22.23.24.25.) permitting Christians to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to
commit fornication. For that false prophet being hired by Balack king of Moab
to curse the Israelites, gave him counsel by his Moabitish women to entise
them to worship Baal-peor, or their God Priapus: by which means it came to
pass, that the Israelites having so don, fell to feastings and dancings with
them, and afterward committing fornication, drew upon themselves horrible
plagues from the Lord.

15. So have thou also them] Because he had before reproved the Church of
Ephesus for the deeds of the Nicolaitans: therefore here he says, so have thou
also etc. By which it appears, that this sect, whatever it were, was crept
into many Churches.

Hence we note two things, concerning the duty of Churches and their officers,
touching notorious-sectaries.

First, that it is meet to call them by the name of their authors. For Christ,
names the Nicolaitans after Nicolas, to distinguish them from such as were
sound in the faith. This I speak of vile sectaries, such as these were,
overthrowing the very foundation. Yet it follows not, that the Lutherans do
well, to call themselves after Luther, unless they would be accounted notorious
sectaries, rending Christ asunder, as in 1. Cor. 1.10. of which thing se more
v. 6.

Secondly, notorious sectaries ought to be seriously reproved by the Church,
convinced, and if it may be regained: as for the obstinate they are not to be
suffered, but to be cast out of the Church, otherwise we provoke the Lord to
wrath against our selves.

But here behold the great ungodlines of the Romish Antichrist, who to bring in
his divelish doctrine of forbidding marriage, accounts all such Bishops and
Priests which do marry, guilty of the haeresie of the Nicolaitans: and this
he does, if we will believe him, to preserve the purity of the Church. See,
Sigon. de regno Ital. lib. 8. and 9.

16. Repent, or otherwise] The third part of the narration, is an exhortation
to repentance, with a threatening of the obstinate, unless they left their
error. For it seems that the Nicolaitans were not secretly, but openly
retained in the bosom of the Church, by the indulgence of the Pastor, and so
publicly maintained their wicked doctrine to the scandal of the faithful, and
danger of the whole Church: For a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.
Besides, because of this, 1 Cor. 5.6.
the unbeleeving Gentiles spoke evil of the Christians, as if they committed
fornication each with other. Thus we see that their sin was of a high nature,
and therefore great reason had Christ to require repentance for the same.

I will come against thee shortly] The like phrase of threatening is in v. 6. and
the same kind of punishment is applied to the description of Christ v. 12. as
if he should say; It is not in vain that I have a two edged sword in my mouth:
for therewith I will strike and wound the unrepentant.

I will fight against them] Christ then fights against us with the sword of
his mouth, when he reproves our evils, threatens and punishes obstinate
sinners. For Gods threatenings are never without effect: But as it is written,
unless ye repent, Luk 13.3
ye shall all likewise perish. Christ fights with a sword, to convince,
wound, condemn and cast off the irrecoverable.

Against them] To wit, the Nicolaitans: notwithstanding he includes the Pastor
also, with the Church it self except they repented: so that (...), with (or
against) them, is put in stead of (...), against you.

17. He which has an eare] He ends the Epistle, with his wonted Epiphonema,
or acclamatorie conclusion, wherein though the promise differs in words, yet the
sense is the same with the former. To him that overcommeth, this is put by a
change of the number, for all that overcome, that al in hope of a recompense
might be encouraged to the good fight of faith. For rewards much prevail to
harten us unto duties. By them that overcome, he means such as stood fast in
the faith, and were not polluted with the filthiness of the Nicolaitans. To
these by an allegory he promises a threefold benefit.

To eat of the hid Manna] This is the first. Manna was that heavenly bread,
sweet in taste, with which God fed his people in the wilderness, who being
pressed with hunger found in the morning without the camp an heavenly dew like
to Coria^der, Exo. 16.15 1 Cor. 10.3
at which they wondering said (man-hu) what is this? And hence it was called
Manna. It was a sacrament, shadowing out Christ the true bread of life. Of this
Christ will give him that overcommeth to eat: that is, I will feed him with the
pleasant food of my own body, and give unto him eternal salvation: for he
which eats the Flesh of Christ, Io. 6.54.
and drinks his blood has life eternal. By hidden Manna he alludeth to the
Omer of Manna, which was laid up in a golden pot into the Arc for a
remembrance, according as God commanded Moses: which signified that Christ
indeed is hid to the profane of this world, yet seen of the godly, not with
bodily eyes, but by the eye of their faith. Ribera says well, that it is
called hidden Manna, because eternal happiness is not bestowed on all alike,
but is reserved only for the elect in the world to come.

And will give him a white stone] This is the second benefit about which
interpreters much differ in opinion. Some understand by it the precious and
bright shining Carbuncle. Rupertus interprets it of the glorious bodies of
such as do overcome, whom Christ will raise at the last day, and make them
shine like the Sun in his brightness. Others understand it of an allusion taken
from runners in a race, to whom was given a white stone in sign of victory
when they overcame: the which thing if it were confirmed by history, it were
then a clear opening of the text.

Sixtus Senensis says, that the ancient heathens caused their festival days
to be ingraved on their public tables, and noted with a white stone, that they
might the better discern them from other days. But they seem to come nearest
to the litterall meaning, who think that Christ in this respects the manner
of judgments, where there were two sorts of stones or counters white and black
cast into a basen. By the white the innocent was absolved: by the black the
guilty condemned: lib. 15. Metamor.
and hence they were named, (...) and (...) acquitting or condemning stones. Of
which the Poet speaks.

Mos erat antiquis niveis atrisque lapillis
His damnare reos: illis absolvere culpa.
In ancient times with stones they did
In Judgment seat proceed:
By black the guilty were condemnd:
The Just by white were freed.
Thus Christ will give to him that overcommeth a white stone, that is, absolve
him in the day of Judgment, Io. 5.24.
according to the promise, he that hears my words, and believes in him that
sent me, has eternal life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed
from death unto life.

And in the stone a new name written] This is the third benefit, and the phrase
is taken from the forenamed custom, where the names of such as were absolved,
were engraven on white stones, but on black the condemned.

A new name] That is, an excellent and honorable name, for so much the
scripture in many places does set forth by the word New, Psa. 33. Reve. 3.12
and 14.3.
as sing unto the Lord a new song: I will write upon him my new name: They sung
as it were a new song before the throne. etc. This undoubtedly is the name of
Gods children, whereof the Lord speaks, Isai. 56.5. J will give unto them a
name better then of sons and daughters, meaning the adoption of the sons of
God, which infinitely surpasses the name of carnal sons and daughters. For
what is there more glorious, then to be the sons of God? surely such shall
never be condemned. But some may say, how can he give them that, Io. 1.12.
which they have already; for, as many as received him, to them he gave power
to become the sons of God.

I Answer, now we are sons, and heirs in hope, but in the world to come, we
shall fully enjoy the right of children, and really then posses the promised
inheritance, and be like unto the angels of God. Luke 20.36. for they that
shall be counted worthy to enjoy that world, neither marry wives, nor are
married, for they can die no more forasmuch as they are equal unto the Angels,
and are the sons of God. Thus we se that the third benefit promised to them
that overcome, is a full possession of the inheritance of Gods children.

Which no man knows, saving he that receives is] What this means, which is
also spoken of Christ (who has a name, that no man knows but himself) I will
show in a word: Reve. 19 12.
namely, it is a name which can not be uttered: because the happiness of Gods
children can not be expressed, for eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc.

This name God will not give to one alone, but to all the faithful, all (I say)
shall know their own name, because all shall have it. For to know this name, is
to have it, to rejoice in it, and to be certain thereof: thus we se that the
people of God, shall not be ignorant of each others felicity and blessedness in
the heavens, howsoever true it is that the damned shall be ignorant thereof:
because they shall never have it: and hence we see, it is no mervaile, that
none in this life know the heavenly adoption, No man knows the new name,
saving he that has it.
but such only as se and have it by faith in their hearts: for as much as in
the world to come, none shall know the dignity of the saintship, but such as
are partakers thereof.

And here the ungodly assertion of the papists is refuted, who affirm that no
man can fully and certainly persuade himself of his own inward justifying
faith, or to be in the state of grace, and so consequently a child of God: but
is to doubt of his faith, grace, justification, adoption and salvation. For
these Profane men do vainlie require an outward demonstration of that which
no man can possibly know, saving he that inwardly has it: which they inwardly
wanting can not know it, and therefore in requiring us to manifest this unto
them, do as foolishly as they who would put a man to prove that there is
sweetness in honey, seeing no man can know it but by the taste thereof.

For the knowledge of this new name, it consists not in bare speculations, but
in the power and practice of the heart. Of this full assurance we have largely
treated in our comment. on Hebr. Chap. 6. v. 18. and Bellar. Castiga. lib. 3.
de Justifi. cap. 9.10. etc.

Moreover hence we have the sixteenth argument of Christ's deity. XVI Argu. of
Chr. deity.
For none can give the heavenly Manna, the white stone, and new name (which
Christ promises to them that overcome) saving God alone.

The fourth Epistle to the Bishop of Thyatira.
18 And unto the Angel of the Church in Thyatira, write, These things says the
Son of God, who has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet are
like fine brass.

19 I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience,
and thy works, and the last be more then the first.

20 Notwithstanding, I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer
that woman Iezebel, that calls her self a prophetess to preach and to
seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto
idols.

21. And I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not.

22. Behold I will cast her into a beade, and them that commit adultery with
her, into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds.

23. And I will kill her children with death, and all the Churches shall know
that I am he that searches the reins and hearts: and I will give unto every
one of you according to your works.

24. But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not
this doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak, I
will put upon you no other burden.

25. But that which you have already, hold fast till I come.

26. And he that overcommeth, and keeps my works unto the end, to him will I
give power over the nations.

27. (And he shall rule them with a rod of Iron: as the vessels of a potter
shall they be broken to shivers:) even as I have received of my Father.

28. And I will give him the morning star.

29. He that has an ear, let him hear what the spirit says unto the
Churches.

THE COMMENTARY.
Unto the Angel of the Church of Thyatira] Epiphanius records that certain
of the Alogians rejected the Revelation as fabulous, because there was no
Christian Church at that time in Thyatira. For how, say they, could John be
commanded to write to one, who then was not, but that old writer shows the
absurdity of the heretics herein, It follows not, says he, although in
their days there was no Church there, therefore there was none in John's time:
for Thyatira was vanquished and overthrowen by them and the Phrygians together,
Not long after the death of John and the other Apostles, namely in the three
and nynteth year after Christ's ascension, which was the seventh of Adrian the
Emperor. And that indeed the spirit of God did foreshew the defection of this
Church, by prophesying of the false Prophetess Iezabel, that is, of certain
women who deceived many, falsely boasting of a prophetical spirit, as namely,
Priscilla and Maximilla, and Quintilla harlots of Montanus, who taught the
heresy of the Cataphrygians.

Touching these things whither they were so, or or, I will not now dispute of,
but that which Epiphanius ads, is indeed more to the purpose, to wit, that in
his time this Church was again recovered by casting off the heresy of the
Cataphrygians. Now, says he, by the grace of God there is a Church in that
place which flourishes, and some others thereabout, although formerlie the
whole Church was fallen away, and had embraced the aforesaid heresy. That also
is very memorable which he writes, that the spirit of God did reveal, that
soon after the Apostles and their successors the Church should fall into many
errors. Whence therefore has the son of perdition taken his insolent decree,
that his Church cannot err?

Now the fourth Epistle is directed to the minister of Thyatira, being more
sharp then the former. He is commended for his faith and works, but reproved
for suffering the Prophetess Jezabel to seduce many, to commit fornication,
and eat things sacrificed to Idols: the which woman, with her followers,
Christ threatens to destroy. Nevertheless such who were not infected with her
wickedness, he exhorts to constance, and promises to give them power over the
nations. The Epistle as the former consists, of an inscription, narration and
conclusion.

In the inscription Christ is described by three Epithites: two whereof have
been handled. Chap. 1. v. 14.

The son of God] in Chap. 1.13. he is called the Son of Man, and here the
Son of God, to show that he is both: Now Christ is a Son by nature, we and
the Angels by grace. Wherefore the Church does rightly believe and profess,
Christ to be both God and man in the unity of one person.

His eyes as a flame of fire, his feet like to fine brasse] Of this see chap.
1.14.15.

I know thy workes] The narration contains five things: 1. commendations: 2.
reproves: 3. threatenings: 4. exhortations: 5. promises.

Thy workes] The Vulgar and Andreas omit this, both here, and in v. 9. Works
are generally to be taken both for good and evil, as in v. 2. and 13. in
special he commends four things: 1. his love, to God. 2. his charity to
the poor, and chiefly to them of the household of faith. 3. his faith; that
is, his sincere preaching of the truth received from the Apostles. And lastly
his patience, in suffering of afflictions for the cause of Christ: for this
Church also (if it be true which Epiphanius writes) was persecuted by the
Pagans, Jews and Cataphrygians, notwithstanding this Bishop remained still
constant in the truth.

And thy works, and the last] The first, and, is declarative, for, chiefly thy
works, the latter, and, seems not necessary, and the text may thus be read,
thy last works are more then thy first, as the vulgar, Complutensis, and
Andreas read it. It seems that the Pastor of this Church had with much
courage lately undergone some great persecution, for the which Christ here much
commends him, as adding this exellent work to his former: or otherwise, because
in the general course of his life he daily became more excellent: for his
latter works were more, that is, more manifest proofs of his constancy, and
more worthy of praise then the first. So that he is commended for his holy
progress in the duties of piety: which is an example unto us, that we also
should labor to increase in the like works of faith and love.

20. But I have a few things against thee] The second part, is a reproof of
few things, so the like in v. 14. not as if his evils were of no great
corcernment, but Christ (like a good physician) lessens the disease, that the
patient may the sooner admit of the cure and not despair of amendment. His
evil was in permitting the false prophetess Jezabel to teach and seduce many,
to commit fornication, and be present with idolaters at their worship and Idol
feastings; for it seems this woman was one of the Sect of Nicolaitans, whose
doctrine she maintained. For these deceivers (under pretext of liberty and
Christian charity) taught, that women were to be accounted common, and that it
was lawful for them to communicate with the heathen in their services and
feastings: now howsoever these things were scandalous and dangerous: yet of
them thought indifferent and in the liberty of Christians: and this very
practice some libertines at this day do imitate. This was a great neglect of
zeal and courage in the Pastor, in not seeking to redress and free the Church
of so pestilent an instrument, but to suffer her amongst them, to the
destruction of many. She is called Jezabel by a similitude, as being equal in
craft and malice to Jezabel, the wife of Ahab: for as this vilde woman by false
witnesses caused Naboth uniustly to be put to death, and cruelly oppressed many
of Gods prophets: so this lying Prophetess boasting of divine revelations, led
aside many from the way of God to her filthiness and devilish worship of
Idols. Interpreters do differ, whither this was one woman, or many: and
whither there were a whole Sect and nation of them. Epiphanius, as we have
already showed, supposes this: to be spoken of Priscilla, Maximilla and
Quintilla false Prophetesses of Montunus, who blasphomously boasting himself to
be the comforter, seduced these women to commit fornication with him, and to
Prophecy in his name. But on the contrary the text shows, that it is spoken
of Jezabel, who at that time bore sway in the Church of Thyatira and not of any
to come afterward: neither is it likely that only this Epistle should reprove
vices to come, when as all the other speak of things present. Andreas
understands it by a figurative speech as meant of the heresy of the
Nicolaitans: But wherefore should that sect be here darkened with such a kind of
speech, which twife before was manifestly named and treated of. Alcasar
coniectureth that by her the Jewish Synagogue is to be understood. But there is
no reason to transform the Jews into the woman Iezabel, who were before v. 9.
comdemned by name, and again in cha. 3. v. 9. Besides, the whole description
tends to set forth in special some one particular wicked woman: seeing therefore
there is no necessary reason leading us to depart from the literal sense, it
is probable that this woman was very famous in the city of Thyatira for her
wealth, authority, and show of piety, but in truth for her uncleanness,
deceit and ungodlines, was equal with Iezabel of old, seducing many to forsake
the truth, and participate with her in horrible wickedness: But touching this
woman and her mentioned chap. 17. who is called a great city, there is no
agreement betwixt them. For there it is expressly said, that by her is
signified a great multitude, yea Rome it self: whereas here no such thing is
intimated.

21. And I gave her time] This shows Christ's patience and the obstinacy of
this woman, who made no use of his long sufferance in giving her time to
repent. Thus the wicked grow secure because of Gods forbearance, and seeing
Judgment is not speedily executed, they rejoice, and think to go unpunished.
But what their reward shall be is plain both from this place, and Romans 2.4.5.

22. I will cast her] The third part of the narration, is a threatening of
judgment, which men by their inpenitencie bring upon themselves. The punishment
denounced is threefold. 1. Against the woman herself. 2. Against her lovers.
And 3. against her children. Jezabel is threatened with a foul disease, for so
God commonly punishes impure harlots, to make them loathsome to others, and
public exampels of dishonest courses.

Into a bed] The antecedent is explained by the consequence. Sick persons keep
their bed: the sense is, the bed which she hitherto had abused to
lasciviousnes, luxury and pleasure, should be changed into languishing and
sorrow. But the Godly man the Lord will strongthen him upon the bed of
languishing, Psalm. 41.3.
and make all his bed in his sickness.

And them that commit adultery with her] Her lovers shall also be punished,
either externally by the sword of the magistrate or some others: or internally
by torments of conscience. But I rather take it to be meant of outward shame
and punishment.

Unless they repent] Behold the mercy and patience of God: he will not destroy
a most wretched harlot with her adulterers, before he call them to repentance,
being ready to forgive such as amend their ways: thus we see how repentance is
the only means to escape punishment. Some times indeed the Lord inflicts
temporal chastisement upon the repentant: but the same is both mitigated, and
turned to their good, besides none of them are eternally punished.

23. And kill her children with death] He threatens death to the children of
this harlot: which some take properly for such as were borne in fornication,
whom the Lord would suddenly destroy by a heavy judgment, that such an
adulterous generation might not be spread among men. Others take it
metaphorically for her companions and lovers who defiled themselves with her. I
rather approve the former sense, for otherwise the difference between the
adulterers, and their children would be taken away.

Hence we may learn, 1. that the lord is greatly offended with the defilements
both of our souls and bodies: for he is a pure and holy spirit: and requires
the same in them that worship him: Hebr. 12.14.
And without this no man shall see him. 2. The corrupters of the truth shall be
grievously punished, howsoever they may for a time by subtlety cover their
deceit, and draw many into their snares. 3. That God is ready to forgive most
vile sinners if they truly repent. XVII Arg. of Chr. deity.
Lastly here we have the seventeenth argument of the deity of Christ: in that
he threatens to punish these wicked deceivers: for none but God only is able
to do it, and therefore it manifests his divine omnipotency. That which the
heretic objects concerning Moses striking the Egyptians with plagues, is of
no weight: neither of Peter his slaying of Ananias: Nor Paul's striking Elymas
with blindness. For we know, that the Prophets and Apostles wrought miracles,
not of themselves, but by the power of God. Whereas Christ threatens to do this
by his own power, Io. 5.19. Mat 10.1 and 16.17.
For whatsoever things the Father does, these also does the Son likewise. Yea
the Son gives power unto others to do the like things.

And all the Churches shall know] The end and use of Gods vengeance on sinners,
is to declare both his omniscience of the hid things of the heart: as also his
omnipotency and Justice in rendering to evry one according to his works: Even
as God said to Pharaoh: Exo. 9.16. Romans 9.17
And in very deed, for this cause have I raised thee up, for to show in thee my
power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth. Thus the lord
by threatening calls sinners to repentance, by Judgments punishes the obstinate,
and hereby declares his wisdom, power and Justice unto all.

Now it is not without cause, that Christ attributes to himself the knowledge
of hidden things: for seeing this wicked woman, beguiled many, by couveringe
her unclean actions under a pretense of holiness: Christ therefore here
declares that none of her ways were hidden from his eyes.

Hence we observe in the first place, that one principal end of Gods exemplarie
punishing of the wicked, is that all the Churches may acknowledge and declare
the wisdom, power, and Justice of God. Thus we se how profitable it is, that
public examples are propounded before our eyes, to the end we may take notice
of the judgments of God, and beware least by the like wickedness we stir up
his wrath against our own souls. XVIII Argu. of Chr. deity.


Secondly here is offered unto us the eighteenth argument excellently proving
the divinity of Christ. For here Christ will be acknowledged to be the searcher
of the heart and reins: which the scripture ascribes unto God alone. For the
righteous God tries the heart and reins. Psa. 7.9. 1. King. 8.39. 1 King. 16
7.
Give unto every man according to his ways whose heart thou know. Thou
alone know the hearts of all the sons of men. see also 1. Chro. 28. Iere.
11.20. and 17.10. and 20.12.

Eniedinus the Samosatenian, objecteth in the first place, that the searching
of the heart and reins does not here signify a knowledge of the thoughts: But
rather a most equal and just administration of judgment by Christ: and so it
proves not that he is true God.

I answer. The antecedent is a manifest and bold corrupting of the text: For
the divine attribute which elsewhere is ascribed to Jehova, is here without any
limitation and in the very same words applied unto Christ: not only in regard
of the administration of his righteous judgments, but also as he is the
searcher of the heart: and therefore must necessarily be taken in one and the
same sense.

But again he objecteth. That Christ has received all his knowledge and
judgment, yea and himself too, from the Father, as he confesses, Io. 5. Rev.
5.11. and here v. 27. as I have received from my Father: so that he is not the
same God with the Father.

I answer: he deceives by an equivocation. For Christ receives all things
from the father two manner of ways; Io 1.14. Prove. 8.25
God the son has received his divine essence from the Father by eternal
generation, for he is the only begotten of the Father, before the mountains
were settled. So that with his divine essence he received his divine
omniscience. But as he is man, he received all his power and glory in time, by
his real exaltation, so far forth as consisted with the nature and perfection
of his manhood: in this latter respect we confess he is not God:
notwithstanding it is false, to affirm that he is not God in the former: for
howsoever in this respect he has received all things from the Father: yet
whatsoever is divine, the Son has it by his own essence, even as the
Father: Because the Father has given to the Son, to have life in himself, as
the Father has life in himself. See Damascenus lib. 4. Orth. fid. cap. 19.

Thirdly he objecteth that many Prophets and Apostles knew the hearts of men
also. Io. 5.26.


I answer. Either this, or that of Solomon is false, Thou only know the
hearts of all men, 1 King. 8.39. God indeed did reveal some things (not al
things) unto Elisha, Peter and Paul, but not the knowledge of the hearts. To be
short none of them did, or could say, that he was the searcher of the reins
and heart, as Christ here says; And all the Churches shall know, that I am the
searcher of the reins and hearts.

24. But unto you I say] The fourth part of the narration is an exhortation,
and here he turns aside from the Pastor before commended and reproved, and
from the deceivers threatened, and speaks to the rest of the Church in
Thyatira, and exhorts such as were godly among them, and had not harkened unto
the false teachers, to go foreward and continue in the Apostles doctrine. And
hence again it appears that these Epistles were written not to the officers
alone, but to all the Churches. The Vulgar, as also Andreas and Montanus read
it without the copulative, but to you the rest, but the other Greek copies
have it, to you, and to the rest, as if he had said, to thee o Pastor and to
thy fellow officers and to the res^ ^f the Church. But the sense is the same.
For the Pastor also was one of those which held not the doctrine of Jezabel:
although indeed he was to negligent in repressing of the same.

This doctrine] To wit, of Jezabel and the Nicolaitans concerning fornication
and communicating with Idolaters.

And which have not knowen] This is an Hebrew phrase, and signifies, who have
not approved.

The depth of Satan] So these deceivers called their blasphemies, as being deep
mysteries, and hidden wisdom, and things more excellent then ever the
Apostles taught: Now Christ grants they were ((...)) depths, but such as had
their original from Hell and Satan, and therefore ought to be opposed and utterly
extirpated.

I will put upon you none other burthen] The meaning is, however the deceivers
do again bring in and impose upon you the burden of the ceremonial law, a
yoke which neither ye nor the Fathers were able to bear: Act. 15.10
notwithstanding I do not subject you unto it: forasmuch I have once freed you
from the same; for it is sufficient to salvation, to maintain the doctrine
faithfully delivered unto you by the Apostles. Some by burden understand
punishment: as if he should say, this shall be the heaviest of Judgments, that
I will inflict upon you: but if it be taken in this sense, then the words
should import a threatening, where as indeed they are a mild admonition: and
therefore the first exposition is more agreeable to the nature of the words.

Hence it appears that humane traditions are ((...)) a burden imposed upon
the Church not by Christ, but by the instruments of Satan; and here we see what
to think of the manifold traditions of the Prelates, to wit, that they are
burdens not required by Christ, but by the fonne of perdition: wherefore
neither the Church nor any of the faithful ought to submit to them, nor to
hearken unto the voice of that Antichristian parasite: affirming that the yoke,
which is imposed by the holy sea, Gratianus distin. 19.
is to be borne, howsoever it may seem to be intolerable.

Until I come] To wit, bodily descending from heaven in the clouds to judgment
according to our Christian belief, confirmed by the scriptures, and confession
of the primitive Church. And therefore for men to believe as necessary to
salvation, that Christ being come in the flesh, is present, in or under the
sacrament of the Altar, or that his humane nature is in all places, and fills
all things, is a most false doctrine, and a burden not imposed by Christ our
Lord.

He which overcommeth, and keepeth] The fifth part of the narration, is a
promise with the former conclusion, 1. Io. 5.4.
he that overcommeth, see v. 7. now the victory by which we overcom the world,
is our faith: and they are conquerours, who keep faith and a good conscience.
Io. 5.36. and 10.36. and 14 11. Io. 6.29.


My workes] Not miracles, which generally are called the works of Christ, by
which also he proved himself to be God: but that work of faith required, Joh.
6.29. To believe on him, whom God has sent: as also all other works of piety
and faithfulness according to our place and vocation: hence as the works of
infidelity, Io. 8.41.
are called the works of the Devil: so the works of faith and love, are said
to be the works of Christ, and he that persevereth herein unto the end, he is
that conqueror, to whom the present promise is made by Christ Jesus.

Unto the end] To wit, of the warfare or fight: for the full victory is not
obtained, nor the crown given, before the fight be perfectly ended.

And keepeth] The word here used in the original ((...)) to keep, Io.
8.57.14.23. and 15.10.20. etc.
is often used by John in his Gospel. So that this phrase of speech argues
John the Evangelist to be the writer of the Revelation.

To him will I give power over the nations] A double reward is promised to the
conqueror, power over the nations: and the morning star. Some curiously
inquire, whither or no, these things are given in this life. But we are to
know, that so long as w^ remain here, the fight dureth: For no man as yet is a
conqueror, neither is the crown bestowed: we must therefore first persevere in
our course unto the end, before we can enjoy the promised reward: not as if we
were altogether now deprived of it: but because we posses it in hope only, and
not in very deed. Now we are the Sons of God: 2. Io. 3.2. Romans 8.34
but it is not manifested what we shall be: we are saved by hope.
Nevertheless one and the same thing is signified by both rewards here
mentioned, to wit, that glory and power, whereof the faithful shall partake
in the heavens with Christ.

Power over the nations] He alludes to Psa. 2.8. where God the Father says
unto the Son, I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost part of the earth for thy possession: thou shall break them with a
rod of Iron: thou shall dash them in pieces like a potters vessel. This power
which Christ the head has received from the Father, he promises to
communicate unto us his members: And as he has receyved it for himself, and
for us: so he will exercise the same, in his own, and our name: for the
saints also with Christ shall judge the Angels, and the world, or wicked men,
that is, the nations here spoken of.

Even as I receyved] This we have expounded, v. 23. and there showed after what
manner Christ receives it from the Father, and how it no way derogateth from
his divinity.

And I will give him the morning starre] That is, I will truly communicate my
self unto him, and make him conformable unto my glory, so far as it consists
with the proportion and measure of a member: for he says, J will, that they
also whom thou have given me, be with me where J am, that they may behold my
glory which thou have given me, etc.

The morning starre] Called in Gr. (...) that is, the day star, being the
brightest of all the stars, and when it follows the Sun going down, is
called ((...)) the evening star. Hence Aristotle commending the virtue of
Justice, says,

(...). that is, neither the evening, nor the day star is so glorious.

To this star Christ is compared for his heavenly brightness and glory. 2.
Pet. 1.19. and Rev. 22.16. see there the sense of this place.

The Argument, parts, and Analysis of Chapter III.
THis Chapter contains the three latter Epistles unto the Angels of the Church
in Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea: in which again John does declare in
general what he had seen, to wit, the majesty of Christ commanding him to
write, what was, either good or evil in every one of them: and what was to
come, to wit, what good or evil they were to expect from Christ. The bishop in
Sardis he reproves for his hypocrisy and negligence: yet comfort some few
that were upright in that Church by promises of reward: and stirs up the Pastor
himself by threatening to diligence. The teacher in Philadelphia is commended
for his care, praeadmonished of his combats with the Jews, and victory over
them, and also is provoked by promises of reward to perseverance. The Bishop of
Laodicea is sharply taxed as an hypocrite, being neither hot nor cold, and
however he is by others much esteemed of for his worth and holiness, yet
Christ threatens to root him out, except he do repent.

The fifth Epistle to the Bishop in Sardis.
1. And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write, these things says he
that has the seven spirits of God, and the seven stars; I know thy works,
that thou have a name that thon live, and art dead.

2. Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to
dye: for I have not found thy works perfect before God.

3. Remember therefore how thou have received and heard, and hold fast and
repent: If therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and
thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee.

4. Thou have a few names even in Sardis, which have not defiled their
garments, and they shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy.

5. He that overcommeth, the same shall be clothed in white raiment, and I
will not blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his
name before my father, and before his Angels.

6. He that has an ear let him hear what the spirit says unto the Churches.

THE COMMENTARY.
VNnto the Angel of the Church in Sardis] By the name Angel, as we have
formerlie showed, is noted the Pastor of the Church: and not him only, but the
rest of the officers, yea and the whole Church: for it seems they were all
alike faulty: according to that of Jesus the Son of Sirach: As the judge of
the people is himself, so are his officers, and what manner of man the ruler
of the city is, such are all they that dwell therein. Sirac. 10.2
And therefore whatsoever is amiss in the people, is imputed to the negligence
of the Pastor; and what is good in them, to his praise and commendation. Some
old writers affirm, that Melito was Bishop in Sardis, of whom Eusebius makes
mention, lib. 4. hist. cap. 26. But neither the argument of the Epistle, nor
time when it was written does agree hereunto. For Melito is commended for his
sanctity and martyrdom: this teacher is accused of hypocrisy and negligence.
Moreover Melito was Bishop of Sardis in the reign of Antoninus Pius, unto whom
Iustine Martyr dedicated his second Apology in behalf of the Christians. This
Anton: reigned more then sixty years after Domitian, in whose time, John
(being banished into Patmos) wrote the Revelation. Now it is not probable that
Melito should so long continue pastor in Sardis: although in all likelihood
Polycarpus all this time was teacher in Smyrna. see cha. 2.8.

Therefore howbeit it be uncercaine who he was, not being named, yet Christ
sharply reprooves him for his hypocrisy and negligence. Hence observe, how
vainly the Romish Parasites boast, as if the Pope and his adherents can not
err in matters of faith: seeing two only of the seven teachers of Asia are
commended for their sincerity in life and doctrine: the rest accused by Christ
either of foul hypocrisy, Hor: in Epist. quid concinua samos, quid Craesi
regia Sardis?
or of the haeresie of the Nicolaitans.

In Sardis] The famous and sometime royal city of Croesus, seated (as Pliny
writes) on the side of the mountain Tmolus: of which I have before spoken:
but here again repeat it, least some might be mistaken as those who think,
that the Synod called Sardicensis, held in the eleventh year of Constantine,
was in this city. For Sardica was a town in Illyria, to which place came all
the eastern and western Bishops by the commandment of Constans and
Constantius Emperors. But this Epistle was not written to the Angel in Sardica,
but in Sardis.

It consists of a preface, a narration, and a conclusion. The preface by two
epithites declares the majesty of Christ, the author of this epistle, and his
care for the Church, he is said to have the seven spirits of God, and the seven
stars, to wit in his right hand, as in chap. 2.2. from whence it might seem
that the words, and the seven stars, were taken and here misplaced: but the
consent of all copies is to be allowed. By the stars the teachers are
signified, as chap. 1.20. But in the description of Christ cha. 1.20. there is
no mention made of the seven spirits: and therefore some have thought, that they
are the seven spirits mentioned cha. 1.4. but seeing these spirits are joined
with the seven stars, that is, the Bishops of the Churches, I therefore judge,
that these seven spirits are Angels properly so called, because Christ
imployeth them together with the ministers of the Churches for the welfare of
them that are heirs of salvation: see cha. 1.4. Neither does the article
((...)) being put before (...) the seven spirits, contradict this exposition:
for in cha. 17.1. the article ((...)) is also put before (...) I will show thee
the Judgment ((...)) of the whore, of whom notwithstanding there was no
mention before: see our exposition on that place.

Thus we see, that Christ has the seven spirits of God in his hand, that is,
all the Angels who readily do his commandments and judgments, both in
defending of the godly and punishing of the wicked, he has also in his hand,
the seven stars, that is, all the ministers and officers of his Church, that
so through his grace they may shine like stars, in sincerity of life and
purity of doctrine before their flocks. For as Christ is the author of the
ministry, so has he given it unto the Church and works so powerfully in and
by the same, that hereby he both gathers and preserves continually a Church
among men, according to that of Ioh. 15.6. I have ordained you, that you should
go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain. Now touching the
ordaining and governing of the stars, whither it be taken properly or
improperly, XIX. Arg. of Chr. deity.
it is only the powerful work of God. And therefore these Epithites do
plainly yield unto us a nynteenth argument to prove the deity and omnipotency
of Christ our Lord.

J know thy workes] The first part of the narration is a reproof of the secret
hypocrisy in the heart and life of this teacher. Thy works, that is, I see all the endeavors and carriage both of thy private life and public ministry: I
know thy hidden hypocrisy: for so he explaineth it: thou have a name that thou
live, and art dead, that is, thou art generally reputed to be a faithful and
godly teacher; but thou art an hypocrite as being destitute of faith and true
holiness, and so dead, that is, as a painted sepulcher before the Lord guilty
of death, although thou seem to be alive and holy before men. Hence we
learn three remarkable points.

The first is an evident argument of Christ's divinity. For if Christ so knows
all our works, as that he discerns betwixt true godliness, and hypocrisy the
dead and living members of the Church, true pastors and hypocrites: then
certainly he tries the heart of man, which is only proper to God, and is not
communicable to any creature, no not unto the Angels. Which further confirms
the X. and XVIII. argument before mentioned.

Secondly we are taught, that all who profess the truth, and make a show of
holiness, are not truly faithful and regenerate persons, but many of them are
hypocrites and deceivers, as being far otherwise then they are accounted of
for hypocrisy is an outward show of inward holiness: or a profession of faith
with the mouth, being in the mean time destitute thereof in the heart. And
hence we may conclude that a bare profession argues not true faith, as the
patrones of hypocrites affirm, whereby they oftentimes delude themselves and
others. Act. 8.13.
Simon Magus is said to believe. Therefore, (say they) some who profess and
have true faith may fall away and perish. But this place shows us, that many
are inwardly dead, who outwardly seem to be alive: being with Ananias the hie
Priest, whyted walls, Act 23.3. Matt. 23.27. Mat. 8.22 1 Timothy 5.6
with the Pharisees painted sepulchers, and spiritually dead, as Christ spoke to
the young man: let the dead, bury the dead. And Paul speaks of some wanton
widows, who are dead while they live: yea all men considered in their natural
condition are dead in trespasses and sins. To be short, many have faith
without love, which is dead, a faith which the Devils also have. Thus we se in
scripture how they are said not only to be dead, who are deprived of natural
life, but also not being regenerated to a spiritual: or who are sincere in
appearance only, and not in truth. Let us therefore take notice that all are
not godly, who seem so to be: neither shall all they, who say Lord, Lord, enter
into the kingdom of God: for the Church consists of a mixture of saints,
and hypocrites: and this difference is not only in the laity, but chiefly in
the Clergy, as they call it: that is, many who in sheeps clothing, seem to be
true Pastors and teachers, are in truth but mercenarie wolves: and howsoever
these may deceive men, yet Christ knows them: And therefore let not the Bishops
of Antichrist think to blind the eyes of Christ, with their titles, mitres,
and royal robes.

The consideration of this informs us in the first place, of the diverse
condition of the Church in this world. For many are called to be members of the
Church whereof some are good, others bad, some saints, others hypocrites: like
as the net takes in all manner of fishes.

But howsoever the faintes elected, are not known of men, yet God and Christ
do discern them. For the Lord knows who are his. Therefore let every one
try and examine himself whether he be dead or alive: for hypocrites deceive not
God, but man and their own souls. Wherefore let us shun hypocrisy even as a
pest, remembering what Ambrose admonishes, not to rest contented with a bare
name, and in the mean while to be greevously guilty: or with the hight of
honor while we abound in sins: or with a profession of Godliness, while our
actions are devilish.

For otherwise we should only have a name to live, when in deed we are but
dead.

Lastly observe, that the efficacy of the ministry does not depend upon the
goodness of the minister. For God does sometime vivifie and govern his Church
by dead officers, as we have here an example: which serves to confute the
Donalists and Popish Sophisters: who maintain, that there was not any Church
of the elect, until the time of Luther in the Papacy but themselves, except
we will acknowledge their Bishops (for other there were none) to have been
approved of by the Lord.

2. Be watchfull] The second part of the narration is an exhortation,
admonishing the Angel in Sardis of diverse things, to the end he might purge
himself from the crime of hypocrisy: and withal he is threatened to be punished
except he do repent. First he is commanded to shake of that hypocritical
drowsines into which he was fallen. Be watchful, that is stir thy self up:
for he is not only required to be more faithful and careful over the Church,
then formerly he had been: but also called upon, as it were, to live again:
for so faith Christ, but thou art dead. Now death in scripture is frequently
compared to a sleep: so that this place, and that of the Apostle (speaking unto
men fallen into a deep sleep of sin,) is of the like interpretation: Ephe. 14
A wake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light. Not as if we could of our selves arise from the death of sin: (for this
is a work of Grace) but because the Lord by his precept powerfully works in
us, that which he requires of us: and by the operation of his own spirit
rayseth us up, being asleep in sin, unto newnes of life.

And strengthen the things] Or rather strengthen the rest, that is, such dying
members of the Church, as are committed unto thy charge, who because of thy
negligence decay both in faith and holiness. For it is no wonder, that a
Church should fall into a deadness and security, while the officers thereof are
asleep: Christ therefore comm^ndeth him to strengthen them that is, to labor by
a holy life and doctrine, to bring them again into the way of life.

That are ready to dy] in Gre. (...) that shall die, that is, which are near
unto death: like as in Luke 7.2. it is said of the centurions servant, (...) he
should die, that is, was ready to die. So these here were near unto death, though
not altogether dead, and therefore the Pastor is exhorted carefully and speedily
to put to his helping hand for their recoverie: This care the Apostle
recommendeth unto all the faithful: Romans 14.2.
namely, to receive them that are weak in the faith: And therefore it is a
special duty of the ministers of God, who are spiritual physicians, to
apply to Christ's weaklings the wholesome medicines of Gods word: 1 Timothy 2.9.
for otherwise, God says unto them by the prophet, forasmuch as ye have not
strengthened the diseased, Ezec. 34.4
nor healed that which was sick, nor bound up that which was broken, nor sought
that which was lost, etc. Behold I am against the shepherds, and I will
require my flock at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding my flock.
Montanus reads it, (...) which thou art ready to lose, that is, destroy by thy
negligence; which is a more heavy expression.

For I have not found thy works perfect] These words contain a reason
wherefore God requires him to be watchful. But it may seem, that this reproof
is not equal and just, 1 Cor. 13.9
considering that no man's works on earth are perfect before God, if he should
enter into Judgment with us: for, we know but in part, we prophecy in part:
and there is not a just man on earth that does good, Eccle. 7.20
and sins not. I answer: Christ speaks not here of the common infirmities
of the saints: but accuses this Bishop for his notable hypocrisy, and
condemns him not, for not being fully and absolutely perfect: but because he
found him not upright in his ways before him: for he was only an eye
servant, outwardly showing a Zeal to piety, and in the meanwhile secretly a
selfe-seeker and one who fulfilled his own lust, not at all caring what became
of his flock. Now forasmuch as Christ knew this his close and wicked deceit, it
proves again that he searches the heart, and so is true God: se arguments X
and XVIII.

Before God] Montanus, Arethas, and the old version read it, before my God,
hence some heretics thus reason. If Christ have a God, then he is not God
himself. I answer, all other copies read it (...), before God, and it seems
that these by some oversight here added, (...) (my) taking it from v. 12. But
be it granted, Io. 20.17.
that the text should so be read, yet it helps them not: for Christ, as he is
man, has a God. I ascend to my God, and to your God; now howsoever in this
respect, he is not God: yet as he is the Son, he is true God and life
eternal, and coessential with the Father. But here we se, how many things
approved of by men, are indeed very vile before God, who sees all things with
eyes of flaming fire. Blessed therefore is he, Romans 2.29
who approves himself sincere, not before men only, but especially before
the Lord.

Remember therefore how thou have received] How, that is, what. In the third
place he is exhorted to be mindful of the faith delivered and committed to him
by the Apostles, to preserve the purity thereof in the Church, and leave it
incorrupt to posterity. For it seems that this Bishop was unmindful of the
trust committed unto him, and named aside from the holy doctrine and way of
the Lord. But all our Bishops forsooth and especially the Romish, are
altogether infallible, yea incorrigible, because unto them alone, and not to
any other, belongs that promise: The spirit shall lead you into all truth.

Here we are taught, that the only way to redress the corruptions both of
life and doctrine, is to have recourse to the rule of Gods word, and to set it
always before our eyes.

Thus Paul reproving the Corrinthians for their abuse about the Lords supper,
1. Cor. 11.23.
calls them back to the first institution thereof. Cyprian writing to Pompie
against the Epistle of Stephen Bishop of Rome, illustrates the matter by an
excellent similitude: If, says he, the conduites which before did plentifully
afforde water to the city should suddenly be stopped, would they not go to the
fountain, there to take notice of the defect, whither the fountain were dried
up, or the conduites stopped, or the water drawn some other way? that so the
conduit pipes being mended, the city may enjoy the former benefit of the
water. Even so it becomes Gods ministers, when the truth of God in any thing
has been changed, and men have been unconstant therein, to return to the first
original and Apostolical tradition, that the reason of our actions may flow
from whence they had their first spring and original.

And repent] The last and chiefest thing required in him, is repentance, that
is, to forsake his hypocrisy, and sincerely to perform the duty of his
place. For then indeed we repent, when leaving our evil ways, we order our
steps aright, and seriously turn, to the Lord: the which I confess, is not in
our own power to do: but God graciously effects the thing which he
commands in whomsoever he pleases. Howbeit they are inexcusable, in whom he
works it not, because they willingly disobey the commandment. But it may be
objected, they cannot do it of themselves. It is true indeed, but from whence
does this arise? for have they not of their own accord brought this inabilitie
upon themselves, and also by a voluntary obstinacy augmented it, whereby they
have made themselves inexcusable, and self guilty before God?

If therefore thou shall not watch] That he might be the more awakened, Christ
adds to the exhortation a sharp commination, threatening him except he be
watchful to come on him as a thief, that is, suddenly and unawares, to take
vengeance on him for his hypocrisy by some horrible Judgment.

On thee] (...), upon thee, or to thee, not in a good sense, as that saying,
thy king co^^eth to thee, to wit, for thy good: but in an evil sense, that is,
to thy destruction: and therefore Beza more significantly renders it: Against
thee. Thus Christ also speaks of himself, Mat. 24.43. and Reve. 16.15. Behold
J come as a thief, blessed is he that watches etc. so Paul 1 These. 25. which
comparison as it is not dishonorable unto Christ in using it: so does it no way
countenance or allow thievish courses: for the similitude respects not the evil
practice of thieves, but their sudden breaking and entering in upon men, while
they sleep securely; Math. 24.43.
and thus the Lord himself expounds it: but know this, that if the good man
of the house etc. so here, And thou shall not know what hour J will come upon
thee, to wit, to inflict punishment on thee for thy security. Ribera
understands it of death, when thou least think of it, thou shall die, and be
called to judgment.

The use Christ shows in the place before cited: Therefore be ye also ready:
for in such an hour as you think not, the Son of man comes.

4. Thou have a few names even in Sardis] The third part of the narration, is a
commendation of some that were faithful in this Church. For howbeit through the
negligence of the Pastor most of them were dead, or ready to die, yet the Lord
still reserved some unto himself who were upright, according as he is accustomed
to do even in such Churches, as are most corrupt. For example when the ten
tribes were fallen away, and had publicly set up the idolatrous worship of
their Calves, and Baal, and withal so oppressed the godly, as that Elias
verelie thought that all the Lords prophets except himself had been slain by
the sword: yet even then God had left unto himself, seven thousand, who had not
bowed the knee to Baal. 1 King. 19 18. Romans 11.4.
In Paul's time the whole nation of the Jews seemed to be rejected, and
destitute of the grace of Christ: yet at that present time there was a remnant,
according to the election of Grace, as the Apostle shows: The like may be
said touching the papacy, for though in many ages together, both the grace of
Christ, and his true Church has been as it were trampled under foot, and the
same overspread with horrible idolatry in all kinds: yet as the histories of
the martyrs do witness, the Lord had some few names among them continually,
who resisted the public abuses of the times even unto blood.

Moreover as this commendation was comfortable to the Godly, so it did tend to
the great shame of the Pastor: Therefore least the faithful should have thought
that Christ also was wroth with them, they are by name (to the others disgrace)
much commended for their constancy. Now what is more dishonorable then that
the disciples should in doctrine excel their teacher, and the sheep the Pastor
in sincerity of life?

Names] That is persons, as Act. 1.15. there were a hundred and twenty names.
So Reve. 11.13. there were slain 7000 names.

A few] For many are called, but few are chosen, almost in every
congregation. We ought not therefore to be offended at the paucitie of the
faithful, and the multitude of the ungodly. The Papists indeed glory in their
multitude, and write volumes in praise of the largenes of the Romish Church,
upbraiding us because of our fewness: but here we see how in Sardis there were
many hypocrites, a few names only who were not defiled.

Here again we have a clear proof of Christ divinity, in that he is said to
know these few names in Sardis, the truth is, he knows all the faithful, and
discerns them from hypocrites, 2. Tim. 2.19.
which is a work only proper to God: for the Lord knows who are his. see
arguments X. and XVIII.

Who have not defiled their garments] Their constant sincerity is set forth by
this Metaphor: and by Garments is meant thus much: as their bodies were not
polluted with the filthy manner and lusts of the Nicolaitans, so neither were
their souls stained with their impious doctrine. Alike Metaphor the Apostle
uses, 1. Thessa. 4.4. That every one should know, how to posses his vessel,
that is, his soul and body, in sanctification and in honor; not in the lust
of concupiscence, for this is the will of God, He. 12.14.
even your sanctification: and without this no man shall see him. Now Christ
acknowledged them holy and undefiled, not as if they were altogether
unreprovable, but because they persevered in faith and holiness of life, not
withstanding the neglect of the Pastor, and the manifold evil examples round
about them.

And they shall walk with mee] As hypocrites are threatened with punishment, so
the Godly are encouraged with promises of reward.

In white] What may this be? by this Metaphor is signified a heavenly
triumph, a kingdom, and glory to come. It is taken from the state of kings,
and the great honor given unto mighty conquerours. With such royal apparel,
Herod was clothed when he sat on his throne, Act. 12.21
and God smote him dead for his pride. So in scorn they clothed Christ the
king of Glory: Lu. 23.11
It also was ancientlie a custom to cloth the Conquerours with a white
garment. To be short white garments for their brightness, were signs of
Glory: here then, Metaphorically the glory of the saints is promised; Thus
it is said, v. 5. He that overcommeth the same shall be clothed in white
raiment. and Rev. 7.11. White robes are given unto the elect, standing before
the throne, and chap. 19.14. the armies of Christ are clothed in fine linen
white and clean: But it may be said; seeing their garments were now already
pure and undefiled, 2. Cor. 5.2.
therefore they needed not to be clothed in white: To this the Apostle
answers: we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed, that we be not found
naked. For the purity and righteousness of the saints on earth can not abide
the judgment of God: and therefore they must be clothed with the perfect robes
of absolute innocence, ere they can stand before his majesty.

With me] They shall be partakers of my glory. If the raiment of Christ, Mat.
17.2.
on the mount, was white as the light: how much more does he now shine being
exalted: Yet so will he cloth the saints: for they shall shine as the sun,
according to that proportion which is betwixt the head and the members. And
hence (...) with me, may also be translated, after me as if he should say, ye
shall be clothed in white, next unto me.

And they shall walke] Beza translates it, and therefore they shall walk, which
indeed expresses the sense: but not the words of the text.

For they are worthie] To wit, to walk with me in white: the argument is taken
from the equity of it. Thus do the messengers of the Centurion beseech Christ
to heal his servant, because he was worthy. Luke 7.3.
But this seems to establish the doctrine of merits: for dignity comes by
virtue. For if we shall walk in white because of our worthiness, then we
deserve the same for our works sake.

I answer the assumption is false: for the scripture no where says, because of
our worthiness, or works: but when soever it mentions the judgment of God,
we are said to receive, (...) according to works, but not (...) because of
works, least we should conceive any opinion of meriting by them: which Christ
expressly denies, Luke 17. v. 10. When ye have done all those things which are
commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was
our duty to do. We therefore shall walk in white, not because of our
worthiness, but according to it: for the particle ((...)) for, does not
signify any cause of merit, but a quality agreeing with the justice of God,
that is, showing not why, but who they are that shall walk with Christ
according to that in Mat. 5.3. blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is
the Kingdom of heaven, etc. as if he had said: because unto such, the kingdom
of heaven is freely promised.

But again though the assumption were granted: yet would not the proposition
be universally true. For dignity in its kind does not always proceed from
virtue, but sometimes from duty without virtue. So Nero had honor, and was
worthy of honor in regard of duty, but not in regard of any virtue in him.
So in particular our worthiness before God, is not because of the worthiness
of our works, but of grace, by which he makes us worthy, by calling,
justifying and glorifying of us. As the Apostle plainly teaches us, 2 Thessalonians.
1.5. where, after he had said, that the tribulations of the Godly, were a
manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that they might be counted
worthy of the kingdom of God: (least this should be misaplyed to a worthynesse
of merit) he prays v. 11. that God would count them worthy of this calling.
As none therefore deserve or are worthy to be called of God: so neither does our
worthiness prove any thing for the doctrine of merit. If they object from
chap. 16.6. For they are worthy; that as there the deserved cause of punishment
is of themselves: so here the meritorious cause of reward. The consequence will
not follow from the rule of contraries: for the comparisons are not alike.
Because in order of justice al evil works whatsoever deserve punishment: for
the soul that sins shall die. But good works how great-soever, being debts
and duties, can-not merit at the hands of God.

5. He that overcommeth the same shall be cloathed] Gr. (...) he, but the old
translator reads it (...) so, shall he be clothed.

The conclusion contains a promise, with an Epiphonema as formerly.

The promise is extended, not only to those few in Sardis spoken of, but to
all who overcome the world, Satan etc. se chap. 2. v. 7.11.12.26. Thus by a
threefold promise all are stirred up to hope for victory: the two former are
metaphorically propounded: the third properly: yet all seem to signify one
thing: for what can be given to them that overcome more, then the crown of
life eternal? however in the reward promised we may note a certain gradation.

First, He shall be clothed with white raiments] This, by a metaphor,
signifies the heavenly glory with which we shall be clothed, as with a royal
garment. What more?

I will not blot out his name out of the book of life] This further notes the
eternity of glory: for not to have our names blotted out of the book of
life, is to have them always remain therein: that is, to enjoy eternal
glory. What more?

I will confess his name] A further degree, promising to make known the
constancy and faith of every one by name, even before the throne of the
blessed trinity, and in the presence of the holy Angels. A glory indeed
surpassing man's opprehension: For what is more honorable then when a general
does by name before the whole army, declare the valiant exploites of this or
that soldier? But this Christ promises here to do: and in Mat. 10.32.
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also
before my father which is in heaven: but whosoever shall deny me before men,
him will I also deny before my father which is in heaven.

And before his Angels.] As being the most holy ministers of God, and
witnesses of our glory.

Hence we note, first, that the saints are said to have a two fould clothing;
for as we heard before, some in Sardis were commended for not defiling of their
garments: and yet promised besides to have other white garments given unto
them: the former are said to be ours, not as proceeding from our selves, but
because we are enjoined to have them, meaning, both moral endowments of body
and mind: as also the grace of faith and love, and other spiritual gifts: which
we must have and preserve clean and undefiled, 2. Cor. 5.3.
that so we may be clothed hereafter in white. According to that of the
Apostle: If so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked. For no man
shall be clothed in white in the heavens, who has not been endued with faith
and true repentance in this life.

Secondly, we are to take notice, that in scripture, God is said
metaphorically to have a threefold book. The first is the book of his
providence, which is the knowledge and counsel of God concerning the actions
and events of all things first and last, of this the prophet speaks Psa.
139.6.16. etc. all things are written in thy book. The other, is the book of
Gods universal judgment, which is his knowledge concerning all those things
which every one has don whither it be good or evil, and to be judged
accordingly in the last day: as in cha. 20.12. and the books were opened. The
third, is the book of life, that is, Gods praedestinating both of the elect
and reprobates: Ps. 69.29. Isai. 4.5. Dan. 12.2. Phili. 4.3. Reve. 18.8 and
17.8. and 22.19.
the first are said to be written in this book, the other not, but blotted
out: of this the scripture speaks in many places: yet that in Rev. 20.12. then
the books were opened, may be understood of them all: for in the same verse,
the book of life is expressly mentioned: Thus God is said to have books
metaphoricallie. Not as if either he has, or stood in need thereof: for so it
cannot be, but by an Anthropopatheia he speaks to our capasitie: For God
does all things without such help or means, even by his eternal foreknowledge,
counsel, government and judgment. But thus men cannot do, for whatsoever is
don in their counsels, cities, families, contracts etc. for memory sake is set
down in writing, that so as there is occasion, they may look it over and call
to mind such things, as they desire.

Now concerning the elect, Luke 10.20.
two things here are spoken of them: First, that their names are written in the
book of life. Phil. 4.3. or in heaven: as Luke 10.20. by which manner of
speech we are taught, that true believers do not obtain salvation by chance,
but were elected of God to life in Christ before the foundations of the world:
and known from them that perish. Secondly, their names are never blotted out of
this book, as it is here testified, J will not blot out his name out of the
book of life. By which phrase is signified, that the salvation of the Elect is
certain and sure, and that they shall never perish: according to the promise:
no man shall pluck my sheep of my hand. It is impossible the elect should be
seduced. All which serves, not for curiosity, but for our comfort, that we
being certain of our salvation, might joyfullie persevere in weldoeing unto
the end.

Of infidels and reprobates two things are also spoken:

First that their names are not written in the book of life: as appears, Rev.
13.8. Rev. 13.8
and 17.8. and 20.15.

Secondly: they are blotted out of the book of life, Ps. 69.28.
and cast into the lake of fire: Let them be blotted out of the book of the
living, and not be written with the righteous. And, whosoever was not found
written in the book of life, was cast into the lake of fire, by which is
signified, that they who are not predestined shall certainly perish.

But this seems to imply a contradiction, as not to be written, and yet to be
blotted out. I answer: that this is taken in a double sense. 1: Either of such
who in the Eternal counsel of God are thus written, and so are never blotted
out. Or, 2: according to the appearance, and boasting of hypocrites: For thus
they are said to be blotted out: that is, declared never to have been written
therein: we see there are many hypocrites in the Church, who are taken for a
while to be the elect of God, whereas in truth they are not. Therefore when
their hypocrisy is discovered, and they justly cast out of the church, then
they are said to be blotted out: As Ambrose and Augustine have well observed.
Matt. 24.24. Io. 10.28.
Not withstanding it follows not, that any of the Elect shall be blotted out,
For this is contrary to that promise of God. It is impossible the Elect should
perish, none shall pluck my sheep out of my hand.

This argument concerning our perseverance is full of comfort: for all the
faithful, being elected, are written in the book of life, and shall never be
blotted out. Whosoever therefore can now assure himself to be a believer, ought
certainly now to believe, that he is the chosen of God, and that he shall
assuredly persevere in his faith, fear and service for evermore: yet not by
his own strength (for that were presumption and repugnant unto faith) but by
the power of God, who keeps the elect through faith unto salvation, 1. Pet.
1.5.
ready to be revealed in the last time.

6. He which has an care] This needs no new explication, but practice. See
chap. 2. v. 7.11.17.

The VI Epistle to the Angel in Philadelphia.
7. And to the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia, write, These things says
he that is holy he that is true, he that has the key of David, he that
opens, and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens:

8. I know thy works, behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man
can shut it: for thou have, a little strength, and have kept my word, and have
not denied my name.

9. Behold, I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, which say they are
Jews and are not, but do lie: behold, I will make them to come and worship
before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee,

10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from
the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that
dwell upon the earth.

11. Behold, I come quickly, hold that fast which thou have, that no man take
thy crown.

12. Him that overcommeth, will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and
he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and
the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which comes down
out of heaven from God: and I will write upon him my new name.

13. He that has an ear, let him hear what the spirit says into the
Churches.

THE COMMENTARY.
Unto the Angel in Philadelphia] There were diverse tities of this name. Lib. 12.
But this was in Asia, and as Strabo writes much incident to earthquakes: this
Church was purer then the rest, for whereas all the others ( Smyrna only
excepted) were sharply reproved by Christ: this Church with her teacher is
singularly commended: not but that they had their faylings (for there is no
Church in this life without spot or wrinkle) but because their sincerity and
faith was such, as it covered all their infirmities, God being pleased to take
no knowledge thereof.

Now Christ commends the faith and constancy of this Bishop above the rest,
foretells his combats with the Jews, and promises to assist him in the
persecution now at hand; Lib. 3. hist. cap. 37.
moreover he exhorts him to be constant to the end. Some think he was
Quadratus a disciple of the Apostles, of whom Eusebius makes mention: but more
of this in its place.

Among the Epistles which are attributed to Ignatius, the sixth was written to
these Philadelphians, in which he exhorts them to keep the unity of the faith,
and fly heresies: but in it, the Eminency and Primacie of Bishops is too
hyperbolically extolled. Ignatius his Epistle to the Philadelphians.
Ye Princes, (says he) be subject to Caesar, ye soldiers to the princes,
but let priests and deacons with the whole clergy and people, soldiers and
princes, yea and Caesar also, obey the Bishop, and let the Bishop be obedient
to Christ, as Christ is to the Father. But it is apparent, at that time the
soldiers, with all the princes, yea and Caesar too, were so far from
embracing the faith, as that on the contrary, they cruelly persecuted both
Bishops and all other Christians.

Notwithstanding there is in that epistle a sentence very observable, and
carries a note of true antiquity: I have heard says he, Some say, if J find
not the Gospel in the ancient, J will not believe: but to such, J say, to me
Christ is antiquity: and whosoever obeys him not, it will be their certain and
irrecoverable destruction. A fit sentence to be applied against the Papist,
who enquire after the antiquity of our doctrine: but this by the way.

The parts of the Epistle are three: The inscription, narration and conclusion.

These things says he that is holy, he that is true] In the preface the person
of Christ is gloriously described by four Epithites.

First he is called holy, 1 Cor. 2.30
both because he is in himself holy, and is made to us of God Sanctification:
besides he loves holiness, and can not abide impuritie.

2. Is true, that is, constant in keeping his word, and performing his promises
and threatenings, loves truth in us, and detesteth all falsehood, whither in
life or doctrine: yea none shall escape unpunished that takes ought from his
promises, or threatening.

Here we have the twentieth argument of Christ's deity. XX Argu. of Chr. deity.
Isay. 6.3.
For none absolutely, save God alone, is in scripture called the holy and
faithful one. Thus the Seraphims cried one to another: Holy, holy, holy is the
Lord God of hosts. And who is true, or truth besides the Lord? The Lord is
righteous in all his ways and holy in all his works. In Dan. 9.24. Ps. 145.17
he is called the most holy, and it seems that these two Epithites of Christ
were thence taken. Christ says of himself: J am the way the truth and the
life. Ioh. 14.6. 1. Io. 5.20.
This is the true God, and eternal life: So here, these things says he that
is holy, he that is true. Thus we see, the divine majesty of Christ fully
declared. Here also let us note the detestable boldness of the Pope of Rome,
who will be called the most holy Father, yea holiness it self: Is not this to
lift himself up above Christ? does he not herein manifest himself to be the
great Antichrist.

Christ indeed is absolutely called the holy one: but the Pope calls
himself, the most holy one and that absolutely: Thus he proudly exalts
himself above Christ, which is proper to Antichrist. The like we noted from the
title of Christ's priesthood Heb. 4.14. where he is twice called a great hie
Priest. But the Pope arrogates to himself a higher title, viz. the greatest hie
priest: wherein again he lifts himself up above Christ: and plainly shows
that he is not his vicar, but rather the successor of the Archpriest of the
Pagans, whom the Romans called Archflamins.

But perhaps it will be objected: That the Pope is called the greatest hie
Priest: not in respect of Christ, but of other inferior hie priests: and being
the supreme and universal bishop.

But this unlooseth not the knot. For in what respect soever he calls himself
the greatest hie priest, it is evident that herein he makes himself greater
then Christ, who is only called the great hie priest:

This therefore confirms what we said before, that he was not Christ's
successor, but the Pagans priest: neither will the pretense of other hie
priests any whit help or credit them: for either they are not great hie
priests, in respect of whom the Pope must be said to be the greatest: or if
they are, then they make themselves equal with Christ, by assuming his proper
title, and so are as sacrilegious in this, as the Pope is in the other.

To be short the Pope in naming himself the highest priest, universal
bishop, prince of priests, etc. does manifestly transgress against their own
Cannons did. 100. cap. Let not the Bishop of the chief city be called the
prince, or chiefest of priests, or by any name tending this way, but only the
Bishop of the first seat: again: Let none of the Patriarcks use the name of
universalitie: because if any one of the Patriarks be called universal, how
can there be any more?

And the Rubricke has it: Let not the Bishop of Rome be called universal. By
this therefore he shows himself to be Antichrist indeed: for as Pope Gregory
witnesses: Whosoever calls or desires to be called the universal Bishop:
is in this his ambition a forerunner of Antichrist: in that he proudly
prefers himself before the rest.

Neither does that help them which some vainly pretend, that the Pope takes
not away the name or jurisdiction from other Bishops: for either he makes
himself alone universal, or else it must necessarily follow, that every Church
has two at one time. But how ever it be, yet that of Gregory is no way
answered, but he is certainly Antichrist, who assumeth a superiority over his
fellow ministers. But let us return to the titles of Christ.

Who has the key of David] This is the third Epithet. The Kings Bible has
it, (...) for, (...). The Greek Scoliast observes that some copies in steed of
the key of David, read, the key of hell, according to that in Chap. 1.18. I
have the key of hell and of death: which though it well agrees with that which
follows: yet our reading is approved by most copies.

Beza supposes, that it might be read, the key of the house of David, as
alluding to Jsay. 22.22. where the Lord promising to make Eliakim treasurer in
steed of Shebna says, the key of the house of David will I lay upon his
shoulder; so he shall open, and none shall shut, and he shall shut, and none
shall open. The house of David, is the Church: the key is a sign of
aeconomical power.

Now Christ has this key, that is, absolute power over the Church as Lord, and
head thereof: and has committed the ministerial power of the keys, to the
Apostles, and their successors, which consists in opening and shutting the
kingdom of heaven by preaching of the Gospel and administration of Church
discipline.

Who opens and no man shutteth] This notes a further degree of power, for he
alone holds the key by his sole and absolute authority, Matt. 28.18.
and so whatsoever he does herein, he cannot be resisted: according to that in
the Gospel all power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.

But this seems to be a paradoxe, he opens, and no man shuts: how can this
be? the words seem to be taken from the place before cited. The meaning is, he
only has right to open and to shut: but how is that? Some understand it of
the sense of the scripture, which to us is as a book shut, unless Christ by
his spirit open our hearts and understanding. This is true indeed in regard of
one part of the sentence, but to the other it answers not: for howbeit Christ
opens the meaning thereof, by enlightening of us: yet he shuts them not,
unless it be by accident, that is, when he darkens such more and more who are
already blind in the things of God. But I question whither such an exposition
appertains to this place: For I rather think, it is spoken of Christ's opening
the door of his Church, and of grace, and so consequently of heaven it self.
And thus in the following verses he is said to open the door of the church in
Philadelphia: and the like he does in all other places, when he calls
whomsoever he pleases, and draws them by his spirit: for none enter in at
this door, but such unto whom Christ opens the same.

And no man shutteth] For none can pluck Christ's sheep out of his hands; the
gates of hell cannot shut this door being once opened by him, neither can any
adversary power hinder them from entering into the same. The which matter
indeed is of singular comfort for his Church: for let Satan attempt what he
can, nevertheless to whomsoever Christ opens the door, to them it shall
still remain open and his sheep shall have their egresse and regresse, and
find sweet pasture for their souls: hence we see that the condition of the
elect is safe and unchangeable.

He shuts and no man openeth] As he opens and no man shuts, so again on
the contrary, he by his mighty power shuts, and no man is able to open.
For whosoever is not elected, called, and drawn by Christ, can never enter:
for he is the door, the way and life, Io. 10: which again proves the Godhead
of Christ: for to whom can these things be applied, XXI Argu. of Chr. deity.
except to God alone? some object, that this also was said of Eliakim Isay. 22.
I answer, it was spoken of him typicallie, and in respect of his ministerial
power, as being a legal hie priest: but of Christ in regard of his kingly,
divine, and proper power, as being an eternal high priest. The Pope of Room
to establish his tyranny, does most impudently assume this power, which only
is proper to Christ: now Christ indeed gave power to Peter of binding and
loosing, of opening and shutting, but it was by the key of the gospel, and not
to him alone, but unto all the Apostles, and Pastors of the Churches. For as he
said to Peter, Matt. 16.19. Matt. 18.18.
whatsoever thou shall bind etc. So he said unto the rest, whatsoever ye shall
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. Whereas the Pope alone will open and
shut all things as he pleases, yet not by the key and power of the gospel, but
by the adulterate key of his own Antichristian tyranny.

8. I know thy works, I have set before thee] The first part of the following
narration, is a commendation of the Pastor and Church of Philadelphia, for
holding fast the sincerity of the doctrine receyved against the haerisies of
the time: and remaining faithful in their fiery trials. This he commends
first generally: I know thy works: which is not to be taken indifferently,
as chap. 2. v. 2. or in the evil part, as it is spoken of those in Sardis and
Laodicea: but in a good sense: as if he had said, I approve thy works. And
this he does to stir them up to a cheerful going foreward in well doing: for
the praise of virtue increases it: and honor provokes men to virtuous
enterprises. Ovid. li. 4. de pont.
As the Poet speaks. Secondly in special: because he had kept his word and
not denied his name. Thus as in the first he is commended for his sincerity in
doctrine: so in the latter for his constant profession of the same before the
adversary. These two things are required of all Christians, but Especially of
Gods ministers: namely, to keep the faith of Christ entire, and not to corrupt
the same by humane inventions: and 2. not to forsake the profession thereof in
any estate or condition. To. 10.10.
For with the heart man believes unto righteousness: and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation.

But least this holy teacher should be lifted up, to think he did these
things by his own strengeth: Christ therefore ascribes both the first
constitution of this Church, as also the constancy of Pastor and people
therein, to his grace alone: behold I have set before thee an open door; that
is, It is not by thy own power, that the congregation over which thou art,
embraces the truth taught by thee, or that thou thy self stand fast in the
faith, against all the threats of the adversaries, who daily labor to shut
this open door: for thou have little strength, that is little, or no outward
help and assistance: but it is I who have set an open door before thee: It is
I who have opened it by my own power, and hence the enemies neither have, nor
ever shall be able to shut the same. Thus we se, that which before was
indefinitely spoken of Christ's shutting and opening: is here in particular
applied to the Philadelphians: J have set before thee an open door.

I am not ignorant how these words, for thou have a little strength, may be
taken in another sense: And some indeed do expound them adversitivelie, as if
they deserved the greater commendation, for their constancy in their
affliction, seeing they had but a little strength, that is destitute of humane
protection. But then the causal (...) (for) should be a reason of the latter,
that is, wherefore he had kept the word: which is repugnant to the scope of the
commendation: for it is manifestly a reason of the former: namely wherefore
Christ had opened a door unto him, which no man should be able to shut.

Others again understand it as spoken for his comfort: as if Christ had said, I
have gathered unto my self a Church in this city in the midst of many
adversaries, over which I have appointed thee a Pastor, and howsoever thou have
but a little strength to resist them, notwithstanding I will so protect both
thee and thy congregation, as that no man shall be able to shut, that is, to
subvert the same, or expel the faithful out of this place. Which
interpretation I confess contains much excellent comfort, both for the Pastor
and people: but considering that the Epistle as yet treates not of
consolations, I therefore allow rather the first exposition.

Now touching this manner of speech: An open door, by a Metaphor is signified
an occasion offered of well doing; that is, an opportunity of preaching and
propagating the Gospel: for as a man goes into the house, the door being
opened: even so when the Lord gives passage to the Gospel, Churches are planted
and propagated: according to that of the Apostle, When I came to Troas to
preach the Gospel, 2 Cor. 2, 12
a door was opened to me of the Lord: and 1. Cor. 16.12. a great door and
effectual is opened to me etc. Hence chiefly we are taught two things.

First, this again proves the divinity of Christ: for whereas he both knows
the works of the faithful, and opens a door to his Church, as also
restraines the power of the adversaries, that notwithstanding all their malice
and rage, yet can they not shut the same: it clearelie shows that he is God
only wise and omnipotent. And therefore as Christ our Lord by his mighty
works, XXII Arg. of Chr. deity.
proved against the blasphemous Jews, that he was God, Joh. 10.38. so are we
bound from his powrful gathering and preserving of this Church to believe the
same.

The cavil of some heretics is of no weight: who pretend that Christ does
these works by a power communicated unto him of the father. I answer, he does
it by his divine and essential omnipotency, which he has received from the
father by eternal generation: for whatsoever the father has, is Christ's, Ioh.
16.15. Io. 5.9.
and whatsoever things he does, these also does the son likewise. Not as if
the power of the Father were uncreated, and Christ's created: but both the
Father, and the Son work by the same divine and uncreated power. For the Son
does all things (...) (alike) with the Father.

Secondly, as Christ of old opened a door for the passage of the Gospel, and
no power of malice of men nor Devils could any way hinder the same: so
considering at this day that among so many enemies a door is opened unto the
Churches in Germany, England, Poland, Hungary etc. we ought to acknowledge,
that this happens not by chance, nor ascribe it to the industry of teachers,
prudencie of politicians, or the power of princes, but unto the grace,
efficacy, presence, and power of Christ alone: for certainly the strength of
Christians has been little or nothing to resist the tyrannical persecution,
cruel edicts, and horrible torments, by which Antichrist has labored, (but
in vain) utterlie to deface our Christian faith: but by how much they have
sought to press it down, by so much (like unto the palm tree) it has
flourished more and more: because Christ by his divine power having opened this
door, Antichrist was not able to shut the same. And indeed it is a thing
admirable in our eyes: that some few Monks and despised teachers should by the
contemptible preaching of the Gospel, so shake the kingdom of the Beast,
howbeit supported with the aid and power of the kings and Emperors of the earth
on all sides, as that whole nations of the Christian world should turn from
Antichrist, to Christ our Lord.

Now this being come to pass, we may not think that either teachers, kings
or princes have opened the door: but because Christ powerfullie reigning at
the right hand of God, has so effected the same: as that none was able to
hinder it. Let us therefore be truly thankful unto Christ for so great a
mercy and divine miracle, humbly beseeching him to keep this door still open
unto us, not suffering it to be shut for our unthankfulnes, or his sheep to be
scattered by the enemies: but that he graciously preserve his Churches by
dwelling among them.

9. And I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan] Gr. I give them. The second
part is a consolation, against two sorts of temptations. The first, in this
verse: the second, is expounded in the verse following, by a close Prolepsis,
or prevention. For having said, that he had set a door open before them, which
none should shut: this might seem impossible, considering how on the one side,
the Jews their professed enemies did much ennoy them: again on the other hand
how the unbeleeving citizens, magistrates, together with the kings and Roman
Emperors did miserably afflict them: yea and how Christ himself foretells that
they should suffer yet greater troubles for his names sake. Here then I say
might they not doubt, how this door should be kept open by Christ against the
adversaries? and not rather in a short time be shut up, that is, oppressed and
destroyed by them.

To these fears he opposes distinct remedies, and to the end, that neither
the Jews perverseness might offend them, nor the oppression of tyrants dismay
them: Christ assures them that he will turn the one to their good, and deliver
them from the other. And this is the coherence, and sum of these two verses.

That which concerns the first temptation, is comprehended in these words,
behold I give them of the Synagogue of Satan etc. so he calls the Jews: as
in cha. 2.9. I give, that is I raise up adversaries against thee, who shall
cruelly hate both thee, and the Church: for look as the Jews continually
persecuted the Apostles, by raising up against them tumults in all places, to
hinder the propagation of the Gospel: so would they do unto these of
Philadelphia.

Now to comfort them herein, Christ uses diverse reasons. First, his
providence. I (says he) give: that is, they shall not fall upon you by chance,
but by my appointment, and to the end that ye should be tried, and therefore
ye ought patiently, to endure this temptation, and always to trust in me:
for I will give nothing, but what shall be for your good and profit. And thus I
understand these words, howsoever others are otherwise minded. But does not
Christ in this make himself the author of sin? seeing the malice of these
Jews against the Christians was very sinful. I answer, it follows not. For
Christ raised up the Jews against his servants, not putting this rage into
them, but using them only for the others trial: as is expressed in the end of
the following verse: to try them that dwell upon the face of the earth.

This is the first consolation, and ground of all the rest. For he which
believes, that his troubles are sent of God, will bear them patiently, and
assuredly hope, that God will turn all things unto his good.

Who are of the Synagogue of Satan] A second consolation is taken from the
vanity of their adversaries: for they lied in calling themselves Jews, that
is, the praysers of God, deriving their name from Judah, which signifies, to
praise, as if they had been the offspring of Judah, the children of Abraham, and
only people of God. But indeed they were not Jews, but a Synagogue of Satan:
se chap. 2.9. by which we are taught, not to admire by pocrites for the
glorious titles, which they vainlie assume unto themselves.

The Papists to this day boast as being the Catholic Church: but they are a
Synagogue of Satan: because they keep not the word of Christ: but persecute it,
whatever they pretend to the contrary. For Christ says: he that believes on
we, has life everlasting: But they on the contrary: not he that believes in
Christ, but he that believes the decrees of the Church of Rome and subjecteth
himself unto the Pope, he shall have life eternal.

Behold I will make them to come, and worship before thy feet] The third
consolation is taken from the profitable event of their troubles: viz. the
marveilous conversion of these Jews unto the faith of Christ. I will (says
he) for a little while exercise thee, and the Church by these lying Jews, but
a while after I will convert them: suffer therefore their injuries patiently,
for shortly they shall become your friends and brethren.

Their conversion is described by these signs: they shall come and worship
before thy feet: that is, in a humble manner desire pardon for their offense:
and join themselves unto your congregation. He speaks not of that religious
worship which is due unto God and Christ alone: but of an outward reverence,
and falling down before the feet of the pastor and the whole Church in sign
of true repentance. For the word in the original (...) is derived of (...) (a
dog) and properly signifies such a manner of falling down before the feet
of any in sign of subjection, as whelps do in fauning on their masters:
Metaphoricallie it is used for divine worship, or reverence, but here it is
taken properly.

Now behold the wonderful conversion of these Jews, which yet is not to be
ascribed unto their own free will: for of themselves they could not have
repented: but this work was wrought in them only by the grace of Christ: for
he says, J will make them to come, which shows the end or consolatorie effect.

And to know that I have loved thee] That is, howsoever for the present they
are your enemies and account you as men appointed to destruction: yet when they
shall be converted: they will be of another mind, and know that I loved thee
for thy patience and sufferance. For I love them that love me. Because no man
will suffer adversity for my names sake, except he love me.

Hence we may note two excellent doctrines.

First, that we ought not to despair of the salvation of our adversaries. For
it is easy with Christ of wolves to make them sheep, of enemies friends: and
therefore we should always pray unto the Lord, for their conversion who are
elected: we know there are twelve hours in the day, and that God calls some in
the morning, some at noon, and some at evening, and then works such an
admirable change in their souls, as of persecutors they become professors, of
a Synagogue of Satan, a Church and spouse of Jesus Christ: as we see in the
known examples of Nobuchadnezzer, Paul and others. Unto whom we may also add
these Jews here spoken of.

Secondly, we se that the conversion of the wicked is not to be ascribed unto
any freewil in them: for Christ makes them to come and worship. Ioh. 15.5. Ioh.
6.44.
And without him we (...) be nothing, according to that saying no man come can
unto the Son, except the Father draw him. The consideration whereof puts us
in mind both of our ^^^erie and weakness, which is come upon us by sin: as
also of the great mercy of God toward us: for although indeed it may in some
sort be applied to our willingned; that we come and worship: to others their
unwillingnes, that they come not, but rather blaspheme the name of Christ: yet
the true and primarie cause, which makes us willing, whereas others in the mean
time are left in their unwillingnesse, is the free mercy and grace of Christ,
by which we are differenced and made better then others, according as it is
here said, I will make them to come etc. 1. Cor. 4.7. Romans 9.18.
and again, who has made thee to differ? for he has mercy on whom he will
have mercy, and whom he will he hardens.

Here falls in a question how Christ makes us to come to worship. The Sophisters
who plead for free will, confess indeed that this is a work of grace, and
without which no man can come: notwithstanding they affirm, that a man before
he is in the state of grace has a free will to do good, although weak and
sleepie: which will, (say they) by grace is awakened and strengthened, and so
it cooperates with grace, yea prevents it in the very act of conversion,
being as it were a coworking cause: as when two horses draw a chariot: or two
men together carry some weighty burden.

Moreover they affirm, that free will is like a seeing man, who albeit in the
dark he discernes nothing by reason of the indisposition of the means, yet
being brought into the light, he presently discerns every thing. So
likewise they discourse much, (though differing among themselves) of the
sympathy or agreement betwixt grace, and the will.

The Scotists will have grace to work nothing on the will, but to have its
influences on the effects. But the Jesuits with Thomas affirm the contrary,
that grace works upon the will, yet so as by an indifferent influence, and so
is distinguished from it, according as the will is either good or evil.

But herein they all agree: that grace is only persuasive, such as is the
motion of Orators unto their auditorie, unto which the will, if it will, either
does, or does not give efficacy and entertainment: Ephesians. 2.1 Ier. 13.23 1
Cor. 2.14
which was the heresy of Pelagius.

Now on the contrary the scripture teaches, that the natural man lies dead
in sin, and is like unto an Ethiopian who cannot change his skin, or a
Leopard which cannot cast off his spots: he receives not the things of the
spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him: Every imagination of the
thought of his heart is only evil continually: Genesis 6.5. and 8.21. Romans 8.6.
thus we see that man's free will is not subject to the law of God; neither
indeed can be. For his blind and erroneous mind cannot bring spiritual
things, savinglie unto the will, neither can his corrupt will refuse that which
is evil, as evil: but on the contrary chooses and delights in it, as if it
were good. And therefore seeing that such is the corruption of our will and
faculties, as that it is Christ, who makes us to come unto him, and the Father
draws unto Christ: none can affirm that the grace of conversion is only an
indifferent influence, or m^^all persuasion but with blasphemy against God.

But they further object, that free will makes man to differ from the beast
that perishes, and therefore sin could not take it away without the destruction
of nature, whereby man should become an unreasonable creature.

I answer: It is true, if it be meant of free will absolutely. But what is that
to the purpose: we deny not free will absolutely, for without it a man should
be no more a man, but a very beast. But we deny that a natural man has a
free and understanding will unto that which is good, in things appertaining to
God: because the scripture in this pronounces man blind, and a servant to
that which is evil, yea to be dead in sins, and altogether disobedient unto
God. And therefore that we may come unto Christ we have need not only of
persuasive motions, but also of an effectual work of grace, by which the Lord
illuminateth, draws, and regenerateth us, that so we may become new
creatures: but what need have we to use many words: the sum of all is this: The
natural man is dead in sin, and God gives us both the will, and the deed:
Christ makes us to come unto him, what now is there left unto free will? they
therefore which establish it against grace, do rob God and Christ of their
honor: precipitate man by pride into extreem danger, and renew the herifie of
the Pelagians, whatsoever they pretend to the contrary.

10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience] Now he comforts him in
regard of the persecutions at hand; of which we might discourse, more fully,
if we had, the histories of the Church of those times. Some understand it of
the persecution under the Emperor Trajane: Who though he prohibited that
Christians should be drawn before the Judgment seats, yet such as were
accused he commanded to be put to death: as Pliny witnesses in his epistles.
Lib. 10. Epist. 97.
Others apply it to the persecutions of Antichrist: wherewith not only these
of Philadelphia, but all the saints upon the face of the whole earth were
greevously afflicted: but the former opinion is more probable.

This consolation is also threefold. The first is an approbation of their
constancy in their former afflictions: because thon have kept my word. It is a
great comfort unto us, to hear, that our actions are approved of by men: but we
ought much more to rejoice if God approve thereof: for this works in us an
assurance of a good conscience, and of the goodness of the cause for which we
suffer: as suffering not as evil doers, but as Christians. He calls the
doctrine of the Gospel, the word of his patience, and Paul calls it the word of
the cross, because we must take up the cross of Christ, and suffer
afflictions patiently for the profession thereof. He calls it his patience, or
sufferance because he first suffered, being an example unto all them that
believe in him: for through manifold tribulations we must enter into the
kingdom of God.

And I will deliver thee] a second consolation, is a promise of deliverance in
the hour of temptation, that is, of affliction, which figuratively is called
the temptation of the Godly. Now hope of deliverance out of evil causes
constancy: because hope makes not ashamed. Unto this hope we are stirred up,
by laying hold on the promises of God concerning our certain deliverance:
which the Lord not only promises here unto this teacher, but unto all such as
are in the like temptation, that is, unto all the saints dispersed throughout
the whole earth. And therefore it teaches us to be constant in the day of
trial, and to expect a full, and perfect freedom by Christ our Lord.

But this seems to establish the doctrine of merits, seeing Christ promises
deliverance, because we keep his word. I answer: when the scriptures speak of
works and reward, they usually thus express it, as, because thou have don
this, I will multiply thy seed. Now we are to know, that this argues no
mercenary reward due for desert sake: But a fatherly (though undeserved
promise, annexed unto the condition of our obedience: For no man can be said to
merit in doing that which he is bound to perform: but we are enjoined to keep
the word of Christ: and besides when we have don the utmost that we can, yet we
are but unprofitable servants: and God does only of his free grace reward our
obedience and constancy. So that the speech of Christ in this place, is not an
argument drawn from the meritorious cause of salvation, but from the condition
only without which we cannot exspect the same: for Christ promises to deliver
none, but such as keep his word. Why then does he thus speak? not that we
should be lifted up with an opinion of merit: but by promising a reward, he
shows how acceptable our obedience is unto him: as also to the end that we
may increase and persevere in grace.

From the hour of temptation] The third consolation is contained in these
words; temptation, that is, the cruel persecution of Trajane, or some other
tyrant: in calling it an hour he notes the brevity of this affliction, that
they might the more cheerfully undergo it. The cross is compared to a woman's
sorrow in travel. Joh. 16.20. because of the shortness of the pain, and the
joyful effect thereof. See also Romans 8.18. and 2 Cor. 4.17.

To try them that dwell upon the earth] the fourth consolation is taken from the
use of afflictions: They are not sent as punishments from God for our
destruction: but for the trial of our faith and constancy. And in this respect
they are, first just: because God has right to try us: and 2: necessary,
Isa. 28.19 Iam. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1, 7.
least we should grow slack and dull: as also very profitable, for vexation
causes us to understand, works patience, shakes of the drowsines of sin,
makes our faith more precious then Gold, to be found to prayle, and honor, and
glory: to be short it stirs us up earnestly to call upon God. Seeing
therefore the Lord makes his trials so many ways profitable unto us, Ps. 91.15.
set us be patient and constant under the same. He uses this temptation, to
try them that are upon the earth: for God tries hypocrites and wicked men, as
well as the saints: though the effect be diverse. For by it the ungodliness,
in constancy, and lightness of the former is made manifest, God hereby
separating hypocrites, and wicked men crept into the Church from the society of
saints: for these remain constant, the other by their apostacy manifest the
secret corruption of their hearts. Moreover we are to take notice, that these
words them that dwell upon the earth, are always in this book taken in a bad
sense, as signifying unfound men, idolaters, and the followers of Antichrist;
as will appear in the following history.

11 Behold, I come quickly] This may be referred to the following exhortation.
I will come quickly, hold fast therefore that treasure of faith, which thou
have received. But it seems rather to agree with that which went before, as a
conclusion of the third consolation: promising to come quickly to destroy the
wicked, and to deliver his children, least by delaying their deliverance they
might seem to be impatient. Some refer this to his last coming. If so, then
quickly, notes not the time at hand: but sooner then the world is aware of. For
although the Lord be not yet come, 2 Pet. 3.9.
yet he is not slack, says the Apostle, concerning his promise, but is long
suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should
come to repentance. He will therefore come quickly, that is, sooner then many
think. For when the world shall say, peace and safety, then sudden destruction
comes. See Chap. 1.1.

Hold that fast, which thou hast] In this third part of the narration, he
exhorts them, to sincerity, and constancy in the faith, that they loose not the
reward: And it is added to the foregoing consolation, least by it we should
become secure. The sentence is brief, but very emphatical. Hold fast that which
thou have. What had they? faith and a good conscience, as Paul expounds it: 1 Timothy 1.18. And indeed these are the chief heads of all spiritual blessings,
the which whosoever has, and keeps in this life, shall obtain a crown of
glory in the life to come. These two, the Pastor and Church of Philadelphia
had, and with them all other graces. For by faith, they had righteousness,
sanctification, adoption, and hope of glory to come. By a good conscience they
increased in sincerity, patience, and constancy under the cross: as we have
already showed: These things (says he) hold fast, to wit, unto the end. The
word ((...)) here used, notes the necessity of our uttermost endeavor, and
strength considering the many lets and impediments, which otherwise might cause
us to make shipwreck of faith, and a good conscience, unless we strive with
all our power. Thus we see they are exhorted to perseverance in their integrity.

That no man take thy crowne] The reason is drawn from the dangerous effect of
slothfulnes: for not they that fight remisly, but only such as hold out and
overcome, 2 Timothy 4.8 Iam. 1.12. 1 Pet. 5.4.
are crowned in sign of victory. Thy crown, so he calls the reward of life
eternal: Paul terms it, the crown of righteousness, which shall be given to
them that overcome, by Christ the righteous judge. James, the crown of life:
Peter, the crown of Glory that fades not away, the which all faithful
teachers shall receive, when Christ the great shepherd of the sheep shall
appear. Thus this crown is distinguished from those other crowns, which in
ancient times were given unto conquerours. See our Commentary on 1 Cor. 9.24.

We may here observe many things, the which I will briefly touch.

First, we are taught, that the promises of God, ought not to make us secure,
but rather to stir up our endeavor to constancy: for we cannot assuredly
apply them unto our selves, except we earnestly labor to perform our duty.
Christ promised indeed to this Church, to keep them from the hour of
temptation: yet he bids them hold fast what they had: intimating, that our
faith and constancy ought not to be lessened by the promises, but rather
strengthened and increased.

Secondly, we are taught, that they only shall be crowned with the promised
reward in heaven, who hold fast what they have here receyved: we shall be
clothed upon with our house which is from heaven: 2 Cor. 5.3.
if so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked.

Thirdly, seeing it is called, thy crown: it seems to denote, that in heaven
we shall have every one his own crown: from whence it may be gathered, that
as there are degrees of punishment: so there shall be differences of reward,
yea undoubtedlie such faithful teachers, as have brought many to
righteousness: Dan. 12.3.
shall shine as stars in the firmament.

Iovinian against whom Jerome disputes, seems to hold that all the faithful
shall have one and the like degree of glory: the which also some orthodoxe
teachers to this day do maintain, grounding their opinion on the words of
Christ, The just shall shine as the sun: Matt. 13.43.
whose brightness surpasses the beauty of all other creatures. Now however
this be granted, yet we may safely conclude a degree of glory, seeing that
even the sun appears unto us, some time more, and some time less in
brightness. And I believe, Jovinian did not deny a degree absolutely, but
denied the same in respect of merit. The which we should understand more
certainly, were his books now extant: howbeit we may probably gather so much
from the very reasons and grounds laid down by Hierom himself.

In the last place we see, that no man in this life ca^ come to that perfection
or fulness, or is so nigh unto the kingdom of God, but that he might be
deprived thereof, in case he should be left unto himself, or be careless: that
is, continues not faithful in weldoeing. And therefore we are admonished, 1
Cor. 10.12. Romans 11.20.
If we stand to take heed least we fall: and though we stand by faith, yet not
to be high minded but fear. But if so be, that some of the faithful may let go
their hold, and loose the crown: where then is that (plerophoria) or full
assurance of our salvation, and perseverance of the elect, of which Christ
speaks: No man shall take my sheep out ^f my hand. Ioh. 10.28 Mat. 24.24 Ioh.
16.33.
It is impossible the elect should be seduced, and therefore be of good cheer,
I have overcome the world.

I answer: however Libertines and Sophisters do hence draw such a conclusion,
yet it follows not: For as Austin from this very place proves, the number of
the elect is certain, and can neither be augmented, or diminished. For, (says
he) if one receives it not, except another loose it, then the number is
certain. And although these things are spoken unto the saints who persevere,
as though it were uncertain whither they should stand or not: nevertheles it
only teaches, that we should not be wise above that which is meet, but fear.
We are moreover to consider, that as the promise, so the exhortation, is
directed not only to the pastor, but also unto the whole Church, in which
there is always a mixture of saints and hypocrites, of elect, and reprobates,
who indeed with the mouth make confession of faith, but believe not with the
heart unto righteousness; and therefore are said to be deprived of the crown,
because they hold not fast that which they have, that is, that which they seem
to have. According to that in Luke 8.18. Whosoever has not, from him shall be
taken, even that which he seems to have. And therefore, when such fall away,
and loose the crown, it nothing weakens the state of election: 1 Ioh. 2.19
for as the Apostle witnesses, they are not in the number of the elect: they
went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they
would no doubt have continued with us, etc. Unto them therefore that of the
Apostle is to be applied. Let him which seems to stand take heed least he fall,
thou stand by faith be not high minded but fear: which threatenings are
manifestly spoken of highminded hypocrites, such as stand in outward appearance
only. But the salvation of the elect is sure, because they are kept by the
power of God through faith, and in humility of mind, they shall certainly
hold fast, that which they have, and never be cast off.

But you will say; if this Bishop, (as undoubtedly he was) were one of the
elect: what need then was there of this threatening, that no man take thy
crown: seeing the elect cannot fall away, or be deprived thereof?

I answer; It is not in vain. First, though indeed the elect cannot loose the
crown in respect of the decree of God, by which they are predestined, and
called unto salvation, yet might it be taken away in respect of their own
infirmity, if they were left unto themselves, and in respect of other causes
also which threaten their destruction, except they were preserved by that power
of which Peter speaks: 1 Pet. 1.5.

Secondly, these threatenings as they respect the faithful, are conditional.
Another shall take their crown, if they persevere not in the faith: but they
do persevere. 1: Because God keeps them unto the end. 2: Because Christ does
continually pray for them, that their faith fail not: And 3: because they
themselves always pray for the same, Ier. 32.40.
and are heard, according to that promise: I will put my fear in their hearts,
that they shall not depart from me: that is, as Augustine interprets it, they
shall persevere, and cleave unto me. And lastly because the Lord by such
threatenings, and exhortations stirs up the saints in their endeavor unto
perseverance. Unto all which we may add the testimonies of Thomas, Hierom,
Bid, Haimo, and others whom Ribera cites. See Bell. Castigatum lib. 2. de
Great. Et lib. cap. 13. page 334. etc.

Him that overcommeth] In the conclusion a reward of victory is promised unto
the spiritual champions, who war under Christ's banner, and to the same is
annexed the common Epiphonema, wherein as formerlie, the diligent consideration
of this Epistle is recommended unto them. The several rewards mentioned, do
illustrate the excellency of the crown proposed.

Now it is propounded unto all, yea even unto us if we overcome: which thing we
do, when we keep faith and a good conscience, and persevere constantly under
the cross in the word of God. And this is the only way to overcome, but
cannot be effected, without great labor in resisting opposing, and putting to
flight all enemies whatsoever. Such therefore as either fight not at all, or else
do it slacklie, or perfidiously fall away, they neither overcome, nor obtain
the crown of life* and so unto them these promises do not appertain. Let us
therefore in consideration hereof, constantly fight the battles of the Lord. And
so we come to treat of the rewards, which are clear in themselves, though
metaphorically propounded in a threefold promise.

I will (...) him a pillar in the house of my God] The temple of God, is the
church militant and triumphant. The pillars serve both for strength and
ornament unto the temple: first therefore he promises to him that overcommeth
that he shall be a glorious, and firm member of the Church triumphant.

The Apostles are called pillars of the Church militant, Gal. 2.9. and
foundation thereof, Ephesians. 2.20. not as sustaining the Church (for that is proper
to Christ alone) but as choice instruments in Gods hand, by whom he founded,
preserved, and propagated the same. Others suppose the phrase to be taken from
the custom of the Romans, who used to set up pillars, that is, trophies and
images of honor: now in this sense it might be taken, but that Christ says
not, I will set him up as a pillar, but I will make him a pillar. But it is
more probable that he alludeth to the two brazen pillars set up by Solomon in
the porch of the temple, which typified the stability of the children of God.

And he shall go no more out] This is the second promise: it shall not be a
momentanie glory, but unchangeable perpetual and eternal. And it seems to
be put here in opposition to those brazen pillars, which were overthrowen with
the temple by the Babylonians: but no such destruction shall befall the godly,
for as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 125.1, 2.
They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be removed
but abides for ever. An excellent place proving the perseverance of the
saints even in this life: for whom Christ has once made a pillar in his
temple, he will never suffer them to go out any more, that is, to fall away
from the state of grace.

And I will write his name] The third promise, An inscription of a threefold
name.
is an inscription of a threefold name, viz. of God, of the city of God, and
of Christ. He seems either to allude to the manner of the Romans, who used to
write on their statues of triumph the actions of the Conquerours, the titles
and names of conquered nations: as for example: To Tyberius: To Constantine
always Augustus: To the Conqueror of Germany, of the Goths, of Africa etc.
Or otherwise he keeps still to the former allusion of Solomon's pillars,
whereof the right was called Jachin, which is being interpreted he will
establish, and the left Boaz, that is, in it there is strength, the one being
a type of the Jewish church, the other of the Gentiles: so Christ will write
upon every faithful man, most honorable names: which exposition might stand,
but that Solomon is said, not to have written those names upon the pillars, but
so to have named them. Well how ever it be, certain it is, that both these
pillars with their names were destroyed: the vain inscriptions of the Romans
perished: but the names which Christ will write upon his pillars, they shall
remain for ever and ever.

First he will write upon them, the Name of his God] not that these conquerours
shall be Gods: but the sons of God, that is, perfectly borne again after the
image of God: Indeed we are now Gods children by faith: but these glorious
inscriptions here promised, do not yet appear, namely, the full fruition and
majesty of our adoption.

And the name of the city of my God] or, of the new Jerusalem, that is, I will
make him an everlasting citizen of the Church triumphant: for as you may see
Chap. 21.2.10. this is set forth unto us by the new Jerusalem.

Which comes down out of heaven] both because it so appeared in a vision
unto John, in the place for calledged: as also because it has its true
original from heaven, as grounded on the eternal election of God: and besides
in this life is borne of water, and of the spirit, and all the grace which it
receives, comes down from above.

From my God] Three times he calls God his God: speaking either as man, and
our mediator: whose office no ways lessneth, but rather confirms his
eternal essence, (see Chap. 1.1. and 3.2.) Io. 20.17. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. Christ's
new name.
Or else God is here personally taken for the father: as it is in these places:
I ascend to my God, and to my Father. Before God and our Father.

My new name] To the Godly in Pergamus, he promised a new name, but lo here he
will give his new name, which he receyved of his father, being exalted above
every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is
to come. Ephesians. 1.10. see also Phil. 2.19.

Touching this new name, it signifies Christ's glorious exaltation, and the
Fathers setting of him at his right hand after his resurrection: now this his
new name, and this fullness of glory at Gods right hand, Christ will write on
the Overcommers: but how? make them pertakers of perfect happiness, according
to their measure, and proportion, as being members of that body of which he
is the head. Se more of this v. 21.

13 He which has an eare] see Chap. 2. v. 7.11.

The VII Epistle to the Bishop of Laodicea.
14 And unto the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans, write; These things
says the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation
of God.

15 I know thy works that thou art neither ^old nor hot, I would thou were
cold or hot.

16 So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue
thee out of my mouth.

17 Because thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing: and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked.

18 I counsel thee, to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou majest be
rich, and white raiment that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy
wikednesse do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou
may see.

19 As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore, and repent.

20 Behold, I stand at the door, and knock; if any man hear my voice, and
open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

21 To him that overcommeth, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as
I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne.

22 He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches.

THE COMMENTARY.
Unto the Angel of the church of the Laodiceans] This last epistle is full of
sharp reproof against the pastor of the Church, because of his great
hypocrisy, and vain boasting: and withal shows him what he should do,
persuades him to serious repentance, and propounds rewards unto them that do
the same. In this Epistle is excellently set forth the lenity and forbearance
of Christ our Lord: by which he suffers hypocrites, and desires their
salvation. It consists of a preface, a narration, and a conclusion:

To the Angel] That is to the pastor and whole congregation. Now because the
evils in the Church, do usually proceed from the pastors, therefore it is
justly imputed unto them: even as the excess, Idolatry, prophanenes, and
other wickedness of the people, were by the prophets of old laid to the charge
of their priests, and governors. It is uncertain who this Bishop was. But
certainly he was a carnal and crafty man: for though he bare the name of a
minister, yet was he void of sincerity and Godliness, and given over to
coveteousnes, and luxury, and other vices.

Paul twice mentions this Church in his Epistle to the Collossians: chap.
2.2. there he wishes, that their hearts may be comforted etc. and Chap. 4.16.
he commands that their Epistle be read of the Laodiceans, The Epist. to the
Laodic. Apocrypha. Vide Bibl. S. Senens. lib. 2. p. 87.
and again theirs by the Collossians. The which place being doubtfully rendered
in the Latin version, has occasioned some to think that Paul writ the
Epistle, which is now extant unto them of Laodicea: but it is an Apocrypha
writing compiled by some deceiver, and taken from the Epistles to the Galatians,
Philippians, and Colossians. Theophilactus and some others understand it of the
first Epistle to Timothy: which was sent, as they say, to Laodicea a chief
city of Phrygia Pacatiana: as the subscription also has it. But that cannot
be: for (as it may be gathered from Coll. 2.2.) Paul had never seen those of
Laodicea. Chrysostom therefore, and others with more likelihood understand it
of an Epistle, which they of Laodicea wrote unto Paul, in which without doubt
they testified their faith and piety unto the Apostle. Lib 5. cont. Marc.
Tertullian says, it was the opinion of Marcion, that the Epistle to the
Ephesians now extant was written by Paul to them of Laodicea.

Now howsoever this Church in John's time was grievously corrupted, yet
questionless after this vehement reproof which John from Christ delivered
unto them, they repented of their evils: For Eusibius commends this Church,
as flourishing in his time, and mentions some of their Bishops, and among
others, Anatolius, a chief opposer of Paulus Samosatenus: and after him one
Stephanus, who indeed in learning and eloquence was equal with the rest, but
not in virtue, and constancy: for in the time of persecution he denied the
faith to the great scandal of the Church of Christ.

And hence it may probably be gathered that this Epistle to the Laodiceans
wrought much good in them. And also we are again here taught, that pastors, and
Churches may err, and fall away, unless they be by the power of God preserved
in the way of truth. Now we come to the Epistle.

These things says the Amen] The preface (as formerly) proves the authority of
the Epistle, describing Christ the Author thereof by three glorious Epith^es:
namely, that he is the Amen, the true and faithful witness, and the beginning
of the creation of God. These things are taken from Chap. 1.5.6.7.8. Christ
calls himself the Amen, from the Hebrew Aman, verity: It is an affirmative
particle, and caries with it the nature of an oath, confirming the truth, and
certainty of things* it is in greek nai (yea) in Latin certe, profecto,
verily, verily. In this place it is put in stead of an adjective, for him who
is most true both in his promises, and threatenings, and is expounded by the
following words, the true and faithful witness, which we have spoken of on
Chap. 1. v. 5.

Christ therefore is the Amen, the true and faithful witness, because as he
is God, so he is truth it self, and the essential wisdom of the Father. And
as he is man, he has witnessed and brought forth the testimony of the gospel
out of the bosom of his father, and by divine miracles so confirmed the truth
thereof as that none but with great impiety can question the same.

Now the reason why here he calls himself thus, seems to be, because he had
to do with hypocrites, who being grown secure, began to esteem of the faith
of Christ as a thing indifferent, and that for the cause thereof they needed
not to contend with the Pagans, or suffer affliction for the same. Now Christ
to the end that he might more plainly take them for their lukewarmenesse, does
by these epithites declare his truth and faithfulness. The reason wherefore
Christ is called Amen, is showed by the Apostle 2 Cor. 1.19. where he says,
that Jesus Christ preached among the Corinthians was not yea, and nay, that is,
variable and inconstant: because in him all the promises of God, even from the
infancy of Church, unto this day, are Yea, and Amen, that is, surely and
certainly fulfilled, unto the glory of God the Father. The which as it the
serves to refute their folly, who either call in question, or reject the faith
of Christ, as do the Turks, Jews, Epicures, Hypocrites, and others: so it
does very much comfort, and strengthen the faith of the godly. For seeing
Christ is the Amen, the faithful and true witness, he will stand to his
promises: and never forsake them that trust in him: Ioh. 14.18. Hebr. 13.15.
according to that which is written. I will not leave you Orphants. I will not
leave thee nor forsake thee, etc.

The beginning of the creation of God] As the two former titles declare the
faithfulness of Christ: so this shows his excellency and power. Observe this
ambiguous manner of speech.
The beginning of the creation of God: this is ambiguously rendered. For the
word which is in the text, ((...)) signifies not only the beginning or
original: But also principallity, and dominion. Now in what sense soever it be
taken, it clearlie proves the Godhead of Christ. If we render it,
principallity, that is, prince of the creation, or creatures: it shows that he
is God. If we render it, the beginning of the creation, it prooves the same
thing: For he, as the Son did with the Father, and holy Spirit, Ioh. 1.3.
give unto all creatures the beginning of their being: for all things were
made by him, and without him was not any thing made, that was made.

Arius contendeth, that the Son is only the beginning of the creation, that
is, the first creature. But he falsely corrupts the text. For Christ is said
to be the beginning, not passively, but actively, as appears Chap. 1.8. where
he is absolutely called (...) the beginning, and ending: which can not be
spoken of any creature. Some interpret this of the new creation, but that also
does no way derogate from his divinity. For a divine power is as much required
to make a creature new, as there was in the first creation. So that these two
interpretations, are not to be separated, but joined together. Now Christ does
in this place call himself the beginning, that these blind and naked
Laodiceans, might the sooner return unto him, as to the fountain of all good.
XXIII. Argum. of Chr. deity.
This therefore is a XXIII argument, proving the divinity of Christ our Lord.

15 I know thy works, that thou art neither cold] The narration contains many
particulars: as reproof, commination, confutation, persuasion, exhortation,
and promise: unto, v. 21.

First, in this verse he sharply reproves the Laodiceans, as not answering to
the name by which they were called. For Laodicea signifies as much, as a
people, just, sincere, and well reformed in manners, faith and godliness: being
derived from (...) (a people) and (...) (just). But thou, says Christ, art
neither cold, nor hot. Interpreters are diversely minded about such as are said
to be hot, cold, or lukewarine: Alcasar brings in eleven opinions, but he seeks
a knot in a rush. The thing it self plainly shows, that Christ by a
proverbiall metaphor accounts him to be neither hot, nor cold, but lukewarm,
who neither is a professed enemy of the Gospel, nor yet a faithful professor
thereof, but an hypocrite: that is one as it were betwixt both; And it may be
referred either to their life, or doctrine. As for the mixture of heathenish,
and Jewish rites in the service of God, it began first to increase immediately
upon the cessation of the persecution of the Roman Emperors, and when the
Christian Church began to enjoye ease and tranquillity. And therefore I judge
that these Laodiceans were not as yet guilty of this evil, but they were
lukewarm, as concerning faith and manners, in complying with the gentiles, to
the end that being the less offensive unto them, they might quietly enjoy
their trade in that noble mart-towne which abounded with all sorts of
merchants: for however they desired to be accounted good Christians, yet did
they not forsake their former frande and luxury. The sum of all is this,
They mingled Christ, and the world together, and made use of religion, no
otherwise then might stand with their profit and trade. Thus they were neither
open enemies to Christ, nor yet his true friends: but as it were lukewarm and
neutrals, that is, fained and lying hypocrites, and so worse in Christ's esteem
then his professed enemies.

I would thou were either hot or cold] He wishes they were hot, that is truly
zealous in faith and godliness: for the law requires, that men should love
the Lord with all their heart, and with all their soul, etc. Thus we see that to
be hot, is to be upright in heart, full of love to God and our neighbor.

Now Christ wishes they were cold, that is, altogether without faith and
godliness, not absolutely, but comparatively, in as much as they who are cold
seem to be more excusable, then such as are lukewarm, and more easily to be
reformed, and better avoided then others, and in this respect are less
hurtful then they. For the sin of hypocrites is greater then theirs who are
open enemies: because it is a worse thing not to follow the truth in sincerity
which we know, then to be ignorant altogether thereof: for such are more easily
wrought upon by the means, and sooner brought to the truth: whereas hypocrites
having faith only in show, do imagine they see, but are blind, and mantaine
their false opinions, hating and persecuting in the mean time the truth of God.

For example, the Lutherans who being wedded to their false opinions, are the
more hardly drawn from them. For they hate and persecute the orthodoxe
doctrine concerning our spiritual communion with Christ, more then the blind
Papists: Again a Jew who is a professed enemy of Christ, will easier be
brought to embrace christian religion, then an hypocritical Jesuit, drowned
in Antichristian superstitions. And therefore with great reason Christ wishes,
that this Church were rather cold then lukewarm: not that it is good to be
cold, but because a lukewarm condition is more dangerous and hurtful then the
other. We see also in natural things (from whence the metaphor is taken) that
hot or cold things are more approved, then those things that are lukewarm. Hot
meats in cold weather, and cold drinks in hot seasons agree best with the
stomach: but that which is lukewarm, is loathsome, and disposes to vomit.

Hence Christ desired that the Pharisees had been blind rather then
hypocrites, who are incapable of reproof. Ioh. 9.41. 1 King 18.21.
If (says he) ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, we
see, therefore your sin remains. And the like Elias said unto the
hypocritical and idolatrous Israelites: why halt ye between two opinions? If
Jehovah be God, follow him: but if Baal follow him. Not as if he approved the
worship of Baal: but shows that there is such a contrariety between it, and
the true worship of God, as that they cannot possibly be joined together.

And hence we are taught, whom we are to esteem in these our days to be
lukewarm, not such as are weak in the faith, whom the scripture commands us
to receive with all meekness: but those who labor to join Christ and Belial
together, in faith, ceremonies and manners. Such also, who though they glory,
as if they were come out of Babylon, and would feign be accounted good
protestants, nevertheless strive tooth, and nail to uphold the superstitions
of Antichrist his tittles, orders, garments, surplices, miters, crucifixes,
images, and the like Babylonish stuff brought by him into the worship of God.
But let us here take notice what Christ judges of such men.

16 So then because thou art lukewarme] The second part of the narration
contains a threatening, with a repetition of the cause thereof: because thou
art lukewarm, I will spue thee out of my mouth. He goes foreward in the
metaphor, comparing hypocrites to lukewarm water, which is so loathsome to the
stomach, as it cannot retain it: but casts it forth with lothsomnesse and
pain: Even so hypocrites are abominable to Christ, for he spues them out of
his mouth, that is, he rejects them as strangers unto him

I will spue thee out of my mouth] Here we se the lenity and patience of
Christ, in bearing a long time with hypocrites: yea inviting of them unto
repentance, and preadmonishing them of their punishment, before he spues them
out for their obstinacy. Gods threatenings therefore are to be understood
conditionally: I will spue thee out, viz. If thou repent not.

Out of my mouth] Here it will not follow that such as are cold, are in Christ's
mouth, or that any of the faithful may fall from grace: As Ribera subtly
disputes. For Christ threatens this, not against the cold, but the lukewarm,
who by profession and appearance are in his mouth, that is, in the Church of
Christ: but indeed are hypocrites, having a form of godliness, but deny the
power thereof.

But hence we ought rather to observe, that there are always many hypocrites
in the bosom of the Church, and especially among the Clergy: this mixture
therefore should not offend us (for the devil will always sow tares among the
wheat) neither ought we to be moved with the lofty titles of hie-priests,
cardinals, archbishops, bishops, prelates, and the like rabble of Antichrist.

17 For thou say I am rich] The third part is a confutation of the vain
boasting of this Church, in which were many rich merchants, fallen into
security and riot: for riches do often times befoole the owners thereof:
occasioning in them pride and luxury. And this seems to be the reason, why
they thus boasted, to weet because they were rich, and having need of nothing.
But it may also be rightly understood, that they gloried, as if they had been
rich in spiritual things: for hypocrites imagine that they are just and holy,
and need not grace and remission of sins as other men. Thus these gloried of
their faith, but it was dead, and void of sincerity and love, as is the faith
of all hypocrites, and so not sufficient for the attaining of spiritual
riches: And this kind of faith we willingly grant to Ribera, who here cavils
against us. Christ therefore mentions their pride as another cause for which
he will spue them out: as appears by the causal ((...)) because thou say:
that is, proudly boastest, therefore I will spue thee out my mouth.

And know not that thou art wretched] Here he refuteth their vanity and
foolishnes, by a contrary judgment of them. For as it is a vain and foolish
thing, for a beggar to boast of the riches which he has not: even so is it for
men to be lifted up with any confidence of spiritual riches before God: seeing
in this respect they are altogether destitute: And though we may abound in
outward goods, yet to glory therein, is vanity, for they are transitory and
perish in their use.

And know not Here he shows, that ignorance is the cause of the pride of
hypocrites, and indeed ((...)) know thy self, is a very hard lesson: And
therefore there is no better remedy to beat down our pride, then to examine,
and know our selves.

That thou art wretched] He shows us in five epithites, what hypocrites are,
yea, what all of us are by nature.

Wretched] Gr. (...), The natural misery of all men.
that is, oppressed with calamity and sickness: such a thing is hypocrisy,
and pride before God.

And miserable] Gr. (...), deprived of mercy, without which men must perish
for ever.

And poore] Gr. (...), that is, as destitute of righteousness, and true
holiness before God, as the poor beggar which has not any thing to supply his
necessity.

And blinde] Gr. (...), that is one ignorant of his miserable state and
condition: hypocrites ordinarily are sharp sighted in wordly matters: yea many
times they have a large knowledge of divine mysteries: not withstanding
touching the knowledge of themselves, they are as blind as beetles.

And naked] Gr. (...), wanting Christ, the wedding garment. For hypocrites,
though they be partakers of the Sacraments, yet being destitute of true faith
put not on the Lord Jesus. Thus Christ in reproving of these men, stirs us up
to the knowledge of our own misery, and the seeking after of Gods mercy: for
knowledge is the first step to salvation.

18 J counsel thee, to buy of me Gold] In the fourth place he prescribes, to
such as are desirous of salvation, remedies against their evils. In which he
metaphorically describes faith, and true repentance, with the fruit thereof.

The first is, to buy Gold, this remedy is opposed to three evils. But what can
a beggar buy without money? with a price indeed not any thing: but according to
the manner of beggars only by entreaty and prayer to God: alluding undoubtedly
unto the prophecy of Isay. Isai. 55.1.
Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no
money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy wine and milk without money, and
without price. Wherefore do ye spend money, for that which is no bread. Where
the Lord teaches us, first, that the means necessary to salvation are attained
by free grace. Secondly, he reproves their hypocrisy, who think to obtain
it by the merit of works. Lastly the Simonie both of the old Pharisees, and
new Romanists, who sell heaven for money: and also their foolishnes, who bestow
gold on such trash, is here condemned.

But on the contrary he commands them to buy Gold tried in the fire, by
which some understand the word of God, Psa. 12, 7. and 119.127. 1 Pet. 1.7.
purer then silver tried seven times in a furnace, to be desired above gold,
yea above most fine gold. Others understand it of faith: by which only we are
made partakers of all heavenly blessings: The which being tried by the fire of
afflictions, is much more precious then gold that perishes. Both these
interpretations are sound. For Christ sends hypocrites to the law and the
Gospel, by which we come to know our own misery and want, which causes
contrition, uncovers the mask of hypocrisy, stirs up earnest desire for
grace, and works in us confidence in the mercy of God: And by faith, the
forgiveness of our sins, righteousness, sanctification and eternal salvation is
obtained through Christ Jesus.

Buy of me] A worthy sentence: Christ is that ((...)) or merchant, who alone
deals in the heavenly merchandise of our salvation, offering the same unto
us in the Gospel, not for a price, or in regard of works sake: but freely to
be obtained by faith and prayer. Here is that Monopoly of Christ our lord,
without which there is no salvation. They therefore who look to be saved by
saints, shall miss of their expectation: and so shall all who give credit to
the indulgences of Antichrist, setting heaven to sale for money. XXIV. Argu. of
Chr. deity.
This therefore is a XXIV argument proving the Godhead of Christ. For that which
is here ascribed to Christ, is by the prophet attributed to Jehovah God.

That thou may be made rich] They who posses much gold, are accounted rich
in the world: now it is not gold, but faith by which we posses Christ with all
his treasure, that makes us rich in Gods account.

And white ra^^ent] This is opposed as a remedy to the fifth evil: having
bought gold of Christ, we must also buy white raiment. For he says, that we
are both poor, and naked: and therefore as we stand in need of gold, to supply
our poverty, so likewise raiment to cover our nakedness. What is meant by
raiment, appears by the effects, namely the covering of our filthy nakedness,
that is, the deformity, and guilt of sin, the which cannot be covered by any
righteousness, or merit of our own. Isai. 64.6.
Because all our righteousness is as filthy cloutes in the sight of God. Now
Christ with his righteousness, is this white and impolluted garment: which is
put on by faith, and in a special manner received of the faithful in the
sacraments. Thus we see, that to buy white raiments, is by faith to seek for,
and appropriate unto our souls, righteousness, and salvation in and through the
alone merit of Christ. It is called white, because it is purified in the blood
of Christ, that immaculate and undefiled lamb: for whitenes does denote
purity: And he seems to allude to the manner of the Romans called candidati,
who seeking for any office or dignity in the common wealth, Vide Cicer. pro Mur.
came clothed in white apparel to the place of election: by their garments
testifying the integrity which becomes magistrates. The white garments spoken
of in v. 5. denote our being made partakers of heavenly glory, but not so in
this place: for the former place has respect to the reward of victory after
this life: but here he speaks of white raiment, with which we must be clothed
in this life, that so we may be acceptable in the sight of God.

And anoint thine eyes with eye salve] This is opposed to their fourth evil of
blindness. Eye salve, Gr. (...), which physicians call the dregs wherout an
ointment is strayned, helping the blearednesse of the eyes. He commands them to
ask of God the illumination of his spirit, by which their dark hearts may be
enlightened, and stirred up unto the true knowledge and love of God through
faith: that so seeing their own misery, and Christ's benefits, they might
cease to be blind.

19 As many as I love, I rebuke] This fifth part of the narration, or
exhortation to repentance, is mixed with comfort, least that heavy foregoing
sentence, I will spue thee out of my mouth, might have occasioned them, to cast
of all hope of pardon, as thinking that now there was no more remedy for them.
But Christ teaches them, that this sharp reproof proceeds not from any
hatred, but from his love toward them, and to the end that they might repent:
he being herein like unto a father, who more severely punishes that child,
whom he best loves. The words are taken out of Prove. 3.12. and again repeated
Heb. 12.5. where we have given the meaning of them.

Whom I love, I rebuke] As if he should say, for thy good I rebuke thy
hypocrisy, and indeed there is great need, thou should be sharply reproved,
that so I may show how greatly I love thee.

And chasten] For stubborn children must be kept down by the rod. And
therefore thou may not think by hypocrisy, or lukewarmnes to escape the
cross. Here we may note, the difference between the afflictions of the godly,
and of the wicked. The godly are chastised like children: but the wicked are
judged and condemned to hell. This is the first reason of the following
exhortation, being as it were a token of his love toward them.

Be Zealous therefore, and repent] Gr. (...). Beza, be fervent, he requires
fervencie, and zeal of faith and sincerity, in sign of true repentance, for
their former hypocrisy and lukewarmnes. For he is said to be truly zealous,
who is fervent in that which is good Gal. 4.18. It may also be understood
transitively, that is, be a Zealous follower of thy fellow teachers of
Philadelphia, Smyrna and others, who walk faithfully before me. Moreover
seeing lukewarm hypocrites are here called upon to repent, we are taught, that
no true repentance comes ever to late.

20 Behold, J stand at the door, and knock] The other reason of his
exhortation is taken from the effects of his love, namely, pardon and grace to
all that repent: before he recompared himself to a Merchant and Physician,
freely selling the marchandises, and salves of salvation. Here he likens
himself to a rich way faring man, entering in to them that open unto him, and
vouchsaving to feast with them. By which allegory he testifyeth his
philantropy, as using al manner of ways and means for our salvation. And this
is the last part of the narration, being a promise of pardon and grace
directed not only to these of Laodicea, but unto all that hearken unto the
heavenly vocation.

Behold] this particle is added, to stir up our ears and hearts unto the
more attention. He says not, I come, or I sit: but I stand at the door: hereby
signifying his continual presence, and daily care for our salvation. I stand
at the door, like as a stranger, who does not presently go away, but if the
door be not opened at his first knocking: yet still stands, and knocks,
until the same be opened unto him. The door here signifyes our heart, which by
nature is shut, hard and stony, excluding God and Christ: but in v. 8. it is
taken in another signification, as we have there showed.

Now Christ knocks, and bids us open unto him diverse ways. 1. He knocks
outwardly, by the preaching of the law, threatening destruction, if we open not.
2. By the preaching of the Gospel, promising pardon of sin, and all kind of
heavenly blessing unto them that open unto him. 3. By laying the cross of
afflictions on them that delay. And lastly he knocks inwardly, by his spirit,
illuminating our blind hearts and minds, making us in some measure to see and
know him, who is life eternal: and so opens the door of our hearts, by
making us willing to receive, and entertain him. Thus he opened the
understanding of the Apostles, Luke 24.45. Act. 16, 14
that they might understand the scriptures: and the heart of Lydia, that she
attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul.

If any man hear my voice and open] Having showed by what means he outwardly
works our repentance and salvation: he now comes to that, which is to be don by
us, that is, to hear and hearken unto his knock or call, and to open the door,
that he may enter in. Outwardly, we hear Christ's knocking, when we attend upon
the word preached by his ministers: and inwardly, when by faith we embrace the
same. We open unto him, when we savingly apply the promises of the Gospel, for
then Christ with all his benefits enters into our hearts, and dwells in us,
when by true obedience we consecrate our selves, as a living sacrifice, holy
and acceptable unto him. And in deed, happy are they, that thus work out
their own salvation: for Christ will not leave them, but perfect that which he
has begun, to their eternal comfort, as here he promises.

I will come in to him, and sup with him] Now he shows what he will do for
them, that hear his knock, to the end we might open the more willingly and
readily unto him. Three excellent mercies are here promised, 1: He will come in
to us, 2 sup with us, and 3: receive us to sup with him.

First, he says, I will come in to him, that is, he will with the Father and
holy Ghost dwell in our hearts by faith, Io. 14.23.
as it is written. Jf any man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father
will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. Sermon.
144. de Temp.
A dignity far greater then if an earthly king should be pleased to dwell with
us, and make our house, his palace. It is more, says Austin, to have Christ
in the heart then in the house: for our heart is nearer to us, then our house.
Hence we are called the temples of God, and of the holy Ghost, and of Christ,
who by his spirit dwells in us, XXV Argument of Chr. Deity.
and we in him. Which again clearly proves the Godhead of Christ.

And I will sup with him] This is a second benefit. Christ sups with us, when
by faith he makes us partakers of the word and sacraments, takes away our sins,
covers our infirmities, and meekly stoopes to our weak capasitie: As when some
great monarch comes into the cottage of a poor man, How Christ is said to sup
with us.
not disdaining to sup with him, and eat of his mean and cuntry fare. Christ
sups with us, when he delights in our faith and conversion, like as frindes
at meal rejoice together.

Now this is spoken by an allegory not as if Christ needed our supper, but we
make ready for him, and he is said to sup with us, when in faith and ^bedience
we perform acceptable service, and wholly consecrate our selves unto him.

And he with me] to wit he shall sup with me. For Christ will not come empty,
but laden with blessings, to enrich, and replenish them with the food of
heaven, and communicate unto them the good things of the Gospel, as
righteousness, holiness, peace, the joy of the holy Ghost, and to be short life,
and eternal happiness. And thus much for the allegorical promise propounded
unto us in this place.

But this allegory is abused by Libertines, Pelagians, and Jesuits, The abuse
of this allegory is showed and resuted.
(whom the Lutherans also begin to imitate) to establish bence (contrary to
the scriptures) universal grace, to the injuring of the free grace of Christ.
For seeing, it is said: I stand and knock, Jf any man hear and open, etc. They
infer, that God has made universally unto all this promise, and as all are
counseled to open to Christ, so it is in their free will, either to admit, or
exclude him.

For, says Bellarmin, they at whose heart the Lord knocks, either have
sufficient power to open, or else they have not. If they have, then the thing we
plead for is granted. If they have not, then why I pray you, does the Lord
knock? or is be ignorant that they cannot open. Would we not account him
unwise, who should knock at his neighbors door, knowing in the mean time, that
there is no man within to open unto him?

First, I answer with Ierom, that parables, and the exposition of dark
sentences, are not to be brought for the confirmation of doctrines. Now all
this is spoken allegorically, and by an anthropopatheia, and not properly: for
whereas Christ is said, to knock like a traveller at the door, and to sup with
them that open: The Jesuits argument retorted upon him.
If this should be taken according to the letter of the text, he should not be
God omnipotent. For either he can open, or else he can not. If he can not do
it, except we open unto him: how then is he omnipotent? but if he can, why then
does he knock? or what use is there that we should open to him. Would not he
seem to be unwise, who should knock at his neighbors door, having in the mean
time the key in his own hand?

Secondly, the consequence will not hold from what is conditional to the thing
categorically required. As, If any man hear, and open: therefore it should
follow, that it is in our free will to do the same. For conditionals prove
nothing, but what ought to be don by us, and what, if don, will follow
thereupon. Thus Erasmus disputed against Luther: If ye will, ye shall eat the
good things of the earth: therefore, (says he) men have a free will to do
good, and repent. But this the scripture wholly denies. Can the Ethiopian
change his skin? or the Leopard his spots? Ier. 13, 23. Matt. 7.18. Philip.
2.13.
then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. A corrupt tree
cannot bring forth good fruit: for it is God, which works in you both to
will, and to do, according to his good pleasure. Luther therefore answ^^^ng to
Erasmus, says, that oftentimes these conditionals, do signify an
impossibility (...), If one should say: Jf thou think, O Maevus, to equal
Virgil in singing: It behooves thee to sing better then as yet thou have don.
If thou think to surpass Cicero, O Scotus, then thou must in sted of thy
subtilties, manifest more eloquence. If thou will compare with David: then
compose such psalms, as he has don: which manner of speech, signifies things,
which are not possible in regard of our own strength, though to God all things
are possible: And indeed the scriptures by such expressions do declare unto
us, not what we can do of our selves, but what the Lord may work in us by his
own power.

Thirdly, concerning universal grace, and power to open of our selves: First,
it is false, that the same is bestowed on all in the state of nature:
considering that the means of conversion and salvation is not alike offered
unto all: But always as it has pleased the Lord, where, when, and to whom he
would. We see, that the Turks, Jews, and Pagans to this day have not the
means of salvation, which we Christians enjoy by the singular mercy of God:
2. we do not deny, but such at whose door Christ knockes by his special grace,
have sufficient help to open, so far as concerns the outward means, and
indeed this were enough for all, but that all by nature are deaf, and dead in
sins: not withstanding it is sufficient for their conversion, who inwardly are
wrought upon by the spirit of God. But it is untrue, that this sufficiency is
made effectual and operative through a free will in us: because while Christ
outwardly knocks, we inwardly are dead in our sins, being deaf, and
blind, black Ethiopians, spotted Leopards, evil trees, which of themselves
cannot bring forth good fruit. And therefore the greatest outward means are of
no force, until there be an inward and powerful motion, raising us up from
the death of sin, illuminating the mind, opening the heart, and changing the
whole man: neither is Christ ignorant that we cannot open at his knock, much
less unwise in knocking: but does it, because he knows we are inwardly deaf,
and dead in sin, and unable of our selves to open: besides hereby to convince
us of our miserable estate by nature, and to raise us up from the death of sin,
and to give unto us both will and power to open unto him.

And lastly the scripture speaks in a twofold manner of our conversion.
Sometimes the Lord attributes to us, and requires of us the whole work thereof,
as if it depended altogether on our will; Isai. 1.19. Zach. 1.3. Ezech. 18.31.
Mar. 1.15. Why God requires and attributes conversion to man. Chap. 6. de
Great. and lib. arbit De correp. and great. Chap. 3. Esech. 36.26. Ier. 31.18.
Ioh. 6.44. Ioh. 15.6.
If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good things of the land.
Turn ye unto me, and I will turn unto you: make you a new heart, and a new
spirit: for why will ye die, O house of Israel: repent ye, and believe the
Gospel, not, as if it were ((...)) or in our power to do these things. For how
can they spiritually move, who are dead in sins? But the scripture thus
speaks: 1. To teach us, that we neither will, nor can do any thing of our
selves: but are bound to ask it of God. And 2. because God by such
exhortations, threatenings, promises and conditions does please effectually to
raise up our desire, and by his spirit inableth us to perform his will. Austin
says well: God commands us those things which we cannot do, that we may
know, what we ought to ask of him. And in another place: O man observe from
the commandment, what thou should have: by reproves, what thou art
deprived of by thy own default, and in prayer acknowledge, whence to receive,
what thou desire to have.

And again, other where the Lord ascribes the whole work of our conversion
unto himself alone, and commands us so to acknowledge it. As, I will make you
to walk in my ways, and I will take the stony heart out of your flesh, and I
will give you an heart of flesh. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. No man
can come unto me, except the Father draw him: without me ye can do nothing:
fee the like Ephe. 2.1. and 1 Col. 2.13. 1 Cor. 2.14. Romans 8.7. 2 Cor. 3.5.
Luke 24.45. Act. 16.14. Act. 11.18. All which testimonies do plainly evince,
that the grace of conversion is not indifferent or universal: but as our
sufficient, so also our effectual help does wholly depend upon the general and
particular pleasure and motion of God.

Which difference of the scriptures, and the cause thereof, because the
Pelagians and their adherents have not observed: But ^^ther abused the former
places, as if they were absolutely spoken: And corrupted the latter by their
equivocations about grace, calling it (as they also do to this day) a swasorie,
indifferent and resistible grace, limited by the will of man either to that
which is good or evil: they have most falsely wrested the same, for to
establish their Idol of free will. Now herewithall they must of necessity
embrace all other Pelagian heresies, and impieties also: as namely.

1 That faith and good works foreseen, do go before Gods predestination: and
so are not from Gods predestinating of them: whereupon it will follow, that
predestination being an effect of causes and conditions foreseen, is not to be
called a predestination: but rather a postdestination.

2 That faith going before predestination, must also be before vocation:
seeing we are elected before we are called: And by this ground, not God, but
man should be the author of faith: contrary to that of Romans 9.16. It is not of
him that wills, or of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy.

3 That the will either co-working, or not co-working with foregoing grace does
make men to differ, which is contrary to 1 Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee to differ
from another? And what have thou that thou did not receive? And so the
increase of faith and grace should be given according to the merit of
congruitie.

4 That man's will is not corrupted, or made worse by the fall of Adam: And so
either there should be no original sin at all, or else but in name only:
whereas, The heart of man is deceitful above all things.

5 That the law is not above man's strength, but that he may absolutely fulfill
the same: and be altogether free from sin in this life, if he would: whereas
the scriptures on the contrary teach. That there is not any one just man in the
earth which does good and sins not. All which errors establish merits of
condignity, overthrow the grace, and merits of Christ, and so consequently the
truth of Christian religion, being nothing indeed, but in name only: and in a
word confirms pagan divinity and philosophy. For in all these positions, the
names only excepted, there is nothing but what philosophy it self teaches,
both concerning the beginnings and reward of virtue: which to philosophers is
faith, righteousness and works.

To him that overcommeth, will I grant to sit with mee] He shuts up the epistle
with the accustomed Epiphonema, or acclamatorie conclusion: being a promise,
and as it were a third reason of the exhortation. And it is twofold: 1. from
the reward of the victory: I will grant to him, to sit with me on my throne.
And 2 from his example: Even as I also overcame, and am set down with my
father. etc. Or else this may be a reason of the former promise, wherefore
Christ will grant, or give power and part of his throne to him that
overcommeth: to wit, because he now as a conqueror sits on the throne of
his Father. For often in scripture the particle (...) (here used) is causal, as
in Io. 17.2. As thou give him power. For, because thou give etc. And Luke
4.36. be ye merciful, as your Father: For: because your Father is merciful,
etc. The Throne is the seat of glory and power. Christ's throne, is the
glorious power of his exaltation: the which he promises to make us reallie
partakers of if we overcome: for we shall be coheires with him: yet so, as
there shall always remain a remarkable difference between Christ the head,
and us his members: And therefore he says not: I will grant to him to sit in
the throne of my Father: that is, at the right hand of the Father: which
dignity is indeed only proper to Christ the head.

22 He which has an ear to hear, etc.] See Chap. 2. v. 7.11.17.

THE PREFACE OF THE SECOND VISION.
Of him that sat on the Throne: And of the book sealed with seven seals: And
concerning the Lamb opening the book.
HItherto John has recorded, those things which he had seen, and received of
Christ to be written by name unto the seven Churches of Asia. The things which
follow in the rest of this book, are of a higher nature, and concern the
future condition of the whole Church, The condition and lot of the Church in
this world.
but especially the churches of Europe. And all tends to teach, that the Church
ought not to expect a flourishing estate in this world: seeing it should be
tossed and tried: first with manifold persecutions of tyrants: afterward by
heretics: And at last should be oppressed by Antichrist, with a more heavy
servitude both spiritual and corporal, then formerlie she ever had been
afflicted by open enemies and tyrants.

Now least the hearts of the Godly should faint under the burden: The comforts
of the godly under the cross.
four kinds of comfort are contained in this prophesy, being taken: 1. FROM
GODS PRESENT HELP: who will not sorsake his in the battle. 2. FROM THE TIME
OF THEIR TROUBLES: they shall neither be always, or ouerlong upon them. 3.
FROM THE END OF THEIR ADVERSARIES, which shall be tragical and mortal. And
lastly, FROM THE HAPPY CHANGE OF THEIR WARFARE, Christ will powerfully revenge
the cause of his Church in this world, and at length glorify her in the
heavens.

Moreover these things are premonstrated by John, The following visions are
distinct.
in six distinct visions: And they are partly universal, representing the
entire history of the Church from her first beginning, until the last
judgment: Of this nature, is the second, third, fourth and seventh vision. And
partly particular, only shadowing out the battles of the Church, with
Antichrist, with the issues thereof, as the fifth and sixth: notwithstanding in
the conclusion of every one of them, a description of the last judgment, with
the punishments of the wicked, and reward of the Godly are expressed, either
literally or figuratively; as I have already showed in the preface: The reason
of which repetition is wondered at, but cannot be declared by such interpreters,
who judge, that the history of the Church is described in these visions
without any intermission: whereas the observation of our method, does clearly
manifest the same.

The second vision is contained in Chap. 4.5.6. and 7. And it consists first
of a preparation unto the vision: in which John saw the majesty of God sitting
on the throne, and the great attendance given unto him. chap. 4. And in his
hand a book sealed with seven seals chap. 5. At length opened by the Lamb.
The four Acts of the second vision.
Secondly it contains the vision it self: representing in four distinct acts
the history of the Church from that time unto the end of theworld. In the
first Act is propounded the different state of the Church from the time of the
Roman tyrants, until the rising of Antichrist, in the first 600 years,
prefigured in the opening of the first four seals, Chap. 6. v. 8 The second
Act is an opposition of the foregoing proposition, for the comfort of the
martyrs, and especially those, who suffered under the pale horse, at the
opening of the fifth seal Chap. 6. v. 9.10.11. The third Act is an
amplification of the calamities of the Church under the Eastern and Western
Antichrist, after the revolution of the first thousand years, and thence
forward, revealed at the opening of the sixth seal Chap. 6. v. 12.13.14. And in
the last place, the fourth Act contains the final end of all the combats of
the Church: fearful indeed, and tragical unto the wicked; but happy and
glorious unto the faithful martyrs, and Christ's sealed ones Chap. 6. v.
15.16.17. and Chap. 7. unto the end Now this is the true state or distribution
of the second vision: And so we come to handle the interpretation thereof.

THE ARGUMENT and parts of Chap. IV.
THis chapter is a preparation to the second vision, and contains a
description of the divine majesty of him that sat on the throne: the scope
and drift thereof, is to let the faithful understand, that however they are
pressed with afflictions in this life, yet they have a glorious and omnipotent
judge in the heavens, to revenge their cause.

The Chapter has two parts.

In the first, appears the glory, and majesty of God sitting on the Throne,
v. 1.2.3. The second: contains a twofold description: 1. Of the company of
the four and twenty Elders. And 2. Of the four beasts, with their
thanksgiving, from v. 4. unto the end of the Chapter.

The first part of the Chapter. The Majesty of God sitting on the Throne.
1 After this I looked, and behold, a door was opened in heaven: and the first
voice which I heard, was as it were of a trumpet, talking with me, which said,
come up hither, and I will show thee things, which must be hereafter. 2 And
immediately I was in the spirit: and behold a throne was set in heaven, and one
sat on the throne. 3 And he that sat was to look upon like a Jasper, and a
Sardine stone, and there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like
unto an Emerald.
THE COMMENTARY.
AFter these things I saw] That is, after I had seen the first vision: for
however Alcasar supposes, that the foregoing Chapters are as a prologue to the
book: Yet Ribera, and that groundedly does acknowledge here a second vision:
because John says, After these things I saw, that is, after those things
already related, I saw yet other visions.

And behold, a door was opened in heaven] As formerly I have showed, so here
again I would have it to be observed: That we are not to search for mysteries
in every particular of the visions, but only in those circumstances, which do
concern the quality and scope of them. Let others (if they pleas) by heaven
understa^d the Church: and by the door opened the sense of the scriptures there
interpreted, by which we search and find out the mysteries of God. But for my
own part, I understand it simply of the place, where these things were seen
of John, to wit: not, as formerly in Patmos, but in heaven, where, as upon a
larg and ample theater, the Acts of this vision were represented unto him. And
thus the following visions are differenced from the first, as being of a
higher nature.

He therefore saw a door opened in heaven, that is, he saw heaven opened, and
within the heavens an open Pavilion or stage, alluding to the custom of
commoediants. Act. 7.56.
Steeven also the first Martyr saw the heavens opened, towit, corporally, but
John saw this in the spirit, as it is in v. 2. however we may hence truly
conclude, that neither the perspicuity of the mind, nor bodelie eyes of man,
can reach to heavenly things, except the Lord do open heaven unto him.

And the first voyce] The positive is here by an enallage, or change of words,
put for the comparative ((...)) first, for ((...)) former, as Chap. 2.4. thou
have left thy first, The voice of Christ revealing the revelation.
that is, thy former love. And 1 Timothy 5.12. They have cast of their first, that
is, their former faith: he means that great voice as of a trumpet, speaking
unto him Chap. 1.10. For as there v. 1. it is said that Christ shows unto his
servants things that must shortelie come to pass. So here this great voice
says: come up hither, and I will show thee etc. So then both this and that, is
the voice of Christ the revealer of the revelation.

Which must be hereafter] That is, the hidden things of Gods secret counsel,
concerning the future condition of his Church in the world, from this present
time until the end thereof. Thus he briefly opens unto John the argument of
the following prophecy: not for the satisfying either of his or our desire
after the knowledge of novelties: but to arm the Godly with comfort against
the approaching troubles.

2 And immediately I was in the spirit] that is, in a trance, as Chap. 1.10.
he ascribes it unto the spirit, least he might be thought to relate a dream:
for he saw these things waking: by which it appears, that he was come to
himself after the first vision, and being again ravished he saw another vision
(although it is not manifest, what distance of time there was betwixt them) and
ascended from Patmos by the commandment of Christ up into heaven, not indeed
by any local motion, but inward illumination, the holy Ghost representing
these things unto his understanding, and revealing the mysteries thereof unto
him; which kind of visions are called intellectual, as we noted on Chap. 1.10.

And behold a throne was set] Now he expounds, what he saw in the heavens,
namely, a royal throne, and one sitting thereon: and an honorable session of
Elders: thundrings, lightnings, voices, lamps of fire burning, a sea of glass
like unto Crystal, winged beasts full of eyes before and behind, singing and
praising him that sat on the Throne, having a book in his right hand, sealed
with seven seals: and in the last place the Lamb opening the seven seals,
with the terrible events thereof. These things are the sum of this second
vision.

The throne which he saw is also spoken of Chap. 1. v. 4. and mentioned eight
and twenty times in this book: and hereby is represented the dominion and
judgment of God over all things, whereof he will have us to be always
mindful.

3 And he which sat on the throne] He saw not an empty throne, but one
sitting thereon: whose name indeed and countenance is not declared: but his
majesty and glory is magnifically described both in this and the following
verse, as being to look upon like a Jasper and a Sardine-stone, and having
round about his throne a rainbow in sight like unto an Emerald: by which
similitude is set forth not an earthly, but a divine majesty, in as much as
nothing can be imagined to be more precious then these pearls, or more
manificent then such an aspect.

A lasper] There are diverse sorts of this stone, as Pliny lib. 37. cap. 9.
and Isidor. cap. 6. lib. 7. do affirm: and it is thought that the Indian
Jasper called Polygrammos, is the best of them, being green, clear, and
somewhat like unto an Emerauld: the Persian is like to brass: that of Cypria
is of a bluish color, and the Phrigian somewhat reddish: that which is found
in Thracia is much like unto the Indian: but the Chalcidonian is less
beautiful then any of them. Pliny writes that he saw one of eleven ounces in
weight, on which was engraven the image of Neroes breastplate. It is thought
that this stone is a singular preservative against all manner of deadly poison,
and withal has many other virtues in it.

Sardine] in latin Sardius, but Pliny calls it Sarda, which is white in
color, Lib. 37. Cap. 7.
whereas the Sardine or Sardius is red. Of this stone see Exodus 28.17. The
nature of this stone as some affirm, is good to expel fear, to cheer the
spirit, and to preserve those that wear the same from enchantments and other
evils: but others say, that there is now adays no such virtue in it.

Emerauld] This is a most pleasant Germme, green of color, and very delightful
to the sight: the Scythian stone is the most precious, although the Egyptian
and British also (as Albertus Magnus witnesses) are of great worth. They
write that Nero beheld his fencers at their game through an Emerald. It drives
away poison, preserves chastity, strengthens the memory, and helps the
sight, etc. Like to this stone, he saw about the throne a rainbow, which we see
commonly to be of white, yellow and green color. It is probable that this
vision chiefly alludes unto the pretiousnesse of these stones. For whatsoever
is either precious or profitable, al is to be found fully and perfectly in him
that sits on the throne. Some interpret the Jasper and Sardine, of the two
natures of Christ. The Jasper which is green refreshing the eyes, they
attribute to Christ's divinity: and the Sardine, which is red, unto his
humanity: like as his flesh was red in the blood of his passion. The rainbow
they will have to be a sign of his grace, alluding to that in Genesis, Genesis
9.13.
where God is said to set his bow in the cloud for a token of his covenant.
Whence they conclude, that this rainbow like unto an Emerald, does signify
Gods everlasting mercy, which is green, that is, never fades away. But such
kind of allegories, do serve little or nothing at all for our instruction.

If it be demanded who he saw sitting on the throne. I answer, that without
all doubt God is here represented: for it is expressly called the Throne of God
chap. 7.15. and 12.5. and chap. 19.4. Notwithstanding interpreters are diversely
minded about it. Lyra understands it of one God, three in persons: appearing on
the throne after this manner, as being the governor and king of the Church
militant, and judge of the whole world. Others expound it of the person of the
father alone. But we may safely understad it absolutely of God sitting and
reigning in the person of the son, to whom the father has given all judgment;
he therefore who is said here to sit on the throne, is the samewho before
gloriously walked in the midst of the seven candlesticks, namely Christ the son
of God. And this does plainly appear from v. 8. and 9. where two Epithites
ascribed Chap. 1. v. 8. and 18. as proper unto Christ (to wit, he which was,
which is, and which is to come, and again, he that lives for evermore) are
here attributed to him that sits on the throne. The like we may gather, from
Chap. 21.6. where he that sits on the throne calls himself a and o, the
beginning and ending, who gives to him that is a thirst, of the fountain of
the water of life. but Christ calls himself a and o, chap. 1.8. And in Ioh.
4.14. and 7.37. we are taught, that it is he, who gives to them that are a
thirst, to drink of the water of life: to be short both the Ordinary Gloss,
as also the Catholic gloss, of Marloratus, interpret this of Christ, the Lord
of the Church: neither does the reason hereof seem to be obscure. For the same,
whom before he saw walking among the candlesticks as Lord on earth: he now sees
him, sitting as Judge in heaven.

That which may be objected concerning the Lamb, seems not to take away what
we have said: for there is no absurdity in this, that Christ should be
represented unto John under diverse figures in a diverse respect. Before he saw
him walking among the candlesticks, as the head of the Church: Now he sees him
sitting on the throne, as the Judge of the world, and also as it were a Lamb
slain, and made a sacrifice for us. Thus also the Apostle to the Hebrews
makes Christ both high priest, and sacrifice, and Altar in a diverse respect.
Neither are we to imagine, that Christ the son so sits on the throne, as if the
Father were put by, for it is the Father which gives unto the son to sit on
his throne, as it has been showed Chap. XXVI. Argu. of Chr. deity.
3.21. So then the Father also sits on the throne in the Son. Which is another
strong argument proving the Godhead of Christ. He which sits on the throne is
Lord God omnipotent, v. 8. But Christ (as we have proved) sits on the throne:
and therefore he is Jehovah, omnipotent.

The second part of the Chapter.
The attendance about the throne. First, the company of the four and twenty
Elders: And secondly, the company of the four beasts, with the thanksgiving
of them both.

4 And round about the Throne were four and twenty seats, and upon the seats
I saw four and twenty Elders sitting, clothed in white raiment, and they had
on their heads crowns of gold.

5 And out of the Throne proceeded lightnings, and thunderings, and voices, and
there were seven lamps of fire burning before the Throne, which are the seven
spirits of God.

6 And before the Throne there was a sea of glass like unto Crystal: and in
the midst of the Throne, and round about the Throne, were four beasts, full of
eyes, before and behind.

7 And the first beast was like a Lion, and the second beast like a calfe, and
the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flying
eagle.

8 And the four beasts had each of them six vvings about him, and they were
full of eyes within, and they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy,
Lord God Allmighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

9 And when those beasts give glory, and honor, and thanks, to him that sat
on the Throne, who lives for ever and ever,

10 The four and twenty Elders fall down before him that sat on the Throne,
and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their crowns before
the Throne, saying,

11 Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power: for thou
have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd about the Throne] After he had described the majesty of him that sat on
the Throne, that is, either God absolutely, or Christ the glorious Judge: about
which we need not to contend. For the sense is all one: because God sits and
judges in Christ. Now he comes to describe the attendance he saw about the
throne. And this second part of the Chapter, is a description of the four and
twenty Elders sitting about the same: and of the lightnings proceeding out of
the throne, etc. And of the four beasts, in the midst, and round about it:
with the thanksgiving of them all. In which diverse men seek diverse mysteries.
Lyra understands by the seats: the Cathedral Churches: Lyraes mysteries
concerning the seats, and their Elders.
and by the four and twenty Elders all Bishops: alluding to so many orders of
Priests, whom David ordained weekly for the service of the tabernacle: 1 Chro.
24. But what need of Cathedrals in heaven? Hierome understands by them the
four and twenty books of the Old Testament, but how fitly I will not here
dispute of. Others will have so many Angels to be noted out thereby. But Chap.
7. v. 11. the Angels are differe need from the Elders. Others suppose more
probably, that hereby is represented the company of the Patriarks, Prophets,
godly Judges, Kings, and to be short of all the saints under the law, who
excelled in faith and piety, and now triumph with Christ in heaven. They are
said to be four and twenty, a finite number being put for an indefinite.
Some understand it of twelve Patriarcks, and twelve Apostles, but that cannot
be: for what then should become of the rest of the Patriarcks, Prophets,
Judges and other godly governors and kings? We therefore do rather Judge,
that by this number is noted a perfect Senate or assembly, which ordinarily is
accounted entire, if it consist of 24 persons. They are said to be Elders,
because age teaches wisdom, and skill in judgment. And indeed Senatus, a
Senate, comes from senium, old age. They sit on thrones: 1 Cor. 6.2.
because they rest from their labors, and shall with Christ judge the world
and Angels: not as if Christ could not judge the world without them: for the
Father has given unto him all power, and all judgment both in heaven and in
earth: but 1: Matt. 28.18. Ioh. 5.22.
because he is pleased to communicate this honor unto the saints, according
unto the promise Chap. 3.21. And 2 because his judgment is righteous, which
all the saints, acknowledge and assent unto. This exposition (to let pass
what others say) is undoubtedlie agreeable unto the analogy of faith, in case
any mystery be hereby typified out unto us.

But because these Elders do not always remain sitting on their thrones: for
sometimes they rise up, sometimes they fall down, and worship, and sing
Halelujah to God, and to the Lamb, as v. 10. and Chap. 5.8. and Chap. 11.16.
and Chap. 19.4. being the chief actors, in setting forth the praises of God:
I hence observe, that in the Revelation, (where diverse persons are brought in,
some tarying, and others departing) this first apparition or company is brought
in before the amplification of the vision, not under the form of young men,
but of Elders, for reverence and gravitie sake: neither does this any way
contradict our former exposition: for in an honorable assembly, is peace and
honor: by the gratulatorie harmony is figured out the office of the
prophetical Church in heaven. And indeed I see not how we should otherwise
understand, what is meant by the often signing of these Elders, except we
understand it as alluding to the custom and manner of enterludes.

Clothed in white raiment, and had on their heads crowns etc.] By this twofold
ornament the priestly and kingly dignity of the saints is shadowed out: white
garments, that is, pure, bright and undefiled robes, such as become priests of
righteousness. And with all the purity of the saints in heaven, and the
integrity of the divine judgment is hereby ^^gnifyed. Now whence the saints
have this purity, we are taught Chap. 7.14. namely, by washing their garments
in the blood of the Lamb: that is, perfectly putting on the Lord Christ Jesus,
who is this white robe, wherewith we delight to be clothed, and by which we
are acceptable to God.

Crowns of gold on their heads] That is most precious crowns, (for what is
more precious then gold?) they have them on their heads, both because they
reign as kings with Christ; Reve. 1.6.
who has made us kings and priests to God and his Father: as also because they
have overcome sin, satan and the world. This is that crown of life promised to
the Angel of Smyrna Chap. 2.10. and unto all who love the Lord. Jam. 2 Timothy 4.8.
1.12. This is that crown of righteousness, wherein Paul rejoiced, and which is
laid up for all them that love the appearing of Christ: This is that crown of
glory, 1 Pet. 5.4.
which fades not away, but shall certainly be enjoyed by all the faithful
servants of Christ.

And out of the throne proceeded] This second apparition shows the majesty of
him that sat on the throne, out of which proceeded lightnings, thunders and
voices: here we need not seek for any other mysteries, but only to take
notice, that these things are proofs of the omnipotency and divine majesty
of Christ, who sends forth such judgments from his throne against the wicked:
as Andreas well observes.

And voyces] Namely the terrible voices of thundrings and lightnings. This is
spoken appositively: for thunder is the voice of Jehovah shaking the earth, and
terrifying the ungodlie The voice of Jehovah makes the desert to quake, Psalm.
29.8. which teaches how terrible and inaccessible the seat of God is. In Chap.
10.3. these thundrings are said to be seven, and to utter their voices, wherein
there is an allegory, as shall be showed on the place.

And soven lamps] Namely, were, or stood before the throne of God: these are
interpreted by John himself, to be the seven spirits, which he calls the
seven Angels standing before God: Alluding to the vision of Zachary Chap. 4.
where the seven lamps on the golden candlestick, v. 2. are v. 10. called the
eyes of Jehovah, which run to and fro through the whole earth. Signifying by
eyes the Angels: who are as it were the eyes feet and hands of God: which is
spoken after the manner of men, like as Constables and Sergeants are said to be
the eyes, hands and feet of the magistrate, because by them he performs, and
knows all things that are don in the city. The like allusion is in Chap. 5.6.
where the eyes of the lamb are the seven spirits of God, sent forth into all
the earth. But of this more in its place.

Also before the throne] The third apparition about the throne, is the sea of
glass like unto Crystal. Which sea some of the ancient, and they which
follow them, will have to be the sacrament of Baptism, said to be of glass,
as Lyra supposes, because of its purity and like to Crystal, because of its
character, which can never be blotted out. Let them who will make use of this
interpretation. But neither Ribera, nor my self do approve thereof. Alcasar
also judges, that it cannot be applied, but with violence unto the sacrament
of Baptism. Andreas Cesariensis understands it of the multitude of Angels,
and heavenly powers. Others suppose it has an allusion unto Solomon's brazen
sea: and that the material alteration of brass, into glass which one may see
through, does denote the difference betwixt the Law, and the Gospel: but these
allegories will not hold. The interpretation therefore of Ribera is more
probable, applying it to the multitude of men living on the earth: who are
compared to the sea of shining glass: because the sea is a gathering of many
waters, by which peoples and nations are signified, Chap. 12.15. and they are
shining, because the counsels and the most secret actions of men are before the
throne, and open to the eyes of God, being like the clearest crystal
discerning all things.

Bullinger before Ribera is yet more clear. The sea, says he, before the
Throne resembling glass and Crystal in brightness and perspicuity, signifies
this frail world, which is always in Gods sight. For the holy scriptures
do type out unto us by the sea (in regard, of its instabilite noise and
tumultuousnes) the mutability and inconstancy of this present world: the state
thereof being more frail then glass. This exposition I well approve of, as
being indeed most probable: As for Alcasars fiction in applying it unto his
devised sacrament of Confession, it is both a violent and a false wresting of
the text. So then the sea, signifies the world, which is said, to be before the
throne, because the same shall be judged by Christ. The world indeed does swell
and rage against the saints: but it is as frail as glass or Crystal, whose
waves are easily broken, and held in by the powerful hand of the Lord. Now
this thing is here inserted, both for the comfort of John and the whole Church.
In this sense also, and for the same end it is said in Chap. 8.8. the great
mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea: and Chap. 15.2. they that
had overcome the beast, are said to stand upon the sea of glass, of which more
in its place.

And in the midst of the throne] The fourth apparition about the throne, are
the four beasts, differing in form, but having eyes before and behind, and
each of them six wings: Alluding to the four beasts in Ezechiel Chap. 1. And
therefore ancient and modern writers for the most part, Whither the four
beasts type out the four Evangelists.
understand by them the four Evangelists, which are commonly expressed, and
painted in these forms: Matthew, in the likeness of a man: Mark of a Lion:
Luke of an Ox: and John of a flying Eagle. Irenaeus applies it to the four
Gospels. But Lyra refutes this, from the order here observed: because the face
of a man, appropriated to Matthew, is here put in the third place, he therefore
here understands the four Patriarchal Churches, viz. Jerusalem, Antioch,
Alexandria, and Constantinople. But if so, where then in the mean time was
Rome? did she not at all appear in heaven? He tells us she was comprehended
under one. But which of them, or how it was, he shows not, neither indeed
could he. Besides the old writers do not agree, about the tipes of the beasts,
in applying them to the Evangelists. The common opinion, is that Matthew should
be the man: and Mark the Lion: Lib. 1. de consensu Evang. cap. 6.
but Austin and Bid will have the contrary. The reason alleged why Matthew
is likened to a man is, because he begins his Gospel from the generation of
Christ according to his manhood: Again Marc to a Lion, in regard he begins
from the preaching of the Baptist, crying like a Lion in the wilderness: so
Luke to an Ox, beginning his Gospel with the sacrifice of Zachary. John is
the flying Eagle, in writing high and great mysteries of Christ's divinity. But
what soliditie there is in these things, let others judge.

It is tedious to set down their reasons, why these beasts should appear in
four diverse forms. First as a Lion, because (say they) God under the Law of
nature showed his glory immediately unto the fathers. Secondly, as an Ox,
because the Lord then required such beasts to be offered in sacrifice.
Thirdly, as a man, because the son of God was made man. Fourthly, as an Eagle,
because the holy Ghost descending from heaven, causes the righteous to fly
upward.

Ribera maintaining the common opinion, Commen. in Apoc. 4. number. 39.
answers Lyras objection concerning the change of the order here. That the
common exposition observes the order of writing: But John the things, according
to their manifestation: for the Baptist began to preach before Christ. But this
is to abuse the reader: besides how could John see the four Evaugelists in the
heavens, he being himself one of them here then present upon earth? To this
Ribera answers. That John saw those things which long after his death were to
come to pass. But this seems to contradict the text: forasmuch as he saw the
four beasts, which were then in heaven, as also the four and twenty Elders,
that is, the Church triumphant with Christ. Some interpret this of the four
Monarchies, with the diverse conditions of the Church militant under them, and
for this cause they are said to have several forms, or faces: but the
following thanksgiving little suits with worldly monarchies.

Others refer it to the four principal mysteries of faith: If the four
mysteries of faith.
The mystery of Christ's incarnation to the face of a man. His passion and
death to the form of an ox, as bearing our iniquities, and because he was
sacrificed for us. His resurrection, to a Lion, even the Lion of the tribe of
Judah, overcoming death: And lastly by his ascension, he resembles the flying
Eagle.

To be short, Whither four principal Angels:
there are some who expound this place of four principal Angels: alluding to
the beasts in Ezechiel, which shadowed out (as they say) so many Angels. But
this cannot be: For 1: the Angels are manifestly distinguished from these
beasts, Chap. 7.11. Again because these together with the Elders sing praises
to the Lamb, Chap. 5.9. Thou have read med us to God by thy blood: and have
made us to our God, kings and priests. which argues they were men, and not
Angels.

But not to use many words: They are the Church of the New Testament.
Even as the four and twenty Elders typifie the Church of the Patriarchs and
Prophets: so the four beasts shadow out the Apostolical Church triumphing
with Christ in heaven. So then the Elders are types of the legal, and the
beasts of the Evangelicall Church, both gloriously reigning with Christ.

But why do these appear before the throne? because, as the thanksgiving and
following visions manifest, this is the second apparition, and serves for a
twofold use in this heavenly sight: not only for the making up of the
celestial harmony, but also to bear a special part with the company of
Elders, through out the visions.

The different form of the four beasts, Why the forms of the beasts are
diverse.
does signify the gathering of the Church of the New Testament, from the four
corners of the world, consisting of diverse nations, and peoples, and tongues:
whereas the four and twenty Elders are uniforme: because the Church under the
Law consisted only of the Jewish nation.

And in the midst of the Throne, After what manner they stood.
and round about the throne] There seems to be a difficulty in this, how they
could stand in the midst of the throne, and in the circuit of the throne. Some
do think, that they so stood, and held up the throne, like as the twelve oxen
did underprop the brazen sea in Solomon's temple: which was so set upon them,
that all their hinder parts were inward, 1 King 7.25. But that cannot be, for
then these beasts should have stood immovable: whereas on the contrary we
read, that oftentimes they fell down and worshipped the Lamb: yea one of them
Chap. 15.7. gave unto the seven Angels, seven vials full of the wrath of God,
etc.

Ribora supposes that three of them were round about the Throne: but the
fourth, namely the Eagle being lifted up above the rest, flew within the
circuit thereof: but there is no use to strive about this thing, as if there
were a mystery in it. For in the midst ((...)) does not denote a mathematical
center, but according to our common expression, a neernesse, and in this place
is put for about or close by: as, I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves.
Satan came in the midst, that is, (as it is translated) among the sons of
God. So these four beasts were about, or near the throne, even nearer then
the Elders, as being before them in dignity. That which is added: (...) and
about the circuit of the throne, does note there standing to be such, as that
they were round about the sides of the throne, and as it were touched the same.
So that here the copulative ((...)) And, is declarative.

Full of eyes before and behinde] The like is said of the living creatures in
Ezekiel. By their eyes is signified the wachfulnes and singular in-sight of
teachers: for it behooves them to have as it were Argos eyes, that they may be
able to feed the sheep, look well to the things committed to their charge,
search the scriptures, and keep off ravenous wolves from the flock. Thus by
this heavenly form, is set forth what they had been, and also how all other
teacher ought still to be qualified here on earth.

And the first beast was like a Lyon] The shape likewise of every beast is
agreeable to the vision in Ezechiel, only there, each living creature had
four faces: whereas here each of them has but one. The diversity of their
forms denotes the diversity of gifts in teachers, as a Lion their fortitude
and courage: an Ox their labor and patience: a Man their understanding and
prudencie: And lastly the Eagle their quickness and sharpness of sight: Now
for other mysteries from this place I think it not meet for men to seek
further. But if any one be prodigal of his time, and desires to read more of
these Elders and beasts: he may if it be not too tedious unto him, read Alcasar
on this book, from page 339. unto page 398.

And the four beasts] The first part of this verse contains a description of
the beasts: the latter a beginning of the thanksgiving. Now because the fourth
is compared unto an Eagle, he therefore attributes unto every one of them six
wings, full of eyes before and behind: which is taken out of the vision of
Isay, Isai. 6.2.
where the use of so many wings is recorded; for otherwise we se, that birds
need not more then two, to fly withal. The Seraphims are said to fly with two
wings: with other two they cover their faces, as not being able to behold the
majesty of God: And with two they cover their feet: that nothing unbeseeming
the divine majesty might appear about them. In that their wings are full of
eyes, Why their wings are full of eyes.
it denotes that full and perfect light or knowledge, which the Church enjoys
with God in the heavens. Thus we have heard the description of the four
beasts, and it is as I said before, the second apparition or company singing
praises to God, and to the Lamb: as here, so also in Chap. 5.8. and 7.11. and
19.14. and as being ministers to God, and publishers of the following visions.
See Chap. 6. v. 1.3.5.7. and 15.17. etc.

And they rest not day and night] Now he shows what was don both by the
beasts, and by the Elders: the beasts incessantly worship God: The Elders
rising from their seats fall down, before him that sits on the throne, and
worship him: casting their crowns before the Throne: singing praises together
with the beasts. This is the thanksgiving wherewith the Church triumphant does
for ever celebrate God in the heavens. The harmony, is the consenting voice of
all the Prophets and Apostles. This is that excellent and most sweet accord of
all the saints, with one mouth saying, Holy, holy, holy: Thou art worthy, O
Lord, to receive honor, and glory, and power. This is that which we are
commanded to pray for: Thy will be don in earth as it is in heaven. The which
we are bound not only to desire, but also after the examples of the saints in
heaven, without ceasing to celebrate the praises of the Lord, while we are here
on earth, both in thoughts, words and actions. And this is the sum.

Holy, holy, holy] Thus also the Seraphims cried one to another Isay. 6.3. by
which threefold acclamation, is signified either the holy Trinity, or else a
perpetual iteration of thanksgiving: for God is thrice holy, most holy, yea
holiness and purity it self, the sanctifyer of men and Angels.

Lord God omnipotent] These Epithites Christ attributed unto himself Chap. 1.8.
The VII argum. of Christ's deity confirmed.
as being God omnipotent, which was, is, and is to come; And therefore it being
added to the former arguments, proves again the deity of Christ. Neither is it
any way derogatorie unto him, although we refer ((...)) this threefold title
of holiness unto God himself. For God sits and reigns in Christ, having
given all judgment unto the son. Now in what sense God, and Christ are said
to be, he which is, was, and is to come, has been explained. Chap. 1.4.

9 And when those beasts give glory to him that sat, etc.] How can this be,
seeing God who is glorious in himself, receives no glory from his creatures? I
answer, Joshua said to Achan Chap. 7. Give glory to God and confess: where to
give glory is not, as if God were made more glorious, then he was in himself
before: But give glory, that is, acknowledge and celebrate the all being
presence, omniscience, omnipotency, truth and righteousness of God. Thus these
beasts glorify God, in celebrating his praise and glory. Thus we also give
glory to God by confession and thanksgiving, not adding any thing which before
he had not: but by acknowledging and ascribing to him that which before we did
not, and this the whole world with us ought to acknowledge, and do the like.

Who lives for ever and ever] This glorious epithet of God, is also ascribed
to Christ gloriously walking in the midst of the seven candlesticks Chap. 1.18.
In the Original as here, so in the following verse. It is ((...)) they will
give, for, they did give, the future being put for the imperfect, by an
Enallage, or change of the tense.

10. The Elders fell downe] Behold the accord of both these heavenly companies.
The Elders also with all due reverence do praise God, rise up from their
seats, and fall down before the throne, worshipping him that sat thereon.

And cast their crowns before the throne] They cast not away their heavenly
glory, but in glory they humbly worship God, attributing unto him the praise
of his almighty power, creation, providence, and preservation of all things,
and to be short for their victory over the enemies of the Church. For to cast
down their crowns before the throne, Lib. 22. moral. cap. 5.
says Gregory, is to attribute the victory of their battles not unto
themselves, but unto God the author, that he may have the glory and praise,
from them to whom he had given strength to overcome.

11. Thou art worthy O Lord to receive] that is, to whom praise be continually
rendered of all the creatures. This also the Angels acknowledge Chap. 5.12.

Glorie] of divine majesty. Honour] of divine service and worship.

Power] Gr. (...) of thy divine omnipotency and power.

For thou have created all things] A reason drawn from the equity of it. It
is meet to give to every one his due. But the celebration of all power is due
to the creator and governor of all things: And this from the act of creation
he assumes as proper unto himself.

Created all things] In the beginning thou made heaven and earth, and all
that was therein of nothing, Genesis 1.1. Ioh. 1.3. all things were made by him.

For thy pleasure] It seems that ((...)) is put for ((...)) by, or, through thy
pleasure, as Chap. 12.11. However it be, as the efficient cause, so the end and
manner of the creation is here pointed out. For God indeed has created all
things for himself: Prove. 16.4. Not with any labor, or toil, but by his will
and word only: for he said, and all things were made, Psa. 33.9.

They are] viz. all things, that is, thou have not only created, but also
sustainest all things for thy pleasure: for as there should never have been a
world, except God had created it: so neither could it subsist, unless he
sustained it by his providence. And therefore as the benefit of the creation,
so likewise the present preservation of all things, is to be ascribed to the
good pleasure of God. Which is an excellent argument both of his general and
special providence.

And were created] by this repetition he extols the work of creation as never
sufficiently to be celebrated. Ioh. 1.3.
If ((...)) And, be put for ((...)) which were created, then the limitation is
universal, according to that in the Gospel, all things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made. By which limitation the
subtilty of the Arrians is taken away: who thus reason: If all things be
created for the pleasure of God: then did not God the Father beget, but create
the son also. But it is false. God indeed created all things, which were
created. But the son is not created, but begotten of the Father: Yea all things
were created by the son Ioh. 1.3. Heb. 1.2.

THE ARGUMENT, PARTS, and Analysis of Chap. v.
THe preparation unto the second vision is yet continued: for John having
described the majesty, and attendance about the throne: with the thanksgiving
of the Elders, and of the beasts; he now goes on to declare what he further
saw: Namely a book in the right hand of God, sealed with seven seals: The
which when no creature in heaven nor in earth was found worthy to open, at
length the Lamb, who was in the midst of the Throne, takes the book out of his
right hand, to the great joy and applause of the heavenly inhabitants.

The parts of the Chapter are three.
THe first is a description of the sealed book, v. 1. The second shows the
difficulty, about the opening of the book, and of the seals, to v. 8.

Where we must observe

1. The Angel proclaiming, if any were able to open the same. 2. The
insufficiency of all creatures to open it. v. 3. 3. John's weeping occasioned
thereby. v. 4. 4. The Elder comforting him. v. 5. 5. Who was the Lamb, that
stood in midst of the throne, v. 6. And what he did, v. 7.
The third is a thanksgiving, in a gratulatorie himne, sung unto the Lamb: 1.
By both companies representing the Church triumphant, who celebrate the benefit
of their redemption and glorification, obtained by the blood of the Lamb. v.
8.9.10. 2. By a third apparition or company of Angels celebrating the
worthiness, power and divine glory of the Lamb. v. 11.12. 3 By a fourth
apparition of all creatures, rendering praises, and blessings unto God on the
throne, and unto the Lamb. v. 13. And last of all, the two first apparitions
of the 24 Elders, and four beasts closing up the thanksgiving by a divine
adoration. v. 14.

The first part of the Chapter. A description of the book sealed.
1 And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne, a book written
within, and on the backside, sealed with seven seals.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd, (or then) I saw] I will not here repeat all the diverse opinions of
interpreters concerning this book (who rather obscure then unfold the obscurity
thereof:) but only will cite some of the most probable. The common opinion
about the book.


Most interpret it either of the book of the old Testament, or else the whole
volume of Gods book both old and new: which is in the right hand of God:
because it is inspired by the holy Ghost, and the contents thereof are in the
hands of God alone. This book is written within, that is obscurely in the old
Testament, and without, that is openly in the new: or within as respecting the
mystical sense, without the litterall. It is sealed with seven seals, because
the mysteries thereof are hid from humane reason. 1 Cor. 2.14.
It cannot be opened by any creature, because the natural man receives not
the things which are of God. The Lamb alone is worthy to open it: because he
only has fulfilled the scriptures: and he only does reveal unto us, outwarly
by his word, and inwardly by his spirit, the hid things thereof.

These things in themselves are true, and according to godliness, but I judge
they serve little to the purpose in hand: because here he treats not about the
obscurity, or manifestation of legal types: neither are the mysteries thereof
revealed in this book: but things of another nature, and which concern the
condition of the Church under the Gospel. Neither can it be said that the old
and new Testament was as a sealed book unto all creatures until the time of
John: seeing it would then follow that both the Prophets, and Apostles were
ignorant of the writings of Moses and the Prophets. Besides all the books of
the new Testament were then already written: and so not shut, but known unto
all such as had their senses exercised in the scriptures of God: even as the
preaching of the Apostles opened a door unto the faith of the Gospel unto
every creature: And therefore this interpretation seems to be repugnant to the
holy scriptures, and injurious to the Apostolical Churches.

They seem to come nearer the mark, Another opinion of the book.
who understand it of the book of Gods providence. For the scriptures
attribute three sorts of books to God, 1. Of his providence, 2. of life, and
3. of universal judgment: of which we have treated Chap. 3.5. But these also
differ in opinion. Some take it in a general way for the book of Gods decree
concerning the government of the world: which interpretation is to large,
seeing not all Gods secret judgments, but only such, which concern the state
of the Church are here intended.

Therefore I rather assent to them, The book is the Revelation it self.
who understand it literally, of the book, in which all these things were
contained, which Christ was pleased to reveal unto John concerning the last
times, the which he afterward penned, and left the same unto the Churches. This
book, I say, is the revelation it self: not as if he saw a material book,
but a visionall book (so to speak) wherein was written Gods secret decree
touching the future event of the Church, and her enemies. Thus also Andreas,
and Ribera expound it.

For first this is the same book, which John (after it was opened) is
commanded to eat up, that is, fully and clearly to take knowledge thereof: And
which was sweet in his mouth like honey, that is, he was much delighted with the
knowledge of so high mysteries: but by and by it became bitter in his belly as
gall, that is, he was much greeved in foreseeing the great calamities of the
Church, as we shall see Chap. 10. for the book there mentioned is the
Revelation given unto John.

Furthermore the contents of the whole Revelation is taken out of this book.
For at the opening of the seventh seal, seven Angels are said to come forth
sounding with trumpets, signifying thereby the diverse changes of the Church,
in the third vision. At the sounding of the seventh trumpet, the Dragon, and
two beasts are raised up against the Church, in vision the fourth. Presently
here upon follow seven Angels pouring forth the vials of the last plagues upon
the earth, in vision the fifth. Afterward one of these seven Angels pronounces
with a mighty voice the judgment of the great whore, and ruin of Babylon, in
vision the sixth. At length the new Jerusalem, with the marriage of the Lamb is
represented unto John, in the last vision. whence we see that the whole matter
of the Revelation was comprehended in this book: and not included in a few
Chapters: viz. from 6. to 11. as Alcasar supposes.

To be short the circumstances of this book do altogether agree with the
former preface. For as Christ is there said to receive the Revelation of God,
and by an Angel to deliver it unto John: so this book was in the right hand of
him that sat on the throne, and taken out of his hand by the Lamb, opened, and
delivered unto the Angel, who gave it to John, commanding him to eat it, Chap.
10. Forasmuch therefore as all things thus agree together, there is no
question, but this book here spoken of, is the revelation it self, delivered
unto the Apostle. These things observed, the three following circumstances will
be the less obscure.

1. The book is held in the right hand of him that sits on the throne] because
God is the author of the revelation: in Gr. it is, (...), at the right hand,
and is put for, (...) in the hand, as appears v. 7. where the Lamb takes the
book ((...)) out of his right hand, and therefore it was In and not at his
right hand, as some will have it. Now he is said to have it in his right hand,
to the end to give it unto Christ to open. As men reach out with their right
hands, what they give unto others: And I suppose we need not seek for any other
mystery in this expression.

2. It is written within and without] that is, there was no place empty in it.
For we are to understand this literally. This book was not made as are our
books, consisting of diverse leaves, and so folded together: but it was one
volume of parchment written within and without: according to the custom of the
ancients, who wrote in rolls: and hence volumen, a volume, comes from
convolvendo, rolling. Like as the Jews to this day at Worms, and Franck ford,
etc. have their (Torah) written out in one volume of parchment. These
parchments, because they were rolled up, were commonly writ on the inside
only. Whereas this on the contrary, was written within, and on the backside
also: which manner of rols were called, ((...),) that is, writings, within and
without, of which see Pliny. lib. 3. Epist. 5. and Iuvenal Sat. 2.

I therefore judge, that this writing, within and without signifies nothing
else, but the multitude of matters: that is all such things as were exhibited
unto John in this Revelation. Origin says that within were written the
promises made to the Church, and without, or on the backside, the punishments
of the wicked. But this to me seems frivolous. A like book written within and
without was seen by Ezechiel Chap. 2.9. but it differs from the other both in
matter and form. In that were written the lamentations because of the
calamities to befall the people of Israel in their captivity: whereas this book
contains the secret counsels of God concerning the last times. That of
Ezechiel, was spread open before him: but this was seen of John rolled up:
Ierom understands that by both these books which were written within and
without, is signified the litterall and mystical sense of the scriptures. But
there is no solidity in it: for neither of these books, do signify the book
of holy writ: neither does every part of the scriptures, admit a mystical
interpretation.

Sealed with seven seales] This is the third circumstance touching the book.
The number seven, is not here put for many, but is to be taken properly: for
after these, there were no more seals opened. We need not search what manner
of seals they were, it suffices to know that the book was closely kept shut
by them. For there is a twofold use of seals, first to keep things secret from
the view of others, as letters, doors, cabinets, chiests, and the like: and
secondly for the confirmation of writings, as for example, to authorize the
edicts of princes, sentences of magistrates, and wills of the dead, the seals
of seven witnesses make these things altogether authentic. Now this book, was
not sealed in this latter respect, but in the former, as being shut or kept
close from the understanding of men. And therefore it could not be opened or
read before the seals were taken away: which was not don until the seventh
seal was removed. Let this suffice for the present, that the contents of this
book so fast sealed, were most obscure and hid, until (the seals being
opened) they were revealed unto John by Christ.

The second part of the Chapter.
The difficulty about the opening of the Book, and of the seals.

2 And I saw a strong Angel, proclaiming with a loud voice; Who is worthy to
open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?

3 And no man in heaven nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to open
the Book, neither to look thereon.

4 And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open, and to read the
book, neither to look thereon.

5 And one of the Elders says unto me, Weep not: behold, the Lion of the
tribe of Judah, the root of David has prevailed to open the book, and to loose
the seven seals thereof.

6 And I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the Throne, and of the four
beasts, and in the midst of the Elders stood a Lamb as it had been slain,
having seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God, sent
forth into all the earth.

7 And he came, and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat upon
the Throne.

THE COMMENTARY.
2. ANd I saw a strong Angel] The difficulty in opening of the sealed Book now
follows. The circumstances thereof are five. First, an Angel proclaims with
a loud voice, if any one be worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals:
by which this Angel both stirs up a desire in John, and others of the heavenly
inhabitants, after the knowledge of these secrets, as also gives them to
understand, (as hereupon it presently appeared,) that no creature could find
out the hidden, and secret counsels and judgments of God concerning things to
come: but it was in the power of the Lamb only to reveal the same.

Lyra affirms that this was the Angel Gabriel, who is called (...) strong,
from the Hebrew geber, hence God is called, El^gibbor, Isal. 9. But this to
Ribera is ridiculous, seeing the word (...) strong, is put without an article:
but how then would he have wondered at Alcasars opinion, had he seen it, who
makes him to be Hosea In Chap. 10.1. a mighty Angel stands upon the sea and
upon the earth: and swears by him that lives for ever and ever. And Chap.
18.21. a mighty Angel casts a millstone into the sea: Which some understand to
be Christ, others a created Angel: and indeed it appears he was not Christ,
seeing he was not worthy to open the Book. Besides all the Angels of God are
called Gibborei choach, mighty in strength Psalm. 103.20. This therefore was a
created Angel, called mighty, because he cried mightily, so as he was heard
throwout the heaven. Gr. (...) preaching with a great voice, because with a
mighty courage he proclaimed the question about the opening of the book before
the whole company in heaven. Who is worthy] he says not, who can, but, who is
worthy: signifying, that not skill or strength only, but worthiness is also
required. For men out of curiosity may violently (howbeit unrightly) break
open that which is sealed. What is meant by opening the book.
But this book could not be opened either by violence, or for curiosity sake:
but only by worthiness or merit. He that opens it must be (...) worthy, that
is, endued with authority and divine power. Now to open the book, is to make
known the secret counsel of God about things to come.

3. And no man, Gr. (...) none in heaven, etc.] This is the second
circumstance: Upon the proclaiming of the Angel, there is a deep silence in
heaven. For all creatures are dumb as unable and unworthy to open this book.
In heaven] that is, Angels and glorified saints. In earth] men and beasts.
Under the earth] Fishes or sea monsters. Some also foolishly imagine, that the
devils in hell, and the souls in purgatory are here called upon. But the
scriptures by things under the earth mean, that which is in the sea: according
to the second commandment: or that is in the water under the earth etc. Thus
all created things are altogether insufficient to reveal these heavenly
secrets: there is (I say) no wisdom in the creature to apprehend the counsels
of God, much less to make them known unto others. This honor appertains to
the Lamb only.

4. And I wept much] The third circumstance, is John's weeping and grief,
occasioned from his desire to know what was written in the book. He saw it
made fast with many seals: he heard the Angel proclaiming the opening thereof.
Whence he concludes that therein was contained many worthy things necessary to
be known: but seeing all creatures were silent, as unable to open it, he weeps
much, and good cause too. Now his weeping was not in vain: for by his prayers
and tears he has his desire granted him to the full. And here we are taught,
that the mysteries contained in Gods word, whither in this or other places, are
not to be understood without weeping: that is, desire study, labor and ardent
prayers unto God. The which shall not be in vain: for though we may be
ignorant of somethings, yet what soever is necessary to salvation, shall be
revealed unto every one, that truly seeks for it at the hands of God.

5 Then one of the Elders] The fourth circumstance concerns the Elder
comforting John: whom some will have to be Jacob the patriarch, others John the
Baptist, others Matthew: but Lyra will have it to be Peter the porter of
heaven: but I pass by these fooleries. He was one of the heavenly company,
and in likelihood one who sat next to him, wishing him to desist from weeping,
for howbeit all creatures failed, yet there was one viz. Christ, worthy to open
the book, and loose the seals. Showing us that all ought to direct their
prayers unto Christ: and not unto the saints. He calls him, the Lion of the
tribe of Judah, alluding to the words of Jacobs blessing: Judah is a Lions
whelpe, viz. in dignity, strength, and kingly power. Genesis 49 9.
Of the tribe of Judah] For Christ's mother was of this tribe. The root of
David] coming of the progeny of David: for Marie the mother of Christ, was the
daughter of David. Christ therefore as he is man, is of the seed of David: as
again he himself witnesses Cha. 22.16. I am the root and the offspring of
David. He also is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, conquering by his divine
power, satan, death and hell.

Has prevailed] Gr. (...) has overcome, which is either absolutely put, for
(...), he was found worthy (Beza has obtained) or transitivelie, for, XXVII
Argum. of Chr. deity.
he has excelled all creatures in dignity and power. Which is an excellent
argument of the person and office of Christ. Of his person, both that he is
true man, being of the root of David: and true God, because he has overcome.
Of his office, that he is the only mediator and revealer of the secrets of
God: and not only the Doctor of the Church: but also the redeemer thereof, as
we shall hear by and by. Thus we see how he admits of no creature with him
into the society of this function: whosoever therefore substitutes any other
mediators together with the Lamb, herein they make this mighty Angel a liar,
who proclaims, that neither in heaven, nor in earth, or under the earth, any
creature is found worthy to open the book of God.

6 And I beheld, and lo in the midst of the throne] This is the fifth
circumstance touching the Lamb. His seat, gesture and form is described in
this verse: his action in the following. Now without doubt Christ is
represented by this Lamb. Before he was called a Lion, because of his dignity,
and power: here a Lamb, noting his innocence and oblation. For he was brought
as a Lamb to the slaughter, Isai. 53 7.
and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opens not his mouth. And
indeed nothing else was typed out by the two Lambs daily offered under the Law,
Ioh. 1.29.36. 1 Pet. 1.19.
but Christ's perpetual and effectual sacrifice. For he is the Lamb of God,
which takes away the sins of the world: And by whose precious blood we are
redeemed.

By the way we may take notice, that Christ is here called a Lamb, Gr. (...)
without an article: And yet not any Lamb, but only Christ is to be understood
hereby. Which confutes their opinion, who think, because in Chap. 13.12,
Antichrist is said to have two horns like a Lamb ((...)) without an article,
that therefore not Christ, but indefinitely any Lamb is there spoken of.
Neither is the rule among Graecians, always true viz. Whenever any certain
individual is noted, that then an article is always required. For we see here
the contrary: as also in Chap. 14 1. where (...) the Lamb, is put without an
article: which cannot be understood of any but of Christ.

This Lamb he saw in the midst of the throne and of the beasts] that is,
between God and the Church triumphant, showing that he is the mediator betwixt
God and man. In Chap. 7.17. he is said to stand (...) in the midst of the
throne, whereby is signified his exaltation at the right hand of God. For
howsoever in the state of his humiliation he was lower then the throne: yet now
being glorified he has obtained to sit on the throne of the Father. And
therefore he says, Chap. 3.24.
To him that overcomes I will grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I
also overcame, and am sit down with my Father in his throne.

In the midst of the beasts] See Chap. 4. v. 3.6.

Stood as it had been slaine] The gesture of the Lamb is twofold. He stood, and
as it were slain. By the latter his death is signified, by the former his
resurrection. He appears not slain, but as if he had been slain, not dead, but
living, having the marks of his death in his side, hands, and feet. Wherefore
he stood as a conqueror, revived from death to life, having like a Lion
overcome the same. Therefore he says Chap. 1.18. I am he that lives and was
dead: and behold, I live for evermore. Wherefore we must not look upon him
simply as a Lamb: but respectivelie, as a Lamb slain for our sins, and raised
again to life for our justification. Furthermore his appearing in the form of
a Lamb, does not contradict what we spoke before touching his sitting on the
throne: for he is a Lamb, in regard of his humiliation and office, and he is
God, and sits with the Father in the throne in respect of his deity.

Having seven hornes] An admirable form, for who ever saw a Lamb with seven
horns, having eyes in, or under every one of the^. But is seven here to be
taken indefinitely for many? No, but properly answering to the number of the
seve^ seals. To teach us that the Lamb wanted neither power, nor wisdom to
unloose the same. His horns denote the fulness of his power: and his eyes, his
divine insight: this is set forth unto us that, we should believe that the Lamb
beholds, and governs all things by his infinite wisdom and providence.
The seven eyes are said to be the seven spirits of God sent forth into all the
earth: which is taken from Zacha. 4.10. and signifies the same thing. For
seeing the Lamb is Lord of the spirits, or Angels, and sends them forth into
all the earth, as a master does his servant, it plainly proves that he is true
God. XXVIII. Argum. of Christ's deity.
For the Angels have no other Lord, but Jehovah: see Chap. 4.5. And hence the
seven eyes of Jehovah in Zachary, are here called the seven spirits of God.
Seeing therefore so many horns, and eyes are attributed unto the Lamb, let the
godly know, that he wants neither power nor knowledge for to preserve them: And
let the wicked fear, and tremble before him: for he sees all their ungodlines,
and is able to repress their tyranny.

Let us also briefly take notice, how Antichrist Chap. 13.11. has two horns
like unto the Lamb, signifying that he like an Ape imitates the Lamb. But he is
much inferior: For the Lamb has not two only, but seven. And therefore can
easily destroy him by the spirit of his mouth.

7. And he came and took the booke] After the description of the Lamb, now
follows what he did.

He came] That is, he came forth out of the midst, and went to the throne, and
took the book out of the right hand of him that ^^te thereon, viz. to open
the same. By which action he shows, that he both can and will unseale the
book of God, that is, reveal this prophecy unto John, and unto the whole
Session in heaven. Thus we have here fulfilled: what is spoken Chap. 1.1. to
wit, that God gave the Revelation to Christ, and Christ to John. For this Lamb,
that is, Christ took the Revelation out of the right hand of God on the
throne, not unwillingly, but freely giving it him, to the end it might be
revealed unto John, and unto the whole Church: I will not be curious in
disputing what this taking of the book was. They who understand by this book,
the whole counsel of God, interpret this taking thereof, a commission to reveal
the secret mysteries of salvation unto the Church. But we have showed v. 1.
that the book denotes the Revelation. Wherefore this taking and opening of it,
signifies nothing else, but the exposition thereof.

But this seems to contradict the interpretation touching Christ's sitting on
the Throne. For the Lamb sits not on the throne, but takes it from him that
sat thereon. Now he cannot be both giver and receiver. I answer. It is true he
cannot give, and receive in one and the same respect: but there will follow no
absurdity to say he does it in a diverse respect: to wit if we consider his
person and office. Christ gives the book as he is God, and takes it as he is
God-man, the mediator. Thus he is both author and opener of the book: even as
he is said in diverse respects Heb. 1. v. 9. and 9. v. 11.14. and 13.10. to be
priest, sacrifice, altar, the anointer and anointed. But if any will contend,
that God absolutely is he that sits on the throne, it comes al to one thing, as
I have formerly proved. For the Father sits, and reigns in the son to whom he
has given all judgment.

The third part of the Chapter.
The hymn sung unto the Lamb.

8 And when he had taken the book, the four beasts, and four and twenty
Eldels fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them harpes, and golden
vials full of odours, which are the prayers of Saints.

9 And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to
open the seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by
thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation:

10 And have made us unto our God, kings and Priests, and we shall reign on
the earth.

11 And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne,
and the beasts, and the Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times
ten thousand, and thousands of thousands,

12 Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing.

13 And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the
earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying,
Blessing, honor, glory, and power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

14 And the four beasts said, Amen. And the four and twenty Elders fell
down, and worshipped him that lives for ever and ever.

THE COMMENTARY.
8. ANd when he had taken the booke] Now follows the heavenly thanksgiving
for the taking of the book. 1. Of the beasts and Elders. 2. Of the Angels. 3.
Of all other creatures, which is the IV Apparition. 4. Again of the beasts and
Elders, every one of them singing a peculiar himne unto the Lamb, and unto God,
gratulating the Church because of the revelation.

First, And when the Lamb had taken the book. The cause of joy in the
heavenly inhabitants.
Here now the grief of the creatures, as also the tears of John do cease:
for in this book is contained the whole counsel of God concerning the good of
the Church, the salvation of the elect, and destruction of the adversaries unto
the end of the world. The latin version reads: when he had opened the book,
which is a manifest corruption of the text: for how could he have opened the
book, while the same was shut and sealed? Ribera purposelie passes it by. But
Alcasar seeks to excuse the matter by many shifts: but says at last that he
had seen it written in a Greek copy, (...) when he had opened, boldly
affirming, that it was by some one or other changed into, (...), when he had
taken: which shameless assertion of his is confuted in the first verse of the
following Chapter.

Secondly, beasts and Elders is set forth, somewhat diverse from what we heard
before. The gesture and habit of the beasts and Elders.
They fall down before the Lamb, humbly submitting themselves unto his will,
rendering not a civil, but a divine worship to Christ: whence again is proved
his deity, forasmuch as religious adoration is due to none but to God only.

Having harpes] Musical Instruments, XXIX. Argum. of Christ's deity.
wherewith the holy Prophets, and kings were wont to praise the Lord: not as
if God were delighted with any such thing, but because it stirred up the
religious affection of the saints to Godward.

And golden vials full of odours] The priests of old made odours for God with
censers: but these with vials.

Which are the prayers of the saintes] Their prayers are called vials by a
twofold trope: First by a Synechdoche, for the odours in the vials. And
secondly by a metonymical denomination, or else a metaphorical translation, as
signifying the prayers of the saints. For as persumes ascend upward and give
forth a sweet smell: so the saints in prayer seek after heavenly things, and
the same is acceptable unto God. They are golden vials, because as gold excels
in purity, so prayers proceeding from a pure heart are precious to the Lord:
what their prayers are now follows.

9. And they sung a new song] Both Companies of the Church triumphant with a
most sweet accord praise the Lamb the redeemer: which proves, that these
beasts and Elders are not Angels, but men redeemed by the blood of Christ. It
shows also unto us the consent of both covenants, in the point of salvation.
For all the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles together acknowledge the Lamb,
their redeemer. Act. 10.43
According to that of the Apostle, To him give all the Prophets witness, that
through his name, whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins.
And again, Act. 15.11
we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved,
as the fathers. For in him all the promises are yea and Amen. 2 Corinthians. 1.20.

Furthermore those prayers of the saints, Psalm. 40.4. and 96.1. and 97.1. and
144.9. and 149.1.
carried here by the Elders in their golden vials, are to be understood as their
own, and not the prayers of others. It is called a new song, that is, most
singularly setting forth the great, rare, and excellent benefits of the Lamb.
For generally in the Psalms a new song, is taken in this sense. The former
Hymn Chap. 4.8. was sung unto him that sat on the throne: but this is a song
unto the Lamb. So Chap. 14.1. the saints in heaven sing a new song unto the
Lamb, which none could learn, but these hundred forty and four thousand which
had his fathers name written in their foreheads. The argument therefore of this
song is new, because it is most excellent, and contains the new benefits of
Christ.

Thou art worthy] They acknowledge him alone worthy to take the book, and to
open the seals, because they both know and confess with all reverence, that
he is the only mediator of the Church, and that the cause of this his great
worthiness is in the preciousnes of his blood.

For thou wast slaine] that is, by dying for the sins of the world, thou
declarest thy self to be the Messiah, Chap. 53.
who^ Isaiah foretold should be led as a sheep to the slaughter to take away
the sins of the world. Here we are taught that the mediator ought both to be
slain for us, that is, to merit: and also to take the book, that is
meritoriously to bestow life and righteousness upon others. Seeing therefore he
only merited by his sacrifice, it must necessarily follow, that none else
could take the book, that is, reveal the counsel of God to the Church, and
by his power give salvation unto her.

And thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood] Now the Church triumphant
prayseth the Lamb, and applies the price of her redemption with the effects
thereof unto her self. Thus we ought so to acknowledge the benefits of Christ,
as to make them our own, not only in believing that he has redeemed others
by his blood, and made them kings and priests to God, but our selves also: for
true justifying faith is accompanied with a certain persuasion of our own
salvation: I live, says the Apostle, by the faith of the son of God who loved
me, Gal. 2.24.
and gave himself for me.

Hence we observe two things: First, that the death of Christ is truly a
ransom satisfactorie for our sins: and that our redemption by it, is not
metaphorical (as the new Samosatenians blasphemouslie affirm) but proper: for
the redemption which is made by a price is proper. But such is ours by Christ,
because by the shedding of his blood, he has paid a full ransom, and
satisfied the justice of God, as the scripture witnesses Matt. 20.28. and 1 Timothy 2.6. being the same with what is here said, thou have redeemed us by thy
blood: and ^hap. 1.5. who has washed us in his blood, and Heb. 1.3. purged our
sins by himself: unless that by the word redemption is properly signified the
whole work of our salvation: by washing and purging a part thereof, viz. our
justification or sanctification. This place therefore and many others, proving
Christ's satisfactorie ransom, are to be opposed against Socinian blasphemies.

Secondly, that the redemption made by Christ's blood, is truly universal, as
sufficient, and propounded not only to one nation, or a few, but to all
nations, tongues and peoples: yet not so, as if all promiscuously should be
saved: but those of every tribe, people, and language, who believe in Christ.
And thus much the Elders teach us: Thou have redeemed us out of every tribe.

We add in the third place, XXX. Argument of Christ's deity.
that this redemption proves the Lamb to be God omnipotent. For to redeem the
Church from sin, death and satan, is a work of divine power, Psalm. 130.8.
Hence the Apostle Act. 20.28. says, that God has redeemed the Church by his
own blood.

10 And made us to God] They magnify the Lamb, for three other benefits. 1.
That he has made us kings, 2. priests, 3. given us a kingdom on the earth.
The two former we have expounded Chap. 1.6. being meant of our spiritual
kingdom and priesthood. See Romans 14.17. and 1 Pet. 2.5. But how shall we
reign on the earth, seeing Christ's kingdom is not of this world: besides
earthly things perish in their use: and lastly the Church in this life is to
expect nothing but tribulation? Andreas says, that the Church shall reign,
not in this present thick and cloudie world: but in that new one, which is
promised unto the meek, Matthew. 5.5. But the saints may truly be said to reign
here on earth diverse ways. First, by mortifying their earthly desires, and
trampling them under their feet. Secondly, as Christ reigns on the earth, not
by a secular but spiritual power, by which he forces the adversary unto
obedience: Even so the faithful do reign with Christ in the earth. For the
head reigning, the members reign also: to be short, the saints with Christ
shall judge the world, and therefore shall rule the same: however we are to
understand this, not of an earthly, but a spiritual dominion: 2 Cor. 10.4.
For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty through God etc.
But thou will say, how shall the saints who now triumph in heaven reign on the
earth? I answer, after the same manner, as they shall judge the world and the
Angels.

11. And I beheld, and round about the throne] The third apparition is of
Angels who sing the new song together with the beasts and Elders: for howsoever
the Angels are not redeemed by the blood of Christ, as men: yet in Christ they
are gathered together in one, Ephesians. 1.10.
being subject unto him as to the head of the Church, whereof they are
members: and therefore they also praise the Lamb, as their Lord, and bless
him in regard of the redemption of mankind. The number of Angels he saw, are
said to be ten thousand times ten thousand and thousands of thousand, that is,
infanite: for so the Hebrews speaking of time without end: express it, by
ages of ages. This number seems to be taken out of Dan. 7.10. where many
millions of Angels stood before the fiery throne of God: which is for the
exceeding great comfort of the godly: for seeing so many thousands of Angels
are ready to do the commandment of God, and of the Lamb: why then should we
fear any adversary power which lifts it self up against God and his Church.

Saying with a loud voice worthy is the Lambe] This company of Angels with
songs and praises, set forth seven divine titles of the Lamb, all which he is
most worthy to receive: not as if he received them from the creatures, but
because all creatures are bound to render the same as most due unto him, seeing
he has obtained all these things by eternal generation, and by his exaltation
at the right hand of God his Father. And it is worthy our observation, that
however all these titles are most divine: yet the Vbiquitie of his flesh is not
reckoned amongst them.

Power] because he is omnipotent Chap. 1.8. and all power is given unto him,
Matthew. 28.18.

Riches] For in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom, Col. 2.3.
and knowledge.

Wisdom] For he is the eternal wisdom of the Father, and of him is made
wisdom unto us, that is, the teacher and author thereof.

Strength] Because by his divine strength and power, he has overcome satan,
the world and all other enemies.

Glorie] because he gloriously reigns at the right hand of his father.

Blessing] he is worthy indeed to be blessed for ever: because in and through
him, all nations are made partakers of all blessings.

13 And every creature] The fourth apparition is of all reasonable creatures in
heaven and in earth: and of unreasonable both in the sea, and under the earth.
And all that are in them viz. whither in heaven, or in the earth, or in the
sea. Ribera understands by the creatures under the earth, the souls in
purgatory: But this fiction Alcasar approves not of. Others understand it of
the evil spirits which will they nil they are compelled to acknowledge, and to
stand in fear of the power and glory of Christ: not because they love him, but
hate him and murmr against him. But the true meaning is, that not only men,
but all creatures, yea even the devils themselves do show forth the praise of
God, XXXI. Argum. of Christ's deity.
because in some sort, they serve to illustrate and set forth his glory.

Here again we may note that Christ is adored with religious worship by all
creatures, the which evidentlie proves that he is God: and this is to be added
to the former arguments. The exception of the Samosatenians is frivolous, who
will have a created divinity to be communicated unto Christ. But God himself
says, that he will not give his glory, that is, the glory of religious
worship, to any creature. But the Idolatrous Papists do more shamefully
dishonor God and the Lamb in attributing religious worship to Angels, to the
spirits of men deceased, to Images etc: let them therefore look to it, how they
will answer the foresaid heretics, nay rather how they will answer the Lord,
when he shall call them to account for it.

14. And the four beasts] As the beasts and Elders were first in manifesting
their joy: so here again they join with the Angels and other creatures in
praising the Lamb and conclude the thanksgiving by saying Amen thereunto: of
which see Chap. 1.6. The Elders by falling down worship him, who lives for
ever and ever, that is Christ: Chap. 1.18.

CHAP. VI. THE PREFACE, ARGUMENT, PARTS, and Analysis of the Chapter.
THe Lamb opening six seals of the book, wonderful sights are showed to John
in this Chapter. At the opening of the first seal, comes forth a white horse
and his rider, having a bow and a crown: At the second a red horse, and his
rider being girt with a sword, taking peace away from the earth: At the third a
black horse with his rider, having in his hand a balance, and proclaiming
famine: At the fourth a pale horse having death sitting on him, and hell
following, threatening a horrible slaughter throughout the four corners of the
earth: The fifth being opened the souls of the martyrs appear under the altar,
crying for vengeance to God against their enemies: At the sixth, there follows
a great earth quake, the sun is darkened, the moon turned into blood, the stars
fall down to the earth, and the last signs do follow.

Now this is an amplification of the second vision continued in the following
Chapter, being not a little obscure. For who doubts but that many dark
mysteries lie hid under these seals, the opening whereof was indeed greatly
desired by all creatures, but by them not possible to be don: precisely
therefore to define (as some do) of the certain events prefigured in such
dark types, in my judgment does surpass the power of humane wit:
notwithstanding from the scope and circumstances I think we may and ought
without any controversy in a general way gather that wherein most
interpreters agree in one, viz. that in them is shadowed out the condition of
the Church from the time of John unto the end of the world: The prosperous
success of the preaching of the Gospel at first: by and by the rage of the
adversaries: The cross and martyrdom of the Godly: as also the increase of
troubles, and at last the destruction of the ungodly, with the glorious
deliverance of the Church, consisting both of Jews and gentiles. Furthermore
we will speak of particular events, following as by rule our former method:
where we showed that the general visions, (of which this is the first) are
distinguished into four Acts or parts, of which as the second is opposed unto
the first, so always the fourth unto the third. The which Acts now follow.

The first (to repeat a few things) is a representation of the state of the
primitive Church both in prosperity, and adversity, under the four first
seals unto v. 9. unto this belongs the history of the Apostolical Church, and
of the following persecutions both under the Roman tyrants, and Arian
heretics, until the rising of Antichrist in the first 600 years. The second
is a comforting of the martyrs, whose souls were safely kept under the
heavenly altar, to be fully glorified a little while after. v. 9.10.11. The
third, sets forth a new oppression and more grievous troubles to befall the
Church by a fatal darkning of doctrine and horrible apostasy both of teachers
and people from the faith under Antichrist, unto the end of the world. v.
12.13. following at the opening of the sixth seal. And lastly in the fourth Act
is showed the end of the troubles of the Church under Antichrist, containing
his and all other enemies, their utter destruction at the day of judgment, v
14.15.16.17. The two latter Acts are not fully ended in this Chapter, but are
continued in the following, wherein is represented unto us the reformation of
doctrine, and final deliverance and glorification of the Church: obscurely
indeed in this present vision, but more clearly in the following. Thus we have
manifested the parts and logical resolution of this Chapter. Now we come to
consider the vision.
The I Act of vision II.
The opening of the first seal: concerning the white horse and him that sat
thereon conquering.

1 And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard as it were
the noise of thunder, one of the four beast, saying Come and see.

2 And I saw, and behold, a white horse, and he that sat on him had a bow, and
a crown was given unto him, and he went forth conquering, and to conquer.

THE COMMENTARY.
1. ANd I saw when the Lamb opened] Hitherto the Lamb held the book shut,
until the heavenly companies had made an end of their himne and harmony: And
then he opened one of the seals, that is the first of them, as appears by the
opening of the rest in order: as the second, third, etc. For the Hebrews
usuallie put (...), one, for (...), first, as in Gene. 1.4. And the evening and
the morning was one, that is, the first day. So in the words following: And I
heard one, that is, the first of the four beasts: for afterward he heard the
second, and third, etc.

Opened the seale] that is, manifested. For in opening thereof he revealed unto
John, and so unto us the counsels of God concerning the future condition of the
Church, which before were hidden or shut. To John indeed he declared the same
in types, and withal giving him the understanding of them: but unto us in
types only, concealing the mysteries thereof from us, to the end we should be
the more exercised in the diligent observation of things, both from histories
and events.

One of the four beasts] who had the form of a Lion Chap. 4.7. We need not
here with Lyra and others inquire, whither this were Mark, Matthew, or James
the first supposed Bishop of the Church of Jerusalem. The other three do in
order invite John, to draw near, and behold these wonders (for he stood off
for reverence sake) that he might the more certainly write down what he saw:
so that these beasts perform the office of public cryers, whose work it is to
call in persons nearer to the throne or judgment seat.

As the voice of thunder] For such is the roaring noise of a Lion. This and the
other beasts, saying unto John and us: come and see, require hereby great
attention: and I conceive that herein no other my sterie is contained.

2. And I saw, and behold, a white horse] to wit, went out as it is in v. 4.
and also in the words following he went forth conquering. But whence came he
forth: from the book, or seal? If out of the book, then this horseman went
forth at the very first opening of the margent, that is, the mystery of him
was there both written and revealed to John: giving us to understand, that such
was the form of the seals, and so set on the margent, as they served for the
keeping close of the whole book folded up together, according to our manner of
sealing letters.

If he went out of the seal, then it seems these were annexed to the book,
like the great seals of princes to their letters pattents, the which are
usually kept in boxes. Now one seal being removed, some part of the book was
thereby opened, in so much as the writing thereof did appear. Behold a great
seal, out of which went forth an armed horseman: But how great then was the
book it self, sealed with so many seals? how great was he that held so great
a book in his right hand? yea, how great the Lamb opening it? The which may
lead us to consider the greatness of the events, and the omnipotency of God,
and the Lamb. The general signification of the seals considered.
It may also be understood of the time, that so soon as the Lamb had opened the
seals the spirit caused John to see these enigmatical horsemen, and other
things.

Now to speak of the opening of the seals in general, Andreas does justly
reject their exposition: who referr all of them to the manner of Christ's
incarnation: as the first seal to his birth: The second to his baptism: The
third to the signs he wrought after his baptism? The fourth to his unjust
accusation before Pilate: The fifth to his cross: The sixth to his burial: And
the seventh to his descension into hell: seeing, says he, all this was already
don, whereas John speaks either of things present, or what should come to pass
afterward.

Others more wittily have distinguished these seals according to the future
times of the Church: applying the first to the Apostles time, and 200 years
after. The second unto the following age: viz. the time of Justinian. The third
unto Phocas the usurper of the Empire. The fourth unto Charles the Great, when
popery was at the highest: The fifth unto Ottho under whom the seven Electors
were erected: The sixth to the counsel of Constans, at what time the Church was
grievously persecuted by three Anti-popes, and the burning of the TWO
WITNESSES, whereupon the elect were sealed. The seventh from that time unto the
end of the world: during al which time in the diverse co^fusions of the Church,
the sealing of the faithful was perfected. But it is difficult to define so
precisely the moments of the seals.

Alcasar a new interpreter having numbered up fourteen opinions and rejected all
of them, at last brings in his own, supposing that the conversion of certain
Jews is praefigured in the four first seals: and the rejection of the rest
in the three latter. The which interpretation we leave unto himself. For our
part we judge it more safe to refer all to the four Acts noted in the preface.

And behold, a white horse] I see no reason, The white horse shadoweth out the
purity of the primitive Church.
but the common opinion of interpreters is here to be embraced viz. that this
white horse with his rider, notes the purity and integrity of the Christian
Church at first (for by whitenes in the revelation, purity is signified) and
the speedy course of the Gospel throughout the whole earth. Nevertheless I
bind not this to the first two hundred or three hundred years, in which,
(notwithstanding all the cruel oppression and persecutions yet) the Gospel was
spread with happy success far and near. But I rather extend it to the whole
time, in which Christ by the successors of the Apostles, namely many sincere
Bishops and faithful teachers victoriously set up his kingdom, throughout the
whole Roman Empire, not withstanding the tyranny of persecutors, and the
wickedness of heretics and Apostates: until by little and little the Church
decayed in this her purity: And this I take contains the space of almost six
hundred years.

The white horse therefore first coming out of the seals, is the primitive
Church, white, and bright in purity of doctrine and discipline. The Apostles
were like horses running strongly, and with great speed, propagating the faith
of Christ in the whole earth, as their Acts, and Epistles testify: after them
God raised up Apostolical men, Bishops, teachers, and Fathers both Greek and
Latin, who firmlie maintained and propagated the purity of doctrine delivered
unto them, against tyrants, apostates and hypocrites, until the time of
Gregory the first: although even before his days the whiteness of this horse
was somewhat changed, and black spots began to appear, that is, corruptions in
doctrine, discipline and worship. The which Egesippus in Eusebius complains of
in these words: Lib 3. hist. cap. 32.
that soon after the death of the Apostles, and them which had received the
word at their mouth, the Church remained not long a pure and unspotted virgin:
notwitstanding the godly held the foundation of faith and salvation entire.
viz. Christ the head.

And he which sat on him] This rider is Christ. He that sat on the white
horse is Christ. Act. 9.15
see Chap. 19.11. This rider was carried to and fro in the ministry of the
Apostles, and other faithful pastors, and teachers, who suffered for the
truth: this metaphor Christ himself uses to Ananias concerning Paul: he is a
chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and
the children of Israel: On these, Christ rode gloriously, entering through their
sincere preaching into the very heart of the faithful, propagating and
defending his own kingdom, according to that of the Psalmist, And in thy
comely honor prosper, Psalm. 45.4.
ride on word of truth, and of meeknes, and of justice.

And he had a bow] Gr. (...) which signifies a bow and arrows, and sometimes a
quiver. The word of God is Christ bow.
The Law and Gospel is Christ bow: from whence he sends forth arrows that is,
the efficacy of his spirit, wounding the hearts and minds of the Elect, that he
may heal, and restore them to life: but to terrify and kill the wicked, as it
is in the same Psalm: thy arrows are sharp, peoples shall fall under thee: in
the heart of the kings enemies.

And a crown was given unto him] to wit, Christ's crown.
a regal crown. For he is a king crowned with glory and honor at the right
hand of God in the heavens: or rather a crown of triumph: because it follows,

And he went forth conquering and to conquer] The doubling of the words notes
his present and future victory. His victory.
By his death he overcame sin: and by his resurrection death, hell and satan:
yea the world also, according as he says in the Gospel be of good cheer, Ioh.
16.33.
I have overcome the world. This is the first victory, with which he went
forth conquering: It is true indeed he was crucified as he was mere man: but
he lived again and overcame, by the power of his Godhead. Now he went forth to
overcome the world, and the tyrants thereof diverse ways. His second victory
was in converting the gentiles by the preaching of the Apostles: for in that he
drew all nations, and brought them unto the faith of the Gospel, he conquered
the world; And tyrants, in his Apostles, confessors, and martyrs, convincing
them by the power of the truth: For the death of the martyrs is Christ's
victory: seeing in their blood the truth was sealed, and the Church propagated.
The destruction of tyrants was Christ's victory: As Julian the apostate
blaspheming in his extreme madness, confessed: Thou have overcome O Galilean.
Christ overcame, when Nero, Domitian, Diocletian, Trajan, Maximinus, Lycinius,
Valens, and others (who had put to death many thousands of Christians, thinking
thereby to take away the name of Christ) were destroyed, and brought to
miserable perdition, while Christ reigned; and his Church increased. Christ
went forth as a conqueror, when by the preaching of the Gospel, the Idol gods
of the gentiles were rejected, their worship and temples abolished and
overthrowen: all men being drawn after Christ. He overcame when the swarms
of heretics, as, Valentinus, Basilides, Praxeas, Manes, Martion, Photinus,
Samosatenus and other most bitter enemies of Christ, were beaten down,
overcome and destroyed by the sword of the spirit. To be short, Christ
overcame, when all the East and Western Churches were in danger to perish and
come to nothing, by the pestilent doctrine of Arius: two sound ministers being
then hardly found in the whole Christian world, (no not in Rome) except
Paulinus, Hilarious, and Athanasius. And indeed he that would understand the
victories of Christ here intimated, must have (as in a table before his eyes,)
the histories of the Apostles, and the Churches after them, written by
Irenaeus, Clemens, Tertullian, Eusebius, Hierom, Theodoret, Socrates,
Sozomenus, Evagrius, Nicephorus, and others: for no better commentary then
their histories can be given upon the opening of the first seal. And herein I
think (not to pass this by in silence) we are more happy then John himself:
for those events which he saw a far of in types, we now by the help of former
histories, and our own experience, do clearly see them written out, and
livelie expressed before our eyes. And thus much concerning the first seal.

Now here perhaps a question will be moved, seeing Christ is the Lamb opening
the book, how also he can be said to go forth out of the seal: For the
answer hereof, we are to mind, what I have already spoken, viz. that
oftentimes one and the same thing is represented in differing types, in a
diverse respect. Now as Christ sits and reigns gloriously with the Father and
holy Spirit as God: so he is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, being the
offpring of Judah according to the flesh: He is the immaculate Lamb, as he is
man, and as he was slain and put to death for us: He stands in the midst of
the Throne, as he is the mediator: he opens the book and the seals, as he is
the chief Prophet and teacher of the Church, the revealer and author of all
heavenly doctrine. And to be short he also sits on the white horse, as king
and conqueror, propagating his kingdom by the preaching of his word through
the whole earth: by which also he reigns even unto this day, in the midst of
his enemies. Psa. 110.2.

The opening of the second seal.

The red horse, and his rider having a great sword, and taking away peace from
the earth.

3 And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second beast say, Come
and see.

4 And there went out another horse that was red: and power was given to him
that sat thereon, to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one
another, and there was given unto him a great sword.

The COMMENTARY.
ANd when he had opened the second seale] The scope of the matter, which here
we are to take notice of, is, that the future condition of the Church from that
time, viz. the end of the former seal, unto the rising of Antichrist, and end
of the world, is represented to John, that he might certainly believe, that
the Church however oppressed by tyrants, yet should be perpetually preserved in
the world by the power of Christ. This her future condition is declared to be
both joyful and sad: joyful before in the white horse: sad in the three
horses following: by their threefold color and gesture is shadowed out a
threefold figure or form of the Church: First red: because tyrants should make
her red by spilling the blood of martyrs. Secondly black, because she should
be stained and obscured, with the black doctrine of heretics. And lastly
pale, because through the slothfulnes of governors, ambition and covetousness
of Bishops, she should at length be pale, and sick unto death. These things are
the sum of the three following seals.

I heard the second beast] which had the form of an Ox Chap. 4.7. he calls
him to see the bloody opening of the second seal. Now whither this were to
signify, that many of the faithful should be slain as oxen before the
altar, I leave for others to determine.

And there went out another horse, The red horse the Church of the martyrs,
that was red] As the white horse was the Church shining in doctrine and
innocence: so the red horse is the Church made red by martyrdom. But who was
the rider? I will relate the common opinion. Because there was given to this
rider a great sword to take peace from the earth, and to stir up men to kill
each other, therefore Lyra applies this red horse unto the cruel and bloody
Roman Empire: whose rider was Nero, disturbing the city of Rome by his wicked
government: so that the citizens were instigated to murder one another.

There was given unto him a great sword that is, Eusebius. lib. 2. hist. cap. 25.
Nine persecutions under the Roman tyrants.
power to kill Christians: for he raised up the first cruel persecution against
them: and among others, the Apostles Peter and Paul suffered for the testimony
of Jesus Christ.

But this interpretation is too straight: for though indeed under Nero bloody
persecution began, yet it ceased not there, but a long while after this red
horse kept still his course in the Christian Church. For after the first
persecution of Nero, which was maliciously raised against the Christians,
pretending they were incendiaries, and anthours of the burning of Rome (whereas
he himself most wickedlie had don the same) there followed another under
Domitian that cruel persecutor, John the writer of this book into boiling
oil, i will of Patmos. Eusebius. lib, 3. hist. 17. After this followed the third
under Trajane, who pretending that there ought to be but one religion in the
Roman Empire, appointed that Christians, as enemies of their forefathers
religion should not be suffered. In his time was put to death, Simeon surnamed
Iustus, pastor in Jerusalem, and Ignatius of Antioch, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 32.
Niceph. lib. 3. cap. 19. Immediately upon this a fourth by Antoninus Verus,
Polycarpus and many others suffered in the year 170. Eusebius lib. 4. cap. 15.
A fifth under Severus about the year of our Lord 204: who executed Leonides the
father of Origin, Eusebius. lib. 6. hist. cap. sixth which dured three years under
Maximinus in the year 239. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 20. and lib. 9. cap. 8. The
seventh (and the cruelst of all) under Decius, at what time Cornelius Bishop of
Rome, and Cyprian of Carthage were crowned with martyrdom. Niceph. lib. 5. cap
27. The eight under Valerius, 7. cap. 9. And the ninth under Diocletian and
Maximinian. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 6. After which the Church, being freed from
persecution, had some time of breathing under Constantine: but soon after
suffered not muchlesse under Constans, Julian, Valens, etc. by all which we may
understand that this second horse was a long time red with the blood of the
faithful. The common interpretation touching him that sat on the red horse.


And therefore all others for the most part do apply (and far better) this
red horse unto all the forenamed persecutions: either making the tyrants to be
the rider, or else Satan provoking them unto so great a cruelty: Unto whom is
given power. that is permission of God to stir the wicked to war and bloody
slaughters, but chiefly to oppress and persecute the Church, and people of
God. This interpretation (I confess) is not improper, if we consider the
causes themselves of the troubles, and persecutions which follow the Gospel.

But seeing Christ himself has said, that he came not to send peace on the
earth, Matt. 10.34. Luke 120 49.
but a sword, and fire: and to set a man at variance against his father, and
the daughter against her mother, etc. Therefore I rather understand, that by
this rider, is meant Christ, who also in Zach. 1.8. is represented as a man
riding on a red horse: So that Christ's horse which before was white, now comes
forth red: And is said to be another, because of the change of the color: The
rider on the red horse is Christ.
signifying that the Apostolical Church which was white in purity of doctrine,
and innocence of life, should now through the cruelty of tyrants, be made red
with the blood of her martyrs: And yet Christ sits on this red horse, because
he is present with, and governs his Church, even in her greatest trials. Unto
him is (...) great sword, viz. the sword of the word Ephesians. 6.17. being
sharper then any two ^aged sword, Heb. 4.12. With this sword he took peace
from the earth, and (...) ^^oodie persecutions: not in himself, but by
accident, because of the malice of tyrants and heretics in opposing his truth.
For Christ is the prince of peace: The Gospel the doctrine of peace, etc.
Therefore Christ takes away neither his peace, nor yet peace from his children
which he promises in Ioh. 14.27. but, from the earth, that is from worldly
tyrants, and enemies of the Gospel. For to the wicked there is no peace, Isai.
57.21. Here we are taught in the first place, that the condition of the Church
in this life, was, and ever shall be reddish, or sprinkled with the blood of
persecution. For through many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of
God, and thereby be made conformable unto Christ. Therefore the going forth of
this red horse, ought not to terrify us. For Gods counsel is grounded on
causes both just and good; in consideration whereof we ought to remame constant
unto the end.

Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine coepit:
Sanguine succrevit, sanguine finis erit.
The Church in blood first founded was,
In blood begin did she:
It had her spreading forth in blood.
In blood her end shall be.
It was established I say in the blood of Christ. It began and increased in the
blood of the martyrs: And in their blood it shall continue unto the end.
Notwithstanding the end shall be the ruin and destruction of the adversaries. For
then shall cease the blood of martyrs when the blood of the wicked shall come
forth of the wine press of the wrath of God, unto the horses bridles, by the
space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs. Chap. 14.20.

Secondly, though the devil and his instruments mightily labor to extinguish
the Church, yet no more can they do, then what is given them from above.

Thirdly, let us not think it strange that God does suffer tyrants thus
miserably to afflict his Saints: for he does it partly for their great good,
that they might not grow wanton, but that their faith and prayer might be
exercised under the cross: And partly, according to their just desert; for if
examination be made, we shall find, that for the most part, as contentions,
coveteousnes and ambition among the officers, so profaneness and security of
the people drew down common judgments upon themselves. See Cyprian de lapsis:
and Eusebius. lib. 5. hist. cap. 2.

The opening of the third seal.

The black horse, having a balance, And proclaiming famine.

5 And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third beast say, Come
and see. And I beheld, and lo, a black horse: and he that sat on him, had a
pair of balances in his hand.

6 And I heard a loud voice in the midst of the four beasts say, A measure of
wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny, and see thou hurt
not the oil and the wine.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd when he had opened the third seale] First I will set down the opinion of
others, and afterward my own. The third seal being opened, John is called
upon by the third beast which had the form of a man, to behold the wonder. Our
attention is here again stirred up by this creature, as a third herald: As for
other mysteries in this I approve not. A black horse comes forth with his rider
holding a balance. Lyra will have this black horse to be the army of the
Romans, with which Titus their captain destroyed Jerusalem, killing a
multitude of the Jews, and carrying the rest into captivity, in revenge of the
death of Christ. The balance (in his opinion) does note the just judgment of
God. The weighing of two pound of wheat and barlie sold for a penny, the
meanness of the Jewish captives, who were sold for thirty pence. The wine and
oil, which the rider is forbid to hurt, are the Christians, who before the
siege left Jerusalem, and went over Jordan to Pella, and there were preserved:
but this sense is to straight, and agrees not with the scope of the history:
for the matter here is not by types to cover former things, but to reveal
things to come: Now we know Jerusalem was already overthrowen, which John was
not ignorant off, being banished into Patmos by Domitian the brother of Titus.

Andreas and others understand here some notable dearth to be prefigured: The
opinion of Andreas.
because mention is made of a scale and wheat etc. Some take it for the famine
under Claudius, which happened long before this revelation. Besides famine and
dearth does no more belong to Christians, (who ought hereat less to be
troubled then others) then unto the adversaries: whereas it is to be supposed,
that only events proper to the Church were prefigured unto John.

Wherefore Bid, Tyconius and others understand more rightly by the black
horse heretics, by the rider the devil stirring them up to make black or
darken the doctrine of the Church: by the balance, the word of God, which
heretics pretend to be on their side, and with which they labor to beautify,
maintain and commend their errors, to the end that people may the more
readily receive them: which exposition Ribera also approves of: for as the
Apostles are the white horse, because they preached the glad tidings of
salvation: so the blake horse notes heretics, maintainers of pernicious
doctrines, and preaching things corrupt and hurtful.

I assent therefore to their opinion who think the state of heretics is here
shadowed out, The black horse is the Church.
yet in some things the scope is to be applied otherwise. For the same horse
which first went forth white, importing the purity of the Apostolical
doctrine: afterward was red, of the bloody condition of the Church under
tyrants: And now is black in regard of her afflicted condition by wicked
heretics, who cloud the light of the truth with their black haeresies, and
bring in such a deformity upon the Church, that she, who appeared white
before, is now black.

By him which sat on the horse I understand not the devil, but Christ: but
after what manner he rides on heretics we shall understand by and by.

Now this blacknes came upon the Church, as diverse ways, so by certain
degrees even from the time of John until Antichrist. How this blackness befell
the Church.


In the first two hundred years many heretics made black the Christian
Church by weakening the very foundation of religion: not indeed in respect of
the elect, who firmly embraced the same, but in respect of themselves and
their followers. Among whom was Cerinthus, Ebion, Valentine, Marcion,
Basilides, and many others, whose madness was recorded, and also refuted by
Irenaus, Epiphanius, Augustine, Thilastrius, and others. These besides other
foul errous, blasphemously oppugned the mystery of the blessed trinity,
denying Christ to be God and man, and the only mediator and savior: who,
although they professed themselves to be Christians, and boasted of the title
of the Church, yet as much as in them lay, overthrew all Christianity, and thus
by the means of these men the white horse was made black.

Again in the two following ages, diverse heretics, as Photinus, Arius,
Eunomius, Macedonins and others did exceedingly darken the doctrine of
Christian religion, and with their vile errors corrupted many, who otherwise
were godly teachers. Papias and Irenaeus were Chiliasts or Millenaries,
Tertullian a Montanist, (though these three lived in the former ages) Origin
maintained many errors. The heresy of the Arians (being mightily supported
by Constans and Valens) infected almost all the have and Western Bishops, in
so much, that very few held the witness, or purity of the primitive faith.
For the principal fathers both Greeks and Latin as, Ambrose, Austine, Jerome,
and Chrysostom had sucked in some of their dregs, mingling with the pure
Apostolical doctrine many errors touching matrimony, single life, grace,
freewill, praying to, and for the dead, and purgatory; about fasts, difference
of me^ts, etc. with which things, as with black spots the white horse of Christ
was much stained.

To be short, in the following two hundred years till the time of Gregory the
first, the heresies of the Pelagians, Nestorians, and Eutichinians succeeded
the Arrians which had before overspread the whole Church. By little and little
also the rites of the heathens crept in, a new worship was devised by the
Bishops, with many beastly vanities and superstitions. Then began hot
disputations and contentions about holy orders, and seats of Bishops, about the
primacie of the chair of Rome, about righteousness of works, merits, and
humane satisfactions and the like, by which the doctrine of faith and free
grace was much oppressed, and a way made for Antichrist, who shortly after
came into the temple of God, when Boniface the third obtained the primacie and
dominion over all other Churches, from Phocas the usurper. Thus we have heard,
how at length the white horse became black.

Upon which notwithstanding Christ sat with his balance, that is, How Christ
sat on heretics with his ballanct. Lib. 2. de bapt. cont. don. cap. 6.
(as I also assent too) the holy scripture: for as the balance is the trial
of a just or unjust weight: so the holy scripture is the rule of doctrine
whether true or false: As Augustine well notes: Let us bring (says he) not
deceitful balances, wherein we may put what and how we will, saying according
to our own pleasure, this is weighty, this is light: But let us bring the
divine balance out of the holy Scripture, as out of Gods treasury: And put
into it that which is weighty, nay let not us put in any thing our selves, but
only acknowledge what is put in by the Lord.

But thou will say, how does Christ sit on heretics? do these bear him up?
or do they not rather deny him, and cast him off? I answer, both is true.
Now these, though in truth they deny him by their blasphemies: yet Christ is
said to ride on them with his balance in a twofold way: First in profession
and appearance; for the worst and grossest heretics professed Christ, and
accounted themselves his Church: And would pretend to weigh their errors in
the balance of the scripture, but by them abused, and miserably depraved. For
the truth is, most of them drew their heresies out of adulterat, and apocrypha
books, corrupting some places of holy writ for a cloak unto the same, but
rejecting such canonical books, as refuted their heresies. And thus we see,
how in this respect, Christ rides on heretics. But secondly, he does it also
by his providence, because even in the greatest confusion of heresies he was
not wanting unto his Church. Neither have, or do heresies at any time come
rashly, or unawares, but by Gods wise ordering hand, for the trial of the
Church: For there must be heresies, says Paul, that those which be approved,
may be made manifest. And therefore he has caused such heresies as sprung up to
be continually examined and confuted by the balance of his word, as histories
abundantly testify.

6. And I heard a voice in the midst] We have heard what he saw at the opening
of the third seal: he adds, that he heard a voice in midst of the beasts,
saying: the old version has it: As the voice of four beasts saying. But (...)
as, is not in the Greek: neither is it (...) saying, in the plural number, but
(...) in the singular. The voice came forth out of the midst of the beasts as
chap. 9.13. I heard a voice from the four horns of the altar. It is not said
whose voice it was. But without doubt it was the Lambs, standing in the midst
of the throne and four beasts: Chap. 5.6. He cries the price of food, but
whither at a dear or cheap rate it is uncertain, for the words following may
be taken both ways. In that it is said, A measure of wheat, viz. shall be
sold, for a penny: and three measures of barley for a penny: that is, shall be
put into the balance. We will first consider the words, and afterward the
sense; A measure, the Gr. (...); was a measure of dry things containing a half
peck: or as some will have it, so much food as would suffice a man for the day:
(...), says Suidas (...), Choenix is a measure of a days provision: hence
came the proverb of Pythagoras, (...), not to sit on the measure Choenix,
intimating, though a man had gotten so much as was sufficient for the day, yet
should he not therefore give himself to idleness, but still go forward in his
labor and calling. A Choenix, according to Bude contains two sextaries, or
four pound: a sextarie contains 24 ounces, or two pound: by which we see that
the old interpreter did err in rendering Choenix, two pound whereas it co^taines
four. For a penny, Gr. (...): so called from the number, being worth ten
pence; So much as was given for a days wages, as appears by the parable of
the laborers in the vineyard. Of wheat, a more dainty, and dearer corn then
barley, for that was for the poorer sort of men, beasts and other uses. I doubt
not, but he alludes to the famine in Samaria which was besieged until an asses
head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, 2 Kin. 6.25.
and the fourth part of a cab of doves dung for five pieces of silver: but soon
after a measure of fine flour was sold for a shekel, and two measures of barlie
for a shekel. Notwithstanding I take it, that here not a cheapnesse, but a
dearth rather of food is foretold, seeing the measure of a days allowance,
could hardly be obtained by a days wages: which must needs cause scarsity both
to man and beast.

But wherefore does he prophecy of a famine, under the black horse, the same
shadowing out (as we have showed) the corrupt state of the Church under
haereticks? If we take it according to the letter, it seems not to cohere: For
what need was there to foretell a dearth, which we know comes ordinarily to
pass.

Wherefore the prophecy seems mystically to be understood, He proclaims a
mystical famine.
not a famine of bread, but of the word of God, threatened here to be sent upon
the despisers thereof, according to that in the prophet: they shall wander from
sea to sea, and from the North even to the East: and run to and fro to seek the
word of the Lord, but should not find it. Amos 8.11.12. Therefore in these
words viz. by scarsitie of wheat and barley, the Church is threatened with a
spiritual famine: that is the Gospel of Christ should be so corrupted through
the ambition, Luxury, coveteousnes, negligence and slothfulnes of Bishops: and
the antie^t faith so adulterated by heretics, as that nothing almost should
remain pure and sound. We know by wheat, the elect are signified, and by
tares, the reprobate, as in Mat. 13.30. Wherefore by wheat in this place, I
understand either sincere teachers which should be rare and precious: or else
the sound and orthodoxe doctrine concerning God and Christ our savior, of
which there should be, as it were, a famine in the earth. Nevertheless with
this wheat God would feed his elect, however it should be obtained by great
difficulty and labor: yea barley bread should be very scarce, that is, the
comforts of the Gospel not so fully enjoyed, as formerly. Such is the darkness,
and the effects thereof, when the Church is burdened with the traditions of men.

This famine of true doctrine was very great in the days of Constans and some
Arian Emperors after him: The time of the famine here spoken of.
when the pernicious and pestilent doctrine of Arius was received by all the
East and Western Churches. For after the Emperor Constans by sundry councils
and other means, had endeavored to establish Arianisme, at last calling
together all the Bishops, both Arians and others, (namely the Western unto
Arminensis, a city in Italy, and the Eastern unto Seleucia a city in
Isauria) he would not admit them to depart, till all had consented unto the
prescript form of the Arian heresy: whereupon it happened, that they being
there retained seven whole months, and wearied with delay, some being overcome
by entreaty, others with threatenings, at last they all, yea Hosius also,
subscribed unto it, and condemned the word (...) and (...), essence, and
coessential: Hilarious (banished out of France) only excepted, who (as a grain
of wheat) returning into France, restored the purity of the faith, and brought
most of the Bishops of Italy unto the right way of Christ: as Sulpitius
Severus records, speaking thus in the conclusion of his book of this synod
which consisted of 400 Bishops: the council held at Arminensis, was dismissed,
whose beginning was good, but in the end wickedlie concluded.

And see thou hurt not the oil and wine.] Junius will have the words, wine and
oil, to cohere with the fore going sentence, as if it ought thus to be read,
three measures of barlie for a penny, and oil and wine: (where he puts a colon
or two points:) and he renders (...), hurt not unjustly: that is, very little
wine and oil shallbe given for a denarius or ten pence: thou shall not deal
unjustlie, understand, while thou metest out but a little for a great price.
But in this he seems to be to courious: neither can the former colon, cohere
with (...) a denarie, or ten penie worth. But hurt not the wine and oil, to
wit, the orthodoxe faith, but some shall maintain the same, and the whole not
be obscured by heretical blackness. And such were Athanasius and Hilarious, in
the time of the Arian heresy, whom we before mentioned: they are called wine
and oil from the effect: because as wine cherishes, and oil purifies: so
sound doctrine does glad and cleanse the consciences. This therefore is added
as a word of comfort, least the faithful, seeing heresies to get the upper
hand, should be discouraged. For God will always preserve some teachers of
his truth, that the elect may not be hurt by heretics.

Ribera interprets this of their seven sacraments, and hence he promises the
pope, a great victory against the Lutherans. But as yet these things
appertain not to the times of Antichrist: and vainly he seeks for a garland,
and comfort in the idle fictions of his own brain. Alcasar comes nearer to the
mark, applying the oil to the light and true knowledge of happiness, the
wine to spiritual joy, which the heavenly voice promises the elect not to be
deprived of.

The opening of the fourth seal.

The pale horse, and death sitting on him, with hell following and killing the
fourth part of the earth.

7 And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth
beast, say, Come and see.

8 And I looked, and behold, a pale horse, and his name that sat on him was
death, and hell followed with him: and power was given unto them over the
fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death,
and with the beasts of the earth.

THE COMMENTARY.
7. ANd when he had opened the fourth seale] I well approve of the observation
of Andreas, that the fourth beast has the form of a flying Eagle, who now
calls John to behold the events of the fourth seal. For the Eagle with his
quicksighted eyes having spied some things on high, with great celeritie flies
thither to it. Whereby is signified, that the plagues here foretold come no
otherwhere then from above. For God being provoked to wrath and indignation,
does justly send them, partly to revenge the injuries don unto the saints,
and partly to punish the wicked, who repent not of their evils.

8. And behold a pale horse] The fourth seal being opened, there comes forth
now a pale horse, whose rider is death, and hell his follower or companion,
having power to kill the fourth part of the earth with sword, famine,
pestilence, and the beasts of the earth. This horse in Gr. is said to be (...),
that is, of a greenish color tending to palenesse, such as is the color of
leaves in harvest time, falling from trees for want of juice.

Now interpreters are of diverse opinions what is the meaning of this pale
horse, and death his rider, with hell following, and what manner of plagues are
shadowed out thereby.

Lyra supposes, Lyras interpretation.
that this horse is the people of Rome, the rider Domitian: named death,
because he most unjustlie murdered many both senators and people: and himself
afterwad by the Senate was also put to death for his cruelty, the horse he
understands to be pale, because of pale death, riding thereon. Hell followed
him: that is, he was immediately upon his death cast into hell fire. Power was
given him to kill the fourth part of the earth, that is, cruelly to persecute
the Christians throughout the whole Roman Empire, which was then streatched
out over the four parts of the world. With the sword] for therewith he killed
many. With hunger] starving them in his prisons. And beasts of the earth]
because he caused many to be cast before wild beasts and torn in pieces. And
death] noting thereby all kind of punishments.

Andreas referrs it to the persecution of Maximianus, Andreas his
interpretation. Riberas opinion.
in whose time (as Eusebius writes lib. 9. cap. 8.) such a multitude of men
were taken away by pestilence and famine, as that the dead could hardly be
buried. Ribera will have all to be applied unto the third persecution under
Trajan, affirming, that he and his instruments in putting to death the
Christians by sword, famine, wild beasts, etc. are this horse, said to be
pale, from the effect: (for he that is slain looks pale) Death was the rider,
because they killed many thousands of Christians. Hell followed not to devour
the saints being slain, but those that had killed them: Howsoever they
thought that none would take vengeance on the^ for so great a wickedness. They
killed four parts of the earth (for so the Latin version reads it) that is in
all places of the Empire: or, according as it is in the original, a fourth part
of the earth: For if the multitude of Christians which were slain should have
been reckoned, the number would have been no less then a fourth part of men
then living in those provinces: or else said to be a fourth part, because the
cities of their habitations wherein they were dispersed by reason of
persecution, were the fourth part of the earth, that is of the Roman Empire.

But these interpretations cannot stand: for undoubtedly the three foresaid
persecutions were set forth under the red horse: besides it is not likely that
John saw the bloody face of the Church after her blackness, but in order of
time it went before. That which Ribera pretends, is without all show of
reason, as if by the red horse should be noted such persecutions as the Godly
suffered by their treacherous confederates: But we know how under the Emperors,
they had neither polities, weapons, or confederates: moreover he himself
before interpreted the red horse, to be persecutions under tyrants.

A certain namelesse interpreter (whom many follow) understands by the pale
horse, hypocrites and false brethren, who disfigure their faces that they may
appear unto men to fast. Matt. 6.16. These carry death, that is bring death
upon themselves and others by their hypocrisy and deceits. Hell follows them,
that is, the multitude of the damned, who follow the devil. They slay the
fourth part of the earth, that is, very many by the sword of false accusation
and slander: Hunger, that is, want of the word of God: Beasts of the earth,
that is, with brutist and unreasonable lusts: and lastly, with death, that is,
with all sorts of mischievous practices. I confess there is something in what
is here said, however their applying it to hypocrites is too general and
obscure. For indeed I verily believe, besides the bloody persecutions of
tyrants, and black blasphemies of heretics, there is here another evil of the
Church shadowed out.

Therefore this pale horse in kind is the same with the three former, but of
another color: for howbeit it signifies the same Christian Church, yet is far
otherwise to look on then before, as having now her white, red and black
estate turned into a mortal palenesse, and being sick even unto death through
the rising of Antichrist: she was whole and sound in the white horse: covered
with the blood of martyrs in the red horse: spread over with heresies in the
black: But now so infirm, weak and sickly, as that she has death on her
back, and is near to death and hell: For a fourth part perishes with the
sword, famine, death, (or pestilence) and beasts of the earth: And these are
the four sore plagues wherewith the Lord threatened to punish Jerusalem for her
apostacy. Ezech. 14.21. To which place he here alludes by an allegory,
signifying those pernicious doctrines of heretics and hypocrites, which tended
to death and destruction, and making way for Antichrist.

But whence came this deadly disease, and palenesse unto the Church? When and
how this palenesse befell the Church.
I answer, it was by accident occasioned by Constantine, that good Emperor,
his excessive bounty to Christian Bishops, by which indeed he enriched, but no
way bettered the Church. For as to much indulgence of parents spoils the
child: so this liberal Emperor was a means to draw Bishops to pride,
luxury, idleness, security and other vices. For after he first had restored
peace unto the Church, and heaped up honor and wealth upon Bishops (but
specially enlarged the jurisdiction of Rome) presently followed such a
declining and corruption in doctrine and discipline, as infected the Church
with a deadly poison, brought upon her (I say) a spiritual sickness, in so
much as the pest of Antichrist began now to enter into her very heart and
bowels. And hence it is reported that a voice from heaven was heard, saying; To
day venom is powered forth into the Church. Sylvestri legenda. In vita Malchi.
And Jerome even in his time complained, that after princes became to be
Christians, the Church indeed was greater in power and riches, but less in
virtue.

The remote cause of this so great an evil considered in it self, was the
guile, and malice of that old serpent the devil, who labored to supplant the
Church through the ease and pomp of Bishops, being otherwise not able to
overthrow it by the sword of tyrants: but the nearest cause was the hypocrisy
of superstitious monks, with the pomp, luxury and avarice of ambitious
prelates, hereby making way for Antichrists oppression of the Church and truth.
Se Clemanges touching the corrupt state of the Church, Cap. 3.

The original of Monks was occasioned by the persecution of Decius, The monks
original.
for some then to avoyde his tyranny (among whom was Paulus Thebaeus, and one
Antonius) fled into deserts, where they endured a while the hardship of a
solitary life: this kind of life by others was afterward imitated, and at
length new orders and religions folishly devised, wherein they boasted of
perfection, and merits of supererogatio^. Hereupon a great multitude of Moncks,
(as a sink of mischief,) overspread the Church, by whom the truth of Christ
(under the pretense of holiness) was soon oppressed. For now such as desired the
pardon of sin, and to obtain eternal life, were sent, not unto Christ, but
unto Hermites, and to the dens of Monks. And hence came this palenes, and
mortal wound upon the Church; hereby drawing more thousands of souls to death
and hell, then either the four sore plagues mentioned in Ezech. 14. or the
sword of tyrants, or the black famine of haereticks, or any other kind of
punishments wherewith Christians were brought unto their end.

Moreover the riot of Bishops and the clergy, mightily increased this pale
disease: for now infinite ceremonies and humane traditions are established: as
the worshipping of the dead, images, the observation of holy days, orders,
rites and solemnities of pagans forged by the devil himself, (the names only
altered) were forciblie imposed upon the Church, to the utter abolishing of the
doctrine of free grace, and the merits of Christ. The sum of all is this: the
fourth seal being opened, the Church appeared languishing with a deadly
palenesse: for about three years after the decease of Gregory, Boniface the
third being created Pope, sat on the chair of universal pestilence, and
began to establish monarchical tyranny.

The II. Act of vision II.
The opening of the fifth seal.

The souls under the Altar crying to have their blood avenged.

9 And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the Altar the souls of
them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they
held.

10 And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true,
do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?

11 And white robes were given unto every one of them, and it was said unto
them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until there fellow
servants also, and their brethren that should be killed as they were, should be
fulfilled.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd when he had opened the fifth seale] Hitherto we have heard the exposition
of the preparation to the second vision: viz. the majesty of God, with the
attendance about the throne: And the Lamb taking the book sealed with seven
seals, etc. We have heard also the first Act of the vision, viz. the opening
of four seals with the wonders following thereupon: namely, the white, red,
black, and pale horse, prefiguring (as we have showed) the future state and
face of the Church unto the rising of Antichrist. First white in faith, then
red in blood, afterward black with heresies, and at last pale through
hypocrisy and apostacy.

Now follows the second Act of the vision in the opening of the fifth seal,
which signifies not (as some have thought) new persecutions, but the comforts
of the Church both militant and triumphant. It is not improbable that here
should begin a new Act, seeing John is not now bidden by any one (as before
he was) to behold the wonder of this fifth seal.

In it three things are recorded, first, what he saw at the opening of the
seal, and the place where: namely, the souls of the martyrs under the altar,
v. 9. secondly what they said, v. 10. and lastly, the answer which they
received. v. 11. The sum of al is, to comfort the Church against the scandal
of the cross, specially shadowed out under the red horse. For least John
should have been to much daunted at the effusion of the martyrs blood, or any
of the faithful so offended thereat as might have weakened their faith and
piety, but rather in hope of a more happy state, with a Christian courage
might endure the fury and force of their adversaries: therefore the blessed
condition of the martyrs in heaven is here exhibited, being full of many
comforts to the godly, for they who in this world had been before cruelly
murdered for the sake of Christ, are now seen of John under the protection of
Christ, as glorious conquerours clothed with white robes.

The souls under the altar] The souls departed out of the bodies are
invisible to the bodily eye: but John saw them in the spirit: By which we
learn, that the soul is separable, subsisting in it self, immortal and dies
not with the body. Of which matter Aristotle albeit an heathen, yet thus
writes, and thus the soul is an essential power, separable, pure, and free
from passion: and again, as it is separable, so also immortal, and eternal.
Nevertheless some have been found not only Epicures, but even teachers in
Israel (as the Saduces by name) who have denied it. Now these brutish men
Christ plainly refuteth in the Gospel: Mat. 10.28.
where he bids us not to fear them which kill the body, and are not able to
kill the soul: but him, which is able to destroy both etc.

The souls of them that were slaine] that is, of the martyrs. But wherefore
were they slain? not for any evil committed, but for the word of God, and for
the testimony (viz.) of the Gospel, that is, for their faith in Christ, which
they openly professed and sealed with their blood: here we see, that not
suffering, but the cause of suffering makes a martyr. By the slain, are meant
not (as Alcasar supposes) those that were put to death by the Jews: neither
they only who suffered under Domitian until Diocletian, as Lyra affirms:
but the souls of all the martyrs, (even from Nero unto Boniface the third, the
first Antichrist) whose blood had been shed for the testimony of Christ,
being (as some call them) the twelve persecutions.

Ribera renders it, which had the testimony, passivelie. that is, of them it
was testified, that they were true Christians: as 1 Timothy 5.10. a widow having a
testimony for good works: but in the Greek it is not (...), but (...), and
therefore to be taken activelie. And are called martyrs, in giving testimony
unto Christ, and to the word of God. So that the word (...) here in the
original signifies, to profess, defend and holdfast. Whereby is showed the
great constancy of the martyrs, who were terrified with no manner of torments,
but still held the testimony, that is, the profession of Christ's name. Thus in
Chap. 12.17. the dragon is said to make war with them, which keep the
commandments of God, and have, that is, constantly maintain, the testimony
of Christ.

But now where were the souls of the martyrs? not under the robe of Marie,
Where the souls of the martyrs were.
as painters foolishlie represent it: but under the altar, which was in heaven
before the throne of God, as we shall see Chap. 8.3. Ribera here is to be
hissed at, who affirms that John in this speech has respect to the ancient
custom of Christians, laying up the relics of saints under the altars. For
when (says he) an altar is builded, there is made under it a sepulcher for to
keep the relics; and the priest, dipping his finger in the Chrisme makes the
sign of the cross upon the four corners of the sepulcher, saying: This
sepulcher is consecrated and sanctified in the name of the Father, the Son, and
the holy Spirit, peace be unto this house etc. But this custom is meerelie
superstitious, and gross idolatry, idly invented many ages after: For John
saw not any relics of bones or garments, but the souls of martyrs, not in a
sepulcher, or under an altar of stone, but under the heavenly altar, of which
the Apostle speaks Heb. 13.10. We have an altar whereof they have no right to
eat, which serve the tabernacle. This altar is Christ (as Anselmus and Haymo
do acknowledge,) under which he saw as in a type the souls of the martyrs,
that is, under the safeguard and protection of Christ. This being the first
happiness which the martyrs enjoy in the heavens, is for the comfort and
encouragement of them, who are yet to be slain. For however tyrants kill their
bodies, yet their souls immediately upon their departing, are received of
Christ: according to the prayer of Steven the first martyr, Lord Jesus receive
my spirit: and as Christ promised the thief: This day thou shall be with me
in paradise. The which benefit Riberas gloss does both deminish, and wholly
take away.

Moreover here we are plainly taught, that the souls of the martyrs, and
other saints departed, are not in the pains of purgatory: but enjoy the
presence of Christ their savior in the heavens. But touching this sight of
Christ, how, and after what manner they see God and Christ, I leave it to
Sophisters to dispute of. If they be under the altar, that is Christ, then
undoubtedlie they do behold him: Ioh. 14.9.
And if Christ, why not God also: Forasmuch as Christ himself says, He which
sees me, sees my Father: the fullness of whose sight we shall enjoy at the
last day, 1 Ioh. 3.2.
as the scripture teaches. For when he shall appear we shall be like him: for
we shall see him as he is. In the mean while the blessed vision here spoken
of, suffices for the present degree of happiness unto the souls of the
faithful.

10. And they cried with a great voyce] Now he shows what the souls do
under the altar: namely cry mightily to God, that their blood may be avenged,
which argues, that their souls were not killed or died with their bodies, but
live eternally: neither are they asleep, but watch. But this we are not to
understand of any vocal crying with the tongue (which the souls cannot do)
but of a visionall crying by which is signified their earnest desire,
represented here unto John in the spirit, under the form of a great cry. The
phrase alludes to the death of Abel, Gen 4.10.
whose blood is said to cry for vengeance to God from the earth.

O Lord] Now he comes to rehearse what their crying was; and in what manner
they implored him that sat on the throne and the Lamb.

Holie] that is, pure, hating the cruelty of tyrants.

True] always constant in performing thy promises and threatenings, and just
also both in rewarding, and in punishing of men.

How long do thou not judge etc.] Seeing thou art holy, and true, why do
thou suffer tyrants to rage so long against thy saints?

On them that dwell on the earth] A paraphrase of tyrants, and their
instruments: being unworthy to be named, only approbriously they are called
inhabitants of the earth, that is, earthly and foolish men, presuming to
rebel against heaven to their own destruction: closely also implying their
own present happy condition, as free from the fury of wordlings.

How long?] They desire the hastening of Gods judgments. But here it may be
demanded, how the souls of the saints in heaven can be said to be thus
impatient and desirous of revenge? I answer their words import no impatient
desire, For the glorified saints, are altogether free from all corruption this
way: and therefore here is signified their earnest desire, that Gods glory be
vindicated, and the Church finally delivered from the tyranny of implacable
adversaries: neither do they praescribe unto God any time touching his
judgments, or the deliverance of the Church, but closely submit unto the
same, as unknown to them when it shall be only they intimate that to them it
seems just and equal, that he should deliver his Church, and no longer suffer
the blasphemies and cruelty of persecutors. And therefore not desiring to
avenge themselves, they commit vengeance unto the Lord: How long O Lord do
thou not avenge? not thristing after it themselves, but desire that God in
righteousness will administer the same, as knowing the just God will not
suffer the cruelty of the wicked to be unavenged, and pass without
punishment: yet they leave the manner and time to the Lords own disposing:
desiring it no otherwise then as it may stand with his pleasure and will. Thus
we also here on earth pray to be delivered from that evil one, in which we
contradict not the counsel of God, neither sin against him, in praescribing
the time and manner thereof: but showing our desire, we attribute unto God the
praise of his justice, faithfulness and omnipotency, believing that he both can
and at length will assuredly deliver us. Much less therefore do the souls of
the saints in praying for the same thing, sin against the Lord. Vide August.
sermon. 11. de Sanstis.

11. And white robes were given to every one of them] God heard the request of
the martyrs, and answers them according to their desire, both in word and deed.
In deed, for white robes were presently given unto every one of them. In word,
for a speadie vengeance is promised. After a little season, The cause of this
delay is added, not that the sins of bloodthirstie tyrants are not ripe, and
worthy of vengeance, but because the number of the martyrs is not yet
complete. And this is the sum.

White Robes] This notes out the beginning of their celestial glory.

Were given them] to wit, by him that sat on the throne, or by the Lamb. Not
as if the souls under the altar were naked before, seeing even in this life
they had put on Christ. For as many as have been baptized unto Christ, Gal.
3.27. 2 Cor. 5.5. and 5.
have put on Christ: and if we be not found naked here, we shall be clothed
with our house, which is from heaven, and being purged from all filthiness, we
shall stand before God, and live with Christ in eternal happiness.

Now I disaproove not their judgment touching the twofold robe after this
life. While we are here our robe remains stained with the spots of the flesh,
August. tom. 10. sermon. 11. de sanct.
though covered with the blood of Christ, to the end they may not appear
before the face of God. After our departure, a robe is given to every one,
perfitly white indeed, yet but one, that is, a new degree of happiness in
heaven. But after the full deliverance of the saints, that is, at the day of
judgment, the other robe shall be also given, that is, the saints shall be fully
and perfectly glorified: This then is another comfort, namely, that to the
martyrs, in stead of the bloody robe, with which tyrants here clothed them,
there shall be given them a white robe of joy and glory in heaven.

And it was said unto them] to wit, by him that sat on the throne, or by the
Lamb under whose shadow they rested: neither is it strange, that Christ is
represented, as a Lamb, in regard of his death, and as an Altar, in regard of
his propitiation.

Here are many things touched in few words. First it is a mild admonition,
that the souls for the present should be contented with their white robes, and
cease crying, expecting the time of Gods appointed judgment. It is also a
close commination of revenge after a little season: for however God for a while
deferres punishment: yet he certainly hears the request of the godly, and at
last will be fully avenged on their adversaries. It is also a prophecy of the
future condition of the saints under Antichrist, by whose tyranny many
martyrs are to brought to their end with fire and sword. And lastly it is
consolation for the godly under this antichristian tyranny: seeing their
afflictions shall endure but for a moment, neither shall Antichrist rage
according to his full desire, but he shall be be limited according to the decree
and purpose of God, who has determined the number of martyrs, which number
being once accomplished not one drop of blood shall more be spilt by him. And
last of all, their fellow servants and brethren which should be killed, shall
also be gathered under the same Altar, to partake with them of the same
blessedness.

Now Antichrists time, is said to be short, or for a little season, after the
manner of the scripture, which speaking of the last times compare them as it
were, unto an hour in comparison either of eternity, or the age of the world
already past.

We are taught therefore in the first place, that God does always hear the
prayers of his children: although touching their deliverance he reserve the
time and manner thereof unto himself, as best knowing when, and how to dispose
of all things for their good.

Secondly, the blasphemies and outrageous cruelties of the wicked, are never
forgotten of God: but vengeance certainly is prepared for them, however he
forbeares them for a time.

Thirdly, the goodness of God is the cause of this forbearance: Romans 2.4.
As to lead men unto repentance, so also that the full number of martyrs may be
accomplished. And for this cause no doubt the Lord suffered the Romans,
Vandales, Goths and other tyrants by the space of six hundred years to shed
much blood (though no more then was appointed) of the saints for the
confirmation of the Christian religion: And no otherwise he decreed but from
that time unto the end of the world, many should suffer under Antichrist for
the same causet that so the judgment of the whore might be the more
intolerable.

Hence we may not think, that either the Churches sufferings under Antichrist,
were unknown unto the Lord, or happened against his will: but rather came to
pass by his most wise counsel, in which we ought to rest, and never to be
scandalized at his fury, nor rage of any of his instruments, but to rest in the
work of God, if so be he have appointed either thee or me to be among the
number of the martyrs. To be short, here we see that there is a communion
between the saints in heaven, and those on earth. For we are brethren and
fellow servants, neither are they our lords, Chap. 19.10. and 22.9.
and patrones, as Idolaters imagine. And being fellow servants, they no less
refuse divine worship, then did the Angel, who forbade John to worship him,
saying, See thou do it not: for I am thy fellow servant, Worship God.

But, say they, they pray for us: and therefore we may pray to them. I answer,
were this true, yet it would not follow. The reason is: because there is a
great difference betwixt praying for others, and to be prayed unto. To pray one
for an other is a duty of charity, and common unto all the faithful. But to
be religiously invocated upon, is a worship due to God alone according unto
the commandment, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, Mat. 4.10
and him only shall thou serve. And the reason is, because God alone is
omniscient, omnipote^t, and present in all places, hearing, understanding, and
only able to fulfill the desires of his people. But now the heavely Angels, and
glorified spirits are neither omniscient, to behold all our actions: nor
omnipotent, as able to help us: nor can they be present with us in all places.

Besides it is uncertain, The intercession of saints is here not proved: but
condemned.
yea false, that the saints do at al intercede for us: neither can any such
thing be proved from this place. For the souls of these martyrs pray not for
their fellow servants, but to have their own blood avenged; nay they knew not
who they were, for else they would not have desired a hastening of divine
wrath: neither at the instant was their request granted, but deferred to the
time appointed of God. To all which we may add that from visions, and
allegories no doctrines can or ought to be drawn, repugnant to the word of
God: as this is concerning praying to the saints: 1 Timothy 26. 1 Ioh. 2.2. Romans
8.34
for it is derogatory unto the honor of Christ, who according to the
scriptures, is our only advocate in heaven: There is one mediator betwixt God
and Man, the Man Christ Jesus: And, we have an advocate with the Father Jesus
Christ the Just: And he makes request for us. Now if the saints were also our
advocates: then should not Christ be the only mediator betwixt God and Man.
In deed we doubt not, but the souls of the saints in a general way do know
the afflicted condition of the Church here, and desire her deliverance: But in
special to know our affairs, they do not, nor cannot.

They see (say they) in God, as in a glass, or by a reflection all our
affairs here: but this is a mere fiction, Isai. 63.16
contrary to the scriptures: Abraham knows us not, Israel is ignorant of us.
But thou Jehovah art our God and Father. But they further object.

They love us: therefore they pray for us. I answer: It is true, yet they love
Christ more then us: and therefore they will not intercede for us, to derogate
from Christ, as if his intercession were insufficient, or that he were asleep
while he is called upon. But, say they, the saints in praying for us, derogate
not from Christ, seeing the prayer of the saints each for other on earth, is
no way derogatorie unto him. I answer: the reason is not alike: for the
glorified saints cannot intercede in Christ's presence without great dishonor
to him, but the others being yet in the body, are bound (having a
commandment) to pray one for an other: Iam. 5.16.
which the saints in heaven have not: yea, say they, they have, for Paul bids
the Hebrews to pray for him. Heb. 12.28
I answer: The Hebrews of whom this duty of love is required were not in
heaven, but here in an earthly warfare. Besides if this commandment did tie
the saints in heaven, then also are they bound to pray each for other: which
is absurd and false.

To be short who does not understand, that those whom the Pope canonizeth for
saints, are as they say, spokesmen before God for others, and howsoever they
may not be worshipped as Gods, yet as Advocates, that is, with a less kind of
worship. Now who (I say) does not see that all this is taken from Apuleius and
the followers of Plato, who fained, that their demons (whom they called Gods)
were, Lib. 8. de civit. Dei cap. 22. Ibid. cap. 23.
as it were, messengers between the upper Gods and men: carrying up their
petitions to them, and bringing down aid and succor from them to men: So
that they pretended not to worship them as Gods: which subtilty of theirs
Augustine thus refuteth. Apuleius (says he) denies them to be Gods: But in
saying that they are so in the middle betwixt both, as that they seem to be
necessary for man before God, in this he does not separate their worship from
the religion of the high Gods: And deriding this vanity, he speaks further:
it is to foolish, to believe that such Gods as are made by men, should more
prevail with the Gods, whom God has made, Ibid. cap. 24.
then men themselves whom God himself has also created. Let us therefore cast
of Popery as a heathenish worship, derived from Apuleius and Plato.

The third Act of vision II.
The opening of the sixth seal.

A great earthquake: darkening the lights, etc.

12 And I beheld, when he had opened the sixth seal, and lo, there was a
great earthquake, and the Sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the
Moon became as blood.

13 And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a figtree casts
her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind.

14 And the heaven departed as a scrowle, when he is rolled together, and every
mountain and Island were moved out of their places.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd I beheld] Horrible wonders appear at the opening of this sixth seal, as
earthquakes, shaking of the heavens, convulsion of the stars, subversion of
mountains and Islands; the explication whereof is difficult.

Arethas understands it of the darkness over all the earth, of the earthquake,
and rending of rocks at Christ's suffering. Matt. 27.51.


Ambrose by a trope applies this horrible concussion, to the destruction of
Jerusalem. But what use was there to reveal that unto John by obscure types,
which was already past, and fresh in memory, and by history formerlie made
known unto all?

Lyra understands it figuratively of the Diocletian persecution, more cruel
then the former. But the most cruelst of all was the persecution yet to come,
namely under Antichrist.

Andreas therefore (more probably) refers it unto the time before the coming
of Antichrist, wherein the miseries and persecutions here spoken of should come
to pass. But most interpreters understand it of the very last persecution
under Antichrist: of whose mind I also am: notwithstanding they err from the
scope of the history in their application. For they following the common
opinion, that some one particular Antichrist shall oppress the Church about the
last four years of the world, refer these earthquakes and darknings of the
sun, etc. unto the foresaid time. Nevertheless herein they agree not. For
Ribera and others interpret it properly of the signs going before Christ's last
coming, spoken of Matt. 24. Luke 21. But most apply it, to the horrible
confusions and calamities, which by Antichrist shall be brought upon the whole
earth.

But for my own part, I understand this third Act of the vision, to shadow out,
the many and sore trials, wherewith for a thousand years and more (as
histories testify) the Church of Christ has been excercised under Antichrist.

Now this Act consists of two parts. The third Act of the second vision has
two parts.
The first treats of the greater and more horrible confusion of the Christian
world under Antichrist: contained in the 12.13.14. following verses, which are
to be separated from the last three verses of the Chapt: the reason whereof I
will show by and by. The other part of the Act is more comfortable, as being
opposed to the former troubles, in which is propounded unto the godly for
their great consolation, the sealing of the elect in their foreheads, in the
first eight verses of the following Chapter. Now unless this be observed,
howbeit many things (I confess) in a general way may be truly, learnedly and
piously treated of, touching this earthquake, darkening of the Sun, and other
prodigious things, as miseries to befall the world: yet in deed these Generals
tend, but to the darkening of the matter: And therefore for the right
understanding of the sixth seal, we must of necessity have recourse to the
histories of the east and western kingdoms, both from the time that Popery was
first established in the West, and Mahumetisme in the East, as also diligently
consider the state and experience of the present times: touching all which a
word or two in General.

About the year of our Lord six hundred, after that the Church had obtained
some rest, and was freed from the persecution of open enemies: she immediately
began to be rent asunder by divisions, corrupted with diverse heresies, yea at
length Pagan worship (under the cloak of Christianity) and humane traditions
so prevailed, as that she became pale and sick even unto the death: For then
arose the hot contention between the Bishops of Rome, and Bizantium about the
monarchical primatie over all other Bishops and Churches. Hereupon the Emperor
Mauritius much favoring Iovinian his metropolitan, made way for him to obtain
the primacie, under a pretense, that where the principal seat of the Empire
was, there ought also to be the chief chair of the Church: Now on the other
hand Gregory Bishop of Rome, invying this honor of universalitie and power in
his corrival, Lib. 6. Epist. 10. Lib. 4. Epist 34.36.37.39.
affirmed that this title was wicked, perverse, proud profane, foolish and
frivolous, neither ought there to be any such scandal raised among the Bishops:
at last he thus concludes. I (says he,) do confidentlie affirm, that
whosoever either calls himself, or desires to be called the universal
priest, seeing herein out of the pride of his heart he lifts himself up above
his fellow brethren, is the fore runner of Antichrist. Thus we see that
Gregory makes the title of universal, to be the true badge of Antichrist. And
indeed he so much prevailed with the Emperor, as at that time the pride of
Jovinian his corrival was repressed. But Mauritius a while after being
wickedlie murdered by Phocas, and Gregory dying about the year 604. Pope
Sabinian his successor (thirsting after the foresaid tyranny) burnt the
writings of Gregory, and made void his decrees: however he attained not what
he aimed at, being preve^ted the year after by an infamous death. After him
succeeded Boniface the third, who by Phocas the usurper was proclaimed
universal Bishop, and Prince of Priests, notwithstanding the clergy and most
of the Italian Bishops opposed the same. Thus he declared himself unto the
whole world to be that Antichrist, and the first (as Platina and other writers
affirm,) that established his tyranny by these insolent expressions: as thus:
we will and command: we appoint and charge, we will and require etc.

From that time the Christian world began to be shaken with a horrible motion:
For now Christ the Sun of righteousness was obscured: The Moon of the Church
turned into blood: The stars fall from heaven, Bishops become secular
princes: heaven, or the opened book of holy scriptures, rolled up: The
mountains, kings and princes stand in jeopardy of their power: to be short,
the Islands are remooved out of there place, by being brought under the yoke
of Romish tyranny. Then, says Platina, only the rents of Bishoprikes was
looked at: Plati, in vita Bonif 3.
but not what sheep were in the pasture. It would be tedious to declare, how
this Antichristian tyranny by the successors of Boniface was afterward
established: As for Boniface himself, he indeed sat scarce a year on this
chair of universal pestilence. For on all sides these ecclesiastical harpies
so gaped after the prey, as that by poison, murder, deceit, factions,
seditions, enchantment and magical art one sought to dispatch the other.

Balaeus has distributed these Antichristian Popes from this Boniface unto
Julius II: that is, from the year of Christ 606. unto the year 1513. Balae.
in Act. Romans Pont.
into five distinct classes or orders: as may there be seen. Who for the most
part (as Genebrardus a Popish writer himself confesses) were Magicians,
Sorcerers, Atheists, Adulterers, Murderers, wicked, perjured, and impure, not
Apostolical, but apostatical and heretical men: they were (I say) capital
enemies of Apostolical doctrine, inventours and defenders of idolatry,
superstition, and a new worship, bloodthirstie men, and so have continued even
unto this day. And here indeed the earthquake began to shake all Christianity
in the Western parts.

Now about the same time, viz. in the year 609. Heraclius being Emperor (who
took away Phocas the tyrant) Mahumet an Ismaelite by open force raised no less
an earthquake in the East. For he (being a soldier and an hypocrite) by the
help of the Persians, took from Heraclius many provinces, and after he had
established a kingdom unto himself, he caused one Sergius a Nestorian Monk to
compose the Alcoran, who mixed togerher somewhat of every religion, in such a
manner as might best serve to draw the affection of carnal people unto a love
and liking thereof, thereby to strengthen the polity of his new usurped
kingdom in the world, and the better to root out the faith of Christ.

Whence it came to pass that by this commotion, most people in the East fell
from Christian religion, and the Sun of righteousness being darkened, the
mist of Mahumeticall superstition prevailed, and oppressed not the East alone,
but all the south parts of the world also: these are the earthquakes, darkening
of the lights, and prodigious wonders here enigmatically described, according
to the manner of prophetical scriptures. Now we come to the words themselves.

And behold a great earthquake] most dreadful and prodigious things, with
which under the reign of Antichrist (as most interpreters both Greek and
Latin confess) the Christian world, yea and heaven it self too, were to be
shaken: as the darkning of heavenly lights, the falling down of the stars,
and lastly the the concussion of the mountains and Islands are here showed
unto John under the Image or form of a great earthquake. Indeed such kind of
praedictions are diverse times mentioned both in the writings of the Prophets
and Apostles: But not in one and the same sense, the which thing we are well
to take notice of: for the circumstance of the places, will lead us sometimes
unto a literal, and sometimes unto an allegorical interpretation thereof.

Undoubtedly the predictions of Christ, The signs which are literally to be
understood.
touching the end of the world and his last coming are to be taken
litterallie: as in Matthew. 24. Mar. 13. Luke 11. Then there shall be signs in
the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the earth distress of
nations, with perplexity, the sea, and the waves roaring, Men's hearts failing
them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the
earth; for the powers of heaven shall be shaken, and then shall they see the
Son of man coming etc. and in Revel. 16.20. Every Island fled, and the
mountains were not found, viz. in the day of judgment. For indeed all these
things shall then really come to pass.

Now in other places, these expressions do set forth allegorically horrible
alterations, or Gods great judgments, and those either particular against the
enemies of the Church: as in Isay. 13.10. where the prophet speaks of the
horrible overthrow of the Babylonians in these words: The stars of heaven, and
the constellation thereof shall not give their light: The Sun shall be darkened,
and the Moon also shall not give her light. And again in Isai. 34.4. And all
the host of heaven shall be dissolved: and and the heavens shall be rolled together
as a scroll: and all their host shall fall down etc. And from this place, as it
seems by the like phrase, the words here in our text are taken. Again in Ezech.
32.7. concerning the overthrow of Egypt. I will cover the heavens (says the
Lord) and make the stars thereof dark: I will cover the Sun with a cloud, and
the Moon shall not give her light. Or universal, signifying the total
commotion of the Church: sometimes in a good sense: sometimes in a bad: and
sometimes in both.

In a good sense; as in Hag. 2.7. and Hebr. 12.27. Thus says the Lord, yet
once it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the
dry land. And I will shake all nations: and the desire of the gentiles shall
come etc. In which oracle is prophesied of an universal concussion, that is,
of the reformation of the world by Christ; the which how it has been, and
shall yet further be fulfilled, we have expounded in our commentary on Hebr.
12.27.

In the evil part it is undoubtedlie taken in this place, as signifying the
shaking of the heaven and earth, that is, the future corruption and oppression
of the Church by Antichrist. Now this concussion both in a good sense by
Christ, and also in an ill sense by Antichrist is prophesied of by Joel 2.28.
The oracle of Joel Chap. 2.27 expounded.
And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all
flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, etc. And I will show
wonders in the heavens, and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of
smoack: the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before the
great and terrible day come. Act. 2.17.
which prophecy Peter shows to have been partly fulfilled, when as on the day
of Pentecost, the Apostles, and the Apostolical Church were miraculously filled
with the holy Ghost: Partly, to be accomplished before the last coming of
Christ, at what time the Church shall be troubled with horrible calamities, not
so much by heretics or tyrants, as by Antichrist, Christ's adversary. Now
these things are foretold, least the faithful should imagine Christ's kingdom
to be of this world, or to expect pleasures in this life: but rather to
prepare themselves for all manner of adversities, and in the mean while being
fully assured, that these calamities shall no way hurt the Elect persevering in
prayer and supplication: Joel. 2.32.
and therefore this is added as a consolation. Whosoever shall call on the name
of Jehovah, shall be delivered; for in mount Sion and in Jerusalem shall be
deliverance. Andreas Caesariensis well observes on this place, that the cross
and calamities under Antichrist, seem to be foretold unto the Church, to no
other end, but that the godly being praeadmonished long be forehand, might be
confirmed in the very time of these trials by Antichrist and his ministers: for
evils foreseen and premeditated on, are less offensive, when they come upon us.

Thus we have heard whence these prodigious sights are taken: what they
signify, and wherefore they are foretold. Now let us consider them one by one:
they are seven in number: three whereof shall come to pass in the earth. viz.
The earthquake, the trembling of the mountains, and the removal of the Islands.
Four shall happen in heaven, viz. The darkning of the Sun: the changing of the
Moon into blood: the fall of stars: and the convolution of heavens.

The first is a great earthquake. This is made by the winds getting into the
hollow parts of the earth and violently breaking forth. Hereupon the earth
shakes, houses, towers, towns and cities are thrown down to the ground, and
all things are gashlie to behold. Even so Antichrist puffed up with base pride,
and lead by an evil spirit, has shaken the Christian world, overthrowen the
ancient order and discipline of Christ, by changing the form thereof into his
Ecclesiastical Monarchy: the which took its beginning from the time of Pope
Sylvester I. For no sooner were the Romish Bishops by Constantine, and the
following Emperors, raised up with outward dignity and riches, but they
hereupon swelling with ambition, forthwith began to domineere, and lord it over
their brethren: as the histories of Sozimus, Zaelestinus, Leo, and others
testify: notwithstanding this their great arrogancy was at first a little
kept under, as by the authority of Emperors, so by the canon laws, as also
the opposition of other Bishops: as may be seen by the Acts of the sixth council
of Carthage: where the Pope of Rome assuming the name of universal unto his
chair, by authority (as he falsely affirmed) of the Nicean council: he was
convicted of falsehood, and for that time repressed.

But after Gregory, this spirit of pride violently burst forth in Sabinian
his successor, and after him in Boniface III. who was (as we said before)
openly by Phocas, declared universal Bishop, that is, Antichrist was now
lifted up on his throne. Then began all the bowels of the earth, that is, of
the Christian world to be horribly shaken. For now the whole clergy: is
brought under the yoke of the Pope, who at length imposed the law of abstinence
from marriage upon them: Now the doctrine of the Church: both concerning the
worship of God as also the faith and free grace of Christ, is so corrupted as
nothing almost remained sound, but the bare name. Now the mountains, viz.
Emperors, Kings and Princes if at any time they displease the Pope, are sore
shaken, yea trodden under feet, by their bulls, and excommunications. Now the
Islands also, that is, whole nations escape not, as we shall hear by and by. It
would be tedious to repeat all the disturbances and grievous calamities, which
this Roman Antichrist has brought, and yet daily devises both against Church
and common wealth. By this earthquake Steeven the 11. through Pipin, wroung the
principallity of Ravenna with all Italy out of the hands of the Grecian
Emperors: from whom also Leo III. with the aid of Charles, drew away the whole
Empire of the West, to settle it (as some of them boast) among the Germans.
We need not insist upon histories, seeing our own daily experience does
sufficiently set forth the meaning of this commotion.

The Sun became black as sack cloth of hair] This is the second wonder. Christ
the Sun of righteousness shall be horribly eclipsed, that is, the doctrine
touching his offices and benefits darkened, and utterlie defaced. We heard
before, how the Church lost her witness, and became black in regard of the
many foul heresies of that time: yet something still remained pure in her, by
reason of some sound teachers who firmlie maintained the truth of Christ. But
under Antichrist even the Sun is made black as sackcloth of hair, that is, most
black, and hurtful. Not that Christ in himself can so be made: but because
Antichrist by his profession both teaches and makes such a Christ.

It is thought, that the hair of sackcloth here spoken of, What this sackcloth
of hair is.
is made of the black hair of goats, or horses: whereof in former time they
made mourning garments, as may be gathered from many places of scripture: these
garments did prick the flesh and much pain those that ware them. Hence the
hypocritical Monks, as Carthusians, Cappuzins, and other Antichristian frogs,
(who glory of perfection) wear such garments for the beating down of their
flesh: but indeed hereby (as by a true badge) they testify, that they live
under the darkness of the Sun here spoken of.

But (say they) Christ the Sun of righteousness is not darkened unto us: How the
Sun is obsctired in popery.
For the Pope professes Christ to be God and man against all heretics. I
answer: If he should openly cast off the name of Christ, then he could not have
brought the Christian Church under his bondage, neither suppress the truth as
now he does: But his coming as the Apostle witnesses, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
is with all deceiveablenes of unrighteousnes in them that perish. So that by
the cunning pretense of Christian profession, he has fraudulently overthrown
the Church: yea herein he has mainly opposed Christ, in that he was looked
upon to be a preacher of his name, Contra Auxentium lib. 2. cont. legis advers.
cap. 12.
as Hilarie and Austin write concerning him. The profession of Christ's person,
and of the trinity, was indeed the mask under which he deceived the Church:
for otherwise Christians would have shunned him as the devil. But of what use,
I pray you, is Christ without his offices and benefits, the which in popery are
trodden under foot? what profits it to believe that the Turk is the Emperor
of the East, from whom, unless it be by thy own deceit, thou can not exspect
either good to thy self or others?

Yea say they, Papists believe not on Christ as the only mediator.
we also profess Christ to be the mediator, redeemer and only savior, and
by believing in whose merits we must be saved. But we have often showed, that
this their profession is nothing but as black sackcloth, if they would but see
it: for if indeed they did believe Christ to be the only mediator, they
would not then have made to themselves so many thousands of mediators as they
have don: For do they not cry to S. Marie, to S. Peter, to S. Nicolas etc. to
pray for them? If they did believe to be saved by the merits of Christ alone:
then they would not have forged the merits of saints, neither their own works
of Justification, or of supererogation, or a purgatory fire, and so ascribe
salvation, which is obtained by Christ alone, unto their own inventions. Thus
therefore the Sun, in Popery, is made black as sackcloth of hair: The
Apostolical doctrine of faith and salvation by them is darkened, and changed
into Philosophical precepts: Christ's sacraments are darkened, and turned into a
stage-playing Pomp or show: The invocation and worship of God is darkened, and
turned into adoration of idols, and of the creature: To be short the Church it
self is darkened, scarslie retaining any thing of Christianity except the bare
name.

Now the black sackcloth of hair does signify the humane traditions, their
hetheanish and Jewish ceremonies mingled with Christianisme, of which Augustine
complains, Epist. 119 19.20.
that even in his time the Church began to be more burdened with them, then the
Israelites were with theirs: to be short it signifies the decrees and canons of
Synods, and Popes, by which the Church was turned into a secular kingdom, the
presbyteny into a civil court, and their temples into very brothel houses.

And the moon became as blood] The third wonder follows; by the moon, is
meant the Church, as Cant. 6.9. Fair as the moon. Rev. 12.1. The Sun is Christ
as we showed before. Now what marveile is it, if the Moon be turned into blood,
when the Sun is darkened? In Eclypses the Moon appears black and reddish, and
sometimes of a bloody color, having in it self but little light. But as the
Moon does receive its light from the Sun: so all light, purity, righteousness
and salvation, or whatever else the Church enjoyes, she receives it all from
Christ the Sun of righteousness. The sense therefore is, that the Church shall
be turned into blood, by the commotion of Antichrist. The like phrase the Lord
uses in Joel 2.31. But whence comes this blood into the Moon? I answer: by the
cruel tyranny of Antichrist, making the Church red with the blood both of the
nations, and of the Saints. For this blood was powered on her partly by wars,
and partly by martyrdoms. For the Pope not being content to usurp the title
of Peter the prince of the Apostles, and under that pretense to terrify the
world with his spiritual lightnings, he has also drawn out the temporal
sword against Emperors, kings, princes, and Christian nations, filling all
places with bloody wars. As we may see in the extravagant of Boniface VIII.
touching superiority and obedience, where it is expressly said, that the
Church has two swords, the spiritual and civil: and it is further added:
that the spiritual is excercised by the Church: the material by the hand of
kings and soldiers according to the pleasure and patience of priests, If this
be true, then what are kings and soldiers, but the Popes vassals? And is not
then that blood certainly shed by the Pope, which is spilt at his pleasure and
command by kings and their soldiers? And is it not the Pope, that causes the
Moon to become blood? but in this also there is deceit and fallacy, for the
Romish Bishops, have not only used the civil sword in the hands of princes,
but also in their own: having these many years together turned the Moon into
blood, by the many cruel wars occasioned and made by them. Beneven. de
Rambal. lib Augustali.
Benevenutus de Rambaldis a noted historian, thus writes concerning Boniface
the eight, above two hundred and thirty years ago: that, Albertus Duke of
Austria being by the Electors chosen king of the Romans, desired of Boniface
that famous Pope the blessing and coronation: to whom this lofty tyrant
answered, that he was unworthie of the Empire, because he had traiterouslie
killed his Lord Adolph in war: and having the crown on his own head, and a
sword girt to his loins, he said: I AM CAESAR. Julius II. the predecessor of
Leo a better soldier then a priest, being borne rather for Mars, then for
Christ, going forth with an army (as Wicelius witnesses) in the year 1513,
against the king of Navarre) threw Peter's Key into Tyber, saying, If the Key of
Peter cannot, let the sword of Paul prevail. Of which Mantuan thus sings:
Ense potens gemino, cujus vestigia adorant
Caesar, and aurato vestits murice reges.
Great Caesar with victorious kings,
Who golden crowns do wear:
They do adore his footsteps, who
the double sword does bear.


To be short the most cruel wars, which continually have been (and at this day
are) among Christian princes, to the shedding of exceeding much blood in
France, the Nederlands, Livonia, Poland, Muscovia, and Hungary, have always
been raised and fomented by the Popes bulls and armies: and by this means, ever
since the death of Priscillian they have continnallie murdered the saints and
made the Moon red with their blood. For Priscillian being declared an heretic
by the Pope, (although Sulpitius Severus describing his sect, does not charge
him with any heretical doctrines contrary to the analogy of faith; but only
for unlawful conventicles) was by the instigation of Ithacius Bishop of
Triers, put to death about the year of Christ 380, contrary to the mind of
Martine Thuronensis a Maximo the Emperor, the murderer of Valentinian the
younger. From that time forward the Bishops went on to have the like punishment
inflicted on all such as were condemned by them of haeresie: And at length the
Popes adjudged to death as heretics, all that opposed their tyranny and
idolatry, under which pretense, what a multitude of Christians have been most
cruelly murdered the books of martyrs testify, yea whosoever reads those
histories shall see clearly enough, that by their means the Moon was wholle
turned into blood. The massacre at Paris committed on Bartholomewes day, in the
year 1572, is yet fresh in memory, at what time within the space of eight
days there were more then a hundred thousand by the means of Gregory XIII.
most barbarously put to death in France, making all the streets, rivers, and
prisons in the land red with the blood of martyrs. Thus I doubt not, but we
understand what is meant by this change of the Moon into blood: touching which
also I will rehearse a very memorable example in the end of this book.

13. And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth] The fourth wonder, is taken
out of Isai. 34.4. and Mar. 13.25. We have heard what the stars do signify,
and wherefore they are so called: Rev. 1.20. the seven stars, are the seven
Angels, or Bishops of the Churches. And Rev. 12.1. The woman, or Church has
twelve stars on her crown, signifying the pastors and teachers of the
Churches. These stars which fell, are apostates who forsook Christ, for fear
of Antichrists cruel persecution: they are I say, principal Bishops and
teachers, who by embracing the kingdom of Antichrist, fall from heaven unto the
earth, among whom the Bishop of Rome was chief, and with him all others who
acknowledged him for their head. They fell unto the earth, by forsaking their
pastoral charge of preaching the word, and becoming earthly princes, imitating
the pomp of courtiers, and wholly giving themselves to worldly affairs, as
to wars, hauking, huntings, and all other vanities and pleasures in princes
courts: yea far exceeding them in pride, pomp and luxury. This fall of the
stars is amplifyed by the similitude of a strong wind blowing untimelie figs
from the tree. By these figs, are meant carnal bishops: and by the mighty
wind, the Papal authority, unto which all of them either for fear of
excommunication, or for promotion sake readily submitted.

14. And the heaven departed as a scroll] The sift wonder is taken out of Isai.
34.4. Heaven (Hebr. rakiagh) is that outspread firmament which God created on
the second day: and adorned with lights on the fourth day. This heaven, the
lights failing and falling down, departed. But after what manner? as a scroll
rolled together. In old time they bound not up their books as we do now, but
rolled them up as upon a rolling instrument, The heaven rolled up, is the
Church falling away from Christ.
and so being shut, they could not be read. But what heaven is here meant to
be thus rolled up? Interpreters understand hereby, the Church spread over all
the face of the earth, which to John did seem to depart like a scrol, not as
ceasing to be, but as ceasing to be seen: The which indeed is true of the
Church of the Elect. For however Antichrist shall cover his kingdom with the
title of the Church: and take those things that are proper unto her, causing
the word and Sacraments (though horribly depraved) to be administered by his
clergy: nevertheless they shall not be Christ's Church, but a synagogue of
Satan. The true Church of Christ shall depart, being hid and not seen to the
world: to whom belonged all the martyrs and professors, witnessing against
Antichrist. But thou will say, these were not hid: It is true indeed, they were
seen, as they were men, and could not be hid as they were martyrs: but hid, as
a Church, or the members thereof: for they were condemned and accounted by
Antichrist, not as Christ's faithful ones, but as wicked heretics.

This heaven or out spread firmament, The heaven departing, is the closing of
scriptures in popery.
may also be rightly understood of the opened book of holy scriptures, which
by Antichrist and his instruments was shut or rolled up, yea, and cast under
foot: using in the mean time with great revere^ce, the Fathers, Scolasticks,
Sentenciaries, Canonists, Legends etc. Moreover since this book of God began
again to be opened, how have the Jesuits labored to roll it up, questioning
the authority thereof, not accounting the same to be divine, but as it is
confirmed by the judgment of the Church, Andrad. defens. council. Staplet.
contr. Witak.
that is, of the Pope. For thus they expressly write: That in it there is so
much of the deity, as the Popes Church attributes unto it: neither ought God to
be believed, but because of the Church.

And all the mountains were moved] This is the sixth wonder, which Andreas does
rightly understand of those who excel others in wordlie power. For in Rev.
17.10. by mountains, kings are understood, in which sense I judge it is here
also taken: neither does it any way cross this exposition, that kings are
expressly nominated in the following verse; seeing that place concerns the
following Act, and is to be understood of their punishment.

But how have kings been moved by Antichrist? The histories of the Popes
declare this diverse ways. First by their ecclesiastical authority, fraud and
threatenings, constraining Emperors and kings not only to maintain by fire and
sword their ordinances and decrees, but even to cast themselves down, and
kiss the feet of their holiness: The Popes tyranny against Emperors and
kings.
And secondly civily: for Antichrist spared neither King nor Keisar, but
whoever would not do all things according to his pleasure, those he oppressed,
deposed and thrust out of their places. Gregory II. having excommunicated Leo
the Emperor deprived him of his revenues. Pope Zachary, deposed Childerick
king of France. Leo III deprived the Grecian Emperors of the Western Empire.
Alexander III. first proudly trampled with his feet upon Frederick I. before
he would receive him into favor. Gregory VII. displaced Henry IV. Innocent
III. thrust out Otho IV. Innocent IV. took the Empire from Frederick II.
Clement VI. excommunicated Ludowick IV. Julius II. deprived the great
grandfather of Henry IV (king of France) of his kingdom of Navarre. Sixtus V.
sought to depose Charles IX king of France, and Elizabeth queen of England
etc. To be short Antichrist powerfully moved the mountains, against Emperors,
kings, and Christian princes, through his Sophisters and councils, usurping to
himself authority over whole councils, boasting that by him kings do reign,
and that it is in his power to cast them down when he pleases, and lastly
that no councils are authentic without his approbation. This is a true and
plain interpretation.

And the Islands were moved out of their places] This is the seventh wonder,
Islands are environed with waters: The waters signify peoples Chap. 17.15. and
therefore by the Islands here are meant nations or the subjects of princes:
these also are moved: for all are necessitated upon pain of salvation to
subject themselves unto the Romish Bishop: neither can any buy, nor sell, nor
make any bargain, but according to his pleasure as appears by the extravagant
of Boniface VIII. We define, we say, we pronounce, we appoint that it is of
necessity unto salvation, for every humane creature to believe, that he is
subject unto the chief priest of Rome. Thus the Islands, peoples, and
communaltie being deprived of their Christian liberty, which they enjoyed
under the Apostles, were brought under Antichrists yoke, under which they serve
and groan even unto this day.

The fourth Act of the second vision concerning the final punishment of the
wicked.
15 And the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the
chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every freeman
hid themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains,

16 And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face
of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb:

17 For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?

THE COMMENTARY.
15 ANd the kings of the earth] Many (with Lyra) refer these things unto the
times of Diocletian and Maximianus, whose cruelty against the Christians
Eusebius treats of Histor. lib. 8. and 9. because in those days men of all
conditions and estates, both great and small, not being able to endure the
extremity of tyrants, sought to hide themselves in caves, mountains and
woods. But they err from the scope, and in my opinion offer violence to the
text: for undoubtedly by kings etc. are not meant the vulgar, but men in place
and authority. Now in those times there were no Christian kings, that we read
of, to be persecuted, or to shun these tyrants. Besides the following words,
hide us, and fall upon us, are not expressions of the godly groaning under the
cross, but of the wicked, dispairing for fear of wrath, as the cause annexed
shows: for the great day of his wrath is come: which cannot be possibly
understood of the day of the Diocletian persecution.

Others therefore have thought, that these things appertain to the last times,
and the punishments of persecutours. So Andreas, The kings, says he, and all
the princes, and rich men, etc. shall rather desire to be hid in mountains,
rocks and caves, then to feel the wrath and scourges of the Lamb, which at
Antichrisis coming shall overwhelme those miserable men: Or certainly they
shall thus greatly quake for fear of the judgments prepared for them after
the resurrection of the flesh, which never shall have an end.

Therefore this fourth Act of the vision concerning the final punishment of
reprobates, is briefly annexed to the matter going before, and answers
successively to the third Act, howbeit neither this nor the third is yet fully
ended in this Chapter, as before we noted. For as the third Act has two parts:
the first setting forth Antichrists tyranny over the Christian world, in the
three former verses: the other his restraint, and the sealing of the elect
afterward described in Chap. 7. So likewise the fourth Act consists of two
parts, both full of joy and consolation to the Church: the first whereof
describes the final and universal destruction of the wicked, in the three last
verses of Chap. 6. The second sets forth the happy condition which the saints
shall enjoy with the Lamb in heaven from v. 9. of Chap. 7. unto the end
thereof.

Now we come to handle the punishment of the wicked, the which here is but
briefly touched, but afterward more largely set forth in the following visions:
The general doctrine is this: that however the wicked for a while oppress and
afflict the Church, yet they shall one day finally perish: their rage and
cruelty in seeking to destroy the godly, shall turn to their utter overthrow
and ruin: for ordinarily injury goes before destruction. Now the reason hereof
is, because God is just, and will not suffer their cruelty to go unpunished:
And also he is omnipotent, and able easily to cast down the kings of the
earth, which have risen up against him: to be short, he is faithful and true,
to perform the promised deliverance and glory unto the saints. Now here is
described 1. The condition of the adversaries: 2. their trembling and despair:
and thirdly the cause thereof.

And the kings] And, here is not so much copulative, as continuative or
adversative, for, then the kings: or, but the kings etc. For it signifies the
effect of this great Antichristian earthquake: we have not in this place,
neither Antichrist, nor his false prophets and parasites, by whose fraud he was
advanced, here named: not as if they should go unpunished: but because their
destruction is purposely and more manifestly described in the following
history, and especially in the fifth and sixth visions, by many fearful
expressions.

These here are named kings, great men, rich men, tribunes, and mighty men,
and all bondmen and freemen, that is, both high and low, all of the laics (as
they call them) of what degree soever, who have been instruments either by
their authority or wealth to advance Antichrist to that hight of tyranny and
cruelty, or who for the establishing of his power, have drawn the sword, or
been helpful in making or kindling of the fires wherein the martyrs were burnt.

But this also is to be extended more largely unto all the enemies of the
Church, even from the beginning of the world, Who these kings and great men are.
viz. as well such as persecuted the godly under the law, as Nimrod, Pharaoh,
Saul, Ahab, Nebuchad-nezar, Antiochus etc. as those under the Gospel, viz.
Herod, Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Severus, Decius, Diocletian, Julian, Valens, and
whosoever else have bent their bow against Christ, and insulted over his truth,
or at this day, do seek to uphold Antichrist. But in the end, an unhappy and
lamentable destruction shall come upon them.

Before we come to treat of this great catastrophe: I again desire the reader
not to think it strange, that we expounded the mountains and Islands spoken of
in v. 14. to be kings and nations: though it seems that they are here only
expreslie named: For before they were more obscurelie and restrainedly set
forth by the names of mountains and Island moved out of their place by
Antichrist, that is, by him seduced, shaken, and subjugated: but here in
general is prefigured the overthrow of all enemies either under, or before
Antichrists time.

This also by the way we may take notice of, that Andreas understands by kings
of the earth, them whose power and study only is in and about earthly
things, as having nothing to do with Christ and heaven.

Chief captaines] Gr. (...) signifying, captains over thousands, such (as
among the Romans) had the chief charge over soldiers: for in a Roman Legion
(which consisted of seven thousand and sometimes more) there were ten bands of
soldiers: whereof the first band was the greater, having 1105 footmen and 132
men of arms: and properly such as had charge over this band were called
chiliarchi, colonels, or chief captains. Vegetius lib. 2. de re milit. cap.
2. and 6.

Every bondsman and every freeman] that is, all other enemies of inferior
ranks, who were strong to shead the blood of the saints, and to persecute and
blaspheme the Gospel: now fearful indeed, shall be the end of every one of
them, as it follows.

And hid themselves in the dens] We read that the godly in times of
persecution often fled into mountains, woods and deserts, hidings themselves
there for fear of tyrants, as the history of the Machabees, and others
witness. But here, not the godly under persecution, but the persecutors
themselves are spoken of: as is plainly to be gathered by what follows: they
hid themselves in dens, that is, they now shall do that themselves, which
formerly they constrained the saints to do: it signifies their extreem fear
and perplexity: as not knowing where to turn themselves for to find any
succor. Now their kingdoms, palaces, fortresses, and munitions of war: now
their armies, legions, military bands, etc. cannot help them: but in vain
do they fly unto dens and rocks, which shall not be open to receive and hide
them. And therefore they shall despairinglie cry, Ah fall on us, and hide us]
The voice of men without hope of mercy and salvation, and wishing that which no
wise man would desire: to wit, to be crushed under the mountains and
miserably brought to nothing.

This is a proverbial description of the wicked despairing, by which is
intimated, that such shall be the horrible appearance of things, as that they
shall an hundred times rather desire any cruel death, then with such a
dreadful distraction and fear of present punishment enjoy the light any more.
Three times in scripture we find these expressions. Once in Hosea 10.8.
concerning the overthrow of Israel by the Assyrians. Secondly in Luke 23.30.
touching the destruction of Jerusalem: and thirdly in this place about the
final punishment of reprobates. And this here is rightly applied to the like
miseries, because in their causes they are all alike. For of old this
exclamation was fulfilled in the wicked Israelites, being cast both into
temporal and eternal punishment. Afterward it was also verified in the
destruction of the city, and the utter overthrow of the Jewish nation, and
shall most fully be accomplished at the day of judgment: when the wicked shall
hear that fearful sentence pronounced: Go ye cursed into the eternal fire,
which is prepared for the devil and his angels. Then shall they burst forth
into these words of despair: Mountains fall on us: as thinking it better for
them once to be crushed by the mountains and brought to nothing, then for ever
to be tormented in flames of hell fire.

But here, I cannot sufficiently wonder at the false and impious interpretation
of Lyra, Gagnaeus and others, who are not ashamed to apply that unto the
martyrs and saints in heaven, (thereby to establish their blasphemous
invocation on saints departed) which the scripture plainly attributes unto
reprobates despairing of salvation. These cries they will have to be made by the
martyrs under the Diocletian persecution: The mountains and the rocks, to be
the Saints, called mountains, because of their exaltation unto heavenly
things. Unto them the godly in their straights and anguishes shall cry: fall
on us: that is, come to us, and help us in our persecution. Hide us: that is,
protect us by praying unto God for us. But what a horrible depravation of
scripture is this? We know that the godly martyrs in their persecution by
prayer fled unto God sitting on the throne, and unto the Lamb standing in the
midst thereof, that is, Christ the only savior: But for any worship to be
rendered unto fained saints the martyrs and others of the faithful were
altogether ignorant of. For what can be imagined more wicked then that the
martyrs in their greatest anguishes, leaving God and Christ, should implore the
help of the creature, against the express commandment of God, call upon me in
the day of trouble etc.

From the face of him that sits] There are three causes of this their great
fear and desperation. The sight of God and the Lamb: the day of judgment: and
an evil conscience. Touching the first no marvel, seeing God is a consuming
fire, and the wicked are as stubble which the fire easily consumes and brings
to nothing.

And from the wrath of the Lamb] No where in scripture is wrath attributed unto
the Lamb, but in this place, and here it notes that reve^ging justice proper
to God alone, XXXII. Argum. of Christ's deity.
which the wicked shall tremble at when the Lamb shall pronounce the sentence,
go ye cursed etc. Now here the Godhead of the Lamb is evidently proved, seeing
Antichrist and his wicked instruments do, and shall stand in fear of none but
of God only omnipotent, as is confirmed by the following reason.

17 For the great day of his wrath is come] This is the second cause of the
wickeds horror. This great day of God and the Lamb, is the day of judgment.
For in the day of judgment being asked a reason of their ungodliness and
cruelty committed, they shall be mute and stand ashamed. They who understand this
great day otherwise then of the last judgment, do groslie deceive themselves.
But Alcasar applying this to the Jewish people, is more ridiculous, who would
mingle an history known unto the whole world with these prophetical types.
In the mean while let the reader observe the relative (...), of his anger,
evidentlie proving (as before we showed) the deity of Christ. For that great
day of wrath, or of judgments, especially of the last judgment, is every
where in the scriptures called the great day of Jehovah. Ier. 30.7. Joel
2.11.31. Zepha. 1.14. Mal. 4.5. Act. 2.20. Now here this day is called, The
great day of the Lambs wrath.

And who shall be able to stand] The third cause of their trembling, is an evil
conscience against God, Men, and the spouse of the Lamb. The words are taken
out of Joel 2.11. For the day of Jehovah is great and terrible, and who can
abide it. Even the godly themselves break forth into the like speeches, when
they look upon the rigor of Gods judgments: If thou should observe
iniquity O Jehovah, who shall stand? but this they speak with a filial fear,
and humbling of themselves, and not with horror, despairing as do the wicked.
To stand in judgment, is to rely on the confidence of a good cause, and to be
absolved or quitted: as Cicero says in his epistles, Yesterday we stood well
in the Senate. Not to stand, is to loose ones cause, and to be condemned,
according to the Psalmist, the wicked shall not stand in judgment. Ps. 1.5. so
again the foolish shall not stand in thy sight, Psa. 5.5. Hence they here cry
out, Who? that is, none of Gods enemies, and the Lambs, shallbe able to stand.
Thus we have heard the Acts of Antichrists tragical end: now follows the
happy and joyful change of the church; the sealed and holy ones shall stand
before the throne, singing to God and the Lamb: Salvation be to our God, etc.

The Argument, Parts, and Analysis of Chapter VII.
THe wonders of the sixth seal, belonging to the third and fourth Act of vision
2. are continued in this Chapter. After the prodigious earthquake of
Antichrists kingdom, and the horrible cries of his supporters under their
punishments: Now further things are exhibited unto John, some to come to pass
in heaven, and others in the earth. In the earth he saw four Angels laboring
to hinder the blowing of the winds: And another Angel reproving them, and
sealing of the twelve tribes of Israel, a hundred forty and four thousand
saints in their foreheads. In heaven, he saw an innumerable multitude before
the throne shouting with praises unto God, and to the Lamb, one of the four
and twenty Elders showing unto John, who they were, and their happy
condition. And thus the second vision is ended.

The parts are two.

THe first touching the endeavor of the four Angels, and their restraint, in
the first 8 verses. The other contains the harmonious thanksgiving of the
heavenly inhabitants, and of their felicity from v. 9. unto the end.

In the former part is set forth the state of the godly under Antichrists
kingdom, that is, howsoever Satan and Antichrist shall labor by all means
possible to suppress the Gospel, and tread all things under foot: yet some
winds shall blow, that is, some witnesses of the truth shall strongly oppose
Antichrist, the Lord still preserving certain thousands of his sealed ones
from being hurt by him: of whom should consist the true Church of God. This
part of the chapter is opposed to the earthquake and Antichristian confusions
praefigured in the third Act, treated of in Chap. 6. v. 12.13.14. with which
cohereth that which here follows concerning the four Angels, and sealing of
the elect in their foreheads.

In the latter part is represented the future state of the blessed martyrs, and
other faithful ones in heaven, even as many as in this life have made white
their robes in the blood of the Lamb. This part is opposed to the horrible
cries and torments of the wicked, treated of Chap. 6. v. 15.16.17.

In this Chapter therefore the third and fourth Act of the second vision is
fully ended: and the whole Chapter is consolatorie, both for the Church
militant, in the former part: and for the triumphant in the latter. These
things thus premised, the rest following will be the more clear.

The fourth Act of vision II.
The first part of the Chapter.
Of the restraint of the four Angels, and of them that were marked with the
seal of God, under Antichrist.

1. And after these things, I saw four Angels standing on the four corners of
the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the wind should not
blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree.

2. And I saw another Angel ascending from the East, having the seal of the
living God: and he cried with a loud voice to the four Angels, to whom it was
given to hurt the earth and the sea,

3. Saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have
sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads.

4. And I heard the number of them which were sealed: and there were sealed an
hundred and forty and four thousand of all the tribes of the children of
Israel.

5. Of the tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Reuben
were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed twelve thousand.

6. Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Nephthali
were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of M^^^sses were sealed twelve
thousand.

7. Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Levi
were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Issachar were sealed twelve
thousand.

8. Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Joseph
were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed twelve
thousand.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd after these things] Now John rehearses what he further saw in the sixth
seal, being contrary to the former, as containing joyful matter. He saw
before what Antichrist and his ministers had don, and what at length they
suffered for the same. Here he sees what in the mean time was don by the godly
on earth, and what was laid up for them in heaven. Now herein interpreters do
very much differ, and for the most part do rather darken then explain the
matter, in not observing the method and scope thereof.

Lyra goes on in applying these things unto the histories of the Roman
Emperors. Lyras opinion of the four Angels.
The four Angels standing on the four corners of the earth, and holding the
four winds of the earth, he interprets of four Emperors, great persecutors of
the Christians, who (after Diocletian and Maximianus had laid down the Empire)
afflicted the Church in many parts of the world at one time: Maximianus in the
East: Severus in Italy: Maxentius at Rome: Licinius of Alexandria in Egypt:
these held the winds, that is hindered the teachers of the Church, that they
should not blow, that is, preach Gods word: for as by the blowing of the winds
the earth is made fruitful: so the preaching of the Gospel fructifyeth the
garden of the Church militant. By the earth, sea and tree^ he understands
Christians, some dwelling in firm lands, some in Islands, and others in woods
for to avoid persecution. The Angel having the seal of God, and forbidding to
hurt the earth, and sea, is Constantine the great, bearing the sign of the
cross in his ensign, and restraining those four tyrants from hurting of
Christians. For Constantine at length overcame Maxentius, Licinius, and other
their fellow tyrants, and having obtained the empire alone, he signed many
thousand in the forehead, that is, being converted unto the faith of Christ,
he bestowed many great privileges upon the Church, and signed many thousands,
that is, caused them to be baptized with the sign of the cross on their
foreheads.

This interpretation I thus far approve of, What is approvable in Lyras
interpretation.
namely, that the winds signify preachers, and the blowing of the winds,
Gods word preached: and the holding of the winds, the hindering of Gospel in
the course thereof. But for his application of the rest unto the short space of
those four tyrants it agrees little to the scope, seeing those things were to
happen a long while after under Antichrist, as appears by the circumstances,
and as the comparing of these things with the following visions will more
clearly manifest. Besides he erreth in making Constantine this sealing Angel,
forasmuch as undoubtedlie the outward sign of the cross is not here at all
intended, but a higher mystery concerning the preservation of the elect, and
their separation from the abominations of Antichrist, least they should be
defiled thereby; as will more plainly appear by the matter following.

Rupertus refers this unto the four kingdoms of the world hindering the faith of
Christ: viz. the Babylonian, Persian, Greek and Roman Empires: but this is too
general.

Andreas (herein agreeing with most of our interpreters) does more rightly
apply it to the times of Antichrist: to which Ribera also consents, but yet
in this he erreth, viz. in that he thinks that the following contents of this
book are to be applied to the four years reign of his supposed Antichrist.
For generally the following visions do plainly represent the foregoing four
Acts of the history of the Church from John's time even unto the end, under
other figures: he also differs from al others in taking these to be good
Angels, which are here spoken of: whereas all others agree, that they are evil
Angels. Notwithstanding in this they do generally err through an erroneous
supposition, in restraining the time of Antichrist unto the last four years of
the world, considering that Antichrist has allreadie reigned above a thousand
years, even from Boniface the third, who (as we have already showed) was the
first that professed himself universal priest, leaving unto his successors
this most wicked title and mark of Antichrist.

But to let pass these men's opinions, we here take notice of a second part of
the third Act of vision II. wherein John is informed of the state of the godly
during the earthquakes, and Antichristian commotions. For having seen before
things horrible and prodigious, even a violent alteration of all states of the
Christian world under Antichrist, he having I say seen Mahumet in the East, and
the Romish Bishops in the West oppressing the Church by fire and sword, and
imposing their decrees and idols upon all, depraving Christian religion by
their manifold traditions, heathenish and Jewish superstitions, in so much as
unto the Churches of the West was left almost nothing, but the bare name of
Christ. Now least John (seeing these things) should thus have thought with
himself: what shall Christ be thus oppressed and kept under by Antichrist? shall
there be no more a Church? no more sincere preaching? no more faithful and
valiant teachers to oppose Antichrist? shall indeed the elect also be drawn
away into errors, of whom Christ says, that it is impossible they should be
seduced? Now hence it is that this present sight of the blowing winds, and of
the four Angels laboring in vain to hinder their operation, is exhibited unto
him: showing how the godly should continually oppose Antichrist: and be sealed
in their foreheads, signifying their safety and preservation unto the end.

Alcasar presupposes (howbeit not truly) that these things appertain unto the
seventh seal: but it is repugnant unto the very text in Chap. 8.1. and though
it did, yet would it no way help the consequence which thence he draws.

Four Angels standing] Now concerning these Angels, let us see, who they are,
Who are these four Angels.
what they did, and the cause thereof. By these Angels, I understand Satan and
his Angels, by whose powerful working Antichrist invaded Christ's kingdom, and
established his own with all deceit of unrighteousness: and withal I
understand all Antichrists agents, both ecclesiastical and secular, as Kings
and Emperors who (to uphold his kingdom) have labored by fire and sword to
suppress the preaching of the Gospel: so likewise Cardinals, Bishops, Monks,
Canonists, Inquisitors, and Jesuits, who deceiving the world under an
angelical show of holiness, have strongly advanced his kingdom: these are
four (a definite number being put for an indefinite) as alluding to the four
corners of the earth on which they stand, that is, have their Bishoprics,
Lordships, Colleges and Fraternities there fixed. Now by four corners the
whole earth is meant, and here it notes that no place shall be free from the
mischievous devises of these wicked Angels.

Others again interpret these Angels standing on the four corners of the earth,
after this manner. The Mahumetans in the East who suppressed the doctrine of
Christ: for however they seem to permit the European Christians the freedom of
their religion, yet the same is don deceitfully, as thereby the easier to draw
the rest of the Christian world under their power, and so if they could
altogether to blot out the very name of Christianity. The South they understand
to be the very seat of the Roman Antichrist: The North is possessed by the
Popes sworn vassals. And the West by the Spaniard (his first begotten son) and
the most Christian French king (as they style him) all which have hithertoo
mightily hindered the winds from blowing upon the earth, sea, and trees. But
we may as fitly apply this to the Popes spiritual Angels standing upon the
four corners of the earth, seeing he has every where his Legates a Latere, his
creatures (I say) to maintain his Antichristian primacie, and to hinder the
blowing of the winds, by their fraudulent devises, preachings, writings,
disputations, miracles, and all manner of working by deceit and
unrighteousness.

The reason why Ribera contendeth, that not evil Angels, but the good, Riberas
opinion weighed.
are here intended, is to free Antichrists ministers from suspicion. But most
Popish writers do hold the contrary. Mart. Delrius libr. 2. mag. disquis.
quaesi. 11. thinks them to be very hurtful and pernicious devils. Alcasar
would feign refute him, but his tongue will not let him, and therefore he
leaves it undecided whether they be good or evil: at last he faineth a dream
of four Aeoluses, brideling the winds with bonds and imprisonment. Now is not
this a worthy exposition of this mystery?

But Ribera will maintain his opinion with arguments, The devils, says he, are
not in corners of the world, but in the midst of the great men of the earth, in
provinces and cities, and to be short, wheresoever they be they hinder the
preachers of Gods word: As if John understood not this same thing by the four
corners of the earth. He therefore too childishlie restraines these corners of
the earth, unto the utmost places, or mathematical centers thereof, forasmuch
as by a synecdoche the whole world is here signified.

But he further objecteth, that God is wont to punish the world not only by
evil Angels, but also by the good Angels: as we see Gen: 19. and 2 Samuel 14.
and 2 King 19. and Isai. 37. etc. which Austin also confirms lib. 9. de Civ.
D. c. 5. but it suffices, that for the most part it is don by the evil.

Neither is there any weight in this, that the other Angel as joining himself
with them, says; UNTIL WE HAVE SEALED THE SERVANTS OF OUR GOD, for he makes
not the Angels which were ready to hurt the earth, etc. companions with him in
sealing, but closely he points out the good Angels which were present with
him.

Holding the four winds that they should not blow] Now he shows what the
Angels did: in which we are to consider, what the four blowing winds are, and
what is meant by the earth, sea and trees: and how they held the winds from
blowing on the earth.

Ribera understands it properly of the four chief winds, The litteral
exposition of Ribera cannot hold.
described in these known verses.

Asper ab axe ruit Boreas, furit Eurus ab ortu,
Auster amat medium solemn, Zephyrusque cadentem.
These winds the four Angels endeavored to hinder from blowing upon the
earth, etc. that is, they desired to destroy all things both in the sea, and in
the land, as also the fruits of the trees: For if the winds should altogether
cease from blowing, all things of necessity would soon come to decay: forasmuch
as all living creatures by them are cherished and preserved. Therefore he
supposes that hereby is signified the outward calamities falling upon the
persecutours of the saints: and his reason is, because the literal sense is to
be followed, except a plain reason does necessitate the contrary. Now indeed
this is true; notwithstanding if we should always expound the visions of this
book literally, much absurdity would follow thereupon: besides the following
words do yield us a manifest ground that the letter here is not to be
observed: for the elect are said to be sealed, and thereby to be freed from
hurt. Now we know that the godly are not free from outward calamities, as
pestilence and famine, whereby the earth, sea and trees are hurt: and therefore
it does necessarily follow, that we must understand it of an immunity of
another kind of hurt.

Andreas understands hereby the dissolution of lawful order and the most
certain event of the evils threatened: Andreas his general interpretation.
Rupertus his exposition lib 4. in Apoc.
but this seems to be obscure, and to general.

Rupertus and many others expound it of the teachers of the word whom
Antichrists Angels or ministers held, that is, labored to keep from blowing
upon the earth, sea, or any tree, that is, from preaching the faith of Christ
in any provinces or Islands, or unto any men of what condition or quality
soever. So he. Thus the winds denote the preachers of the Gospel, by a
metaphor often used in the scriptures. For the holy Ghost, whose ministers they
are, is compared unto the wind Ioh. 3. and Act. 2. by reason of his vehement
and piercing efficacy. These are said to be four indefinitely according to the
4 quarters of the Christian world, that is, some of them being in every place.
They blow, that is, sound forth the Gospel of Christ upon the earth, sea and
trees, that is, unto al sorts of men. To hold the winds that they blow not, is
to hinder these from preaching: now in this all interpreters agree:
notwithstanding it is to be applied more fully unto the times of Antichrist.

By the winds therefore I understand all the sincere teachers of the Gospel,
The authors judgment touching the four Angels hindering the blowing of the
winds.
which for a thousand years together have opposed Antichrists idols,
corruptions and tyranny: such, I say, whom the Roman Bishops by their decrees
and bulls have condemned as heretics: whose names are recorded among the
witnesses of the truth in the books of Martyrs. Among the number of these also
(besides such Emperors who by opposing the popes, have caused the winds to
blow,) I understand such Bishops, Priests, and Doctors, as have contradicted
the tyranny of the Romish court: as Berengarius, John Scotus, Bertramus etc.
who more then six hundred years ago have strongly in defense of the truth
blown by their sermons and writings against the diol of the mass and
transsubstantiation, the chief prop of Antichrist kingdom: also Bernard,
Waldus, Wicklife, Hus, and Ierom of Prage, Clemanges and others, who by the
wind of Gods spirit have maintained the faith of Christ against the pope,
partly by word and writings, and partly by sealing the same with their blood.
But chiefly among these are to be reckoned, Luther, Melanchthon, Oecolampadius,
Zwinglius, Farellus, Bucer, Hegio, Martyr, Viret, Bullinger, Calvin, and as
many as in Germany, France and the neighboring kingdoms have in this last age
begun so to blow the Gospel of Christ, as thereby a great part of the
Christian world has been restored into the precious liberty of the faith.

The earth, sea, and trees, I understand allegorically, not of the faithful in
particular, or learned men only, but of distinct churches. As the earth, to
denote the churches in the mediterranean provinces: The sea, the churches
bordering near the same, or in Islands: The trees, churches planted in wooddie
and hilly countries, as are generally those in the Northern parts. The reason
why I take this to be meant of whole churches, is, because the Angels are
forbid to hurt them, until such were sealed, as the Lord had appointed: and
afterward they are permitted to do it. Therefore the sealed ones shall be in the
earth, sea, and trees, that is, in those Churches that are hurt, nevertheless
they being sealed shall be preserved in safety.

But how shall they hold the winds from blowing, and to what end? What is
meant by holding the winds from blowing.
This may be understood by the following words, It was given them to hurt the
earth and the sea: and again, hurt not the earth, sea, nor trees. So that they
shall hold the winds from blowing: when the Angels who profess themselves to
be spiritual Bishops, and ought to blow, shall neither preach the Gospel, nor
suffer others: but oppose them by their Popish decrees and edicts, by their
excommunications, by cruel persecution with fire and sword, as against
heretics: forbidding the reading and use of the holy Scriptures unto all men,
least the deceits and lies of Antichrist should be made manifest. Hence
necessarily followed the hurt of the earth, sea and trees: for the wholesome
blowing of the winds now ceasing, all the churches were led into errors by
the contrary blowing of seducing spirits, and lying prophets, who brought al
under the yoke of Antichrist, to the destruction of the greater part of
Christianity. Thus we see the meaning of the vision: now hence we observe two
things.

First, though Antichrist by violence and deceit has horribly shaken the
Christian world, doing much harm unto the earth and sea: yet God at all times,
raised up some good winds, that is, faithful teachers who taught the
wholesome doctrine of Christ, to the salvation of the elect, as the histories of
Popes and books of martyrs testify. Yea the Lord did preserve unto himself a
Church in the midst of Popery, which Antichrist could never altogether
suppress, however he cruelly by fire and sword continually raged against the
same. And therefore it is false that God had no Church, nor Christ any spouse:
because the Pope and his synagogue were not the spouse of Christ.

Secondly, we see by what ways Antichrist did invade Christ's kingdom, and
establish his own tyranny: to wit, by holding the blowing of the winds, in
condemning for haereticks, and violently oppressing the witnesses of the truth,
as also by hurting the earth, sea and trees, that is, seducing all the
particular Churches by false miracles with all deceit of unrighteousnes,
overthrowing them by his impious doctrines, and superstitious worship, of which
the Apostle foretold 2 Thessa. 2.9. saying, whose coming is after the working
of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all
deceiveablenes of unrighteousness in them that perish, etc. these things we
find in histories formerlie to have been don, and we daily see the further
accomplishment thereof, which serves for a clear exposition on these words:
now let us hear the antidote or consolation opposed.

2. And I saw another Angel] First we will consider who, and what manner of
Angel this was, and secondly what he did.

One Angel having the seal of the living God, ascends from the East against
the four Angels standing on the earth. Lyraes opinion in expounding this of
Constantine we have already refuted. Others suppose that Elias shall come
toward the end of the world, of who^ Malachie speaks Cha. 4.5. But their
supposition is false, as we shall see on Chap. 11. for the prophet there
speaks of John the Baptist, as Christ himself interprets Matt. 11.14. most
understand it of Christ the great Angel of Gods counsel: as Rupertus, Haymo,
Bid and others. Ribera indeed denies it, and will have him to be one of the
seven emissarie Angels spoken of Chap. 5.6. but he gains nothing by his
denial: neither need we to contend at all about it: The Angel ascending from
the East is Christ Luke 1.78. Col. 1.15. Heb. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.4.
For it is all one whither we understand it of Christ himself, or of his Angel
mentioned Chap. 1.1. and 22.16. However it seems rather to be meant of Christ,
in that it is said, he ascends from the east. For Christ is the sun of
righteousness arising from on high, and he it is that has the seal of the
living God: for he is the Image of the invisible God, the brightness of his
glory, and the Character of the person of the Father. Sealing the elect,
because in him we are chosen before the foundation of the world. Also he
seals, because he gives faith unto the Elect, justifies, regenerates, and
sanctifies them, sealing in their hearts the witness of the spirit, that they
may not be seduced by the guile of Antichrist. Now forasmuch as these things
are proper unto God, I rather understand this to be spoken of Christ then of
any created Angel.

The seal which he imprints on the Elect, What the seal of the living God is.
the Apostle explaineth 2 Timothy 2.19. the foundation of God stands sure,
having this seal, the Lord knows who are his. Moreover that this is to be
understood of Christ, it may be probably gathered, because this vision is like
unto that in Ezech. 9. where the Prophet saw six men, every one having a
slaughter weapon in his hand for to destroy Jerusalem. He saw also one man
among them clothed in linen with a writers inkhorn by his side, to mark such
with the sign Thau on the forehead, as mourned for all the abomination
committed in the city, that is, all the godly, who were not polluted with
idolatry. Now here all interpreters understand Christ the mediator. Neither
does it any way contradict what we say, in that Christ is said to be the Lamb
opening the seal: for (as we have showed Chap. 5.2.) it is not strange, that
he should be represented in diverse forms in this visionall Revelation.

He cried with a great voyce] This angel does two things. First, with a great
cry he forbids the evil Angels to hurt the earth, sea and trees, adding a
limitation: until he had sealed the servants of God: the sense is, seeing
those that were to be sealed are the servants of God, therefore power of
hurting is not given unto them, till this sealing be finished, least they
should be promiscuously wrapped in the danger of seducement, and so be destroyed
with the rest. Secondly, he sealed an hundred forty and four thousand of the
twelve tribes of Israel. This great cry denotes Christ power over Antichrist
and his instruments, whose madness he so bridleth, as that they cannot by
their tyranny proceed further, then what is permitted them. And therefore it
is said; to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea.

Hence it appears in the first place, why they held the winds from blowing:
towit, that they might hurt the earth and the sea, that is, destroy the
Churches by pestilent doctrine. Secondly, that the devil howsoever he does
forciblie stir up Antichrist unto cruelty against the Gospel, and endeavors
to blot the elect out of the book of life, yet he can do no more, then is
given unto him, that is, no more then what is granted him by Christ the Angel
of the East. Now the Apostle teaches us 2 Thessa. 2. that the power which is
given him, is over them that perish.

8. Hurt not the earth] what is meant by the earth, sea and trees, I have
already showed. The enemies of the winds are commanded, not to hurt these: so
that we see they cannot rage and dominere as they list: Antichrist has taken
possession of the Churches of Christ.
neither is Antichrist stronger thon Christ, although he has invaded his
Churches: For it was don by permission only. Now the reason thereof we must
not too curiously search into. But acknowledge that the security, ungodliness
and ingratitude of Christians deserved the same, as the Apostle shows 2 Thessalonians.
2.11. For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie: because they received not the love of the truth.

Till we have sealed] to wit I, and my ministers. For Christ is not without his
ministering spirits: But whither he had now more Angels with him as Ezech. 9.2.
or not, the same is not expressed. He does not simply forbid them to hurt, but
limits the time, and until that prefixed time these destroyers could do
nothing. Thus Antichrist has not hurt the earth, sea and trees, that is, by
his Angels brought the particular Churches of the West under his yoke, either
against the will, or knowledge of Christ, but by his sufferance: neither could
he hurt them sooner then Christ would; nor shall he be able to do it any
longer then it seems good unto him. Now touching this sealing we are briefly to
consider: who were sealed, when, with what sign, wherefore and how many.

Who they are, he shows, saying, until we have sealed the servants of our
God: Who are these sealed ones.
these are the elect in Christ, who worship not idols, or Antichrist, but God
in faith and true obedience.

This sealing is partly eternal, and partly accomplished in time. What this
sealing is.
From eternity God has sealed all them that shall be saved in the counsel of
praedestination, which is made and founded on Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. In time he
sealed his, when now for a thousand years he stirred up many witnesses of his
truth and faith, being endued with true knowledge, excellent gifts, and
heroic boldness, who stoutly opposed the impostures of Antichrist, by their
preaching and writing, and preserved very many faithful ones from his idol
worship. But chiefly he has and does seal in these last times, in restoring
almost in all the provinces of the Christian world, the lost truth of the
heavenly doctrine by his servants and excellent divines, who have dissipated
the mist of popery by the light of the Gospel, and purged many Churches in
Germany, France, England, Denmark, Poland, Bohemia, Moravia, and Hungary,
from Antichristian pollutions, plucking them as a prey out of the jaws af the
devil.

I confess indeed that all the members of these Churches are not elected:
nevertheless they are all separated from Antichrist, so that he cannot hurt
them; yea we doubt not but that a great number of them appertain unto the
election of grace.

In Ezech. 9.4. W^ ha^^ manner of seal this is.
we read that all which were to be preserved from the common destruction were
marked with the sign Thau, but here no certain mark is expressed.

Ribera will have it to be meant of the sign of the cross. Now we know that
many who are signed with the popish cross are the bondslaves of Satan: but
none of these here sealed shall perish: seeing they are marked to this end,
that no man should hurt them.

Alcasar says well, that this is no external sign, which may be discerned
with corporal eyes, neither is it made by any created Angel, but immediately
by the holy Ghost, who himself marketh such with the sign of the living God,
to whom he graciously communicates himself.

Let us therefore understand it of the seal spoken of 2 Timothy 2.9. The
foundation of God stands sure having this seal, the Lord knows who are
his: and let every one that calls upon the name of God depart from iniquity.
This seal Chap. 14.1. is said to be the fathers name, written in the foreheads
of the saints.

First therefore this seal imprinted in the elect, is Gods eternal purpose to
save them: the which however it is not seen by the eye of man, yet the elect
both discern, and feel the same in their hearts. Secondly, it is a saving
vocation unto faith, and wrought externally by the word and sacraments,
internally through the earnest of the spirit. Thirdly, it is a true invocation
on the name of God, that is, a sincere profession of the truth, by forsaking
and detesting all the known ways of Antichrist. To be short, it is a true
conversion unto the Lord, constancy and perseverance in the faith of Christ. By
these notes the sealed ones separate themselves from the dregs of Antichrist,
and are easily known from all other men: therefore they are said to be marked
in their foreheads, because they are not at all ashamed of their holy
profession.

But wherefore is this mark put upon them? The use of their sealing.
I answer, to the end that they may not be hurt by the evil Angels, nor
seduced by Antichrist, and led into error, and so made partakers of his
plagues. That Antichrist, I say, may have no interest in them: for being
sealed, they are secure, and certain of their salvation in midst of all
confusions and ruins. This is matter of singular comfort to the elect, in that
their salvation is certain, and that the Lord cares for them. Agreeable
hereunto is that in Ezec. 9. where the marked ones are preserved, while the
city in the mean time is destroyed. And Rahab, having her house marked
according to the covenant with the spies, escapes: So the Israelites
sprinkling their posts with the blood of the Paschal Lamb were delivered, while
the first born of Egypt perished, therefore it is said, Rev. 9.4. that the
locusts only hurt them, which had not the seal of God in the forehead. For
Antichrist also does mark his servants with his character, as we see Chap. 13.
but not to the end they should be preserved, but to have power to buy and sell
his holy wares, make merchandise of men's souls, and trade in his kingdom. Now
this Character shall not secure them that are marked therewith from destruction,
but rather draw down Gods judgments upon them: for the beast, and the false
prophet, and all that have received his mark shall be cast into the lake of
fire and brimstone, Rev. 19. and 20.

And I heard the number of them that were sealed] their number is great: yet
less then the number of locusts, and such as had the mark of the beast in
their forehead and right hand. Nevertheles much greater then men imagine and
judge: a definite for an indefinite. For always there have, are, and shall be
more witnesses of the truth, then Antichrist or the world knows of: a Church,
I say of sealed ones preserved by thy Lord unto himself; as in the time of
Elias seven thousand in Israel were reserved, who had not bowed the knee to
Baal, albeit the Prophet then complained that he was only left. The Papists
inquire who, and where the Church was before Luthers time? let them receive
here an answer from John: that when Antichrist thought he had brought al to
stoop under him, yet then the Lord has 144000 sealed ones. We affirm
therefore that a Church of sealed ones was hid in the midst of popery, even when
the Angels stood on the four corners of the earth to hinder the winds from
blowing (that is, to hinder the course of the Gospel) and to subject all
particular Churches under the power of Antichrist. Moreover the number here
specified is most perfect, twelve and ten being by the rule of Arithmeticke
put together. For twelve being multiplied by ten, makes a hundred and twenty:
and ten times a hundred and twenty, makes twelve thousand, which is the number
that was sealed out of each tribe: this again being multiplied by twelve,
makes a hundred forty and four thousand, which is the compleet number of all
them that were sealed. For other mysteries I let them pass.

Out of all the tribes of Israel] Ribera understands it literally of the
conversion of so many Jews out of every tribe, about the last times under
Antichrist, proving it from that of the Apostle Romans 11.26. and so all Israel
shall be saved. But in this he agrees, neither with himself, nor yet with the
oracle of Paul. For if so be that all the Jews shall receive and follow
Antichrist as the Messiah (as the Papists themselves imagine) how then shall so
many thousand cleave unto Christ? And again, if all Israel shall be converted,
how then shall there be only 144000 sealed ones? the prophecy of the Apostle
I will not here speak of, as not appertaining to this place, and the rather
because in my commentary on the Romans I have expounded the same.

Lyra speaks of the conversion of so many Jews under Constantine: but yet he
dares not affirm, that such a thing was then accomplished, and therefore he
approves of a mystical interpretation, and applies it to the spiritual
Israel, that is, to such as were converted to the faith of Israel and of Christ
under Constantine; But I have already proved that these things may not be tied
to that time, but belong to the ages after under Antichrist.

There are also some of our interpreters who expound this number 144000 of
believing Jews, and apply the great multitude spoken of v. 9. to the Church
of the gentiles.

But leaving such men's opinions, I follow the exposition of my Anonymus: of all
the tribes of the children of Israel, that is of all nations imitating the
faith of Israel: because God has elected some to salvation out of every part
of the world: Christ also shall have his sealed ones, in all places where
Antichrist reigns. Besides the believers of the Gentiles are often in the new
Testament called by the name of Israel, as following Isreal's and Abraham's
faith. Romans 4. and 9.6. For they are not all Israel which are of Israel etc.
Now these are compared to the twelve tribes of Israel, because they succeeded
in their place: and therefore it is said they shall sit on twelve thrones to
judge the twelve tribes of Israel, who were apostated from God and Christ.

The distribution therefore of these sealed ones, according to their tribes, is
not to be taken literally, but by a certain similitude, because God has
substituted other special nations, in stead of those apostatical tribes, in
which he has a certain number of sealed ones, that is, ordained to life
eternal. And the reason hereof is apparent: because the twelve carnal tribes
of Israel before the manifestation of this Revelation, were lost by the
destruction of Judea and Jerusalem: much less do they remain to this day:
For touching the small remainder of the Jews now in their dispersion, it is
altogether uncertain of what tribes they are.

Furthermore Andreas (whom my Anonymus follows) applies certain virtues to
each tribe, from the Etymology or signification of their names: as for
example: the sealed of the tribe of Judah are confessors of Christ: the sealed
of Reuben are the pure in heart enjoying the heavenly vision. But I pass this
by, as being more subtle then solid: as for the signification of their names
read Genesis 29. and 30. and 35. Now twelve thousand are sealed of every tribe,
for many are chosen by Christ out of all peoples and nations under Antichrist.

The natural order of the tribes is not here observed.

Judah is put before Ruben, both because it was the kingly tribe of which
Christ came according to the flesh: as also because Reuben by defiling his
fathers bed lost his birthright. So at the numbering of the people, and pitching
of the camps Judah had the preeminence. Number. 2.3. and 1 Chronicles. 4.

The tribe of Levi contrary to the ordinary custom of the Scripture is here
brought in: for he had no inheritance with the rest.

Ephraim again is omitted, and Joseph is here placed in his stead, contrary
to the order of the tribes.

Dan also is passed by: the reason whereof most of the fathers and some also to
this day will have to be, because Antichrist should come of this tribe:
grounding their opinion, on that in Genesis 49.17. Dan is a serpent in the way:
and Iere. 8.16. the snorting of horses was heard from Dan. Whither Antichrist
shall be a Jew, and arise out of the tribe of Dan.
And hence arose another erroneous opinion. viz. that Antichrist should be a
Jew: by which fiction the devil so deceived the world, as that Antichrist
already sitting and reigning in the Church, was not taken notice of and
avoided. But this Gloss is frivolous: Dan shall be a serpent by the way, that
is, of him Antichrist shall come: neither is there any thing to be gathered
from Ieremies words (out of Dan we have heard nighing of horses) that does at
all concern this matter. But the Ancients are the less to be blamed, not
having the means and knowledge of histories touching Antichrist, which we now
enjoy, and see with our eyes, and which the Papists themselves cannot but also
see, if they would confess it; and therefore they are the more ridiculous in
alleging such foolish things: Lib. 3. de Papa Romano. Why the tribe of Dan is
omitted.
the vanity whereof Bellarmin himself confesses. For where is now the tribe of
Dan?

Others therefore affirm more probably, that the Danites are not mentioned,
because of old they forsook the worship of God, and leaving the fellowship of
their brethren became like unto the Gentiles, as we read. Iud. 18. which seems
also to be the reason why they are not mentioned with the other tribes 1 Chro.
7. But suppose it be granted, that Antichrist shall come of Dan: what does
better suit with the Pope then this? For Dan signifies to judge. Now who, but
the Pope alone, judges all men, and himself is judged of none? do not the
Popes parasites make him to be this Antichristian Dan, or judge? See Gratian
distinct. 40. Cap. si Papa.

The latter part of the Chapter.
Touching the harmonious thanksgiving of the heavenly inhabitants: and of
their blessedness.

9. After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, which no man could number,
of all nations, and kinreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the Throne,
and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands:

10. And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God, which sits
upon the Throne and unto the Lamb.

11. And all the Angels stood round about the Throne, and about the Elders, and
the four beasts, and fell before the Throne on their faces, and worshipped God.

12. Saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thankesgiving, and
honor, and power, and might be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen.

13. And one of the Elders answered, saying unto me, What are these which are
arrayed in white robes? and whence came they?

14. And I said unto him, Sir, Thou know. And he said to me, These are
they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made
them white in the blood of the Lamb.

15. Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him day and might
in his Temple: and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them.

16. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the
Sun light on them, nor any heat.

17. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne, shall feed them, and
shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes.

THE COMMENTARY.
9. ANd after this I behold, and lo, Lyraes opinion touching this multitude.
a great multitude] Lyra observes well that here is described the comfort of the
triumphant Church. Notwithstanding he restraines it to the martyrs only who
suffered under Diocletian and Maximianus. But we may easily perceive by this 9
verse, that the multitude here mentioned is to be understood in a larger sense.

Others for the most part suppose, Other men's opinions about it.
that as before the number of the Jews: so here the sealed of the Gentiles are
described, but in this place we find nothing spoken concerning sealing: Besides
John saw the hundred forty and four thousand sealed ones in the earth: But
this great multitude he sees before the Throne of God in the heavens, and
therefore it is certain that as the former multitude noted the militant
Church: so this here the Saints in glory: but how does John so suddenly pass
from the one to the other? this indeed I find not to be opened by any
interpreter.

But the method by me propounded does clearly manifest the reason thereof. For
as the former part of this Chapter touching the sealing of the elect under
Antichrists kingdom, does cohere with what was spoken Chap. 6.12.13.14:
concerning the Antichristian earthquake being as it were an antithesis of Act
the third: So, the latter part, touching the joy of the Church triumphant,
accords with what is described in 15.16.17. verses of the said Chapter,
touching the cries and punishment of the enemies, as an antithesis of Act the
fourth. So that these things by parallels are thus to be opposed as contrary
each to other.

Parallel of Act the third.

Chap. 6. verse. 12.13.14. Antichrist shall raise an horrible earthquake in the
Church: and hinder the preaching of the word: and bring all things unto a
final destruction which he has now done a thousand years.

Chap. 7. v. 2.3.4.5.6.7.8. Christ ascending from the East shall seal the elect
in the midst of Antichristian commotions: and will always keep, and preserve
them safe unto himself: and has done so these thousand years.

Parallel of Act fourth.

Chap. 6. v. 14.15.16.17. The Antichristian adversaries trembling for fear of
Gods judgments shall cry with a horrible howling, Mountains fall on us: who
can stand, because of the wrath of God and the Lamb?

Chap. 7. v. 9. unto the end. The martyrs and all the blessed and sealed ones,
formerly afflicted in the world, now enjoy eternal felicity: and stand before
God and the Lamb singing with joyful harmony: salvation to our God; for God
will protect them, and the Lamb will feed them.

By which double antithesis or contrary position the coherence does appear:
as also hereby we understand both the consolation of the Church militant under
Antichrist, as of the Church triumphant in the heavens.

After this I saw] The transitory particle (...) shows that this is a
different Act from the former, therefore these words, After this, do denote
not only the order of the vision, but also the future time in which it was
done. Before indeed he saw a great company which were sealed: but afterward he
sees this innumerable multitude. Moreover the former were sealed: viz. during
the persecutions of Antichrist on earth: but these latter sung a hymn, to wit,
after the enemies were cast into utter darkness, and the Church taken up into
glory.

Furthermore five things are recorded concerning this multitude. 1. Who, how
great, where, and what manner of multitude it was? v. 2.2. What they did? they
praise God and the Lamb. v. 10.11.12. 3. Who they were? The martyrs and
faithful before sealed. v. 13.14. 4. What their happiness was. ver. 15.16. 5.
The cause of this their great felicity. v. 17.

A great multitude which no man etc.] This multitude is a figure of the new
triumphant Church: so that it consisted both of the souls which John erewhile
saw under the altar, namely who in this world had fought the good fight of
faith, from the time of the Apostles for the space of 600 years: as also the
hundred forty and four thousand sealed ones, preserved by Christ during the
troubles and commotions of THAT MAN OF SIN, from the sixhundreth year, unto
the end of the world. This multitude is great and innumerable, as consisting of
all the forenamed persons. viz. both of the martyrs under the altar, and of the
hundred forty and four thousand sealed ones, with all other of the faithful
from the Apostles time unto the last day. 2 Timothy 2.19.
The which number, although it be small in comparison of them that perish: and
certain and defined in respect of God (who knows who are his) yet in it self
it is great, and cannot be reckoned by any creature. Howsoever therefore the
greater part shall follow the devil, and cleave to Antichrist: yet the Lord
will have a great multitude, and by such he will be praised for ever.

Of all nations] Thus also the Church in Chap. 5.9. sings unto the Lord: Thou
have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and nation. Hence we see, that the sealed of the twelve tribes of
Israel, belong to this multitude: otherwise they could not be of every tribe
and nation. So that here is represented the whole triumphant Church of the new
Testament.

Stood before the Throne] This shows that they were in heaven, and not on
earth: for this standing denotes their celestial happiness, which consists
in the perpetual vision of God and the Lamb. The queen of Sheba counted
Solomon's servants happy, in that they always stood before Solomon, and heard
his wisdom: but how much greater is the happiness of the Saints in heaven, who
continually behold the majesty, and glory of God and Christ? Now this standing
of the Saints is opposed to the dreadful cry of reprobates, who can stand?

Clothed with white robes] Their heavenly purity, brightness and glory is
here set forth: For the just shall shine as the stars of heaven. Hence again
it appears that the souls of the Martyrs, to whom white robes were given
Chap. 6.11. and to whom it was said that they should rest for a little season,
are joined to this multitude, being commanded to come forth from under the
altar, and placed before the Throne. Moreover palms were given into their
hands, in sign of victory. For as Gregory observes, these palms which the
multitude held in their hands, are nothing else but the reward of victory
following the works of Martyrs. Yet God forbid, we should with Ribera
attribute this reward, to any meritorious work: seeing a far other meritious
cause thereof is noted unto us ver. 14. and 17.

10. And cried with a loud voyce] Now follows what this multitude did: they
together with the Angels, Elders, and Beasts, that is, with the whole assembly
of the heavenly inhabitants, sing joyfullie to God and the Lamb. This joy of
the Saints, as I even now said, is opposed to the howling of the ungodly under
their plagues: Mountains fall on us. Here therefore is signified the most
certain change of things as now they are, joyful indeed and desirable unto
the godly, now under affliction: but doleful and cursed to the wicked, now
lifting up their horns: For it is a righteous thing with God (says Paul) to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you: 2 These. 1.6
and to you who are troubled, rest with us, etc. According as Abraham said to
the glutton crying in hell: Luke 16.25.
Son remember that thou in thy life time receivedst good things, and likewise
Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.

Salvation to our God] This acclamation is not a wishing salvation, as is the
manner of subjects, desiring prosperity to their prince, to cry: Let the king
live: but a shouting for joy, and a blessing of God and the Lamb, for man's
salvation, or blessed immortality and happiness: It is (I say) no wish; but an
action of thanksgiving, attributing to God that which is dew unto him, namely,
the praise and glory of their salvation: and the sense is: we ascribe not our
salvation received, to our own power, but to the grace of God and merits of
the Lamb. Therefore Beza to express this sense, has rendered the words thus:
salvation from our God and from the Lamb, to wit, is given unto us: And thus
Austin in his 11 sermon concerning the Saints: They sing with a loud voice
salvation to God, who acknowledge with much thanksgiving, that they have
overcome in battle all fiery trials, not by their own power, but by his
assistance etc. The joy therefore and blessedness of the Saints in heaven,
shall be an eternal celebration of God and of Christ.

11. And all the Angels] The rest also of the celestial company, as the
Angels, Elders and beasts spoken of Chap. 4. do join in singing with the
blessed souls of the Martyrs and sealed ones.

And fell before the throne on their faces] A gesture of suppliants, who humble
themselves before the most high majesty.

Saying Amen] The like thanksgiving of the heavenly inhabitants we see Chap.
4.10.11. and Chap. 5.14. and Cha. 19.1. In saying Amen, they joyfully ascent to
the hymn of this innumerable multitude: as if they should say: worthily
indeed ye do celebrate God and the Lamb the author of your salvation and
glory. For he is worthy, as Chap. 4.11. They add also more glorious praises:
as blessing, glory, etc. In which, as we before noted, they do not so much
pray and wish that God may have the same, as by approbatio^ show forth that
which is dew unto him.

Blessing] that is, celebration is dew unto God from all creatures.

Glorie] Or a thankful publishing of the powerful works of God.

Wisdom] For he is the author and fountain of all wisdom.

And thanksgiving] For the exceeding great benefits of their creation,
redemption and glorification.

Honour] Reverence with subjection.

Power] Above all the power of Satan, Antichrist and all adversaries.

Might] by which he sustaineth all things, overcomes al things, and is overcome
by none. By repeating Amen they confirm and desire that these his praises may
remain for ever and ever.

This is a most sweet harmony of the Saints in heaven, always praising the
Lord: now we who for the present remain here on earth, are hereby stirred up
to the like affections. Moreover we are taught, after what manner the Saints
in heaven pray before God and the Lamb, namely, by perpetual praising of them:
but we hear them not supplicating to God, neither interceeding before Christ,
The Saints in heaven pray not for the Church on earth.
either for the whole Church on earth, or any particular member thereof: for
this honor is dew to Christ alone. And therefore to affirm, that either they
pray for us, or that we ought to pray unto them, is an hypocritical invention
contrary to the Scripture and true religion: greatly derogating from the
glory of God and the Lamb, making the glorified Saints to be tutelar idols.

And one of the Elders answered saying to mee] Now one of the Elders, by way of
conference shows John who this multitude of thanksgivers are: as did the Angel
to Zachary Chap. 1. v. 9. (...) answered, for, asked, by a metalepsis of the
consequent for the antecedent, usual to the Hebrews: who frequently, For
answer, use, ask: for hear, speak, etc. because ordinarily questions are
answered: and they that speak are heard, etc.

One] Lyra laugheth at such who make this Elder to be Pope Silvester, Who this
Elder was.
and indeed well he might: for John could not learn any thing of him: but he
himself is as ridiculous, in making Peter the Apostle to be this One. Now where
has he this, but from his own foolish invention. Others therefore say more
probably, that it was Isay the Prophet, who speaks in the words of this Elder
Chap. 1.18. and Chap. 19.10. but whosoever he were, it seems he sat near
unto John and was perhaps the same, who bade him Chap. 5.5. not to weep.

He asks who they are? whence they came? not as if he knew it not, but hence
to take occasion for to instruct him therein, as if he should say, know thou
not who these are clothed in white, I will show thee: these are, etc. Thus he
stirs up John, diligently to observe, and mind this multitude, as being matter
full of comfort both for him and us: For if we make white our garments in the
blood of the Lamb, we may then be certainly persuaded, that after the
troublesome warfare of this present life, we shall be partakers of the like
victory and happiness with them in heaven.

Now he describes the multitude by two notes. The first is taken from their
former afflicted condition: which came out of great tribulation; this is a
paraphrase of the martyrs enduring with patience most cruel persecution, and
all kind of torments for the sake of Christ: as also of all other faithful
professors, who through the manifold troubles of this wretched life, have
attained the port of eternal happiness. For howsoever some men's afflictions are
greater then others, yet of necessity all that will live godly in this world,
must through manifold tribulations enter into the kingdom of God.

Came out] that is, obtained a glorious victory by the power of God, howbeit to
the world they seemed as lost: which is partly to teach us, that we should not
dream of delights and pleasures in this world, but prepare our selves for the
cross of Christ: And partly to comfort us, least we should faint under the
same: for howsoever our tribulations are great, yet we shall come out, and be
conquerours.

And have washed their robes] It is strange that Erasmus should rather read it
(...) enlarged, then (...) have washed, seeing al our most approved copies so
have it, and the analogy of this place and that in Rev. 1.5. and 1 Ioh. 1.17.
do necessarily lead unto it: for a reason is here given how they came to have
their garments white: viz. by washing them in the blood of the Lamb. And this
is the second sign or note of the godly, taken from their faith and
constancy. Their white robes set forth their righteousness and purity, see Chap.
6.11. This they have not by their own blood, that is, by the merit of
martyrdom or sufferings: but by the blood of the Lamb, that is, by the alone
merit of Christ. For this whitenes comes by faith, by which the godly apply
the merits of Christ's blood unto themselves as. Rom 3.25. God has set forth
Christ to be a propitiation through faith in his blood: to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past. Whosoever therefore seeks
to wash their robes in their own merits, satisfactions, popish masses,
purgatory or indulgences, they appertain not to this multitude: for they cast
of the blood of the Lamb. He says in the preterperfect tense, (...) they have
washed and not in the present tense (...) they wash: to signify that if by
faith we are not washed in this life, there shall not be afterward any more a
washing or purging from sin.

And made them white] All other blood makes red and staineth, How we are made
white by the blood of the Lamb.
but the blood of Christ purges us from all sin, 1 Ioh. 1.7. and makes white
as snow. Isai. 1.18: therefore this is a washing and whiting not of nature, but
of grace, not of art, but of the spirit.

15. Therefore are they before the Throne] Here the Elder declares unto John
the happiness both of the martyrs and all other true believers. The particle
(...) therefore, notes the cause of this felicity, that is, how it flows not
from the whiteness of their robes, but because they are washed in the blood of
Christ: so that nothing hence can be gathered for to establish the merits of
Saints.

Now he describes this celestial happiness, in a fourfold degree.

First: They are before the Throne of God, that is, they enjoy eternally the
sight of God, and have a blessed and happy communion with him.

Secondly: They serve him day and night] that is, they always worship him, in
celebrating his glory and majesty. This service is the glorious liberty of
the sons of God.

In his temple] In Chap. 21.22. it is said, that the heavenly Jerusalem has
no temple, viz. a material one: for the Lord God allmighty and the Lamb are the
temple of it.

Thirdly, Christ shall dwell among them] Gr. (...), that is, shall cover them
as with a shadow, and under whose wing they shall safely and sweetly rest
themselves: The Latin version renders it, shall dwell over them: the which
Beza also in his first edition followed, and not a miss. The sense is, they
shall eternally enjoy the favor, grace, and glory of God.

16. They shall hunger no more] The two former degrees noted their positive
good: The two latter, the evils they shall be freed from, taken out of Isai
49.10. For hunger, thirst, and heat are by a synecdoche put, for all the
defects, wants and troubles of this life. Wherefore as the third degree of
glory, signifyes their freedom from the wants of this miserable life: so the
fourth shows that they shall be no more afflicted with any troubles or
calamities: For in scripture the heat of the sun is put for persecution. Matt.
13.21.

17. For the Lamb shall feed them] These words contain a reason of this so
great felicity and freedom from former defects. they shall not hunger, for the
Lamb will feed them: who is both a savior in redeeming them, and a shepherd
in feeding his sheep to life eternal. The food of this present life is one
thing: that of the life to come is another: viz. satiety of joys in his
presence, and pleasures in his right hand for ever. Nor thirst] for the same
Lamb will lead them to the fountains of living waters: as we shall see in
Chap. 22.

1. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes] A metaphor taken from
mothers, who not only lay their infants (crying for hunger or thirst) to the
breast, but are wont also to wipe of their tears from their eyes: of which also
see Chap. XXXIII. Argum. of Christ's deity.
21.4. Now here let us take notice of a XXXIII argument, proving the Deity of
the Lamb. And it is twofold. 1. He that feeds the elect with life eternal,
and leads them to the fountains of living waters, is Jehovah God: Isai. 49.10.
Psalm. 23.1.2. Ezech. 34.14.15. But this the Lamb does, as we see in this
place: Ergo, etc. 2. He that wipes away all tears, and feeds the elect, is
the same God Jehovah. Esa. 25.8. and 49.10. but the Lamb feeds, and wipes
away all tears. Isai. 25.9.10. Lo this is our God we have waited for him: and
he will save us: this is Jehovah, etc. Ergo etc.

The Preface on the third Vision, contained in Chap. VIII. IX. X. XI.
THe second vision is ended at the opening of the seventh seal. Now follows
the third vision concerning seven Angels with seven trumpets containing more
dreadful apparitions then hitherto we have heard. What is signified by them,
the same being very obscure, interpreters, are diversely minded. Yet herein they
all agree, that the persecutions of the world, the afflictions of the godly,
and punishments of the wicked are prefigured. But what, and after what manner
they are, herein they much differ: For here is wisdom indeed, neither can any
man fully declare the meaning of them, except John himself (to whom they were
revealed by the spirit) were present to interpret the same. To the end
therefore we may in some measure attain to the knowledge of these mysteries,
(lifting up our eyes in the first place for the Lords assistance) Let the
observation before spoken of, be as a leading star unto us: viz. that as the
end of the second vision was the catastrophe or change of the Churches
calamities in the last day: so likewise this third vision ends at the last
judgment Chap. 11.17. Whence we gather for tertaine that here again in a
general way is represented under new mysteries, the history of the state of
the Church and the enemies thereof unto the end of the world. For this vision
takes its beginning at the casting of the censer full of fire of the altar, The
beginning and ending of this vision The third vision is universal.
upon the earth: that is, from the time the holy Ghost first fell upon the
Apostles. and it is ended in the description of the last judgment.

This vision therefore is also universal, consisting of four Acts: and is of
the same argument or nature with the former vision, prefiguring the success of
the preaching of the Gospel: what enemies the Church should have: what battles
should befall the godly teachers in the world, especially under the kingdom of
Antichrist: also comfort and remedy by which the godly ought to raise up
themselves in the midst of so great confusions.

Now in this it differs from the former, The difference between the second
and third vision
in that the types are different, which for the most part do more clearly
represent some special events, to wit, the apostasy of certain eminent
teachers, and the rising of Antichrist, both in the East and West. For the
sound of the trumpet, in scripture has a plain analogy to the preaching of
the Gospel Isa. 27.13. and 58.1. Hos. 8.1. And lastly the four Acts of this
vision are somewhat differing and more clearly set down, then the foregoing.

The first Act in the sound of six trumpets shadows out the state of the
Church and the godly in this world, The four Acts of vision III.
not only during the first six hundred years unto Antichrist, as before: but
furthermore it describes the rising and reign both of the Eastern and Western
Antichrists: The Western under the figure of a star falling from heaven, and of
locusts proceeding out of the smoke of the bottomless pit. But the Eastern
under the form of a very great army of horsemen: and withal it deploreth the
great evils, wherewith these two enemies should afflict both the Church, and
astonish the inhabitants of the whole earth. This Act is extended from the
blowing of the first trumpet, or promulgation of the Gospel until the
council of Constans, during the space of 1382 years; or rather until the
time of the reformation of doctrine by Luther Anno 1482. in Chapters VIII. and
IX.

The second Act subalternate to the former, is consolatory, teaching us, that
notwithstanding the violent rage, and cruelties of both these Antichrists, yet
Christ will keep the book open, having his foot upon the earth, and upon the
sea, and alawayes preserving a Church unto himself. Chap. X.

The third Act prefigureth new battles of the two witnesses, or reformers of
the Church in the last times. And also the great rage of Satan, and Antichrist
against the preachers of the Gospel, is livelie set forth Chap. 11. unto 15
ver.

The fourth and last Act represents the victory of the triumphant Church, and
the last judgment in which the militant Church shall be at length freed from all
troubles: but the wicked who have caused destruction to the world, shall now
perish for ever from v. 15. of Chap. XI. unto the end.

The Argument and parts of Chapter VIII.
THe seventh seal being opened, after half an hours silence in heaven, there
appear seven Angels with seven trumpets. But before they sound, Christ comes
forth with a golden censer, offering the prayers of the Saints upon the golden
altar: and then he casts the censer filled with fire upon the earth, whence
arise thundrings, voices, lightnings and earthquakes. Moreover, four Angels
sounding in order one after another, many wonderful and fearful things come
to pass. At the first trumpet, hail and fire mingled with blood is cast on
the earth; whereby the third part of trees is burnt. At the second, a great
mountain burning with fire is cast into the sea, turning the third part of the
sea into blood. At the third, a great star burning as a Lamp falls from
heaven upon the third part of the rivers and fountains of water, turning the
third part of the waters into wormwood, of which many men died. At the fourth,
the third part of the Sun is smitten, and of the Moon, and of the Stars, that
they should not give light, night, nor day. After these things an Angel flying
through the midst of heaven denounces woe, woe, woe to the inhabitants of the
earth, because of the three other trumpets following.

THe Chapter therefore contains

1. The preparation to the third vision. 2. Four parts of the vision it self,
or four soundings of the trumpets with their events, unto the end of the
Chapter.
The opening of the seventh seal.

And a preparation to the third vision.

1 And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven about
the space of half an hour.

2 And I saw the seven Angels which stood before God, and to them were given
seven trumpets.

3 And another Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a golden censer, and
there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers
of all Saints upon the golden Altar which was before the Throne.

4 And the smoke of the incense which came with the prayers of the Saints
ascended up before God, out of the Angels hand.

5 And the Angel took the censer, and filled it with fire of the Altar, and
cast it into the earth: and there were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings,
and an earthquake.

6 And the seven Angels which had the seven trumpets, prepared themselves to
sound.

THE COMMENTARY.
1. ANd when he (to wit the Lamb) had opened the seavouth seal] Rupertus and
some others will have this verse to belong to the former vision, What is meant
by the silence of half an hour.
understanding the silence here mentioned, to be the tranquillity which
follows in heaven after the day of judgment, to wit, when the souls of the
martyrs shall cease to cry for vengeance, half an hour, but perpetually.

Others: there was silence in heaven, that is, the Church had a little
breathing or freedom from persecution: for after Constantine, suddenly followed
the Arian persecution against the orthodox verity, under Constans, Julian,
Valens, etc.

Anselmus and some others apply the silence for the space of half an hour,
Jerome seems to speak somewhat in his commentary on Dan. Chap. 12. But this
fiction Ribera justly disapproves of, albeit there is little weight in his
reason. Because, (says he) that time shall be so quiet, as that the wicked
casting of all fear of evils to befall them shall live securely, and say:
peace, peace, according to that of Matt. 24.28. and 1 Thessa. 5.1. but this is
rather to confirm, then any way to confute their opinion: for this silence
does note tranquillity according to these interpreters.

Others suppose that the silence was,

For my part I seek for no mystery in this silence, The Authors opinion.
in which, the former vision being fully acted, there was a cessation for a
little while from further apparitions, permission being granted unto John in
the mean while to desist from contemplation of these high mysteries. For the
opening of the sixth seal concluded the foregoing vision of the last judgment.
After which at the opening of the seventh feal, begins a new vision, the which
that it might plainly be differenced from the former, there is silence for the
space (as it were) of half an hour, during which time the heavenly assembly
ceased from their hymns, and John prepared himself for to contemplate on new
visions. This stillness therefore is to be referred to the order or decency of
this apparitional Act: and to me there seems to be no other mystery in it.

2. And I saw those seven Angels] here begins the preparation, and it is
twofold. First appear seven Angels for to sound with seven trunpets. v. 2. and
6. But before they sound, comes forth an Angel with a golden censer casting the
same upon the earth, as acting the prologue, and setting forth the argument of
these trumpetters.

And I saw] He sees again seven Angels showing themselves on the theater, to
whom are given by him that sat on the Throne, or by the Lamb, Seven trumpets
to sound withal. And here we are to take notice of the article (...) those
seven, to wit, whom before he saw Chap. 4.5. and 5.6.

Who stood] that is, their office was to stand before God (as heralds)
speedily to perform his commandments: Or standing, that is, ministering and
ready to sound with their trumpets. For as the edicts of princes are published,
their festival days proclaimed, and people, or armies gathered together by the
sound of the trumpet: so these Angels by sounding, do publish the secret
judgments of God, set forth admirable events, and provoke the adversaries to
wrath and tumult.

Most interpreters understand by these Angels, Who these sounding Angels are.
the preachers of the word: whose office it is (like trumpetters) to proclaim
the will of God unto men: now indeed this may not unfitly be applied to the
first six of them, but not to the seventh: For without all doubt thereby is
signified the Archangel, with whose voice and trump the Lord shall descend from
heaven, and come to judgment. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. and when he sounds the
inhabitants of heaven shall sing a song of triumph, and the dead shallbe called
forth to judgment: Chap. 11.15.18.

3 And another Angel came] This is the second part of the preparation unto the
vision: An Angel casts the golden censer with the fire of the altar upon the
earth. All interpreters say something touching this Angel, who he was, and what
he effected: But wherefore he prevented the sounding of the others, and how
this sight does cohere with that which follows, I find it not sufficiently
expounded by any of them, the which thing notwithstanding is necessarily to be
considered. First I will rehearse the opinion of others.

Andreas acknowledges, Andreas opinion touching the Angel with the censer.
(howbeit very darkely) that it is Christ the High Priest of the Church: who
also is the Altar thereof. He offers the prayers of the saints to God,
desiring, says he, that the scourge here inflicted upon the wicked, may lessen
their eternal torments etc. by lightnings, voices, thunders, and earthquakes,
he understands the terrors and threanings which shall go before the
consummation of the world.

Lyra doting as his usual manner is, applies this to Pope Damasus, The doting
opinion of Lyra.
the successor of Liberius about the year 384. who, as he says, had the
golden censer, that is, purity of heart, and zeal toward God. He offered the
prayers of the Saints to God: that is, he composed the mattins and evening
songs, and glory be to the Father and to the Son, etc, causing them to be sung
by all the Churches. He sent forth the censer and fire on the earth: by
stirring up the inahbitants thereof to fervent charity: After which followed
thunders of preaching: voices of praising of God: lightnings of miracles:
earthquackes, of conversion of men's hearts to God. But these things are to
foolish.

Rupertus understands this Angel to be him that was present with the Fathers,
Rupertus opinion.
by whose ministry the law was given, and the priesthood instituted. But what
use was there here, that a clear and known history should be represented unto
John by oscure types? wherefore they err from the scope, who in expounding the
Revelation, keep not themselves within the limits of the New Testament: seeing
it is certain, that only the condition of the Church under the Gospel is
revealed unto John.

Ribera denies this Angel to be Christ, Ribera denies this Angel to be Christ.
both because Christ is no where absolutely called an Angel: as also because it
is said, And another Angel: which shows that he was one like to the other
seven: as Chap. 1. I saw four Angels: and a little after: I saw another Angel
ascending. Now he supposes that it was Gabriel who appeared to Daniel, and
Marie: or Michael, Dan. 9.21. Luke 1.26.
to whom the whole Church is committed. The Altar he makes to be Christ: The
Censer, by a strained metaphor he applies to the body of Christ, full of holes
like a censer, by the wounds he received at his passion. Therefore he
imagines that the Angel offers up the prayers of the Saints. The thunders,
wyces, earthquakes, etc. he takes literally for the signs prognosticating the
future calamities of the ungodly.

Alcasar understands it of an imaginary person: Alcasars opinion.
shadowing out Christian charity.

My Anonymus says well: This other Angel is Christ, Anonymus does rightly
apply it to Christ.
who is present with his elect to defend them from the deceit of heretics,
unto the end of the world: he offers the prayers of the Saints upon the
golden Altar, that is, upon himself who is both God and man, and also
interceeds for his Church before the Father: he sends forth the censer and fire
upon the earth: that is, by sending the holy Ghost upon his Apostles: And
there were thundrings etc. that is, the threatening of Gods ministers against
Antichrist: And earthquakes, that is, through the preachers of the Gospel
Christianity was divided against it self, some favoring Antichrists super
stirions, and some impugning the same.

This interpretation both I my self, and most of our writers approve of, as
most true. For this Angel stands, and performs in heaven the work of the
Churches high priest, in offering up the prayers of the Saints and making them
acceptable to God, as a sweet smelling sacrifice: Now the Church has no other
highpriest, but Christ alone: and therefore Ribera in applying this, not to
Christ, but unto a created Angel, robs him of the honor of his priesthood, and
makes the Saints in heaven as mediators to be prayed unto. But this wicked
invention is contrary both to this vision, and the whole drift and scope of
the Revelation.

His objection, that Christ is no where in scripture absolutely called an
Angel, is false: for he, who delivered the Patriarch Jacob out of all his
troubles, is absolutely called an Angel Genesis 48.16. which must be understood of
Christ Jehovah, the Son of God, as appears by Genesis 32.9.11. and 28.15. and in
Mala. 3.1. Christ is called the Angel of the covenant. Neither is it true, that
John makes him like one of the seven Angels here spoken of. For he calls him
(...), another Angel, the which must be understood, not only of another
individual, but of another kind of Angel, as plainly appears by the office of
priesthood attributed to this Angel: to be short we have already showed, that
what is alleged in Chap. 7. v. 1.2. is to be referred unto Christ our Lord.

Thus we have the meaning of the preparation: Before the seven Angels should
stir up the world by sounding their trumpets, Christ steps in as the
high priest, for to offer up to God the prayers and groans of the Church
militant against tyrants and Antichrist: to teach us that the complaints of the
faithful vanish not away in the air, but are received by Christ our merciful
highpriest, and by him effectually offered, and presented before God, thereby
to procure deliverance for them. This is the lively comfort of the Church, that
she has an highpriest to fly unto in all her troubles.

But as yet it does not sufficiently appear, how these things agree with what
follows: and therefore we will more narrowly consider the matter.

That which the seven Angels shall afterward more distinctly set forth by
sounding their trumpets: The mystery of the Angel with the golden censer
explained.
This Angel (as I before said) as a certain forerunner in a general way,
shadows out the same. For as John in the beginning of the foregoing vision saw
Christ riding, and crowned as king of the Church, and conqueror of al enemies,
first on a white horse, afterward on a red, thirdly on a black, and at last on
a pale: so now he sees Christ standing at the altar as the highpriest of the
Church, offering to God the prayers of the Saints, and sending into the earth
the fire of the spirit, and preachers of the Gospel, at the sound of whose
trumpets arise voices, thundrings and lightnings, prefiguring the same thing,
which in the former vision was typed out by the white, red, black and pale
horse, viz. the diverse state and condition of the Church: and at last
follows a great earthquake.

Christ therefore the high priest of the Church, the heavenly author and
directour of the ministry, is here represented unto us, that we may be
assured, that while the preachers on earth do sound the trumpet of the word,
Christ performs for them, and for the whole Church the part of an highpriest
in heaven. Now let us consider the words themselves: in which is propounded I.
What this Angel did in heaven. II. With what success he did it. III. What
followed thereupon in the earth.

All what he did in heaven, is accommodated to the types of the Old Testament.
For as the priest being to pray and offer for the people, went to the golden
perfumatorie altar, on which was preserved the continual fire, and taking a
golden censer, put incense thereon, the which being kindled by the fire of the
altar was resolved into an odoriferous smoke acceptable to God: So John sees
Christ standing in the heavens, at the Altar, But in heaven there is no Altar,
except Christ himself; see Chap. 6.9.

Having a golden censer] what is this, but the precious passion and death of
Christ, by the powerful effacie whereof, he himself for ever appears in heaven
as an highpriest for us. Hebrew. 9.24.

Much incense] that is, the prayers and sighs of the Church militant. They are
given to Christ, when as the prayers and groans of the Saints ascend upward
unto God in the name of Jesus Christ: The word giving here used, does not argue
that this Angel is not Christ, for he himself professes that all things are
given unto him of his Father, to wit, as man and mediator: And indeed in him
are hid all the treasures of grace, the which he distributeth according to the
necessity of all his members, so that he needs not to take any incense other
where. But incense is given him, not that he stands in need thereof, but as
being our mediator to offer the same unto the Father.

To give, that is, to offer it with the prayers of all Saintes] (...) of all
Saints, the which expression shows, that no Saint is neglected: but al their
sighs and groans are received and offered up to God by our high priest in
heaven. In Gr. it is (...) that he should give, or offer it to the prayers, in
the dative case: and it seems there is a defect of the praeposition of, or
with. The Latin renders it, of the prayers materially: as Abel was said to
offer the first fruits of his sheep: and Prove. 3.9. we are commanded to honor
God by, or with our substance. So this incense should note the prayers
themselves, or part of their prayers: because, says Rupertus, he offered not
all, but that which they lawfully pray, for many times the Saints know not
what to ask, or ask amiss: but this seems to be to subtle.

Beza, and so our translation, with the prayers of the Saints: as if their
prayers were given to Christ to be offered together with the incense: in which
sense, the incense, and the prayers should be distinct, as the sign, and the
thing signified. But it may also be well understood without such an Ellipsis or
defect: What is meant by the incense.
because the incense is given to Christ, (...) that he should give, that is,
add, and confer the same unto the prayers of the Saints: and thus this incense
should signify the applying of the precious merit of Christ, by which only
the Saints themselves, and their prayers also are acceptable and well pleasing
to God. Ephesians. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 5.2.

4. And the smoke of the incense ascended] The effect of the former oblation
here follows, which is, that the prayers of the Saints being sprinkled with
the sweet perfume of Christ's merits, they do ascend (as it were) out of his
hand, in a gracious acceptance before God: for even as the sweet odor of the
incense of old pleased the Lord: even so our prayers through the merit and
intercession of Christ are acceptable to him, and obtain the promise. To
ascend up before God, is a phrase much used in scripture speaking of sacrifices
and it signifies, that God is well pleased with them, and hears them; so the
Angel said to Cornelius, thy prayers, Act. 10.4. Exodus 3.9.
and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God. The cry of the children
of Israel is come unto me, etc. Again he says, the smoke of the incense
ascended which came (...) that is, either, of, with, or to the prayers, for
this fragrancy comes to our prayers by Christ's oblation, who makes them
worthy to ascend up before God.

Thus we have heard what Christ does in heaven: as also the success thereof.
And in this consists the Churches comfort. It remains to consider, What the
casting of the censer on the earth signifies.
what the effect thereof was in the earth: in which the first Act of this
vision is summarily shadowed out with wonderful analogy and brevitie.

5. And the Angel tooke] Two things remain to be spoken of in this verse: 1.
What the Angel did further. 2. with what effect, He filled the golden censer
with the fire of the Altar, and cast it into the earth. Many take this in the
evil part, viz. of the fire of punishment, by which God will consume the
wicked: But it is rather to be taken in the better part: for what agreement is
there betwixt the censer, and punishment? The filling therefore of the censer
with fire, and the casting of it into the earth, if it be properly taken,
happily may signify the fulfilling and abrogation of the types of the Law made
by the oblation and intercession of Christ. But for my part I take it, that
hereby two benefits of Christ are shadowed out. First the wonderful shedding
forth of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles, in the likeness of fiery tongues. And
this I take to be the casting of the fire of the Altar into the earth. I know
that some understand it of the fire of division which should follow the
preaching of the Gospel, whereof Christ speaks, I am come to send fire on the
earth, Luke 12.49.
and what will I, if it were already kindled? But so it can not be, because the
high priest with this fire had formerly kindled his incense. The second benefit
is the casting of the censer upon the earth, which signifies (as I have
showed;) the precious death and passion of Christ. This he sent into the earth,
when the whole world was filled with the knowledge of Christ crucified, by the
preaching of the Apostles.

The casting therefore of this censer etc. is the same with that of Christ's
riding as conqueror on the white horse: by which (as we have showed Chap. 6.)
is set forth the Gospel preached by the Apostles, and the whitenes of the
primitive Churches, that is, their purity in life and doctrine.

And there were voices and thundrings] This also by most is taken in an evil
sense, namely for the plagues of the wicked: But it signifies the diverse
events of the Church occasioned by the preaching of the Gospel, and indeed the
very same thing was before set forth, at the opening of the first, second,
third, fourth, and sixth seal: yet so, as in a general way only: The order of
the words is here to be noted. The old version puts thundrings in the first
place, and voices in the second: but all Greek copies read voices first.

First therefore, there were voyces] That is, the preaching of the Gospel had a
blessed success, while the voices of the Apostles sounded throughout the
earth, drawing the whole world, as it were unto the obedience of Christ:
agreeable unto this, is that before spoken of, concerning Christ's glorious
riding on the white horse.

Secondly, Thundrings, this was noted by the red horse, whose rider took away
peace from the earth, that is, by the preaching of the Gospel raised up the
thundrings of tyrants. For look as thunder shakes, strikes and tears the
highest mountains: so did the tyrants first terribly rage against the
Apostles, afterward by axe and sword slew many thousands of good Christians.

Thirdly, there were Lightnings, fyerie flashes, which burnt, and made pale and
black the standing come. This was shadowed out by the black and pale horse, the
Church being darkened by the lightnings of heresies, and by the flourishing
shows, and deceites of hypocritical monks, was brought into an irrecoverable
palenes or death.

To be short there follows an Earthquake] to wit, that great one spoken of at
the opening of the sixth seal, meaning that Antichrist should shake the
Christian world, as Mahomet in the East, and the Pope in the West.

Here we may learn in the first place, that Christ our faithful high priest
does always appear in heaven before God for his Church, and by the golden
censer, that is, by the eternal efficacy of his oblation, intercedes for us to
the Father, making our prayers acceptable unto him: so that neither Satan, nor
Antichrist shall ever be able to destroy the Church whatsoever in their rage
they imagine against her.

Secondly, that the prayers of all the Saints both in heaven and in earth, are
offered up by Christ, and by him only made acceptable to God. Therefore it is
great impiety, to direct our prayers to the Saints, as thinking by them, to
have them offered unto the Lord.

In the last place, if we see in these our days thundrings, lightnings, and
earthquakes to follow the preaching of the Gospel, let us not be offended
(seeing John has foretold us hereof) only let us in such times fly unto
Christ our high priest by prayer and true repentance.

6 And the seven Angels which had] That which before was showed in a general
way to follow after the casting of the censer full of fire into the earth
(signifying the pouring out of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles, and their
preaching of the Gospel) namely the voices, thundrings, etc. He now comes to
set down in a more special way, by types indeed for the most part obscure, yet
not so hard to be understood, if we diligently compare them with histories.

The Angels prepare not themselves to sound, before that Christ had cast his
censer of fire into the earth; Now what is this? but the commandment given
unto the Apostles not to depart from Jerusalem to preach the Gospel, Act. 1.4.
until they had received the holy Ghost. For all these trumpettours as before
we showed, are the Apostles, and all other faithful teachers in the after
ages, except the seventh and last only, which shall be the Archangel himself.

And as the apparition exhibited to John in the former vision, served to unfold
the mysteries of all the seals: so these here serve for the understanding of
the sound of all the trumpets, which thing we are principally to observe,
laying it down for a sure ground, that both there and here are signified by a
certain analogy, partly the same, and partly the like events to befall the
Church from that time unto the end. For Christ intended to reveal no other
events unto John, There is an analogy betwixt the seals, trumpets and vials.
then what he had seen before: neither can there be any question made, but that
there is a certain agreement betwixt the seven seals, seven trumpets, and
seven vials, if we diligently consider every particular, and rightly attend to
the scope of the prophecy.

Here then we see, that they altogether err from the drift of this history,
who apply the seven trumpets to the seven greatest judgments of God, which
have fallen upon the world, since the creation: as the first trumpet, to note
the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrha by fire. The second to the drowning of
Pharaoh and his army in the red sea. The third to the Canaanites being
destroyed by Iosuah. The fourth to the murmuring Israelites in the wilderness.
The fifth to the Israelites falling away from God, in the times of the judges.
The sixth to Ierusalems destruction by the Romans. And lastly the seventh, to
the everlasting punishment of all the wicked at the day of judgment. But these
things are altogether besides the matter: For wherefore should Christ now again
represent that unto John in obscure types, which formerly he plainly knew by
histories of old. Therefore we shall come nearer unto the mark, if we observe
that these trumpets began, from the Apostles time, and so shall continue until
the end of the world. Now let us hear the trumpets.

The sound of the first trumpet.
7 The first Angel sounded, and there followed hail, and fire mingled with
blood, and they were cast upon the earth, and the third part of trees was burnt
up, and all green grass was burnt up.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd the first Angel sounded] Lyra applies the four first trumpets, Lyraes
interpretation corrected.
to the haeresies condemned by the four general Councils. And the first Angel
he understands to be Arius, who sounding with the trumpet of great pride and
outrage, maintained his heresy, and infected the third part of the earth, that
is, the whole Christian world. For the earth is divided (as it were) into three
parts, viz. Jews, Pagans, and Christians: this interpretation is not absurd,
and therefore approved of by Bullinger and some others: but hence the analogy
betwixt the seals and trumpets does not appear: neither is it likely that the
first Angel began not to found till 300 years after John's time: but
undoubtedly it was presently upon Christ's casting the fire into the earth.

I therefore do compare the first trumpet to the first seal. The first trumpet
answers to the first seal.
For as Christ before is said to ride on a white horse as a conqueror, having
a crown on his head, signifying the prosperours success of the Gospel, and in
his hand the bow of his word, by which he moved, wounded, and converted whole
nations unto himself: so here a contrary effect is shadowed out in respect of
the enemies of the Gospel: to wit, the grievous contradictions and
persecutions raised by the Jews in all places against the Apostles. For the
Gentiles readily inbracing the Gospel, moved the Jews through envy,
tumultuously to rage, and raise up much mischief in every place against the
Christians; the which is here set forth by the hail and fire migled with
blood, alluding unto the seventh plague of Egypt: Exodus 9.24. being a grievous
hail mingled with fire, and the blood of men and beasts, consumed by it. Hail
is a congeling of the water in the air through cold, and it is very hurtful
unto the standing corn. Fire, is contrary to hail: Blood, signifyes cruelty.
At the sounding therefore of the first trumpet, which began by the preaching of
the Apostles on the day of Pentecost, there fell hail, fire and blood, that
is, contradictions, persecutions, banishments, and slaughters through the
obstinate Jews: as the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles, with other histories
do plainly prove. Now the reason, why I refer this (with the Catholic
Gloss) unto the Jews and other tumultuous adversaries, viz. such as had lost
their civil power, shall appear by the following trumpet.

Now familiarly in scripture by hail, fire and blood are noted popular and
common calamities, as Joel 2. Zeph. 1. and in other places. But the following
effects touching the burning of the third part of the trees, and of the green
grass causes me to expound this of the calamities befalling the godly, and
not of the punishments of the wicked: because undoubtedly this is to be applied
to the sufferings of the Saints.

And the third part of trees was burnt up] by the trees I understand the
Apostles and chief teachers: by all green grass, the Saints of the primitive
Churches. For the godly are compared to fruitful trees planted by the rivers
of waters Psalm. 1.3. and to grass, noting their imbicillitie and weakness, yet
green, because of their lively faith and charity. Of these the third part was
burnt up, that is, multitudes of them were hurt, afflicted and murdered by
their adversaries, the perfidious Jews. For as tempestuous hail and lightning
is very hurtful to the trees and grass of the earth: even so at the first
beginning of the Gospel, the Apostles and the rest of the faithful were
exercised with cruel storms of afflictions, whereby a great part of them was
taken away. The phrase seems to have an allusion unto that of Ezech. 5.2. where
the Prophet is commanded, to cut of the hair of his head and beard, and to
burn a third part with fire, to smite a third part with a sword, and to scatter
a third part in the wind, under which type the Lord threatened grievous plagues
unto the Jews for their rebellion.

And all green grass was burnt up] Not all strictly, but a great part: for
often times all in scripture, is put only for a part, not for the whole. In
saying the green grass, it notes the extreem calamities of those times. For
the dry hay may more easily be burnt, then the green grass, or wood. Luke
23.31. Hence it appears that this affliction was very grievous. How long this
trumpet sounded, I will not precisely define, but think that is to be extended
from the first preaching of Gospel mentioned Act. 2. until the times of
Domitian, who was the first of the Roman Emperors ( Nero excepted) that
persecuted the Christians. But the Jews afflicted and persecuted them many
ways.

The special use of this first trumpet belonged to John and the primitive
Church, that they should not (though living under the white horse) promise
delight, and ease unto themselves, but prepare for cruel storms of
afflictions, notwithstanding this was their comfort that howsoever by the
cruelty and lightnings of the wicked, the third part should be burnt up: yet
two parts should remain unhurt. In general it appertains unto us also, that
we having the primitive Church for an example, should not be offended if we be
brought to the like condition: but be confident, that the Lord will still
preserve some Churches notwithstanding the rage of Antichrist, who for a long
time has tyrannised over our Ancestors, and with whom we yet wrestle unto
this day.

The sound of the second trumpet.
8 And the second Angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain burning with
fire, was cast into the sea, and the third part of the sea became blood.

9 And the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life,
died, and the third part of the ships were destroyed.

THE COMMENTARY.
8. ANd the second Angel sounded] Lyra understands this Angel to be Macedonius,
who sounding, that is, Lyraes opinion.
proudly teaching (for he was an eloquent man, and Bishop of Constantinople) a
great mountain, that is, the great Macedonian heresy, which was the denying
the holy Ghost to be God, burned with the fire of perfidiousnes, and fell into
the sea, that is, into the Church, resembling the sea by baptism: and the
third part of the sea became blood, that is, by denying the Deity of the holy
Ghost he corrupted the form of baptism in the third part of it: and the third
part of creatures perished: that is, believers, infected by his heresy: and
the third part of the ships, that is, of Prelates and Bishops whom he drew into
the same heresy: until at length he was condemned by the council held at
Constantinople. Bullingers interpretation.


Bullinger much to the same purpose understands by the sea, the world: by the
great mountain, the great heresies of the Valentinians, Manichees, and
Montanis^s: BVRNING WITH FIRE, that is, boasting of divine revelations, as if
they had been altogether led by the spirit, the effects whereof were very
pestilent: because the third part of men, and such also as dwelt in Islands
dyed, that is, being infected with these heresies perished for ever. The
opinion of Aretius.


Aretius also takes it for a great heresy strengthened with the arm of flesh,
as the Macedonian and Eutichinian heresies, by which not only many private
Christians, but many whole Churches were seduced, and brought to destruction.

Ribera understands the mountain literally of a great fiery globe, Riberas
opinion. Alcasars opinion.
which should at some certain time be thrown into the sea.

Alcasar applies it to the war, with which God afflicted the Jews by Titus
and Vespasian. But I would feign know of him, why that shoul be abscurely
foretold, which was already fully accomplished.

The greater part of interpreters both Papists and Protestants, as my Anonymus
Gagnaeus, Lambertus and others (with Andreas) understand this mountain to be
Satan the prince of the world, who burning with the fire of envy at the
preaching of the Gospel, is cast into the sea of this world, and causes the
same tumultuously to rage against Christ: Or: into the sea, that is, among
peoples, nations, princes and kings, enforcing them to shed much innocent
blood, and dissipate many Churches.

This interpretation, I confess, in it self is pious and true, but does not,
as I judge, agree with the purpose of this vision: my reason is, because the
devil from the beginning has been a murderer seeking to devour the Church, in
which respect there was no use, that this thing should be represented unto John
in obscure types.

I therefore do again (with the Catholic gloss) compare the sounding of the
second trumpet with the opening of the second seal, The interpretation of the
Catholic Gloss.
and understand it of the cruel persecutions of Roman tyrants, and the remnant
of the Church which was preserved from utter destruction. For as at the opening
of the second seal went forth a red horse, that is, the Apostolical and
following Church appeared red with the blood of the martyrs: so there by the
founding of the second trumpet is showed unto John, 1. Whence this bloody
condition of the Church arose. 11. How great evils she should suffer thereby.
111. Wherein she ought to be comforted.

For the first, a great mountain burning with fire should be cast into the sea.
The Scripture familiarly by mountains, notes kingdoms, kings and tyrants:
because of their highness, that is, their power and pride: as Zach. 4.7. the
Prophet thus speaks concerning the Persian kingdom: Who art thou O great
mountain before Zerubabel? Let us therefore understand this great mountain, to
be some powerful kingdom, having other kingdoms in subjection, as at that time
the Romans had. He saw this mountain burning with fire, that is, their
Emperors in wrath cruelly raging against Christian religion.

This mountain was cast into the sea] Now what is the meaning hereof? The sea
is a gathering of many waters. The waters are peoples Chap. 17. by the sea
therefore, I understand all nations in subjection to the Roman Empire, and
among which the Christian Churches were here and there dispersed. This mountain
was cast into the sea, that is violently nished upon the world, (not indeed of
unbeleevers,) but of true belevers, that is, the Christian Church, when as the
Roman Emperors, as Domitian, Trajan, Severus, Diocletian, Maximianus and
others (imitaring the tyranny of Nero) persecuted the saints, even until
Constantines time. What followed hereupon? The third part of the sea became
blood] that is, as we heard before at the opening of the second seal, the
Church was made red with the blood of martyrs, so here this mountain with a
fiery rage oppresses many thousands of saints.

9 The third part of the creatures died] These are the slaughters and
Martyrdoms of infinite Christians, put to death by the Roman tyrants for the
confession of the name of Christ. And there is an allegorical analogy between
the sea and creatures in it: and the Church, and faithful living in the same.

And the third part of the ships were destroyed] by ships we understand the
Churches with their pilots, or teachers: for by ships Churches are signified,
many whereof were then lost and destroyed with the Apostles, Bishops and their
worthy teachers; these, I say, were crushed through the weight of this great
mountain, not indeed eternally, but corporally only. Now touching this, we
are to consult with the Ecclesiastical histories of the Churches persecutions
(of which we have spoken somewhat on Chap. 6.) which will serve for an excellent
commentary on this place. Certainly the ship, or Church at Rome was in a
special manner made red with blood: for all her bishops or teachers (as it is
recorded) unto Melchiades, suffered Martyrdom under those tyrants. Thus
therefore this trumpet allegorically explaineth the efficient cause of the
second horses redness, and further amplifies the grievous outragiousnesse
thereof.

But what reason is there, Why only one third of the sea was made blood.
that the whole sea was not turned into blood, and that all creatures and ships
died, and perished not, but only a third part? I have showed that this manner
of speech is taken out of Ezech. 5.2. Now there the Prophet is commanded, not
only to destroy one third part of his hair, but the three thirds thereof,
thereby signifying a total destruction: But here the mountain shall only make
red one third part of the sea, and kill the third part of creatures, and cause
the third part of ships to perish, which undoubtedly was for the comfort of
John, and the faithful: for however this mountain were great, and rushing with
a mighty violence labors to fill all places with fire and blood, yet should he
be able to hurt but one third part of the Christian Church. For two thirds
shall be preserved in safety.

And the truth hereof is confirmed by histories: The fulfilling of this type.
for both in Rome and all other kingdoms, the greater part of Christians were
safely kept in the midst of the most dangerous and cruel persecutions, yea the
blood of the martyrs was as it were the seed of the Church, for the more
Christians were put to death by tyrants, the more their number increased, in so
much that many times even the executioners themselves beholding the confession,
courage, and constancy of martyrs, became Christians, and obtained the same
crown of martyrdom with them.

Moreover it is for the Churches comfort that this burning mountain is cast
into the sea: for by water the fire is extinguished. However therefore tyrants
do much rage for a time: yet at length they shall perish, the victory shall
remain on the Churches side: for by faith we overcome the world 1 Ioh. 5.5.

The Catholic Gloss interprets this mountain (not unfitly) of the Roman
Empire, great indeed, yet thrown into the sea, which is much greater, The sea
swallowed up this great mountain.
and so consumes and deitroyes the same. By the sea he understands Christ's
kingdom, of far greater power then the Roman, signifying that the Roman
tyranny should be swallowed up by Christ's kingdom: for however Christ seems to
be overcome in his afflicted members, yet in truth he conquereth all his
tyrannical adverlaries, for the gates of hell shall not prevail against the
Church Matt. 16.18. Thus sad and joyful things are here mixed together, by
which we see, that the iteration of this vision touching the bloody condition
of the Church, is not in vain.

Moreover I understand the sounding of this trumpet to be from Domitians time
(under whom John was banished) until Constantine, who repressed the tyranny of
his Copartners in the Empire, and restored peace unto the Church, about the
year of our Lord 312.

The sounding of the third trumpet.
10 And the third Angel sounded, and there fell a great Star from heaven,
burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and
upon the fountain of waters:

11 And the name of the Star is called Wormwood, and the third part of the
waters became Wormwood, and many men died of the waters, because they were
made bitter.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd the third Angel sounded] Andrea^ (howbeit unfitly) takes this falling
star to be Lucifer thrown down headlong out of heaven, the Wormwood, the
torments of the wicked in hell. Andreas opinion.


Lyra conceives it to be Pelagius the third Archeretick, Lyraes interpretation.
who in the days of Arcadius and Honorius) denied original sin, pleaded for
free will, and overthrew the grace of Christ. He fell from heaven, that is,
fell away from the Church militant: And is called a great Star, because he
was a learned, and religious Monk. Burning as it were a Lamp: by show of
holiness and learning deceiving many: his name is Wormwood: because, contrary
to the sweet doctrine of true grace, he taught that men by the mere help of
natural faculties, (setting grace aside,) might be converted and saved: with
which pestilent doctrine he made bitter and destroyed many Churches with their
teachers.

Ribera desirous to be singular in interpreting the trumpets literally, does
very foolishly apply this to some fiery exhalation falling from heaven, and
takes all these signs historically. Riberaes frivolous exposition.
But we know that such fiery mixtures do often happen in the air. Besides
the name of this Star, and the making of the waters bitter, do sufficiently
manifest, that these things cannot be properly, or literally taken. But Ribera
perhaps durst not do otherwise, least he should have been forced to apply it
to the apostasy of the Romish Antichrist.

All other interpreters for the most part understand this falling star to be
some certain eminent heretic, Diverse interpretations concerning this falling
star.
one or more. But they differ in the persons: For some refer it to Simon
Magus. Others to Samosatenus, Manichaeus, Arius etc. Others again to Pelagius,
Novatus, Montanus, Manichaeus: And some unto Origin.

Now howsoever all these differ and err in the hypothesis, or special
application: yet they all agree in the thesis, or general position, neither,
(as I judge,) do they herein err from the scope. For the third trumpes with
its apparitions, answers to the third seal and black horse, that went out at
the opening thereof: which signifies (as we have before showed,) the state of
the Church spotted with black and foul heresies, from the Apostles time unto
the rising of Antichrist, and howsoever the Church were thus defiled, and
Christ with the balance of his word was still present, reproving and
condemning their haeresies by his faithful teachers: yet in the mean time a
great famine of sound doctrine much afflicted the Christian world: forasmuch as
almost all Churches with their teachers were drawn aside to the pestilent
error of Arius.

Others refer this to Mahomet, but they little observe the circumstances of
the trumpet. For Mahomet being a most wicked villain, cannot be called a
star: muchlesse a great star shining like a Lamp: neither fell he from
heaven, that is the Church, in which he never was: although I confess he
has occasioned much bitterness unto Christians.

My opinion therefore touching the third trumpet, is, that this great star
burning like a lamp, falling from heaven, and turning the third part of the
waters into wormwood, in a general way denotes all apostated Arch-hereticks,
spoken of Chap. 6. Who at the opening of the third seal, for the space of six
hundred years after the time of the Apostles, deformed the Church of Christ by
their foul heresies, and brought destruction upon the four corners of the earth
by their blasphemies, errors and tumults, as we have before declared. For it
is plain that by stars, the teachers of Churches are signified, and by
falling from heaven, their apostasy from the true faith. But specially, by this
star, and his fall from heaven, is undoubtedly signified the apostasy of the
Bishop of Rome, not indeed that universal departure, The apostafie of the
Church of Rome.
which followed afterward at the full rising of Antichrist, but that first
defect, which three hundred years before forcibly occasioned and led the
Churches both of the East and West, by little and little to submit to
Antichrist, namely, from the time of Constantine, unto Phocas the intruder. For
the Bishops of Rome in regard of the great renown and chief honor of that
city (it being the seat of the Roman Empire) were eminent lights among their
fellow bishops: hence the star is called great, burning like a torch or
lamp. He fell from heaven] not at one instant, but by degrees: therefore it
is said in the Preterimperfect tense (...) He did fall. He saw him here not
quite fallen, as in Chap. 9.1. but falling: for as yet the Roman sea was only
declining, or in the motion of its Apostasy. Before Siluester, thirty and one
Bishops of Rome for the most part like stars in the firmament brightly shined
both in learning, faith, Piety and constancy: yea they all suffered
Martyrdom under the Roman tyrants. But after that Constantine had granted
peace unto Christians, and enriched the Churches by his too much liberallity,
heaping wealth and honor exceedingly upon bishops: then began this star
(swelling with pride and ambition) like Lucifer to lift up himself above his
fellow ministers to be wholly given to voluptuousness, to fill and burden the
Churches with Jewish and heathenish rites and ordinances, and so by forsaking
the truth of the Gospel, altogether to embrace humane traditions.

Sylyester was the first (if histories may be credited) who gave himself
wholly to the institution of their Mass Priests, orders, ornaments, temples,
singing-men, sacrifices, sanctuaries, vestments, ointments, surplises, miters,
embroidered garments, and the like Babylonish stuff, bringing all these idle
rites into the Church, under this pretense, partly, least Christian religion
should seem inferior in outward luster and pomp to heathenisme, partly, that
the Pagans by the likeness of these rites with theirs, might be the more
easily drawn to Christianity: And this very thing was afterward pretended by
the following Bishops, as Gregory's Epistle to Serenus testifies. Now this
Silvester was he, on whom Constantine (as Platina records in the life of this
Bishop) imposed an embroidered mitre beset with Gold and Pearls in stead of a
Diadem: And then this great star began to fall from heaven unto the earth.

And upon the third part of the rivers] that is, as I understand, on the Roman
Bishops the successors of this Sylvester, and others: for rivers do note the
teachers of Churches, by whom divine doctrines ought to flow, and be derived
unto others. Of these the third part, not all (for many remained faithful and
sincere) but a great number, or the third part of them that lived in Europe,
leaving heaven gave themselves wholly to worldly cares, pleasures, pomp, and
foolish ceremonies, defiling the Church with many abuses, superstitions,
errors, yea and gross heresies also. For as Ierom and the Ecclesiastical
history both testify, Liberius was indeed a great star (being at the first
a great opposer of Constantius) but overcome by banishment, at length, he
yielded to Valens and Vrsacius Arians, to the end he might by this apostasy
regaine the Romish chair. His successor Felix II. was a professed Arian. Yea
all the Bishops of the East except Athanasius and Paulinus (as the said Ierom
witnesses against the errors of John) were infected with the Arian pest:
Besides how the following Roman Bishops have behaved themselves, may be seen
by the histories of Platina, Balaeus, and others, who have recorded their lives
and Acts. By the Fountains, I understand the holy scriptures, namely the
living fountains of Israel Psalm. 68.27. By the waters; the doctrines and
comforts contained in them. Now how far this falling star infected the
rivers, fountains, and waters, here follows.

11. And the name of the star is Wormwood] He describes the apostasy of
this siarre by the effects; it is called Wormwood, not by a proper name, but
from the events. For by pestilent institutions, he did make bitter the third
part of the waters, that is, of the doctrines, and comforts of the scriptures,
turning the same into a deadly wormwood, not indeed naturally (for howsoever in
this respect wormwood be a bitter herb, yet, it is medicinal, and causes
digestion) but theologically, it being a scripture phrase, and signifies a
vile depravation of justice and equity: as Amos 5.7. Ye who turn justice to
Wormwood: Ier. 9.15. and 23.15.
And sometimes Gods grievous plagues and judgments: I will feed them, even
this people with wormwood. The sense then seems to be thus, that these
Apostates should make the waters of the holy scriptures so bitter, that
whosoever drinks thereof, should hazard their eternal salvation. He alludes
undoubtedly to the bitter waters of Marah, which the Israelites could not
drink Exodus 15.25. To this bitterness appertain the horrible confusions of the
Eastern and Western Churches by the Arians: the contentions of Bishops, the
oppositions of Councils each to other, condemning, rejecting and persecuting
one the other, to the great scandal of the heathens, disturbance and
destruction of Christian Churches: The which Emperors sometimes occasioned,
otherwhile connived at, and sometimes wanted power to suppress the pride of
Bishops being lifted up with ambition and envy one against the other, they
having before put to much power into their hands. Of which read the
Ecclesiastical histories of Socrates, Sozomenus, Theodoretus, Evagrius, and
Nicephorus even from the time of Sylvester until Leo and Gregory. For so long
I judge, that the sound of this trumpet continued.

Howbeit we are to take notice, that the Church was not destitute of comfort
in these evil times: For not all the rivers, nor all the waters were made
bitter, neither were all men killed with Wormwood, but a third part only: For
Christ even in the midst of all this bitterness and ruin of Bishops, did still
preserve a Church unto himself: And indeed histories abundantly testify, that
there were many faithful, and sound professors of the faith of Christ, who
resisted the pride and arrogancy of the Romish Bishops: as for example the
Council of Carthage (of which Augustine was president) openly reproved and
suppressed the affected tyranny, of three Popes, (viz. Sozimus, Boniface, and
Caelestinus) over the Affrican Churches.

The sound of the fourth trumpet.
12. And the fourth Angel sounded, and the third part of the Sun was smitten,
and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the stars, so as the
third part of them was darkened: and the day shone not for a third part of it,
and the night likewise.

13. And I beheld, and heard an Angel flying through the midst of heaven,
saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe to the inhabiters of the earth, by
reason of the other voices of the trumpets of the three Angels which are yet to
sound.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd the fourth Angel sounded] This Angel sounding the third part of the Sun,
and Moon, and stars was darkened, so as the day shone not for a third part of
it, and the night likewise. The former wonders happened here below in the
earth, sea and waters: but these things following are above in the heaven,
celestial signs, Riberas and Andreas opinion.
and stars.

Andreas, Ribera and some others, understand this trumpet to denote the wonders
foretold in Joel. 2. and Matthew. 24. There shallbee signs in the Sun, Moon and
Stars, etc. the which should happen alittle before the day of judgment: But
as yet we are not come to the trumpet praefiguring the end of the world, as we
shall see by that which follows. Neither is it probable, that these things
should be represented unto John in obscure types, seeing he well knew they
should come to pass, as being foretold by the Prophets, Christ, and the
Apostles. Neither does the praediction of Christ, agree with what is here said
touching the defect of the third part of the lights: Indeed there may be some
allusion in this trumpet to the last signs: But without doubt other events are
noted by the same.

Lyra understands the fourth Angel of Eutyches, Lyraes opinion.
who confounding the two natures of Christ, said that the divinity was first
changed into the humanity, and the humanity again into the divinity: By which
pestilent heresy he darkened the third part of the Sun, that is, of the
divinity: and the third part of the Moon, that is, of the Church: and the third
part of the stars, that is, of Bishops, of who^ many were infected with this
heresy: and a third part of the day, Bullingers interpretation. Francis
Lamberts opinion.
and of the night, that is the scriptures of the old and new testament.

Bullinger interprets this allegory after the same manner, yet applies it not
to the heresy of Eutyches, but of Pelagius.

Franciscus Lambertus expounds it in a general way: Christ the Sun shall be
smitten, when the light of his truth shall be hid: then also the Moon the
Church, and stars the teachers shall fail: but he shows not when and how this
was accomplished.

For my part, howbeit the apparitions of this trumpet do much agree with the
events of the sixth seal (for as here, so there the light of the Sun, Moon,
and Stars are said to be darkened) yet I judge there is a manifest
difference. For here only the third part of lights is darkened: but there a
total defect is spoken of: besides, the Analogy of the seals and trumpets is
to be kept unto what possibly we can. Whether the fourth trumpet does agree
with the sixth seal.
Now there the total Apostasy from the faith by the darkening of true doctrine
under Antichrist is denoted: but here the beginning and growth thereof only:
certain therefore it is, that the total obscuration of the Sun shall be at the
sounding of the fifth trumpet following.

So that I do here again follow the Ecclesiastical Gloss, that the wonders
of this fourth trumpet agree with that which happened at the opening of the
fourth seal: As therefore we saw there a pale horse, with death his rider, and
hell following, by sword famine and pestilence devouring the fourth part of the
earth; by which is signified (as we have showed) the state of the Church a
little before the rising of Antichrist, being sick with a mortal palenes, and
near unto death: accidently occasioned by the overmuch liberallitie and
indulgencie of Christian Emperors, who thereby corrupted the Bishops and
Christian religion: but principally by superstitious Monks and vain glorious
Bishops, who little caring either for Christ or his graces, only labored how
they might satisfy, and fill their own bellies, and establish their Lordly
authority, turning the doctrines of faith into humane Philosophy, and
Christian religion into a stageplay and horrible idol worship.

So here again the very same thing is foretold in this trumpet under different
types. For as Anonymus, and after him Gagnaeus have observed, the Sun shadows
out the chief Prelates of the Church, as Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops, and
Bishops, who ought to shine before others by the light of their life and
doctrine: The Moon, which receives its light from the Sun, to be inferior
Ecclesiastical orders, as curates and religious persons: The Stars: being
less in light are the laity: but I rather understand by Stars, Bishops and
other teachers so called as we have seen Chap. 1. Very fitly (says
Gagnaeus,) is the third part of the Sun said to be smitten, in so much that the
third part thereof was darkened: considering how one part of Praelates do
shine in life and doctrine: others but in one only, and a part in neither of
both. For many of them neither burn in charity, nor shine in doctrine (and I
would it were but a third part of them) but the truth is, they have only an
hypocritical show of true pastors: for after the likeness of this Sun the
third part of the inferior Clergy and Laiks also, were smitten with
obscurity and blindness, etc. Thus he in a general way does not with out good
cause complain of Popes, Cardinals, and Bishops their great Apostasy. But we
are (as I have said) to apply these things by an Analogy unto the events of
the fourth seal.

This trumpet therefore appertains unto the darkness and corruptions brought
into the Christian Churches during the space of three hundred years, viz. from
Sylvesters time unto the rising of Antichrist: in which time all these things
were allegorically fulfilled, as histories testify: Yet only in a third part,
that is, in Europe alone. And this again serves for to mitigate the evils: in
as much as not the whole Sun but only a third part thereof is smitten with
darkness: For indeed many Bishops in the East and West both Greeks and Latin
did still uphold the light in the Church: For as yet Antichrist was not lifted
up into the chair of universal pestilence: neither was the Church so near
unto death by a mortal palenes, although hell had almost swallowed up the
fourth part thereof. Thus we have heard four trumpets of the Angels, with the
histories thereof.

13. And I beheld, and heard an Angel] by this exclamation the Angel commands
us to be much attentive to the following trumpets: because they show forth more
grievous calamities to befall the Church. For, (...) the bibles of Montanus
read (...) an Eagle: so the Latin: I saw an Eagle, concerning which Eagle many
men dispute diversely: But all other copies have (...) an Angel. Now whither we
read it, an Angel, or an Eagle, the matter is not great, only we are to be
attentive unto his voice, neither do I think, that we should seek for any
allegory in it. He was an heavenly herald, foretelling far more grievous
calamities then yet we have heard in the foregoing trumpets. Neither will I
deny, but that by this Angel may be noted Gregory Bishop of the Church of
Rome, Antichrists predecessor, who in his Epistles to the Emperor Mauritius,
pointed at him as if he had been then present.

Woe, woe, wo] This is a voice of commiseration in regard of the evils that hung
over the Church. The threefold iteration, notes that the three following
trumpets are to denounce more horrible and fatal evils unto the inhabiters of
the earth, then the former.

To the inhabitants of the earth] This might be understood of the Church
dispersed thorowout the whole world: but usually in this prophecy hypocrites
and wicked men oppressing the Church, are called inhabitants of the earth, as
we have noted on Chap. 3.10. and 6.10. Wherefore these threatenings are not
intended against the Church, but against the wicked: which serves for the
comfort of the Godly, for howsoever they be involved in the public calamities
under Antichrist, yet these things shall be mortal unto their adversaries only.

CHAP. IX. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis.
IN this Chapter are described the fifth and sixth trumpets with most sad events,
in which the first Act of this vision is ended, and the apparitions of the sixth
seal more fully exhibited unto John, touching the rising and tyranny of
Antichrist both in the West, who with smoke and Locusts, that is by deceit and
devilish instruments: And in the East, who with horses and armies, that is, by
open war and violence should horribly afflict the Christian world, God by
them most justly punishing the idolatry and flagitious life of Christians, and
hereby calling them to repentance, but in vain. Now here principally are
prefigured the woeful events which befell the Church during the space of nine
hundred years, or there about, both by the Popish Antichrist in the West, and
Mahomet in the East, from the year of Christ six hundred and six until the
Council of Constans.

The parts of the Chapter are three:
The first concerns the events of the first trumpet unto verse. 13. consisting
of four members. I. The apparition it self which John saw: viz. a star
falling down from heaven upon the earth: to whom was given the key of the
bottomless pit, verse. 1. II. Four effects of this falling star. 1. He opened
the bottomless pit: 2. raised a smoke out of it. 3. with the smoke he darkened
the Sun and air verse. 2. 4. Out of the smoke he brought forth Locusts upon
the earth, verse. 3.
III. The locusts are described by diverse adjuncts. First from the power they
had to hurt verse. 3. But limited by God three manner of ways. 1. In respect of
the objects: that they should not hurt the elect, but only the reprobate,
verse. 4. 2. In the degree of hurting: not to kill, but to torment. 3. In the
time: not always, but for five months, verse. 5.

Secondly, from the effect of their hurting, which shall be more bitter then
death it self, verse. 6. Thirdly, from the form of the locusts, First, as
touching the body: they are like to horses prepared to the battle: Secondly
touching their members and habbit verse. 7.8.9.10. And lastly touching their
head or king called Abaddon, verse. 11. IV. An acclamatorie conclusion ending
the calamities of this trumpet, and denouncing new woes verse. 12.
The second part concerns the events of the sixth trumpet, consisting also of
four members. I. A heavenly commandment to unloose the four Angels of
Euphrates, verse. 13.14. II. The execution of this commandment, or the
unloosing of the Angels, verse. 15. III. Their furniture and weapons, verse.
16.17. IV. The woeful effect: The third part of men were killed, verse. 18. as
also an amplification of the reason drawn from the facility thereof, v. 19.
The third part is a foreshewing of the stupidity of the rest of men, and their
hardening in sin, both against the first table, by serving and worshipping of
idols, verse. 20. as also against the second table by murders, sorceries,
fornication and thefts, verse. 21.
The sum of all is this't The rising of the Eastern and Western Antichrists,
the two greatest enemies of the Church is here foretold. The first whereof
should destroy the Church by locusts: The other by horses, the which how and
when it should be accomplished, the fathers before Gregory could not
understand, as not so much as once imagining of the histories and events which
we now have, and behold with our eyes: Hence we may note the vanity of the^
apists who enquire of us where the fathers, as Augustine, Ambrose, Hierome,
Chrysostom, and others have written that the Pope of Rome is Antichrist:
nevertheless they have not spared to affirm, that he should be of the
LATINS, and many other things, of which more hereafter. They had heard indeed
the four trumpets: and some of them saw a great declyning of the Romish chair.
But as yet the fifth trumpet had not sounded, which Gregory beginning to hear,
confidently affirmed, that Antichrist was even at the door, having an army of
Priests prepared for him: and that it should be he who called himself, or
desired the title of UNIVERSAL Priest. This, I say, Gregory saw, and
confidently affirmed, which also was accomplished (as histories testify) three
years after his death.

Now let us hear the fifth trumpet: taking notice in the first place, that the
sixth trumpet does not follow the fifth in order, but by way of a parallel they
sounded both at one time, differing indeed in the quality of events, and
places. For the fifth does prefigure the dissipation of the Western Churches;
And the sixth those of the East: both, I say, at one time, but in diverse parts
of the Christian world, and by diverse weapons or means.

The sound of the fifth trumpet.
1. And the fifth Angel sounded, and I saw a star fall from heaven unto the
earth: and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit.

2. And he opened the bottomless pit, and there arose a smoke out of the pit,
as the smoke of a great furnace, and the Sun and the air was darkened by reason
of the smoke of the pit.

3. And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth, and unto them was
given power as the scorpions of the earth have power.

4. And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the graffe of the
earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree: but only those men which
have not the seal of God in their foreheads.

5. And to them it was given that they should not kill them, but that they
should be tormented five months, and their torment was as the torment of a
scorpion, when he strikes a man.

6. And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it, and shall
desire to die, and death shall flee from them.

7. And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared to battle, and
on their heads were as it were crown like gold, and their faces were as the
faces of men.

8. And they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as the teeth
of lions.

9. And they had breast-plates as it were breast-plats of iron, and the sound
of their wings was as the sound of charets, of many horses running to battle.

10. And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in their
tails: and their power was to hurt men five months.

11. And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the bottomless pit,
whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue has his
name Apollyon.

12. One woe is past, and behold, there come two woes more hereafter.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd the fifth Angel sounded] Many (without cause) much trouble themselves about
this Angel who he was. For my own part I will only take notice of the
apparition showed to John at the sounding of this trumpet. He saw a star
falling down from heaven upon the earth. It is strange there should be such
diversities of opinions about this star and the actions thereof, seeing the
matter in it self is not obscure.

There are not a few, who make this Angel to be the devil thurst out of
heaven for his pride, alluding to that in Isai: 14.12. How art thou fallen from
heaven O Lucifer, Son of the morning? how art thou cut down to the ground,
which did weaken the nations? Luke 10.18
And to that of Christ in the Gospel, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from
heaven. The smoke and darkning of the sun, they understand to be the
blindness of men: The Locusts, to be evil Angels: the hurting, a misteading
of men. But this is to general and confused. For wherefore should an history
so ancient, and well known to the Churches, be exhibited unto John, as if it
were a new prophecy, under an obscure type? The inconveniency whereof even
Ribera himself saw and refuted: howbeit that which he alleges, is to no
better purpose. Riberas opinion.
For he takes him to be some good Angel, to whom was given the key of the
bottomless pit, that be might (as a minister of Gods righteous judgments,)
open the same.

Others will have this Angel to be Christ, who in Chap. 1.18. and 20.1. is said
to have the key of the bottomless pit. But the things attributed here to this
Angel, can not possibly be applied to Christ, as, the falling down from
heaven, the raising of smoke on^ of the pit, darkning of the Sun etc.
Nevertheless Iunius is of this mind, alleging that in Genesis 14.10. and 24.64.
and Hebr. 6.6. to falt, signifies to descend. To which I answer, it is one
thing to fall, and another thing to fall from heaven, Now this latter for the
most part in scripture is taken in an evil sense Isai. 14.19. Matt. 24.29.
Revel. 8.10. as on the contrary to come down from heaven, is taken in a good
sense. Psa. 144.5. Bow the heavens, O Lord, and come down. 2 King. 1.12. Let
fire come down from heaven. Revel. 3.12. Jerusalem comes down out of heaven
from God. 10 Chap. 10.2. and 16.21. and 18.1. and 20.21. and 21.2.10.

Lyra thinks Valens the Emperor to be this star, Lyraes opinion.
who for some time was a good Catholic, but (seduced by his wife, and Eudoxius
an Arian priest) he afterward fell from the hight of the Catholic faith, unto
the herefie of Arianisme: To him was given the key of the bottomless pit, that
is, power to set up the Arian heresy, by which means the Sun^^ became dark,
for he denied Christ's divinity. By the are, he understands the Church, being
enlightened by Christ: as the air takes its light from the visible sun. The
Locusts, are the Vandales, and Goths, who being infected with Arianisme, much
afflicted the Churches in the East, etc.

The opinion of Rupertus I am ashamed to relate, The strange opinion of
Rupertus.
who applies this to the apostasy of the Israelites, and to their punishment
by the M^abitas and Philistinas, after the death of Iosuah. Now we know that
such things as were past are not here revealed unto John: but that which should
afterward shortly come to pass.

Alcasare opinion is yet worse, who will have this star to be the Law of
Moses, Alcasars opinion.
the which (says he) as coming down from above, so presses men, that
thereby concupiscence and evil desires (the which he makes to be the Locusts)
are accidentally wrought in their hearts. Ad calcem tomi tertis, in prima
editione.


Bellarmine confesses that he dares not rashly pronounce any thing concerning
this dark prophecy: And yet in the mean while in a long oration, or rather a
satirical invective, consisting almost of as many lies as words, he most rashly
pronounces Luther to be this star: The smoke ascending out of the pit, to
be the doctrine of Luther: and that the innumerable multitude of these horrible
Locusis, do most lively express his disciples. But this whole fiction is so
ridiculous, as indeed Alcasar himself derides it, I wonder (says he) that he
did not also refer it to the fall of Judas.

But how should Luther a poor and obscure Augustine Monk be this great
star? he says, though he were poor, yet he became rich, though at first he
professed abstinencie from marriage, yet afterward he took a wife, and of a
Monk became a statesman. I answer, by great falling stars none can properly
be signified, but great and mighty praelates: and therefore I wonder why be
upbraideth Luther with his riches, seeing he neither had, nor left any behind
him: now although it be true, he was poor (but no worldly politician, only
aprofessour of divinity) yet indeed he had many rich adversaries, and among
the number Bellarmine himself was not the least, who of a Monk became a
mighty Politician, and famous Cardinal. If Luther therefore fell from heaven,
because (according to the Apostles Cannon) he was married: then Bellarmine may
as well say, that the Apostle in commanding a Bishop to be the husband but of
one wife, does thereby throw down the stars from heaven: But the very truth
is, Bellarmine by this his wantonness of wit endeavors to darken this vision,
that so he may preserve the Popes reputation, as if by this falling star he
were not typed out, besides he would dissipate this hellish smoke (if he
could) from popery, least he himself should be accounted (as in truth he is) a
leading and chief locust among the rest. These things I thought good to
rehearse, that I may not seem to despise the opinions of other interpreters:
and that the reader among the variety of expositors may take what he likes
best: and the rather, because this prophecy is somewhat dark: notwithstanding
if all things be well considered, it will easily and undoubtedly appear, that
by the fall of this great star nothing else is praefigured, but the apostasy
of the Romish Bishop, who makes himself head of the Church: together with his
devised Hierarchy. I will therefore, (not out of any sinister affection,) but
truly as the things are, and according as the Lord has made me to see now
come to expound every particular, leaving it unto the judgment of the reader.

It is plain, that by stars, in the Revelation are noted, not Emperors or
earthly kings, but Bishops and teachers of Churches: by great stars therefore
are meant, not the inferior ministers or Bishops (as they are called) but
prelates of higher note and rank. Now the reason of the analogy I have showed
on Chap. 1.20. Mat. 5.14.
to wit, because Bishops ought to shine like stars in sincerity of doctrine,
and holiness of life: they ought (I say) to be the light of the world. And
hence it is, that with the Catholic Gloss, Morelius, Alphonsus, Bullinger,
and other learned interpreters, I understand this great star fallen from
heaven, to signify some chief and eminent Bishop: By his fall from heaven
into the earth, is signified his apostasy from the heavenly truth, unto
earthly doctrines of humane traditions. But who should this be?

In the third trumpet the great star falling from heaven was the Bishop of
Rome, (who being accounted by Constantine as a God on earth, and enriched with
wealth and power above measure) began to swell with great pride, whereupon the
successors of Sylvester by means of the Emperors decree, began to fall upon
the third part of the rivers and fountains of waters, that is, leaving the
study of heavenly things, affected an earthly dominion and power over the
Churches and Bishops of all Europe (which hitherto was the third part of the
world) and by bringing in pernicious superstitions and worship of idols, made
the waters bitter, to the destruction of the Eastern Churches.

Now this great starr fallen from heaven is not another, but the very same.
For it is to be observed that John says not as before, (...) fell from heaven:
neither says he, (...), and I saw to fall (although the Latin version, and
Beza also so render it) but he says: I saw the star ((...)) fallen, or,
which did fall at the sounding of the third trumpet. Now here he sees the
adjuncts and effects of the same Star, being far more grievous then before. At
first he saw it to fall upon the third part of the rivers and waters, making
them bitter with wormwood, so as they became mortal to many: Yet was not the
same a total corruption and Apostasy. But now he sees this star fully
fallen, neither vanished away, nor perished in the waters, but sticking fast
like filth unto the earth, as do slimy and thick vapors which fall from
heaven.

He saw also the key of the bottomless pit given unto him: to open
therewithal the bottomless pit, etc. by which was represented unto John a
worse shape, or condition of the Romish chair, The rising of the Romish
Antichrist described.
viz. its total apostasy and monstrous corruption. By which it is plain, that
in this place the rising of the great Roman Antichrist is described: For to
what other Ecclesiastical person (I pray you) can these things possibly be
applied? And indeed Gregory makes him to be the Antichrist, who should affect
the title of an universal priest: the which thing Boniface the third did three
year after his decease, being declared in the year 606. by Phocas the
intruder universal Pope, chief Priest, and Bishop of Bishops. And therefore
it must needs be that he was this star here said to be fallen: Nevertheless
it may not be understood of Boniface alone, but of all his successors in that
sea: even as before the great falling star typed out not only Sylvester, but
also his successors until Gregory. It is true Boniface himself sat scarsly
one year on the chair of universal pestilence: notwithstanding the rest who
succeeded him were so far from repairing the ruin being once made, as on the
contrary they continually proceeded from evil to worse.

I am not ignorant that some learned men do think that Mahumet is here to be
understood, Mahumet cannot be here meant.
who about this time caused an open apostasy from the faith of Christ in most
of the Eastern parts, being esteemed by his followers a great Prophet, and so
is unto this day. But I see no reason, why in scripture he should be called a
celestial star, seeing it is certain that from the very first he was a most
wicked deceiver, and a cruel murderer, setting up his own dreams by magical
art, and power of the sword. Wherefore I judge that here is most plainly typed
out the Romish Antichrist with his clergy: but Mahumet in the following
trumpet.

The sum of all is this, that we may interpret the Revelation by it self, the
falling of this star, is that great earthquake, which arose at the opening of
the sixth seal, of which you may see, what we have observed on Chap. 6. v. 12.

And to him was given the key of the bottomless pit] The principal thing here
showed unto John, is the giving of the key of the bottomless pit unto this
apostaticall star. And hence he is called the Angel of the bottomless pit,
and Abaddon the king of the locusts, v. 11. Al which may most fitly be applied
unto the Popes of Rome, who after their apostasy received this key. Now we are
briefly to consider what is meant by this bottomless deep, what by the gulf
and the key thereof, as also when, and by whom the same was given unto the Pope.

It is called in Gr. (...) being derived from a and (...), or (...), which
signifies a bottom, as it were without bottom: or from a and (...) to cover,
for the deep is covered with waters. The word in scripture is used, first for
the Chaos or disordered form at the first creation, darkness being upon the
face of the deep, Genesis 1.2. Secondly for the depth of the sea or waters. Genesis
7.11. And the fountains of the great deep were opened. Psalm. 42.7. deep calls
unto deep at the noise of thy water spouts. Thirdly for hell, as Luke 8.31.
where the devils beseech Christ, that he would not command them to go out into
the deep. and Romans 10.7. Who shall descend into the deep? so here and in many
other places of this book.

The bottomless pit] This is not meant of the whole gulf, but as it were the
deepest and narrowest receptacle and filthy sinck of hell.

The key of the bottomless pit] That is, power to open and shut the same,
thrusting into, and delivering out of it whomsoever he pleases. For keys do
signify power. Now who besides the Pope does usurp this power unto himself?
which plainly shows, that he is this apostaticall star. Was given to him]
by whom? by Phocas who appointed by a solemn decree that the Pope (as being
universal Priest) should have absolute and full power over all Bishops and
Churches, to call and dissolve Synods, to confirm or abolish their decrees,
and that nothing should be ratified but by the sole Authority of the sea of
Rome. And hence it is, that the Pope has power both in heaven, and earth, and
hell: in token whereof he wears on his head a triple crown, and thus has
written in one of his decrees: if the Pope should send many thousands of men
into hell, no man may say unto him, what do thou? hence he imposes laws on
the consciences, makes new articles of faith, canoniseth books, saints and
images, celebrates Jubilees, sends forth innumerable indulgences or pardons for
sin, emptieth purgatory, the which latter may not unfittly be applied to
this bottomless pit. But in truth this key was given unto him by Satan that
old serpent, according to that of the Apostle, The coming of Antichrist
shallbe after the working of Satan, with all power, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.


I confess indeed that the first Bishop or pastor of the Christian Church at
Rome, received the key of the kingdom of heaven from Christ, that is, power to
bind and loose the consciences of men according to the Law and Gospel. But
Satan contrary hereunto gave unto the Pope this hellish key: by which he has
thrust aside and made void Christ's key. And hence it is that the Pope has two
keys crosswise in his ensigns.

Nevertheless this came not to pass without Gods secret and unsearcheable
judgment, as the Apostle witnesses 2 Thessalonians. 2. saying, that the coming
indeed of Antichrist is with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness: Yet God
shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a ly, because they
received not the love of the truth: Now this we must not understand only of a
bare permission, as if God did nothing, but look upon that which Satan, Phocas
and Antichrist should do: but he willingly granted this power unto him by his
secret and righteous judgment, that so both he himself, and all they might
be damned who believed not the truth. Thus it is said also in v. 3. that power
was given to the locusts to hurt men as the scorpions of the earth have power,
that is, from their king the devil, yet so, as not without the ordering hand
of God, who wisely disposes all things, whither don by men or devils. And thus
in Chap. 13. v. 5.7.15. it is said, that it was given to the beast to make
war with the Saints, and to give life to the image of the beast, etc. Whence
we may see, how God righteously punishes sin with sin in Antichrists
kingdom. And this thing we are to take notice of, that so in the midst of
these Antichristian confusions we may not look upon Antichrist and the devil
only, but indeed cheifely consider and adore, the presence and secret
judgments of God.

But thou will say, Rev. 1.18. and 20.1.
how is the key of the bottomless pit, (which Christ has) given unto
Antichrist?

I answer, The difference how Christ and Antichrist are said to have the key of
the bottomless pit.
Christ has it one way, Antichrist another. Christ has it truly and by right
of his Godhead and mediation, as being Lord of death and hell, and that he may
redeem sinners out of the power thereof: but Antichrist has it falselie and by
deceit, as being king of locusts, and impudently professing himself to be
Christ's vicar: Besides he has not the key of hell absolutely, but of the
bottomless pit, or of the sink of hell, and thence to raise the smoke of his
pestilent lies and deceit, to the damnation of the inhabitants of the earth.

2. And he opened the bottomless pit] Now John expounds the pestilent
effects of this power. The bottomless pit was shut up by the doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles, who plucked men out of the snares of Satan, by leading
them unto the living fountains of Israel: it was shut up, (I say,) almost
until these times; For hitherto the faithful teachers took heed that this
pestilent smoke might not spread it self over their Churches. But now
Antichrist having gotten the key into his hand, unlocked as it were the very
gate of hell which before was shut. But what is this? surely nothing else but
the Popes universal power, by which he labored, not to open unto men the
kingdom of God, but on the contrary to unloose the very bars of hell, that
so the world might rush headlong into the same. Now the Pope opened this
bottomless pit, when by his authority he established his filthy errors,
superstitions, idols, etc. and took out of the Church the certainty of faith
and perseverance, tormenting and infusing into the consciences of men fears,
doubtings etc. This was the porch or entry into hell: he opened therefore the
bottomless pit, for the destruction of all men, like as hunters open caves and
pits, whereinto the unwarie dear might fall and be taken. This was the first
effect of the key.

And there arose a smoke out of the pit] This second effect, is an exhalation
of a pestilent smoke which necessarily follows the former, as when an house
of office is uncovered there arises a filthy stink. And it is called a
smoke, because it ascends out of hell, as smoke does from fire. Moreover it
is not a thin, but a very thick smoke, as of a great furnace, like to
bakers, brickmakers, smiths, or the like.

This smoke is nothing else, but the black and smoaky divinity of the Pope:
His wicked decrees touching images and idol worship, his taking upon him to
purge sins by masses, penance, satisfactions, pilgrimages, alms, purgatory,
jubilees, pardons etc: the primacle of his Romish chair, his power in heaven
and hell: to be short the whole volumes of their Canons and Decretals, together
with the inextricable toys of Scholastic divinity, by all which the Pope has
in very deed brought a thick smoke upon the Christian world, establishing a
mingle mangle of Iudaisme and Paganism, in stead of Christianity, and
oppressing the truth of Christ with most gross darkness. Now the doctrines of
Antichrist are compared to smoke from the effects thereof. For as the smoke
obscures the air, hurts the eyes, causes such a darkness, that things cannot
be seen as they are, and he which walks in it, is in danger to be stiffled,
or to fall down headlong: even so is it with Antichrists smoke: therefore it
follows.

And the Sun and the air was darkned] The Revelation expounds it self.

The fourth trumpet sounding, the third part of the Sun, Moon and Stars was
smitten. But here the whole Sun is darkened, and so consequently the air which
is enlightened by the same. This signifies the same evil, with the former, but
more grievous: For before only a third part, but here a total defect of the
light appears. Nothing is more sad to behold then total eclipses. (as
happened in Egypt at Christ's passion) For all things then are in darkness,
the day being turned into the night.

Now as Christ is the Sun of righteousness: so nothing can be signified by
this total darkness, but that universal Apostasy from the faith, which the
Apostle foretold should come to pass under Antichrist. Until the times of
Gregory the third part of the Sun was smitten, that is, much darkness was
brought into the Church by Bishops, heretics, hypocrites, hermites and monks,
as we have before showed upon the going forth of the black and pale horse, as
also at the sounding of the the third and fourth trumpet. But after Gregory,
Boniface at length, and his successors sitting on the chair of UNIVERSAL
pestilence, a horrible night darkened Christ the Sun in the Church, for all
places were filled with most gross darkness of Popish decrees, traditions,
superstitions, ceremonies, lies, fraud and Sophistry. The sum of all is
this: The darkening of the Sun which the Apostaticall Star brought in by his
hellish smoke of Popish divinity, does exactly answer to that obscurity which
happened at the opening of the sixth seal. For the Sun was made black like
sackcloth of hair, the Moon was turned into blood, the Stars fell from heaven
unto the earth etc. by all which (as we there showed) is mystically set forth
that horrible night of blindness, which Christ suffered during Antichrists
reign.

But thou will say how can this darkness be applied unto the Papacy, seeing
they profess the name of Christ, believe him to be the savior, receive the
Apostolical faith, and to be short, acknowledge the holy Scriptures of God
unto this day?

Now here I desire the reader to consider what I have before answered unto this
fair pretense: And what the Apostle said unto the hypocritical teachers of his
time (who under a show of preaching Christ, brought into the Church Jewish
ceremonies, and a flagitious licentiousness of life) they profess that they
know God, but in works they deny him: The which how fitly it agrees to
Antichrist the fathers of old, as Hilarie, Austin and others, have well
observed. It is true indeed, in word he professes Christ, but in works he
denies him: For had he come as an open enemy of Christ, he could never have
invaded the kingdom of the Church: but his coming was (as the Apostle has
foretold) with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness.

Thus we see that Antichrist under the name of Christ should oppose Christ, and
labor to destroy the faith of Christ out of the hearts of men. The propriety
of Antichrists name (says HILARIE) is, to be contrary to Christ: the which is
now effected under the opinion of fained piety: This is now preached under
show of preaching the Gospel, And indeed Christ, while he seems to be
preached, is denied. So AUSTIN: He also is to be esteemed the SON OF
PERDITION who under the NAME OF CHRIST which is the name of God, that is,
making show of being a Christian, extolles himself above Christ: whence it
appears that these fathers were of opinion, that Antichrist under the name of
Christ and the faith of Christ, should deny both.

But how is this don by the Papists? This has fully been, manifested long ago.

They pray unto the images of Marie made of stone, wood, gold, etc. Holy Marie,
queen of heaven hear us, save us, O thou our only hope, etc. In thee O Lady
I trust. Into thy hands O Lady I commend my spirit. The Lord said unto my
Lady, sit thou at my right hand, etc. And unto other images thus: S. Peter, S.
Paul, S. Nicolas, S. Magdalene have mercy on us, save us, etc.

Is not this in works to deny God, and Christ the only Savior; albeit in the
words of the Creed they do profess him? They teach that the remission of
sins, righteousness and eternal life is to be sought for in the merits of
humane works, as penance, satisfactions, Jubilees, indulgences, masses,
exorcismes, processions, pilgrimages, purgatory, etc. Is not this (whatsoever
they profess) a denying of the blood and merit of Jesus Christ?

The Pope boasts to be the Vicar of Christ, the Head and Monarch of the
Church on earth: But Christ neither appointed nor gave any such office unto the
Church. Read 1 Cor. 12.8. and Ephesians. 4.11. where the distinct orders and office
which Christ gave unto the body, are all reckoned up. Now if any man takes
upon him to be a Kings Vicar, without his appointment; is not such a one the
kings enemy? Ioh. 19.12.
as they said in the Gospel, whosoever makes himself a king, speaks against
Caesar. The Pope therefore arrogating to himself the title of Christ's Vicar,
does thereby plainly prove that he is Antichrist, Christ's adversary.

The Pope will be adored as God, In Donat. Constant. did. 96.
taking divine honor unto himself. Steuchus says. Constantine adored the Pope
as God. Bloudus says: all the Princes of the earth adore and worship the Pope
as the chief God. Mantuan thus writes concerning the pope: Great Caesar with
victorious kings,
Who golden crowns do wear:
They do adore his footsteps, Who
the double sword does bear.


The Fathers of the Lateran Council gave this blasphemous applause to the Pope.
Thou art all things, and above all things, To thee is given all power in heaven
and in earth. And another Poet thus: Oraculo vocis mundi moderaris habenas,
Et merito in terris diceris esse Deus.
By thy unerring word thou rulest over all;
And fit it is a god on earth men should thee call.


The titles of some books lately dedicated unto the Pope are thus. PAVLO V.
VICE DEO, To Paul the fifth in place of God; The letters of which title in
Latin, do pecisely express the number of the BEASTS name 666. does he not
therefore deny God, and show himself to be the very Antichrist, seeing he thus
presumptuously takes a deity to himself? Touching marriage, meats, fasting,
etc. He binds where God unlooseth, and loses where God binds. Now is not this
in pride to lift up himself both against and above the Lord?

He will not that the scriptures should be believed, no, neither God himself,
otherwise then he approves off. Enchi. de script. de authorit. scriptu. lib. 1.
cap. 10. sect. 3.
The scripture is not authentic (says Eckius) but by the authority of the
Church: And Stapleton: neither do we believe God, but for the Church. How
therefore can he himself either believe in, or call on the name of God?

He has made himself to be the GREATEST high priest of the Church, whereas
Christ is called the GREAT High Priest thereof. Heb. 4. and 12. By how much
therefore greatest is more then great, by so much the Pope has lift himself up
above Christ.

To be short, he not only weakens, but labors wholly to take away all faith
out of the hearts of the Godly, not only in making the scriptures (which is the
rule of faith) to depend on his will: but also in denying and comdemning all
certainty and confidence of grace, mercy, and salvation: and on the contrary
he will have the conscience to be in perpetual trouble, fear and doubtings. I
forbear to speak more: these things are sufficient to show how in the Papacy,
the Sun was darkened by the smoke of hell.

And the air by reason of the smoke of the pit.] The Sun being darkened the
air of necessity must be so likewise: What is meant by the darkening of the
air.
For the air (dark in it self) is enlightened by the Sun. Lyra well
understands by the air the Church; because the Church receives her light from
Christ, as does the air from the Sun.

Now the Church vanished out of the sight of men, when she lay hid and buried
(as it were) under the smoke of this pit, being changed into the chair and
kingdom of Antichrist. At first the state of the Church was oeconomicall,
wherein Christ as the only father of his household taking a far journey even to
heaven, appointed many servants over his family, the Church, and howsoever he
gave unto them diversity of talents or gifts, yet equal power in the
dispensation thereof. But Antichrist having possessed the chair of UNIVERSAL
pestilence, altered this oeconomicall state into a Monarchy, and was
acknowledged (in stead of Christ) to be the priest and head of the Church. But
thou will say was Christ now without a Church, had he quite forsaken and lost
his spouse? These indeed are the objections of the Romish Parasites, but they
are idle and frivolous: For in the midst of the confusions of Antichrist,
Christ (as we heard before) preserved unto himself out of every tribe and
nation, and tongue 144000 sealed ones: So that there was a Church even in the
bowels of Popery, although it were not in the least the Papal Hierarchy,
which carried the title thereof.

We may also interpret the air to be the holy Scriptures, or the ministry of
the Church: for as the air instrumentally brings the light of the Sun unto us:
so by the holy Scriptures and the opening of them, the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ does brightly shine in our hearts. But now this air was
darkened, viz. by a fatal eversion of the word, and the whole ecclesiastical
order. But I rather approve the former sense. For touching, the ecclesiastical
order, how it began, the history of the locusts will show.

3. And there came out of the smoke Locusts] We have heard three effects of
this Apostaticall Star, viz. the opening of the bottomless pit, the smoke of
the pit, and the darkening of the sun and air. Now the fourth follows, a
monstrous brood of Locusts came out of the smoke of the pit.

Locusts are a small kind of vermin having weak wings, The description and
nature of Locusts.
lifting up themselves by flight so little from the earth, that they seem
rather to leap then to fly. In Africa, Syria, and the Indies they are bigger of
body, and stronger of wings: they are very hurtful to the herbs, fruits and
trees upon which they feed, and by touching infect them: in summer time they
leap and make a creaking with their wings. Among the ten plagues of Egypt the
Locusts were the eight, being brought by an East-winde over the whole land:
Exodus 10.13. Joel. 1.6.
In Joel also the Lord threatens the Israelites with Locusts having teeth like
Lions, alluding allegorically unto the Babylonians. Here also the whole
description argues, The Locusts are allegorically to be understod. Lyras
opinion rejected.
that this vermin is not to be understood properly, but mystically of the
troops of most hurtful enemies. Who they be, it is hard to define, says
Ribera. And so it is, because as Papists, so also our interpreters are of
diverse opinions about them.

Lyra interprets it of the Vandales, Goths and Hunnes most cruel enemies of
the Church, who being infected with the Arian pest, spread themselves by
mighty troops in the East, and in Africa, and like devouring Locusts miserably
afflicted the Christian world. This opinion seems probable to Tossanus,
although he follow it not.

Ribera also understands it of cruel and Barbarous men afflicting the Church,
Riberaes opinion.
such as were of old the Goths and Vandales. But their description here seems
not fitly to agree to these natione. For these Locusts are raised and spread
over the earth by the key of the Apostaticall Star, that is, by Antichrists
power they come out of the bottomless pit: but Antichrist did neither raise
up, nor send forth the Vandales and Goths, unless it were by accident, that
is, as occasioning by his idolatry the Lord to punish men by these
adversaries: besides they did not torment, but miserably murder many, and not
the wicked alone, but the godly also, and this not for five months but many
years together.

Junius interprets it of evil spirits molesting the world: Iunius
interpretation.
but the description little agrees therewith: besides it was needless that any
such thing should be typed out unto John, seeing it is well known to all, that
they never cease troubling and tempting the sons of men. Moreover sensible
events are undoubtedly here signified, as working upon men's senses: Whereas the
evil spirits do insensibly rage and hurt the world.

Gagnaeus and some others (with whom our Tossanus agrees) apply it to the
swarm of heretics, Gagnaeus opinion.
which in Constantines time and after, with a mighty force, prepared the way
for Antichrist. For those heretics being come forth from the hellish smoke
of arrogancy and presumption, like Locusts far and wide devoured the pastures
of the Church. Now howsoever these things are true in themselves; Yet as Ribera
well observes, the locusts here spoken of may not be understood of heretics,
because that which follows in verse. 5. seems not to agree unto them. It was
given that they should not kill them, but that they should be tormented; Now
heretics torment not their disciples, and favorers, but such as are sound in
the faith who have the seal of God: whereas the locusts are commanded not to
torment those which have the seal of God in their foreheads: to which we may
also add, that the state of heretics was before described in the third and
fourth trumpet: as also in Chap. 6. at the opening of the third and fourth
seal: whereas it is manifest that here the rising and kingdom of Antichrist
is prefigured.

I therefore (leaving all these,) do in this ascent unto the Ecclesiastical
Gloss, to the Gloss also of Illyricus and Bullinger, who following Bid and
Anonymus, understand by these Locusts the disciples of Antichrist, The
application of the Locusts to Antichrists disciples vindicated.
that is, the innumerable troop of the Popish clergy, neither is there any
weight in what is objected to the contrary.

First, they say, that Antichrists kingdom is described hereafter in Chap. 13.
Now howsoever this be true, yet is it not a sufficient ground to prove the
thing they bring it for: For as it is both there and here described, so also
(as we have showed) it was before prefigured in the second vision at the
opening of the sixth seal: yea it shallbe also again described in the fifth and
sixth visions. For in every one of these prophetical visions the same is
repeated, and more clearly illustrated.

Secondly they object, that these Locusts shall only rage for the space of
five months: whereas the power of the Romish clergy has already continued
much longer: But neither is this to the purpose: For the time of five months
is not here precisely to be understood according to the letter, (for in this
sense it would as little agree with the Vandals and heretics, whose time of
rage and cruelty lasted many years:) But the words allude to that space of
time, in which the Locusts are in their chief vigor and strength, as we shall
hear hereafter.

Thirdly they object: that the power given to the Locusts is not over the
servants of God, but them that were not sealed. Whereas Antichrist has power
over the sealed ones, for he shall kill the witnesses of the truth. But it is
one thing to kill, and another thing to hurt. He shall indeed kill the two
witnesses, yet not hurt them, for the spirit of life from God shall enter into
them Chap. 11. verse. 11. therefore properly he only shall hurt them that are
not sealed, by seducing and leading them to destruction, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.

Lastly they object, that the Locusts had power grievously to torment men, the
which (say they) cannot be truly said of them in the Papacy, who have lived in
all kind of carnal licenciousnesse. But we are to distinguish betwixt the
outward condition of the flesh, and the inward state of the conscience.
Outwardly indeed idolaters rejoice greatly, and abound in all pleasures: But
inwardly when conscience comes to work, they feel secret torments: because
seeking life and salvation out of Christ, they never find any rest for their
souls, but are tormented with perpetual anguish, fear and torture of hell or
purgatory, of which more hereafter.

Notwithstanding therefore all the foresaid objections, we understand by the
Locusts the Romish clergy, unto whom the whole description and all the effects
thereof do fitly agree.

I. The Locusts remain skipping on the ground, and fly not up into the air:
Application of the Locusts to the Romish clergy.
So this wicked clergy savours nothing but earthly things: seeks only after
them, and not the things that are above.

II. The Locusts go forth in great troops: so in the Papacy there are seen
innumerable swarms of religions orders: in so much that one of their Generals
(as Sabellicus records) promised sometime unto the Pope, to send a complete
army of thirty thousand soldiers, consisting only of Franciscane Friars, to
war against the Turks, without any interruption of divine service unto their
cloisters.

III. The Locusts sing, and skippe in summer, and delight in ease. What does
this sinful clergy: But perpetually sing, dance, and delight in pride and
luxuriousness, being in the mean time serviceable neither to God or men.

IV. The Locusts though but little yet are gorbellied creatures, and fall upon,
consume and destroy most pleasant feilds and gardens. The false Romish clergy
loves to be in the greatest and chiefest cities, possess the pleasantest
valleys, insinuate themselves into great men's favor and families, spoil and
devour widows howses, build their cloisters, colleges and palaces in places
most commodious, gather infinite riches without labor, etc. But let us see in
order the rising of these Locusts, their power, age, figure and polity, al
which is here set down by John.

And there came out of the smoake] The rising of the Locusts is out of the pit.
The original of the Locusts is out of the smoke of the bottomless pit.
Signifying their greater and lesser orders, their several religions and
innumerable families of Franciscanes, Dominicanes, Benedictines, Cistercians,
begging and barefoot friars, whippers, Capuzins, Jesuits etc. all which
springing out of the smoke of humane traditions have through the authority of
the Apostated Star spread themselves over the Christian world: And indeed the
inventions of merits, satisfactions, penance, masses, pardons, purgatory etc.
were the root of these innumerable sects and orders. He that will, may read a
whole volume in Hospinian touching the original of Monks, and so doing he
shall not need any other commentary to unfold the wonderful birth of these
grassewormes, springing out of the vain inventions of Popish darkness, as out
of the smoke of the bottomless pit.

And power was given unto them] Now he describes their office and power. Their
power.
The Locust is a little and weak creature: being able to bite and gnaw
nothing save herbs, and the flowers of trees. But these Locusts have a mighty
and deadly power, like unto the scorpions of the earth, that is, who hide
themselves in the earth under stones, hills, and clifts of walls, to hurt them
that pass by, by which is noted their most dangerous power, altogether
venomous, secret and full of wiles, in so much as it can hardly be avoided. For
the scorpion is a little worm, fair and no way terrible to the sight: but
strikes deadly with his tail, infusing his mortal poison into the wound. So
these spiritual flies appear to be weak without sword or weapon, in their
behavior and habit reverend, insinuating themselves by flattering speeches
into the minds of men: But they infuse the venom of their pestilent doctrine
into the hearts of the simpler sort: And as the scorpions sting is not felt at
first, but the venom works by little and little until it penetrate into the
vitals of the heart: so at first the bitings of these grasshoppers are not felt,
but rather their pious deceits, are very pleasing unto men. But at length the
deadly poison comes forth, causing their miserable consciences to rush head
long into the sorrows of death, and gulte of utter desperation.

But whence have these Locusts this great power? It is given them: by whom?
First from their king Abaddon, or Antichrist the Apostated star, by whose
power so many orders were authorized and canonized. Secondly from Satan, by
whose effectual working the Son of perdition came to sit in the temple of God.
Lastly from God, without whose most righteous permission, neither Satan, nor
Abaddon could have effected any thing. So that the Locusts have their venomous
power from God also, yet in wrath. For it seemed him good in his righteous
judgment by the Locusts to punish the horrible blindness and idolatry of the
Christian world: 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
as the same Apostle witnesses: therefore God sent them strong delusions etc.

4. And it was commanded them that they should not hurt] The limitation of
their power is here added, and it is threefold, as we noted in the Analysis.

First, they are not permitted to hurt every one, according to their own,
Satan's and Antichrists lust: but some only: in which again we observe three
things.

First, it is expressly said, that it was commanded them. But by whom? by Satan,
or Abaddon? no verily; for it is their desire to bring all unto destruction.
But by God, who by his secret providence restrains the tyranny of Satan and
Antichrist, that they cannot rage promiscuously over all. This is the first
consolation of the godly, that the tyranny of Antichrist is limited by the
power of God.

Secondly, such whom he may not hurt, are here noted. viz: Not the grass of
the earth, These Locusts are no herb devourers.
nor any green thing, nor any tree. Now these ordinarily are the sweetest
pastures of the Locusts. But God permits them not to touch these. By which we
may understand, that these Locusts are no grass eaters, or herb devourers: for
Antichrists clergy feeds not on hay: the which also shows, that the grass and
trees here mentioned are not literally to be taken, but by allusion to the
pasture of the Locusts. The Grass of the earth notes (as also Chap. 8.7.) the
generality of the faithful, which shall as yet be under Antichrist. Green
things, that is, such Christians as are in civil authority (for the green
wood is strong) namely such Princes, What is meant by Grass, green things, and
trees.
Kings, and Emperors, as have manfully opposed Antichrists deceits. Trees,
such godly pastors and teachers as in Antichrists kingdom were eminent in
piety and zeal of pure doctrine, and contradicted his wicked devices. These
the Locusts are forbid to hurt, that is, to seduce and destroy them. But thou will say, these as heretics they chiefly persecute, hurt and kill. Chap. 11.
It is so indeed, but by killing they hurt them not, because they can no way
hinder their salvation. This is a second consolation, that the elect shall be
freed from the biting of the Locusts, by the providence of God: For it is
impossible they should be seduced: None can pluke Christ's sheep out of his
hand.

Hence it evidently appears that the Lord has preserved in the greatest
darkness of Popery, Grass, Green things, and Trees, that is, some thousands
of Saints, whose salvation the Locusts could not hurt. The Sophisters of our
days ask where the Church was before Luther, If the Papacy was not? Now here
we answer, that it was in the Papacy, but not the Papacy, because some
continually were saved, who held the foundation, and were not mortally wounded
by the scorpions.

But only those men] Thirdly, these whom the Locusts might and should hurt
are here specified: men which have not the seal of God. By which we are not to
understand, as if the Grass, Green things, and Trees were not men also, but
only that they are not of the number of those men, that should be hurt. For in
Chap. 7. Men are divided into sealed ones, and not sealed. The sealed, are the
faithful or elect: These are green grass, and trees: the which the Locusts
are prohibited to hurt. The not sealed, are the reprobate: among whom is
Antichrist himself, as also these Locusts, who are commanded to hurt them which
are not sealed: not as if they themselves were not also men unsealed, but
because here they represent not men, but Satan's instruments.

Thus then we see that the Locusts have power given them only to hurt such as
have not the seal of God in their foreheads, (of which see Chap. 7.2.) as the
Apostle foretold 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. that Antichrists coming should be after the
working of Satan with all power and signs, and lying wonders, in them that
peerish, The 2 These. 2.9.10. explained.
that they should believe a ly, because they received not the love of the
truth, that they might be saved.

By which words the Apostle gives us to understand: First, that Antichrist
shall establish his power by cunning and diabolical deceit. Secondly, by his
tyranny he shall oppress the greater part of men in the Christian world: as
not being sealed. Thirdly, that Antichrists followers shall inevitably perish
and run into destruction. Fourthly, that their destruction shall be voluntary
and just, because they cast off, or receive not the love of the truth, rather
delighting in Popish dreams and Lies. Lastly, that under Antichrist there
shall be always some sound teachers of the truth, who shall suffer grievous
contradiction: as in Chap. 11.4.

5. And it was given them that they should not kill] The first limitation of
the Locusts power, we have heard: here is added a SECOND, that they should not
kill men but torment them: also a third limitation, not always, but for five
months. Behold the wonderful lenity of God even in suffering the wicked,
limiting and moderating their plagues, who deserve to be destroyed all at one
instant. The elect under Antichrists kingdom he altogether preserves from the
mortal biting of these scorpions, insomuch as we doubt not, but that there
are still some godly groaning under his tyranny in the heart of Popery, as in
Rome, Italy, Spain, etc. The other idolatrous troop he will not suffer the
Locusts suddenly to kill: to the end they may have time to repent: But only to
torment them: that thereby they might be stirred up to seek remedy for their
sowles.

Notwithstanding it seems that not so much a mitigation, as an exasperation is
signified by the foresaid limitation: This torment notes the Ecclesiastical
Locusts.
For it is far worse to be tormented with a lingering disease, then suddenly to
perish: neither may we doubt, but that by this kind of hurting is designed not
a civil but an Ecclesiastical kind of Locusts: because they shall not kill
men's bodies, as did the Vandales, Goths, and other open tyrants: but they
shall torment men's souls and consciences, torturing them continually as on a
rack by their deceitful doctrines of penance, satisfactions, purgatory, etc.
Now what, (I pray) can be spoken more openly against the impostures of that
false and Antichristian clergy? by which indeed for the present they kill not
the body, but torment the wretched conscience by showing them remission and
explation of sin, not in the faith of the Gospel, in the mercies of God, and
in the blood of Christ, but in the merits of good works, auricular
confessions, numbering of sins, imposed penance, poenal satisfactions, going in
pilgrimage to the sepulcher of our Lord, S. James, the lady of Lauretta, in
travels by sea and land, in fasting and abstinence, in masses, in alms, and
legasies, building of Closters, in Moncks coules, in whippings, in going
barefoot, and lastly in the Popes jubilees, and indulgences bought for money.
Now what are all these things, but the sinful devises of men, altogether
tending to the wounding of men's consciences, and no way serving for the healing
and helping of the same. Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.9
For in vain is the Lord worshipped with the doctrines of men.

This is the miserable rack of the conscience, none greater then it, nor more
dangerous: Let the history of the Romish Church and Emperors be read, and
there it will appear that many through the fury and rage of the Locusts, have
been so stirred up, and brought to such madness, as to quiet their
consciences, they have of their own accord laid down the government of the
Empire and kingdoms, put themselves into religious Covents or monasteries,
built Cloisters and Colleges for Monks with great liberallity, thereby to
redeem souls, have taken upon themselves religious orders for the expiation
of sins, have woren either dead or living the cowles or hoodes of begging
Friars: but in all these things, what could they find, or hereby receive, but a
perpetual torture and trouble of conscience, a dreafull fear and doubt of
being deceived. We need not therefore seek these Locusts among the Vandales,
Goths, Hunnes, Saracens, Mahumetans, etc. For these did promiscuously rage and
tyrannise by fire and sword against the persons both of the just and unjust.
Besides it is very clear by the matter it self, that Ecclesiastical and
religious deceivers are here meant: who torment indeed continually the fearful
consciences of men with the terrors of hell and purgatory: but send them not
for releife to Christ by faith, but to the Popes laws, that is, in stead of
Physic administer poison, and precipitate their souls into the gulf of
final desperation.

Moreover we are again to take notice of the word (...) it was given, which I
find to be twenty times repeated in this book about Antichrists tyranny, that
so we may understand, that he does not thus rage by chance, but as being Gods
scourge to punish the ingratitude of the Christian world: as also that he is
bound and limited by God, and cannot go bejond the same. The which serves for
our great comfort.

Five monthes] This is the third limitation of their power, serving also for
our singular consolation: Seeing God has prefixed a certain time to these
Locusts, bejond which they shall not longer rage and torment. Interpreters
discourse diversely about these five months.

Some take it properly for five Egyptian months, or an hundred and fifty
days, the time that the waters of the flood increased upon the face of the
earth: some take it for so many years. Notwithstanding they are much troubled
how so short a time should agree to the tyranny either of the Vandales,
Saracens, or Popish clergy. Bullingers exposition best agrees with the nature
of the place, viz. that the mitigation is taken from the age of Locusts, which
ordinarily is no more then five months, making the sense to be thus: that as
the Locusts continue not hurting the whole year through, but sing, leap, and
feed upon the grass scarsly during the five summer months, that is, from
April unto September: even so a certain time is defined to Antichrists
seducers, after which they shall torment men no more. But this seems not to
agree with histories: For the Pope has now for a thousand years and more sent
forth his Locusts to spoil the field of the Church: neither does the end as
yet appear: Yea he shall continue devouring until he be consumed by the
brightness of Christ's coming.

But this no way contradicts what we have before said, for what are five
months with the Lord, seeing with him a thousand years are as one day? The
time therefore of the Locusts is hereby designed, not as if it should, be no
longer then an hundred and fifty days, or years, but because it should be
short: a definite time, being put for an indefinite: And thus also Alcasar
expounds it indefinitely, although (contrary to the scope) he apply it to the
plagues and conversion of the Jews. But we are taught, however Antichrist
shall remain with his Locusts, yet when he shall be revealed, his tyranny and
the power of the Locusts shall be so weakened, that they shall not torment men any
more, or at least not so much as before they did: The truth whereof we see
through Gods mercy these hundred years accomplished, both in Germany and
other kingdoms. For now the biting of these Locusts is not so forcible, but
every where that ancient power of those scorpions lies under contempt, because
the five months are ended. And as Polydore Virgil writes and persuades in his
seventh book Chap. 3. It would be very profitable that these dregs of men, as
superfluous members of Christian religion, were cut off and utterly consumed,
that so they might no longer with their filthiness stain the purity of Gods
worship.

And their torment] He amplifies their torments from a similitude before spoken
of ver. 3. for as the power of Scorpions was given to the Locusts: so their
biting and torment is like unto that of Scorpions. The pain at the beginning
is indeed not great, but suddenly so increases, that if remedy be not had, it
will kill the person wounded, within four and twenty hours: even so howsoever
at first men little regard the biting of these Locusts, but give way to carnal
reason and licentiousness: yet at the hour of death all things appear
horrible and mortal.

6. And in these days men shall seek death] Another amplification of the
torment taken from the most lamentable effect thereof, by which men's lives are
not only made bitter, but so detestable, as that they shall prefer death (of
which all men stand in fear) before life: they shall, I say, desire to change
life for death, and good for evil. Now this is not the property of men sober,
but mad* noting how this biting shall infatuate and besott people, no otherwise
then as it ordinarily happens to such as are bitten by mad dogs: Even so these
little beasts with their stings have befooled the greatest kings, and wise men
of the earth, as that they have suffered themselves to be dwawen, lead, set on
work, and sent wherever they would, yea to be persuaded, that black was white,
that life eternal was comprehended under the hood of Monks, that holy water
purges sin, and quenches the flames of purgatory; that so at least they
might find some ease for their consciences, the which notwithstanding they
obtained not. It is well known, that such was the Germans devotion to the
Papacy, and in their devotion such madness, and in their madness such brutish
obedience, as that they would do any thing how absurd soever (so it were
imposed by the Locusts in the Popes name) for to redeem souls out of hell and
purgatory: Insomuch that the Cardinal CAIETAN said (as it is reported) that if
Luther had not been, the Germans at the Popes beck, would have eaten (like
oxen) hay for their provender.

And shall not find it, but death shall flee from them] A further increase of
sorrow: they shall not find remedy for their torments, no not in death. For
there is no man but would rather once suffer death, then to be tormented with
perpetual fear and expectation either of purgatory, or the flames of hell
fire. Then shall that saying be in force.

Mors optanda magis: sed enim sua funera passis
Major ab extremo restat agone dolor.
Death wished is rather, but
her funerals being over,
From extreme torments felt,
Remains a greater dolor.
Death shall flee from them] because either through superstition, or fear they
be shall hindered from laying violent hands upon themselves. The trembling
therefore of these shall not be unlike the anguish of the reprobates, mentioned
in Chap. 6.16. who cried to the mountains, fall upon us, and hide us from the
face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the face of the Lamb.
Notwithstanding the judgment of the last day is not here as yet treated of:
but thereunto are compared the torments with which the Locusts tortured men
that were not sealed. Now the Lord Jesus keep us from the venom of such
Locusts. Their form now follows.

7. And the shapes of the Locusts] The reason why they are thus lively
expressed before our eyes as in a table, is, to the end we might the better
take notice and shun these pestilent creatures. Their figure is so monstrous
and horrid, (not like the natural Locusts) that the very sight of such a
monstre would affright a man, neither may we imagine the description of this
monstre, to be like unto that which Flaccus jestingly describes in the
beginning of his art: Humano capiti cervicem pistor equinam
Iungere si velit, and varias inducere plumas
Vndique collatis membris, ut turpiter atrum
Desinat in piscem, mulier formosa superne:
Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici?
If to a humane head a painter should thus do
A horses shoulder join, and sundry feathers too:
And that the members all did represent in show
A woman fair above, an ugly fish below:
The friends which came to see, would laugh at it I trow?


But this monstre is formed of diverse, and those the crueller sort of shapes.
The whole form at the first appearance represents a fiery warlike horse: having
a man's face, and hair of a woman: but Lions teeth strong to rend asunder: a
breastplate of iron to bear off blows: the sound of his wings terrible: the
tail, stinging as a Scorpion ready to hurt every one; to be short not unlike
to the Chimera or monstre in Homer: (...).
A Lion before, a dragon behind, and a goat in the middle.


Now certain it is, that these similitudes are not to be taken properly, but
mystically: as we have distinguished the form of them in the analysis, partly
by their outward proportion, as members and body: partly by their habit and
armor: and partly by their head: by all which is signified the power and force
of these beasts: And it does so fully agree with the Antichristian clergy, as
that nothing can be more evidently spoken. But now let us consider the
particulars.

Like unto horses prepared unto battel] Horses prepared for war are well
fenced, armed, fatted, and having fierce riders on their backs, thereby become
very cruel, and with a blind force rush terribly upon the enemy. With the like
cruelty these Locusts, being fatted and pampered in their cloisters, and
strengthened with the power of Abaddon their rider, they furiously oppose the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, some by railing in their Pulpits, by disputations,
pasquils etc. Others by cruel counsels and bloody designs, as the histories of
Emperors, but chiefly of the Henry's, Fredericks, and Othoes have testified
long ago: namely, that they more frequent stables then temples, and better
know how to handle bridles then books, more fitted and prepared to occasion,
and wage war to the destruction of the Christian common wealth, then to
perform holy duties. An instance for this we have in Hungary, for by the
means of these Locusts she lost her two kings Vladislaus and Ludovick, together
with the two lamentable overthrowes and discomfitures by the Turks at Varna and
Mocha.

And crowns on their heads] Ribera, (but ungroundedly) understands hereby the
crowned helmets of Kings and Princes, which should make up the army he
dreameth of. But Helmets will not well suit with the hair here mentioned v. 8.
Besides it is manifest that the Locusts are described by a threefold ornament
of their head, viz. their golden crowns; humane face; and comely hair, the
which three things may most fittly be applied to the Poopish clergy, for their
heads being hallowed, they curiously shave, and cut their hair round, crown^
wise, as it is called, in which they say they are like unto kings, because they
may (as kings,) command the consciences of the laity, and impose laws upon
them.

The King of the Locusts wears on his head a triple crown of most fine and
bright gold, as governor both of heaven, earth and hell.

The Cardinals wear mitres glittering with precious stones; which first was
set on the head of Pope Sylvester by Constantine the Emperor, if it may be
credited.

The Bishops, and Abbats also have precious ornaments wrought with gold and
silk: so that we need not much scruple what is meant by these crowns.

Faces of men] They are men, but they alter their shape, by profession and
habit, separating themselves from men: however they retain humane faces, least
men should abhor and avoid them. This signifies the fained humanity of these
spiritual Locusts: none seems more affable then they: They know how to flatter
the Pope himself, Kings, Princes, Courtiers, etc. insinuating themselves
bejond measyre into the favor of all both men and women, being very
acceptable to the world, and esteemed as peaceable, wise, sober and godly
persons: whereas indeed they are carnal, and plotters of mischief. Many of them
also are learned eloquent and wonderful crafty, by which they gain authority
both to themselves, and to their followers.

8. Hair as the hair of woman] This is the third ornament of their head,
which serves to take away Riberas literal exposition of a real military army.
Synnecdoche.
Women do much delight to cheerish, coulor, and soften their hair: so these
Locusts are tender and effiminate: they curiously shave and compose their
hair: moreover in their clothing are delicate, tender, and gorgeous, wearing
long robes, silken and embroidered garments. Now its a question if Austin
alluded not to this place, De opere Mon. cap. 31.32.
upbraiding the Monk^^ of his time for their ricit. and effeminate nourishing
of their hair: calling them hairie brethren, who carry about their
hypocrisy to sale, fearing, least a shaven holiness should be less esteemed
then a hairie.

And their teeth were as the teeth of Lyons] He alludes to the Locusts in Joel
1.6. Lions are rayenous and terrible: So these under a humane face, hide their
Lions teeth, by which, they snatch all things, empty the common treasures,
devour widows houses, lay wast orphans fields, and all under pretense of
religion: toward the godly falling into their hands they are cruel and
merciles; witness the Spanish Inquisition and other histories. They make use
also of their Lions teeth, in their letters and disputations cruelly tearing,
or blaspheming the truth and teachers thereof, least they should seem to be
overcome.

9. And they had breast plaets] Iron shieldes and breast-plates keep off blows
from the heart: noting that it is not easy to hurt these Locusts, having
diverse breast-plates: As first their priestly rites and privileges, by which
they are exempted from all civil power, insomuch that they may not be attached
by the magistrate for criminal causes. This breast plate Henry IV. and Frederick
I. sought to break in pieces, but for this very thing they were cruelly
persecuted by Apollyon the king of Locusts. Not long ago the Venetians also
unable to bear the insolences and horrible wickedness of the Locusts, would
not suffer them in their territories, but its to be feared they shall not
escape the curse of their Abaddon for it. Secondly they have for their
breastplate, kings, princes and other powerful patrones, favorites and
vassals of the Pope, by whose weapons, they are sheltered and defended, that
none without eminent danger can do them any hurt. Thirdly the orders and
societies of Monks and spiritual fraternities are so closely linked together,
that they can hardly be broken. For as a breast plate made, and closely knit
together of many little rings, cannot be pierced through by the edge of the
sword: so these Locusts by a brotherhood are so linked in one, by oaths and
vows, as none can hurt them, but they on the contrary may easily hurt
whomsoever they please.

The sound of their wings, was as the sound of charets] Locusts have little
wings; yet by beating them together make a great noise: so these by their
secret wings make a dreadful sound. Their wings are their privileges, by
which they have lift up themselves above the condition of al other men, and
grown to that hight of impudency, as to despise government speak evil of
dignities, and are a terror to Kings and Emperors. Out of these wings
proceeds the terrible hishing of their sermons, disputations and seditious
writings, sparing no man of what state or quality soever: but keeping them
under with fear of excommunications. And as Chariots strongly compassing an
army about, cannot easily be broken: so these by the sound of their privileges
preserve their Cloisters. They run also to war, and whosoever subjects and
falls not down before them, they bitterly curse and anathematize.

10. And they had tails like to scorpions] This whole verse is explained by
verse. 3. and 1. where it is showed what is the power of scorpions; and how far
the same was given unto the Locusts, viz. not to hurt all, but such only as
were not sealed in their foreheads: nor to kill, but to torment them with the
torment of scorpions; neither perpetually but for five months. All which, both
what it is, and how it has been don by them, I have there showed.

The sum is this: in their faces they seem frindlie like men: Their tails
are hurtful like scorpions: Honey is in their mouth, but gall in their heart;
such as they intoxicate with their doctrins, they mortally wound, like unto
them that are stung with the scorpions tail. In word; countenance and gesture
they promise salvation, but whom they strike they draw with them (through
purgatory) into destruction. Anonymus says well, that Officials,
Commissaries, Deacons, Registers, Chancelours, Apparitours, are the Pralates
tails, who like venomous serpents by their wicked life and doctrines, (however
they pretend purity) poison both clergy and people.

11. And they had a king over them] The monarchical polity of the Locusts now
follows. In Prover. 30.27. it is said that the Locusts have no king. But
these have one. For they are unlike to other Locusts and much more prudent:
having set over them a king, under whose protection they may safely creak,
skippe and destroy the fields. This king is here called the Angel of the
bottomless pit, being that apostated star, to whom in v. 2. was given the
key of the pit. Now least we might have thought it was the Angel, who Chap.
1.18. and 20.1. is said to have the key of the bottomless pit, that is,
Christ, he expresses his name Abaddon, which is Hebrew, with the Greek or
Chaldie termination, we find the word in Job. 28.22. and Prove. 27.20.
signifying destruction, of Abad, perished, in Piel, destroyed. John adds the
Greek interpretation, (...) destroying, or rooting out: that is, the destroyer
of the Church.

Here with out doubt, by this (...) or destroying king is meant that (...) or
son of perdition, spoken of a These. 2. so called by an Hebraisme both
passively and actively, to be destroyed by Gods judgment, and destroying
himself and his followers. Moreover it is manifest to all, that the son of
perdition is Antichrist: giving us a most certain proof that both this king
Abaddon, and the apostated star, is meant of Antichrist: Because in both
places he is said to be the Angel of the bottomless pit, in an evil sense.
Now seeing it has been proved that the great star fallen from heaven, typed
out the greatest Bishop, that is, the Bishop of Rome, who after Gregory's time
was set in the chair of Universal postilence: it must necessarily follow,
that he also is this Abaddon king of Locusts.

12. One woe is past] A transitory clause to the following trumpet. One, viz.
of the three woes, which were yet to sound Chap. 8.13. Thus we see the woe of
the fifth trumpet signifies the most sad calamities under the kingdom of the
Locusts, not killing men bodily, but torturing them with spiritual torments,
more bitter then death it self.

Is past] It is said to be past not as being accomplished, but respecting the
apparition: for these calamities were not as yet past, but to come to pass
afterward. Yet they were past, inasmuch as they appeared no more to John, and
were fully written by him: the meaning is: The woeful state of the Church
hitherto under the Western Antichrist, or king of Locusts is past, that is,
has appeared, and is written down.

And behold two more] The first of which representes the calamities of the
Eastern Churches under Mahumet, at the sounding of the sixth trumpet: The
latter shadows out the last judgment at the sounding of the seventh and last
trumpet.

Come hereafter] For, are yet to be written down after the first: because men
remaining in their sins, God goes on with further punishments. (...)
hereafter, appertains not to the time of the events, but to the order of the
visions: because the fifth and sixth trumpet founded both at one time: For both
the West^ne and Eastern Antichrists, begane together to tyrannise over diverse
parts of the Christian world by different ways or weapens. Therefore the fifth
and sixth trumpets are parallels, as sounding at one time.

The second part of the Chapter. The sound of the sixth trumpet.
13. And the sixth Angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of
the golden Altar, which is before God,

14. Saying to the sixth Angel which had the trumpet, Loose the four Angels
which are bound in the great river Euphrates.

15. And the four Angels were loosed, which were prepared for an hour, and a
day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third part of men.

16. And the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred thousand
thousand: and I heard the number of them.

17. And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on them,
having breast-plates of fire, and of Iacinct, and brimstone, and the heads of
the horses were as the heads of lions, and out of their mouths issued fire,
and smoke, and brimstone.

18. By these three was the third part of men killed, by the fire, and by the
smoke, and by the brimstone which issued out of their mouths.

19. For their power is in their mouth, and in their tails: for their tails
were like unto Serpents, and had heads, and with them they do hurt.

THE COMMENTARY.
13 ANd the sixth Angel sounded] The second woe now follows, the which in
outward appearance is more dreadful then the former: for whereas the former,
was a spiritual affliction of the Christian world by monstrous Locusts,
miserably deceiving, and tormenting the consciences of men under the Western
Antichrist, or apostated star. This on the other hand is corporal, showing
how the third part of the Eastern world shall cruelly be murdered by sauvage
nations, that is, under the Mahumetane Antichrist in the East.

Now there are diverse opinions about this trumpet, and these Angels.

Andreas (whom Ribera and some of ours follow) takes these Angels let loose,
The interpretation of Andreds and Ribera.
to be four evil spirits. Only herein they disagree, for first the Papists
suppose they were really bound in the river Euphrates by the coming and
passion of Christ: yet at length loosed, for to hurt the sons of men: as in
Tob. 8.3. the Angel Gabriel is said to bind the evil spirit in the utmost parts
of Egypt, etc: For they think it not contrary to the analogy of faith to
hold, that some evil Angels are by the Lord sometimes confined to certain
places, to the end they might not so freely rage as others do. But the other
understand the river Euphrates here mystically of the spiritual Babylon,
because the armies here described go forth to a spiritual war under the
Popes kingdom, but I doubt whither this agree to the truth of the vision and
histories. Lyraes opinion.


Lyra interprets it of the Abettors of haereticks in Gracia and Italy about
the year of our Lord 493. when Anastasius an Entychinian reigned at
Constantinople, Theodorick an Arian in Italy there being then elected in Rome
two Antipopes, SYMMACHVS and LAVRENTIVS, by whose contention a horrible war
was occasioned, to the destruction of many thousands of men: according
therefore to his opinion the four Angels let loose at the river Euphrates are
two Kings, and two Popes raised up in the Roman Empire. By the sixth Angel
that sounded he understands Paschasius the Cardinal, who assisting Laurentius
the Antipope against Symmachus, was the trumpet of those trumpets. But this
seems to be to straight an interpretation of so weighty a vision. Neither
would it be a hard thing with as much color to apply many particular
histories hereunto. But here undoubtedly is intended an universal and durable
persecution against Christians.

Brightman a learned interpreter, applies all this to the rising of the Ottoman
Empire: which at first begane about Euphrates by the Saracens, who conspiring
with the Turks, at length by degrees enlarged their Empire over a great part of
the world, to the effusion of much Christian blood, about the year 1300. the
which opinion does well agree to the vision, yet it seems: we are to ascend
higher, even to Mahumet himself the first author of the Eastern apostasy: as
Bullinger and Illyricus do rightly (in my opinion) interpret it. For about the
same time that the Roman Bishop was created by Phocas UNIVERSAL king of the
Locusts, and so (according to Gregory's opinion) declared to be the Antichrist,
there arose in the East a new Mahumetan sect by this occasion.

Heraclius the Emperor Phocas successor having ended his war against the
Persians, The original of Mahumetanisme.
dismissed without pay his Saracene soldiers, whom he had in his army under
their captain Homar, these being returned into Arabia asked counsel of
Mahumet the false Prophet, at that time famous by a new kind of doctrine
patched together of Judaisme, Christianisme, and Gentilisme. (For of the Jews
he borrowed circumcision and some other rites: of the Christians the doctrine
of love and duties between man and man: of the Pagans military discipline,
etc.) Mahumets answer to the Saracens.
who gave them this for answer: My will, says he, is, that ye executing the
commandments of the Law do in mutual love and charity stick close to each
other both in riches and provertie: that ye pollute not other men's wives by
adultery, that ye abstain from evil your selves, and hinder others also,
do good and persuade others thereunto, wage war in the name of God, by fear
and force impose laws on the disobedient, in doing whereof I certainly
promise paradise unto you.

This doctrine (which Mahumet afterward put into his Alcoran) the Saracens with
their captain Homar received, and drawing the rest of the Arabians into a
society of war with them, in short time they subdued and brought under their
power the neighboring provinces of the Roman Empire, as all Arabia,
Palestina, Syria, Egypt, Africa, Cypress, and many cities of Asia the less
even unto Byzantium, withal propagating and establishing the impieties and
blasphemies of Mahumet, and on the contrary rooting out Christian religion,
which indeed at that time was every where much corrupted: at length they entered
into Spain, and held it in their possession, until in the year 1488, at
which time (after most cruel wars, and with great difficulty) they were
driven thence by Ferdinand king of Castile grandfather to Charles the fifth. To
these Arabians and Saracens, the Tartars and Turks (professing the same
Mahumetan religion) joined themselves, who at length all of them by mutual
consent became one Empire, whereof Ottoman a Turk by nation, was the first
Emperor, in the year 1300 as has been said, and hence it is called the
Ottoman or Turkish Empire unto this day: since which time they have by cruel
wars (praefigured in this trumpet) enlarged their borders through Asia,
Africa, and almost whole Europe even into the very heart of Hungary. Now these
things thus briefly premised in an historical way, we may the more easily
understand the types of the following trumpet.

A^b^h^ (...) Angel sounded] In the person of the Angel I seek for no mystery.
By his sounding h^e gives us a sign well to observe the future events, which
shall here be represented. First he notes the author of the Revelation, viz.
Christ, whose voice he heard from the four horns, that is, out of the midst of
the golden or perful^^tory altar, mentioned Chap. 8.3. which under the Law was
a type of Christ. The horns thereof are mentioned in Exodus 30.10. where the
high priest is commanded once every year to make an atonement (with the blood
of the sin offering) upon the horns of the golden altar for the sins of
the people: to signify that their sins should be at length truly expiated by
the blood and intercession of Christ.

It was before God] Not as if there were in heaven a golden altar, but it is an
allusion to the ceremonial type. For the golden altar stood before the veil by
the ark of Jehovah. The allegory betwixt the four Evangelists, and these four
horns I refer to its place. But here it is an allusion to the ancient type,
as before in Chap. 6.9. Christ is said to be the Altar protecting the souls of
the Martyrs. XXXIV. Argum. of Christ's deity.
John therefore sets forth the author and matter of this Revelation, namely
that he heard Christ's voice commanding four Angels to be loosed, as actors of
the future tragedies. And here the divine authority of Christ appears, who
commands, as the Angels in heaven, (being Lord of them:) so in earth stirs
up wicked and tyrannical men, to punish the ingratitude of the world by them.

14. Saying to the sixth Angel which had the trumpet] This also may literally
be understood, that John truly heard the thing here mentioned, committed to
the sounding Angel, that is, having ended, he should speedily unloose the
Babylonian Angels.

Loose the four Angels] He shows how hitherto they were there bound; that they
might not exercise their cruelty: but now by Gods commandment are loosed to
execute his judgments, in punishing the Christian world for their idolatry and
other wickedness. Here is an argument of the Lords divine providence who holds
in, and lets out the enemies of the Church, as he pleases: Hence we should
both fear the Lord, and pray to him that the enemies be not loosed for our
destruction: as also to trust in him, seeing against us, they can do nothing
contrary to the will of God, or without his permission and sufferance. This
work of loosing is committed to an Angel: because Angels are Gods ministering
spirits to execute his judgments, whither good or evil.

Now let us consider who these Angels are, Who are these four Angels bound at
the river Euphrates.
and what is meant by the great river Euphrates.

I have showed you what other men's opinion is concerning these things. Some
also take these four Angels to be the same, which in Chap. 7.1. Held the four
winds of the earth, from blowing etc. But to this I can no way assent. True it
is, as they there, so these here are evil and not good Angels, as the
circumstances show. Notwithstanding neither the one, nor the other are devils;
For the former were the temporal and spiritual instruments of the Western
Antichrist, hindering (as much as they could) the preaching of the Gospel from
the Christian world: But these are only secular ministers of the Eastern
Antichrist, who hindered not so much the preaching of the Gospel, In what they
differ from the four Angels Chap. 7.1.
as by murdering of Christians brought a lamentable destruction upon them. They
are clearly differenced from the other by the circumstances of the place,
being loosed at the great river Enphrates: so that hitherto they were there
bound, not as devils confined to a certain place, but as cruel and barbarous
people kept in by the hand of God, that they could no sooner break forth to
destroy the Christian world.

Euphrat^^ I take properly for that great river mentioned in the history of
the creation, and throughout the scriptures: which descending from the
mountains of Armenia did run between Chaldea and the midst of Babylon. This
river hitherto was the bound of the Roman Empire, separating the Christian
world from the Barbarous people: beyond it, toward the North and East, the
Scythians, Tartars and Turks inhabited: beneath it, toward the south the
Arabians and Saracens. Now hitherto by the divine commandment, these nations
kept themselves quiet. But here four Angels, that is, peoples, viz. the
Arabians, Saracens, Tartars and Turks are loosed, that is, by the will of God,
go forth as armed against Christians.

I therefore take the four Angels, to be the four peoples or nations, who
about the foresaid time gathering themselves together, Why these Barbarous
peoples, are called Angels.
brake forth by the just judgment of God with their hostile armies upon the
Christian world. They are called Angels, not by nature, but as respecting their
ministry; For they were stirred up, and sent by God to punish Christians:
neither is it unusual in this book that men whither ecclesiastical or civil,
any way employed by the Lord as his instruments, should be signified by the
name of Angels. Now it will appear by the 17 ver. that these Angels note not
particular persons, but whole nations, and armies.

15. And they were loosed] God speaks, and it is don, he commands, and all
creatures are ready to do his will. By Christ's commandment therefore, the
four Angels, that is, these people present themselves before God with a
mighty army to destroy the world: yet not herein to obey the Lord, but to kill
the third part of men: so that not their obedience, but their bloody
disposition ready to kill and destroy is here signified: therefore it is said,
(...) that they might slay. Gods command excuses not the Turks cruelty.
And here we are to note the diverse and contrary end, and work of God, and
the wicked in one and the same thing: least we might think, that the cruelty
which the Turks (howbeit let loose by God,) have hitherto exercised against
Christians, were excusable. For God in punishing the idolatry and other sins
of men sought thereby to bring them to repentance. But the enemies minded
nothing but rapine, and murders, and how to advance their Mahumetane power. As
therefore neither Pilate nor the Jews in crucifying of Christ are to be
excused, Act. 2.23. and 4.18.
because they did that, which the hand and counsel of God had decreed:
considering that they did it not to obey God, but to destroy Christ: and in
this regard the work of God was holy: but theirs most wicked: even so, the
pronenesse of these to hurt Christians is no way to be commended or excused.

In that it is said, they were prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month,
and a yeere] It signifies their readiness) and I suppose there is no other
mystery in it) at all times, whenever the Lord would please to send them
forth. And as it serves to amplify the bloody and cruel nature of these
adversaries; so it sets forth Gods watchful providence, who determines the
very moments of his judgments; so that nothing can be don in the world, but by
his fore-appointement. Now we know that these are the four divisions of time:
for four and twenty hours make a day, thirty days a month, and twelve
months a year.

Brightman says well, that this serves for the comfort of the godly, to whom
the spirit of God would have it known that this most grievous calamity has
his appointed terms and limits, Brightmans conjecture about the term of the
Turkish power considered.
even to the least moment, beyond which it should not be prolonged. But whither
that will hold, which he further affirms touching the space of three hundred
ninety and six years, by reducing after a prophetical manner, the year into
months, months into days, and days into years: and thence by numbering
from the year of Christ 1300. He gathers that the power of the Turks should
last unto the year 1696. which should be the last term of the Turkish name:
yet in the mean time he conjectures that their strength shall decay, and tend
to ruin some forty years before: I doubt, (I say) whither this will hold. For
to grant what he says touching the day, month and year: what shall then be
understood by the hour? besides he takes a Julian year consisting of 365
days, but an Egyptian month containing thirty days: the which little
agrees. And therefore it may well be that the Turkish tyranny shall longer
last, in case the world continue. I rather assent to Bullinger who thinks that
here is noted the swiftness of these people in war: they suddenly are up in
arms, fall on unexpectedly, and at a word speaking give assault, they fly, and
in fleeing fight.

To slay the third par,] of this see verse. 18.

16. And the number of the army of horsemen] The number of the horsemen of
war, wherewith the four Angels assault the Christian world is (as it were)
innumerable, viz. (as our translation and some others have it) two hundred
thousand thousand] But in the Gr. it is (...) two millions of millions: one
million contains ten thousand: so that two millions of millions is twenty
times a thousand thousand. Erasmus, twenty thousand times ten thousand. Luther,
indefinitely many times thousand thousand. The like number almost of Angels we
find in Dan. 7.10. thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand
times ten thousand stood before him. Now here is signified such an innumerable
army, as hardly ever was in the world: such an army as easily will discipate
all things, and by humane stre^ght not to be resisted. And it is well known that
the Arabians, Saracens, Tartars and Turks always go forth with huge armies,
especially of horsemen, in which consists their greatest force: yea many
times one Emperor of the Turks alone brings forth more horsemen into the
field, then all the Christian Princes joining their forces together can
possibly do. Moreover hitherto these barbarous nations have conquered by
reason only of their multitudes. Tamberlane king of Scythia brought forth an
army of twelve hundred thousand, with which he overcame Bajazet. Decad. 3.
lib. 6. de reb. Vnga.
Bonfinius reports that Ladislaus (afterward called Varnensis from the
overthrow he there received) going against Amurath with four and twenty
thousand horsemen was counseled by Dracula of Vailachia (passing through his
borders) not to go forward with so small an army against the Turk, who daily
(says he) rides forth with greater forces a hunting.

And I heard the number of the] least any might question how John should know
the number, he shows that he heard the same mentioned from the throne of God.

17 And thus I saw the horses] So much for the number of these barbarous
soldiers: now he describes their armor and cruelty. He says: he saw the
horses in a vision, that we might not think these beasts were reallie in
heaven. By three adjuncts he sets forth the terriblenesse of their power. The
first respects the armor of these horsemen, the two latter the form of the
horses.

First, they that sat on them had breast-plates] Not of Iron, The Turkish
soldiers armor.
as our cavaliers are wont to have, but of fire, Iacinct, and Brimstone. For
the Barbarians seldom come into the field with heavy, but only with light
armor, the readier to assault, fight and flee away if need be. It notes their
fiery naturs, that is, their earnest, bloody and enraged cruelty, breathing
forth as it were fire, and devouring everywhere they come. The Iacinct in
coulor is like a flame: for which in the end of the verse he puts smoke.
Brimstone is easily set on fire, and being kindled is of a purple color
giving forth a deadly smell: which signifies that their armor shall be rather
inward in their breasts, then outward on their bodies. And indeed these nations
carry not so much harnasses of steel, as fiery, sauvage and cruel minds, the
which in their combatts they manifest by a horrible roaring noise, terrifying
therewith their adversaries, and many times putting them to flight, before they
come to blows. It signifies also their manner of warring, devouring, and
causing horrible desolation by fire: But I rather refer it to their fiery
breasts.

The heads of the horses, were as the heads of Lyons] The generosity, The
Turkish horses are excellent for war.
strength and swiftness of horses is of much use in war. Now it is known that
the Turkish horse excels in swiftness and valor: and therein they chiefly
trust, and hope for victory. Alexander often times overcame by means of his
horse Bucephalus, so named of an Oxes head: but these shall fight with
Leocephalis, that is, horses having lyonlike heads. Now Lions are generous,
strong and cruel; with such horses shall these barbarians come forth: and indeed
the Turkish power is lyonlike, most cruel and tyrannical. The Locusts also had
somewhat of the Lion: namely the teeth, but not the head; noting their
fraudulent and secret tyranny chiefly consisting in their tongue. For the teeth
are as a wall to the tongue: but the cruelty of these is manifest (like as the
head is open to the view) carrying forth the matter by open war and force, as
the professed enemies of Jesus Christ.

Out of their mouths proceeded fire and smoake] The relative (...) their, or of
them, may indifferently be referred either to the horses, or their riders: by
these three things, as being the instruments of their cruelty, they shall kill
the third part of men, as it follows v. 18. Concerning this I hardly find ^^y
thing probable among Interpreters: I will therefore set down my own judgment
about it.

Because these things are said to come forth out of their mouths, therefore by
fire I understand (as before) the terrible cries of these savage people, and
their blasphemies against Christ, which the Turks and Tartars in their war
fighting with Christians are wont to use. Now though they kill not men simply
with their roaring noise, yet hereby they make way for it, by terrifying and
putting their adversaries to flight before they come to battle, and thereupon
follows horrible slaughters. The smoke proceeding out their mouth, is nothing
else but the impious and blasphemous doctrine of Mahumet, propagated by their
wars, and killing such as embrace the same, that is, causing them to run
into eternal destruction: like as we heard before the smoke that proceeded out
of the bo^^omlesse pit, signified the wicked doctrine of the Locusts. The
Brimstone I take to be their bowstrings, rubd over with brimstone, used by a
synecdoche for the poisoned arrows, lances, and all other Turkish and
pestilent armor whatsoever, with which these thousand years they have cruelly
murdered innumerable multitudes of men. These arrows also may be said to
proceed out of their mouth: For they draw their bows even to their mouth, so
that the arrows do seem to fly as it were out of the same.

I have lately read Brightmans exposition much to the same purpose, applying
this to the mouth of their gunnes, out of which comes fire, smoke and
brimstone: and especially to that Piece of ordinance of incredible greatness
which Mahumet used in besieging Constantinople, for the drawing whereof there
were used seventy yoakes of oxen, and two thousand men, as Laonicus
Chalcocondilas reports lib. 8. de rebus Turcicis. And those twelve thousand
Janissaries which are the ordinary guard of his body, are all gunners. So he.

18 By these three was the third part of men killed] The success of the
enemies and overthrow of Christians is here noted. For however sometimes the
Christians have obtained great victories over the Turks, yet was the same
little or nothing considering their multitude, whereby in the end they have had
the better of them: for seldom any Christian army how strong soever, has been
able to stand against them, as the largeness of their empire sufficiently
witnesses. But usually in their war they have take from the Christians some
provinces, cities or strong holds. By the Greeks they have often with great
loss of men been repulsed, yet at length they brought all Gracia with the
Thracian and Trapezuntine Empire under their power. From thence invading
Hungary they were indeed often valorously repressed by Johannes Hunniades and
king Matthias: notwithstanding by force of arms they possessed themselves of
Mysia, Servia, and all the south part of Hungary, few places only excepted.

The Venetians overcame them in a great fight at sea in the year 1571. Yet in
the mean while they still held Cyprus, which they had taken away from them.
Memorable is the holy war (so called) undertaken by Godfrey of Boullion, who
took all Palaestina out of the hands of the Turks and Saracens: and it
remained 83 years under the power of Christians: but at length by the ambition
of Popes, and dissentions of Princes it was shamefully lost and fell into the
hands of Saladine. Godfrey brought to this war sixty thousand foot, and an
hundred thousand horsemen: but this great army was in a short time so weakened
by the Turks, as that when they came to the siege of Jerusalem (being the
fourth year of their expedition) there were found hardly four and twenty
thousand soldiers remaining. Thus much generally touching the slaughter.

It is expressly said, that these adversaries killed the third part of men, by
fire, smoke and brimstone: what these three things are, which proceeded out of
their mouth: and how they killed, I have showed. Now it remains to show how
they killed the third part of men.

It seems that the threefold number of men slain answers to their
threefoldkinds of weapons. Yet the third part may be taken indefinitely, for a
great part, or a perfect number: for a threefold number notes perfection.

The third part of men, not the infidels, but Christians, were killed: First,
the third part of their armies opposing the Turks perished in war. Secondly,
the third part of Citizens were either slain or carried into miserable bondage.
Wilhelmus Tyrius affirms that in the holy war there were slain by the
Turks two thousand times an hundred thousand in the space of a few years: But
of Turks not above an eleven hundred thousand. Thirdly, a third part if not
more of Christian Churches were spoiled and overthrown by them: take for
example, the flourishing Churches of Balestina, Syria, Egypt, Asia, Armenia,
Thracia, Pontus, Mysia, Bosnia, etc. where now Mahumetain blasphemies do
reign: hardly any thing of Christianity there remaining. To be short the
third part, of the provinces of the Christian world have been by them within
these three hundred years subjugated, or laid wast. Mahumet the first, he
alone took away two Empires, and four kingdoms from Christians: and now in
our time these enemies domineer far and near through all the sea coast of
Africa, Egypt, Arabia, Babylon, Mesopotamia, and both countries of Armenia,
Palaestina, Syria, Asia, Thracia, and Grecia. So that in this vision John saw
the overthrow of Christian Emperors, Bishops, Churches, citizens, and
soldiers, which histories and daily report make known unto us.

19. For their power is in their mouth] A probable reason of the foresaid
slaughter, is taked partly from the bloodthirstinesse, and partly from the
craftiness of the enemies. Their power, that is, faculty to hurt and kill: is
in their mouth, and in their tails, that is, they fight and hurt both forward
and backward. How they fight and kill with their mouths has already been
showed, viz. by fire, smoke and brimstone: He shows now how they hurt
backward: they have serpentlike tails and heads: serpents have venom in their
heads and tongues, with which they bite and poison men. This may be understood
in a twofold way: either of the Turks and Tartars their manner of fighting:
who not being able to stand, in fleeing shoot up their arrows into the air,
which falling either on the heads or horses of their persuers do mortally
wound them: thus they kill behind them with their tails. Or else, of the Turks
perfidiousnesse: for as serpents fight subtly: so these do not only hurt by
open force of arms; but by deceit, and treachery: For often times by laying
in wait they have set upon Christians, and given them mighty overthrowes.
Otherwhile they perfidiously break their leagues and cessations of arms made
with them. And indeed the Turkish war which has continued these sixteen
years in Hungary, brake forth at first through their perfiousnesse. Thus they
have hurt the Christian world with their mouth and with their tails.

The third part of the Chapter.
A complaint of the impenitency of Christians after their punishments.

20. And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues, yet
repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils,
and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood, which
neither can see, not hear, not walk.

21. Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of
their fornication, nor of their thefts.

THE COMMENTARY.
20 ANd the rest of men which were not killed] The third part of the Chapter is
a complainte against the brutish dullness of the rest of the Eastern
Christians: who repented not of those sins, which had caused so many, and so
great overthrowes unto their brethren: This is the sum. The construction
seems to be defective: The rest of men, some understand, shall likewise
perish, as being impenitent. But Andreas well observes, that (...) neither
repented, is put for (...) repented not; and makes the construction plain by a
paraphrase: And the rest of men not suffering these things, remained impenitent.

But we are to consider who are the rest of men here spoken of: and what the
complaint against them is.

Lyra foolishly applies this to the Saxons and Thuringians, Lyras ridiculous
opinion.
who in the time of the schism above mentioned, fell out among themselves.
Such also are as much out of the way, who understand the place of some infidels
(but who they name not) worshipping Mercury, Mars and Venus. But questionles
these are the rest of the Christians (at lest so in name) whom the enemies even
now mentioned, had not killed: For what reason had John to declare the
slaughters of infidels? seeing such things were showed unto him by Christ as
concerned the state and condition of the Church. Alcasars frivolous gloss.
Alcasar therefore beats the air, in misapplying all these things unto the
Jews. For without doubt (as we said before) here is meant, not only the rest
of the Eastern Christians, and other Provinces in subjection to Turks: but
also other Papistical Churches of the West, as yet free from their yoke and
slavery: For as the one, so the other were horribly guilty of the evils here
mentioned, but chiefly indeed they in the West.

Five of the greater sort of sins are named: of which their worshipping of
idols or dovils is the fountain or spring. But what, have Christians ever
worshipped devils? The idolatric of the Eastern and Grecian Christians.
Tyrius lib. 3. cap. 11.
Yes, for so says the text, they worshipped devils and idols the works of
their hands. What works? Idols of gold, and silver, and stone, and wood,
which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk: Now to adore idols is to worship
and serve the devil, as the Apostle witnesses 1 Cor. 10.20. This overthrew
the Eastern and Grecian Churches: who tooth and nail maintained the worship of
idols and images, and established the same by the second general Council held
at Nice; but soon after (the Graecians being thrust out) the Turks became
masters of the town, making it the seat of their Empire against those of
Constantinople. It is true, that the Christian Princes of the holy war, A
remarkable judgment of God on idolatry.
expelled again Solomon the Turk out of the same place: but they kept it not
long: for soon after he not only regained it: but at length vanguished the
whole Empire of the Greeks. Thus we see what those of the East suffered,
because of their idolatry.

Which neither see] A description of Idols taken from Psalm. 115.5. against
which, what I pray you, can either the Grecian or Italian idol worshippers
justly object: For the idols of Christians, can no more hear, see, nor walk,
then did those of the Gentiles.

21 Neither of their murthers] Their other sin is murder both attempted by
the Grecian Emperors one against the other, as histories testify: as also by
otheir men's oppressing each other against all right and reason: as if their had
been no ruler over them, which brought destruction upon this Empire. Under one
kind he comprehends all manner of injuries and oppression of the innocent in
judgment.

Nor of their sorceries] Their third evil is witchcraft whereunto they of the
East were much addicted: under this is comprehended all the superstitions,
enchantments, magical and devilish arts, which have been spread by Bishops and
Monks among the common sort of Christians.

Nor of their fornications] The fourth is their fornications adulteries, and
all manner of filthiness, wherein the Clergy lived, under their impure
unmaried estate.

Nor of their thefts] The fifth is their thefts, sacrilege, and rapine, not so
much committed by civil as ecclesiastical persons, who by pious deceits, that
is, most foul impostures, and pretense of religion devour widows houses,
exhaust the treasuries of Princes, and great men, and draw into their hands by
hook and crook this worldly wealth: These were the sins for which the Lord by
Saracens and Turks punished them of the East, to the end that their brethren
of the West guilty of the same sins might take warning by their example and
repent. But what followed?

They repented not] He foreshewes by the spirit and reproves (not to speak of
them in the East still remaining in their filthiness) the obstinacy of the
Papists: who openly pollute themselves with the like idolatry, m^rthers,
sorceries, fornications and thefts even unto this day: insomuch that whosoever
opposes and reproves these things in them, is accounted an haereticke and
enemy of the Church.

Their idolatry is manifest: for in all their temples, highwayes, The
idolatry of Papists.
porches and corner of streets they set up idols, the works of men's hands,
images of God of Christ, Marie and the Saints: before which whoever will not
fall down and religiously worship, is accounted an haeretick and condemned to
the fire: They cannot abide to have them termed idols, but images set up, in
and by them to worship God, Christ, and the Saints. But in truth herein they
worship the devil; for God will not be worshipped by images: Now whatsoever is
externally worshipped in a religious way is an idol: and all idol worship is
don, not unto God, but unto the devil: and indeed the description here of
idolaters does plainly convince them: for do they not serve idols of gold,
silver, stone, etc. which can neither hear, see nor walk? an egg is not more
like unto an egg, then the idols of Papists, and of the heathens resemble each
other.

And touching their murders, we need go no farther then to consider the
innumerable company of Martyrs put to death by them.

As for sorceries and all magical arts, to whom may these things be applied
but to the Papists? for in the reformed Churches now of a long time the
impostures of the devil and magicians are rooted out.

For fornication, adultery, pollutions, sodomy, they are beyond measure
committed by the Popish clergy: for howsoever marriage is honorable among all
men, yet to them it is not permitted: But sodomie has publicly been disputed
for: yea commended in rhyme by Iohannis de Casa Archbishop of Benevent. what
multitudes of whores and strumpets are there at Rome? how great is the gain
which thence comes unto the Pope? It appears by records that by them his
treasury has of late been augmented forty thousand ducats.

To be short who is ignorant of the thefts, rapines and simonie of the
Romanists? or who is able possibly to describe them? Their taxes and annals
which are in print do openly show the same: so that the Papists are
altogether guilty of the same evils, for which they of the East were destroyed;
what remains then, but that a like punishment will surely befall them? Thus in
the conclusion of this Chapter we are taught: First what was the cause of the
great calamities befalling the Eastern world, and how the greater part of the
Roman Empire was brought under the Turkish yoke: namely their idolatry and
much other wickedness going along with it, for as the idolatry of the
Balaamites and of Jeroboam the son of Nebat caused the overthrow of the two
powerful kingdoms of Israel and Judah by the Assyrians and Chaldaeans: So it
is manifest, that idolatry and other sins thereon depending, have occasioned
the destruction of whole Empires, and many mighty kingdoms and provinces of
the Christian world, as Egypt, Palaestina, Damascena, Syria, Asia, Cyprus,
Thracia, Armenia, Mysia and part of Hungary, So that it is not come to pass
by chance that the Tu^kes have, and still do afflict Christians, but the Lord
in his just judgment uses as a strong rod in his hand to punish their impiety.

Secondly: what is the end of the calamities inflicted? not as if God would
destroy the Church, but rather to provoke, both the idolaters thus punished,
and others also guilty of the same sins, unto repentance: For the Lord
desidereth not the death of a sinner, but that he repent and live.

Thirdly, The Papists draw the Turks armies on Christians.
here we are plainly taught, who they are that hitherto have, and still do
draw the Turks upon the necks of Christians, to wit, the worshippers of idols
of gold, silver, wood and stones. But who be they? are they Iaponians,
Canibals, or Brasilians? I affirm no: For howsoever it be granted (as these
say) that these are worshippers of devils: yet not they, but ours are threatened
to be punished by the Turck and Tattarian forces: but it may be demanded. Are
not they of the reformed religion worshippers of idols? I answer no, but
rather they have quite banished the same, shanning all manner of idolatry as
the pest. But your temples, (oye Papists,) your Cells, Altars and Highwayes
abound with images of gold, silver, wood and stone: there is no corner, but ye
may se one or other-beeing prostrated before the image of Marie, Peter or Paul
thus mutters: holy Marie, 5. Peter, S. Paul pray for me, have mercy on me,
save me etc. Will ye deny, that you have not been the cause, that the Turks
for these sixteen years have wasted the borders of the Christian world? what
madness is this, that ye should stir up Christian Princes to conquer the
Turk, having drawn him on your necks by your idolatry, and made him
invincible unto this day? It is time therefore that at length ye seriously
think of these things, and repent of your sorceries, thefts and fornication,
before the revenging hand of God destroy both you, and the rest of the
Christian world for these your abominations.

Fourthly: we are taught, that probably the rest of the Christian world, shall
suffer the like judgment: because the Papists are so far from repenting of
their idols and other wickedness, as on the contrary they strongly maintain
the same and whosoever opposes them therein, they condemn as heretics, and
persecute them with fire and sword: what remains therefore, but that the same
armies who by Gods commandment have killed the third part of Christians for
their wickedness, should at length also come into these parts to kill the rest
for the like evils. For it is a constant rule, that they that commit like
evils are worthy of like punishment. So that without doubt, the horrible
idolatry of Papists will in short time draw the Turkish arms on the rest of
the Christian world. Now whereas the Lord has hitherto spared the same, it is
to be ascribed to the prayers of the godly groaning under the dregs of
Antichrist, and to the reformed Churches, who with their whole heart do loath
his idolatry, dissipating to the uttermost of their power the smoke of
Antichristian darkness, by the light of the Gospel, that so the glory of
Christ and true godliness lost among the false Christians, may again be
restored and flourish.

Hitherto has been treated of the first Act of the third vision, concerning
the calamities of the Church under the Roman tyrants, heretics and
hypocrites: and of the Western Antichrist, king of Locusts, as also of the
Eastern Angel with his army of horses. Which Act indeed, so far as concerned
the king of the Locusts was ended about the time of the Council of Constans:
but as for the other, namely the Turkish destroyer he shall continue unto the
sound of the seventh trumpet which shall be be heard in the last day.

Now follows the second Act of this vision, as opposite to the former, showing
remedies for these so great calamities, or comforting the godly under so long
continued afflictions.

THE X. CHAPTER. The Argument, Use, Parts and Analysis.
THe first Act of the vision was a declaration of the Churches calamities, and
a beginning of the amplification thereof, during the time of the four
trumpets, and part of the fifth and sixth. The second Act follows, being
consolatorie and opposed to the former calamities. A mighty Angel defcends from
heaven holding in his hand a book open, standing upon the earth and sea,
crying with a loud voice as when a Lion roareth, insomuch as seven thunders
uttered their voices, which John went about to write, but was commanded to
seal the same. The said Angel swears by God, that the time of so great
calamities should continue no longer, the end and sound of the last trumpet now
being at hand, but first John is commanded to cat up the little book which he
received of the Angel, and to prophesy again: All which are so many mysteries
of consolation.

For the godly are taught, that in the greatest disturbances and calamities of
the Church, which she has, and still does suffer by the Roman tyrants, by
heretics and hypocrites, and chiefly by both Antichrists, that Christ (I say)
will not be wanting unto her, but will always hold in his hand the book of
his doctrine open, and set the foot of his kingdom upon the earth and sea: and
by the roaring of his lyonlike voice will cause some faithful teachers to
thunder out their voices: although during the most gross darkness of
superstitions they shall be sealed and neglected, until at length according to
Christ's oath, Antichristian tyranny hastening to its end, and the
accomplishment of the divine mystery being at hand, God shall raise up other
witnesses of his truth, who shall eat up the book of the Gospel received out
of the hand of Christ, and again strongly prophesying against Antichrist,
shall labor the reformation of the Church: concerning which it follows Chap.
11.

Thus the whole Chapter consists merely of consolations for the afflicted
Church, the which being reckoned, are six in number.

1. Christ descends from heaven unto the Church afflicted by Antichrist:
therefore she shall not be left an orphant. 2. He holds in his hand a book
open: therefore his word shall not be suppressed. 3. He sets his foot upon the
earth and sea: therefore both by sea and land he will reserve some remnants
unto himself, neither shall his whole possession ever fall. 4. By his Lyonlike
roaring he makes the thunders to utter their voices, although they remained
sealed: therefore he will always raise up some faithful teachers, however for
a time they shall profit but little. 5. Christ sw^ares, that the time sbalbe no
longer: therefore Antichrist shall not rage perpetually, but the calamities of
the Church shall have an end. 6. John is commanded to eat the book: and
therefore before the last trumpet sound, the Gospel shall again be openly
preached, and the Church purged from the dreggs of Antichrist.
The scope of all, is, that the Church faint not under the cross, but in
confidence of the presence of Christ her judge; and in hope of an happy issue,
always raise up her self.

The Chapter may be divided into two parts.
1. TOuching the strong Angel, unto verse. 8. 2. Of the book that was eaten up,
unto the end.
The first again has two parts. First the Angel is described by six Epithites
v. 1. Secondly four Acts of the Angel are expounded: 1. He holds in his hand a
book open. verse. 2. 2. He sets his right foot upon the earth, and his left
upon the sea, ibid: 3. He roares like a Lion, v. 3. The which is illustrated
from the effect of the roaring: viz. seven thunders thence utter their voices,
as it were an Echo, ibid: and from a double consequent: First John's desire to
write the voices: and secondly the prohibition, not to write, but to seal the
same verse. 4.
4, He swears: wherein we are to consider: 1. The person of the swearer: An
Angel standing upon the sea, and on the earth. 2. His gesture: He lift up his
hand to heaven, verse. 5. 3. The form of the oath: By the living God the
creator of all things, verse. 6. 4. The two things confirmed by oath: That the
time of troubles should be no longer, ibid: and that the seventh Angel
sounding, the mystery of God should be consummated. verse. 7.




The other part, consists of a divine commandment, with John's obedience and
the effect thereof.

In the commandment note 1. the efficient cause, the voice before heard from
heaven, verse. 8. 2. A double argument, that he should take the book out of
the hand of the Angel, ibid: and to eat it v. 9. 3. A prediction of the the
effect, ibid: John's obedience, 1. He takes the book out of the Angels hand. v.
9. 2. Having taken it, he eats up the same, v. 10.



The effect of his obedience is twofold: 1. internal, a sweetning of his mouth,
but making his belly bitter verse. 10. and external, a new vocation to
prophecy: The which is amplified both from the efficient, Thou must prophecy:
and from the form again prophecy: as also from the object, before many
peoples, nations and kings, verse. 11.


The first part of the Chapter. Of the strong Angel holding the book.
1. And I saw another mighty Angel come down from heaven, clothed with a
cloud, and a rainebow was upon his head, and his face was as it were the Sun,
and his feet as pillars of fire.

2. And he had in his hand a little book open: and he set his right foot
upon the Sea, and his left foot upon the earth.

3. And cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth: and when he had
cried, seven thunders uttered their voices.

4. And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write:
and I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Seal up those things which
the seven thunders uttered, and write them not.

5. And the Angel which I saw stand upon the sea, and upon the earth, lifted up
his hand to heaven,

6. And swear by him that lives for ever and ever, who created heaven, and the
things that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein are, and
the sea, and the things which are therein, that there should be time no longer.

7. But in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall begin to
sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he has declared to his
servants the Prophets.

THE COMMENTARY.
1. ANd I saw another mighty Angel saying] I find all interpreters ( Alcasar
only excepted who contrary to the drift of the history applies it to the
Jews) to agree in the general argument and scope: namely that here are
inserted (as it were) sovereign medicines or consolatory remedies in regard of
the sad calamities and miseries of the Church, under their manifold enemies,
but especially under the Eastern and Western Antichrist, by which the godly
being provoked to constancy, may be certainly persuaded, that Christ the judge
will always take care for his people in the midst of their greatest
persecutions, and preserve them in safety unto the end. But yet they much
differ about the time: most restrain it to the times of the sixth trumpet. But
for my part I take it, that this consolation is opposed to the evils of all the
trumpets which we have formerly heard, being as it were the second Act of this
vision, as I have showed in the argument of the Chapter. As the fifth seal
therefore in the former Vision, contained the comforts of the martyrs under the
altar, and so respected the evils of the foregoing seals: so in this Vision,
the history of this Chapter annexed to the sixth trumpet, does contain
consolations against the evils of all the foregoing trumpets.

Another Angel] All interpreters for the most part consent in one, that by this
Angel is represented Christ the mediator and revenger of his afflicted Church:
some few indeed are of another mind, whose opinions I will briefly set down.

Andreas Cesariensis supposes him to be one of the holy Angels, Andreas and
Riberas opinion.
gathering it from the cloud, rainbow, and light of the sun here mentioned:
But these adjuncts rather argue the contrary, as being of an higher nature
then to be applied unto a created Angel.

Ribera following him, understands this mighty Angel to be the same, who in
Cha. 5.2. desired to open the book that was shut. For seeing men repented not
by the plagues of the six trumpets, therefore he says, that now a mighty Angel
is sent, who by an oath protests unto the world, that the end thereof, and the
last judgment is at hand.

But this is neither the principal scope, neither are his reasons of force to
prove that this ought not to be understood of Christ: And therefore Alcasar
also rejects them. His arguments indeed would have seemed the more probable, if
he had made this mighty Angel, to be Gabriel, so called from his strength: and
Psalm. 103. where all the Angels of God are said to excel in strength: moreover
that Christ shall not descend from heaven until the day of judgment,
according to the scriptures: Also that this Angel swears by the living God,
as by a greater then himself. But neither are these reasons of weight: For
Gabriel does not signify a mighty Angel, but the mighty God: Now Christ
properly is El Gibbor, the strong or mighty God. It is true indeed, that all
the Angels of God are mighty: but Christ is stronger then they, as being the
Lord of them all.

Now the descention of this Angel from heaven must not be understood of Christ's
incarnation or any corporal descent on earth, but visional, that is, signifying
his continual presence with the Church: He, and God also, is said to descend
and ascend by his presence and manifestation of his grace and help. To be short
he swears by the living God, greater then himself, as he is man, but not as
he is the living and omnipotent God: whom we have often before proved so to be.

Lambertus thinks that some excellent ministers of the word are here noted,
Lambertus opinion.
whom the Lord sent into the Church at the beginning of the sixth trumpet: yet
he shows not who they are, or shall be. But the description of this Angel cannot
agree to any such ministers of the word.

Lyra doting, Lyras opinion.
(as his manner is) makes this Angel to be the Emperor Justinius and his nephew
Justinianus, about the year 518. who held in his hand a little book open,
that is, wrote letters to all places in favor of the Catholics against the
Arians. But these acts and divine description are to unsolidly ascribed unto a
secular man.

We therefore assent unto the common opinion, This mighty Angel is Christ.
that this Angel is CHRIST the revenger of his Church, because both the
description of the person, and all the acts here mentioned do plainly make
good this sense: as also the scope requires the same. For without Christ, the
Churches consolation would be very little in all these things: Besides
undoubtedly this mighty Angel is the same, who in Dan. 12.7. is called Michael
standing upon the waters and swearing by the living God: from whence this part
of the vision seems to be taken. But Michael the great prince standing for the
people was certainly Christ. Therefore this Angel is either Christ himself, or
one representing his person. Now we will consider the Epithites.

Mightie] Gr. (...), strong, able, for Christ is truly El Gibbor the mighty
God having two natures, who has vanquished the devil that strong armed man,
taken possession of his palace, and divided the spoil. See Chap. 5.2. and
18.21.

Descending from heaven] This is far different from that he saw Chap. 8.10. a
star falling, and Chap. 9.1. fallen from heaven. Now Christ descended from
heaven for the salvation of mankind in taking our flesh upon him: but that
descension is not here intended. Again he ascended into heaven corporally and
sits at the right hand of God, where he is to remain until the day of
judgment. Notwithstanding John saw him descending, not by a local motion, but
by visionall grace, inasmuch as he comes down by the presence of his spirit
and special help to relieve the afflicted condition of his Church, not leaving
her comfortless, according to the promise: where two or three are gathered
together in my name, I am in the midst of them. Matt. 18 20. and 28 20.
I am with you unto the end of the world. So Chap. 1. he appeared to John
walking in the midst of the Churches, not by a corporal motion, but a visional
presence of his grace and spirit. Now the likeness of the description shows,
that the same is here intended.

Clothed with a cloud] Some understand this cloud to be meant of Christ's flesh,
hiding or covering his divinity: Others for the obscure knowledge, by which he
revealed himself unto the world in the time of the sixth trumpet, being (as it
were) as yet covered with great darkness: making the sense thus: he appeared
clothed with a cloud, that is, he manifested himself in an obscure or dark way
unto the world. For my own part I take it (according the manner of the
scripture) to be a sign of divine majesty. For Jehovah was wont to appear
unto the people in a cloud, 2 Chro. 6.1. the cloud also leading the people in
the wilderness, and sheltering them from the heat of the sun, was Christ:
Therefore he is clothed with a cloud, to show that he is Lord of a heavenly
nature.

And the rainebow on his head] The rainebow signifies grace, being set by God
as a sign, Genesis 9.13.
that he would not send the flood any more upon the earth. Christ therefore
appears crowned with a rainebow, as the messenger of grace and peace; for he
is our peace Ephesians. 2.14. and the prince of peace, Isa. 9.6. This sign was very
fit for the time confirming tidings of peace with God to the afflicted Church:
shortly to rest from all her troubles, and enjoy future happiness.

His face was as the Sunne] Thus also in Chap. 1.16. it is said, Christ's face
shone as the sun shines in his strength, that is, it was most clear, and
shining in full brightness: For he is the sun of righteousness illuminating his
Church, and clearing up the storms of afflictions. For as the sun in its
vigor, dissipates the clouds, drives away cold, alayes the winds, and brings
a serenity: so Christ by the brightness of his spirit of grace, will assuage
the storms of afflictions, dissipate the tempests of calamities, and bring
unto the faithful a quietness of conscience in the midst of all their
troubles, and at last by the clear beams of his countenance will dispell all
manner of adversity.

His feet as pillars of fire] In Chap. 1.15. Christ's feet were as fine brass,
burning as in a furnace: by which metaphor the power and strength of Christ is
signified; for pillars by their strength underprop and support the house: Fire
consumes chafe, and other things: so Christ appears here with such feet, who
by his power and strength will stand fast against the adversaries and
Antichrist: the Church he will purge and defend, but consume the enemies like
stubble.

Hitherto we have heard the description of the Angel, who does in this manner
show himself unto John, that the Church groaning under the burden of
afflictions, might know, that Christ will come to revenge and relieve her
deplorable condition, especially under the fifth and sixth trumpets: for he will
be present with his Church in all her troubles, because he is crowned with a
rainbow: as also he is powerful to assuage the tempests of calamities, as
having a face like the sun, whom the scorpionlike Locusts, with their horses,
and Lions heads, and tails like serpents shall no way terrify, or overthrow:
because by his feet, as with fiery pillars, he so settles his kingdom, as it
cannot be moved: to be short he easily can destroy Antichrist with all his
Locusts arising out of the pit, seeing he is (...) mighty and powerful. This
is the scope and use of the description of the Angel.

2 And he had in his hand a little book open] Now follow the Acts of the
Angel, which tend to the same purpose. The first is, that he holds in his hand
a book open. This book open is the same, which before was shut.
Here it may be demanded, whither this open book, be the same with the former
shut with seven seals. I suppose it is the same, because Christ under the
form of a Lamb, received the book that was shut, unsealed and opened the
same: neither do we read that he gave the book being opened to any. Now who
can better hold the book open, then he that opened it? here therefore Christ
under the figure of a mighty Angel, holds that book open in his hand, which
before he opened. Neither is it any way co^tradictory, that there it is called
((...)) a book, but here (...)) a little book, seeing both words are derived
from (...) which signifies a book: besides the book being opened was less,
then when it was shut: or else it seemed to be less in weight, when the seals
were taken off: or lastly it was lessened in regard many events were now
revealed unto John, so that it contained not so many secret mysteries as it did
before.

But what may be the meaning, Why Christ holds the book open in his hand.
that Christ holds this little book open in his hand? The book was written
within and without: within, were contained the secrets of future things to be
revealed unto John: without, was written the doctrine of the Gospel before
published and penned by the Apostles. Christ opened the whole book: both
because the Apostles were by him inspired, and sent forth to preach the Gospel
to the whole world: as also because he revealed these mysteries unto John. Now
least it might have been thought, that by the great storms, tumults and cruel
devises of Tyrants, Locusts, and the armies of horsemen, the book of the
Gospel had been wrung out of the hands of Christ, in regard that almost
throughout the whole world the doctrine of free grace, justifying faith, and
the certainty of salvation had of a long time been buried, especially under
Antichrists kingdom: Therefore Christ now appears, holding the same open in his
hand, thereby teaching us, first, that, not withstanding the perfecution of
tyrants, the superstitions, and lies of Antichrist, by which he darkened the
doctrine of Gospel, yet he held forth in his hand the book of his word, that
is, raised up continually some faithful professors and teachers of the truth
who maintained the same against all tyrants and Antichrists: And indeed the
books of martyrs, and other ecclesiastical histories do abundantly witness,
that there have been multitudes of such, not only during the persecution of
the Roman Emperors, and heretics, but also these thousand years many under
Antichrist, condemned and cruelly put to death for heresy. But secondly it
teaches us, that at last he will also purge his book from the pollutions of
the Locusts and dregs of Antichrist, by fit witnesses of his truth, whom in the
last times he will raise up for that end, in the midst of Antichrists kingdom.

And he set his right foot upon the sea] The following actions of the Angel
illustrate the matter going before: For in that he set his feet upon the sea
and earth, cried as when a lion roareth, caused the thunders to utter their
voices, and swear by the living God: all this tends, to give us to understand,
that Christ suffered not the book of his doctrine to be wrung out of his
hand, neither by the Roman tyrants, heretics, Antichristian Locusts, or the
devouring armies of Mahumet, but always kept the same open in the world.

His right foot] The feet of Christ, are said before, to be like pillars of
fire. Many (and among the rest my Anonymus,) understand this of the preachers
of the word: The right, to be some eminent ones: The left inferior ministers:
for the left foot is weaker then the right. By the sea they understand the
world: by the earth worldly men. Now he sets his right foot upon the sea, his
left on the earth: that is, by his ministers both of high and lower degree, he
reproved earthly minded people.

Brightman much to the same purpose, understands the right foot, to be Christ's
faithful servants, whom he raised up against Antichrist out of the sea, that
is, out of the viperous brood of the Popish clergy, as, William Ockam, John
Wickleffe, etc. his left foot, of secular princes, as, Ludovick of Bavaria the
Emperor, Marsilius of Padua, Dantes, etc. who with all their might strongly
opposed the monstrous inventions of Antichrist.

But we need not make use of so subtle an allegory. This part of the Vision
is taken out of Dan 12.7. where Michael the great prince standing for his
people, is said to have set his feet on the waters of the river. In which place
no doubt is signified the great armies of the Babylonians at the River
Euphrates, whom the Lord so restrained and kept down by his providence, as that
they could not destroy his people according to their own pleasure: So Christ
here sets his feet upon the sea and the earth, (for so John saw him truly
standing in a vision,) but to what end?

To set the foot anywhere, is to challenge the possession and dominion thereof
to himself. How Christ set his feet on the earth and sea.
The earth and sea denotes the whole world, with all that is therein. In this
place therefore is signified, that when Christ shall seem to have lost his
possession in the earth and sea, yet then he shall set one foot upon the sea,
that is, the seacoast provinces and Islands: And his other foot upon the earth,
that is, the mediterranean regions of the Christian world, as preserving in all
places some remnants of a Church unto himself. But when? Here now we are to
have regard unto the times of the six trumpets: for howbeit in John's time
Domitian, and after him Aurelius, Commodus, Diocletian, Maximian, and other
tyrants persecuted the Christians both by sea and land, and endeavored to root
out the very name of Christ: Notwithstanding Christ set his foot on the sea
and on the earth: for the Christian Church dispersed throughout the whole earth
increased the more, by how much it was persecuted. He set his foot on the sea
and earth, by the Christian Emperors Constantine and others, at what time the
whole world seemed to be in subjection to Christ. Afterward again when Christ
in outward appearance seemed to be thrust out of his possession by the Arian,
Macedonian, Nestorian, Eutychinian, Manichean, and Pelagian heretics: yet then
he still held his foot fast upon the earth and sea, for he preserved
continually some faithful Teachers and Bishops, who being zealous of his glory
kept always his possession.

But chiefly when the Bishops of Rome fell from heaven unto the earth, turning
the doctrine of Christ into wormwood, and opening the bottomless pit, whence
came out the pestilent smoke of their abominations, with those devouring
Locusts, which tormented men for five months: as also when the Mahumetane,
Saracen, Arabian and Turkish armies horribly destroyed and overthrew all the
Christian Churches in the East, to the great hazard, as it seemed, of Christ's
government and kingdom: yet behold even then Christ set his foot upon the earth
and sea: For he had during all the time of Antichrists reign in the West,
always some remnants in the midst of Popery, and raised up very many
witnesses of his truth: In the East also some Churches, however burdened with
the Turkish tyranny, were preserved, and professed the name of Christ.

This therefore is a third consolation for the godly, that they might not,
being under the calamities of the six trumpets, be discouraged: For neither
tyrants, nor heretics, nor Antichrists, shall ever put Christ so out of his
possession, as not to have his feet still standing upon the earth and upon the
sea.

3. And he cried with a great voyce] This cry, and roaring of Christ serves
also to comfort the godly, and declares the two former acts. For as he will
hold a book open, and set his foot upon the earth and sea, so he will not be
silent or mute, but have the Gospel to be preached: The saving efficacy
whereof unto the faithful is signified by the great voice, but the dreadful
effect applied unto the wicked, by the roaring of a Lion. Now here again, we
are to return to the times of the six trumpets. For the more that tyrants
labored to suppress the Gospel, the louder and greater was the voice: the
Lion of the tribe of Juda, as he is called Cha. 5.5. roared, and prevailed,
that is, Christians embraced the Gospel, and joyfully suffered marty rdome for
the same. It is true the enemies did mightily rage, yet were they tormented
with a secret dread fearing they knew not what: like as of old the Scribes,
Pharisees, and chief Priests taking counsel against Christ were sore
dismayed: What do we? (say they) for this man does many miracles: Io. 11.47.
If we let him alone all men will believe on him, and the Romans shall come and
take away both our place and nation, And again, what shall we do to these
men? Act. 4.16.
for that indeed a notable miracle has been don by them, is manifest, and we
cannot deny it. Thus tyrants albeit they stand in fear, yet consult together
how to suppress the truth: Even so howsoever both these Antichrists are
terrified at the Lions roaring, notwithstanding as formerlie they have, so
still they rage unto this day: but all in vain: for at length this Lion will
consume all his adversaries.

As when a lion roareth] The Greek (...) according to the propriety of the word
signifies to roar or bray like an ox, ass or camel. Lions properly are said
(...) to bellow: but it seems the Greeks do not always observe this
difference. Some will have that the mildness of this Lion is here noted, as
giving forth a voice like an ox, which is a mild or tame creature.

But this seems to be too curious and contrary to the scope of the matter.
What he cried, is not by John set down: yet a part thereof seems to be noted in
v. 5.6.7. where the Angel swears lifting up his right hand etc. so that the
things next following touching the voices of the thunders, are inserted (as it
were) by a parenthesis.

Seven thunders uttered their voyces] This circumstance is obscure. Twice
before mention is made of seven thunders. In Chap. 4.5. it is said out of the
throne proceeded, lightnings, thunders and voices, with seven lamps of fire
burning. In Chap. 8.5. Christ casting his censer of fire into the earth, there
were voices, and thundrings, and lightnings, and an earthquake. But in these
places the Greek (...) (thundrings) has no article set before it: but here it
is read with an article (...) The thundrings, as having reference to the former
thunders. The thunders in Chap. 8. we applied to the calamities under the red
horse. The thunders in Chap. 4. to the terrible threatenings of the Law, by
which Christ does strike and terrify the consciences of Antichrist, and other
adversaries, as to be self convicted, however they furiously rage against
Christ: for my part therefore I doubt not, but this place is to be expounded by
the others; and that these thunders figuratively do denote undanted teachers
who shall thunder out the word of God against tyrants, heretics and
Antichrist, as thereby they shall be made altogether inexcusable.

Seven] A definite number for an indefinite, that is, many shall thunder out
their voices against Antichrist. It is very emphatically said, (...), their
voices, as dictated to them by the spirit of God, and divinely commanded so to
do: For without doubt these heroic teachers who opposed themselves against
Antichrist, were stirred up by the special instinct of the spirit of God. Some
understand it of seven, that is of diverse gifts and graces of the holy Ghost
bestowed upon the teachers of the Gospel: which comes all to one, in case the
scope be minded, namely that this also serves for the comfort of the godly:
For Antichrist shall not always have a quiet and peaceable kingdom, because
Christ both by his roaring voice, and by the thundrings of his faithful
ministers, will many times disturb him, to the end he may not seduce all.

Brightman makes the seven thunders to be the seven Angels spoken of Chap.
14.6. But there only six are mentioned: besides it seems not to agree, because
the voices of these thunders are commanded to be sealed: whereas the others
were written by John.

And when the seven thunders uttered (Gr. spoke) their voyces] John would have
written the voices of these thunders, that we also might have had the knowledge
thereof in this Revelation. But he is forbidden and commanded to seal them up,
that is, to keep them secret.

And write them not] The kings Bible reads it (...), Andreas (...), and after
these things write: as if he were not altogether prohibited, but only at this
time and in this place: being afterward commanded to write the same, viz. in
Chap. 14. where the same seems to be set down. But other copies, as also the
greater and lesser of Robert Stephanus have it, (...), and these things thou
shall not write. Besides in Chap. 14. there is no mention made of thunders: but
however it be, John is forbidden to write, but to seal, that is, to close or
keep secret: like as the book that was sealed Chap. 6. could not be read. Now
this seems to be taken out of Dan. 8.26. and 12.4. where the Prophet is
commanded to seal the words he had heard.

But what? will the Lord be angry with men, if they understand not the voices
of the thunders, seeing in the mean time he will have the book to be shut,
that is, the doctrine or meaning thereof not to be understood? I answer; the
command is not to be taken absolutely of hiding the doctrine, but only to
comfort John and the faithful against the contempt of the Gospel, for the
future event is foretold, viz. that the wicked shall not hear, but despise the
voices of the thunders, thereby causing the same to be secret unto themselves
by their own default: that is the greater part of men will not hear the
thundrings of the Law, neither the voices of the Gospel, but neglect and
contemn the same. Thus they shall remain sealed unto them. Or, but thou seal,
that is, do not thou therefore esteem lightly of them, but lay them up as a
most precious treasure, because very shortly thou must again prophecy.

A voice from heaven] Undoubtedly of God sitting on the throne, who both
foresees, and by his providence directs all future events. The question which
Ribera takes up with so much scrupulosity is needless: viz. whither this
Revelation be entire: and whither these voices be not the same with them
written in this book. For not the defect of this Revelation is signified, but
Antichrists contempt of the word preached, is here foretold.

5 And the Angel, which I saw stand] This is a fourth gesture of the Angel: he
lifted up his hand and swear by the living God, etc. in which again there is
an allusion unto the last vision in Daniel, who saw an Angel swearing by him
that lives for ever, yet there is some difference, both in the manner, and in
the thing it self: He in Dan: held up his right and his left hand and swear
etc. this lifts up only his right hand, etc. He in Dan: swears that after
the accomplishment of a time, times and half a time, the prophesies there
foretold should be finished. This swears, that there shall be no more time,
but that the mystery of God should be finished in days of the sound of the
seventh trumpet. Now we will briefly consider, Who, how, what, and wherefore he
swears.

The Angel swearing and standing on the earth and sea, is undoubtedly Christ,
who often, as we read in the Gospel, confirmed his doctrine by oath: Verily,
verily I say unto you. And God himself many times is said to swear. Psa.
110.4. Heb. 6.13.
The Lord has sworn. God swear by himself etc. neither is this contrary to
the precept of Christ: Swear not at all. For there is forbidden, not a lawful
oath taken in the name of God, in doubtful and hard cases, whether before the
magistrate or otherwhere: (for an oath is a divine ordinance instituted to end
controversies and strife among men) but rash oaths either by God or the
creature, Heb. 6.16.
to which the Jews (as the circumstances of the place show) were much given:
for otherwise Christ should condemn both himself, God, Angels and men for
swearing. An oath therefore in it self is lawful, touching the conditions
whereof we have largely handled otherwhere.

Lifted up his hand] viz. his right hand: for so they that swear were wont to
do: as, Abraham swearing that he would not receive any thing of the spoil of
the Sodomites, I have (says he) lift up my hand unto Jehovah, etc. Hence to
lift up the hand generally in scripture is put for swearing: Ezech. 20: 5.
Numb. 14.30.
In the day that I lifted up my hand to bring them forth of Egypt, ye shall
not enter into the land, concerning (or for) which I lift up my hand etc. And
the reason hereof is not obscure: For heaven is the throne of God: wherefore
they that swear, lift up their hands to heaven, as calling upon God, to be a
witness and judge of the truth. Hence also comes the received custom amongs
us, to lift up the right hand, and put forth the three first fingers, in sign
of the blessed trinity, whom we call for a record upon our souls.

6, And swear by (Gr: In) him that liveth] by two adjunctes he denotes the true
God. The first internal, that lives for ever and ever. The other external,
who created heaven, earth, sea, and the things that are therein. The former is
a most proper note of the true God, because he alone is of himself and shall be
from eternity unto all eternity, not receiving life from any, but giving unto
all life, moving and being. Hence with the Hebrews the Lord is called
Jehovah, that is, subsisting and living of himself. And by this Epithet
generally in scripture he is distinguished from the false gods or idols of the
Gentiles.

In him] that is, by him that lives, being an Hebraisme: for they that take
an oath, are to swear in, that is, by Jehovah: as Jonathan said to David, 1.
Sam. 24.22. What it is to swear by the living God.
swear unto me in Jehovah. Now to swear by Johovah, or by the living God, is
to require and call him, who is the alone searcher of the heart, to give
testimony unto the truth, and to punish him that swears, in case he wittingly
take his name in vain.

Here then we see in the first place, that an Oath is a kind of invocation upon
God: and therefore often in scripture, swearing is put for invocating, and so
again invocation for the other: As Isa. 19.18. The nations shall swear by
Jehovah, It is lawful for Christians to swear in some cases.
that is, shall call upon the true God: and 2. Cor. 1.23. I call God (says
Paul) to record upon my soul: so that an Oath is a kind of worship, and
therefore lawful and acceptable to God, no way prohibited unto Christians, as
some fantastical men have affirmed.

Secondly: that no Oath is laflul, except it be taken in the name of God. For
he alone knows the heart, and only i^ able to reveal secrets, to punish
hidden perjurie, to resolve doubtful things, and confirm the whole truth, for
he is above all, and in him alone in the last place all faith is settled.

Thirdly hence we see that to swear by Angels, It is a great wickedness to
swear by the creature.
Saints, or any other creature, is a horrible wickedness: both because they
cannot search the heart and reins, in which regard they are vainly called upon:
as also because religious invocation is a worship only proper to God, and
cannot without sacrilege be given unto any other. They therefore who swear
by Mary, and the Saints, do as much offend the Lord, deceive themselves and
others, as SOCRATES who was wont to swear by his dog, or any stone whatsoever.

But here it may be demanded, if this Angel be Christ himself, how then does
he swear by him that lives for ever? For hereby it seems either that he is
not Christ, or else that Christ is not true God, but inferior unto him, because
he swears by the living God, as by one greater then himself.

To this I have given somewhat in answer before, and sufficiently showed that
Christ is this Angel. He swears by him that lives for ever, as he is man
and the mediator, and so he acknowledges God to be above him: according as he
speaks: Io. 14.28.
The Father is greater then I. Or else as he is God, and then he swears by him
who lives for ever, not as by a superior, or by another, but by himself,
according to that in Heb. 6.13. because God could swear by no greater he swear
by himself. But that Christ is he that lives for ever appears by his own
testimony Chap. 1.18. I live (says he) and was dead, VIII, Arg of Christ's
deity confirmed.
to wit, as man: and behold I live for ever and ever. This therefore (as we
have before noted) yields us a worthy argument to prove the deity of Christ.

Who created heaven] By this other Epithet he also distinguishes the true God
from idols, as being the only creator of all things in heaven and in earth,
etc. gave them, I say, at first a being of nothing: the which was a work of
omnipotency, not to be effected by false gods or any creature. Therefore the
true God everywhere in scripture, as also in the common creed is celebrated as
the creator of all things: Ier. 10.11.
but the gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, even they shall
perish from the earth, and from under these heavens. Neither does this make any
thing to the contrary, but that this Angel is Christ: for he swears by the
creator of all things, Ioh. 1.3. Heb. 1.2.
that is, by himself: For by him all these things were made, and without him
was not any thing made, that was made: By whom also God the Father made the
worlds. This Epithet therefore does also confirm the truth of Christ's
divinity.

That there should be time no longer] Now follows what Christ swear, and to
what end. Both which are to the same purpose: for the latter adversitively
expounds the former: viz. that there should be no more time, but that the
accomplishment of the mystery of God was at hand under the seventh trumpet.

The former is taken diverse ways: ANDREAS: he swears there should be no
time after, or, in the world to come, or, not long after the sixth trumpet: the
latter part of whose opinion is agreeable to the scope, but not the former,
(notwithstanding Ribera foolishly approves thereof:) there shall be no time (says
he) because this variety of time, as days, nights, months and years shall be
no more: but an unchangable eternity shall follow in the days of the seventh
Angel. But what use was there to confirm that with an Oath, which no man is
ignorant of, viz. that after the consummation of this world, time shallbe
swallowed up by eternity. Alcasar wresteth it unto the Jews, to whom there
shall be no more time, as being threatened of God to be forsaken. But what need
was there that Christ should signify a thing by vision and Oath, which long
before was clearly declared: Behold your house is left unto you desolate, Matt.
23.28.

BRIGHTMAN: there shall be no more time, that is, no longer delay, but a very
little time shall be remaining until the consummation of the mystery: the which
is agreeable unto the scope of the place: for Christ by a fifth consolation would
encourage the faithful, taken from the brevity of the time remaining, least
they being dishartned in regard of the long and continued calamities of the
six trumpets, should be out of hope, as if there should never be an end of
their miseries, but that Antichrists rage should always continue in the
world. But it shall not be so, for the end is near at hand, as Christ
swearing by himself confirms, to the end we might no way doubt thereof: so
that this Oath serves, both for the confirmation of his promise, and for our
consolation also: neither indeed does Christ use on oath without weighty cause;
for Antichrist had so established his possession, as that it seemed impossible
that his kingdom should be overthrown: Therefore Christ swears, that there
should be no more time, to wit, sad and mornefull unto the Saints, as
hitherto it had been under tyrants, and especially under Antichrist, who only
bearing swaye, tyrannized over all, insomuch as no man might contradict him,
unless he meant to die for it by fire or sword: But there shall follow other
times, wherein shall be a reformation of the Church, and the last down fall of
Antichrists kingdom.

The mystery of God shall be finished] When? In the days of the seventh
trumpet, that is, so soon as it shall begin to blow: then shall be the end of
the sixth trumpet, the end of the Churches calamities, and the end of
Antichristian tyranny.

Alcasar applies the mysteries of God, to the casting off the Jews, and
election of the Gentiles. But the most on the contrary understand it of the
mystery of all Isreal's conversion unto Christ, which shall to come to pass
near the last times, of which the Apostle Romans 11.25. seems to treat: and
indeed the prophets of old have often prophesied of their calling. But because
in this place the comfort of the Church militant under Antichrist is only
aimed at, unto which the calling of the Jews does not directly much belong,
therefore it is rather and better to be taken of the resurrection and day of
judgment, even when the power of tyrants and all adversaries shall be
abolished: of which mystery the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 15.51. Behold I show
you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a
moment in the twinkling of an eye at the last trumpet: for the trumpet shall
blow, and we shall be changed. This is that which Christ here swears, that at
the sound of the seventh trumpet the mystery of God is to be finished, the
Church delivered and glorified, but the enemies eternally to be punished:
according unto that in the Prophets: Isa. 24.26.27.66. Daniel 7.11.12. Zacha.
14. Mala. 3. and 4.

Hence we plainly see, that the sound of the sixth trumpet shall continue unto
the end of time, that is, of this world: and that at the beginning of the sound
of the seventh trumpet, an end shall be put to the afflictions of the Church,
and cruelty of the adversaries. The seventh trumpet therefore, is no other then
that of the Archangel, by which the dead shall be raised out of their graves,
and brought to judgment. As in the following Chapter we shall hear, so that
without all doubt this trumpet respects the end of the world. They therefore do
err from the scope, who extend the time of the seven Vialls, and of the
following visions, beyond the seventh trumpet.

The second part of the Chapter. Of the book eaten up by John.
8. And the voice which I heard from heaven, spoke unto me again, and said,
Go and take the little book which is open in the hand of the Angel, which
stands upon the sea, and upon the earth. 9. And I went unto the Angel, and
said unto him, Give me the little book. And he said unto me, Take it, and
eat it up, and it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth
sweet as honey. 10. And I took the little book out of the Angels hand, and ate
it up, it was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as I had eaten it, my
belly was bitter. 11. And he said unto me, Thou must prophecy again before
many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and Kings.
THE COMMENTARY.
THe other part of the Chapter concerning the book eaten by John, is a
preparation to the following Act, touching the combat of the two witnesses with
the beast, about the end of the fifth and sixth trumpets, which yet remain
founding in this present age. John (as he is commanded,) eats up the little
book he took out of the hand of Christ: the which was sweet in his mouth, but
bitter in his belly: And he is commanded to prophecy again before kings and
nations. Now what is this? but that toward the last times, prophesying shallbe
renewed against Antichrist: after which indeed there shall follow new combats,
notwithstanding Antichrists kingdom shall be greeviously shaken: the which
being done, there shall be no more time, that is, like the former, when
Antichrist raged according to his lust and pleasure over the Church. This is
the sum.

Now we are well to take notice, that this part of the vision is taken out of
the prophecy of Ezech. Chap. 3. where an hand from heaven reaches unto the
prophet a roll, to eat it up, being in his mouth as honey for sweetness:
whereupon he is commanded to denounce judgments against the Israelites. It
shadowed out the heavenly call of Ezechiel, as also his readiness to obey God,
in reproving the vices of the people, and threatening punishment against them
for the same. All things are here alike: But that Ezechiel felt not the book
(as John,) bitter in his belly: and that he was sent to prophecy against the
house of Israel, but John against Antichrist. Let us briefly consider, who
commands, what is commanded, and what followed upon the doing thereof.

8. And the voice which I heard] To wit, that heavenly voice mentioned in ver.
4. write not, but seal the voices of the thunders, etc. The same voice
therefore who before forbade him to write, does now command him to eat up the
little book, and to prophecy; by which is signified the admirable
dispensation of the divine grace: for Antichrist bearing sway in the Church
during the times of the fifth and sixth trumpets, the thunders indeed uttered
their voices, that is, some faithful teachers publicly thundered against the
idolatry and tyranny of Antichrist: But with little profit: The voices
remained sealed, and Antichrists power entire, yea increased daily by
suppressing those teachers, and bringing kings and nations under his yoke. Now
whence came this? I answer, Christ as yet had not given to John the open book
to eat it up: neither commanded him again to prophecy, because he reserved
this special grace unto the later times of the fifth and sixth trumpets. Let us
therefore acknowledge this singular mercy of God, that now unto us the open
book of Christ's doctrine is given to be eaten up, and prophecy against
Antichrist again revived in the world.

Take the little booke] The heavenly voice commands two things. First, that
John should take the open book out of the hand of Christ. Secondly, eat it up.
The little book on the outside contained the revealed and written doctrine of
the Gospel: within the secret counsels of God touching the future events of
the Church. For it was written, within and without, as we heard Chap. 1.7. and
Ezech. 2.10. This little book Christ both opened, and held open: teaching us,
that as John, so all the teachers of the word, must ask of Christ, and receive
out of his hand the doctrine of salvation, which they are to propound unto the
Church: but not from the hand of Satan or Antichrist. Now he exhibiteth a book
open, because the holy scriptures do open, and manifestly set forth the
mysteries of our salvation. Thus we see the decrees of the Romish Antichrist,
the traditions of Popes and Councils, the humane Philosophy and subtilties of
Sophisters are to be quite banished out of the Church. It is expressly added,
Of the Angel that stood upon the earth, and sea] that we might confidently rest
on the power of Christ, and acknowledge him alone to be the revealer of the
heavenly truth, and so desire nothing as necessary to salvation, but what we
take out of his hand.

9. Take it, and eat it up] This is the other commandment. Books of paper or
parchment are not to be eaten properly, as not being fit food for man; but
they are said to be eaten up metaphorically, when they are so carefully read
and thoroughly taken notice of, that we are able promptly to rehearse and
discourse of the contents thereof. So a man is said to have devoured Virgil,
Cicero, who is fully acquainted with them, and has them, as it were, by
heart. So Cicero called M. Cato a devourer of books, because he was an
insatiable reader. Thus, as the Prophet in Ezech. 3. so John here, is commanded
to eat up the book he received of Christ, that is, well to understand and as
it were, hide the same in the bowels of his heart, that so he might deliver no
other doctrine unto the Church, but what he had received from Christ. Now
whether this book were eaten up truly, or in a vision only, makes little to
the purpose: the latter is most probable. For all these things were don by a
vision.

Here the ministers of the word are taught earnestly to devour, or eat up the
doctrine of salvation divinely written and received from Christ, that is,
diligently to read, understand, search, meditate, and as it were to turn it
even into their very moisture and blood. For such only can faithfully
instruct the Church in the knowledge of the truth, who after this manner
meditate in the law of the Lord day and night. On the contrary their
sluggishnesse is condemned, who though they love to be called Bishops,
Archbishops and Patriarchs of the Church, yet in the mean while are little or
nothing acquainted with the scriptures of God.

And it shall make thy belly bitter] He preadmonisheth John of a double effect
of the book, sweet in the mouth, bitter in the belly. Sweet things are
delightful to the palate, bitter things provoke to vomit. Hereby signifying,
that one effect thereof should be sweet, the other troublesome: the nature
whereof is expounded in the following verse. He fore shows it should be sweet,
to stir him up the more earnestly to eat up the book: he tells him also that it
should be bitter, that he might not afterward be offended thereat: but know
that this bitterness should be recompensed with much sweetness.

Then I took the booke] He shows his readiness in eating the book: for
neither the difficulty of the command, nor the bitterness of the book
dishartens him: showing us, that we are readily to submitt unto the command of
God, and not to be dismayed at any hardships or difficulties whatsoever. Now he
ate the book not really, but in vision only, as I said before, signifying
that he most readily accepted the work imposed upon him, of which it follows.

And it was sweet in my mouth] Here the foresaid effects follow. This book
being eaten was sweet in the mouth, and bitter in the belly: the first
signifies the sweetness of the word, as Psalm. 119.103. How sweet are thy words
unto my taste, yea sweeter then honey to my mouth. Ierem. 15.16. Thy words were
found, and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of
mine heart. This is the proper effect of the word, it brings joy to the heart,
and comfort to the conscience: yea and by how much faithful teachers do feel
this sweetness, by so much the more they preach the Gospel cheerfully. But
the effect thereof is bitter by accident, because the preaching of the word
occasioneth most painful grypings of the belly, as the hatred of the world,
persecutions, banishments, and martyrdomes. This effect Christ foretold unto
his disciples: They shall put you out of their synagogues, Ioh. 16.2.
and whosoever kills you will think that he does God service.

But what use was there to reveal this in a type unto John: seeing it was long
before plainly foretold in the written word? It was altogether needful,
considering that this bitterness does not properly denote the calamities
already past under the four trumpets, but to come in the end of the fifth and
sixth, under the kingdom of Antichrist, the which we shall hear in the
following Chapter, namely the combats of the third Act of this Vision. He
foretold them therefore unto John, that he might not be offended: for he had
already experience hereof, being sent into exile by Domitian: notwithstanding
Christ does not properly intend this here, but praefigures in his person the
future calamities of the witnesses of the truth.

11. And he said unto me] To wit, the former voice from heaven.

Thou must again prophesie] This commandment is taken diversely. Lyra: thou
must write down more prophesies, to wit those which follow in this book. But
to write more things, is not again to prophecy, etc.

Thomas, Rupertus, and some others understand it historically, of John's being
restored unto his Church: as if he had said, Thou must after the death of
Domitian return from Patmos the place of thy exile unto Ephesus, and preach
again the Gospel: or, as if it were a promise of writing his Gospel after
the Revelation. The which Ribera refuteth: This (says he) I approve not of,
for to put prophesying in stead of preaching the Gospel, is new: which reason
is not solid: he adds another: that seeing John was gifted with the fullness of
the holy Ghost, therefore he needed not to eat up the book, either for to
preach, or, to write the Gospel; wherefore he says, the sense is thus: that
although John hitherto had prophesied many things concerning the last times,
notwithstanding there remained as yet many things of the same nature, which he
was to prophecy of, against the gentiles, etc. The which is one with the
opinion of Lyra, and which Alcasar also with his subtilties does at last come
unto. But he needed not to eat up the book in this respect: seeing before he
had received a commandment to write the whole Revelation: and allthough I
grant that Lyras opinion touching the promise of John's restitution is to be
approved off, yet the eating of the book, does make nothing for it. Andreas,
and they which follow him, perceiving that here is spoken of prophesying to
come in the last times, have imagined (much like to the disciples of old) that
John is not dead to this day, but yet lives with Enoch and Elias in paradise,
with whom, after Antichrist is risen, he shall come and prophecy against him.
Touching whose opinion so much indeed is true, viz: that here is treated of a
future prophesying under Antichrist: but the rest is false and refuted by John
himself: Chap. 21.23.

All the forenamed opinions therefore are to be joined together, and then the
meaning will appear to be thus: that here is a confirmation of the Prophet,
that he should not, because of his banishment, desist from his office, but go
on to prophecy: and thus the commandment may include a promise of his
restitution into his former place: Yet the heavenly voice is further to be
applied, namely, to the prophesying which should be renewed against Antichrist
in the last times. So that John is commanded to eat up the book, and again to
prophecy, not so much in his own, as in the person of all those witnesses of
the truth who lived near the end of the fifth and sixth trumpets: the sense is
therefore, that when Antichrist has long enough raged, then prophesying shall
again be restored against him, etc. Now to prophecy again, To prophecy
again what it is.
is to bring to light, purge, reform and wholly to restore to its former
brightness the doctrine of the Gospel, filthily polluted, mangled, and
brought to naught by Antichrists Locusts. Againe] for although the Apostles,
Pastors, Teachers and sincere Bishops had formerly published and preached the
Gospel, yet afterward prophecy was oppressed by Antichrist: and therefore it
was behovefull it should again be restored by the faithful preachers of the
word. This, I say, must be don, for otherwise Antichrist, would have thrust
Christ quite out of his possession, and troaden his Church under foot.
Therefore for the truths sake of these divine praedictions, and that the
Church perish not, but that Antichrists abominations be wholly rooted out, it
was needful that prophecy should be renewed. The Thunders indeed uttered
their voices, but they did little good: and therefore other witnesses must be
raised up, who shall more strongly strike at, assault and weaken Antichrists
kingdom. Thus it is manifest, that here is promised a reformation of the
Church about the last times, which shall be expounded in the following Chapter
under the two witnesses, who shall again prophecy against Antichrist.

Before many people, and nations, and tongues and kings] The success of
prophecy renewed is set forth: for hereby many peoples nations, and kings, who
before worshipped the beast, shall embrace the Gospel, and forsake Antichrist.
The which how far it has, and yet daily is accomplished both in Germany,
France, England, Poland, Bohemia, Hungary, Denmark and Suetia, etc. all may
clearly see, who do not maliciously shut their eyes. Thus we see that here is
a preparation and transition unto the following measuring of the tempie of God.

The Argument, Parts and Analysis of CHAPTER XI.
NOw are described the new combats of the two witnesses (prophecy and
ministry) with the beast, their martyrdom, and vindication: also the triumph
of Antichristians because they were killed, their astonishment and ruin: and at
last (the seventh trumpet sounding) the songs of joy and triumph of the Church
in heaven; also the last judgment, the abolition of Antichrists kingdom, with
the fretting and punishment of the wicked.

Who are these two witnesses, what events they do prefigure, and of whom, is
very obscure. Interpreters indeed, every one according to his understanding,
have learnedly thought upon several opinions. But I hardly find one, who
satisfies himself and the reader. And perhaps all humane understanding does
here fail. For mine own part I willingly confess that herein I stick and
come short. The obscurity chiefly consists in the defining of the months,
days, and moments of times, the resolution whereof cannot fully be had, but by
the bright beams of divine revelation. Yet notwithstanding I doubt not but by
blessing of God, the observation of our method will afford us some little light
in this mystery.

Hitherto the two former Acts of this Vision have been Parallels, as answering
each to other. The first was the proposition of the Churches calamities under
the sound of the six trumpets, that is, under the heathen tyrants, hareticks,
Apollyon the king of Locusts, and Mahumet. Chap. 8. and 9. The second is of the
comforts of the afflicted Church under the said enemies Chap. 10.

Now follows the third Act Chap. 11. unto ver. 15. which is an amplification
of the foresaid calamities, describing the renewed combats of the Saints with
the Western Antichrist, The Western Antichrist more hurtful then the
Eastern.
as being much more cruel and hurtful unto the Church then the Eastern:
considering how the latter tyrannized by open force and war, killing only the
bodies of them who submitted not unto his yoke: whereas the other tyrannizeth
over the souls with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness and lying signs,
moreover torments the consciences of them who enslave themselves unto him, with
torments far worse then any kind of death: as we have heard in Chap. 9. But
chiefly it describes the occasion and cause of those combats, namely the
purging of the Evangelical doctrine from Antichristian defilements, with the
reformation of the Church by the preaching of the two witnesses in the latter
times of the fifth and sixth trumpets, as also the success of the reformation,
and what should happen, both to the witnesses, and also to Antichrist.

Lastly the fourth Act is added by the sound of the last trumpet, relating the
happy change of all former calamities in the last judgment: when as Christ
the judge, destroying the kingdoms of his adversaries, will render a reward
unto his servants, and punishment unto the wicked: Chap. XI. from verse. 15.
unto the end. This method being observed, the reason is plain, why the last
judgment is again treated of in the end of this Chapter: now without this we
grope in darkness, and many imaginary things are in vain devised.

The parts therefore of the Chapter are two.
I. FIrst a prophecy of the reformation of the Church under Antichrist, unto
verse. 15. II. The sounding of the last trumpet, from verse. 15. unto the end.
The former part has a twofold oracle. The first general, commanding John to
measure the temple, that is, to purge the Church from the filth and corruptions
of Antichrist. verse. 1. To leave out the inward court, and shows the cause
thereof, verse. 2. The second special: declaring the manner of the future
reformation, viz. by the ministry of two witnesses: consisting of four
particulars. I. A description of the witnesses. 1. From the time of their
prophecy, and from their habit, v. 3. 2. From their dignity and esteem with
God, v. 4. 3. From the efficacy and authority of their office, v. 5. 6. II.
Their war with the beast: where 1. we have the description of the beast, his
hostile invasion and victory, ver. 7. 2. The martyrdom of the prophets, and
place of reproach, v. 7. 8. 9. 3. The joys of the wicked for the slaughter of
the prophets, with the cause of this their great rejoicing, verse. 10. III. The
avengement of the prophets: where 1. we have their restoring to life, verse. 11.
2. The astonishment and fear of the wicked, ibid. 3. Their glorious ascending
up into heaven, v. 12. 4. The shaking and ruin of Antichrists kingdom. IV. An
acclamatory conclusion of the end of the Churches calamities: and of judgment
at hand, v. 14.



The latter part, (the seventh trumpet sounding) declares the change of the
Churches warfare in three particulars. 1. An heavenly triumph because the
kingdoms of the world were become Gods and Christ's, ver. 15. 2. A triumphant
song of the first company, viz. of the four and twenty Elders: whose reverend
carriage and gratulatorie hymn is recited, in which 1. they give thanks to
Christ for freeing his Church and kingdom from the tyranny of the adversaries,
v. 17. 2. They declare the vain fretting and wrath of the wicked hereat. v. 18.
3. They proclaim the resurrection of the dead, with the last judgment, ibid.
4. They denounce rewards unto the godly and punishment unto the wicked, ibid.
The excecution of judgment on the godly and ungodly. To the godly heaven is
opened, that they might see Jesus Christ the Ark: upon the wicked are sent
lightnings, thunders and eternal hail.


The first part of the Chapter. Of the reformation of the Church by the two
witnesses under the Western Antichrist.
1. And there was given me a reed like unto a rod, and the Angel stood, saying,
Rife, and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship
therein.

2. But the Court which is without the Temple, leave out, and measure it not:
for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread under
foot forty and two months.

3. And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days clothed in sakcloth.

4. These are the two Olive trees, and the two candlestickes standing before
the God of the earth:

5. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth, and
devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner
be killed.

6. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their
prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the
earth with all plagues, as often as they will.

7. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that ascends
out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall overcome
them, and kill them.

8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which
spiritually is called Sodom, and Egypt,, where also our Lord was crucified.

9. And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations, shall see
their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead
bodies to be put in graves.

10. And they that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice over them, and make
merry, and shall send gifts one to another: because these two Prophets
tormented them that dwelt on the earth.

11. And after three days and an half the Spirit of life from God, entered
into them: and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon them
which saw them.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd there was given me a reed] This is a general prophecy touching the
restoring of the Church being declyned under Antichrist. Before John was
commanded again to prophecy: But now to measure the temple of God with a
measuring reed, that is, to prophecy of the measuring of the temple of God,
which should be afterward in the times of Antichrist. The measuring of the
temple is the reformation of the Church.
The measuring of the temple signifies the building and repairing thereof, as
appears, if this prophecy be compared with that in Ezech. 40.41. etc. unto
which this place does allude. The Temple of God, signifies the Church, as
almost all interpreters both ancient and modern understand it: and indeed the
words here (...) temple of God, are so taken, 1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor. 6.16. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.

They who apply this to the temple of Jerusalem, are refuted by the time it
self: for when these things were spoken unto John, that temple with the city
being utterly destroyed, was never any more to be restored.

Lyra, Lyras frivolous interpretation.
doting (as his manner is) applies it to the festivitie of the dedication of
temples instituted by Pope Felix about the year 525. at which time the Bishop
holding in his hand a sprinckling reed, goes about the outward walls of the
temple, as if he were to measure the same: and within on the floor from one
corner thereof unto another he thwartwise writes down the letters of the Greek
alphabet: and so measures the space within: The words therefore, Rise and
measure, he will have to be meant of Pope Felix, speaking to every Bishop about
the dedication of temples: the court leave out (or cast forth) because mass
may not be celebrated, except the place be consecrated.

But I pass by these fopperies: For Ribera and Alcasar themselves acknowledge,
that the Temple here signifies the Church of God. Now let us see what
instrument he is to use, what to do with it, wherefore, and when.

First, he shows the instrument, A reed like unto a rod was given mee] to
wit, by the Angel, who before commanded him to eat up the book, and again
prophecy, that is, by Christ.

Ribera well observes that it was not a writing pen, but a measuring reed:
because it is said to be (...) like to a rod, that is, a great measuring staff
with which Architects use to mete plats of ground and buildings, a measure of
six cubits, and a handbreth, Ezech. 40.5.

The Rod wherewith the Church is measured, What is meant by the measuring rod
of the Church.
is nothing else but the word of God, the most perfect rule of faith, and
Church discipline.

Rupertus acknowledges it to be the authority of the Evangelical scripture.
So that this reed is indeed the same little book which Christ gave unto John
to eat it up: the which is here again delivered to him under the type of a
reed or rule, in regard of the measuring work here enjoined: Thus also my
Anonymus above 260 years ago: The rod (says he) is the sense of the
scripture, because, as a rod of diverse colors, it chastises sinners.

Rise and measure the Temple of God] First, he must measure the Temple, Altar,
and Worshippers therein. Secondly, leave or cast forth the inward court. The
reading of both is somewhat different, yet the sense is al one. After (...)
rod, some books read, (...), saying rise, as if the reed it self had said it.
The old version seems to read, after (...), for he renders it, And it was said
to me, to wit, by the Angel. We here (and so our translation) follow the
reading of Montanus, who after (...) has it, (...): and the Angel stood (or
stood by) saying, etc. He is commanded therefore to measure the temple etc.
being a plain allusion (as before I showed) unto the prophecy of Ezech.
Chap. 40. where the Angel is commanded to measure the new temple with a reed:
The prophecy of Ezech. touching the measuring of the temple, is spiritual.
in which vision God promised the restoration of the temple destroyed by the
Babylonians, not indeed materially but spiritually under the Gospel. For the
outward temple built by Zerubbabel after their return, does not at all answer
to the dimensions of that vision, neither shall any one be like unto it: and
therefore that measuring was a prophecy of the future reformation of the
spiritual temple by Christ. By the like metaphor the restoring of Jerusalem is
promised in Zach. 1.16. My house shall be built in it, says the Lord of
hosts, and a line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem.

So here by the like reason, in that John is bid to measure the temple, is
signified, that the same should be so wasted, rent and overthrowen, as that of
necessity it must be measured, that is, reformed and built again. This work
John is commanded to set himself upon, that is, by this type to foretell what
should come to pass, viz. that after Antichrist had taken possession, wasted
and oppressed the temple of God, then Christ by giving the measuring reed unto
his two witnesses, would again measure, repair, and wholly renew the same.
Thus we se that this commandment of measuring the Temple, is a prophetical
promise, of the reformation of the Church, wasted and ruinated by the Western
Antichrist.

Hence the Papists fiction is refuted, that the visible Church can never
degenerate, The visible Church could err, seeing it had need of measuring.
err and fall from her integrity. But the thing it self shows the vanity
hereof: The old Temple according to Ribera, was a type of the Church: Now we
know that might be, and was laid wast and destroyed, yea the old Church it self
very often degenerated: The new Church also shall be possessed and trodden under
foot by Antichrist, and so need a new measuring, or reparation. Wherefore it
cannot be denied, but that the Church may be destroyed and degenerate from the
faith of Christ unto Antichrist.

Furthermore it is manifest that the Church dissipated by Antichrist, neither
can be, nor shall be measured by any other instrument, then by the reed of the
word, contained in the holy Scriptures, as being indeed the only true and
infallible rule, Psalm. 45, 7.
according to that of the Psalmist: The scepter (or rod) of thy kingdom is a
scepter of righteousness. Let us therefore wholly cast of all other adulterate and
false rules, as humane traditions, decrees of councils and Popes, unto which
the foolish builders giving way, have destroyed the Temple of God, from whose
corruptions it shall be restored, as from death to life, by the reed of Gods word.

Measure the Altar also] For the understanding of this, we must have recourse
to the structure of the old Temple: for the spirit of God is pleased in this
prophecy to shadow out the state and worship of the new Church by the type and
service of the Old: not as if such types were to remain under the Gospel, but
because the things signified by them, are fitly applied unto the new Church.
We have the description of the tabernacle in the latter part of Exodus: and of
Solomon's temple in some Chapters of 1 King, from Chap. 4. unto 8. The Apostle
also Hebr. 9. rehearses the parts of the tabernacle. To be short we have a
worthy portraiture of the Temple, in Ezech. Chap. 40.41.42. divided into four
parts.

I. There was an outmost court, in which the people were conversant.

II. A more inward, or middle court for the keeping of the Leviticall
instruments, and making ready of the sacrifices.

III. The most inward, or court of the Priests, in which was the great brazen
Altar for burnt-offerings.

IV. The Temple it self, in the entry whereof stood the golden Altar of
perfumes, with the golden candlestick and table: within, behind the veil was
the sanctuary, in which was the Ark of the covenant. This Temple was a type of
the Church: and we have showed wherefore he was commanded to measure the same.
He must also measure the Altar to wit, the golden Altar, from the four corners
whereof he heard a voice Cha. 9.13. This was a type of Christ. But how? Is he
commanded to measure Christ? yea verily. For Christ under a pretense of his
name was thrust out of his possession by Antichrist, who suppressed the faith
and turned Christian liberty into miserable servitude. The Altar therefore of
Christ shall be measured, when as the faith of Christ shall be freed from the
perfidiousnes of Antichrist, and Christian liberty from his tyranny. The Altar
indeed by a synecdoche may be taken for the whole worship of God. But we shall
see by and by, why it is rather to be understood of the golden perfumatory,
then of the brazen Altar of burnt-offering. The building of the old temple.
Thus also my Anonymus, the Altar, that is, Christ.

And them that worship therein] He means the residue of sincere worshippers
in the midst of Antichristian defilements. These he is commanded to measure,
that is, (as Ribera well expounds it,) to number and sever as chosen members of
the true Church, and not to be delivered unto Antichrist: he therefore
acknowledges that God will reserve some true worshippers of Christ in the
midst of Babylon, that is, the Papacy. So then these worshippers are the same,
who in Cha. 7. are said to be 144000 sealed in the foreheads, out of every
tribe, and nation and tongue. Which serves for to comfort the godly, and to
refute that daily irksome song of the Papists, viz. if the Papacy were not
the Church, then Christ before Luther had neither body nor members. Although
true it is, this measuring of the Temple and Altar leads us to a farther thing,
promising moreover a purging of doctrine and discipline, as we have seen the
same accomplished in our times.

Therein] No man did worship in the Temple properly so called, except the
high priest alone: all other worshippers stood in the court, turning their
faces only toward the sanctuary. Yet here the faithful are said to worship
in the very temple of the sanctuary, because they are the true members of the
temple, yea the temple of God it self, 1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor. 6.6.16.
as the Apostle says, Know ye not that ye are the temple of God: And, ye are
the temple of the living God.

2. But the court which is within cast forth] Here also the reading is
different: for some copies have it (...), the outward court: but the most
(...), the inward court: of both which I will speak a word or two. For the
first to wit, that John is bid not to mete the inward court, but to cast it
forth: what is it, but that this court ought to be cut of from the Temple, that
is, to be excluded and separated from the Church by the reed of the word, as
not belonging unto the same? but now what is meant by the court? It is plain,
that by a synecdoche it is put for them that are conversant therein. Now these
are opposed to the worshippers in the Temple, whom he commanded to be numbered,
and to be sealed in Chap. 7.3. These therefore in the court, are those that
worship not Christ: but administer Antichrists holy things, and therefore are
not to be reckoned, but accounted as out of the Church. But if we read it
(...), the court that is without: as the kings edition, and the old version
have it, then it signifies the place of the common people, into which also the
Gentiles had access: by casting forth whereof is signified, (as the Papists
say,) that only the promiscuous rabble of the Jews and heretics following
Antichrist should be cast forth out of the Church, But we are to mind, how
that court was before without the Temple: and how then could he be commanded
to cast it forth? as if the common sort only, and not also kings, princes, and
the rich men of the earth should commit fornication with the whore. My Anonymus
indeed retains the vulgar reading: yet he rightly expounds it: THE COURT THAT
IS WITHOUT, IS THE TEMPLE, that is, Antichrist and his accomplices, who labor
even before the doors of the Church to maintain their avarice and vain
ostentation of dignity: also false Christians and notorious or manifest
transgressors in their places, who in words feign themselves to be the
Church, but indeeds deny it: CAST FORTH: that is, insinuate them to be cast out
of the fellowship of the faithful.

Notwithstanding the other reading is rather to be approved off, viz. the court
within: as the most exact copies both greater and lesser of Robert Stephanus
imprinted at Paris have it: And so Luther also renders it. This was the court
of the Priests, in imitation whereof the Popish Temples have an inward Chore
hallowed for the singers and Masspriests: into which the Laity is hardly
allowed to look through the Lattice. The meaning therefore of the prophecy is
clear, viz. that the clergy which appropriate the inward parts of temples to
themselves, shall fall away from the faith, and have their share with
Antichrist: and therefore to be utterly rooted out of the Church of Christ. And
this is that which John is commanded to prophecy, by this saying, Hose. 1.1.
cast forth, that is, declare that the court of Apostated priests shall be cast
out: like as it was said to Hosea: Take unto thee a wife of whordomes, for,
preach that this people is as a wife of whoredoms, etc. But when does he say,
that it shall come to pass, and wherefore? both will appear by the reason
annexed.

For it is given unto the Gentiles] It now follows in the third place wherefore
and when the inward court should be cast forth: because it is given unto the
Gentiles, that is, because it is possessed and polluted by Antichristian
priests, aliens from the Church of God. It was lawful for the Gentiles to come
into the outward court: but not into the inward. And therefore the Apostle Paul
was evillie handled by the furious Jews, Act. 21.28
because they supposed he had defiled the holy place by bringing Greeks into
the Temple. Hence the reason is plain, why it is said, that the inward court
should be cast forth: namely because it was so polluted by the profane idols
of the Gentiles as that it was turned (though formerly set apart for holy uses)
into a nest of devils, and den of thieves: and so deserved to be cast forth of
the temple of God, and trodden as it were under foot by swine.

It is given] Without doubt by God: Who the Gentiles holding the inward court
are.
by whose just indignation the Gentiles invaded the same. But what Gentiles?
this I have already showed. They who understand that the Gentiles are here
properly meant, are indeed so entangled, as that they can neither show who they
are, nor when, or how they did, or shall possess this court. They come nearer
to the mark who understand it of Antichrist and his followers, for it is
manifest that here and in the following sentence is noted the time of
Antichrist. Ribera therefore says well: It is given to the Gentiles, that is, it
shall be obtained and possessed by Antichrist and his ministers, etc. because
Antichrists army shall truly consist of heathenish men, worshipping not the
true God, but Antichrist. Bell. lib. 3. cap. 12. de P. R. Romans 3.29
But the good man in the mean time sees not, that it makes against their
fiction, that Antichrist should be a Jew: for in scripture the Gentiles are
continually opposed to the Jews: Is he the God of the Jews only, and not of
Gentiles also? I therefore take this sense to be right, namely that these
Gentiles shall be Antichrist and his ministers.

And hence it follows, that the priestlie court shall therefore be cast forth
out of the Church, because the Clergy shall become heathenish, or degenerate
unto paganism: not indeed by open profession, but by their coulerable
idolatry and heathenish life. For they have turned the doctrine of faith, into
heathenish philosophy, teaching that men are justified by good works: and
have brought the idols of the heathens, their names only being changed, into
the Church of God, making of Juno, Venus, Pallas, Minerva, Diana, Proserpina,
Ceres, Bellona, Hecate, Rhamnusia and Isis the queen of heaven: so many Mary's:
of Jupiter God the father: of Mars their S. George: Mercury, Peter: of
Neptune, Nicolas; and so of other idols, their tutelar gods. The clergy also
shall imitate the Gentiles, as well in their ecclesiastical order as common
course of life. For after the man^er of the heathens, they have for their
Archflamins, high priests, for their flamins, priests and other orders, unto
who^ they forbid marriage, but permit them to wallow in whordom: And as the
heathens had their feasts of Baccus, Ceres, Pan: so these keep shrovetide,
Rogation week, and such like festivities, having altered only the names
thereof. To be short they have corrupted al Christendom with heathenish rites,
and overthrown the Church. SO ANONYMVS: because it is given to the nations,
that is, because they shall be like to unbeleevers, yea worse then they: for it
had been beteer for them not to have known the way of righteousness, then
after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto
them, 2 Pet. 2. But that which follows does express the thing more clearly.

The holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two moneths] He declares
by an auxesis or amplification how the court is given: as if he should say, The
holy city trodden under foot by the Gentiles is the Church.
the court shall not only be given unto the Gentiles, but all the holy city
also shall be trodden under foot by them. Ribera again rightly understands the
holy city to be the Church, typed out by Jerusalem of old.

Moreover we are to observe, that the Angel, that is Christ who speaks these
things, does allude to his own words: Luke 12.24.
Jerusalem shall be trodden down by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles
be fulfilled: foreshewing the besieging, taking and overthrowing of the city
and temple by the Romans; so that to tread under foot, is to fall upon, wast and
destroy in a hostile manner, as was done unto Jerusalem not long before by
Titus Vespasian. Now like as Jerusalem was a type of the Christian Church: so
the treading down of Jerusalem by the Romans, was a type that the Church also
should be trodden under foot by the same nation. For Rome, as it was of
Jerusalem, so shall it be the calamity and destruction of the Church. What ca^
be said more clearly then this, that the Church shall be possessed, trodden down
and laid wast by the Romish Antichrist and his adherents. So then these words,
viz. the Roman Gentiles shall tread the holy city under foot: agrees to that
of the Apostle: The man of sin (Antichrist) shall sit in the temple of God:
that is, he shall suppress the Romish Church by tyranny, proudly boasting
himself to be as God, the head and universal monarch. But when, and how long?

Forty and two moneths] here is wisdom: It is manifest by the consent almost
of all interpreters, that the time of Antichrists persecution is hereby set
forth. But what time and how long it is to continue? or how to determine either
of the beginning or ending thereof, is obscure, both unto me and other
interpreters: and happily it is beyond the reach of man. For it pleases the
spirit, that we should rather still be searching into some things which
concern the times, then certainly to know them: as Christ intimated unto his
disciples Act. 1.7. It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the
father has put in his own power. However I will recite the chief opinions of
learned men.

The first is of some Ancients, brought in by the authority of the Pope, which
Caesariensis follows, and so do generally all the Papists to this day, viz:
that forty two months, are astronomicall months, making three Egyptian
years and an half: whence arose that received poopish opinion, that
Antichrist should only reign three years and an half: This they collected
out of Daniel Chap. 7.25. And they shall be given into his hand until a time,
and times, and the dividing of time. And Chap. 12.7. where the Angel swears,
that all these things shall be finished at a time, times and half a time:
The which division of time is also assigned unto the Church banished in the
wilderness, Reve. 12.14. of which we will speak in its place: Now they make
the three years and an half to be the time immediately going before the end
of the world, Lib. 3. de P. R. c. 17.
because Antichrist (as Bellarmin affirms) shall be slain by the Jews before
the fourth year be ended, and then forty and five days after Christ shall
come to judgment. Now hence they seek to establish two things: I. that
Antichrist is not yet come into the world. II. And so consequently the Pope of
Rome is not he. ibid. cap. 8.
For Antichrist (says Bellarmin in his V: demonstration) shall only reign
three years, and an half: But the Pope has already spiritually reigned in
the Church, above fifteen hundred years: and more then five hundred
temporally: neither can any one be noted or accounted to be Antichrist, unless
he has precisely reigned three years, and an half. Therefore the Pope is not
Antichrist, neither is he as yet come.

But (to speak nothing of the most false assumption of this ridiculous
demonstration) it is certain, that the Roman Bishops before Constantines
time, were so far from reigning spiritually, much less temporally in the
Church, as on the contrary they all suffered martyrdom for the sake of Christ.

True it is Sylvesters successors many times affected the primacy, but were
continually suppressed by their fellow Bishops: until that Boniface the third
(many laboring, but in vain, to hinder it) was by the authority of Phocas the
Emperor set on the chair of universal pestilence. The fiction of the 42
astronomical months refuted.
To let these things (I say) pass for the present: the proposition, which is
taken from this place of the Revelation is altogether false: because that
Popish opinion touching the 42 astronomicall months of Antichristian
persecution, is contradictorie both to it self and the holy scriptures.

It consists not with its self, because the things which they feign that their
Antichrist shall effect, are as impossible to be don in the space of three
years and a half, as for a snaile in three days to creep over the whole
earth: he must be acknowledged by the Jewish nation dispersed throughout the
earth, for the Messiah: he must sit in the temple of Jerusalem, which for so
many ages has lain wast under a horrible destruction: moreover he must kill
three kings of Egypt, Lybia and Ethiopia, and subdue seven other princes: he
must repair the ruins of Rome burnt by those ten kings, and chasing the Pope
from thence, sit there as Monarch: persecute and blot Christian religion quite
out of the world, to be short bring the Church and the Empire of the whole
world under him, etc. Who, I pray you, except he were a mad man, would imagine
that all these things should be possibly accomplished in four whole years?
What for messengers think ye shall Antichrist have to send abroad, who so
suddenly shall tell and persuade the Jews dispersed over the face of the whole
earth, of the coming of their Messiah? The temple forsooth shall be built
again in three days, the which Solomon, having all manner of materials
prepared to his hand, could not finish in seven years, nor Zerubbabel scarsly
rebuild in forty six years. Yea this Antichrist, hardly of four years
standing, shall expel the Turk out of Syria, the Persian out of the East, Cham
out of the South, and Prester John out of all the North. What can be imagined
more frivolous? shall the Emperors and Christian kings be fallen into such a
dead sleep, as altogether in a moment to be suppressed by one man. Will the
Pope with his Cardinals watch no better, but suffer Catholic Rome to fall to
Paganism: and shall all Christians so rashly yield assistance unto Antichrist
so soon as he manifests himself? O foolish vanities. Thus we see this fiction
is inconsistent.

It is also diverse ways repugnant to the holy Scriptures. For they teach us
that Antichrist shall not come but by an universal apostasy from the faith. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. 1 Timothy 4.1. the elect only excepted, who are sealed in their
foreheads. But who would say that al Christian Bishops, with their highpriests
could be led aside from the faith, within less then four years.

Besides the Scripture witnesses that the day, Mark. 13.22. 1 Thessalonians. 5.2.
month and year of Christ's last coming being hid from all creatures, is
only known unto God: and the Lord will come suddenly as a thief in the
night, when the world shall say: Peace and safety. But according to the opinion
here laid down, the day, month and year of the last judgment should not be
unknown: for from the rising of Antichrist unto his death, there should remain
but three years and an half: and from his death, unto the last judgment 45
days: for so Bellarmin expressly writes, Lib. 3. de P. R. c. 17.
that after the death of Antichrist there shall be no more then 45 days unto
the end of the world. Seeing therefore, that the opinion being granted, there
follows a falsity: the opinion it self must needs be false.

This reason is so strong, as that it forced Ribera to forsake that false
opinion about the 45 days, as we shall hear on Chap. 20.

To be short this only suffices, that in Chap. 13.5. these 42 months are
again repeated touching the beast, unto him power was given to continue forty
and two months: which cannot in any wise be understood of Astronomicall
months, or three years and an half. For that beast to Bellarmin, Alcasar and
others not a few, is the Roman Empire, the power whereof (whither it be taken
of the old or new) continued far longer then three years and an half.

For these causes therefore and many other absurdities, this first opinion
cannot possibly stand. And this error is the rather to be excused in the
Ancients (who diverse ways erred about Antichrist as Bellarmin himself
confesses) because they saw not the histories of future ages, Ibid. cap. 3.
but is not in our days to be suffered in the least, but banished out of the
Church as a most pernicious error. For it has brought both a security upon
the world hitherto, as also it keeps the Papists to this day in their
blindness, insomuch as they neither will nor can see and avoid Antichrist
reigning in the Church, long ago discovered by the light of the Gospel.
Concerning the divisions of the times in Dan: we will speak in the following
Chapter.

The other opinion understands these to be prophetical months, The other
opinion of forty two prophetical months. Ezech. 4 5 6. Number. 14.34. Cent. 1.
lib. 2. c. 4. col. 438.
taking a month for thirty days of years or thirty years, and so these 42
months make twelve hundred and sixty years: like as Ezechiel was commanded
to lie on his left side 390 days, and upon his right forty days for forty
years: by taking a day for a year: so the Israelites are commanded to wander
in the wilderness forty years, according to the days in which they searched
the land, counting a day for a year: and so the Centurie writers of Magdeburg
take it: and our Junius on this place; who begins the forty two months, or
1260 years of this treading under foot from the passion of our Lord, and
ends it in Boniface the eight who was created Pope in the year 1294. from
which the thirty four years of Christ's life being deducted, there remain
1260 years: now concerning this determination, I will speak afterward.

Bellarmins objections against this opinion are not solid. He says, Ibid. cap.
8
that the scripture indeed speaks of weeks of years Levit. 25. and Dan. 9.
but that we find not days to be put for years, or months of years: Unto
which I answer, it is not true, that days are not put for years: for the two
alleged places Number. 14.34. and Ezech. 4.6. do plainly show the same. That
which he objects, that years are not taken for days according to the letter:
otherwise Ezechiel must have lien on his left side 390 years, is frivolous,
for days do not signify years literally, but according to the pleasure of
God so speaking: forty years are imposed upon the Israelites for forty
days: and on the contrary for 390 years, 390 days are granted unto Ezech.
so that it cannot be denied, but the scripture in a prophetical sense does
reciprocally put a day for a year, and a year for a day. Touching the months
of years he cavils in vain. For if the scripture allows of days of years,
and weeks of years, why not also of months of years, seeing months are
reduced into weeks, and weeks into days? The determination I leave to the
authors: notwithstanding it seems not to be without some inconveniences.

For first as concerning the life of Christ, In heresi 51 Alogian.
I rather think with Epiphanius, that he lived 32 complete years and 74
days, then 34 years, of which I have spoken something otherwere. So then the
end of these years would come short of Boniface VIII.

Secondly, it sufficiently appears by what we have spoken on Chap. 4.1. I
will show thee things which must be hereafter, that this account must not
begin from Christ's passion, or any other time before this vision was exhibited
unto John: And therefore these years are to begin after the Revelation, and so
after the times of Domitian.

Thirdly, although Boniface indeed most wickedlie trod under foot the holy
city: yet after him it ceased not: for his successors no way inferior to him
in Antichristian tyranny, have gone foreward treading down the Church unto
this day: Now it is apparent that here is noted the time, how long the holy
city must be trodden under foot by Antichristian Gentiles. So that these XLII
months shall not be ended, until the holy city be freed from this treading
down. And therefore this opinion also seems to have little soliditie in it.

The third, The third opinion touching Sabbath-moneths.
is John Fox (that excellent writer of the English book of Martyrs) in his
conjectures on the Revelation, who understands the XLII months of sabbaths,
weeks, or years, of so many times seven years, which make 294. and so many
years he reckons from the death of John Baptist unto Constantine the Emperor,
under whom the Christians first were freed from persecution: as therefore,
says he, the times of the first persecution of Christians under the Jews and
Emperors increased unto 294 years: so likewise the last persecution, and
treading down of the holy city, shall endure 294 years, beginning from the
time that the power of the Turks first began to increase, viz. from the year
of our Lord 1300. So these months should have been ended in the year of
Christ 1586. and the holy city now delivered from being trodden under foot by
the Gentiles more then 50 years. Now howsoever I do not at all derogate from
this opinion, as being indeed very pithy and ingenious: yet I scarslie dare
follow it.

For first, the hypothesis or argument propounded touching the Sabbath-moneths,
seems to be very uncertain, neither can it easily be proved by any example of
Scripture where a month is put for a week of years. The which also that
excellent divine of great Britain Robert Abbad Bishop of Sarum (whom I name
for honors sake) seems clearly to prove, Demonstr. cap. 8. page 111.
in his demonstration of Antichrist against Bellarmin.

Secondly, it appears plainly that this prophecy is not to be understood
of treading down the holy city by the Turks, because two witnesses are
brought in prophesying against that treading down: whereas prophesies will
little help against Turkish tyranny: courage and force of arms rather must
free the holy city from that oppression.

Thirdly, it is very unlikely (according to his opinion) that the XLII 42
months, should now be finished and the holy city cease to be trodden down by
the Gentiles: For both in the East, and West a miserable desolation of the holy
city is yet to be seen. For the Turks power is so far from being broken, as
on the contrary it daily increases, and sets more and more his feet upon the
holy city. The Romish tyranny also, although it be greatly weakened by the
prophecy of the two witnesses: not withstanding it is not as yet broken, but
still oppresses the Church both in the Western and Northern kingdoms. I
therefore leave the conjecture of this most learned man in the same nature, as
he himself desires, I (says he) do not at all assume this to my self, to
define here any thing on a certainty, or that my opinion should be any way
praejudicatorie unto others far better then my self: this only I desire, that
the same liberty which others take unto themselves, may also be granted to me
without offense.

In Alcasars opinion I find nothing either probable or true, Vestigat. page
567.
save that he rejects the common opinion of Antichrists reigning three years
and a half. For my part (says he) as yet I may freely say, that if I take
this exposition about Antichrists persecution, as the chief thing in this
eleventh Chapter, then I know not how to draw the line of the REVELATION, and
knit things together in order. And afterward: Notwithstanding as the half
hour in Chap. 8. and the five months in Chap. 9. are not to be taken in a
proper sense but mystically: so for the more convenient connection of the
REVELATION these forty two months are not to be taken in a proper but
mystical sense: for to take these numbers of days, months and years as they
sound, it were not suitable unto an enigmatical style.

In which two things are to be gathered: First, that this place serves not at
all for to establish the common opinion of Antichrists reigning for three
years and a half: whereas the Patrones thereof do hence chiefly build upon.
Secondly, that our interpreters who take not the numbers of days, months or
years, according to the letter, but understand them either of Sabbath-moneths,
or prophetical days definite or indefinite, The fourth opinion of forty two
indefinite months. Act. 1, 7.
do no way stray from the aenigmatical style of the Revelation.

Bullinger therefore and most of our interpreters, considering that the method
and drift of this prophesy is chiefly, to enlighten us somewhat in the future
events of the Church, but not that we should dare define precisely the moments
and seasons, which the father has set in his own power, do think, that a
certain designed time indeed of Antichristian persecution is noted, yet left
unto us uncertain so far as concerns the terms, to wit, all that which is
reckoned from those fatal 666 years mentioned Chap. 13. unto the last
judgment. For confirmation of which opinion two reasons are brought. One, that
in Chapter 13.6. this self same number of 42 months is attributed unto the
first beast, that is, to the Roman Empire: of which we shall speak afterward.
The other, because Daniel, Christ our Lord, and Paul the Apostle, do joyntlie
teach us, that Antichrists persecution shall endure unto the day of judgment:
the year or day whereof no man can certainly determine. Demonstr. p. 108.


Abbat also before spoken of, after many things, at last assents to this
opinion: I, says he, do willingly consent to them who suppose that by a
defined number of months and years, a certain time indeed is appointed of
God, but not so expressed by the very period of the numbers as to be discerned
by the Church before hand, but numbered, and circumscribed by the counsel and
providence of God alone, and can not be known unto us but by the event and
accomplishment of them. The which opinion, seeing as yet I find no other more
probable, I also far the present will follow, to wit that the time of treading
down is defined by XLII months, a finite number being put for an indefinite:
not as if it were not definite and certain to God. But because it remains to
us indefinite, that is, we cannot at the present determine of the certain
time: It is circumscribed by a few months, that the faithful in their
tribulations might be encouraged unto patience, knowing that their troubles
shall not continue overlong, but as it were only for a few months. Again it
is enlarged unto 1260 days, to show us, that we are to prepare not for trials
of some few days or years only: but resolve to be constant unto the end.

I confess there are many things by some alleged to the contrary, The
difficulties against the fourth opinion answered. Genesis 31.7. Prove. 24.16. Matt.
18.22.
but with little ground.

They say, that the scripture does never put a finite number for an indefinite:
but the contrary appears by Jacobs speech to Laban: Thou have changed my
wages ten times: And Solomon: The just man falls seven times. And Christ:
Thou shall forgive thy brother not seven times only, but seventy times seven,
etc.

They say in other places of this book an uncertain number is not put for a
certain: as Chap. 12.6. The woman shallbe in the wilderness 1260 days. And
Chap. 13.5. The beast shall rage XLII months: And Chap. 20. Satan shallbe
bound a 1000 years. So in Jeremy 29.10. After 70 years ye shall return out
of Babylon. Therefore also the number in this place is not uncertain. I answer
in the first place, that the number is not uncertain to God: although it be so
to us, for the present.

Secondly, there is a dissimilitude of places: now touching these several
numbers taken out of the Revelation, we shall speak of them hereafter. The
seventie years of the captivity are so circumscribed, as that they could not
be uncertain, and the event manifested that they were to be taken in a proper
sense: as Daniel also teaches Chap. 9.2.

Bellarmin grants that then a certain number is put for an uncertain, Lib.
3. de ^. R. cap. 8.
when the number set down is full and perfect as 10.100.1000. but not when
diverse numbers great and small are propounded. But this is infirm and false,
as appears by Luke 13.32. I do cures to day and to morrow, and the third day
I shallbe perfected: which is indefinitely spoken. And Matt. 18.22. Forgive thy
brother seventy times seven: indefinitely, for very many times. And Revel.
7.4. and 14.1. 144000. are said to be sealed indefinitely: and Rev. 9.5.10. The
Locusts shall hurt five month, and in this very Chapt. v. 11. the two
witnesses shall rise again after three days and a half. Reve. 14.20. Blood
flowed out of the Lake, by the space of a thousand six hundred furlongs, all
which foresaid places are indefinitely to be understood.

Yet if I durst speak any thing touching the certain beginning of these 42.
months, I would (as most do) by a prophetical mystery apply them to 1260
years beginning from the time that the holy city began to be trodden under foot
by the Roman Gentiles, not the old, but new, that is, by Antichristian Popes,
whom we have showed to be here noted by the Gentiles. They began to tread upon
the Church, after they were lifted up into the chair of universal pestilence:
among whom Boniface was the first in the year 606. Then the star of the Church
of Rome, fallen from heaven upon the earth, opening the bottomless pit,
brought forth out of the smoke those mortal Locusts, spoken of Chap. 9. From
the year of Christ therefore 606, until this time the holy city has been
trodden under foot by the Roman Gentiles, which is the space of 1073. years,
and is yet to be trodden down 223 years more, to wit, until the year of
Christ 1866. But let this term be indefinite, seeing the Lord has reserved
it to himself, and undoubtedly will shorten it for the elects sake. Wherefore
I will determine nothing of these forty and two months.

3. And I will give to my two witnesses] I have expounded the general
prophecy touching the future reformation of the Church, after that the
Company of priests were departed from the faith unto paganism, and Antichrist
had trodden down the holy city by his tyranny. Now follows the special
prophecy touching the instruments, manner, success and event of this
reformation: serving for the comfort of the faithful: for when in appearance
Antichrist shall have wholly trodden the holy city under foot, and thrust Christ
(as it were) out of all his possession, then he will show, that he rules in
the midst of Antichrists kingdom, and will renew and preserve unto himself, a
measured Temple in the city trodden under foot, viz. by the prophecy of his two
witnesses. Now this part of the prophecy, is also full of difficulty, as, who
these two witnesses are, after what manner they prophesied, and to what times
this history appertains. For here are almost as many opinions, as expositours.
Yet these things will not be altogether obscure unto us, if we give heed unto
the scope laid down by us in the Argument and Analysis.

And I will give] So Beza (...), and, adversatively, yet it may well be read,
but I will give, because it is as it were an exception: as if he had said: In
outward appearance the whole city shall be trodden down, and all prophecy
extinct by Antichrists tyranny: but I will restore prophecy, For the word
power is not in the Greek, but added by the translatours to make up the sense.
that the city of God may be rebuilded.

I will give to my two witnesses] He neither names the witnesses, nor
expresses what he will give them. Some therefore guess one thing, and some
another.

Beza here adds the same, to wit, the holy city, which agrees well with the
sense, because Christ will truly give, that is recommend the same unto his
witnesses, that so it may be set free from oppression, and purged from the
filthy smoke of Antichrist. Others: I will give them, to wit, a mouth and
wisdom, which Antichrist shall not be able to resist, according to that in
Luke 21.15. I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries
shall not be able to gainsay or resist. Which promise is made to all faithful
professors of the name of Christ. Others: I will give them, to wit my spirit,
which is all one with the former: but it seems rather that the two future
verbes are coupled together as noting the end and effect, I will give to them,
and they shall prophecy, for, I will give unto them that they may prophecy,
that is, authority or power to prophecy; and so much such coupling often
signifies, as Genesis 34.30. They shall gather themselves together against me, and
smite me, and I shall be destroyed. For, that they may smite me, and I, and my
house shall be destroyed. So Ierem. 9.1. Oh woe will give my head to be waters,
and mine eye a fountain of tears: and I will bewail night and day the slain
of my people, For, that I may bewail, as Pagninus expresses it. They shall
prophecy therefore, to wit again, according to the commandment: Thou must
again prophecy.

But concerning these witnesses, who they are, and what time was determined for
their prophesying: is a difficult question. I will briefly speak somewhat of it.

The Papists, taking the whole literallie, do vainly dream, The Papists fable
about the two witnesses.
that when the Jews with their leader Antichrist, shall have recovered the
city of Jerusalem, then these two witnesses shall be present, who by
prophesying shall oppose themselves against these perfidious Jews and
Antichrist 1260 days, that is, three years and an half: The witnesses they
say, are Enoch and Elias, whom they affirm to be yet alive in paradise, and
there reserved to this end, that returning into the world they may resist
Antichrist: But being slain by him, they shall again be restored to life
after three days and an half, at the beholding of which miracle, the Jews,
(as they feign) shall turn to Christ and put Antichrist to death in mount
Olivet, and thenceforward prepare themselves for Christ who should now come
forty and five days after.

From this fable Bellarmin drew his third demonstration in defense of the Pope,
that he is not Antichrist, neither that Antichrist is yet come: because (says
he) the two Prophets Henoch and Elias must come before Christ: but these are
not as yet come, whereas the Pope of Rome has now reigned for many ages:
Therefore he is not the Antichrist, neither is Antichrist as yet come.

The major of this fable he labors to prove, first, by four places of
Scripture. Malach. 4.5. Behold, I will send the prophet Elias, etc. Ecclus.
48.10. Elias is written in the judgments of times to pacific the wrath of the
Lord and restore the tribes of Israel. And 44.16. Enoch was translated into
Paradise that he might give repentance unto the Gentiles Matt. 17.11. Helias
shall come, and restore all things. And Rev. 11.3. I will give to my two
witnesses, etc.

Secondly, by the authority of Fathers, as, Hilarie, Hierom, Origin,
Chrisostom, Lactantius and Austin, who affirm that the two witnesses are Henoch
and Elias who shall come against Antichrist.

Thirdly, by reason, because otherwise a reason cannot be given, why these two
were taken up before their death, and yet live a mortal life, and must die at
an appointed time.

But verily that in Luke The Papistical fable refuted.
16.29. does plainly contradict this fable, for Abraham shows that none are
to be exspected to come from heaven and preach unto the world: but that Moses
and the Prophets are to be heard. This whole text also, touching the martyrdom
of the two witnesses, with the events that follow thereupon does strongly make
against this fiction. For how unlikely is it, that those two holy men, who were
taken up into heaven, and live with God, should again return into this mortal
life, to be cruelly murdered by the beast? And how should it be that their
carkeises lying in the streets of the great city, should be seen in the space
of three days and a half, of all peoples, nations, tribes and tongues? what
shall all the whole world in so short a time fly like Eagles to Jerusalem, to
behold two carkeises? And how shall they all rejoice and send gifts to each
other in three days time? How can two only, within forty two months, by
their prophecy torment the inhabitants of the whole earth? certainly the thing
it self speaks that this place cannot, nor ought to be understood according
to the Letter. And therefore there is some other mystery in it, which Hierom
seeing, thus writes in Epist. 46. to MARCELLA, if (says he) we follow the
litteral interpretation, then we must rest in the Jewish fables, that Jerusalem
shall be built again, and sacrifices offered in the temple, to the weakening of
spiritual worship, and strengthening of carnal ceremonies.

To the first, I answer that the scriptures alleged, make nothing at all for
the matter. Bellarmins arguments answered.
For the prophecy of Malachie speaks not of a return of Elias out of
Paradise, but of John the Baptists preaching in the power and spirit of Elias,
for so the Angel interprets it to Zachary, Luke 1.17. He shall go before him
in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children, etc. So Christ himself speaking of John, Matt. 11.14. says, If ye
will receive it, he is Elias which was to come, namely, according to the
prophecy in Malach. 4.5. teaching us, how that prophecy was fulfilled in John
the Baptist.

Bellarmin insists on the contrary, that Elias is to come before Christ's last
coming: For it is said: I send him, before that great and terrible day of the
Lord shall come. But this is not of necessity to be understood of the last day
of judgment, because the first coming of Christ was also great, by the
mystery of his incarnation and miracles: and terrible to the wicked, witness
Herod's and the Jews trembling. But be it granted, that Elias shall also come
before the last day. Yet Malachie says not that he shall precisely come three
years and an half before the judgment.

The former place of Ecclesiasticus makes less for the fable, both because it
is aprocrypha (and so proves nothing) as also because the Latin reading is
faulty as differing from all Greek copies. Of Elias it is said Chap. 48.10.
Thou art written for reproves in times, to pacify the anger of Gods judgment
in wrath: to turn the heart of the father to the child, and restore the tribes
of Israel: The which things he is said to have done not after his translation
into heaven, (of which it follows afterward in verse. 13.) but in the time of
his prophesying on earth.

The other place of Ecclus. 44.16. is thus in Greek: Henoch pleased the Lord,
and was translated, being appointed an example of repentance unto the Nations:
But the old version thus renders it falsely, that he might give repentance unto
the nations. Now while he lived he was an example of repentance unto those of
his time.

The place of Matt. 17.11. does manifestly speak of the Baptist: For Christ
there plainly affirms that Elias was already come, to wit, the Baptist, whom
they acknowledged not, but put to death. That which goes before: Elias indeed
shall first come, and restore all things, does not make any thing for the
fable, but the place confirms Malachies prophecy, that is, as Elias was
certainly to come, so now he was already come, and that the same prophecy was
fulfilled in the Baptist. It was the opinion of the Scribes, that Elias the
Thesbite should come before the Messiah: who because he was not as yet then
come, therefore they denied Christ to be Messiah. But Christ declares the false
hood of their opinion, because not Elias the Thesbite, but John the Baptist,
was prophesied of by Malachie. But the Baptist did not restore all things: how
then is he Elias? yea but he did restore all things according to the limitation
of Malachie, and the Angel in Luke 1. For he prepared the way of the Lord, and
turned the hearts of the fathers unto the children, etc.

The opinion of the Fathers without the scriptures, proves nothing: neither do
the fathers agree in one: some will have the two witnesses to be Elias and
Henoch: Others Elias and Elisha: Others Elias and Moses: Others Moses and
Aaron, because they turned the waters into blood: Others Elias and Jeremie.

Now if any desire to know more of the dissentions both of the old and latter
writers about these witnesses, Vestigat. p. 578.
he may read in Alcasar four ways of opinions: The FIRST way, (says he) is
interpreted of two men being to preach in Antichrists time. The SECOND, of
Antichrists time indeed, but not of two men. The THIRD of two men, but not of
Antichrists time. To be short the fourth neither of two men, nor of Antichrists
time. Again every of these ways are divided as it were, into diverse
divisions of Paths: and other things there following. He himself goes in the
fourth way, the worst and falsest of all, The two witnesses he makes to be two
great virtues, WISDOM and HOLINESS, as preachers of the Gospel in the
primitive Church against the Jews: which new opinion needs no refuting, seeing
it is manifest that here mention is made not of qualities, but men preaching
against the Beast or Antichrist.

They, who will have these to be precisely understood of two men, would have
had more show of reason, in applying the same to Iehoshua and Zerubbabel:
seeing they two Zach. 4.3. are called two Olive Trees, and two candlesticks,
unto which these two witnesses are here likened ver. 4.

To his reason, I answer, that it is false that no other cause can be given of
the translation of Henoch and Elias, without this fable. For they were taken up
alive, that they might be examples to the world, how much the Lord accounts of
godliness, and that there is another life prepared for the faithful in
heaven. Now to these two he vouchsaved this grace before others, because he was
better pleased with them then with others.

That Henoch and Elias should yet live a mortal life and be subject to death,
is a very fable. For how can they prove this fiction? And what mercy would
there translation into heaven be, if there they are reserved unto a more cruel
death? Whereas the Scripture teaches, that to them who are either in paradise,
Luke 16.26.
or in the place of torment, there is no going forth or returning. Passing by
therefore this fable, let us now go foreward.

In Austins notes or the Revelation, Whether the two witnesses be the two
testaments.
attributed to Triconius the two witnesses are said to be the old and new
Testament: which Bid and Brightman follow, and some others of ours: as if the
sense should be thus, notwithstanding Antichrists treading down the scripture,
yet God would give it power to prophecy, that is, reprove his tyranny, and
instruct the faithful secretly mourning under the cross, in the way of life
eternal. For the Scriptures are Gods witnesses in the world against the wicked,
as Christ says, search the scriptures, for they testify of me. Io. 5.39.
Now thus far indeed it is true: But I see not how the following attributes
(except it be by a harsh allegory) can be applied unto the scriptures, viz. in
that the witnesses are said to be clothed in sackcloth, killed by the beast,
their carkeises thrown in the streets, restored to life and ascend into heaven.

There are some, who think, that in the last times there shall come two most
powerful teachers, who being endued with the power and spirit of Elias, shall
fulfill all these things literally, both by prophesying and fighting against
Antichrist. But they do acknowledge, that this their opinion is uncertain.
And therefore in as much as I find nothing certainly concluded touching this
matter by others, and seeing the Lord for the present does not suggest any
thing unto me, I will follow the opinion of Bullinger, and some others of our
best interpreters, who understand the two witnesses indefinitely, to be diverse
reformers of religion in Antichrists times.

The Papists indeed imagine, The two witnesses are indefinitely to be
understood. Lib. 3. de P. R. c. 6.
that they are two strictly, and no more. But it is not credible, that
Antichrist sending forth infinite Locusts out of the smoke of hell into the
Church, Christ should raise up only two witnesses: besides it is impossible
(as we even now proved) that the things spoken of v. 9.10. should be effected
by two persons alone. As for Bellarmins objections, we shall have occasion to
examine them hereafter.

We therefore by these two witnesses do indefinitely understand, a succession
of certain maintainers of Evangelical truths against Antichrist. Yet they are
said to be two definitely, both because they are but few in respect of the
Locusts, of whom the whole Christian world are full: as also because in all
matters of judgment two suffice to confirm a testimony, that so we might
neither be deceived by the applause of the multitude of Locusts, nor offended
at the fewnes of sincere teachers, wherewith Antichrist upbraides us. Besides
in the last place, as of old, the Lord was pleased to use two witnesses as
instruments in his hand for special deliverances of the Church: Thus he sent
two, viz. Moses and Aaron unto Pharaoh, for the deliverance of the Israelites
out of Egypt: Josuah and Caleb to search the promised land: Zerubbabel and
Jehoshuah to bring back the people from Babylon, unto which two there is here a
plain allusion in verse. 4. As these two latter (I say) sufficed to deliver the
people of God out of the first Babylonish and corporal captivity, so two, that
is, few prophesying witnesses, shall suffice to deliver the Church from the
second Babylonish and spiritual captivity. And thus much concerning the two
witnesses. Now what do they?

They shall prophesie] to wit, again according to the commandment: Thou must
again prophecy: We are not by prophecy, strickly to understand a praediction
of things to come: but in a larger sense, for the preaching of Prophetical and
Apostolical doctrines, which were darkened, yea trodden down by Antichrist, but
again renewed by their prophesying, that is, by faithful preaching unto the
Church: for Christ will give this unto them, that is, so arm them with an
heroic spirit and qualifications, as that they shall be able strongly to oppose
and shake Antichrists kingdom, which seemed to be so established throughout the
Christian world, as if it had been an invincible fortress. But when, and how
long?

Two thousand two hundred and sixty dayes] This again is hard to be
understood: but we must look back to what has been treated of touching the
forty two months: for it is clear enough, that by those months, and these
days, one and the same time is designed. The Papists opinion touching these
days refuted.
For forty two equal months precisely consist of 1260 days: but herein is
the difference, that the Papists restrain these months and these days
astronomically unto three years and an half, which is the time their supposed
Antichrist shall reign, and these witnesses prophecy: but this cannot be,
both because the fable of Antichrists standing so short a time, has been
before refuted: as also because it is contradictorie, that the time of
Antichrist and of the two witnesses should be of one continuance, and yet
Antichrist should slay the witnesses after they had prophesied 1260 days, and
rejoice thereat with his followers.

Others interpret these days (as the months also) prophetically of so many
years, taking the beginning either from Christ's passion, Another opinion not
probable.
or from the time of Constantine, or from the beginning of the Ottoman Empire:
whose opinions we have showed to be very improbable, because according to them,
the years of treading down the Church, and the prophese of the two witnesses
should be expired now long ago, but this is not likely.

To be short, others understand the XIII months, and the 1260 days, The third
and best opinion.
indefinitely, for the time of the Churches oppression, and of the prophecy of
the witnesses, defined indeed in Gods eternal comsell, but hid unto us for the
present that we should not curiously search ^^to that, which God has reserved
to himself, or by knowing the term, to say with the wicked servant, Luke 12.45.
My Lord delayeth his coming, etc. And this is the reason why the end of the
world is hitherto kept secret from men. The time therefore of reading down, and
of the witnesses, shall be the same: for all the while Antichrist shall tread the
Church under foot, the two witnesses shall prophecy: because during Antchrists
reign, Christ shall never want two witnesses, least he might seem to be
overcome and thrust out of his possession by Antichrist: now without al doubt
this is the safest opinion, and suffices for the consolation of the godly.

If thou demand what is the reason of the change of months into days? Why the
months are changed into days.
We have nothing here to answer precisely; except, that the same time, and the
same thing is set forth by diverse expressions, as it is familiar with the
prophets: By two dreams God signified the same thing unto Pharaoh; so
generally throughout this whole prophecy, the same events are prefigured by
diverse types. Notwithstanding it is not a miss to observe (as some have done)
that the lesser number is attributed to the treading down, to denote the
shortness of afflictions: the greater to the witnesses, to signify the during
and invincible power of the Gospel, both which serve to comfort the godly.

Furthermore, what we said before concerning the 42 months, seems here again
to be repeated of the 1260 days, and it may be, to the end that the time both
of the months and days might hereby be defined: For why should the spirit of
God rather attribute 42 months unto Antichrists treading down, then 10, 20, 60
or 100? and why should 1260 days be rather appointed then more or less? If
therefore it might be lawful to guess at the terms of the months and years
from histories past and present, then I should think, that as Antichrist began
to tread down the Church, when Boniface the third was set on the Chair of
universal pestilence, anno 606. and that the Church has now from that time
unto this been trodden down 34 months, and an half: so the prophecy of the two
witnesses against Antichrist has continued 1036 days, and so are not yet
ended. And as the Churches oppression was not all at one time or instant,
neither was the sorest in the beginning, but it increased by little and little,
until at length the holy city was trodden wholly under foot by Antichrist: so
the preaching of the two witnesses, was not always alike perspicuous and
powerful against him, but manifested it self in several ages by manifold
martyrdoms: until at length ( the mystery of iniquity being unfolded) it
most manifestly brake forth in these latter ages.

For it appears by histories, that the Bishops of France and Germany, yea
also of Italy, but especially they of Ravenna, Mediolanum and Aquileia, did
often times most strongly oppose the successors of Pope Boniface: As also
Synods not a few have condemned the tryannie and idols of the Popes of Rome:
moreover among these witnesses were John Scottis, Bertramus the Abbat,
Berengarius a priest, Waldus in France, Wickleffe in England: as also Nicolaus
Clemanges, and Marsilius of Patavia. Besides many of the Emperors (as Henry
IV. and V. Frederick I. and II. Ludowick IV. etc.) have with all their might
suppressed Popish tyranny. Now the reason why I reckon these Emperors among
the witnesses, I will show in the following verse. See also the Catalogue of
witnesses, published in two volummes, who by prophesying have opposed the
Romish Hierarchy.

A little before the Council of Constans anno 1409. the holy city was most
miserably trodden down by Romish beasts, Tom: 11. council. Constant. sess. XL.
art. 67.
at what time three Antipopes laid claim, and by tyranny possessed the
Antichristian chair, viz. Gregory XII. Benedicte XIII. Alexander V. and after
his death John XXIII. who denied that there was any hell or resurrection of the
flesh.

At this time the Antichristian Church was a horrible three headed monster, the
which schism dured above seventy years. Then Christ raised up two witnesses
in Bohemia, John Husse, and Jerome of Prage to prophecy against those Beasts.
Who being called, appeared before the Council ( Sigismund the Emperor having
swoorn safe conduct unto them) and laid down their testimony in the assembly
of the Locusts, condemning the Antichristian tyranny of Popes. But the thing
here foretold happened unto them. The Beast overcame and slew them: Husse was
cruelly burnt anno 1415. 8 of the ides of Iulie: Hierom, anno 1416. 3 of the
Calends of June. Now however John Husse taught publicly at Prage in the
beginning of the year 1400. not withstanding he begane first to maintain the
opinions of Wicleffe and opposed the Beast in the year 1412. from which time
until his martyrdom were precisely 42 months, or 1260 days: So that the
Prophecy may seem to have been fulfilled according to the letter in these two
witnesses. Now Husse, while he was in the fire, foretold, that the adversaries
after an hundred years should give an account to God and to him: which also
came to pass: for an hundred years after, the Lord stirred up other couples
of Prophets against the beast, In Saxony Luther and Melanchthon: at Argentine
Bu^^er and Cariton: In Helvetia Zwinglius and Oecolampadius: In France Farellus
and Calvin, who being divinely armed with the spirit and power of Elias, be
gane with the reed of the holy Scriptures, to measure the temple, reform the
Church, purge the doctrine of the Gospel and cast out the court of priests:
these being dead, the Lord raised up other maintainers of the truth in diverse
Kingdoms, Provinces, Commonwealthes, Churches and Academies of Europe, who unto
this day both by word and writing have strongly opposed themselves against the
Beast, treading the holy city under his foot.

Clothed in sackcloth] The titles of the witnesses now follow, about which we
are in a general way to observe, that what ever of old was attributed in holy
scripture as memorable and excellent unto the Prophets and chief servants of
God, that is here applied unto these: not indeed in a litteral sense (which in
many things can not hold) but by a certain similitude. They shall be clothed in
sackcloth, like unto the Prophet Daniel Chap. 9.13. Two Olive Trees before God,
as Zerubbabel and Iehoshua, Zach. 4.11, Fire shall proceed out of their mouth,
as out of the mouth of Jeremy, Ier. 5.14. With it they shall devour their
enemies, as Elias 2 King. 1. They shall shut heaven that it rain not, as the
said Elias 1 King 17. They shall turn waters into blood and smite the earth
with plagues as often as they will, as Moses and Aaron, Exo. 4.5.6.7.8.9.10. By
which we may more clearly perceive.

First, Against the fabulous opinion of Enoch and Elias.
that the two witnesses are not rightly applied to Enoch and Elias: seeing
nothing of Enoch is here referred unto them. The miracles indeed of Elias are
attributed unto them, but not his alone: so that if we should judge by the
attributes, one of them should no more be Elias, then Moses, Aaron, Jeremy,
Daniel, Zerubbabel, or Iehoshua.

Secondly, that two individuals are not only noted, but a few at several
times, yet many successively who shall prophecy against the Beast. For those
prophets unto whom they are likened, have prophesied either alone, two, or few,
but succeeded one another at several times in the work of the Lord.

Thirdly, The titles of the witnesses are not to be taken literally.
that these titles are not literally, but spiritually accommodated by a
certain similitude unto them, because of some proportionable effects between
the foresaid prophets, and these witnesses. For what the former did literallie,
these later shall do spiritually. Now that all these things are thus to be
taken, John himself show eth v. 8. calling Rome the seat of Antichrist
spiritually Sodom, Egypt, and Jerusalem. As therefore the seat of the beast
is to be taken spiritually: so also the titles of these witnesses are
spiritually to be understood: And that especially, because these things taken
according to the letter, for the most part would appear to be either absurd or
miraculous. New miracles the marks of Antichrist.
But God will not work new miracles: because he has foretold us, that new
miracles shall be the marks of Antichrist.

Furthermore the honorable titles given to these witnesses before their
martyrdom, are chiefly five, declaring partly their dignity, partly their
prophetical power. The which we will briefly consider.

Clothed with sackcloth] The first title declares their contemptible condition
in the eyes of worldly men. Sackcloth was the habit of mourners, as the
Ninevites, Title of the witness is their conttemptible habit.
Daniel, Mordecai, are said to have mourned in sackcloth. Christ speaking of
them of Tire and Sidon, says, that they would have repented in sackcloth and
ashes. It was also the habit of the prophets, and now is of poor and despised
men.

Some therefore by their wearing of sackcloth will have the argument of their
prophecy to be noted metaleptice: Metalepsis is a figure, by which a word is
put from its proper signification.
because they shall denounce unto the world mourning, and punishments at hand
in regard of Antichrists abominations: and are to call men unto repentance: And
indeed rightly may it be thus taken: for their prophecy shall consist in
preaching of repentance.

Others interpret it of their own mourning, because by their base and mean
habit they shall manifest the bitterness and grief of their mind for the
destruction of the Church and horrible blindness of the world: even as such in
old time were in bitterness of spirit who clothed themselves in sackcloth. This
also may well stand.

Notwithstanding I rather take it of the neglected condition of the ministers
of the Gospel. For sackcloth undoubtedly is opposed to the pomp and luxury
and Antichrist, and his Locusts: These glorious praelates, with their soft,
silken and broidered garments of gold and silver bewitch the world: whereas on
the contrary these witnesses shall be vile, and despised, scarsly having whereon
to live or cloathe themselves. And indeed almost all the servants of Christ
who hitherto have waged war with the Beast, have been abject, poor and
despised in the eye of the world.

Bellarmin upbraides us with this sackcloth as being an argument of the
falsitie of our religion, The Patrones of our opinon (says he) have been great
and worthy men, and followed by the whole world: but BERENGARIVS was a Deacon,
a man neglected, and having for his followers a few poor Scholars. But for
our parts we need not be offended thereat: for how contemptuously soever the
world judges thereof: yet the excellency of the same before God we shall hear
by and by.

Neither is Bellarmins taunting worth the answering: Lib. 5. de P. R. c. 6.
that he never as yet saw any minister of the Gospel clothed in sackcloth. For
the two witnesses shall no more be literallie clothed in sackcloth, then they
shall be literallie two Olive Trees, two candlestickes, or breach out of their
mouth fire, therewith to devour the adversaries, etc.

4. These are those two Olive-trees] The other title is the dignity of the two
witnesses, opposed to their contemptible condition. The dignity of the
witnesses.
They shall not be therefore neglected of God because the world despises
them: For they are two Olive Trees, and candlesticks: whereby mystically the
dignity of the ministry of the word is noted, as serving in stead of
Olive Trees and candlesticks unto the Church. An Olive Tree is always green,
bringing forth most wholesome fruit. A candlestick bears up the light, by which
darkness is expelled, and the whole house enlightened: so the ministry of the
witnesses shall be lively and efficacious, because the Oil and anointing of the
Spirit is powered forth through it on the elect. It is known, that the grace of
the spirit is very often compared unto Oil (especially by John) in regard of
a like efficacy. These witnesses therefore shall be Olivetrees, pouring forth by
prophesy spiritual oil, that is, they shall be profitable instruments for the
salvation of true believers. They shall also be candlesticks, as holding forth
the light of Gods word, by which they shall drive away Antichristian darkness,
and kindle again the lost light of the Gospel in the Church.

I said before, that this is an allusion unto the type Zach. 4.14. where God
says of Zerubbabel and Iehoshua the two captains that brought his people back
again: These are the two sons of oil (or anointed ones) standing before the
ruler of the whole earth: by which commendatorie title the authority of these
two, is set forth. The two witnesses therefore are two Olive Trees not
literally: But first by a certain metonymia, for, they are two restorers of
the Church from under the bondage and yoke of Antichrist, signified by these
two Olive Trees of old of the Babylonish captivity. And secondly by a metaphor:
for, as they rebuilded Jerusalem being formerly wasted by the Babylonians and
repaired the temple and typical worship: so these shall restore the Lords
spiritual worship, and repair the holy city trodden under foot by
Antichristian Gentiles.

Now hence it appears, Under the two witnesses and Olive Trees godly princes
are also to be understood. The dignity of the witnesses.
that under these two witnesses, godly Kings and Princes, reformers and
maintainers of the true religion, being nursing fathers to the Church, are
likewise to be understood. For as one of the two Olive Trees was Jehoshua the
Priest, the other Zerubbabel a civil magistrate or prince, who rebuilded the
temple and holy city: So God in these last times will raise up besides the
teachers and preachers of his word, some godly and zealous kings and princes,
to defend the orthodoxe religion against Antichrist and his followers.

Standing before the God of the earth] By the words of Zachary chiefly the
dignity of the witnesses is set forth. In the eyes of the world their sackcloth
is vile and contemptible: but with God they are in great esteem, as most sweet
Olive Trees and golden candlesticks: or else their fidelity is noted, as
performing their ministry faithfully and with great constancy, as it were in
the sight of God, whom no man can deceive. Antichrist to man's thinking
gloriously reigns with his hellish Locusts, upholding his tyranny by the
favors of the great men, and kings of the earth: but it suffices that these
witnesses enjoy the favor and blessed presence of God the King of kings, and
Lord of the whole earth. The Epithet of the earth does not lessen, but augment
the authority of God: therefore by and by in ver. 13. he is called also the God
of heaven.

Fire proceeds out of their mouth] The third title sets forth the power and
effect of their ministry against the adversaries: Fire proceeding out of
their mouth against the enemies. Iere. 5.14. Ier. 23.29.
as the former showed their dignity and efficacy in respect of the godly. It
is an allusion, partly to the ministry of Jeremie, and partly to that of
Moses and Elias. Of Jeremies preachings God says: Behold I put my words in
thy mouth as fire, but this people I will give for chafe which the fire shall
consume: Again, My word is as fire, and like the hammer that breaks the rock
in pieces. Thus fire shall proceed out of the mouth of the witnesses: But they
that would understand it according to the letter, should be more absurd then
Pollodorus faining, that a monstre called chimera, vomits flames out of her
mouth, and destroys all what comes near her, and infecteth the cattle. Now
howsoever perhaps it may be credited that fire should proceed out of a beasts
mouth, yet that a man should spit fire without hurt (except it were a jugler)
has not been seen, neither can it be.

This fire therefore proceeding out of their mouth is to be spiritually
understood of the word of God, proceeding out of the mouth of the witnesses, as
it is clear by the fore alleged scripture in Jeremy. Neither are the other
titles of the witnesses to be taken otherwise, then by certain allegorical
phrases applied to the things signified thereby, as plainly appears by the
word, SPIRITVALLY, in v. 8. The which thing unless it be well observed, we
shall be as absurd in urging the letter touching the killing of the witnesses,
the casting of their carkeises in the streets, their resurrection and
ascension into heaven, as in the sackcloth, Olive Trees, candlesticks and
ascension of the Beast out of the bottomless pit, etc.

But against whom shall the fire proceed? Against them that will hurt them]
that is, against their adversaries called (...) enemies, namely the Beast with
the Locusts proceeding out of the infernal smoke, with all other their
accomplices, favorites and adherents.

These will hurt them] By opposing their preaching, both by sophistical
disputations, and cruel proscriptions. But it shall be in vain. For fire
proceeding out of the mouth of the witnesses shall devour them.

But thou will say; The Beast shall destroy the other, for he shall kill and
overcome them. How then shall they devour the adversaries? this must again be
spiritually understood. The fire of the witnesses shall devour the adversaries,
not by killing them corporally (for in this sense they rather shall be devoured)
but spiritually, because by the fire of the word they shall lay open to the
world the abominations and impostures of Antichrist, confound his idols, and
refute his lies, by which his kingdom shall greatly diminish, and the kitchings
of Locusts begin to grow cold. This fire therefore proceeding out of the mouth
of the witnesses and devouring the enemies, is nothing else, but that spirit of
Christ's mouth, 2. These. 2.8.
by which (as the Apostle foretold) Antichrist shall be consumed, because the
preaching of the Gospel shall utterly consume Antichristian lies, like as the
fire consumes the stubble.

But he alludes (as I said) to the two histories of Moses and Elias: Numb.
16.35.
For at the prayer of Moses there came out a fire from Jehovah and consumed two
hundred and fifty sworn rebels. At the prayer of Elias, fire fell from heaven,
and consumed the captains with their fifties being sent to take the prophet.
2 King. 1, 9
After their example these witnesses shall devour their enemies by the fire of
their mouth, not by any external miracle, Luke 9.54.
which the disciples in a preposterous zeal desirous to imitate, were reproved
for it by Christ: but by a spiritual effect, not unlike the other, because the
fiery preaching of the Gospel shall prevail against the enemies laboring by
all means to hinder the same.

For (Gr. and) if any man will hurt them] This serves for the confirmation of
the efficacy before spoken of. Many shall rise against the Gospel: Antichrist
indeed shall endeavor to suppress the witnesses, but to his own destruction.

He must thus be killed] The particle (...) thus, or so, does limit the
destruction of the enemies: he shall not be so killed by the sword or outward
force, as to cease from hurting: but he shall be consumed by the fire of Gods
word, in so much that his opposition against the Gospel shall be in vain. What I
pray you can be spoken more plainly concerning the events of our age? God
raised up his two witnesses, Luther, Zwinglius, Bucer, Musculus, and a few
other weak Monks, out of whose mouth the fire of Gods word has so devoured
their opposites, as that they could not resist them by any forces, plots,
thundrings or punishments. For by how much they cruelly opposed themselves
against the Gospel, by so much the more it was spread over diverse kingdoms
and provinces in the Christian world, devouring and confounding the sophistries
and subtilties, arms and plots of all Sophisters and enemies fighting for
Antichrist.

To be short this whole effect of the preaching of the Gospel may be declared
in these words of the Apostle: The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, 2
Cor. 10.4. 2 Cor. 2.16.
but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, etc. Again: We
are to God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that
perish, to the one we are the savor of death unto death, to the other the
savor of life unto life. For the ministry of the word is powerful to the
salvation of the elect through faith, and destruction of the ungodlie through
their own perfidiousnes.

6. These have power to shut] The fourth title is their power to shut heaven
that it rain not in the days of their prophecy. Power to shut heaven.
This is a manifest allusion to the history of Elias, who shut the heavens by
his prayer that it rained not on Ahabs kingdom for three years and six months:
whence arose a grievous famine, 1. King. 17.1. Iam. 5.16.
by which God punished the wickedness of the Israelites. And from this very
place it appears, that whatsoever is said of the 42 months and 1260 days, is
not literally to be understood of three years and an half commonly attributed
to Antichrist. For then heaven should be shut during the whole time of his
kingdom: and this must needs be so, because the heavens shall give no rain in
the days of the prophesy of these witnesses. But would not this be very false
and absurd according to the letter? For how should Antichrist in so great and
continual a famine lead such mighty armies, and obtain so many great
victories over most potent Monarchs?

Therefore this also is here to be understood as in ver. The four years
standing of Antichrist refuted.
8. (...) showing that these witnesses have power to shut heaven that it rain
not in the days of their prophecy spiritually. This they shall do by the
power of the keys, shuting the kingdom of heaven, that the grace of God rain
not upon the contemners of the Gospel: because they condemn the preaching of
the witnesses as a most pestilent heresy. The heavenly rain therefore
moistening the dry hearts, shall not fall upon them: for they shall not be any
whit the better by the preaching of the Gospel, but shall seek for eternal
life in their own merits, Popish pardons, and paenal satisfactions, whatsoever
they shall pretend touching Christ or his free grace. These words therefore.
It shall not rain in the days of their prophecy, does wholly concern the
Antichristian adversaries, on whom the rain of the Gospel (as we said before)
shall not come, but only plentifully moisten the Church of Christ.

Hence also we may understand that the time of the witnesses prophesying, was
not before properly defined by 1260 days, but by a certain allusion unto the
history of Elias: 1 King. 17 Iam. 5.17.
For the three years and six months in which it rained not in his time, do
make just so many days.

And they have power over the waters] The fifth title, power of turning the
waters into blood, To turn water into blood.
and smiting the earth with plagues as often as they will, by a manifest
allusion unto the history of Moses and Aaron, who turned the Egyptian waters
into blood, and smote Egypt with tenplagues, until at last Pharaoh being
drowned in the red sea, the people were brought out of the house of bondage.
Thus we see, these things must also be spiritually understood: For when the
Church shall be held captive under the Romish Pharaoh, and sigh to God under
her oppression, then shall the two witnesses Moses and Aaron come, that is, God
will raise up one or more faithful teachers of the Gospel, who by the
preaching of Christ's free grace, shall endeavor to set free the Church out of
bondage. But Pharaoh shall not hear them: therefore these shall turn the waters
into blood, and smite the adversaries with plagues, as often as they will: that
is, not once, but many times, like as Moses of old smote Egypt ten times. Now
this they shall do by threatening plagues against these spiritual Egyptians,
on whom God will take vengeance, because of their contemning of the Gospel, by
sending wars, seditions, droughts, famines, pestilence and such like evils,
which have since the rising of the Gospel been spread over the Christian
world, as the complaints of the common people do testify: who impute these
miseries to the doctrine of the Gospel. And indeed not altogether without
ground, for the Gospel is the occasion thereof, yet only by accident, for not
the word, but the contempt of the word, draws down plagues from heaven upon
the sons of men.

Now the witnesses are said to smite the earth, How the witnesses shall smite
the earth.
God smiting the same upon their threatenings and sighs, which the Lord hearing
does punish the malepertnes of the world with plagues. We need not therefore
make any matter of their calumnies, who impute the fault of these evils unto
the Gospel: We confess indeed, that it is the cause: but how? not by any
fault of the Gospel in it self (and therefore unjustly imputed) but by
accident: For the cause in it self is the idolatry of Antichrist, and his rage
against the doctrine of Christ Jesus.

We have heard what the witnesses shall do, and effect both in the Church, and
touching the faithful, as also in and against the adversaries. Now follows on
the contrary what the enemies shall do and effect.

7. Moreover when they have finished] Hitherto we have spoken of the general
and special prophecy of the measuring of the temple, or the power and
ministry of the two witnesses.

Now follows the martyrdom of the witnesses. For Antichrist will not sit
still, while these do prophecy, but prepare himself to war against the
witnesses, overcome and kill them, cast their carkeises with contempt into the
streets, and so rejoice with his followers over the slain: But however the
witnesses be put to death, yet prophecy shall not be extinguished, but a tenth
part of the great city shall fall by an earthquake: the martyrs shall again
live, and be taken up into heavenly glory. This therefore is the amplification
of the Third Act, or Antichristian persecution, which in a diverse event shall
continue unto the end.

But that which follows, seems to be contrary to what we heard before
touching the power of the witnesses, in that it is said, they shall devour
their adversaries with the fire of their mouth, and smite the earth with
plagues as often as they will: Now here they are killed and overcome by the
Beast. This is already answered on ver. 5. For it does well agree, that the
witnesses shall overcome and be overcome. They overcome in the goodness of
their cause by their spiritual power, war and victory (...) spiritually, as
it is v. 8. because the doctrine of the Gospel, notwithstanding all
Antichristian opposition, shall break forth, confound the lies of the Beast,
and weaken his kingdom.

On the contrary the Beast shall employ his spiritual and secular weapons
against the witnesses, and by tyranny overcome and kill them. The Beast
overcoming the witnesses is Antichrist.
This Beast ascending out of the pit, is that self same Angel of the
bottomless pit, Abaddon the king of Locusts, spoken of in Chap. 9.11. that is
Antichrist, as Ribera also, Gagnaeus and Anonymus confess. For this Beast has
his seat in the great city Babylon Rome, as shall appear Chap. 17. v. 9.18.
which in the following verses is called Sodom, Egypt, Jerusalem spiritually.
For Antichrist shall rage more cruelly then any beast, against Christ: but
touching the Beast more largely on Chap. 13. Now let us see when, and with what
success the Beast makes war against the witnesses.

When they have finished their testimony] Before it was called a prophecy,
here a testimony, by which name John familiarly notes the doctrine of the
Gospel. This being ended, the Beast shall make war against them, but they shall
finish the same, as the Papists say, after they have preached 1260 days, or
three years and an half. The fable of the four years refuted.
But this fable we have before refuted, and here it is apparent, that it cannot
consist. For after 1260 days, the Beast shall slay them, and triumph thereat.
Therefore they shall remain, after the witnesses are slain. But according to
their supposition, the Beast shall be no more, but killed after three years and
an half. Now we have showed, that the 1260 days of their prophecy is put
indefinitely by an allusion unto the history of Elias, who by prayer shut
heaven from raining for so many days. Therefore also the end of their
testimony is to be taken indefinitely, for the time appointed by God therein
to fulfill their ministry: And so the sense seems thus; The Beast indeed
shall raise up war, so soon as they begin to prophecy, yet he shall not overcome
them before they have finished their testimony according to the will of God.
The which serves for the great comfort of the witnesses. For as the
highpriests could not hurt Christ, before his hour was come, although they
never ceased to lay wait for his life: so likewise Antichrist shall not be able
to overcome Christ's witnesses, before the course of their ministry be
finished. Therefore the words when they have finished, are not to be referred to
Antichrists rage against them, spoken of in the first place, but to the two
latter, he shall overcome and kill them. For he shall always war against the
witnesses, but shall not kill and overcome them, before they have finished their
testimony. This also serves to prove, that Antichrist shall have power indeed
to kill and overcome the witnesses: but not their testimony in the least: for
it is said, they shall accomplish their testimony: And therefore the preaching
of the Gospel shall endure unto the end.

Thus we see who the Beast is, and what time is to be understood. It remains
now to be handled what manner of war it is, and what the effect thereof shall be.

Touching the war it is said, He shall make war against them] Before he had
sufficiently declared, what the witnesses should do and effect against the
Beast: now on the contrary he shows, what the Beast shall do and effect
against the witnesses, for Antichrist will not sit still and suffer his
kingdom to be destroyed, but with all his power will fight for the same: And
therefore as soon as the witnesses shall begin to prophecy against his kingdom,
he will prepare himself to war against them: and by how much their prophecy is
powerful, by so much the war shall be the greater.

But what manner of war, and victory shall this be?

Rupertus says, such as is usually betwixt truth and falsehood. The war shall be
both ecclesiastical and civil, and therefore such also shall the victory be:
His Ecclesiastical war shall be three manner of ways. The manner of the beasts
war against the witnesses.


First, by the seditious sermons of the Locusts, their venomous writings and
sophistical disputations in the behalf of Apollyon against the witnesses of
Christ, branding them for most pestilent heretics: They shall preach with
great applause to the multitude, that the Beast is head of the Church, Christ's
Vicar, and armed as with the key of Peter, so with the sword of Paul and
Caesar, crying out with full mouths, that his kingdom is the Catholic Church.

Secondly, through the Councils of Locusts, by whose decrees the Beast shall
establish his kingdom, and anathematize, as heretical, the truth of Christ. For
it is true, Aene. Syl. in histor. council. Basil. page 79.
as Julian the Cardinal freely wrote from the Council of Basil unto Pope
Eugenius, that by the means of Councils the liberty and power of
Ecclesiastical persons has always been strengthened and augmented.

To be short by the bulls and excommunications of the Romish court, by which
he shall condemn Christ's witnesses with their testimony, for heresy, and
delivering them over to the secular power, destroy them by fire and sword, to
wit, as unworthy to breath or live in the world. Moreover the beast will raise
up civil wars, and by his subtlety cause the kingdoms and provinces of the
Christian world, to fight against the Gospel, that so the witnesses of Christ
may be overcom and killed. Therefore it follows:

The beast shall overcome them, and kill them] The latter declares the former.
This very thing does sufficiently show, that these witnesses cannot be
literallie taken for Enoch and Elias. For what godly man will believe, that
those holy prophets whom the scriptures testify to have been tranflated from
death to life eternal, should again return into the earth, to be cruelly killed
by Antichrist?

Furthermore the Beast shall kill the witnesses, in the like manner he overcame
them, partly by ecclesiastical censure, partly by the secular sword: so then
not by the goodness of his cause, nor by the holy scriptures (for by these
the witnesses shall overcome and consume Antichrist) but he shall overcome them
by outward force and tyranny, by the authority of Councils, by thundering out
his bulls, by cruel war, and his hangmen. Thus, I say, he warreth against
the Saints, overcoms and kills them, not by arguments and scriptures: but by
sword, fire and excommunications.

So also my Anonymus 260 years past, wrote concerning the Popes victory: He
shall overcome them in reputation of his friends: and kill them, some
corporally, either by burning, or murdering them with the sword, and other
kinds of death, others civilly by adjudging them to perpetual imprisonment:
and against these, whom he cannot torment in this manner, he will at least
thunder out his excommunications, insomuch as they shall not be accounted
otherwise then dead men in the Church, so far as concerns a spiritual life.
What would not this author have written, had he seen the histories of our time,
and the foregoing age, when the Beast anathematized the two witnesses of
England: John Wickleffe that excellent teacher and opposer of Popery (and his
protector John Earl of Leicestre,) whose carkeise not long after being taken
up out of the grave he caused to be burnt: When he overcame, and burnt
(contrary to the public faith of the Empire) the two witnesses of Bohemia,
John Husse, and Ierom of Prage, prophesying that the Ecclesiastical court of
priests should he cast forth. When by the bloody inquisition he delivered unto
death many thousand martyrs in Italy, Spain, France, England, and Belgia: when
he enwrapt almost all the provinces of Europe in cruel wars, to suppress
the Gospel: when at length in Germany God restored the slain witnesses unto
life? The Jesuits I doubt not, may find this little commentary of Anonymus, in
their public libraries, speaking (...) plainly, impartially, not respecting
persons. And thence let them judge, whither the Pope of Rome were by us of
late, first accounted that Beast and Antichrist: as Bellarmin falsely affirms.
Lib. 3. de P. R. cap. 21.

And their carkeises] The particle, spirituallie, here mentioned, shows that
this also is not literallie to be understood, as we shall further see by that
which follows.

The cruelty therefore of the Beast against the witnesses, falsely condemned for
heresy, is hereby noted: forasmuch as they shall not be satiated by cursing
and putting of them to death, but also insult contumeliously over them after
their death. All sorts of injuries are here noted under this one, which for the
kind of it is the most inhumane: namely, to hinder their carkeises (contrary
to the law of all nations) from being buried, but causing the same to be
thrown forth unto the scorn of all in the streets of the great city.

The carkeises of the witnesses are not only their bodies, What is meant by
the carkeises of the witnesses.
unto which these things do frequentlie happen according to the letter, (for
the Beast will not suffer any heretic to have Christian burial, as they call
it) but also their names cursed by him, and books which he prohibits to be
made use of, read, or sold, but causes them to be burnt, to be short their
families also which he seeks by all means to make infamous and to suppress:
So that to lie in the streets, is to be exposed to the public scorn of all
men. But where shall these things be done?

In the streets of the great citie] It is questioned what this is. Ierom takes
it to be the world; but Ribera refutes him, Epist. 17. ad Marcell.
and will have it to be Jerusalem the which thing Alcasar also pleads for.
But this the text refuteth by the word, spiritually, here added: as does the
Angel also Chap. 17.18. The woman which thou saw is that great city, which
reigns over the kings of the earth: now by that great city Rome is
understood, as the Jesuits themselves confess: But certain it is, one and
the same great city is both there, and here spoken of.

In the streets of this great city the carkeises of the witnesses shall be
exposed to the scorn of the multitude, both properly and figurativelie. First
properly, This great city is Rome see Chap. 14.8. and 17.18. How they carkeises
shall lie in the streets of Rome.
because they shall suffer the contumelies here described in the public
places, courts, palaces, temples, theaters and streets of the Romish city. For
the lightnings and thunders of excommunications, the martyrdomes, punishments
and wars against the testimony of Jesus Christ, are all forged in the shop
of Rome, and from thence with great celerity sent abroad over the Christian
world: Now by a synecdoche the great city is put for the whole jurisdiction of
the Pope, which extends it self over all Italy, France, Spain, Germany,
Poland, Hungary, etc. as if all were but one city, (as the Poet sung of old
touching the Romans -- Cuncti gens una sumus: We are all one nation:)
Claudianus
in whose streets, and princely palaces, courts, market places, ports,
theaters, etc. the martyrs of Christ are reproachfully defamed, cursed and
condemned.

To be short, least we should be ignorant of what city these things are
spoken, Lipsius and Stapleton have not long ago published in print: the former
the greatness of the city, the later of the Church of Rome.

Which spiritually is called] By three titles this great city, the seat of the
Beast is marked out, that so we may the better understand its shameful
filthiness, horrible idolatry, blindness, cruelty and detestable impiety.

Sodom] First Rome is called Sodom, not literally (for Sodom was now long ago
consumed by fire from heaven) but spiritually, or mystically, that is,
allegoricallie, and in a certain similitude: for the word spiritually, is not
here put in a Theological but Rhetorical sense: And this is plain, because to
speak Theologically, there is nothing spiritual in this city, except the bare
name, as being called the holy city, and Catholic Roman Church. Spiritually
therefore it is Sodom, that is, metaphorically, because it is like unto Sodom.
But wherein stands the likeness? In filthiness and Sodomiticall lust, which
horribly reigns in this great city. And hence it is called the mother of
fornications, Genesis 19.5. Ezech. 16.50. Romans 1.17. ha. 17.4.
Chap. 17.5. The abominations of the Sodomites are known unto us by the holy
Scripture: and the like evils were practiced by the Romans in the Apostles
times. But thereunto John here has no reference: For he prophesies of Rome
which should be the seat of the Beast, and afterward called a woman of
whoredoms. Therefore she is called Sodom, as most infamous by her Sodomitical
beastliness.

Now let us but look upon the great city of papacy, what is it, but as an
abominable warehouse of all spiritual and corporal fornications? In the city
it self, in which is the seat of the Beast, filthy lusts not to be named, are
commonly and freely committed, nourished, commended, and gain made thereof. If
any doubt, let him read histories, or go to Rome: and he shall find the truth
of that, which PETRARCHA complains of: viz. that deflowring, ravishing,
incests and adulteries are now but as a sport to the Pontifical lasciviousnes.
He shall find that of Mantuan true: I pudor in villas, si non patiantur easdem
Et villae vomicas: Roma est jam tota Lupanar.
Go shame into the villages if they refuse
Such loathsome beastliness: whole Rome is now a stews.


And again: Roma vale, vidi, satis est vidisse revertar.
Cum Leno, meretrix, scurra Cynaedus ero.
Now farwell Rome, I have thee seen, it was enough to see:
I will come back when as I mean, bawd, harlot, knave to be.


And what was answered to one inquiring about Rome: Roma quid est? Amor est,
quem dat praeposterus ordo,
Roma mares: noli dicere plura scio.
But what is Rome? she is that love which natures rule does break,
For its at Rome amongst males: I know much more, but will not speak.


There have been some (as I have heard) and glad I am I have not seen the same
who have published books by the Popes authority in commendation of the
unnatural villainy of Romish buggerers. O WICKEDNESS, O SODOM.

And Aegypt] Egypt was not a city, but a kingdom: by which we understand that
this great city is to be applied unto the whole kingdom of the Beast: For
allegorically it is Egypt, that is, like unto Egypt. In what? in idolatry,
blindness, and cruelty.

Herodotus witnesses that the Egyptians were beyond measure superstitious,
worshipping oxen, cowes, doves, onyons, garlic, and other herbs. Juvenal also
Sat. 15. shows, that the Egyptians were so deprived of understanding, as to
worship the Crocodyle, the bird Ibis, munkies, fishes, dogs, hogs and
onyons. Oh holy nations (says he) who have their Gods growing in gardens.

The great city of the beast, changing the name only, does worship the same,
or the like things. For there is nothing at all which the Priests (after the
example of the Egyptians) do not give religious adoration unto by their
consecrations. Yea the Beasts idolatry is worse, in honoring of wood, stones,
brass and gold, together with his breaden god, whereas the Egyptians for the
most part worshipped things in which there was life. Mantuan therefore Eclog.
9. taxes the Romanists for viler idolatry, then was amongst the Egyptians in
these verses: Fama est Aegyptum coluisse animalia quaedam:
Et pro numinibus multas habuisse ferarum.
Illa superstitio minor est, quam nostra, ferarum
Hic aras habet omne genus, contraria certe
Naturae res atque Deo, qui dicitur olim
Praeposuisse hominem cunctis animantibus unum.
That Egypt did adore some living creatures, heard have we.
And for her gods some wild beasts she, acknowledged to be.
That superstition sure of theirs, is less then ours by far,
Because for Beasts of every kind, high altars now there are:
Which thing against both nature is, and Gods most righteous law:
For he ordaind over all Beasts, one man to have the sway.


So then the great city and seat of the Beast is Egypt, that is like unto
Egypt in wicked Idolatry.

It is also like it in miserable blindness: we read, that the Lord sent on
the obstinate Egyptians such darkness, as that for three days together they
groped at noon day like blind men. So the city of the Beast, what is it, but a
kingdom of darkness, wherein miserable blindness and ignorance of the
scriptures, yea and of God and Christ does extremely abound: Luther writes
well: In act. August. lit. P 207.
Italy is cast into the gross darkness of Egypt: in so much as they are
become all of them altogether ignorant of Christ, and of the things
appertaining to him.

To be short, as Egypt of old most cruelly oppressed the Church by a
lamentable bondage for the space of 225 years: even so has the Church now of
long time been burdened, yea and yet groaneth under the yoke of Antichrist and
kingdom of the Beast. And therefore this great city is fittlie called Egypt,
because of her cruelty.

Where also our Lord] Hence Ribera and Bellarmin do feign, In Apocal. 11. nu.
22. Lib. 3. de P. R. c. 13.
that the great city or seat of Antichrist, is not Rome but Jerusalem. For in
what city (say they) was our Lord crucified, except Jerusalem. But this is a
vain shift, for as before the seat of Antichrist is called Sodom and Egypt
not literally but spirituallie: so here it is called the city where our Lord
was crucified, that is, Jerusalem in a spiritual sense: This then is the third
title of the great city being called Jerusalem where our Lord was crucified.

Jerome and others dispute, how Christ was crucified in Egypt, Epist. 1. ad
Marcell.
and how Jerusalem is called Sodom: but it is beside the purpose: For the
words (...) where also, do not cohere with Egypt next preceding (for the
scripture no where says that Christ was crucified in Egypt) but are to be
referred to the former words (...) of the great city, as the particle (...) (
and, or also) inserted does show: as if he had said, it is called also that
city, where our Lord was crucified, that is, Jerusalem.

Furthermore it will clearly appear on Chap. 17. The great city is not
Jerusalem.
that this great city the seat of Antichrist, is not Jerusalem literallie: for
there the great city is said to have seven mountains, and to reign over the
kings of the earth, neither of which agrees literallie to Jerusalem, but both
unto Rome: For Jerusalem had never seven mountains, but only three hills, viz.
Sion, Moriah, and mount Calvarie: It never held the Empire of the world, as
Rome has don: To be short, It was never absolutely called the city, or the
great city, but this title was proper to Rome only. Lib. 8. de bello sacr.
Wilhelmus Tyrius writing of the largeness, of Jerusalem, says, that it is a
city less then the greatest, yet greater then the middle sort: But of Rome
Lipsius writes, Lib. 3. de magn. Rom cap. 2.
that the greatness thereof appears to this day, and that her ancient walls
contained in circuit XV or XVI miles. So that the Jesuits here do falsely and
guilfully send us unto Jerusalem, that we might not seek Antichrist at Rome,

Furthermore why the great city of the Beast is compared unto Jerusalem,
appears by the following paraphrase, where also our Lord was crucified.
Jerusalem crucified our Lord literallie. The great city of the Beast does it
spirituallie. Now there is nothing more cruel or ungodlie, then to crucify the
Lord of life: yea it is more cruel for to crucify Christ spiritually, then his
witnesses literally. And therefore the seat of the Beast is called Jerusalem,
because of their unheard cruelty and impiety, killing the Prophets and
witnesses of Christ against all right and reason, yea (not satiated with their
death) have exercised all manner of contumelies upon their dead bodies.

Besides (as much as in them is) they not once, but daily sacrifice, destroy,
crucify and kill Christ himself. Epist. 19.
Let us hear Petrarcha long ago accusing Rome of this most horrid parricide
in his own words: Behold thou see a people not only adversary to Christ,
but that which is worse, under Christ's ensign rebelling against him, and
fighting for Satan, being drunken with the blood of Christ, and malapertly
saying: Our lips are ours who is Lord over us? a hard hearted and wicked people
indeed, proud, hungerstarved and thirsty, always gaping, having sharp teeth,
crooked nails, slippery feet, a stony breast and heart of steel, a mind of
lead, but honey in their mouth: a people unto whom thou may well apply not
only that of Christ and the Prophet: This people honors me with their lips:
but their heart is far from me: But that also of Judas Iscariot, who betraying
his master with a kiss, said, hail master. And that of the Jews, who clothed
Christ in purple and crowned him with thorns, smote and most contumeliously
spat in his face, and bowing the knee worshipped and saluted him, saying: Hail
king of the Jews: whom they in the mean time accounted neither as God or a
king worthy of divine or humane honor, but as a blasphemer guilty of death,
reproach and judgment. But what? is not the like daily practiced among Christ's
enemies and Pharisees of our age? do they not buy, sell, and make merchandise
of Christ himself, whose name notwithstanding they seem day and night to extol
with most high praises, whom they cloth with purple and gold, whom they load
with precious stones, salute and worship: Him I say, as if he had his eyes
covered and saw not, they crown with the briars of wicked men's works, defile
him with the spittle of a most impure mouth, and inveigh against him with
viperous hissings, strike him with the dart of venomous actions, and what in
them lies do again and again deridinglie drag him, as naked, poor and
scourged on mount Calvarie, and wickedlie consent to nail him unto the cross.
And oh shame! oh grief! oh indignity! Even such are the Romanists at this day
as it is reported. These things Petrarcha wrote concerning Rome. Now let the
Romish Locusts see how they can deny, Rome to be spiritual Jerusalem, and
themselves crucifiers again of the Lord of life?

A Recapitulation or summarie repetition of the third Vision, hitherto
expounded.
BEcause we have for-borne a while (upon some occasion) the interpretation of
the eleventh Chapter, wherein (as we have before showed) is contained the third
and fourth Act of the third Vision touching the seven trumpets: therefore, to
make way the better, for what remains to be handled, it will be worth our
labor in a brief way to call to memory the sum of this Vision.

We distinguished the same for methods sake into four Acts. The first whereof
Chap. 8.9, was a proposition of the calamities of the Church under the sounding
of six trumpets, that is, by Roman tyrants, until the time of Constantine,
and from thence by heretics and ambitious Bishops, unto Gregory, and at
length by the Western Antichrist the king of Locusts, unto the council of
Constans, as also by the Mahumetan tyranny, until the overthrow of the Eastern
Empire, and taking of Constantinople.

The second Act was contrary to the former, as treating of the consolations,
during the whole time of the Churches afflictions, the which the godly ought to
oppose unto their calamities, that they might not be discouraged in regard of
the long continuance of the cross Chap. 10. The sum was: John saw a mighty
Angel descending from heaven, having a book open in his hand, standing with
his right foot upon the sea, and his left upon the earth: crying with a great
voice like a roaring Lion, insomuch as seven thunders uttered their voices,
lifting up his right hand to heaven, and swearing by the living God that the
time of afflictions should be no more, but that even now at the sounding of the
seventh trumpet an end of labors, and the accomplishment of the judgment of
God were at hand, To be short commanding John to eat up the book that was
open, and again to prophecy before the end. By all which things we are
taught, that in the midst of the rage of enemies and greatest distresses of the
godly, Christ does descend from heaven, not leaving his Church as an orphant,
but holding in his hand the open book of his word, that it might not be
altogether suppressed: sets his feet upon the earth and sea, that every where
some remnants of the faithful might be preserved: By his Lionlike voice he
stirs up the thunders which utter their voices, that is, some sincere preachers
opposing themselves against Antichrist, although their voices remained sealed,
nor profited much for a season: Confirms by oath the deliverance of the godly,
and destruction of the wicked, that Antichrists rage might not always
continue: To be short, gives a commandment to John to eat up the book, and
again to prophesy, that the godly might consider that the gross darkness of
Antichrists kingdom should be expelled in these last times, the Church
reformed, and his tyranny diminished by prophecy renewed, as by a clear light
breaking forth. This is the second Act Chap. 10.

The third Act is an amplification of the calamities of the Church under
Antichrist: describing new combats of the faithful with the Beast, their
deliverance, and the clearing of doctrine, and a future reformation of the
Church by the two witnesses of Christ. Chap. 11. in the first 14 verses.

The fourth Act, at the sounding of the last trumpet shall be a joyful change of
things: For then both Antichristian kingdoms shall be destroyed, and the
adversaries cast into hell, but the godly everlastinglie rewarded: from v. 15.
unto the end.

This is the sum of the third vision, the which it behooveth us to have
before our eyes, that the coherence and sense of the Prophesy concerning the
two witnesses may the better be understood.

Now I have showed before, that the third Act concerning the reformation of the
Church is propounded two manner of ways: First generally, where John is
commanded with a measuring reed to mete the temple of God, the altar, and the
worshippers therein: yet not to measure the inward court, but to cast it forth,
because both it and the holy city also was given unto the Gentiles to be
troaden under foot 42 months: In which we observed, that the measuring of the
temple does shadow out the repairing of the Church oppressed by Antichrist, and
to be effected chiefly in the last times by the reed of Gods word: The which
reformation the inward court or clergy should not admit: as refusing to be
measured: And therefore should be cast out, that is, declared not to appertain
unto the Church, because Antichrist has trodden down the same with more then
heathenish idolatry and tyranny.

Touching the time of the XLII months I have showed diverse opinions of
learned men about it: among which two may be received as most probable: by
supposing each month to contain thirty days, which make as in v. 3. 1260 (
not astronomical but) prophetical days, by reckoning a day for a year, as in
Ezech. 4.6. And in this sense the years of Antichrists treading down the
Church are 1260. But where to begin, or where to end them God knows: perhaps
the time cannot be calculated and defined by any man. Therefore most learned
interpreters dare say nothing of certainty about this, for howsoever the time
of this treading down be defined by the counsel of God: yet is not to be
searched into by us a priori, nor known for the present. In this sense they
hold that the number of years are definite in Gods decree and as revealed to
John, but so far as concerns us and our knowledge indefinite: for it is not
for us to know the moments which the father has kept in his own power.

Notwithstanding if any thing were by us to be defined from histories, then the
time of this treading down began, when the Romish Antichrist first manifested
himself unto the world by stepping into the chair of universal pestilence
under the Emperor Phocas anno 606. And in this sense the treading down from
that time unto this has dured 1036 years, two hundred twenty and four years
yet remaining unto the end: But far be it from us, that we should dare
pronounce any thing peremptorily of Gods secrets. These things generally
touching the measuring of the Church v. 1.2.

Secondly, the Churches reformation is more specially declared, as by whom,
how, with what success and event it should be don.

Christ shall be the author thereof: The two witnesses his administrators, I,
says he, will give unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy, etc.

The two witnesses according to the common conceit are to be Enoch and Elias,
who shall descend from heaven, and prophecy against Antichrist, and be killed
by him. But the vanity of this Jewish fable has been showed by us.

Concerning the conjectures of others we have also spoken.

At last we consented to that opinion as the most safe, by which the two
witnesses are partly definitely, and partly indefinitely understood.

First Indefinitely, of such sound teachers raised up by the Lord in these last
times during the greatest oppression, for to purge the doctrine of the Gospel,
from the filth of popery. These are said to be two, not individuallie (for
what can be more absurd then to think that Christ should have only two
witnesses, Antichrist having in the mean while many thousands of Locusts.) But
two, that is, a few, who should suffice to hold forth the truth in all times,
even as in judgment, by the testimony of two (or three) every thing is
established.

Secondly two definitely: because as God of old was wont to use the ministry
of two worthies in the execution of his singular and special works, one of
them commonly being a civil, the other an ecclesiastical person: Thus he sent
Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh: Joshua and Caleb to spy the land: Elias and Elisha
unto Ahab: Zerubbabel and Joshua to bring back the people out of Babylon, and
to restore the worship and temple of Jerusalem, unto whom there is here a
manifest allusion in v. 4. so he raised up under Antichrist for the most part
two special instruments among his witnesses for the maintenance of his truth:
as John Husse and Jerome of Prague, whom the Locusts of the Council of
Constans most cruelly burnt against the public faith: In our Fathers days
Luther and Melanchthon in Saxony: At Argentine Bucer and Cariton: In Helvetia
Zwinglius and Oecolampadius: In France Farellus and Calvin: and so others in
other places.

Furthermore he described the power of the witnesses by many excellent and
wonderful phrases taken out of the history of the chief prophets: viz. Their
enemies that would hurt them, they shall devour by the fire of their mouth, as
did Elias and Jeremy: shut heaven that it rain not for three years and six
months, as did the said Elias: Turn waters into blood, and smite the earth
with all manner of plagues, as Moses and Aaron smote Egypt: by which
allegories is signified, that at length the preaching of the Gospel should go
forth with such force and efficacy as that no opposite power or threatenings
should be able to hinder the same.

Notwithstanding however they shall finish their testimony, yet they shall
prevail little against the Beast: for the Beast shall war against them,
overcome and kill them by drawing out both swords, as we have declared.

Neither shall the Beast be satiated by oppressing the witnesses: but shall
cast forth their dead bodies as dung to the scorn of the common people into
the streets of Rome, the great city, which is spirituallie, that is,
allegorically called Sodom, because of Sodomiticall filthiness reigning
therein: Egypt, because of their Egyptian idolatry, darkness and obstinacy
against Christ's ambassadors: and Jerusalem because of their wicked cruelty,
daily crucifying the Lord Jesus Christ both in his members, as also (as much
as in them is) destroying him now glorified in the heavens in their daily
sacrifice of the Mass. Thus far we formerly went in our interpretation. Now we
go forward.

9. ANd they of the kinreds shall see] The public rejoicing of the Christian
world in the contumelious oppression of the witnesses of Christ, is here
signified: for they are so far from commiserating of them, as on the contrary
they altogether approve the Beasts cruelty, in sulting and triumphing over
their dead bodies, as conquered enemies. This is the sum of the two verses:
in which is aggravated both the cruel inhumanitie of the Beast and his
followers: and the ignominious condition of the witnesses. But wherefore? To
the end that seeing it to come so to pass, we should not be offended, as if
some strange thing happened unto us. For the spirit here foretells it, as
Christ also said unto his disciples: ye shall mourn, but the world shall
rejoice: Ioh. 16.1.2.
Yea the time comes that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God
service. But the comfort, by which the witnesses should raise up themselves, is
annexed. Let us consider the words.

And shall see] to wit, the men of this world: for Antichrists rage shall not
be secret, but he will publicly oppose, and war against the witnesses of
Christ: neither shall a few only see it: But they of the people, and kinreds,
and tongues, and nations] to wit, all people etc. Which Ribera rightly
interprets of all those nations which shall cleave unto Antichrist: And
therefore it is false that the Jews only shall cleave unto him. For his
kingdom shall be spread over all peoples, nations, and tongues, that is, the
whole Christian world shall close and join with him. Let us not therefore be
moved with the vain boasting of the Papists, because of the largeness of their
Church, and that all kings, princes, great men, and peoples of the Christian
world follow the Pope: a few poor and obscure men only excepted, who profess
the Gospel. As if the multitude of strayers could excuse error: or that it
had not been foretold by the spirit, that so it should come to pass.

The word (...) shall see, here used, is changed in 11 verse. into (...)
signifying, to contemplate diligently and with pleasure. So that they shall see
the dead bodies of the Saints with great delight and joy: for all shall
applaud their king: as if his tyranny were just and righteous, yea and that in
killing of heretics he did a divine work. But how long shall they see them?

Three days and an halfe] For so long their carkeises shall lie unburied.

Romish writers do not agree about this time. What is meant by the three days
and an half.


Lyra applies this whole history of the witnesses unto Justinian an
Eutychinian Emperor, who by Belizarius banished Pope Sylverius, and imprisoned
Mena the Bishop: and this he will have to be the three years and an half.

Rupertus does scarcely agree with himself, for one while he takes it
definitely for three years and an half: another while indefinitely for a
short time.

Ribera understands it properly of three days and an half.

Alcasar applying it to the Jewish persecution leaves it indifferently to be
taken either for so many years, or months.

But to take it in any of these ways, The fable of Antichrists reigning three
and an half year refuted.
the fiction of Antichrists three and an half years reign is thereby
refuted. For if Antichrist even after that the witnesses are slain (who had
prophesied during the three years and an half of his kingdom) shall see and
rejoice three days (or years) and an half over their dead carkeises: then it
must needs be false, tha the is precisely to reign three years and an half:
for by that account he shall either reign seven years, or at least more then
1260 days.

Our interpreters also are not of one mind about it: yet agree in the maine
argument and scope.

Io: Fox applies it to the council of Constans, which precisely dured three
years and an half. So long therefore the carkeises of the two witnesses John
Husse, and Jerome of Prague, did lie in the streets of the great city, that
is, the council gathered out of all nations, peoples, tribes and tongues: And
so long the Fathers of the council rejoiced over the witnesses being dead.

Brightman referrs it to the Council of Trent in which the Fathers likewise
rejoiced three years and an half over the treading down of the scriptures of
the old and new Testament, which he makes to be the two witnesses. Now however
these things be very probable: yet I dare not conclude whither the spirit had
respect hereunto.

I think it more safe to follow their opinion who understand the three days
and an half indefinitelie of a short time, in which the contumely of the
witnesses, and triumph of the adversaries shall endure, being scarcely the
half of a week: Es is it vmb drey oder vierthalb tag zu thun, so hat der
Pfaffen tantz vnd jubiliren ein end: that is, It is but to do for three, or
three days and an half, and then the Popes dancing and melody shall have an
end.

This circumstance of time therefore is inserted in way of comfort, as taken
(which is usual unto the scriptures) from the brevity of their trouble and
deliverance at hand. Io. 16.16. 2 Cor. 4.17. Cic. in Lael
A little while and ye shall not see me, etc. Our light affliction which is
but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding weight of glory.
Wherefore as Cicero says: Omnia adversa quantumvis magna, tolerabilia esse, si
sint brevia: all adversities are tolerable, though great, if they be short.

And their carkeises] The carkeises of the witnesses we showed to be not only
their bodies, The carkeises of the witnesses unburied.
against which Antichrist rages by the civil and spiritual sword: but also
their books, writings, families and estates. These things shall lie unburied in
the streets, that is, publickely exposed as doung to all manner of reproach.
And the reason is given.

For they shall not suffer them to be put in graues] The which cruelty is
contrary to nature, and the Law of nations. But who will not suffer it? The
Beast with his mitred Locusts and the rest of his followers. As by their
Councils may be seen. Now here one sort of the worst of contumelies is put for
all kind of reproaches, which hitherto in the Papacy (as histories testify)
have been fulfilled according to the letter. For according to Popish laws,
such as are heretics, may not be buried, as being unworthie to be covered
with earth: but rather to be consumed in flames of fire: And therefore anno 1387
the Council of Constans ordained, that the bones of Wickleffe should be taken
out of the grave 28 years after his death, and burnt, that so the ashes thereof
might lie unburied in the streets. The said Council would not permit the
carkeises of the two witnesses Husse and Jerome to be put in graves, but to be
burned, and the ashes cast into the River Rhijne: And the like cruelty the
Beast has exercised against infinite carkeises, writings, families and estates
of Martyrs.

That the bodies of Luther, Melanchthon, and other witnesses were not cast
forth in like manner, was not for any want of cruelty in the Beast. For had
they fallen into his hands, they should have had the like usage. Now the spirit
would not have us to be offended at this kind of contumely: for it no way
derogates from the salvation of the witnesses: because, precious in the eyes of
the Lord, is the death of his gracious Saints: and to be unburied is but a
small loss.

10. And the inhabitants of the earth shall rejoyce] The madness and fury of
Antichristians is here showed, with the cause thereof.

Inhabitants of the earth] Thus in way of contempt (as in Chap. 6.10.) he
calls worldly men, the sworn vassals of the Beast, the children of the earth,
wholly given to worldly things. This is Antichrists Catholic Church here upon
earth. What shall they do? They shall rejoice over the dead bodies of the
martyrs, and send presents one to another in token of joy, as they use to do
in times of public triumph and victory. But this is an inhumane, not to say a
divelish wickedness, for to rejoice at another harm, and insult over the
afflicted. It is (says Rupertus) a most foul sin for wicked men to rejoice in
their evil, and ungodly actions. But whereat shall they laugh? even at their
own wickedness, which is indeed madd mirth, and to be ashamed of. During the
Council of Constans, were kept public bankets and shows at the burning of
the martyrs, as if they had overcome their enemies. And to this day as often as
the Locusts condemn the Saints unto the fire, they keep holy days (as they
call them) and feastings, they sing Te Deum Laudamus: and gratulate each other
by sending gyfts, and presents one to another. We therefore ought not to be
offended at this furious mirth of the Beast and his followers, but rather to be
confirmed in the faith: for in this very thing, he does manifestly show himself
to be the great Antichrist.

Now what is the cause of their joy? Because these two prophets tormented the
in inhabitants of the earth] This indeed Antichrist pretends, as if the martyrs
were justly put to death, deprived of Burial, and burnt to ashes, because they
were troublesome by their preaching, disturbers of the public peace, guilty of
crimen laesae majestatis, blaspheming God and the Saints, and opposing the
Catholic Church. But it is a lying pretense, for the Gospel is the doctrine
of peace, Antichrists false pretense for his tyranny.
of comfort and life.

The witnesses therefore labor by their doctrine to keep the inhabitants of
the earth from eternal torments, and to direct them into the way that leads
to eternal salvation. Neither is it any fault in the witnesses that the
ungodly are offended at the doctrine of Christ, pricked in their consciences,
tormented and become ontragious, but it is by their own malice: who, because
they love falsehood, hate the light, as such which have sore eyes cannot endure
the brightness of the sun. The Gospel therefore torments the wicked by
accident, For in its self it comforts, and makes glad the hearts of the
faithful.

Hence we learn, that it is the property of Antichristians, falsely to impute
that unto the witnesses of the truth, which is proper unto themselves: For it
said is in Chap. 9.5. It was given to the Locusts not to kill but torment men:
so then it is the proper work of the Locusts to torment and vex the
conscience by their deceits: And yet they are not ashamed falsely to accuse the
witnesses of Christ, as if they tormented the sons of men.

11. But after three dayes] We have heard the martyrdom of the witnesses, and
the triumph of Antichristians thereat. Now let us hear the catastrophe or
change. The witnesses that were slain are delivered and restored to life and
glory: the adversaries amazed, tremble and perish. Which serves to comfort us
against Antichrists cruelty: considering that unto us a certain deliverance
is here showed, but confusion to the adversaries. Let us therefore patiently
suffer his tyranny, for it shall neither dure long, nor hinder our salvation.
For being overcome we conquer. Eusebius. lib. 4. histor. cap. 12.
This caused Antoninus the Emperor to forbid the governors of Asia, to draw
the Christians before their tribunals, and punish them: because, says he, by
dying they overcome, for they rather choose to die for Christ, then to live.

After three dayes] That is, as Rupertus says well: After a little while,
although it seem long, see v. 9. First the miraculous vivification and
glorification of the witnesses is described. Secondly, the effects following
upon the enemies.

For the first: The spirit of life] That is their vital spirit by an Hebraisme,
or life, that is, the soul or ghost which they gave up at the hour of death is
said, to enter into them from God (that is, by a divine miracle) and that they
stood upon their feet: which phrases seem to be taken out of Ezech. 37: and
show both Gods omnipotency, by which he restores the dead to life as often as he
pleases: as also the immortality of the soul, which though separated from
the body, yet is not killed by tyrants, but does live with God, and shall
return from him into its own body again. Now to the sense.

The Papists take it for the miraculous restoration of the two witnesses Enoch
and Elias from death to life after three days: Papists opinion touching the
vivification of the two witnesses.
And Ribera disputes how the raising and glorification of the witnesses agrees
with that of Hebr. 11. That without us they might not be consummated, or
perfected. But their fabulous opinion touching Enoch and Elias has often been
refuted, the which is here also manifestly contradicted, in that the two
witnesses are said to have tormented the inhabitants of the earth. Now it is
absurd to imagine that two poor prophets should torment all the tribes,
peoples, nations and tongues of the whole earth in the space of three years.

So that this dualitie of the witnesses (so to speak) cannot be restrained to
two individuals, or unto two precisely.

Now however the vivification of the witnesses shall literallie come to pass
in the end of the world, yet unto that the spirit here has no respect at all.
But by this vivification is signified a perpetual restoring of witnesses unto
the Church militant, viz: that in stead of such whom Antichrist puts to death,
the Lord will raise up others to hold forth the testimony of Christ, and
strongly oppose the Beasts kingdom. For when Antichrist shall think that all
Christ's witnesses are suppressed, then others restored to life shall renew
again the battle against him. As therefore Elias is said to have lived again
in John Baptist, not by a Pythagorean (...), or transmigration of the soul out
of one body into another: but in condition or nature of office: because John
came in the power and spirit of Elias preparing the way for Christ: So the two
witnesses: As for example, John Husse, and Jerome of Prague being killed by the
Beast, they lived again after three days and an half in Luther, Melanchthon,
and others, etc. And to this purpose that of Husse being led to his martyrdom
does excellently serve: At the end, said he, of an hundred years (which before
God are scarsly three days) ye shall answer to God and to me. He said also,
now indeed ye burn a Goose (for Husse in the Bohemian tongue signifies a goose)
but out of his ashes shall arise a swanne, which ye shall not be able to roast.
Foretelling that which afterward came to pass, for just so many years after
Husse was burned, Luther begane to oppose Popish pardons, which was the
beginning of reformation, and bringing down of Popery.

This restoring of the witnesses to life, serves for the consolation of the
Church militant: feeing there shall always, (notwithstanding all Antichristian
persecution) be some faithful professors of the truth, who shall strongly
fight for the glory of Christ. So then if Antichrist kill the two witnesses,
God will again vivifie them, and make them to stand upon their feet, by
raising up others in their place.

That which is added touching the Glorification of the witnesses serves also to
comfort us. For to whom Antichrist shall deny the fellowship of men, to them
God will vouchsafe a heavenly fellowship: such as he shall exclude out of the
world, God will receive them up into paradise: they whom here he will not admit
to be honorably buried, them God will crown with the glory of everlasting
life. This is that which follows v. 12.

12. And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto them, Come up
hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld
them. 13. And the same hour was there a great eartquake, and the tenth part of
the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand, and
the remnant were afrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven. 14. The second
woe is past, and behold, the third woe comes quickly.
12. And they heard a great voyce] Not the enemies, but the witnesses restored
to life, heard this voice. This shall be Christ's voice, who according to his
promise will call his witnesses unto him into glory. It shall be Great, because
of the power thereof: for it shall bring the witnesses to glory, and strike a
terror into the adversaries.

Come up hither] To me into my glory, that where I am, ye may be also. Ioh.
17.24.

And they ascended up into heaven in a cloud] After Christ's example, who
ascending into heaven was taken up and received by a cloud. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
And often the clouds are called Gods chariot. Christ also shall return in a
cloud to judgment: And we shall be caught in the clouds to meet the Lord in
the air. Now to seek for other allegories in this cloud is needless.
Moreover this glorification of the Martyrs begins presently at their departure
out of this life, when their spirit goes unto the Lord: but shall be
comsummated in the last day, the which was shadowed out before in Chap. 6.
under the fifth seal.

Moreover this also serves for the honor and credit of the witnesses that the
Lord will wonderfully preserve their doctrine though condemned by Antichrist as
heretical, and propagate the same far and near in spite of all adversary
power whatsoever. Thus the world shall know, that they were no deceivers, but
the true witnesses of Jesus Christ. And therefore in this place the spirit does
animate the professors of the Gospel, least being terrifyed by the tyranny of
Antichrist they should prophecy the more remissely. If he labors to put them
to death, God will restore them to life. If he cast reproach on them in this
world: God will crown them with glory in heaven: For blessed are ye when men
persecute you: rejoice, for great is your reward in heaven, says Christ, Matt.
5.12.

And great fear shall fall upon them] He rehearses six kinds of effects
touching the enemies.

First, 1 The fear of the adversaries.
a great fear fell on them. On whom? Upon the beholders] A paraphrase of the
adversaries: before they beheld the dead witnesses with delight: but suddenly
they shall tremble at their vivification. What is the cause of this great fear?
because they shall feel (but to late) that they warred not with poor man, but
with God himself. And therefore they shall stand in fear of their kingdom,
treasures, praebends, and kitchins. They shall dread the judgment of God, but
not escape it. This is wonderful in our eyes: The wicked when they most rage,
do then tremble, and are forced even to fear them whom they prosecute with all
manner of hatred. Thus the Scribes persecuting Christ, were afraid, Ioh. 11.47.
What shall we do? for this man does many miracles: If we let him thus alone
all men will believe on him, and the Romans shall come, etc. Thus likewise the
chief Priests feared the Apostles who^ they persecuted: What shall we do (say
they) to these men? for that indeed a notable miracle has been don by them is
manifest, neither can we deny it, etc. Thus therefore howsoever convinced in
their consciences, yet they believe not the Gospel, but hate it the more by how
much they are afraid: because they see that their lies and impostures are
discovered and confuted by the truth and light of the Gospel. Therefore why
should we fear the Antichristians, who though they seem outwardly to carry
forth the matter with a high spirit: yet inwardly they tremble, and are
tormented with the wound of an evil conscience. Now such fears are not
prolonged: For what the wicked fear, that comes suddenly upon them.

And their enemies beheld them] The second effect of the witnesses
glorification, The astonishment of the adversaries.
is the astonishment of their enemies. For seeing them restored from death to
life, and their reproach turned into glory, they stand amazed: alluding (as
some think) to that in Wisd. 5.1. The just man shall stand with great
boldness before the wicked, who seeing it shall be troubled with terrible
fear, and shall be amazed at the strangeness of his salvation, saying is this
he whom we had sometimes in derision and a proverb of reproach: How is he
numbered with the children of God, and his lot is among the Saints? Thus the
wicked shall see Christ whom they have crucified with amazement, because being
convicted of their ungodlines and confounded with shame, they shall feel his
revenging hand. Hitherto the Romish Antichrists have seen the martyrs whom they
burnt at Constance, to be again restored to life in Luther, Melanchthon,
Martyr, and Calvin. They see them with amazement at this day glorified in their
doctrine, the which is both lifted up (they in vain resisting the same) and
daily propagated far and near to the honor and glory of God through diverse
provinces of the Christian world.

13. And there was a great earthquake the same hour] The third, fourth and fifth
effects do show the great destruction which Antichrists kingdom receives by
the restoration of the witnesses, as also declare the cause of the fear and
trembling of the wicked. They are afraid least that should come to pass, which
already is, viz. that the prophesying being renewed, a ruin should befall their
kingdom, as it is at this day.

The same houre] Some copies have it the same day (to wit) the witnesses were
vindicated, that is, a little after the witnesses were suppressed by
Antichrist, God restored them again.

A great earthquake] In Chap. sixth seal, Antichrist raised a great earthquake
against Christ: A great earthquake
when Pope Boniface the third being declared UNIVERSAL Bishop of the Church by
Phocas the tyrant, caused an horrible shakeing of the Christian world by
bringing all Bishops and Churches under his yoke. For thereupon followed an
universal change and miserable deformity of the Church. But in the last times
Christ likewise will raise a great earthquake against Antichrist, when by the
preaching of the Gospel he shall so shake his kingdom, as that it shall
totter and come to ruin, howbeit he had by his deceit and tyranny formerly so
established it, as if it had been invincible.

To this earthquake appertain the seditions, wars, tumults, disputations,
alterations of opinions and great contentions raised up about religion
throughout the whole Papacy after the restitution of the Gospel. And indeed
suddenly after the Council at Constance, an earthquake grievously shook the
Papacy. For the Bohemians to revenge the cruel death of their two witnesses,
fell in a hostile manner upon the Popish Clergy, suppressing the armies of the
Empire sent against them, and obtained many singular victories over their
adversaries. It is true the earthquake ceased a little while after the Council
of Basil by the COMPACTATA (as they called them) granted unto the Bohemians:
But not long after by the preaching of Luther in Saxony: of Zwinglius in
Helvetia: of Viret in France, there followed a more grievous shaking,
accomplishing that which here follows.

And the tenth part of the great city fell] This Ribera purposely passes by:
The ruin of the tenth part of the city.
for he would not expound that, which evide^tly happened unto the Papacy by the
preaching of the Gospel. For the great city is the kingdom of the Roman
Antichrist, whereof Rome, Babylon and Sodom is the head, the which indeed was
not wholly overthrown by the preaching of Luther and other ministers of the
Gospel, but the tenth part thereof fell, that is the jurisdiction, religion
and tyranny of the Pope was much diminished through Germany, together with his
revenues, annuities, Commendums and holy tribute. For Germany by embracing the
Gospel returned from Antichrist to Christ, and hence worthily is accounted the
tenth pa^^ of the great city.

But thou will say, Germany is not wholly fallen off from the Pope: For it yet
has very many Archbishops, Bishops, and others of the hierarchy, sworn Vassals
of Antichrist. What then? seeing some other whole kingdoms, as Great Britain,
Denmarck, and Sweden: or in part, as France, Poland, Pannonia, have supplied
that defect, by rejecting the Pope and embracing the faith. These things are so
clear as that they cannot be denied. The fifth effect follows.

Alcasar here understands this great earthquacke to be the conversion of
Jerusalem unto the faith. But indeed he rightly laughs at the fiction of the
ruin of the tenth part thereof at Antichrists coming.

And there were slain seven thousand names of men] Names, are here put, The
slaughter of Antichristian.
for persons as Chap. 3.4. A definite number, for a great many: for the number
seven, is perfect: as in the history of Elias, God says, he had reserved to
himself seven thousand, who had not bowed their knees to Baal, that is, very
many. Now these names are the Antichristian adversaries, who perished by the
ruin of the tenth part of the city. But how? some understand it of the bloody
wars and commotions which Antichrist to his own hurt has raised up against
the Gospel. For many millions of his followers have been consumed by this
means, to the exceeding loss of the great city. But perhaps not less, but
rather more blood of the Saints has been shed by Antichristians in the civil
wars of France, Spain, England, the Low countries and other where.

Others therefore do rather understand it of the spiritual destruction of the
adversaries by the preaching of the Gospel: for by it many of the Papists
being the more blinded, hardened and enraged have eternally perished.

Brightman interprets it of the Popish Clergy, who by the rising of the Gospel
being spoiled of the revenues and yearly profits of their Monasteries and
Colleges, were bereaved of their delight and former luxuriousnes, and put to
such an exigent, as either to labor, or starve for hunger: But I rather allow
the former, because of that which follows.

And the remnant were afrighted] The last effect is good, The conversion of
many to the faith of the Gospel.
noting the conversion of the ^est of men from Popery unto the faith of Christ.
For the ruin of the tenth part of the great Antichristian eity, shall be the
building of Christ's little city. Many therefore in the forsaid provinces
observing the wonderful work of God in preserving and propagating the Gospel,
were afraid any longer to resist the truth, but gave glory to God by forsaking
the lies and idols of the Papacy. Now touching these things we may behold them
as in a table, by which we have a plain description the very events, partly in
the histories of our times, and partly by what we daily see with our own eyes,
so that we need not have recourse unto ancient comme^taries.

14. The second woe is past] This is a transition from the third Act unto the
fourth.

Woe] He notes the calamities by the effect: for calamities cause woe unto the
flesh. In Chap. 8.23. an Angel flying through the midst of heaven proclaimed
three woes to happen under the sounding of three trumpets. The first woe under
the fifth trumpet were the calamities of the Godly under the Western
Antichrist, even from the time of his rising until the Council of Constance.
The second woe of the sixth trumpet is yet to this day under both Antichrists
viz. the Turk in the East, and the Pope in the West.

The first did praefigure the calamities of the godly alone. The second the
calamities common both to the godly and the wicked. Now follows the third woe,
only belonging unto the wicked, and which shall come to pass under the last
trumpet.

Is past] Not in event, seeing it was then to come, but in vision and
description, as if he should say, hitherto I have described the second woe: the
third remains to be described.

Comes quickly] For shall come. This he opposes to the security of the
Antichristians, as Chap. 1. v. 1.3. And if then they were not far off, how much
nearer are they now to us after so many ages, the seventh Angel being at hand,
to summon men to judgment by the last trumpet.

The second part of the Chapter.
The scound of the seventh Trumpet at the last judgment. Containing the fourth
Act of this Vision.
15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven,
saying, the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and
of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.

16. And the four and twenty Elders which sat before God on their seats,
fell upon their faces, and worshipped God,

17. Saying, we give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast,
and art to come, because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and have
reigned.

18. And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the
dead, that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward unto thy
servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear thy Name, small
and great, and should destroy them, which destroy the earth.

19. And the Temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his
Temple, the Arc of his Testament, and there were lightnings, and voices, and
thundrings, and an earthquake, and great hayle.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd the seventh Angel sounded] Of this Angel interpreters write diversely. The
fiction of Lyra I pass by.

Gagnaeus understands thereby the seventh order of good men or preachers, Who
is this seventh Angel.
who after Antichrists death and near about the last day shall preach the
Gospel: the which he takes from the common fiction, that Antichrist shall die
forty and five days before the last judgment. But Antichrist shall be destroyed
by none, save by the brightness of the coming of Christ.

Alcasar speaks little of him: but applies the trumpet to the obstinacy of
the Jews, and election of the Gentiles: Which thing is unworthy of any
refutation. For the nations here are not said to be elected, but angry:
besides the very matter it self shows, that these things appertain unto the
last times.

Brightman takes this Angel to have sounded anno 1558. when there were great
voices in heaven, that is, much joy in the reformed Church for the restoration
of Christ's kingdom in Germany: at what time Q: Elisabeth also began to reign
and restore the sincere preaching of the Gospel in England, etc. But it is
plain, the words are to be applied unto the last day, when both the living and
the dead, good and bad, shall come to judgment: and therefore cannot be
restrained to such a sense.

More truly therefore Fox, Alphonsus, Bullinger, Tossanus, Marlorate, The
seventh trumpet foretells the last judgment.
with the rest of our interpreters (a few only excepted) acknowledge that the
seventh trumpet is the messenger of the last day: in which the kingdoms of the
adversaries being overthrown and abolished, Christ will immediately restore his
kingdom, casting the wicked into eternal punishment, and receiving the elect
into endless glory: And this exposition of the trumpet plainly appears to be
right from Chap. 10. v. 7. where Christ the strong Angel expressly swears that
the seventh Angel when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be
finished. It is also evident from the text. For in the last judgment and not
before, all kingdoms of the earth become Gods and Christ's, that God may be all
in all: Then shall be the time of Gods wrath, and of the dead, that they may be
judged, that the Martyrs, Prophets and servants of Christ may receive an
eternal reward of their labors, and the wicked who destroyed the earth,
perish for ever and ever.

Therefore many of the Ancients, as Andreas, Bid, Aretas, A fained
anticipation justly reproved.
Primasius and others follow this opinion. Ribera also acknowledges the same:
but faineth that these things are here brought in by way of Anticipation, which
Alcasar justly reproves: For what probable cause can there be imagined of an
anticipation? or reason that John by and by should return again by a regression
unto the war of Antichrist? This inconvenience they al run into, who observe
not the order and method of these Apocalypticall visions, the which being
neglected, we must needs wander as in a wood.

So then here is described the fourth and last Act of the third Vision, The
fourth Act of the third Vision.
containing the third Woe, that is, Gods horrible judgments which shall be
powered out in the last day universally upon all wicked men, adversaries,
tyrants, heretics, hypocrites, Antichrist and his locusts: the which indeed
shall be an happy change of the Churches calamities.

Now touching the seventh Angel, he is no other but that Archangel, Who is the
seventh Angel: and what the seventh trumpet.
the publisher of Christ's coming with a shout and great voice. The seventh
trumpet is that last trumpet of God, with which Christ shall descend from
heaven, and call both living and dead unto judgment, 1. These. 4.16. and 1.
Cor. 15.52.

The members of this Act (as we showed in the analysis) are three. The first is
the heavenly triumph, because the kingdoms of the world are become Gods and
Christ's. v. 15. The second is a triumphing song of the four and twenty elders,
rendering thanks and praises to Christ for the deliverance of the Church, and
entreating him to bridle the wrath of the adversaries by his judgment, and
render rewards unto the godly, and due punishments unto the wicked, ver. 16.17,
18.

The third is the execution of judgment on both, ver. 19.

The scope is, to set forth the consolation of the godly at last: for howsoever
the Church on earth be in war against Antichrist, yet she shall at length
triumph with Christ in heaven.

And there were great voices in heaven] These are not the voices of mourners,
Great voices of rejoycings.
but of them that rejoice, tow it, of the blessed Angels and souls of the
Saints in heaven, as appears by the subject of the matter. But did not John
threaten the third Woe? Yea he did so, but not to the heavenly inhabitants, nor
unto the servants of God, but to the adversaries, not in heaven, but upon the
earth. Before the Woes therefore of the enemies (called in other places of
scripture, gnashing of the teeth, the worm that dies not, unquencheable fire,
tribulation and anguish, and here are named lightnings, voices, thunders,
earthquakes and hail, etc.) John heard the joy of them that were in heaven,
celebrating with songs the equity and righteousness of the judgment to come. So
then the third Woe shall fall, not upon the godly, as the two former woes did
on both Antichrists, but upon the adversaries, whom Christ will cast into the
lake of fire and brimstone. And thus the first apparition or company of the 24
Elders shall with songs of triumph put an end unto this third Vision.

The kingdoms of this world are become] Montanus in the kings edition has it
in the singular number (...) the kingdom of this world is made or become: but
al other books have it in the plural (according to our translation) (...): the
sense being all one. Now it is (as I said) the triumph and joy of Angels and
Saints in heaven, because the mystery of God was finished, according to the
praediction in Chap. 10.7. that is, because at last Christ's kingdom was
delivered out of all danger, and the power of the adversaries trodden under
foot: The sense is thus: The adversaries had violently taken into their
possession the kingdoms of the world, thrusting out, as much as lay in them,
Christ: But now the kingdoms are returned unto Christ, who henceforward (all
enemies being destroyed) shall reign alone.

Of our Lord and of Christ] And, here is declarative, for, of our Lord, who is
Christ. So often the Apostle, God and the Father, for, God who is the Father.
But does not Christ even now also reign? Psa. 2.6. Heb. 2.8. Phil. 2.9.
Yea verily, for he sits at the right hand of God: God has set his king upon
his holy hill of Sion: And put all things under his feet: And unto him is given
a name above every name. But then at length he truly shall reign, that is,
declare that he reigns, when having thrown down the Pope, Turk, and all
other tyrants and adversaries from their thrones, he shall alone with the
Father and holy Ghost rule the elect Angels and Men. The best interpreter of
this place is Paul, 1 Cor. 15. ver. 24. Then comes the end when CHRIST shall
have delivered up the kingdom to God and the Father, and shall have put down
all rule and all authority and power. For he must reign, till he has put all
enemies under his feet: and when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall
the son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that
God may be all in all.

But thou will say, How Christ shall deliver up the kingdom to the Father, and
yet reign for ever.
how shall Christ reign for ever and ever, if, as it is there said, he shall
deliver the kingdom to God and the Father? I answer, he shall deliver the
kingdom to God, not by resigning up the kingdom, but by ceasing to reign
after that manner as hitherto he had done. Now he reigns by the means of his
word, sacraments and ministers, gathering to himself and sanctifying the Church
here on earth: Then he shall reign by immediate illumination and glorification
of the Saints in heaven. Now he rules in the midst of his enemies, Psalm.
110.2. 1 Cor. 15.25. Then he shall reign alone without enemies. Now Antichrist
Christ's corrival with all deceiveablenes of unrighteousness and by the power
of Satan, does subject the kingdoms of the world unto himself,

Then he shall be thrown down and abolished by the brightness of Christ's coming.
Now God and Christ have a divided empire (so to speak) with Satan, the Pope,
and other tyrants, who challenge much unto themselves. But then all enemies
shall be abolished, God and Christ shall have a full and entire kingdom over
all: because they shall be all in all things. Christ the Son therefore shall reign
with the Father and holy Ghost for ever and ever, and not for a thousand years
only, (as the Chiliasts dream) of which afterward.

16. Then those four and twenty Elders] The company of the four and twenty
Elders do also with the other heavenly inhabitants give thanks to God for the
vindication and deliverance of the Church and kingdom of Christ: beseeching
him to execute his last judgment. Touching the Elders we have heard Chap. 4.4.
One of them Chap. 7.23. concluded the second Vision, and expounded to John the
glory of the blessed Martyrs. Here all of them shut up this third Vision, with
a song of triumph: not much unlike unto that in Chap. 4. and 5. It contains a
thanksgiving and a prayer. They give thanks to the Lord God almighty, which
is, which was, and which is to come] that is, either to Christ, or unto the
holy Trinity, as before on Chap. 1.8. But for what benefit?

Because thou have taken to thee thy great power and have reigned] But what
good comes hereby unto the Elders? indeed they have great cause to rejoice for
these benefits, considering that they serve to the eternal felicity of the
Church triumphant. Hitherto the Lord in suffering the fury of the adversaries
did seem not to exercise his great power, that is, his omnipotency: and Christ
to be overcome by Antichrist: but at length by taking, that is, by exercising
and showing forth his power in casting down the adversaries, he delivered the
afflicted Church out of all her trouble: and by reigning blesses her with
eternal happiness. Romans 14.17.
The kingdom of God is righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost. And God
shall then perfectly reign, when as he shall give to his elect eternal
righteousness, peace and the joy of the spirit. Of this see the description in
the end of the second Vision Chap. 7. v. 15.16.17.

18. And the nations were angry] Now follows their wish or prayer. For by
putting God and Christ (as it were) in mind of the time of judgment, they
humbly beseech him that he would most justly execute the same, according to the
prophesies of the scripture.

The nations were angry] This is as it were a former reason: Because the
nations are angry, as if he should say, they have bin angry, that is, raged
long enough against Christ and the Church. It is time therefore that thou also
be angry, that is, repress the angry nations. Thus he calls all
adversaries whatsoever, whither Jews, Turks or Christians falsely so named.

Thy wrath] That is, thy vengeance and judgment, or wrath for punishments, by
a metalepsis as Romans 2.5.

Is come] For let it come.

And the time] namely, is come, the which thou have defined in ty eternal
counsel; Unknown indeed unto mortal men, but then revealed by Christ unto them
in heaven: For without a special revelation no man knows that day, save God
alone: But what time?

Of the dead] That is, to be raised. Some take it of the wicked only, dead in
sins. But the following distribution of them which are to be judged comprehends
all, both good and bad.

For it is added, That they should be judged] But the godly shall not come
into judgment, Jo. 5.24. He that believes on him that sent me has eternal
life, and shall not come into judgment: But (...) judgment is there put for
(...) condemnation, and therefore Beza has so rendered it. So then the elect
shall come to judgment: for all must stand before the tribunal seat of Christ,
however they shall come to be absolved and not condemned. And therefore the
Elders further add. Two companies of them that are to be judged.


That thou should give reward] They make two sorts of people of such as shall
be judged, some to be rewarded, the other to be destroyed: as Christ in Matthew.
25. and Joh. 5. The reward of their faith shall be given them, and of their
obedience, constancy, patience, labors and miseries. What reward? eternal
life and glory. Unto whom? They make three sorts of such as shall be rewarded.
Three ranks of such as are to be rewarded.


First they place, Gods servants the prophets: thereby comprehending the
faithful of more special note whither under the Law or Gospel, as Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, etc. who were Gods servants by a more then
orninary vocation.

Secondly the Saints, to wit confessors and martyrs, who either by sincere
preaching, or constant martyrdom have held forth the glory of Christ against
Antichrist. Under whom are comprehended all faithful teachers and preachers of
the word, called Saints by an Hebraisme, as separated to some special work.

In the third place, they add the fearers of Gods name, that is, all other
faithful ones (besides the two former companies) who from the beginning of the
world unto the end thereof have worshipped the Lord in sincerity. What it is to
fear the name of God.
For to fear the name of God, is to worship him sincerely, to call upon him,
and love him above all: because the fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom, and godliness.

Great and small] They show that the reward is common unto all, without any
difference of merit either of greater or lesser condition and state: to the
end, that neither the great ones should promise unto themselves a greater
reward, or the others despair of the same recompense. Popish Sophisters
dispute much touching the degrees of glory, which rather proceeds out of
their own brain, and from a false supposed foundation of humane merits, then
from the Scriptures of God. But whither the Lord will crown his servants with
equal or unequal glory, it shall not be according to their merit, but merely of
his own grace. And this is all Jovinian (against whom Jerome wrote) pleaded for,
except I be deceived, viz. that unto all who kept their baptism, there should
be one recompense in the kingdom of God. For he seems not to disapprove of a
degree of reward, but of merit. The crown of righteousness propounded unto all
the faithful.
Paul the Apostle who was taken up into the third heaven, and inferior to none
of the Saints, shows us, that for him was laid up a crown of righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous judge would give him at that day, and not unto him
only, but unto all that love his appearing. This same crown of righteousness
the Elders do promise unto the Prophets, and Saints, and all the fearers of
the name of God. This suffices for our faith and consolation. Let us leave
disputing in this life touching the differences of the crown, and rather
endeavor, so to walk, as that we may be made partakers thereof in the life to
come.

That thou should give reward] Here falls in a question. For a reward is
given of merit and debt. Therefore say some, the reward of eternal life is
given unto the Saints, as a due debt: otherwise it would not be called a
reward. Now it is not only here so called, Mat. 5.12. and 20.8. 1 Cor. 3.8.
Romans 4.4.
but in many other places: Great is your reward in heaven. Give unto them their
reward or hire. Every one shall receive his own reward according to his own
labor. But to him that works the reward is not given of grace, but of debt.
Thus the mercenarie adversaries of grace dispute. But how eternal life is said
to be a reward, appears by the words of the Apostle: The wages of sin is
death: but the gift of God is life eternal. Romans 6.23 Ephesians. 2.9.
It is the gift of God: not of works least any man should glory. Now all
gifts are gratis, (and not due debts.) Forasmuch therefore as eternal life is a
gift, Eternal life is mercy not merit.
it is of mercy, and not of merit. And it is called a reward not due, but
freely given, such a reward as a father gives to his son: not as a master unto
his hired servant.

Neither is it contradictorie that the Apostle denies, that a reward is given
of grace. For he denies it of a reward of works: To him that works, says
he, the reward is not imputed of grace but of works. Now we deny that life
eternal is said to be such a reward. For not to workers but to believers is
this reward given.

They insist out of Thomas: Thom. 1. secundae quaest. 114. ad 1.
that it is not indeed given of debt in order of justice, but yet that it is
given of debt by divine ordination, in as much as every promise becomes a debt.
I answer: That the divine appointment is not, that we should by our merits
obtain eternal life: or that eternal life should be given to any of merit:
but Gods appointment according unto the Gospel is this, that eternal life be
given, not to them that work, but to them that believe: not of debt but of
grace: for the gift of God is life eternal. Faith works indeed (because it is
operative through Charity) but it does not therefore work that it may merit,
but to the end that due obedience may be performed to the Lord. For no debt can
be said to be a merit.

But thou will say, Howfar a promise becomes a debt.
every promise becomes a debt. This is true amongst men, with whom there is a
natural and legal obligation. But that Gods promise should come under the
nature of a debt, it is false: Both because their is no proportion between God
who is infinite, and a finite creature, neither any obligation on Gods part: as
also because as well the promise, as the thing promised is of mere grace. For it
is of grace (I say) that he promises to give, and whatsoever he does give, he
gives it of grace.

But they say, God by promise becomes indebted unto us. This Aquinas himself
denies, saying, It follows not that God simply becomes a debtor to us, but
unto himself. Se Bellarm. castigat. lib, 5. in prooem. and cap. 3.14.16. de
justif.

And destroy them that destroy the earth] The other sort to be judged, are such
as shall be destroyed with unquencheable fire, and eternal torments. For (...)
signifying to corrupt, is not so to destroy them, as if they should cease to
be; like as it is in natural corruption, the which is motus ab esse ad non
esse, a dissolution from a being to nothing: but to thrust them into
punishment, so as they shall not be blessed, but miserable for ever.

Who destroy the earth] A paraphrase of such as are to be destroyed, among the
number of whom chiessy are tyrants, heretics and both Antichrists: The son
of perdition destroys the earth.
who in a special manner destroyed the earth, that is, the inhabitants of the
earth, by fire and sword, by destructive laws and doctrines, by wicked manners
and examples. This is a most proper note of Antichrist; who therefore is called
the son of perdition and (...), because being lost himself and devoted to
destruction, he destroys the earth, like a robber killing souls and drawing
men by all deceiveablenes of unrighteousnes and lying signs with himself into
eternal destruction. So Chap. 19.2. The whore is said, to corrupt the earth
with her fornication: And therefore as Antichrist is a destroyer, so he shall be
rewarded with a final destruction.

Hitherto is the description of the last judgment, the which by no show of
reason can be applied to any other thing: neither is it here put by way of
anticipation, but repeated in a right order, as being the last Act of the
third Vision: the which order they who observe not in this book, do vainly
weary themselves with many subtilties.

19. And the temple of God was opened in heaven] Here some begin the following
Vision. But these things cohere with that which went before: For John shows
allegorically the execution of the last judgment: viz. the reward of the
Saints, and punishment of the wicked.

The temple of God in heaven] That is the Church triumphant, in which God
dwells as in a temple.

It shall then be opened when the heavenly glory thereof shall fully appear:
For now indeed it is inward and hid: and therefore the magnificence of the
temple, being as it were shut, is not perspicuous. But then the temple of God
shall be opened, when the Church shall appear most glorious.

And the Ark of the testament was seen] He persists in the allegory of the
ancient temple: In the inmost part whereof was kept the Ark of the covenant (a
type of Christ) being not to be seen of any save once a year by the High
priest: signifying that Christ of old was hid, and as through a lattice the
people then had but a small glimpse of him. Under the New Testament he appeared
in the flesh, but in a lowly way, neither is his glory yet seen in the Gospel,
but by faith. But after the judgment, the Ark of the covenant shall be seen in
heaven, that is, Christ shall so appear as he is in heavenly glory unto his
elect.

Now we see through a glass darkly, but then we shall see him face to face.
The sight of God is the Saints felicity.
This Vision shall be the Saints happiness, viz. when Christ shall present
himself to be perfectly beheld and enjoyed, and fully perfect the grace of
his covenant.

And there were lightnings] Before Chap. 4.5. in the praeparation of the second
Vision there proceeded out of the throne, lightnings and thundrings, and
voices: and Chap. 8.5. in the praeparation of the third Vision the Censer
being cast into the earth, there were voices and thunders and lightnings and
an earthquake: The wickeds pitnishment.
but in sense far different, then it is in the catastrophe or change of this
Vision. For now John in the description of the last judgment, as he showed the
felicity of the Saints allegorically: so he represents the punishments of the
wicked metaphorically, by the lightnings, thunders, voices, earthquakes, and
great hail oppressing them. These things shall be the terrible signs of the
wrath to come, when the heaven, earth and all the elements shall conspire
together to take vengeance on the wicked, according to that in the Psalmist:
Psalm. 11.6.
he will rain upon the wicked, snares, fire and brimstone, and wind of burning
storms shall be the portion of their cup.

Our Tossanus to the same purpose, understands here the shaking of the whole
frame of this world, and melting of the elements, of which Peter speaks,
together with the destruction of the wicked. The like is spoken Chap. 16.18. at
the pouring forth of the seventh Vial, in Vision the fifth. Thus much touching
the third Vision and seven trumpets. The fourth Vision follows touching the
Woman, and the Beasts.

The fourth Vision. Touching the Woman in travail, and flying into the
wilderness from the dragon, and of the two Beasts, etc.
THE PRAEFACE.
THey who think that in the prophecy of the Revelation, a continued history
of the Church is linked together, even from Christ's first coming unto the
second: begin the same from this Chapter, in which it seems the new birth of
the Church is represented. But at the very first they run into a great
inconvenience. For they are forced to bring in such an hyperbaton, and confused
order of the history, as cannot be defended: For, that which was first, ought
not to have been omitted til now, but to have been described in the first place.

Wherefore their opinion is far better, who observe that in this book, the
condition of the Church on earth is sundry times showed unto John in certain
distinct Visions, as in the beginning we noted. Neither is the iteration to be
thought needless: for however in the nature and kind of the events most of
the visions are alike: yet in the species and indiviaduals they represent unto
us histories much different, in so much that what is in the former was more
dark and obscure, is in the later clearer and fuller set down. And hence by
diligent comparing of the Visions each with other, aman shall have a singular
help to remove that obscurity which appears in this prophecy.

After the three Visions therefore formerly expounded, The first whereof
specially concerns Christ's walking in the midst of the candelsticks, and his
admonishing the teachers of the Churches in Asia touching their duty: The other
two generally respect the book sealed with seven seals, The sum of the
fourth Vision.
and opened by the Lamb, with the seven trumpets of the Angels: Now the fourth
is exhibited to John, touching the woman in travail, and the dragon standing
to devour her child and persecuting her, and of the two Beasts warring against
the Saints: as also of the Lamb overcomming them, and of the Angels preaching
at the last harvest and vintage: Chap. 12.13.14. In which types the future
condition of the Church in this world is much more evidently shadowed out then
before, even from the first beginning thereof under Christ and the ministry
of the Apostles, until the end. For the Church shall have to do with the
Dragon and the Beasts, and be miserably afflicted and tried by them, yet she
sufficiently armed from heaven for so grievous combats, at last shall
gloriously triumph over all her adversaries.

This Vision is also universal, manifestly consisting of four Acts, The four
Acts thereof.
like the two former general visions.

The first Act contains the proposition of the Churches calamities at her
birth and growth under the Jewish and Roman tyrants persecuting the woman: as
also under heretics laboring through the instinct of the Dragon to devour
her with the floodes of errors and heresies, Chap. 12. It answers to the
four former seals of the second Vision, and to the first four trumpets of the
third Vision, representing the history of the Church for the space of 606
years, viz. from the birth of Christ until the rising of Antichrist.

The second Act is opposed to the former, and contains comfort for the Church
against the wrath of the Dragon, and floodes of heresies sent forth against
her: because the child of the Woman is caught up into heaven: and Michael the
Archangel fights for her against the Dragon: The woman with Eagles wings is
carried into the wilderness, hiding herself from the sight of men: The earth
swalloweth up the Dragons vomit. This Act is mingled with the former in the
same Chapter: it answers to the fifth seal of the second Vision: and to the
tenth chapter treating of the mighty Angel standing upon the earth and sea,
Vision the third.

The third Act has two parts.

The first part is of the Antichristian persecution, representing the
amplification of the Churches calamities, or the new and more grievous
conflicts which she sustained during her abode in the wilderness against
Antichrist: whose kingdom, power, cruelty and subtlety is set forth under
the image of Beasts Chap. 13. This part answers to the sixth seal of Vision
the second: and to the fifth trumpet of Vision the third.

The latter part is opposed to the former in way of a parallel: being
consolatory to the godly, prefiguring Christ's presence in his deserted Church,
and his preserving of the same against the Beasts: as also the reformation that
should be in the latter times through the Angels, that is, new teachers of
truth and godliness, who by their preaching should oppose the Babylonish
Antichrist: and bring men back again into the right way of salvation. chap.
14. unto ver. 14. This part answers to the former part of chap. 7. touching
the 144000 that were sealed by the Angel in Vision second, and to the former
part of chapt. 11. of the meting of the temple, and prophecy of the two
witnesses in Vision third: And this whole Act appertains unto the history of
the Church, which now from Antichrists rising has continued 1035 years, and
shall perhaps remain unto the end of the 1260 days, or yet for the space of
225 years, but this is only known unto the Lord.

To be short; the fourth Act from v. 14. unto the end of chap. 14. under the
type of an Angel gathering in the harvest, and vintage of the earth, represents
the last judgment, in which the Church at length being freed from all trouble
shall be blessed with eternal glory: But Antichrist with all his followers cast
into the lake of Gods eternal wrath. This part answers to the latter member
of Chapter the seventh, touching the melody of the Church triumphant, in Vision
second: as also to the latter part of Chapter 11: concerning the joyful song
of the Elders, in Vision third. Thus we have the whole distribution of this
Vision.

The Argument, Parts, and Analysis of CHAPTER XII.
THis Chapter, (in which as we have said is shadowed out the first and second
Act of Vision fourth under the type of a woman in travel, and a Dragon opposing
of her: and of Michael fighting for the woman against the Dragon) does
represent the state of the Church even from her infancy: with the changes of
her after age: for at the very first she was cruelly set upon by Satan: yet
powerfully defended from heaven by Christ, so as neither the devils cruelty,
nor tyrants rage, nor the deceits of wicked heretics could overcome her:
although she were forced to flee into the wilderness, and to withdraw herself
from the sight of men.

The parts of the Chapter are two.
I. Two great signs are showed unto John in heaven: of a woman in travel, and
a Dragon standing before her to devour her child v. 1.2.3.4. II. The history
and event of both these signs: unto the end.
In the former part is described the first sign, 1. From the adjunct of the
magnitude: It was a great sign. 2. From the place: It was in heaven: 3. From
the form: It was a woman; who is described by three external adjuncts.
She was clothed with the Sun, she had the Moon under her feet, and a crown of
stars on her head ver. 1. Three internal also: she was with child, travailed
in birth, and for pain cried to be delivered verse. 2. The latter sign is
described; 1. from the place, it was seen in heaven. 2. From the form, it was a
Dragon. 3. From the quantity, it was great. 4. From the color, red. 5. From
the monstrous shape; having seven heads, ten horns, and seven crowns, v. 3. 6.
From a double cruelty: with his tail he cast the third part of the stars from
heaven to the earth, and stood to devour the Woman's child v. 4.


1: the woman's fruit or child, by a threefold description. 1. His sex, a man
child: 2. His office, a ruler of the nations:

The Woman's flight, sustentation and abode in the desert, the which is inserted
by an anticipation, ver. 6. For the woman did not fly presently, but after the
Dragon was cast out of heaven, and she received wings v. 14. The war that was:
the place whereof is noted to be, in heaven: the Combatants, Michael and the
Dragon with their Angels on both sides, v. 7. And the catastrophe or success
of the battle, Michaels victory, the Dragons overthrow: with a threefold
description of the said Dragon: he is that old serpent: the calumniator, and
seducer of the whole world, v. 8.9. And the effect, a song of praises of some
in heaven (not named) in which they celebrate three benefits of this victory:
viz. that the kingdom of God and Christ is vindicated: that the Church militant
is freed from the accusation of the conquered Dragon, v. 10. and that the
Church also herself was a conqueror of the Dragon, showing three causes
thereof: one principal and meritious viz. the blood of the Lamb: two
ministerial: the word of their testimony and constancy in the faith v. 11. 2.
They gratulate the heavens and them that dwell in them for this victory, v. 12.
They denounce woe to the inhabiters of the earth and sea, for three causes: one
efficient: because the devil was come down unto them: two moving causes:
because he was full of wrath: having but a little time. Ibid. two wings of an
Eagle were given her. 2. The form: she flue out of the sight of the Dragon. 3.
The place: into the wilderness. 4. The end: there to be nourished. 5. The time:
for a time, times and half a time, v. 14. He vomiteth out waters to drown her:
v. 15. earth swallowing up the waters. ver. 16. The Dragons wrath: and war
against the rest of the woman's seed:

The first part of the Chapter. Two signs in heaven: of the woman in travel
and the Dragon watching to devour her child.
1. And there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the Sun,
and the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars:

2. And she being with child, cried, travailing in birth, and pained to be
delivered.

3. And there appeared another wonder in heaven, and behold, a great red dragon
having seven heads, and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his head.

4. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast
them to the earth, and the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be
delivered for to devour her child as soon as it was borne.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd there was seen] This Vision goes up higher with the condition of the new
Church then hitherto has bin don in the other, viz. from the very birth of
Christ, at which time the Church of the Gospel began to be born. For it is
apparent that here is represented, the first birth, infancy, and youthful
condition of the new Church, both how it was born, educated and accepted in the
world. Therefore howsoever in this prophecy are represented unto John not
things that were already past, but to come: nevertheless the nienty six
years, which were from the birth of Christ until the time of this revelation,
that is, from the 42 year of Augustus unto the 14 year of Domitian, are also
included in this vision: and hence we see that it is more full and perfect then
the others.

(...) was seen] to me, or by me.

(...) a sign or wonder] An image represented either to the eyes, or
understanding. It is more probable it was a mental vision, because of the
circumstances, which could not well al of them have been corporally acted.

Great] In signification, that is, shadowing out great and wonderful things.
For what can be more wonderful, then that a cruel dragon should stand ready to
devour the child of a weak woman in travail, and yet not prevail.

In heaven] Here I seek no mystery, because these mental apparitions were
exhibited to John in heaven.

A woman clothed with the sun] Ribera here moves two great and difficult
questions, Riberas two questions weighed.
as he calls them: One: what woman this was: whither the Church? or the always
blessed virgin Marie? because some things agree to Marie: as that it is a woman
clothed with the sun: that she brought forth a man child ruling the nations
with a rod of iron, etc. Some things agree not, that she cried for pain in
travail: that she fled into the desert, etc. Again, it seems not to agree to
the Church: to bring forth a man child ruling the nations with a rod of iron:
because the Church did not beget Christ, but is begotten of him through his
word: that also the dragon is said, leaving the woman, to fight with her seed,
etc. At length he concludes out of Methodius with Cesariensis, that not the
virgin Marie, but the Church is the woman here spoken of.

The other question, as he says, is more difficult: Whither this be spoken
concerning the Church in her first state, that is, before Christ coming, or at
his first coming, or of that state which she shall be in, in the last age of the
world. Now rejecting the former opinion, he supposes that all is to be
referred unto the last time of the Church, and the four years reign of his
Antichrist: and his reason is, because the woman's flight, and her abode in the
wilderness 1260 days, as also the fight of Michael with the Dragon, do
altogether belong to Antichrists time.

But I think I can move here a far more difficult question, A more difficult
question about the woman.
that is, whither this woman flying into the wilderness, be not the same, whom
John saw in the wilderness sitting on the scarlet colored Beast, or another: of
all which questions I will speak a few things.

As for the first; The Monkish fable touching Mary's assumption is not hence
proved.
This Vision makes nothing for the establishing of the Monkish dreams and
pictures of the virgin Mary's corporal assumption into heaven, and placing
her on the Throne of the Trinity, her being queen of heaven, and so clothed
as the woman here appeared to John. These are mere apocriphal fictions, and
contradictorie to Christian relegion: Yea themselves also confess that this
type does not in many things agree with their fables.

This woman is a type of the Churches birth under the New Testament, alluding
to the history of Christ being borne of the virgin Mary: for the history of
Christ's coming in the flesh, does partly literally, and partly allegorically
very well represent the future condition of the Church.

This woman brought forth a man child: A historical comparing of this type
with Marie and Christ. Mat. 2.13
so in the fulness of time God sent his son made of a woman Gal. 4.4.

The Dragon lays wait for the woman's child: so Herod the tyrant sought to kill
Christ as soon as he was born.

The Woman with Eagles wings flies into the wilderness: so Mary being admonished
of God, fled with the child into the deserts of Egypt.

The Woman was there sustained, and kept 1260 days: so Mary remained in Egypt
near four years until the death of Herod.

The Dragon cast forth a flood of waters after the Woman to devour her: So
Herod after Mary's flight, murdered all the infants of Bethlehem of two years
old and upward, that among them he might slay the woman's child.

To be shortt, the child of the woman was caught up into heaven, unto the
throne of God, and made the feeder and ruler of all nations: so Christ having
finished the work of our redemption, ascended into heaven, and is set down on
the throne of the Father, having all power in heaven and in earth.

These things are now represented unto John, not as historical, seeing he was
no way ignorant of them: neither as things to come to pass afterward, seeing
they were already don: but as types of future things, mystically setting forth
the future condition of the Church in this life.

For as the virgin Marie once brought forth Christ corporally: so the Church
continually (as it were) in travail, brings him forth in his members
spiritually. Se Gal. 4.19.

Herod persecuted Mary with her child: so that old Dragon by tyrants and other
enemies shall persecute the Church with her members. The allegory of the Church
and Christ's birth of the virgin.


Mary flying from the tyrant, withdrew herself out of the sight of the
adversaries, yet she still had a being, and was preserved and nourished in the
deserts of Egypt until her return: so the Church shunning Antichrist,
withdrew herself out of the eyes of the world, yet had she a continuance still,
and was nourished and preserved in the wilderness of the world, until the
measuring of the temple.

Christ the son of the woman being taken up into heaven, was set on the throne
of God: so the faithful at length shall be taken up into heaven, and reign with
Christ.

So that this type does excellently represent the history both of the birth of
Christ, and of the Church: The woman, represents Mary: The child taken up into
heaven, Christ: The Dragon persecuting the woman, Herod the tyrant: the taking
up of the child unto Throne of God, Christ's ascension into heaven, and his
sitting at the right hand of his Father. Notwithstanding in a mystical sense,
which only is intended in this prophetical Vision, the woman, is the Church:
the child of the woman, and her seed, are the faithful of all ages: the Dragon
is the Devil and all other persecuting tyrants of the Church. Why the Church
is represented under the type of a woman.
Furthermore it is not unusual in scripture to compare both the true and false
Church unto a woman: as in Isai: 54.1. it is said unto the true Church: rejoice
O barren, thou which did not bear, for more are the children of the desolate
then of the married wife: and Mica 7.8. the true Church says to the false:
rejoice not against me O mine enemy because I fall, for I shall arise, etc.
Hence generally the Church is called the spouse of Christ, a chaste and
undefiled virgin: so Chap. 19.7. she is called the wife and spouse of the
Lamb. The reason she is so called, is both her spiritual marriage with Christ
her bridegroom, as also the weakness of that sex: for the Church being like unto
a weak woman, has no humane strength to subsist of herself. On the contrary
the Church of malignant men is compared to an adulterous woman, Ierem. 3.1. to
a whore and most impure harlot Ezech. 16. and Reve. 17.18. Thus we se what this
woman is, and I hope by this time Riberas first question is fully answered.

Now I come to his second question: In what state the Church is here
represented.
he rightly denies that the Church is represented in the first state, or as it
was before the coming of Christ: although some do think that there is an
allusion unto Eve our first mother, betwixt whose seed, and the serpents, God
put enmity in the beginning: but this is without al ground. Neither was John to
be informed of the state of the ancient synagogue: but of the condition of the
new Church.

Now the other two things which he affirms are not true. One: that the state
of the Church at Christ's coming is not here spoken of: for we have showed the
contrary, because the woman in travail of Christ corporally, was a type of
the Church being in travail with Christ spiritually. The other: that he
refers the event of this type unto the last times of his feined Antichrist, who
shall never come. As if the woman were not already long ago fled into the
wilderness, and persecuted by the Dragon in her flight, as shall appear more
evidently by that which follows.

Lastly unto the third question: viz. whither this woman flying into the
wilderness, be the same that sat on the Beast Chap. 17. I say, that she is,
and is not: the which I thus manifest: It is plain that the woman represents
the Church. Now the Church by a diverse signification is taken either for the
Church of the first begotten Heb. 12.22. which universally comprehends all the
elect before, and under the law, Lib. 4. Epist. 38.
as also under the Gospel, as Gregory affirms, and this is the Catholic
Church mentioned in the Creed: or, for the Church of the called, which in the
New Testament is the multitude of them that profess the faith of Christ in
every place. In the former sense the Woman, or Church is, and always shall be
the only spouse of Christ: and never so degenerate as to become Antichrists
strumpet: neither did this Church appear unto John, 2 Timothy 2.19.
for God knows who are his: But she appeared in the latter sense, here indeed
in this place, like unto a chaste matrone, but in Chapter 17, as a great whore.
But how then is she the same? I answer, she is the same in name but not in
deed, in profession, but not in faith: in appearance, but not in truth: In the
same sense that Jerusalem is called a holy city, as in Psalm. 122.3. and a
harlot as Isai: 1.21. At the first in the Apostles time, and a while after, the
whole Christianity of the East and West was as a chaste matrone clothed with
faith and holiness as with the stars: just so as she here appeared. But
after the decease of the Apostles and Apostolical men, she keept not long the
chastity of an undefiled matron, Lib. 3. hist. cap. 32.
as in Eusebius is testified by Egesippus a most ancient writer: until at
length possessing the mountains of Rome, and changing her starlike habit into
scarlet, she sat on the Beast, and degenerated into a common strumpet as she
appeared Chap. 17.

Indeed the Romish parasites strongly cry out to the contrary, that the true
Church of Christ, such as was Rome (according to the Apostles testimony)
cannot fall away: that the spouse of Christ cannot degenerate: The which is
true of the Church of the first borne, the only and true spouse of Christ: but
of every Church of the called (or of every particular Church) it is false, as,
besides very many testimonies, the particular Churches of Corinth, Galatia,
Ephesus, Philippi, etc. confirm: for howsoever every one of them of old was a
true Apostolical Church and spouse of Christ: Yet at this day where are they,
or what manner of Churches are they become? Now what wonder is it though the
same has happined to Rome, although in a different condition: but let us
return to the text.

The woman therefore or Church appears as a chaste mother in heaven: although
she warreth here on earth, Phil. 3.20.
yet her conversation (Gr. (...) administration) is through faith with Christ
in heaven.

Clothed with the sun] For by faith and baptism she puts on Christ the sun of
righteousness as a wedding garment. Gal. 3.17.
The brightness of the sun is now indeed darkened with the clouds of the
infirmities and calamities unto which the Church is subject during her warfare
in this life: but at last this clothing of hers shall fully shine: as it is in
Matt. 13.43. The righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of the
Father: Ephesians. 5.27
and the Church shall be presented to Christ her husband, glorious in the
heavens, and purged from every spot and wrinkle.

Having the moon under her feet] This denotes the variable state of the Church
in this world: Heca. lib. 4. c. 8. Aug. Epist. 48. ad Vincent.
as also her high mindedness. For the Church (says AMBROSE) has her often
defects and risings like the moon: having not her own brightness, but borrowes
her light from Christ, as the moon does from the sun. So AUSTIN: The Church is
sometimes darkened, and as it were clothed with the multitude of scandals:
sometimes she appears quiet and free by the tranquillity of the time:
otherwhile she is covered and troubled with the floods of tribulations and
temptations. In Psalm. 10
And again: The moon increasing and decreasing signifies the Church: because
so far as the Church is spiritual, she shines: but so far as she is carnal,
she is obscure.

As therefore the moon appears in diverse forms in the firmament: The
condition of the Church is variable in this world.
so is the Churches condition diverse in this life: sometimes shining in full
light: otherwhile she is scarcely to be seen, and sometimes not at all, until
again her light break forth as out of darkness. This serves for the confutation
of that Popish fiction, which is that the Church shall always be as visible in
the world, as is the kingdom of Naples, or the like.

Moreover in that the Woman has the moon under her feet, what is it? but that
she despises all sublunary and earthly things as vain and perishing: The
moon under the feet of the woman.
seeks after and possesses in Christ the things that are above.

And a crown of twelve stars on her head] This denotes the faith of the
Apostolical Church, the profession whereof was as a crown unto her head. For
the Apostles being twelve in number, did like bright shining stars spread forth
the light of Gods truth over the world. 1 Cor. 5.11 Ephesians. 2.10.
For however Paul and Barnabas were afterward added unto them, yet the number
of 12: remained even after Judas fell away. These by their ministry did set a
crown upon the Church, by laying the foundation upon which she is builded: Or
in the head, that is, in the beginning of the Church they did shine like stars
and principal members thereof: And thus a certain interpreter expounds it.
Others make the twelve stars to be the heads of the Creed; because faith is the
crown of the Church, and in them are contained the chief points of Christian
religion. Thus much of her clothing.

Hence we are to observe, while the woman did shine clothed with the Sun, The
church has changed her sun like clothing into purple.
had the Moon under her feet, and a crown of stars on her head, so long she
remained the undefiled spouse of Christ: but after she put on, (in stead of the
Sun) purple and scarlet: then she left off from trampling the moon under her
feet, and begane to follow after earthly things, changed her crown of stars,
into a crown of gold, pearls, and precious stones: In a word, then she played
the harlot, sat on the Beast, and became the mother of fornications, which
things are afterward described in Chap. 17. Let the reader diligently compare
the description.

And she being with child cryed] Most Greek copies have it in the present tense
(...) cries, so also Andreas and the greater and lesser copies of Robert
Stephanus. But Montanus and the old version have it (...) cried: and so Beza in
his latter edition. The sense is one. But I rather take it in the present
tense, because the propriety of the style denotes the Evangelist John to be
author of this book, unto whom this kind of Enallage or change of tenses, is
very familiar both in his Gospel and Epistles.

For paine] Our Wafer-worshippers cannot tell how to apply this to the Virgin
mother: for they hold, that Marie was delivered without pain, grounding this
on another false opinion, viz. that she was free from the stain of original
sin: but neither of these opinions can be of faith: because neither of them are
grounded on the word of God. The virgins conceiving indeed was miraculous. But
her bringing forth was natural, for by the opening of the womb she brought
forth her first born son, Luke 2.23. But whither a natural delivery can be
without pain, I leave to naturalists: Neither is it needful to define that
with danger, August. Enchirid. cap. 59.
the which without any danger, a man may be ignorant of. The type represents
the usual order of nature, whereby women being in labor to be delivered are
commonly pained: the which Christ confirms John 16.21. And indeed the sorrow
of child bearing at first was imposed on the woman by God, as a punishment of
her sin: Genesis 3.16.
I will multiply thy sorrows, etc. Hence the scripture compares vehement and
inevitable anguishes unto the pain of a woman in travel, which the Greeks
call by a peculiar word (...) sorrows and to be in sorrow. If therefore the
scripture has defined childbearing to be with pain, then we cannot without
danger be ignorant thereof.

So then this type signifies, that the Woman, or Church shall not bring forth
her fruit without labor, sorrow and much crying: The which is to be referred
partly to the labor and care of the ministry: and partly to the troubles and
calamities of persecutions: hence the Apostle traveling in birth of the
Corinthians cries out not without grief: Even unto this present hour we both
hunger and thirst, 1 Cor. 4.11
and are naked, and are buffeted and have no certain dwelling place: we are
made the filth of this world, and are the of scouring of all things unto this
day: In stripes, 2 Cor 6.5. and 7.5.
in imprinsonments, in tumults, in labors and watchings: on every side we are
troubled, without were fightings, within were fears. So likewise he speaks of
the declining Galatians: My little children, says he, Gala. 4.19
of whom again I travel in birth ((...)) until Christ be formed in you. So
then we se, that the birth and propagation of the Church shall be with great
troubles, cares, sorrows and crying: the which thing Christ foretold us,
saying: The world shall rejoice, but ye shall mourn: And the Apostle: Ioh.
16.20 2 Timothy 3.12.
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. Now by that
which follows it will appear, that by this sorrowful travel of the woman,
are chiefly prefigured the miseries, persecutions, punishments and martyrdomes
which Christians should afterward suffer under tyrants, yet not to terrify but
to comfort them: for whereas the world thought by these things to suppress the
Church; she should (though with pain) most fruitfully bring forth, and bejond
all expectation increase far and nere.

3. And there appeared another signe] The first sign or wonder was a woman.
The second follows, viz. a Dragon is seen by John in heaven of a terrible
shape: not in that starrie heaven, where Astronomers place the Dragon with the
sign Ophiuchus or Esculapius: but in that heaven, which the Apostle speaks
of, where principallities and powers, and spiritual wickedness do rule (...)
that is, in the regions of the air above us: as the Apostle himself declares
it Ephesians. 2.2. unless perhaps this sign appeared in the utmost heaven being
opened.

A great Dragon] Of an huge bigness and strength: for a Dragon is an old
Serpent, who by devouring of many serpents at last becomes a Dragon, according
to the saying: (...): If a serpent does not eat a serpent, he shall never be a
Dragon: He is said to be a red Dragon, to denote his cruel and blood thirsty
nature, as being wholly red with the blood of the Saints: Others think he is
called (...) fiery (for it may either way be translated) to denote his fiery
and hellish condition: but I rather approve the former.

Having seven heads] Hence Ribera says, it is manifest, that these things
belong unto the time of his fained Antichrist: But he deceives and is
deceived, as thinking, Dan. 7.8.
that these are the heads, and the horns of the fourth Beast mentioned in
Daniel, whose little horn tipeth out Antichrist: As if the Beast with his
heads and horns there spoken of, were yet to be expected and not already come
long ago. The Dragon here, has nothing common with the Beast in Daniel,
besides the ten horns: and yet it shall neither be this Dragon, nor the Beast
in Daniel: but passing by this, let us more narrowly consider the monstre.

Poets have fained a terrible monstre called Hydra Lernaea (not much unlike
unto this Dragon in shape) having a huge body and nine heads, Hydra Lernaea,
vide Apollod. Bibl. lib. 2.
eight whereof were mortal, the middlemost immortal: the killing whereof they
ascribe to the second labor of Hercules.

Now the monstre here spoken off, How the Dragon and Beast differ
differs from the following Beast, in that the Dragon has crowns on his head;
the Beast on his horns: so that the heads and horns in this place, do not
signify the same thing there, as we shall see herafter. Thus there is some
difference betwixt the Dragon and the Beast, yet their likeness is great: for
the Dragon begat the Beast, even as like begets its like. Who this Dragon
should be, is very plain by the epithites: for he is called that Old Serpent,
the Devil and Satan ver. 9. and Chap. 20.2. who is known of all to be that
enemy of mankind. He is represented in the form of a serpent, both because in
likeness of a serpent he seduced our first parents, as also because of his
rage and cruelty against the Church, and lastly because of his poison wherewith
he infecteth the world.

The heads and horns of the Dragon, are the devils instruments, and ministers
of his fury against the Woman.

In that the crowns are said to be on his heads, and not on his horns, it
argues, that the heads denote the chief instruments of the Dragon armed with
regal authority: But the horns inferior and vulgar, yet armed. The crowned
heads therefore of the Dragon, are kings and tyrants persecuting the woman: The
horns, Who are the heads and horns of the Dragon.
are officers under them: as, governors, captains, soldiers, hang-men and
the like, by whom they exercise their cruelty, like as the head of a beast
does push with his horns.

Seven heads] indefinitely for many, as before: the seven spirits, seven lamps
etc. For a sevenfold number is always indefinite, except it be restrained,
as afterward it is, where it is said, that the seven heads of the beast, are
the seven mountains of the woman or Rome. SO THE TEN HORNS indefinitelie are
very many, because there are more inferior executioners and murderers, then
kings.

Among the heads of the Dragon Herod the Ascalonite is worthelie reckoned in
the first place, as first laboring to destroy the woman's seed, Who are the
heads of the Dragon.
for whose cause (almost as soon as he was borne) he wickedlie caused all the
infants of Bethlehem to be murdered. Next was Herod Antipas his son, the
murderer of John. The third Herod Agrippa; who killed James, and persecuted
Peter.

After these, the Roman tyrants persecuting Christians are to be numbered among
the seven heads, as Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus Verus, Commodus,
Severus, Decius, Diocletian and other most cruel Serpents who wholly imbrued
themselves in the blood of the saints, and most miserable afflicted the Church
until Constantines time.

Of the Dragons horns Pilate the Roman Governor was chief, Who are the
Dragons horns
who with the Scribes and Pharisees crucified the Lord of life: also his
successors, as Felix, Lysias, Festus, with all such as afterward were
assistants unto the Roman heads in persecuting the saints. Thus of necessity
these things must be interpreted, unless we would grope in darkness, for
they altogether belong to demonstrate the calamities of the primitive Church.

4. And his tail drew the third part of the stars] Hitherto we have spoken of
the Dragons form: now follows what he did viz. his twofould cruelty is here
noted: the first against the Stars: the second against the woman. He drew the
third part of the stars etc. This Andreas (but little to the purpose)
interprets of Lucifer drawing with him very many Angels into destruction: It
is a Metaphorical allusion unto that in Dan. 8.10. touching Epiphanes, The
stars cast down to the earth.
who (in the type of Antichrist) cast down the stars to the ground, and stamped
upon them.

The Stars in Chap. 1.10. signify the teachers of Churches. Their casting down
from heaven to the earth, signifies their falling away from the faith and
heavenly function, unto humane traditions and the cares of this life: as
before we heard on Chap. 6.13. and 8.10. and 9.1. This the Dragon did by his
tail, The fail of the Dragon.
signifying, as some think, his fraudulent subtlety: for as dogs with their
tails faune upon their masters: so Satan drew by flaterie and lying promises
many teachers from seeking after heavenly things, and dashed them against the
rocks of wordly honor. Now this indeed he has don and yet daily does to the
destruction of many: not withstanding this is not al, for the Dragon begane his
battle by open violence.

I therefore rather interpret the Dragons tail, (in which his chiefest
strength consists) of the cruelty and long continued persecutions, by which
many professors of the name of Christ, who ought like stars to shine before
others, partly through torments and partly through fear, have fallen from
the faith and worshipped devils. This happened under the cruel storms of
former persecutions, as histories testify, and principally under Domitian,
Diocletian, and Decius. For Diocletian (to allege the words of Eusebius
concerning his time only) by a tyrannical edict commanded the meeting houses
of Christians to be laid even with the ground: then to burn the holy
Scriptures: Lib. 8. hist. c. 3.
that the leaders of Christians should be apprehended, fettered, and by
torments constrained to sacrifice unto Idols. Then many indeed being constant,
suffered Martyrdom, but an infinite number of others (says he) being overcom
by fear, soon after the first brunt gave over wholly the combat. But what way
soever we take it, it is an anticipation, that is the things are before
related, which the Dragon did afterward.

Primasius says, that the tail are the false prophets, through whom the
enemy fulfils his wickedness. As in Isay. 9.15. The prophet that teaches lies,
is the tail: namely, because of their smooth and flattering sermons. Now the
Dragon did both. And therefore we may take both the senses, making the sum to
be thus: The Devil both by the lies of deceivers, as also by the cruelty of
tyrants drew many away from the faith, etc. Of which seducement mention is made
in verse. 9. So then he casts from heaven to the earth, because he seduceth from
the faith unto perfidiousnes by the love of the earth, some by lies, others by
torments.

Not withstanding when I compare the Visions, I see that here the spirit
points at the third, fourth and fifth trumpet of the foregoing Vision: to give
us to understand that the great Star called wormwood Cha. 8.10. with the third
part of the stars: Ibid. v. 12. and that great Star fallen from heaven Chap.
9.1. were drawn and cast to the earth by the fall of this Dragon: that is,
fell away from the sincerity of the faith and Christian piety, to worldly
mindednes and Antichristianisme.

And the Dragon stood] Another enterprise of the Dragon against the woman: he
stands before her to devour her child: like as an hungry wolf stands before
the fowld, 1. Pet. 5.8
to destroy the sheep that come forth. Satan's ravenous appetite is insatiable,
the which he desires to fill with our blood: therefore Peter describes him under
the type of a hungry and roaring Lion. But this is general. Let us therefore
apply it more nerely to the purpose.

First the dragon endeavored what he could to devour Christ in his own
person, that is, when Herod the first head of the Dragon, being troubled at
the hearing of Christ birth, most wickedlie murdered all the children of two
years, that so he might not miss to devour the woman's child: Also when Pilate
the first horn of the Dragon condemned and crucified the son of God.

Afterward he mightelie labored to destroy him in his members: when Herod
Antipas beheaded the Baptist: Herod Agrippa took away the life of James:
Again when the other heads, as Nero, Domitian and the following tyrants by
cruel edicts, punishments, rackings and persecutions throughout the whole
empire endeavored by all means, to swallow up what ever the Church brought
forth, that so they might destroy all Christians and utterly blot out the faith
of Christ.

Neither is Brightmans note to be disapproved, viz. that the Dragon by tyrants
did diligently watch, that there might not be born any defender of the
Christian religion. And if any Emperor or Governor seemed but to favor
Christians, he was soon devoured by the Serpent. The enterprise we have heard:
now let see the event.

The Second part of the Chapter. The history and event of both signs.
5. And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all the nations with
a rod of iron: and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne. 6. And
the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God, that
they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days. 7. And
there was war in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against the dragon,
and the dragon fought and his Angels, 8. And prevailed not, neither was their
place found any more in heaven. 9. And the great dragon was cast out, that old
serpent called the devil and Satan, which deceives the whole world: he was
cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. 10. And I heard
a loud voice, saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the
kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our
brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night. 11.
And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death. 12. Therefore rejoice
ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the inhabiters of the earth,
and of the sea: for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath,
because he knows that he has but a short time. 13. And when the dragon saw
that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the woman which brought forth
the man child. 14. And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle,
that she might flee into the wilderness into her place, where she is nouris
head for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the Serpent. 15.
And the Serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood after the woman, that
he might cause her to be carried away of the flood. 16. And the earth helped
the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the
dragon cast out of his mouth. 17. And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and
went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments
of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ. 18. And I stood upon the sand
of the Sea.
THE COMMENTARY.
ANd she brought forth a man child] The woman brings forth, and a man child is
born: he is set upon by the dragon, but caught up to the throne of God: so the
Dragon is frustrated of his prey. This whole type may be applied to Christ
literallie. For in the head the lot or portion of the members is represented.

A man child is born] which notes his sex, strength and power: This is meant of
Christ who is the mighty God: and the following attribute is also proper to
him.

He shall feed (or rule) all nations with a rod of iron] out of Psalm. 2. for
he is appointed by the father to be the feeder or ruler of all nations, ruling
them with an iron rod, that is, a most powerful scepter (for iron is not
frail) yet in a diverse or different way: some he quickneth by the scepter of
his word and spirit, and directs them, as his sheep, into his sheep fowld of
glory: Others by the same scepter he breaks in pieces as a potters vessel,
and casts them, (as goats) into hell fire: Christ therefore does nothing fear
the Dragons open mouth, because he is a manchild: he cares not for his diadems,
nor fears his horns: because he can beat down all things with his rod of
iron.

And here it is closely answered to what might be objected, Why the Dragon did
not devour the manchild.
viz: Why did the Dragon cease? and wherefore did he not devour the child so
soon as he was born? two, or three reasons are showed how his endeavors were
frustrated. The magnanimity, that is, the divine power of the manchild did
terrify him: his iron scepter made him afraid, wherewith he bruiseth his heads
and horns. But did he not swallow him up being dead? not in the least: for
though he bruised his heel, yet he could not hurt him, because, being
delivered from the power of death and satan, he was taken up into heaven, and
sat down at the right of God. For this also which is added, and he was caught
up, etc. may be literallie applied to Christ. However the prophetical sense of
this type is here chiefly to be considered.

The Woman, that is, the Church brought forth a Son collective, for, many
children of God, by the seed of the word. For even in the beginning by the
Apostolical preaching many thousands of Christians were begotten to Christ:
and the elect of God dispersed throughout the whole earth were gathered by
little and little.

This generation is said to be male-children, because the elect being strong
in faith do manfully resist Satan: Io. 11, 52. Act. 2.39.
They also in Christ their head shall rule the nations with a rod of iron.
Revel. 2.17. seeing the head communicates what is his, unto his members: hence
the Saints shall judge the world and Angels, 1 Cor. 6.2. They shall be caught up
to God also on his throne: because being supported by the power of God they
shall not fall under their temptations, but finishing their warfare with
courage, shall obtain, (as conquerours) a crown of glory with Christ: For to
him that overcommeth he will grant to sit with him in his throne, even as he
also overcame, and was set with his Father on his throne, Chap. 3.21. This
consolation did chiefly belong to the times of the martyrs, while Christ rode
on the red horse, even from Neroes persecution unto that of Diocletian, as may
plainly be gathered from v. 11. Now this allegorical sense by me expounded
would have been the more obscure as touching the members, but that the
historical sense before was very plain and clear in Christ the head: and
therefore it was necessarily to be set down in the first place.

Brightman takes this man child to be Constantine the great, who at length was
brought forth by the Church as a patron and defender of the faith against
Maxentius, Licinius, and other enemies: But I know not, whither with more show
of reason, then Lyra who understands it as meant of Heraclius, who reigned (
Phocas being taken away) very unprosperously. For here the woman's seed does
certainly denote the rise, and first state of the primitive Church.

6. And the woman fled into the wildernesse] Unless here we take notice of the
anticipation, The anticipation of the woman's flight and reason thereof.
mentioned in the Analysis, and which our Tossanus has rightly observed, many
intricate questions will arise: as, how in this verse the woman is said to fly
into the wilderness, and again in v. 14? whither she once returned? fled
twice? fled thither before the battle? how she flue before she received wings?
etc. Therefore her flight is put by an anticipation, but came to pass afterward
when the Dragon was cast into the earth: and after a new persecution was raised
against her v. 13. For she fled not so soon as she was delivered (and indeed
bow could she fly having newly brought forth) but some while after. First
Michael thrust the Dragon out of heaven: Hereupon the heavenly inhabitants sang
their triumphant song: The Dragon then to revenge the loss of his prey, and
his own ruin, began to follow after the woman. She then has wings given her,
and so flies into the wilderness. And this is the order of the Vision. Thus
her flight is here brought in by an anticipation: because the spirit having
showed how the child was delivered from the Dragons fury, would also add
something touching the woman's preservation from the same: He, by being caught
into heaven; The woman by flight into the wilderness: howbeit not together at
one time: for betwixt these things there happened a cruel battle in heaven
betwixt Michael and the Dragon: as also the Dragons new enterprise against the
woman on earth: upon this John returns unto the flight and persecution of the
woman. Therefore we will reserve the interpretation of this verse, till we come
to v. 14. Now only let us take notice of the sum and drift.

FIRST, the flight of the woman into the wilderness, signifies the invisibility
of the Apostolical Church, after she had fought many battles with tyrants,
heretics and hypocrites. For as the Moon coming so low as the shadow of the
earth, gives noe light, neither for the present is more seen, then if it were
not in the sky: so the Church that chaste mother, through the shadow of worldly
ambition, The Church vanished as the moon.
covetousnes luxury and power of prelates and carnal priests, lost her light
by little and little, and at length vanished away, insomuch as she never
appeared any where in the world in her primitive beauty. The Papists affirm
that their Church never fled or vanished away: and contend that she always
shined in her full light: by which they deny that their Church is this chaste
mother. Histories indeed show, that Rome of old was a chaste mother, but ceased
so to be by changing the government of Christ instituted by his Apostles, into
the Ecclesiastical and secular kingdom of the Pope: the which when and how it
came to pass has already been showed several times, and shall further be
spoken of afterward.

Secondly, in that there is a place prepared for her in the wilderness where
she is nourished, it signifies that however the purity of the Church shall
then fade away, and the outward face thereof appear wholly discrepant from the
primitive state: yet God will reserve and feed some remnants. Of the rest in
verse 14.

7. And there was war in heaven] Which happened not after the woman's flight
into the wilderness, but after the manchild was caught up into heaven. For the
Dragon being disappointed of one prey, he thirsted after the other: that is,
seeing he could not destroy the child, he attempts to devour the mother. But
Michael is present in her behalf, provoking the Dragon to combat: and
thrusting him, being overcom, with his followers out of heaven: whence arose a
shout among the heavenly spirits.

What is meant by this battle, and when it was, is not easy to be expounded.
What the war was between Michael and the Dragon. Riberas fiction.


There are some who refer it to the first fall of the devil, when Lucifer with
his Angels was cast down out of heaven.

This Ribera rightly rejects: yet puts in the place thereof a strange fiction
of his own: viz. of a battle that shall be betwixt Antichrist and the Saints
about the last four years before the end of the world. But without all doubt
this battle is already fought, and the Dragon cast into the earth: because the
woman long agone is fled into the wilderness.

Others take it as an allusion to the battle of Michael with satan about the
body of Moses, mentioned in Jude verse. 9. But the cause of the war there, is
other then here.

Brightman thinks that Constantines victory over Maxentius, Maximinus and
Licinius heads of the Dragon, is here set forth. But the effects of the
victory (celebrated with songs by them in heaven, verse. 10.11.) Seem to be
more glorious, then can possibly be restrained to Constantines temporal
victory.

As therefore in the sign of the woman, her deliverie, and the child, there
was a double sense: One Historical fulfilled in the person of Marie, and
Christ. The other Allegorical in the Church and members of Christ: so we may
rightly interpret this combat in a twofold sense: first spiritually of the
conflict of Christ and Satan, the which went before in order of time. Secondly
Historicallie of Constantines and the enemies battles, which happened
afterward. For as Christ caught up into the throne of God: thrust Satan out of
his kingdom, and brought eternal peace and saftie unto the Saints by his
intercession. So Constantine being advanced on the throne of the empire, did
manfully suppress all enemies of Christianity, and brought in a breathing
time unto the Church, after her former and long continued afflictions. This is
the sum. Now let us consider the battle: of which: 1. the place: 2. the
Captains and armies: 3. the event: lastly the effect and benefit thereof is
explained.

The place of the war was heaven. But heaven is a place of peace, not of war:
of quietness not of dissension. The war in heaven is visional not real.
It is so indeed. This is therefore to be attributed only unto the Vision,
the which John saw in the heaven above. The Captain, and army fighting on the
one side were Michael and his Angels. On the other side the Dragon with his
Angels. As the Dragon is Satan: So Michael is Christ the Manchild caught up
into heaven. MICHAEI being interpreted is, Who is like God? Now who is like
God save Christ his only begotten son? So Daniel also brings in Christ under
the name of Michael, Chap. 11. and 12. Propheticallie pointing at this battle.
At that time Michael the great prince shall stand up for the children of his
people, viz. having finished the work of our redemption in the flesh. But what
manner of battle is it?

The first conflict consisted in Satan's temptations, The first conflict of this
war.
the which Christ did offten most strongly sustain and suppress.

The soorest conflict, was his bloody sweating in the garden, that which he
suffered in the high priests hall, and on the cross at his death.

Then Michael indeed seemed to have bin overthrown: but a while after the
adversaries power was broken: for by death Michael overcame: and rising again
he bruised the Dragons heads: and being lift up unto the throne of his father
he triumphed over all principallities and powers. Col. 2 15
Then as a conqueror he ascended with his body, (on which he had born and by
his blood purged the sins of men) into heaven, and by the efficacy of his
eternal intercession repressing the accusations of the adversary, has made
up our everlasting peace with God. This mystery of our salvation is shadowed
out under the type of this battle, as plainly appears from verse. 10.11. The
which typical representation did very much serve for the consolation of the
Church, seeing she should be shaken with most cruel storms of persecutions
for the space of three hundred years: least the faithful being unmindful both
of this fight and victory, might faint under the long continuance of the
cross.

But how are the Angels joined with Michael in the fight, Why the Angels are
joined with Christ and who they are.
seeing Christ alone has troaden the Wine Press of Gods wrath, and overcom
the Dragon? This is to be referred to the decency of the Vision. For a captain
does not use to fight without an army: And all though Christ alone has fought
the battle hand to hand (as it were) with Satan, yet has he also left
occasion of combatting unto his Angels: that so they might not stand still, and
only behold their captain fighting, but courageously imitate him in the
same. The Angels of Michael were the Apostles, who next unto the captain,
suffered the adversaries rage: Together with all other faithful and elect
ones, standing continually in battle array under Christ their leader. So also
the Dragon has his Angels joined with him, the which are his heads and
horns, viz. all instruments of the devil whither high or low, by whom he
exercises his violence against Christ and the Church. This is the spiritual
combat betwixt Christ and Satan.

8. And prevailed not] The event of the war is, that the Dragon with his
followers stood not in battle, but fleeing were cast down to the earth. Great
indeed and cruel is the Dragon: but Michael is greater and more powerful.
Satan is that strong armed man, Math. 12.29. Luke XI. 21. Heb. 2.14.
possessing his house in peace, and vexing the Church: but Christ stronger then
he, being come, takes away his palace, overcomes him and divides his spoils.
For by death he destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the devil,
and delivered them who through the fear of death, were all their life time
subject to bondage. Now as Christ sits triumphing at the right hand of God: so
there was no place found for Satan in heaven: but he was cast to the earth
like a champion broken and overcome: whom then we clearly judge to be
conquered when we see him lie grovelling on the ground. This thrusting down of
Satan out of heaven was mystical, not historical, of which also Christ speaks
in the Gospel: I beheld satan as lightning fall from heaven: And again: Now is
the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out:
Ioh. 12.31.
For the spreading of the Gospel through the world was Satan's overthrow and
the destruction of his kingdom. So Christ being near his death, says, The
Prince of this world is Judged. That is being shortly to be Judged, he says,
he is Judged: like as a dying man, is said to be dead, or the like. For in his
death he threw down Satan by merit: In his resurrection and ascension by
efficacy: viz sending down the holy Ghost from heaven, throw whose grace Satan
is thrust forth out of the hearts of the faithful.

Andreas also gives a touch of the mystical sense of this war and victory of
Michael: applying the casting down of the Dragon here, Andreas opinion.
Unto the second fall of Satan, by which he was overcome and thrown down
through the cross of Christ: Namely, when the Prince of this world was
judged, and thrust from that tyranny which he before exercised.

9. That old Serpent] Now, that we might not imagine this to be a natural
Dragon, he sets him forth by his proper names or surnames, whence we may know
both his natural disposition, and who he is.

He calls him, that old Serpent] as afterward in Chap. 20: verse. 2.10. To wit,
1. The old serpent.
who of old by infusing into our first parents the venom of pride, was the
cause of their and our fall and ruin. This Dragon therefore is the same who in
Genesis 3. Is that subtle serpent, and may be called that old deceiver. De exhort:
mart: in proem:
He is therefore that proper adversary the Devil, says Cyprian, and the old
enemy with whom we wage war, who almost for the space of six thousand years,
has fought against mankind: And therefore through length of time has fully
learned all kinds of temptations, and how to lie in wait for to destroy the
soul. If he find a soldiour of Christ unprepared, unskilful, careless, and
not vigilant with his whole heart, he circumvents him before he knows it, he
beguiles him unawares, and deceives him as being not skillful. But if any one
keeping the commandments of the Lord, and strongly cleaving to Christ, resist
him, he must needs be overcome, because Christ (whom we confess) is invincible.

He calls him (...), the Devil, that is, a slanderour or false accuser. 2. The
Devil.
For (...) or a calumny is when a thing well spoken is wrested unto a malicious
sense: and this is the proper work of the Devil, being the first most
impious calumniatour. There seem to be two causes why he is so called: First
he slanderously perverted Gods prohibition to our first parents concerning the
forbidden fruit: by accusing God of falsehood and envy, as though man should
not die by eating of the forbidden fruit, but become like unto God. Secondly,
because he cease not to cry out against Christ who died and was raised up for
our sakes, denying his satisfaction, scoffing at our redemption, and not
ceasing to accuse the saints before the judgment of God as guilty of death
for their sins.

He calls him also, Satan] that is, adversary, 3. Satan.
for the Hebrew Satan signifies to resist. Because from the beginning he was a
rebel to God and Christ, and yet cease not to oppugn the childeren of God,
who are Christ's members.

Lastly he calls him the seducer of the whole earth, 4. Seducer.
or a most vile impostor through long and continued wickedness. For at the
beginning with his lies he seduced our Mother Eve: through his impostures he
caused the old world to be drowned by the flood: and soon after again he drew
aside the sons of men from the true worship of God unro idolatry: and
always has bin the first inventer and deviser of heresies and deceits by most
wicked instruments.

Brightman, as I said, expounds it historicallie, making Michael with his
Angels to be Constantine with his legions: The Dragon with his Angels
Maxentius, Maximinus and Licinius, by whose tyranny Satan did vomit out his
last hatred against Christians, against whom Constantine warred.

Maxentius flieing over a certain bridge was drowned in tyber. Maximinus
perished in miserable exile. And Licinius at last was also put to death. So the
Dragon was then cast down from heaven to the earth, these tyrants being driven
out of the borders of the Church. Now whither this be the meaning of the type,
I dare not affirm, seeing the proper and express description of the Dragon
seems very much to condradict the same as here, so also afterward Chap. 20.2.
Where the same apprehending of Satan is figured out in another type and to
another end.

10. And I heard a great voyce] The war and victory of Michael, and the
overthrow of the Dragon have bin spoken of. Now follows the Song of the
Church triumphant, in which two fruits of the victory are celebrated: viz.
The joy of the Church: and the mourning of the adversaries, with the causes of
both.

The great voice that John heard signifies the multitude of rejoycers, and the
greatness of their joy because of the victory. From verse. 11. it may be
gathered that they were the saints in heaven, who acknowledge the Church
militant for their brethren. Therefore all the heavenly companies sing
together, excepting the third company of Angels, and the fourth of other
creatures.

The proposition of their song is in verse. 12. rejoice ye heavens, and ye
that dwell in them. In calling upon the heavens themselves to rejoice, they
amplify the excellency of the benefit: for great joy is caused by great
mercies. This Prosopopoeja is often used, as afterward in Chap. 19.20. so in
Isa. 1.2. hear ye heavens.

And ye that dwell in them] that is, the Angels of heaven, whom they invite to
rejoice with them. The arguments of their joy are the worthy benefits of the
victory, which are three in number, as we showed in the analysis. The first
is, that by this victory comes salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our
God, and the power of his Christ. The like benefits were set forth in the
foregoing vision, at the sounding of the seventh Angel: Cha. 11.15
but arising from a different cause. There the dwellers in heaven rejoiced for
the final judgment, and destruction of Antichrist and other adversaries: here
they exult for the first victory of Michael against the Dragon, by which is
come salvation, and strength etc: Now howsoever God and Christ had this
evermore before: yet the same appeared not so fully, because of the wickeds
rage and tumult, the which they seemed to wink at: But then they openly
declared their power, etc. When Michael, that is, Christ by his death,
resurrection and exaltation brake the power of the Dragon, and cast him to the
earth. Besides they had it not always for us, that is, for our help and
consolation. But at last it came to be ours and for us through the victory of
Michael. For it is to be observed, that they say not, these things came to God
and to Christ, but that now the salvation and power of God and of Christ was
come, that is, was gotten, given and communicated to us. For through Christ's
victory the salvation of our God is come, viz. unto us from our God. Then the
power of our God did manifest it self, when it drew us as a lost prey out of
the Dragons jaws. Then Gods kingdom became ours, when we being delivered out
of the power of darkness, Colos. 1.13 Romans 1.4.
were translated into the kingdom of his beloved Son. Then Christ's power
became ours, when he, having over come death and Satan, was declared to be the
son of God powerfullie according to the spirit of sanctification by the
resurrection from the dead. This is the first argument of joy to the heavenly
spirits and to us: in regard that our salvation is founded in the victory of
Michael, and that the power and kingdom of our God is vindicated from the
violence of the Dragon.

Our God] so they call him, that we might confidentlie trust, that by this
victory God is reconciled unto us, Ioh. 16.33.
for so Christ bids us, saying, be of good cheer I have overcome the world.

To this spiritual joy may also be added that outward rejoicing of Christians,
when Constantine the Emperor had driven the foresaid Dragons out of heaven to
the earth. Thus (I say) salvation, strength, kingdom and power of God and
Christ did seem to come, when a Christian Emperor was set on the throne,
glorified God, publicly maintained Christ's power, and freed the Church from
tyranny: For the kingdom of God is visiblie seen, as it were (says
Brightman) when godly princes are placed at the stern. The which indeed is
true: But here it is a secondarie sense.

For the accuser of our brethren is cast down] The second benefit of the
victory, and argument of joy, is the immunitie of the Godly from satan's
accusations. Whom before he called a slaunderer, adversary, and deceiver: he
now calls him our accuser. It is an allusion to the court, where the judge
sits on the tribunal: Satan's Judicial action against sinners.
before whom is brought a guilty person, with his accuser demanding his life.
This judge is God: For he will judge the world in righteousness: and shall
minister judgment to the people in uprightnes. Before his tribunal we all stood
guilty of eternal death through sin: Gods revenging justice stood against us,
requiring, that we should suffer temporal and eternal punishments, For what was
committed by us against his infinite majesty: Romans 1.32.
For it is the judgment of God that they who commit such things are worthy of
death. Against us stood the law of God pronouncing cursings against the
transgressors thereof: Our own evil conscience also, arguing and convincing
us of eternal guiltiness. But Christ our Michael pleaded our cause before
God, and by suffering death for our sakes, most fully satisfied his justice,
and healed our wounded consciences from the sting of sin, purging and
sanctifying our hearts through faith by his spirit: Act. 15.9. Romans 8.1.
and therefore there is no condemnation to us who are in Christ.
Notwithstanding satan left not off to prosecute his action, to accuse and blame
us, to stir up God against us, and to rage against the faithful.

In that he is said to accuse us day and night before God, it does
emphaticallie set forth satan's malice: he knows God is ours, that is,
reconciled unto us in Christ: yet he impudently blames us, to make him, if he
could, not to be ours. But thanks be to God: Michael has cast this impudent
railer out of heaven, that hence forward he might no more molest the Lord with
his lying accusations.

If this great benefit gave occasion of so great joy to the heavenly
inhabiters, then much more to us: For the Dragon was not an accuser of them in
heaven, but of us, who as yet walk in the slipperie paths of this world.
Therefore they say: The accuser of our brethren, to wit, they who as yet have
their warfare here on earth.

This is a worthy thing, that the Church triumphant acknowledges us to be
brethren. And indeed the Catholic or universal Church is a communion of all
the Saints both in heaven and in earth. So Chap. 6.11.

Hence first the doctrine of the Gospel touching free justification by faith is
here confirmed. For if our accuser be cast out, then certainly, Free
justification by faith here established.
no man accusing us, God the judge will not condemn, but acquit and justify
them, who by faith are in Christ Jesus.

It confirms also the doctrine of the full assurance of our faith and
salvation. The full assurance of faith touching our salvation. Romans 8.33.
For if Christ has satisfied Gods judgment for us, and silenced our accuser:
then verily henceforward we may fully persuade our selves of the clemency and
Philantropie of God the judge, who wills not the death of a sinner, but that he
be couverted and live: for who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect?
it is God that justifies: who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died,
yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, nay in all these things we
are more then conquerours through him, who has looved us in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, it serves to exhort us, considering the spirit says that our
accuser is cast out, not trodden under foot. It is true he can do nothing
against us before Gods judgment seat: Nevertheless he cease not to
prosecute the suit against us amongst worldly men, whom he stirrs up exceeding
lie to wrath and rage therefore we must not give our selves to carnal
security: but watch and pray having always our loins girt, that we enter not
into temptation.

Brightman also interprets these accusations historicallie, applying them to
the reproaches of pagans against Christians, who objected to them that they had
their suppers like that of Oedipus, that they were incestuous persons, and
adulterers, satisfying their lust in common, that they were manslayers and
conspiratours against princes, and cause of all public calamities, as
Tertullian in his Apology witnesses: the which calumnies of whom learnt they
them, but of the devil that old serpent and father of lies. Now howsoever this
be true, yet is it to be taken in a secondarie sense.

11. And they overcame him] They, to wit our brethren. The third benefit of
the victory and argument of joy, is the victory of the Church militant over
the Dragon, as if they should say: Christ has overcome him: and we the
inhabiters of heaven rejoice at the victory: Besides our brethren also have
overcome: therefore let them likewise rejoice: But how have they overcome?

By the blood of the Lambe] Hence it is apparent in the first place, The Lamb
and Michael is Christ.
that the Lamb and Michael is one and the same, viz. Christ Jesus. Secondly
that the war with the Dragon and the victory over him was chiefly in the blood
of Christ, his death, resurrection and exaltation: in regard therefore the Lamb
has overcome the Dragon: the godly also have over come him, because they have
washed and made their garments white in the blood of the Lamb: that is, they
are justified and sanctified in the blood of Christ: so that the merit and
victory of the Lambs blood, 2 Cor. 5.14. 1 Cor. 15.57. 1 Ioh. 5.4.
is ours: He overcomming, we overcome: He dying for us, we are all dead with
him: To which purpose is that of the Apostle: but thanks be to God, which
gives us the victory, through Jesus Christ. So John in his Epistles: This is
the victory that overcommeth the world, even our faith.

By the blood] Gr. (...) for, or, by reason of the blood: and it seems to be
put for (...) by the blood as Chap. 4.11. (...), is put for (...) by the will
or pleasure: And Chap. 13.14. (...), for (...) by the miracles. But whither we
read it one way or other, the efficient cause of our victory and joy is
signified, viz. the blood of the Lamb, that is, the death of Christ, by which
God is pacified, the devil overcome: neither does it unfitlie cohere, that it
be rendered, for, or because of the blood, in regard it shows us the
meritorious cause, for which the victory becomes ours.

And by, or, for the word of thy testimony] Unto the efficient meritorious
cause, he adds two instrumental cause, by which the Lambs victory becomes
ours.

ONE is the word of the testimony, Romans 10.10.
that is, the Gospel, not written, or set forth in tables, but believed and
hidden in the heart: neither believed in the heart only, but also professed with
the mouth before the world: For with the heart man believes unto righteousness,
and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Therefore he says not,
for the testimony, but, for the word of the testimony, that is, for the
ingenuous profession of the Gospel of Christ: which John familiarly sets forth
by the word (...) testimony. And thus again (...) for the word is put for
(...) by the word.

The other cause, is the constancy of martyrdom, not fearing to shed their
blood for the faith of the Gospel: And this is meant by the expression: They
loved not their souls unto the death, that is, their life more then death,
being willing to lay down the same for the glory of Christ: So that (...) they
loved not is put for (...) they neglected, or, contemned their life, as
Brightman has well observed. It is a paraphrase of the constancy of their
faith even unto martyrdom: for the name of Christ: without which constancy, the
Dragon is not conquered in respect of us: not that all are to lay down their
lives, but all, being called thereunto by Christ, are to be prepared for it. For
he which loses his life for Christ's cause, does find it: but he loses it,
who lays it not down for Christ. Now it appears that this song of triumph is
to be extended unto the times of the martyrs under the Roman tyrants before
Constantine, who then indeed put an end to the martyrdoms of Christians. Thus
much of the Saints rejoicing, containing the first part of the song, and first
effect of the victory.

12. We unto the inhabiters] The other part of the song denounces woe unto the
inhabiters of the earth and sea: the particle Woe, does denote deadly
calamities, as before: The third woe shall come quickly. This shall be the other
effect of the Dragons downfall: for seeing he could not effect any thing
against Michael and his Angels, that is, against the constant martyrs of
Christ, who by shedding of their blood (a wonder to be spoken) overcame the
Dragon: therefore he will now pour forth his choler on the children of the
earth and sea.

Inhabitants of the earth] Always in this book the inhabitants of the earth
are taken in an evil sense for the enemies of the Church, Antichrists
associates, The inhabitants of the earth.
worldli^^ men and idolaters: as we noted on Chap. 3.10.

To these therefore the Saints in heaven threaten woes, because of the Dragon:
to whom also are joined the inhabitants of the sea] Not fishes or Whales
swimming in the sea, but men living in Islands, and mariners who generally are
very profane. Thus Satan's universal rage both by sea and land is here set forth.

They add the cause of the danger: For the devil is come down unto you] It is
true, satan did never cease from raging in the world, after he was once thrust
out of heaven. But this is a prophetical threatening of other plots at hand, by
which, not long after this revelation, he should bring to destruction all the
inhabitants of the earth, and sea through out the Christian world, as wholly
given to all manner of superstition by Antichrists means. Seeing therefore, by
what has been spoken, and hereafter more shall be, it appears that the
darkness and calamities of Antichrist came into the world about the year of
our Lord 606. this Woe is altogether to be referred unto that time.

Brightman consents that the inhabitants of the earth, are all sorts of wicked
men hypocritically professing Christianity, viz. all the inhabiters of
Antichrists kingdom. But by the inhabitants of the sea, he understands the
clergy men, who broach gross, troubled and saltish doctrine, to their
counterfaite Christians, which indeed produces hypocrisy in them, but at last
gnawes their entralls, and bereaves them of understanding.

Full of great wrath] They foretell Satan's fury, by which he should introduce
Antichrists spiritual and secular power into the Christian world, establishing
his kingdom to the destruction of infinite sowles.

Because he knoweth] The cause of this his great fury, is the shortness of time
allotted him to rage in, or, immunitie from the eternal torments of hell, to
which he knows himself to be ordained. And therefore he will make up the the
brevitie of the time with unwearied endeavor of doing mischief, not letting
pass a moment without satisfying his poisoned lust on the miserable
inhabitants of the earth. But thou will say whence does he know that his time
is short: seeing no man knows the day of judgment but God? Undoubtedly he
knows it by the signs foreshewing the same to be at hand, and by conjectures
which are secret to us, seeing he is a spirit of quick and deep apprehension.

But how is the time short, it having continued more then a thousand years?
How this time is said to be short
Ribera restraines it to the last four years of his supposed Antichrist; But
if it were so not only the devil, but men of the weakest capacity might know
the day of judgment aforehand. But this is manifestly false: for the Beast was
not as yet ascended out of the sea and earth: The Dragon had not as yet seduced
the world by the Beast and falls Prophet, when he should be cast down to the
earth. So then the time of Antichristian persecution, which was to continue
more then a thousand years, is said to be short, for the consolation of the
godly: that they might know that the Dragons rage should have an end: short
also in respect of the time that was past before Antichrist was revealed: 1
Ioh. 2.18 1 Cor. 10.11.
like as the time of the new Testament, though long in it self, yet is called
the last hour, and the ends of the world.

13. And when the Dragon saw] The things we heard before, touching the
deliverie of the woman, the war of Michael, and the ruin of the Dragon
represented the state of the Church from the first birth thereof, unto
Constantines time: and were the first part of the first and second Act. Now
follows the latter member of both the said Acts, containing new combats, and
comforts of the Church, belonging unto the three hundred years from
Constantine until the rising of Antichrist. Then the Church seemed to be in a
safe haven, being freed of outward persecutors, and having obtained Christian
Emperors. But as histories witness, no less storms befell her then before.
For she falling to hypocrisy, and abounding in security, idleness, wealth,
luxuriousnes and ambition, soon begane by hom-bred dissentions to consume
herself, and to hold forth the faith, not in the heart, but in Creeds and
papers, depraving the doctrine of grace by philosophical subtilties, and to
heap up without measure humane traditions, bringing in the rites and idols of
Pagans, in a word, under the name of Christ to follow heathenisme and deny
Christ. Then sincerity betook it self to Eagles wings, and fled into the
desert, out of the sight of men: but whatever was hypocritical and
Antichristian got the upper hand.

And he persecuted the woman] Here follows a new assault of the Dragon against
the woman, The second assault of the war.
now what it was, and when, is to be considered. The time will declare the
persecution: which is signified two manner of ways: First on the Dragons part:
secondly on the woman's part. The Dragon is said to assault the woman after he
saw that he was cast unto the earth. Now we have showed that spiritually he was
thrust out of heaven soon after the death and exaltation of Christ: but
allegoricallie when Constantine came to the Empire who overthrew Maxentius,
Maximinus, and Licinius being the heads of the Dragon: Then the Dragon begane
to plot new mischief against the woman. The adjunct also of the woman shows
the time: who brought forth the man-child. The persecution therefore begane
after the woman was delivered. Her bringing forth, was the time of sorrows and
persecutions under the tyrannical Jews and Romans, For a woman (says Christ)
when she is in travel has sorrow, because her hour is come.

To retain therefore the sense of the prophecy, Ioh. 16.11.
it is thus: after that the Church had brought forth a man-child, that is, had
gotten Constantine to defend her, a new calamity more pernicious then the
former befell her. The occasion whereof was partly the overmuch bounty of
Constantine toward the Bishops and Churches: The occasion of a new persecution.
Partly also his and some of his successors their inconstancy. For by the
persuasion of ambitious Bishops, he built at Rome to his great cost, stately
and sumptuous palaces: he gifted the Churches with revenues, lands and
princelike treasures: he honored the Bishops as gods, and such as none might
judge, enriching them with excessive gifts, which made them insolent: (...): In
vita Silvestri.
for fulness breeds pride: especially he was lavish toward the Bishop of Rome,
on whose head (if Platina lie not) he set a mitre beset with gold and precious
stones: he built a royal Temple, named first Equitium of the Knighthood: then
Lateranensis: afterward Peter's: at last Paul's and Agnets: two also at
Constantinople: One called the temple of Peace: the other of the Apostles,
furnished rather with Persian then Christian ornaments, bestowing on them
vessels of silver, gold, and large rents, Why Constantine was called Nepos.
insomuch for his immoderate prodigality he was commonly called Nepos which
signifies a spendthrift or a riotous person. In the first ten years of his
reign he was called CONSTANTINVS THE GREAT, because of his victories: The ten
years after Latro a robber, because of his cruelty to his children and
friends: The last ten years of his reign (for he reigned 30 years in all)
Pupillus a pupil, because of his prodigality: as Bapt. Egnatius records.

These things ministered an occasion to the Dragon of a new persecution. A new
persecution by Bishops ambition and luxuriousness. See Mat. 23.6.
First he breathed the venom of pride into the minds of secure and ambitious
Bishops, insomuch as unmindfull of their former calamities they lifted
themselves above each other, basely striving in their Synods about the
uppermost sittings, primacie and the like. Witness the bundels of such books,
which Constantine caused to be burnt. Touching Christian doctrine, they thought
it sufficient to hold fast the truth of the Trinity, although in this very
thing they much trifled in their councils, making yearly, yea monthly
confessions of faith: All their other matters tended to pomp and vain glory.
It is true, Arius was condemned by the Nicene Council, and the Arians thrust
out of their places: But not long after Constantius leaning to Arianisme,
Athanasius was banished, and Arius called back: Him again the Council of
Sardica condemned: and restored Athanasius: who was again cast off by the
Synod of Millane, and Arianisme was again established by the Council held at
Ariminum and Seleucia, where all otherdoxe teachers were compelled to
subscribe, insomuch as at that time were hardly to be found two or three
Bishops in the whole Christian world that were sound in the faith: Yea Liberius
also Bishop of Rome fell to the Arians: Of which pestilent corruption Mantuan
thus writes: Arius humani generis lethale venenum
Legis in excidium natus fideique ruinam
Polluerat gentem, totumque infecerat orbem.
Arius was borne that heretic,
The deadly bane of men to be:
Of Law and faith he was the ruin,
And all the world corrupt did he.


But these things were but the beginning of sorrows. For the Bishops being
used to Synods, thereby having opportunity to establish their ambition and
power, did upon the lightest occasion require or force the Emperors to call a
Synod, the latter councils still condemning the former: The conflict of
councils.
having little or no care to set forth the purity of faith and further
godliness: But for the most part their decrees were concerning Patriarchal
seats, of the primacie of Old and New Rome, of the orders of clergy men, their
privileges, immunities and rents: of consecrating the holy Chrisme: of
coverings of altars, adorning and worshipping of images: of Massepriests, their
ordination, anointing and clothing: about the shaving of virgins and monks
hair: of mitres, surplisses, robes, copes, embroidered and fine linen
garments, holy vestiments, sacrifices, places of refuge, extreem unctions, and
such like fooleries. Thus we see what was the cause of the spiritual calamity
of the woman: touching which Ierom says truly, though little to what might
have been spoken: That the Christian Church, after she had princes to be
members, was made greater indeed in wealth and power, but less in virtue and
piety.

Besides we read that the woman or Church suffered such sore trialls by the
emperors themselves, and other tyrants, as hastened her flight. For such
generally was the state of the Church, as was the emperors pleasure, and
affection to have it, and he for the most part was swayed by the Bishops: so
likewise the issue and event of Synods, was usually according to the faction of
such Bishops as were stronger then the rest, by reason of the secular power.
Constantine himself wavering in the faith toward his latter end, and favoring
the heresy of Arius, while he thought (says Sulpitius) to fulfill his duty in
religion, he exercised THE POWER OF PERSECUTION; for Bishops were banished, the
clergy persecuted, and the laity punished, who had separated themselves from
the communion of the Arians. The persecution being then at the hottest, when
Constantius, ^ulian the Apostate, and Valens raging with hostile cruelty
against orthodox Christians, differed in nothing, but in name from the
cruellest tyrants. These calamities were seconded by the horrible incursions of
the barbarians as, Goth^s, Vandals, the Hunni, etc. who brought a horrible
destruction on the Christian world. And thus the Dragon did long and most
cruelly afflict, and put the woman to flight, after she had breathed a while.

By these things we may understand what was this new ecclesiastical and civil
persecution, with the occasion thereof: Of which Mantuan writes to this
pur^pose. That however peace is delightful and much defired, yet it occasioned
to the Church more miserable slaughters, opprobries, losses, disgraces and
miseries, then the open force of tyrants: For by means thereof Christians did
degenerate from their ancient virtue; voluptuousnes made them effeminate, and
weak both in body and mind: hence Christ and true faith was forgotten, and set
at naught, but all manner of wickedness increased: and men became worse then
beasts, of whom Rome was the receptacle: which caused, (says he) the Lord for
these abominable evils to punish Christians with plagues from heaven, and to
let loose upon them nations of a terrible and fierce countenance, regarding
neither the laws of God or man, as the people of Sarmatia and Scythia, the
Hunni, Saracens and Turks: yea such as professed one faith, like made dogs
devoured each others, by mortal war, sparing in the mean while the Turks and
Saracens, etc.

14. And to the woman were given two wings] Here we see how the woman escaped
the new assault of the Dragon: having wings given her she flees into the
desert. Of which thing John spoke somewhat before in v. 6. by way of
anticipation: save only that there it is said, the woman fled (...): here,
(...) that she might fly into the wilderness: there, that they should feed
her: here, that she might there be nourished: There, 1260 days, here, for a
time, times and half a time. The sense is one and the same. Touching all which
we will speak something, especially of the flight and time.

The Woman (I say) was either to fly or to fall under the Dragons assault. For
how should an unarmed woman stand against a cruel monster? neither was she to
trust unto her feet: Two Eagles wings give^ to the woman.
therefore wings are given her of God. Concerning these wings, we need not
dispute subtly thereof. Some will have them to be the two Testaments, the old
and the new, with which the Church defends herself. Others, hope and faith:
Others, prayer and desire of good works: Ribera understands it to be the
desire of Gods glory, and an endeavor to lead a spotless life: ALCASAR, the
contempt of worldly, and esteem of heavenly things. But we need not seek for a
mystery: for it is a plain metaphor taken from birds that fly: so the woman
being to fly had need of wings, and indeed no less then two: for one would not
serve to fly withal. A man is said to fly, who does suddenly shunn the sight of
men: as the Poet speaks of one fleeing swiftly: Timor addidit alas:
Fear was in stead of wings.


Wings therefore are given to the woman, not of a dove, which are to weak for
to fly long: although David wishes saying, O that I had wingsof a dove, that
he might have a little rest from trouble: neither the wings of a kite, or of a
houpe, or Storke, as Zacha. 5.9. These are unclean birds: but the wings of a
generous and Great Eagle, able to fly a long time: For the woman was to fly a
great while even till she came into the wilderness. A great Eagle flies
strongly, lifts her self up on high, and is carried above the clouds: hence
the flying of an Eagle is commended in scripture: Deuteronomy. 32.11. Isa. 40.31.
and hereby is signified that the Church was divinely enabled to this flight,
that she might not be a prey unto the Dragon, according to the promise: they
that hope in Jehovah, shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with
wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not
faint. Now touching the FLIGET, let us see how, and when it was.

There are diverse opinions of expositours about it, the which I list not to
rehearse. hearse. They spoke according to their module. I also will show mine
opinion: yea I have already not obscurely showed the same.

Let us call to memory what has bin said before of the place and clothing of
the woman, and of the Dragons persecution, the woman before was clothed with
the Sun, shined as the moon, and glittering stars openly in heaven: signifying
that the Christian Church until Constantine (who brought peace, and quietness
unto her,) should under the cross shine in brightness of faith godliness:
And indeed all that while by how much persecution increased, and Christians
were hated, and and afflicted, by so much the more they were eminent and
perspicuous: But peace (I say) being obtained by Constantine, Christians then
began to disperse themselves over the whole Roman Empire, and the Church
seemed to be again past al danger: but the thing fell out otherwise: for
suddenly new storms of persecution overwhelmed her, causing her to flee by
little and little, till at length she was forced altogether to hide herself in
the wilderness.

The wilderness is opposed to heaven: her flight to the ornaments wherewith
formerly she was adorned. For the Church fled from heaven into the wilderness,
not by change of place, but by loss of her graces, changing her ancient
sincerity of doctrine, faith, piety, humility, and Christ's government, into
luxuriousnes, ambition, superstition and pagan worship: when, I say, in stead
of pure and virgins attire, she put on whorish habit, altering her visage,
insomuch as now she was not the same, but altogether another woman, save in
name only. Nota. What it is to fl^e into the wilderness.
Thus she fled into the wilderness, that is, she vanished out of man's sight,
so that what formerlie she had been, the same now appeared not: as things are
hid and appear not in a wilderness. It is true in all ages there remained
still many godly people: but these were of no account and suppressed: there
being ver^e few (if any) congregations, who worshipped the Lord in the purity
of his ordinances: But superstition, idolatry and tyranny altogether
prevailed.

But thou will say, such a flight suites not with the history. For after
Constantines time for the space of three hundred years even until Gregory
the Woman remained in heaven, that is, the Church did flourish both in the East
and West: yea the Church has ever since remained, and at this day the Church
at Rome is more magnificent then of old. I answer: we are to distinguish the
true Church from the false. The true, sincere and chaste woman was forced
through the Dragons assaults to flee into the wilderness, and vanished out of
sight, having lost her former clothing and ornament, so as that chaste mother
the Church never appeared any where in the world: In her place succeeded a new
Church, being a gaudish and whorish woman: so that the flight of the woman
signifyes the departure of the true Church in the world.

The sum is this. The true Church fled into the wilderness, The wilderness
is the Popish desolation.
not by changing her place but loosing her former state: not by gooing forth of
Rome, but in loosing her ornaments.

This wilderness therefore may not be imagined to be any remote place in
Arabia, Lybia, or Japponia: Or a certain place unto which the true Church was
limited (as the Donatists dreamt concerning their Africa,) but is that desolate
and apostatical state brought in by Antichrist, in which indeed there was a
true Church, but not apparent to the view of men: like as of old in Isreal's
apostacy, there was indeed a Church of seven thousand, but unknown to Elias
and others: It is, I say, the spiritual confusion of the Papacy: Isay. 40.3.
like as the Prophet Isaiah calls the spiritual desolation of the Jewish kingdom
a wilderness. In this wilderness or spiritual confusion of the Romish Church,
John sees a woman riding on a scarlet coulered Beast. Chap. 17.

It is very memorable, that here, so in v. 6. it is said, The woman had a
place prepared of God in the wilderness that they should feed her there] who?
the Angels, as they did Elias (unto whose history it seems to allude) 1 King
19. Or some secret nursing fathers, whom the Lord would raise up during the
woman's exile. For we are to consider, that Christ's spouse (howsoever during her
banishment, it could not be said, that she was visiblie either here or there)
nevertheless was not extinguished, and no where to be found, but was secretly
kept and nourished by God, even as in the time of Elias, the Lord reserved to
himself seven thousand worshippers of his name, although so much did not
publicly appear, but a general corruption and depravation of religion had
spread it self over both kingdoms of Judah and Israel.

The Papists therefore asking us where the Church was a thousand years past,
if the Papacy were not it? may here receive an answer, that it was in the
wilderness, where not long after Constantines time she was forced to flee:
which made Hilarie to complain that in his time, Hilar. Cont Auxen.
the Church was rather hid in caves and dens of the earth, then to be found in
the chief seats.

But how long shall the woman remain banished in the wilderness? A time, and
times, and half a time. This threefold distinction of time, is taken out of
Dan. 7.25. and 12 7. where Antiochus (a type of Antichrist should tread the
Saints under foot for a time, times, and half a time. What is here meant by
it, appears from v. 6. they shall feed her there 1260 days: Of these days
has been spoken Chap. 11.2. There it signified the time of the prophecy of
the two witnesses: here it is the time of the woman's exile in the wilderness.
The same time of 42 months there is taken for the space, that the holy city
should be trodden down: and Chap. 13.5. it is the time the Beast shall rage
against the Saints. Whence I gather, that the Churches abode in the
wilderness: The treading down of the holy city: The prophesying of the two
witnesses: Chap. 12.14. Chapter 13.7.
And the Beasts persecution of the Saints, shall be at one and the same time:
and go together (as it were) with equal steps: The which observation will much
illustrate the prophecy: for that which is obscure in one place, is opened by
another being more clear.

Now it may be demanded, Time and ^imes.
what this time is? I have formely showed diverse opinions about it.

The Papists understand by Time a year: by times two years: and half a time,
a half year: so making, the twelve hundred and sixty days, the forty two
months, the time, times, and half a time to be three years and an half: and
so long they imagine their Antichrist shall reign in the end of the world, and
thrust the Woman the Church out of Rome into the wilderness, etc. the which
(however it be ancient yet) is a manifest error, as before I have proved.

We added some expositions of our own divines: and at length followed that
which seemed the most safe: viz. that a definite time was put for an
indefinite, of which also the most learned BIBLIANDER thus writes in his
Chronology: The time, times, and half a time does not signify three years
and an half: but according to the propriety of the Hebrew language, a time
not certain and definite, whither long, or short, or betwixt both, in which
God will permit Antichrist, to rage according to his pleasure against Christ's
servants, the holy law and true religion. This time (I say) touching the
Churches banishment is defined in the eternal counsel of God, but so far as
concerns the term can not possibly be found out by man's reckoning.

Now this distribution of time is opposed unto a twofold error. What is meant
by this threefold distinction of time. A worthy observation of the Author. Lab.
20. d. C. D. c. 23
For least we should imagine that the afflictions of the Church under
Antichrist would be short, it is said they shall remain a time, and times,
not one and two, but one and many: For neither the Hebrew nor the Greek text
has it in the duall number mo^adaim, or, (...) two times, although Austin
following the common opinion took it so: but both have it in the plural number
moyadim and (...) times towit many: the which notably confutes the common
error about the time of Antichrists reign: and it seems that Justine Martyr
took notice of this very thing against Trypho confuting the Jews, who
understood a plural word du^lly, of two hundred years. And least also we
should think that Antichristian calamities should be perpetual, they are
said to remain but half or part of time.

Notwithstanding if this shall be understood of a definite time in respect of us,
because the number of the days and months is again and again definitely
repeated, for my part then I should think that a prophetical number of days
is put for the years, in which Antichrist should reign and rage in full
vigor, viz. 1260 years, which begane (as before I showed) with his first
rising: for then this woman fled into the wilderness: and the harlot succeeded
in her room.

If thou demand, seeing the Church begane soon to flee after Constantines time,
wherefore then are not the 1260 years reckoned from thence? I answer, her
flight, and the time of her exile is not altogether one thing. For her flight
begane from Constantine, and dured until Phocas, almost 300 years, after which
time the woman begane to be in the wilderness. For neither are we to imagine,
that the Church was carried by flight in one day, month or year into the
wilderness: but by little and little, as she lost her heavenly endowments,
changed her clothing and corrupted her chastity: by degrees therefore (I say)
the Apostolical sincerity of faith and order did wear out: and the
corruptions, superstitions and heathenish abominations and idols were brought
in: together with that Pagan-Jewish hierarchy, which to this day Rome with so
great pomp and luxuriousnes boasts of: for Antichrists apostasy was not at
the highest all of a sudden, but increased by slow paces: till the pride and
tyranny of the Roman Bishops was lifted up and established. For as the Poet
says: Nemo repent fuit turpissimus: Iuve. Sat. 2 When the flight begane and
how long it dured.


Until Sylvester I. all the Roman Bishops were martyrs for the space of 310
years: from that time to John 1. they were all Archbishops, for the space of
200 years, until the year 520. at which time the Roman Praelates were created
Patriarchs by Justine Caesar. Then the woman almost by flying was come to the
wilderness. Notwithstanding the time of banishment began 86 years after, when
from Patriarchs they became to be open and very Antichrists: when, I say,
Phocas the parricide, contrary to the minds both of the Grecian and Latin
Bishops, raised up Boniface the III. with a mighty tumult of men into the
throne OF UNIVERSAL PESTILENCE, causing him to be worshipped, and proclaimed
prince and Lord of all Bishops. Hitherto the flight still dured. After this was
her exile in the wilderness. The long time of her flight is signified by the two
wings, not of a dove, but a great Eagle, that is, able to carry her a long
while, as I before noted. For the woman was not to fly a little time, but her
flight into the wilderness was to be through groves and great woods, through
fields and seas, til she came in a certain place of the wilderness prepared by
God: therefore Eagles wings were required: because the Eagle holds out longest
in flying.

15. And the serpent cast out] Here the Church has a new trouble and comfort
again; The Dragon endeavors to destroy the woman while she flies through
persecution: casting out a flood of waters after her, for to swallow her up:
but his vomiting is in vain. The woman flies on high: and before she lets
herself down into the wilderness the earth opening her mouth swallows up the
flood which the Dragon cast forth. These things are the sum of the two verses:
The general doctrine or meaning whereof, I confess, is not obscure: for it
signifies, that the Church having stood out one danger, is involued again with
new calamities by that oldserpent, who seeks by all means to destroy her: but
that God is never wanting for her safety, but when she is nearest to
oppression, then is he nearest suddenly and unexpectedly to provide away for
her escape: as here al outwardmeans failing, the earth opens her mouth, that
the woman might not be swallowed up. For all the creatures are ready at Gods
appointment for the safety of the elect.

But the special sense of this prophecy seems to be very obscure: What is
meant by this flood of waters.
namely what these waters and flood should be? And when the Dragon cast out
the same after the woman? What earth swallowed it up, and how? The particle
(...) as shows that the waters and flood are allegorically to be understood.
Most understand this flood of waters, to be the manifold and grievous
afflictions and persecutions, by which satan seeks in all times to oppress
the Church, taking it to be an allusion to that complaint of the Church of old:
Psalm. 124.1.3.
unless Jehovah had bin on our side: now may Israel say; Then the waters had
overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul, etc. This I confess is not
amiss: But it must be more specially expounded, now the Dragon persecuted the
woman in her slight, by a flood of waters: and that also before the Beast
ascended out of the sea: of which it follows Chap. 13.

Fox makes the flood to be those horrible edicts, Fox his opinion.
proscripts, and commands of Emperors, (especially of Maxentius and Maximinus)
which were every where published for the taking away of Christians from the
earth. But these things fell out before the former persecution: neither did the
woman take her flight under the perfecutions of the Roman Dragons.

Bullinger comprehends under it, Bullingers interpretation.
all the Churches afflictions: This flood (says he) signifies that the Devil
powered forth a sea of evils on the Church, as sects, dissensions, tumults,
seditions and persecutions, by which almost the whole earth was over flowen.
And he applies these things to the very time of the Apostles: when satan
stirred up every where the magistrates and priests against the Apostles and
Apostolical truth: this is true indeed: yet in my judgment but little
agreeing to the sense of the present prophecy.

Brightman understanding by these waters, Brightmans opimon.
peoples or nations, as afterward in Chap. 17.15. interprets this other
persecution of the irruptions of the Franci, the Alemanni, Burgonions, Goths,
Vandals, Hunni, Treballi, the Heruli, the Lumbards, and such other Northern
nations, who about the year 400 and thence forward rushed in (the sluices being
as it were taken away) upon all Europe and Asia, for to swallow up, as with
deep gulfes the Christian Church: Yet the earth, that is, the counterfaite and
earthly religion swallowed up the force of this flood: because these barbarous
nations, by whom the Dragon thought to blot out the very name of Christ, after
they came into these countries more full of humanity, they embraced the
Christian religion which they saw amongst them, though indeed it was most
corrupt: For all of them were either Arians, or Nestorians, or Eurychinians:
but yet changed not their life and Barbarous manners. So the earth deluded the
Dragons endeavor: The which exposition seems not in the least to be contrary
to histories, and the order of this Vision.

Notwithstanding I should rather consent to them, The waters cast out by the
Dragon are heresies. Ioh. 7.38.
who apply this to the foul heresies, scismes, blasphemies, and monstrous
doctrines, by which the Dragon attempted to drown the Woman while she fled,
even under Christian Emperors. For as the doctrine of the Gospel proceeding
out of the mouth of God is compared to streams of waters, which none are able
to resist, as Christ says: he that believes on me, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living water: So the heresies coming out of the Dragons mouth,
what are they but as a violent vomit or floods, to swallow up the Church? For
even in Constantines time, the Arian heresy and blasphemy against Christ
violently burst forth like to a most swift stream, and overflowed all the East,
and soon after the West also, whereby the Church was almost swallowed up in
her flight. After the Arian heresy against the son of God, followed the
Macedonian against the holy Ghost: soon after that the Pelagian against the
whole Gospel: That also of Nestorius and Eutyches, and the Monothelists
against the truth of Christ's person: the which mightily shook the Church
almost for the space of 300 years, as the histories of Eusebius, Socrates,
Theodoretus, Zozomenus, and Evagrius witness: The Dragon by these floods
thought to drown the woman in her flight: but in vain, as it follows.

16. But the earth helped the woman] Some here by earth understand Churst in
regard of his stabilitie, and because the waters of the Dragon were swallowed
up, the darts and plots of the adversaries suppressed, and the afflicted Church
not utterly overthrown.

Others of earthly men, by whom the Lord often wonderfully protects (though
they aim at other ends) his Church and people: as of old by the Philistines he
delivered David, from the hands of Saul: by Lys^as he preserved Paul from the
fury of the Jews.

Brightman, (as I said before) understands this of those Barbarous nations, who
coming on furiously to root out Christian religion, yet preserved the same by
embracing it, though much corrupted. There are some who interpret it of
Councils, which being gathered together out of all nations swallowed up the
blasphemous floods of heresies, by refuting them: Thus the general Council of
Nice condemned the Arian heresy, the Synod of Constantinopel the Macedonian,
and Eunomian; that of Ephesus the Nestorian; that of Chalcedon the Eu^ychinian.
But this sense seems to be forced. It is an allusion to the history of Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, whom the earth swallowed up alwe, Numb. 16.22. As therefore
the earth did then help Moses and Aaron against the seditious rebels,
miraculously opening her mouth, and devouring them: So the Lord no less
miraculously helped the woman flying from the floods of most dangerous
heresies, so as she was not drowned by them, that is, he wonderfully swallowed
up those false doctrines with the authors thereof, as if the earth had opened
her mouth and utterly devoured them: we need not therefore subtly dispute
about the earth: considering how the Lord continually dissipated all the
heresies, which during the space of 300 years overflowed the Christian world:
caused the same, I say to vanish away like smoke by the power of the holy
scriptures, and zeal of Orthodox teachers.

17. And the Dragon was wroth] The third assault of the Dragon, not against the
woman herself (for her he lost, as being out of his sight in the wilderness)
but the rest of her seed, whom he purposed to set upon by open war. This
therefore is a preparation to the following third Act of the Beasts war with the
Saints. And so this third assault belongs to the Antichristian times, which
begane in the reign of Phocas, and Boniface III. the first universal
high priest, when the Church was now fled into the wilderness, and so none
appeared any where but as a whorish woman.

The meaning of the verse we take to be thus: The Dragon being angry that he
could not by the flood of heresies drown the woman in her flight, and now
despairing of further effecting any thing against her, he stirs up a new
war against the rest of her seed by themeanes of the Beast, as it follows.
For that which here the Dragon is said to do, in the following Chapter is
attributed to the Beast, to whom it was given to make war with the Saints.
They who there are called Saints, Who are the rest of the woman's seed.
here are named the rest of the seed of the woman. Now these are the faithful,
who seeing all the public congregations in the Papacy corrupted, withdrew
themselves, and privately worshipped the Lord according to his institution in
their own families, of whom also some openly opposed the Beast even from the
first rising of the Papacy until this day: against these what manner of war
the Dragon has made by the Roman Beast, the books of Martyrs plentifully
declare, as also the Spanish and Popish inquisition, which has drawn many
thousands of Saints unto the gibbet, fire, and other exquisite torments:
besides the wars of Popes against diverse Emperors and Kings, for the
upholding of their tyranny, the which for the present I will not speak off. At
that time indeed the Dragon could not war against the woman, that is, against
whole congregations of the Saints, because such were not visible: therefore he
strives by all mea^s possible to extirpate the rest of her seed, which was
scattered here and there. But more of this war in the following Chapter.

By two Epithites the woman's seed is set forth: that they keep the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. The former notes
the life and piety of the Saints conformable to the word of God: The latter the
sincerity of their faith according to the tenor of the Gospel. So that these
should not pollute themselves with the superstitions, idols and abominations of
Popery; but holily and unblamably pass the time of their dwelling here,
according to the rule of Gods law: neither should they receive the traditions,
laws and decrees of the Pope for articles of faith, but constantly maintain
the sincerity of Christian belief: for the sake whereof they were to undergo
the contradictions and war of the Dragon through the Beast.

18. And I stood upon the sea] A transition to the following Act touching the
Beasts. All Greek copies have it in the first person (...). I stood, that is, I
John, noting the opportunity of the place where then he stood to behold the
Beast that arose out of the sea. Notwithstanding the vulgar reads it in the
third person: And he stood: as if the Dragon had stood on the sand of the sea:
that is, as some interpret it, on a weak foundation, for a sandy station is
not to be trusted too: Or, as others, on the multitude of wicked men. But in
this there is no use of a mystery. Neither is there gold under every stone.
The former reading is proper and natural: the which Andreas also follows, and
from this transition does rightly begin the following Chapter touching the
Beasts.

Rupertus also, I stood upon the sand of the sea, and I saw: to denote (says
he) the difficult doubtful and dangerous state of that time, when the elect
standing shall waver, and wavering shall stand: the which allegory I leave to
its own strength.

Ribera approves not the Latin but the Greek reading: though Alcasar does
mightelie labor to defend the Latin version against all opposers.

CHAPTER XIII. The Argument, Parts, Analysis.
THis Chapter is a declaration or an exposition of the 17 verse of the
foregoing Chapter. For it describes the war of the Dragon with the seed of
the woman, that is, with the Saints and faithful worshippers of Christ,
managed through Antichrist: whose rising, nature, kingdom, power, deeds,
success, character, and lastly his name and number or numberal name the
Prophet sets forth as by lively colors under the type of a double beast. For
he saw Antichrist coming forth on the theater, first under the figure of a
Beast having seven heads, presently after under the figure of a Beast having
two horns, in which is signified the twofold person of Antichrist, viz. as he
is a secular Monarch, and a spiritual seducer or false prophet, of which is
spoken Chap. 16.13. and Chap. 19.20. Here therefore begins the Third Act of the
fourth Vision, touching the last and most grievous Antichristian persecution,
which shall endure unto the end of the world.

THe parts of the Chapter are two, according to the number of the Beasts
treated of in the same.

The description of the first Beast is contained in 10 verses: And it is
diverse: I. The Beasts rising is noted to be out of the sea, v. 1. II. His
monstrous figure or shape: seven blasphemous heads: ten crowned horns, ibid:
with the skin of a Leopard, feet of a Bear, and mouth of a Lion, verse 2. III.
His state: he has a throne and kingly power: of which is noted 1. The
efficient cause, the Dragon gives him his seat and power, ibid. 2. The degree
and variation of the power, it is great v. 2. One of his heads being deadly
wounded is again healed ver. 3.3. His divine authority: the whole earth
admires and adores him, in praises making him equal with God, yea lifts him
above God, ver. 3.4. IV. His deeds: both with his mouth: he speaks great
things and blasphemies: the outragiousnesse whereof is figured out by the time
it dured, viz. forty two months, v. 5. and by the objects, which he
blasphemeth. 1. God. 2. His nacle. 3. The inhabiters of heaven, v. 6. then with
weapons: he makes war with the Saints: the event of which is twofold. 1.
The victory over the Saints. 2. an increase of universal power, v. 7. and of
worship, v. 8. V. It is shut up with an exclamatorie and hortatorie conclusion
unto the godly, that they should attend v. 9. comminatory against the Beast,
that he should suffer like for like, v. 10. But consolatory to the Saints:
showing them what was don, was for the exercise of their faith and patience,
ibid.


The description of the latter Beast is from v. 11. unto the end of the
Chapter: and it contains diverse particulars: I. His original is noted to be
from the earth. v. 11. II. A threefold similitude or likeness: 1. With the
Lamb, having horns like his. 2. With the Dragon, speaking as he did, ibid. 3.
With the former Beast, whose whole power he exercises, ver. 12.
III. Six effects of his power: 1. He establishes the worship of the former
beast, v. 12. 2. He does great wonders, v. 13. 3. By miracles he seduceth the
inhabiters of the earth, v. 13.14. 4. He commands an image to be made to the
former Beast, ibid. 5. He gives life to the image, makes it to speak, causing
all them that will not worship the image to be slain, ver. 15. 6. He imprints
the character, name and the number of the Beast on the right hands and
foreheads of the worshippers thereof, giving them a privilege to buy and sell,
the which is prohibited all others, ver. 16.17.
IIII. It is ended with an exclamatorie conclusion amplifying the mystery of
the Beast: and stirring us up to the searching out the mystery thereof: both
from the possibility of it: because it is the number of a man, also from the
facility: because it may be expressed in three numeral letters (...) which make
six hundred threescore and six.


The former part of the Chapter. Of the Beast arising out of the sea.
1. And I saw a beast rise up out of the Sea, having seven heads and ten
horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of
blasphemy.

2. And the beast which I saw was like unto a Leopard, and his feet were as the
feet of a Bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion: and the Dragon gave him
his power, and his seat, and great authority.

3. And I saw oneof his heads as it were wounded to death, and his deadly wound
was healed, and all the world wondered after the beast.

4. And they worshipped the Dragon, which gave power unto the beast, and they
worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast? Who is able to make
war with him?

5. And there was given unto him a mouth, speaking great things, and
blasphemies, and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months.

6. And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God to blaspheme his Name, and
his Tabernacle, and them that dwelt in heaven.

7. And it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome
them: and power was given him over all kinreds, and tongues, and nations.

8. And all that dwell upon the earth, shall worship him, whose names are not
written in the book of life, of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world.

9. If any man have an ear, let him hear:

10. He that leads into captivity shall go into captivity: He that kills
with the sword must be killed with the sword. Here is the patience and the
faith of the Saints.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd I saw a Beast rise up out of the sea] In this part of the vision there
seems to all interpreters some bar to lie in the way touching this prophecy,
as what should be meant by these Beasts, of both which John at length cries
out, as if they were but one, here is wisdom, let him that has understanding
count the number of the Beast: intimating, that here something is figured out,
passing the reach of man. And indeed the thing is so. Notwithstanding from the
manner of the method formerlie laid down by us, we may undoubtedly gather that
the Third Ast of this 4 Vision, that is, Antichristian persecution is here
represented.

Beside I scarsly find any whether ancient or modern interpreters ( Lyra and
Alcasar excepted) but expound either the former, or the latter, or else both the
Beasts, of Antichrist. Now, whatsoever is meant by the latter, let us first
consider the former.

Touching this I find diverse opinions.

Some will have it to be the devil. Opinions about this sea-beast.
Others some certain and special persons abounding in all manner of
wickedness, such as Gensericus, or Cosroes, or his son Syroes, or Mahumet: or
Luther as Lindanus foolishly feigneth.

Others by the Beast understand the universality of wicked men.

But these opinions are not at all to be esteemed, because indeed they
manifestly contradict the text. For the Dragon who is the devil shall give his
throne unto the Beast. Therefore he is not the Beast himself. But in a
prophetical style, a Beast in scripture usually signifies not a special man,
but a monarchical kingdom with the head thereof. Lastly all the wicked shall
follow and worship the Beast: therefore they themselves are not the Beast. So
that this Beast can neither be restrained to one certain wicked man, nor
confounded with all the wicked in general.

But there are three other opinions more probable, Three opinions more probable.
which I will briefly set down and examine.

The first is, that this Beast denotes the old Roman Empire with its idolatry
and cruelty against Christians. Of this mind are many of the ancients, as
Tertullian, Hierome, Orosius, Eusebius, with many also of our latter divines,
as Bullinger, Fox, Osiander in his conjectures, Junius, Aretius, Whitaker:
wherein Alcasar the Jesuit agrees with them. 1: sentence touching the Roman
empire examined.


This opinion howsoever I do not altogether disapprove: considering, that in
Chap. 17. (where this Beast again comes forth) it is manifest that Antichrist
clothed with the spoils of the Roman Empire, is represented by the same:
nevertheless in this place I take it otherwise.

For first John here sees the beast arising out of the sea. So that he saw its
originnall: but the original of the Roman Empire he did not see. For it it had
now already continued from Julius unto the fourteenth year of Domitian (when
this prophecy was revealed unto him) CXLII years. Therefore it is said
afterward in Chap. 17.8. of the Roman Empire: The Beast was, to wit, before
this vision, and before his rising out of the sea.

Secondly, this Beast rose not out of the sea, til the Woman's flight into the
wilderness, as the order of the Vision both here, and in the foregoing Chapter
does plainly manifest. Now the flight of the woman was not under the Roman
tyrants, but begane under Christian Emperors and heretics, as we have showed
in the foregoing Chapter.

Add hereunto that the Beast is said to rage forty two months: the which is
the time of the woman's abode in the wilderness, and the time of the prophecy
of the two witnesses, as appears by what has before bin spoken. Now this time
by the consent of all shall be the last, in which Antichrist shall rage. And
therefore it cannot possibly belong to the old or Pagan Empire of the Romans.

To be short, this seems to be a demonstrative reason, that this Beast is often
mentioned throughout this prophecy, as being to remain in a continual
persecution of the Saints unto the end of the world: and not to be abolished
but by the brightness of Christ's coming, who will cast him into the lake of
fire and brimstone, Chap. 19.10. Whereas the old Roman Empire scarsly dured
three hundred and fifty four years, and now has bin in the hand of
Christians, thirteen hundred years and more. Therefore this Beast cannot
simply be applied to the ancient Roman Empire.

The reasons most probable alleged for it (though of little solidity) are
three:

First, that this Beast seems to be like to the fourth beast in Daniel Chap.
7.7. by which, according to the common opinion, is denoted the Roman Monarchy.

Secondly, because the Roman Emperors from Tiberius unto Constantine have
most cruelly warred against the Saints, the which also the Beast is here said
to do, ver. 7.

Lastly, because power is given to this Beast over every tribe and tongue and
nation, in the same verse. The which most properly may be applied to the Roman
Emperors, Lords of the world.

To the first, I answer: if we compare the Beast in Daniel with this here, we
shall see indeed that both of them have ten horns, but their likeness in all
other things is very obscure: besides the fourth Beast in Daniel is diverse
from all the other beasts: but this here is as it were compounded of the three
former Beasts in Daniel. Add to this, that the Ancient Hebrews with great
show of reason interpret the fourth Beast in Daniel, not of the Roman Empire,
but of the kingdom of the Seleucides, of which Antiochus Epiphanes that little
blasphemous and cruel horn was chief: notwithstanding I will not now dispute
what solidity there may be in it.

As for their second reason, we have showed that the persecutions of the Roman
Dragons are represented in Chap. 12. But this war of the Beast (far more
cruel) shall endure unto the end of the world, and not against the woman (which
afterward he sees riding on the scarlet colored Beast) but with the seed of
the woman, that is, with them who are truly faithful.

To be short, that the whole earth is said to wonder, and follow after the
Beast, v. 3. and to have power over all kinreds and tongues, etc. v. 7. this is
restrained to the dwellers on the earth and reprobate worshippers of the Beast,
in v. 8. Now not only the reprobate gentiles were subject to the heathenish
Roman Empire, Apolog. c. 30 and ad Scapul. Mat. 17.27.
but the believing Christians also, who (as Tertullian records) worshippped
not the Roman Emperors but God alone: And Paul to escape the fury of the
Jews appealed to Caesar: Our Lord himself also paid tribute to the Roman
Empire: And the Apostles taught Christians to be obedient unto the Magistrates
thereof. In a word the worshipping of the Beast imports not only civil
subjection, but religious worship, as we shall see hereafter. By all which it
appears that this Beast cannot be absolutely restrained to the Roman Empire:
howsoever we may perceive that the monarchical power of the Roman Empire is
in some sense taken up by the Beast, as may be gathered from Chap. 17. The
second opinion touching Mahumet weighed.


The other opinion (principally urged by Viterbiensis) is of those, who
understand this Beast of the Mahumetane or Turkish Empire.

These first consider his rising out of the sea, that is, the gathering and
joining together of diverse nations, as Arabians, Saracens, Turks, Tartars,
etc.

Secondly his figure. For he is like a Leopard, because he violently took
into his hands the seat and power of the Grecian Monarchy, which Daniel
likens unto a Leopard. He has also the feet of a Bear: in regard he holds the
pillars or props of the Persian Monarchy, the which is also there compared unto
a Bear: he has moreover the mouth of a Lion: because he possesses the
spoils of the first Assyrian Monarchy.

For the Mahumetane Empire is extended in religion and worship over all these
peoples: in regard both Persians and Babylonians are at this day Mahumetanes,
though under diverse kings. It is also full of blasphemies against the God of
Israel, and against the Son of God. The Mahumetanes power is terrible and
invincible: and has more then nine hundred years most cruelly warred against
the Saints and worshippers of Christ: and so overcome, as that all Asia, and
almost Africa with a great part of Europe (being wrung out of the hands of
Christians) is brought under the religion and power of Mahumet: and Christian
religion forced into the outmost corners of Europe.

Lastly, the time of the forty two months designed to the reign and rage of
the Beast, may well and fitly be applied to the violent rage of the Mahumetanes.

But now however indeed these things have a great show of seeming truth: yet
they are not solid.

For first this rising out of the sea, is rather to be understood of a coming
forth out of the bottomless pit, then of a gathering of Barbarous nations, as
by and by it shall appear.

Secondly, the figure taken from the members of diverse Beasts does also admit
of a more fit interpretation. So also the blasphemies, and the large and
terrible power are more rightly to be applied to the Roman Antichrist then to
the Turk: although he also does in a very hostile manner act the parts of the
Eastern Antichrist against the Christian Church, as appeared in the sixth
trumpet, Chap. 9.

Lasily, the time of the forty two months, does altogether agree to the war
of the Roman Beast against the two witnesses, as has bin showed on Chap. 11.
Thus we see that the foresaid reasons do not sufficiently confirm this
second opinion.

Moreover there are two things which do plainly disprove the same: One is, in
that it is often said: this Beast was wondered at, and worshipped by the
inhabitants of the earth, the which (as I have showed) signifies not simply a
subjection, but a religious worship given unto the Beast: now this does not so
well agree to the Turkish Empire: for although the Turks worship Mahumet as the
greatest prophet: yet they attribute no religious worship unto their Emperors:
neither do they subject themselves unto their Empire so much through
admiration, as for fear. The other is taken from Chap. 17. where it is
manifest that this same Beast appears again unto John a woman sitting thereon.
Now there the seven heads of the Beast, are the seven mountains of Rome, and
the woman herself denotes Rome, the which is so evident as it cannot be denied,
no not by some of the Jesuits themselves. Therefore this Beast has his seat
at Rome: But the Turk never had his seat there: hence then it seems that this
Beast does not belong unto the Turkish Empire: unless perhaps it yet come to
pass that Italy and Rome fall into the hands of the Turk: the which thing
God knows. Indeed the horrible Idolworship of Rome may justly procure such a
judgment: notwithstanding the holy Ghost threatens in Chap. 17.16. that the
Romish harlot shall be destroyed and burnt with fire, not by the Turk, but by
ten kings, sometimes her lovers and frindes.

I come unto the third opinion, The third opinion.
which is that this Beast is Antichrist. The which not only many ancient
writers as Irenaeus, Ambrose, Prosper, Methodius, Arethas, Andreas, etc. But
also sundry modern both Papists and protestants have followed: as Gagneus,
Bellarmin, Ribera: and of ours Alphonsus, Morellus, Tossanus: with whom my
Anonymus also consents.

Alcasar indeed likes it not, because he sees that it cannot consist with the
common fable touching Antichrist his three years reign: And because he
feineth that after the destruction of the beast, there shall be thousand years
of peace: and hence therefore he does justly reprove and reprehend as well the
old as latter Authors and maintainers of the said fable. But he is deceived
touching the thousand years of peace to follow after the destruction of the
Beast, as I shall manifest on chap. 20. But his caveat is good: that it is not
enough for the approving of an exposition as certain and not to be doubted of,
because many subscribe unto it. Whosoever therefore the authors be, their
reasons are to be examined. First, The third opinion expounded and proved.
this Beast does very well agree with the little horn in Daniel, cha. 7.8.
which signifies either Antichrist himself, or at least is a type of him, as the
most learned Christian interpreters do acknowledge: for what Daniel speaks of
the little horn, John does almost in so many words ascribe unto this Beast:
that he has a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies: that he makes war
with the Saints, and overcomes them, and that for the space of forty two
months, or for a time, times, and half a time, etc.

Secondly, this Beast rising out of the Sea, and that in chap. 11, ascending
out of the bottomless pit, are undoubtedly one: because the figure and time of
wrath and war does agree: and that it is one, not only Arethas and Andreas,
but also Anonymus, Ribera, and Gagneus do acknowledge, viz. that Antichrist.
Furthermore this sevenheaded Beast, and the Beast on which the woman sits,
chap. 17. is one and the same altogether, as the description shows, and shall
more plainly appear afterward. Now the Beast there v. 11. without all doubt
(though in a great mystery) denotes Antichrist with his kingdom and seat: and
therefore the Beast here is to be understood of him also.

Lastly, the attributes of this Beast agree to none more evidently, the^ to
Antichrist, First in this, that the whole earth with admiration followed the
Beast, the which thing is most true, for the whole Christian world readily
indeed honors Antichrist, as sitting in the temple of God, boasting himself
that he is God, and holiness it self. Now the Romans heretofore did hardly
with great force of arms subject the world under their power. And as for the
Mahumetanes hitherto they have enlarged their Empire only by slaughters and
effusion of much blood.

Moreover it accords in this, that on his heads he had a name of blasphemy, and
with his mouth he speaks great and blaspemous things. Now howbeit it is true,
the Romish and Turkish Empire ever has been, and still is very blasphemous:
yet the Romans were, and the Turks still are blasphemers without the Church,
and ignorant of God and Christ; as the Apostle speaks of himself what he did
when he was a Pharisee: But Antichrist sitting in the Church of God, under the
name of Christ, grievously blasphemeth the same: and will be accounted by his
followers a god, yea most proudly lifts himself up above all that is called
god. It is true the Emperors Nero and Domitian were sometime so athistically
mad, as that they would be divinely worshipped. But that was nothing in
comparison of Antichrists arrogance, whose footsteps are adored by Kings and
Emperors. Again in this likewise the agreement stands, that he makes war
with the Saints: the which thing I grant that the Romans and Turks have also
done: But Antichrists war with the Saints by the confession of all men shall
be far more cursed and cruel: for it shall not be a civil war only, as in
killing the body, and confiscating the estates of men: but a spiritual
likewise, selling, tormenting, and killing of souls.

Lastly, it agrees, that he has power over every nation, kindred and tongues:
it is true the Romans did very far enlarge the bounds of their Empire, that
so they might be the Lords of the world: The Mahumetanes also Lord it far and
near, yet without the limits of the Church: But Antichrist sitting in the
temple of God, so far forth as the temple of God, or Christian Church did
visibly appear, should under the pretense of religion usurp the Empire as
Monarch, and Head of all. All which things considered, I suppose that the third
opinion touching the Beast-Antichrist is sufficiently confirmed.
Notwithstanding, if these things are not fully satisfactory to any: such then I
only desire that they will rest in the reasons laid down, until they hear
John himself in Chap. 17. give the interpretation of this mystery. For from
that fountain the sense of this place is to be drawn, howsoever those
interpreters seem to me inconsiderate, who apply all the mysteries of that
place to this here, for they ought to observe, that the spirit does purposely
and in great wisdom produce this monstre in four distinct visions, ( viz. the
third, fourth, fifth, and sixth) acting or suffering diverse and different
things, that the former things may the more clearly be known by the latter.

And hitherto indeed such of the Papists agree with our interpreters, Who
Antichrist should be, questioned betwixt us and the Papists. The Papists
description of Antichrist.
who acknowledge Antichrist to be noted by this Beast whither wholly
considered, or in one of his heads.

But we disagree in judgment about the question, who is that Antichrist
figured out by this Beast.

The Papists (that the Pope might not be suspected to be he) feign such an
Antichrist (as we have more then once before spoken of: to wit) a certain Jew
begot by an evil spirit, and to be borne of a Jewish woman near the end of the
world: whom the Jews shall acknowledge for their Messiah, and who (as they say)
in the space of three years and six months shall subdue all the kingdoms of
the world, yea the Roman Empire also (but yet not take up the title of a
Roman Emperor) seduce the whole earth, rebuild the temple of Jerusalem, sit
and reign there: he shall restore Rome, which ten Kings (having thrust out the
Pope) had burnt with fire, there he shall reign and literally fulfill all
things which here are recorded of both Beasts. Touching the vanity of which
fabulous opinion (which al may see was forged for the destruction of the
Christian world) we have spoken enough before on Chap. 9. and 11.

Our Divines on the contrary affirm, Antichrist described by the Protestants.
that no man is more evidently represented by this most monstrous Beast then
the Papal Empire or Pope of Rome: of whom Alphonsus Mantuanus thus writes:
John (says he) being to describe Antichrists ravenous extortion, and venomous
rage against the godly, types him out under the monstrous image of a horrible
Beast, which neither could be termed a Lion, or a Bear, or any such like
creature, but one in whom was contained the fierceness of all wild beasts. By
this Beast therefore Antichrist is undoubtedly to be understood: whenever
then Antichrist is mentioned, we need not seek him in Babylon, but in the head
of the fourth Monarchy, to wit, at Rome, etc. Furthermore, I see not who he
should be, save the Pope, whose kingdom and tyranny if we compare with the
things spoken in Daniel of the little horn, it will abundantly appear, that it
is be who fully acts all the parts of Antichrist, etc.

This opinion seems indeed to Alcasar to be foolish and vain: Alcasars reasons
answered.
but not so unto us in the least, but rather he himself is ridiculous in
deceiving both himself and others by his idle and foolish reasons. It is
apparent (says he) that the Popes authority, is founded, stablished, and
erected by Christ our Lord. As if forsooth whatsoever seems right and apparent
to them, must needs be true and certain. What I pray you is more apparent, then
that the Priesthood of Aaron was appointed of God? And yet was not Cayphas the
high Priest his Successor a wicked murderer of Christ? Besides the ancient
Bishops of Rome were not guilty of that filthiness and corruption, with which
afterward the succeeding Popes having invaded the Chair of universal
pestilence, defiled the sea of Rome.

Further, he feigneth, that if the Popes of Rome be this Beast, then the Devil
made war against the Church by the ministry of the Romish Popes immediately
when (the Jews ceasing) the Gentiles became the Church. But the consequence
which he supposes, is false, viz. that the transferring of the Church unto the
Gentiles is not described till in Chapter 12. for what was the treading down of the
holy city by the Gentiles, before treated of in Chapter 11? Wherefore it certainly
follows, that the Roman Popes by the instigation of the Dragon made war
against the Church troaden down by the Gentiles, that is, as Ribera interprets
it, by Antichrist and his ministers.

But says he, it is altogether improbable that the Revelation should omit to
mention that most cruel war, by which the idolatrous Roman Emperors oppressed
the Christian Church, together with that most glorious victory, wherein the
Church obtained; notwithstanding the persecution of the Roman Empire. I
confess it is improbable. But Alcasar might have learned from the foregoing
war of Michael with the Dragon, that neither this war was omitted, nor the
victory passed by in silence, if he would wipe off from his eyes the disease
occasioned by his own foolish consequence.

Fourthly, he objects, that the fourth Beast in Daniel figures out, not the
Pope, but the heathen Roman Empire. But this has been answered in what we
spoke unto the first opinion.

Lastly, he says that the description of the Sea beast cannot but with
contradiction be applied unto the Pope. But the reason thereof is, because he
disdaines out of a Spanish pride, Alcasar strongly refutes the heretics by
hearsay.
to read what has been published hereabout by the authors of the said
opinion: for this subtle man acknowledges, that he knows nothing but by
hearesay, and refutes the heretics by the report he has heard. But he should
have learned rather to believe his eyes then ears, and so doing, he would have
made the better application. Thus I have expounded the most probable opinions
of others touching this Sea-Beast.

Now for my own part, The authors opinion.
I conceive that neither the first touching the Roman Empire, nor the third
concerning the Roman Antichrist is simply to be approved or disproved, but
that in a certain sense, both are to be joined together.

First therefore I take it undoubtedly (seeing it is usual to the Prophets
under the type of a Beast enigmatically to figure out Empires and Monarchical
kingdoms, because of their violence, cruelty, and other horrible excess) that
by this Beast is also noted some certain Monarchical Empire.

Secondly, I suppose the thing it self makes it clear, as in its place shall be
showed, that this and the seven headed beast mentioned Cha. 17. is one and the
same, and that the seven mountains, signify Rome.

Thirdly, I affirm with the foresaid interpreters, that this Beast, as has
been even now proved, signifies Antichrist.

Fourthly, Lib. 8 in Apoc. Bell. lib. de R. P. C. 25.
(with Rupertus and Bellarmin) I judge that the same Antichrist in a diverse
regard is figured out by both Beasts. The Beast (says Rupertus) is said to be
twofold, because of his double, viz. warlike, or Kingly and magical force: Or
as Bellarmin: By the one, Antichrist is expressed, in regard of his kingly
power and tyranny: But by the other, in regard of his magical art, by which he
subtly seduceth men: More rightly according to Revel. cha. 13. by one is
meant his tyranny: by the other his deceit and seducing: for which cause
afterward he is often called a false prophet: And so chapter 17. he is again
represented by this Beast as a Monarch: and by the woman riding thereon, as a
Queen, or seducing Church. Fifthly, I conclude, that Antichrist is figured out
by a double beast, and by his twofold rising out of the sea and earth, as it
were living on the land and sea, having two bodies, two shapes, and a twofold
nature, in a certain likeness to Christ: here indeed as a secular Monarch and
ecclesiastical seducer: but afterward as the Roman Monarch and adulterous
Church. Sixthly, I conclude, that neither the old nor the new Roman Empire
simply, nor the Romish prelateship is absolutely represented by this beast (for
absolutely neither the one nor other is Antichrist) but that Roman Pontifical
Empire and authority, which the Popes of Rome have exercised these many ages.
Lastly, I conclude, that this double bodied and faced Antichrist living both on
the land and sea, signified by both the beasts is none other but the Romish
Pope, clothed with the spoils of the Roman Monarchy, and pretended Vicarship
of Christ, and armed with the sword of Paul, and key of Peter, that is, with
both powers: The Temporal to set up and put down Emperors and Kings, etc.
The Spiritual to give Laws both to them in heaven, on earth, and under the
earth: that Antichrist, I say, who first under the figure of a Sea-beast,
presently after under the figure of a land-beast does here come forth on the
theater, who one while is clothed in his pontificals, an other while comes
armed into the council with imperial ensigns, saying I am Caesar.

This is my opinion of Antichrist, who is here so evidently figured out by the
seven-headed beast, and fained likeness to the Lamb: and afterward Chap. 17.
by the seven-headed beast and woman riding thereon: that no man, unless he
willingly shut his eyes against the light, cannot but perceive the same. This
light our method brings to al (who without it are in darkness) the which
henceforward we will labor to illustrate by our interpretation unto Gods glory.

But thou will say, See Ver. 18
wherefore then does not John expressly name the Pope or Antichrist? because
here he stands not in the place of a teacher, but of a Prophet. Teachers indeed
are to express things plainly: but Prophets foretelling things to come
especially of dangerous consequence, (set them forth under dark and obscure
types:) hereby to stir men up to the more diligent searching out of the events:
and to shun unnecessary displeasure. John in his Epistles, where he only
teaches and exhorts the Church, often names Antichrist, and bids us avoid
him. But here as a Prophet he paints out his person and kingdom, under the
type of a Beast: and thence would have us to judge of the mystery thereof. So
Paul Prophesying of Antichrist, purposely abstains from naming him, yet sets
him forth in such lively colors, that whosoever looks but on the Romish
Prelacie, may plainly see, who, and what manner of person he is.

And I saw a beast rising out of the sea] We have heard who this beast is. It
follows now touching his rising; he ascends out of the sea. Before in Chap.
11.7. and afterward Chap. 17.8. he ascends out of the bottomless pit: the
sense is all one; for the sea also in Scripture is called abyssus, because of
its deepnesse; See Chap. 9.1. The preposition OF, may as well note the place,
as the beginning, whence the beast derived his original, and received his
power.

Understanding it originally of the place: The sea out of which the beast
arises.
by the sea then is meant, the infernal bottomless pit, or the throne and
kingdom of Satan; Whence also the Locusts came forth, Chap. 9.13. for
Antichrist is the Angel of the bottomless pit, whose coming is after the
working of Satan, with all deceitfulness of unrighteousness, lying signs and
wonders. So that these places do excellently expound themselves. For the Beast
in this place rising out of the sea: and out of the bottomless pit, Chap.
11.8. and 17.8. is the Angel of the bottomless pit, Chap. 9.11. Whose coming
is after the power of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. and to whom here, verse. 2. the
Dragone gave his throne and power: All which things show, that Antichrist is
raised up by Satan and armed with his power.

But if we understand it of the matter from whence he took his original or
beginning (like as a living creature is begotten of seed, or as trees grow from
the root) in this sense the sea is nothing else but that flood which the Dragon
cast forth out of his mouth after the woman, Chap. 12.16. that is, the sink of
Heresies, errors, traditions, superstitions, and all other abominations which
increasing in the Church, the sincerity of faith, and purity of Christian
religion was corrupted and depraved, the Church forced to flee into the
wilderness, Christ thrust out of his possession, and Antichrist set up in his
stead.

But here some may say, How the beast arose out of the sea.
how could Antichrist arise out of the dregs of the heresies of Arius,
Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutyches, Pelagius, Coelestius, Julian, etc. Seeing it is
certain that those heresies were chiefly condemned by the Roman Bishops?

It was so indeed: nevertheless Satan through Synods condemning heresies, did
subtly and secretly work the mystery of iniquity. For under pretense of
rooting out heresies, almost yearly, yea monthly these councils like seas
flowing together, continually devised new laws, rites, forms, creeds, etc.
insomuch as it came to be a proverb that Christians had a monthly faith. Now
with the new forms of faith, were forged new canons of erecting and purifying
temples, consecrating altars, of seats and chief places, of orders, garments,
immunities, powers, privileges, and rents of praelates and priests, of
establishing and increasing of the clergy, etc. Who though they were all alike
ambitious and covetous, in affecting power over each other, as the Roman over
the Constantinopolitane, he over the Alexandrine, the Alexandrine again over
the Antiochian, and this later over him of Jerusalem: yet at length the Roman
praelates under the favor of the emperors and primacie of their city,
together with the pretense of the Peter's chair, keys, and vicarship of Christ
overcame all other in ambition and power.

In the Nicene Council, the power of the bishops of Rome, Can. 5. mos antiquus.
The limits of the Roman Church.
Alexandria and Antiochia was limited within certain bounds: that of Rome
extended no farther then the confines of Hetruria, Picenum and Latium, as
IACOBVS, GOTHOFREDVS the son of Dionysius the great, a diligent searcher into
antiquities, has brought to light. But the Roman Praelate not contented with
his jurisdiction, invaded the empire over all the Christian world: first by
spiritual, and afterward by temporal deceit: allthough for a long time he
wanted not his corrivals, viz. the Bishops of New Rome, as also those of
Alexandria, Lib. 7. hist. Chap. 11.
as may be seen in the register of Gregory: Socrates complained that in his
time the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria were promoted beyond the priesthood
unto a temporal lordship and principallitie.

By the decree also of the III. Council of Carthage Chap. 26. it appears:
Did. 99. C. primae sedis.
that the Roman Bishops under pretense of the first seat, which they held for
honors sake, desired to be accounted Princes of Priests, Chief and universal
Priests: but this title was denied them, and a decree passed that no man should
so be called.

Yea the craft of Satan was more openly manifested in the sixth Council of
Carthage, at which Augustine was then present: where first Zosimus, afterward
Boniface and at last Coelestinus Popes of Rome (for these three succeeded each
other in the Chair, while this council continued) by their Legates, (falsely
pretending a decree of the Nicene Council) contended, that the Africanes ought
to appeal to Rome as to the chief court of justice: but their fraud being
discovered, they were frustrated and derided.

That also is memorable which Bright-man observes out of Bellarmin, Lib. 3. de
Council. cap. 19.
that the Roman Popes would never be present at the Eastern Councils, but by
their Legates, for two causes: First because it seemed not convenient that the
head should follow the members, (as if it were inconvenient, that a sound head,
should follow an infirm body:) Secondly least the Emperors being present,
and taking the Chief places, they should be forced to give way thereunto. By
which thou may see that the Roman Bishops did long ago with an inveterate
ambition plot and strive for the Monarchy over Emperors and their fellow
Bishops: until at length they obtained it by, and after many councils, where
they themselves being Presidents by their legates, did authorize the same, not
regarding whether they did right or wrong

The Beast therefore rose out of the sea, not suddenly, nor in one day, month
or year: but by certain steps continuing almost three hundred years, viz.
from Constantine unto Phocas: or from Julius I. until Boniface III. In this
tract of time, Antichrist was formed in the Bosom of the Church, as it were in
the womb of a mother: And when the woman fled into the wilderness (into which
she came in the year 606.) Then also the Beast (as it were) was fully
hatched, and risen out of the sea: The which rising happened at the opening of
the sixth seal, and the sounding of the fifth trumpet. Now he is described here,
not what he was in his youth, or presently upon his first rising, but as he
was at length in the vigor of his full age. For no man is at the highest or
worst on a sudden: Thus much for the rising now follows the figure.

Having seven heads and ten hornes] The beast is very monstrous and terrible,
not much unlike unto the Dragon.

He has seven heads] Therefore he is a monster and not unlike to the Poets
Hydra Lernea. A natural beast has but one head. Antichrists kingdom therefore
is monstrous and unnatural, having Emperors and Kings lying under its feet.

It has also ten horns like to the Dragon: Wherein the beast differs from
the Dragon.
yet differing from the Dragon: for the Dragon had seven crowns upon his heads:
but the Beast wears his ten crowns on his horns; and on his heads the name
of blasphemy: being in his spotted skin like to a Leopard: in his feet to a
Bear, in mouth to a Lion: all which the Dragon had not.

What is meant by the heads and horns, we need not here labor to expound.
Horns by an Hebraisme very usually signify strength because the strength of
horned Beasts is in their head: and hence are called Cornupite, strikers with
the horn. The Angel, Rev. 17.10. teaches us, that the seven heads are seven
Kings, and the seven mountains of Rome: and the ten horns so many Kings: and
therefore for the present I purpose to speak no more about them. But let us
carefully take notice of the gradation which the spirit uses: first he named
the Beast, Chap. 11.7. Here he disciphers him out: and in Chap. 17. gives the
interpretation thereof.

And upon his heads the name of blasphemie] The Kings Edition of Montanus for
(...) name, Antichrists kingdom holy in title, but really worldly.
has (...) names. Afterward in Chap. 17.5. the woman sitting on the Beast,
has on her forehead a name written, Mystery: by both signs noting the same
thing: because there shall be a mystery in her secret blasphemies: and the
kingdom of the Beast being indeed secular, shall mystically be called Sacred.
Therefore the Beast himself shall not wear his crowns on his heads, but set
them on his horns, to wit, the Kings being his vassals: but in stead of them
he shall have on his head written, mystery, that is, his mystical or
spiritual kingdom shall be in show employed about holy things, as doctrines,
laws, traditions, religions, sacrifices and worship.

Blaspemie] is railing against God: What blasphemy is.
from (...), babbling or dissolute and (...) fame, or name and reputation: or as
others will have it from (...) as it were, a hurting of the reputation and
name. This he shall have in his forehead, not by open profession (for he would
not be accounted a blasphemer) but in works and in very deed, as bringing in
and defending blasphemous doctrines, religion and worship. Yet he will cloak
the same with the name of Mystery, as being divine and holy worship instituted
by the fullness of his power, as if he could not err. Therefore his pretended
title shall be mystery: but his true title blasphemy.

2 And the Beast which J saw] here follows the rest of his description, being
monstrously compounded of a Leopard, Bear, and a Lion, three most cruel wild
Beasts. It is a manifest allusion unto the Beasts in Daniel, the first whereof
being a Lion represented the Babylonish Empire, the second a Bear the Persian,
the third a Leopard the Macedonian: the fourth having no name was more terrible
then the rest: to whom this Beast seems to answer, as having something of the
nature and property of the three former: The which mixture denotes the
monstrous disposition of Antichrist: because he shall be as merciless to the
servants of Christ, as Bears, Lions and Leopards are to flocks of sheep.

Like to a Leopard] The Gr. (...) signifies a she Leopard. For this beast is
called a Woman: although it has the outward form of a man. The she-Leopard
has a skin speckled: giving forth an odoriferous smell, being swift, subtle,
and most hurtful to man: It signifies first that Antichrists kingdom is spotted
and garnished with diverse colors: And indeed his policy and state is as it
were a mingle-mangle of diverse heresies, superstitions, idols, and traditions
parched together of the spots of Iudaisme, Paganism and Christianisme: hence
their whole hierarchy consists of diverse and different colors of religions,
sects, Monks, Clergiemen, even from their Arch-flammins unto the Porter or
Sexton: yea the whole hide is spotted with heresies, errors, superstitions,
and blasphemies.

Secondly, it is very odoriferous: for by the sweet smelling enticement of
dignities, superfluities, honor, wealth and pleasure, it has so allured the
Christian world, as no man but would desire the voluptuous life of Clergiemen,
as if they were gods.

Furthermore it is most crafty: for through subtilty and under a show of piety,
by feined wonders, lying signs, superstitious impostures, or seeming pious
deceits, he has gotten the dominion and riches of the world.

It is also most swift, for after that the Christian world was once persuaded
that Rome was the seat of Peter the Prince of Apostles the Pope Christ's Vicar
and Apostolical heir of Peter, and universal Bishop, etc. it cannot be
spoken with what swiftness this Apostolical sea not only subjected unto it
all the Bishops and Churches of the west, but also Emperors themselves, Kings,
Princes, Commonwealths, and communities were brought under that yoke.

To be short, it is most hurtful to the eyes of men, to their purses, I say,
estates and souls, which hitherto Rome has with no less peril ravished,
devoured and destroyed, then if a Leopard had fixed his nails into the eyes of
a man.

And his feet as the feet of a Beare] the Bears feet denotes the stability of
his kingdom, for the feet of a Bear are flat, large, and having sharp nails,
which he fixes in the ground: and therefore goes and stands the firmer: so
Antichrists kingdom has large feet: insomuch as it cannot easily be shaken.
The feet are Grants of Emperors, the Canons of Councils, and Decrees of Popes,
against which, whosoever does but mutter, he is presently crushed with the
Bears feet: witness the Histories of the Ottoes, Henry's, and Fredericks
Emperors, who if at any time they assayed to bridle the insolency of the
Beast, were soon smitten with the Capitoline thunder, and deposed from the
Empire. Not to speak of others of lower rank: thus then the Beast stood with
the feet of a Bear.

And his mouth as the mouth of a Lion.] A Lion is a generous creature: but the
Beast has nothing of a Lion, save the mouth, being terrible and roaring, and
of a horrible devouring nature: and what I pray you, is more outrageous then
the Papacy: For Quic quid non possidet armis, religione tenet.
What he by arms cannot get,
Does by religion hold fast it.


What is more terrible then the Pope, whose footsteps are adored by Kings and
Emperors? What is more devouring then Rome? into whose Courts there are
brought great sums of money for all flagitious facts and vile wickedness
committed wheresoever: where no Priesthood is given to any but the first
revenues must be brought into their treasury? What is more ravenous then the
Clergy, who suffer none either to be borne, live or die freely? Hereupon
Frederick the Emperor writing to Pope Hadrian touching the prohibition of
Cardinals: Baleus in vita. Hadr. IV.
his Churches (says he) are shut: neither are his Cities open: for we see them
to be, not preachers, but robbers, not peacemakers, but money-takers: not
repairers of the world, but insatiable heapers up of gold.

Lastly, what is more horrible then the Popish Edicts, Bulls, Writs, Amos. 3.8.
written at Rome, not with ink, but in blood. If the Lion does rear, who will
not fear? The Roman Beast roaring against Emperors, Kings, Electours,
Princes, Bishops, Vassals, who will not tremble? Thus we see how the prodigious
disposition of Antichrist is lively represented by this monstrous Beast.

And the Dragon gave him his power] Here follows the Beasts power. But from
whom has he it? The Dragon gave it to him. Now there is no power but from God.
And therefore the Beasts power is not lawful: but a corruption of power and
tyranny, having for its author him, who said: All these things will I give
thee, if falling down thou will worship me. viz. the Devil that lying Serpent.

His power] Gr. (...): some render it virtue: but I rather allow the former,
least there might be an ambiguity in understanding it of a natural or moral
virtue: The power of the Dragon is his malice, fraudulency and strength to
hurt: so that the Dragon did fill the Beast (God so permitting the same, as
Ribera well observes) with all deceiveablenesse, of unrighteousness and
wickedness, to seduce and destroy. And his seat] Or Throne, as all Greek
copies have it: But the Vulgar omits it. The Throne of the Dragon is his
kingdom and rule which he has in the children of disobedience, in regard
whereof he is said to be the god of this world. This kingdom he gave to
Antichrist by making him the god of this world, who by a pretended power gives
the kingdoms of this world to whom he will, according to that of the Lateran
Fathers, crying out to Julius II. Thou art all in all and above all, to thee is
given all power in heaven and in earth. According to that of the Poet: By
oracle of thine own voice, the world thou governest all,
And worthily a god on earth men think and do thee call.


And great authoritie] The which will appear in ver. 5.6.7. And by it we
understand who is Antichrists benefactour: here then we may see what before was
obscurely spoken: viz. He ascended out of the sea, that is, came forth out of
the bottomless pit of hell, unto the height of the Universal Chair: is here
more clearly expressed in these words: 2 These. 2.9.
The Dragon gave him his power, and his throne, and great authority. And most
plainly by the Apostle: Whose coming is after the working of Satan with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders, with all deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness, etc.

3. And I saw one of his heads] The Kings edition omits (...) I saw: but the
sense and consent of copies requires it. It signifies the weakening and
restitution of the Beasts power, of which some say one thing, some another.

It is a weak fiction of the Gloss (displeasing also to Ribera) viz. that
Antichrist should feine himself to be dead, and afterward rise again in
imitation of Christ and by this deceit gain to himself that admiration here
spoken of. But John saw not the Beast dead, or as it were dead, but one of his
heads wounded as it were unto death, that is, so mortally wounded, as that he
was not far from being dead. But if the words (...) as it were slain, be
understood really of the slaughter and death of the head, as in Chap. 5.6. the
Lamb appeared (...), as it were slain, that is, truly slain and dead: yet it
no way helps the fiction: for howsoever by the killing of one head, the Beast
indeed was hurt, yet not wholly dead. But the former sense is hereby confirmed,
that this stroke is twice called a deadly wound: and again (...), a wound
inflicted by the sword.

Our Interpreters, who understand this Beast of the old Roman Empire, do all
agree that here is noted some remarkable weakening thereof: but others apply it
otherwise.

Some understand the one head of Julius Caesar the first Emperor, who being
slain, the Empire received a deadly wound: but was healed again by Augustus.

Others refer it to the death of Nero, in whom the family of Caesar's ceased:
and then the Empire seemed to be near a dissipation, when in a few months
after were slain three Emperors, viz. Galba, Ottho, and Vitelius: yet this
wound was healed by Vespasian, whom the Commonwealth of Rome (as Aurelius
Victor reports) being almost spent by the cruelty of tyrants, obtained by a
providence for their Emperor after LVI. years, that it might not utterly be
ruinated. But these wounds were before John's time, whereas here he prophesies
of the Beasts wounded afterward.

Others understand it of the scisme of the Roman Monarchy under Heraclius,
occasioned by Mahumet in the East, and the Pope in the West, by which division
the Roman Empire was so shaken, as it had much ado to subsist: the which
wound they conceive was again healed by Charles the great. But we have showed
before, that the Beast or Antichrist does not here absolutely denote the Roman
Empire.

Now whatsoever this be (we may well refer it till we come to Chapter 17. v. 11.)
yet here we must consider, what is meant by the Beasts deadly wound, and what
by the healing thereof. Concerning which, although our Interpreters (who
interpret the Beast to be Antichrist) do not precisely agree in every thing:
yet hence the Papists have no cause to insult. For the verity of our tenet,
viz. that the Pope is Antichrist, may firmly stand, although it be not so
easy to define all the particulars of this mystery, (for Histories testify
that the Beasts head has already been diversely wounded) or know to what
mortal wound of Antichrist the holy Ghost here properly points at. Lib 3. de
P. R C. 15. In Apocal. 13.
Beside the Jesuits are no less differently minded about it: Bellarmine
approves of the fable touching the feined death and resurrection of Antichrist.
This Ribera refutes, and imagines that not Antichrists head, but a head of one
of the ten Kings (a member and forerunner of Antichrist) was wounded. Alcasar
rejecting both, contendeth that Nero being this Head mortally wounded, did live
again in Domitian. I forbear to rehearse more. Three of them we see disagree
each from other: And why may not ours also holding to the main dissent in some
thing without a manifest note of error?

Brightman a most learned Interpreter, is of opinion, Ennead. 7. l. 7 sub fin.
that this wound is to be referred to the sacking of Rome by the Barbarians: of
which see Sabellicus. For who doubts but that the seventh head of the Beast was
then wounded unto death, when Rome being forsaken of her Emperors (who retired
to Bizantium in the East, or to Ravenna in Italy) was overwhelmed under the
new government of Popes with that great tempest or irruption of the Goths,
Vandals, and the Hunni, etc. By which the whole West was most miserable
afflicted, and Rome well nie wholly brought to nothing. For within the space of
XLII. years, it was five times besieged, taken and spoiled by the Barbarians,
insomuch as sometime for forty days there was found in the City neither man
nor woman. Adolphus King of the Goths also determined to alter the name
thereof, and instead of Rome to call it Gothia. Who would not have thought that
then there had been an end of the Popes seat and kingdom in Italy:
notwithstanding this wound was healed by little and little, first by Justinian
the Emperor, who sending Belisarius and afterward Narses with an army, rooted
the Goths out of Italy, restored the Pope to his former place, and enlarged
his dignity and power. For when the Constantinopolitane and he of Alexandria
affected the Primacie, as thinking that Rome was now wholly brought under, the
Emperor gave forth a new constitution, saying, We decree, and will according
to the Decrees of the holy Synods, that the most holy Bishop of ancient Rome be
the chief of all Priesis. Afterward Phocas fully healed the wound, attributing
to Boniface III. not only to be accounted the chief, but Universal.

This interpretation of Brightman I should follow, but that he does two much
anticipate the wound and the healing thereof. For he makes the Beast to be
wounded before he was fully manifested, for he was not as yet ascended out of
the sea into the Chair of Universal pestilence, until Boniface III. and
therefore could not be wounded and healed before his rising.

Leaving therefore the opinions of others, I will here propound two things. The
Authors opinion of the wound of the Beast.


First, there is in this stroke and healing, an (...), as we observed in the
woman's flight, namely, how that is first related, which happened after. For the
Beast was not presenly wounded and healed so soon as he rose, or was set on his
throne, but some while after: Neither did the whole earth then begin to admire
and worship the Beast upon his wounding and healing: and when he blasphemed God
and made war with the Saints: but immediately, or so soon as he received his
throne and power from the Dragon: which indeed evidently proves the
anticipation.

Secondly, seeing it is not expessed by whom the mortal wound was inflicted,
neither by whom healed, we are therefore to conceive that it was inflicted and
again healed, either by the Dragon, as not being able (as it were) to endure
the pride of the Beast: Or else by the Lord, provoked to wrath, but healed
again by the second Beast. For the wound of the sword, as it is called, ver.
14. signifies not a wound willingly made, but inflicted by some other. Now it
could not be inflicted on the Beast, unless either the Dragon did it (as being
more powerful then he) or the Lord. For touching all others his admirers cry
out v. 4. Who is able to fight with the beast.

If we take it in the former sense, I find not when the head of the beast
sitting on his throne, The capital scisme of Popes.
was more grievously wounded then by that deadly scisme of Popes, wherewith
the Papacy was afflicted more then forty years, viz. from the year 1378.
unto the Council of Constance, when almost Antichrists kingdom was wholly
ruinated by the discords of the Antipopes, occasioned by the Dragon.

For when Clement V. a Gascon, removed the Roman court to Avinion in France,
where it remained Eighty three years, Gregory XI. indeed recalled the Papal
seat from thence to Rome: but being dead, the Romans chose Vrbane VI. for
their Pope, whom the Italians, Germans, and English followed, and he sat at
Rome. On the contrary, the French and Spaniards created Clement VII. for their
Antipope, and he remained at Avinion: who being dead the scisme was continued
by new Antipopes, viz. Boniface IX. and Benedict XIII. (before called Petrus de
Luna.) The first approved as Pope by the Italians, the latter by the French.
Boniface IX. being dead, Innocent VII. succeeded, and after him Gregory XI.
against whom the said Benedict XIII sat Antipope at Avinion. Chro page 690.
This scisme (as Genebrad witnesses) when two and three Popes together strove
for the Popedom did mightily afflict the Popish Church for 40 years together^:
of which wound also Franciscus Petrarcha, Petrach. Epist. 19.
who scarcely notwithstanding had seen the beginnings of the wicked scisme thus
writes: Our two Clements (says he) have in a few years more wasted the
Church, then seven of your Gregory's will be able to repair in many ages.

These things considered, who will deny, but that the Beasts head was then
deadly wounded. And now who inflicted the same but the Dragon, by setting those
Antipopes full of Diabolical pride, one against the other, to the scorn as it
were, of the Beast and his throne. But thou will demand how this wound was
healed? Diverse remedies were indeed sought for by many: and sundry plasters in
vain applied to the sore. Sometimes a reconciliation was labored after by
parties on both sides, betwixt Gregory XII. and Benedict XIII. and so far forth
effected, that Gregory promised to lay down his Popedom, if his Corrivall
would do the like. The which the other assented to: and an oath passed betwixt
them: But when they should come to the doing of it, their pride hindered the
same: for soon after both of them repented of their promise. Qui vellet
Cathedra cedere nullus erat.

Afterward a Council is gathered at Pise in Hetruria, Anno 1410. for to heal
this deadly wound. but the same availed not: But rather it increased the sore:
for as the foresaid Genebrad reports, The scisme was not only not repressed,
but made greater: for the two Antipopes being in vain deposed, a third was
chosen, viz. Petrus Cretensis, a Franciscane, named Alexander the fifth. Thus we
see the others refusing to resign, the Council was so far from healing the
wound, as that on the contrary it made the Papacy before a two headed monster,
now to be three-headed. Alexander the fifth, that proud hypocrite being taken
away in the eight month of his Popedom, John XXIII. was placed in his room by
the Italians: so the Papacy remained three-headed, and the wound made greater
and greater.

At length therefore the Dragon fearing the utter overthrow of the Beast, (and
the rather because the preaching of John Husse in Bohemia now added a deadly
symptom unto that old wound) prepared a medicine by the Council of Constance,
Anno 1414. for in the third year it was celebrated, it wickedly condemned John
Husse, and Jerome of Prage the two witnesses of the Gospel to be burnt, and
displacing the three Antipopes Gregory, Benedict, and John, it substituted
Martin V. and so the deadly wound of the Beast, was at length as it were healed
by a divine Aesculapius or Surgeon, one only Pope being again set on the
Romish Chair.

Notwithstanding the ulcer burst forth in diverse places, first in Spain and
France: for Benedict XIII. dying, Anno 1424. the Cardinals by his commandment,
and authority of King Alphonsus created Aegidius Munyos a Canonist, named Pope
Clement VIII. Afterward in Bohemia, where in the Hussian wars it is
wonderful to consider how much Christian blood was shed for the wound of the
Beast: until at last Pope Martin regaining the favor of Alphonsus, Aegidius
was forced at the commandment of the King to lay down his Popedom: And to the
Bohemians the Council of Basil permitted marriage to their Priests, to have
the Liturgy in the vulgar tongue, the use of the Cup in the Eucharist, and
some other things (which they called Compactata) on this condition that they
should acknowledge the Roman beast to be head of the Church. Now I suppose
there is no man but sees that these things do very well suite with this
prophecy touching the deadly wound and healing of the Beast. Notwithstanding I
leave it to the judgment of the Reader, for whose sake I here briefly set down
a ripe of the Antipopes during the wound of that scisme.

ANTIPOPES During the schismatic vvound of the Roman Beasts.
At Avinion. At Rome. Clement VII. dies, Anno 1392. Urban VI. dies, 1390.
Benedict XIII. deposed at Pise, 1410. and at Constance, 1417. Boniface 9. dies
1404. Innocent VII. dies, 1407 Gregory XII. deposed at Pise, 1410. and at
Constance, 1415. Alexander V. dies, 1411 Clement VIII. giving place to Martine
at Constance, 1421. John XXII. deposed at Constance, 1415. Martine V. created
Pope at Constance, 1417.

But if so be we are to understand the wound and the healing thereof in the
latter sense: Alphonsus his opinion touching the deadly wound of the Beast.
then I should altogether embrace the opinion of Alphonsus Mantuanus, a learned
Italian Interpreter. One of the Beasts heads (says he) as it were wounded to
death, seems to me to denote that age of impiety, in which the Gospel began
to be preached, and the Popish kingdom opposed through the ministry of the
Gospel, and the abomination thereof so manifested, as it is even known to the
ignorant themselves, that the Pope who has on his heads written names of
blasphemy, is the Beast, and a most wretched man, who presumes to be esteemed a
god. For then the Beast was seen to have received a deadly wound, when those
impious doctrines, by which hitherto the Popes kingdom has remained in its
strength, were reproved as mere lies, and Diabolical deceits, by the free
preaching of the Gospel of Christ. Thus far he.

By the mortal wound of the Beast therefore he understands the separation of
the Professors of the Gospel from Popery, whence first a deadly disease
befell the Papists in Germany, and soon after in the neighboring Kingdoms of
France, Poland, Hungary, and England: Like as the ach of a wound ordinarily is
irksome to the parts adjoining. This wound could not be inflicted on this
powerful Beast, but by God himself, who at last taking compassion on Germany,
confounded the deceits of Rome, by raising up Anno 1516. Luther, Melancthon,
and other excellent Divines, as the instruments and organes of his grace and
favor. The sword wounding the Beast, was the preaching of the Gospel, by
which in a short space the props of Popery were so sore shaken throughout
Germany, as it was not far from an utter ruin.

Notwithstanding our sins so deserving, we see this wound now healed, the
Papacy again prevailing, and reassuming her strength and vigor. But by what
medicines or potions? This is cleared by Histories: And as Alphonsus well
writes, this deadly stroke began to be healed: When the Kings and Princes of
the earth, began through fire and sword to force men unto the Popes obedience.
To this end was raised the Smalcaldick war against the Protestants: The wars of
the Spaniard in the Low Countries, and the Massacres in France, that the
mortal stroke of the Beast might be healed: But the false prophet ver. 11.
seems to have made the true medicine, The Beasts Chyrurgians.
by his Chyrurgians, Campegius, Caietane, Polus, Faber, Prierates, Eckius,
Latomus, Staphylus, and the like Physicians, who excelling in art, fraud and
sophistry, have held up the tottering state of the Papacy: Notwithstanding the
Council of Trent acted the part of chief Physicians, as applying with great
skill wonderful potions for to heal this wound. To these we may add the
Popish Academies, and especially that of the Sorbonnists at Paris. The last are
the juggling Jesuits, by whose industry, boldness and craft, the Head of the
Beast is daily more and more restored to its former health. And I could wish
that the unhappy contentions of the Professors of the Gospel were not as oil
and wine powered into this wound: for I verily believe, that our own dissentions
have more strengthened the Beast, then all his own force and policy whatsoever.
Thus much concerning the wound, and the healing thereof.

And all the whole earth wondered after the Beast] First, I desire the reader to
take notice of the anticipation even now laid down. For we are not to think
that the world admired not the Beast till he was wounded and healed again: for
the Beast never was without his followers, and people wondering at his throne,
and great power: and therefore by way of a parenthesis, the stroke and cure was
spoken of before, which came to pass afterward. Now the authority of the
Beast, and the besotted stupidity of men to worship him, does immediately
cohere with his seat and great power: for although this be not so plain in the
verse, yet is it clear by the following: For wherefore is the Beast so much
wondered at? was it because he was healed? certainly it is a matter of no great
admiration that a wound should be cured by a Chyrurgian: and therefore this
cure could not be the cause of so great an admiration, as the Gloss imagines,
in applying it to the feined death and resurrection of Antichrist: the which
thing even the chiefest of the Jesuits are ashamed of. The true cause of the
worlds wondering, is the seat and great power given to the Beast by the Dragon:
as we shall see in the following verse: for as the Philosopher says,
admiration begets Philosophy, so here the worlds admiring the Beast, Aristot:
lib. 1. Metap. c. 2.
begets Antichristianisme.

At first men admiring the Keys, and pretended seat of Peter, together with
the majesty of ancient Rome, did easily attribute to the Roman bishop
primacie of honor, and agreed, that every Church should bring their cases to
the Church of Rome, because of her power and principallity. This admiration
increasing by little and little, and turned into superstition, by giving unto
the Pope right of Universal jurisdiction, with divine honor, they made him to
be the Antichrist. And so much is signified by the phrase (...), wondered after
the Beast, that is, men being bewitched with the admiration of his power, they
worshipped him as god, and subjected themselves by willing reverence under his
feet, adoring all his decrees and commandments as divine oracles: for thus the
Scripture usually speaks of divine worship: Walk after the Lord your God,
Deuteronomy. 13.4 1 Samuel 7.2
for Worship God: All the house of Israel rested after the Lord, for,
persevered in his true worship. So also of the false: They committed
fornication after strange gods, for, they worshipped idols: Walk not after
strange gods, for, Judge. 1.17. Ier. 8.6.9.
serve not the idols of the heathens: with many the like places in Jeremy: so
that not a civil or forced, but a religious and willing subjection is here
signified.

Whence first, we see that neither the old Roman Empire, nor the Mahumetane
kingdom is properly this Beast: for they required and forced men to a civil
obedience only. And hence Alcasars Gloss is frivolous and fabulous, that
persecution being renewed, the nations of their own accord subjected themselves
unto the Beast: for no nation but by force of arms subjected its self unto
the Romans. Secondly, it appears that the throne which the Dragon gave to the
Beast, is not only a secular Kingdom, but also a sacred Monarchy, and
grounded on religion: Thirdly, it is clear that this Beast is no other then
the person whom the Apostle speaks of, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Who opposes and exalts
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped: that is, the
Roman Antichrist, after whom the world has wondered these thousand years:
ascribing unto him these verses of triumph: By oracles of thine own voice the
world thou govern'st all,
And worthily a god on earth men think and do thee call.


And lately dedicated to: PAVLO V. VICE DEO, To Paul the fifth being in Gods
stead ( which letters in Latin do expressly contain the number of the Beast
666.) THE INVINCIBLE MONARCH OF THE CHRISTIAN COMMONWEALTH, AND MOST ZEALOUS
PRESERVER OF THE PAPAL OMNIPOTENCY: And again: Thou art all in all, and above
all, and to thee is given all power in heaven and in earth: who says: My peace
I give unto you: my peace I leave with you. And lastly, who usurps all things
unto himself, which belong to God and to Christ: he takes away the sins of the
world: rules from sea to sea: is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of
David, the Savior and light of the world, etc. Thus much touching the
admiration.

But now who are these admirers? (...) the whole earth] in which we may observe
two things: first, that this admiration is Catholic and universal: Secondly,
that these CATHOLIC ADMIRERS, are said to be the earth, that is, all both
great and small, bond and free, given to earthly worship, pomp, wealth, dignity
and pleasure, as it follows in ver. 16. And therefore we must take heed not to
be taken up with admiration of these admirers, or follow them: but rather mourn
in regard of their stupidity and destruction.

4 And they worshipped the Dragon] this declares the former: for whereas before
he said, they wondered after the Beast, he now shows it to be the worshipping of
the Dragon, and attributing titles of divine majesty and power unto the Beast.
Religious admiration (as the Scripture witnesses) is only proper to God and
Christ: Deuteronomy 6.13 Mar. 4.10 Psalm. 97.7. Phil. 2.10. Psalm. 72.9.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. All the
Angels of God adore him. In the name of Jesus every knee shall bow: before him
the inhabitants of the desert shall fall down. But these admirers adore the
Dragon and the Beast: and therefore attribute divine worship unto them. And
that we may not imagine it to be a civil worship, the words and exclamations
of these wondrers are added: Who is like to the beast? Who is able to make
war with him? as making the Beast equal with God. For by the first they
extol his majesty: and by the latter the divine power of the Beast: In
imitation of the Scripture, saying: To whom will ye liken God? What likeness
will ye make to him? Who is like to me says God? As therefore the Saints and
worshippers of God cry out, Isa. 40.18. Psalm. 113.7
Who is like the Lord our God? O Lord who is like thee? so the admirers of the
Beast cry out, Who is as the Beast? Who is like him? And as the Saints cry out
to God: Lord, who shall resist thee? Who shall withstand thy will? so these
idolaters cry out: Who can fight with him? So that by these expressions, they
liken the Beast to God and Christ: yea if thou well observe it, they make him
greater: for these exclamations are absolute negatives: Who is like thee? Who
is able to fight with him? as if they should say, no man; no not God nor
Christ: whereby they openly profess the Beast to be (...) adversary to God and
Christ, lifting himself above all that is called God: This is one of the
clearest arguments proving the Beast to be Antichrist.

But how are they said to worship the Dragon? Not by profession but in works.
For they religiously worship Saints and Angels in heaven who are not God: They
worship images of wood, stone, and brass: but all religious worship attributed
to the creature, is an honoring, not of God, but of the devil, whatsoever the
intention and profession of the worshippers be: according to that of the
Apostle, That which the Gentiles sacrifice, 1. Cor. 10.20.
they sacrifice to devils and not to God. And yet we know that the Gentiles (as
the Indians and Brasilians to this day) did intentionally sacrito God. As
therefore they that worship Christ, worship God, so they that worship
Antichrist, worship the devil, of whom he received his seat and power.

5. And to him was give^ a mouth speaking great things] Thus much of the
figure, power and worship of the Beast. Now follows the declaration and
usurpatio^ of that power received from the Dragon. The which will be the less
obscure, because in part we have heard formerly the like in chap. 11. The
declaration of the power is in this verse: The usurpation in the two following.
This great power is two fold: 1. to blaspheme: 2. These. 2.9
2. to do. Now this is said to be give^ to the Beast: But by who^? by the
Dragon the devil, v. 2. for the coming of Antichrist is after the efficacy of
satan. His mouth in figure is like a Lions v. 2. but speaks like a man who is a
blasphemer: for metonymically the mouth is put for boldness in evil speaking: as
a hard mouth is an ill speaking mouth. Great things and blasphemies, is put for
great blasphemies: which are rehearsed v. 6. Here observe, that the little horn
also Dan. 7. v. 8.20. has a mouth speaking great things: whence it is
conjectured that by it Antichrist is shadowed out: specially seeing the three
following things are also attributed to him: as blasphemies against the
highest: war with the saints: and the time of his rage to be XLII months,
verse. 25. Historically indeed that horn seems to be Antiochus the scourge of
the Jews: but Mystically it figured Antichrist. For as Antiochus afflicted the
Jewish Church: so does Antichrist the Christian. Thus we see that the old and
this new prophecy excellently agree both in phrases and deeds, and illustrate
one the other.

And power was given him to do] The first part of his power we have heard: now
follows the other (...) power of doing: The OLD VERSION TO DO OR MAKE: some
copies add (...) war: which seems to be taken from v. 7. The sense is all
one, yet it is better to take it absolutely of making, but is not making here
put for sacrificing? I wonder our Sophisters have not observed this, that so
they might make the beast a sacrificer or mass priest. But TO DO here is put
for to rage and destroy according to his pleasure. This is given him by the
Dragon, (God permitting the same,) yet holding the bridle in the midst of the
beasts rage. And that we might not imagine the beasts fury to be absolute, a
term is prefixed unto him for the comfort of the godly.

Forty two moneths] his rage shall continue long, but not always. What is
meant by these months, I have showed on Chap, 11. ver. 2. The Gentiles shall
tread down the holy city XLII. months. The time is the same, because the
History both there and here is all one, so that the treading down of the city
by the Gentiles, is this very rage of the Beast here, being to endure XLII.
months, and it will clearly appear by the sixth Vision (treating of the
destruction of the Whore and Beast) that these months took their beginning at
the Beasts ascension out of the bottomless pit, and are now for the most part
expired.

6 And he opened his mouth in blasphemie] The usurpation of his power
follows, both by his mouth, in this verse, as also in action, in the
following. He opened his mouth in blasphemy, that is, he began to blaspheme in
a horrible manner. These are the great things which were given to the Beast to
vomit out with open mouth, that is, publicly, and in the very height of pride
and malapertnesse. Now what are these? but those great privileges, the Romish
Beast boasts of, as that he is in Gods stead, yea a god, and Christ's Vicar on
earth, Peter's successor, having alone the Keys of Heaven: that he is the
invincible Monarch of the Christian world, the Prince of Bishops, the head and
spouse of the Church, the King of Kings, the Lord of heaven, earth, and hell,
the alone interpreter of the holy Scriptures, chief Judge of all religion,
having all laws and mysteries locked up in his breast, the chief decider of the
Catholic faith, judgeing all men, but to be judged of none: to whom none may
say, though he lead thousands of souls with him into hell, My Lord the Pope
why do thou so? to whom is given all power in heaven and in earth: who opens,
and no man shuts, shuts and no man opens, who loosing no man binds, and
binding no man loses: forgiving iniquities, taking away the sins of the
world: with many other blasphemies which proceed out of his lascivious mouth.

But distinctly or in particular, the bent of his blasphemies are against God,
his name, his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.

Now to show again how he blasphemeth God and his name. It is by doing that
which the Apostle foretold of Antichrist: and which we see the Pope of Rome to
do even at this day: viz. he opposes and exalts himself against all that is
called God, or that is worshipped, so that he as God sits in the temple of
God, showing himself that he is God: for he arrogates to himself the name and
honor of God: suffers his Clawbacks to cry out, Who is like unto the Beast?
Who is able to make war with him? he challenges to himself all the rights and
works of God: that he can create God: make some thing of nothing, make the word
of God: that he cannot err, that his decrees are of like certainty and
authority with the divine Scriptures: that it is of necessity to salvation to
be subject unto him: that it belongs to him to give the kingdoms of the world,
to set up and depose Kings as he lifts, etc. All which things if the Pope
does, what is left for God? Is not this blasphemy against God and his name?
The tabernacle of God, is the Church in which God dwells: this he also
blasphemeth: for he falsely affirms himself to be the Head, Bridegrom, and Lord
thereof: tyrannically oppresses and infects her, by the poison of wicked
doctrine, seduceth and as much as in him lies, thrusts her into eternal
destruction by his lying signs and horrible idolatry.

Andreas understands this Tabernacle (...) to be the flesh of Christ, in which
the word (...) dwelt with us, Ioh. 1.14. This tabernacle of God he also
blasphemeth diverse ways: for what blasphemy is more horrid against the Son of
God, then that the Pope should boast daily by his Locusts to create Christ of a
piece of bread in the Mass, to sacrifice and to destroy him. What blasphemy
more odious against the office of Christ, then that the Pope boasting himself
to be the greatest high Priest, proudly should exalt himself as above Christ
the great high Priest? he denies that the alone sacrifice of Christ is
sufficient for the expiation of the sins of the Church, unless it be again and
again iterated by his Mass Priests, he denies that the merits of Christ
alone suffice to take away sins, and the punishment thereof, unless through
his indulgences he add a supply from the treasure of the Church, which is the
merits of the Saints. Other things I pass by.

And them which dwell in heaven] I see not why we may not understand these
heavenly inhabitants, properly of the Angels and blessed souls triumphing with
the Lamb in heaven, for against these the Pope also poures forth his
blasphemies more ways then one: for will they, nill they, for his own gain
sake he obtrudes false honor upon them, makes them gods, and builds temples,
altars and images unto them: and by this worship exercises a most filthy
trade: and the most of them he forces to succeed in the places of Heathenish
idols, and does weary them as if they were household and tutelar gods, with
diverse troublesome and sordid services, setting one over Hogs, another Horses,
another Asses: one over this City or Town, another over that, for the
preservation thereof, and to prosper Handicrafts, to heal diseases, and drive
away calamities: but of them all no one is more unhappy, or put to a greater
task then the blessed Virgin Mary, unto whom are sent, as unto a sure anchor,
all kind of people, women with child, such as are baren, old and young, boys
and girls, the whole, the sick, Merchants, Fishers, Sailers, Horsekeepers,
Horse-riders, etc. There is no favor so great, but is obtained of her: no
necessity so pressing which she takes not away, yea she is far more liberal in
curing then God himself and to her chiefly they run: She continually is saluted
as the Queen of Heaven, the Lady and only hope, salvation and Patroness of
men. To her they sing this song of praise Tu spes certa miserorum,
Vere matter orphanorum,
Tu levamen oppressorum,
Medicamen infirmorum,
Omnibus es omnia.
Thou art the hope of comfortless.
True mother of the fatherless,
A comfort to the poor in thrall,
The sick a sure salve have thee shall,
To all things thou art all in all.


God and Christ are nothing with the Beast: But Mary is Alpha and Omega, the
haven and helper of all men unto salvation, she alone supplies the place of
Isis, (the Pagans Queen of heaven) of Ceres, Venus, Proserpina, etc. And in
very deed the Beast seems to be educated in the same school and religion of L.
Apuleius the Platonic, who thus prays to the gods for a Metamorphosis or
change of an ass into a man: Apul. l. 11. Metamor.
O thou Queen of heaven, or thou O sacred CERES, the first inventer and teacher
of tillage and sowing of seed, who (rejoiced with the finding again thy
daughter) did take away from men the former pasture of wild fruit, Papists
prayers like to the Pagans.
and show in place thereof a more mild and temperate, and now art honored
in the Eleusian fields: Or thou heavenly VENUS, who at the first being of
things, coupling the diversity of Sexes by an engendring love, and propagating
mankind by a perpetual issue, art now O Goddess worshipped in the holy
places of Paphus: Or thou DIANA, sister to Phoebus, who (easing the pains of
them that are ready to be delivered by thy softning medicines, bringing up so
many and great nations) are adored in the Ephesian temples: Or thou PROSERPINA,
who (dreadful in regard of thy night howlings, and with thy threeformed
countenance restraining all ghostly assaults, ruling in the vaults of the
earth, and wandering through diverse dark and loanly woods) art appeased with
many sacrifices: And thou who with thy womanly light shinest over all cities,
and with moistning heat do nourish all living seed: and sometimes by thy
revolutions take the light of the Sun out of our sight: by what name
soever, by what rites, or in what manner it be lawful to call upon thee: O
help thou now in this my extreme misery, raise up my lost fortune, put an end
to my manifold sorrows, and give peace: Let my former troubles suffice: put an
end to all my misfortunes: take from me this horrid visage of a bruit beast,
and restore me to the sight of my acquaintance.

And so in all places where the Beasts kingdom extends it self, Mary is
saluted as Queen of heaven, and worshipped and wearied with more
sumptuousness, cost, devotion and religion, then God or Christ. Is not this to
open the mouth in blasphemy against God, against his tabernacle, and the
dwellers in heaven? For as Cassianus well writes, When any thing is spoken of
God, Christ, or the Saints, otherwise then it is, though in pretense to honor
them, yet it is in truth to dishonor them. Of this natrue is that blasphemous
Antidote compounded (by one of those juglers) of the Breasts, and milk of
Mary, together with the blood of Christ: in these verses.

Haereo lac inter meditans, interque cruorem,
Inter dilicias Vberis and Lateris,
Et dico (si forte oculos super Vbera tendo)
Diva Parens Mammae gaudia posco tua.
Sed dico (si deinde oculos in vulnera verto)
O Jesus Lateris gaudia malo tui.
Rem scio; prensabo, si fas erit, ubera dextra,
Laeva prensabo Vulnera si dabitur,
Lac Matris miscere Volo cum sanguine nati:
Non possum Antidoto nobiliore frui, etc.
O quando lactabor ab ubere, vulnere pascar?
Deliciisque fruar Mamma latusque tuis? etc.
I musing do stick fast betwixt the milk and dropping blood,
Betwixt the pleasures of the breast and side that is so good:
And thus I say when on the breast I think to cast mine eye,
O holy Mother grant the joy of thy sweet duggs to me.
But afterward if I again upon the wounds look wide,
O Jesus I would rather have the comforts of thy side.
This I will do; with my right hand I Will take (if it be fit)
The breast, and with the left his wounds if granted may be it:
Thus in the Mothers milk I will the Son his blood infuse
Then which a better antidote I cannot surely use.
O when shall I thy sweet breasts suck, and with thy wounds fed be,
Enjoy thy duggs, thy wounds, O Christ, even such felicity?
And thus much touching the Beasts blasphemies.

7. And it was given to him to make war with the Saints] The other usurpation
of his power, is not with his mouth, but in work. This is that power ((...))
of doing, that is, of making war with the Saints, and overcomming them XLII.
months: And it is the same that Daniel spoke of the little horn, Chap. 7.
verse. 21. And I beheld, and the same horn made war with the Saints, and
prevailed against them. This war and victory of the Beast over the Saints, is
the same over the two witnesses before treated of, Chap. 11. verse. 7. for the
former witnesses with their congregations, are these Saints: and however they
are said to be two only, that is, a few in respect of the Locusts: yet they
suffice to confirm Gods testimonies: like as in judgment by the testimony of
two or three every thing is established. Now what war that was, and when,
appears by what before was spoken. What manner of war the Beast makes. The
two swords of the Beast,
It is not so much a civil, as an Ecclesiastical war: for the Beast has two
swords: One spiritual, which he draws out against the Saints by bitter
calumnies, lies, and accusations of his orators, by anathematismes of Councils,
by proscriptions, bulls and decrees of the Romish Court. The other secular,
which at the Beasts beck the Kings of the earth are forced to unsheath, to rage
by fire and sword against such whom the Beast has excommunicated: In this
sense the Beast is said to overcome: and the Saints vanquished: because (bellis
and bullis) he persecutes them both by battles and bulls: But the Saints being
conquered, overcome: Romans 8 37.
according to that of the Apostle: In all these things we are more then
conquerours, through him who loved us. This victory in overcomming the world
and the Beast, is the faith of the Saints, against which the Beast shall never
prevail.

The same thing speaks Daniel touching the little horn, and the issue of the
war made with the Saints: He prevailed against them (says he) until the
Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the Saints of the most high.
And therefore the Beast shall not always prevail against the Saints, but at
length they shall judge the Beast: for his power shall endure no longer then
XLII. months: which serves for the comfort of the godly, lest fainting under
their long-during calamities, they should cast away their hope of victory.

If thou enquire after the time of the war, When the war began.
it began to be made of old, when the Beast first trod down the holy city, and
tyrannically persecuted al opposers by fire and sword. In special, the war
was at the height after the measuring of the temple, which through the great
mercy of God was effected in these last times. By this war the Council of
Constance took away the two witnesses, John Husse and Jerome of Prague: and
was afterward strongly prosecuted against the Saints by the Council of Trent,
and yet is to this day.

And power was given him over all kindreds and tongues] We have heard the
declaration and usurpation of the power. The universal power of the Beast.
Now he adds the largeness and greatness thereof: for that which in verse. 3.
was generally spoken: The whole earth wondered after the Beast, is now
distributively spoken: Power is given him over every tribe, and tongue, and
nation. It is therefore an amplification of his power from the largeness of
the territories in subjection to the Beast. His power is universal, so as
none, whither high or low in the Christian world, but do either desire, or are
forced to submit to the Romish yoke. Behold here again, whither the spirit of
God does not point at the Catholic state of Rome, that so Antichrist (Christ's
adversary) might be known even by the largeness of his kingdom. Psalm. 2.6.
Psalm. 72.8. Hebr. 1.2. Rev. 5.9.
For as CHRIST is appointed by the Father to be heir of all things from sea to
sea. He it is that has redeemed us to God by his blood, out of every tribe,
and tongue, and people, and nation: so on the contrary, the DRAGON has given
power to the Beast over every tongue, and kindred and nation, etc. Yet lest we
should think that Christ was wholly thrust out of his possession by Antichrist:
a limitation is annexed.

8. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him] He much amplifies the
dignity and worship of the Beast, but withal limits the same: He shall be
worshipped as God: in verse. 4. it is said in preterperfect tense (...) have
worshipped. Here in the future (...) shall worship. So that the Beasts majesty
shall not be for a short time: but shall long endure, until it be fully
manifested. Notwithstanding, the holy Ghost comforts the godly by a twofold
restriction: first, in that he calls the worshippers of the Beast,
inhabitants of the earth. And therefore none but earthly men shall worship him:
for the Elect are not the inhabitants of the earth: Phil. 3.20.
but Citizens of Heaven, in regard that their conversation is there. So that
Gods chosen shall not adore the Beast, neither shall their salvation or Christ's
Kingdom be in jeoperdie: but theirs only who follow the Beast: for they shall
all of them be cast with him into the lake, Chap. 19.20.

The other restriction is more expressly set down, viz. that they only shall
worship the Beast, Whose names are not written in the Book of life, etc. that
is, who were not elected in Christ unto salvation, but reprobated unto death
before the foundations of the world: THEREFORE NO MAN CAN BE SAVED IN THE
ANTICHRISTIAN CHURCH: because all who are not written in the Book of life,
shall be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, Chap. 20.15. Let all
therefore who love their salvation forsake the Popish Church.

The names of the Elect are said to be written in the Book of life, The Book
of life.
by an usual metaphor: for we commonly write down the names of such who are
dear unto us, that we may continually remember them: so God, having in his
eternal counsel elected some to salvation, has written their names in the
Book of life: so says Christ: Rejoice, because your names are written in
Heaven. The metaphor also may be understood of the Sonship of the Elect, so
that to be written in the Book of life, shows that they are heirs of glory,
for we know that such are to inherit, whose names are written in the last will
or testament of men.

The Book of life is Christ: for in him God has elected us: Therefore it is
called the Book of life of the Lamb, that is, of Christ, because election is
made in Christ, hence none shall obtain eternal salvation, but such who are
ingrafted in him through faith: the Lamb also is said to be slain: because
election includes the blood and death of Christ for the sins of all true
believers: for God has so decreed to save the Elect, as that (Christ's
satisfaction coming in as a ransom for their sins) his justice might stand
with his mercy.

From the foundation of the world] This may be referred either to the next
foregoing word, slain: or else to the words before, who are not written. And
so Aretas, How the Lamb is slain from the beginning of the world. Ephesians. 1.3.
Rupertus and some others take it: because of another place, not unlike to
this, Cha. 17.8. They that dwell on the earth shall wonder at the Beast, whose
names are not written in the Book of life from the foundation of the world.
And Paul says: that we were chosen in Christ before the foundation of the
World. Notwitstanding, the spirit does not without cause immediately join the
words from the foundation of the world with the Lamb slain: For he would
commend unto us the sufficiency and largeness of Christ's sacrifice: in as
much as the efficacy of his death and passion is extended to the very first
beginning of the world, and so unto all the faithful from Adam until the end
thereof: to show that no man living shall obtain eternal life, except he be
redeemed by the blood of the Lamb.

But how could the Lamb be slain before he was? I answer. 1. Pet. 1.19.20.
Genesis 3.15. Heb. 11.1. Act. 9.4.
It is true he was only slain once on the Cross some sixteen hundred years
ago, by a real suffering: yet he is in diverse respects said to be slain
before. 1. in Gods eternal preordination, viz. that he should be slain in the
appointed time. 2. by promise, that the seed of the woman should bruise the
Serpents head. 3. in belief of the fathers which was the substance of things
hoped for. 4. in the sacrifices of the fathers, which sacramentally were the
Lamb himself. 5. and lastly, in his members, as suffering in their sufferings:
Thus Christ was slain in Abel: because (says Lyra) the slaying of innocent
Abel was a figure of the Lambs slaughter.

9. If any one has an eare] Here the Vision of the first Beast is shut up with
an acclamatory conclusion many times before used in the Epistles by which the
holy Ghost does again raise us up to attention, that by the due contemplation
of the Beast we might know who is the Antichrist: lest unawares we might be
circumvented by his subtlety.

Here is signified that his impostures shallbe so subtle as not easily to be
discerned: but as a Wolf lies hid under a sheeps skin: so Antichrist under
Christ's title, shall deceive the world, coming in a mystery with all
deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.10.

10. He that leads into captivitie] By this condemning commination he does
not terrify, but raise up the godly, lest they should faint, being offended
with the cruelty and success of the Beast. It is true, he shall lead into
captivity, and destroy the miserable souls of them that worship him: yea, he
shall also take away the estates of the Saints, and kill their bodies with the
sword: But he shall suffer the like things: for he shall be led into captivity,
and slain with the sword: because he shall be cast into the lake of fire, Rev.
19.20.

Here is the patience and the faith of the Saints] He shows the antidotes by
which these great evils may be borne and overcome. Here (says he) is need of
patience, which faints not under afflictions: And faith of the Saints, the
which overcomes the world: As also it is a promise of Gods presence. The Beast
indeed shall endeavor to break the patience of the Saints, and extinguish
their faith: but God will turn it to their good: so as in suffering they shall
not be conquered, but their faith tried, being much more precious then gold.

The second part of the Chapter. Touching the Beast rising out of the earth.
11 And I beheld another Beast coming up out of the earth, and he had two
horns like a lamb, and he spoke as a dragon. 12 And he exercises all the
power of the first Beast before him, and causes the earth and them which dwell
therein, to worship the first Beast, whose deadly wound was healed. 13 And he
does great wonders, so that he makes fire come down from heaven on the earth
in the sight of men. 14 And deceives them that dwell on the earth, by the
means of those miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the Beast,
saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to the
Beast, which had the wound by a sword, and did live. 15 And he had power to
give life unto the image of the Beast, that the image of the beast should both
speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the image of the beast
should be killed. 16 And he causes all both small and great, rich and poor,
free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads:
17 And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name
of the beast, or the number of his name, 18 Here is wisdom. Let him that has
understanding, count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a man,
and his number is six hundred threescore and six.
THE COMMENTARY.
ANd I saw another Beast] Touching this Beast Interpreters are as diversely
minded as of the former. To repeat all their opinions is needless.

They who understand the former Beast to be the old Roman Empire, take this
other to be meant of Antichrist. But such who interpret the former of
Antichrist, take this later to be his armor-bearer or guardian.

Now both these in my opinion are not unfitly applied, provided the
Armourbearer be not childishly understood of one carrying the shield, but by a
synecdoche of the whole and primarie order of the Antichristian officers,
together with their head: for here Antichrist is represented not as Lord, but
as one acting, or putting in execution his full power: as the works of this
Beast do plainly show.

Gregory applies it to Antichrists preachers, Lib 33. Moral, cap. 26. Vestigat.
page 693. Lib. 3. de P. R. c. 15.
who glory in their earthly power.

But, says Alcasar (whose new found opinion deserves not to be rehearsed) They
who understand the Sea-beast of Antichrist, are repugnant to themselves, if
they also apply this beast of the earth unto him. But (good sir) if so, then
thy companion Bellarmine is no less contradictory to himself, who thus
writes: The same Antichrist is expressed by two Beasts: by one in regard of
his kingly power and tyranny, by which he violently forces the sons of men:
by the other in regard of his magical art, by which he subtly seduceth the^.
But herein there is no repugnancy or inconveniency, for it is not unusual in
this Revelation, It is not inconvenient that Antichrist be figured out by a
double Beast.
that one and the same person have diverse forms, and in different respects be
represented under sundry types. For so Christ in the first vision, walked
amongst the Candlesticks as a man, or the son of man: In the second vision he
sat on the throne, as God: The Lamb stood before the throne, as a sacrifice:
Again, as a conqueror, he is called a Lion: An Altar, as the receiver of the
blessed souls: The Angel of the East, as the sealer of the Elect: In the third
Vision, an Angel making perfume, as the Priest of the Church.

So also Antichrist in the said third Vision, is the Star fallen from heaven,
as he is an Apostate: The angel of the bottomless pit, Abaddon, Apollyon, as
he is king of the Locusts: The Beast ascending out of the bottomless pit, as
the persecutor of the witnesses: Again in this fourth Vision, he is the
Sea-beast, as a tyrant and persecutor of the Saints: so also he is the earthly
Beast, as an hypocrite and seducer of the inhabitants of the world, Again in
the fifth Vision he is in the same respect a Beast and false prophet, as king
and deceiver. Lastly, in the sixth Vision, he is the Beast and Woman riding on
the Beast, as a king and Church that bears sway.

The whole Revelation, I say, represents Antichrist under diverse forms, not
simply as one person, but as diverse, having a twofold life and original out of
the sea and earth, a double body, a twofold shape and person, viz. as being a
secular and ecclesiastical person, a tyrant and a false prophet, an Emperor
and high Priest. And indeed after this manner the Pope has showed himself
more then once: One while as Caesar in his warlike armor: another while as
Pope with Peter's Key for his Ensign: Of which see Albertus Crantzius Saxon,
lib. 8. cap. 26. Thus therefore Antichrist the high Priest comes forth on the
Theater, first as a Roman Monarch: but now laying aside his Imperial habit,
he is represented under the person of a seducer.

Which opinion is confirmed, because this second earthly Beast, has no figure
proper to it self, only his two horns, and words are expressed, as proper to
this new birth or appearing: in all other things, as it seems, being both
alike: of which more afterward.

This also confirms it, that he exercises all the power of the former Beast:
now the Dragon gave not the same power to two, but to one Antichrist.

Thirdly, in that he makes the former Beast to be worshipped, from whom if he
were different, oranother in number, he would rather have taken this honor to
himself, seeing he was of the same power and ungodliness.

Fourthly, what argument more evident then this, viz. that toward the end of
the Chapter both the Beasts close and grow up as it were together in one, so
that the Character, name, and number of the name is not said to be of two
Beasts, but of one Beast only.

Lastly as in Chap. 17. The woman sitting on the Beast in a different respect
notes one Antichrist with the Beast: so here the earthly Beast making the image
of the Sea-beast to be worshipped, does represent with the said Sea-beast one
and the same Antichrist, and that without any repugnancie.

These things thus observed, the seeming contradiction in the text will easily
be reconciled, viz. that this Beast is said to be another, their originail and
rise to be different, and that one acts in the sight of the other, etc. But
these and the like things do only serve to denote under diverse types the
different nature, disposition and actions of one and the same Antichrist, as by
the interpretation it will appear: unto which now we come.

11. And I saw another Beast] BEZA: then I saw: as if it were (...) or (...)
after these things: But I rather take it copulatively: And I saw, for, also I
saw; lest we might imagine that this Beast did not ascend till after the XLII.
months of the former Beast: for indeed he either ascended with him, or a
little while after.

Another] To wit, in show and rising different from the former, but in
substance the same with him: because it is one Antichrist, though appearing
under a new person or shape: for now he comes forth on the stage, not as a king
or tyrant: but as a seducing Prelate. Therefore henceforward he shall be called
a false prophet, misleading all the Inhabitants of the earth by his lying
signs and deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness: but that this should be done
by one seducer, and that in three years and an half (as some foolishly
imagine) certainly it is most ridiculous.

This Beast therefore denotes the Head with the members, that is, Antichrist
with the whole crew of his seducing priests: of whom Gregory in Registro thus
writes: The king of pride is at hand: Lib. 4. Epist. 38.
and that which is not fit to be spoken, an army of Priests is prepared: It is
true most copies have it, Exitus Sacerdotum est preparatus: The end of Priests
is prepared. But the following words show that it is a deceitful falsefying of
the authors intent: Because (says he) the Clergy war and strive for
mastery and advancement, who were appointed to this end, to go before others in
humility: which words cannot be referred to the end of Priests, but certainly
to their army and proud war.

Under this Beast therefore is comprehended the high Court of Cardinals, the
Catholic authority of Papal Decrees, the sacred power of the Legates a
Latere, and fathers of the inquisition: The craftiness and shamelessness of
preaching Monks, especially the deep wickedness and courtly malapertnesse of
the upstart Jesuits: for these hitherto have been the chief architects and
inventours of all artificial fallicies to seduce the world, and principal
physicians in healing the deadly wound of the Beast.

Beast] Forasmuch as the Vision expresses nothing touching the form of this
Beast, save only of his two horns, and blasphemous words, but afterward is
three times termed a false prophet: there are some who think that he had the
figure of a man having horns, or of some Devil who in such a shape (as Jerome
reports in the life of Paulus) met one Antonie in a wilderness, and spoke to
him of Christ. There are some also who think that excepting his horns and
speech, he had all other things common with the Sea-beast. But let us not
trouble our selves about his shape. His actions will declare that he was a
misshapen monster, or rather one that had a thousand shapes, teaching us that no
one figure was sufficient to represent all his several plots and deceitful
devices.

Coming up out of the earth] Brightman wittily interprets this rising out of
the earth, His rising out of the earth.
of the power which the Beast obtained over earthly kings and people: as if it
were (...) upon the earth. But touching his power the same is spoken of
afterward: And the like phrase verse. 1. shows that this coming or rising out
of the earth, does signify his beginning: for as the former Beast drew its
original out of the Sea: so this out of the earth.

Neither do I dislike Riberas observation: That the rising of this Beast
signifies that he was not of a terrible and huge form, like unto the
sea monster, but such whom we see here on the earth, as a Lamb, or the like: or
that he rising as it were but from small beginnings, yet did suddenly draw
after him an incredible multitude of men: for they are said to rise out of the
dust, who of small beginnings become great.

Therefore it seems more simply to denote the ignoble and earthly rise of the
Beast, See Clemang. de corrupto ecclesiae statu. cap. 10.
both in respect of himself and his whole Clergy: for as the beetle is
engendered of horse-dung: so for the most part the Popes, Cardinals, Bishops,
Prelates and Monks, all children of the earth, have from a low degree and
state been raised up to the hight of worldly glory, being altogether vassals to
earthly pleasures and honors.

The order of Cardinals arose out of the earth, and began to be in esteem
about the year 1004. as Baleus shows from Bacandorpius in the life of John XIX.
Others say it was after Benedict VIII. Lib 3. Chron. page 426.
anno 1023. or thereabout: which indeed Genebrad in his Cronologie denies, and
contends that Jerome was a Cardinal Priest: but without authority: for it
appears the seven Cardinal Deacons distributed to the holy offices, according
to the seven divisions of the City Rome (of whom mention first is made in the
decrees of Fabian and Sylvester) were far differring as being scarcely Parish
Priests: Yea Clemanges affirms, that of old time it was their proper charge
to carry the dead, and to serve about burial affairs. Thus of carriers of the
dead, they are become the Lords of the Church.

The sects of Canons and Monks arose one after the other out of the earth:
neither is their original very ancient, as we may see in the History of
Hospinian touching the original of Monks: As for the Jesuits it is certain
they sprung up even in the memory of our fathers, Anno 1540. out of the
dunghill of the Spanish Soldier. As therefore the former Beast did not rise at
one instant out of the Sea, but by degrees: so this rises out of the earth not
all at one time, but leisurely and as it best stood with Antichrists necessity
and profit, and established his kingdom from time to time, by sundry
instruments.

Having two horns like the Lamb] This Beast in his horns is likened to the
Lamb or Christ: in his speech to the Dragon or the Devil: in his power to the
former Beast or Antichrist. Now what is all this but to teach us that
Antichrist should seine himself to be Christ, or Christ's Vicar (which title
Gregory VII. that most wicked Sorcerer, did first assume unto himself) and by
his diabolical doctrine seduce the world. Horns signify power. The Lamb has
seven horns, Chap. 5.6. signifying his absolute and perfect power. The Beast
has two like unto these: In the similitude I observe his hypocrisy, in that
he has but two his defect of power: he arrogates indeed all the power of the
Lamb unto himself: But he comes far short of it, for Christ remains
infinitely more powerful then he: The which makes much for the consolation of
the godly. Some understand the two horns of the Popes double sword, which is
not amiss. For howsoever the Lamb never exercised any secular power, but
always put it off from him: Extra de major. and o^d. C. unam sanctam.
yet Antichrist in pretense of the Lamb has violently taken it unto himself:
because the Lamb said: Behold here are two swords, it is enough.

Like a Lamb] In the Greek it is (...) without an article, for, (...) like to
the Lamb. Hence some do think that these horns are not likened to the horns
of the Lamb Christ, but indifinitely to the horns of a common Lamb or Sheep.
But it has been showed before, that Christ is called a Lamb (...) as well
without, as with an article, and more examples hereafter follow. Let the
antithesis here suffice: And he spoke (...) as a Dragon, where the words of the
Beast are not likened to a Dragons speech indefinitely, as Ribera feineth (for
Dragons, indefinitely taken, do not speak) but to the speech of that Dragon,
viz. the Devil, which in v. 2. Gave his seat to the Sea-beast. And yet it is
said (...) like the Dragon, without an article. The likeness therefore of his
horns to the Lambs, signifies not in general a lam-like hypocrisy, that
being a goat he should feine himself a sheep: But in particular his Christian
hypocrisy, who being indeed the Antichrist, should yet falsely boast himself to
be Christ or Christ's Vicar. To this also we may refer the hypocrisy and
fraud of his whole ecclesiastical fraternity: Franciscus they say, that
Angelical Monk, bore in his body the wounds and marks of Christ: Thus also
the hypocritical Jesuits falsely assuming the Lambs name, speciously deceive
the world, etc. But let us hear his speech:

And he spoke as the Dragon] And, for, But. In his horns there is a feined
simplicity of the Lamb: But his speech bewrayes his guile: like the ass by
braying was discovered, though in the Lions skin: so this Beast had not the
voice of a Lamb, but of a Dragon. Hitherto we read not that the Dragon spoke,
but gave his throne to the former beast: as also his mouth, by which the same
is governed verse. 5. the which the Beast opening, spoke great things and
blaspemies, verse 6. The Beast therefore speaking like the Dragon, utters
likewise great things and blasphemies by the instinct of the Dragon, that is,
the Devil: for the Dragon is the Devil, Chap. 12.9. This is the letter.

Now the speech of the Beast is nothing else, but the doctrine he preaches as
if it were the Lambs: but in truth it is the Dragons. The Apostle calls it a
lie, because the Dragon is a liar, and the father of lies. his coming is after
the effectual working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders,
that they might believe a LIE, because they received not the love of the truth,
that they might be saved. Antichrists doctrine therefore is false and
blasphemous touching the Scriptures, justification of sinners, of merits and
humane satisfactions, of the sacraments, indulgences, jubilees, fasts,
forbidding of meats and marriage to Priests: 1 Timothy 4.3
the which the Apostle expressly terms the doctrine of Devils: and for this
diabolical language the Beast here, is generally afterward called the false
prophet, as Chap. 16.13. and Chap. 19.20. and Chap. 20.10.

12. And he exercises all the power of the first Beast before him] Thus much
of his horns and speech: his power follows, and it is the same with the
former Beast: Because howsoever this Beast differs in rising and type, yet
really, and in power he is the same Antichrist, all whose power no man but
himself shall ever exercise. Now this power was both to speak great things and
blasphemies, as also to make war with the Saints, and lastly, to command every
kindred, and tongue, and nation: all which this Beast also exercises.

In that it is said (...) before him] or in his sight, it imports the manner
how he exercises the same power, because he not only blasphemeth, makes war
and seduceth immediately by himself, but also by the help of his Legates a
latere, who do all things in his sight, that is, according to the appointment,
beck and pleasure of the Beast: whatsoever things these do, the Beast is said
to do. Now what is this, but that for these five hundred years and more (as
Histories testify) the Legates a latere, or Cardinals do all things in
Emperors Courts by the authority of the Pope their master, determine Councils,
direct the decrees thereof at his beck, and for the establishing of his power:
Thus also his Inquisitours and chief Apostolical Notaries, and such like
agents execute al wicked acts against the Saints according to the will of the
Pope: see Sextus Decret. l. 5. tit. 2. de Hereticis per totum.

And causes or makes the earth and them that dwell therein] Here follow
diverse effects of his power, Six effects of the beasts power.
which he executes, partly by himself, and partly by his vassals.

He maketh] This respects his doctrine, that is, he preaches, commands and
forces ( viz. by his Emissaries and inquisitours) all men to worship the first
Beast. He causes all to worship the first Beast.
which they did before, and that of their own accord? The reason hereof is
intimated in the following words:

Whose former wound was healed] that is, howsoever the Beasts authority began
not a little to be lessened by that wound: Nevertheless by the unwearied
endeavors of this Beast (which here the word (...) causes or does signifies)
together by his subtilty, eloquence and violence it was effected, that all men
remained constant in adoring the Apostolical sea. But who are these
worshippers?

The earth and the inhabitants thereof] Now who, and what these are, see v. 8.
We need not to envy this worship of the Beast, seeing that not the salvation
of the Elect, but only of reprobates shall be in jeoperdy thereby. But are al in
the Papacy reprobates and damned? God forbid: for even in the midst of Babylon
God has his people, Rev. 18. v. 4. The spirit therefore speaks this only of
those, who persevere to worship the Beast, and do not renounce his blasphemies.

13. And does great wonders] Another effect of his power are Great signs or
wonders, He does great wonders.
by which he shall persuade and induce the inhabitants of the earth to worship
the Beast. For as the devil is Gods Ape, so is Antichrist, Christ's: as God and
Christ, therefore confirmed the doctrine of Moses, the Prophets and Apostles by
many wonders and miracles: so Satan shall establish the Beasts great words, and
Antichrist his great power by wonderful signs.

Signes] that is, miracles, or works either really or in appearance surpassing
the strength of nature.

Great] that is, wonderful and terrible. These he shall both do himself, as
also cause his agents to do the like, as Bellarmin well observes: Not only
Antichrist, says he, Lib 3. de P. R c 15.
but also his ministers shall do wonders. The same thing Christ foretold us,
Mat. 24. verse. 24. There shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets, and
shall show great signs and wonders, in so much (as if it were possible) they
shall seduce the very elect.

Now what signs they are the Apostle tells us, 2 These. 2.9. What Antichrists
miracles are.
with all the causes thereof: Whose coming is after the effectual working of
Satan with all power and signs, and lying wonders, and with all
deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish, etc. The efficient
cause is Satan's efficatious working: The material, the prodigious events
beyond nature. The formal, the deceits and subtle illusions of the devil, by
which the senses of men are bewitched. The small, How they differ from true
miracles.
his lies and deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness, that the world may be
seduced. And indeed in all these causes false miracles differ from the true,
which are works truly surpassing the order and strength of nature, and are
done by the power of God to the manifesting of his omnipotency and confirmation
of doctrine divinely revealed, such the Lord sometimes wrought by the Prophets
under the Law: Yet not by all, nor at all times, lest they might have been
little regarded, or else that the world should depend upon them.

In the New Testament also Christ and his Apostles, with many other of the
faithful wrought great miracles for the confirmation of the Gospel of Christ:
De vera relig. c. 5. de util. cred. lib. 6. in 1 Cor. 2. Hom. 6. ca. 49. in mat.
But these (as Augustine and Chrysostom in many places witness) ceased in the
third age after Christ. And therefore Austin admonishes, that we are not
rashly to believe miracles, because Christ foretold such things of deceivers,
and bids us to beware of them. Whereby we see how soundly the Jesuits quit
themselves and their Pope from the impostures of Antichristianisine, in
glorying of the many signs and wonders that every where are to be seen in the
Papacy: Not perceiving in the mean time that in this very thing, they discover
Antichrist, seeing the Scriptures do make great wonders and miracles to be the
proper marks of him.

So that he makes fire come down] he rehearses one of the great signs of the
Beast: namely, that he makes fire to fall down from heaven in the sight of men.
Antichrists miracles according to the Jesuits.


The Jesuits reckon up three miracles of Antichrist: One is, that he shall
feine himself to be dead and rise again. But in ver. 3. we have showed how
this fable is without all probability. The second, that he shall bring down
fire from heaven. The third, that he shall put life into the image of the
Beast, and cause it to speak, 1 King 13 38. 2 King. 1.10.
of this we shall treat on, verse. 15. The second, he shall do by a certain
imitation of Elias, who by fire from heaven consumed the sacrifice: and also
devoured the Captains with their fifties, to show that he was a man of God: To
which it is probable the spirit here alludeth: for Antichrist will be accounted
a man of God. But it seems rather to allude to that wicked action of Satan, who
with fire from heaven consumed the sheep and servants of Job. For whatsoever he
does, Job. 1, 16,
he shall do by the effectual working of Satan unto the destruction of men.

Now hence it follows (says Bellarmin) that the Pope is not Antichrist, for
neither any Pope himself, or any of his ministers did ever make fire to come
down from heaven. The consequence is not good: for it is apparent the species
or one great wonder is put for the whole genus. But the species being denied,
the genus is not denied. As therefore it will not follow that none of Christ's
Disciples were true Apostles, Mat. 17.20.
because none of them removed mountains according to the letter of the text:
the which notwithstanding Christ promised unto his Disciples (for it was enough
that they did other great miracles) so neither does it follow, that the Pope is
not Antichrist, although he has not according to the letter brought down fire
from heaven. For it is enough that many Popes (of which Bellarmin boasts)
have been renowned for working great signs and wonders, and that the whole
Papacy is full of miracles, to wit, false and lying ones, such as the holy
Ghost here and in 2 These. 2. do ascribe to Antichrist: and of which Christ
himself forewarned us: Mat. 24.24.
believe them not.

Now the spirit rather attributes this species of wonders unto him, then any
other, as respecting the manner of speech then common to the Hebrews: and still
is to this day: for the Jews say: If a man cause fire to descend from heaven,
for, if any one with a heavenly miracle would prove himself to be a man of God,
and deny the Law of Moses, let him be accursed. Vestigat. page 701.
Because no miracles can verify false and blasphemous doctrines.

Add to this, that Alcasar the Jesuit, contrary to the common opinion,
acknowledges that a litterall sense does not at all agree with the style of
this aenigmaticall sentence: which undoubtedly is most true, although he brings
in a most idle gloss, taken not from the Scriptures, but out of the conception
of his own brain. Antichrist therefore by an allusion unto the litteral
history of the Scripture causes fire diverse ways to descend from heaven.

In the likeness of fire rushing from heaven the Apostles received the holy
Ghost: How the Pope causes fire to descend from heaven.
so Antichrist boasts, that he by power given him from above, does confer the
grace of the holy Ghost in consecration, confirmation, confession and
absolution, to wit, by a great and miraculous working.

In the likeness of lightning the devil made fire to descend from heaven, and
devoured the sheep and servants of Job. And does not the Pope boast, that he
fulminates against Emperors, Kings and Princes by his excommunications? for so
Gregory VII. said that the Emperor Henry IV. whom he excommunicated, was
stricken with lightning, And therefore in excommunicating, the Pope casts down
burning torches or firebrands from on high, that even hence we might understand
that it is he, who causes this dreadful fire to descend from heaven, by which
the sheep and servants of Job are devoured, to wit, by a marveilous wonder.

In that it is added: In the sight of men] it signifies, that he gains
authority to himself and his deceitful working, by striking great amazement,
fear and delusion in the hearts of men. For he bewitcheth the eyes and minds
of the people, and so terrifies the conscience with his signs and lightnings,
as that the simpler sort are held in false devotion, and the more prudent in
fear and obedience.

14. And deceives them that dwell on the earth by those miracles] Gr. (...)
for the miracles, Seducing by his signs.
and it seems to be put for (...) by, or by means of those miracles, as Chap.
4.11. and 12.11. This is the third effect of his power, he drives wretched men
from Christ to Antichrist, from the truth to a lie, and from the path of
salvation to the way of destruction. For to seduce, is properly to bring out of
the right way, and lead into error. It is a metaphor taken from travelers
ignorant of the right way: for so Antichrist seduceth the inhabitants of the
earth] that is, earthly minded men, ignorant of God and of their salvation, to
wit, as casting all care of religion upon their spiritual fathers, and hence
being bewitched and terrified with the signs and lightnings of the Beast, they
devoutly swear obedience unto his lies. For as by true signs, being the seals
of true doctrine, the Elect are helped and moved to believe that it is divine.
(For God who is true and the author of miracles, gives no testimony save to
the truth:) so the lying miracles of the Beast are the seals of his lying
doctrine, which earthly men embrace for true, because of his miracles, thinking
that they are divine signs, and so his doctrine also: But thus thinking they
are deceived and seduced. What therefore are our workers of miracles but
seducers? And in this sense it is truly said (...), for, or because of the
signs, as being the formal cause of his imposture. Now they work their signs
in the sight of the Beast] that is, by the Popes authority, because the
miracles of these deceivers must of necessity be Canonized by the Pope, that
they may be authentic to the faith, that is, to the seducement of men.

Saying to them that dwell on the earth that they should make] Observe how
often the holy Ghost does reiterate the dwellers on the earth, The image of the
beast.
lest the faithful should be offended with the multitude and readiness of
them that follow the Beast against Christ. And this is the fourth effect of his
power: he commands the inhabitants of the earth to make an Image to the Beast
which was wounded by the sword and did live. With which cohereth the first,
that he gave life to the Image of the Beast, and also that the Beasts image
should speak, and cause, that whosoever would not worship the image of the
Beast should be slain. Ribera in c. 13.32.
For these two verses agree together, by which indeed most interpreters amongst
the Papists will have the third miracle of the Beast to be described, viz. that
he should persuade men to make an Image to Antichrist, and worship him in their
temples, Lib. 3. de P. R. c. 15.
to which image he would give life and speech, etc. Whence again it follows,
says Bellarmin, that the Pope is not Antichrist, because none of them have
made an Image to speak, etc. But first this fable touching Antichrists image
placed in temples, speaking and to be worshipped, Alcasar refutoth Bellarmine.
Aleasar himself refuteth, and expounds it of heathenish idols, which they
imagined by an heavenly miracle should receive and give answers; This opinion
is far more tolerable, although not agreeable unto the text, which openly
speaks, not of Satan's delusions among the Gentiles already past, but of the
future impostures of Antichrist sitting in the temple of God. Secondly, (to let
pass the fable) do not the images in the Papacy speak? and has not the Pope
caused and commanded them to be worshipped on pain of death?

Such of ours who understand the former Beast of the old Roman Empire,
interpret this Image of the Beast sometime wounded, and again healed, of the
Roman Empire re-established by the Pope. Which they think was done when Steven
II. and Leo III. transferred the decayed Empire of the West on Charles the
Great, and as it were repaired the same: The which was no more then a certain
image, or rather a shadow of the old Empire, coming short both in the
majesty, largeness and power thereof. But we have before showed that the
former Beast denotes not the Roman Empire, but Antichrist. Neither do the
circumstances of the text agree to it. The Pope (say they) made the image of
the Roman Empire: But the second Beast (or the Pope) made not the image of the
former, but the inahbitants of the earth did it by the commandment of the
Beast. That also which is added touching the worshipping of the image, does
little agree. For as much as none of the Germane Emperors commanded either
themselves or their Empire to be worshipped on pain of death.

The participle (...), saying, referred to that which goes before, makes the
sense clear, to wit, that to the two former ways of power and seducing (being
his false doctrine and great miracles) now are added two more, to wit,
worshipping of Images, and outward violence. And the spirit does plainly
allude to Daniels History, where the King set up a golden image (Hebr. (...)
Gr. (...)) whose height was sixty cubits, and breadth six cubits, proclaiming,
Dan. 3.4. The Babylonish Image.
that all should fall down and worship the golden image: whosoever falls not
down and worshippeth, shall the same hour be cast into the midst of the
burning fiery furnace. This was that Babylonish idolatry, maintained by a
furnace of fire, in imitation whereof Antichrist has set up a Golden Image to
the Beast, that is, to his own wicked inventions, commanding that all who will
not worship the same, shall be burnt in a furnace of fire. By these two latter
ways therefore, far more effectual then the former, he universally seduceth
the earth. But both these ways seem to require a more full exposition.

That they should make an image to the Beast] Both Alcasar and Ribera
acknowledge that by an Enallage or change of number one image is put for many,
The Image of the beast what it is.
though they apply it to a different sense. The holy Ghost calls the whole
Papisticall worship of images, or Antichristian idolatry the image of the Beast.

That they should make] to wit, the inhabitants of the earth. In the
construction there is no ambiguity. The Beast himself makes not the image, for
he being covetous, will not be at the cost: but he says to them that dwell on
the earth, that they should make it, that is, he teaches and commands the
nations in the honor of God and of the holy Trinity, to make and set up in all
consecrated places and temples the images of Christ crucified, of Mary the
mother of God, the Queen of heaven, of Peter the Prince of Apostles, and of all
the Saints in heaven: Images, I say, of wood, stone, brass, gold and silver:
neither may they be set up naked and without attire, but must be adorned and
clothed in silk and purple, have waxe-candles and lights set before them, men
must humbly and devoutly make requests and prayers unto them, yea and
contribute unto their worship yearly revenues for the salvation of souls.
This commandment the world (being delighted with Babies, and desirous of a
glorious worship to the eye) at length obeyed, sparing no cost: and hence the
Papacy does so much abound with Palaces, temples, consecrate places full of
pictures, altars, waxe-candles, lights, purifying vessels, etc. as being a
kingdom of images.

15. He gives life to the beast, makes it to speak and to be worshipped.
And he had power to give life to the Beast] Gr. (...) And it was given him to
give life, etc. The first effect of his power, he puts life into the Beasts
image, makes it to speak, and to be worshipped upon pain of death.

It was given him] by whom? by the Dragon, that is, Satan the inventour and
architect of all idolatry, God permitting the same: yea also in his most
righteous judgment sending them that dwell on the earth strong delusion that
they should believe a lie, because they received not the love of the truth,
that they might be saved. Now it is very apparent unto all, how in the Papacy
the Image is made to live, speak, weep, laugh, and do other actions of the
living, through the fraud and devilish cunning of Monks: And hence follows
that mighty running after this and that Mary, Crucifixes, Peter, etc. Hence are
all the pilgrimages, wonders, canonizations, sacrifices for the dead, and vows,
in so much as none of the inhabitants of the earth, whither of the simple or
wiser sort, but have thought it necessary for the salvation of souls, The
Beasts image excels that of Nebuchadnezzar
to offer, bequeath, and give unto this Image whatsoever they possessed.
Furthermore the Image of the Beast has this as proper to it, and above that of
the Babylonish: for we read not that Nebuchadnezzar made the same to live or
speak: In this great wonderment therefore Antichrists image was to excel the
other, that he might more prevalently seduce: otherwise in idolatry and
madness they are alike, as it follows.

And to cause that whosoever] Gr. (...) and should make, to wit, the image
which speaks, for the words (...) and (...) are both governed by the word
(...) image: and this is the common reading. But the sense shows that not the
image, but the Beast caused them that would not worship to be slain: therefore
the Kings Bible seems more rightly to read it (...) and causes, or makes,
that is, the Beast does it. However it comes all to one purpose, whither the
Beast himself, Dan. 3.6.
or the Image by the Beast cause all that will not worship to be slain, the
which we plainly see, is taken out of Daniel: Whosoever falls not down and
worshippeth, shall the same hour be cast into the burning fiery furnace.

Thus the Beast besides his doctrine, miracles, and worship of Images, adds
outward force, that so whosoever will not submit by the former, may
notwithstanding be compelled to worship through fear of punishments. For such
a spiritual madness possesses idolaters, that with fire and sword they
punish the contempt of their idols: hence Idol-worship is in Gr. called (...)
as it were, a mad and befotted worshipping of Idols.

Now let us see whither the like has not been hitherto practiced in the
Papacy. This setting up of Images first did rend the East from the West with
many tragical tumults and uproares. And afterward was the utter overthrow
thereof, by the Turks: For Constantine that furious Pope, by sedition thrust
Philippicus Emperor of the East, out of his government, because he prohibited
the Image of the Beast to be worshipped: also he caused John the Emperors
General to be slain at Ravenna Gregory II. deposed Leo the Emperor, for the
same cause, commanding them of Ravenna to put to death Paulus, the Emperors
chief officer: He also put out the eyes of Peter Governor of Rome, and by
that means made himself Lord thereof. Behold the power of the Beasts image, of
which if any be desirous to know further, let him read the Book of Martyrs: Or
let him go to Rome or Spain, and see whither all men are not constrained to bow
the knee, and adore the Image of the Beast. Babylons Law is universal:
Whosoever will not fall down and worship the Image:

16. Impression of a Character. The difference between Character and Charagma
And he causes all] The sixth effect of his power: he imprints a Mark in the
right hand, or in the forehead, with a privilege to buy and sell. Mark, Gr.
(...) not (...) Character, as most render it. A Character represents the
express image of the Archetype or first pattern: as for example, a child being
like his father in countenance, is said to be the character of his father: by
which analogy, Heb. 1. verse. 3. The Son of God is called (...) that is, the
Character (or as it is translated) the express Image of the Fathers person.
But the word Charagma here used is of a larger signification, and taken for any
sign or mark put upon things, thereby to difference them from others: like
sheep or such like cattle have a mark set upon them, as also household stuff,
as vessels, clothes, and other merchandise, that they may be known who is the
owner thereof, or what their price and value is: of this use also are the
colors, among Soldiers: Thus Princes distinguish their servants by different
habits. And so the Charagma here properly denotes the Beasts livery.

But let us, if you will, call it his Character. This he causes to be
imprinted upon all, without any distinction of age or stature, great and
little, young and old, of every estate, rich and poor, bond or free, noble,
ignoble, Emperors, Kings, Princes, Magistrates, Subjects, none exempted. So
then this is a CATHOLIC CHARACTER, and must be received of necessity to
salvation: by which as by a solemn mark the Beast shall distinguish all the
adorers of his power. The Beast apishly imitates Christ. What the Character of
the beast is.
Now herein he imitates Christ, who in Chap. 7. Signed all the servants of God
with the seal of God, as by a Character, separating them from the world. So
the Beast by his Mark separates all such as are his from Christ the Lord.

In their right hand or in their foreheads] The distinction shows, that there
is a certain difference in the Character, of which more by and by. But what
may this Mark be?

Ribera feineth that it is the form of the Dragon, which Antichrist shall
command to be worshipped: But because he sees there is no weight in the
fiction, therefore he will have it a future Character, or some mark, which
secretly shall show that name in which he most glories, that is, the name of
Christ or the Messiah, by which he shall deceive the Jews, many Christians and
Sarazens also, to wit or -- P whereby Constantine in his Ensign did in short
include the name of Christ, in token that he was deliverour of the world,
expellour of tyrants, and settler of public peace, such as Antichrist would
also seem to be.

Bellarmin, being ashamed of these triffles, says that it cannot be known what
this Character is, till Antichrist shall come: in the interim he pleasantly
derides our interpreters, as being ignorant of this Character, which he
willingly refuses to know, lest he bewray the Pope: But undoubtedly the mark
of the Beast, should not so often have been used in this prophecy, if it were
altogether hid, for then it should be no Character. Neither does it follow,
that our Interpreters know not what it is, although some seem to understand
thereby the unction of their holy Chrisme; Others the profession of the Romish
faith: Others their oath of fidelity to the Pope. For all comes but to one
thing, as noting an obligation or bondage to Antichrist.

But put case we were ignorant of the Character, will it therefore follow that
the Pope is not Antichrist, in whom all other Marks of him, do evidently
concur together.

First therefore we are not to imagine that it is a visible mark burnt or
imprinted on the forehead or right hand, What manner of Character the beasts is.
3, Q 63. Art. 3. ad. 3
whatsoever Alcasar triffeleth touching a military Character out of Vigetius:
for it suites not with this aenigmaticall style: And therefore Thomas says
well, that the Character of the Beast is a profession of unlawful worship.

Secondly it appears, seeing the Antichristian Beast is the Romish Pope,
clothed with the skin of the Roman Empire, and coat of Christ, that the
Character of the Beast is the profession of the Papisticall worship: like as we
heard before, Christ's Character was no material mark, but a profession of
Christian worship. This Character of the Beast they receive in their foreheads,
who only by profession and obligation to believe all things the Pope
believes, acknowledge themselves subject to him, and receive all the
Sacraments. But such receive it in the right hand, who either by general or
special vows, whither Clergymen or others, Demonstra. Antichrist. c. 11.
Sect. 25.26. The Character of the Beast twofold.
do oblige themselves strongly to defend the Romish Sea.

But in my opinion Robert Abbot Bishop of Salisbury does excellently expound
this Character, understanding it from the foresaid distinction to be twofold:
One common to all, the other proper to them, who buy and sell.

To the common Character appertain (says he) the things which usually are
practiced by all Antichristians: as the observation of fasts and holy days
instituted by the Pope: the worshipping of their breaden god in the Mass, and
of images: kissing of the Pix, auricular confession, doing penitential rites
and other things not commanded of God, but by him, in which things
notwithstanding he makes the whole life of a Christian man to consist.

But the peculiar, belongs to those spiritual Merchants, buying and selling
the Oath, by which being obliged to the Pope, as by a special tie, they
promise subjection and obedience unto him, and in witness whereof they
separate and divide themselves from the rest of the Church by certain rites,
vows, unctions, shavings, garments, and religious institutions by the Beast.

This Character therefore they bear in their forehead, that is, by open
profession: as also in their right hand, that is, by oath, -- behold my right
hand, and faith: more peculiarly the whole Clergy, as Bishops, Priests,
Monks, and other religious and anointed shavelings, promise a blind obedience
unto the Pope: in testimony whereof they openly teach and profess, that in
their ordination they receive a Character not to be put out, God undoubtedly by
his providence so directing the matter, that we thereby might know who are
these stigmatized varlets, bearing the Character of the Beast.

17. The privilege of Antichrists signed ones.
And that no man might buy or sell] The privilege is added, which they only
shall enjoy who have the Character, all others in the mean time being deprived
thereof. Only the marked ones may buy and sell, but others not; whicht thing
whither it be understood either of temporal or spiritual merchandise, i^
altogether agrees unto the Papacy. For none may spiritually trade among them,
that is, buy, receive or sell the holy wares of Masses, indulgences,
absolutions, dispensations, tithes, etc. but these spiritual hucksters marked
with this perpetual Character, to wit, Bishops, Priests, Monks, and the like
merchants of souls: of whom Peter speaks: 2 Pet. 2 3 2 Timothy 6.5.
Through covetousness shall they with feined words make merchandise of you.
And Paul: they suppose that godliness is a gain or merchandise.

But if we extend it to the common Character: it may also most truly be
applied to civil trading: For whosoever acknowledge not the Beast, they are so
far from having freedom and liberty to buy and sell: that on the contrary
fire and water is forbidden them, as being heretics, and so by Popish edicts
are deprived of all honor, dignity, offices, courts, privileges, and common
rights, but condemned to exile, torture, and horrible punishment.

This Pope Martin V. has most clearly expressed in his Bull annexed to the
Council of Constance: where he enjoyneth by an oath all such as profess
themselves addicted to the Roman Sea, whither Emperors, Kings, Princes,
Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Soldiers, Protestants, Rectors,
Counselors, Presidents, Communities and Universities of Kingdoms, Provinces,
Cities, Towns, Castles, Villages and such like territories and places, as also
all other who exercise temporal jurisdiction: also all Clergiemen and
inquisitours, that they expel all such as hold not the faith and communion of
the Roman Church, as being scabbed sheep, infecting the flock of the Lord:
nor permitting them to preach, nor to dwell in their dominions, neither to make
contracts, bargain or trade with them, or suffer them to enjoy with Christians
the comforts of an humane life. Now is not this the very thing here testified
by the spirit, that the Beast should do, viz. that all of what estate soever,
as receive not his Character might not buy nor sell. Thus we have Pope Martin
himself to be the best interpreter, and indeed a full practiser of this
prophecy, who as a Rat by his own mark declares himself to the world to be
that Antichristian Beast.

Save he that has the Character of the Beast] What means he to say of the
Beast and not of the Beasts: but to show, that they are both one, and represent
in a different respect the same Antichrist, as before we declared,

Furthermore he seems to distinguish them that enjoy the privilege of the
Beast into three orders: having the Character, or the name, or the number of
the name of the Beast: about which some dispute, whither these things be not
declaratively coupled together, as three names containing all one thing, seeing
that which is here and in the foregoing verse, absolutely said to be the
Character: is Chap. 15.2. and 16.2. and 19.20. called the Character of the
Beast: And Chap. 14.11. the Character of the name of the Beast. Of this opinion
is Alcasar: But Ribera thinks that the Character is to be distinguished from
the number of the Beast and his name: with whom I rather agree: for it
sufficiently appears from Cha. 15. v. 2. that the Character is distinct from
the number of the Beast: for there it is spoken of such as had gotten the
victory over the Beast, and over his image, and over his Character, and over
the number of his name. Now thus I distinguish them, that by the Character is
understood the more proper Mark, The proper and more common Character of the
beast how they differ.
which is set on the Clergy by their special vow and oath: By the name and
number of the name, the common Character imprinted on all of the Laity, by
their ecclesiastical obedience unto the Pope. But of the name and number of
the Beast we shall speak more by and by.

18. Here is wisdome] Because all those things which he had spoken of the
Character, name, and number of the Beasts name, are aenigmaticall and very
obscure. Therefore John sets forth the very same by an exclamation here is
wisdom, to wit, hid: Or here is need of wisdom to search out the meaning of
these three things: because by the understanding of these, all other mysteries
of the Beast may easily be understood. Now difficult and dark things cannot be
enquired into but by the help of wisdom, the which, as Aristotle says, is the
Prince of Sciences, consisting in understanding and knowledge. And therefore
the holy Ghost does here again (as in verse. 9.) stir up our attention, lest we
with deaf ears and blind eyes pass by, not only these most hurtful Beasts
with their image, but the Character, name, and number also. For except we be
very wary, he will devour us. But we cannot shun him, except we know him: we
cannot know him but by wisdom which searches into all obscure and dark
matters. This is the first part of the exclamation.

But whence shall we attain this wisdom? by prayer, as James tells us, Chapter 1.5.

If any one lack wisdom let him ask of God who gives to all men liberally,
and upbraideth not: and it shall be given him, if he ask in faith nothing
wavering: For as Sirach says: All wisdom flows from God. Now here we want
wisdom, Sirc. 1.1.
and yet it is necessary for the searching into this obscurity. Let us
therefore earnestly pray unto God, to teach us what these monsters signify,
what we are to know touching them, and what to shun. But behold we have the
wisdom revealed unto us in this very place, in the second part of this
exclamation.

He that has understanding let him count the number of the Beast] In the
number, says he, is hid the name of the Beast, his Character, and all other
mysteries touching the same. He therefore that will know (...) let him count,
that is, diligently discuss the number of the Beast: for by his number he may
know his name, by his name his Character, by his Character his Image, and by
the Image the beast himself. But that he may know it, says he, (...) let him
have, or set to his mind, that is, he must with great skill count or reckon up
this number, showing that with earnest prayer to God, there is need of great
study and paines-taking to comprehend the knowledge of the mystery. What the
number of the beast is.
But wherefore will he have us so carefully to mind the number? Or why has
the Spirit hid the rest in the number of the Beast? he would unfold all other
things by the number, because (says he) it is the number of a man] that is, a
man by much diligence may search it out: so this clause is understood of most,
as a reason taken from the possibility of the thing, according as we also
observed it in the analysis. Neither do I altogether dislike Riberas
exposition, that it is a reason taken from that which is proper to man: because
(says he) to reckon is proper only to man endued with understanding. And thus
number should be put for to number, for it is not said (...) The number, with
an article, but indefinitely (...) it is a number of a man: as if he should
say: for this cause the spirit has hid the knowledge of this whole mystery in
the number of the Beast, that men (who excel bruit Beasts in knowledge and in
the art of reckoning, and weary themselves in casting up infinite accounts of
other kinds) should also diligently exercise themselves in searching out the
number of the beast, for that being once known all the rest will easily be
discerned. Behold how familiarly the Holy Ghost descends to our capacity,
thereby leading us to an infallible knowledge of the Beast and his mysteries.

And his number is six hundred sixty six] In the Greek the number of the Beast
is set out in three numerall letters (...). But here again is need of wisdom
to guess what is meant by these three letters.

The reading is twofold, Whether the time of Antichrists rising be here noted.
Lib. 3. de actis Ponti. Romans sub. initium.
the which we are well to take notice of, because it much serves to know the
sense: Montanus and all Latin copies express it not in three numerall
letters, but in full words (...) six hundred sixty six. Hence some think that
John expresses not the numerall name of Antichrist, but the number of years
after which he should be revealed: viz. after 666. years: of this opinion is
Balaeus: Bullinger and others: But many things seem to make against the same.

First, the beginning of the years would not accord, for if we reckon from the
time of Christ's birth, there will be, not 666. years, but only 606. till
Antichrist did rise: if from the time of the Vision (as it seems it must be
done) then there will be only 510. years: If with Balaus sixty years before
Christ, or at the Consulship of Cicero when Judea was reduced by Pompie into a
Province under the Roman Empire, there can no sufficient reason be alleged
for such an anticipation.

Secondly, by this means the wisdom which John hence promises could not be
attained by the number of the Beast: for he teaches that by the number the
name, by the name the Character, and so the rest might be searched into: which
indeed may be gathered from the numerall letters, but not by the words
themselves of the number.

Add to this, that verse. 17. and Chap. 15. verse. 2. John calls it expressly the
number of the name of the Beast, but not the number of the Beasts rising.
Therefore it is not a number of time but name.

This makes me rather assent to them who judge that by this number Antichrists
name is opened, The numerall letters show the name of the beast.
of which opinion are not only the most of our Interpreters, but also the
ancient Writer Irenaeus lib. 5. cap. penult. Yea all Popish writers of these
times, Alcasar excepted, who here imagines altogether strange and absurd
things.

Now the ground of this our opinion is twofold: First, that all other Greek
copies express this number not in full words, but in three Greek numerall
letters (...) whereof (...) according to the Grecians is 600. (...) 60. and
(...) is six. But with a mark above it is faulty, as most Greek copies have
it, through the unskilfulnesse of the Printers. For (...) thus marked, makes
not 6. but 90. Some Ancient writers notwithstanding have thought that for the
middle letter (...) was to be written, so making the same to be (...) by which
Characters the Greeks have abreviated the name of Christ, because they thought
that by this sign Antichrist should vaunt himself both to Christians and
Jews to be the Christ, and then the number should not be 666. but 706. because
(...) with the Greeks does not denote 60. but 100. the which number indeed
might also not unfitly agree with Antichrists rising, in case the number here
did respect the same: for by taking of 96. from 706. (for so many years were
expired before this Revelation was given) there remain 610. years, at what
time sat at Rome Boniface IV. the Successor of the first Antichrist, who
therefore it seems is not considered in the number, because he was taken away
in the first year of his tyranny, viz. Anno 606.

But the things before spoken make against this: neither have any Greek copies
to this day (...) But all have it either in full words six hundred sixty six,
Irenaeus reproves the alterers of these letters.
or in the three Characters (...) Which number and numerall letters Irenaeus
testifies, were put in all the old most approved and ancient writings,
whereupon he does mightily inveigh against such as rashly changed this middle
letter: lib. 5. cap. 15,

The other ground is because Chap. 15. verse. 2. this number here, is directly
said to be of the name of the Beast. And therefore Antichrists name consists of
numerall letters, making up the number 666.

But the greatest doubt about it is, Whither we are to understand Greek or
Hebrew letters. Fox in Apoc. p. 458.
whither these numerall letters be Greek or Hebrew? It is very certain that
John wrote the Revelation in Greek: howsoever there are some (whose conjectures
are not to be slighted) who maintain that this prophecy was dictated to John
by the Angel not in the Greek but Hebrew tongue, as being John's native
language, and best known unto him, the which afterward he turned into Greek,
because of the Grecian Churches unto whom he wrote. Now this in the first place
seems to be so, in regard of the style which abounds with Hebraismes, as in
many places we have observed. Secondly, considering the Hebrew words which are
oftentimes inserted, or left out, as Abaddon, Harmageddon, Gog, Magog, etc.
Also by an often expression of a sevenfold number, which is proper to the
Hebrews. Thus also the words of Christ, Saul, Act. 9.4.
Saul, why persecutest thou me? howbeit, they are written in Greek, yet
undoubtedly were at first spoken by Christ, either in the Hebrew or Syriack
tongue. But whether this be so or no, the number of the name, or numerall name
of the Beast, seems long ago to have been discovered by the prudent search of
the godly.

Let us take it for granted that the Revelation was written in Greek, and that
we are to reckon with Greek numerall Characters: as Irenaeus also a most
ancient writer affirms. Now it is known that the Grecians in their accounts
used the letters of the Alphabet, distinguishing them into three ranks: of
which the first consists of unites from a unto i: the note s being inserted for
seven: The other rank is of of Decades or Tens from (...) with a mark upon it,
which is 10. unto r which is put for an 100. s' with a mark being here also
brought in for 90. The third is of centenaries or hundreds from r' unto of
which signifies 800. unto which they add p for 900. Their thousands they
denote by the foresaid unites with a little straight line under them, viz. from
a b, etc. unto i. Now if we count the numerall Characters according to the word
latenos (lateinos) we shall precisely find the number of the Beasts name 666.
after this manner. l a t e i n o s 30. 1. 300. 5. 10. 50. 70. 200. 666.

This numerall name of the Beast is not of my invention, neither was it of late
thought upon by our Interpreters: But Irenaeus a most ancient writer 1400.
years ago by a divine insight found out and discovered the same unto us as
being very agreeable unto this mystery: his words are these; The name (...)
(Lateinos) contains the number six hundred sixty six; and it is very likely,
because the truest kingdom has this name. For they are Latins, that now
reign: but in this we will not glory. Now who possibly can be marked out unto
us by this name, except the Latin or Roman high Priest? for he long ago has
possessed the kingdom of the Latins, and Rome the seat of the Latin
kingdom. The Popes Latin Church.
His Church the Graecians call the Latin Church, and indeed it is altogether
Latin: for their Letanies, Masses, Prayers, Exorcismes, Indulgences, to be
short their whole service is in Latin, insomuch as with them it is unlawful
to perform the same in any other language but the Latin. Wherefore
undoubtedly this is that numerall name of the Beast, which here the holy Ghost
bids us number after the computation of the Greeks.

But if the Spirit would have us to count the same not in Greek, but rather in
Hebrew Characters, we are again by the like name led as by the hand unto the
Pope of Rome: for as John Fox (a most diligent searcher into this mystery)
has found out, the Latin name Romanus expressed in the Hebrew letters does
represent the number of the Beast 666. after this manner, 300. 6. 50. 70. 40.
200.

In this nothing is forced or obscure: for who, these many ages has been this
Romanus, that is, Lord and head of Rome, but the LATIN MONARCH possessing the
kingdom and the royal Metropolis of the LATINS, viz. the Pope of Rome? of
which thing if any be ignorant or doubt, let them read the history of Carolus
Sigonius (who either by entreaty or for lucre sake was hired to set forth the
affairs of the Romish Popes) touching the kingdom of Italy, Carol. Sigo de
regno Ital.
after the Lumbards and Graecians were expelled out of Italy, in his third and
fourth book unto the end. Certainly, it is not without the singular counsel
of God, and intention of the spirit, that both the Hebrew and Greek reckoning
should aim at one and the same thing, and point out by the finger as it were
him only, who is (LATINUS and ROMANUS) the Latin and Roman Monarch. Him
therefore we cannot but confidently judge to be the Antichrist, for as much as
in him all the marks of Antichrist do evidently concur and agree together.

Neither are we the first who have held this opinion: but many in the ages
before us, and indeed in the midst of gross darkness have observed and
constantly affirmed the Papacy to be Antichrists kingdom, and the Pope
Antichrist.

Gregory surnamed the Great: The Pope long ago called Antichrist. Lib. Regist.
Epist. 8. Lib. 6. Epist. 30.
perceiving that Antichrist was at hand, brake forth into these words a
thousand years ago. The king of pride is near, and that which is not lawful
to be uttered, an army of PRIESTS is prepared for him, because the CLERGY who
should go before others in humility, fight or strive for mastery. Gregory
therefore foresaw that Antichrist should be a King of Priests, that is, some
Bishop or Pope, who should call himself or desire to be called UNIVERSAL:
prophetically as it were pointing at Boniface the third, Successor of Sabianus,
who manifested himself to be the Antichrist by arrogating the wicked, foolish,
idle, perverse, proud, vainglorious (for by these Epithites it is there set
forth) title of Universal Bishop.

Arnulphus Bishop of Orleans spoke these words 600. years ago in the Rhemish
Council: What think ye him to be, who sits in his lofty throne, glittering in
purple, and embroydered garments? Verily if he be destitute of Charity, and
only puffed and lifted up by knowledge, he is the ANTICHRIST.

Bernardus Clarevallensis an Abbot above 464. years ago, wrote such invectives
against the luxuriousness of the Pope, Bishops and Clergy of his time, that
if any man now did the like he should be accounted as an Arch-heretick.

Anno 1240. a Council of the Princes and Bishops of Germany was held at
Ratisbon: where Eberhardus Archbishop of Salisburg spoke these words: We feel
(says he) except we be blind, under the title of the highest Priest a most
cruel wolf cleathed in the skin of a Pastor. The Roman Popes war against
all Christians, and being become great by their bold attempts, deceits and
sowing wars, they kill the sheep, etc. HILDEBRAND 170. years ago and more,
first laid the foundation of ANTICHRISTS Empire: he first began this wicked
war, which is continued to this day by his Successors.

And a little after, Babylons highest Priests desire to reign alone: cannot
endure to have an equal: believe me who am taught by experience they will not
cease, until having brought under the Emperor, and loosed the honor of the
Roman Empire, oppressed true Pastors, they by this way extinguish all things,
tread all things under their feet, and sit in the temple of God, and are lift
up above all that is worshipped: He that is servant of servants, desires as if
he were God, to be Lord of Lords. This wretched man daily meditates how to set
up an Empire proper to himself, he alters the laws, establishes his own
sinful devices, robs, spoils, and defraudeth every one: him they usually call
the ANTICHRIST, in whose forehead is written: I am god, I cannot err: he I
say, sits in the temple of God ruling far and near, etc. These things he: See
Aventinus lib. 7. annal. fol. 685.

About those times lived the Abbat Joachin Calaber, who affirmed that the Pope
was Antichrist, and illustrates the Revelation with prophetical pictures, and
short expositions in the Italian tongue.

My Anonymus in his Book written 260 years ago, does many times in express
words call the Pope of Rome Antichrist.

Page 78. The first Angel, says he, whosoever he were, did first of all
declare the Pope of Rome to be Antichrist. And a little after: It came to pass
by great boldness, that every one durst declare the Pope, who is called
Apostolical, to be apostaticall and Antichrist.

Page 108. No man except he become a spiritual temple of the holy Ghost in
evangelicall conversation and doctrine, has received grace to interpret the
mysteries of Christ and Antichrist his adversary: or to understand that that
great Praelate the Pope of Rome should be the great Antichrist.

And page 115. In Pope Urban VI. all the mysteries of Antichrist are fulfilled.

And page 117. Antichrist is a Libard spotted with diverse heresies, also
because he says he is Christ's Vicar on earth, although he oppose Christ's Law
more then any: and so is an adulterate mongrill, as being Apostolical in name,
but apostaticall in deed: Like as a Libard and a Lion coming together engender
an adulterate Leopard.

Page 119. he says, that the worshippers of the Beast worship the Devil in
the Pope. And again: That the Pope has it from the Dragon, that he is a
sacrilegious and tyrannical person, wasting on himself and his creatures the
goods of the poor, and destroying men for his filthy dung sake. And whereas he
is the greatest hypocrite, and calls himself Apostolical, yet he despises
Apostolical conversation above all men living.

Ibidem. Who was able to fight with the Beast, or resist his will, in regard of
his twofold supreme power, viz. Imperial and Priestly, which be pretends to
have ever the Church Militant.

And page 120. It appears therefore, when the Pope sitting in the Temple of
God, extols himself above all that is called God, or is worshipped, that he
boasts as if he were God: and so consequently bewrayes himself to be that
son of perdition, who commonly is called Antichrist. With many like places.

Franciscus Petrarcha a most eloquent Philologer of Italy in his time, wrote
such things Anno 1370. against the Pontifical sea, as almost Luther never
spoke worse.

In his 15. Epistle lamenting the oppression of the Catholic Church: That
worthy Court, says he, of Jesus Christ, that excellent Tower of divine
worship, is now at length because of our sins, being destitute of divine help,
become a den of cruel thieves.

And of the Popes tyranny; I see indeed, says he, afar off, but not being able
to hinder it, I refuse to see nigh at hand: It is a cruel and infamous guile,
by which this ecclesiastical Dionysius vexes and spoileth our Syracusaes.

And Epist. 16. I speak not what I have heard, but seen: I know it by
experience, that there is no charity there, no faith, no piety, no reverence,
or fear of God, nothing that is holy, just, equal, laudable, or humane: as
for love, shamefasinesse and purity it is banished thence. Touching the truth
indeed I am silent: for what place is it where all things are so full of lies:
The air, earth, houses, towns, sireets, court-yards, porches, halls, beds,
roofes of houses, clefts of walls, the secret and close rooms of houses and
temples, the seats of Judges and Popes, yea in the last place the very mouths
of men, their becks, gestures, voices and countenance.

And Epist. 19. Behold now thou touchest with thy hands, and see with thine
eyes, what that last Babylon is: viz. angry, raging, dishonest and terrible: To
which neither that Egyptian Babylon the work of Cambyses, nor the more ancient
and royal Assyrian Babylon built by Semiramis, is equal, etc. Behold thou
see a people not only adversary to Christ, but that which is worse, under
Christ's Ensign, rebelling against him, and fighting for Satan, etc. For what
else I pray you is daily practiced by Christ's enemies, and the pharisees of our
age? do they not buy and sell, and make merchandise of Christ himself? whose
name notwithstanding they seem day and night to extol with most high praises:
whom they cloth with purple and gold, whom they load with precious stones,
salute and worship: him I say they put to sale and make merchandise of here on
earth, and as if his eyes were covered and saw not, they crown with the briars
of wicked treasures, defile him with the spittle of a most impure mouth, and
inveigh against him with viperous hissings, strike him with the dart of
venomous actions, and what in them lies, The Papists crucify Christ
do again and again deridingly drag him, as naked, poor, and scourged on
mount Calvary, and wickedly consent to nail him to the cross. And O shame! O
grief! O indignity! even such the Romanists are at this day, as it is
reported. Whereupon one merrily made these pithy verses: Roma tibi fuerant
servi domini dominorum:
Servorum servi nunc tibi sunt domini.
Once Lords of Lord; O Rome thy servants were,
But servants now of servants thy Lords are.


Petrarcha goes on Epist. 20. touching the Pontifical Babylon: In the kingdom
of covetousness nothing is counted as lost, so that money be safe: there the
hope of life to come is but a vain fable, and what is spoken of hell is all
fabulous: The resurrection also of the flesh, the end of the world, and Christ's
coming to judgment are esteemed as fopperies, etc. O Babylon the worst of
things, situated on the fierce bancks of the river Rhone, thou famous or rather
infamous whore committing fornication with the kings of the earth, in very deed
thou art the same whom the holy Evangelist saw in the spirit: Thou art (I say)
the same and no other, sitting upon many waters, etc. The woman clothed with
purple and scarlet, and glittering with gold, pearls, and precious stones,
having a golden cup in thy hand full of the abomination and filthiness of thy
fornication. Babylon know thou thy self? Certainly that which follows
only agrees to thee, and not to any other: BABYLON THE MOTHER OF FORNICATIONS
AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. Hear the rest: And I saw a woman drunken with
the blood of the Saints, and the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. Why art thou
silent? Either show some other that is drunken with this blood: or else if thou
can, deny that thou art not this drunken woman.

And Epist. 21. against the Popes, the Princes of darkness: Let the gods and
goddesses: nay rather the God of gods destroy them all both living and dead
with their treasures and wicked works, who being fatted with the blood of the
heavenly Lamb, do spurn and rebel, etc. But why, or to what end? that we may
see the good overwhelmed, the wicked raised up, Eagles to creep, and Asses to
fly: to see Foxes on chariots, Kites on towers, Doves on the dunghill, Wolves
at liberty, Lambs in fetters; to be short, Christ banished, ANTICHRIST to be
Lord, and Beelzebub judge, etc. These things wrote Petrarcha, and more also.

Besides more then 230. years ago, lived Michael Cesenas chief of the
Minorite Friars: The Pope Antichrist.
who openly accused the Pope to be ANICHRIST: and called the Romish Sea, the
Babylonish harlot drunken with the blood of the Saints.

But for brevity sake I refer the Christian reader unto the Catalogue of
witnesses of the truth: where it is most clearly proved, by innumerable
witnesses of Christ, Catal. testium verit. Tom. 2. p. 79.
before Luther was borne, that the Pope of Rome was Antichrist.

Now let us consider the wisdom that is in the number of the Beast: of which
John cries out: Here is wisdom. From the number laid down 666. he closely bids
us to search our all the other mysteries: for here we have the name of the Beast
Latinos, Romanus. This name both the Greek and Hebrew number does declare. By
the name also we have the Character: for all that will buy and sell must
profess the Latin service, or Roman faith, and be sworn vassals of the
Romish Church. By the said name and Character is manifested the Image of the
Beast that all were to adore, viz. that mad worship of stocks and stones, by
which every one is constrained at the sound of the Cornet, Flute, Harp,
Sackbut, Psaltery, Organ, Dulcimer, and al kinds of Music to adore the image
or idol that is nearest to him. Lastly, by the name, Character and image of the
Beast appears what was both the land and Sea-Beast exercising the same power,
and eccasioning all the evils which hitherto have been spoken of.

But what is the reason, Why the holy Ghost does not express the Pope of Rome.
See the notes on verse. 1.
that the spirit does not more clearly express this name? Why does he not
openly say, the name of the Beast shall be the Latin or Roman chief Priest?
It might also be demanded, why he does not plainly say that the Beast is
Antichrist? Touching this we are to know that typical oracles of future
things, are not wont to be plainly set down till they be fulfilled. Now it
pleased the spirit thus to manifest these mysteries even by dark expressions,
that the faithful hereby might be stirred up to diligent searching after them,
and lest that hence disturbances should be occasioned before the time, and the
Church endangered. The Apostle, 2 These. 2. might have said more openly, that
the son of perdition should sit in the Church of Rome: and that (...) that did
let, was the power of the Roman Empire, the which in the appointed time should
be weakened and assaulted with the city it self by the Romish Pope: But it was
useful to the Church to speak more closely of the mystery of iniquity as then
secret. And if John had openly written that the Pope of Rome should be
Antichrist, etc. Certainly either the Popes themselves would have labored long
ago to take away this Revelation out of the sight and memory of men, that they
might not be bewrayed. Or else the mystery of iniquity which was a growing,
should never have broken forth, because the Roman Emperors would soon have
cast down the Popes out of their seat, lest they should be forced to kiss
their feet, and try by experience their great tyranny: Now thus the counsel of
God (a thing impossible to be done) should have been hindered, and this
prophecy never fulfilled.

But Bellarmin disputes much against these things, Lib. 3. de P. R. cap. 10.
Bellarmins subtilties answered.


I. He says that Irenaeus only applies the name Lateinos probably to
Antichrist: but that to him the name (...) seems more probable, which signifies
the Sun.

I answer; That which to Irenaeus seemed only probable is unto us most
certain, both by history and experience. The things we see, Irenaeus indeed
was ignorant of, and saw them not: but undoubtedly had he lived to see the
state of the Romish Church as now it is, he would have judged as we now do.
Yea it is not without admiration, that Irenaeus did even then suspect and fear
that Antichrist should sit at Rome: Perhaps the arrogance of Victor might
occasion the same, Eusebius. lib. 5 hist. c. 24.
who was not ashamed to excommunicate all the Churches of Asia for a difference
about Easter: certainly he mightily blamed him for it. It is true indeed he
did not affirm the thing as certain touching the name of Antichrist, because
he either could not, as wanting sufficient arguments, which now we have, or
else he durst not, because of the scandal and danger that thence might befall
the Christians by the Romans: notwithstanding his words there added are not
without a prophetical mystery, though perhaps few have observed them: BUT IN
THIS WE WILL NOT GLORY: What is this but to show that that name of the Beast,
should be the greatest infamy of the Church of Rome: as if he should say: in
this we have no great cause of boasting, but rather of shame. I beseech the
prudent reader well to weigh this fear of Irenaeus.

II. He says, that the Latins possess not now that most potent kingdom,
which they held in the times of Irenaeus.

I answer: It suffices that the Pope has a long time held under him the
kingdom and seat of the Romans in Italy: the rest of the Christian world
also being subject to his power and beck.

III. He says that Latinus is not written with ei; but simply with an i.

I answer: This cavil is too childish, for who is ignorant that the Ancients
were wont to write their j longum by ei, as queis for quis, so queibus,
preimus, capteivi, usual to Plautus: And thus the Englishmen to this day
pronounce the i as if it were ei.

IV. He says, that the word Latinus is not the proper name of any Pope: And
that only one was called Romanus, who lived no more then four months: and
therefore could not be the Antichrist.

I answer: It is a frivolous evasion: for it appears that the spirit speaks
not of a personal but national name and profession: for he will have the
numerall name to be the mark, whereby it might be known where Antichrist
should reign: as it shall further appear on Chap. 17.18. to wit in Italy at
Rome. Now personal names are common to many: Therefore the holy Ghost intends
here no such name.

V. He says, that innumerable other names besides Lateines make up the same
number, and therefore hence nothing can be concluded. And he alleges out
Hippolitus the word (...) to deny: out of Arethai (...) illustrious: (...) the
Sun: (...) a conqueror: (...) an evil guide: (...) truly hurting: (...)
invying of old: (...) a wicked lamb: Out of Primasius (...) contrary: Out of
Rupertus (...) and the two Latin words, DIC LUX: Out of Lindanus, Martin
Lauter: Out of the Cronologie of Genebrard (...) (Lulther:) so himself adds
two (...) all which words, faith he, make the same number.

I answer most of the old words he alleges are wrested, for (...) which makes
only 664. and therefore must be written barbarously (...) to make 666. for
(...) which is 672. abruptly (...) to make 666. Neither have the other words
the like evidence with these two (...) and Romanus.

The new are allfoolishly feined.

The Germans write Luthers name Martin Luther: not Martin Lauther or Lauter.
But put the case they did, who ever has heard, that the Germane letters are
all numerall, or used in stead of ciphers, according to the manner of the
Hebrew and Greek? Certainly he that feineth that this agrees to the propriety
and truth of the Germane tongue, is altogether foolish.

But Genebrard (says he) has noted that Luthers name in Hebrew makes 666. by
writing it (...) Lulther, O subtle heads. What Devil I wot taught that Monk
this mystical ciphering? If we write the true name of Luther, whether in
Hebrew or Greek, it will not make the number 666. If in Greek (...) its 908. If
(...) 717. If (...) 847. If in Hebrew (...) 637. If (...) 703. To be short, as
often as you change the letters, you shall find an excess and falsity.

As touching the name of David Chytraeus, if we write it in Greek so as it
ought to be (...) it makes the number School. which is more then twice the number
of the Beast. If in Hebrew (...) it will be 709. and what way so ever you alter
the letters, you may see the excess and foppery. Bellarmin besides the other
wresting of the name, does also cut of the last letter o that so he might
extort 666. which shows his unfaithfulness, neither is there any great
cunning in it: Alcasar not much unlike him, labors ridiculously to forge the
number 666. out of the words (...).

(...) is written faulty for (...): neither can the last vowel saving one being
short in (...) be written with (...) as in (...) for as much as ni in Saxonius
if pronounced long is barbarous.

The name Bellarminus Jesuita does more elegantly by far yield us the number
of the Beast, thus written in Hebrew: 1. 9. 10. 1. 6. 60. 70. 10. 60. 6. 50.
10. 40. 200. 1. 30. 30. 70. 2. 666.

For so the Germane Jews write der: and so in holy writ is rendered by e: as in
Gideon Emmanuel Abi ezer, etc. Notwithstanding I confess Bellarminus is not
the Beast as yet: though perhaps he cleave to his horn.

Some also observe the number of the Beast in the name I t a l i k E k k l e s
a 10. 300. 1. 30. 10. 20. 1. 5. 20. 20. 30. 8. 200. 10. 1. 666.

Or thus one letter being taken out. k l e s i a l a t n a 5. 20. 30. 8. 200.
10. 1. 30. 1. 300. 10. 50. 1. 666.

To which I add a name most convenient to the Beast. p a r d o s i s 80. 1.
100. 1. 4. 70. 200. 10. 200. 666.

For what is the Papacy save a kingdom (paradseon) of traditions?

Thus with more likelihood the jest might be retorted upon Bellarmin, then as
Alcasar foolishly feineth it in the words, l a x o n a b o u 8. 1. 30. 1. 7.
70. 50. 10. 1. 2. 10. 70. 400. 665. in which one is wanting: and the article
(...) is cut off, which alone makes 770.

But here we may not pass by the Emblem of Pope Paulus V. so as it is in many
Books dedicated unto him printed at Rome and Bononia: which expressly contain
the number of the Beast. P A V L O V. V I C E D E O 5. 50. 5. 5. 1. 100 500.
666.

Besides what may be the meaning also of his Ensign, a Dragon flying under an
Eagle, I leave to them that can understand it: about which if you please read
Alcasar vestigat. page 372. for it belongs not to me to declare such great
mysteries. Now to return to the matter. Although Bellarmin should feine six
hundred such like numerall names, yet it will no way weaken the force of our
argument. For we do not go about to prove who is Antichrist, by the numerall
name only: but by the name joined with other marks of the Beast. For example:
although it would be no sound reasoning thus to reason: he that is borne at
Bethlehem is the Messiah: But the Son of Mary is borne at Bethlehem. Ergo he is
the Messiah. Yet thus it does most firmly follow. He that is borne at
Bethlehem, and has all other prophetical notes of the Messiah, he is the
Messiah: But the Son of Marie has them all: Therefore he is the Messiah. So
touching Antichrist it will not altogether firmly follow by the numerall name
alone: but yet it follows most firmly from the numeral name joined with the
rest of the notes of the Beast, all concurring in the Pope of Rome, as hitherto
has been showed.

The Latin, Papa Latinus vel Romanus, habet nomen numerale bestiae.
or Roman Pope has the numerall name of the Beast, he has also the other
Apostolical marks of the Beast or Antichrist. Therefore he is the Antichrist.

V. He says, that Irenaeus professes himself ignorant of Antichrists name,
and that this the truest opinion.

I answer: he falsyfies Irenaeus words. For he says not that Antichrists name
cannot be known: But because there are many names of this number, therefore he
says, it is more certain and without danger to stay till the prophecy be
fulfilled, then to suspect and guess at several names. Now this makes for us
against Bellarmin: for Irenaeus gives us to understand, that the prophecy
being fulfilled, we may more certainly and safely judge of the name. But long
ago the fulfilling of this prophecy began to be accomplished in the Pope of
Rome, as the comparing of histories and times with this prophecy does
evidently manifest: The which if Irenaeus had seen, he would undoubtedly have
concluded with us that (...) Lateinos was not only probably, but of a
certainty the name of the Beast. Bellarmin therefore does here deceitfully
require ignorance, feining that both he and the generality of men are ignorant
of Antichrists name: and hence concludes that he is not yet come: thereby to
turn away the eyes of the simple from the Romish Antichrist: As if forsooth,
that which he will not know, or the rude multitude is ignorant of: cannot
therefore, neither be, nor be known of others. If so, then Irenaeus indeed had
added in vain: viz. that John shows this number of the name, that we might
avoid him when he comes, knowing who he is. Therefore by the number of the
name it may be known who he is, and so consequently the name it self also.

VI. At last (to draw a veil over his pretended ignorance) he says, that
after Antichrist is come, his name shall be most manifestly known, like as the
name of Christ (Jesus) after Christ was come, began to be openly known unto
all, where as before it was unknown unto the Jews, although the Prophets had
foretold many things of him: as also a certain Sybill in verses had declared
the number of his name to be 888. Hence he infers, seeing the greatest
controversy that is, See Abbot demonst. ca. 2. p. 34. sect 17.
is touching Antichrists name: therefore Antichrist is not as yet come: and so
consequently the Pope is not Antichrist. This he calls an insoluble argument,
but there is no weight at all in it: for the things he feineth are all false.

I. It is false that Antichrist being come his name shall then be clearly
known by all: for his coming shall be with all deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. Therefore he shall not come openly, but by a
feined and fraudulent name he shall deceive the world, so that it shall be a
very hard thing to know him: for he will transform himself into an Angel of
light, Contr Auxent. lib. 2. Contra advers leg. cap. 12.
and come under a feined show, viz. under the name of Christ, as Hilarie and
Austin affirmed long ago. Therefore his name shall not be openly known unto
all men: but as the Devil came to sow tares in the Lords field not openly, but
when men were asleep: so Antichrist shall creep in while the world is not aware
there of.

II. It is false, that the Prophets foretold any thing of the name (...): And
to think that God should foretell that by the idolatrous Sybills, the which he
spoke not of by his own Prophets, let him believe that lists.

III. It is also false, that after Christ was come, his name was most
certainly known to all: for John expressly speaks of the Jews living in the
time of his coming: Ioh. 1, 10.
that the world knew him not: And that he came unto his own, and his own
received him not. However therefore they were not ignorant of the name Jesus,
yet they knew that it was common to many other men: but they did not know nor
believe, that it was the name of Christ the Messiah: therefore the name Jesus
who should be the Christ, was not known unto the Jews.

To this day also the name Jesus, who is the Christ, is no way known unto the
Jews, Turks and Pagans: for however they know indeed the name Jesus, yet they
neither know nor believe, that it is the name of Christ the Messiah: By the
like reason we may conclude, that although Antichrist is come, yet to the
Papists and many others Antichrists name is not certainly known: for the
Papists take not their Pope to be Antichrist, for although they well know the
number of the name (...) and Romanus: yet they neither know, nor believe, that
it is the name of Antichrist. But as the ignorance and obstinate denial of the
Jews could not hinder the name of Jesus to be the true name of Christ: so the
ignorance and obstinate denial of the Papists lets not, but that the name
Lateinos and Romanus, is truly the name of Antichrist.

IV. That is also false which he affirms touching the great controversy
about Antichrists name. For howsoever the Papists raise a controversy about
it: yet to us (who know Antichrist as being revealed by the Spirit of Christ's
mouth to sit in the Latin Church) his name is no way controvertible; for there
is none of us, but easily assents to the opinion of Jrenaeus, that his name is
(...) or RoMANUS, which are names of the same number, demonstrating the Pope of
Rome.

V. The conclusion of Bellarmine is false, that if Antichrist were come, there
should be no question about his name. For this is sufficiently apparent to all
who do not purposely shut their eyes against the light of the Sun: And hence
the insoluble argument of the Papists is turned upon themselves, for as much as
the number of the name of Antichrist is generally known, so as all do point as
with the finger, at the Latin Pope: It being certain that Antichrist is now
come, and that he is the chief Priest at Rome.

VI. And lastly, that is false which he gathers out of Marlorate touching the
obscurity of this place: viz. that this oracle being most obscure and
aenigmaticall, is not as yet fulfilled, for all prophesies, says he, when they
are fulfilled are most clear.

But O Bellarmine, are not the prophesies touching Christ's coming in the flesh
fulfilled? and are they now most clear unto the Jews? nay they remain most
obscure and aenigmaticall unto them even after their full accomplishment,
because their minds were blinded, and the veil of Moses remains upon their
heart even unto this day: not to speak of us Christians: unto whom many visions
of this Revelation, undoubtedly fulfilled, do nevertheless remain obscure in
regard of our negligence: like as many oracles touching the abolition of the
ceremonial and judicial Law of Moses, about the difference of meats and
peoples which were taken away and fulfilled in Christ, remained obscure and
controvertible even to the Apostles themselves, as the Acts and Epistles of the
Apostles witness. Prophesies therefore become most clear by the fulfilling of
them, to wit, not to them who maliciously shut their eyes, or open them not to
receive the light: but to them alone who diligently attend unto the
accomplishment of them. This is the cause that this prophecy touching
Antichrist, after the fulfilling thereof in some measure (for yet it is not
fully accomplished) remains most obscure unto the Papists: who seeing will not
see, although an egg is not more like to an egg, then the Pope of Rome unto
the Beast.

CHAPTER XIV. The Argument, Uses, Parts, Analysis.
AFter the Beast, or Antichrist the seducer of the world, appears the LAMB
standing on mount Sion with 144000 sealed ones, singing to God with melody a
new song before his throne: three Angels in order go forth to reveal
Antichrist. Of which the first bad the everlasting Gospel, by which men
received light to call upon God in the name of Jesus Christ, and not in the
name of Saints: The second threatens the fall of Babylon: that is, he shows
that Antichrist sits in Babylon, or the Church of Rome. The third exhorts all
men to take heed that they worship not the Beast, neither his image, upon pain
of eternal damnation. And lastly, the harvest and vintage of the earth is
gathered in by the Angel sitting on the cloud.

In which types is shadowed out, first Christ's presence with his Church
oppressed by Antichrist. Secondly, the purging of doctrine (corrupted by
Antichrist) by the preachers of the Gospel, with their combats against
Antichrist, raised up in our times by the singular mercy of God: And thirdly,
the last judgment is signified, in which Antichrist with all other enemies
being cast into the lake of Gods wrath, shall be eternally punished for their
perfidiousnesse and tyranny.

This whole Chapter therefore is diverse ways consolatory. First, howsoever
the whole earth for these thousand years has followed the Beast, yet Christ
still will have a Church and people: because even in the midst of the Beasts
reign, the Lamb reserveth unto himself 144000. sealed ones, who shall truly
invocate the name of God: like as of old in the corruptest time of Israel, he
reserved 7000. worshippers, who bowed not their knees to Baal.

Secondly, howsoever Antichrist has a long time suppressed the Church and
doctrine of the Gospel: yet Christ will at length purge the same by his Angels
or ministers: the which he has truly done in our age.

Thirdly, howsoever these thousand years and more Antichrist has oppressed by
horrible punishments, and condemned such as haereticks, who would not adore his
image: yet they were most blessed Martyrs, and enjoyed rest, and the reward of
their labors in heaven.

Lastly, howsoever Antichrist no way lessens his fury, but goes on to
persecute still in an hostile manner the Gospel and ministers thereof: yet we
ought not to be terrified by him, but on the contrary, manfully oppose him by
the preaching of the Gospel: because in the last harvest and vintage, he shall
be abolished by the glorious coming of Christ, and eternally punished in the
lake of Gods wrath.

The parts of the Chapter are three.
I. TOuching the Lamb standing on Mount Sion, in the five first verses. II. Of
three Angels, preaching against Babylon and the worshippers of the Beast, unto,
v. 14. III. Concerning the harvest and vintage of the earth, unto the end.
The first part concerns the Lamb standing on Mount Sion with 144000. sealed
ones, verse 1. II. A mutual song of the dwellers in heaven is heard: verse.
2.3. III. Seven worthy titles of the sealed ones are declared. 1. their
teachablenesse, that they alone could learn this heavenly song, verse. 3. 2.
Chastity, they are virgins, and are not defiled with women. 3. Society with
the Lamb, whose inseparable companions they are, ibid. 4. Liberty, they are
redeemed from among men, ibid. 5. Their prerogatives: they are the first
fruits, and holy to God and the Lamb, ibid. 6. Integrity, they are without
guile, verse. 5. 7. Innocence, they are without fault before the throne, ibid.


In the second part the three preaching Angels are described. the first Angel
is described. 1. by his gesture and place, he flies (...) in the midst of
heaven, verse. 6. 2. His habit, he holds the everlasting Gospel, ibid. 3. His
office, he preaches the Gospel to all the inhabitants of the earth, ibid. 4.
The thing it self that was published, viz. A threefold exhortation. 1. that
they fear God. 2. that they give glory to him. 3. adore the Creator of heaven
and earth: inserting a persuasive reason, from an inforting cause: for the
hour of judgment was at hand, verl. 7.



The second Angel publishes the ruin of Babylon, verse. 8. with a reason taken
from the meriting cause: because she had mingled the wine of her fornication
unto the Gentiles, ibid.

The preaching of the third Angel is comminatory: and here is showed: 1. Whom
he threatens; viz. the worshippers of the Beast and his image, etc. v. 9. 2.
What he threatens: two things: 1. they shall drink of the wine of Gods wrath,
verse. 10.2. be tormented with fire and brimstone, ibid. This he amplifies, 1.
from the eternity of the punishment, v. 11. 2. that it is continual, without
any intermission, ibid. 3. By an hortatory conclusion he stirs up the Saints to
constancy, v. 12. Here is patience: And he comforts them from the rest and
felicity of the Saints, opposed unto the eternal torments of the wicked, ver.
13.


In the third part is represented, 1. Christ the Judge on a white cloud, with a
reaping sickle, ver. 14. 2. He is required to gather in the Harvest, by a
reason from the convenience: because the Harvest was ripes verse. 15. 3. The
execution, which is the reaping of the earth, v. 16. 4. The said Judge with a
sharp sickle to cut the vine, ver. 17.


He is bid to vintage the earth, by reason (as before) of the ripeness, ver.
18.6. The gathering the vintage of the earth, and treading down the winepresse
of Gods wrath with the effects, viz. exceeding much blood flows thence, verse.
19.20.

The first Part of the Chapter.
Touching the Lamb standing on Mount Sion with 144000: sealed ones, as also a
sist apparition of unknown Harpers:
1. ANd I looked, and lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an
hundred forty and four thousand, having his Fathers name written in their
foreheads.

2. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the
voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers, harping with their
harps.

3 And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four
Beasts, and the Elders, and no man could learn the song, but the hundred and
forty and four thousand which were redeemed from the earth.

4 These are they to hich were not defiled with women: for they are virgins
These are they which follow the Lamb whethersoever he goes: These were
redeemed from among men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb.

5 And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault before the
throne of God.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd I looked, and lo, a Lamb] The former part of the third Act was touching
Antichrists rage against the Church: here follows the latter of the Churches
preservation and reformation of doctrine under the same: viz. The preservation
is typed out in the first part of the Chapter. The reformation in the second.

The Author of this preservation is the Lamb, The Lamb is Christ.
that is, Christ, as appears both by what we have already heard, and by the
things following, See Chap. 5.6. and 6.1.16. and 7.9.17. and 19.17. etc. Christ
is said to be a Lamb by a sacramental Metonymia, because he was praefigured by
the Paschall Lamb and sacrifices of Beasts: And by a Metaphor, because of his
innocence: hence the Baptist: Behold (says he) the Lamb of God, who takes
away the sins of the world. (...) (a Lamb) without an article, for, (...),
for the Greeks often omit articles speaking of a known thing.

Stood on Mount Sion] that is, Why he stands on a mount.
in the Church, which stands firmly as Mount Sion against all the devices of
the Dragon and the Beast. Wherefore sits he not, but stands? Same say,
because he was slain and rose again: Others, because he is the judge and
avenger of the Church. But he comes forth afterward as the Judge sitting on the
cloud, verse. 14. Here therefore he stands as a watchman on the tower watching
for the Churches safety, as Isay 21.8. And he cried, A Lion: My Lord I stand
continually upon the watch tower in the day time; Hab. 2.1.
And I am set in my ward whole rights, etc. I will stand upon my watch. Neither
stands he alone, but with 144000 sealed in their for theads. Now let us
consider wherefore the Lamb appears here standing on the Mount, with so many
sealed ones: And to what times this prophecy belongs: and who these sealed are.

Touching the scope I find interpreters to agree. viz. that the Lamb is
opposed to the Beast, Christ the preserver, to Antichrist the destroyer. And
now Ribera acknowledges that this serves for the comfort of the righteous, The
scope of the Lambs appearing on the mount.
to cause us assuredly to believe that during the rage of the Devil and
Antichrist against the Saints (before spoken of in Chapter 13.) Christ is not
asleep, nor neglects his Church, but stands on the watch for her safety, lest
the wheat should be corrupted, although indeed the chasse or wicked by Gods
permission follow and adore the Beast, and run into destruction. But when and
how this should be, seems unto him most difficult to be expounded: neither
has he any thing to say, but according to the vulgar error, he refers the
following things unto the four years reign of his Antichrist.

Our interpreters also still keep to the position: that howsoever Antichrist
shall sway far and near, yet Christ always will have his elect and sealed,
which shall stand with him on the Mount, where their salvation shall remain
safe and unmoved: which indeed is most truly spoken: but this thing is
generally treated of through the whole Revelation: And the question still
remains touching the order of the vision, and the time when Christ chiefly
stood with his sealed Ones.

I say therefore, When the Lamb stood with his sealed ones.
when the Beast ascended out of the Sea, and out of the earth then also the
Lamb appeared on the mount with them that were sealed: When Antichrist (I say)
had invaded the Church, brought the same under him and seduced the world. Then
the Lamb in appearance had lost his possession. Then the woman flying into the
wilderness vanished out of the sight of men, so as she appeared no where, as
if there had been none. This happened, when a little after Gregory, the Roman
Pope sat on the Chair of Universal pestilence, as before we have showed.
Then the Church fled into the wilderness, not by change of place (for it
remained in the Roman Empire) but by loss of her ornaments and change of
shape. Because even from that time it retained indeed the name of the Church
(for Antichrist was to sit in the temple of God) but in very deed it began to
be changed in to a worldly kingdom of Antichrist. And that gashly form of the
Church remained in the West, which we now see, but the Church gathered by the
Apostles being thrust into the wilderness, did no where appear, all public
congregations either at Rome or other places being polluted with idolatry,
until God taking compassion on the seed of the woman in the wilderness,
vouchsafed again to measure the temple, and purge the Church in the age of our
forefathers.

Now the godly may think, and so much indeed the Sophisters do object,
Whether there were no Church under Antichrist.
did the Church therefore then utterly cease to be? Was there no Church before
Husse or Luther? Was Christ either negligent, or unable to defend his spouse?
Is it not written. The gates of hell shall not prevail against her?

But behold the Lamb standing here on mount Sion with the Elect and sealed; so
that Christ was no way wanting to his Church: he suffered indeed by a secret
and just judgment, that Antichrist should take in his possession, and to the
outward view make spoil (as it were) of all things, notwithstanding in the
midst of Antichristian corruption, he always stood as a careful watchman
preserving to himself 144000. that were sealed, who worshipped not the Beast
nor his Image, and these were his Church and Spouse, like as in the corruptest
time of Israel, when no true worshippers, save only Elias, seemed to remain,
God reserved to himself 7000. who had not bowed the knee to Baal. But thou will say, wherefore did he permit Antichrist thus to invade the Church? I
answer, she justly deserved such a trial, chastisement and dissolution. See
Cyprian de lapsis.

This standing of the Lan be therefore belongs to all the time (even a thousand
years and more) which has been since Antichrists rising, until the
reformation of the Church: begun by Wickleffe in England, John Husse in
Bohemia, and in the ages after them, by Luther, Zwinglius, Melanchion, and
their fellow brethren in Germany, being all great opposers of Popery.

But these sealed did then no where appear, they had no public meetings: for all Churches together worshipped the Beast. What then? because they appeared not
to man, were they therefore hidden to God? The 7000. in Israel had no
uncorrupted congregation: but were mingled (in outward appearance) with the
idolatrous Balaamites. The same thing is to be thought of these here, sometimes
they lay hid in the Popish Church, and sometimes openly made war with the
Beast by the sword of the Spirit. For those Saints against whom the Beast made
war and overcame, Chap. 13.7. who were they? not whole Churches (for such
were all subject to the Beast) but such teachers, confessors and martyrs as
opposed the idolatry of the Papists: of whom the histories of their time make
mention. Thus it appears to what times this prophecy appertains.

Now it remains to speak of the sealed who they were: Who these sealed are.
The Papists do much weary themselves about it.

Lyras fancy I pass by, who tells us of 144000. Monks professing virginity,
Lyras opinion.
and slain by the Agarens in the caves and dens of Syria and Antiochia toward
the end of the Empire of Heraclius. But this fiction is absurd to the Papists
themselves.

Ribera alleges Hieroms opnion, that they were the 144000. Riberas dispute
about the 144000
sealed out of the twelve tribes of Israel, which should be converted unto
Christ in the last four years reign of Antichrist. Of which Chap. 7. But he
proves nothing. For first, it is not likely that the Jews then to be converted
should all be Virgins: seeing the Hebrews did never highly prize such a state
of life. II. Hence it would follow that no married person should be converted.
III. The Virgins of the Gentiles should be excluded. But as the opinion
touching the Jews to be converted is fals^ (as Chap. 7. we have showed) so his
reasons are frivolous, grounded on a false supposition of virgins, of which
more by and by.

He therefore alleges the opinion of Arethas as more probable, that the
144000. sealed, spoken of in chapter 7. are not here to be understood: and that
because the article is omitted, for here it is not said (...), but (...),
intimating that these were others, namely such of the Gentiles as should be
converted. But neither does this please him, because it is not likely that
there should so few thousands be converted out of so many nations, and in so
many ages. And indeed he justly rejects it. For the reason taken from the
omission of the article is of no weight, his argument also proves nothing:
because a great and difinite number is put for an indefinite, as Beda has
rightly observed.

At last he affirms, that they are 144000. virgins to be converted to Christ
both of the Jews and Gentiles under Antichrist. But he is deceived. I.
Touching the time of Antichrist, which is now, and has been these many years,
and is not (as he supposes) yet to come, namely in the last four years of
the world. II. Also in the Epithet of Virgins, the which (as afterward I will
show) is not corporally but spiritually to be understood.

Alcasar makes these sealed, Alcasars opinion.
to be the faithful of the Primitive Church under the Roman Emperors. But he
erreth: for these as conquerours stood with the Lamb even while Antichrist
reigned.

First, therefore we are to hold, that these 144000. sealed, are the same
spoken of Chap. 7. because this part of the Chapter does altogether answer to
the seventh Chapter, in which as we said, is contained an antithesis of the
third Act of the second Vision.

Secondly, that this multitude of sealed ones, are no other, then the remnant
of the woman's seed, with whom (after her flight into the wilderness) the Dragon,
made war Cha. 12.17. as appears by the description there added, and repeated
in the 12. verse of this Chapter.

Thridly, that they are no other then those Saints, to whom it was given to
make war with the Beast, Chap. 13.7.

Lastly, that they are the faithful, whether teachers or hearers of: the godly,
I say, who from Antichrists rising until the reformation withstood the tyranny
of Popes, and retained the purity of the Gospel, to wit, all the martyrs, and
professors, touching whom, see the Books of Martyrs, and the Catalogue of the
witnesses of the truth.

They are said to be sealed in the name of his Father] To wit, of the Lambs:
The Kings Bible reads it, in the name of the Lamb and of his Father: What is
this, but to show that they constantly professed the doctrine of the Father,
and faith of the Lamb against Antichrist, by an allusion unto the Character of
the Beast. For as the Beast imprints a Character in the right hand or forehead
of his worshippers, Chap. 13.16. which is an obligation to Antichrist. So the
Lamb imprints a Character in the foreheads of his worshippers. The name of the
father and of the Lamb, which is a profession of the true Christian religion,
and open denial and separating from Antichrists idolatry and abominations.

And I heard a voice from heaven] We have heard who the multitude of the sealed
are. Their titles should now be spoken of in the next place: but the joyful
shout of the inhabitants in heaven is put in between, because of the
preservation of so many sealed ones from the idolatry and tyranny of
Antichrist, and then their excellent commendations are afterward rehearsed.

The connection and sense seems to be obscure unto interpreters. But I do
expound this part of the third Vision, by that part of the second Vision, in
Chap. 7. touching the 144000. that were sealed, seeing all things excellently
accord. There John saw the 144000. sealed in their foreheads: here, the same
multitude standing with the Lamb. There he hears an innumerable multitude
clothed in white robes, singing to God and the Lamb before the throne. Here he
hears a voice as it were of many waters, a voice, I say, of harpers finging a
new song. There enquiring who they were arrayed in white robes: it is answered:
These are they which came out of great tribulation, etc. Here not enquiring, he
hears from the company of the heavenly inhabitants: These are they, who are
not polluted with women, etc. The Scripture interprets it self.
All things being thus alike contain the same history. Thus we see that the
whole Scripture, especially the Revelation interprets it self. But I will more
clearly touch every particular.

There are three parts of the comparison. First, there John saw 12000. servants
of the living God sealed in their foreheads by an Angel, The comparing of the
sealed here with these in Chap. 7.
out of every of the tribes of Israel: making together 144000. Here he sees
the same multitude of the sealed ones standing with the Lamb on Mount Sion:
The name of the Lamb, and the name of his Father being written on their
foreheads. Thus he expounds, what was that Seal of the living God. In both
places the multitude of the sealed signifies the combat of faithful Martyrs
and Professors whom the Lamb had reserved with himself these thousand years
on Mount Sion, that is, in the Church groaning under Antichrist, even from the
time of the Woman's flight into the wilderness, until the new measuring of the
Temple, that is, from the rising of Antichrist unto the reformation of the
Church and doctrine, accomplished in the age of our predecessors.

The second member of the comparison here follows. There John saw a great and
innumerable multitude before the throne, clothed in white robes, in the sight
of the Lamb, and of all the Angels, the four and twenty Elders; and of the
four Beasts: and singing with a great voice salvation to God and the Lamb,
etc. The which multitude we showed to be the triumphant Church succeeding the
Apostolical times, who having finished their warfare, did now rest in heaven,
continually praising God and the Lamb: Here he hears a voice from heaven as
of many waters] This is the voice of that innumerable multitude out of all
nations and kindreds and tongues mentioned Chap. 7.9. for many waters (as the
Angel interprets it, Chap. 17.15.) are many peoples, multitudes, nations and
tongues. This voice by and by he calls a new song. In the beginning indeed he
heard as it were a confused sound of a multitude: but by little and little he
more narrowly observed what, and whose voice it was: Even as the singing of
Musicians afar off seems to be confused: but by approaching nearer and
nearer the gravity of their accord, and sweetness of their harmony is more
distinctly perceived.

Presently, therefore he also heard as it were the sound of a great thunder]
which some apply to the terriblenesse thereof. But this little agrees with the
following Epithet, and is repugnant to the scope of the harmony. I therefore
expound it of the vehemence of the voice: viz. that now these singers did not
lightly strike or pass through the ears of John: but they thundered it out with
all their might, which undoubtedly denotes the vehement joy of the Saints in
heaven.

At last he heard the voice of harpers] He says not, as it were of harpers, as
before, as it were of many waters, as it were of thunder, etc. intimating that
now he did plainly hear and perceive the harmonious accord of harpers playing
on their harpes, as being most delightful, artificious and sweet, such as is
the music of most skillful harpers. In Chap. 5.8. The four Beasts and four
and twenty Elders were brought in as Harpers before the throne: but these
Harpers here are differenced from the Beasts and Elders, for they are said to
sing before them, verse. 3. This therefore is a distinct troop of blessed
Martyrs and Professors of the Church triumphant, who as I said even now, were
departed this life, The allegory of the Law and the Gospel is not here set
forth.
and had finished their warfare before Antichrists rising.

I am not ignorant that most interpreters allegorically apply this voice, first
thundering, and afterward pleasant: the first to the preaching of the Law, which
is terrible to the wicked: the second of the Gospel, which sweetly affects the
consciences of the godly: but this application here seems to me to be strange
and uncouth, for after the appearance of the dreadful monsters, viz. the
Dragon, Beasts, etc. Now comes, this company of harpers (...) to delight the
heavenly theater, before that the preaching Angels went forth. Neither was that
voice any thing else, but that new song, of which it follows.

3. And singing as it were a new song] Gr. (...) and sung by changing the
participle into the verb, for, (...) singing, or (...) who also sung. He
expounds what the melodious accord of the harpers was, and where.

As it were a new song] New harmonies usually more delight the hearers then
such as are old, and often heard. Such was the Song of these Harpers, rare,
new, and worthy to be heard. Or New, that is, excellently setting forth the
new, rare and unspeakeable benefits of God and the Lamb: for so the Hebrews
(as generally may be seen in David's Psalms) call that a new song, which is
rare and most sweet.

The Argument of this new song, John here indeed does not speak of: but he
declared it before in Chap. 5.9. Where the Beasts and Elders sung a new song to
the Lamb saying: Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals
thereof: for thou wast slain and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of
every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, etc. And Chap. 7.9.10. Where
the innumerable multitude clothed in white robes cried with a great voice:
Salvation be to God who sits on the throne, and unto the Lamb: And a little
after: Amen, blessing and glory, and wisdom, and thankesgiving, and honor and
power, and might be unto our God for ever and ever, Amen, etc. Undoubtedly this
song was the same.

As for the circumstance of the place, It was before the throne and before the
four Beasts and Elders] Hereby he intimates two things: first, that this voice
was in heaven, and so we are to think that John heard the same from thence.
And therefore it was a song of the Church triumphant in heaven, not of the
militant in earth. Secondly, that this multitude of singers is distinct from
the Beast and Elders: for they are said to sing before them. They were
therefore a certain troop of triumphant Saints who afterward came to the
company of Beasts and Elders, for the Church triumphant is not yet full, but
daily increases with new members, who finishing their warfare here on earth,
are added unto them, until in the end it become truly universal and
catholic. Touching the Beasts and Elders, see the notes on Chap. 5. verse.
4.6.7. and Chap. 7. verse. 9.

And no man could learn that song] Now he turns his speech to the multitude
that were sealed, honoring them with excellent titles, which are seven in
number, as we observed in the analysis: of which some were proper unto the
state of their warfare in this life. But the most appertain unto the state of
Glory. For the drift of this place is to teach us, that Christ will not only
preserve his elect or sealed in their conflict against Antichrist: but also at
length gather them unto the heavenly multitude of Harpers, that with like joy
they may sing a new song to God and the Lamb. This chiefly serves to comfort
the godly here groaning under the cross.

Now this is the third member of the comparison, for as Chap. 7.13. One of the
Elders asking John, Who are these? did declare the like titles of them that
were clothed in robes: These are they which came out of great tribulation, and
have washed their robes, etc. So here John does either himself, or hears
this multitude of sealed ones to be adorned with like honorable praises (for
perhaps these were the words of the harpers touching them that were sealed)
These are they which are not defiled with women, etc. These epithites seem to
be diverse: but most are of the same nature, or are consequents, as we may see
by the diligent comparing of them together.

The first title in which they differ from others, that no man could learn the
new song but they] Here first it appears, Teachablenesso.
wherefore this company of Harpers in heaven were here brought forth, to wit,
as examples of the sealed yet remaining on earth: for our endeavor and study
ought to be the same with theirs in heaven. By which very thing the most sweet
communion of the Saints, both in heaven and in earth is signified.

Secondly, the docility and praerogative of them that were sealed, is
commended: They, and they only could learn this new song. But how can they
do it? not indeed by their own wisdom, but by the special illumination of
the Spirit, which God only vouchsafes unto them, and therefore the reprobate
cannot learn it. But do not many of them know the doctrine of the Gospel?
True, yet have they not a saving knowledge. They do sometimes profess and
boast of faith, etc. but they never can apply the benefits of the Lamb by faith
unto themselves, and praise him with their whole heart. For no man can say that
Jesus is the Lord, 1 Cor. 12.3.
but by the holy Ghost. This teachablenesse therefore is a privilege of the
sealed.

Thirdly, hence it appears, what this seal of the living God is, which the
faithful are said to have in their foreheads, Chap. 7.3. In verse. 1. it is
called the name of the Lamb, and the name of his Father. Now he says that it
is a new song, the which only the sealed can learn. It is, I say, that
rendering of honor and praise for the benefits of God and the Lamb, the which
the Elders and multitude clothed in white, ascribed unto them in Chap. 5. and
Chap. 7. viz. their sincere faith and confidence in God and the Lamb joined
with a continual celebration and thanksgiving. By this sign the worshippers
of the Lamb are separated from the followers of the Beast.

Fourthly, it appears that this seal is attained and imprinted in the
foreheads of the Saints in this life: It is attained, I say, (...) by learning,
without which we cannot have it, and for to learn it, we must continually
exercise our selves in the reading, meditating, and harkening unto the word of
God, and calling upon his name. And hence the benefit and worth of the
ministry is commended, as being the means by which we come to know this new
song, even while we are here in this life: for in the world to come there shall
be no use of instructing, but all shall be (...), taught of God. Moreover it
hence appears that this multitude belongs to the Church militant, who by
learning the new song of the harpers, shall also at length stand before the
throne, and be joined unto the Saints triumphant in heaven, as we shall see in
verse. 5.

These were redeemed from the earth] Gr. (...) bought. sealed, Freedom.
The liberty which the Lamb has purchased for them. They are bought, I say,
that is redeemed: But with what price? by the blood of the Lamb, as Chapter 5.9.
Whence? out of the earth, that is, by a synecdoche from among the inhabitants
of the earth, by which name John in this Revelation, does always denote the
reprobate worshippers of the Beast, as being children of the earth, given to
earthly desires: nay he closely intimates that these also sometimes were of the
number of them being servants of Satan and sin, but by special mercy are
brought into the liberty of Gods children through the blood of the Lamb. 1 Pet.
1.18
Peter excellently interprets this place, Chap. 1.18. Knowing that ye were
not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold from your vain
conversation received by tradition from your fathers: but by the precious blood
of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot.

The same benefit of redemption the Elders celebrate, Chap. 5.9. Thou have
redeemed us to our God by thy blood. And indeed this benefit we enjoy in this
life: for now, as many as through faith, are sealed in the blood of the Lamb,
are redeemed; howbeit the fullness of our redemption is reserved to the life to
come.

But are not all redeemed by Christ, dyed he not for all? 2 Pet. 2.
says not the Apostle Peter that he bought the false prophets, by whom he is
denied? To this Augustine well answers, that all are said to be redeemed,
according to the digni^^ of the price: which would suffice for the redemption
of all men, if all by faith did receive the benefit offered. But as many as
pass the time of their being in this life in infidelity, they remain
unredeemed through their own fault. The sealed therefore are only redeemed,
because they alone by faith receive the grace of redemption, through the grace
of election, which God vouchsafed them (not to the others) from all eternity.

4. These are they who are not defiled with women] Their third commendation is
Chastity: Chastity.
They have not defiled themselves with whoredom. The reason is added, for they
are virgins, that is, undefiled, or else the causall may be adversatively
taken: They are not defiled, but are Virgins. Before I give the true meaning.
I will in a few words vindicate the depravation of the place.

The ancient heretics called Hieracites urging the letter, The depravation of
this place by the hieracites.
forbad matrimony, as an unclean thing, and hence established the merits of
virginity: because, said they, they who are not defiled with women, that is,
unmarried persons only, shall follow the Lamb whether soever he goes. Thus
they expounded it literally: The same thing Tertullian also affirmed, and
after him Jerome who though he did not condemn marriage, yet he called it a
pollution, lifting up the merits of virginity into heaven: for besides
innumerable scoffs in detestation of matrimony, he also wrests this place
against Jovinian, who taught that virginity was of no greater merit before God
then matrimony, his words are these: Lest we should think, that they are said
not to be defiled with women, who abstain from fornication, therefore he
adds, for they are virgins: By the undefiled therefore he understands such
as have no wives, by virgins such as have no husbands. Therefore it shall be
the merit of virginity to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes: where the
married cannot follow him. This Ribera also is not ashamed to maintain.

But it may be clearly showed that this place serves neither to disgrace
marriage estate, The vindication of this place
nor to establish the merit of corporal virginity.

First, the Scriptures testify that matrimony is an ordinance of God, and is
honorable among all, and undefiled. Who therefore without blasphemy may say
that marriage is a pollution and defilement?

Secondly, the Apostle commands married persons to give due benevolence to
each other, and calls the very conjugall work (...), 1 Cor. 7.3 It is false
therefore, that husbands rendering the due to their wives, are defiled with
women. Theod. l. 4. epist. 22.
But as Paphnutius said in the Nicene Council (which went about to prohibit
Bishops to marry) marriage is honorable, and to lie with ones own wife is
chastity.

Now if the words, for they are virgins should be understood of virgins
according to the flesh: as Ribera the Jesuit following Hierom will have it,
then many absurd, blasphemous and impious things will necessarily follow.

I. It is proved that corporal virginity is not here understood.
That none of the holy Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, who all were married
( John perhaps excepted) can follow the Lamb.

II. That al both of the Jews and Gentiles to be converted to Christ under
Antichrist, should be unmarried persons, none married, then which nothing is
less credible.

III. Seeing (...) properly signifies maidens that have not known man, it would
follow, that this company of Harpers consisted all of pure virgins or maidens,
which is absurd even to Alcasar himself.

IV. That all virgins according to the flesh should follow the Lamb: and so
consequently the Priest of Cybele and the Goddess Diana, who, loosing their
genitours by taking in poison, remained virgins according to the flesh.

V. Not one of a thousand of the Popish Priests who vow chastity should follow
the Lamb, because they are no virgins, but are all for the most part
whoremongers and have concubines.

VI. Hierom himself should be excluded from the Lambs society, because
howev^^ he extolled virginity with praises even up to heaven, yet himself had
it not, as he confesses in the Apology to Pamm^^ius: where he says: I lift
up virginity to heaven, not because I have it, but because I the more admire
that I have it not. Therefore he being polluted with women was no virgin.

Lastly, the holy Scripture does so join all the faithful with Christ,
whither they be married or unmarried, as members with the head, so as they can
never or no where be separated from him: as Christ says: Father, Ioh. 17.24 1
These. 4.17.
I will also that they whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that
they may behold my glory. We shall be caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord,
and so ever be with the Lord. Therefore we shall all follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes: not only virgins or unmarried persons according to
the flesh: but all the faithful, who live chastely whither in a conjugall or
unmarried life, for in Christ there is neither male nor female, but a new
creature. The same the old Church professes in their hymn. Gal. 3.28. and
6.15.
O how glorious is the kingdom in which all the Saints rejoice with Christ,
and clothed in white robes follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. Away
therefore weith the Hieracites, who believe that only unmarried virgins shall
follow the Lamb.

What then? It is certain the chastity of the sealed is commended: The
chastity of body and mind is praised
And it is twofold, viz. of body and spirit, and both may be here understood:
If of the outward, the sense will be, These are not defiled with women, that
is, by unlawful copulation: for no man appertains to the company of the
sealed, but such as are chaste, whither in widdowhood, married or unmarried
estate: not that none of the sealed have ever been defiled, as may be seen in
Lot, Judah, David, Magdalene, etc. but because through faith they have purged
themselves in the blood of the Lamb before their departure out of this life.

But if it be understood of spiritual Chastity, the sealed are said not to be
polluted with women, that is, with idolatry, which is spiritual fornication,
but they are virgins, to wit, in spirit and faith.

Thus Austin interprets it: They have not defiled themselves with women, that
is, have renounced carnal lusts, nor cleaved to idols, strange gods, heresies,
errors, and wicked works, but are spiritual virgins, of whom Christ is the
Bridegroom. So Ambrose on the words of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 11.2. I have
prepared you for one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to
Christ: he will have them, says he, to be virgins in faith, such undefiled
ones as John in the Revelation does assign to Christ in the day of judgment:
These are they who have not defiled themselves with women; for they are
virgins, these follow, etc. (...) with women, he interprets metaphorically,
with errors or heresies. By women, says he, he signifies error, because
error began by the woman: As before in Cha. 3. by the woman Iesabel he
understood idolatry, by which the manners and verity of faith are corrupted:
for if thou so understand women, to think that therefore they are said to be
Virgins, because they have kept their bodies untouched, thou excludest the
Saints from this grace, who all of them had wives, the Apostles John and Paul
only excepted. By which he directly refutes Tertullian, Jerome, and Riberas
depravation of this place, as being absurd and wicked. To whom Alcasar also
consents, understanding virginity here metaphorically of the integrity of
life and doctrine, and all such to be virgins who defile not themselves with
an inordinate love of the creature.

But the observation of our Tossanus does much delight me, that here is an
antithesis betwixt the faithful, and the inhabitants of the earth, who have
committed fornication with the Babylonish Whore making the sense to be thus.
These signed ones are not defiled with women, that is, they have not committed
fornication with the great Whore, but are virgins persevering in the faith and
sincere worship of Christ.

To all these I add (which notwithstanding comes all to one thing) that this
title is to be compared with that in Chap. 7. These are they which have washed
their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. He speaks, I say
the same thing here in other words: These are they which have not defiled
themselves with women, for they are virgins. Our robes are carnal
concupiscences, these must be washed and made white in the blood of Christ
through the remission of sins, and white robes put on by the imputation of
Christ's righteousness and sanctification of the Spirit. The signed therefore
are said not to be defiled with women, that is, with carnal concupiscence, and
other sins, because they have washed and made white their defiled robes in
the blood of the Lamb. For they that are washed from their filthiness are not
defiled: And they are virgins: because they are made white in the blood of
Christ, that is, justified and sanctified by the merit and spirit of Christ.
The sense, as we see, is all one. And I doubt not but that the spirit had
respect unto that which the Apostle expresses more clearly: And such were
some of you, but now ye are washed, 1 Cor. 6.11.
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus,
and by the Spirit of our God.

They follow the Lamb whethersoever he goeth] The fourth title is their
individual society with the Lamb: Their inseparable communion with the Lamb.
which being referred to the state of their warfare, notes the sincerity and
constancy of their faith and obedience under Antichrist: And it is an
antithesis of that which is said, Chap. 13.4. The whole earth wondered and
followed after the Beast: and verse. 8. All the inhabitants of the earth
worshipped the Beast. These sealed, I say, have not followed the Beast, but
FOLLOW THE LAMB WHITHERSOEVER HE GOES, that is, exactly walk in the precepts
and steps of the Lamb, whithersoever he leads them: Now he leads them unto
the fountains of living waters, Chap. 7.17. These therefore suffer not the
decrees and idols of the Beast to be obtruded upon them, but wholly cleave to
Christ their guide. But if we understand it of the sealed in the state of
glory: then this title must be expounded by that in Chap. 7. verse. 15.17. These
serve him day and night: And the Lamb will feed them and lead them unto the
living fountains of waters. In which words the most holy and blessed communion
of the faithful with God and the Lamb, and their unspeakable happiness is
noted, as we there observed.

These are bought from among men, ] The fifth commendation is an amplification
of the second, Their prerogatives, they are the first fruits.
he said before that they were redeemed out of the earth, here, from among men,
the sense is one, that is, out of the multitude of vile and earthly men,
perishing under the captivity of Satan, sin and death. Now he adds to what
they are redeemed: The first fruits to God and the Lamb] for, that they may be
the first fruits, etc. It is an allusion unto the first fruits under the Law,
the first of their ripe fruits being then consecrated to God in the feast of
weeks. These were most holy, so the sealed are most dear to God and the
Lamb. The first fruits were peculiar to the Priests: so these are a peculiar
and elect nation, a royal Priesthood to God and Christ, etc.

5. And in their mouth was found no guile] The sixth title is their integrity,
they are without hypocrisy both in faith, Their integrity.
word, and manners. This indeed is truly said of Christ alone, Isay 53.9. But
attributed to the sealed by participation with Christ their head, August. hom.
11 in Apoc.
and by imputed righteousness, He says not, says Austine there has not
been, but there is no guile found, etc. for such as the Lord finds a man when
he calls him hence, such also he judges him to be, etc.

For they are without fault before the throne of God] These words (...) the
Kings bible has not: Innocence:
yet the old Latin, and the other Greek copies have them. The last
commendation is their innocence, and full perfection before God. The cause both
of this and the former commendation, is showed before, viz. because they have
washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb: Therefore they all are without
guile, and spot. The which if it be referred to the state of this life: we must
again understand it, that they are such by imputation and and inchoation: And
then the words: before the throne of God, signify not the place, but their
esteem in Gods judgment, as if he should say: They are without fault not in
themselves and before men, but in the eyes and judgment of God freely
absolving the faithful from all pollution, and accounting them as without fault
because of the blood of the Lamb: If unto the state of the life to come, then
before the throne not only signifies the place, but also the cause of the
blessedness of the sealed ones in heaven: for being without fault they shall
enjoy the perpetual sight of God, which shall be their persect blessedness.
And this is that which he said, Chap. 7.15. Therefore they are before the
throne of God, and serve them day and night.

The second Part of the Chapter. Of the three Angels publishing the everlasting
Cospell against Antichrist.
6 And I saw another Angel flee in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting
Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and
kindred, and tongue, and people. 7 Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and
give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that
made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters. 8 And there
followed another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great
city, because she made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication. 9 And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, if
any man worship the Beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead,
or in his hand. 10 The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which
is powered out without mixture in the cup of his indignation, and he shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in
the presence of the Lamb. 11 And the smoke of their torment ascends up for
ever and ever. And they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and
his image, and whosoever receives the mark of his name. 12 Here is the
patience of the Saints: Here are they which keep the Commandments of God, and
the faith of Jesus. 13 And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write,
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow
them.
THE COMMENTARY.
ANd I saw another Angel] Here follows the second part touching the Angels
preaching against Antichrists kingdom. Who these are, and to what times the
prophecy appertains, is much questioned, All agree in this, that these Angels
represent the Preachers of the Gospel in the times of Antichrist. But Popish
expositours refer the same to the last four years of the world, in which
time they absurdly imagine that Antichrist shall bear the sway. For how should
all those things which are treated of touching the Beast and the Whore from the
13. Chap. unto the end almost of the whole Book, be accomplished in so short a
space.

Ribera supposes they are three renowned Preachers of the Gospel in the time
of Antichrist. But Alcasar by his consequence is forced to reject this
interpretation of the Papists: And therefore he feineth that these are the
three principal writers of holy Scripture, Peter, Paul, and John: The which
foolish fiction is refuted by the very naming of it.

Our interpreters do generally acknowledge that these things appertain to the
times of the reformation of the Church: but by what occasion this vision is
here again demonstrated, seeing it was before foretold in Chap. 11. touching
the measuring of the temple, they expound not.

By our Method it is plain, seeing here we handle the Third Act of this
vision, that these things are to be compared with the Third Act of the
foregoing vision.

In the second vision indeed, there was nothing answering to this, because
there only the preservation of the sealed or elect under Antichrist was
manifested to John, the which is here also treated of in the first part of this
Chapter.

But in the third vision we have the measuring of the temple, and the prophecy
of the two witnesses, Chapter 11. representing unto us the reformation of the
Church that should be in the last times, unto which therefore we are to
return: for the two, that is, a few prophesying witnesses there mentioned, are
here said to be three preaching Angels, that is, they are more then before. And
this very thing Anselmus, as Ribera reports, acknowledges, taking the first
Angel to be Elias: the second another Prophet and companion of him: rightly
indeed according to the scope, but he erres in the persons. But as before we
showed that the measuring of the temple began about the time of the Council of
Constance, or a little before: so without doubt these three Angels began to
preach from that time forward: whose ministry no sooner shall be ended, but
the Beast shall be thrust into utter destruction.

I saw another Angel flying] No Angel had gone before: Therefore he was not
one of the Harpers, or of the multitude of sealed ones. Which signifies, that
from this time another state of the Church was to be looked for: An Angell]
that is, a Preacher of the Gospel, as before in Vision first, the singular
number (by an enallage) being put for the plural: for there should not be one
only but more, although at the first but few should zealously set themselves
upon the work of reformation. The first Angel is Wickleffe.
One therefore is named, because one should excel and with an heroical spirit
begin the work.

This Angel is John Wickleffe Professor of the University of Oxford, a man
noted throughout the whole world. For when the whole West admired and followed
the Beast, he Anno 1371. thundered out the everlasting Gospel in England both in
his Sermons and Writings against Antichrist: Wickliffes doctrines against
Antichrist. Balae. Cent. 6. c. 6.
viz. That in Christ's Church there ought not to be any supreme Bishop. That the
Pope is not the Vicar of Christ, but Antichrist: that is, his privileges,
bulls, dispensations and indulgences were idle, fruitless, and wicked: that
ecclesiastical officers ought not to have civil authority: That the Pope and
his Clergy had violently taken the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and that
neither themselves entered into the same, nor suffered others to enter: he
disproved transsubstantiation, Masses, offices, canonical hours, and other
vain bablings: he disallowed the Chrisme in Baptism, and taught that the
faithful were to be baptized simply with water, according to Christ example:
he condemned auricular confession, as also the Popish doctrine of poenitence,
satisfaction and worship of relics, teaching that the Saints ought not to be
called upon, because they also are servants: he utterly rejected the Romish
rites, new shadows and traditions: he denied that it was lawful for any to
add any thing in matters of religion which was not comprehended in holy writ:
or to make the same more difficult which he complained that the Pope had done.
He thought that the glorious temples, and all the pomp and worship of the
Papacy, together with the diverse degrees of the Clergy ought to be taken
away, condemning the orders of Monks as superstitious, impious, and very
hurtful to true religion, and therefore ought speedily to be forsaken: he
maintained that the Lords supper ought to be administered in both kinds. He
wrote (as Aeneas Sylvius witnesses) more then two hundred volumes, most of
them against the Papacy, and the wicked life, traditions and abuses of Monks,
etc. To Wickleffe were joined many excellent instruments in England, Richard
Killington: Robert Langland, and others.

Many in Italy also, as Dantes, Marsilius Patavinus, Franciscus Petrarcha began
to take notice of the Romish Antichrist. Wickleffe also left many disciples
behind him, who after his death (which was Anno 1387.) manfully opposed Popery.

A while after the the two witnesses in Bohemia, John Husse and Jerome of
Prague began more forcibly to oppose Antichrist and plant the everlasting
Gospel in the Churches of Bohemia, which yet flourish and grow to this day.

About the same time Nicolaus de Clemangis a man (as Trithemius witnesses)
excelling in divine and morrall discipline, in many Books opposed the Papacy,
Trithe. de scriptor. eccles.
but chiefly in his book, of the corrupt state of the Church, of yearly
pensions not to be paid to the Pope: of the Simony of Praelates, etc.

Add to these all the witnesses of the truth, which are recorded in the
Catalogue of witnesses, Tom. 2. lib. 19. Now let us consider the actions of
this Angel.

He flies (...) in the midst of heaven] Like to the Angel who Chap 8.13.
proclaimed woe to the world, but this here is more prosperous, for he
publishes not woes, but the everlasting Gospel.

Midst of heaven] that is, say some, through the midst of the Church:
Others openly, so as he might be seen and heard of al, like as such things are
conspicuous which appear in the middle of heaven. For however the foresaid
preachers remained in their places and Churches, yet their doctrine and
writings were spread through the whole Church. Brightmans conjecture I dislike
not, that by this flying betwixt both is signified the imperfection of the
doctrine first published by these teachers: for however they saw and reproved
the grosser sort of errors in Popery, yet in many things they clave unto the
dregs of earthly rudiments, so as they could not with full flight soar up into
the highest heaven: for as a man being on a sudden brought forth into the
light, who along while was in darkness, looks upon all things with dazeling
eyes: so they who many ages together were kept in the darkness of Popery,
could not behold the light of the Gospel, but with dim eyes.

Having the everlasting Gospell] The message or thing published by this Angel
he sets forth by an excellent title, calling it the everlasting Gospel: by
which is declared the authority, effect and constancy thereof. Antichrist
indeed will condemn this his preaching and writings as haereticall and full of
poison, and labor by the authority of Councils to repress and refute them,
not by arguments, but by fire and sword. So did he to Wickleffe, whom first he
greevously vexed by the Masters of Schools: and afterward thrusting him out of
England into Bohemia (though he were again recalled by the King) he miserably
persecuted him until his dying day. Nevertheless he went on constantly in
teaching and writing: And after his death the Council of Constance caused his
body to be taken out of the grave, and together with his Writings to be
consumed with fire.

The like they did to the two witnesses John Husse, and Jerome of Prague,
condemning, oppressing and burning them as haereticks with their books and
doctrines. Now howsoever the Beast affrighted the world with this tyranny, and
kept the same a while under his yoke: nevertheless he gained nothing by it.
For there remained some remnants in England, and Churches in Bohemia, who
constantly maintained the doctrine of those Martyrs until this day. The
everlasting Gospel could not be suppressed.
For it was the Gospel brought by the Son of God out of the bosom of the
everlasting Father, to wit glad tidings of the remission of sin, righteousness
and life eternal freely to be given through the faith of Christ. The Gospel,
I say, not of yesterdayes rising, as Antichrist calumniates, but everlasting,
revealed indeed from the begnining to the Fathers and Prophets: but at length
fully manifested and consummated by the Son of God, and henceforward shall
remain eternally. Whatsoever therefore the Beast and his sophisters endeavor
and babble to the contrary, yet they shall never be able to overthrow and
suppress the same.

To preach unto the inhabiants of the earth] The effects and lawful calling of
these teachers is here maintained, The lawful calling of Evangelicall teachers.
Gal. 1.7.
touching which if Antichrist shall plausibly move any question, as from whom
they received this new Gospel? what Church before them held this faith? by
what miracles they can prove their calling, etc?

The holy Ghost answers: They have the everlasting Gospel: The which is one
only received from Christ and the Apostles, and of old abundantly confirmed by
miracles, so that there is no use of new: And they have it, to evangelize the
same, that is to declare and preach it to the inhabitants of the earth. They
have therefore a lawful calling to teach in the Church.

To them that dwell on the earth] Thus the followers and worshippers of the
Beast, the adversaries of Christ are continually called.

First then the difficulty of their charge is intimated, they must have to do
with the inhabitants of the earth, gross and earthly men, superstitious
maintainers of Antichristian idolatry, obstinate adversaries, from whom they
shall suffer grievous contradiction.

Secondly, the success of their doctrine is noted, not to be very great. They
shall labor indeed to reform the Papacy, Caecis sabulam canent, Aethiopes
lavabunt.
to call the blind unto the light: but according to the proverb: they shall
sing to the deaf, and wash Black-moores: because Antichrist will resist them
by all means possible, and labor to keep his kingdom in peace: And indeed it
shall be so by the just judgment of God. For because the world rather loves
lies then truth: God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe
a lie: that they all might perish, who have not received the love of the truth,
2 These. 2.11.

The consideration hereof serves both to illustrate the goodness of God, who
graciously caused the everlasting Gospel to be preached unto the inhabitants of
the earth, that is, the sworn vassals of Antichrist drowned in superstitions
and idolatry: As also to lessen the scandal that we be not offended at the
small success the Gospel then had at that time. For what wonder was it, that
the inhabitants of the earth received not the same, who were accustomed to
hear and believe nothing but the dreams and lies of Antichrist.

And to every nation and tribe] This partition is taken from Chap. 13.7.
signifying that the fame of this Gospel should be spread as far as the
Papacy did extend. For however those teachers should remain in their places:
yet their doctrine by their writings was made known every where, and found
adversaries in all places.

Before I go further let us here take notice of one thing touching the devils
subtilty. Cyrillus feineth a new gospel.
We find by history, that a little before God raised up this Angel in
England, the devil had begun to spread abroad his eternal gospel through one
Cyrillus a carmelite Monk, consisting of most foul errors, and monstrous
opinions, pretending that it was the everlasting gospel of this Angel. And
indeed the Monks under pretext of this prophecy did readily embrace the same:
because he confirmed their monastical rites, rules, superstitions, and fables.
He taught that the Gospel of Christ was to remain unto this time, but thence
forward his new Gospel was to take place in the Church. This was a wicked
depravation of this prophecy, 1 Pet. 1.25 Romans 10.8. Rev. 2.25. Gal. 1.8.
and blasphemy against the express word of God: The word of the Lord
remains foe ever. This is the word of faith which we preach. Hold fast that
which ye have, till I come. If an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel
let him be accursed.

To this ungodly fiction many learned of that age opposed themselves, insomuch
that Pope Innocent himself was forced by the Lateran Council to condemn this
impudent assertion: because it also touched the Popes kingdom. Some say
Joachim the Abbot was the broacher hereof: but it is false. See Centur.
Ecclesiast. 13. cap. 5.

To discover therefore the imposture of the Devil, the Lord began to bring to
light in the same age the everlasting Gospel here prophesied of, by Wickleffe
in England, and by other teachers in other places. We may easily Judge which of
these two was that everlasting and true Gospel. For the one abolished the
Gospel of Christ, and writings of the Apostles: The other brought forth the
same out of darkness. The former therefore was false, the latter true.

Saying with a great voice] The zeal of the Angel in publishing the Gospel
is commended. And indeed the foresaid teachers performed their office with
unwearied labor and pains both in teaching, preaching, and disputing: for
when they came into the world, the world was in a deep lethargy of
superstitions, drunken and buried in the wine of the wrath of Babylonish
fornication: So that they were forced to cry aloud so mightily, to the end that
they might be heard of the drowzy (or rather deaf) inhabitants of the earth.
This voice is to be understood not only of their preaching, but writings also,
by which they manifested the doctrine of the everlasting Gospel.

Fear God] The argument of his preaching has three parts: yet the whole is
doctrinall and hortatory. The first part is the fear of God, which is the
beginning of wisdom. Here rightly the teachers begin. Sometimes by it the
whole worship, but here properly is signified that part of worship which
consists in the true knowledge and reverence of God: and it is opposed both to
the carnal security of the whole world, whence arises profaneness and the
wicked contempt of God: as also to the preposterous fear, by which Antichrist
has along time kept the world under his yoke. Both these I will briefly now
expound.

The Papacy did abound with security and fear. Security and fear in the
Papacy.
This carnal security was fostered by their bewitching confessions,
absolutions, satisfactions, Masses, indulgences, etc. No wicked act how great
soever, but by money, and such remedies might be expiated: Hence Gods
judgment, neither was, or to this day is feared in the Papacy: as having
present remedy for their sins in their confessions, satisfactions, and
indulgences. Hence springs that brutish security and liberty to sin.

So again the fear of Antichrist has, and still does vex the world: because
it is held a greater offense to neglect the edicts of the Pope, then to violate
the commandments of God. So that they were easily frighted with the fear of
excommunication, poenall satisfactions, purgatory, etc. insomuch as Emperors
and Kings were forced to kiss the feet of Antichrist, yea all both great and
small did tremblinglie submit to his beck. Now this Angel recalling the world
both from this profane security, as also from their preposterous fear, bids
them, FEAR GOD, not the Beast: for it is not the Beast but God that can cast
both soul and body into hell fire, Math. 10.28.

And give glory to him] Secondly, he requires faith and obedience unto the
Gospel: for then is the glory of Gods truth, goodness and power truly
attributed unto him, when his word is received by faith, and performed in
obedience. In the former member the Angel prepared the world for the Gospel,
because without the fear of God, that is, so long as profaneness and contempt
of God does reign, there the Gospel finds no place. By this other member, he
instructs them thus prepared, to give glory to God by receiving his word in
faith, and conform their life according to his commandments. And indeed this
is all God requires of us. So Moses: And now O Israel, what does Jehovah thy
God require of thee, Deuteronomy. 1.12
save that thou fear Jehovah thy God, and walk in all his ways, and love him
with all thy heart.

For the hour of his judgment is come] A reason confirming what he had said,
is taken from threatening of judgment at hand: the serious consideration
whereof will recall a man from his carnal security to the fear of God and
working of righteousness, except he have a heart of steel, for as much as in
the day of Gods judgment, a most exact account of what has been done in the
flesh must be given by all, the greatest Kings and Potentates not excepted.
When without any respect of persons they that have done well shall possess
life eternal: They that have done ill shall be cast into everlasting fire. The
Angel therefore could not use a more forcible reason, to deter men from the
contempt of God and his word. To this purpose is that in Sirach, Chap. 7.40
In all things that thou say or do, remember thy end, and thou shall not
sin.

Now if any ask how this prophecy is true and accomplished, seeing it is so
long since John said, 2 Pet. 3.9.
Gods judgment was at hand? Let him hear Peter answering the mockers of his
time. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise (as some count slacknesse)
but is long suffering toward us, not willing that any should perish, but that
all should come unto repentance.

The Angel says (...) is come, for, shall certainly come, by an usual
Enallage of the preterperfect tense instead of the future, so a little after,
is fallen, for, shall certainly fall, noting the immutability of the events
decreed by God: so formerly he often said, he will come shortly, that is,
sooner then we are aware of, that the deep fleepe of security might be driven
out of us, and lest with the wicked servant we should say, Luke 12.45.
My Lord deferreth his coming: But rather let us consider seeing the Apostles
did presage the day of judgment to be then at hand, how much nearer is it now
unto us after so many ages.

And worship him that made] In the third member, he recalls the world from
popish idolatry, unto the service of the true God alone: whom he notes by a
periphrasis from the work of the creation of heaven and earth, the sea, and
fountains of waters: The Old version ads, and of all things that are in them:
which words are not in the Greek: but seem to be taken out of Psa. 146.9. unto
which place the spirit here alludeth. The fountains of waters are reckoned up
among the chief works of God, because the continuance of the fountains is
indeed a very wonderful work of the Lord: concerning which Philosophers have
much disputed with great admiration: Psalm. 104.10. and 114 8.
And it is also celebrated in the Psalms: He sends the springs into the
valleys, which run among the hills. Which turns the rock into a standing
water, the flint into a fountain of waters.

Furthermore, that religious worship is only due to God, both the Scripture
and nature it self teaches. For God alone is omnipotent, knows all things,
and is present in all places. He is able to hear and help all that call upon
him wheresoever they be. He alone is the Author of nature, governor and Lord
of the world: wherefore all ought to depend upon him only, in him alone we
must believe and put our considence. Ier. 17.5.
But cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm. Hence
faith and prayer are in Scripture coupled by an individual tie as the cause
and effect: Romans 10.14. Mat. 4.10.
How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed. Therefore it is an
express commandment: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve.

Now howsoever this be an undeniable and manifest truth, yet the world
forsaking the Lord, followed and wondered after the Beast, all (I say) both
great and small, bond and free, worshipped the Beasts image: kissed his feet,
and attributed divine honor unto him, as though he were God on earth: And this
the worshippers of the Pope do not deny: according to that of the Poet before
mentioned: Ense potens gemino, cujus vestigia adorant,
Caesar and aurato vestiti murice Reges.


Nay all have not the privilege to worship before the Beast and kiss his
feet: this only is permitted to Kings and Emperors: Others must be content
devoutly to worship his image, and call upon the Saints that are canonized by
the Beast, and adore his Crosses, Crucifixes, Altars, set up by him in temples,
groves and highwaies, etc. From this beastly worship of idols the Angel here
dehorteth the world, as calling them to the worship of the true God: Neither
will he any whit esteem their vain pretenses: That the Pope is not worshipped
as God, but as Gods and Christ's Vicar: for they falsely affirm him to be that,
which he is not: That they call not on the Saints with a worship of (...) but
(...) for this is a false distinction, the religious worship both of Latreia
and Douleia being in Scripture only attributed to God, and signify both one
thing. That they worship not graven images but God in them: this also is false,
for Images are no gods, neither will God be worshipped in or by them: Thou
shall not do so unto the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy. 12.31.


Thus far of the everlasting Gospel published by the first Angel, or reformer
of Popery. The sum of which is in these three things.

I. That God is to be feared, and Antichristianisme to be repented of.

II. That glory is to be ascribed to God by believing in his son.

III. That God is to be worshipped by fleeing the Image of the Beast: and
performing obedience to God.

8 And another Angel followed] because the former Angel, although he cried
with a great voice, did little profit unto the inhabitants of the earth, who
were drowned with the wine of Babylonish whoredom for after Wickleffe, Husse,
and Jerome of Prague were burnt, the Papacy remained still in its vigor and
fury. Therefore another Angel followed, who more forcibly assailing
Antichrist, weakened his kingdom in many Provinces. And here again by an
Enallage, One Angel is put for Angels: for there shall be diverse succeeding
each other in diverse places. But One shall excel and continue the ministry of
the former Angel, who was a while interrupted.

Now this Angel, if we look into histories, who can he be save Luther? This
second Angel is Luther.
who followed 130. years after Wickleffe: and 100. after Husse and Jerome: he
first began in Saxony, by word and writing, to thunder against the Popes
Pardons publicly put to sale: soon after against the whole Papacy, anno 1517.
To him was joined Philip Melanchton as a most faithful assistant: and soon
after many other excellent men: who by little and little restored the
everlasting Gospel in diverse parts of Germany and expelled Popery.

About the same time Zwinglius and Oecolampadius began together to oppose
Popery, and (...) Gospel in Helvetia. But let us hear what this Angel
publishes.

Babylon is fallen, is fallen] He threatens ruin to Babylon for her wicked
fornication, by which as with a pestilent plague, she had infected the
Christian world, her horrible idolatry (I say) and cruelty, by which she
defiled and oppressed the Church. The commination is taken out of Isai. 21.9.
Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and all the graven images of her gods he has
broken unto the ground. And Ier. 51.8. Babylon is suddenly fallen and
destroyed, howl for her: In which words the Prophets threaten ruin to Babylon
of the Caldeans, which had grievously pressed Gods people by 70. years
captivity.

Now it may be demanded whither this Babylon here threatened, be the foresaid
Chaldaean Babylon, or another, and which?

That it is not Babylon of Chaldea appears by many reasons.

First, that Babylon neither was is, or shall be the Seat of Antichrist. This
is not the Caldea^ Babylon.
For however there be an ancient fable of Antichrists rising out of Babylon:
yet the same makes not Babylon but Jerusalem to be his seat. Now the Babylon
here threatened by the Angel, shall be the Seat of Antichrist by the consent of
all interpreters.

Secondly, This Babylon is that great city, the which in John's time ruled over
the Kings of the earth, Rev. 17.18. But then the Caldeans held not the
Monarchy, but the Romans.

Besides this Babylon defiles all nations of the earth with her fornication.
But now, how the Caldean Babylon should so do in these last times no sound
reason can be given for it.

Lastly, the people of God are bid to go out of this Babylon, Chapter 18.4.
But Gods people for these thousand years have not been, nor shall be in the
Eastern Babylon, etc. Therefore this Babylon, is not Babylon in Caldea,
although the holy Ghost does apply the prophetical threatenings of old against
Babylon, to good purpose and fitly here. from the letter therefore we must
necessarily come to the figure, which thing Ribera also acknowledges.

Now secondly some of the Ancients will have this Babylon to be the world, as
being the great city of the wicked, in which the Devil rules: So Ambrose,
Bid, Arethas, Andreas, Ansbertus, Haymo, Primasius, Anselmus, etc. But this
opinion cannot stand.

For first, This Babylon is that Great whore making drunk the inhabitants of
the earth with the wine of her fornication. But how shall the world make drunk
the inhabitants of the earth, seeing themselves are the world made drunk by
the whore? shall the world make the world drunk? the whore therefore which
makes drunk is plainly distinguished from the inhabitants of the earth, who
are made drunk.

Secondly, the sense would be absurd: Babylon is fallen, that is, the world is
fallen: for by the ruin of Babylon the whole world shall not decay, but there
shall remain Kings, and merchants, which shall see and bewail the ruin of
Babylon: whereas after the ruin of the world there will be no kings nor
merchants.

Thirdly, we are commanded to go out of this Babylon, Chap. 16.8. But we are
not bid to go out of the world, 1 Cor. 5.10. except in a spiritual sense. But
out of this Babylon a local departure is commanded.

Fourthly, it is the common opinion that John prophesies of that Babylon,
which is the seat of Antichrist. But the whole world shall not be Antichrists
seat: For he shall sit in the temple of God, 2 These. 2.5. the which cannot be
meant of the whole world.

Fifthly, This Babylon is Rome see Chap. 11.8. and 17.18.
Ribera adds that this Babylon stands on seven Mountains, Chap. 17.9. Now
that the city of wicked men, or the world, should stand on seven mountains,
cannot be true in any sense. And therefore Ribera concludes, that we must
expound it otherwise. And indeed at last the said Jesuit does ingeniously
confess that this Babylon is ROME, for which opinion he alleges many old
writers, as Austine l. 8. de C^^^^, where he amimeth that Rome was built by the
fall of the Assy^^an kingdom, and calls the same the Daughter of Babylon, or
another Babylon. Orosius lib. 2. cap. 2. Eusebius lib. 2. hist. cap. 14. Bid,
Occumenius, Victorinus, Hierom in Isa. 24. in his Prologue in lib. Dydimi and
lib. 2. against Jovinian, and Epist. 15. q. 11. to Agasia. and Epist. 17. to
Marcel. Tertullian lib. 3. against Marcion, and against the Jews. Some also of
the latter Writers as, Sixtus senensis lib. 2. Bibliot. in vocabulo Meretricis
Magnae. Bellarmine lib. 2. de P. R. cap. 2. and 13. Ludovicus Vives in lib. 18.
de C. D. cap. 20. Lindanus lib. 4. Panop. cap. 82. the which confession of his
we willingly approve of: he alleges also that of Peter, The Church that is in
Babylon salutes you, 1 Pet. 5.13.
that is, in Rome, as Eusebius lib. 2. hist. cap. 15. expounds it, the which
the Papists do therefore gladly lay hold on, to show that Peter sat at Rome:
but it is a weak conjecture, for it may more probably be said, that Peter
wrote from Babylon of the East, as Calvin in his Commentary on the place
shows. But be that place in Peter what way soever understood: Many things
persuade us that this Babylon is Rome.

First, the description and situation of this great city agrees not so fully
to any as to Rome: for it is said to stand upon seven Mountains, which cannot
so well be said of any city as of Rome, built of old by Romulus on seven hills,
named Palatinus Quirinalis, Aventinus, Coelius, Viminalis, Aesquilinus,
Janicularis: Hence Virgil., lib. 6. Aeneid. Scilicet and rerum facta est
pulcherrima Roma.
Septem quae una sibi muro circundedit arces.
Rome is become the famoust place of all.
Which has enclosed seven hills within her wall.


And Ovid lib. 1. Trist. Eleg. 4. Sed quae de septem totum circumspicit orbem,
Montibus imperii Roma, deumque locus.
Rome is the place of gods, and royal seat,
Over looks the world with her seven mountains great.


And Horace: Diis, quibus placuere colles,
dicere carmen,
Unto the gods a verse to tell,
Whom the seven hills do please full well.


And Propertius: Vrbs septem alta jugis toti qua praesidet orbi.
The lofty city on seven hills hie,
Which rules the world continually.


Secondly, this Babylon is called a great city: Rome the great city.
and that indeed emphatically with a double article (...) That great City. Now
it is known that Rome is called the City, and the great City ((...)) by way of
Pra-eminence: hence Tityr in Virgil thus speaks: Vrbem quam dieunt Romam
Melliboee putari,
Stultus ego huic nostrae similem, etc.
The city called Rome O Melibee,
I as a fool like ours did think to be.


Besides this great city Babylon in John's time, Having rule over the world.
had dominion over the Kings of the earth, Chap. 17.18. and no city then but
Rome, had monarchical power.

But we need no further proof, seeing this opinion is backed with the authority
of many Ancient writers, Bellar. li. 2. de P. R. 1. Rib. in Apoc. 14. s. 39. A
lca page 721.
nay the Jesuits themselves ( Alcasar not excepted) do not now oppose the
same. Yet lest they should any ways prejudice their Pope, they feine that by
Babylon here is meant, not Christian Rome, as it has been more then a thousand
years under the government of holy Popes: But heathenish Rome, as of old it was
under Emperors.

But it will easily appear, that this is a vain evasion. For first,
Heathenish Rome, was not the seat of Antichrist, touching which seat (as all
consent) John here prophesies off Neither was Antichrist come, so long as Rome
remained heathenish: Therefore the former Rome is not this Babylon.

Secondly, It cannot be understood of the Old, but Popish Rome, Babylon is no
Pagan but Popish Rome.
that she indeed it is who has made drunk all the inhabitants of the earth,
with the wine of her fornication, and that all the Kings of the earth have
committed fornication with her. For Old Rome, however it did abound with most
foul idolatry: Yet she always gave liberty to all nations subjected to her,
for to exercise their own religions and superstitions, yea suffered the gods
of all other people to be set up and worshipped even in Rome, Christ only
excepted, as Eusebius records out of Tertullian. Neither can it be proved by
any history that ancient Rome forced their worship on foreign people: whereas
on the contrary Popish Rome compels and imposes on all nations and kings
her superstitious and idolatrous worship on pain of excommunication, seeking
to be esteemed the Mother of Churches, and in very deed the whole East lucked
their abominations and idolatries from her as from the paps of a mother.

Thirdly, In the time of the Fathers before alleged, Tertullian excepted, Rome
was no longer heathenish, being under the power of Christian Emperors: and yet
they call her Babylon: Therefore they understood it not of heathenish Rome,
such as it was not, but of Christian Rome, such as then it was.

Fourthly, That Rome is Babylon, of which it is here said: It is fallen, it is
fallen: and which was to be destroyed in the latter times. But the ruin of
heathenish Rome is not here published (as Alcasar vainly feineth) for that
Rome is ceased long ago: but the destruction of Popish Rome is yet to come:
for it is foretold, to be in the last times. These things therefore belong to
Popish Rome.

Fifthly, that Rome is Babylon, which makes merchandise of the souls of men,
Revel. 18.13. Now this beastly trade was not driven by heathenish Rome, but by
the Popish Rome, as we shall fee heareafter.

Lastly, that Rome is Babylon out of which in the last times Gods people are
commanded to go forth. Now they are not bid to depart out of heathenish Rome,
which has ceased to be long ago. Neither do we read that ever any Christians
by virtue of this commandment did forsake heathenish Rome, but did always
constantly there persevere even in the times of most cruel persecutions. Gods
people therefore are commanded to go out of Popish Rome: Thus we see Rome is
this Babylon which must be destroyed.

Ribera the Jesuit not daring to deny so evident a truth, changes himself
into diverse shapes, to salve the Pope.

First, he propounds a weighty scruple, the which he says is not yet
unfolded by the Patrons of his opinion, viz. wherefore John does foretell so
many evils to befall this city, which although of old it were the chief seat
of idolatry: yet now is the head of sanctity, and defender of the Catholic
faith: and the proper seat of him that is head of the Church, etc.

But O Ribera, Riberas defense of Popish Rome.
thy doubt is here clearly unfolded by the Angel, viz. that this shall be the
cause of all these evils, because Babylon-Rome, makes drunk all the nations
of the earth with the wine of her fornications. And that which thou speak of
the seat of holiness, in this very thing thou unwittingly accusest the Pope,
The Pope Antichrist.
and make him to be Antichrist. For he that possesses the sea of Antichrist
is Antichrist. The Pope sits in the seat of Antichrist: For Rome which is to be
overthrown, is the seat of Antichrist: and (...) that is to be destroyed is the
seat of the Pope: The seat therefore of the Pope, is the seat of Antichrist:
And so consequently the Pope is Antichrist.

Secondly, Riberas evasions touching Popish Rome confuted.
he objects that it cannot be understood of Papal Rome. First, because John
here describes a most potent and wealthy city, which was the Queen of the
world. But Papal Rome neither is so now, nor ever is likely so to be.
Secondly, because in Chap. 18.20. The heaven, and holy Apostles and Prophets
are bid to rejoice over her: because God had avenged them on her: but whom
(says he) of the Apostles, or which of the Prophets has the Romish Church or
Popish Rome persecuted? What injury has she done unto them, that they should
rejoice at her punishment? Therefore he concludes that Babylon here spoken of,
is to be understood of heathenish Rome, which persecuted the Apostles and
Prophets.

But in vain he seeks for pretenses in so clear a matter. For he granted
before that the future state of Rome is here spoken of, therefore he is
contradictory to himself.

And as for his objections they are easily answered.

To the first it suffices, that Rome did then Lord it over all nations, when
John wrote this book. The same Rome the Pope now holds. And besides this
even Papal Rome is a most wealthy and powerful city, and the Queen of the
world: for all the treasures and delights of the Christian world, have now long
ago by thousand enticements been drawn unto Rome alone. She challenges the
Empire of the world unto herself, for she boasts that the Emperors and
Kings of the earth do reign by her favor and benefit. All must be vassals of
Popish Rome, yea, if we believe the Jesuits, even in temporal things. Papal
Rome therefore is Lady of all, and Empress of the world, according to the
verses: Roma caput mundi, quicquid non possidet armis relligione tenet.

To the second I say, that which he pretends is ridiculous, as if because
Papisticall Rome had not persecuted the Apostles and Prophets: therefore they
ought not to rejoice at her destruction: for then also the heaven ought not to
rejoice: for was heaven I pray you slain by Papistical Rome? Nay, how could
heathenish Rome kill the Prophets, which never saw Rome? Notwithstanding the
Apostles and Prophets, and heaven it self are worthily bid to rejoice for the
destruction of her, both because in persecuting the Saints she persecuteth the
Prophets and Apostles: as also because all creatures ought to rejoice for the
vindicating of Christ's glory and destruction of Antichrist, whether they have
been hurt by him or not. Lastly, if Popish Rome (the which Ribera was not
afraid to write) shall be punished for the wickedness of heathenish Rome,
which herself has not committed: Why then may not the Prophets rejoice for
the destruction of Popish Rome, though they were not hurt by her?

Understanding therefore that these things cannot be put off, Riberas new
fection about the Pope.
he is forced necessarily to grant that Popish Rome is Babylon. Notwithstanding
to keep up the credit of the Pope, he devises a new prophecy, namely, that
Rome toward the end of the world, expelling the Pope with all the Catholic
Saints, shall again apostate to their old wickedness and idolatry. And then
indeed Rome shall be Babylon and the warehouse of all filthiness and idolatry,
when she shall fall off from the Pope, and expel him thence with all other
Christians. Whatsoever therefore John prophesies touching the ruin, burning
and horrible plagues of Babylon, appertains, says he, to Rome after that she
shall have thrust out the Pope Christ's Vicar: Without which fiction this subtle
Writer saw that the Pope of Rome could not be freed from Antichristianisme: and
thinks by this artificial device to shift off this our argument: He that in
the last times holds Babylon the seat of Antichrist, is Antichrist. The Romish
Pope in these last times holds Babylon ROME the seat of Antichrist. Therefore
the Romish Pope is Antichrist.

The assumption he labors to weaken, not indeed by denying, that Rome, which
the Pope possesses in the last times is Babylon: nor also that Babylon in the
last times is the seat of Antichrist: But by denying that Rome now so long as
it is held by the Pope, is the seat of Antichrist: Because Rome (as he says)
before Antichrists coming shall decline to Paganism, and thrust out the Pope.

But O Ribera, by what authors, by what Scripture, Lyras fiction refuted
by what reason will thou prove unto us this thy new Oracle, or rather dotage,
hitherto unheard of even among Papists: as, I. That Rome at length shall fall
from Christianity and return to Heathenisme. II. That she shall drive out her
most holy father the Pope, and give place to Antichrist.

The latter indeed of these thou think to make out well enough after this
manner: That as long as Rome is obedient to the Pope, so great evils cannot
befall her: Because the Pope is Christ's Vicar: And that Rome so long as the
Pope is present, shall be the maintainer and mistress of the Apostolical
faith, and mansion of piety: Not therefore to be destroyed, before the Pope be
driven thence. But O friend, thou see not how often thou do beg the
question, and how many things thou take for granted not only doubtful unto
us, but also incredible to the Papists themselves.

I let pass thy common assertion that the Pope is Christ's Vicar.

Thou must prove I. That Babylon and Rome to be ruinated, is to fall to
Heathenisme. Certainly herein thou have Alcasar opposing thee, who on the
contrary faineth more absurdly, that Romes ruin is her conversion to
Christianity.

II. That Rome having the Pope present with her, Roma est jam tota Lupanar.
is the mistress of the Apostolical faith, and mansion house of godliness,
of which it was long ago truly said: Rome is now wholly a Brothelhouse.

III. That Rome the most holy city having her Pope and Cardinals there present
(but perhaps fallen into a fatal Lethargy) should cast off the profession of
Christianity, and decline to the idols of the Heathens.

IV. That Rome being thus fallen to heathenisme, the Pope with his Cardinals
shall miserably be deprived and thrust out of the seat and patrimony of Saint
Peter. Now unless these things be solidly proved by thee, all men may see that
our argument stands firm, and proves the Pope to be Antichrist.

To the first, Riberas reasons touching Romes falling away examined.
second, and fourth, Ribera says nothing. But the third (of Romes declining
from Christianity to Pagan idolarry) he endeavors to prove by some reasons.

I. He says, that the place of ancient Rome, was of old stained with
abominable wickedness: and therefore of necessity she must one time or other
be purged by fire.

But first, he may as easily prove the apostasy of the whole Christian world
unto Heathenisme. For we know that of old the whole world was full of
abominable wickedness. Secondly, that which he says touching the defilement
of ancient Rome is true indeed. But I wonder how any can without crimen laesae
majestatis object unto the Popes holiness, that the guiltiness of ancient
Rome should not yet be expiated by the religion and holiness of so many ages.
What? have not so many Processions, Masses, Consecrations, Prayers, so many
merits of holy Popes for these thousand years, been able to purge away the
defilement of ancient Rome? Besides what can be more contumeliously spoken,
then that the Pope the most holy Vicar of Christ, should have his seat in a
place defiled with such horrible wickedness and offenses? Ribera contradicts
himself.
And how does this agree with what thou said before, that Rome under the
government of her Pope is the mansion of piety, if so be that as yet it be not
purged from its old guilt and defilement. Let Ribera look to it, how herein he
may answer the Popes holiness.

II. He says, that there are many to this day at Rome who boast that they are
of the name and stock of the old Romans: And therefore it is probable that
they shall again fall to the idolatry and wickedness of their Ancestors, and
so be destroyed.

But this also is altogether frivolous, and a most injurious infamy and
accusation of the noble families of Rome. For it is certain that in
Constantines time there were many more noble families of the pedigree of the
ancient Romans then now, who notwithstanding forsaking the idolatry of their
forefathers, embraced the faith of Christ: so neither will it necessarily
follow that the ancient families which yet remain at Rome, should fall away
from Christianity. But put the cause they should, He argues the Pope of
extreme neglect.
does not the Jesuit herein accuse the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, and all the
Jesuits which then shall live in Rome of extreem negligence, in not performing
their duty, but to suffer all the people committed to their charge to fall away
from the faith of Christ. What shall all of them fall into so dead a sleep? Or
rather now by their impiety and heathenish riot, make way to such horrible
profaneness. Let the Jesuit again see too, how he will answer these things.

III. He says, howbeit they are not of the linnage of the ancient Romans, yet
forasmuch as they dwell in the same city, the which they inhabited, they are to
be accounted as one body with them.

But by this reason the Pope and Cardinals too, are one body with the Roman
Pagans, and guilty of the same apostasy: seeing they also dwell at Rome. Thus
the Pope should be the head of that body and city, which is one with the wicked
commonwealth of old Rome. Now the truth is, nothing can be more vainly
spoken. And I wonder that the Jesuit when he wrote these things, had not
considered, that he himself lived in Spain, where the ancient Moors formerly
inhabited.

IV. He adds from Chap. 16.19, That Great Babylon came in remembrance before
God, and 18.5. Babylons sins have reached unto heaven, and God has remembered
her iniquities. Therefore says he, toward the end of the world her old sins,
which hitherto for religion sake seemed to be forgotten, shall again be
remembered and punished because of the new and like transgressions added to the
former.

But first, not only things done long ago are said to come in remembrance
before God, but also such things as are newly done: by an Anthropopatheia: for
so in Act. 10. The prayers and alms of Cornelius, which he daily performed,
are said to come up for a memorial before God: Secondly, albeit his gloss
were granted: yet there were no need that new Rome should be punished for the
sins of the old, for as much as Popish Rome for these thousand years and more
has abounded in all manner of villainies, for which the Lord most justly may
take vengeance on her.

Lastly, he flees unto the Oracles of the Sybills.

But they speak nothing touching the Popes ejection, or apostasy of the Romans
from the faith of Christ unto Heathenisme, but only touching the destruction of
Rome, therein agreeing with the prophecy of this book.

By all which things it appears, that whatsoever the Jesuit alleges for
the upholding of the credit of the Pope, it is nothing but a frivolous dotage
of a dreaming writer.

The sum of the place is this: That Babylon here threatened with destruction,
is Rome, not of the Pagans, which ceased in Constantines time: Nor new
heathenish Rome, the which (as the Jesuit feineth) shall thrust out the Pope:
But Popish Rome which a long while has boasted her self to be the Mother of
Churches, and from whose breasts all the nations and kings of the earth have
sucked their errors, superstition and idolatry. Thus our insoluble argument is
no way weakened by the Jesuit, but stands firm against the Romish Antichrist.

But now when we speak of Rome, we understand not simply the walled city, or
palaces, towers and stately walks thereof: but chiefly the Pope himself with
his whole kingdom and power over the Western Churches, of which afterward in
Chap. 17.18.

Now why is Rome named Babylon? Why Rome is called Babylon. lib. 2. cap. 3.
hist.
The cause may be the likeness that is between them, of which OROSIUS: Behold,
says he, the rising of Babylon and Rome is alike: their power is alike, their
greatness, times, good things and also evil. But I rather think the reason
is, their likeness in tyrannny and destruction. The old Babylon afflicted the
ancient Church: Rome the new Babylon has oppressed the new Church. The Old is
fallen: The New shall fall. Babylon is fallen, is fallen] The doubling of the
threatening denotes the certainty and hastening of the destruction. Therefore
also it is said in the preterperfect tense, has, that is, is fallen: because
it shall certainly and suddenly fall: like as we say of a dying man, that he
is dead, or the like. Neither did the Angel prophecy vainly. For even during
the preaching of this Angel, while Luther, I say, yet taught, a great part of
Babylon fell both in Saxony, Germany, and other neighboring Countries. But
touching the destruction of Babylon it follows in Chap. 18.

Alcasar again by his consequence is forced to make black white, applying the
ruin of Babylon to the conversion of heathenish Rome to the faith of Christ:
making the sense of the words, Babylon is fallen, is fallen] that is, is
converted to Christ: Now who ever heard so great an absurdity? The whole
context and consent of all interpreters evinceth that the ruin of Babylon
signifies not mercy, but punishment: And therefore so impudent a depravation of
holy Scripture is to be rebuked.

Because she made all nations drinke] This reason evidently refutes Alcasars
absurdity: The cause of Babylons destruction shall be her fornication, by which
she has most foully defiled her self, with the Kings and Inhabitants of the
earth: for she is the Mother of all whoredoms.

This fornication (as before was showed) is idolatry, by a prophetical and
metaphorical phrase: for idolaters like harlots do by spiritual uncleannes
perfidiously violate their faith to God, prostrate themselves before their
Idols, and run headlong into utter destruction, as we have largely expounded in
our Commentary on Hosea, Chap. 1.2.

Of the wine of her fornication] For the Pope obtrudes his idols on all
nations: who therefore are said to drink of the wine of his wrath, because
idolatry (through the corruptnesse of man's nature) is more pleasing to all,
then the true worship of God. (...): is a figure when with a little change of a
word the sense is wholly altered.
In the Greek is an elegant * parenomasia in the words (...) and (...). For as
Antichrist gave all to drink of the wine of his fornication: so shall all
drink of the wine of Gods wrath: because they suffered themselves universally
to be drawn aside to the worship of Idols, by the pretended authority of the
Catholic Church.

Idolatry is compared to wine, because by its sweetness and outward luster it
is pleasing unto the flesh, and much desired. Also from the effect: for it
makes idolaters mad, furious and blind: like as wine takes away the sense of
a drunkard.

The wine of wrath] so named from the effect, because it stirs up Gods wrath,
and draws down his judgments: As also from the efficient cause, because God
in his anger does justly inflict blindness on the worshippers of Antichrist:
according to that of Paul, 2 These. 2.11. For this cause God shall send them
strong delusion, that they should believe a lie, that they might be damned, who
received not the truth.

It might seem the words here, should thus be read: (...) of the wine of her
fornication: as in Chap. 17.2. The inhabitants of the earth, are said, to have
been made drunk with the wine of her fornication, etc. because the wine of
fornication is opposed to the wine of Gods wrath, verse. 10. The same shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God: But all copies have (...) of the wine
of the wrath, etc. Not here only but also in Chap. 16.19. and 18.23. The use
of this preaching.


The use of this Angels preaching does plainly respect both the godly and the
wicked.

The godly are exhorted to the duty before published by the former Angel: To
fear God, and not the Beast: To give glory to God, not to Antichrist: And
lastly, to worship God the Creator of heaven and earth, not the Beast or his
Image: Also in Chap. 18.4. he admonishes all such as desire to be free of
Babylons plagues, to go out of her.

The ungodly worshippers of Babylon and the Beast, he terrifies by threatening
of punishment, the which the Angel following will denounce more plainly, that
if they go on delighting themselves with the wine of fornication, and to
worship the Beast, they shall eternally be tormented with babylon and the Beast.

9. And the third Angel followed them] The former Angel denounced Woe to
Babylon. This terrifies Babylons inhabiters, to the end they might not think
to be scot-free, while Babylon was destroyed, but understand (that except they
left off their fornication) they should be thrust into eternal destruction
with her. The Thesis, or position therefore of this Sermon is very horrible:
viz. That none of the worshippers of the Beast, Pow. lib. 2. de Antich. cap. 36.
if they die in that estate, can be saved, but all of them must necessarily
perish for ever. The Beast is the Roman Antichrist, with his Monarchical
kingdom, as we heard Chap. 13. The worshippers of the Beast, are the
idolatrous Papists, zealous observers of the Popes injunctions. Now what their
end shall be, is here declared unto us by the Angel.

Who this Angel should be, the Popish Writers mention not, except Lyra, who
feineth him to be Pope Gregory. Who is the third Angel.
But this Angel was to be after Antichrists rising: for he preaches against
him. Now Gregory was Antichrists forerunner, viz. of Boniface III. who first
built Babylon by claiming the title of universality.

This Angel is said to follow the two former: who denoted all the preachers of
the Gospel, and opposers of Popery from Wickleffe unto Luther and his fellow
laborers: so that their ministry dured for the space of 175. years, or
thereabout, viz. from Anno 1371. when Wickleffe began to publish the
everlasting Gospel, until the year 1546. at what time Luther ended his
ministry, leaving behind him this prophetical verse: Pestis eram vivus,
moriens ero mors tua Papa.
I living was a plague O Pope to thee,
And dying now, thy death I Will surely be.


This third Angel therefore is a figure of all such evangelicall Teachers, who
since the ministry of Luther have preached against Babylon, and they are to
continue unto the end of world. For there follows no fourth preaching Angel
after the third: but Christ sitting on the white cloud comes forth to
judgment, verse. 14. And therefore the ministry of the third Angel is to
remain unto the end.

Now among the number of excellent Teachers, who by word and writing since that
time have labored to bring men from popish idolatry unto the faith of Christ;
Of the Germans, are Bucer, Capito, Hedio, Brentius, Hyperius, Alesius,
Snepfius, etc. In Helvetia, Bullinger, Simlerus, Myconius, Pellicanus,
Gualterus: Aretius, Stuckius, etc. In France, Farell, Viret, Calvin, Marlorate,
Beza. In England, Cranmer, Hooper, Latimer, Whitaker, Reynolds. In Denmark,
Palladius, Hemmingus, etc. Out of Italy, Peter Martyr, Zanchius, Tremellius,
etc. In Poland, Johannes a Lasco, etc. In Hungary, Michael Statinus, Stephanus
Szegedinus, Petrus Melius, Paulus Thurius, with innumerable others who now rest
in the Lord, or yet fight, or hereafter shall fight for the faith of Christ
against the Beast.

With a great voice] like the second Angel, that is, with great zeal and
labor, because these Teachers, as the former, shall not be wanting, but use
all diligence to bring men to Christ, and recall them from worshipping the
Beast. And indeed it is needful they should cry with a great voice: for the
greater part of men shall stop their ears at their preaching.

If any man worship] This hypothetical commination: If any man worship the
Beast, the same shall drink, etc. is universal, as if he had said. Whosoever
he be that worshippeth the Beast, shall drink, etc. He speaks
hypothetically, to teach us, that the punishment may be avoided, so that the
condition be observed, that is, if a man leave off to worship the Beast. Whence
it appears, that not all the worshippers of the Beast shall be tormented with
these plagues, but such only as always persevere therein, and repent not,
being admonished. Now it seems that this Hypotheticall threatening closely is
opposed to the wicked anathematismes of the Beast, which also are
hypothetically propounded. For example:

If any one worship not venerable images, let him be accursed.

If any man teach not from the heart to the Christian people the worship of
Saints, Anathemaes of the 11. Nicene Council. Act, 1.
and of the honorable images of all the Saints, Let him be accursed.

If any man salute not images in the name of the Lord and of his Saints, Let
him be accursed.

And in the Council of Trent,

If any man say that the wicked is justified by faith alone, Let him be
accursed.

If any man say, that justifying faith is nothing else, but a confidence in the
mercy of God forgiving sins for the sake of Christ, and that we are justified
by this confidence alone, Let him be accursed.

If any man say, that by Gods commandment all Christ's faithful ones ought to
receive the Eucharist in both kinds, Let him be accursed, etc.

Now on the contrary, let the worshippers of the Beast and his image hear the
anathema, or curse of the Angel.

If any man worship the Beast, etc. Let him be accursed.

Furthermore who these worshippers of the Beast and his image are, who, I say,
are marked with the Beasts Character, I have before showed. Now let us consider
the curse.

10. The same also shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God] The curse of
the wicked is typed out by a prophetical phrase including the sin, for which
Babylon was threatened by the former Angel. Babylon gave her worshippers to
drink of the sweet and voluptuous wine of her fornication: But God will give
them to drink of the deadly wine of his wrath: as if he should say: they have
drunk the former wine, so they shall drink the other likewise: the meaning is:
They have committed fornication: therefore they shall be punished. The
punishment of the wicked by a prophetical phrase is compared to Wine, a
Chalice, and Cup, alluding to the excess of the wicked, who swallow down full
cups of wine.

Which is powered without mixture into the cup] But in the Gr. it is, (...), as
it were, with unmixt mixed wine, which words seem to be co^tradictory to
themselves: because (...) called in Latin Merum, is not wine mixed or alaied
wine, but such as is without mixture: Yet there is no contradiction in it, for
with the Greek the word (...) mixed, signifies not wine allaied with water, but
such as is powered forth for to be drunk, although it be without any mixture:
And hence the Latins sometimes use the word MISCERE, to mingle, simply for to
power out drink: Iuvenal. Satyr. 5.

-- Nescit tot millibus Emptus
Pauperibus miscere puer.
Here the words miscere pauperibus, signify to fill drink to the poor.

So that, to drink out of the mixed cup (for so the words may be translated) is
to drink out of a cup filled with the wine of Gods wrath: and this wine is
called (...) not allaied with water, to denote its strength and efficacy to
make drunk.

Brightman understands this pure wine said to be mixed, of diverse kinds of
wines mingled together, which mixture (says he) does much sooner beget
drunkenness. The sense is all one.

Of his indignation and anger] The Gr. (...) signifies fury or great
indignation: and is more then (...) anger. The words seem to be taken out of
Psalm. 75.9. A cup is in Jehovahs hand, and the wine is red, it is full of
mixture: And Ier. 25.15. Take the wine-cup of his fury at my hand, and cause
all the nations to whom I send thee, to drink it.

This Cup of his anger the Lord in the following Chapter divides into seven
vials, the which being full of his wrath, he will power forth on the
Antichristian idolaters, six of them in this life, but the last in the end of
the world. Therefore he threatens temporal and eternal punishments. The
temporal he expounds specially in Chap. 16. here the eternal are more
clearly described.

And he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone] This is a declaration and
an amplification of their punishment: He shall drink of the wine of wrath,
that is, he shall be tormented: for as he drunk the wine of pleasure: so
likewise he shall drink the wine of torment, and that eternally.

He adds the matter of the torment, With fire and brimstone] Brimstone is soon
set on fire, burns strongly, is not easily extinguished, and causes a filthy
smoke and deadly stink. Fire, is nourished by brimstone, it devoures and
destroys combustible things, and the burning thereof is intolerable torment to
the body. Not as if there were material fire or brimstone in hell, but the
grievousnesse of the torment is hereby noted. It seems to be an allusion unto
Psalm. 11.6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest shall be the portion of their cup. This is expounded in Chap.
19.20. where the Beast and they that worship him are to be cast alive into a
lake of fire burning with brimstone. This is the torment of hell, Luke 16.24.
Isai. 66.24. Mark. 9.43. Luke 3.17.
in which the glutton being to this day cries, Father Abraham have mercy upon
me, for I am tormented in this flame. The Scripture does not find words, as it
were, sufficiently to express the unspeakable torments of the wicked. Isaiah
says: The worm of transgressors shall not die, neither shall their fire be
quenched, and they shall be an abhorring to all flesh. Christ Math. 8.12. calls
it utter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth: and 5.22. hell
fire: and 25.41. everlasting and unquenchable fire. Paul says, Romans 2.9. 2
These. 1.8.
Tribulation and anguish shall be on every soul that does evil: and again:
The Lord will take vengeance in flaming fire, on them that obey not the Gospel.

IN THE PRESENCE OF THE HOLY ANGELS, AND IN THE PRESENCE OF THE LAMBE] The
Lamb shall be the Judge of the ungodly, who despised him, and as much as in
them lay exposed him to be torn by the Beast. The Angels are added to the
Lamb as sumners, by whose ministry, all men shall be gathered from the four
corners of the earth, and presented before the tribunal seat of Christ to be
judged. The word therefore, (...) before, which is attributed as well to the
Angels as to the Lamb, signifies, that the Angels shall not only be beholders
of the torments of the wicked: but also executioners of the same: So the
Apostle: They shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence
of the Lord, 2 These. 1.9
and from the glory of his power.

Holy] to distinguish them from evil angels, concerning whom Paul says: Know
ye not that we shall judge the Angels? 1 Cor. 6.3.


11. And the smoke of their torment] He further amplifies the torments of the
wicked, if happily the kings and inhabitants of the earth might be restrained
from worshipping the Beast by the horror of cruel torments. The smoke of
their torment, by an hebraisme he calls it a tormenting smoke: Or by a
metonymia of the sign the fire tormenting them. But I rather approve the
former, because he had before spoken of their torment by fire. Now what is more
bitter, then to be tormented, broyled, and stifled with smoke?

Before in Chap. 9. the smoke of the bottomless pit did denote in a sense
somewhat different, the darkness of doctrine, brought into the Church by the
Pope of Rome through the operation of Satan. And this belongs to the matter of
the infernal torment: What smoke is, and whether it be in hell.
not that there is a real smoke in hell (for properly smoke is an exhalation
or fume arising out of a material fire, which is not in hell: otherwise the
smoke must cease, when the matter is wholly consumed) but the Scripture does
metaphorically shadow out the grievousnesse of the torments in hell from things
known unto us, and very hurtful, as calling the same, smoke, fire, brimstone,
the worm, etc.

Ascended for ever and ever] Smoke by its lightness ascends upward: and so the
smoke of eternal fire shall ascend (...) into ages of ages, that is, for ever
and ever: for it is an unquenchable fire, Isai. 66.24. Hence we see that the
torments of the wicked in hell shall be everlasting and without end. Before in
Chap. 8.4. The prayers of the Saints are called a smoke ascending up before
God, by a more noble metaphor. That smoke was sweet and pleasing to God, as
being the smoke of incense: But this here is stinking and pestilent unto the
wicked, as being the smoke of brimstome. The verb (...) to ascend, argues that
the place and fire of hell is beneath: but where it is, they shall feel, who
too curiously seek it.

And they have no rest day nor night] He signifies their continual torments
without any intermission: they shall not now and then have rest: but shall be
perpetually tormented. Thus hitherto the Glutton cries in hell without
intermission, I am tormented in this flame. For as hell fire shall not be
extinguished, no not for a moment: so the wicked shall not have so much as a
moments respite from torment, but in this unquenchable fire they shall be like
incorruptible firebrands, never to be consumed. O most miserable men, whom the
cogitation (and perhaps horror also) of so great tormenrs, has not hitherto
moved to repent, and forsake the worship of the Beast. Before Chap. 4.8. this
same phrase is applied to the four Beasts: And they rest not day and night,
saying, holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty: And to the sealed in their
foreheads: Chap. 7.15. They serve God day and night: But in a contrary sense:
for there is noted the continuance of the Saints their joy in heaven: here the
perpetual torment of the damned. In the mean while it appears, that by the
phrase (...) day and night is signified, always, perpetually, and without
intermission: for however there be no light or day in hell, but a perpetual
night or darkness: yet the holy Ghost speaks after the manner of men, who
have days and nights interchangeably.

Who worship the Beast] That the worshippers of the Beast might leave of to say
that these torments are prepared for heretics, whom they so term, the holy
Ghost does expressly repeat, that they are prepared for them that worship the
Beast and his image: Touching whom we have before treated.

And whosoever receives the mark of his name] This is that large and
Catholic symbol of the Romanists: for as we heard Chap. 13. the Beasts name
in Greek is (...) Lateinos, in Hebrew (...) Romanus.

12. Here is the patience of the Saints] An hortatory and consolatory
exclamation unto the Saints, to stir them up to patience under the trials of
Antichrist: and not to decrease in faith and obedience under the cross: but
look up to the promised reward in heaven. This is the sum of the two
following verses. The first member, here is the patience of the Saints, is
taken out of Chap. 13.10. yet the scope is something different. For there it
was spoken in respect of Antichrists tyranny: the sense therefore was thus:
seeing Antichrists tyranny is so great, the Saints ought to prepare themselves
patiently to endure, lest falling from their constancy, they make shipwreck of
salvation: Here it is spoken with respect unto the torments of the
Antichristians. Hence therefore the holy Ghost suggesteth an argument of
patience to the Saints, that seeing so tragical an end, is certainly to
befall Antichrist and his followers, therefore they ought quietly to endure his
tyranny, knowing the other are to suffer eternal punishment for the same:
which horrible destruction of the adversaries ought to provoke the Saints to
constancy.

Here are they that keep] A periphrasis of the Saints, for they are called
Saints, not who are canonized in Antichrists Calender, but the observers of the
commandments of God, and faith of Jesus: and both is opposed to the false
worship of the Beast. The faith of Jesus, is our confidence in Christ the alone
Savior. The keeping of the commandments of God, is obedience to the Gospel,
not according to Antichrists decrees, but according to Gods Commandments. Both
these cohere, for without obedience faith is hypocrisy, here, says he, are
they that keep: for, henceforward they shall, or let them keep: that is, we are
exhorted to persevere constantly in the faith of Jesus and obedience of Gods
commandments, that we may be free from Antichrists punishments.

13. And I heard a voice] Thus much of the exhortation. The consolation of the
Saints follows. It is an argument stirring up to constancy taken from the
reward of heavenly felicity, for to use Brightmans words, the last evil which
the wicked could bring upon them, is the means of the present felicity of the
faithful. It is opposed to the temptation of anathemaes, by which the Pope
shall strike the three Angels, accusing them: as broaching a new Gospel: That
they were enemies of the Catholic Church, and damnable heretics: On the
contrary the heavenly voice pronounces them, Blessed, etc. this is the
connection and scope, let us now see the words.

The particle (and) is continuative: for, Then, as Beza renders it, or causall,
for, therefore be constant in the faith of Jesus, and obey God against the
Beast: because, or, for I heard a voice. The words are John's declaring with
what comfort the Saints should raise up themselves to constancy: And whence he
has it: I heard a voice from heaven: Therefore being proclaimed from heaven it
is certain and true: he says not whither it were a voice of God or an Angel.
But it is the voice of Christ: Ioh. 5.24. Ioh. 8.51.
who published the same in the Gospel: He that hears my word, and believes
in him that sent me, has life eternal, and shall not come into condemnation,
but is passed from death to life: And: If a man keep my word, he shall never
see death.

The heads of the voice are three. I. a commandment to write. II. The argument
of the writing. III. The proof and declaration of the argument.

Write] Before in Chapter 1.19. he had a general commandment to write the
Revelation This is a special commandment to write the heavenly voice, Bell l.
4. de verb. c. 4.
touching the blessedness of such as die in the Lord. Both places teach
(against the Jesuits) that the Apostles were commanded by Christ not only to
preach, but to write their doctrine. Now wherefore is he bid to write? That we
might understand the dignity of this doctrine, the which the holy Ghost would
not have to vanish in the air, but to be set down in tables, that it might
perpetually serve for the consolation of the Church, and that Antichrist might
not in any wise be able to deny, deprave, or suppress the same.

Write] to wit, to comfort the Saints, and refute the monstrous judgment of
Antichrist touching the godly, that they are damnable heretics: to refute also
the wicked fiction of Purgatory, in which they say that the souls of them that
die in the Lord, are first to be tormented, before they can enjoy felicity.

Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord from henceforward] By the second
argument of this most comfortable writing, the dead in the Lord are declared to
be blessed: by which is refuted the profaneness of Epicures, who say, that
death is the end of things, and that the dead are wholly brought to nothing.
And the wicked opinion of Antichrist, touching the unhappy estate of the godly,
by him accursed as heretics. But the heavenly voice pronounces them blessed
in death. Therefore Antichrists beastly thunderbolts should not terrify us.
But let us see who are said to be blessed, and when.

Of the former it is said, Who being dead are said to be blessed. Mat. 5.11.
What it is to die in the Lord.
(...) the dead who die in the Lord. Beza renders it, which die for the sake of
the Lord, or, because of the Lord: according to the saying: Blessed are ye when
men shall say all evil against you falsely for my sake: The which Ribera also
approves. And so indeed the words (...) in the Lord do sometimes signify, as
Romans 16.1. Receive Phebe our fister in the Lord, as becomes Saints, that is,
for the sake of the Lord. Salure Amplius my beloved in the Lord. Salute the
beloved Persis which labors much in the Lord, that is, for the cause of
Christ: Thus taken, the consolation should only belong to Martyrs that die in
the Lord, that is, who lay down their life for the glory of Christ.

But undoubtedly the consolation is more largely to be extended even unto all
whosoever die godly: who as they are said to be, and abide in Christ: so also
they are said to die in the Lord, that is, To be, and to die in Christ.
to depart out of this life in true faith and invocation on the Lord, and so to
go unto him. For to be in Christ, is to cleave unto Christ by true faith, Romans
8.1. and 16.7. Who were before me in Christ. To abide in Christ, is to
persevere in the faith of Christ unto the end, Ioh. 15.4.7. Abide in me, etc.
If ye abide in me, etc. So to die in Christ, is to fall asleep in the faith, 1
Cor. 15.18. Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished, The
consolation belongs as well to professors as to martyrs.
that is, in the faith of Christ, and in the hope of the blessed resurrection
unto eternal glory. In this sense the consolation belongs not only to the
Martyrs, but to all true professors also: which exposition in my judgment
does best agree with the drift of the place. For here he speaks not of those
sad times of Antichrist, when he raged in his full fury against the Saints,
but of the more happy age of reformation, when the power of Antichrist shall in
many places be broken, neither shall the martyrdoms of the Saints be so
frequent as before.

Hence therefore we are taught, who after this life, are translated from death
into eternal happiness. Not such as die in the faith of the Beast, Act. 4.12.
Ioh. 14.6.
Antichrist, the Pope, or Mahumet, etc. But that die in the Lord. For there is
no salvation in any other, neither is there given any other name whereby we
must be saved, etc. He is the way, truth and life: no man comes to the Father
but by Christ. All that go out of him are deprived of blessedness, and shall
be tormented with the plagues before^ described.

But when shall they be blessed? (...) from henceforward] This particle in all
Greek copies, save in that of Montanus, closes up the sentence. But the old
Latin makes it to cohere with the following words: a modo jam dicit spiritus,
rendering the word (...) also, or yea, viciously and sencelesly, jam, now, as
Ribera confesses. For what sense is it to say, from this time now says the
spirit, that they may rest? Beza joins (...) henceforward with (...) blessed
henceforward. But it matters not where it be put in the sentence, so that it be
not taken from it. Commonly it is understood of the term or beginning of
happiness: and the question is, what that term is?

Some refer it to the time when this voice was heard, What is the term or
beginning of happiness.
as if he should say, from the very instant of this revelation the dead in the
Lord are blessed. But the question will be, whether the dead in the Lord were
not blessed before the time of the revelation? It is clear that all the
Apostles, and many of the Saints were departed in the Lord before this time.
Now Christ extends blessedness unto all the faithful, Mat. 5.11. and Ioh.
5.24. And seeing in this place is treated of the last times of the Church to be
reformed by the three Angels, I see not, by what way he should go back to
those former times of John.

Others therefore refer henceforward to the hour of every ones death, in a
sense I confess true and godly, but scarcely native or proper. It is true,
they that depart hence in the faith, do presently pass from death to life:
for so Christ teaches, Ioh. 5.24. This opinion also is pious, and becoming
charity, not to deny that blessedness to them that die in the Lord, which is
promised them in Gospel. Ioh. 3.36. Ioh. 5.14.
He that believes in the Son of God has everlasting life. He that believes
in me comes not into judgment, but is passed from death to life. The which
also the carrying of Lazarus soul into the bosom of Abraham does plainly
confirm. Yet I know not whether henceforward can here properly be understood
of the hour of every ones death.

And this indeed the Papists deny, The Papists Gloss.
to confirm their fiction about Purgatory, in which, as they feine, even they
that die in the Lord are first to be tormented and purged (both from the
pollution of venial sins, as also from the guilt of temporal punishment, in
which they died) before they can obtain blessedness in heaven. And they will
have henceforward to denote the time of the last judgment, making the sense
thus: Blessed are the dead, etc. a modo jam, from the time now, that is, from
the end of the last judgment they shall eternally rest from their labors. So
Anselmus and Lyra, L^b. 1. de purg. c. 13. The Gloss refuted.
the which BELLARMIN confirms, because says he, this whole Chapter treats of
the last judgment.

But first, this last is false: for the last judgment, being the fourth Act of
this vision, is not handled through the whole Chapter, but in the end only,
viz. from the 14. verse, for undoubtedly the three Angels publishing the
everlasting Gospel with the ruin of Babylon, and future torments of
idolaters, go before the last judgment: And therefore henceforward cannot be
applied to the time of judgment.

Secondly it is false, that men dying in the Lord, carry with them any
pollution to be purged thereof: Ioh. 3.36. Romans 8.1. 1 Ioh. 1.7. Act. 15.9.
for this crosses the Gospel: He that believes in the Son of God has
everlasting life. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.
The blood of Christ purges us from all sin. Purifying their hearts by faith.
Therefore, whosoever die in the Lord, are without any mortal sin cleaving
unto them, much less venial, and so being purged through faith in the blood
of Christ from the guilt both of eternal and temporal punishment, they are
translated into everlasting happiness.

Neither is this their wicked fiction confirmed by Austins authority: he says
rightly: Lib. 3. con. duas epist. Pelag. c. 3.
that the faithful in this life are partly the children of God, partly the
children of this world: for so the Apostle affirms, Romans 7.15. and Gal. 5.17.
for all of us are spirit and flesh in part. But he says not that we die such:
for before we depart, by faith in the blood of Jesus Christ we are purged from
all sin.

I know that the 110. Chap. of Austins Enchiridion is objected touching the
threefold condition of the souls departing: Augustine vinaicated.
that some go hence very evil: some very good, but others betwixt both, and
so according to their merits are kept in hidden receptacles either in rest or
pain unto the resurrection. But I doubt whither Austin ever saw that Platonic
Chapter: and do believe it was foisted into the Enchiridion by some body else:
my reason is, because Austin in other places does expressly speak but of two
conditions of them that die, and of two places after this life, altogether
denying a third. As through one, says he, all go to condemnation: Lib 1. de
peccat. M^rit. c. 28. Lib. 5. hypogn. circa medinm.
so all by one to justification. Neither is there any middle place for any: but
he that is not with Christ must needs be with the Devil. More clearly in
another place. The faith of Catholics does by divine authority believe, that
the first place is the kingdom of heaven, from whence, as I said, the
unbaptized are excluded. The second GEHENNA or hell, where all apostates, or
infidels shall feel eternal torments. A third we are altogether ignorant of,
for we find it not mentioned in the Scriptures of God. And again: Sermon. 14.
de verb. Apostoli.
I have given no divisions of places, save ONLY OF TWO, etc. So likewise:
There is left no middle place between the right hand and the left.

To return to the particle (...), henceforward, although it be not applied in
the least to the hour of death: yet the assertion of the Saints happiness
remains certain and true, even from the very instant of death, not only by
many Scriptures before alleged, but from this place: Purgatories fiction
resuted.
for it is not said (...) they that were dead, but (...) they that die, in the
present tense. Therefore so soon as the godly are dead, they are blessed. Thus
Purgatory is hence notwithstanding excluded.

But what then is meant by henceforward? We are to observe that the time of
this Third Act, is the time of the reformation and deliverance of the Church
from Popery by the three Angels: from henceforward therefore, that is, The
Authors opinion touching the particle hence forward.
from the time the three Angels published the everlasting Gospel against
Babylon and Antichrist, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, that is,
they not only are or shall be so: but the three Angels shall publish and
preach the same, refuting the heathenish fiction of Purgatory, Satisfactions
and Indulgences. For these Angels shall not only teach that Antichrists Bulls
are vain, but also prove by the Scriptures of God that the pain of Purgatory
is a wicked and feined imagination, there being no such place: And as hereby
the godly shall be freed from that error and vain fear: so Antichrists gain
shall be much lessened.

Yea says the spirit, that they may rest] This is the third. The holy Ghost
seems to add two reasons of their blessedness: ONE is, because they rest from
their labors, to wit, which they have suffered in this life, for, they have
attained the end of their labors and combats, henceforward enjoying
everlasting rest: The other, because their works follow them, by a metalepsis,
for, because they now have the fruit or reward of their works, which was laid
up in heaven for them. The merit of works is not here established, but ref^ted
It appears that both reasons are taken from runners in a race, who having
attained the mark, enjoy a twofold benefit: rest and reward. So (...) that, is
here put for the causall (...) because they rest, etc. Their works are said to
follow them, or (...) with them (as it is in the text) being as it were the
followers of faith in this life. Hence the merits of works are rather
overthrown then established. For seeing they follow, therefore they merit not,
otherwise they should go before as causes. Romans 6.23.
Now they draw with them a free reward, because the gift of God is eternal
life.

The third Part of the Chapter. Of the Harvest and Vintage of the last
judgment.
14 And I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like
unto the Son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a
sharp sickle. 15 And another Angel came out of the Temple, crying with a loud
voice to him that sat on the cloud: Thrust in thy sickle, and reap, for the
time is come for thee to reap, for the harvest of the earth is ripe, 16 And he
that sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth, and the earth was
reaped. 17 And another Angel came out of the Temple which is in heaven, he
also having a ^harpe sickle. 18 And another Angel came out from the Altar,
which had power over fire, and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp
sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the
vine of the earth, for her grapes are fully ripe. 19 And the Angel thrust in
his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into
the great winepresse of the wrath of God. 20 And the winepresse was troaden
without the city, and blood came out of the winepresse, even unto the
horse-bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.
THE COMMENTARY.
ANd I looked and behold a white cloud] Hither to we have handled three Acts of
the fourth Viston: The first (briefly to repeat them again) comprehends the
condition of the Church in its beginning and growth, with her many combats
under the Roman Emperors, both Pagan and Christian until Antichrists rising,
in the first 600 years, Chap. 12. The second opposed to the former, contains
the consolation of the godly under the foresaid conflicts, in the same Chapter.
The third having two parts, represents 1. Antichrists persecutions, which from
his first rising till now have continued more then a thousand years, Chap. 13.
2. The Churches preservation under the same, and also her future purging from
the dreges of Antichrist in the last times. Chap. 14. The fourth Ast here
follows, describing the joyful Catastrophe or change of all the Churches
afflictions in the day of judgment, the form whereof is figured out in two
parables, viz. of the Harvest and Vintage, in the rest of this Chapter.

Furthermore, The consent of ^nterpreters about the last judgment.
I see all interpreters (a few only excepted) unanimously to agree that the
last judgment is here treated of: And I wonder that any should dissent in a
matter so clear and evident. For by types and words not much unlike, the
judgment to come is described in Dan. 7. touching the Son of man coming in
the clondes of heaven to judgment: and Mat. 3. and 13. of the harvest of the
tares and wheat. They agree also in the scope, that these types serve to
comfort the godly, and terrify the wicked. For the godly do groan under
their afflictions and troubles, desiring to know what end at length shall be
put to their evils: On the contrary Tyrants and Antichrist doe-tumultuously
rage without let or punishment, promising to themselves perpetual prosperity:
Lest therefore the faithful should be discouraged, seeing the son of
perdition thus to rage, and themselves overwhelmed with diverse sorrows and
calamities, here the last judgment is propounded to John, in which shall
follow a wonderful change of things. For then the Wheat shall be gathered into
the heavenly Barn, and the chafe burned with unquenchable fire. This I say is
the scope and use of the remaining matter in the Chapter.

But in the coherence of these things with the foregoing, I find all equally
at a stay, as not perceiving wherefore the last judgment is here again
represented, Touching the Coherence interpreters are troubled.
seeing it was before showed unto John, Chap. 6. toward the end. and Chap. 11.
toward the end. and afterward again in Chap. 16. and most clearly in the end
of Chapters 19. and 20. Ribera (as before Chap. 11) has nothing to say, save
that the day of judgment is here described by an anticipation: because the
context of the things themselves requires that the punishment of the wicked be
here described. But no reason can be given why these judgments should be so
often described, and that indeed at the end of every Vision, except our method
be observed, in which we have noted that all the general visions consist of
four Acts answering each to other. This therefore is the true cause why the
last judgment is here again represented, because the last Act of the fourth
Vision now follows. Let us see the words.

And I saw] This is the last part of the vision. The last Iugdement figured out
by the Harvest and Vintage.
The day of judgment is figured out by two types, The Harvest and Vintage:
because there shall be two acts of the same: The gathering of the godly into
heaven, and the casting of the wicked into hell fire. The former is set forth
by the Harvest, in which the wheat shall be gathered into the barn, according
to the parable of Christ, Mat. 13.30. The latter, by the Vintage, because the
wicked shall be troaden down in the lake of Gods wrath, that is, be tormented
with eternal pains of hell. So these types may not unfitly be distinguished.

Notwithstanding it is not amiss to difference them as the whole and part. For
the Harvest shall not only gather the wheat out of the Lords field into the
garner, but also burn the tares that are gathered, as we see in the said
parable, Mat. 13. Thus the Harvest should represent the whole judgment. But
the vintage shall cast and tread all the grapes in the lake of Gods wrath. Now
the godly shall not be cast into this lake, for they shall not come into
condemnation, Ioh. 5.24. But the ungodly only. And therefore by the vintage
the punishment of the wicked seems only to be represented. Thus much of the
parables in general.

And behold a white cloud] The person of Christ the Judge is gloriously
discribed in this verse, by four adjuncts. 1. by his form: that he is like to
the Son of man. 2. by the gesture of body, he sits on a white cloud: 3. by his
habit, he has on his head a Crown of Gold. 4. By the Instrument: He holds in
his hand a sharp Sicle. In these words is no obscurity: therefore I will not
dwell on them.

They who deny or doubt, (as Ribera and Brightman) that the Son of man does
here denote Christ, because it is not said the Son of man, but like to the Son
of man: Neither with an article (...) seem in my opinion to ground it on a
very slight conjecture. For in Dan. 7.13. It is plain; Christ is said to be
like to the Son of man: I saw in the clouds of Heaven as it were the Son of
man. And Paul Philip 2.7. Being made in the likeness of men, he was found in
fashion or habit as a man. And Romans 8. He sent his son in the likeness of
sinful flesh. And Heb. 2.14. He likewise took part of flesh and blood: and
Verse 17. It behoved him to be made like his brethren: In which Phrases the
verity of Christ's humane nature is not denied, but the privilege of the
Man-Christ is noted: that though he be like unto us in all things, yet is he
not (like us) man only, but God also; neither as man is he borne a sinner of
man's seed, but conceived and begotten of a Virgin by the operation of the Holy
Ghost, being not defiled with any stain of sin.

That which they say of the Article, is infirm: For before also in Chap. 1.13.
John saw CHRIST (...) like to the Son of man (without an Article) standing in
the midst of the seven Candlestickes: Here he sees him sitting as a Judge on
his Tribunal.

On a white cloud] Noting his divine Majesty: For God in the Psalms is often
said to be carried and ride on the clouds, because of his heavenly power. This
white cloud is that throne of glory, whereon Christ says he will sit, Mat.
25.31. The which throne he himself interprets of the clouds of heaven, Mat.
26.64. Hereafter ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of
power, and coming in the clouds of heaven, according to that in Dan. 7.13.

The crown of gold on his head, is the ensign of his Kingly Majesty. In Chap.
19.12. he has many Diadems on his head: and on his thigh a name written, The
King of kings, and Lord of lords. The Beast also had crowns on his horns, but
not of gold, and ten only. This Judge therefore is more powerful then
Antichrist and all tyrants, for with an iron rod he will crush all adversaries
as a potters vessel in the day of judgment.

The sharp sickle of a reaper, which is in his hand, to wit, in his right hand,
denotes Christ's judicary and divine power, to whom it is as easle to execute
his judgment on the whole earth, as for reapers with a sharp sickle to cut
down the ripe corn. ANDREAS: the sickle, says he, is a symbol of
consummation, for Christ himself calls the end of the world, a harvest, Mat. 13.

15. Another Angel came out of the temple] This Angel and the other two
coming forth out of the temple and altar, verse. 17.18. are not preachers of
the Gospel, as Brightman supposes (for at the harvest and vintage of the last
judgment preaching shall cease) but it is one of the chief Ministers of
Christ, by whom he will execute the judgment. He comes out of the Temple, to
wit, of heaven, as verse. 17. and before Chap. 11.19. By and by another comes
forth from the Altar of Heaven, which is visionally to be taken: because
properly there is no Temple nor Altar in heaven: but formerly in Jerusalem it
was fashioned and made according to the heavenly pattern. The great cry of the
Angel (says ANDREAS) denotes the common supplication of all virtues, desiring
to see the glory indeed of the just, but the excision of the unjust and all
iniquity, that transitory and unstable things might have an end, and that which
is stable and eternal appear.

Thrust thy sickle] It is no commanding but a supplicating voice, for the
Angels command not Christ, but worship him: The words are taken out of Joel
3.13. where Jehovah says: I will sit in the valley of Jehosaphat to judge all
the heathen round about. Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe. The
Angel knew that the day of judgment was near, and entreats therefore, that
the judge would stay no longer, but thrust the sickle into the harvest.

Thy sickle, says he, to wit, which is thine by office.

But how does the Angel bid Christ to reap, seeing Christ calls the Angels
reapers, Mat. 13.39? I answer, In all Allegories circumstances do often vary.
Christ is here said to do that, which there is applied to the Angels, because
Christ reapes by the Angels his ministers, yea the Angel here offers himself
to the Lord to reap.

Because the time is come for thee] Gr. (...) thy hour, etc. The Angel adds
a twofold reason of his petition. The former from the first cause, for, says
he, the term of judgment prefixed in the counsel of God is at hand. But
whence does the Angel know this, seeing that day and hour is not manifested
to any creature, Mar. 13.9? I answer, by revelation from God: Or else, by the
signs which he saw were either all past or at hand.

In saying, for thee, he acknowledges him to be appointed by the Father the
only Judge of the world: Ioh. 5.12.
as he says himself: The Father judges no man, but has given all judgment
to the Son. Here by the phrase we have no obscure argument, that John the
Evangelist is the Author of the Revelation, with whom we find nothing more
familiar then to express a defined time by (...) hour, as Cha. 2.4. My hour
is not yet come, Chap. 5.25. My hour is come and now is, Chap. 7.30. No man
laid hands on him because his hour was not yet come, Chap. 13.1. Jesus
knowing, that his hour was come, Chap. 17.1. Father, the hour is come,
glorify thy Son, etc.

To reap] That is, to take away men from the earth: by gathering the good as
wheat into the barn: but the tares into bundles to be burnt, as is declared,
Mat. 13.30.

For the harvest is ripe] This is the second reason, from the next cause, or
order of nature, requiring harvest when the corn is white, Ioh. 4.35. Lift up
your eyes, says Christ, and look on the fields, for they are already white to
harvest: Therefore being ripe, the time of harvest is at hand. This ripeness
signifies that the measure of the Churches calamities, Antichrists tyranny, and
the iniquity of the wicked was now full, as God in Genesis 18.21. says touching
the sins of the Sodomites: that he was come to see whither they were come to
the full height or not: And Christ of the Pharisees: Mat. 23.32. Fill ye up
then the measure of your fathers. 2 Pet. 3.9. Romans 2.4.
This also commends both the patience and justice of God: The Lord is not
slack in his judgment, but is patient toward us, not willing that any should
perish: but by longsuffering leads us to repentance. So then he will execute
judgment most justly, because he will not do it, till there be no hope of the
worlds recovery, and that the sins of men are come to that height as none
shall have cause to complain either of the overmuch haste or severity of the
Judge.

16 And he that sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle] Christ readily yields
to the request of the Saints: for its no sooner desired, but he thrusts the
sickle into the earth, for, into the ripe fruits of the earth, by a Synecdoche,
that is, on men themselves. When therefore the hour of judgment shall come,
Christ will finish the harvest of the earth, without any delay, labor, or
hinderance, for he is a most careful and powerful Judge.

And the earth was reaped] that is, both the living and the dead being cited
before the tribunal seat of judgment received rewards, according to that in
Joh. 5.29. and Mat. 25.46.

The declaration of this parabolicall harvest is best expounded by Christ
himself, Mat. 13.39. The harvest is the end of the world: The reapers are the
Angels: then the Son of man shall send forth, and say, gather ye together
first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat
into my barn. The tares are the seed of the wicked one: the good seed are the
children of the Kingdom. Then therefore the Angels shall gather out of his
kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast
them into a furnace of fire, there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth: but
the righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father,
etc. This is that harvest which John saw, by us indeed who walk in faith,
longed after: but it shall be dreadful unto the worshippers of the Beast: for
we shall be gathered into Gods barn: but as many as have not repented of their
Antichristian idolatry, being threshed with the eternal scourges of Gods
wrath, shall be burnt in hell fire.

If thou demand how Christ himself is said to thrust the sickle into the
earth: seeing this charge was committed before to the reaping Angels: we have
even now answered, that Christ is said to have done that which the Angels are
to do by his commandment, as in Ioh. 4.2. Christ is said to have made and
baptized more Disciples then John, yet it is added, he baptized not, but his
Disciples did, to wit, by his authority and commandment.

17. And another Angel came out of the Temple] Another type of the foresaid
judgment, properly representing the horrible punishments of the wickedunder
the form of a vintage. First Christ does again come forth in the likeness of
an Angel with a sharp sickle not to reap, (as before) but to cut down the
vine, which again represents Christ's judicatory power.

Some by this Angel understand the Saints, who in that great Day, as
assistants to Christ, shall judge the world, according to that in 1 Cor. 6.2.
But I dare not attribute this sickle to the Saints. Perhaps this Angel is one
of the chief ministers of Christ the Judge: Or it is an Enallage of the
singular for the plural, because as the Angels shall be Reapers, so also
Vintagers in the end of the world. Yet I see nothing to hinder, why Christ the
Judge may not here be understood, who alone holds the Iudicatory Sickle,
because he only has received all power from the Father. For often Christ is
said to be an Angel: as in Chap. 7.2. and 8.3. and 10.1. To wit, the Angel of
the Covenant, and great Counsel: neither is it unusual that Christ in respect
of his diverse functions in diverse Visions, should also be represented under
diverse Types, as sometimes being called the Son of man, otherwhile a Lamb, a
Lion, an Angel, etc. He is said to come out of the Temple, the which John in
Chap. 11.19. saw open in Heaven: for the Temple, especially the Sanctuary: was
a figure of Heaven: Heb. 9.2. so then he came out of Heaven from whence the
Judge shall come.

We see that all things are dramatically acted in this Revelation: for as in
Comoedies among men, diverse persons coming out of diverse Scenes, do act their
parts on the Theater: so it is in these Visions, to the end we might more
easily perceive Heavenly things by a certain similitude of things done amongst
us.

18. And another Angel came out from the Altar] Seeing the former Angel
having the Sickle, was Christ the Judge: We therefore do rightly understand
this Angel to be some chief Minister of Christ: whose Cry; Thrust thy Sickle,
is not a commanding voice or admonitory, as if the Judge were slack in his
Office, but supplicatory, desiring him not to defer the Judgment any longer,
but to execute the same, because of the inveterate malice of the world: as in
verse 15.

He comes out of the Altar] Or from the Altar, that is, from Christ who is the
Heavenly Altar: namely as a Herald, who in the name of all the rest proclaims
the time of the last Judgment, testifies the desire of all the Heavenly
Powers, for the vindication of the Church, and punishment of the adversaries,
and offers as it were his most ready ministry to the Judge.

Having power over fire] Hence we learn, says Andreas, that God has set the
angelical powers as administrators of things created by him: One over Water,
another over Fire, Dan. 10.13.20.
another over another part of the world: This exposition I do not altogether
reject, seeing the Scripture other where testifies, that some Angels were set
over particular Kingdoms. Yet I neither will affirm, nor deny whether some
are set over one Element, others over another: because afterward in Chap. 16.5.
What is meant by this fire.
mention is made of the Angel of the waters: Nevertheless it is clear, God
uses them to execute some one judgment, some another.

Furthermore what this Fire is, over which he is said to have power, is
diversely disputed: some understand the fire of the holy Ghost. But no created
Angel can have power over the holy Ghost, who is the eternal God. Others, the
fire, which shall consume the world: as if this Angel who is said to have
power over fire, should set the whole world on fire. But God shall need no
Incendiaties to burn the World.

Ribera hereby understands the fire of the heavenly Altar, by which the
Sacrifices of the Saints were burned: probably indeed, but by an allegory not
safe enough: for seeing the sacrifices of the Saints in Heaven are their
prayers and thanksgivings, by which they always praise the Lord: I see not
how it agrees to Christian belief, that any created Angel should have power
over this fire. But I wonder that none have applied it to the fire of Purgatory.

Bid applies it to the fire of Punishment: which Ribera approves not, because
the punishment of the wicked is here Metaphorically figured, not by fire, but
by the Wine Press of Gods wrath: yet a little before we heard that the ungodly
should be tormented with fire and brimstone, the smoke whereof should ascend
up for ever and ever.

This interpretation Bullinger follows, and we also approve of: for fire in
the Psalms, and generally through the whole Scripture, denotes Gods plagues
and punishment on the wicked, the which he executes by his Angels.

This Angel therefore has power, to wit, ministerially over Hell fire,
because by this Angel, or by these Angels (for it may be an Enallage of the
singular for the plural) Christ the Judge will cast the tares into eternal
fire: which agrees with the Parable of Christ. Mat. 13.42. They shall cast them
into a Furnace of Fire.

And gather the Clusters of the Vine of the earth] A Vine does sometimes denote
the Church: Isa 5.1. Mat. 20.1. Into which the Lord sends diverse laborers to
dress the same. But here it signifies other the Church of malignants, or the
world of ungodly men: therefore he calls it the Vine of the earth, for, the
whole multitude of the wicked, who are not those ripe grapes, which the Lord
looked for and found not in his Vineyard: Isa 5.2. but it is taken in the evil
part for the wild, unripe and sour grapes, which God in wrath threatens to cut
off: And they are said to be ripe, not for new Wine, but Verjuyce: because when
the wickedness of the ungodly is grown to its full ripeness, destruction and
ruin necessarily follows.

19. And the Angel thrust in his Sickle] The execution will be short: for the
Judge, when the hour is come shall without any let cut down the Vintage of
the earth, that is, execute wrath on the wicked, by casting them into the great
Lake of Gods wrath. The lake of Gods Wrath is great.


Hell metaphorically is called the lake of Gods wrath, or the place of infernal
torments, for as the clusters of the Vine are trodden in the Wine Press, so the
Reprobates shall be punished in bell. It is great, that is large enough to
contain all the multitude of the wicked that perish. A large Vintage requires
a spacious place: now this Vontage shall be the greatest, to wit, of all the
wicked even from Cain the first parricide, (...) the last (...), which shall be
death* And therefore the lake must be great.

20. And the Wine Press wa^ trodden without the City] This shall be the
thrusting of the wicked into eternal torments.

Without the City] viz. the Heavenly Jerusalem, which is described Chap. 22.15.
Without shall be dogs and sorcerers, and whoremongers and murderers, and
Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie: which is the proper
description of the Grapes of the Vine of the earth to be trodden in the great
lake of hell, and to be cast forth into utter darkness, where shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth.

And blood came out of the Wine-presse] The Scripture is wont to call red wine
the blood of the grape, of the like redness thereof. Here he calls the liquor,
flowing out of the lake, Blood, not by reason of the color, but to denote the
bloody and horrible kind of punishment that is to befall the wicked; for
seeing they could not be satiated with the blood and slaughter of Saints,
therefore hell also being made red with their blood, shall not be satiated for
ever and ever.

Unto the Horse-Bridles] He aggravates the horriblenesse of their plagues from
the great abundance of blood flowing out of the Wine Press, both by the space,
of a thousand and six hundred furlongs, and the depth so great, that it
reaches even to the horse bridles. For there shall be an innumerable multitude
of the clusters of the earth, that is, of all the wicked from the beginning of
the world to the end thereof, who being together cast and miserably crushed in
the Wine Press, there shall on all sides flow forth so much blood, as it shall
increase to such a wide and deep Lake or Sea. A Furlong contains an Hundred
twenty and five Paces. Eight Furlongs make an Italian or English mile: Thirty
two a Germane: so then a Thousand six hundred Furlongs make fifty Germane miles.

Why the holy Ghost does assign precisely this number to the lake, needs not
to be known by us. Andreas thinks it is to signify the consummated iniquity
of those men, and the greatness of their punishment: seeing a millinary number
is most perfect, and most consummate: And in the six hundred year of Noah, we
read that sin was overwhelmed by water. But it is more safe to say that a great
definite number put for an indefinite.

But what is meant by the Horse bridles? I think it serves to upbraide the
adversaries, who being mounted on stately horses, were wont to behold the
Martyrs in their sufferings, and proudly to trample their blood under their
horses feet. But then those proud horses shall swim in blood (not of the
Martyrs) but of their own Lords and Riders.

Also I do not disaprove that some suppose it to be an Allusion unto
Conquerours, who after the fight and great slaughter of their adversaries,
usually go forth to behold the carcasses of the slain: and because the fields
do flow with blood, they go not a foot but ride on horses: Now if the blood
shall ascend even to the bridles of the horses, certainly hereby is signified
the slaughter of infinite adversaries, Is^ 66.24.
and a most horrible effusion of blood: by a like figurative Speech Isaiah
describes the destruction of the wicked, and the victory of the Saints: They
shall go forth and look upon the Carcasses of men that have transgressed
against me, for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be
quenched, and they shall be an horror to all flesh.

The PREFACE of the Fifth VISION: Touching the seven Vialls contained in Chap.
XV. and XVI.
John points at a new Vision, in saying; And I saw another great sign: for so
he began the fourth Vision Chap. 12. This Vision therefore is the Fifth, more
short indeed (for it is comperhended and ended in Chapters 15 and 16.) But not
much plainer then the former, therefore it is called a Marveilous Sign. He saw
seven Angels going forth out of the heavenly Temple, with seven Vialls full of
Gods wrath, and pouring out the seven last plagues upon the worshippers and
throne of the beast, and on diverse elements: whence there follow dreadful
events: Now it manifestly appears, that grievous punishments are hereby
denounced to the Kingdom, and followers of Antichrist. But it is very obscure
to define what manner of plagues, and what the effects are, whether they are
properly or tropically to be understood, and to what times they belong.

Lyra applies all these things Metaphorically unto the Acts of the Roman
Popes, Hadrian, Leo, Hildebrand, etc. against the Emperors Constantine the
Image Breaker, and Henry IV. and others, until the Holy War raised by Peter
the Hermit, that is, from the year 742. until the year 1094: But his grounds
are insufficient, for if so, then these plagues should have been ended long
ago, whereas they are called the last, filling up the wrath of God.

Ribera applying it literally to the four years of Antichrist, supposes,
that there shall be real plagues like the Egyptian, unto which there is here a
plain allusion; But it will manifestly appear in its place, that the litterall
sense cannot generally stand: Yea even hence it appears, that the Kingdom of
Antichrist is absurdly straightened to the time of four years: because the
History of the seven plagues requires a far greater time. We will collect from
such things as are plain the dark and obscurer matters.

Two things seem to be clear.

First, that the beginning of these plagues belong to the time when the beast
was already ascended out of the sea and earth, and when the whole world
worshipped his image: Yea, when the beast began to be overcome by some, that
is, after Popery had stood a long while in its flourishing estate, and began
now again somewhat to decline: This appears by the first and fifth Vial poured
out upon the worshippers and throne of the beast. Chap. 16. ver. 2.10. as also
by the song for the victory over the beast. Chap. 16.2.

The Second is, that the plagues shall end in the fall of Babylon, when the
Islands shall flee away, and the mountains shall not be found, that is, in the
end of the world: which appears by the seventh Vial: see also Chap. 20.11. The
fifth vision is not universal.


By which, first it is manifest, that this Vision is not universal, neither
does it contain the whole History of the Church, as did the three foregoing,
but is particular and restrained to Antichrists Kingdom: Therefore it does not
consist of the four Acts, which we showed were in the former: but only of the
two latter: so that the seven Vials answer not to the seven Seals and
Trumpets, as some have thought, because of their likeness in some effects: for
the beginning of the Seals and Trumpets extended it self even to the times of
the Apostles, and first birth, (so to say) of the Christian Church as before
appeared: whereas the pouring out of the Vials only shadows out the last
plagues of the Kingdom of the beast.

Secondly, It belongs to the last times.
It is manifest that this Vision belongs to the last times, and shall be
finished indeed at the end of the world, but takes its beginning about the time
that the measuring of the Temple (treated of in Chap. 11.) was already begun,
that is, about the time of the Churches Reformation in Doctrine and manners,
whereby the throne of the beast was grievously shaken, and the Popes Kingdom
much weakened by Luther, and other evangellicall Preachers.

Thirdly, It plainly appears that the seven Vials of these angels, answer to
what was published by the three, or more clearly, by the two latter Angels (for
the preaching of the first took no great effect) of which before in Chap. 14.
verse 8, 9, 10, 11. Teaching us that the thundrings of those crying Heralds:
Babylon is fallen, is fallen. And If any one worship the beast, he shull drink
of the wine of the fury of Gods Wrath, etc. shall not pass away without
effect, but be very terrible and mortal to Antichristians, what ever they
attempt to the contrary by fire and sword: because from that time forward they
shall receive one plague upon another, until they be utterly destroyed. For as
the Gospel is the savor of life unto life, 2. Cor. 2.16
to them that are saved, so a savor of death unto death, to them that perish.

The scope therefore and use of this Prophecy is Doctrinall and Consolatory.
The scope and use of this vision.


For First it teaches, that after the beasts kingdom has flourished and vexed
the Saints a long time, it shall be weakened by preaching of the Gospel.

Secondly, It shall always notwithstanding remain in some power, not ceasing
to make War with the Saints until the end.

Thirdly, Howsoever it shall tyrannically rage against the Reformation of
Evangelicall doctrine, yet it shall never be able again to suppress the same,
but there shall be many Angels to pour out the vials of Gods wrath on the throne
thereof.

Lastly, as the Gospel shall be pleasing and saving to the elect: because by it
they overcome the beast, for which they shall celebrate God with perpetual
praises: so to Antichristians it shall be grievous and mortal, because being
turned into rage in regard of the success thereof, they shall fret and grieve
to see their kingdom, which seemed immovable, to be weakened, lessened, and go
to ruin, until (being wasted with the last plagues) they shall be cast
according to the threatening of the third Angel Chap. 14.10. into everlasting
torments of fire and brimstone. Now hence the spirit suggests a twofold comfort
unto us.

The first, from the often renewed plagues of the beast: whose power, wealth,
luxuriousness and oftentation was great, as we heard Chap. 13. But we need not
be offended at those shadows, for she shall receive and feel inward torments
and gnawings by the preaching of the Gospel, and in the midst of her
delights be tormented by Gods wonderful judgments and severe plagues.

The second, from the final fall of Babylon: the Popes parasites affirm: that
the seat of Saint Peter shall endure for ever: that the Catholic Roman Church
being founded and strengthened by God shall stand, etc. That the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against her: but Babylon shall come in remembrance before
God, and in a moment be cast down by an earthquake: so she shall cease to vex
the Church and persecute the Saints.

We have heard the Argument, Scope and Use of the Vision: now it is partly
dramaticall, partly prophetical. The Dramaticall part contains certain
preparatory apparatitions serving for the Order, and preparation of the vision
Chap. 15. The Prophetical part foretells the kinds and increasing of the
seven plagues on the worshippers of the Beast. Chap. 16.

CHAP. XV. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis.
This whole Chapter is a preparation to the follovving Vision, for John
declares here what, and what manner of things he savv before the pouring out
of the seven Vials, The parts here are three: I. THe seven Angels with so many
plagues, ver. 1. II. A company of Harpers, ver. 2, 3, 4. III. The clothing of
the Angels, verse. 5, etc.


In the First he expounds what he saw. I. generally, A great and marveilous
sign in Heaven. II. specially, seven Angels, with their Instruments: having
seven plagues: The which he describes by the Epythite,
Last, with the reason hereof: because in them is filled up the wrath of God:
verse 1.

In the second he expounds I. The place of the harpers: A sea of glass. II.
The harpers themselves, whom he describes 1. by the effect: They had gotten
the Victory, etc. 2. By their station: standing on the sea of glass. 3. By the
Instrument having the harpes of God verse. 2, 4. By another effect, And they
sang, verse 3.
III. The Argument of the song, generally from the Author and subject: The Song
of Moses and of the Lamb. And specially, so far as concerns the words and the
sense: consisting of a Preface, Proposition and Reasons.



The Preface is laudatory, figured out by an exclamation to God: I. They
declare his power and Majesty: Lord Almighty, King of Saints. II. His works by
the adjuncts of quantity and quality: They are great and marveilous. III. His
Judgments by the adjunct quality of Justice and Constancy: Just and true are
thy ways ver. 3.

The Proposition: The Lord is to be feared and glorified. It is figured out by
an Interogation. Who shall not fear, etc. The reason is threefold. 1. From the
Property of God: for thou only art holy. 2. From the worship due to him: All
nations shall come. 3. From the moving cause: Thy Judgments are made manifest.
v. 4.

In the third he rehearses 1. The receptacle of those Angels: The Temple of
the Tabernacle opened in Heaven ver. 5. 2. Their gesture: They went out. 3.
Their habit: having seven plagues. 4. Their ornament: clothed in white and pure
linen, ver. 6. 5. The Instruments given them: he gave them golden Vialls:
which he describes by the number: seven: And what they contained: full of the
wrath of God, etc. verse 7. 6. Two effects 1. The smoke of Gods Majesty
filling the Temple. 2. A shutting out of all persons from entering into the
Temple, during the time of the plagues, verse 8.



The first Part of the CHAPTER.
The Argument of the Vision: seven ANGELS, with so many PLAGUES.
1 And I savv another sign in Heaven great and marveilous, seven Angels
having the seven last Plagues, for in them is filled up the wrath of God:

THE COMMENTARY.
I. Why the Visions are iterated.
AND I saw another Signe] John is not informed by one Vision, but by many
touching future things, that so by comparing the obscurer types with the
plainer, the Revelation might the better be manifested: The iteration therefore
of the Visions is not in vain.

Now it is to be observed, The following things do all belong to Antichrists
judgment.
after that the Beast, that is, Antichrist was once mentioned, his tyranny and
pomp plainly described in the foregoing Vision: the remainder of this whole
Prophecy contains descriptions of the judgments, by which God will restrain
and destroy Antichrist, but deliver the Saints from his Tyranny, and bestow the
rewards of Victory on them: both to the end to meet with the scandal of
desertion of the godly, And to the terror of the wicked, and comfort of the
godly.
least it should be thought that Christ neglects his under the Cross, or to be
a sleep, or want power to suppress Antichrists rage: as also that in hope of
Victory and glory to come, they might with the more alacrity resist Antichrist,
and persevere constant under their long during troubles. To this end tend the
seven last Plagues, which God in the last times will pour out on the Throne
and followers of the Beast: Let us henceforward keep this use in memory.

John therefore saw another sign, What a sign is.
that is, another Vision signifying events, diverse from the former: for a sign
is that which makes something diverse from it self to come into the cogitation,
Austin lib. 2. de doctr. Christi cap.
besides the shape or form it suggesteth to the senses. But as signs are not
the things themselves: so the things themselves are not to be sought in the
signs as if they were included,

In Heaven] That is (as most interpret it) in the Church: But there is no need
of an Allegory: for these are heaveny Visions: And John saw these sights acted
on the heavenly Theater.

Great] A great sign (as Chap. 12.1.) shadowing out great things: It requires
attention, as also the following Epithet Admirable, representing things worthy
of admiration: to wit, the great and wonderful judgments of God in delivering
his Church, and casting down Antichrist: for it is a thing indeed to be wondered
at, that the powerful Kingdom of the Roman Antichrist, should be only weakened
by such a contemptible and weak means as the preaching of the Gospel. It is
also admirable, that the faithful, men despised should fight against and
overcome the Beast. Thus these Epithites serve to comfort us, knowing that the
Church shall certainly overcome Antichrist.

Seven Angells] He summarily propounds the whole Vision, which he expounds
afterward. Therefore we will not stay long upon it. Of seven Angels mention is
made in Chap. 1. ver. 4. and Chap. 8. verse 2. and 16. 1. and 17.1. and 21.9.
In all which places they are said to be (...) seven with the article (...)
excepting in this place: whence it might be questioned whether these seven be
the same with the former that sounded the Trumpets.

Brightman thinks they are not the same: neither do I dislike his opinion if
we take the Angels for the Ministers of the Gospel, because the time of the
six former Trumpets and these Vialls is different. Yet we may rightly
understand they are the same: because the said seven Angels that is, many (for
a septenary number does indefinitely signify perfection) do type out diverse
persons in sundry Visions. The last plagues.


Having the seven Plagues] That is, as we have it expounded in ver. 7. Seven
golden Vialls full of the wrath of the living God, etc.

The Plagues, which God in wrath will inflict on Antichristians, are said to be
the last, because they shall happen in the last times: For the christian Church
has four periods. One under the Rome tyrants: The second from Constantine
under Christian Emperors until the times of Phocas: The third under
Antichrist swaying in his full vigor, from Pope Boniface III. unto Leo X. in
whose time Antichristian power began to decline: The fourth under Antichrists
declining from Luthers time to the end. Unto this last period, belong the last
plagues. The four periods of the new Church.
Thus John himself expounds it: because in them is filled up the wrath of God:
(...) is filled up, for, (...) shall be filled up: by an Enallage of the
Preterperfect for the Future usual with John, because of the certainty of the
events; he signifies therefore that the plagues should continue unto the end:
One Plague following another, till the last did put an end to Antichrists rage,
and the Churches troubles. They are said to be seven for the number of the
Angels, that is, diverse, and continuated, as we shall see hereafter.

Ribera moves a Question how John should return from the Harvest and Vintage
of the last judgment even now described, A question about the order.
unto the seven Plagues which are to be before the judgment: neither indeed is
it a frivolous Question, yea insoluble to Ribera and all such who make the
Revelation a continued History: he himself has nothing to answer, save his
(...) saying that the Prophets do not always observe the order of things as
they are done: and that it was needful the plagues of the wicked should often
be inculcated: of which the last indeed is true: but for the other there is no
reason (viz.) why the last judgment should so often be anticipated, unless we
observe that all the Visions (the first excepted) do end in the last judgment:
because every of them do represent either the general History of the Church,
as the three former universal Visions: Or else the last times of Antichrist,
and of the Church, as do the three following special ones.

The second part of the Chapter. The Fifth Company of Harpers
2. And I saw as it were a sea of glass, mingled with fire, and them that had
gotten the Victory over the beast, and over his Image, and over his mark, and
over the number of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the harpes of
God. 3. And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the
Lamb, saying, Great and marveilous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and
true are thy ways, thou King of Saints. 4. Who shall not fear thee O Lord, and
glorify thy Name? for thou only art holy: for all Nations shall come and
worship before thee, for thy Indgements are made manifest.
THE COMMENTARY.
II. ANd I saw as it were a sea of glasse] Before the Angels pour out the
plagues, a company of Harpers come forth on the Theater, celebrating the power
and judgment of God. And why so? to prevent the thoughts of the godly, lest
they might think that the following plagues were repugnant to the goodness and
justice of God: and the blasphemies of the wicked, that they might not accuse
God of cruelty, and complain of injury done unto them.

It serves also to the decency of the Vision: for as in Commoedies musical
interludes are again and again iterated at the ending of their Acts, to
delight the beholders and drive away tediousness: so in this apparitionall
Revelation are heard almost in every Vision, a company of singers, as it were
in distinct Acts: least either John in the contemplation of so long a
Revelation, or we in the meditating thereon, should be over wearied.

We have heard the scope of this apparition. Now let us see who these singers
are, where they were, how, and what they sang. First the place is noted: A Sea
of glass mingled with Fire: the meaning whereof we shall the better
understand, when we know, what this company of singers is.

I saw them that had gotten the victory] If they got the victory over the
Beast, then the beast had fought with them, Who these harpers are.
to wit the same who made war with the Saints Chap. 13. verse 7. These Harpers
therefore are those Saints there mentioned. The success of the war is not
prosperous to the Beast, he sought to devour them: but on the contrary he
himself was vanquished, though indeed it was a bloody victory to the Saints.
This divine miracle ought to animate the godly cheerfully to fight against the
Beast.

But how do the Saints overcome the Beast: seeing in Chap. 13.15. the second
beast caused all that would not worship the first to be slain? How they
overcame the beast.
how then do they conquer, seeing they are slain?

I answer: the victory of the Saints is spiritual: They are indeed bodily
overcome and slain by the Beast, suffering punishments and torments this way:
yet spiritually they overcome the beast, while by refuting and condemning his
false and idolatrous worship, they constantly persist both in life and death in
the true faith of Christ: This is the victory of the holy Martyrs and
Confessors, of which it is said: 1. Ioh. 5.4
The victory that overcomes the world is our faith. It is bloody indeed, and
not obtained without great resistance, yet it so far excels all the triumphs
of Alexander and Caesar, by how much the Beast is more cruel then those
Monarchs. They by force of arms brought some part of the world under their
power: But to this Beast the Dragon gave great power, so as the whole world
followed and wondered after the same.

This victory of the Saints John makes as it were fourfold. The victory of the
Saints foretold.


I. They got the victory over the beast] that is, over Antichrist himself,
whose power, threatening, and Tyranny they despised and contemned, cleaving
constantly unto Christ.

II. Over his Image] to wit, which he caused to be made for him by the
Inhabitants of the earth. This we have showed to be that whole Idol worship, by
which the worshippers of the Beast rage againstall, who refuse to adore him and
his Image: Now to contemn this so great a madness, and overcome it by their
blood, is to get the victory over the Image of the beast.

III. Over his character] viz. which the second beast caused to be imprinted in
the right hand or foreheads of the worshippers of the first beast. Chap. 13.
verse 16. This we showed to be both a common and special obligation to the
profession and worship of Antichrist. Over this Character the Saints and
Professors get the victory when they cast off the beasts religion, and
constantly refuse to be obedient unto him.

IV. Over the number of his name] which in Chap. 13. verse. 8. he showed was
666. being Antichrists national name expressed in the Hebrew letters of
ROMANVS, and the Greek LATEINOS, as before we showed. Over this number and name
also the Saints get the victory, by communicating no more in the Romish
Idolatry, Latin service, Masses, etc. This is the victory for which the
company of harpers sing songs of Praises to God. Whether these harpers are the
Martyrs or other Professors.


But are these harpers the Martyrs in Heaven, or the faithful in the Church
Militant? Some interpret it of the Church Triumphant, others of the Church
Militant, applying it to the Protestant Churches in Germany, France, England,
and other places, who are said to have overcome the beast, by casting off the
yoke of the Pope, having obtained the liberty of a more sincere doctrine from
their Emperors and Kings.

For my part I understand it simply to be the same company of harpers, who in
the foregoing Vision Chap. 14. ver. 3. by a new song did gratulate the company
of sealed ones, standing with the Lamb on Mount Sion. Nevertheless Brightmans
opinon is not altogether to be rejected, because the word (...) who overcome,
is in the present tense: for if the triumphant Church were only meant: he
would have said in the preterperfect (...), or in the Aorist (...) who have, or
had gotten the Victory: The participle therefore (...) being put in the present
does also include such who obtain Victory over the beast even in this life.

Furthermore from this place there arises unto us a most sweet consolation,
touching the spiritual victory we obtain over the beast by the sincerity and
constancy of our faith, although the Beast bite, kick, persecute and kill us:
It serves also to stir us up stoutly to resist him. Besides it furnishes us
with three things, for the true understanding of the foregoing matter. The
Seabeast is Antichrist.


First, that the former beast ascending out of the Sea, could not be the old
Roman Empire, but necessarily Antichrist: The reason is, because these holy
harpers, sing not a triumphant song for any conquest they had over the Roman
Empire, seeing they never made war against it: for Christians according to the
precept of the Apostle were always obedient to Emperors: The Seabeast and
that rising out of the earth is the same Antichrist.
but they celebrate the victory over Antichrist, with his sinful deceits and
inventions.

Secondly, that the first and second beast in a diverse respect, denotes one and
the same Antichrist, as before we have declared: The reason is, because one,
that is the former is only mentioned, who being overcome the latter was so
likewise: Now the Saints rejoiced and sung because Antichrist was overcome.

Thirdly, Antichrists Kingdom cannot be straightened to four years.
that Antichrists Kingdom cannot possible be restrained to the space of four
years, as the Papists will have it: The reason is because many Martyrs and
Professors had already gotten the victory over Antichrist, before the Plagues
were poured out upon the throne and worshippers of the beast. Now all the
plagues cannot be comprehended within so short a space, but must longer torment
the followers of Antichrist, as we shall see hereafter. Therefore it
necessarily follows, that Antichrist bare sway and made war with the Saints
long before those four years, forasmuch as here it is said he was overcome by
them. Thus much touching the persons of the Harpers: now let us see where they
were.

I saw as it were a sea of glasse] Lyra (whom Gagnaeus follows) makes this
sea the Sacrament of Baptism: which is glass, that is, pure: mingled with
fire, that is, with the regenetating grace of the holy Ghost. Andreas will have
it to be meant of the multitude of them that shall be saved, in which sense the
sea and harpers should be the same: which is not proper. Lambertus, of the
large knowledge of the truth: Brightman, the doctrine of the Gospel, said to
be glass, that is, perspicuous and clear: but mingled with Fire, to wit, of
contentions and strifes which Satan has raised amongst the teachers of the
Gospel. But these opinions I pass by.

Before in Chap. 4. verse 6. John saw before the throne, a sea of glass like
to crystal, which is the purest glass. Now here he sees the same sea: It
denotes the world of wicked men. Ribera rightly calls it the multitude
following Antichrist, for the sea is called a gathering of waters: The waters
are the wicked nations obeying Antichrist, as in Chap. 17. And Ierem. 51.42.
Cyrus Army that vanquished Babylon is called, a sea coming up upon her and
covering her with the multitude of the waves thereof. The sea therefore is a
gathering of people, or the whole multitude of the ungodly, that is, the world
tossed like the Sea with many waves and confusions.

It is of glass, Why the sea is said to be glass.
so said, first because it is clear as glass, that is perspicuous and open to
the eyes of God: for God sees the secret counsels and hidden endeavors of the
world and Antichrist: secondly, because it is bright like Crystal: for the
pomp and luster of the world bewitcheth Antichristians. Thirdly, because its
weak and brickle as glass: for the world passes away with the lust thereof.
The favor and prosperity of the world is glassie, for when it most shines it
is then broken. Lastly, The sea for the most part is like glass in color:
hence the Poets call the Sea Mare vitreum, undas vitreas, the glassie Sea and
glassie waves. It is mingled with fire, viz. of afflictions and calamities, in
which the godly also are often involved: however they stand as conquerours upon
this sea, because they trample the world with the delights and baits thereof
under feet: neither are they of the world, nor removed from their station by
the fire of affliction, but persist constantly in the faith unto the end. This
indeed the Saints triumphant have fully attained unto, and we, who are yet in
the body in part: for it is our duty also to stand on the sea, that is, to
trample the world under our feet. Or they stand (...) nigh or besides the sea]
because they are not part of the sea or world, but separated and redeemed from
the world, as in Chap. 14. ver. 4. And this sense I like best: because by the
following verse it appears, here is an allusion to the red sea, by which the
Israelites standing, saw the Egyptians drowned, and rejoicing over their
destruction, sang songs of praises to God.

Having the harps of God] By an hebraisme the harps of God are put for such as
are rare and of a most sweet sound: The harps of God.
for with the Hebrews whatsoever are said to be the things of God, are
excelling things, worthy his high Majesty: so the mountains of God, the
Caedars of God, the City of God, that is, very high and great. It is opposed to
the harpes of David and of other Saints, by which they sometimes praised God.
These are infinitely sweeter in sound: for these harpers sang a new song which
none could learn but they that were marked with the seal of God: unknown also
to the former Saints, viz. touching the weakening and ruin of Antichrists
kingdom by these harpes, that is, by the preaching, Prayers, and sweet
confessions of these Champions.

3. And they sing] for, they sang, viz. with their harpes, together with their
voices, like to joyful harpers. But what sing they? The song of Moses the
servant of God] We have a twofold song of Moses: One of thanksgiving which he
sang with the Israelites by the red sea, for the overthrow of Pharaoh and the
Egyptians: I will sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed glorioussy, the
horse and his rider has he thrown into the sea: Exodus 15.1. The other of
praises, celebrating Gods wonderful benefits unto the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 32.
Both may be here understood, but chiefly the former, because of the
similitude: for as then the Israelites standing by the red sea, sang with Moses
their leader a triumphant song unto God for the drowning their adversaries,
under whose bondage they had a long time groaned: so the saints being brought
through the vast sea of this world, do jointly sing praises to God, and bless
him for their deliverance from the most cruel bondage of Antichrist. And
hereby they intimate not obscurely that Pharaoh and the Egyptian servitude was
a figure of the Churches bondage under Antichrist.

And the song of the Lambe] that is, praising the Lamb for his benefits
bestowed on the Church.

Diverse songs we have already heard. In Chap. 4.11. The songs of the Revelation.
The elders sing to him that sat on the throne: Thou art worthy O Lord to
receive glory. Chap. 5.9. The Elders again sing a new song to the Lamb: Thou
art worthy to take the Book and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast
slain and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, and have made us Kings and
Priests to our God, etc. Unto which song the Angels and all creatures do there
by mutual accord sing Amen. Chap. 11.17. they likewise sing to God: We give
thee thanks Lord God Almighty, etc. A like song we heard Chapter 2. ver. 10.
Now is come salvation and strength, and the Kingdom of our God, etc. Again in
Chap. 14. the company of harpers sang a new song to the Lamb standing on Mount
Sion. This therefore is the song of the Lamb, by which the triumphant Church,
or the heavenly companies celebrate the Lambs victory, and their own over
Antichrist. Now this title affords a clear argument to prove the divinity of
the Lamb, 34. Argument of Christ's deity.
considering that to him this wonderful work of the conquest over the beast
is attributed by the Saints. But now let us hear the song.

It seems to be collected out of diverse places of the Psalms and Prophets, by
which these divine singers commend unto us the authority and dignity of the
Scriptures. As from Psalm. 86.10. they publish the great and wonderful works
of God. Great, because they fill heaven and earth: Wonderful, because they are
unsearchable and beyond humane reason: such are the works of creation, and the
government of the world, our redemption, and preservation of the Church in this
life. from Psalm. 25.10. they celebrate the true and righteous ways of the
Lord: for all his paths are mercy and truth. Gods ways are his counsels and
judgments about the Church and the enemies thereof: And though he suffers the
godly to be afflicted and fore troubled, and the enemies to bear sway and
flourish, which indeed seems unjust to flesh and blood, yet the ways of
Jehovah are righteous: for he knows wherefore he does the same, and the event
shows that his ways are all right and good: for in the end he performs his
promise to the Saints, in preserving and delivering the Church, and in
punishing and destroying the adversaries: by which he declares that he is
constant in his promises, true and omnipotent in his threatening.

Lord Almighty, King of Saints, Thou only art holy] By these Epithites the
Saints extol God above all adversaries, and stir up their own confidence and
joy, for seeing he is omnipotent, he can easily cast down his enemies. If King
of Saints, then he can strongly defend his holy Church: If only holy, or most
pure, then he alone, (not the creatures) is to be served and cleaved unto.
(...) O King of Saints] so all greek copies read it, excepting Montanus, who
reads it (...) King of the Nations, and also Andreas from Ierem. 10.7. Who
would not fear thee O King of nations? The old Latin: (...) King of eternity,
which the interpreter seems to have read for (...) of Saints.

4. Who shall not fear thee O Lord] An exclamation taken out of Ierem. 10.7.
Or rather out of the everlasting Gospel Rev. 14. ver. 7. where the first
Angel cried: Fear God, and glorify his Name: They show the madness of the
Antichristian adversaries, who lift up their horns against Almighty God and
the Lamb; and the stupidity of the world, which is not moved by the
consideration of the great and wonderful works of God to fear and glorify
him. To fear God is in true faith and obedience to submit to God. To glorify
God, is not to make him glorious, as if he were not so before, but to celebrate
his due glory and praise Only holy] They condemn the pride of Antichrist,
boasting himself to be holy and holiness: whereas God alone is holy and
holiness it self, purifying the heart, and sanctifying the elect. For all
nations shall come] As in Psalm. 86.9. All Nations whom thou have made shall
come and worship before thee O Lord, and shall glorify thy Name: showing not
absolutely what all shall do, but what all ought to do: the Antichristian
adversaries shall never come: for they will not amend by their plagues, but
persevere in their Idolatry and rage against God, as we shall see in the fourth
and fifth Vial. Nevertheless some remnants of the Christian nations shall come
adoring and worshipping God sincerely through Jesus Christ: to wit, the elect
in Italy, Germany, France, England, etc.

The Church therefore celebrates the effect of the Gospel in the last times,
that she shall not decrease amidst her diverse afflictions, but be increased by
diverse nations: who forsaking Antichrist (his fraud being discovered) shall
turn to Christ. Which effect the Antichristians have now a long time seen, and
we yet daily do: And God grant that our posterity may see the like more and
more.

For thy judgments are made manifest] That is, are begun to be manifested: for
as yet they speak not of the final judgment, nor generally of Gods ancient
judgments, but they celebrate in special those wonderful judgments of his,
by which he began in these last times to weaken Antichrists kingdom, and bring
the Church into the liberty of Christ: for it is wonderful to consider that
the power and authority of Antichrist, which had so long been formidable to
Christian Emperors, and Kings, as causing them like so many unreasonable dogs
to cast down themselves and lick his feet, and as most vile slaves to hold the
bridle or stirrup while he mounted on horseback, should by the preaching and
ministry of a few poor and contemptible teachers, be exposed to the common
contempt of men, insomuch as no man but the Popes sworn vassalls, should any
more stand in awe of his anathemaes and threatenings: Now this work, these
Celestial harpers do worthily pronounce not to be of man, but a wonderful
judgment of God, for the which he ought to be praised continually of all
creatures.

The sense therefore is, that because God in the last times by the preaching of
the Gospel has manifested Antichrist, and by his wonderful judgment poured
contempt upon him, it shall come to pass, that by degrees one Nation after
another shall leave him, and be converted to Christ: and so indeed it shall be.
Only let not us by our sins stop this judgment of God, which he has begun to
reveal. Thus much of the Triumphant Song.

The third part of the Chapter. The Furniture and clothing of the seven Angels.
5 And after that I looked, and behold the Temple of the Tabernacle of the
Testimony in Heaven was opened. 6 And the seven Angels came out of the Temple,
having the seven Plagues clothed in pure and white linen, and having their
breasts girded with golden girdles. 7 And one of the four beasts gave unto the
seven Angels, seven golden Vialls, full of the wrath of God who lives for
ever and ever. 8 And the Temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God,
and from his power, and no man was able to enter into the Temple, till the
seven plagues of the seven Angels were fullfilled.
THE COMMENTARY.
5. ANd after that I looked, And the Temple was opened] After the celestial
interlude, John returns to the description of the Angels, declaring from
whence they came forth, in what habit, what the Vessels were wherein they bore
the Plagues that were to be poured out, whence they received them, and what he
saw in Heaven during the time thereof: such was the Furniture of the Angels to
declare the judgments of God, the which, as it appears, is dramatically
inserted, to illustrate the order of the Vision. Now whether in every of the
particulars lie hid such mysteries as some look after, I know not, neither do
I believe it. But as in dramaticall shows, the preamble of the singers being
ended, the Sceenes are opened, and other persons come forth in new apparel to
act other things: so these Angels came out of the Temple, that was open in
heaven, unto a new Act of this Revelation.

6. And the seven Angels came out of the temple] Who these Angels were, we
shall more fitly manifest in the following Chapter.

In that they came out of the temple in Heaven, most do hereby understand the
holy and irrevocable judgment of God against Antichrist. For it shall be most
righteous, although the wicked shall gnash their teeth against it, and gnaw
their tongues.

Some understand hereby to be signified, that God judges according to the
decrees of his word, preached by his Ministers the Angels: because the
ministry here on earth is instituted according to the heavenly pattern: Or
also, that all Antichrists plagues proceed from Christ the high Priest of the
heavenly Tabernacle: now these things being plous I reject not: but leave to
the judgment of the Reader.

Clothed in pure linne^] The old Version has it, having on a pure stone, which
is a manifest error, as Alcasar the Jesuit acknowledges and corrects:
Ribera confesses it also, but does not correct it, yea on the contrary he
labors to establish or hide the apparent untruth of that version, to the end
it might remain authenticke, but with what conscience it may easily appear.

The pure linen garment, some expound of the joy of the Angels, because of
the judgment of the wicked: Others of Angelical purity.

With a golden girdle about the breast] This some understand of the love of
Angels toward such as here on earth exercise themselves in the worship of
God: Others, of their strength in executing the commandments of God: 1. Pet:
2.13 Ephesians. 6.14
in which sense a girdle is generally taken in scripture: for the garment not
being girt up hinders in going. They are golden girdles, so before in Chap.
1.13. Christ appeared, the which we interpreted of the Majesty of Christ:
Therefore the Angels have golden girdles representing as it were the Majesty
of Christ their Lord. But these mysteries in my opinion have little solidity in
them, for I judge that this habit Imports nothing else but to set forth the
Angelical decency: Angels have no bodies, but are spirits: yet they take
corporal forms for our sakes: neither is it meet they should appear naked,
but some clothing was requisite for them, howbeit not common but holy garments,
such as God of old prescribed to the Priests and Levites, which were of linen,
long, white and girded with a girdle: In such habit the Angels commonly
appeared: so Ezech. 9. verse 2. the sealing Angel appears clothed with linen:
so the two Angels at Christ's resurrection, Luke ^.24 Ioh. 20.11
which appeared to Mary were clothed in white and shining garments: And again
at his ascension, Acts 1.10. Let this suffice.

7. And one of the four beasts] Of these beast we heard Chap. 4.6. and 5.6.
and 6.1. and 7.11. and 14.3. One of them gives to the seven Angels the seven
golden Vialls. We need not enquire whether it were the first or second, or why
one, and not rather two or all four. Also in Chap. 5.8. the Elders and beasts
had seven vialls but full of odours, which were the prayers and thansgivings of
the Saints: here they are full of Gods wrath: The former I leave, and retain
the dramaticall Allegory.

The plagues of Gods judgments are metaphorically called the wine of the wrath
of God Chap. 14.10. Wine is drunk out of cups, pots, and vialls. In Chap.
14.10. the third Angel threatened to the worshippers of the beast, a mixed cup,
and full with the wine of Gods fury: here he shows how God will dispense the
same unto them. That great cup he devideth into seven Vialls, that is, into
diverse kinds of punishments, to be poured out by these Angels. A Viall] the
Greek phiala as it were piala from (...) to drink) as Athenaeus will have it,
contains so much as a man can drink at a draught, and says it is greater
then a cup: which agrees not with the place here, for out of this cup the seven
vialls are filled with the wine of Gods wrath: And therefore the Vialls were
less then the cup. It is needless (I suppose) to seek a mystery, in that they
are said to be golden ones: for they are so called according to the customary
use, because Vialls are not wont to be made but of gold or of silver.

The Epithet of GOD living for ever and ever does amplify the heaviness of
his wrath, as if he should say, This shall be a terrible wrath, because it
shall endure for ever and ever: Thus he signifies that both temporal and
eternal punishment does wait for the wicked.

8. And the Temple was filled with smoake] John saw moreover two things, which
put an end to the preparation: First, The temple was filled with smoke
proceeding from the Majesty and power of God: And secondly no man could enter
into the temple, until the seven plagues were fullfilled. Here he manifestly
alludes to the History of the tabernacle, Ex. 40.33
which in the dedication thereof was wholly filled with a cloud of the glory of
the Lord, so as Moses could not enter into it: And to the history of the
Temple, 1: King 8.10.
which likewise at the dedication was filled with the cloud of the glory of
God, so as the Priests could not stand to minister, so long as the glory of
Jehovah filled the house.

That cloud was undoubtedly a sign of Gods gracious presence in the Temple and
Tabernacle, Whether the cloud be a sign of grace or wrath.
of his approving the worship therein, and his hearing the prayers there poured
out to God. But this smoke cannot be any such sign, seeing here is not
treated of the worship and prayers of the Saints made in the heavenly Temple:
But of the plagues of the wrath of God to be hence poured forth upon the
adversaries. Interpreters therefore are of diverse opinions, and much troubled
about it.

Most will have it to signify in the thesis, that Gods judgments are
unsearchable, and however they are most righteous, yet are they not so
acknowledged until they are accomplished, because this smoke hinders the
knowledge thereof: the which indeed is true, but too general.

Others confess that the smoke is a sign not of grace, but of the wrath of
God, because of the disparatie between the cloud and smoke. But yet they do
not sufficiently expound wherefore the wrath of God filled the Temple in
Heaven, and who were kept out of the same, and how long.

Ambrose and Arethas expound this latter (as Ribera says) that no man in body
and soul shall enter into heavenly blessedness, until the seven plagues are
ended, that is, until the Day of Judgment. But what is this to the present
matter.

I acknowledge the allusion of the Histories, but I gather another sense from
the scope, viz, that the whole serves for the terror of Gods adversaries.

The smoke therefore is a symbol of Gods anger in his Temple, The authors
opinion:
and ready to inflict smoke, that is, horrible blindness on Antichristians,
yea even on their quicke-sighted and most acute Doctors and Sophisters, The
smoke of Gods wrath: Psa: 18:9.
so as none of them could enter into the Heavenly Temple, that is, understand
the just judgments of God, and that these plagues were inflicted on them by
God in wrath, because of their wicked Idolatry: and so cannot repent, until
the seven plagues were fullfilled, that is, never. For in Psalm. 73. ver. 17, by
entering into Gods Sanctuary, is signified, the acknowledging of his judgments.
This sense the events of the Vialls and plagues in the following Chapter will
make good unto us.

This smoke therefore denotes the blindness of Antichristians under their
punishment. It comes not out of the bottomless pit, but from the glory and
from the power of God, because it shall be inflicted by his most righteous and
powerful judgment, according to the threatening of the Apostle: 2. These. 2.11.
Therefore God will send them, etc. for seeing the Pope raised a smoke out of
the bottomless pit of hell Chap. 9. verse 2. therefore also he shall be
punished with smoke for ever and ever.

The universal No man I restrain to the Antichristian adversaries, who only
shall be kept from entering into the Temple, that is, from the acknowledging of
Gods judgments, and from repentance, as will appear in the following Chapter.

The particle Until I understand of eternity, as in the saying, Thou shall not
go out until thou have paid, that is, never: He knew her not until, for,
never: And indeed the plagues shall never be ended, because they shall proceed
from the glory of the living God, and from his anger against the Devil and his
instruments for ever and ever. The obstinacy and final blindness of
Antichristians is signified, of which we shall hear Chap. 16.9. They repented
not to give glory to God. And verse 11. They blasphemed the God of heaven, and
repented not of their deeds. This is my opinion touching the smoke, until I
understand that something more agreeable is alleged.

CHAPTER XVI. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis.
The Preparation of the Vision we heard: viz, Seven Angels stand in the
Theater of Heaven with seven Vialls full of the wrath of God ready to pour out
the same. Now follows the vision or the pouring of them out, with the events,
namely horrible plagues and the effects thereof: for the Angels having
received commandment, in order pour out the Vialls upon diverse elements and
places, whence follows the joy of the godly, the misery of the Antichristian
adversaries, and at last their rage and destruction.

THe Parts of the Chapter are two: The former contains the commandment of
God, verse 1. The second, the execution in the rest of the Chapter, distinct in
their pourings out according to the number of the Angels, and seven Vialls:
The first on the earth, with the effects thereof, A noisome sore fell on the
worshippers of the beast. verse 2. The second on the Sea, with its twofold
effect: The corrupting of the Sea, and death of all living creatures in it,
verse 3. The third on the Rivers, the effect whereof is first internal, the
waters are turned into blood. ver. 4. secondly, external, a twofold
gratulation. 1. of the Angel of the waters praising the righteousness of God,
ve. 5. in rendering like for like. ve. 6.2. Of a voice out of the Altar
assenting to the former, ver. 7. The fourth on the sun: the effect whereof is
threefold: 1. The scorching of men, ver. 89.2. Their blasphemies. 3. Their
impenitency, ibid.

The fifth on the throne of the beast, the internal effect whereof is the
darkning of the Antichristian Kingdom, ver. 10. and a twofold external
effect, 1. blasphemies against God, and the moving cause: viz. their pains and
sores. 2. Their obstinacy in sin, ver. 11. The sixth on Euphrates, the
internal effect whereof is the drying up of the waters thereof, and the end of
it, to prepare the way for the Kings of the East: The external, three unclean
spirits, who are described, 1. by their original: out of the mouth of the
Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet: ver. 13. 2. By their figure or shape,
they are like to frogs, ibid. 3. by their disposition, it is divelish ver. 14.
4. By their cunning and impostures, working miracles, ibid. 5. By their
function or office: to raise up war against God, ibid. here an exhortation to
the Saints is inserted, in these troubles to be watchful, ver. 15. 6. By the
execution of their charge: the gathering of the enemies into Harmageddon, ver.
16. The seventh on the air, the event whereof is the last judgment or
consummation of all things: This is proclaimed, 1. By voice (...) it is done,
ver. 17. 2. It is figured in four types. 1. By horrible tempests, verse 18. 2.
By the division of Babylon, and the ruin of the cities of the Nations: And the
efficient cause hereof: Gods remembrance of Babylon ver. 19. 3. The flight of
the Islands and Mountains, ver. 20. 4. Hail of a talent weight falls on the
wicked, the effects whereof are blasphemies against God. v. 21.

Thus we have the Argument and Order of the Chapter: to the understanding
whereof it seems requisite in a general way to premise a few things. 1. Of
the scope, and of the seven Vialls, whether they be the same with the seven
Seals and seven Trumpets: 2. Of the seven Angels pouring out the same. 3. Of
the last Plagues following thereupon.


I. Of the Scope and Use of the Plagues: and of the seven Vialls, whether they
be the same with the seven Seals and seven Trumpets.
COnsidering that I spoke in the Preface of the Scope of the Vision, I will now
only add, that the consideration of the Order makes very much for the comfort
of the godly, and terror of the adversaries. In the former Vision indeed are
contained the plagues, by which the beast with his associates afflicted the
Saints. In the third Vision, the beast fought against and killed the two
witnesses, contumeliously abused their Carcasses, and the inhabiters of the
earth triumphed over them being slain: In the fourth Vision the Dragon
persecuted the woman, and made war with the remnant of her seed: The beast also
molested the Saints by War and overcame them, to the great applause of his
worshippers, and to them only it was permitted to buy and sell: such as
refused to worship the beast were slain. Thus the tyranny of the beast stood in
its vigor, and his kingdom flourished and was greatly admired at.

Here on the contrary we shall hear of the Plagues by which the beast and his
followers shall be tormented. Now in the end indeed of the foregoing vision
Babylon and the worshippers of the beast were vexed by the preaching of the
Angels: But in this Vision the Saints begin to sing in triumph over the beast,
and the Angels are joined to them pouring out seven Vials etc.

Touching these it may be demanded, whether they agree with the seven Seals
and seven Trumpets. It is answered, although there be some likeness of effects
in the six Trumpets, and six latter Vialls, yet the seven Vials do not
altogether answer to the seven Seals and seven Trumpets. The reason is plain
by verse 2. both of this and the foregoing Chapter from the time, because the
vialls begin to be poured out on the marked ones of the beast, Chap. 16.2. long
after the beasts rising, even when he was already in part overcome Chap. 15.2.
But the original of the beast is first treated of in the sixth Seal, and fifth
Trumpet, as we noted on ver. 1. of Chap. 13.

The pouring out therefore of the vialls followed after the opening of five
Seals, and the sounding of four Trumpets, the sixth Seal and fifth trumpet
being almost ended, and the fourth period of the Christian Church begun, which,
as we noted on Chap. 15.1. took its beginning from the measuring of the Temple
or Reformation of Evangelicall Doctrine in the West, and is to endure unto the
end.

II Of the seven Angels pouring out the Vialls, Who they are, and what the
pouring out of the Vialls is.
THese seven Angels are thought by most to be such preachers, whom Christ in
the last times will raise up against Antichrist, and according to their
threatening inflict these plagues on Antichristians. If so, then these Angels
of the fifth Vision, should analogically answer to the two witnesses of the
third Vision, and to the three angels of the fourth Vision: because all these
are publishers of the Gospel against Antichriste unless perhaps they so
differ in time, as what at first was done by two, that is a few, afterward was
done by three, that is more: and at last by seven, that is, very many were
raised up to oppose Popery. If we take this sense, then the golden Vialls given
to the Angels should be that golden and eternal gospel, which the first of
the three angels flying through the midst of heaven evangelized to the
inhabitants of the earth, saying with a great voice, Fear God, etc. Chap. 14.
ver. 6. And the pouring out of the vials should be the preaching of the
Gospel, which works indeed in the elect the fear of God, joy and life, 2 Cor
2.15
but to the marked ones of the Beast it occasioneth sores, diseases and death:
as the Apostle foretold: That the Gospel should be a savor of death unto
death to them that perish.

This sense Ribera the Jesuit likes not of, Because it is not the work of
Preachers to inflict plagues, but to foretell and denounce them, Riberas
opinion examined.
and to deter men from their evils. But these Angels says he, do not
foretell the plagues but inflict them. Therefore they are true Angels, by whom
the Lord inflicts plagues, with he does not by the Ministers of the Gospel.
But these things are not solid.

For first these Angels are not said to cause the plagues, but to pour out
the vialls of Gods fury: Therefore properly the plagues were caused by the
wrath of God. The angels were only ministers of the pouring out, which lets
not, but that it may metaphorically be understood of the publishing and
denouncing of the wrath of God. As God therefore by his ministers saves some,
and condemns others: so also he inflicts these plagues by their preaching.

Secondly, How far ministers of the word are said to cause plagues.
it is not absurd to say that the Preachers of the Word do inflict plagues,
because they communicate in the work of God, which he executes by them.
Therefore they are said to beget, and to save them that hear them: because in
this work they are (...) Co-workers with God. They are said to forgive sins,
because in the name of God they declare and confirm the remission of sins to
them that repent. 1 Cor. 4.15 1 Timothy 2.16 1. Cor. 3.9. Ioh. 20.21
Why then may they not also be said to strike the wicked with plagues and
condemn them, as being Co-workers with God that does the same? certainly in
Chap. 11. ver. 5. the two witnesses slew their enemies with fire that came out
of their mouth, and they had power to smite the earth with all manner of
plagues as often as they would. And therefore the Jesuits reason does not
weaken the former opinion, that they are preachers of the word, neither does he
solidly prove the contrary, that they should be real Angels forasmuch as God
does equally dispense his judgments as well by the preachers of the Gospel as
by Angels, although in a diverse manner.

What then? Who the Angels of the seven trumpets and of the seven vialls are.
I so judge touching these seven Angels of the Vialls, as of the seven Angels
of the trumpets. The six former might denote preachers: because at the sounding
of their Trumpets, the temporal events there described did happen. But the
seventh could not: because he openly denounced the last judgment as present;
Chap. 10.7. and Chap. 11.15. he therefore was that Archangell, by whose voice
and Trumpet the dead shall rise up at the coming of Christ. 1. These. 4.16. 1.
Cor. 15.52. now this no preacher can do.

So likewise these six former may signify ministers of the Word, because
during their Vialls the marked ones of the beast shall be smitten with these
plagues in this life: But the seventh proclaiming the consummation (...) It is
done, cannot be any other, but that Archangell the chief Herald of Christ the
judge: nevertheless (as before I noted) there is no necessity to fasten on
this exposition: for the angels which John saw, were so in appearance, and
ministers of the plagues in a Vision: by which representations God showed to
John, what he was about to do: what kind of plagues he would inflict on
antichristians toward the time of the measuring of the Temple and Reformation
of the Church. But there is no necessity urging us to affirm, that he
precisely showed unto him the manner and persons, that is how, and by whom he
would accomplish the same.

III. Touching the Plagues that followed the pouring out of the VIALS.
LAstly touching the plagues it is demanded, whether they are properly or
allegorically to be understood, and whether they are to fall universally on all
antichristians, or on some only, and in what time every one of them is to be
inflicted, and after how long time one is to follow the other? The two latter
of these questions, touching the time, are more curious then profitable, seeing
they can hardly be defined by the understanding of man, further then has been
formerly spoken of the beginning and end of the vialls: Whence it is most
certain that Antichrist shall reign much longer then four Years.

For the other question on whom they are to be inflicted, whether universally
on all, or on some only, we shall learn by the several vialls.

Lastly it were in vain generally to dispute touching the quality of the
plagues: seeing we shall more rightly understand every of them apart in their
places.

Ribera indeed thinks that all of them are to be taken literally, because
these plagues are like to those of the Egyptians, which happened not
metaphoricallie, but literally: him Alcasar refutes, and interprets the
plagues mystically: yet however it sufficiently appears there is an allusion
unto the plagues of Egypt: notwithstanding neither are they all alike, nor
would a litterall sense hence follow: for the history it self is one thing, and
a Vision alluding to the history another. In the History all those things
happened really to the sense: in the Vision all these things are aenigmaticall,
as, the Angels, Vials, pouring out, etc. And therefore we may not doubt that
the plagues also are aenigmatically set forth. Now we will speak of every of
them in order.

CHAP. XVI. The first Part of the Chapter.
A Command touching the pouring out of the Vialls.
1 And I heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying to the seven Angels, Go
your vvayes and pour out the seven Vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.

THE COMMENTARY.
I. ANd I heard a great voyce] The Angels having received the Vialls full of
Gods wrath in Heaven, do not hasten to pour them out, but wait for a heavenly
Commandment to do the same: for the ministers of God neither do, nor indeed
may do any thing against the wicked of private affection, but in all things are
to contain themselves within the limits of their vocation, that so they may
righteously execute the judgments of God. John therefore heard A great voice,
that is, vehement and terrible: like as he heard Chap. 1. ver. 10. and Chap. 6.
ver. 1. and Chap. 11. ver. 12. and doubtless it was the Lamb, or of God
sitting on the throne as chief moderator of the plagues: Out of the temple,
which ere while was filled with the smoke of the glory and power of God. Pour
out the seven Vialls of Gods Wrath] that is, of my wrath. If we understand
this of the pouring out of the preaching of the Law and Gospel against
Antichrist, then the commandment here is a testimony of the divine calling of
such ministers as in these last times have opposed the Roman Antichrist, the
Popish Sophisters do enquire after their calling, by whose commandment they
are sent, or who ordained them to preach the Gospel against the Church of
Rome? here they may see a commandment, Go, pour out. But if it be understood
of the infliction it self of the plagues, then the commandment is a testimony
of Gods providence, not only in permitting them to be inflicted on the wicked,
but also commanding his ministers, and himself powerfully inflicting the same
by them. In vain therefore do the Antichristian adversaries rise up, and
tyrannically rage against the ministers of God, and publishers of the Gospel:
for herein they have to do with God himself. They are also deceived in
thinking it is by chance that they are overwhelmed by so many plagues: for they
lie under Gods hand, avenging his own glory

Pour out] this is a word of aggravation: They are not bid to let fall the
plagues by drops as it were, but to pour them forth abundantly on the heads of
wicked men, that they may feel the weight of Gods hand.

On the earth] the first Vial was only poured out on the earth, and all the
rest on other elements, as the Sea, Rivers, Sun, Air, etc. Therefore it is a
Synecdoche, one part being put for all: for the calamities of all the other
parts or vials shall also fall on the earth, that is on the inhabitants of the
earth, by which name the idolatrous worshippers of the beast are always
signified in this Prophecy.

The pouring out of the first Vial upon the earth.
2. And the first went, and poured out his Vial upon the earth, and there
fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the
Beast, and upon them which worshipped his Image.
THE COMMENTARY.
II. AND the first went] To wit, the first Angel: here we may note the
readiness and prudencie of the Angels in executing the commandment of God:
for being bidden to go and pour out, the word is no sooner spoken, but they
incontinently do it, yet not confusedly, but every one in order, and upon such
parts as they were commanded, although for brevity sake John does not express
the distribution of the Commandment. Here obedience unto the precepts of God
is commended unto us: and likewise it signifies that the troubles of the
adversaries even in this life shall long endure, and follow one upon another:
for all the evils shall not be pour' dout in one month, or yeet, or four
years, (as the common fiction is) but the seven plagues shall succeed each
other in order, that is, the Antichristians shall be vexed most grievously and
a long while by many divine judgments, until such as are recoverable, being
broken by their long continued affliction shall repent: and the rest that are
incorrigible perish without excuse For the word seven, as before, I take
indefinitely for a full and perfect number: as in Levit. 26.28. I will smite
you seven times for your sins.

On the earth] This (as I said) is either by a synecdoche put for the
inhabiters of the earth, on whom all the seven vialls are to be poured out: Or
by the earth; in a stricter sense is signified certain regions of the earth,
on which indeed the first vial was poured out, but the effect thereof was on
all the inhabitants of the earth. Now what was done? A noisome and grievous
sore] Greek (...) An evil and miserable boil or botch. The old version: a
very evil and cruel wound, but improperly: for he says not (...) a wound,
but (...) an ulcer, that is, a filthy and incurable discase, as biles and
venomous impostumes, which in a few hours disperse their poison into the heart,
and either kill or make men to run mad.

(...) Upon men] Beza, against men. He expounds and limiteth the foregoing
words, upon the earth: neither are all men promiscuously smitten with these
boyles, but the marked ones of the beast, and worshippers of his Image: now who
they are we have heard Chap. 13. ver. 16. and Chap. 15. ver, 2. viz. both great
and small, rich and poor, bond and free, who alone had power to buy, sell, and
exercise the Antichristian trade or merchandise. It is plain he alludes to the
sixth Egyptian plague, by which the Egyptians, and their Magicians also were
smitten with boyles breaking forth with blaines, so as they could not stand
before Pharaoh: but the Israelites were not touched by them: so these boiles or
fores shall not touch the Angels or ministers of the Vialls, and other
conquerours of the beast, although they also shall be in the earth, but only
the adherents of the beast. Here it may be demanded whether the beast shall be
free? not in the least, but for brevity sake he is not mentioned, nor such as
have the number of his name: because immediately a peculiar and grievous plague
attends both him and his throne.

Now let us see what manner of fore this is, Lyras opinion.
Lyra takes this first Angel to be Pope Hadrian pouring out Anno 740. the
boil of excommunication upon Constantine, whom he calls Iconomachus or
Image-breaker. The Popes excommunication is a noisome sore.
Rightly indeed he calls the Papal excommunication a boil: for never was
there a more cruel pest depopulating the Church then it: however it is not to
the purpose here: because this is a plague of the last times.

Which thing Fox not observing (otherwise a diligent interpreter of the
Revelation) very unfitly applies this noisome sore unto the raging pestilence
which a little before the Diocletian persecution (for fifteen years together)
over spread the whole Roman Empire under Gallus and Volusianus about the year
125. In which sense this plague should not at all belong unto the worshippers
of the beast in these times. Riberas opinion.


Ribera understands it properly of incurable Ulcers, lying hid in the inward
parts of the body, (like to the sixth Egyptian plague) with which the
worshippers of his feined Antichrist shall be tormented. Bullinger also and
Aretius interpret it of the Spanish or French disease, common to the Clergy in
their impure single life. Others apply it to other grievous diseases. But such
the godly also are incident too: But not to the boil or sore of this Vial.

Andreas therefore more rightly understands it of spiritual ulcers, or inward
tortures and pangs of a corrupted heart, continually like a Scorpion biting and
gnawing the minds of Apostates, that is, because Antichrist whom they
worshipped as God, cannot help them in their plagues and distresses.
Notwithstanding he adds, that happily external ulcers also shall torment
their bodies, to augment the grief and torment of their ulcerous consciences.

Brightman does well observe that the construction it self (There came a
noisome and grievous sore upon men, for, in men) does intimate an inward ulcer,
inwardly troubling and vexing the hearts and consciences of men, and he adds
withal it is nothing else but malice and envy, Hora. lib. Ep. 2.
then which the Sicilian Tyrants could not devise a more exquisite torment, etc.

By which indeed the Papists were wonderfully tormented at the pouring out of
this Vial: for as soon as Luther began to oppose popish Indulgences in Saxony,
Zwinglius and Oecolampadius to extinguish Purgatory in Helvetia: It is
wonderful to consider what hatred, malice, sorrow, fury, and madness these
ulcerous Priests, Monks, Schoolmen, Cannonists, and Bishops were possessed
with, what arguments and counsels sought they not, to extinguish this new
flame? Certainly this grief was more tedious and painful unto them, then any
Egyptian ulcer.

The first Vial therefore being poured upon the earth, that is, on the Regions
of Bohemia, Germany, and a while after on France, England, Denmark, etc.
begat foul ulcers in the minds of the Papists, which are so far from being
cured as yet, as on the contrary we see the Monks and Sophisters of our time
more ulcerous then those of old.

I apply the Earth, The first vial chiefly fell on Germany.
under the first Vial principally unto Germany, because (I know not by what
destiny) Antichrist has more bewitched the Germans then other people, so as
they are ready to believe, do, or suffer any thing whatsoever, for the sake of
the beast, yea some have not been ashamed to boast, that the Germans, at the
Popes Commandment, for the redemption of souls, would with the beasts of the
field have eaten grass, had it not bin for Luther: O wretched soil! yet by
how much Germany was deeply drowned in the Gulf of Superstitions, by so much
the Lord in mercy has pitied them, and vouchsafed the greater grace unto
them, above other Nations. For though it is true indeed, that the first Vial
being poured out on this earth, occasioned a noisome and filthy ulcer on the
worshippers of Antichrist: yet on others who overcame the beast, it wrought the
true fear of God, increase of joy, and to be short, it recalled the greater
part thereof, from Antichrist to Christ, as we may see at this day.

CHAPTER XVI. The pouring out of the second Vial on the Sea,
3 And the second Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sea, and it became as
the blood of a dead man: and every living soul died in the Sea.
THE COMMENTARY.
III. ANd the second Angel powered out] The first plague has wrought but
little effect on the skabbie Monks, for as yet they many ways bewray that
ulcer of venom and malice which lies hid in their hearts against the Gospel,
neither will they suffer themselves to be cured, being blinded by a just
judgment of God. Ex. 7.20,
And therefore the second Angel proceeds to pour out the wrath of God upon
the Sea, which became as the blood of a dead man] that is, corrupted and
filthy: and every living soul died, etc. It is a plain allusion unto the
first Egyptian plague: when Moses turned the waters of Nilus into blood, that
the Egyptians could not drink thereof, and all the Fishes of the River dyed.
Now we come to the meaning.

Some take it according to the letter, The litterall exposition of Andreas and
Ribera.
that the Sea is to be turned into blood, either miraculously by Elias and
Enoch, as of old by Moses: or else by the slaughter of Sea-combats (and such as
dwell near the Sea) under Antichrist. So Andreas whom Ribera follows, All
things shall be so as is here spoken. The Sea shall be like to blood, which is
poured out when a man is slain: or it shall be so red as if it were dyed with
the blood of many men, and all Fishes in it shall die, as in the River of Egypt.

But the greater part of Interpreters acknowledge that this corrupting of the
Sea is mystically to be understood: for indeed the turning of the Ocean into
blood, It cannot hold.
cannot be a more heavy plague to Antichrist, then to the rest of the sons of
men: The loss also of the Fishes would be common to others as well as to him:
yea his loss would be less: for being the greatest Monarch he could the
easier bear it, though there should not be a Fish left alive in the whole Sea,
seeing the Land can furnish him with infinite dainties: Therefore we must not
at all keep to the Letter.

To come therefore to the mystery, Lyras opinion.
first I pass by the historical gloss of Lyra, touching Charles the Great,
who, as he says, poured out this Vial, that is, the vengeance of God upon the
Sea, viz. on the Saxons whom he vanquished, which are signified by the Sea,
because of the multitude of that people. The conjecture of Gagnaeus.


I pass by also the conjecture of Gagnaeus the Popish Commentator, that the
sea signifies the gentiles, because of their manifold worshippings of diverse
gods whose blood (whether it be corporally or spiritually taken) is largely to
be poured out. But they err from the Scope, not observing that here is
treated of the plagues of Antichrist.

Most of our Interpreters understand the sea to be the world, or the chief men
of the world, or Ilanders, who shall become like corrupted blood, because God
will bring upon them all kinds of horrible wars, pestilence and destruction,
that every soul, that is, the greater part of the wicked shall miserably
perish, or, that all that assent to Antichrist in persecuting of the Saints
shall perish through final damnation: which opinion is not unfit, yet too
general: forasmuch as the world was never free from war, pestilence, and
destruction: And the godly have always had no less share in these evils then
others: but these plagues shall be peculiar to Antichristians.

Therefore we are more nearly to consider what this sea is: What this Sea is.
whether that of Glass which John saw before the throne Chap. 4.6. and on
which stood the Conquerours of the beast Chap. 15.2? But it seems not to be
the same, because this here is a watery Sea, the other of glass. Again,
whether it be that into which the burning Mountain was cast, Chap. 8.9? It is
not, for that denoted the world of the faithful, that is, the Church, which
the Mountain of the Roman Empire had almost overwhelmed: But this here is the
Antichristian SEA, because one of the last plagues is poured upon it.

Or, whether it be that out of which the Beast ascended, Chap. 13. ver. 1? It
seems to be the same: for the sea there spoken of, may be taken two ways:
either for the pit, whence the beast ascended, Chap. 11.7. but so it is not
here taken: Or for the vile assembly of Episcopal councels by whose authority,
chiefly after the sixth age, the Monarchical power of the Romish chair was
established: thus it should be the same. Therefore Brightman does not unfitly
(as it seems) determine, that this sea, is the Council of Trent, into which
from the year 1545. unto 1563. under five Popes, viz. Paulus 3. Julius 3,
Marcellus 2. Paulus 4. and Pius 4. the Rivers and Fountains out of all parts
of the Antichristian world did unburthen themselves as it were into a Sea, that
is, thither were gathered 9. Cardinals, 3. Patriarchs, 33. Archbishops, 233.
Bishops, 7. Abbats, 8. Generals, 4. Counselors at Law, 149. Divines, 11.
Vicars of Bishops, in all 467. together with an infinite number of servants,
Pages, and Scullions out of every Nation, Tribe, and tongue: For the Angels
going forward to pour out Gods Vialls, that former grievous ulcer compelled the
Antichristians to flow to the Latin Sea to get remedy for their disease. But
what was done? The waters of the sea became as the blood of a dead man, that
is, corrupted and mortal, hence every soul living in the sea dyed, for the
Decrees of Trent were bloody, that is written (and so indeed generally they
were) with the blood of heretics: But (being false and destructive) by their
filthy and deadly savor, they killed the souls of all living creatures,
swimming or seeking for life in this sea.

CHAP XVI. The pouring out of the Third Vial on the Rivers and Fountains of
Waters.
4 And the third Angel poured out his Vial upon the Rivers and Fountains of
waters, and they became blood. 5 And I heard the Angel of the waters say, Thou
art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shall be, because thou have
judged thus. 6 For they have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou
have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy. 7 And I heard another out
of the Altar say, Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy
judgments.
THE COMMENTARY.
4. ANd the third Angel poured out] This Angel poures out the wrath of God on
the Rivers and Fountains of Waters which became blood, Greek (...), which the
old version renders and blood was made, but (...) is to be referred to the
Rivers and Fountains of Waters, They to wit, (...) the Waters became blood.
The sense of this effect the Angel will declare verse 6. Thou gave them blood
to drink, (for, thou did shed their blood) because they shed the blood of
thy servants: The turning therefore of the waters into blood, denotes a bloody
vengeance on bloodthirsty adversaries: Hence it appears, that this plague is
diverse from the former: although in both there be an allusion unto the first
Egyptian plague.

Now we are to see, who these wicked are, here signified by the Rivers and
Fountains.

Lyra thinks Charles the Great to be this Angel, Lyras opinion.
who poured out the Vial, that is, the vengeance of God, upon the Rivers and
Fountains of Waters, that is, on the Moors or Hunni, who anciently inhabited
near the Poole Maeotis, where there are many bublings of waters after the
manner of fountains: And they became blood: because Charles his army killed
many of the Hunni. But he erres from the scope.

Ribera also here urges the letter, but absurdly: For have ever the Rivers and
Fountains shed the blood of the Saints according to the Letter? Rib. opinion
Or has God given blood to drink to the Fountains?

Gagnaeus therefore does more rightly apply it metaphorically to the
persecutors of the godly, Gagnaeus opinion.
because rivers and floods of waters do often in Scripture denote grievous
persecutions. Now it may be demanded who these Persecutours are?

Fox understands it of the Roman tyrants, Fox his opinion.
who by Ten persecutions shed the blood of Saints in abundance, to whom
likewise God gave blood to drink, because scarcely one of them dyed a natural
death: But neither is this to the scope: for it is certain this place intends
not the punishment of the adversaries of the primitive Church, but the last
plagues of Antichristians.

Others of our Interpreters come nearer to the scope, understanding the rivers
and fountains of Waters, the f^^se Prophets and false teachers of Antichrist:
Bullinger. Marlorate.
because Peter calls them (...) Fountains, or wells without water, that is,
deceivers: for as dry wells frustrate the hope of the Traveller, 2. Pet. 2.17:
who thinks to find water in them, and does not: so false Prophets deceive
such who look for sound doctrine and consolations from them, whatsoever they
promise or make show of.

Notwithstanding these also show not who are here meant, nor do they
sufficiently unfold the kind of the plague here signified: but keep for the
most part to the thesis, that to Antichristians the waters become blood, that
is, unprofitable, yea deadly to drink of: for as to the godly all things, yea
even their sins do work ^^gether for their salvation: so to the ungodly the
good creatures of God ^^come a curse, and are turned to their destruction. This
indeed is true, but expresses not the meaning of the prophecy, because that
which follows: Thou gave them blood to drink, does not cohere with this
sense: for God gave not blood to drink to these rivers and fountains, that
is, laid not a cruel punishment on them, in regard they had shed the blood of
the godly.

Therefore such false Prophets are not here simply to be understood, who only
by their false doctrine kill the souls, which the Sea of Trent did by its
filthy and corrupt blood, killing all that took in the same, which was the
second plague: But such cruel false prophets, who either with their own
hands, or by their bloody counsels: and condemnatory sentences shed the blood
of innocent Christians. But who are they?

We must keep to the Allegory of the Sea, Rivers, and Fountains. The sea has
its continual course, and is nourished by the flowing waters of rivers and
fountains: so likewise the fountains and rivers have their moistness from
the vapor of the Sea: hence they are rightly called the breasts of the Sea,
because they both suck for themselves, and give nourishment to the Sea. The Sea
was the gathering together of Bishops and Doctors in Council. The Rivers
therefore and fountains of Waters, who are they, but Bishops and Doctors, not
indeed belonging to the Council, yet chief Antichristian Pillars and Champions
for Popery.

Thus also in Chap. 8.10. the Rivers and Fountains were Bishops and Doctors of
the Church, viz. the successors of Pope Sylvester, whom he (being corrupted
through the favor and liberality of Constantine) drew with himself from
Heaven into the Earth, and made bitter the wholesome and sweet Doctrine of
Christ by the wormwood of humane traditions, as there I declared. Therefore
here also the Rivers and Fountains are Bishops and Teachers, but in time
diverse from them. Those were made bitter before Antichrists rising: These here
exercise their cruelty after Antichrists declining. These therefore became
blood, that is, they shall pay their own blood for the blood which they shed of
the Saints. The time and manner whereof the Lord knows: 1. Pet: 2.17.
whom I beseech to bring these rivers and fountains to repentance. Therefore I
think that the event of this Vial is prophetical, which as yet we have not
seen, and perhaps understand not.

5. And I heard the Angel of the waters] In Chap. 14. ver. 18, This Angel is
said to have power over the fire: here he is called the Angel of the waters,
hence arose the opinion that sundry Angels are set over several elements.

The Papists also hence have feined that their tutelar Saints are appointed
over diseases, Arts, Handi-crafts, Cities, Countries, and every member of man.
But hence nothing can solidly be gathered: for the Angel of the waters, is not
a Neptune set over the waters: but it is the same Angel pouring the Vial on
the Rivers and Fountains: so called, because God by his ministry turned the
waters into blood: after the same manner the first Angel might be called the
Angel of the earth, the second the Angel of the sea, the fourth the Angel of
the Sun, etc. because they poured out the Vialls on the earth, sea, sun, etc.

Because thou have judged thus] He declares God to be just in judging these
things, that is, because he turned these cruel and cursed Rivers and
Fountains into blood, to vindicate Gods judgment from the slanders of the
wicked: for it might seem that the Plagues of Antichristians were not
altogether righteous, but rather too cruel. Now the Angel ascribes them not
to men but God, affirming them to be most just, in regard they singularly agree
to the rule of distributive justice, which renders rewards to the just, and
punishments to the wicked.

O Lord which art] Sundry times before the true God, yea Christ is thus
described: See Bezas annotations on this place.
save that in stead of (...) which is to come (before used) here it is (...)
who shall be (as Beza has brought to light out of an ancient maniscript)
though it commonly be read, (...) and holy, as cohering with the foregoing word
(...) righteous, as if he should say, Thou art righteous and holy, that is,
pure from all unrighteousness. Let us learn therefore ratherto adore Gods holy
judgments, although we do not fully comprehend the causes of them, then to
repine and murmurre against them as being unrighteous.

For they have shed the blood of Saints] By the Law of requital they celebrate
the justice of God: because they shed blood, therefore with blood shall they be
punished. For he that sheddeth man's blood: by man shall his blood be shed.
Genesis 9.6.

Thou gave them blood to drinke] Bloody waters are not to be drunk, yet such
shall be the drink of the adversaries. The history of Cyrus is known, whose
head being thrown into a great Tub full of blood, Tomyris queen of Scythia
upbraiding his cruelty, said: Drink thou blood who could not be satiated
with blood.

But thou will say, whose blood either of the Saints or Prophets have they
shed? For answer to this, (not to speak of the secret Plots, Conspiracies, and
poysonings ordinary to Monks and their Confederates) read Fox his book of
Martyrs and thou shall see who they were that put to death, even in England
alone, multitude of Saints and Prophets, many Bishops, Doctors, and Teachers,
very holy, learned, and innocenr persons: As Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper,
with other Martyrs, who in Queen Maryes days for their constant profession of
Evangelicall Doctrine, and opposition of Idolatry, were condemned, some to the
fire, others to other torments: Who I pray have been the architects of all
Conspiracies, Plots, and Commotions in the neighboring Nations? Let Histories
speak. Rightly therefore the innocent blood of the Saints is imputed unto them
by the Angel.

For they are worthy] Their cruelty is the reason why they justly drink blood.
The Angel rejoices not simply over the plagues of the wicked, but declares
the justice of God by the law of requital. Every one shall be rewarded
according to what he has done: for this is the judgment of God, that they
which commit such things are worthy of death, Romans 1. verse 32. God therefore
is righteous, and so are his judgments on blood-thirsty men.

Before in Chap. The merits of works hence not established.
3.5. it is said of them that overcame: they shall be clothed in white: for
they are worthy: hence the merit of good works seems to be confirmed: for if
these of right are punished for their cruelty, because they are worthy, that
is, because they have merited the same: Then also the other must of right be
clothed in white, because they are worthy: that is, because they have merited
the same. As cruelty therefore is the meritorious cause of punishment: so
innocence should be the meritorious cause of reward.

I answer. The consequence will not hold from a contrary dissimilitude. Evil
works in order of justice do merit punishment: but good works do not merit
life eternal; because in order of justice, the creatures good works are due
debts to the Creator: now nothing that we do can possibly merit: considering
we are obliged unto it by duty: But to merit, is a work not due, making a
reward due, by the work done, which before was not due.

7. And I heard another out of the Altar] The old Version: I heard another,
omitting the words, out of the Altar: some Copies also have it, And I heard the
Altar: which is a manifest error as Ribera himself cannot deny. John therefore
heard another, (to wit) Angel coming out from the Altar, undoubtedly being
the same spoken of in Chapter 14. verse 18.

Even so Lord God Almighty] see ver. 5.

The pouring out of the fourth Vial on the Sun.
8 And the fourth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sun, and power was
given to him to Scorch men with fire. 9 And men were scorched with great heat,
and blasphemed the name of God, which has power over these plagues: and they
repented not, to give him glory,
THE COMMENTARY.
8. AND the fourth Angel poured out] The two former Vialls were Historical to
us: the events whereof we have, and do yet see. The third as I said is
prophetical: such also are the four following, the events of them being yet to
come, and therefore the searching into them is the more obscure and difficult,
the last excepted, which contains the final punishments of the adversaries,
the ruin of Babylon and the World. Yet I will speak of each of them that
which shall seem to be most probable.

The fourth Vial is poured out on the Sun, the events whereof are, 1.
Ascorching heat, (...), a most violent and burning Fever engendring
intolerable pain. 2. Blasphemies of men against God. 3. desperate obstinacy
in sins. Riberas opinion.


If with Ribera we take the Sun properly, then a horrible scorching by reason
of an excessive heat is portended to the Antichristians, that their bodies as
by a burning flame should be inwardly broiled, like such as are right under
Zona torrida, who are tormented with continual heat, and forced in the day time
to shadow themselves in Caves under the earth. Dryness follows heat: and
barrennes the drought of the earth, barrenesse is accompanied with want of
corn, pestilence, hunger and intolerable thirst: by which plague the ungodly
shall rage, and pour forth horrible blasphemies against the Name of God, and
at last rush into utter despair: so the sense should be thus, he poured out
his Vial on the Sun, that is, by it so powerfully wrought on the Sun, that
it scorched the earth with its beams more vehemently then formerly. And thus
Bullinger, Meyerus, Aretius, Fox, Why the literal exposition cannot hold.
Chytraeus, (who notwithstanding alleges also a mystical sense) interpret it

Now the reason why I assent not unto them is, first, because this shall be a
plague peculiar to the Antichristians: whereas heat, drought, barrenness,
hunger; and thirst are common calamities incident to the godly and wicked:
neither are we to doubt, But that these words, It was given to this Angel, or
to the Sun (for the relative (...) may be referred to either, though more
properly to the Sun) to burn or scorch men with heat, are only to be
referred to those ulcerous ones having the mark of the beast. ver. 2.

Secondly, The second effect should but little agree, for why should men
blaspheme God because of the heat? They would rather curse the sun it self
thus scorching them, Lib. 4. page 135.
after the manner of the Atlants who, as Herodotus reports in Melpomene, curse
the sun rising over them, and bitterly rail on it, because with his scorching
beams it spoils both them and their country.

Thirdly, although afflictions for the most part are Sermons of repentance: yet
this plague seems chieflly to work inwardly on the conscience, thereby to
instigate men to repentance, but they on the contrary do obstinately blaspheme:
Therefore I rather understand it of an inward, A diverse mystical sense.
then outward plague.

Now (passing by the letter) the conjectures of Interpreters are very diverse
touching this sun, and its scorching, which I think it not amiss briefly to
repeat, Lyras opinion.
that by comparing them, we may gather a truer sense.

Ly^^ doting as his manner is, makes this Angel to be Pope Leo III. whom the
Romans by sedition displaced, evilly entreated and cast into prison, out of
which notwithstanding he made an escape by the means of some, as Writers
report: he poured out his Vial on the sun, in declaring the grief of his
mind to Charles the great, King of France: because as the Sun in its light
excells all other Planets: so he shining in faith and magnaminity excelled all
the Kings of the earth. To him it was given to afflict men by heat: because
Charles came to Rome with an Army and grievously afflicted the Popes Rebels,
and restored Leo to his seat. Hereby men were scorched, to wit, the seditious
Romans by the heat of wrath, and blasphemed the name of Charles. The rest I
mention not: The unsavourinesse of the gloss being as it plainly appears
altogether contrary, to the scope.

Some interpret the Sun to be Antichrist, Gagnaeus opinion.
who falsely affirms himself to be the Sun of the Church. So Gagnaeus the
Papist and our Marlorate. He shall torment men with heat: 1 Pet 4.12
that is, afflict them with grievous persecutions: for heat and fire denote
afflictions. But this exposition cannot stand, because Antichrist will not
persecute his followers, but the godly only who by no torments will be brought
to blaspheme the name of God.

Others understand the Sun to be Christ the sun of righteousness, to whom it
shall be given, to torment the consciences of Antichristians with the heat of his
wrath, as it were by fire: for because they can by no means resist the Gospel
of Christ (by the heat of wrath being turned into fury) they shall blaspheme
the name of God, that is, the truth of the Gospel in its clearest light, as if
it were divelish and heretical, being far from repentance and giving glory to
God. If this be the sense, we may then understand, what we are to expect
henceforward of the Papists, and how we are never to hope for any
reconciliation with them. Brightmans interpretation.


Here also I will allege Brightmans opinion not altogether diverse from the
former. The sun he interprets of the holy scriptures, by whose light our dark
minds are enlightened. The Vial is to be poured out on these, not to hurt
them, as the former vialls were hurtful to the earth, sea and rivers, but to
give a force and set an edge upon them, that may more sharply prick and
penetrate into the consciences of men: for although the scriptures in our times
have been very much illustrated, yet many things (especially prophetical) are
as yet not sufficiently explained. And although indeed Antichrist be plainly
discovered: yet what shifts and feined pretenses does he daily make, to the end
the world may not take notice of him? But by how much the day of Judgment
draws nearer, by so much the more shall the light of the Sun, that is the
Scriptures, bring to the eyes of the world a more abundant and clearer light:
The sum of all is, that a greater perspicuity of the Scriptures seems to be
expected, by which Antichristians as by a more vehement heat of the Sun, shall
be very much tormented: because the filtinesse of Antichrist will hereby be
more discovered, which shall occasion them to persecute men with the greater
hatred, yea such shall be their exceeding folly, as they will rage and fret
against the Sun, because their filthy whoordomes are laid open to the view of
all the world.

This sense is clearer then the former: yet both are to one effect: for Christ
by the scriptures will send forth a great light and new heat, which indeed
should rejoice the adversaries, amend them, bring them to repentance, but
through their own malice they shall be the more enraged thereby. Now all
things will be clear.

And it was given him to scorch men] (...) the phrase denotes some
extraordinary judgment of God: For indeed neither Christ nor his word do in
themselves, or of their own nature work this effect, viz. to torment men with
the scorching heat of fury, but the sun is given or attributed unto them
accidentally: God sending on Antichristians strong delusion that they should
believe a lie, because they received not the love of the truth. They ought
indeed by the beams of the Sun of righteousness so clearly shining in the
holy Scriptures, to be enlightened, warmed and stird up to acknowledge, love and
embrace the truth of Christ: but they maliciously in heat of fury will rage
against Christ, and be tormented by fire, that is, extreme malice and envy. In
that he says with the article (...) The men, he expressly points at them in
ver. 2.

9. And men were scorched] Again with the article (...) that we might not
indifinitely understand all men, but only the ulcerous marked ones of the
beast: who are like dogs over heated, gaping and hanging out their tongues: for
the more their eyes are smitten with the beams of the Gospel, the more
despitefully they shall hate the same; and be scorched with heat, or rage,
because they shall find no way how to darken the Sun, and extinguish the light
thereof.

And they blasphemed] A second accidentary effect on the Antichristians, is by
desperate oppressing of the truth, they shall break forth into blasphemies
against God, to wit, by attributing the work of God to the devil: like the
blasphemous Jews in Mat. 12. neither is it strange: for they learned to
blaspheme of the Beast their head, unto whom as we heard in Chap. 13.5. A mouth
was given, speaking great things and blasphemies against God, his name, his
Tabernacle, and those that dwell in Heaven: It is true the beast did long
before cast out blasphemies, but they were nothing in comparison of those which
these ulcerous blasphemers shall pour orth against God.

Having power] By this attribute he aggravates their fury: they ought humbly
to entreat God to take away the plagues: who only has power, (as to inflict,
so) to remove the same: but they like mad men, will not cease to set their
faces against the sun, and to blaspheme God to their inevitable ruin and
destruction: for at last they shall be necessitated to fall under their plagues.

Here by the way we are admonished that God is the orderer of all scourges:
from which if we desire to be freed, we must humbly turn our selves by
supplication unto him.

We are admonished also of the end of Gods scourges: for the words, And
repented not: show, that therefore men were thus afflicted, that they might be
r ecalled by this rod, unto true repentance and detestation of Idolatry.

Lastly, we are informed how to shun and turn away the rod: for had these men
repented, God would have mitigated and taking away this scorching plague.
Repentance therefore lessens and takes away plagues, but impenitencie
increases them. Now to repent is to forsake evil works, and endeavor truly
to lead a pious life.

To give God glory] An increase of their obstinacy, in that they would not by
repentance, give God his due praise. But what glory? I. The glory of his
justite, that he had inflicted the scorching plagues on them, for their
deserts, and that it were just to lay more heavy punishments on them except
they repented. II. The glory of his truth, that only the Doctrine of the
Gospel revealed in the word of God, is true and saving. III. The glory of his
mercy, that forgiveness is prepared for the Repentant, viz. for such who
forsaking Antichrist, do by a livelie faith turn to Christ. Lastly the glory
of his almighty power, that he will utterly destroy the beast and all such with
him, who persevere in their blasphemies: Behold in our repentance how many
ways Gods glory is manifested and attributed unto him, and our salvation
furthered by it.

The pouring out of the fifth Vial on the Throne of the BEAST.
10. And the fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the seat of the Beast, and
his Kingdom was full of darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain. 11
And blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their pains, and their sores, and
repented not of their deeds.
THE COMMENTARY.
ANd the fifth Angel poured out] The fifth Vial being poured out on the Throne
of the Beast, his Kingdom is filled with darkness, his worshippers fret,
blaspheme, and remain obstinate unto the end: which effects are not much
differing from the former. And therefore this plague is the less obscure,
provided we understand what the throne of the beast is, and the darkening of
his Kingdom.

Now we are to observe that touching this Vial alone, scarce any Interpreter
keeps to the Letter, but all bring forth Allegories, howsoever some more
properly then others.

Lyra takes this Angel to be the Emperor Otto, Lyra makes the Roman sea the
throne of the beast.
who poured out the Vial, that is, vengeance on the throne of the beast that
is, on Pope John, whom Crescentius thrust into the room of Gregory, living the
life of a beast: now howbeit he erres from the scopes, (as ordinary he does)
yet here he dotes not, but acknowledges the Roman Sea to be the beasts throne.

Andreas thinks the throne of the beast to the be Kingdom of Antichrist, which
(says he) shall be darkened by this pouring out, because it shall altogether so
appear, and be wholly destitute of the light of the sun of righteousness. He
understands it therefore of the darkness of doctrine, wherewith Antichrists
Kingdom shall be utterly overwhelmed: from which opinion our interpreters, as
Bullinger, Marlorate, Alphonsus, Artopoeus, Aretius, and Chytraeus do not much
differ, save only that they interpret the throne of the beast more clearly
then he, viz. of the Popish Kingdom and its gross Idols, errors, and horrible
darkning of the truth, which at last shall be discovered by the light of the
Gospel.

But hardly any one is so absurd as Ribera, who says that the Kingdom of his
feined Antichrist shall be darkened, because all his worshippers shall be
smitten with grievous wounds, and so their prosperity and joy obscured. But he
too much wresteth the metaphor of darkness, for not the prosperity of
Antichristians, but the Kingdom, that is, the power of Antichrist is said to
be darkened: Hereby also this plague should nothing differ from the first.

But what if the throne of the beast be the seat of the Pope of Rome? and the
darkning of Rome, its spoiling and ruin: of which see Chapter 17. ver. 16,

Artopoeus therefore thinks that the spoiling of the City Rome by Charles V.
Duke of Borbon anno 1527. is here signified, but so this plague should not have
been very great: for the Emperor soon restored the Pope again: neither did
there thence follow greater darkness to the Papal kingdom then before.

Brightman applies this darkening of the beasts throne to the last destruction
of the Rome, by which the dignity thereof shall not only be a little lessened,
but wholly perish according to the verse of Sibyll (...) Then thou shall be
wholly in ashes, as if thou had never bin Rome. Nevertheless he thinks that
the beast shall remain sometime after the destruction of the City, not to
regaine his former dignity, but that soon after a more horrible destruction may
befall him. Therefore his Kingdom is said to be darkened, not wholly
exstinguished, but deprived of its former luster.

For mine own part, I dare not simply disapprove of this prophetical sense:
especially seeing the Jesuits themselves begin to prophecy of the destruction
of Rome, and banishment of the Pope, as before in Chap. 14. I showed out of
Ribera. For though the Turk sit still, yet certainly Christian Kings and
Princes will put their hands to this work of God, for to thrust the Pope out
of his nest: as John Chap. 17.16. does not obscurely intimate.

Notwithstanding if it be thought more agreeable not to restrain the Throne of
the beast to the City Rome, but rather to understand the same of his whole
Kingdom, which is said to be darkened, because in the Egyptian Type (for it is
a plain Allusion unto the ninth plague of Egypt) not only Pharaohs royal
Court, Ex. 10: 23
but the whole land, except the dwellings of the Israelites, was overwhelmed
with most thick darkness three days together: I see not to whom I should
rather assent, then to our foresaid interpreters, who expound it of the
darkening, or total darkness, in which Antichrist has deeply involved and
plunged the Christian world these thousand years, which shall wholly be
dissipated by the clear light and preaching of the Gospel. How the beasts
king dome is darkened.


The darkening therefore of Antichrists Kingdom, is not a bringing in of a new
darkness: for his kingdom was never enlightened with the light of true
doctrine: But began to be darkened even from the first, after that the smoke
of the bottomless pit had filled all parts and places thereof with a most
gross mist or blindness, although the world in regard of its external luster
thought it to be most bright and shining. But the full manifestation of the
darkness, and dispelling of the smoke, shall be a fatal darkning unto
Antichrist, when the most clear light of the Gospel shall break forth and
shine in all parts of the world: for then the beasts abominations shall be laid
open to the view of all men: whereupon many shall desert him: his glory shall
be obscured, his authority despised, and his Kitchen grow cold. This plague
shall be more grievous then the former: or certainly an extreme increasing
thereof: for then the beast shall be nearest to utter ruin: of which more
afterward.

And they gnawed their tongues] Now follow three secundary effects of this
Vial on the Vassalls and Worshippers of Antichrist.

First, they gnaw their tongues: By which proverbiall Speech is noted the
extreme rage they shall fall into: And the cause is added: to wit, for the
pain or grief in which they shall be because of the fatal declining of the
Popish Kingdom: for mad or furious persons use to bite their lips, tongues,
and fingers, and gnash their teeth as beasts not able to revenge themselves. It
may also be an Allusion to such as have the Falling Sickness, who by the
sharp sits of their disease are wont to bite their lips and fingers: with the
like madness or frenzy, the Papists shall then be vexed, when they see the
Popes Kingdom to be darkened, exposed to contempt, and the authority thereof
taken away: when Kings, Princes, and the Vulgar sort shall deny obedience unto
the same.

Secondly, They shall blaspheme the God of Heaven] As before: for because they
go on to condemn the Gospel of Christ as divelish heresy, and wickedly
accuse the same as the cause of all the Commotions and troubles which
themselves have raised.

Thirdly, They repented not of their deeds] viz, which we have expounded verse
9. and before in Chapter 9. ver. 20.21.

The pouring out of the Sixth Vial on Euphrates.
12 And the sixth angel poured out his Vial upon the great River Euphrates:
and the Water thereof was dried up: that the way of the Kings of the East might
be prepared. 13 And I saw three unclean Spirits like Frogs come out of the
mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of
the false Prophet. 14 For they are the Spirits of Devils, working miracles,
which go forth unto the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather
them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. 15 Behold, I come as a
thief: Blessed is he that watches and keeps his garments, lest he walk
naked, and they see his shame. 16 And he gathered them together to a place,
called in the Hebrew tongue, Armageddon.
THE COMMENTARY.
12 AND the sixth Angel poured out] The sixth Vial is poured out on that great
River Euphrates, which, as histories testify, runs through Babylon, and is
the bound of the Eastern Palestina. Two events do follow, The drying up of the
waters of Euphrates, And the sending forth of three unclean Spirits unto the
Kings of the earth to make War against God, etc. By the former, the plague it
self, by the latter, the last endeavor of the Beast to keep off the plague
is signified.

The drying up of Euphrates is by some properly, by others mystically expounded.

Andreas expounds it properly, Andreas opinion touching the drying up of
Euphrates.
yet doubtingly: Perhaps, says he, Euphrates by Gods permission shall be
shallow, as that it will be easy for the Kings of the Nations and other men to
pass over for to kill each other: Now these Kings of the East for whom the way
shall be prepared, he guesseth to be Gog and Magog, who shall come out of the
region of the Scythians: Or Antichrist, with other Kings out of the eastern
Persia, where the Tribe of Dan shall inhabit, of which Tribe Antichrist is to
be borne, and pass over Euphrates to the destruction and death of the souls
and bodies of very many. The first clause of which sentence, touching the
litterall drying up of Euphrates, Ribera approves: but the latter he
rejects, viz. of Antichrists coming out of the East with other kings over
the River Euphrates being dried up: because (says he) Antichrist shall sit in
Jerusalem on this side of Euphrates: and therefore shall not come out of the
East which is beyond it, but supposes that the seven Kings of the East shall
be called forth by the three impure spirits, to join themselves with
Antichrist in that general battle against Christians. Wonderful darkness,
and fabulous toys: no token of any plague does appear in these things:
whereas it is certain that the beasts last plague save one, is here denounced.

Here also I see our Brightman to keep to the Letter about the drying up of
Euphrates, but in a diverse sense and end. Euphrates in this place, as in Chap.
9.14. in the sixth Trumpet, he understands to be the River of Mesopotamia which
made the passage of the Eastern People into Judea very difficult: The waters
whereof he thinks after the overthrow of Rome, shall be dried up by a like
miracle as of old it happened at the red Sea and the waters of Iordane. To what
end? That the way of the Kings that come from the rising of the Sun might be
prepared: that is, that the Jews dwelling in the East may the easier and more
speedily return unto Jerusalem their native Country, not to restore the
Jewish worship, but to embrace the Gospel of Christ. Rev. 5.10
And he says further that the converted Jews are called Kings, because all
Christians are Kings and Priests to God: And Kings of the East, because they
shall come from thence, and all the Eastern people shall be in subjection to
them. Brightmans reasons.


This opinion he backs with four reasons.

First, because it was never heard, that such a miracle happened to any Nation,
but the Jews, who passed through the red Sea and Jordan as on dry ground.

Secondly, because the Prophet Isaiah in Chap. 44. ver. 22. and 51.10. and
63.11. seems to promise unto the Jews such a kind of passage, namely that the
River should be dried up in their return unto Jerusalem.

Thirdly, because the Apostle Romans 11.25. has foretold that in the last times
the Jewish Nation shall with great zeal turn to Christ.

Fourthly, because it is not probable that so great a mystery as their
conversion should be passed by in this prophecy. Now either it must here be
mentioned, or else it is not at all spoken of in this Book.

Thus I have clearlie laid down the opinion of this Interpreter, Not very
solid.
which indeed is pious, ingenious, much desired by the godly, and perhaps
probable also: notwithstanding his arguments are of little weight.

For though it be granted that the drying up of the Sea and Jordan was peculiar
to the Jews: Kings of the East signify the Jews to be converted to Christ.

Concerning the drying up of Euphrates we read nothing thereof,

The mystery foretold Romans 11. has partly been already accomplished, Europe
Asia and Africa, shall embrace the Gospel, yet without a miraculous passing
over Euphrates (beyond which it is not certain that any Jews do inhabit) or
returning into their country: seeing the faith of Christ is not in the least
tied to the Territories of Judea.

Lastly, this mystery is not passed by in silence, Vision of the 144000.
sealed ones out of the twelve Tribes of Israel. Chapter 7.

But what ever his reasons are, this one thing moves me not to assent
thereunto: because either in these words of the drying up of Euphrates, the
sixth plague is pointed at, or else here is no plague at all; for the following
words set not forth a plague, but the Beasts endeavor to defend himself
(although in vain) against the same. The drying up of Euphrates is mystically
to be under stood.


I think therefore that the drying up of Euphrates is rather mystically to be
taken.

Now I find two mystical interpretations (for Alcasars new and foolish opinion
I leave to himself) which suppose, that the place here is a manifest allusion
unto the taking of Babylon by Cyrus who drawing the stream of Euphrates
another way, made the River shallow and passable, to the spoiling of the city,
through the midst whereof it ran.

Euphrates denotes the Turks now possessing the same: Artopoeus opinion.
The waters thereof drawn out into other Brooks, the strong incursions of the
Turks on the Roman Empire, whose Princes being distracted because of the
darkening and weakening of the Beasts Kingdom: some of them desiring to see it
overthrown: on the contrary others wishing the safety thereof: hence refuse to
join their forces together for to resist the power of the Turks, who by this
means shall the more easily break in from the East and spoil them, as
hitherto experience has taught us. This is the opinion of Artopoeus, which I
rehearse, not because I altogether approve thereof (for so the Plague should no
more appertain to Antichrist, then to us) but because it is not altogether
disagreeing from what we see by daily experience. Bullingers opinion.


But the other I much prefer before all the rest, viz. which Bullinger,
Aretius, and Illyricus have learnedly expounded, that Euphrates signifies the
principal Fortresses of the Antichristian Babylon, and by means whereof it
grew to so great power, and hitherto has stood in its strength: namely their
spiritual Revenues, Tithes, First Fruits, Taxes, Annuities, Copes,
Indulgences, Peter Pence, Impropriations, Dispensations, Vacancies, Commendums:
to be short, all the wealth and riches that were wont to flow to Rome out of
all parts of Christendom. The waters of Euphrat.
These waters shall be dried up, because these Taxes and Tributes formerly
paid to the Beasts kingdom shall be as was said, darkened, that is, no more
flow to Rome, but be bestowed otherwhere, so as the Chests, Cellars, Kitchins,
and Storehouses of the Pope shall grow empty. The Way shall be prepared for the
Kings of the East, to take Babylon, that is, without any let or hinderance
kings, Princes, and People of all sorts shall foresake Antichrist, Tread the
Beasts kingdom under foot, and embrace the gospel. The Kings I say of the East
metaphorically are such as hitherto were adicted to Antichrist, but then
embracing and professing the Gospel: (for the faithful are Kings) and shall
come from the East, that is, from Christ, who is the Dayspring from on high,
Luke 1.78.

The Analogy of this mystical interpretation is proved both by divine and
humane history. Herodotus, and Xenophon witness, that Babylon had two
principle Fences: One without, viz. Their Walls, being fifty Cubits thick,
and two hundred Cubits high: The other within, viz. Euphrates running through
the midst of the City, being of such a depth that two men, howbeit standing
one on the neck of another, yet no part of their bodies would appear above
water, as Gobryas in Xenophon speaks: The history of Cyrus in taking of
Babylon.
so that the River was of greater strength to the City then the Walls.
Notwithstanding the kings of the Medes came and besieged Babylon, viz. Darius
the Mede, and Cyrus the Persian, according to the prophecy of Jeremy in Chap.
51.28. Prepare against her the Nations, with the kings of the Medes, that is,
the kings coming from the East: for Media and Persia lies to the east of
Babylon. Now the Besiegers despairing to win the Walls took counsel how to
divert Euphrates: for which purpose having made many deep ditches, in the same
night that the Babylonians were at their riotous feastings and so overcome with
wine and sleep, the waters of Euphrates were brought into the aforesaid
ditches, and the enemy passed through it into the City on dry ground, took the
palace of Belshazzar, killed him, and won Babylon, as we have it in Daniel
5. ver. 30. and Ier. 51.32. her passages were stopped, etc.

To this Type the thing in hand does very well answer: for the Antichristian
Babylon has chiefly by two Monuments stood unmovable. Outwardly in stead of
walls, The walls of the Roman Babylon.
she has Emperors, kings and nations, who as Vassals to the Pope do at his
beck, take up Arms in defense of Babylon: Within her is Euphrates drawing to
Rome as through a deep channel, the treasures of the world, in so much as the
Churches Eschequer does far surpass the Treasures of all Monarchs in the
earth. It has bin observed, that in most Provinces Clergymen have had
Two-thirds of all rents, scarcely one third remaining to the Prince and people:
Thus as Babylon gloried because of her deep waters: so Rome boasts of her
excessive riches: but like as the waters of Euphrates being diverted, the River
was dried up, The deep waters of the Romish Babylon.
and thereby an easy passage was prepared for the kings of the East, who took
Babylon in one night: Even so Romes holy tribute being intercepted and derived
otherwhere, there will be an easy way made for faithful kings and teachers to
pass as through dry Foordes, Rev: 18.8
that new Babylon may fall in one day and be destroyed.

If thou ask, who shall make the ditches, and turn these Tributes of Rome
another way: See the History of Cyrus: his army wrought day and night, till at
length the work being finished, Cyrus himself opened the Sluices and drew the
waters from the City: so the continual labors and endeavors of Gods
ministers shall prepare the ditches: and Cyrus the Lords anointed Isay 54.1.
that is, faithful kings and princes shall themselves open the more thus
prepared, draw back the Rivers of Babylon, and convert her Tributes to better
uses, as in Chap. 17. ver. 16. is plainly taught unto us.

Thus we have heard the meaning of the sixth Vial, which without doubt is
proper and true, for Babylon shall receive no plague more grievous then this,
before the total destruction thereof.

Neither is this interpretation new, or lately thought of by us: but even my
Anonymus has expressed the same 260. years ago, in these words: He dried up]
that is, The preaching of the Gospel does and shall cause men to take away all
temporal things, that is, Possessions and earthly Dominion from the Clergy,
and they shall no more be given unto them.

Neither are the waters of Euphrates only begun to be dried up a little: but
almost a hundred years the way has bin a preparing for the kings of the East,
to invade Babylon: Thus Bohemia in a great measure is fallen off from
Antichrist, and long ago has denied to increase Babylons waters: The like we
see in England, Scotland, Denmark, Swethland, with a great part of Germany,
France, Poland and Hungary: And what would ye think, if at last the waters of
Italy and Spain should be dried up also?

But let us see the industry of the Beast in keeping off this plague. While
Cyrus of old prepared the motes and built Turrets before the walls of Babylon,
they scorned him, and therefore it was no wonder they perished on a sudden
because of their security. But the Romish Babylon will more carefully stand on
her watch, and make the siege of the Eastern kings tedious and difficult, as
it follows.

13. And I saw come out of the mouth of the Dragon] The internal effect of the
sixth Vial we have heard spoken of: The drying up of Euphrates, being the sixth
plague of the Beast. The external effect now follows, viz. the Beasts
Embassage unto the Kings of the earth to make War, for to keep off the
plague. The Connection is to be considered. By six Plagues the beast is almost
wasted.

I. By the venomous ulcer on such as had the mark of the beast.

II. By the death of every living soul in the corrupted Sea.

III. By the blood of the Rivers and Fountains.

IIII. By scorching of men by the heat of the Sun.

V. By the darkness of the Beasts kingdom.

VI. By the drying up of the River of Euphrates.

Now because the Beasts kingdom shall seem by all these plagues to be brought
to a most desperate condition: he on the contrary will leave nothing
unattempted for to uphold the same: And as the Poet speaks: Flectere cum
nequeat superos, Acharonta movebit.

And therefore to advance his throne again, and bring back the waters of
Euphrates into the Channells of Babylon, he will not fear to lift up his hand
against Heaven: but by an unheard of fury will move war against God, and by
his Legates solicit, and draw the kings of the earth into the Confederacy of
this war. But with what event? Here indeed it is not mentioned, but shall be
declared in the following Vision Chap. 19. Namely that this his last rage shall
expose the Beast, his kingdom, and the kings his Associates, unto utter
destruction. This is the sum.

But because this last tumult shall be raised by the Beasts Legates, John here
expounds in order, from whom they are sent, and to whom, who, and what manner
of Messengers they are, wherefore they are sent, together with the success of
their Message: all which things we will briefly consider.

The Authors of the Embassage are, The authors of this war and embassage.
the Dragon, Beast, and False Prophet. Of the Dragon and Beast we spoke in
Chapter 13. The false Prophet is here first mentioned. Now there we showed that
he is the same Land-beast, who by great signs caused the Sea-beast to be
worshipped, and this will more clearly appear in Chap. 19.20. where the same
effects are attributed to the False Prophet, which before were spoken of the
beast rising out of the earth. Moreover we there made it appear that both
Beasts do represent one and the same Antichrist under a diverse shape. The
former, as a King: The latter, as a deceiver: Out of the mouth therefore of
these three go forth these three Messengers, that is, they are sent by their
invention, counsel, commandment and authority, for this is meant by the Type
of going forth out of the mouth: How the three Legates proceed out of the mouth
of these three.
seeing Satan properly has no mouth. Neither is the sense, as if one should
proceed out of the mouth of the Dragon, another out of the mouth of the Beast,
and the third out of the mouth of the False Prophet: for thus their original
and authority would seem not to be equal: But that they all three go forth as
it were out of one mouth, by the common conspiracy of the three aforesaid
parties, for to perform their interprize, viz, with lies, in behalf of the
Dragon, who is the father of all lies, and by tyranny in the behalf of the
Sea-beast, who represents Antichrist as he is a secular Monarch, and withal
deceit of unrighteousness in behalf of the Land-beast, that is, Antichrist as
he is a spiritual Impostor. Now let us consider the Messengers themselves.

Three impure Spirits] Ribera understands them to be Three Devils, whom they
call familiar spirits, such as Magicians send forth at their pleasure. But they
shall be men properly, because they go, speak, and have to do with Kings in a
civil way, all which little suites with Devils.

Notwithstanding they are said to be spirits, because by profession they shall be
Spiritual Fathers: And Three, because there shall be many of them, sufficient
for to perform what they shall undertake: for a threefold number denotes
perfection: as before in Chap. 11. the two witnesses were indefinitely put for
a few, yet sufficient for the Testimony of the truth. Yet here it seems they
are said to be three rather then seven (which number the Scripture more
frequently uses) because they shall be the choicest and subtlest out of the
flocks of Locusts, who ordinarily are not very many. Notwithstanding they
shall be of the true kind of the Locusts: however they differ in form and
office.

Impure Spirits] Not only being of an impure original, but nature and manners
also, laboring to stain both divine and humane things, even as the Locusts
who came out of the filthy bottomless pit, did defile all things with their
venomous mouths and tails.

Like to Frogs] They shall not be Frogs, nor in the form of Frogs (for so they
should be unfit messengers to be sent to Kings) but like to Frogs, in
filthiness, impudency, and loquacitie, because like as Frogs with their
continual croaking ((...)) are most irksome to our ears: Aristoph. in Ranis:
so these Emissaries of Antichrist living a most impure life within their
Covents, and being taught much to babble, do fill the ears of Kings with their
cries, until they induce them unto their holy War: Neither are they much
unlike to the Locusts: for Locusts skip like Frogs: besides they resemble the
four square heads of Frogs by their geometrical hoods.

14. For they are the Spirits of Devills] He further describes them by their
nature and craft: they are instructed in the School (not of the holy Ghost,
but) of the evil one: and therefore they shall have the nature and disposition
of their master: yet will some of them make a fairer show, and thereby prove
more hurtful, and are the more carefully to be avoided.

Working miracles] They shall gain credit to their Embassage, not so much by
words, as by signs and miracles, and thereby allure and deceive the Kings of
the earth. But by what signs, and whose? by lies and the efficacy of Satan,
from whom they originally proceed: for the wonders they work are delusions of
Satan, which are spoken of in 2. Thessa. 2.9, and Rev. 13.14. and 19.20.

Which go forth unto the Kings of the earth] Thirdly, he declares their office:
they shall leave the function of teaching unto others of their order, and shall
be employed in Warlike Messages.

Here Ribera erreth, in thinking that these Kings are the same unto whom the
way was prepared by the drying up of Euphrates: for they were Kings of the
East, spoiling the beast: But these are the Kings of the earth and of the whole
world: The former were against, These shall be for Antichrist.

The Kings of the earth] Thus he calls (as before) the sworn Vassalls of the
Beast, and therefore they are said to be of the earth, however by profession
they would seem to be Christians.

And of the whole world] That is, all Foreign Kings whatsoever: for at last
the beast will labor to have the friendship and assistance of them all. For in
regard he shall see that they of his own profession are more remiss and
negligent then he would have them, therefore by Ambassages he will stir up
Foreign Princes, and by all means labor to draw them on his side.

Now if thou demand who these Legates are, I answer: Who these three spirits
are that are sent forth.
(howsoever undoubtedly they shall manifest themselves so much the more, by how
much Antichrists fighting against God shall appear, and the nearer we come to
the day of Judgment: yet) it seems not to be obscure in the least, both by
history and experience. For it is plain that the chief of these Messengers,
are the Legates a latere: who are sent with full power unto the Kings of the
earth to negociate for Babylon: next to them are the Bishops who order and
direct the affairs of the Court: In the next place are the Monks and Jesuits
who insinuate themselves into the clossets of women, dive into counsels, and
are Architects of dissension; These (as their own Epistles witness) are daily
sent as Legates to the kings of India, America and Africa, to bring them into
the fellowship of this war that is a preparing. And now of late (if I be not
deceived) they have made the king of Persia bounden to the Sea of Rome. And
indeed without the religious interposition of these men, scarce any counsels
of peace or war can be handled in Court, as experience teaches.

Moreover this Type does very fitly agree to Frogs. They are Spirits, viz.
spiritual fathers: but unclean like Frogs] Because (says my Anonymus) they
remain in the mire of riches prating and tatling against the truth of the
Gospel. Spirits of devills] because (says the same Author) they are inspired
by the Devil only so to do. Working miracles] or doing signs, that is,
making show of outward holiness, though in truth they be the greatest
hypocrites, having their affections set on the earth and wordly Pomp, and
therefore howsoever they be the truest Proctours of Antichrist, yet being
outwardly cloaked with so many signs of Sanctity, they captivate as it were
all men, so that they are esteemed of them more holy then the rest of men.
These things Anonymus: but we are further to consider, that by prodigious and
false miracles they shall gain credit to their Embassage. viz. such by which
the beast himself is said to seduce the Inhabitants of the earth Chap. 13.14.
Now it is notorious, that there are none at this day in the world, who arrogate
to themselves the glory of working signs and miracles, but the Popes
Emissaries. Thus we see, who the Legates are, and to whom they go forth.

To gather them to the Battell] They will not profess to make war against
God: for then they should never induce any but mad men unto it: but pretend
that it is a war undertaken for Gods glory, and against heretics, for the
safety of the Catholic Church: although in very deed it shall be against the
God of Heaven: they shall, I say, prepare a great Diet, to cut off at last all
the heririckes in one battle, and at once restore the affairs of the Romish
Sea. But O great folly! for it shall not be the day of Heretics but of God:
Namely, Of God Almighty] Whereby the faithful should be stird up to consider
the wonderful judgments of God. The Frogs indeed shall gather the Kings of
the earth to War, thereby to root out the Gospel of Almighty God. But by
that war God will root them both out together. It is called a great Day,
because the judgment of that day shall be great and wonderful by the
slaughter of all adversaries: of which in Chap. 19.

15. Behold I come as a thiefe] By a prophetical Parenthesis, he exhorts us
unto watchfullnesse. And it is inserted by the occasion of that great Day in
which the enemies shall come to fight against Christ. Christ then on the
contrary shall come to cut off the adversaries. Now this his coming shall be
sudden and unexpected like a thief in the night as Mat. 24.43. Luke 12.39. 1.
Thessa. 5.2. Reve. 3.3. We must watch therefore, least being brought asleep by
the cares of the World, we be on a sudden oppressed by that great day of the
Lord.

And keep his garments] That they be not polluted with the defilements of the
flesh, and of this World: or rather, that they be not secretly stolen away:
for if their garments be taken from them, they shall be forced to go naked,
having nothing wherewithal to cover their shame. 2 Cor. 92
This exhortation agrees with the doctrine of the Apostle: We desire to be
clothed upon with our house, which is from Heaven: if so be that being clothed
we be not found naked. And with that of Christ, unto the Bishop of Laodicea
Chap. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy white raiment, that thou may be clothed,
and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear. See the exposition on that
place: And indeed Beza supposes that this Parenthesis is for some reason from
thence here inserted: but there is no cause of such suspicion, seeing the
occasion of the Parenthesis is manifest: and that the metaphor taken from
garments is familiar to this Book.

16. And gathered them] The old Version: And he shall gather them, as if it
were (...) Beza in his latter Edition: he gathered them, (according also as it
is in our English Translation) to wit Christ, or God, referring it to the
foregoing Verse: But in his former more rightly: And they gathered them: viz.
the three unclean Spirits: for the words (...) and (...) do cohere: as if he
had said, The spirits went forth to gather the Kings of the world and they
gathered them: the 14. verse, as we have showed, being inserted by a
parenthesis: It is true, the Verb (...) being in the singular number, may
carry both senses: notwithstanding it plainly appears from the end of the
Spirits going forth, that in the Text by an Atticisme (usual to the Greeks)
the Noune (...) Spirits being plural is joined with a verb of the singular
number. Now the end of the Embassage of the unclean Spirits was to gather the
Kings: least therefore it should seem they had bin slack in their office:
their endeavor is added: And they gathered them, viz. to the Battle, for by
their importunity, subtilty, and juggling, they persuaded the kings to take up
this war. The Kings therefore of the earth, and of the whole world are in
readiness with their armies for to defend the Beast against God Almighty. O
detestable madness! The whole world will be up in arms: no corner shall be in
quiet, or free from the war of these frogs. And indeed it seems that
toward the end of the world it shall come to pass, that not only Popish
kings (who then shall be but few) but also foreign and barbarous nations, as
of India, Asia, and Africa, being induced by the craft and deceit of the frogs,
shall join their forces against the professors of the Gospel, for to restore
the authority of the Pope. What a confusion shall there then be in all places?
And how great shall the fear and trembling of the godly be?

Now what shall be the event of this unhappy expedition? This is reserved to
the following Vision: only the place where the battle shall be fought, is set
forth by the Hebrew word Armageddon: Of Armageddon the place of the battle.
concerning which if I should allege the several guesses of Interpreters
(seeing it seems not to be manifested either by Scripture or Histories) time
would fail me.

In the writing of the word copies do differ, generally it is written (...)
Harmageddon with two dd: some have it Harmagedon with one d: some (...)
Hermagedon with E: diverse significations are also alleged.

Jerome expounds it The mountain of thieves: Others A cursed Troup, from (...)
and (...): Others, The army of malediction or destruction: Others, The deceit
of destruction: Others, The ruin of the River or stream: Others, The
mountain of the Gospel: Others, The mountain of apples or fruit.

Two of these opinions I like best. First theirs who render it, The deceit or
guile of destruction from (...) subtle, and (...). which signifies cutting off
or ruinating: that the very place of the battle it self might discover the
imposture of the Frogs, who having put the Kings in hope of a great prey,
should deceitfully bring them into the place of their destruction, where they
shall be slain in a horrible manner, not by the sword of men, but by the sword
of Almighty God: for while they tumultously rage, and fiercely fight against
the Gospel, in a moment they shall all be oppressed by the last judgment, and
be cast into the Lake of brimstone with the Beast, false Prophet, and the
Frogs, as it is in Chapter 19. verse 19.

The other opinion of Beza I rather approve, that Armageddon is that place
where Josias unhappily fighting with Necho king of Egypt, was slain, as we
read 2. Chron. 35.22. and Zechar. 12.11. where it called the field or valley of
Megiddon: here (...) The mountain Megiddon: for at the foot of the mountain
was a valley or large field for Combat, but Megiddo was not the name of the
mountain or field, but of a city, after which the field and the mountain
called Gilboe near unto the same, took their denomination.

Neither does it hinder that the field Megiddo was tragical, not unto the
adversaries, but to good Josias: for it may be answered, that two things are
here aimed at: The opportunity of the place, as being most fit for battle: and
the mourning which there was of old for the death of Josias: the which at last
shall be here, in regard of the destruction of the adversaries.

The sum is this: This cursed army here treated of, shall be gathered into
the place of its destruction, which is not meant of one certain place, but
wherever it be that these unblessed Troops shall then gather themselves and
rage against God, there the day of judgment shall come upon them.

The pouring out of the seventh Vial into the Air.
17 And the seventh Angel poured out his Vial into the air, and there came a
great voice out of the Temple of Heaven, from the Throne, saying, It is done.
18 And there were voices and thunders, and lightnings: and there was a great
earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an
earthquake and so great. 19 And the great City was divided into three parts:
and the Cities of the nations fell: and great Babylon came in remembrance
before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his
wrath. 20 And every Island fled away, and the mountains were not found. 21 And
there fell upon men a great hail out of Heaven, every stone about the weight
of a talent, and men blasphemed God, because of the Plague of the hail: for
the Plague thereof was exceeding great.
THE COMMENTARY.
ANd the seventh Angel poured out] Now the Battle is expected: but yet it is
intercepted by the seventh Angel pouring out the seventh Vial, and last
plague, the which respects the last judgment, and the casting the Fighting
Adversaries into eternal punishment.

It is so apparent that this is a true description of the last judgment, that
almost all Interpreters acknowledge the same. Yet none of them give a
sufficient reason why it is here again repeated, seeing it has so often before
been described, save only they say it is done by way of anticipation. But what
cause is there that this Anticipation should be so often iterated? certainly
none at all, except it be because this is the last Act of the fifth Vision: Now
every of the Visions, as hitherto we have seen, do end with the last
Judgment.

So that this part of the Vision is to be compared with the former Analogies of
Chap. The latter Act of Vision 5.
7. toward the end of the second Vision: and Chap. 11. toward the end of the
third Vision: and Chap. 14. toward the end of the fourth Vision. Now in this
they differ, that in Chap. 7. the last judgment is only described by the
deliverance of the godly: On the contrary in Chap. 11. and 14. and here also,
it is only figured out by the destruction of the Antichristians.

This also is to be observed: That the seventh Vial does answer to the seventh
Trumpet in Chap. 11. but not to the seventh Seal in Chap. 8. the opening
whereof did not shut up the foregoing Vision, but made way for the following.
Now to the words.

The last Vial is poured out into the Air, which is the common receptacle of
all living creatures. The air therefore being smitten with the fury of Gods
wrath, and infected with pestilence, what should follow but the common
destruction of the creatures and end of other things: of which that we might
not doubt, there came a great voice, saying, (...), It is done. It is a great
voice, because with marveilous earnestness it proclaims the judgment of the
last Day. It came out of the Temple of heaven from the Throne] that we might
understand it was the voice of God, or Christ the Judge sitting on the Throne.
The voice, It is done, is as it were abrupt or suddenly broken off: because in
a moment it shall put an end to the fatal battle of the wicked against God.
The word (...) is expounded It has bin, or, It is done: in both which senses
is proclaimed the end of the world: Beza limits it, It has bin, to wit,
Babylon: as it is in the Poet: Troja fuit, fuimus Troes. But it is better to
take it absolutely, It is done, that is, now is the end of all wordly matters:
for it is a dramaticall clause: As when the Comoedie is ended, one cries out,
in dissmissing the Spectators: Acta est fabula: Plaudite: So then the fashion
of this world shall pass away and come to an end, when it shall be proclaimed
(...) It is done: as Christ dying on the Cross cried out (...) It is finished,
signifying that the mystery of our redemption was now accomplished by his
death, that we might not seek or exspect any thing otherwhere as necessary to
salvation. In a word, by this voice we are sent back to what was before spoken
by the Angel sounding the seventh Trumpet Chap. 10.7. That the mystery of God
should be finished. As before therefore at the sounding of the Trumpet, so now
at the pouring out of the seventh Vial, the Angel cries (...) It is done, or
It is finished.

18 And there were voices, and lightnings, and thunders] These horrible effects
of the last Vial do figuratively signify the coming of Christ the Judge, the
end of the world, and the destruction of the ungodly, as Chap. 11.19. Now the
effects are Four. 1. Respects the Air. 2. The Earth. 3. The Sea. 4. Men.

First, there are voices, and lightnings and thunders in the Air: 1. Signs in
the air.
These are not such lightnings as came forth from the throne Chap. 4.5. Neither
such as happened at the casting of the censer upon the earth Chap. 8.5. (for
they were effects of the preaching of the word) but such as concluded the third
Vision Chap. 11.19. Being Signs I say, of Christ's coming to judgment, and
taking vengeance in flaming fire on them that know not God, who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power: to wit, 1 Thessalonians. 1.8
those shakings of the powers of Heaven, the melting of the elements and
horrible tempests spoken of by Christ and Peter, Mat. 2429 and Pet 3.10
with these things the Lord will at last come to judgment, and take away the
furious weapons out of the hands of all such as fight against God.

Secondly, In the earth, is an earthquake such as was not since men were upon
the earth] And no wonder: for this shall be no natural earthquake, Signs in
the earth.
but the earth being smitten with lightning from Heaven, shall be shaken and
rent into a thousand pieces, and be burnt with fire, with all the works that
are therein.

Now the Antichristian earthquake, before mentioned in Chap. 6.12. and 8.5.
differs from it. 2. Pet 3.10.


19. And the great City was divided] Or rather broken etc. Now he expounds
what (in this common destruction) happened in particular to Antichrists Seat,
and Cities of other adversaries, that is, their kingdoms, Forts, Armies, and
Palaces.

The great City was broken] that it, rent asunder by the earthquake into three
parts, that is, It fell being broken to pieces: for here three parts denote the
destruction: and the threefold number, the perfect, full, and utter ruin
thereof: for a City being divided by an earthquake into diverse parts cannot
remain entire, but must of necessity perish. Thus I understand this rupture,
not of a light sha-, king, or rent, but of a total subversion of the great
City: The which sense the following word (...) Fell does necessarily import:
for the Great City shall suffer no less overthrow then other cities of the
nations.

But what Great City is here intended? Undoubtedly, The great City broken into
parts: see chap 11 8. and 14 8 and 17.18.
the same in whose streets the bodies of the two witnesses did lie unburied,
Chap. 11.8. that is, the City, Dominion and Church of Rome, which is the
Kingdom of Antichrist, being as it were one Great City, because it is governed
by one head, the Pope.

Brightman includes the Turkish kingdom or Empire, because here is treated of
the total destruction of all the ungodly. But the Mahumetane tyranny is more
rightly comprehended under the Cities of the Nations: that so we might take
notice that Rome is set forth by the Great City, both formerly, here, and in
the following Chapter also.

The Allegory of some seems to me not to be proper: namely that the great
City, that is, the universallity of men shall be divided into three parts,
that is, in the last time there shall be found three sorts of men in the
Church, Christians, Papists, and Neutralls: for these three sorts shall not
then take their beginning, seeing they have already bin a long while in the
world.

Ribera following Andreas, makes Jerusalem to be this great city,
understanding the division of it into three parts, to be three sorts of people
living in the same, Christians, Jews, and Saracenes. But the following Chapter
does evidently show that not Jerusalem but Rome is this city, as standing on
seven Mountains, and in John's time having dominion and power over the Kings of
the earth, and therefore Alcasar does justly reject this opinion, although
himself does wholly err from the scope.

Neither is it material that Ribera supposes that Rome must be overthrown
before these things do happen, unto which also Brightman seems to assent in
his exposition on the fif^ Vial: for of this we shall see more in the
following Chapter: however the Jesuit erreth, feining that Rome shall be
destroyed before Antichrists rising, seeing John in Chapter 11. and again
Chap. 17. does not obscurely make the great City standing on seven hills to be
the Seat of Antichrist. But how long before the end Rome shall be cut off, the
Lord knows: If some time before, it makes nothing against the sense by us
alleged. For by the great City we are not only to understand the walls and
streets of Rome, but all places wherever the Romish Antichrist has any
jurisdiction: which as the Jesuit confesses may stand (although Rome be
destroyed before) even unto this last Earthquake.

And the Cities of the Nations fell] We have heard of the ruin of Rome,
Antichrist, and his kingdom. Now is added what happened to the other Adversary
kingdoms: They also fell by the foresaid Earthquake: for the Cities of the
Nations I take to be the kingdoms, Provinces, Forts, and power of the
Barbarians, not belonging to Antichrists kingdom, as Jews, Turks, Saracens
and the like, dispersed throughout the whole world, which shall all at the same
time be ruinated: And thus it must necessarily be understood: for if here we
should understand the Nations figuratively, viz. of the Antichristian Papists,
who worship God after the manner of the heathens, as it is before taken in
Chapter 11.1. it would seem to be a tautologie not to be approved of.

And great Babylon came into remembrance before God] That which before he
called the Great City: here he calls it great Babylon, and so much we may
plainly gather from the voice of the second Angel, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen, that great City, Chapter 15.8. and 18.10. Wherefore I see no reason why
we should here seek for another Babylon, to wit, a new Rome, that is,
Constantinople as Brightman supposes: for seeing Constantinople to this day,
and so without doubt shall continue in Mahumetisme and idolatry, the same shall
fall with the Cities of the Nations. But to imagine that the Western
Christians after Popery shall be abo^shed, and also drive the Turk out of the
East, and recover, or overthrow Constantinople, the Metropolis of the Turkish
Empire, this, I say, seems to me to be a thing rather to be wished then
expected, in regard that our own sins shall fight for the Turk, even
against our selves: until such time that the great City Babylon, and all the
Cities of the nations shall be utterly overthrown by the universal Earthquake.

Wherefore then does he repeat the name of the great City? I answer: he does
it by an Emphaticall (...) or reversion, that we may not think the division,
which before he spoke of, to be small, or to happen by chance, but understand
the just and horrible judgment of God in the destruction thereof: for then the
Lord will give unto her the cup of the fury of his wrath: by which phrase is
signified the most fearful judgment of God executed on her, in regard of her
idolatry and tyranny, according to the threatening of the third Angel Chap.
14.10. as if he had said: The great City is broken, Babylon, I say, the great
is come into remembrance before God, that forasmuch as she has made drunk the
world with the wine of her fornication, she herself also shall have her fill
of the cup of the fury of Gods wrath, that is, God will punish her in a
horrible manner. She is said to come into remembrance before God (...) or
after the manner of men. For God did seem for a thousand years and more, to
connive and forget her as it were, in not punishing her wicked Idolatry and
tyranny, but at last by his horrible judgments he will make it known, that
she was never out of his remembrance, and that he never approved of her
flagitious works.

Now in what sense, and how many ways both in the good and evil part, God is
said to forget and to remember, and wherefore the Scripture speaks thus of
God, we have fully expounded in our Commentary on Genesis, touching these
words, And God remembered Noah. Chap. 8.1.

20. And every Island fled away] The third kind of wonders are in the Sea,
Signs in the Sea.
intimating how they that live (though never so remote) in the Islands, shall
also be overwhelmed by this fatal Earthquake: for every Island shall flee
away, that is, shall vanish away and perish, either by water or fire. Now by
Islands the Hebrews understand all places seated near the Sea: The Mountains
also which are either in the Islands or other mediterranean places, shall not
be able to shelter the adversaries, because there shall none be found, but all
be swallowed up by the violence of the Earthquake. In the days of Noah when
the flood came, men ran to the Mountains for safety: and at the destruction
of Jerusalem, Christ counseled his disciples to flee unto the Mountains. But
here now the wicked cannot flee to the Islands or Mountains: because then they
shall not be: by a like manner of Speech the end of the world is set forth
afterward in Chap. 20.11. Before in the Antichristian Earthquake Chap. 6.14.
the mountains and Islands too, are said to be removed out of their places in
an allegorical sense, but not to have fled and vanished away, as in this
place. Now after what manner Antichrist removes the Mountains and Islands
both civilly and ecclesiastically, we have there declared.

21. And there fell great hail of a talent waight] The fourth kind of signs
are on men, hail of a talent weight falling on the heads of the ungodly, In
men:
It is an allusion unto the seventh plague of Egypt: where hail mingled with
fire very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt
since it became a Nation, Ex. 9 24.
smote all that was in the field both man and beast, and broke every herb and
tree of the field: We read also of another grieyous kind of hail, when great
stones from Heaven fell on the Canaanites, and slew more of them, then did the
sword of the Israelites. Joshua 10.11. But the foresaid was nothing in respect
of this, which shall be of a talent weight, that is, he will cast down hail
like to huge Bullets of an hundred pound, such as a strong man is hardly able
to move, much less escape without being hurt or killed if they fall on his
head. Thus I rather take the talent for our hundred pound weight, then for the
money talent of 60. or 80. Minas, as Luther has rendered it: the Greeks indeed
call any thing that is great (...) Talentary.

This hail fell on men, yet not on all men, but only upon blasphemers, as the
effect shows: for their punishments are here alone described: whereas the
godly shall be as free from this hail, as were the Israelites of old: so that
it notes the dreadful destruction of the ungodly, which shall be as terrible
as if hail of an hundred pound weight fell on them, and crushed them to
pieces: And who knows, but that this very thing shall be literally
accomplished: for touching the signs of the last day, nothing must be thought
incredible.

And men blasphemed God] A horrible effect of the plague. The wicked being
crushed by the hail (after the example of the Egyptians and Canarnites) will
cry, as before, to the Mountains fall us, and to the hills cover us, etc.
wishing that they might perish and be consumed by the same, but they shall
only be smitten therewith, their plague not being ended in one day, but shall
be tormented for ever and ever, as we heard before in Chap. 14.11. Therefore
being turned into furious rage, they shall blaspheme and accuse the LORD as it
were of cruelty, as having lost all hope of being ever freed from the torment
of the hail. Therefore he says: They blasphemed God because of the plague of
the hail: for the plague thereof was very great. The which is a brief
description of the eternal torments of the Reprobates, who will never repent
of their wickedness.

Because of these blasphemies Brightman supposes that the end is not here
spoken of, for then, says he, the wicked shall themselves subscribe to the
sentence of the Law, and say Amen unto the same: But we are to mind, that
howsoever they shall inwardly indeed subscribe as being convinced in their
consciences that they suffer justly: yet outwardly with their tongues, they
will never cease to pour out blasphemies against Gods administrations, for if
they feared not to break forth this way against him while they lay under
temporal plagues: what wonder is it then, if they do the like, or more when
they shall be tormented with the last plugue of the hail, that is, in hell
for ever. Thus we see that the fife Vision ends with the end of the world.

The PREFACE to the Sixth VISION, Touching the Judgment of the great Whore,
contained in CHAP. XVII. XVIII. XIX.
THe sixth Vision comprehended in Chap, 17.18.19. is a supply, and gives light
to the foregoing Visions, especially to the third, fourth, and fifth, as far as
concerns the two latter Acts which treated of Antichrist: of these, I say, it
is as it were a plain Commentary: so that we may no longer doubt, but Rome is
certainly the seat of Antichrist, and that the Pope of Rome is the very
Antichrist figured out, and revealed in this prophecy.

In the third and fourth Vision John saw a monstrous beast rising out of the
bottomless pit and the Sea, Chap 11: 7 Chap 13: 1
having seven heads and ten horns, which killed the two witnesses, made war
with the Saints, etc. now there it was somewhat obscure what should be
signified by this monster: But here the whole mystery of the beast is
explained, viz. who he is, who his heads are, and his horns.

In the fourth Vision also he saw a woman ready to be delivered, Chap 12: 8 9:
10.11: 12: 16
whom the Dragon immediately persecuted and caused to fly into the wilderness
out of the sight of men: here now he rehearses, how in stead of the woman
formerly hanished: he saw another, viz. a whorish woman clothed in scarlet and
sitting on a beast, and that this woman is the great city on seven hills, the
Queen of cities, and Empress of the world, that is, Rome.

In the said Visions, chap 11: 7 chap 14: 8
he made mention of the great city Babylon, whose destruction was proclaimed by
the second Angel, here he prophetically fores heweth that that great Babylon
is Rome, and that it shall at last be burnt with fire, even by the horns
themselves of the beast, that is, by such Kings who before gave their authority
unto her.

In the fifth Vision he saw the great city divided into three parts, chap 16:
19 cap 18 29
and overthrown by a great earthquake. Here by a prophetical demonstration he
more plainly describes the fatal ruin thereof.

In the foresaid Vision (the sixth vial being poured out) he saw the kings of
the earth, and of the whole world gathered together by three unclean spirits,
chap 16 14 chap 19.11
to war against God Almighty in defense of the Beasts kingdom. Here excellently
he describes the batell it self, and the dreadful issue thereof, the victory
of Christ, and the casting of the beast and all his confederates into the Lake
of fire.

By all which it is manifest in the first place, that this vision, as I said,
does give a most clear light to the things before, yea to the whole Revelation.

Secondly that the scope and use indeed of this vision in general, is to
terrify the adversaries, that they might not be lifted up, The use of this
Vision,
because of their prosperity, and presume against the church in hope always
to escape unpunished: as also to comfort the godly, least being offended with
the present outward luster and power of Antichrist, and overcome by their
manifold calamities, they should faint under the same, but in hope of a happy
issue persevere constantly under the cross, fighting the good fight of Faith
against the heast, and holding Faith and a good conscience unto the end.

But the special use thereof is clearly and manifestly to set forth to the
world Antichrist and his seat: For in regard the son of perdition shall sit in
the Temple of God, and by a pretended divine show and lying signs bewitch the
world, so as he shall be thought not to be Antichrist, but rather christ's
Vicar, and his kingdom the Catholic Church: Therefore the spirit of God
would once for all unmaske him, and by his own finger as it were show, that
Rome is his seat, to the end that we might not suffer our selves any longer to
be deluded by impostors, as if we were to seek for Antichrist at Jerusalem,
Babylon, or elsewhere.

Thirdly, It is not obscure unto what times this vision belongs: The angel
distinguishes the age of the Beast by four periods of time: in which he was or
had bin, in which he was not, in which he shall ascend out of the bottomless
pit, and lastly in which he shall go into destruction.

The first denotes the time in which the Beast was before John's time, To what
times this vision belong:
so far as concerned the Monarchical power, although he were not as yet the
Antichrist.

The second denotes John's time, and foreward along till the Emperor Phocas,
even so long as the Beast as yet was not that which afterward he came to be.

The third is the time from Antichrists rising under the foresaid Phocas, so
long as the Papacy stood in its vigor and strength, until the declining thereof
through Luther: for then the beast was ascended out of the bottomless pit.

The fourth is from the declining until the future destruction: for from that
time forward the Papacy began, and still by little and little does go into
perdition: of which Bellarmine himself complains: from that time, Lib. ^ de P
R: ^p: 21 col: 9^7: c:
says he, that you began to make the Pope Antichrist, his dominion has bin so
far from increasing, as that it has more and more decreased: The which he
truly said in a prophetical way: because in that year the Popes Legate was
sent unto Paris to disturb the kingdom of France: notwithstanding the first
part of his Speech is not true; for the Pope long before our time was reputed
and known to be antichrist, as before we have proved.

Hence fourthly, it appears that this beast is the same with that in Chap.
11.7. and Chap. 13.1. yet not absolutely: for so far as this here was before
his rising out of the bottomless pit, and the Sea, in that respect indeed, and
so far forth he is not that Antichrist there, but denotes the monarchical
power of the Roman Empire, and so his original extends it self unto the
first beginnings of the Roman monarchy. But again so far as he afterward
ascended, and came under the yoke of the woman, he came to be Antichrist:
and so his original does belong unto the times of the Emperor Phocas, which
Wretch did no other good but only this, that he was the first that discovered
Antichrist unto the world, but of this more largely on ver. 3.

Fifthly, We are also to consider, seeing the beast is Antichrist, what then
should he meant by the woman sitting on the Beast? Is she not the Antichrist?
yea verily, for as a rider with the Beast makes one horseman: so here, the
woman with the beast makes one Antichrist: we are therefore to remember, that
like as in vision fourth, C. 13. Antich. was figured out not by one, but by a
double beast, in a diverse respect: so in this sixth Vision he is represented not
under one but a twofold figure, viz. of a beast and woman, yea a woman having
the beast under bit and bridle. How Antichrist is the woman and the beast.
And indeed Antichrist is a whorish woman, because the Church of Rome (as the
Angel shows) is an adulterous church: he is also a beast, not at liberty as
of old, but under the yoke of the woman, who does not lead the beast but rides
on him, and constraines him as with a sharp bit to go whither she pleases: for
the Pope has two bodies holding the bridle of the Empire: And thus Boniface
VIII. as a filthy beast did publicly show himself in the first Iubile at Rome:
appearing indeed in the first day of the solemnity in his pontificalibus, and
imparting his apostolical benediction unto the people: but the day following
in a soldiers habit, with the Emperors arms and a naked sword before him,
crying aloud from his throne, Lib: 8 saxon cap 36,
Behold here are two swords: The which Cranzius recording: Thou see, says
he, O Peter, thy successor: and Thou O Savior Christ behold thy Vicar. Behold
to what pride the servant of thy servants come? And in the margent: The Pope,
says he, acts a twofold pe^^^ in the theater of the Jubilee. My Anonymus
calls the beast Antichrist the wife, spouse and church of Antich: which comes
to one thing. Lastly, The four Acts of the sixth vision:
I serve, that this sixth Vision is not universal touching the whole course and
time of the church, as were the second, third and fourth: but more particular
touching the history of Antichrist only, yet much more clearer then all the
other. For it most plainly represents the rising of Antichrist from his first
Parentage, as it were, together with his seat, Kingdom, vassalls, success and
tragical destruction. Now however it be particular, as is the fifth,
notwithstanding it is not like that, distinguished by two Acts only, but
manifestly by four.

In the first Act Antichrist is exhibited to the view of all men under the
Image of a Whore riding on a Beast: and the whole mystery thereof is opened
Chapter 17.

The second Act by a prophetical description represents the burning of Babylon
or Rome, together with the sorrow and mourning of Antichristians for the same,
Chap. 18.

In the third Act the heavenly companies do after each other declare the just
judgments of God, and the marriage of the Lamb. Chap. 19. to verse 11.

Lastly the fourth Act, is a full manifestation of the Vision, declaring the
last battle of the beast, and the kings of the earth in Harmageddon against
Christ, and the issue thereof, the beast with all his assistants, is thrown
into the lake burning with fire and brimstone, from the eleventh verse unto the
end of the Chapter. And thus much of the Preface.

CHAPTER XVII. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis.
A whorish woman is showed unto John, sitting on a Beast, at which he wondering,
the mystery thereof is unfolded, first, who the beast is: secondly, who are the
seven heads and ten horns thereof: And their unhappy fight against the Lamb:
who afterward fight more prosperously against the whore herself. Lastly it is
declared who the woman is.

The Parts of the Chapter are three.
I. THere is a general Preface showing the occasion and Argument of the whole
Vision, ver. 1.2. II. The Vision it self ver. 3.4.5. III. The interpretation
of the Vision, in the rest of the Chapter.
In the first John is invited by the Angel to contemplate a new Vision, ver.
1. The Argument thereof being the judgment or condemnation of the great whore,
ibid. Whose person is described generally by two adjuncts. 1. Of her seat or
throne upon many waters. 2. Of her abominable fornication, as the cause of her
condemnation, v. 2. with whom the kings have committed fornication, etc.

In the second is noted. 1. The place of the Vision, in the wilderness. 2. The
Vision it self: A woman sitting on a beast, ibid. 3. The monstrous shape of
the beast, ibid. 4. The attire of the whorish woman, ver. 4. The name on her
forehead, ver. 5. and her cruelty, ver. 6.


In the third is showed a twofold occasion of the interpretation. John's great
admiration, ver. 6. and the readiness of the Angel to interpret, ver. 7. The
interpretation follows, 1. Of the Beast, ver. 8.9.10.11.12.13.14. 2. Of the
woman, ver. 15. unto the end. The beast is unfolded: first in the whole,
secondly, according to his parts. Of the whole Beast is showed 1. The fourefold
state: also his authority among the inhabitants of the earth, ver, 8. to which
is annexed an exclamation, stirring up to attention, ver. 9. The parts of the
beast are unfolded, 1. The seven heads: that they are so many mountain^s, and
so many kings, ver. 9.10.11. 2. The ten horns, that they also are so many
kings, ver. 12. 3. The conspiracy of the kings with the Beast against the
Lamb, ver, 13. 4. The fight of the kings with the Lamb, ver. 14.

To (...) the woman here is showed, 1. her seat on many waters, ver. 15.2, her
(...) desertion and burning, ver. 16. The secondarie causes whereof shall be
the horns of the beast, ibid. The first and chief, the divine motion, ver.
17. 3. The surname of the woman: the great city reigning over the kings of the
earth, etc. that is, Rome, ver. 18.

CHAPTER XVII. The first Part of the Chapter.
The Preface of the VISION.
1 And there came one of the seven Angels which had the seven vials, and talked
with me, saying, Come hither, I will show unto ^ee the judgment of the great
whore, that sits upon many waters.

2 With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the
inhabiters of the earth have bin made drunk with the wine of her Fornication.

THE COMMENTARY.
AND there came one of the seven Angells] The occasion of the Vision is the
invitation of the Angel unto a new Vision. Now whether this Angel were the
first of the seven by an hebraisme, it matters not. Brightman takes him to be
the fifth, who poured out the Vial on the throne of the Beast. But it may be as
well any one of the other: for every of them did pour out the last plagues on
the beasts kingdom. Notwithstanding it seems to be the seventh or last, who
with his Vial raised an earthquake whereby Babylon was destroyed: for this
shall be the judgment of the great whore, to which John is now invited to behold
the same, he had heard indeed by the preaching of the second Angel in Vision
fifth, chap 14 8
the fall of Babylon, and even now in the earthquake he saw the division or
rent thereof: chap 16.19
but the Type was something obscure: here therefore in a more evident vision
the tragical judgment of Babylon is manifested to him.

Come hither, I will show unto thee] The sense is not: I will reveal or expound
unto thee in words: but I will bring thee to the very beholding of the thing it
self, as if he should say, I will no longer describe Antichrist in words, but
will now set him forth plainly before thy eyes. Now as this was a Vision, so
it was a mental transportation, as appears verse 3. The scope or drift was,
that John should wrire these tragical apparitions to the terror of Babylon
and comfort of the godly.

The friendly manner of speaking, Come hither, and the whole matter teaches us
what the Apostle speaks Heb. 1.14. that the Angels as ministering Spirits,
are with alacrity employed about these things which serve for our consolation
and salvation: not to the end that we should worship them (for thus John is
prohibited to do) but that we might rejoice and give thanks to God, chap 19:10
and 22.9
who so cares for us, as for our sakes to send forth the Angels as ministering
spirits.

The judgment of the whore] In one word he shows the Argument of the Vision:
(...) the judgment of the whore, for (...) the Condemnation: which is not
meant of a temporal spoiling and burning which the whore shall suffer by her
lovers: but to be cast for ever into the lake of fire and brimstone, the which
Christ the Judge shall himself execute at the last day.

Of the great ^hore] Gr. (...) with a double Article, Regula articulorum non
semper perpetua.
as if he spoke of a whore before known, whereas indeed there was nothing
formerly mentioned of her. And therefore the rule will not always hold, that
articles are never put but before things that are known. Unless perhaps he
denotes this Whore by a double article, because she was known to the Angel,
as if he should say, I will show unto thee that famous Harlot, or Strumpet,
well known to all the heavenly inhabitants, and what her end shall be, seeing
as yet thou know it not.

She is not that woman Jezabell, which seduced some of the Church of Thiatyra
by her fornication, Chap. 2.20. For the description shows that here a far more
famous whore is noted: For this Strumpet sits not in Thiatyra, but upon many
waters: and upon the beast: the meaning whereof shall be opened on ver. 3. and
ver. 15.

By calling her a whore, and a great one, that is, insatiable, and far
exceeding other Strumpets in lust and filthiness, he teaches us, that the
guilt and cause of her horrible judgment shall be her fornication, and not
simply fornication (the punishment whereof might happily not have bin so
capital) but joined with detestable perfidiousnesse, namely her loathsome
adultery: as when a Bride forsaking her Bridegroom, or a wife her husband,
shamefully prostitute themselves unto strangers, which sin both by humane and
divine laws is punished by death.

This may not be taken of corporal fornication: for this harlot is afterward
called a City, and fornication could not be committed with the walls or
houses thereof. Therefore it is rather to be understood of spiritual
fornication, viz. apostasy from God, perfidiousnesse and Idolatry: Now
wherefore the scripture does so often compare this to Fornication, I have
showed in my Commentary on Hosea, Chapter 1. and Chapter 2.

Betwixt Christ and the Church is a spiritual marriage: Ephesians. 5: 32 Hose: 2: 18
He as the Bridegroom has espoused the Church as his own Bride in
faithfulness, righteousness, and judgment, and will shortly consummate the
marriage at his last coming, as we shall hear Chap. 19.7. in the mean while
enjoining her to remain pure and chaste unto him. And thus the Apostle labored
to present the Churches of Rome, Corinth, etc. as chaste Virgins to Christ, that
is, free from the leaven of Superstition, idolatry and humane traditions: such
a Church I say, was at Rome in the Apostles days and some while after, and
here is represented in her apostasy by this woman the same Church as shall
appear by that which follows. Isa: 1.21:


But how is she now become a harlot? Because as of old Jerusalem that holy City
casting off the worship of God, and polluting her self with traditions,
superstitions and idolatry, is therefore called an Harlot. So the Christian
Church (as Egesippus witnesses in Eusebius) remained not long after the
Apostles death a chaste Virgin. But touching the declining condition of the
Church, and especially that of Rome enough has bin spoken in the foregoing
Visions, and more shall be said hereafter. The fornication of kings with the
Romish whore.


2. With whom the Kings committed fornication] The cause of her judgment is
more expressly signified: viz. her Fornication with the Kings of the Earth; for
this is a noble Strumpet, enticing Monarchs and Kings of the Earth to lie with
her. But how? by persuading the kings her lovers under the Title of the
Catholic Faith, to receive her Superstitions, Idol-worship, Decrees, and
Decretalls, and so bewitching all of them by her fair show of holiness: that
as Samson was enslaved to Dalilah, and Hercules to Omphala: so these willingly
serve, dedicate, and give themselves, and their kingdoms as Tributaries to the
Apostolical Sea, Christ's Vicar, and Peter's Successor, that avaricious
Strumpet. Now who these Kings of the Earth are, we shall see in the opening of
the horns.

To the Kings are joined the Inhavitants of the Earth, that is, Earthly men,
Idolaters, and sworn enemies of the Gospel: for with these also she plays
the Harlot, as despising no sorts of people, but with an unsatiable lust does
promiscuously prostitute her self unto all both rich and poor, bond and free,
Imprinting the Character of her Idolatry on them all, Recogn: lib. 9:
and giving them power to buy and sell her spiritual wares: herein imitating
those women of Susia, who anointing themselves (as Clemens writes) with costly
ointments, and adorned with Ornaments and precious Stones (like unto this Whore
verse 4.) used to go abroad with great Pomp, accompanied with handmaids,
indifferently alluring whosoever would, whither strangers or servants to commit
folly with them: This being permitted them by their own Husbands.

By the wine of her Fornication he understands the glorious Superstitions and
Magnificence of the Apostolical Sea, and Vizard of the Catholic Church, The
wine of fornication:
the which earthly men have as greedily embraced, as thirsty lovers drink the
wine offered them by their beloved ones. Therefore they are said to be made
drunk, because being bewitched with a blind love of Superstitions, they stand
for their Idols beyond all sense and reason, furiously hating and persecuting
the Gospel of CHRIST. If thou kill a man, its a finne with them to be bought
off with a little money. Romes idolatry:
But if thou uncover not thy head to the Idol Image of Marie, or turn thy
back upon it, its a wickedness to be punished by death, as having committed
Crimen lesae Majestatis against her. Behold the mad drunkenness of Idolaters,
occasioned by this wine of Fornication.

The second Part of the CHAPTER. The Vision of the Whore upon the Beast.
3 So he carried me away in the Spirit into the wilderness: And I saw a woman
sit upon a scarlet colored Beast, full of names of blasphemy; having seven
heads and ten horns. 4 And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet color,
and decked with gold and precious stones, and pearls, having a golden cup in
her hand, full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication. 5 And upon
her forehead was a Name written, Mystery, Babylon the Great, The Mother of
Harlots, And abominations of the Earth. 6 And I saw the woman drunken with the
blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw
her, I wondered with great admiration.
THE COMMENTARY.
AND he led me in the Spirit] Thus much of the Preface: Now follows the first
Act of the Vision: Where first we are to observe the motion unto the same, and
the place. In that John does again say he was led by the spirit, as Chapter
1.10. and Chapter 4.2. it shows that he was not in a continual Ecstasy of
Visions.

The motion unto the Vision was not of the body but the mind: for bodily he
remained in Patmos, beholding there the wilderness and the sights with the
eyes of his mind: like as Ezechiell bodily remaining in Chaldea, was in spirit
in the Temple of Jerusalem.

The place where he saw this, was the wilderness. But what? Is the Woman, the
Beast, Rome, and Antichrist in the Wilderness? Do they not inhabit the largest
possessions and most sumptuous palaces?

I do not dislike, that some understand by wilderness, Gentlilisme, which
Antichrist under the name of Christ has brought into the Church: hence in
Chapter 11.1. the Antichristian Clergy is signified by the name of Gentiles.
And indeed the Antichristians imitating the Paganes, do fall down before Idols
of wood and stone made with hands: And as Paganes, so Antichristians make God
beholding to them by the merit of works: save only that these abuse the holy
Name of Christ as a pretense for their Idolatry: which the other know not of.

Notwithstanding in my opinion there is an higher mystery in it. Before Chap.
12. the chaste Woman, Mother, or Church, being persecuted by the Dragon, fled
into the wilderness: when as after Constantines time being shaken with the
floodes of Heresies and Superstitions, she withdrew her self by degrees out of
the sight of men. Now here John shows what he saw in the wilderness in stead
of that woman. He saw indeed a Woman also, or Church, but a whoris^^ woman, or
adulterous Church, riding on a beast, that is, being Antichristian. There, I
say, where before he saw the Woman clothed with the Sun, the chaste spouse of
Christ, viz. at Rome, he now finds a whorish woman.

This forsooth is that continual succession of the Romish Popes: This is the
venerable antiquity of the Popish Church: The succession of the Romish Chur.
to wit, like as in the wilderness the whorish woman succeeded the chaste woman
and banished matrone: so at Rome the whorish Apostaticall succeeded the true
Apostolical Church, and in place of Bishops, holy Martyrs, and Confessors
excelling in faith and godliness, are come in the great high Priests of Rome,
terming themselves universal Monarchs, being indeed proud and wicked
Idolaters: who (as Genebrard confesses) are altogether fallen away from the
virtue of their Ancestors, and are rather. Apostaticall then Apostolical.
Rome therefore and Popery is a wilderness, not properly (for the former is a
policy, Lib. 4. chronol. ^.553.
and the latter contains many Commonwealths) but spiritually, the true Church
being vanished thence (like as a wilderness is remote from men's eyes) and in
which the adulterous Church has succeeded the true: of this see Chap. 12.14.
see also Hieron. ad Algasiam. Quest. 11.

I saw a wom in sitting on a Beast] A monstrons vision. A woman being of the
weaker Sex, and trembling as it were at the sight of a mouse, how she should
not then be afraid of so cruel a Beast? But she mounts on the beast, guides
and sets him forward. The holy Ghost hereby intimating that this woman being
stirred up by the infernal spirits, did with more then humane audacity climb
upon, and bring this beast under the yoke. Now let us briefly consider who
this woman is, who the beast, and what the sitting on the beast does signify.

That this woman is Rome is so clearly declared by the Angel, The woman is
Rome.
that the Jesuits dare no more deny the same: For Ribera howsoever on this
place he seeks to shift off the matter, and altogether passes by verse 18. In
Apoc. c. 17. se. 5. and cap. 14.33 et seq.
yet he denies not but that as before under the name of a Cay, so here under
the name of a woman Babylon is spoken of. Now that Babylon denotes Popish Rome,
we have before clearly proved.

Bellarmine howsoever he jestingly contendeth that Jerusalem shall be the Seat
of Antichrist: yet at length he grants that Rome, Lib. 3. de p: R: c. 13
yea Popish Rome is the scarlet colored whore to be burnt by the Kings: but he
miserably intangles himself: for if Popish Rome be the purpled whore, and the
same whore is that great Babylon, which certainly is the Seat and habitation of
Antichrist, then Popish Rome must needs be Antichrists seat, which
notwithstanding both the Jesuits deny.

Neither does that fiction help them, viz. that Popish Rome shall be burnt by
the ten Kings before the coming of Antichrist, and therefore cannot possible
be Antichrists Seat: for this Fiction is not only contradictory to it self,
but is greatly reproachful to the Pope also.

First it is inconsistent, Inconsistent
because thus the whore should have bin burnt before she had committed
fornication with the Kings and inhabiters of the earth, and before she rode on
the beast Antichrist, that is, she should be punished before she had sinned:
whereas the cause of her burning and punishment must necessarily go before her
punishment. Now the only cause of Babylons judgment shall be her Antichristian
whoredom, and riding on Antichrist, that is, her Antichristianisme: Rome
therefore shall commit Antichristian fornication, and be the Seat of
Antichrist before it be burnt.

Secondly, And opprobrious to the Pope and cardinals:
Nothing can be imagined more contumelious against the Pope then this Fiction:
for if Popish Rome is to be burnt for her Antichristian sornication, then of
necessity the Jesuits must confess one of these two things: Either that the
Pope does, or shall give to drink the wine of Antichristian fornication to the
Kings of the earth (for this cannot be understood of any other whoredom) and
so the Pope now is, or shall be the Antichrist: Or that the Pope with his
Cardinals shall some time or other be taken with such a Lethargy of
Prophannesse, and be so careless in their office, as to suffer the wine of the
Babylonish fornication to increase in their City and Church, and then to be
given unto the Kings of the earth: Now could this cursed wine grow in Rome,
except the Pope and Cardinals were the Authors and furtherers thereof? And by
whom, if not by themselves should it from Rome be proffered unto the kings of
the earth? Let them therefore take which of these two they will, and it must
necessarily follow, that Rome is Antichrists seat, and the Pope Antichrist.
Thus much touching the woman.

The sum of the mystery is this: The woman, as she is a woman, is the Church,
see Chapter. 11.1. as she is whorish, the false and adulterous Church: as she
to scarlet colored, making the Kings and inhabitants of the earth to drink of
the wine, etc. she is the universal Church, giving the law to all: as she
rides on the Beast, The sum of the mystery of the Ra^^ish wh^re
the Antichristian Church armed with both swords: as she sits on seven
mountains, she denotes the adultorous, Catholic, Antichristian Roman Church.

Touching the beast the adversaries do wonderfully contradict themselves in
their writings.

Ribera makes the beast to be the devil reigning, or the kingdom of the devil:
but its a false gloss, and were it true, it would no way salve the Pope and
Rome.

First, This beast as not the devil reigning.
this beast was not yet in John's time, but was to ascend out of the pit: but
the kingdom of the devil was in his time most cruelly exercised by the Roman
tyrants against the godly. Christ indeed destroyed Satan's kingdom so far as
concerned spiritual violence, but not as yet in respect of civil tyranny.
This beast therefore is not the kingdom of the devil, or the devil reigning.

Secondly the Dragon and the beast are not the same: for the Dragon gives his
throne to the beast: And the beast receives his authority from the Dragon. In
their punishment also they are distinguished, as is manifest by comparing Chap.
19.20. with Chap. 20.10. Now the dragon is the devil that old serpent: The
beast therefore is not the devil.

Thirdly this beast so far as he comes up out of the pit, is the same mentioned
in Chapter 11.7. who is there said to ascend out of the bottomless pit, and
Chap. 13.1. out of the Sea. Therefore he says (...) which thou saw, to
wit, before Chap. 11. and 13. but that beast was Antichrist: And therefore this
also.

The major Ribera labors to disprove by a grammatical reason: because the
beast in Greek is called (...) without an article, not (...) and so the woman
(...) not (...) with an article: that we might understand says he, that here
the woman and beast are brought in, which were not before: but this reason is
vain and of no validity: for by that which went before it is plain, why the
article is not put before (...) the woman, viz. because in the first verse he
had with a double article called her (...) that great whore. Therefore it was
not needful here again to repeat the article. And in that he calls the beast
(...) not (...) it does not argue him to be a diverse beast from the former:
for though the article be ommitted, yet in stead thereof is the relative (...)
which thou saw, to wit, not now only, but twice before also.

Besides the rule of articles on which the adversary grounds his denial, is
altogether sandy and weak, as not being strictly observed, neither by humane
or divine Writers: especially in this prophecy, as many examples might be
alleged for it both ways: as Chap. 13.11. and 14.1. where the Lamb and
Dragon which had bin before spoken of are in the Greek written (...) without
articles, in stead of (...) etc. And on the contrary the whore not spoken of
before, with a double article (...). as before we noted ver. 1. Therefore the
Jesuits exception is childish.

But that this and the former is all one beast appears, See the Preface.
first, by the same ascending out of the bottomless pit: secondly, the heads
and horns of both are the same. Thirdly, by their blasphemies, wherewith they
are both full, Fourthly, their worship is the same. Fifthly, both have all one
kind of worshippers. to wit, the reprobate, inhabiters of the earth, not
written in the book of life. Lastly, Ribera himself confesses, that the beast
in C. 19.20. and 20.10. which shall be cast into the lake of fire with the false
prophet, is Antichrist, and not the devil, because there the devil is expressly
distinguished from the beast. Now nothing can be more clear then this, viz.
that that beast and this is one: and therefore there is no show at all to
imagine that this beast should be the devil.

Notwithstanding if Ribera will needs have it to be so understood, what will be
gain by it? namely this, that Rome and the Pope shall ride on the devils back,
for who is this horseman that sits on the devil, but Antichrist? And what also
the woman's riding on the beast is, I have showed in the Preface. Now let us see
the color and blasphemous names of the beast, the habit also of the woman, her
forehead and belly.

Sitting upon a scarlet colored beast] He describes the form of the beast
that carried the woman, to the end his nature might be the more easily and
better known.

First he is scarlet colored, or rose-coloured, because, as Pliny says, its
like to the clear and precious red colored rose, most pleasant to the eyes.
For coccum or cocc^^, (the word here used) is a grain to die withal, growing
of a red herb, serving to die purple or scarlet: of which color were the
armour-coates of Kings. This Kingly color therefore of the beast, denotes his
royal magnificence, as also his deep hypocrisy: for Antichrist makes a very
fair show to the world, blinding the eyes of men, and deceiving their minds
with Vizards and Impostures: It may also signify his bloody disposition: for
scarlet is of the color of blood: now in verse (...) John sees the woman drunk
with the blood of the Saints. And it is well known that the Romish Court for
some ages has used this color, that so it might set forth the proper Livery
of the Romish Court: whose purpled fathers (in whom resides the power to create
Popes) are clothed in scarlet.

Secondly the beast is full of blasphemous names] Which may be understood
either because in stead of trappings or barbes which horses have, he wears the
names of blasphemies on his head: or because he vomits them out with full
mouth: Both which agree to the former description Chap. 13. ver. 1. and 5.
where the beast bad names of blasphemies on his head: and afterward opened his
mouth blaspheming God, his tabernacle and the inhabitants of Heaven, at which
thing a godly mind cannot but tremble very much. This shall be the Theology
of the Beast: such his kingdom; full with names of blasphemy.

The Names are either persons, as before Chap. 3.4. Or blasphemous doctrines:
For the beast as we have formerly showed shall be wholly defiled with
blasphemies, insomuch as not a hair shall appear without it: Now what these
blasphemies are, it has been opened in Chap. 13. I. He blasphemeth God, in
boasting himself with his Tripple-crowne, to be Lord of Heaven, Earth, and
Hell. II. The Tabernacle of God, in transforming the Spouse of Christ into a
loathsome and filthy Strumpet, the Temple of the Lord into an impure
Brothelhouse. III. The Inhabiters of Heaven, in making them, whether willing or
not willing, to be their gods and faviours, and for more sake gives divine
honor unto them.

Thirdly the Beast (like to the monster Hydra) has seven heads and ten horns,
fully resembling the beast before mentioned, save only that the horns here
have no Diadems: the which thing was not indeed needful to be added, because
afterward in verse 12. the horns are said to be the kings, on whom he set the
Crowns. Touching the form of the rest of his body, as his belly, mouth, and
feet, it is not here expressed: because we had it in Chap. 13. notwithstanding
if we consider his chief parts wherein lies his whole power, the rest of his
body may be easily known, as a Lion by his Claw. Thus much of the beast.

4. And she was arrayed in purple] Now follows the description of the woman:
first by her glorious, luxurious and whorish attire, as if she were another
Cleopatra or Rhodopa. Purple and Scarlet is Queens clothing, such as afterward
the woman boasts herself for to be: being according to the Proverb, like
lips like lettice. The color of the Beast and the woman agrees: viz. The
color of the beast and woman is the same.
being royal, hypocritical, and tyrannical, arguing the proud, wicked, and
cruel mind of both. The rest of her attire bewrayes her whorish
luxuriousness, viz. Gold, Pearls, and most precious Stones, with which her
hair, head, ears, neck and fingers are made glorious and transplendent in
the eyes of the world. This is the Persian religion and Sybaritican luxury of
Popes, The whorish luxuriousness of the Popes.
and the whole Romish whorish worship, which is to be seen in the Palaces,
Steeples, Corners of streets, high Arches, Images, Baths, Temples, Roofes,
Crosses, Altars, Idols, Robes, Mitres, and other Babylonish Monuments, all of
them glistering with gold, purple, scarlet, and precious stones, whereby the
whore bewitchingly allures the inhabitants of the earth, like as Daniel
foretold that Antichrist should adore his god of Forces with gold, silver,
precious and desirable stones.

Now howbeit the blind world is delighted with these fancies: lib: 2 offic. c:
28
yet the worship of God does not stand in need of these toys: for as Ambrose
says, The sacraments, want not gold, neither are such things which are not
bought with gold, pleasing to gold.

If thou ask, whence has the woman all these great treasures? I answer, by
her fornication with Kings, Merchants, and Mariners, the riches of the whole
world have flowed to Rome, as into an unsatiable gulf, as we shall see in the
following Chapter.

The participle (...) is observeable, it properly signifies gilded. Now
Instruments are commonly gilded thereby to deceive, outwardly appearing to be
gold when as inwardly they are scarce Copper. It notes the hypocrisy of this
whore, showing that with vain and idle shaddows she shall deceive the world.

Here Ribera sends us back unto the Ancient Romans, Conquerours of all
Nations, who brought the riches of the world into their City. Notwithstanding
he acknowledges that these things are also to be referred to future times:
Indeed be had said more rightly, if to the time some while past and present:
for as yet the woman has not put off her whorish habit.

Secondly, the Instrument in her hand is a golden Cup: which she presented to
the Kings and Inhabitants of the earth: The whorish inticemants of Antichrist
are noted: much like the description in Proverbs 7. for cups serve to stir up
lust. This golden cup, are the golden titles of the Pope, by which hitherto he
has persuaded the world to drink the wine of his fornication: namely that he
is Pope, the Father of Fathers, the Pastor of Pastors, the most holy father,
Holiness, Christ's Vicar, Peter's Successor, the head of the Church, Spouse,
and Foundation: Prince of priests, Apostolical Bishop, lib: 2 de P R cap 13.
Universal, Ruler of the City and world, etc. from all which Bellarmine
laboring to demonstrate that the Pope is an Ecclesiastical Monarch of the
whole world, what does he but hence uncover the whores nakedness? But now what
was within her, Full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication]
Outwardly she is gold, inwardly poison: he understands the filthy blasphemous
doctrines, and detestable Romish abominations and wickednesses, with which the
whore has made drunk the Christian world.

The Prophets call the worshipping and trusting in Idols and creatures, which
God abhors, Abomination: because it is the foulest fornication, drawing with
it all kind of impurity and wickedness. And indeed the Romish Strumpet has
poured these deadly poisons out of her bewitching cup.

Ribera does again send us back to heathenish Rome, who induced the nations
under them to serve their Idols. Eusebius, lib: 2 histor cap 2 Tertull. in Apol
ca: 5
But the contrary is true: for the Romans were so far from forcing the Nations
they conquered to forsake the worshipping of their own Gods, and embrace
theirs, as that they would have all strange gods erected and set up at Rome,
lest any of them should not be there worshipped, Christ only excepted, whose
worship the Senate rejected at the persuasion of Tiberius, because he had not
first approved of the same. Popish Rome therefore it must needs be which to
this day holds this Circean cup in her hand.

5 And upon her forehead a name written] The third note openly setting forth
the filthiness of the woman is her name: which she carries written upon her
forehead, that by the very sight thereof she may allure every one she meets
with, to commit folly with her. It shows, that this public Strumpet is most
impudent as showing her name openly to the world: MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT.
THE MOTHER OF FORNICATION, etc.

It is a question whither or no the word MYSTERY be spoken of the name. If it
be, it bewrayes the profession of the whorish kingdom, which chiefly is
employed about Mysteries, Sacraments, Ceremonies, Pompes: it shall be, I say,
an ecclesiastical Monarchy, having both swords.

Notwithstanding Andreas joins Mystery with the name written, as it were
appositively, A name written, Mystery, that is, having a mystery in it, or
being mystical: for Rome is Babylon the great, not properly but mystically,
as before it was called Sodom, Egypt, Jerusalem (...), by a spiritual
Allegory, because of likeness in idolatry, blasphemies, abominable filthiness
and tyranny against the Saints. Thus Anonymus 260. years ago: Babylon the
great the city Rome, or the Papal Court.

This woman is called a Mother in imitation of the former, but very unlike in
respect of issue: for the first was mother of the man-child caught up unto God,
or of blessed Confessors and Martyrs: This is the mother of fornication and
abomination of the earth: for all the abominations that have reigned these
thousand years in the Christian world, have by this mother been sowed, and
brought forth and propagated.

And therefore Rome does to this day glory in the name of Mother of Churches:
neither is it to be admired, that her daughters, as heirs of their mothers
abominations and fornications, should be followers of her steps. But as for the
reformed Churches in Germany, France, Brittane, Poland, and Hungary, who in
these latter ages worship God and Christ the only Savior without Idols: they
are so far from acknowledging this whore for their mother, as that they
detest her abominations with all their hearts, and flee from them.

6 And I saw the woman drunken] We have seen the habit and forehead of the
woman: Now he shows us her belly also, swollen, not with wine, but with blood:
which again is very monstrous: for as it was unnatural for a woman to ride on
the back of a cruel beast: so it is no less horrid to consider the cruel
mind of this woman, and her belly full of blood: by which nothing undoubtedly
is signified but her unsatiable cruelty and bloodthirstinesse.

Of this drunkenesse, thus my Anonymus: because, says he, Antichrists Church,
being finally condemned for her wasting and abusing the goods of the Church,
shall suffer so great vengeance, as through pain she shall be past feeling,
like a drunken man. Therefore he thinks that she is said to be drunk, because
of her astonishment, being like a drunken man without sense or feeling of her
punishment. But because she is expressly said to be drunken with blood, it is
certainly to be understood of her cruelty against the Saints and Professors
of the Gospel: Which Anonymus adding in the following words: Of the blood,
says he, of them, who fear not to profess the doctrine of the Gospel in
spite of the whole College of Antichrist.

Therefore she is said to be drunk, that is, full of blood, The belly of the
woman filled with blood.
by a metaphor usual to the scriptures taken from men drunken and enraged with
strong wine. But with whose blood?

Of the Saints and Martyrs of Iesus] Against whom the Beast made war Chap. 13.
and whom he slew Chap. 11.

Ribera acknowledges that this agrees to no City so well as to Rome, yet he
labors again to send us to Nero, Domitian, Diocletian and other Persecutors
of Christians, but absurdly: for how should the Emperors be the woman: Or how
should this woman drunken with blood, whose judgment is next joined with the
judgment of the Beast, and shall be accomplished at the end of the world, be
Ancient Rome which has not for thirteen hundred years shed any blood of the
Saints, but has ceased to be? What Mystery also should be applied to old Rome?
certainly this mystical name is as absurdly written by the Papists on the
foreheads of Roman Tyrants, as if they made Alexander the Great Priest of
Cybele.

The cruelty therefore of Papal Rome horribly exercised above six hundred
years, has made the whore drunk.

But here they will demand: which of the Saints the Popes have killed with
their own hands? or with whose blood they have bin made drunk?

As if forsooth the woman be not therefore drunk with blood, because she her
self has not with her own hands made the gallows, swords, fires, and other
deadly weapons, wherewith the Saints have bin taken away. Histories do witness
by what cunning endeavors the Romish Antichrist has stirred up Christian
Kings and Princes to rage even against their own bowels, and those chiefly
whom under the name of Waldenses, Albigenses, Leonists, Wiclevists, Hussites,
Lutheranes, and Hugonots, they condemned as Heretics, because they refused to
take in the vemone of her whorish cup. Read the books of Martyrs of the
French, Germans, and English, and principally the Acts of the Spanish
Inquisition: and not to be tedious, See Abbat demonstra. Antichri. Chap. 7.
where Bellarmines subtilties touching the future persecution of the Church
under Antichrist are refuted. Read, I say, these, and thou shall sufficiently
understand the bloody surfeit of this whore, which to this day, wherever she
has any footing, does vomit and breath out cruelties and still thirsts after
more blood, and so will until the heavenly Judge put an end to her fury.

And I wondered with great admiration] Hitherto the Vision: the interpretation
follows, occasioned by John's admiration. He wondered with great admiration:
that is, very much. But at what was it? at the monstrous beast? nay this he had
seen before: At what then? Is it at the woman riding on the beast? yes verily,
as at that, so also at all other wondrous things in the woman, viz. her attire,
whorish luxury, the title on her forehead, and bloody drunkenness.

John wonders not with an admiration of worship, as did the inhabitants of the
earth, Chap. 13.3. but it was an humane astonishment at so horrid a sight, and
desire to know the mystery: for as yet he knew not what was meant by the woman,
neither by her riding on the beast.

The third Part of the CHAPTER. The VISION Interpreted.
7 And the Angel said unto me. Wherefore did thou marveile? I will tell thee
the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carries her, which has the
seven heads and ten horns. 8 The Beast that thou saw, was, and is not, and
shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition, and they that
dwell on the earth shall wonder, (whose names are not written in the book of
life from the foundation of the world) when they beheld the beast that was, and
is not, and yet is. 9 And here is the mind which has wisdom. The seven
heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sits. 10 And there are seven
kings, five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come, and when he
comes, he must continue a short space. 11 And the beast that was, and is not,
even he is the eight, and is of the seven, and goes into perdition. 12 And the
ten horns which thou saw, are ten Kings, which have received no Kingdom as
yet: but receive power as Kings, one hour with the beast. 13 These have one
mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the Beast. 14 These shall
make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: For he is the Lord
of lords, and King of kings, and they that are with him, are called, and
chosen, and faithful. 15 And he says unto me, the waters which thou saw,
where the whore sits, are peoples, multitudes, and nations, and tongues. 16
And the ten horns which thou saw upon the Beast, these shall hate the
whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire. 17 For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will,
and to agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God
shall be fullfilled. 18 And the woman which thou saw, is that great City,
which reigns over the Kings of the earth.
THE COMMENTARY.
AND the Angel said to mee] Here we have fullfilled the promise: he that
seeks finds: To him that desires wisdom, it shall be given. Of old,
admiration begat Philosophy, here it begets prophecy. The Angel observing
John's desire by his countenance, does of himself open the mystery to him.

Why did thou marveile?] He blames him not: Mat: 7 8: James 2.5
but shows his desire to reveal the secret: as if he should say: I see thou
art astonished at the wondrous sight: but go to, I will open the whole mystery
now unto thee.

The mystery of the woman] The old Version, The sacrament, which Ribera
approves: because both words signify somewhat that is secret and lies hid in
another thing: And the Church, says he, has seven such Sacraments. But why
then do they not also reckon the purple and cup of the whore among their
sacraments? And why did they not render also (...) Mystery in ver. 5. by the
word Sacrament, that so Babylon herself might become a sacrament unto them?

8. The Beast which thou saw, was, and is not] The Interpretation of the
Beast follows: first of the whole: secondly of the parts, that is, of the
seven heads and ten horns: lastly of the woman, but aenigmatically, touching
which perhaps thou may say as Aristotle said of riddles or deep sentences,
Gel: lib 20 cap. 4
that they are so published, as if they were not at all published: so this
Vision is so expounded as if it were not in the least expounded. And so it is:
neither did it otherwise beseem the Prophecy. Why the explication of the
beast is dark.
It was enough that the spirit did declare the future events by such signs as
might not provoke the wicked: And by which the godly through continual
searching might attain some knowledge of the Mystery. Unto the wicked the
matter ought certainly to remain obscure, least foreknowing the events, they
might furiously presume to hinder the same, and their rage be the more
increased: But as for the godly, the holy Ghost would stir them up by an
aenigmaticall interpretation, to the end they should the more carefully attend
to the events and histories of their times: Notwithstanding all things are not
ininvolved with such dark sentences, but that he does bewray with Characters
evident enough to such as do not willingly shut their eyes, both the beast,
that his seven heads are the seven hills of the City Rome: and the woman that
she is the Roman City and Church. These Characters therefore are as it were
the Touchstone of our interpretation: because they will point out unto us as
with the finger, the beast and the woman.

To the Beast he ascribes four conditions or states according to the times: He
was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and shall go
into perdition. The three former, seeing they so cohere together, do argue
that the beast is not simple or single, but to be considered in a diverse
respect and form.

Ribera takes this beast to be the devil reigning, Riberas opinion of the
beast false.
as in Chap. 3. but it is absurd, for the devil never cease to reign in the
children of unbeleefe, and even in John's time the Apostle Peter wrote, that the
devil is always going about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour,
and therefore the Angel could not say to John, The devil reigning IS NOT.
Neither is it of weight what he pretends of Christ's Victory. Satan indeed is
overcome according to his spiritual power, that he cannot exercise the same
over the elect: but not according to his civil violence, by which in John's
time he mightily raged in the Roman Tyrants against the godly. And what need
was there I pray that Satan (of whose continual rage the holy Ghost had so
often advertised us without any figure) should now be represented unto John
under an obscure type, as if it were an unknown Mystery. This color is too
slender to hide the truth; The beast therefore is not the devil.

The common opinion of our Interpreters is, The commonopinion of our expositers
touching the beast:
That the beast is the old Roman Empire, as before Chap. 13.

That WAS] viz. most powerful and largely extended while it was heathenish.

AND IS NOT] to remain so, because it shall be destroyed by the Vandalls,
Goths, and Hunni, which happened under Theodosius, when Rome in a short space
being four times taken destroyed and burnt, the Empire of the West seemed
wholly as it were overthrown.

And ascended out of the bottomless pit] The new Papal Empire which the Pope
of Rome by an hellish ambition erected in the West, seditiously thrusting the
lawful Emperors of the East out of Italy: Not as if the Empire of the West
were from the Devil (as some do wickedly calumninate us) for all Empires are
of God: but when Empires are corrupted, which the Pope caused in the West, then
those corruptions do not descend from Heaven, but ascend out of the
bottomless pit.

And shall go into perdition] For by Christ coming he shall be cast into the
pit of eternal damnation.

Touching this opinion thus far it may seem to be imperfect, viz. that it
distinguishes not sufficiently the Roman Empire from Antichrist: as also that
it draws the second term, IS NOT, unto the future destruction of the Empire:
whereas the Angel denies that the Beast was in his time: lastly that the
third term HE SHALL ASCEND OVT OF THE BOTTO MLESSE PIT is most properly to be
interpreted of Antichrists rising.

Brightman somewhat varies from the common opinion. Brightmans opinion.


The Beast is Antichrist.

He was] to wit, after public persecutions were taken away by Constantine.

And is not] to wit, when the Pontificacie was so weakened by the incursions of
the Barbarians in Italy, that men might truly say, that the Beast was no more.

And is to ascend out of the bottomless pit] to wit, when by Justinian and
Phocas the pope of Rome was restored, and as it were recalled out of Hell, that
thence forward with the Empire he might be Chief Dictator and Universal
Bishop.

And shall go into perdition] to wit, when the renewed dignity and power of the
Pope began to be weakened by the Gospel, and by little and little consumed away.

This exposition in the fourth term is true: How far true or not true:
but in the three former he confounds the times, which the Angel has
accurately distinguished, not by saying, The beast shall be, and shall not be,
and shall again ascend out of the bottomless pit: But by distinguishing
expressly the time past, present, and to come: He was, in the preterperfect
tence: is not, in the present: And shall ascend, in the future: which
differences of time can no more be here confounded, then in v. 10. Five are
fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come, and when he comes, etc.
where the said differences are necessarily to be observed.

Notwithstanding he seems to hold that the beast soon after Constantine did
ascend out of the Pit, which agrees not to the Visions, and Histories: For
although the Church, as soon as Christ left off riding on the red horse under
Constantine, began to be black with heresies, and with diverse diseases grew
miserably pale even unto death, nevertheless the Dragon had not as yet with
his tail cast down that great Star from Heaven unto the Earth, neither had
the smoke out of the bottomless pit wholly filled the Church with
Antichristian Clouds. That was the time of the secret conception and
generation of Antichrist, in the womb of the Roman Church, being about 296.
years, In Vita Sylv:
namely from Sylvester on whose head Constantine (if Platina lie not) set a
Crown of gold beset with most precious Gemmes, until Gregory I. who as a most
cleer-seeing Prophet, showing as with the finger Antichrists Birthday then at
hand, said, Lib: 4. Ephesians: 30.
I confidently affirm that whosoever calls himself universal Priest, or
desires to be so called: he in his loftiness is the Forerunner of
Antichrist, because by pride he sets himself before others: Lib: 4 Ephesians. 38.
And again: The King of pride is near, and that which is unlawful to be
uttered, an Army of Priests is prepared for him.

But Antichrist came forth fully ten years after, when Sabian caused the
writings of Gregory publickely to be burned, pretending that he affecting
popular praise, by his munificence and profuse gifts, had wasted the Patrimony
of the Church: but it was indeed out of hatred, because he had declared the
Universal Priest to be Antichrist. After him at length Boniface III. having
obtained the title of Universal Bishop from Phocas, manifested the Beast unto
the world.

I will therefore lay down what the Lord has suggested unto me, The Authors
judgment touching the Beast.
touching this dark matter, not new, neither much contrary to the foresaid
opinions, but yet coming nearer to the scope.

I showed before that the Beast is Antichrist, not absolutely but in respect of
the three latter states: neither is he simple or single, but having two bodies:
neither naked, but clothed with the skin of the Roman Empire, armed both with
the ecclesiastical and imperial sword, as some ages have seen in the Romish
Popes.

According therefore unto the prodigious and different state of Antichrist, So
he is said prodigiously to have bin, and not to be, and to come afterward.

The Beast was] or has bin, viz. formerly, according to the monarchical and
secular power, which before John's time was in Kings, Consulls, Decemviri,
Dictators, Tribunes, Caesar's, as in verse 10. for although that power was not
then as yet the power of Antichrist, yet it began afterward to be his, when he
by force took the same unto himself. And therefore he is said to have bin
then, because then something of him was: and he was then according to that
power, although in another respect he were not as yet.

And is not] To wit, in this time of the Revelation, when the Roman Bishops
had not yet so much as dreamt of a Monarchical Spiritual or Secular power,
but all of them for the space of 300. years, until Melchiades suffered
Martyrdom for the Name of Christ: Although Bellarmine foolishly boasts, that
Clemens received the Ecclesiastical Monarchy from Peter.

And is to ascend out of the bottomless pit] To wit, 510. years after the
Revelation of this Prophecy, when Sabian attempted to invade the
ecclesiastical Monarchy, Boniface III. really invaded it, and so transmitted
the same unto the Popes his Successors. And about 649 years from this
Prophecy, Steeven II. also laid hold on the secular power, who first thrusting
the Greek Emperors out of Italy possessed the chief government. He was the
first that deprived the French King Hildericke of his kingdom: He was the
first that admitted Pipine (upon whom by his Antichristian power he bestowed
not his own, but the kingdom of France) to kiss his feet (...) he first would
be pontificallie carried with great triumph in the midst of the people on men's
shoulders, as it were another Alexander or Julius, unto the Lateran Palace,
which thing has ever since bin very religiously observed of his Successors,
namely being men, as Balaeus records, not worthy that the Earth should bear.
Not long after also the beast in Gregory VII. and Boniface VIII. ascended to
the highest step of Monarchy, when the Pope said: I AM CAESAR: for he ascended
not in a moment, but by diverse degrees, of which see Chap. 13.

He shall ascend out of the bottomless pit] As Chap. 11.7. or out of the Sea,
as Chap. 2: These: 2: 9:
13.1. the sense being one: understanding (...) either properly of the pit of
hell, to denote the procreating cause, of which the Apostle speaks, that his
coming should be after the working of Satan with all deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness, and signs and lying wonders: or metaphorically of the deep
of the Sea, that is, the sincke of Bishops in Papal Councills, by which under
praetext of establishing the faith, and routing out of heresies, the
privileges of Emperors and kings were overthrown, the monarchy of the Pope
established, the power of the Clergy augmented and confirmed: the which Julian
the Cardinal alleging thereby to allure Pope Eugenius unto the Council of
Basil: It is a wonderful thing says he: I find that the power of the Church,
and Ecclesiastical Liberty has always bin strengthened, defended, and
augmented by Councills, and now do we fear it should be taken away?

And shall go into perdition] Here I assent to Brightman for the clearness
thereof: for this going of the beast into perdition, foretold by the Angel, is
by the wonderful judgment of God begun in our age: and now the beast goes on
in the way of destruction, so that he is not now far from his end: And this
Bellarmine himself confesses; who thus writes, From that time you made the
Pope to be Antichrist, his Empire is not only not increased, but more and more
decreased. The time therefore is near at hand, in which the Church of Christ
shall sing with the rest of the Heavenly Companies HALLELVJAH, Salvation, and
Honor, and Glory and Power be to the Lord our God, because his judgments are
true and righteous. Revelat. 19.1.

And they that dwell on the earth shall wonder] Thus much of the fourefold
state of the beast: his authority follows, which has largely before been
expounded in Chap 13. here it is briefly touched.

Shall wonder] Not at the monstrous sight, as John did verse 6. but shall adore
and worship the woman Queen that rides on the beast as a Goddess: so Chap. 13.
verse 3.4. And the world wo^dred after the Beast and worshipped him, saying,
Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make war with him? And verse 8, And
power was given him over all kinreds and tongues and Nations, and all the
Inhabitants of the earth shall worship him.

But what then? shall none remain with Christ? I answer. Least we should
think so, in both places the inhabiters of the earth are only comprehended in
this number: Whose Names are not written in the Book of life from the
foundation of the World: by which limitation is intimated, first, the chief
cause of this great madness of men, to worship so monstrous and execrable a
thing: it is because they shall be children of the earth and not of God:
Reprobates, not Elect: secondly, the Elect are freed from the Impostures of the
beast, for it is impossible they should be seduced. Mat. 24.24.

Whose Names are not written] See Chap. 13.8.

Beholding the beast that was and is not] He reckons up some titles of the
beast, and not in vain: for it shall be one cause of the worlds wonderment,
that the beast having diverse shapes (like unto another Proteus) WAS, AND IS
NOT, AND YET IS: Whence the Admirers of him shall conceive in their minds
something divine touching him. Now these things are evident by what we said
before.

Was] viz. before John's time, so far as concerned the monarchical secular
power.

Is not] viz. in John's time, because the Roman Bishops had not assumed this,
no nor as yet the Ecclesiastical monarchy

And yet is] viz. in John's time, in respect of the Imperial power, which then
the Caesar's had, and afterward should be usurped by the Popes. Thus we must
reconcile these seeming contradictions: Is not, and yet is: according to the
different state of the beast, least we might imagine a repugnancy to be in the
words, which to avoid, the old Version has wholly ommitted the words (...) And
yet is.

But Andreas and Arethas whom Montanus follows, for (...) read (...) Is at
hand, or is to come, which agrees with the third term, shall ascend out of the
bothomlesse pit, for he says that he shall come, that is, in his time ascend
out of the bottomless pit. The fourth term is not here mentioned, because
that served not for admiration, but belongs to the future wayling, of which in
Chapter 18.

9 Here is the mind having wisedome] This is added that none might complain
and say, Why are all these dark expressions? what may be the meaning of the
heads and horns of the beast? he cries out as before, Chap. 13.9. at the
rising of the first beast. If any one has ears let him hear. And after the
second, verse 18. Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding count, etc.
so now Here is understanding, to wit, hid above man's reach. Here, may be
understood of the diverse states of the beast even now mentioned: but I rather
refer it to the following matter: Here, for, in these things which yet remain
to be expounded touching the heads and horns, greater wisdom is contained.

Now the words of the Angel consists either of one comma, here is the mind
which has understanding, to wit, hid: for, herein is a mystieall sense that
cannot be searched out by the mind of man: Or of two commaes, or clauses, One
being, Here is wisdom: the other, he that has wisdom, that is, let him
understand. And this latter seems to be according to the mind of the Angel,
because of the article (...) he that has: though the sense be all one: viz.
that the mystery of the beast is above man's wisdom, except it be revealed:
And therefore the Angel offers himself to declare the same: And he stirs up
our desire by an exclamation, lest we should be slothful in taking notice, and
shunning of the beast.

The seven heads are seven Mountaines] Now he opens the wisdom which he
promised by expounding the mystery of the beast according to his several parts.

Where first we may observe, the Metonymicall Phrase of the sign for the
thing signified, being ordinarily used in Sacraments, and therefore are called
Sacramental kind of speeches. The seven heads are seven Mountains: Gen: 4: 28
and 17.10
by a Metonymia of the sign and the thing signified, for, the seven heads
signify seven Mountains: so also, The seven kine are seven years, that is
signify seven years: Ex: 12:11 1 cor 10: 4 Ioh. 1: 32 Ma. 26: 26
Circumcision is the Covenant: for the sign of the Covenant, as God himself
interprets it. The Lamb is the Passover, that is, signifies the Passover.
The Rock was Christ: for it signified Christ. The Dove was the holy Ghost, for
it was a sign of the Holy Ghost. And so: The bread is the body of Christ
broken for us: for: Aug: did. 2 de consec: c: hoc est: contra Adem cap: 12
Luk: 22: 20
it signifies that the body of Christ was broken for us, and is given unto us
for food: so Austin says: The bread is the body of Christ not in verity of the
thing, but by a significant mystery: And again: The Lord doubted not to say:
This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body: So: The Cup is the Now
Testament: for it is a holy sign of the New Testament, etc.

Now this I do the rather speak of, because some inconsiderately do contend,
that neither in Scriptures nor good Authors any examples are to be found, that
the sign is put for the thing signified, with the copulative Is betwixt. But
here they may see it: The seven heads are seven Mountains: and a little after,
They are seven Kings. Again: The ten horns are ten Kings: The waters are
Peoples: the woman is the Great City: what will they have more?

Secondly, that we might not seek these Mountains in the Moon (as they say)
he adds. The seven heads are seven Mountains on which the woman sits. But
the woman verse 18. is the great City that had dominion over the Kings of the
earth in John's time, that is, Rome: so then the sense is, upon which Mountain
the woman fitteth; that is, upon which Mountains Rome is built that rules the
world: hence Rome is called (...) seven haled, see Chap. 14.8.

These Hills are called Capitolinus, Palatinus, Caelius, Aventinus,
Aesquilinus, Vnninalis, Quirinalis, in honor whereof was yearly kept on the
third of the Ides of December, the Festivitie of the seven hills in memory of
Romulus the builder: or rather for the three Mountains that were added by
Servius Tullius, that the City might stand upon seven: for that which Romulus
before built comprehended but four Mountains within the walls. This ^^ngell
therefore does plainly mark out Rome situated on seven h^^ls as the seat of
Antichrist.

Neither can the Jesuits any longer deay the same, The Jesuits wrangling.
but only by cavelling they would persuade us that Ancient or heathenesse Rome
is here meant, such as it was in John's time. But themselves know it is a mere
evasion, for this Prophecy respects Rome that shall be in Antichrists time.
At last therefore they confess it is meant of Popish Rome: but here they seek
out another startinghole: viz. that this Rome shall not be the seat of
Antichrist, because it is to be burnt before Antichrist come. But they well
know that this is also false: For why shall Rome be burnt? Is it not because of
her fornication with the Kings of the Earth, and for being the seat of
Antichrist.

They say that Rome shall apostate from the Christian faith unto Heathenisme:
See before chap: 14: 8
But what then shall the Pope do in the mean time, will he look no better to
his cure? but a liar had need have a good memory.

They say that Rome shall commit fornication with the ten Kings, and for the
same be burnt: And yet they say, that those ten Kings, or at least seven of
them shall follow Antichrists Camp: How then can it be burnt before
Antichrist come?

It is also observeable, how diversely the seat of the woman is noted. In verse
1. How the woman sits upon the waters, upon the beast and upon the mountains:
she sits upon many waters: afterward verse 3. upon the beast, and here upon
the mountains, the which are the heads of the beast. All which things do well
agree. ROME sits upon many waters: as she bears rule over the Kings and
Inhabitants of the Earth. Rome sits upon the beast: as she is born up of the
beast: and ruled by Antichrist. Or if the beast be the Roman Empire, Rome sits
upon the beast, as she swayeth the beast or Empire: for by sitting, dominion is
noted. Lastly, Rome sits upon the heads of the beast, which are the seven
Mountains, as sitting on them herself, and giving them for a dwelling place to
Antichrist.

Observe also the admirable union and mixture between the beast and woman, and
the mutual metaneorphosis of the one (as it were) into the other, so as the
one is the other, or a part, and of the essence thereof, yea both are one, even
the same Antichrist.

The seven Mountains are the heads and strength of the beast: and the seven
Mountains are the seat of the woman, what does hence follow, but that the
heads of the beast are the strength and seat of the woman, that is, of
Antichrist. Now the Mountains of the woman are the mountains of Rome. And if
the mountains of Rome are the heads of Antichrist, and the woman sit on the
mountains of Rome: The woman then sits and reigns upon the heads of
Antichrist: Furthermore, he that reigns upon the heads of the Beast and the
Mountains of the woman is Antichrist. The Pope of Rome reigns on the heads
of the beast, and the mountains of the woman, therefore the Pope of Rome is
Antichrist.

But Ribera contendeth, that the beast is the devil not Antichrist: yet he
grants that the mountains of the beast are the mountains of Rome. Now what
will he gather hence, but that the mountains of Rome, and Rome it self are a
part of the devil? yea his strength and dwelling place: which is worse then
the former: See verse 3.

10. And they are seven Kings] Now that we might not stick in the bare
Mountains of Rome: He adds another mystery, viz. that the seven heads are
also seven Kings: thus of one type he makes two antitypes. But what Kings?

Ribera, that we should not seek them at Rome, and so perhaps find the Pope
amongst them, says that they are the Kings of the whole earth, This is
wonderful: before he said that the beast was the devil: therefore either the
whole world is the devil: or else these are not the Kings of the whole earth:
unless perhaps he would rather say, that the devil reigns on his heads the
mountains of Rome, and that Rome rides upon the devil: out for shame with so
vile and wicked a fiction. For whose the mountains are, the same are the Kings
also: but the mountains are of the woman Rome: therefore the Kings also are of
the woman Rome. Let this once for all be minded as a sure position.

But who are these kings? Wonderful Riddles are propounded by the Angel: Five
are fallen, One is, the other is not yet come, and when he comes he must
continue a short space] This is a Gordian knot, and not to be untyed, had we
not the benefit of histories: Now passing by the opinion of many, I will record
three of the principal: the comparing of which will somewhat ease us.

First that of Victorinus, whom our Bullinger and Iunius follow: 1: The opinion
of Victorinus about the seven Kings:
that these are the seven Kings, which reigned at Rome after Nero. Five are
fallen] viz. Vitellius, Otto, Galba, Vespasianus, Titus. ONE WAS] viz. Domitian
who in John's time reigned at Rome. The other was not yet come] Namely Nerva his
Successor, who, being come, was to remain a short time, because he reigned
not full two years, Which opinion, howsoever backed with the authority of these
great men, I cannot follow. Why it is rejected:


First because before John not only five Caesar's were fallen at Rome, but six
others besides: Fulius, Augustus, Tiberius, Caius, Claudius, and Nero: neither
can any reason be given why these should be excluded.

Secondly, because these seven Kings are not singular persons, otherwise those
seven being dead, all the heads of the beast should have perished: and the
Beast either should have remained without heads, or new heads must have grown
upon him (as Apollidorus fabulously writes of Hydra) or else being without
heads he should have bin extinct, All which things are contrary to the
prophecy, for the beast yet lives, and is reserved unto the last judgment.

This Ribera saw, and doubted not to affirm, that all Expositors, In chap. 17
S. 25
except Victorinus, understood that in every of these seven, many were
comprehended: although he joins a foolish fable that not the Kings of Rome are
meant, but of the whole world, which Fiction we erewhile refuted:
Notwithstanding as if he forgot himself he affirms, and strongly proves
that it is not unusual to the Scriptures, that in one king, many like (as it
were of the same body) are signified: which, says he, is carefully to be
observed: alleging for example the Ram and Goat in Daniel: of which two the
first denotes the Kings of the Medes and Persians: the other all the kings of
the Macedonians.

But (good Sir) this; say I, is carefully to be observed against your self:
for by this reason of yours, is manifestly refuted or wholly weakened your
Fiction that Antichrist shall be only one singular person, and that because
he is said in the singular number to be the man of sin, the son of perdition,
the Beast, False Prophet, etc. for behold what follows. If Antichrist be one
of these Kings, then verily he shall not be one singular man, but a king having
others succeeding him in his kingdom: as had the Kings of Medes, Persians and
Macedonians, in their kingdoms. But thou thy self make the seventh of these
kings to be Antichrist: The other, say thou, is not yet come, that is,
Antichrist, who shall come in the seventh age.

Now to come to the second opinion, which is Riberas out of Gagnaeus, viz. 2:
Riberas opinion about the beast:
that the seven kings are the seven ages of the world, or seven kingdoms
adversary to the Church.

The first age from Kain to Noah. The second from Noah to Abraham. The third
from Abraham to David. The fourth from David unto the transportation into
Babylon. The fifth from the transportation unto Christ. The sixth from Christ
unto Antichrist. The seventh from Antichrist unto the end.

Of these, says he, five are fallen] because five ages were past before
Christ's birth.

One was] because the sixth age of Christ did then run on.

One is not yet come] because the seventh age of Antichrist was not as yet.

When he is come he shall remain a short space] because Antichrist shall only
reign three years and an half.

A wonderful Metamorphosis of kings into ages. But what reference have the
ancient ages unto the heads of the beast, that is, unto the mountains and
kings of the City Rome? for it cannot be denied but that the Angel precisely
speaks of these: These kings therefore are not to be sought any where, but
there even where the mountaiues are: because the heads are mountains and
kings: Now the mountains are at Rome: and therefore the kings are there also.

But truly the Jesuit does subtly send us to Kain, Nimrod, Nebuchadnezzar,
etc. The subtilty of the Jesuit.
least we should find Antichrist at Rome. Nay but the kings are to be sought
in Romes mountains, for here they sat, reigned, and at length have also born
up the woman. I pass by that there is no proportion of the seventh age with
the six former. For what are three years and an half to the former ages which
all of them dured many hundred years. By which very thing the fiction of
Antichrists three years reigning is refuted. III: Opinion touching the seven
kings:


Now I come unto the third opinion, viz. of Aretius, Napier, Brightman, and
others, to whom the seven kings are not seven Emperors, nor seven ages: but
they will have them to be seven kinds of government of the Roman Monarchy, six
whereof Tacitus mentions in his first book: Kings says he, at the beginning
governed Rome: Liberty and Consulship was set up by Brutus: The Dictatorship
was only taken up for a time: Neither did the power of the Decemviri last
above two years: Neither did the Consulary authority of the Tribunes of
Soldiers remain long. The power of Cinna and Sulla was but short. Pompie and
Crassus soon gave place to Caesar: And Lepid us and Antony to Augustus, who
received the Empire (all things being confused through civil discords) under
the name of a Prince.

He reckons up, Castig: Brightman page: 110.
I say, six sorts of government: viz. Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemviri,
Tribunes, and Princes or Emperors, neither is there any more, as Eudaemon the
Jesuit cavills against Brightman: for between the power of Tribunes and
Princes, Tacitus puts no ordinary government, save only civil discords. The
seventh he saw not, because it came after him.

Now of these in John's time Five were fallen] to wit, Kings, Consuls,
Dictators, Decemviri, Tribunes: because these forms of government were put
down at Rome before John's time, for the Consuls which then were, wanted
Monarchical power, and their power was limited within the City.

ONE IS] The sixth government of Princes or Emperors which then was. Now in
this Expositours vary. Difference about the sixth and sevent kind of government.


Some make the sixth kind of government, which Domitian held in John's time, to
be of such Caesar's as descended of Julius, that is, home-borne Princes, but the
seventh of Foreign Caesar's, which, say they, the Angel intends in the
words, One is not yet come] to wit, Vlpius Traianus the Spaniard, after whom
thenceforward Foreign Emperors governed Rome. That which follows.

And the Beast is the eight, and is of the seven] They understand of the French
and Germane Emperors at length created by the Pope.

Which opinion unto me seems to have little ground, first, in that they divide
domesticke and foreign Emperors into two orders or ranks, seeing both held
the same Empire at Rome. Secondly, that they pass by Nerva before Traiane.
Lastly, that they observe not, how the eight is the whole Beast, or Antichrist,
Verse 10.

Brightman herein consents touching the five that were fallen: but the sixth
he understands of the Emperors, who in John's time, and thencefore held the
Empire: The other not yet come, that is, the seventh, he makes to be the Pope,
for howbeit there was a Bishop at Rome while John lived: Nevertheless he did
not Lord it, nor take any Papal jurisdiction on him. The Epithet, (...)
Other, he understands not of the number but quality of the kingdom, because
the seventh should have a kingdom far diverse from the former, who all had been
political Kings: but this should be of a mixed kind, viz. Ecclesiastical and
Political. The following words: When he comes he must remain a short
space: He thus expounds: After that the Popish kingdom takes its beginning
under Constantine, the pontifical authority shall remain in safety but a
little while, viz. about an hundred years: for then Rome by the incursions of
Barbarians shall be taken, and so wasted and ruinated, as that it shall
appear to be wholly destroyed: The which thing was done by the Goths,
Vandals and Hunni.

That which follows: The beast was and is not, even he is the eight, he thus
expounds: The beast, that is, the Pope, which was the seventh king already
manifested or come (and yet is said, not to be, by reason of the discomfiture
the Barbarians brought upon him) shall be the Eight, that is, again recover
himself after his overthrow, and attain his former strength, which, says he,
happened in Gregory II. and his next Successors by the help of their two
horns Pippine and Charles.

And is of the seventh] that is, the Pope the Eight being again restored, will
be of the same disposition, manners and regiment as he was before his
overthrow, while he was the seventh: so that he makes the seventh and Eight to
be al one, viz. the Romish Pope, with this difference, that the seventh
signifies the Pope before he was discomfited by the Barbarians, seeming then to
have bin wholly extinguished: But the Eight to signify the Pope again
restored to his ancient dignity by Pippin and Charles: This (as I take it) is
the sum of his words.

The which things I confess are wittily and probably written according to
histories. But yet this has no small difficulty in it, how the same Pope can
be both the seventh and Eight, seeing John does distinguish them as the part
and whole: for he names the seventh, one of the Beasts heads: but the Eight the
whole beast himself. The Beast, (says he) which was and is not, he also is
the eight. Neither can the two states of the beast repeated verse 11. (which
was and is not) be drawn unto the rising and overthrow of the seventh head,
seeing John in verse 8. makes them to be the states not of one head, but of the
whole beast. The Authors opinion:


To untie this knot: I understand (as before I proved) that the beast is
Antichrist: whence it follows that the seventh head is not Antichrist,
because the seventh head is not the beast, but a part thereof. Now a part of
the beast, and the beast are not the same.

Furthermore, the heads are the strength of the Beast. Therefore the seven
kings are the strength, that is, the Monarchical power of the beast, which
before was in the seven kings or regiments, but at last shall be in the beast
himself, as it were in the eight king or Antichrist: so then the seventh king
is not the same with the eight: because the former is but one head of the
beast: The other is the beast it self or Antichrist. But what then? Five
Regiments.


Five (kings) are fallen] That is, the five Regiments of kings, Consulls,
Dictators, Decemviri, and Tribunes were already in John's time put down from
the mountains of the woman, that is, in Rome.

One is] The sixth order of Pagane Emperors: which in John's time and
thenceforward unto Constantine, did in Domitian and his successors sway the
Scepter on the mountains of the beast and woman, that is, at Rome.

The other is not yet come] The seventh order of Christian Emperors, which was
not yet in John's time, being to come after in Constantine the great.

But it may be said, that these held the same Empire with the former, The sixth,
viz: of pagan emperors:
and had no new Regiment. These therefore are not distinguished from the sixth.
I answer, The face of the Empire began to be altogether new, and fit for the
conception of Antichrist. For this seventh head reigned not as did the former
on the mountains of the beast and woman, Constantine the great is the seventh.
that is, at Rome, but out, or from the same, viz. in the East: when
Constantine, either because he was hated of the Gentry and Commons of Rome for
his Christian Religion, as Baronius feineth, (for what needed he to fear the
Citizens, who had blotted out the names of so many Tyrants) or to increase the
greatness of his name, Why the Empire of Constant. is distingu^ shed from his
predecessors.
leaving Rome, removed to Bizantium, and would have it to be called after his
own Name, Constantinople, An. 19. of his Empire, and of his conversion 12, and
of Christ 324.

Now this is that which the Angel says, When he is come, he must remain a
short space] that is, he shall not reign long at Rome in the mountains of the
beast and woman, but only nineteen years, not that the seventh head was then
presenly to perish (for then the beast also having lost all his heads must have
perished) but that he was not to remain in the mountains of the beast and
woman, that is, Rome, where the other heads of the beast had remained with the
Empire 1078. years. This exposition is illustrated by the following verse.

11 And the beast that was and is not, the same is also the Eight] First here I
propose that this beast is the same with the former, verse 3.8. of which there
is no Question, seeing the Angel repeats the three states of the beast in the
same words: One, that is, Emphatically declares the third, that it may be made
manifest. Whence I conclude that this Beast is Antichrist (because the other
was Antichrist) but the seventh head was not Antichrist.

Furthermore let it be observed that (...) and, the first word of the verse is
not simply copulative, but a note of order and opportunity, as Beza renders it
almost in all the Chapters: (...), Then I saw, then he came, etc. so here (...)
Then the Beast, Let the opportunity (I say) be noted, by which the Beast came
to be the Eight King, that is, usurped the mountains of Rome, The beast the
eight king is Antichrist:
and took the Monarchical power of the seven heads unto himself, as his
own: for after the seventh king Constantine (with his Successors) leaving
Rome, had taken up his Seat abroad, The Pope remaining at home upon the
mountains of the Beast, that is, at Rome, thought it now a fit time to take
this occasion, How the Pope came to be the eight king.
under the pretext that he was Bishop of old Rome, the Imperial Seat. And
first indeed by reason of the superfluous devotion of Emperors, they being allo
wearied through the continual invasions of Barbarians, he by wonderful
cunning and rapine drew from them great gifts especially from Constantine; who
because of his unreasonable prodigality to Bishops, was commonly called Nepos
and Pupillus, as Egnatius witnesses: by little and little also he begged
Kingly privileges. And not contented to be called Bishop of the chief Seat: a
while after he made himself Greatest, or chief Priest, which dignity till
then was proper to the Roman Emperors.

For after Augustus all the Roman Princes, Lib: 5: Fastor.
who governed the Roman affairs under the name of Emperors, either took on
them (as Onuphrius writes) the chief pontificacie, or else suffered
themselves to be called Greatest Priests, as Constantinus, Constantius,
Valentinianus, Valens, and Gratianus: Who although they detested the Function
of Chief Priesthood, being addicted to the Christians: Nevertheless they
despised not, nor rejected the title thereof: Gratianus the Emperor being the
first (as Zosimus teaches) who forbade by proclamation that the title of
GREATEST PRIEST should be given unto him: and so that dignity of the
Priesthood first failed in the Emperors. Thus he.

Now these Augustall titles despised and condemned by the Emperors, The Pope
assumeth the Augustall title.
because of the impiety thereof, the Pope assumed unto himself as being the
first Character of the Empire, and so by this profane title and function made
himself the greatest Priest, and soon after Oecumenicall, Catholic and
Universal Bishop, being styled Prince of Priests, head of Churches, from whom
all the Bishops of the world were to receive laws, that is, he was
acknowledged Ecclesiastical Monarch: Thus was borne the Eight King though not
in full growth.

Wherefore not long after the Pope finding an occasion (when the Lombards
grievously disturbed Italy) as if he had bin deserted by the Greek Emperors:
(whom he notwithstanding by his Antichristian Anathema thrust out of Rome and
whole Italy, seditiously stirring up the Romans to thrust their Governor out
of the City, and put out his eyes, and them of Ravenna to kill their Prince or
Viceroy) he sent for Pipin with an Army out of France, by whose help he
suppressed the Lombards, and thrust the Greek Magistrates out of Ravenna, and
all Italy, usurping the principallity of Ravenna (which at that time did
represent the seventh head or imperial power in the West) by the gift of
Pipine the Conqueror, unto whom in recompense thereof (a thing never heard of
before) he gave the Kingdom of France, thrusting Childericke the lawful King
into a Monastery or C^vent.

Notwithstanding as yet the Pope sat not in the mountains of the Beast and
woman with full power, Anno 773:
wherefore a few years after Charles the son and heir of Pipine, coming with
an Army out of France suppressed the Lombards (who again had raised great
tumults) confirming and augmenting the Donation of Pippine to Pope Hadrian I.
And afterward the Romans making insurrection against Leo III. because of his
detestable pride, the said Charles coming again with his Army into Italy, and
taking knowledge of the cause, absolved the Pope: Hereupon the Pope, not to be
ungrateful (out of the fulness of his power) gave unto Charles the Title of
the Roman Empire (the which belonged unto the Greeks, and therefore was not
his to dispose of) crowning him Emperor of the West: On the other hand,
Charles the new Emperor to gratify the Pope, forced the Citizens of Rome to
swear fidelity unto Leo, and appointed him Lord of Rome, the which donation
Ludowicke son of Charles afterward confirmed and increased. Then was the Beast
at length fully ascended out of the earth, and came to be the Eight King: Then
Anno 800. the Pope of Rome together with the Ecclesiastical Monarchy which he
got from Phocas, obtained also the secular power of the seven heads of the
Beast with the mountains of the great City: for always from that time the
Pope usurped the power of translating Kingdoms, and casting down Kings, and
creating Emperors; hereby declaring to the world that he was the true Beast,
the Eight King or Antichrist.

These things thus observed, we may easily understand, what in verse 11. is
spoken of the Beast.

And] or Then, when Constantine the seventh King with his successors shall
place the seat of the Empire, not in Rome but otherwhere.

The Beast which was] that is, before John the Monarchical power had bin in
Five Kings which were fallen.

And is not] that is, In John's time neither the secular nor the Ecclesiastical
Monarchy was as yet in the Pope, for the Bishops of Rome that then were meddled
not with either of them.

Even he is the Eight] The relative (...) He, according to the sense is
referred to the antecedent (...) Beast: but according to the construction to
the following word (...) Eight: hence the Old Version has it: The beast
himself is the eight king.
Bestia est ipsa octava: for, octavus Rex, for in Greek it is (...) Eight, to
wit, (...) KING.

IS] for, is made, or began to be, or shall be, as in the following words: Is
of the seventh] for, shall be: Goes into perdition, for, shall go, by an
enallage of the Tence usual to John: for he speaks of the rising and future
destruction of the Beast the Eight King.

The Eighth King] that is, the eighth Regiment, consisting of an
Ecclesiastical and Political Monarchy.

Thus the sense is plain: Then the Beast shall be the Eighth King, that is,
the eigth Regiment, or Roman Pontificacie, being Ecclesiastical and
Political much differing herein from the seven heads: because they only had a
political Monarchy, which the Pope shall join with the Ecclesiastical,
having in his bands the Empire and Pontificacie together: armed with both
swords, and saying: Behold here are two swords: EGO SVM PONTIFEX: EGO SVM
CAESAR: I am the High Priest: I am Caesar. Therefore he is much unlike to the
other Kings: for they all of them were political only: but this is (...)
spiritual and secular, or (...) living and having a twofold original out of
the Earth and Sea, exerc^^ng under pretense of Ecclesiastical power his
secular Monarchy, by translating Kingdoms, setting up and casting down Kings
and Emperors at his pleasure, rightly therefore he shall be named the Eight.

That which is added: And is of the seven (for, shall be,) is not to be taken
as if the Beast were also the head, or one of the heads: (which has deceived
some Expositours) for there is a difference between the whole and a part, the
Beast and the head: but it implies that the Beast shall himself exercise the
Monarchical power; which before had bin in the seven heads: yet in another
form, and under another title: to wit, by his horns, touching which it
follows:

And goes into perdition] for, shall go. In the former member the Angel
intimated the three states of the Beast before expounded in verse 8. First, in
which he had bin. The second in which he was not. The third in which he came to
be the Eight King. Here he adds the fourth, in which he shall go into
perdition: Now as he ascended not all at once out of the bottomless pit, but
by degrees, and was almost five hundred years ere he came to his full height of
both Monarchies, so he shall go into perdition not on a sudden, but by little
and little. Therefore he says (...) he goes, not (...) runs, but step by
step, and as it were, by the same degrees that he ascended out of the pit, so
shall he descend into the same.

The Beast began to go into perdition in the age of our predecessors, when
the Gospel being again restored, The beast begins to go into perdition.
his fraud was manifested, and his impostures laid open to the view of the
world, viz. his lies, as that he is Christ's Vicar, Peter's Successor, Mo^arch,
Head, Spouse of the Church, and the rest of his proud and foolish Titles: when
as also the waters of Euphrates began to be dried up, and the Tributes and
Revenues of the Romish spiritual wares were forbidden in Germany, France,
England, Scotland, Denmarcke, Sweethland, and Bohemia. And he daily goes
forward, the divine judgment pressing him more and more unto destruction, by
revealing the light of the Gospel to diverse kingdoms, Provinces, and Cities,
who shall detest the Beast, until he come to his last period (the time whereof
the LORD knows) and so set his last foot into destruction.

12 And the ten hornes] We have seen the heads of the Beast: Now let us view
his horns: Touching which, first the false opinion is to be refuted: and in
the next place the true sense to be sought out.

Ribera, In Apoc. Chap. 10.11. Lib. 30 de. p. R. Cap 16.
and Bellarmine feine, that toward the end of the world, ten Kings shall
divide the Roman Empire between them (Woe therefore to our Emperor) and
reign thorowout the whole earth one hour, that is, a very short time before.
Antichrists coming: but that Antichrist when he is come shall kill three of
these Kings, viz. of Egypt, Lybia, and Aethiopia, making the other seven to
yield unto him. And least this fiction should not be believed, they labor to
prove the same by the oracle of Daniel, Chapter 7.24. And the ten bornes out of
this kingdom are ten Kings that shall arise: and another shall rise after
them, and he shall be greater then the first, and shall subdue three Kings.
And Chapter 11.43. He shall have power over the treasures of gold and silver,
and over all the precious things of Egypt, and the Lybians and Aethiopians
shall be at his steps. That these things are spoken of Antichrist, they prove
by the authority of Jerome, who in his Commentary on that place, says, that all
Ecclesiastical Writers affirm that near the end of the world, when the
Kingdom of the Romans shall be destroyed, ten Kings shall arise and divide
the Roman World among them: and that an Eleventh a l^tl^ out shall stand up
(Antichrist) who is to overcome three of th^^^ (...) King^^ viz. of Egypt,
Lybia, Aethiopia, Who being overcome the ot^^^ also s^all submit unto the
Conqueror.

But surely it is not the property of a good Interpreter to expound one dark
thing by another, and that as dark as the other: for this is, as the saying
is, Daniels Oracle most diverse from this:
to beg the Question. The type in Dan^el is no less obscure then this of John:
what will they then prove by that? Besides, the Type there is unlike to this in
every particular, so that we cannot but wonder considering the present light of
doctrine, and help of histories at the impudency of these Interpreters.

The Fathers whom they pretend, are to be excused though they delivered some
things amiss of matters so remote, seeing they had not the means which we
have now.

The dissimilitude I spoke of, appears. The dissimilitude.
There the ten horns are of the fou^^h Beast, which according to the received
opinion was the Roman Empire: according to others, the Asian kingdom of the
Seleucians erected by Sel^^cus Nicanor, one of Alexanders four Princes. Here
the ten horns are of the Beast, who according to Ribera is the devil: Now are
the horns of the Roman Empire the horns of the devil? There between the ^^n
horns did arise a little hor^e. Here nothing is spoken of that little horn.
There the little horn plucked up three horns: Here the plucking up of the
three ^^ornes is not mentioned. There the Angel expounds that the little
horn is a king arising from a mean estate, who was to suppress the other
three Kings. Nothing of this in the whole Revelation. But the spirit of God
would not certainly have passed all this by, if any such thing should have
happened in the end of the world. There the little horn was Artiochus
Epiphanes who expelled Ptolomaeus Philopator, Seleucus and Demetrius, these
three Kings out of their kingdoms. Here is treated of such Kings as shall
receive their power from the Beast Antichrist. Their proof therefore is
nothing to the purpose.

Neither does Jerome help the matter in applying the Oracle of Daniel to
Antichrist. Ierom helps not the Jesuits fiction.


For first Jerome acknowledges that the same was in some measure fullfilled in
Antiochus. Now however we will not contend whither or no Antiochus were a Type
of Antichrist, but willingly grant it: because of their likeness in Tyranny:
Notwithstanding it is not necessary to apply all things strictly to the
antitype which are spoken of the type, for if so, there would be no difference
betwixt the one and the other: Neither is it of necessity that similitudes
agree in all particulars: Certainly what there is recorded of the three horns
that were plucked up, can with no show of reason be applied unto Antichrist:
because the Angel is silent of it, which he would not have omitted, if the
same should have come to pass: For why should Christ conceal that from John,
which before was revealed to Daniel.

Besides we may not give credit to Jerome in this without the Testimony of
Scripture, Lib. 1. contra Iovin. Romans 8.
no more then to his argument by which he condemned his own parents in their
marriage estate: They that are in the flesh cannot please God: My parents being
married are in the flesh: Therefore they cannot please God. Or to his
inconsiderate depriving of such as are twice married from the Grace of Christ,
where he says The first Adam was once married, The second Adam was unmarried:
Let such therefore as are twice married, show a third whom they should follow:
what more unworthy so great a man?

But he appeals unto the tradition of all Ecclesiastical writers: In cap. 23.
Mat.
the which we have not: and although we had the same, yet ought we as the said
Jerome otherwhere speaks, hold to this certain truth, That whatsoever has
not authority in the Scripture, may as ^asily be rejected as approved. The
which is most true touchching this Fiction: for a is not taken out of the
Seriptures, but first delivered by one Papia^ a man of small parts, (as
Enschius writes) and afterward with many other uncertain things taken up and
divulged by other Fathers as if they were certain. Lib. 3. histor. cap. 39


In special that Fiction is very unsavory, touching the Kings of Egypt,
Lybia, and Ethiopia to be slain by Antichrist, for nothing here of is spoken by
Daniel, but he says that the little horn shall subdue three Kings. not that
he shall kill them: neither does he say that they shall be the Kings of Egypt,
Lybia, and Ethiopia, But thus: be shall rule over the treasures of gold and
silver of Misraim: and the Lybians and Ethiopiand shall be in his steps: as
Pagninus renders it: but Tremellius, the Lybians, and Ethiopians shall follow
his steps: which was accomplished in Antiochus: for when he had vanquished
Egypt, then the Lybians and Ethiopians (neighboring Nations to Egypt) who
before served B^olomaeus Philometor, fell to Antiochus and warred under his
banners.

This Fiction being now sufficiently refuted (which Alcasar also likes not) we
come to his opinion no less false then the other. Aleasars fable.
The ten horns, says he, denote the Senators and chief men of the Roman
Empire, figured out in the Beast himself, namely ten being put for a great
multitude, These, as he feineth, were to fight with the Lamb until
Constantines Empire: and then being converted unto the faith they should hate
whorish Rome, burn her with fire, and root out the heathenesse idolatry
thereof. Onuphr. Com: in Lib 1 Fastor:
This is a new gloss, false and repugnant to the Text: for who taught him to
make of the Ten kings two hundred Senators (for so many by Romulus were
appointed to be chosen out of Romans and Sabines?) besides if the Senators be
the Kings, how then could it be said, that they had not yet in John's time
received their kingdom? Lastly the lamentation made in the following Chapter,
will most clearly refute the absurdity of this Fiction: viz. that the burning
of the whore cannot be understood of her Conversion to the Faith.

Letting pass therefore both these Fables: we will now labor to find out the
true meaning: And here again, I propound two undoubted truths. One that the
horns of the beast are not the heads of the beast. The other, that the horns
are something growing out of the heads.

The first appears: The ten kings are to be distinguished from the seven
former.
because the heads and horns differ in form and number, hence it follows:
that these ten Kings are not Christian Emperors, viz. Constantine the Great,
with nine of his Successors, as some do think, for these Emperors do
necessarily belong to the sixth or to the seventh head: because they reigned
before the beast came to be the Eight King or Antichrist, and they were true
Emperors of the East and West, neither received they their power with the
beast: But these Ten shall receive their power in one hour with the Beast:
neither shall they be such Kings as the heads formerly were, but shall be (...)
as it were Kings, neither of so great, nor of so absolute power: and therefore
these ten Kings denoted by the horns, may not be mingled with the seven
Capital Kings.

As for the second supposition, (that the horns as they are not the heads, so
they are something, or some part of the heads) we know that the horn is an
excrementall matter of the creatures skull, The horns sprang out of the
seventh head:
growing hard into a crooked horn: hence with Priscian, Cornu a horn, is
quasi curuor crookedness. These horns therefore did grow out of the heads:
yet not out of all, but in my opinion out of the seventh: as springing from the
Christian Caesar's, in place of whom succeeded the Emperors and Kings of the
West: for after that the Beast had devoured the seventh head belonging unto the
Christian Emperors, and came to be the Eight King: he reserved the Prerogative
of Monarchical power unto himself, yet not under the title of a Roman
Emperor (for this, as Bellarmine confesses, Antichrist was not to do so, Lib.
3. de P. R. ^: 15
least hereby he should seem not to be Christ's Vicar) but under the Title of
Saint Peter's Successor, Universal Bishop, Head of the Catholic Church, he
creates Emperors and Kings, who must as his creatures and Vassalls compose
themselves to his pleasure, making them the Actors and Ministers of his
Monarchical power: The first Parents of which generation (as Histories
manifest) were Steven II. and Leo III.

Ten hornes] I do not think that we are here precisely tied to the number Ten,
seeing as Bellarmine confesses either 10. 100. 1000. Genesis 31. Number. 14.22.
or any perfect number in Scripture, may be taken indefinitely. Therefore by
Ten is meant some certain number of Kings arising out of the Ancient Roman
Empire only: as in these expressions: He changed my wages ten times: This
people has tempted me ten times: for, many times or often. Now this could not
be said of the seven former heads, because the Angel did distinctly number
them.

Thus it cannot be obscure who these Ten Kings are. Undoubtedly they are all
such as hitherto have held the Christian world at the appointment and command
of the Romish Pope. Of which read Angustinus Steuchus touching Constantines
donation against Valla, Sect. 94.97.103. where he maintains that all kingdoms
in Christindome, as Hungary, Spain, France, England, etc. are subject and
tributary to the Pope.

Which have received no kingdom as yet] We have showed who the Ten Kings are:
now of their original, when, and with what success they should reign. At the
time of the Revelation they had not as yet received the kingdom: for hitherto
the sixth head reigned in the Roman tyrants: The seventh head also was to reign
a short space on the mountains of the woman in Rome: and afterward, some while
out of these mountains at Constantinople in the Christian Emperors: before
this also the beast having swallowed up the seventh head, was to be made the
Eight king. The word therefore (...) not as yet, notes the time from the
revealing of this Prophecy, which was Anno 14. of Domitian, and of Christ 96.
until the Empire of the West taken from the Greeks by Pope Leo and given to
Charles anno 800. being, I say 704 years.

But receive power] For, shall receive, by an ennallage usual to John: which
the Particle not yet shows: for if they had not then as yet received the
same, it shows that they should receive kingly power afterward. But when?

In one hour with the beast] Gr. (...) One hour, and so rendered, it signifies
the little time their kingdom should continue. But the Angel shows not how
long their power should continue, but when they should receive the same. For
what kind of kingdom would that be to continue but one hour? Therefore the old
Version and Beza do more rightly render it, In one hour, as in Chap. 3.3.
(...) what hour I will come, that is, in, or at what hour. And John 4.52.
(...) Yesterday at the seventh hour. Now here an hour is not astronomically
taken for the twelth part of the day, 1. Ioh. 2.18
but metaphorically for an indefinite article of time, as John in his Epistle:
little children it is the last hour, that is, the last time: so here in one
hour, is to be understood at one and the same time they shall receive their
power with the beast, namely when the beast shall come to be the Eight king,
usurping the Empire of the West, and armed with both Monarchical swords. Thus
undoubtedly the holy Ghost points as with the finger unto the history of Leo
III. that when he began to create Emperors and Kings, then also he began to be
the Beast and the Eight King.

With the Beast] The old Version: After the Beast, as if it were (...) but it
is in the Text (...) with the Beast: Neither do I find it otherwise in any
Copy, though Alcasar says he has, but alleges no Author. The sense comes
much to one: for whither they shall receive power one hour after the Beast, or
at the same hour with the beast, yet shall they reign together: but we are
rather to keep to the Greek reading, and sense, They receive power in one
hour, that is, at one and the same time with the Beast.

They receive] From whom? from the Beast? who out of the fulness of his power
shall give kingdoms unto them? not so, for the Angel says not from the beast,
but with the beast: for how soever they shall receive it through the wicked
means of the beast, yet they receive it from God: to whom only it appertains
to give and transfer kingdoms, and from whom is all power: But the holy Ghost
thus speaks, that they are to receive their power with the beast, for two
causes.

First, The kings received power from God.
because although the translation of the Empire (under which the welfare of
other kingdoms is contained) was brought to pass by the rashness and
boldness of the Beast: Notwithstanding God himself intending to punish the
intestine dissentions and other sins of the Eastern nations, did by means of a
necessary and lawful war of Charles against the Lombards (the destroyers of
Italy and the Empire) justly translate the Imperial state from the Greeks unto
the French: seeing it is God that rules in the kingdoms of men, Dan. 4.25.
and gives them to whomsoever he will: And therefore the kings here, received
their power not from the Beast but from God, although the perfidiousnesse of
the Beast came in between; like as in the Schism of the ten tribes,
notwithstanding the sedition of Jeroboam, yet that alteration of the kingdom
is ascribed to God: Return ye every man unto his house, because this thing is
of Jehovah. 1. kings 12: 2.
Therefore by this circumstance, the spirit again points unto the history of
Leo, that when he began to create Emperors and kings, Then also he began to be
the Beast, and Eight king.

Whence it is manifest that when the Roman Pope, boasts of the translation
of the Empire from the Greeks unto the French and Germans, he glories in
nothing but in his own wickedness and seditious perfidiousnesse.

Secondly, because the kings were so to receive power, as to have the same with
the Beast, that is, to reign with his favor, they should have it, I say for
his advantage not without the Beast, but with him, that so the Beast might
reign with them and by them. For the Pope will not be accounted an Emperor or
king: but will have with and under him other Emperors and kings of his own
inauguration and making, as his vassals. Therefore are they said to be (...) As
it were kings] which indeed shall bear the title and ensigns of kings: yet
shall they not be absolute kings, as the seven heads were: and therefore Ribera
says most truly: They shall have indeed the name of kings: But in truth
Antichrist himself shall reignt, and they obey him. For they shall only be
entrusted by the Pope, and hold their kingdoms from him, evther directly as
Fee-Farmes or Coppy-holds: or indirectly as sworn to the Church of Rome. Thus I
rather take the particle (...) As, because of the following matter which
confirms this sense, then of the obscurity of these kings, who in comparison of
the former Mouarchy shall be but the shadows of kings as it were: although this
sense be also true, and agrees with the former.

Notwithstanding that which is spoken of (one hour) is not so to be taken as if
all these kings received their power together, but with some difference of
time: for if the last hour with John in his Epistle includes diverse ages? why
then may not one hour here include certain years? As therefore those kingdoms
which were taken from the Roman Empire by the Barbarians, received not the
Christian faith together: so they received not their power all together with
the Beast, but some before, others after (as it follows) and so gave the same
unto the Beast. viz: Italy, France, Germany and Britany sooner: Spain, Poland
and the Northern kingdoms, later.

Lastly it is to be observed, as before I noted, that the old version (in stead
of (...) at one hour with the beast) has it in one hour after the beast as if
it were (...). So the sense should be, That these kings should reign a little
while after the Beast, which is contrary to Riberas fiction that they should
reign a little before. Neither will his wrested Gloss help him. They shall
receive power after the beast, that is, into the obedience of the Beast,
because they shall obey Antichrist, as Chap. 13.4. The whole world wondered
after the Beast. For there it is not Meta to Therion, but Opiso to Therion.
Besides if they shall obey Antichrist (the which thing he confesses) because
they shall receive power after the Beast, how does this agree with his former
fiction, that the Beast here is the devil, and not Antichrist.

13 These have one minde] We have heard who the Kings are, when, and by whose
favor and help they received the kingdom: Now we shall hear their counsels
and intentions: These, to wit, Kings have one mind. The old Version and Beza,
one Counsel. The consent and great conspiracy of the kings among themselves
and with the Beast, is hereby noted, which is recorded not as a thing praise
worthy in them, but as wonderful: For they shall be Kings very different in
manners, nature, tongues and people, who ordinarily by mutual discord and
hatred make great wars each with other: but yet for all this when the Beasts
matter is on foot, laying aside their hatred, they shall have one mind and
counsel, as it follows.

And shall give their strength and power to the Beast] that is, vide council:
windeck: in progn: page 12. hinc petitum.
shall conspire together in defense of the Pope: they shall all I say, joining
their arms and forces together, mightily labor to uphold the Idolatry and
power of the Romish Sea: And indeed he must be very ignorant in Histories, who
knows not that this has fully, for diverse ages, bin accomplished: for although
some Emperors and Kings being provoked by the arrogance of the Beast, have
sometimes taken up arms against him: The Pope notwithstanding by the help of
other Princes, and by his Capitoline fulminations has evermore easily
suppressed them: Neither indeed did such oppose the Idolatry of the Beast, but
the flagitiousnesse of his person, or else the perfidious counsels of his
Cardinals, and still reverenced the Monarchical pontificacie.

Moreover this place plainly shows, what kingdoms are signified by the horns.
that the Ten horns do not promiscuously denote all and every of the Kings and
kingdoms, which of old belonged to the Roman Empire: but those only which
shall remain in these latter times, in the Western Christian World. And
therefore as for other kingdoms of Africa, Asia, Thracia, Mysia, Greece,
Albania and Seruia (which long ago have bin wasted by the Barbarians, being
now under the oppression of Perfians, Turks, and Saracens) are not to be
numbered amongst these, the names of any of them being scarce left to
Christians. And this is evident, because these ten Kings have one mind,
employing their power and strength in defense of the Beast: whereas the Turks
and Barbarians now lords of those kingdoms, have not one mind with these
Kings, but in a hostile manner oppugn both them and the Pope also.

14. These shall make war with the Lambe] It follows, for what end they will
give their power and strength to the Beast: viz. to oppose the Lamb, or make
war with him: The Lamb is Christ, as formerly we heard. The Beast therefore
shall be the head and Captain of the war: The Kings his Auxiliaries and
Entrusted ones. But here it may be demanded whither this war be the same with
that before spoken of in Chap. 16.16. and shall follow afterward in Chapter
19.9. or another? And whither these be other KINGS, then the kings of the earth
there?

A hard Question which can scarsely be here resolved: If it be the same war,
then how are they said to be here overcome by the Lamb? being to begin their
war afterward in Chap. 19. and then to be vanquished by Christ? But if it be
another, then the question will be what war this is, What that: Again, if they
be the same Kings, how then is it said v. 16. of this Chap. that they persecute
the woman, and Chap. 18.9. that they shall bewail Babylon, and mourn over
her, whom themselves have burnt with fire? And shall again war against Christ,
Chap. 19. And why are they here called Kings only, but there Kings of the
Earth? If they be diverse: Who are these, and who the other? I will answer to
both in a few words here: but more fully hereafter.

In respect of the parts and cause, Whether the war here be the same with
that in chap 19.18.
the war is the same: for the Beast with the Kings his Tenants both here and
there, does fight, and shall fight against Christ in defense of his throne:
Nevertheless it is diverse, in time and manner. This fight of the Kings against
the Lamb, began presently after they had received their power and strength,
and given the same unto the Beast, that is, they have defended the Monarchical
Power, Idolatry, and decrees of the Romish Pope above 600. years against
Christ. But the other Battle, unto which were gathered the Armies of the Kings
in Hermageddon (and so shall be fought afterward) was at length begun to be
managed after the drying up of the Waters of Euphrates, that is, after the
Kings of the East had diverted the holy Taxes and Treasures of the Romish
Jupiter, and this war shall be prosecuted with the greatest fury against Christ
until the end: yet not altogether by the same Kings: for many of those ten
Kings who of old fought against the Lamb (despairing of the Victory) shall
repent (at least most of them) and turn their sword against the whore and burn
her with fire, These kings here and the kings of the earth are not the same.
as is said ver. 16. But such other Kings as remain with the Beast, being
stirred up by the unclean spirits, shall at last take up arms and with
greater fury fight that Fatal Battle, the issue whereof shall be the Beasts
and their utter destruction: so that the latter properly with their Associates
(not these) are named Kings of the Earth. Now we return again to the war here
treated of.

Where first it may be demanded, how these Kings should be guilty of so great
madness? The Fight of the kings with the Lamb.
Shall the Pope and the Kings his Creatures fight with the Lamb? The Angel
says yea: But do they not stoutly war for the glory of Christ? I answer, It is
true, so much indeed they pretend, and are persuaded of, but they are willingly
blinded, and while they shed Christian blood for to establish the Popes
authority, they in very deed make war against the Lamb: For the Pope does
lie in saying he is Christ's Vicar. Now to defend a false Vicar of Christ, is to
oppose Christ. The victory of the lamb over the kings.
But let us hear the success.

The Lamb shall overcome them] This is not as yet that last Victory: but that
wherein the kings shall before the end submit to Christ: and it is both
spiritual and civil also. The Lambs spiritual Victory was of old in his
faithful members, Spiritual victory.
whose constancy could not be overcome by any cruelty of Kings, nor abated by
the Popes Excommunications, nor shaken by the fraud of Sophisters. It is also
in overcoming the Kings themselves, who being in their consciences at last
convinced of the truth of the Reformed Religion according to the word of God,
shall forsake the whore, lay down their arms, and join to Christ, by setting
up his Throne in their Territories. Thus the Kings have been, and further shall
be overcome to their own good. There is besides an external Victory: Outward
Victory.
for howsoever the Antichristian armies have many times (especially in this our
age) shed abundance of Christian blood in Germany, Spain, England, and the
Low Countries, unto the end they might suppress the Lamb, and his Gospel:
yet have gained nothing, but rather by this means (though unwittingly) spread
and propagated even that which they accuse to be heresy far and near among
diverse Nations: wasted and destroyed their own Provinces, bringing them under
the power of strangers, and been forced to give liberty to the Gospel: neither
have they much oftener obtained bloody victories over the Godly, then they
themselves have miserably perished by the sword of Christ.

For he is Lord of lords] The reason of the Victory is added, taken from the
Majesty and Power of the Lamb, in comparison whereof all the forces of the
Beast and kings are but vanity: for the Lambs power and majesty is divine and
eternal. 1. Tim: 6: 15
That this is signified by these Titles, the Apostle teaches, in ascribing the
same otherwhere unto God alone, blessed and only Potentate king of Kings and
Lord of Lords, etc. This again Chap. 19.10. is attributed to Christ under the
person of the word of God, coming forth on a white horse to battle against
the Kings of the Earth.

Now as this does clearly prove the eternal deity of the Lamb Christ, XXXV.
Arguments of Chr. deity]
so also that he is God-Man in one person. For none but One and the eternal
God is King of kings and Lord of lords: If Christ therefore be King of kings
and Lord of lords, then verily he is that One and eternal God with the Father.
Furthermore being called a Lamb, is signified the Manhood and Mediatorship of
Christ: Rev. 13.8 1. Tim. 2.6
for he is said to be slain, because the Man-mediator gave himself a ransom
for all men. If therefore the Lamb be King of kings, etc. then verily the
Man-Christ in unity of person is the same King of kings, Lord of lords,
Eternal God. Explicat: locor. p. 439


Eniedinus the Samosatenian Heretic excepteth: If this Title should make him
Eternal God, then also Artaxerxes and Nebuchadnezzar should be eternal Gods:
the one indeed being styled King of kings, Ezr. 7.11. The other Dan. 2.37. and
Ezech. 26.7.

But this is an ungodly and vain Sophistry: first touching Artaxerxes calling
himself King of kings in his Epistle, seeing he was ignorant of the true God, it
may be said, that it was only of fact, but not of right: yet will we not deny
the right to Artaxerxes the Persian Monarch, which Daniel attributed to
Nebuchadnezzer, the Monarch of Babylon, each of them being a King of kings, The
lamb is King of kings absolutely.
because to both of them many earthly Kings (yet not all) were tributaries. But
the Lamb is not called the King of kings in this sense, for he has no Kings
tributaries here on earth, as they. But is King of kings absolutely: both in
respect of his deity, being true God blessed for ever, as he is the word, and
son of God, and so more powerful then all Monarchs and Kings: as also in
respect of his office received from God, not as Cyrus received the Persian
kingdom from God, as the heretic intimates: but as mediator betwixt God and
man, and as being God-man the Savior of mankind, thus he is exalted unto the
right hand of God above all principality, and every name that is named in
heaven or earth.

In vain also the heretic seeks a grammatical shift: God, says he, in the
Greek is called King of kings, with an article: but the Lamb and Word of God
((...),) without an article. For the Greeks do not tie themselves to articles,
but sometimes prefixe them before indefinite words, as Mat, 12.35. (...), THE
good man out of the good treasure of his heart, etc. Luke 4.4. Man ((...))
shall not live by bread only, etc. Sometimes also omit them, even in an
excellent and certain thing: as in this prophecy Christ is called (...)
without an article, C. 5.6. and 13.11. and 14. 1. The devil (...) Dragon
without an article Chapter 12. Antichrist and Rome his Seat (...) without articles,
Chap. 13.1. and 14.8. and 17.3. etc. It is enough therefore that the proper
attribute of God alone be ascribed unto the Lamb, whether the article be added
or not: Otherwise the heretic might as well say, that neither the father, nor
Christ the son is truly blessed for ever, because as the father Romans 1.35. so
the son Romans 9.5. is said to be (...) without article.

And they that are with him are called, elect and faithfull] They also shall
overcome them, which is greatly to comfort the godly in their fight with
Antichrist: For as they are the Lambs Partners in fight, so shall they also
participate with the Lamb in victory: And therefore they shall neither fight
alone, nor without victory: for the Lamb overcomming, they overcome also.

That are with him] to wit, in the fight, are called elect and faithfull] By
three Epithites he closely implies three causes of their victory. I. Because
they are elect in Christ before the foundation of the World. II. 1: Io: 5: 4
Because they are called by the Gospel of salvation. III. Because they are
faithful: For this is the Victory that overcommeth the world, even our faith.
Here also observe that election is put after vocation by a gradation from the
effect to the cause, as 2. Pet. 1.10.

15 And he said to mee] Hitherto of the Beast, his heads and horns: Now
follows the interpretation of the whore. I. He declares her Empire. II. Her
destruction, and the cause. III. Her name or surname.

And he said] for, Then, or moreover he said, for (...) And, belongs to the
order as also in ver. 11. and throwout hitherto.

Where the woman sitteth] Least John should scruple how here the woman sits on
the waters, How the where si^^t^ (...) waters upon the beast and peoples.
which he saw before sitting on the Beast, the Angel interprets the many
waters to be many Peoples: by which he might easily reconcile the matter: for
to sit upon Peoples, is a known Phrase, signifying rule or dominion over many
People. The sitting notes the largeness of her Territory. To sit upon the
Beast, is to hold the Monarchical Power of the Empire in subjection, or to
rule the Empire by the Title of the woman, that is, of the Church, which thing
Antichrist does.

The Waters are Peoples] By a Metonymicall Phrase, that is, they represent
Peoples. The reason of the Metonymia is grounded on the similitude, because
peoples are like to waters in rage and unconstancy: for as many waters by their
forceable running carry down all things before them lying in the way, So
populous kingdoms and great armies wast and subdue all things: And as waters
filling still the stream with a perpetual motion are unburdened into the Sea,
so peoples by continual succession of each other are swallowed up one after
another by the gulf of death. Ier. 47.2
So says God touching the army of the Chaldeans: Behold waters rise out of the
North. and shall be as an overflowing flood, and shall overflow the Land, etc.

Now by many Peoples we understand both the mighty Armis and Legions of the
Romans, by which of old they obtained the Empire of the world for themselves:
As also the People themselves brought under their subjection. These the Angel
distinguishes into multitudes, nations, and tongues, because of the variety,
being of Europe, Asia, and Africa, very different in Nation, Tongue, Nature and
Manners.

Ribera well observes that not only those Peoples are signified which then
obeyed the Romans, but such also as shall afterward obey Antichrist. These
Peoples therefore are principally such as are spiritually subject unto the Pope
either directly or indirectly, viz. all the Laity of what nation soever, and
Clergy (who for number are thought not to be less then a third part of the
Laity) on whom he has imprinted the Character of his name.

16 And the ten horns which thou saw on the Beast] Now he begins to declare
the destruction of the whore, which he promised to show, ver. 1. The argument
or scope whereof he will further show in the following Chap. Now he expounds
by whom it shall be inflicted, how, and the Author thereof.

The ten horns which thou sawest] that is, the ten kings (which thou heardest
to be signified by the ten horns ver. 12.) shall destroy the whore. In the
reading it is to be noted, that Montanus in stead of (...) on the Beast, has
it (...) and the Beast: as if the Beast also should hate Rome: the which
Bellarmin makes great use of, denying that Rome shall be the Seat of
Antichrist, for if Antichrist shall hate Rome and make it desolate: how then,
says he, shall Rome be the Seat of Antichrist? will Antichrist make his own
Seat desolate? but he knows the reading is false though he thus dallies: for
not the Beast, but the horns or Kings shall hate Rome: as all Copies both
Greek and Latin have it, yea the Old Version also, unto which the Jesuit is
tied, and this reading the Relative These (to wit Kings) does require.

And so Ribera holds against Bellarmine, Ribera against Bellar.
that the Ten Kings shall overthrow Rome: although he adds, that they shall
do it before the coming of Antichrist, which we erewhile proved to be false.
In the mean while out of Bellarmines reasoning against Ribera, we gather that
the Beast is Antichrist, according as we truly expounded it, but Ribera
applying it to the devil, does grossly err.

The Kings therefore shall labor to destroy the Whore: yet not accomplish it in
a moment,

They shall hate her] And therefore they shall then cease to commit Whoredom
with her: The kings hatred of the whord.
But shall hate her which is the beginning of repentance: For to hate sin is
to avoid the same, which is the first degree of repentance. Thus in regard of
the following matter, I expound this Hatred. The occasion went before verse,
14. viz. the Victory of the Lamb, against whom these Kings had formerly
unhappily taken up arms: for they were, and shall be overcome: yet so as with
a different effect, for some shall remain still in their hostility: being the
KINGS of the Earth, who will again encounter with Christ, and shall feel his
sharp sword, Chapter 19.15. Others being overcome and convicted in
Conscience, shall give glory to God, open their eyes unto the light of the
Gospel, and oppose the Tyranny of the Beast, the Cup of the whore, and
Idolatry of the Pope. Thus these Kings being converted to the Faith of the
Gospel, shall hate the Whore, and bid Rome farewell. But others shall remain
Kings of the Earth. Notwithstanding the Ten are said to do that, which the most
of them shall do, by a Synecdoche familiar in Scripture.

And shall make her desolate] The second degree and effect of repentance: By
deserting:
Leaving Rome, they shall with their Kingdoms, Provinces, and Territories turn
to Christ and restore the true worship of God, according to the Gospel.

And naked] This they shall do both by public confessions and writings, By
making her naked.
in declaring and demonstrating the filthiness of Romes Idolatry, to make her
detestable, like as an harlot having her whorish attire pulled off, is odious to
the view of all honest people: As also by taking back the gold, pearls, and
precious stones, Purple, Scarlet, Manours, Possessions, Territories, Taxes, and
Riches, which the Whore had drawn from former Kings their Ancestors, through
seeming piety, and with which (like Aesops Crow) she proudly adorned herself,
as with the feathers of another.

Now this they shall do not without, but within their own Territories, doing
herein injury to none, nor violently take that which is another, but with all
right keep that which is committed to their Faith, Custody, and Government,
taking care that the same may be employed for the maintenance of Churches,
Schools, and Hospitals. Out therefore with Sycophants, who calumniate the making
naked of the whore, as if it were Sedition and Rebellion against Emperors,
Kings, and Princes who are still adicted to the Romish Religion. Nay verily
from this Prophecy it is to be hoped, that as these kings have begun already
to make the whore naked, so they shall also in due time most certainly perfect
the same.

And shall eat her flesh] Not in love, as some have thought, but in hatred. By
eating her flesh.
Now this cannot also be understood according to the letter: for the kings
which shall do this work are no Canibals or men-eaters of Brasilia. Therefore
most expound the flesh of the whore, not corporally but mistically of the
whores kitching, fat revenues, anuities, vacancies, commendums, tithes, and
holy rents hitherto brought to Rome from all parts of Christendom, with which
the whore being fatted, grew to such fleshinesse and great strength.

This flesh the kings shall eat, by denying these revenues to the whore, and
appropriating the same to their own provinces, kingdoms, churches, schools,
hospitals, and almes-houses. So Bullin. Illyr. Chyt. Artop. Napier and others.
This sense agrees with the uncovering of the whore: or certainly it notes the
last degree of the same.

However it be, this phrase of Scripture does also in other places signify
great hatred, persecution, wounding and killing, Job 19.22 Psalm. 27: 2
being taken from Beasts tearing the flesh of their prey, as in Job, Why are
ye not satisfied with my flesh? When the wicked came upon me to eat my flesh,
they stumbled and fell: on which place Augustine thus, They eat our flesh,
says he, that persecute us.

Shall burn her with fire] Rome I say, that whorish seat and nest they shall
take, By burning
destroy and burn. This prophefie is so open and clear touching the overthrow
of Popish Rome, as the Jesuits dare no more deny the same. And therefore we
here see that Papal Rome shall be made desolate, not by the Turks, but by
Christian KINGS, the definite or certain time thereof we know not: yet by what
goes before it may be gathered without obscurity that the time is near: for
some Kings have already begun to hate and forsake the whore, making her naked,
and eating her flesh: some of the Ten yet remain with her: into whose hearts,
what the LORD will put for them to do, himself knows: Perhaps more shall
forsake the whore. And though some Kings of the Earth may remain to make war
still against Christ: Nevertheless these also will not spare her flesh no more
then others, as the present times do witness: for do they not equally gape
after the holy Revenues? Neither will they any more fight gratis for the Whore,
but sell their protection of her for filthy lucre, emptying her Purse as much
as they can.

Here by the way to gratify the Reader, I think good to set down a prophecy
taken out of an Ancient Munuscript found in the House of Salezianus, and lately
sent to me: which every one may credit, so far as it likes him. Certainly so
much of it as concerns the destruction of Rome does not aberre from the present
Prophecy of his Book. Now the words are these.

There shall arise a King out of the Nation of the most Illustrious Lilie,
having a long Forehead, high Brows, great Eyes, and an Eagles Nose: He shall
gather a great Army, and destroy all the Tyrants of his kingdom: and slay all
that fly and hide themselves in Mountains and Caves from his face. For
righteousness shall be joined unto him, as the Bridegroom to the Bride: with
them he shall wage war even unto the fourtieth year, bringing into
subjection the Ilanders, Spaniards, and Italians: Rome and Florence he shall
destroy and burn with fire, so as Salt may be sowed on that Land. The
greatest Clergymen who have invaded Peter's Seat, he shall put to death: and in
the same year obtain a double Crown. At last going over Sea with a great
army, he shall enter Greece, and be named King of the Greeks. The Turks and
Barbarians he shall subdue, making an Edict: that every one shall die the
death that worshippeth not the Crucified one. And none shall be found able to
resist him: because an holy arm from the Lord shall always be with him. And
he shall possess the Dominion of the Earth. These things being done, he shall
be called the rest of holy Christians, etc. Thus far the Prophecy.

Now to return to the Kings, Whether these kings be ten in succession.
Brightman understands by the horns, Ten Kings: not reigning all at one time
in so many kingdoms, but so many Emperors succeeding each other in the Roman
Empire: and thinks that Charles V. was the first of those, who taking Rome by
force Anno 1527. did not a little shake it: Four followed, none of which
received their Crown from the Whore after the manner of their Ancestors, or
came to Rome to kiss his Holiness feet: yea all of them according to their
clemency and prudencie gave freedom to publish the Gospel in the Roman
Empire: and by their example invited neighboring Kings to the like clemency.
God is to be entreated, that he will further put into their hearts to do what
his pleasure is.

As for the succession, the Angel made the same most plain in the seven heads:
but of the seven horns not so: for these Kings shall receive power together in
one hour with the Beast, and shall have one mind together: first in
defending, afterward in opposing the Whore. Therefore they shall be together,
some space of time only excepted.

Nevertheless Riberas fiction (which before I touched) has no place of Ten
Kings, Riberas fiction is inconsistent.
who suppressing the Roman Emperor shall reign thorowout the whole world
toward Antichrists coming, and destroy Rome before Antichrist begin to reign.

For first in this he agrees not with himself: in Apocal. 17. Sect. 18: 19.
When, says he, Antichrist is risen, They indeed shall have the names of
kings, but in truth Antichrist shall reign, and they shall obey him. Here he
will have that the Ten kings shall obey Antichrist. And afterward: The devil,
says he, and Antichrist his chiefest limb assisted with the help and power of
these kings, will be able to do all the things, which are foretold by God: Now
it cannot be questioned but that the things he speaks of are the same which
the Angel foretold ver. 16. viz. of consuming the whores flesh, and her
burning by the kings. How therefore should Rome be burnt by the Ten kings
before Antichrists coming, if the Devil and Antichrist shall do this very
thing by the help and power of the Ten kings? and how does the fable confist,
that three of them shall be wholly extinguished by him, if all ten shall give
their faithful assistance unto him?

Secondly, it is an assertion altogether unprobable, that these ten shall then
rule the whole universe: nay rather it is refuted by evident reason: For when
Antichrist (whom they expect does come) certainly there shall be some Christian
Kings to burn the whore. There shall also be some kings of the Earth, who
shall lament her, and gathering themselves into Harmageddon, shall fight an
unhappy Battle against Christ. But the former and latter shall not be the same
in the least, as Ribera is forced to feine Chap. 18. Sect. 21. and Chap. 19.
Sect. 34 because both these and the other shall never have one and the same
mind: therefore there shall others rule in the world beside them.

Thirdly, that false Fiction has often bin refuted, viz. of Romes burning
before Antichrists coming: for Babylon shall not be burnt before Antichrist
come: But Papal Rome is Antichrist. Therefore Papal Rome shall not be burnt
before Antichrists coming. The assumption is before proved, neither can it be
any longer denied. The most certain proof of the major is this, viz. Rome is
to be burnt not before but after Antichrists coming.
Babylon shall be burnt because of her Antichristian fornication: but Babylon
shall not commit fornication before, but after Antichrists coming: because the
Beast, which is Antichrist, and whose horns are the kings committing
fornication with the whore, carries her on his back, yea on his seven heads,
being the Mountains on which the woman sits: The which carriage or bearing
does signify the monstrous commixture of both. Therefore Babylon shall be
burnt not before, but after Antichrists coming.

Lastly add hereunto, that the whore shall not be burnt before she shall sit
upon the Beast. But the Beast is Antichrist, and so Ribera, whether willing or
not willing, is forced to confess, Chap. 19.19. Sect. 31. and Chap. 20.10.
Sect. 73. The Beast, says he, that is, Antichrist. Therefore the Where Rome
shall not be burnt before Antichrists coming.

There is yet one scruple, Whether Rome being burnt, Antichrist shall be
abolished
whether these Kings by burning the whore are to abolish Antichrist.

I answer, they shall not: for it should be contrary to that of the Apostle:
The LORD shall consume that wicked one with the spirit of his mouth, and shall
destory him with the brightness of his coming: not therefore by the arm of
flesh. Besides it should be contrary to this Prophecy, the which Chap. 19.
affirms, 2. These. 2
that the Beast with the False Prophet, and the kings of the Earth shall be
cast into the lake burning with fire and brimstone, after that the Beast with
the false Prophet, and kings of the Earth have fought their last battle
against Christ. So that the burning of the whore shall indeed be very great,
yet not the last or utter overthrow of Antichrist. Antichrists Nest shall be
burnt: The shop of abominations, fullminations, tyranny, Popish Idolatry, and
conclave of Cardinals shall be destroyed. The Pope himself and false Prophet
shall flee out of Italy unto such kings which yet shall adhere unto him,
suppose the Spaniard, Ribera confesses the Pope shall be thrust out of Rome.
or some other by whom he may find shelter.

Neither does Ribera deny this, but often confesses that after the destruction
of Rome, the Pope notwithstanding shall be the Roman Bishop, although he sits
not at Rome: like as the Emperor of the Germans is called Roman, howbeit he
have not Rome, and as the Popes during the seventy years scisme were called
Romans, though they sat at Avinion, and not at Rome. Thus we see the guilty
confesses the Fact. Ribera Apocal 14 sect: 48.


Only herein he staggers, as not knowing where to turn himself, for sometimes
he feineth that these kings themselves, other while that Antichrist by their
assistance shall destroy Rome.

But his Fiction is frivolous: for the Kings that are to destroy Rome, shall
not be Antichrists friends, but his enemies: because they shall hate the whore,
who as she is the Whore riding on the Beast, is one with Antichrist, yea
Antichrist himself, as before we showed. Therefore Antichrist shall then be:
nevertheless he shall not destroy Rome by their help.

The Pope therefore or Antichrist shall remain some while after Rome is burnt,
yet his strength shall be mightily weakened. Now what he will further
enterprise, we shall hear Chap. 19. viz. that last battle unto which he shall
gather by the three unclean spirits, the Armies of the Kings of the Earth in
Harmageddon: the which being unhappily fought, he shall be cast into the
Lake of fire.

17 For God has put in their hearts] We have heard, by whom, and what the
overthrow is that shall befall the Romish whore: Now thirdly he adds, who is
the author inflicting the same: and here the Angel by a certain
Anticipation, bids us to ascend higher even unto God: For it might be thought a
wonderful thing, how the Kings, having been so long obsequious unto the whore,
should so suddenly change their mind, and turn their love into hatred, and
ceasing to oppose Christ, bend their sword against the whore. Now this says
the Angel, happened not at a venture, but by the direction of God, for God
gave, or put it into their hearts, that is, moved and bent their wills and
counsels so to do: For the kings heart is in the hand of the Lord as the
Rivers of waters: Pro: 21: 1
he turns it whethersoever he will.

But what did he put into their hearts? he joyneth three acts of the Kings
before mentioned, as singular benefits of God.

To do, or full fill his will] to wit of God, as the Old Version rightly has
it, to do that which is pleasing unto him. And so Beza in his former Edition:
but in his latter: to execute his sentence or mind. The word (...) His, is
rather rendered relatively then reciprocally, least in regard of the ambiguity
thereof it might be applied to the will, not of God, but of the Kings. The
sense is: that they might execute on the whore the judgment decreed by God,
that is, the hatred, desertion, making naked, eating and burning of the whore,
described in verse 16. God therefore shall overthrow Rome: and the Kings shall
be his Ministers.

To do one minde] namely their own, that is, to agree together with the Beast
for to defend the woman, as before ver. 13.

And to give their kingdom unto the Beast] that is, to lend all their power
unto the Roman Antichrist, fighting with all their might for his Hierarchicall
Empire, as in verse 13.14.

Until the words of God shall be fulfilled] This limitation is not of the
final consummation, which is to happen at the sound of the seventh and last
trumpet, Cha. 10.9. for after the burning of Antichrists Seat, and the
alteration of the counsel of the Kings, he shall notwithstanding remain and
rage some while, but with very broken and weak attempts. Now the term
prefixed by God is showed, that is, how long this holy League of the Kings, and
Conspiracy of the Beast, and so consequently their opposing of the Lamb shall
endure: which being finished, God put into the hearts of the Kings, that (their
love of the whore being turned into hatred) they should execute his judgment
upon her.

The sense therefore is, The Kings have thus long conspired with the Beast, and
committed fornication with the whore: Until the words of God] that is, his
decree touching the rising of Antichrist, revealed in the words of the Prophets
and Apostles be fulfilled: After the fullfilling whereof, God put into their
hearts to hate the Romish Strumpet, that is, detest Popish Idolatry, embrace
the Gospel of Christ, forsake, yea and oppose the Whore.

Why therefore should we wonder, that so many great Emperors, so many
religious Kings, of Germany, France, Spain, England, etc. have with such zeal
defended Popish Idolatry, the Romish Church, and Antichrist the Pope, almost
these 800. years, in defense of whose magnificence and glory, they have made so
great wars, and shed so much Christian blood? We hear that God did put it into
their hearts, that they should do so, and not otherwise, so that the Angel
wills us to rise from the events and secondary means unto the secret, yet just
judgment of God.

Here again we have cause greatly to admire, that after so long fornication,
some of the Kings, as of England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweethland: Many
powerful Princes also of Germany, Bohemia, France, Poland, and Hungary, having
laid down their arms against the Lamb, and embraced the heavenly Doctrine of
salvation, brought to light by the Two Witnesses in the ages of our
predecessors, do at this day hate the Romish Adultresse, and make her naked:
We have cause, I say, to admire the Fact, and extol Gods judgment to Heaven.
Certainly the Kings did not repent either rashly, or by their own
understanding, God put it into their hearts that they should repent of their
whoredom, hate the whore and make her desolate. The LORD is to be entreated
that he will put the same into the hearts of the rest of the KINGS, that is, to
take knowledge, shun, and hate the Whore, and to give their power no longer
unto the Beast, but unto the Lamb.

Some Textuall scruples do here offer themselves, which I shall explain, after
I have opened what yet remains in the Text.

18 The woman which thou saw is the City] The Angel opens the whole
mystery of the whore: This woman is popish Rome: see chap. 11.8. and 14.8. and
16.19
that we might not think the woman sitting upon the waters to be an Asian or
Vtopian Nymph.

It is, says he, that great City] before he often calls it Babylon: Now he
sets it forth by a more remarkable note.

Having dominion over the Kings of the Earth] Now what is this? Is it the whole
multitude of ungodly men in the world, as some of the fathers (wanting the
experience which we have now) have thought?

Nay it is Rome, yea Popish Rome: For the Writers, says Ribera, In cha. 17
sec. 20.22
who have otherwise interpreted it, are forced by the truth it self to yield
unto us, that Rome is that whorish City, to be destroyed and overthrown:
Again: The foregoing words: God put it into their hearts, belong to the
desolation and burning of Rome, for they show the cause of so great desolation
effected by them, who rather were thought should have proved friends: With this
sense which is certainly true, etc. Thus we have the interpretation of one
sworn Jesuit.

Let us hear another: Lib. de P. R. cap. 2
Babylon says BELLARMIN that great City standing on Seven Mountains, and
having dominion over the Kings of the Earth, is ROME. Neither was there any
other City which in John's time had dominion over the Kings of the Earth then
ROME, and it is most notorious, that ROME is built upon seven Mountains.

Let us hear a third: Vest: page 817
This Verse says ALCASAR causes no small difficulty to them, who expound it
otherwise then of ANGIENT ROME: But in our exposition nothing is more clear.
What can we desire more? The great City is Rome, both because the same is built
upon seven Mountains: As also, because it only in John's time had dominion
over the Kings of the Earth. But now perhaps it has not? yea but it has: For
whatsoever it possesses not by force, Quicquid non possidet armis. Relligione
tenet:
it holds by Religion.

Wherefore the two latter Jesuits do in vain seek an evasion, that not Popish
but Heathenish Rome is this City: for they are confuted by Ribera their own
companion, ingeniously confessing, that Heathenish Rome long ago burnt to
ashes, by the Goths and Vandalls, has no place here: but that it is Popish
Rome that now is: yet notwithstanding he says, that it is to be burnt before
Antichrists coming: which latter refutes the former. It remains therefore that
the whore sitting on the Beast is Papast Rome.

O Rome hearken to Clemanges, De corrup. Eccle: statu Cap: 26
What, says he, do thou think of thy Prophecy, to wit. of John in the
Revelation? Do thou not believe that it belongs at least in some measure unto
thee? Thou have not so lost shame and sense to deny these things. Wherefore
look on it, and read the damnation of the great whore, sitting upon many
Waters, and there contemplate thy worthy actions, and what shall befall thee.

Again therefore we gather this argument: Babylon that Great City, standing on
seven Mountains is the Seat of Antichrist. Popish Rome is Babylon that Great
City standing on seven hills: Therefore Popish Rome is the Seat of Antichrist.
Furthermore.

He which rules in the Seat of Antichrist, is Antichrist. The Pope of Rome
rules in Antichrists Seat, Therefore the Pope of Rome is ANTICHRIST.

There remains three scruples to be discussed from ver. 17.

I.

How God puts into the hearts of Kings, that is, works in the hearts of men,
without impeachment of their liberty.

II.

Seeing God is said to put three things into the hearts of the Kings: One in
its own nature good, viz. The hatred of the Whore. Two things in themselves
evil, viz. Their agreement with the Beast, and fight with the Lamb: Whither
he puts this after the same manner into their hearts: and whither it will not
hence follow that he is the Author of sin?

III.

In granting (which thing some maintain) that these Kings were not converted,
how then are they said in spoiling of the whore to do the will of God, seeing
they were ignorant of it: Neither spoiled they her so much out of affection to
piety, as of desire to the prey.

Now first, how God works in the hearts of men, the liberty of their will
remaining.

Of this Question both in the Hypothesis, and in the Thesis the explication is
the same, being not a little difficult: For if God works in the hearts of men,
he seems to determinate or limit their wills to one thing: Now if God limit
the will, then man seems not to act freely: seeing that is said to be free which
is unlimited in respect of a thing: Furthermore God seems to move and bend the
wills of men according to his own will or pleasure. But that which is moved and
bent by another will, seems not to act freely.

Now the Scripture on the contrary says: The Kings heart is in the hand of the
Lord, he inclines it to whatsoever he will: So the Holy Ghost in this place:
God put into the hearts of the Kings that they should do these, and not other
things,

I ANSWER: Sophisters do much labor and sweat to unty this knot touching the
concurring of Gods providence, Lib: 5. de C. D. ca. 9
and man's free will, but after long toil, they put (as the saying is) the Cart
before the Horse, that is, they subject the operation of God to the will of
man, the Creator to the creature: and that befalls them (which Austin wrote of
Cicero) that by making men free, Lib. 4. de Great. and lib. Arbit: cap: 14
they make them sacrilegious. BELLARMIN does diversely torment himself
throughout his six books of Grace and Freewill. And after all he falls with
both hands into the same mire of blasphemy. And alleges diverse opinions
touching this Concurring. Caiet. in 1. qu. Art. 4


The first is of Caietan: That the concurring or accord of the divine
providence and free will is inexplicable, and not to be understood in this
life. Bellarmine confesses it to be dark, but not inexplicable.

The second he ascribes to Durand: Duran in 2. did. 37 qu. 1.
That there is required no concurring of the divine operation unto actions of
secondary causes, but that is enough, if God preserve the natures and virtues
of the same. This Bellarmine rejects as false, for it is repugnant to
Scripture. But whither it be Durands, let himself look to it. I have sought for
it, but find it not. It is absurd. For how does God not concur unto actions,
if he concur unto their virtues: seeing there is no influence of the action,
save from the influence of the virtue thereof.

The third is of others whom he is afraid to name: That God indeed by his
concurrence does determinaters or limit the will of man, and that in regard of
it, Man's will cannot but act, and yet remains free: either because the
concurring of God is not of the things requisite unto the action of free will:
or because the divine determination hinder not the judgment of our reason
about choosing or rejecting of objects, which is the root of the liberty in the
will.

Against this opinion (which is true) he largely disputes. First by the saying
of Siracides, Chapter 15.14. That man is left in the hand of his own Counsel:
which is nothing to the matter, because he speaks there of man as he was
first created, or before his fall. Secondly, by the authority of the Fathers,
which make nothing against it. At length by reason, viz. That this
determination should make God Author of sin, The wicked excusable, both being
false, Scot. in 2. de 37
as shall appear in the following Question. At last he alleges two opinions,
as he says better, but indeed they are worse. The former is of Scotus, That
the divine cooperation is not of the part of the cause, but only of the part
of the effect, that is, that Gods concurrence does not determinate the will, or
imprint any thing in the same, but flows immediately into the effect, and
produces the same in the very moment in which it is produced from our will. As
when two Porters carry a great burden, which one alone could not do: here
neither of them adds strength to the other: but only both bear the weight.

This opinion pleases him, yet not altogether: for he sees it is repugnant to
the Scripture, which says not, that the divine influence is in the actions,
but in the hearts of men. As here God put into their heatts: he says not, into
their actions: Again, The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, he inclines
it to whatsoever he will: he inclines, I say, the heart, and not only the
effects of the heart, or of the King. It is repugnant also to the prayers and
practice of the Saints, who fervently desire of God, to have not only their
actions and ways directed, but likewise to have their minds enlightened and
bearts guided by God.

The other opinion is of Thomas, which says he, C. 1: q. 105 art. 5. and Lib.
3. con. Gent. ca. 7 Et qu. 3. de potentia artic. 7.
perhaps is more probable (so ignorant is he of that truth, which he
undertakes to expound) viz. that the divine cooperation so concurres with the
will of men, as it gives not only strength unto, and preserves the same, but
also mooves and applies it to the work.

The which opinion being heartily taken, differs nothing from the third, and
is true. But because the truth pleases not Bellarmine, he subtly pretends
that this opinion also has its difficulties, and again by cavelling seeks to
deceive: For you would think him to be some Iugler: for being a Thomist he
dares not refute his master: therefore he shuffles by subtilty, and at length
against Thomas he comes to this: that Gods concurring to the will of man,
brings nothing save a negative determination, that is, none at all: and that
the motion of God remains subject to our will, and is in our power. Thus God
and his grace should be subject unto us: and so again the Cart draws the
horse.

Thus I say, the Sophister to make men free, makes them sacrilegious. What
therefore?

The opinion of Caietane is most true, that this concurring of God remains
inexplicable to us in this life: for the divine providence has a thousand
inexplicable ways to insinuate it self unto us, inwardly to incline, turn,
bend, draw, and create our hearts a new, that we by doing what we will freely,
yet do nothing but according to the divine determination and appointment.

But if any thing can be expounded touching this concurring, then the third
and fifth opinion must be true: neither is our liberty endangered thereby: for
to incline, move, bow, draw, and determinate the heart, is not to force men as
if they were brutish or against their will: because this inclination, motion,
determination is not without the proper judgment of reason, and free election
of the will. Now nothing but coaction, is repugnant to the liberty of the will.
Whether the divine determination be repugnant to the will.


Yea, says he, also determination is repugnant. This was the first argument:
That which acts determinately to one thing, acts not freely, etc. This is
true if determination be put without the judgment and proper choice: otherwise
it is false: for God himself out of perfection of nature, wills that which is
good, and hates the evil determinately, yet does both most freely.

Bell armine cannot deny this, But excepteth, that God is determinated from
himself, Bellar. lib: 3. cap. 7 and lib. cap: 7.
and not by any other. What of what? The question is not whether liberty stands
with this or that determination: but whether with any. If it may stand with
some: he has beaten the air by a long disputation. But also man determinates
himself in the act of election, through the last judgment of practical
reason: for without such a determination the will and choice of man should be
nothing at all. Now howsoever this judgment of practical reason (which the
Sophisters confess is the root of liberty) be sometimes also determinated out
of it self, Act: 14.16
that is, by God (I say sometimes, not always: for God does not determinate
all acts of the will, but oftentimes leaves men to their own ways, and suffers
them to run headlong into destruction.) Notwithstanding this determination is
not done without the voluntary judgment of our reason and choice of the will,
without any coaction, yet in a manner to us indeed inexplicable, but known to
God: Who works all things after the counsel of his own will. Ephe. 1.11


To the second Argument: That which is governed by the divine providence, acts
not freely, etc. I ANSWER, it is false, unless it be understood with the same
distinction: to wit, if it be governed by a providence without our own
deliberation and choice. For that which God governs, showing the object to
the understanding and efficaciously moving the will to choose the same: that
notwithstanding man does freely choose, although he be inclined by the will of
God to whatsoever he pleases. What it is to act freely
For the creatures freedom in acting, is not to act without the government of
any, but with deliberation, and by a voluntary motion of its own will: although
this motion be raised and ruled by another.

And that I may return unto the determination of the will: It is not repugnant
even to moral Philosophy: For Aristotle lib. 3. Ethic. Cap. 5. says, That
man is the original of his own actions, as of his children: and denies not but
that in some occurrences the will is determinated to one thing, the liberty
thereof remaining: suppose in vicious men, drunkards, and incontinent persons,
who after they have brought a vicious habit upon themselves, do indeed commit
their vices freely, yet also necessarily and determinately, because their will,
by a vicious habit (which they are not able to shake off) is determined to vice.

To conclude it is plain from these things in the Hypothesis, that God put into
the hearts of the Kings, the liberty of their will remaining, to do, what they
did, determinately: and in the Thesis, that the concurrence of God governing
and determinating the will of man, as he pleases, does not at all take away
the liberty of the same.

II. Whether God after the same manner put good and evil into the hearts of
the Kings: and whether hence it will follow that he is the Author of sin.

Touching the good there is no question about it, for this all that are godly
do willingly grant, viz. that God, as the Scripture says, works both the
will and the deed, without overthrowing the liberty of our will, as before we
showed.

Notwithstanding Pelagius did not grant the same: and a Philosopher will no
more grant the determination of the will in virtue, then in vice. But the
Philosopher is answered by the doctrine of heathens themselves, as erewhile we
heard out of Aristotle.

Pelagius, and such as follow him, object the Theological knot in evil things
touching the cause of sin. For if God also determine the evil of man (as for
examples the hearts of the Kings) as touching things evil in their own
nature, as suppose, to conspire together with Antichrist, and to fight against
the Lamb: hereby God seems to be the Author, as it were of their evils, and
the Kings excusable. This indeed Pelagius of old objected to Austin, as at this
day the Pelagian Relickes, in pretense to maintain the righteousness of God,
as if it could not be otherwise maintained, but in the sense of bare
permission, viz. that God is said to do that, because he permits it to be done.

But first the gloss of bare permission is a manifest abusing of sundry places
of Scripture, in which it is plainly affirmed, that God did, and that indeed
most holily, which men have done most wickedly.

Joseph (touching the parricide of his brethren) says Genesis 45.8. It was not
you that sent me hither: but God sent me hither before you.

Touching the hatred of the Egyptians against the Israelites, Psalm. 105. verse
25. God turned their hearts to hate his people, to deal subtly with his
servants.

Touching Shimeis cursing, 2. Samuel 16.10. The Lord has said unto him: Curse
David.

Of Absoloms incest, 2. Sam. 12.12. Thou did it secretly: But I will do this
(viz. give thy wives unto thy neighbor) before all Israel, and before the sun.

Of the Rebellion of Jeroboam, and the ten Tribes, 1. Kin. 12.24. This thing is
from me. And in the same place touching Rehoboams tyrannical answer, ver. 15.
Wherefore the King hearkened not unto the people: for the cause was from the Lord.

Touching the spoiling of the Babylonians, Isa. 10. ver. 6. I will give him a
charge to take the spoil, and to take the prey.

Touching the seduction of the false Prophets, Ezech. 14.9. I the Lord have
deceived that Prophet. So of the seducement of Ahab by the false Prophets and
Satan. 1. Kin. 22.20. Who shall persuade Ahab, etc. and the Lord said, Thou
shall persuade them, and prevail also: Go forth and do so.

Of the Rapine of the Arabians, Job, 1.21. The LORD gave, and the Lord has
taken away.

Touching Christ's crucifying, Act. 4.27. Herod and Pontius Pilate have done
those things which thy hand and counsel determined before to be done.

By these and the like places both the evil works of men, and Satan are
ascribed unto God, not absolutely, but in some respect, viz. so far as God by
the same accomplisheth his secret judgments: not as the author of man's wicked
deeds (God forbid) but as a most righteous performer of his judgments in, and
by them: for to imagine that God executes not his judgments, but barely
permits them, agrees not with faith and godliness.

Secondly, the gloss of bare permission in many places would be blasphemous:
take for example the place in hand: Will thou say, that God put it into the
hearts of the Kings, that is, permitted it to be put? Who then put it into
their hearts? Thou will say, the devil: and hereby thou make the devil to
put that into the heart, which the Scripture expressly says, that God did: will thou make the devil to be God? Besides the devil will never persuade the
kings to oppose the whore. Consider therefore whither this thy gloss does not
by an open blasphemy attribute satan's work to God, and on the contrary the work
of God to the devil.

Thirdly, the gloss of bare permission imports heresy: for under it lies hid
the Pelagian denial of the divine grace and providence: and the establishing
of humane strength against grace. For this gloss has flowed if not
primitively, yet chiefly from the School of Pelagius, as may be seen in Austin,
Lib. 5. Cont. Julian cap: 3:
against whom Julian the Pelagian disputes after this manner. As God is to be
considered about the will in evil, so also in good, but in the evil will he
only works permissively, by suffering the same to rush on by its own motion
and desire, but not by moving the same: Otherwise he should be the Author of
sin. Therefore also he works good in the will only permissively suffering
the same to act by its own strength, but not by moving the same: otherwise the
liberty thereof should be taken away. This was Pelagius Logic, the which very
thing now a days, the Patrons of bare permission, and Preposterous Defenders
of Gods righteousness, do unwittingly maintain.

But Austin shows both the premises of the Pelagian subtilty to be false.

The Proposition is false, because God works one way in the good will, another
way in the evil. The former he makes good of evil, whereas by nature he finds
all to be evil, none good: but being made good by himself, he moves them
effectually: yet so as their liberty remains, as has bin expounded. The
latter he makes not evil, but finds them so.

The assumption is also false: for he not only forsakes and suffers the wicked
will (which he finds) to rush on whether it pleases, but also delivers the
same over to Satan and their own desires, yea moving and inclining the same how
he will, that by doing the evil it wills, it becomes subject unto his
judgment, secret indeed, but never unrighteous, in a manner whither explicable
unto us, or inexplicable, as Austin speaks: and as in the fore-alledged
examples we have seen.

Notwithstanding he is not the cause of sin, Lib: 5: Cont. Iulican cap. 3
for he uses the wicked will to execute his judgments most holily: neither is
he any more the cause of the sin which evil men commit, by executing his
judgments by them: then the ungodly are the cause of the good which he works
through them.

Luther against Erasmus does perspicuously declare the matter by similies: A
Rider rides well though he use a lame or halting horse: De ser. arb. cap. 148:
The Artificer forms of putrefied wood an artificious image: Notwithstanding
there is halting in the riding, not by fault of the Rider, but by the defect of
the horse. In the image is putrefaction, not through fault of the Artificer,
but by defect of the wood. So by the selling of Joseph, the betraying of Judas,
God brought to pass unspeakable good: yet in both wickedness was committed:
not indeed on Gods part, but by the perfidiousnesse of the brethren, and of
Judas.

But thou will say, the same sins are attributed, as to the wicked, so to
God: True, if thou consider the words only, and not the meaning of the
Scripture. Now this is done with great difference. They are ascribed unto Satan
and wicked men in regard of themselves, and as they are wicked actions
committed by them against the Law. But to God, so far as by accident they serve
unto his secret judgments, which he uses to execute most righteously, even by
wicked men doing most wickedly.

The reason of the diversity comes partly from the diverse end, partly from the
form of actions: The rule of final causes
for a different end makes different actions, according to the rule: Final and
impulsive causes make the differences of actions. Hence two doing the same
thing, yet do not the same: though both do somewhat, which is either good or
indifferent, when as they have diverse ends differing in moral quality.

Gods end is always good: wicked men's evil: in the selling of Joseph his
brethren fulfilled their hatred, against the Law; Thou shall not kill. In the
oppression of the Jews, the Babylonians enlarged their Tyranny to the injuring
of their neighbors, against the Law: Thou shall not steal. And therefore both
these and the other did sin. But God to whom both these are attributed, Genesis
45.8. and Isa 10.7.19. had a most holy end in both, viz. Joseph's exalting Genesis
50.20. and his peoples chastisement according to the Law, Isa 10.6. Therefore
he sinned not. Read the tenth Chapter of Isaiah touching this diversity of ends
in the same work, and thou shall learn, that what the Chaldeans did most
evilly, God by them did the same most righteously.

In the form of actions the distinction is more evident: for three things
distinctly to be considered, concur in those actions of wicked men, which God
is said to do. 1. The Motion. 2. (...) or the vitiousnesse of the motion, and
3. the secret judgment of God. Motion is a natural good thing: And therefore
it is from God, in whom also the wicked live, move, and have their being. The
secret judgments of God, are morally good, even works of justice and mercy:
And therefore are of right attributed to God. The (...) or pravitie of the
motion prohibited by the Law, makes the motion vicious and sinful. This
therefore is not of God: but remotely flows from the devil, and more nearly
from the froward will and malice of men: whenever therefore the works of
evil men are in Scripture attributed unto God, as affirming that God does
them, or that they are from God. This is not to be understood simply, but with
limitation, that is, not in respect of the disorder and pravity, but first in
respect of the motions, so far as they are natural motions: secondly and
chiefly in regard of the secret Judgments, which God executes in, and by the
same.

But here thou will happily demand whether it may not rightly be said, that God
does permit sins? yea verily: yet with a twofold limitation.

First, that to permit and to grant is not the same thing, as if God did permit
men to sin without punishing the same, like as some Magistrates permit
Brothelhouses, where fornication is committed without punishment. Now God does
not so: for his permitting of sin is not to hinder, but suffer that they should
be committed through the vitiousnesse of men, and concur with his Judgments.

Secondly, we must not understand such a bare permission as is a cessation
altogether of the divine providence in the works of evil men (which thing
only is in question betwixt us and the Pelagians) but restrained unto the
vitiousnesse of their works, being repugnant to the nature and Law of God. For
herein God himself does something, something he does not, but permits it to
be done by men. He permits sins to be done, as they are sins, not hindering the
doing of the same, nor correcting sinners, that they should not sin, whereas he
could do both. But he does two things. I. The motions and natural actions
themselves of evil men, by a general influence (as the Schools speak)
sometimes also by a special. II. His Judgments or events, agreeing to his
goodness and justice, the which if he did not respect, he would never permit
sins to be committed, and this he does by moderating and effectually directing
as the sins, so other means also coming in between, to make them serve to his
judgments and ends, which he intends most holily: not only by a general
influence, but always by a special. Hence the wise man: she also reaches
from one end unto another, Wisd. 8.1
mightily and comely does she order all things. These things no man will deny
unless an Athiest, who makes God the governor of the world, no other then to
be a slothful or brutish Idol of Fortune. See Luther touching the slavish
will, Chap. 143.

III. How these Kings in eating the flesh of the whore and burning her, did
that which was pleasing to God.

This Question in regard of our interpretation, is of no weight, for we have
proved, that the Kings who before had given their power unto the Beast, and all
their assistance to the whore, did afterward by a certain divine metamorphosis
or change, repent of the same. As therefore they hated the whore, according to
the revealed will of God: so they shall rightly and in obedience to God,
forsake, make naked, eat her flesh, and burn her with fire: according to the
commandment of the heavenly voice: Go out of her my people: Render unto her
double: thou shall overthrow their Idols: burn their Images with fire.

But put case they did not repent, and so were not without sin in spoiling and
burning the whore, yet herein they did the good pleasure of God, not as it was
their act but accidentally: for in committing the manifest wickedness which they
intended: they together executed the secret judgment of God, which they
intended not: Like as the Jews, Herod, Pontius Pilate in condemning Christ, did
together, Act. 4.8.
howbeit wickedly that which the hand and counsel of God had well decreed
should be done by them. But the former opinion is the better.

And thus much touching the Questions propounded. Now let us return to the
Prophecy.

CHAPTER. XVIII. The Preface touching the Coherence.
WE now take in hand to expound the second Act of the sixth Vision, touching the
lamentable destruction of Babylon, the royal Seat of Antichrist, that is, of
Rome; The which (God is my witness) I speak not of humane or evil affection
against the Pope of Rome, or as being lead by a dark conjecture, but induced
by this divine Prophecy, and the clear Demonstration of the foregoing Chapter.

The Angel did show unto John in the wilderness in stead of the woman, the
chaste Mother of the Man-child, that is, the true Church of Christ, a
Scarlet-colored woman, a whore drunken with the blood of the Saints, sitting
on the Beast, that is, the adulterous Antichristian Church.

For Ribera ( though he deny it on Chapter XVII.) is forced Chap. XIX. and XX.
(where the casting of the Beast into the Lake of fire is described) to confess
that this Beast denotes Antichrist. Now the Angel had plainly said before,
that the woman was the great City, which in John's time had dominion over the
Kings of the Earth, the which could not be any other City but Rome. Of the same
it was said, that the Ten Kings sworn-unto the Beast, who before had employed
their power in defense of his kingdom (at length his abominations being
discovered, and hating his fornication, God so governing their hearts) should
detest the whore, forsake, uncover, eat her flesh and burn her with fire. All
which considered, these things do evidently follow.

First, that Rome is the Seat of Antichrist.

Secondly, that the Pope of Rome is Antichrist.

Thirdly, that Papal Rome before the last judgment, shall be miserably burnt,
and utterly overthrown.

The First thus: Where the purpled woman sits, there is Antichrists Seat,
because she sits on the Beast, which is Antichrist. The purple-coloured woman
sits at Rome, because she sits on the Seven heads of the Beast, which are the
Seven Mountains of Rome. Rome therefore is the Seat of Antichrist This
deduction the adversaries can no longer deny: Only they dally, as if Rome were
not yet, but should hereafter be the Seat of Antichrist, viz. when Antichrist
shall come, who thrusting out the Pope shall possess Rome. Which fiction has
often before bin refuted, and overthrowes it self: neither do the fictions
consist: That Rome should be the seat of Antichrist, and that Rome before
Antichrists coming should be burnt by the Ten Kings: and that Antichrist is to
have his Seat in the Temple at Jerusalem.

The Second thus: He which in the last times possesses Rome, the Seat of
Antichrist, he is Antichrist: The Romish Pope does now possess Rome
Antichrists Seat. Therefore he is Antichrist.

The third thus: Babylon the great City shall be destroyed before the last
judgment, because after its desolation, there shall be godly and ungodly,
rejoicing and lamenting at the destruction thereof. Popish Rome is Babylon the
great City. Therefore Popish Rome shall be destroyed before the last judgment.
The Jesuits seeing they cannot deny the assumption: would shift it off by
their fiction; that Rome as ye is not, but shall be Babylon hereafter: but in
vain, as has appeared. The Proposition the XVIII. Chapter will illustrate.
Thus much of the Coherence.

Now after our wonted manner, we will first lay down the Argument, Parts, and
Analysis of the Chapter, as the Basis or ground of our following Interpretation.

The Argument, Parts, and Analysis.
THis Chapter is an exposition of verse 1. and 16. of the foregoing Chapter,
touching the judgment and burning of the great whore, viz. of the great
Seven-hild City, Antichrists royal Seat or Rome: For the fatal judgment and
lamentable ruin hereof, is solemnly published from heaven, and tragically
figured out by an Angel: And the godly are commanded speedily to depart from
her. Afterward the lamentation and mourning of Kings. Merchants, and Mariners
of the Earth, because of the loss of their traficke by the ruin of the city,
is represented by a prophetical Hypotyposis or illustration; The Saints on the
contrary are commanded to rejoice because of the divine vengeance. Lastly the
judgment is confirmed by the Symbol of a millstone cast into the Sea. These
things are done in order by three Angels. Therefore the parts of the Chapter
are three.

The first is the voice of the first Angel touching the ruin of Babylon, ver.
3. The second voice is of the departure of the Godly out of Babylon, the
mourning of the wicked, and joy of the Saints unto ver. 21. The third voice is
of the third Angel casting a millstone into the Sea, unto the end.

In the first voice, is first the description of the crying Angel, set forth
by three adjuncts. 1. From of his original, he descends from heaven. 2. From
of his power, which is said to be great. 3. From of his form, the earth was
lightened with his glory, ver. 1.
Secondly, the thing published by the Angel, both whose crying is noted; as
also the twofold Argument of the cry. 1. A sentence touching the destruction
of Babylon: It is fallen etc. which is amplified by three horrible
consequences: that it is become the habitation of devils: the hold of unclean
spirits, and Cage of unclean birds: ver. 2. 2. Two causes of the destruction:
One fornication, by which she has defiled all nations and Kings of the Earth:
The second, Luxuriousness and most filthy trading with the Merchants of the
Earth, verse 3.

In the second voice are three things. I. An exhortation unto the Godly under
Antichrists kingdom, ver. 4.5.6.7.8. II. The lamentation of the Kings,
Merchants, and Mariners of the Earth. This shall be the former effect in the
ungodly, from verse 19. unto verse 20. III. A turning to the heavenly
inhabitants: Rejoice, etc. This shall be the other effect in the Saints, ver.
20.


I. The exhortation unto the Godly living under Popery is twofold: First to go
out of Babylon: Come out of her my people: with three reasons. 1. Least they
might be defiled with conversing with the wicked. 2. Least they be partakers of
their plagues and ruin, ver. 4. 3. Because the inevitable time of vengeance is
at hand, ver. 5.
Secondly that they might render double unto her: which I. he amplifies by
Phrases four times changed, and prophetically set forth ver. 6. 7. II. He
persuades by a reason from the equallity: because she proudly lifts up her
self: I sit a Queen, ver. 7. III. He expounds the kind of punishment, ver. 8.
she shall be burnt with fire, and the first cause hereof: Gods power and
righteousness, ver. 8.
II. The lamentation is distributed into three sorts of men. The first are the
Kings of the Earth: of whom it is said, 1. What they did before: They committed
fornication and lived deliciously with the whore ver. 9. 2. What they should do
beholding the smoke and fire. 1. They shall see it burning a far off,
trembling and mourning, saying, Alas, Alas. 2. Acknowledge the judgment of
God, ver. 10. The second, are Merchants of the Earth: whose wayling is
described, first generallye: They shall weep and mou^^^ and it is Illustrated,
both by the procreating cause, Their gain ceasing in regard of the contempt of
their wares, verse 11. As also, by a Register of their diverse merchandise,
among which also are the souls of men, ver. 12. 13. Lastly by the effect on
Babylon it self, which shall be deprived of all her delights, verse 14.
Secondly specially: what th^^ did before: They bad gathered riches: and what
then they will do: Treme^^ and mourn to behold her burning afar off. v. 15. 2.
Cry, Alas, Alas, and the cause of their wavling is showed, viz. by comparing
the present condition of the whore with her former, ver. 16. The third, are the
Shipmasters and Sailors, of whom likewise is noted. 1. What they did before,
They reaped gain, to wit, by Babylon. 2. What then they will do. 1. Behold
her destruction a far off, ibid. 2. Cry out, What City is like? etc. ver. 18.
3. Testify their grief, both by signs, as casting dust on their heads, ver.
19. As also by weeping and crying Alas, Alas. adding the procreating cause of
their sorrow, ibid.
III. The turning of the second voice unto the heavenly inhabitants to close up
the lamentation with joyfulnesse: The Proposition is, Rejoice. The reason is
taken from the remote impelling cause, because Babylon is punished for her
Tyranny exercised against the Saints, ver. 20.
In the third voice is the final and irrecoverable destruction of Babylon. I.
Figured out by a Symbol: which is, both acted by an Angel: A mighty Angel
took a stone like, etc. As also expounded: Thus with violence shall that great
City be thrown down, ver. 21. II. It is amplified by the effects. 1. She is
deprived of music. 2. Of trade. 3. Of all manner of corn. 4. Of light. 5. Of
Mariage-Feastings, ver. 22. 23. III. This is approved by three enforcing
causes. 1. The Luxuriousness of Popish Traders. 2. Their witchcraft, and
seducing of the Christian world, ver. 23. 3. Their cruelty against the Saints.
verse 24.


The first Part of the CHAPTER, Publishing the Ruin of BABYLON.
1 And after these things, I saw another Angel come down from heaven, having
great power, and the earth was lightened with his glory.

2 And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is
fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils; and the hold of
every unclean spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful bird.

3 For all Nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and
the Kings of the Earth have committed fornication with her, and the Merchants
of the Earth are waxen rich with the abundance of her delicacies.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd after these things I saw another Angell] What Origin writes touching the
song of Songs, that the History thereof is after the manner of an Interlude,
acted by four persons: appears more clearly to have bin observed in this
Prophecy, as hitherto we have still observed. For as in Comoedies diverse
persons come and go on the Theater: so we see done here.

In this sixth Vision the first person was the Angel having seven Vialls,
leading John into the wilderness, and showing unto him the Babylonish Strumpet
on the Beast, and expounding the mystery of both, which things being done,
another Angel came forth on the Scene to declare the judgment of the whore
under the Type of Babylon.

Therefore John says that he saw another Angel (...) After these things viz.
which were acted and spoken by the former Angel: Of whom is expounded in three
Verses, whence he came, what for an Angel he was, what he did, and spoke.

Descending from Heaven] The place from whence he comes gives divine
authority to his Message. For he comes from Heaven, as Gods Herald: and
therefore publishes the judgment of Babylon in the Name of God: that so we
might not question, but all shall certainly come to pass, Who this Angel is.
which is foretold by this heavenly Messenger. Who he was, it is not needful
to enquire. The following description shows, that he was one of the chief
Emissarie Angels of God: Neither is it of necessity, to understand it of
Christ, seeing the action of this Vision is distributed between many Angels.

This might be demanded, whether these three Angels proclaiming the ruin of
Babylon, be the same with the three mentioned, Chap. 14. The first of whom
proclaimed the eternal Gospel. The second the destruction of Babylon in the
same words, in which this also proclaimed it: The third deterred men with
threatenings from worshipping of the Beast, and committing fornication with the
woman.

I suppose they are not the same: Because the time and argument of the Act
differs. The former came forth long before these, viz. when God in compassion
to his people was about to restore the Gospel, suppressed by Antichrist, and
purge the Church from the dregs of Popery, which as we showed, was first done
by Wickleffe, Husse, Jerome of Prague, afterward by Luther, Melanchthon,
Zwinglius, Calvin, and the following Preachers of the Gospel: for these
restored both the doctrine of Grace, and first denounced the ruin of Babylon.
Therefore those Angels were preachers of the Gospel. But these here come down
from heaven long after, viz. when now the destruction of Babylon was at hand:
and they declare only prophesies revealed unto them in special by God;
touching particular future events. Therefore they signify not ordinary
Preachers, who now know not, nor foretell things to come, but are real
Angels, publishing new Oracles in the Name of God: Yea the middlemost seems to
have bin either God himself, or Christ, ver. 4.

Having great power] What he was is showed by two Epithites, by which generally
the Angels in Scripture are commended, viz. strength and glory. The Angels
indeed are not omnipotent Spirits, yet they have great power, insomuch as One
was able in one night to destroy an Hundred and Eighty Thousand of the Assyrian
Army. Hence they are called strong, mighty, Psalm. 103.20. Bless the Lord ye
his Angels, mighty in strength, etc. The third also of these Angels is called
(...) Mighty, ver. 21. as before Chap. 5. ver. 2. and Chap. 10.1. which we
there interpreted of Christ because of the circumstances, which are not here.
Great power therefore is attributed to this Angel for the comfort of the
Godly, that they might not think, that the power and glory of Babylon should
be invincible. The power of one Angel shall suffice to overthrow the same.
Notwithstanding in the Greek, it is not (...) might, but (...) Great power, by
which the greatness of the business committed by God to this Angel seems to
be noted. And indeed the overthrowing of Babylon shall be a work more then
ordinary.

And the Earth was lightened with his glory] This Majesty shows that he was a
heavenly Ambassador of God, to terrify the Adversaries, and strengthen the
Godly. The Angels have not always appeared with such glory, but only when
there was occasion: as at the publishing of the Birth of Christ: The Angel of
the Lord came on the shepherds, Luke 2.9. Act. 12.7.
and the glory of the Lord shone round about them. At Peter's deliverance the
glory of the Angel that delivered him filled the prison. So here With the
glory of this Angel the Earth was lightened, that men should the more carefully
receive his Message.

I like well what Ribera adds, that hereby is noted, that the judgment of
Romes desolation should not be secret, but manifest to all. He confesses
therefore that here is treated of Romes destruction.

2. And he cried with a great voyce] Now follows what he did: He cried
mightily. Most Greek Copies have it (...) He cried in a strong great voice: The
Old Version: Cried in strongth. The sense is the same: The voice of this
heavenly Herald was vehement and most strong, so as he might be heard of all,
that none, through ignorance of the judgment at hand, should remain in
Babylon. The stupidity also and deep security of Babylon is noted, which shall
so lie drowned in pleasure, that while her judgment shall sound through the
whole world, she alone shall not be able, nor willing to hear the same.

Babylon is fallen, is fallen] He proclaims the ruin of Babylon, as did the
second Angel, Chap. 14.8. Now it is an Enallage and prophetical Anadiplosis,
for, it shall fall, it shall certainly, shortly, utterly perish: the
Proclamation of the former has bin, and still is daily published: for the
Preachers of the Gospel have above an hundred years denounced ruin to
Babylon: And not altogether without effect: for Babylon is fallen in many
Provinces of Europe, Popery being overthrown and dissipated by the preaching of
the Gospel: But the words here, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, are not yet
fulfilled; because she is not as yet wholly brought to nothing: And therefore
the time of this Angel is not yet come, but shall be a little before the
desolation of Rome. Now the form of the Exclamation (as before we said on
Chap. 14. ver. 8.) is taken out of Isai. 21.9. and Ierem. 51.8. speaking of the
Typical ruin of Babylon. In the like form Isaiah foretold the destruction of
old Assyrian Babylon, which had oppressed Gods ancient people about an hundred
years before it happened: After the same manner perhaps an Angel now may
foretell an hundred years before it come to pass, the ruin of the new Italian
Babylon, which has suppressed the Church of Christ.

Now who this Babylon is, there is no question about it: for before on Chap.
14.8. we have showed it to be Rome. And Chap. 17. the Angel makes the seven
Mountains of Rome to be Antichrists Seat: Lastly the adversaries themselves
confess it. And therefore the desolation of the Roman City is here proclaimed,
and it is indeed to happen before the last judgment: as the whole following
matter shows.

And is become the habitation of divells] From the horrible consequences, he
aggravates the desolation of new Babylon, by such as of old the Prophets
described the overthrow of ancient Babylon. They are also taken out of Isai.
13.21. and 14. and 21. and Ier. 50.51. Ezechiel also Chap. 26.27. describes
the desolation of Tyrus almost by the same threatenings. Now three things are
threatened.

It is made, or become] For, it shall be the habitation of devils. Isa 34.14:
Isaias names these devils SEGNIRIM, that is, rough and rugged, as hairy
Goats, because in such shapes they sometime appeared, likes the Satyrs of
which the Poets speak: The Germans call them FELD-TEVFEL, Field Devils, unto
whom the Heathens of old sacrificed, and is forbidden by God, Levit. 17.7. They
shall not offer their sacrifices any more to, SEGNIRIM, rough, or hairy devils.

And the hold of every foul Spirit] Greek (...) custody, that is, receptacle.
Before he noted a special kind of devils hanting the deserts, called Fayries,
or Satyrs: unto whom he now joyneth other devils: or by every foul Spirit he
means diabolical apparitions, Night-spirits, and the like terrors: such as
often appeared unto Antony the Hermit in the deserts of Egypt: Hieron. in vitae
Antonij.
and yet to this day are wont to appear in desert places.

And Gage of every unclean and hateful bird] Not only such as by the Law were
unclean, and might not be eaten, Lev. 11. But dreadful to the sight of men, or
which in nature are hateful and hurtful to men, as Scrich-Owels, Kites,
Vulturs, Gripes, Ravens, etc. All these denote horrible desolation: for
experience teaches, that old Castles, Towns, and unhabited places, are for
the most part the abode of Devils, Ghosts, Beasts, Harpies, and hateful
birds: for such kind of creatures delight in deserts, and desolate places,
remote from the company of men: so that the Angel proclaims a horrible
change of the Babylonish state. For where before stood the stately walls,
Royal places, high towers, and Chapels of Romish Saints, there shall lie
broken walls, rubbish, and ashes: where before the most holy Father the Pope,
with his Purple Cardinals, Anointed Fathers, Coped Bishops, Silken Prelates,
fat Monks, Glittering Clergy, and multitudes of people did abound in all
manner of riot, and luxuriousness: there shall Devils, Ghosts, Scrich-Owls,
and all manner of hateful birds inhabit. This horrible judgment, if the Pope,
Cardinals, and Clergy did read, it were wonderful if they could contain from
tears, and not think of repentance and flight from Babylon. But to be enraged
against me, against the Prophet, and against God, what is it but to kick
against the pricks?

Ribera demands, wherefore evil spirits rather love and inhabit desert places,
then to frequent the company of men? Before Christ they did so, to the end,
appearing to travelers, they might by terror induce them to Idolatry. After
Christ he feineth another cause, viz. to deter Hermits and Monks from
abiding in the wilderness. But as the Question is foolish, so the answer is as
ridiculous. The Lord Jesus, Mat: 12.43. says, that the devils being cast out
of man, do wander through dry places, seek for rest, but find none: So that it
rather seems they are banished into desert places, as it were into a large
prison, that they might not disturb the society of men: And so much the word
(...) (signifying properly an hold or prison) seems to import: Not that they
never return unto men, but this they cannot do, unless God permit them: Indeed
their proper domicile or abode is Hell, into which Satan is thrust with his
Angels: yet in the mean while by Gods sufferance they often go forth, some
raging in the air, others wandering through the deserts. Now what do the wicked
differ from deserts? And therefore they more familiarly insinuate themselves,
and delight to be with them. Hence it is that in the Papacy many are troubled
with apparitions, and evil spirits (whether truly or feinedly others know)
that so Exorcists may have matter and occasion for their impostures. Now this
kind of Devils is wholly vanished from us by the shining light of the Gospel
of God.

3. For they have drunk of the wine] The causes of so horrible desolation are
diverse times declared in this Chapter, The causes of Babylons destruction.
that we might understand the righteousness of Gods judgment. Neither would the
justice of God inflict so horrible punishments, but for grievous wickedness: Now
their are two, or three, if we divide the former.

The first cause is: In regard all Nations had drunk of the wine of her
fornication, that is, because Babylon has filled the Christian world with
abominations and Idolatrous worship. The Prophetical Phrase is before
expounded on Chap. 14.8. where in stead of (...) have drunk (here used) it is
(...) made to drink: And so the Kings Edition reads here also, the sense being
one, only if we read it (...) as it is in Chapter. 14. the guilt of the whore
is more expressed thereby.

The second cause is fornication with the Kings of the Earth. Not corporal,
for that could not be committed with a City: therefore we must understand it of
spiritual fornication, that is, the Idolatry which Rome has obtruded on the
whole Christian world, and which she has maintained by the approbation,
defense, and zeal of the Kings her Vassals. Now what was that?

Ribera sends us back to the Idolatry of old Rome, the which we have before
refuted. First it is contradictory to histories, which show, that the Romans
did not obtrude their Idols on other nations, but made the Idols of all peoples
their own, least any of the gods should not be worshipped at Rome, Christ only
excepted. Secondly, God has not till now differred the punishment of Old Romes
Idolatry and wickedness: This fornication is nothing but Popish Idolatry.
but most grievously punished the same long ago, through the Vandals, Goths,
Hunni, who three or four times spoiled and ruinated the Roman City. Lastly,
here is treated of Rome in the last times, which can be applied to no other
then Popish Rome: now she shall not be punished for another, but for her own
whoredom: And therefore this fornication can be nothing else save Popish
Idolatry, which the whole Christian world has drawn from the breasts of Rome
their Mother.

And the Merchants of the Earth are waxed rich] Here is a third cause, which
hitherto has not bin mentioned: The lasciviousness and riot of her Merchants.
Through riot Magnesia and Colophon were lost, according to the Proverb: It was
also the overthrow of Sibaris, and shall be the ruin not of old Rome, which now
is not, but of new Popish Rome, of whose riot, lasciviousnes, Sodomie, simony I
need not say any thing, it being notorious to the world. Read if you please the
selected Epistles of Franciscus Petrarcha, The riot of Popish Rome.
who above two hundred years ago most eagerly upbraided the Papal Court for
its most excessive luxuriousness and Pomp. What would he have done, had he
lived till now?

But thou will say, the Angel seems not to note the riot, but the richness of
these Merchants. Now should this be the cause of so great a judgment? Is
wealth or merchandise in it self vicious? not in the least: but because these
Merchants, being as it were masters of new delights and pleasures, were not
enriched by honest trading, but as it is in the Text (...) by the power, (or
abundance) of her lasciviousness, that is, because to their own excessive
gain, they have most earnestly furnished the Romish whore with all manner of
riot and delicacies. But who are these Merchants?

Ribera here also sends us to the riot, and merchandise of Old Rome. I confess
old Rome did much abound in these things: but she has ceased to be for a long
time, and so it makes nothing to the thing here in hand: Neither did Old Rome
obtain her power and wealth by merchandise, but force of arms, not by
Mercury, but Mars. Besides these Merchants are called Great men, and Princes of
the Earth, ver. 23. Therefore they are not common Merchants, who bring in, and
carry out ordinary wares, profitable and necessary for man's use. But that
singular kind of merchandise, spoken of ver. 13. shows that a special rank
of merchants is noted: for they shall buy and sell the souls of men. What more
palpable then that these Merchants are no other save Prelates and Princes, whom
they call Ecclesiastical, and all the sacrificing traders in spiritual wares,
Friars, Monks, etc. And that this merchandise is that whole Court of
conscience, reserved and unreserved Cases, Indulgences, Annuities, Vacancies,
Commendums, Dispensations, Tithes, and sale of Ecclesiastical riches, through
which Channels the wealth and treasures of the Christian world have flowed to
Rome, and the whole Popish Clergy has every where gathered so much riches, as
that Kings, Princes, Earls, Cities, Communities, have scarcely wherewith all
to maintain their Politic State honestly. Pope Alexander the sixth was a
mighty Merchant in these things: Of whom it is commonly said: Vendit Alexander
cruces, Altaria Christum:
Vendere jure potest, emerat ipse prius.
Allexander sels Crucifixes, Christ, and Altars high,
And reason good he should do so, for first he did them buy.
Of such kind of Merchandising MANTUAN: -- Venalia nobis
Templa, Sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
Ignis, thura, preces; Coelum est Venale, Deusque
Temples, Priests, Altars, Sacred things, and Crowns renowned too:
Fire, Frankincense, Prayers, Heaven, and God here sell we do.


Who now will wonder that this merchandise shall hasten Romes destruction?
Hitherto the first Angel: The second comes forth.

The second Part of the Chapter. An Exhortation to the Godly to go out of
BABYLON: The lamentation of Kings, Merchants, Shipmasters: and the rejoicing of
the Heavenly Inhabitants.
4 And I heard another voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her my people,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues. 5 For her sins have reached unto Heaven, and God has remembered her
iniquities. 6 Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double
according to her works: in the Cup which she has filled, fill to her double.
7 How much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment
and sorrow give her: for she says in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no
Widow, and shall see no sorrow. 8 Therefore shall her plagues come in one day,
death, and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire,
for strong is the Lord God, who judges her. 9 And the Kings of the Earth who
have committed fornication, and lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her,
and lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning. 10 Standing
afar off for fear of her torment, saying, Alas, alas, that great City
Babylon, that mighty City, for in one hour it thy judgment come. 11 And the
Merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her: for no man buyeth their
merchandise any more. 12 The Merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious
stones, and of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet,
and all thin wood, and all manner vessels of Ivory, and all manner vessels of
most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble. 13 And Cynamon, and
Odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour,
and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and slaves, and
souls of men. 14 And the fruits that thy soul lusted after, are departed from
thee, all things which were dainty, and goodly, are departed from thee, and
thou shall find them no more at all. 15 The Merchants of these things which
were made rich by her, shall stand afar off, for the fear of her torment,
weeping and wailing. 16 And saying, Alas, alas, that great City, that was
clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and
precious stones, and pearls; 17 For in one hour so great riches is come to
naught. And every Shipmaster, and all the company in ships, and Sailers, and as
many as trade by sea, stood afar off: 18 And cried when they saw the smoke of
her burning, saying, What City is like unto this great City? 19 And they cast
dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that
great city, wherein were made rich all that had Ships in the Sea, by reason of
her costlinesse, for in one hour is she made desolate. 20 Rejoice over her,
thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has avenged you on
her.
THE COMMENTARY.
ANd I heard another voice from Heaven] This Angel is only heard, but appears
not on the Theater. Therefore Brightman calls him (...) Namelesse. Now
wherefore he is not named, nor comes forth, we need not enquire after it;
perhaps it might be, because he treats of things displeasing: but the former
also was no less odious to the Romans. Therefore we leave this to the
wisdom of God. We know that in Interludes sometime a voice and words are
uttered by persons that are hid, that the Assembly may be the more astonished.
Let therefore this unknown voice stir up our attention: unless perhaps it
were the voice of God or Christ, because he calls the people His.

Now the First part (as we showed in the Analysis) is an exhortation to the
Godly: Afterward the lamentation of Kings, and Romish Chapmen: Lastly, the joy
of the heavenly inhabitants.

In the Exhortation the people of God are commanded, First, to go out of ROME,
least they partake of her sins and plagues: Secondly, to render unto her
double.

Come out of her my people] This in Jeremy 51.45. was the voice of God unto the
Israelitish people: Go ye out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man
his soul from the fierce anger of Jehovah. Therefore here also it seems to be
Gods voice, because (as I said) he calls the people His.

The words do a little differ (yet the sense is the same) and are directed unto
all the Godly whomsoever, that either have bin, are, or shall be at Rome, not
only within her walls, but the limits of the Romish Jurisdiction. We see
therefore that as there was in Babylon of old, the very stock of abominations,
a people of God, but captive: so in the new Babylon, although it be the Seat of
Antichrist, yet there always has bin, is, and shall be, some Godly and Elect,
God has some of his in Babylon.
but Captives. For by this people Rupertus well understands the Elect only
according to the counsel of God.

Therefore as often as the Papists demand, If the Papacy were not the Church,
where then was it before Luthers time? Let us also ask them, if Babylon were
not, where then was the Church in the time of the Babylonish Captivity? The
church before Luther was in Babylon.
wherefore as the Old Church was in Babylon, but oppressed through captivity: So
the Christian was under the Papacy, captivated and oppressed.

Go out of her] The Israelites were commanded to go out of Babylon, first in
heart: by shunning her Idols and abominations: After Seventy years bodily also,
by returning into Judea under Cyrus. Both goings out of the new Babylon are
commanded unto us, viz. with our hearts to flee and detest her Idols and
abominations, and corporally also, as much as may be, to depart from Rome, and
shake off the yoke of Babylonish Tyranny by virtue of the commandment; Go
out of her.

By which first we may readily justify our separating from Popery: They indeed
accuse us to be Schismatics, Heretics, who are fallen off from the Church:
But we have not left the Church of Christ, but the Babylon of Antichrist, God
so commanding us.

Secondly the stupidity, or madness of some is here reproved, who by an
unhappy desire to see Rome, the Pope, Cardinals, and Romish Idolatry, run to
Italy to the great danger of their health, Life, Estates, Conscience,
Salvation. Such also who enjoying the profits, and delights of Babylon, had
rather remain in her and perish, then obey the commandment of God. Yea such
also who being ensnared by her baits, fall from Christ to Antichrist,
returning with the dog unto their former Vomit: Like to the Israelites who
loathing the Heavenly Manna in the Wilderness, desired to return to the
onions and fleshpots in Egypt: but remembered not their former miserable
bondage, Taskmasters, Scourges, Brick-ovens, etc. So these indeed greedily
embrace the fat Kitching of the Papacy, but think not upon the miserable
slavery of the Conscience and Tyranny of Antichrist. But as they lusting after
their fleshpots and onions, at last miserably perished in the wilderness, and
entered not into the promised Land: So let these look to it, how in regard of
their Apostasy they will satisfy their wounded consciences at the hour of
death, and what answer they will give Christ the Judge at the last day.

Least ye be partakers] Some weighty causes of the Commandment are added. The
first is, least they be defiled with her sins: for he which dwells near a
cripple learns to halt: and he that rubs a scabby person, may easily be
infected. Our admirers of Rome, plead indeed that they can without wounding of
the conscience be conversant there, and behold the Mass, Idols, and Pomp of
Babylon: But their pretense is false, because God forbids the same, and
experience proves the contrary: for they are forced (at the least) to uncover
the head, bow the knee to the Mass, Idols, Pope, and by outward shows to give
approbation to Babylons Idolatry, except they would endanger themselves: But
that this is to participate in their sins, cannot be denied by any sound
reason: for to shun sin is to avoid the occasion thereof. Let such therefore
call to mind that true saying: Esto procul Roma, qui cupis esse pius.

And of her Plagues] Another cause, Lib. 8. cap. 28.
least being overthrown by the fall of Babylon, we suffer justly for our
rashness and backwardnes. Mice (as Pliny writes) depart out of the house
when it is ready to fall: and the Spiders first fall down with their webs. A
little before the Siege of Jerusalem by Titus, there was heard a voice in the
air: Let us depart hence, whereby the Christians were induced to go over
Jordan to Pella. Having therefore these examples, why should not the Godly
depart from Rome, being near to destruction, that they be not partakers of her
plagues: for when a house falls, all that are under the roof must of necessity
perish.

5. For her sins have reached] A third reason is taken from the revenging
justice of God, which although it sometimes defer, yet at length it requires
the punishment of wicked deeds: (...), God has a revenging eye.

This reason is amplified two ways: First in respect of the sins which are
said to have reached unto Heaven: Generally all greek Copies have it (...) They
followed each other, one begetting another, so that like chains fastened
together with many rings, What is meant by sins to reach to Heaven.
they reached as it were up to Heaven. Andreas and Montanus have it (...) glued
together, or as it were with lime or mortar raised up to so great an heap, as
it reached even to Heaven. This signifies the abominable heaping up, and
filthiness of sins, which is said to reach up to Heaven, that is, by excessive
guilt to draw down vengeance from God: By a like metaphor God makes Kains
parricide detestable, Genesis 4:10. The voice of thy brothers blood cries to me
from the earth: And the filthiness of Sodom, Genesis 18:20.21. The cry of Sodom
and Gomorrah is great: the cry of their sin is very grievous which is come
unto me.

RIBERA on this place says well, That there is no sin, though never so
little, but it comes even to Heaven, that is, unto the knowledge of God,
although the scripture uses so to speak only of greatest sins, ripe for
punishment. Now hence is refuted the distinction of venial and mortal sins:
for to reach to heaven, is not only to come unto the knowledge of God, seeing
he takes knowledge even of the least that are committed, but so to take
knowledge of them, as being a sinful violation of the Law, and therefore
deserving the punishment prescribed in the Law. If therefore all (even the
least of sins) do reach, and come unto the knowledge of God, it follows that
all deserve the punishment of the Law, namely death eternal: and that none in
their kind are venial, that is, do deserve pardon, not punishment: yet indeed
by accident they become venial to the faithful through the mercy of God.

Secondly the grievousnesse of her sins are aggravated on Gods behalf: who is
said to have remembered them: by an (...) or humane affection often in
Scripture applied to God, by which is signified not any forgetfullnesse, but
Gods goodness and lenity: he is said to forget sinners, when he differs their
punishment, and affords time of repentance, and wholly forgiveth them that
repent: And he is said to remember, when the time of punishment is at hand:
Thus in Chap. 16. ver. 19. Babylon is said to come in remembrance before God,
to give unto her the cup of the fury of his wrath: which is repeated in this
place.

Hence three things are briefly to be noted, the consideration whereof ought to
recall us from sin, and stir us up to repentance.

First, that all our sins, even the least are taken notice of by God, and
deserve to be fearfully punished, especially if they be heaped up without
repentance. Let no man therefore think to escape unpunished, as if his evils
were forgotten, or hid from the eyes of the Lord: for all the actions of men,
as well evil as good, are open and bare unto him with whom we have to do.

Secondly, If we have a long time gone on in sin without punishment, it is to
be ascribed to the patience of God, by which he leads us to repentance: Let us
therefore take heed that we abuse not his long suffering and forbearance unto
security, Romans 2.3.

Lastly, that at last sins being heaped up, God does call them to remembrance,
and will certainly punish them the more grievously, by how much he has forborne
the same; Let us therefore not persevere in sin, in hope to go always
unpunished, but while God calls not our sins as yet to remembrance, let us
forsake them.

Now it may be demanded, what is that chain of sin reaching to Heaven?

Ribera here is silent, being conscious to himself, that they are the
abominations of Papal Rome, for either they are of Old Rome, or else of Popish
Rome. Of Jerusalem they cannot be, forasmuch as this Babylon by the Jesuits own
confession is Rome; not Jerusalem, though before he falsely and against his
knowledge so seined in Chap. 16.19. Neither can they be sins of Old Rome:
seeing the chain of them was broken long ago by the rooting out of Paganism:
Add to this that the guilt thereof was long since expiated by the worship of
Christian Religion, as also by the punishments inflicted through the Goths,
Vandalls, Hunni, before Antichrists rising at Rome. Besides God would not
impute to Christian Rome the wickedness of others: for the soul that sins,
it shall die. Ezec. 18.4.
It remains therefore that this chain or heap of sins, is of Papal Rome.

Furthermore these sins shall be either of Popish Rome, or else of Rome invaded
by Antichrist, who (as they seine) is to reign three years and an half. Of
this feined Antichrist they cannot be: both because Ribera gloseth, Chap.
16.11.14: that Rome before the coming of Antichrist should utterly be
destroyed by the Ten Kings: As also because in the space of three years the
sins of their feined Antichrist cannot in any probability increase to so great
an height, if we seriously consider what is here spoken of his whoredoms,
wares, merchandise, and great wealth: so that whithersoever the Jesuits turn
themselves, this heap of abominations reaching to heaven, is meant of none save
Popish Rome, now extant. Thus the Papists themselves, except they be altogether
brutish, may understand what is to be determined of the worship, superstitions,
Idols, and universal polity of the Romish Church.

6. REWARD (Gr. render) HER EVEN AS SHE REWARDED (rendered) YOV] The second
Part of the Exhortation, that the godly should repay double to Babylon: Which
God inculcates by diverse figurative words. 1. That they should render, for,
reward her, to wit, judgment. 2. Double unto her double according to her
works, for, afflict her twice as much as she has afflicted the Saints. 3.
Fill to her double the cup of wrath, the sense being one with the former. 4.
That by how much through pride and luxuriousness, she had lift up herself
above all Churches, Bishops, Kings, Princes: by so much they should not only
bring down, but also afflict her with torment and sorrow: In the latter of
which he alludes unto that in Daniel, Dan. 11.36 These. 2.4.
And he shall exalt himself: And to that of Paul: And exalts himself above
all that is called God. By this diversity of Phrases her sins are so much
aggravated, as no punishment, or torment seems to be great enough for them:
Withal the godly are stirred up in taking vengeance on her, to exercise all
manner of severity and punishment, not out of their own affection, but by the
commandment of God.

But here two doubts are to be cleared.

First how this stirring up of the godly to revengement stands with charity,
piety, and the commandment of Christ, Render not evil for evil: For the
godly are rather to be dehorted from cruelty, then to be edged on thereto.

The second, how it agrees with equity and justice to render double, that is,
to inflict a heavier punishment then the nature of the fault seems to require.

Unto which two a Third may be added, seeing he commands us to render to
Antichrist according to his works, which were wicked and abominable sins:
whither then we are commanded to reward wickedness with wickedness, theft with
theft, murder with murder, perjury with perjury? Thus God should command that
which is abominable: Now that which God commands is right and just: and so it
should be no sin to steal, commit adultery, forswear, kill, Christianus
Gottlieb.
etc. Which thing of late a Masqued Sycophant did hence labor to maintain.

But to the first it is answered, that the godly are not commanded to take
vengeance, but to rejoice because of the same, that is, they themselves are not
bid to burn Babylon, but to rejoice that God by the Kings had brought so heavy
a judgment on her: as if they should say, take vengeance on her with God, and
gladly subscribe unto his righteous judgment: by how much she has rejoiced in
doing injury unto you: by so much rejoice ye over her just punishments. In this
sense it is said that the Saints shall judge the world and Angels, 1. Cor.
6:2.3. and the Twelve Tribes of Israel, Mat. 19.28. to wit, as approoving of
the judgment to be executed by Christ the Judge.

This opinion many of ours follow: Ribera also holds the same: If we take it
thus, then it is not contradictory to Christ's commandment touching shunning of
revenge. Neither are the Saints bid to rejoice over evil, or the torments of
Babylon, but the righteous judgments of God.

But thou will say, they are not only commanded to rejoice over her judgment,
but to take vengeance on her themselves: for as by the words: Go out: they
themselves are commanded to go out: so by the words, Render unto her: they
themselves are commanded to do it: which seems to contradict the commandment
of Christ in the Gospel.

I Answer: This must be understood by a Synecdoche, part being put for the
whole. Therefore my Anonymus refers the command unto Preachers: RENDER UNTO
HER, that is, Preach ye that so much be done unto her. Thus there is no
difficulty: Neither is there any, though it be referred to the whole Company of
the Godly, which consists not only of private men, (unto whom indeed private
revenge is prohibited by Christ's Commandment:) But of godly Princes and Kings
also: Anonymus a true prophet:
for some of them, says the said ANONYMVS, speaking of the ten horns or
Kings, who now hold with Antichrist, shall at the preaching of the Gospel be
turned against him: the which thing we have before spoken of. So that here is
commanded no private revenge to private men, but public to godly Kings and
Princes, into whose hearts the Lord will put this, using them as instruments
for the overthrow of Babylon. Unto them therefore and their military forces,
this part of the Exhortation does principally belong: and the manner is
declared how God put that into their hearts, namely, because by an express
commandment he stirred them up to this revengement.

Unto the second the Answer is more easy: he commands not to render double
punishment for a single sin, or to afflict Babylon more grievously then she
deserved: the which should be contrary to justice: but commands them to
inflict the double of those afflictions, with which she had tormented the
Saints: and so much her sins did require: for he says expressly: Double unto
her double, according to her works: as if he should say, because her sins
deserve double punishment. For no punishment can be double in respect of sin in
the judgment of God, that is, more grievous then the fault: forasmuch as all
sin deserves eternal punishment: Or we may understand double not
Arethmetically, but Geometrically, that is, of a most fearful punishment
agreeable unto her deserts. And the word Double is thus taken in the Prophets:
Isa. 40.2. God promises to the people deliverance out of their Captivity, for,
says he, she has received of the Lords hand double for all her sins: that
is, she has grievously and sufficiently bin punished. And Zach 9.12. he
promises to the new Church double happiness, or double benefits in respect of
the old Church, Even to day do I declare that I will render double unto thee.
So here: Double unto her double: for, punish her sufficiently according to her
deserts: In which sense also Christ says Luke 6.38. Good measure, pressed down
and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom.
Wherefore he wills not that the punishment should exceed measure.

Unto the third: It is a malicious cavil from the aequivocation or double
meaning of the Phrase: for to render double unto Antichrist according to his
works, is not to recompense his wickedness with twice as much wickedness
(for the heavenly voice cannot command sin) but to inflict double punishment on
him. For the works of Antichrist, wherewith he afflicts the godly, in respect
indeed of himself are most vile sins: but in respect of the godly afflicted by
him, they are but sorrows and torments, which only they are commanded to
double to Antichrist: for thus God himself interprets it, ver. 7. how much
she has glorified herself, and lived deliciously: so much sorrow and TORMENT
give her.

7. Because she says in her heart] The Pomp and riot of Rome is so plainly
set forth, as the chief cause of its destruction, as that it cannot be denied,
but he speaks of Popish Rome: who in the foregoing words is commanded to be
brought low by sorrow and torment, by how much she had glorified ((...))
herself by pride and deliciousnes: Now what Nation or City, in pomp, glory,
deliciousnes, is equal to Rome. She alone these thousand years has gloried to
be Head of all Churches in Christendom. The Pope has made himself Universal
Bishop, from whom the whole world is to receive Rights, and coactive Laws:
Which arrogance Gregory I. expressly attributes to Antichrist, saying, I
confidently say, that whosoever calls himself, or desires to be called
UNIVERSAL PRIEST, in his exaltation is afore-runner of Antichrist, because by
pride he sets himself before all. The pride therefore and arrogance of Rome is
nothing save the Antichristian Monarchy of the Pope of Rome. He indeed boasts
to have received the same of CHRIST: But here the Holy Ghost makes him a liar.

For Babylon has glorified herselfe] That is, has usurped and taken the same
unto her by wicked devices, with all deceitfullnes of unrighteousnes: And
therefore the Lord who is an enemy to pride, will justly cast her down by how
much she has exalted herself: according to that saying, Luk 14.11 1. Pet:
5:6.
Whosoever exalts himself shall be abased. And that of Peter: God resists
the proud.

This pride of the Romish Sea does most manifestly appear by her shameful
boasting, and Thrasonicall lifting up: I sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and
shall see no sorrow] It is an allusion unto the boasting of Ancient Babylon,
with which the Lords upbraides her, Isa. 47.8. Thou say, says he, in thine
heart, I am, and none else besides me: I shall not sit a Widow, neither know
the loss of children. Thus Babylon gloried because of the Monarchy, as having
none equal or superior in strength and power, but like an Empress had all
Provinces and Kingdoms under her: neither could be endammaged or overthrown by
any. The vanity of this arrogance God does there reproove, and the event
confirmed it: for not long after she was overthrown by Cyrus and the Persians.
The pride of the Romish Sea is no less: Not only saying in her heart, but
publicly boasting so much. Now the words here are a proper Mimesis or
imitation of the words, by which the Popes of Rome, and their flatterers have
hitherto bin accustomed to glorify themselves.

I sit] A word proper to the Pope, for he boasts, that he sits, that is,
reigns, and Commands in the Chair of Peter, the Apostolical Seat: Namely,
to manifest that he is the Son of perdition, who, as the Apostle says, 2:
These. 2.4
SITS in the Temple of God: thus this Angel shows him sitting on the Beast,
that is; like Antichrist swaying the Roman Empire.

I sit a Queene] And this is proper to Rome: for she boasts, that she is
Lady, Staplet: Relact: Princip. Edit Anno. 1596.
or Queen of all Churches and Kingdoms. In sign whereof they paint the
Church of Rome, sitting as a Queen on a Throne, Crowned with a royal Diadem,
holding in her right hand the Book of Decretalls, with a Papal Cope on it, in
her left hand two Keys, crosewise: treading under her feet the Heretics,
Luther and Calvin with their Bibles. Is not this to sit a Queen?

My Anonymus thus: I sit as a Queene] to wit, ruling all, and exceeding all in
the riches and glory of the World: and therefore I am a Queen as well in
secular honor, as in spiritual dignity.

And am no widow] This also is Romes language, who boasts that as she is
Mother of Churches, so the Spouse of Christ, whom Christ will never forsake,
who can never err, be defiled, or slip, to wit, having the Holy Ghost as
friend to the Bridegrom, always to preserve her Chastity.

Anonymus as though he had been living in our times, Thus: I am no Widow,
(Although the greater part is turned to Christianity, and gone from me)
because as yet a great part of Christendom holds with me, and I have singular
consolation in the Subsidies of Simonists.

And shall see no sorrow] Either by loss of children or any other calamity.
This boasting also is proper to Rome, whose Parasites would persuade all men:
That Rome is the Church built on the rock, against which the gates of hell
shall not prevail, that she is Peter's Boat, which may be tossed, hurled,
shaken with the winds, but cannot be sunk by the waves. Hence Bellarmine gives
two notes of the Catholic Roman Church. The prosperity of the defenders, and
unhappiness of Romes adversaries. Anonymus: And shall see no sorrow] which my
adversaries threaten shall befall me in Hell. The sum is: That this
Cathedral Queen is the Romish Seat, the Lady of all Churches, Kingdoms,
Bishops and Kings. Now how truly she boasts, that she shall always be free
from widow-hood, loss of children and sorrow, let us hear further.

8. Therefore shall her Plagues come in one day] The pride and security of Rome
is here reprooved by a deadly sentence pronounced by God, after the manner of a
Judge, as it were on the Tribunal. And 1. he shows the equity thereof. 2.
Swiftness. 3. The grievousnesse. 4. The necessity.

The judgment shall be just; for it shall be inflicted (...) Therefore, that
is, because of the pride, riot, and sins even now reckoned up and confessed.

He will most swiftly fall upon her in her security, for (...) in one day
(which is taken out of Isai. 47.9.) yea (...) in one hour (as it is in ver.
10.) shall her plagues come: she shall not be besieged by the Kings a long
time, or many years, but be suddenly taken, because of her security (like as in
one night Cyrus suddenly took careless Babylon) being forsaken of her
friends, and driven to despair, having no power to defend her self.

The grievousnesse of the punishment is aggravated by enumeration of four
Plagues, Death, Mourning, Famine, Fire: every one of which shall answer to her
sins: she promised her self perpetual happiness: but Death shall cut her off:
she delighted in all kind of pleasures, therefore sorrow shall overthrow her.
She continually gave her self to gluttony, riot, etc. Therefore Famine shall
kill her: she burnt the godly Martyrs as Heretics: therefore with Fire shall
she be utterly consumed, by the Kings (sometimes her lovers) who shall fall
from her, and turn their swords (which they formerly employed for her against
the Godly) into her own bowels. See Chap. 17. ver. 17.

For strong is the Lord] He prooves that her lot and portion shall be
irrecoverable, from the omnipotency of the Judge: the which he opposes to the
Roman power, that we might not think the thing foretold impossible, the which
immagination has beguilded many even to this day. Stapleton has writ a Book
of the admirable greatness of the Roman Church: which he says shall so
remain for ever. Lipsius also had no other end then to flatter Rome in his
Book (which he published about the same time) touching the admirable greatness
of the Roman City. Johan. Paul. Windek.
About this time also a certain Parasite of the Romish Seat, spread abroad a
Prognostication about the future state of the Church, wherein he affirmed, that
the Evangelicall Doctrine, and Christian Churches, should shortly perish: The
Roman Seat remain stable and constant: so is this opinion settled in the
minds of Papists, that it is impossible the Roman Power should be overcome
through any Plots or devices, or the Romish Hierarchy linked and fastened
together with iron bonds as it were, should ever be overthrown by any: But:

2. Strong is the Lord which judges her] Gr. (...) Judging, in the present
tence: Andreas and Montanus (...), who has judged: because in his unchangeable
decree he has devoted her to condemnation: some think because this shall
happen in one day, and suddenly, that (like Sodom) she shall be burnt with fire
from Heaven: but because it was said before, that the Kings should burn her,
it seems rather to be meant of fire suddenly thrown into the City by the
Victorious army. Hitherto the Exhortation, the Lamentation follows.

9. And the Kings of the Earth shall bewail her] The wicked lament the
wretched condition of Rome: First Kings, then Merchants: Lastly Shipmasters.
Now what, and how great their mourning shall be, and the cause thereof common
to them all, is showed to be the loss of their former riot and gain: And
therefore there is the less difficulty and reason to insist upon it. This
generally is to be noted from the lamentation, that a temporal judgment on
Rome is here described, not the last judgment in the end of the World: for
wicked Kings, Merchants, and Shipmasters, shall see, and bewail the same.

In the first place the Kings of the Earth are brought in mourning, as being
more worthy and powerful: who were chief in committing filthiness with the
Romish Strumpet.

They shall bewail and lament for her] That is, because of her sudden and
miserable destruction: who these are, is noted by two Epithites: they are Kings
of the Earth, committing fornication, and living deliciously with her. By both
we may understand that they shall be enemies of the Gospel: Vassalls, Sons,
Spiritual Lovers of the Romish Seat. For the first Epithet (...) of the
Earth, is always in this Prophecy taken in an evil sense, for Kings,
Nations, and worldly men given to earthly worship. By the latter Epithet, the
cause also of their mourning is showed, they shall lament excessively because
they are deprived of their sweet converse with the whore, by means of her
unexcepted destruction. What that converse was, we have opened on verse 3. and
diverse times before.

It may be demanded who these Kings of the Earth shall be?

Ribera feineth, that they shall be the same Ten Kings who burned her with
fire, who these Kings of the Earth are.
repenting and bewailing the destruction of the most renowned City, like as
Titus is said to have mourned for the burning of Jerusalem and the Temple. But
it is a vain Fiction: for those Kings shall be converted unto the faith: These
shall be Kings of the Earth, Enemies of the Gospel. Joseph, lib: 7: de bell.
Iud. c. 24.
The cause also of the mourning is different: These shall lament because they
can no longer commit fornication and riot with her. But the former Kings after
they had once by the divine mercy of God repented of their sin, refused any
longer to commit fornication with her: for it is said, They shall hate the
Whore, and make her desolate. Therefore we affirm that these Kings of the
Earth shall be such of the Ten, as still remain with the Pope.

10. Standing a far off for feare] The gesture and voice of these Mourners is
noted: standing a far off and crying: Alas, alas. In which he prevents an
objection: Why shall they not rather take up Arms, and succor the distressed
City? Fear and trembling shall hinder them: signifying, that the Lord will so
astonish them, as that they shall not so much as think upon arms, or succor,
for the fear of the divine judgment will make them to seek shelter for
themselves.

For in one houre] Before, In one day, Her judgment shall be so sudden, that
before the report of her Siege be far spread, the City shall lie in ashes.
Thus high things are on a sudden brought to nothing: Trees of great height are
long in growing, but rooted up in one hour. They call it judgment, to wit, of
God, the just Judge, whose vengeance shall be so manifest, that the very
enemies shall be forced to confess that so great a City was thus suddenly
overthrown not by humane force, but by the judgment of God being angry.

11. And the Merchants of the Earth shall weepe] Merchants succeed the Kings in
mourning, the Merchants, I say, of the Earth, whom we have showed to be
spiritual Traders, Treasurers of the Popish Court, Paenitentiaries, and
Granters of Pardons, etc. The which plainly appears by the adjunct cause of
their sorrow, and kind of Merchandise.

Because no man buyeth her merchandise any more] But gold, silver and precious
stones, shall not be out of esteem, because of the destruction of one City.
For by the overthrow of one Mart-Towne, trading is not taken away from other
places: but the fall of one is rather the rising of another: as not long ago in
the low Countries, Antwerpe sometime a noble Mart-Towne decaying, was the
flourishing of Amsterdam. Therefore it is manifest, that here properly
merchandable wares are not noted, but the gainful hunting of the Romanists,
their Bulls of indulgence, and spiritual tributes, by which they have emptied
the treasuries of the Kingdoms, Provinces, and Cities of Christendom.

Buyeth them no more] For these things shall be discovered to be but bastardly
wares, mere impostures, which the Pope, falsely claiming to be Successor of
Peter and Paul, had obtruded on the world, to be believed as necessary to
salvation. ANONYMVS: Their wares] By which they merchandized with the goods of
the Church: No man shall buy them any more. Because all simonie and
covetousness shall then eternally cease from the Church: And by these
Merchants are meant hypocrites also, who sell great holiness for a temporal
reward.

12 The merchandise of gold and silver] This whole Catalogue of wates, is taken
by a certain allusion from Ezechiel 27. where the destruction of Tyrus, then a
most noble Mart-Towne, is likewise described, for like riot and pride. There
the neighboring Nations and Peoples are reckoned up, who all of them brought
both their own and foreign merchandise unto Tyrus: The Edomites, brought
Caedars and Fur trees from Lebanon: The Macedonians Ivorie: The Egyptians
fine linen and broidered work: They of the Isles of Elishah silk and purple:
They of Tarshis silver, iron, tin, lead: Tuball and Meshech, slaves, horses,
mules, etc.

So here the Holy Ghost would have us to understand the diversity of peoples,
who have brought those wares to Rome, that is, enriched the Roman Sea with
treasures and rich tributes: In vita sylvestri.
Unto this royal Court (says Platina) flows the increase of Tarshis in
Cilicia: from the possession of Tyrus comes Oil, Spices, Cassia: Baulme also
from the places where it grows, with Saffron, Salt, Peper, Cynnamon, etc. Here
the conjecture of most learned Brightman is very propable: The merchandise of
gold, silver, pearls, the Spaniards by their Navigations bring to Rome: Italy
furnishes her with Cinnamon, Frankincense, Ointment, Wine: Sicilia, Sardinia,
Corsica, with fine flower and wheat: Germany with beasts: England with sheep:
France with horses and chariots: Helvetia with men: And all of them together
with souls of men: all of them being forced to believe, that it is of
necessity to salvation to be subject to the Pope: all alike are affrighted
with fear of Purgatory, from whence they cannot be redeemed but by means of
gold and silver: To be short, through covetousness and feined speeches, the
Roman False-Prophet makes merchandise of the souls of all men.

Now to dispute of the quality of each sort of this merchandise, I think it
needless: some are known and in use amongst us: Others being outlandish are
anknowne to these parts, the descriptions whereof may be sought in Pliny,
Dioscorides, and other Writers of natural things.

Fine linnen] called Byssus, a most excellent sort of linen.

Of Purple and Scarlet, See Chap. 17. ver. 4.

Silke] Or silken cloth spun of the finest silken thread, being of a great
price.

Fine flowre] being made of the flower of wheat.

And all thyine wood] Or odoriferous wood, as the Cypress, Juniper, Caedar,
the word comes from the Greek (...) THUOO, to send forth a smell. And of
horses] viz. the merchandise of horses.

And slaves Greek ((...)) Bodies] from Ezechiel 27.13. Meshech and Tuball
traded with the souls (or persons as most translate it) of men, and vessels of
brass, etc. the which all do expound of selling slaves: But here the Holy
Ghost does distinctly put (...) the bodies and souls of men. The Old Version:
Of slaves and the souls of men. Therefore this merchandise of souls is
different from that of slaves, neither can we otherwise understand it, then of
that spiritual trade which is exercised about the redemption of souls out of
Purgatory: For hence comes up their Courts, Temples, Altars, Masses,
Monasteries, Cloisters, Legacies, Pilgrimages, Annuities, Waxe-candles, and all
other gainful works in Popery: All I say was done to redeem souls.

Therefore RIBERA on this place does vainly feine two sorts of slaves, of whom
some were sold to serve: Others to be slain, that is, to fight with beasts in
the Circle. The which although it be true: yet no reason can be given, why
these latter should be called souls. The soul, says he, signifies the life:
with the Hebrews indeed, but not so with the Greeks: and it is against him: For
thus souls should signify slaves appointed not to death, but life.

14. And the fruits that thy soul lusted after] Gr. The harvest of thy lust is
gone from thee: The Old Version, Apples of thy desire: because the Autumn is
Appletime: It is an Hebraisme, for, the desirable fruits of thy palate shall
fail thee: namely, their delicious Banquets, delicate Iunckets, with which
though the Roman Clergy glut themselves twice or thrice in a day, yet they
fast.

And all dainty and goodly things] He understands the variety of dainty dishes,
with which the riotous Fathers use to fill their tables: now all this shall
cease. The fire will put an end wholly to these delights.

The change of the construction is here observeable: For whereas before the
Heavenly voice declared the mourning of Merchants, and their several wares:
here he suddenly directs an Apostrophe to Rome it self: and so it is again in
the third voice, ver. 22.23. Therefore BEZA conjectures that this verse is here
inserted from the Apostrophe there. Which opinion is the more probable, because
it is certain that this Book of old was greatly neglected, and the authority
questioned by the special subtlety of Satan, least these mysteries should in
time be manifested: yet he leaves the verse in his place, because of the
consent of Copies. Now we know that such an Enallage or change of persons, is
not unusual to the Prophets, and to John in this Prophecy, as we had it in
the beginning of Chap. 1. verse 7.8.

Are departed from thee] Montanus (...) are perished from thee: Andreas, (...),
the sense being all one.

15. The Merchante of these things] He returns to the mourning of the
Merchants, and describes the cause thereof, with the manner.

Which were enriched] The cause of their mourning shall be, in regard of the
loss of their gainful wares, by which they gathered abundance of wealth,
insomuch as one Canonship was worth by the year ten or twenty thousand
florines: One Bishopric or Cardinalship, an hundred, yea three hundred
thousand. At so high a rate has the Pope sold these Places. Now by the
destruction of Rome, all the hope of gathering wealth this way shall be cut
off: yea the riches which they have gathered shall expose them to danger,
because the Annuities, Legacies, Tithes, etc. shall be ceazed on. This
therefore is no small cause of sorrow.

They shall stand a far off] Namely, for fear least they be hurt by the flames
thereof: And indeed how should her Merchants any way help her, seeing her
Kings stand a far off, trembling for fear.

16. Alas, alas, that great City] The Merchants shall imitate the howling of
the Kings: but speak of their merchandise of fine linen, purple, scarlet,
gold, pearls, and precious stones, the which they be wail, not only as being
now consumed in this fire, but also because they should never traffic any
more with such like wares.

17. And every Shipmaster] After the Kings and Merchants of the earth, Seamen
also shall mourn: who are divided into four ranks: first Masters, or
Governors of Ships, signifying Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops of the
greater Nations. 2. Pilotes, or Masters mates, being in company and fellowship
with the former: as the familiars and domestickes of Cardinals have partners
in profit and loss. 3. Sailers, Bishops of inferior note, and Abbates,
Gardians, Priors,, Rowers in Peter's boat. 4. As many as trade or gain by Sea:
the whole Clergy, as Canonists, Regulars, Monks, Jesuits, Capuzines, who
help forward, and live upon the profits of the Romish Court.

Shall stand afar off Not daring to approach for fear, like the Kings and
Merchants: Gr. (...) Stood (...) and Cried: by a prophetical certainty he
rehearses the thing as if it were done: Now they shall testify their fear
and astonishment: First in words by crying. What City is like to this City,
from Ezech. 27.32. Till now they boasted that the gates of hell should not
prevail against Rome. But they shall grievously be astonished by her
unexpected destruction. Experience therefore shall be the Mistress of these
fools: Secondly they testify their fear by gesture, of which it follows.

19. And they cast dust on their heads] Like unto sad Mourners, as Joshua 7.
the Israelites mourning for the sacrilege of Achan threw dust upon their
heads, so did the messenger that brought tidings of the Israelites overthrow,
1. Sam. 4. And Jobs friends Chap. 1. But the mourning of these shall be more
grievous then the other, because the destruction of Babylon will more
grievously touch their Kitchings. Therefore lamenting they shall sing the same
Funerall-Song with the Kings and Merchants, bewailing not the sins and
abominations of Rome, neither their own offenses against God, but the loss of
their riches, all occasion of increasing their treasures being taken away, and
because they shall no longer furnish the Clergy with their merchandise, but be
feign to feed on brown bread, (as the saying is.) This is a Judas-like
repentance: for they mourn not because they have sinned, but because they may
sin no longer. The Songs of the righteous sound otherwise: Just art thou O
Lord, and righteous are thy judgments.

Is made desolate] This desolation is again and again inculcated, that Rome may
not question, but that it shall certainly come to pass, though she now
securely mockes at the same. In one hour] Suddenly, and in a moment, so said
the Kings, ver. 10. and in one day, ver. 8.

20. Rejoice over her thou Heaven] We have heard the wickeds lamentation on
earth: Now follows the Saints rejoicing in Heaven: unto which the second
heavenly voice exhorts them: It is an Apostrophe unto the Heaven, the holy
Apostles and Prophets, to Rejoice over her, that is, over her destruction. Some
by Heaven understand the Church: By the Apostles and Prophets, the Publishers
of the Gospel that then shall be. But it appears to be a Prophetical
Prosopopoeia: as Isa. 1: 2. Hear O Heavens: to testify the greatness of
their joy. Before Heaven mourned because of Babylons sins heaped up to Heaven,
ver. 5. Now it is bid to rejoice, because so great filthiness is taken away.
Or it is a Synecdoche: Rejoice O Heaven, for, Ye Angels, and other heavenly
inhabitants. Thus I rather take it, because of that which follows, Chap. 19.
ver. 1.

By the name of Apostles and Prophets are meant the souls of the holy Martyrs
slain by the Roman Tyrants, and Antichrist for professing the doctrine of the
Apostles and Prophets: which we may gather from ver. 24. In her is found the
blood of the Prophets: and yet we read not that any of the old Prophets were
slain at Rome: which I mention because of Riberas starting-hole on Chap. 14.
verse 8. where he denies that Papal Rome is Babylon, because not Popish but
Heathenish Rome killed the Apostles Peter and Paul, but in vain says he,
should the Apostles and Prophets be commanded to rejoice over the vengeance of
Popish Rome, by whom they were not killed: but it is false: for Heaven and the
Prophets also are bid to rejoice over her, although neither Heaven nor the
Prophets were slain by her.

The souls therefore of the ancient and latter Martyrs to whom (requiring God
to avenge them before the time, were given White robes, that they might in the
mean while rest content with their felicity) are now at length bid to rejoice,
because the time of vengeance is at hand. yea, because God had now avenged
their blood, and abundantly answered their desire.

This cause of joy is added: For God has avenged you on her] In the Greek the
Hebraisme is very Emphaticall: Because God has judged your judgment on her:
For both the cause of their Martyrdom is approved: that it was a judgment,
that is, righteous and pleasing to God: as also the punishment of Babylon is
wholly attributed to God the Judge, and the avengement of the innocent blood of
the Saints is made the most righteous cause thereof.

But he seems to command rejoicing over evil; not in the least: But bids them
to rejoice, because the riot and tyranny of Babylon is repressed, and the
Church freed from the same: as also because Gods glory is vindicated from the
blasphemies of the ungodly. Now the deliverance of the Church, the suppressing
of the wicked, the vindicating of Gods glory, and Declaration of Gods
righteousness in punishing the ungodly, are not evil things, but excellent
and the most just judgments of the Lord. So that the Heavenly Inhabitants are
bid to rejoice not over evil but good things. And this is the meaning, Psalm.
58.10.
whenever in Scripture the Saints are commanded to rejoice over the enemies:
The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance: he shall wash his feet
in the blood of the wicked: where straightway a reason is added: A man shall
say, Verily, there is a reward for the righteous: Doubtless there is a God
that judges in the Earth.

Whence it appears, that this rejoicing of the Godly is opposed to two
weighty Tentations: I. Least it might be thought Godliness should want its
fruit. II. Least the Godly might seem to be quite forsaken of God under the
Cross.

If therefore thou object. To rejoice over another harm is prohibited
otherwhere: but here the Saints are bid to rejoice over other men's harms:
Therefore they are commanded to do that which is forbidden in other places:
The Assumption is false: Or there are four terms: for to rejoice over evils,
as they are evils and torments, not as they are a righteous avengement, and an
illustration of Gods glory, is forbidden in Scripture.

The Third Part of the Chapter. The Voice of the third Angel, figuring the
destruction of Babylon, under the Similitude of a Millstone cast into the SEA.
21 And a mighty Angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into
the Sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown
down, and be found no more at all. 22 And the voice of harpers and musicians,
and of Pipers, and Trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee, and no
Craftsman of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in thee: and the
sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee. 23 And the light of a
candle shall shine no more at all in thee: and the voice of the Bridegroom and
of the Bride shall be heard no more at all in thee: for thy Merchants were the
great men of the Earth, for by thy sorceries were all Nations deceived. 24 And
in her was found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were
slain upon the Earth.
THE COMMENTARY.
AND a mighty Angell] The second voice leaves speaking: And another Angel
comes forth on the Scene: Greek (...) One Angel indefinitely, that is, One of
the company of the ANGELS, who was to seal up the whole action of Babylons
judgment by an external Symbol.

(...) Strong] He is said to be mighty because of the Symbol, which did
require more then humane strength. For he takes up (as if it were but a straw)
a stone, like a great Millstone (which ten strong men can hardly move) and
casts it with force into the Sea. Therefore in Scripture the Angels are
worthily commended for their strength, to comfort the Godly, and terrify the
wicked.

But what is meant by this throwing? It would have seemed frivolous, had not
the signification thereof bin added, Tract. 81. in Johan.
for signs without the word are dead Ceremonies: Therefore our Sacramental
signs which we call Sacraments, have the word annexed touching the things
signified, according to that of AUSTIN, Let the word be joined to the Element,
and it becomes a Sacrament. The word therefore is the soul of the Sacrament,
The soul of signs is the word.
because it expounds what the sign in every Sacrament does signify. Whence
it is certain, that signs testify the same thing to the eye, that words sound
to the ear, and that Sacraments signify the same benefits of Christ, which
are taught in the Word or Gospel, hence also Austin often calls them Visible
words: De catal. Chap. 3. Cantr. faust. Cap. 16. Tract. 18. in Johan.
because, as I said, they represent the same thing to the eye, which the word
sounds to the ear: But to the matter.

Thus with violence shall the great City Babylon be cast down, and shall be
found no more at all.] Hence it appears, that signs represent the same thing,
that the word does, but much more effectually, because they work upon two
Senses together, and stir up to faith, viz. The eyes by the Symbol: The ears
by the word. For the same judgment which hitherto we have received or heard by
the voice of the Angels, and the Iamentation of the wicked: we now also as it
were behold with our eyes under the Type of a Millstone thrown into the Sea. So
that the thing which before was certain to the ear, is now made far more
certain, the Sense of the Eyes confirming the same. The Particle (...) so
denotes the force and analogy of the Type. The Analogy between a millstone,
and Babylon.
For as a great Millstone cannot be easily moved: so the great City Babylon, is
hardly to be conquered. As a Millstone is thrown down, so Babylon shall be cut
off. As a stone is thrown with force: So Rome shall suddenly, and with force
be overwhelmed. As a stone is swallowed up by the Sea: So fire (a contrary
Element) shall devour Babylon. As a Millstone thrown into the Sea, remains
covered in the bottom thereof, and can no more be drawn out: So Rome being
once burnt with fire, shall not be found or repaired any more, but remain in
ashes. This is the analogy of the type and antitype.

We are to know, Ier. 51.63.
that the same Type was of old used about the destruction of Ancient Babylon:
for Jeremy is commanded to bind the Book of his Prophecy, not indeed to a
Millstone, but another stone, and cast it in the midst of Euphrates: saying, So
shall Babylon sincke, and shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon
her, and they shall be weary. Thus Old and New Babylon go borh one way in Gods
judgment.

The Great City BABYLON] This is so often reiterated in this Prophecy, as it
confounds with shame the boasting of Papists touching the greatness of the
Romish City and Church.

22. And the Voice of Harpers] The Angel aggravates the most sad desolation,
which shall there appear, where now lofty Rome does pride it, by prophetical
phrases, threatening the privation of such good things, which are requisite for
the pleasure and necessity of a flourishing Commonwealth.

To the pleasure of a City belong musical Instruments, Harpes, Fluites,
Trumpets, and Artists that have skill to use them. By Harpes, men are
occasioned to rejoice at Feasts: At the sound of the Fluite, they use to dance:
By Trumpets, the people are called to holy and civil meetings, and Soldiers
stirred up to war, whither for exercise, or in earnest. Nothing, says he, of
these things shall be heard in thee any more. Therefore there shall be
nothing but mere desolation and sadness.

To the necessity of a City are required all kind of Artists, Arist. in Eth:
and Handicrafts men: For a City consists not of a Physician alone, but of a
Physician and the husbandman. But no Craftsm^^ shall be found in thee any more:
so that in stead of the delicious^^sse and abundance of these precious wares,
shall be misery and desolation:

To the upholding of man's life Corn also and Millers are requisite: by whom
the seed is grinded, and the meal prepared for bread and necessary food. The
voice says he of a Millstone shall be heard no more in thee] In stead of
abundance of fine flower and delicacies, shall be poverty and want.

Also burning lights are requisite for the night season, without which we
should beforced to pass the half of our Life in darkness. These also, says
he, shall shine no more in thee] Therefore there shall be datknesse and
desolation.

Lastly to the preservation of Cities, there must of necessity be procreation
of children in lawful Matrimony, for without Weddings and Marriage a City
must needs perish, (either by death of her Citizens) or be full of Bastards.
Also there shall be no more Weddings in thee] For the voice of the Bride and
of the Bridegroom shall be no more heard in thee. Thus thy delosation shall
be consummated.

Behold in what a horrible manner the destruction of Rome is aggravared. Now
these things because of the similitude are here applied out of the Ancient
Prophets: See Isa. 24.8. and Jerem. 7.34. and Ezech. 26.13. In the former, the
desolation of Judea, in the latter, that of Tyrus is set forth under the like
Figures.

Because thy Merchants are the great men of the Earth] He concludes with
repeating the causes of this horrible judgment: that the Romanists might not
complain of overmuch rigor. In the Analysis we showed the causes to be three.
1. Riot. 2. Witchcraft. 3. Slaughter of the Saints. Their riot is noted in one
most evident sign only, because her Merchants are (...) The great men of the
Earth, as if he should say, not minding their condition, and original, they
carry themselves as Princes, usurping authority over all men. Who now will say,
that these are ordinary Traders? what if one or two Merchants come to be
Princes, what is that to all these? As therefore their wares were allegorical:
So these are Allegoricall-Merchants, Spirituall-Prelates,
Ecclesiasticall-Princes, Cardinals, Palriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, etc. as
before we showed. At first the seven Deacons of Rome were Cardinals, severallie
placed through the City to preach, and administer holy things: But now there
are sixty eight purpled Fathers, being as they say, the chief Senate of the
whole world, who according to their instruction may not stand up though a
Prince or a King salute them, or give them the way, and chief seat at
Banquets. What therefore can be more arrogant then the pride of these Merchants?

For by thy sorceries] This cause has bin often declared: He calls the
Idolatry, false doctrines, ungodlie and superstitious traditions (by which
Antichrist has seduced the Christian world) Witchcraft, both in regard of like
efficacy: because as with Charming-cups they infatuate worldly men, and draw
the souse to destruction: because also Magic is always joined with
Idolatry, as we find in special among the Idolatrous Papists.

24. And in her was found the blood of the Prophets] The cruelty of both old
and new Rome against the Godly is here noted: but chiefly of the new, who
under pretense of the Catholic Religion, has for these thousand years shed
as much Christian blood, if not more, then the old Pyrants in the first three
hundred years.

Is found in thee] Because the greater part of Martyrs are slain at Rome.

And of all that were slain upon the Earth] Because also the Martyrs that
suffered in other Kingdoms and Provinces, were slain by the authority of the
Romish Strumpet: And therefore all that blood shall be justly avenged on her:
The same was before said Chap. 16. ver. 6. For they have shed the blood of
Saints, and thou have given them blood to drink. Of which see more on the
place.

The Coherence, Argument, Parts, and Analysis of CHAPTER. XIX.
THe third and last part of the Sixth Vision touching the Judgment of the great
Whore and the Beast, that is, of Rome and Antichrist, remains to be treated
of. The destruction and burning of the City (to be executed by the Ten Kings,
once the Vassals of the Roman Antichrist, but afterward converted to Christ)
the Angel had revealed to John in Cap. XVII. and described the same by a
Prophetical Hypotyposis in Chapter XVIII.

But seeing the whole Papacy shall not utterly perish at the sacking and
burning of Rome (Antichrists Seat in Italy) but that the Pope shall find
entertainment, either in Spain or otherwhere, and shall persevere to oppose
Christ, and persecute the Gospel unto the end: therefore in this XIX. Chapter
is revealed the destruction also of the Pope himself, and of the whole Papacy.
The Chapter is full of manifold doctrines, and consists of a most artificious
structure. Therefore the Reader may conceive the Argument, Parts, and I ogicall
resolution to be thus.

The company of Saints rejoice over the judgment of Babylon, their deliverance
from his Tyranny, and the Wedding of the Lamb at hand. By and by is described
a type of Christ's coming to judgment, and casting of the Beast and all his
followers into the Lake of fire.

The parts therefore seem to be two. The Saints rejoicing, and Antichrists
judgment: John's error about worshipping the Angel being brought in by a
Parenthesis. But we may more fitly cast the same into three Heads or Branches.

1. WHat John heard, in the first nine Verses: Aften these things I heard. II.
What he did ver. 10. And I fell down, etc. III. What at length he saw, from
verse 11. And I saw, unto the end.

Touching the first: He heard a twofold voice of gladne^ and praysings: The
first celebrate the righteous judgments of God, in the five first Verses. The
other triumph, because of the wedding of the Lamb: in the four following
Verses.

In the former rejoicing is noted.

1. Who they were: A twofold Chore or Company: first, a great multitude leading
or beginning the Triumph-Song in three Verses. The second, viz. the twenty
four Elders, and four Beasts Isinging after them, verse 4.

^^1 Where they were: In Heaven, verse 1. Both Companies therefore denote the
Church Triumphant.

The Hyinne of the first Chore consists of three Parts. 1. A Proposition, God
is to be praised: Halelujah, saivation, etc. ver. 1.2. The Confirmation, from
the justness: First in the Thesis: because Gods judgments are true and
righteous: Secondly in a double Hypothesis or application: because in
righteousness he has judged the whore: and avenged their blood, ver. 2.3. The
conclusion iterating the praises of God, ver. 3.

Touching the other Company is noted. 1. Their gesture, And they fell down. 2.
Their Religion: and worshipped. 3. Their assent, or concluding the Song with
AMEN, ver. 4. etc.

In the Latter rejoicing is noted: First the provoking cause, and of this: 1.
What it was: A voice proceeding out of the Throne: 2. What it commanded, viz.
to praise the Lord, 3. Who are commanded, All the servants of God in general
verse 5.

Secondly, the effect of the cause is annexed: viz. The rejoicing it self, in
which is noted:

1. Who the Rejoycers were: A great multitude: whose voice is aggravated by the
similitude of the noise of waters, and thunders, ver. 6. This multitude are the
Servants and Fea^ers of God, that is, the Universal Church of Saints in Heaven
and Earth.

2. A Gratulatorie Hyinne, consisting of two Parts. In the first they bless
God with praises of Hallelujah: adding a reason: For the Lord God omnipotent
reigns: that is, has vindicated his Kingdom from the blasphemies of
Antichrist, verse 6.

Secondly, they stir up themselves to joyfullnesse and to praise the Lord:
Let us rejoice: with a reason from the joyful circumstance of time: for the
marriage of the Lamb is come.

The which they commend. 1. from the presence of the Bride or wife: she has
made herself ready, etc. ver. 7. 2. From her ornament and pure attire, ver. 8.
And to her was granted. 3. From the saving effect, or blessedness of the
wedding guests, ver. 9. Blessed are they that are called, etc. The certainty
whereof is ratined 1. by the Angels command to write it, Write, Blessed are,
etc. 2. By asserting the truth of the sayings of God, Ibid.

In the second what both John and the Angel did.

John does two things, 1. he falls down. 2. with intention to worship the
Angel, verse 10.

The Angel forbids it: See thou do it not: with a twofold reason, 1. From the
person, to whom worship is not dew, I am thy fellow servant. 2. From Gods
peculiar property: Worship God, Ibid.

In the third: What he saw: 1. CHRIST coming with his Elect to Judgment. 2.
The casting of Antichrist and his followers into hell, under the Type of two
warlike Armies: Of which Type there are two parts. 1. A description of each
Army, from ver. 11. unto 20. 2. The event of the Battle, ver. 20. 21.

Touching the former army is noted, 1. The original place whence it came: from
heaven being opened, ver. 11. 2. Christ the Captain of these Forces: and the
Forces themselves.

The description of the Captain is magnificall and divine. I. By the placing
of his body: Sitting on a white horse. II. His nature or disposition: True and
faithful. III. Office: He judges and makes war in righteousness, ver. 11.
IIII. His fiery eyes seeing all things His eyes weke as a flame of fire, v. 11.
V. The Royal Ornaments of his head: Many Crowns, ver. 12. VI. The Majesty of
his Name, ver. 12. 13. 16. VII. His bloody Vesture, verse 13. VIII His armor:
A two-edged sword proceeds out of his mouth, ver. 14. IX A reason both of his
Vesture and Armor: by changing the order. The latter; because he rules the
Nations with an iron red: the former: because he treads the Wine Press of
the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God, Of which Chapter 14.20.


His Armies are noted to be two. First. His Attendants of honor, who follow
the Captain on white horses, not to fight, but for office sake: Therefore they
are not armed, but clothed in fine linen. verse 14. Secondly, His ministering
servants; whom God will send against the adversaries. Of these is noted. 1. By
whom they are to be enrolled and called, ver. 17. I saw an Angel. 2. Who they
are, All the fowls flying in the midst of Heaven, Ibid. 3. Their assembling:
Come and gather your selves together, etc. Ibid. 4. To what: first
figuratively: Unto the Supper of the great God, ver. 17. secondly properly:
That ye may eat the flesh of Kings, as if he should say, not to beat down the
adversaries (for that Christ will do by the word of his omnipotency) but to
eat up the slain: Of whom he reckons up diverse orders, verse 18. Hitherto of
the former Army.



Of the hostile army is noted 1. the Captain, the Beast-Antichrist. 2. His
auxiliarie Vassalls, the Kings of the Earth, with their forces. 3. Their
Counsel to suppress Christ and his Army, ver. 19. Lastly the Event of the
Battle, the adversaries are overthrown, which is aggravated by certain
degrees. 1. By apprehending or taking of the Beast, the False-prophet, and them
that were sealed with his Character, and all his worshippers. 2. The casting of
them all into the lake of fire, that is, into hell, ver. 20, 3. Slaying the
rest, viz. all that fought for Antichrist. The Author of this slaughter is
Christ, mounted on a white horse: The Instrument, his sword. The Ministers, the
Fowls, filled with the flesh of the Adversaries, Verse 21.



The first part of the Chapter. The Gratulation of the heavenly Inhabitants for
the righteous Judgments of GOD, and the marriage of the LAMB drawing near.
1. And after these things, I heard a great voice of much people in heaven,
saying, Alleluia, salvation, and glory, and honor and power, unto the Lord our
God.

2. For true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the great
whore; which did corrupt the Earth with her fornication, and has avenged the
blood of his servants at her hand.

3. And again they said, Alleluia: and her smoke rose up for ever and ever.

4. And the four and twenty Elders, and the four Beasts fell down, and
worshipped God, that sat on the throne, saying, Amen, Alleluia.

5. And a voice came out of the throne, saying, praise our God, all ye his
servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great.

6. And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of
many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia: for the
Lord our God omnipotent reigns.

7. Let us be glad and rejoice, and gi^^ bo^^ur to him* for the marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready.

8. And to her was granted, that she should be arrayed in sine linen, clean
and white, for the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints.

9. And he says unto me, Write, Blessed are they that are called unto the
Marriage Supper of the Lamb. And he says unto me, These are the true
sayings of God.

THE COMMENTARY.
1. ANd after these things I heard a great voyce] Now comes forth the joyful
Company, which celebrate the righteous Judgments of God: and as other things,
so in special such plagues as before were mentioned to be inflicted on the
Romish Babylon. In the words is no difficulty: therefore we pass them over,
and come to the Coherence. The use of this rejoicing in the thesis and
hypothesis.


They who say in the Hypothesis, that the ruin of Babylon shall affoard unto
the Saints a most delightful argument of rejoicing and praising God: and in
the Thesis, that the Saints, however they be many times offended in regard of
the prosperity of the wicked in this life, and complain as if God dealt hardly
with them; yet at length they shall perfectly know, and openly confess, that
the Judgments of God are true and righteous in the whole government of the
world: They draw indeed a true and profitable doctrine from this place, which
is worthy of observation. Notwithstanding in my opinion they do not
sufficiently touch the occasion and cause of the renewing of the Vision by this
Chore or Company.

The occasion indeed Gagnaeus and Brightman do rightly observe in their notes,
The occasion of the rejoicing
from ver. 20. Chap. 18. where the Angel exhorted the Saints to rejoice over
the judgment of Babylon: Rejoice over her thou Heaven, and ye holy Apostles,
etc. whereupon Heaven and all the Saints do now rejoice, and joyfully applaud
the Judgment of God.

But what is the reason that not here only, but formerly also the Company of
Rejoycers are so often brought in? For the Company of the four and twenty
Elders and four Beasts singing to God sitting on the Throne, and to the Lamb,
made entrance to the second Vision touching the Book sealed with seven Seals,
Chap. 4. and 5. The said Company of Elders closed up the third Vision with
praising God and his Kingdom, Chap. 11. In the fourth Vision after the
Antichristian persecution the Company of 144000. sealed ones sang a new song
before the Throne, Chap. 14. Again the Company of Harpers began the fifth
Vision with the Song of Moses and of the Lamb, Chap. 15. Now here the Company
of Rejoycers conclude the sixth Vision with rejoicing and triumphing because of
the judgments of God, and the Marriage of the Lamb.

The cause, I say, of this often iteration of thanksgiving and praysings, The
cause of the often iteration of Gods praises.
to me such seem not to touch, who observe not that the Revelation is a
Prophetical and dramaticall representation distinguished into certain
visions, and subdivided into certain visionall Acts, which ever and anon (as
we have often observed) are renewed with Chores of singers both for a
dramaticall decency, as also for a sacred pleasantness and delectation.

In the first Act of this vision, John saw the beast and the woman sitting on
her, the Angel showing the mystery thereof, and her destraction, Chap. 17.

In the second Act, Three Angels proclaimed the burning of Rome, commanding the
saints to go out of her, and heaven to rejoice. There was heard also mourning
and wailing by kings, merchants, shipmasters and sailors for Romes desolation
by fire.

Now in the Third Act appears on the scene, the company of Saints rejoicing in
heaven, who first being divided sing artificially, by course one after the
other, Haleluiah, The third Act of the second vision.
Praising the judgment of God: Afterward all together with one consent
celebrate the marriage of the Lamb.

The fourth Act will at length represent unto us the last battle of the beast,
and kings of the earth gathered in Harmageddon, against Christ (the which in
Chap. 16. v. 26. was broken off) and the event of that battle. These things for
the help of the reader I have briefly repeated, by which the matter of this
whole vision may be the more clearly understood. Now let us hear the Companies
singing.

After these things] that is after the burning of Babylon, and the mourning of
the merchants.

Of much people] instead whereof The old version corruptly has it of many
trumpets, both here, and v. 6. This company is no other, save that innumerable
multitude, Chap. 7.9.
which were clothed in robes with Palms in their hands, standing before the
throne, and singing, salvation to our God. viz. The company of saints
triumphing with Christ in heaven. Therefore he heard a voice in heaven. Neither
do I here seek an allegory, as some, understanding by heaven the Church. For
John heard the multitude visionally, singing not on earth, but in heaven:

Haleluiah] The sum of the Hymn, we showed in the analysis. (...) Haleluiah
with the Hebrews is, Praise ye the Lord, with an aspiration from (...) which
in Piel and hithpael is, to praise (in Kal and Poel tobe mad) and (...) one of
the ten proper names of God taken off from (...) Jehovah. With this David
begins many of his psalms. And therefore it is a word by which not only the
Jews, but Greeks and Latins also, yea the Germans and many other nations
stir up themselves to praise and celebrate God: so that the mystery which some
say lies hid under this word, in my understanding is of little Validity.

Ierom to Marcella asking why John writing in Greek uses Hebrew words, Epist.
137.
answers, because the first Church was gathered of Jews, the Apostles would
not for fear of offending the believers innovate any thing, but so deliver
things as they had received them from the Cradle: afterward the word being to
be spread among all nations, they could not alter what once they had taken up.

But this does not touch the cause why these heavenly inhabitants praise God in
the Hebrew tongue. Perhaps it may be to signify the conjunction of the new
Church with the old: for which cause also certain other Hebrew terms as
Hosanna, Amen, Abba, etc. Seem to have been commonly used among Christians.

Brightmans reason (If true) were plausible, viz. that hereby after the
overthrow of Rome, the Church of the Gentiles shall provoke the Jews unto the
faith. The said Author before on Chap. 16. touching the sixth vial powered out on
Euphrates, affirms, that by the Kings of the East who should pass Euphrates,
being dried up, are meant the Jews who then in great number shall be converted
to Christ, according to the prophecy of the Apostle Rom, 11. which conjecture
is indeed pious, but of little certainty, as we there showed.

Salvation and honour] All Greek copies have it (...) to the Lord our God: The
kings copy (...) of our God. Understand (...) or (...) Is or be: the sense
almost being the same. But in stead of the four atributes, salvation and glory
and honor and power to the Lord our God, the old version has only three,
Praise and Glory and Power to our God, Omitting (...) Honor, and (...) to the
Lord. Observe O Papists the manifest defects of your version.

These same attributes the heavenly inhabitants sang to God, Chap. 5. v. 13.
and 7. v. 12. Where we expounded every of them. Here only we observe two
things.

First, that this is no wish by which the glorified Saints and Angels pray that
God might obtain these good things, as if he had them not: for he is (...) The
God of sufficiency, possessing all salvation, glory, honor, and power in
himself, and abundantly pouring the same forth on his creatures: But it is a
confession of praise, in which the saints of heaven celebrate and profess that
God has all these good things, and that all creatures ought to ascribe the
same to God.

The second, that this rejoicing over Babylons destruction, is not (...) a
rejoicing in evil. For they rejoice not over the afliction and torments of the
whore, which were contrary to charity: but that the glory of God is vindicated
from her blasphemies, the which is very good.

We therefore, after the example of this multitude, ought to ascribe our
salvation, and all honor, glory and power to the Lord our God, that is, with
all our hearts and souls to bless the Lord for his incomprehensible mercies
unto us in Christ Jesus.

2. Because true and righteous are his judgments,] This cause of the saints
rejoicing shows more clearly what I erewhile said, that they insult not over
the torments of the wicked out of an evil affection, but are wholly bent in
celebrating the righteousness and glory of God. The first cause, that the
judgments are true and righteous, is general and before expounded on Chap.
16. v. 7. and Chap. 15. v. 4. The wicked under their punishments like dogs
bark against God, as if he were a tyrant. The saints on the contrary silence
their blasphemous mouths by confessing that the Lord in punishing of them is
not tyrannical in the least, but a most righteous Judge. For it is just to
give every one his own: but in order of justice punishment for wickedness is
due to the ungodly. When therefore God punishes them, his judgments are
righteous.

And true] that is, certainly to be accomplished: for though God does a long
while delay the punishments threatened against the wicked, yet at length he
truly executes the same. So Psalm. 9 v. 9. Jehovah judges the world in
righteousness, he ministers judgment to the people in uprightness.

For he has judged the great whore] Specially they celebrate two examples of
Gods righteousness, as it were the nearest matter of their joy: the
condemnation of the great whore, and the vindicating of the servants of God.
Both being manifestly worthy to be celebrated. For that Great whore has
corrupted the earth by her fornication. Now what is more agreeable to justice,
then that such a pest which has defiled the inhabitants of the earth with her
most filthy whoredom, should be adjudged unto eternal damnation. Moreover
with her hand, that is tyranically, with fire and sword she has oppressed, and
killed the servants of God. Now it is a righteous thing to avenge the innocent
blood, and such as are uniustly oppressed. But God has avenged the blood of
his servants on the whore, by rendering unto her such like punishments, as she
had before exercised. For the destruction of the adversaries is the vindicating
of the Saints. Furthermore who this great whore is, what her whoredoms, what
earth, and how she has corrupted the same: need not on this place to be
repeated.

Let us learn to acknowledge and celebrate Gods righteous judgments in
destroying the adversaries: And continually labor to walk with fear and
trembling, entreating the Lord that the like judgments fall not upon us.

3. And again they said] They conclude the thankesgiving by repeating the
exhortation of Halleluiah, to testify the greatness of their joy. They add
further.

And her smoake] AND, has here an adversative sense: as if he had said: Ye
praise God: But the whore shall burn for ever and Ever. Ribera interprets
the smoke more coldly of the remembrance of the burning, which says he, is
always to remain, and shall never be forgotten. But they amplify Gods
judgment on the whore, because the smoke of her burning and torment shall
have no end but remain for ever, from Chap. 14. v. 11. And the smoke of their
torment shall ascend up for ever and Ever, signifying the everlasting torments
that attend Antichrist and his followers in hell fire: If perhaps the miserable
Romanists by fear thereof might be deterred from their Idolatry.

Rose up for ever] The present flame of her burning which they shall see with
their eyes, yields matter of joy. Now the smoke ascends up. Therefore
Babylons condition is altogether deplorable.

4 And the four and twenty Elders] The former Chore desisting, another comes
in, singing, that so God might be praised with a most sacred Symphonie of all
the heavenly dwellers. This was the company of Elders and Beasts often before
mentioned Chap. 4.14. and Chap. 5.8. and Chap. 7. 11. and 11. 16. Here they
serve as it were for a heavenly senate (reverend in gravitie and majesty) unto
the former promiscuous multitude of the heavenly inhabitants, whose joy, and
celebration of Gods judgments they approve of by their most grave acclamation,
closing up, and as it were sealing the same in two words, Amen, Halleluiah: as
if they should say, It is so, as ye have before sung: salvation and glory is
truly due to our God: His judgments are truly righteous: Just indeed is the
condemnation of the whore, and the vindicating of the innocent blood of the
saints: for Amen with the Hebrews is a particle confirming the truth, and
signifies, Truly, certainly. God therefore is to be truly celebrated with
praises.

Now who these Elders and Beasts are, has been largely declared on Chap. 4.
and Chap. 5. The Elders represented the Company or Chore of Patriarchs and
Prophets: The Beasts the Apostles: although (as has bin before showed) these
may also be understood of the stationary Angels before the throne of God.
Whoever they be, certain it is, they are a more honorable company of the
Church triumphant. what the adoration of the heavenly inhabitants is.
For the Elders wear golden crowns on their heads, and are clothed in white
raiment, holding harpes and golden vials in their hands, etc. And they sit upon
four and twenty thrones, being as it were honorable administrators of the
judgments and counsels of God: But for reverence sake in this solemn
assembly they fall down from their thrones on their faces, before the feet
of the divine Majesty, casting off undoubtedly their crowns also (as before
Chap. 4.10.) and religiously worship and adore God, together with the Beasts.
This adoration was an admiration of the powers of God, a celebration of his
judgments and works, a ready publishing of his mercies, and lastly a testimony
of their religious subjection. In which they afford us an example of religious
worship and thankesgiving. For if the Saints in heaven who are come to their
journeyes end praise God incessantly: how much more ought we poor traveillers
to worship the Lord without intermission. Neither do they adore one another,
but God sitting on the throne. And therefore such as direct their worship unto
others, shall never come to this Chore: of which thing the Angel will by and
by instruct us.

5 And a voice came out of the throne] Both companies had finished their
Halleluiah: notwithstanding the song of praises was not as yet ended. Therefore
another Chore is invited unto a new gratulation, by another voice.

A new voice out of the throne] not of God sitting on the throne, as before
Chap. 14.13. A voice from heaven: and Chap. 16.17. A voice out of the Temple.
The author of this voice is not showed, being uncertain: yet we may easily
gather, that it was divine, because it proceeds out of the throne: yet not of
God sitting, but of the Lamb standing on the throne: because he says: Praise
our God. Now Christ acknowledged God to be his and ours: because he is the Lamb
and Mediator, as if he should say, The praises of God, touching his righteous
judgments, are not yet ended: There remain other works and benefits far
exceeding these judgments to be celebrated. What these are, the following
Hymn shall teach us. Now whom does he invite?

All ye his servants] The servants of God are all that are and shall be saved:
both Angels and men: For also the good Angels are preserved by grace in their
integrity, and hence throughout the Scripturs they are named the servants of
God, as being spirits most ready to execute the ministries of God. But as for
men, they are Gods servants, both such who continually serve him with praises
in heaven, viz the saints triumphing with Christ: as also who yet are here on
earth serving him with sear in faith and true piety viz. all the Elect and
faithful of the Church militant here below. Whereas therefore the heavenly
Herald does stir up in general all the servants of God to praise him, and in
special all his fearers, he shows, that not only God is to be celebrated by
the companies of the heavenly inhabitants apart, but with joint wishes and
voices of all Gods servants together, as well of Angels, as men, as well of the
Saints triumphant in heaven, as of the militant on earth, that is, by the
universal consent or accord of the whole Catholic Church: This exposition is
not obscurely confirmed by the Universal particle All ye his servants, No one
therefore of Gods servants is to be silent. The distribution also prooves the
same small and great] Therefore both children and old men, men and Angels are
invited to this duty of praise.

Hence now may easily be understood, what is meant by that great multitude,
whose loud and terrible sound John did erewhile hear. Moreover we see this
voice belongs to us also. For if God be our God, we must wholly employ our
selves in his service, we must not be the servants of men, and slaves of sin:
but if we be Gods servants, him we must fear above all things and only
worship. If we fear God then let us join our selves to this Chore, and gladly
celebrate the Lord with all his servants.

6 And I heard as it were a voyce] Behold the essicacie of the heavenly voice,
the willing obedience of Gods servants: being commanded to praise the Lord,
they all readily lift up their voice to his praise.

Of a great multitude] The old version corruptly renders it a great Trumpet.
This great multitude, is the Universal Church of Gods servants in heaven and
earth: as we see by the voice coming out of the throne. Therefore this voice
and accord is great, diverse, and weighty, as it were of many waters, running
swiftly through uneven places (so as a man cannot hear himself speak) or of
many thunders with whose echo heaven and earth is filled.

Thus the holy Ghost aggravates this voice, not that it was terrible (save to
the ungodly) but so vehement and weighty, that the Beast and Dragon with all
his fornicators might, yea were forced to hear the same. By such like metaphors
the voice of the 144000 sealed ones is amplified Chap. 14. 2. See the
exposition on that place. And they are taken out of Ierem. 51.55. This song of
praises belongs to the last times.


Now it will appear from the following Hymn, that this whole praising song
belonges to the last times, not long before Christ's coming to judgment: in
which undoubtedly we now live: and therefore we are bound to join our voice
with the same: the Church triumphant sings in heaven: and the church militant
has with joint desires almost these hundred years (since which the Church
began to be purged from the dregs of Antichrist) sung, and praised the Lord,
because he has set up among us the kingdom of his Son, and freed us from the
tyranny of Popery, entreating him at length to deliver that great whore to
condemnation, and avenge the blood of his servants on her.

Halleluiah for the Lord reigneth] They begin the hymn as before, with
Halleluiah: But the arguments of their joy are more magnificent then before:
And they are two. One properly concerns the glory of God: the other of the
Church. Of the former they say: Because the Lord God omnipotent has reignea]
that is, has now at length declared that he is truly king omnipotent.

God indeed always reigns, How God now reigns and is to reign afterward.
and did never cease governing the world and Church. But now his kingdom is
obscure because of Antichrist and wicked men's cruelty: who hitherto have as it
were without punishment tumultuously raged in his kingdom. But at length God
shall reign alone and manifestly, having subdued all adversaries and abolished
all powers in this life. Then he shall be said truly to reign, when he shall
appear so to reign, as that in regard of his following glory, he seemed not
to have reigned before. For many things are then said to be, when they begin
to be manifested. Therefore he is said then to reign, not according to the
essence, but form of his kingdom, in which respect also Paul says 1. Cor.
15. That then Christ is to deliver up the Kingdom to God his Father.

7. Let us be glad and rejoyce] By another more effectual argument, they
stir up to gladness and praising of God, from the circumstance of time. At
joyful times we are to rejoice: But weddings are times of gladness, then the
bridegroom, and the bride with great applause of kindred and friends go to
embrace each other.

But least they might seem to rejoice for their own good only, they add,
And let us give honor to God] Not by conferring on him that which he has not,
but by acknowledging, and celebrating his infinite justice and power in
punishing the wicked, his goodness and mercy in vindicating his servants, the
which he has from, and by himself.

So that they show unto us the fountain and manner of true rejoicing in God:
For then we truly rejoice, when we give honor to God, when we acknowledge and
confess with a willing mind, that God is the author of that good we enjoy: so
says the Apostle, I rejoiced greatly in the Lord, Philip. 4.10. and bids us to
rejoice in the Lord our God, that is, to attribute the glory of all good to
God. Hitherto the exhortation. Now let us consider the reason.

Because the marriage of the Lamb is come] The Lamb is Christ, as before we
showed: His wedding or marriage, is the solemn and most joyful copulation of
the bride and bridegroom. Christ is the bridegroom, so he calls himself Marc.
2. 19.20. 1. Tim. 2.6. Ephe 5.27.26.
and so the Baptist calls him, John 3.29. But who is the bride? The holy
Catholic Church 2. Cor. 11.2. Ephesians. 5.26. whom Christ has espoused by giving
himself a ransom for her, sanctifying and cleansing her with the washing of
water, by the word, to present her to himself a glorious Church, not having
spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, etc? According to the promise: I will
betroth thee unto me for ever in righteousness, Hosea 2.19.
and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies: J will even betroth
thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord.

Now although this betrothing between Christ and the Church be in this life, so
that we are Christ's, and Christ ours, and dwells by faith in our hearts:
nevertheless the marriage is not yet. Now is the espousal time, the marriage
being differred to the end of the world. For the bridegroom is yet as it were
in a far country, viz. in the heavens: neither is the bride as yet prepared:
because all the Elect that are to be gathered, are not yet gathered: Therefore
the time of joy is not yet come: But the marriage shallbe in the end of the
world: for then the Bridegroom shall return, and the Bride shall be prepared in
her perfect beauty, for the embracing of her bridegroom: and then shall be the
time of perfect joy. Then all Gods servants and all his fearers, both small and
great shall sing together, Let us be glad, and rejoice, and give honourto him,
for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready.
This marriage in one word denotes the full and final redemption and
glorification of the Churchof the Elect with Christ in heaven.

The marriage is come] For, is near or at hand. Therefore this voice belongs to
the Church of the last times, in which we are, and therefore we are stirred up
to gladness, that with joyfullnesse we may meet our bridegroom, who is coming
unto us.

They add: And his wife has made her self ready] This is spoken after the
manner of men: For the marriage day being come, the bride prepares and
adorneth her self with nuptial ornaments, that in her full beauty she may be
brought to the embracing of her bridegroom. They call her, wife, for bride,
because of the neerenesse of marriage: For now indeed so long as she remains
in the world, she is but hetrothed: How the espoused and wife differs.
but then she shall be the wife, when she is brought unto the heavenly house of
her bridegroom. For the betrothed bride is one not yet delivered over to the
bridegroom, but remaining at her own house: but the wife is delivered and
goes into the house of the bridegroom. Or the word (...) is a name of the Sex:
signifying a woman, whether it be meant of an unmarried maiden, or married
wife, as mat. 1.20. and Chap. 19. v. 3.5.8.9. and 22. v. 24.25. and Luke 14.20.
The which I note because of the place, 1. Corin. 9.5. have we not power to lead
about a sister ((...)) a wife: where some also of the fathers urge that the
word (...) signifies any woman, nor a wife, that so they might maintain the
impure Coelibate of the clergy: but it is without authority of scripture, or
history.

Has prepared her selfe] This favors not the Palagian strength and
preparation of free will. For it presently follows, And it was given or
granted her, that she should be arrayed in fine linen, etc. Therefore the
ornament of the spouse is freely given by the bridegroom: so that she has it
not of her self: Neither does the Text speak of preparation to grace, but to
glory: Now she prepares her self by grace, prepared, or granted her of Christ
her bridegroom. For the bride receives her ornament from the bridegroom, as
it is said: He sanctified her with the washing of water, by the word, that he
might present her to himself, etc. And, Ephesians. 26. Ephe. 2.10.
we are created unto good works, which God has before prepared ((...)) that
we should walk in them. Notwithstanding we also make our selves ready, because
by faith we put on the ornament of the bridegroom, and in holiness of life
declare our faith. The multitude therefore thus speak, to teach the duty of
the bride, what she ought to do, and does all the time of her espousall: To
wit, she must and does make her self ready for her marriage at hand. Like as
the Apostle says, If a man purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel
unto honor. And: Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and Spirit. 2. Tim. 2.21. 2 Cor. 1.


Before we go forward, Alcasars impudent fiction is to be refuted, who would
obtrude to us the Babylonish strumpet instead of Christ's spouse, eagerly
contending, that this wife of the Lamb, can be no other, save the Roman
Church. And why?

First, this place alludes, says he, unto the history of Hester, who alone,
among many Virgins became wife to Ahasuerus.

Secondly, she is the wife of the Lamb, Alcasar Page 849.
to whose manchild was given an iron rod to rule the nations. But this rod is
given to the Church of Rome alone above other Churches.

Thirdly, Only the Queen, says he, married to Solomon, Ps. 45. and Cant. 6.7.
(unto which places is clearly alluded in this marriage) is wife of the Lamb.
But only the Romish Church is that Queen. Therefore the Church of Rome only
is wife of the Lamb.

Who can withhold laughter at such childish fopperies?

The first allusion is feined, and were it granted, yet the assumption is
false, viz. that the Roman Church is that, which Hester was.

In the second, he goes altogether from the matter. For to rule the nations
with a rod of iron, is promised to every one that overcommeth, Rev. 2.27. But
the iron rod with which the Pope smites, not the nations, but all Churches, he
has received from the dragon who gave his power and throne to the beast, Rev.
13.2.

In the third, he again feineth an allusion, which is not: and if it were, yet
could it not bear such a sense, which this flatterer would hence draw by
feined allusions.

Wherefore to his fopperies we oppose a true and solid demonstration, which he
has framed against himself, not being able to take away the difficulty
thereof. viz. The demonstration against Alcasars dream.


She is the wife and bride of the Lamb, whom the Lamb has redeemed to
himself, washed and sanctified in his own blood, Ephe. 5.16. Rev. 1.5. and to
whom he gives life eternal, John. 10.28. But this only is the whole Catholic
Church of the first borne, Act. 20.28. Hebr. 12.23. Therefore she only is the
wife and bride of the Lamb. Morover the bride and wise of the Lamb is no
harlot, but the Romish Church, that now is, is the great whore, siting on the
beast (as before we heard) who daily commits whordome with her idols and graven
images. Therefore she is not the Lambs bride and wise, but is groslie deceived
by this Sycophant. Now we go forward.

8 And to her was given that she should be arrayed in fine linnen] Now he
shows how the bride has made her self ready: First, by putting on nuptial
ornaments. The old version renders the passive (...) that she should be
clothed, actively, that she might cover her self: the sense indeed being the
same: yet not so much the active as passive clothing of the bride is intimated:
although the active be not excluded. For the metaphor is borrowed from an
earthly bride, who both is arrayed by others, and puts on ornaments her self
also.

Secondly: whence she has her ornaments. Not of her self. For so she is
destitute, naked and uncovered, Ezech. 16.7. But (...) it is given her] to wit,
by her bridegroom. He persists in the metaphor of a bride, unto whom, if
poor, her rich bridegroom of his own cost gives wedding garments, that she
may become beautiful, and adorned for marriage estate, whence we are put in
mind of our natural want and poverty: Romans 3.23.
for we all come short of the glory of God, being naked and destitute: Also of
Gods beneficence, unto whose liberal hand we owe all the good we enjoy, that
so none of us with mercenary hypocrites should boast of our own merits.

Thirdly he shows what this ornament, and what the wedding garment of the
bride is: First, figuratively: Fine linen, clean and white] (...) is a kind
of most tender, precious and white linen, as we showed Chap. 18.12. touching
the merchandise of the whore, being like our purest silk. Now if any man
might think, seeing the merchants of the whore do likewise sell fine linen,
whether the garment of the bride and whore be the same? I Answer: There is a
twofold fine linen. The one true: the other adulterate. The true is given to
the bride by Christ: The adulterate, viz the Saints merits instead of Christ's,
is sold by the Popes spiritual agents. Secondly: they declare the wedding
garment properly, yet by a figurative phrase. For the fine linen is the
righteousness of the Saints. Gr. (...) the righteousnesses or justifications:
The causall, for, contains a reason, why he called the fine linen, clean and
white: for, that is, because it is righteousness, which is clean and pure,
because it is conform to the Law and to God: without which nothing can be
clean and white, because the Law is holy, and God most pure. It is a
metonymicall phrase, fine linen are the righteousnesses, For, it signifies the
righteousness of the saints: As, The seven kine are seven years, For, they
signify seven years: and so the like of other sacramental phrases.

Now it is demanded, what these righteousnesses are? Ribera interprets it of
merits, The Justfications, says he, that is, works of righteousness and
holilie done. But the word (...) given, contradicts him. For this
righteousness is freely given by the bridegroom. But good works are not
freely granted, but performed by us. Yea, says he, they are also given,
because we do them of grace, and they are the gifts of God. It is true indeed:
But good works cannot be (...) righteousnesses: First: because they are not
pure and clean, Isa. 64.6. Isa. 3 2. Eccles. 7.20. Mat. 22.12.
but defiled with blemishes: for all our righteousnesses are as a menstruous
cloth. In many things we offend all. There is not a just man upon earth, that
does good and sins not. The Guest in the Gospel had good works: in that he
obeyed the call and sat down with others at the banquet: and yet was not
clothed in fine linen pure and white, But wanted the wedding garment. Lastly
the good works of the Saints what ever they be, cannot be merits, seeing
they are due debts: Now nothing how good soever being a debt, can be rightly
considered as meritorious.

Therefore this fine linen or wedding garment is Christ himself with his
righteousness, This garment of fine linen is Christ, Ierem. 23.6. 1. Cor:
1.30.
with which we being clothed are acceptable to God: For Jehovah is our
righteousness, that is, he is made righteousness unto us: in consideration
whereof the saints are said Rev. 7.15. to be clothed in white robes, not
because they had adorned themselves with merits of good works, but because they
had washed and made white their robes in the blood of the Lamb. Now we put on
this garment outwardly indeed through the word and Sacraments, hence it is
said: As many as have bin Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: INWARDLY
through faith and the holy Ghost.

Therefore are they called the righteousnesses or justifications of the saints,
because they are imputed to the Saints by Christ the bridegroom.

But why in the plural (...) Righteousnesses? Is it because Christ has many
righteousnesses? I answer, he has indeed many, the Divine, humane, active,
passive, etc. but the multitude respects not this, but use the plural because
of the plurality of saints: of whom every one shall have his righteousness
from Christ: nevertheless they all put on one Christ, and shall wholly
possess him. Thus there shall be many righteousnesses.

Ribera demands whether this marriage be the same with that in Mat. 22.1.
Undoubtedly it is: save only that there is mention made of the calling to the
wedding, here of the solemnity and marriage it self.

9 And he says unto me, write] To wit the Angel, who hitherto had familiarly
spoken unto John, and before also Chap. 17.1. had said, I will show thee the
judgment of the great whore. For he commands him in special to write (besides
those things which he had hitherto seen, heard, and written) the joyful
sentence of the Lambs marriage: Blessed are they that are called unto the
marriage Supper of the Lamb: For this is a new matter of joy: that the wedding
guests should be blessed. But why? I. Because the guests themselves shall be
the spouse and wife of the Lamb: now the bride is blessed. II. Because the
feast is not earthly and vanishing, but Eternal life and glory in heaven.

Unto the Supper] Why not unto the dinner? Is it because they were wont to keep
weddings toward evening, or Supper time? But in Mat. 22.4. the king says: I
have prepared my dinner. Therefore I rather think it is called a supper,
because the marriage shall be at the Evening, or end of the world. Mat: 20.16.


But how shall all that are called unto the Supper be blessed, seeing our
Savior says, Many are called, few chosen? I Answer: Some are only called
externallie: and of such Christ there others inwardly also in faith and
newness of life: and of these the Angel speaks in this place. For these
called, are all predestined, Romans 8.30.
as the Apostle teaches, whom he did predestinate, them he also called,
justified, and glorified. Neither does Ribera deny, but confesses this.

These are the true sayings of God] Wherefore is this Clause added: The more to
confirm the hope of blessedness unto us. These words, says he, are not mine,
but Gods, and therefore are most true, and must certainly be believed. Indeed
all Gods words are true in themselves, because God is truth, and cannot lie:
But in special we ought to be most fully persuaded of this promise of
blessedness, viz. That if we obey the heavenly call on earth, then we shall
enjoy the blessedness of the Lambs marriage in heaven. But the doctrine of
Sophisters denies the truth hereof. For they will have the wedding guests
always to doubt of their blessedness, and fear as being deceived, that is,
not to believe, but he that believes not God, 1 John 5.10.
makes God a liar. Therefore the (...) or certainty of the salvation of the
Godly is here established.

The Second part of the CHAPTER. JOHN is forbidden to adore the Angel.
10. And I fell at his feet to worship him: and he said to me, See thou do it
not: I am thy fellow servants, and of thy brethren, that have the testimony of
Jesus, Worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy.
THE COMMENTARY.
10 AND I fell] Thus far of the things which John heard: Now follows, what
was done, both by himself, and the Angel. Antichrists kingdom must be forsaken
He fell at the feet of the Angel to worship him: The Angel forbids it, because
it is an abominable thing that a servant should be worshipped by his fellow
servant, God alone must be worshipped.

A remarkable place of the Saints infirmities, and the pronenesse of man's
nature to idolatry: of the office of Angels, and of religious adoration, which
is due to God alone: refuting most clearly both the blasphemous madness of the
Roman Antichrist, why John would worship the Angel.
who not only suffers, but commands and forces Emperors and Princes, to
fall down and kiss his feet, and worship him as a God on earth: as also the
horrible idolatry of Papists, who not only worship and adore Angels, but dead
men (being by the Pope mustered among his Saints) and their bruit images also:
which one thing sufficiently shows that the Papacy is Antichrists kingdom,
and must be wholly left by the Saints.

Touching this fact of the Apostle, it may be demanded: Why now he would
worship the Angel, and not before? with what kind of worship? and whether
rightly?

Some say, it was because he knew him to be greater then himself: but this is
no satisfactorie answer: For not every one excelling others, is to be
worshipped: John knew that the Elders, and diverse Angels before spoken of,
were greater then himself, and yet he fell not down to worship them. Perhaps
the most sweet prophecy of the certain blessedness of the wedding guests of
the Lamb so delighted him, as for joy he fell at his feet, and would have
worshipped him in way of thanksgiving. Perhaps he thought the Angel to be
Christ, and therefore would reverence him with religious worship: But all what
is spoken on this place touching John's intention is uncertain. Therefore I
pass it by.

It was no civil kind of adoration (as we read that Abraham and Lot civillie
worshipped Angels, It was no civil adovation.
taking them for travelers) but religious, as evidently appears by the Angels
refusal: neither do the Papists deny it: but say there is a twofold
religious worship: One due to God alone, which they call (...) Latreia: the
other due to Angels and saints called (...) Douleia. But they are at variance,
which of these two John ascribed to the Angel. Lib. 1. de Beat. sanct. Cap. 1.


Bellarmin holds it was the worship of Latreia; for he says, John was
reprooved not for the error of worship, but for the error of the person,
because he thought him to be God to whom Latreia is only due, In Apoc. 19.
sect. 16.
and not an Angel, to whom Douleia does appertain.

Ribera on the contrary denies that it was the worship of Latreia, or that
John erred in the kind of worship, or in the person: but that he would have
worshipped him as an Angel and with a worship due to Angels. Behold how well
these worshippers of Angels do agree, whom the Apostle most plainly
condemns Collos. The difference about this adoration.
2.18. Besides if Ribera speak truly, Why then would not the Angel admit
thereof? he would not, says he, be worshipped by John, in honor of Christ, as
showing how highly he esteemed of Christ, seeing he so much honored his
faithful friends.

ALCASAR to reconcile his companions, and flatter the Pope, Vestig. Page 856.
says it is in vain to be troubled about rendering a reason, why the Angel
refused to be worshipped, because he was not an Angel, but the Apostle PETER,
before whom as chief Priest and Christ's Vicar John prostrated himself to kiss
his feet.

But passing by this fopperie, FIRST the distinction of religious worship into
Latreia and Douleia is denied, because there is no such thing. For both are one
and the same worship due to God alone, neither do the words Latreia and
Douleia more differ among Grecians, then the words GLADIVS and ENSIS with the
Latins, Latreia and Douleia signify one thing:
which all know who understand the Greek, or have read the Greek Bible.

SECONDLY it is false that the religious worship of Douleia is suitable to
creatures: and so much (to let pass other things) the Angel here refusing it,
and Riberas confession do sufficiently evince. They allege Austin as author
of the distinction, but they deprave his mind and words. Lib. 10. de C. D.
cap. 1
It is true indeed he says that the worship due to God alone is to be called
Latreia: although there be little weight in it: Forasmuch as Latreia also is
rendered to men: It is true also that he so distinguishes Latreia from Douleia,
as he makes the former due to God only, the latter to creatures also: although
this likewise is not very sound: Augustines opinion vindicated.
for in scripture Douleuein and Latreuein, signify to serve, whether God or
creatures. But it is false that Austin makes Douleia to be a religious worship
due to Angels or Saints: But says, that Douleia is only a civil worship, by
which we honor men of worth they being alive, but denies, that a religious
Douleia is to be rendered to saints departed: Let us not, says he, maintain
the worship of dead men: De vera relig. Cap. 55.
because if they have lived godly: we may not judge of them, that they seek
such honors: but they would have that GOD he worshipped by us, etc. They are
therefore to be honored for imitation, Not worshipped for religion sake: And
afterward: Wherefore we honor them in Charity, not with (DVLEIA) service:
neither do we build temples unto them: For thus they will not be honored of us:
because they know that we our selves, if we be upright, are the temples of the
most High God. This very thing also does the said Author affirm De civitat.
Dei. Lib. 8. Cap. 27. and Lib. 22. Contra Faustum. Cap. 21. But the Papists do
build temples to saints departed, and worship them with religious Douleia both
which Austin denies to be lawful, but grants that the dead are to be
honored only in charity and imitation. Thus Austin, whom they would make their
Patron, openly refutes them.

Thirdly, Riberas fiction is false, that John would have worshipped the Angel,
with the worship of Douleia only: For so from their Hypothosis he ought not to
have bin reprooved: Besides this foolish gloss is contradicted by the
commandment of the Angel: Worship God: For the worship John would have rendered
to him, he commands to ascribe the same to God, But he commands to render
to God the worship of Latreia: Therefore John would have rendered that to the
Angel.

But granting the thing which Ribera would have, yet the worship of Angels is
thereby overthrown. For they themselves deny that Latreia is to be rendered to
Angels, Now Duleia the Angel refuses by his own supposition. Therefore
neither the worship of Latreia, nor of Duleia is due to Angels. Moreover the
cause Ribera feineth of the Angels refusal, is false and frivolous. False:
because the Angel makes his own person, not the reverence of Christ, the
reason thereof, I am thy fellow servant. It is also frivolous: For so the Angel
ought to have worshipped John, that he might honor Christ in his Minister or
servant. But the Angll was not ignorant, that he also was Christ's Minister, and
indeed greater then John, as shall appear Chap. 22. Therefore he ought not to
have refused this worship, that in him Christ might have been honored. Behold
what shifts idolaters are put too, and how they are ensnared by themselves.

Now whether John did well or not, Whether John did well in worshipping the
Angel.
is no great question: Rightly (says Ribera) he adoreth the messenger of the
most High God, declaring most joyful things unto him: But this is false:
because not Gods nessenger, but God himself must be adored: otherwise all the
Jesuits, who call themselves messengers of the most High God, and companions
of Jesus, ought religiously to be worshipped by us, and so much perhaps they
desire. But the Angel forbids the thing: Therefore John did err, either
through humane frailty, or by mistaking the person. Otherwise the Angel should
have reprooved him unjustly: For that which is rightly done, is unjustly
reprooved: And therefore Bellarmin contradicts himself, in affirming so
boldly: Lib, 1. Adorson. Cap. 14.
That Angels in respect of themselves are to be worshipped, and yet they do
well in refusing to be worshipped, This Italian supposes that they may sport
with Angels in religious worship, as they use to do in their complements,
where one servilely bowing himself, is ambitiously restrained by the other: And
thus also Alcasar the spaniard toyeth.

See thou do it no:] He simply forbideth al manner of religious worship, not
this or that kind, as Idolaters feine. In the Greek the words are (...) See
to, Least: breaking of his speech as it were for haste, the sooner to lay hold
on John, and hinder him from worshipping of him, To worship the creature, an
abom enable wickedness.
to signify how great an abomination it is, religiously to worship an Angel or
any creature. Therefore the Angel refuses the honor of worship simply,
whether we respect the kind of honor, or John's intention. For the honor was
unlawful: because no religious worship is due to the creature, but only to
God: John's intention also was erroneous: for he erred either in the fact or in
the person, intending to worship him, whom he might not, or thinking him to be,
who he was not. But undoubtedly his error was not in the person, but in the
Fact.

I am thy fellow servant] The reasons why the Angel refuses this strange
honor, are two. The first is taken from his person, I am thy fellow servant,
and of thy brethren: as if he had said: It is no way lawful to worship fellow
servants: because hereby we should make our selves servants of servants. But
the Angels are our fellow servants. Therefore it is not lawful to worship
Angels.

This argument of the Angel cannot by any destinction of worship be shifted of
in the least. For the Sophisters themselves confess that the worship of
Latreia is not to be rendered to Angels: neither does the worship of Duleia, by
the Angels reasoning belong to them: because they are our fellow servants: the
which Peresius a Popish writer ( De tradit. Part. 3. Consid. 7,) has well
observed. Now they are our fellow servants, because they serve with us, the
same Lord, who is God and Christ.

And of thy brethren] The rest of the Apostles and ministers of Christ.

That have the testimony of Iesus] For, who preach the Gospel revealed by Jesus
Christ. The phrase shows, that the Evangelist John was the writer of this
prophecy, who familiarlie calls the Gospel, the testimony of Jesus, as we have
observed before.

Worship God] The second reason is taken from that which is proper to God. The
proper worship of God, is not agreeable to Angels, but God alone. But all
religious adoration ((...)) is Gods proper worship. Therefore it belongs not to
me, but to God alone. Let Popish sophisters study what they can, they shall
never avoid the Angels argument, unless they say: Either that the Angels are
more ambitious now adays, then this Angel was: Or they must obtrude on them
against their wills strange worship, and make them sacrilegious supplanters. For
the Angel says not (...) Worship God with Latreia: nor (...) worship him with
Donleia: But (...) adore him, referring the whole kind of religious adoration
to God alone.

The testimony of Jesus] A reason, why he calls himself John's fellow servant,
and of his brethren: because the same testimony of Jesus committed to John and
the rest of the Apostles, was committed to him also: to wit, the spirit of
revealing the prophecy to John: It is a synecdoche: The reason is thus: Unto
whom the same testimony of Jesus is committed, they are fellow servants: To me
and to you is committed the same testimony of Jesus: The reason: because the
testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of prophecy: But it is committed to me to
reveal this prophecy to thee: Therefore, etc.

The third part of the CHAPTER. Christ prepares himself to the judgment of the
Beast, and kings of the earth, with the casting of these into the Lake of fire.
11 And I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse, and he that sat upon
him was called faithful, and true, and in righteousness he does judge, and
make war. 12 His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many
crowns, and he had a name written, that no man knew but he himself. 13 And he
was clothed with a vesture diptin blood, and his name is called, The Word of
God. 14 And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses,
clothed in fine linen, white and clean. 15 And out of his mouth goes a charp
sword, that with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule them with a
rod of iron: and he treads the winepresse of the fierceness, and wrath of
Almighty God. 16 And he has on his vesture, and on his thigh a name written,
KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. 17 And I saw an Angel standing in the Sun,
and he cried with a loud voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst
of heaven, Come, and gather your selves together unto the Supper of the great
God: 18 That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the
flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and
the flesh of all men, both free, and bond, both small, and great. 19 And I saw
the Beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies gathered together to
make war against him that sat on the horse, and against his army. 20 And the
Beast was taken, and with him the false prophet, that wrought miracles before
him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the Beast, and
them that worshipped his image. These both were cast alive into a Lake of fire,
burning with brimstone. 21 And the remnant were slain with the sword of him
that sat upon the horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth: and all the
sowles were filled with their flesh.
THE COMMENTARY
ANd I saw heaven opened] Thus far of what John heard and did, Now what he
saw, remains to be treated of, being the fourth Act of the Last vision save
one: In which is represented Christ the Judge, under the type of a glorious
captain coming with a great army from heaven, Here is proved that the last judge
ement is discribed in this place 2 These. 2.8.
against the forces of the Beast, and the kings of the earth gathered together
in Harmageddon, before spoken of in Chap. 16.16. And I see no reason why any
should doubt that the last judgment is here described: For it is certain by
the testimony of the Apostle, that Antichrist shall not be consumed but by the
brightness of Christ's coming in the end of the world. But here the glorious
coming of Christ, and the destruction of Antichrist is evidently prefigured.
Add to this, that the present vision is closed up in this type,

Neither does Ribera deny this, if his words be well weighed. Notwithstanding
he feineth, that here is described I know not what for an invisible descention
of Christ from heaven before the last judgment, to succor the saints
wrestling and striving with Antichrist and his ministers. But what is his
reason? Because, says he, Antichrist shall not then be in the last judgment:
But this is false and against that of the Apostle even now alleged. For
Antichrist shall be destroyed by the last coming of Christ: 2. These. 2.8.
Therefore he shall remain till then. Now Riberas fiction depends upon
another, viz that Antichrist shall be killed forty five days before the day
of judgment, which we have before refuted, besides it is manifestly repugnant
to the saying of Christ, But of that day and hour no man knows, no not the
Angels: The which Ribera acknowledges in the following Chapter, v, 8. and
thereby not unwittingly rejects the fiction of 45 days.

The said Ribera does here also not obscurely confirm our opinion, namely,
that this coming of Christ proves that which before the heavenly chore had
said: For the marriage of the Lamb is come: marriage of the Lamb celebrated.
For the adversaries destruction and the Saints glorification shall be both
together.

To this Last Act therefore of the sixth vision, does answer (in way of
Parrallel) the Last Act of the third vision in the end of Chap. 11. and the
Last Act of the fourth vision in the end of Chap. 14. touching the harvest and
vintage: and lastly, the last Vial of the fifth vision in the end of Chap. 16.
For this Act does cohere with the history of the sixth Vial, touching the kings
of the earth gathered together in Hermageddon to the battle of that Great day
of God Almighty: the which battle was there broken off by the last voice (...),
It is done: and is here at length represented,

Whence we have a fourth argument for our opinion: great day of God Almighty,
shall be no other but the day of judgment, Whatever Ribera feineth to the
contrary in Chap. 16. Number. 11. For the seventh plague shall not be powered forth
before the day of judgment (as he pretends) but in the very day of judgment
and consummation of all things: But this battle shall be in that great day of
God Almighty. Therefore this battle shall be in the last day of judgment.

Which things thus laid down, the history of this type is not obscure. For
what we shall here see touching Christ's coming from heaven with an army of
horsemen to fight against the Beast and kings of the earth, to take and cast
all of them into the lake of fire and brimstone, is indeed the very thing which
Christ says in the Gospels. Matthew. 2^.30 and 25.30.
Then shall ye sie the Son of man coming in the clouds of hearen with power
and great, glory, etc. Again, When the Son of man, shall come in his glory and
all his holy Angels with him: then shall be sit upon the throne of his glory;
and all nations shall be gathered before him etc. And what Jude speaks from
the prophecy of Enoch: Behold the Lord comes with thousands of his saints,
Jude v. 14.
to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among
them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all
their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him: And that of
Paul: 1. These. 4.16. 2. These. 1.17.
The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, with the trump of God: And the dead in Christ shall rise first: AND:
The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming
fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Who shall be punished with overlasting destruction from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. Lastly the best and
briefest interpreter of all this warlike preparation is the same Apostle, where
he says: 2. These. 2.8.
And then shall that wicked one be revealed whom the Lord will consume with the
brightness of his coming. This, I say, shall be that bright day of Christ's
coming: when this glorious Emperor shall come from heaven with innumerable
companies: This shall be the destruction of that wicked one, when the Beast
(Antichrist) and his followers shall be taken and cast into the Lake of fire.
Now let us consider both armies going forth to battle, with the event thereof.

I saw heaven opened] In this there is no allegory: But John does
historicallie set down what he law viz, heaven opened and Christ Coming thence
with his holy Angels, under the likeness of a Captain and troops of horsemen:
as horsemen use to rush forceably through the gates of a city, being opened.

And behold a white horse] To wit, Went worth. The Maiesticall description of
the Captain figureth the glorious coming of Christ from heaven, to judge
Antichrist and the ungodly. Therefore we are not to imagine that it is meant of
corporal horses, or horsemen, or swords, or any such thing. But under the
allegory of military forces, that brightness of Christ's coming (spoken of 2.
These. 2.8) is here represented. For Generals use not to go on foot, but to be
mounted on brave horses, that with facility and swiftness, they may be here
and there in the army to put forward the battle the more hotly. So Christ sits
on a white-horse, by which is signified the divine majesty, power and glory of
the judge: For the white color here denotes excellency. Before at the opening
of the first seal came forth a white horse with his rider etc. The rider
indeed is the same both there and here, namely CHRIST: but the white horse is
diverse. For the former signified the Apostolical Church, pure and white: on
which Christ riding obtained the first victory over Paganism. Here he comes
forth on a white horse of majesty and heavenly glory, to obtain the last
victory over Antichrist: And that the world might know him to be that Great
Pontife of Rome: he himself causes his God as often as he takes on a journey
to be carried on a white horse with a silver bell, and to be sent a day before
him with his servants and scullions.

Was called faithful and true] The General for our consolation is set forth
by diverse titles illustrating his divine Majesty and power: Other Generals
indeed use to go forth with great warlike furniture: but are ignorant of the
event. For it is not in their hands to dispose of the doubtful success of
battles, but instead of conquering they are often overcome, or slain. But the
titles of this General do al tend to certify us that he shall undoubtedly and
certainly obtain the victory, be the power of the adverse party never so
great.

Faithfull] In authorizing and maintaining his forces. TRVE, in rendering wages
and rewards to such as have fought stoutly: This sentence is enough for the
allegory. For faithfullnes in preserving, and truth in rewarding soldiers
does much commend a General.

And in righteousness he does judge and make warre] This Captain comes not
only as a warrior, but also as a judge: both offices he administreth in
righteousness, that is, righteously: He will execute Judgment righteously:
because to the upright he will render the promised reward of life and glory, to
the wicked the wages of death eternal, according to the declaration of the
Gospel, Romans 2. v. 6.16. And ^^o he shall fight the battle altogether in
military equity. No man shall be injuriously spoiled or hurt by his forces, which
otherwise is customarie in war. The adversaries only shall suffer by this
conflict, being either slain or taken. Which again is no obscure argument to
prove that here is intended that righteous judgment spoken of, Romans 2.5.

12. And his eyes as a flame of fire] Like to the eyes of the Son of man
walking in the mids of the Candlesticks, Chap. 1.14. Flame gives light. Fire
burns. It signifies mighty quickness, in sight and fervencie of this
General: The which vigilancie of Christ for his Church was before also set
forth. But here it denotes his quicknes in perceiving al things: For he shall
Judge even the secrets of the heart: It signifyes also the providence and valor
of this warrior, who not only looks to the necessities of his army, but
knows also the hidden plots and counsels of the adversaries, bringing the same
to nothing, like as fire consumes the stubble.

And on his head were many crownes] Our General wears a royal diadem on his
head: The Beast also had ten crowns on his heads, or three upon one. But Our
Captain has many more. And therefore is not less in Dignity, but in Power
far exceeds Antichrist, his pretended Vicar.

A name written that no man knew] This name John himself does by and by
express. The word of God, The King of kings, And Lord of lords. This is the
name of the Son of God: Ephesians. 1.21. Philip. 2.10.
The which name the Father has given him, far above every name: That in the
name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, In earth, and under
the earth. But how is it that none knows it but himself, seeing John wrote and
revealed the same unto us? I answer: he says truly, No man knows it, because
no man knows the Son but the Father, and to whom the Son will reveal him.
Now this name he revealed to John, How no man knows the name of this General.
and by him to us. Therefore all are excluded from the knowledge thereof except
it be by Revelation and faith. We know him, because he has revealed himself
unto us: and because we have believed on the Son of God. The wicked know him
not: Either because it is not revealed unto them: Or because being revealed,
they believe not the same. Before, to him that overcame, was promised a white
stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knows, Chap. 2.17.
saving he that receives it: This is the name of the children of God, which
none know, but such as apprehend their adoption in Christ: like as no man
knows the sweetness of honey, but he that tastes it. Therefore the Papists
are profane and wicked in requiring us to prove our adoption by arguments:
and because they apprehend not the same in themselves, therefore they make a
mock of it: tormenting themselves and others with doubting and despare of
salvation.

13. And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood] His bloody vesture
shows that he was to return victoriously from the slaughter of his
adversaries. For he is sprinkled with blood, as if he had already fought the
battle, to signify the certainty of the victory. The reason will more clearly
appear in v. 15. Now that which some do here bring in touching Christ's body
appearing bloody, and his wounds yet remaining, is not to the purpose in hand.

And his name is called, The Word of God.] This name John in his Gospel and
Epistles gives to the Son of God: Whereby we know that this Captain, is Christ
the Son of God. As also it gives us a mark, to note, of the writer of the
book. For it is the peculiar Phrase of the Apostle and Evangelist John, to call
the Son of God (...) The Word of God, either in respect of his person:
Because he is the wisdom of his Father: Ioh. 1.18.
Or of his office, because he is the spokesman of the Father, through whom he
reveals unto us his wisdom and counsel.

14. And the armies which were in heaven] These armies accompany Christ the
Captain, not so much for help, as for honor sake. For he alone, as God
omnipotent, shall slay the adversaries with the sword of his mouth, v. 21.
Therefore he comes accompanied with an army for decency sake: because without
followers he should seem to be no Captain. Yet in that his armies are not
harnesed but clothed in white linen, it appears he led them forth not to
fight, but to triumph: being apparelled as if they went to a marriage feast.
Neither is there any other allegory in this linen, but to signify the purity
and splendor of his army, the which thing is also denoted by the white
horses, on which they sat. And therefore both the Captain and his armies ride
on white horses, because the purity, splendor and majesty both of the head and
members shall be exceeding great. Undoubtedly, in this also the Decorum of the
Metaphor is kept. For Generals and Princes love to have their followers alike
in color, both in horses, liveries etc. Furthermore it is not obscure, who
these heavenly armies are: For by them the Scripture usually understands
troops of Angels. This army therefore represents those thousands of Angels,
with whom Christ will come to Judgment, Math. 24. and 25.

15 And out of his mouth goes a sharp sword] Gr. (...). The kings Edition
(...) a sharp two edged sword, taking it perhaps from Chap. 1.16. and Chap.
2.16. The sense is one. And it is evident, that both this Captain, and that
Son of man, represents under a diverse person the same Christ, there
appearing as a President and Bishop: Here as an avenger of the Church. He comes
not unarmed: Nor yet burdened with any weighty kind of arms, as other Generals
are used to do with helmets, breast plates, and coats of male, that their
bodies lie not open to the strokes of their adversaries, holding in their hands
swords, spears, Iavilins, arrows, etc. therewithal to strike the enemy: This
Captain has only a sword (very sharp indeed) not in his hand, but in his
mouth, which shows that it is no material sword, which is guided not with the
mouth, but the hand. Therefore this spiritual sword, proceeding out of the
mouth of the Captain, If we respect the time next going before the Last
judgment, what is it, save the word of God, of which the Apostle Ephe: 6.17.
Take the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God: And Hebr. 4.12: The
word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword. With
this sword he both strikes the adversaries himself: as also commands us
therewith to fight against all spiritual powers, and in special against
Antichrist. But if we respect Christ's last coming, of which is here treated,
then this sharp sword proceeding out of his mouth, is the spirit of his mouth,
with which (according to the prophecy of the Apostles) the Lord will destroy
that wicked one, to wit, his Divine power, by which at his pleasure Antichrist
and all adversaries shall be consumed.

That with it he should smite the nations] He adds the use of the sword: viz:
not therewith to defend himself or his armies (for they are subject to no
dangers) but to smite the adversaries: Whom he calls Gentiles, or the
nations, because Antichrist under the name of Christianity imitates the
heathens in Religion, life and tyranny: In this sense Chap. 11.2. the inward
Court was said to be given to the Gentiles, that is, to Antichrist and his
clergy: And at the sounding of the seventh Angel, the GENTILES WERE ANGRY,
that is, Antichrist and his followers did fret against Christ!: But wrath
without power is vain: Neither shall the holy City be always trood under
foot, because our Captain will slay the nations with the sword.

And he shall rule them with a rod of iron] He illustrates by testimony of
Scripture, what he had said before, touching the armor and clothing of the
Captain, the former from Psa. 2. the latter from Isa. 63. For his armor he
needs no more then a sword, for he is that king whom God has anointed and set
upon Sion his holy mountain, unto whom he has subjected the heathen, that he
might break them with a rod of iron: The word break, or bruise, the SEPTVAGJNT
render (...) Feed or rule, whom John follows. Now what is a sword, but a rod
of iron?

And he treads the winepresse of the fierceness and wrath of God Almightie]
Now he renders a reason why in v. 13. he said that his vesture was dipped in
blood, taking it from Isa. 63.5. where the Lord being about to take vengeance
on the Edumeans, adversaries of the Church, by a Metaphor of a victorious
Captain returning from the slaughter of the enemy, having his garment dipped in
blood, also of a grape gatherer treading in the wine-fat, and besprinkling his
garments with the blood of the grapes, Why (says the text) art thou red in
thine apparel, etc. The Lord answers, I have trodden the wine press alone,
and of the people there was none with me: For I will tread them in my anger,
and trample them in my fury, and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my
garments, and J will stain all my raiment. It is a prophecy of Christ, who
alone, assuming the clothing of our flesh, did tread the wine press of Gods
wrath, by suffering a cruel and bloody death on the Cross for our sakes: For
when he appeared bloody on the Cross, he triumphed over his and our enemies.
Hence it is that many interpret this garment sprinkled with blood, of his
humanity, according to which he shed his blood. But here is intended, not the
passion, death and blood of Christ, but the destruction of the adversaries
which he will execute on them at his Last coming. The blood therefore, with
which he is here said to be sprinkled, is not his own, but the adversaries,
not indeed as yet, but soon after to be slain, yet he is now figured out as if
he were already sprinkled, because of the certainty of the victory.
Notwithstanding chiefly he continues in the Metaphor of the wine press, into
which the adversaries or clusters being cast, shall be trodden by him, so as his
garment shall appear stained with their blood: yea, their blood came out of
the wine press, even unto the horses bridles, by the space of a thousand and
six hundred furlongs: see, Chap. 14.20.

This title serves I. to terrify the wicked. 2. to comfort the godly. 3. For
the glory of the Captain, who alone is a perfect redeemer: because he alone
treads the wine press of the wrath of God: he is the invincible conqueror
of the adversaries, The xxxvij. argument of Christ's Dietie.
because he shall tread the wicked in the wine press, being that one God
omnipotent with the Father: For it is the wine press of his wrath and fury,
in which the adversaries shallbe trodden: Now this in Isai. 63. is applied to
God Jehovah, which again plainly proves the Divinity of Christ our Lord.

16. And he has on his vesture, and on his thigh] That he may once for all
fully set forth the invineible power and immense Majesty of this Judge, he
calls him King of kings, and Lord of lords: The which title many Monarchs have
indeed arrogated to themselves, as Nebuchad-nezzar, Xerxes, Alexander: but
falsely: It being proper to this Captain, who alone is the Monarch of Heaven
and earth: for to him alone is given all power in Heaven and earth. Given, I
say, not only in time according to the dispensation of the flesh, through his
exaltation at the right hand of God: but also from al eternity, according to
the nature of the Dietie by eternal generation of the Father: As the Father
has life in himself (viz. from eternity) So he has given to the Son to have
life in himself. (viz. from eternity): that as all men honor the Father, so
they should honor the Son also. Therefore he has this title, King of kings,
and Lord of lords, common with the Father, as being one God with the Father,
The xxxviii. argument of Christ's Dietie.
whom the Apostle sets forth by this his proper title: which again is an
evident argument of Christ's Dietie. Now how the Samosatenian heretics labor
to shift this off: with the vindicating of the same, has before bin expounded
on Chap. 17.14. This name he has written on his garment, to signify, that the
Divine Power and Majesty of this Captain, shall then be apparent to all
creatures, that he may be openly acknowledged and worshipped by all. It is
written also on his thigh, to denote the eternity of his power and Monarchy.
For by the thigh the scripture usually understands the generative force, and
propagation of posterity: as often we have it in Genesis and Exodus. Therefore
he carries the name on his thigh, because his kingdom shall be propagated and
endure to all posterities, that is, unto eternity.

17. And I saw an Angel standing] Thus much touching the honorable armies,
the troops of Angels: Now other administering forces are called forth, which
in some manner are to be employed in executing vengeance, viz. all the ravenous
birds of heaven: Notwithstanding they are not called to the fight, but are
invited to the banquet

Who this Angel standing in the Sun should be, needs not curiously to be
enquired after. He was an he rauld proclaiming the Captains coming, being an
Angel either really, or in appearance. For John records what he saw: Neither is
it necessary to seek for mysteries in every circumstance of the visions.

He calls him indefinitely (...) one Angel, for, A CERTAIN ANGEL: because he
stood before the other without the Camp, going before like an Herald of arms.

Standing in the Sunne] That is, in the midst of heaven, in a clear and high
place, that he might be seen and heard of all the fowls: which serves to the
decency of the Action. For Heralds, when they publish the Edicts of Princes,
Usually stand in some Eminent place, that they may be the better seen of all
men. And here I seek no other my stery.

And cried with a great voyce] Like as Heralds use to do, that they may be
heard afar off, also the efficacy of the voice is here noted: for this cry
shall not be in vain: but at the very instant the fowls are in readiness. Now
perhaps we may say, that this Angel is the Archangel, and this voice, that
great trumpet of God: with which Christ shall descend on the clouds 1, Thessa.
4.16.

Come and gather your selves together unto the supper] This whole Prophetical
allegory is taken out of 39. of Ezech. v. 17. For the Revelation has many
things common with the visions of Ezekiel and Zachary. There the Prophet thus
prophesies against Gog and Magog (understood by many to be the two
Antichrists, viz. the Turk and the Pope, touching which we shall Treat in the
following Chap. v. 8.) Assemble your selves and come, gather your selves on
every side to my sacrifice ( Hebr. (...) slaughter) that J do slay for you,
The comparing of the present place with Ez. 39.17.
even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh,
and drink blood. Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of
the Princes of the earth, of Rams, of Lambs, and of goats, etc. Al things are
alike: save that the Prophet is there commanded to proclaim: Here the Angel
proclaims: There both the fowls and beasts also are called: here the fowls
only. There they are called to the sacrifice: Here to the Supper of the great
God. There to eat flesh and drink blood: here only to eat flesh: There to
eat the flesh of the Mighty and the Princes of the earth: here to eat the flesh
of Kings, Captains, mighty men, of horses, and of them that ride on them, of
freemen and bondmen, of small and great, etc. The sense of both Allegories is
the same.

This indeed shall not Litterallie be accomplished at the last judgment for
the birds of the air, and beasts of the field, with all the elements shall be
consumed with fire. But under this similitude is set forth the horror of the
last judgment. For as after some bloody combat, the Ravenous birds, (as
Crows, Ravens, Kites and such like Harpies) fly to the prey (as it were to
some great Feast) and feed upon the dead carkeises: so after the like manner
the enemies being overthrown by a great slaughter, and torn as it were by
vultures, shall be cast into the everlasting fire of hell. This supper
therefore is the judgment of God it self, by which the wicked shall be
consumed.

He calls it, the Supper of the great God] Because it shall be prepared by him.
The xxxix argument of Chr. deity.
Now This great God is the same who even now was called the King of kings, and
Lord of lords, viz. Christ the Judge: which again is an evident argument of his
Divinity.

18 That ye may eat the flesh of kings] To wit, of the earth, whom the three
unclean spirits gathered in Harmageddon, to fight against the Lamb in defense
of the Beast, Chap. 16.14.

It seems to be doubtful, whither these kings be those ten, who were (as in
Chap. 17.) to give al their power to the Beast, to fight with the Lamb, and be
overcome by him. The reason of the doubt arises hence, that those ten kings,
should hate the whore, and burn her with fire, that is, destroy Rome, the
seat of Antichrist. But it is not probable that they should defend the Beast,
who shall destroy the whore and seat of the Beast. The thing therefore shall be
thus. If not all, yet certainly many of those Ten Kings, forsaking the Papacy,
shall turn to Christ and destroy Rome: And that which many shall do, all are
said to do; yet some shall still adhere to Popery, who, after the burning of
Rome shall prepare themselves to this battle in defense of the Pope. These
shall draw all the other Kings of the Earth (the adversaries of the Gospel in
Asia, Africa, America) into the society of this war, and so with joint forces
shall go to oppress the Gospel of Christ. But while they thus plot, God will
be present, and prepare this supper for the birds of heaven, that is, Christ
shall come from heaven to judgment, and cast Antichrist with his raging kings
and associates into hell fire.

Now he promises diverse sorts of flesh (as it were variety of dainties) unto
the fowls, not only of kings, but also of Captains, Mighty men, them that
sit on horses; to intimate the greatness and sumptuousness of the Supper. For
variety of messes delights. Now it is an Allusion unto the diverse orders, of
which great Armies usually consist, and are led, all whose flesh being given to
the birds to be devoured of them, shows that all of them shall utterly perish,
and not one escape the hand of the Judge.

19. And I saw the Beast] Hitherto of the Heavenly Armies and CHRIST their
Captain: Now he briefly touches the opposite Army, with their Leader
Antichrist, and describes the event of the Battle. The Jesuit at length
confesses this Beast to be Antichrist. Rib, Apoc. 19. S. 31.
Now this Beast is the same which John saw before Chap. 13. and Chap. 17. (as
Alcasar acknowledges Page 864.) Therefore he calls him emphatically (...)
that Beast: whence it appears that Ribera without any show of truth did idly
feine this Beast (in Chapter 17.) The beast is Antichrist.
to be the devil.

Furthermore he saw not the Beast alone, but with the Kings of the Earth and
their Armies. These Kings shall be all the Vassals and friends of the POPE,
which shall seek to defend him after the destruction of Rome. They shall not be
the Ten, because some of those ten shall hate Rome, and lay her wast.

To make warre] He shows the madness and fury of Antichrist and the Kings, who
will presume to join battle with the King of kings, and Lord of lords, with
Christ, I say, the Heavenly Judge, and against the Angels, his Armies, the
least of whom is able in a moment to destroy millions of adversaries. This
therefore shall be more then the furious (...) of the Giants. But let us see
the event.

20. And the Beast was taken] The event of the battle is unfortunate to the
Beast and Kings. In the first conflict their Armies are scattered and put to
flight: so some (as it happens after the routing of Armies) are taken, and
all the rest of them slain. The victory remains on Christ's side and his Army.

Now he distinctly expounds what befell the Beast, and what the rest. Great
Armies do many times fight a long while with doubtful success. Here. at the
first brunt the hostile Army is routed, the Beast taken, Gr. (...) bound or
fettered. The word (...) is familiarly used in John's Gospel, and properly
signifies to take, or apprehend, as you may see John 7.30.32.44. Chap. 8.20.
and Chap. 10.39. and Chap. 11.57. and 21.3.10. etc. Here the Beast, though he
be monstrous, seven-headed, full of horns, and guarded with a strong band of
Kings and Confederates, notwithstanding is without difficulty apprehended and
taken, to wit, by Christ the Captain. Now the Leader being taken, what can the
rest of the Army do? Here now the fight is ended, now they cast away their
arms, and they would willingly fly, but cannot, every one of them is slain:
yet first he shows the miserable lot or condition of the Beast and his
Companion. With the Beast also is taken the False-prophet, the individual
Achates and Orator of the Beast. Of this False-prophetal so mention is made
before Chapter 16.13. but is not there set forth with any marks: Here with
two, That he wrought miracles before the Beast, The false Prophet is the same
with the Beast with two horns.
and that he deceived the stigmatized worshippers of the Beasts Image. Whence
it plainly appears that this False-prophet is that other Beast with two
horns, Chap. 13.11. for he is there said to do these things. Now howsoever
he showed before, that both Beasts in a diverse respect figured out one
Antichrist: Notwithstanding as before the Spirit represented him by two Beasts,
also by a Beast with a woman sitting thereon: so now he speaks of the Beast
and of the False-prophet, as it were of two distinct persons: because before
with the Pope Antichrist or Head, he joined the Senate of Cardinals, and the
whole Clergy, Architects, and ministers of deceits and wickedness. These
therefore shall go forth with the Beast to war against Christ, as it were
ALATERE on the side of the General. But they shall justly suffer for their
madness, for the Beast and they shall be taken together. Furthermore touching
the signs of the False-prophet, of the Character of the Beast, and of his
Image. I will here repeat nothing as being before treated of Chap. 13. Now we
come to the punishment of the Beast, and the False-prophet.

Both were cast alive into a Lake of fire burning with brimstone] IN STAGNVM
IGNIS ARDENS, so is the natural reading in all Greek Copies, and also in the
Old Latin. Notwithstanding Ribera contendeth that the truest reading is, IN
STAGNVM IGNIS ARDENTIS SVLPHVRE, and that it is so in the Greek. But it seems
the Jesuit looked not upon the Text, for all Copies have it constantly (...).
The Kings Edition of Montanus without the article (...) as Chap. 14.10. where
(...) cannot be rendered ardentis but ardens, because it cohereth not with the
genitive (...) fire, but with the accusative (...) Lake: though the sense be
the same in both readings: for both the fire, and the lake by the fire, burns
with brimstone. This must be the miserable end and destruction of the Roman
Beast and his sacred Clergy: to wit, Number. 16.33.
like to that of Corah, Dathar, and Abiram, who of old seditiously rising up
against Moses, were swallowed up alive of the Earth, and so cast into Hell. For
this is no obscure allusion unto that History, as it were unto the type of that
horrible punishment. Not that the Earth shall literally open her mouth and
swallow them up (neither does the Letter say so) but because Christ the Judge
will thrust them alive (that is, not like other men taken away before by
ordinary death) into the most exquisite flames of the burning lake, (as a
horrible example to others) before the rest. For the devil also, whom the
Earth cannot swallow up, shall be cast into the same lake of fire and
brimstone, Chap. 20.10. wherefore it signifies a terrible kind of destruction,
into which the Beast and the False-prophet, shall be cast before their other
associates. For the rest being slain by the sword, shall be cast for a banquet
to the infernal Vultures to be devoured by them. But these shall be cast alive
into the Lake of brimstone. Every of the words serve to amplify the
grievousnesse of the punishment.

Were cast] This shows that it shall be a horrible ruin and fall from the
height of power and riot, with which they are now puffed up.

Alive] Death therefore shall not put an end to their punishment, but they
shall be tormented alive for ever. It is more tolerable once to die, and then
to be burnt being dead. But these always living, shall never be altogether
consumed by the fire, but burn in the flames of hell.

Into a lake of fire burning with brimstone] A Periphrasis of hell, which
afterward in Chap. 21.8. is called the second death, that is, eternal: He
calls it metaphorically A Lake of fire: because as fishes in a Lake are
environed with waters, so these shall be covered with infernal fire in the
Lake of hell, then which nothing can be thought on more miserable: yea in the
Lake burning with fire and brimstone, that is, unquencheable, as before in
Chap. 14.10. with many other like places: For brimstone is a most durable
nourisher of fire, and much thereof being cast into the same, makes the flame
unquencheable. Wherefore as Antichrists torment shall be most horrible, so
shall it remain for ever, the which is more clearly mentioned in Chap. 20.
where not only the Beast and False-Prophet, but the devil also shall be cast
into this lake of fire and brimstone, there to be tormented day and night for
ever and ever.

Ribera moves (as he says) a great and difficult Question: How Antichrist
shall be cast alive into the Lake of fire, seeing the Lord will consume him
with the Spirit of his mouth, 2. Thessa. 2.8. After many things he answers:
that properly he is not to be slain, but to remain no more among the living,
be deprived of all power and joy, and brought to the place of the dead. The
Earth, says he, shall suddenly open its mouth for him, and violently he
shallbe carried alive with his False-prophet by devils unto the fire of hell.

But this Question cannot seem great, or difficult, in case we rightly consider
the words of the Apostle. For he says two things touching the destruction of
ANTICHRIST: Neither of which are in the least show repugnant to this place.

First he says not: Whom the Lord will slay: but he says (...), Whom he will
consume with the Spirit of his mouth. This shall be the first degree of the
destruction of Antichrist and his Kingdom: the which has been begun these
hundred years: in which the Lord by the spirit of his mouth, that is, by the
preaching of the Gospel, has, and yet does consume the Papacy more and more:
no otherwise then the flame by burning diminishes and consumes the match: For
as Bellarmine confesses, Lib: 3 de P. R.C. 22.
from that time since we affirmed the Pope to be Antichrist, his Empire has
not only not increased, but always more and more decreased. Whence we see
that Paul's words are not repugnant to the present place: because they speak
nothing of a corporal killing.

Secondly he adds, and shall destroy him by the brightness of his coming:
which again is undoubtedly to be understood not of any corporal slaughter,
but of a total and final destruction; that is, of the last punishment, which
is here revealed unto John, to be accomplished at Christ's last coming to
Judgment. As for other things which Ribera here disputes of, from the
opinions of certain Writers, and from the Sibylls touching the death of
Antichrist, and of the brimstone in Hell, seeing even Alcasar judges them too
uncertain and curious, I leave to their Authors.

21. And the remnant were slain with the sword] That is, (besides the two
Leaders) the Kings, Captains, Soldiers, and Armies of the Beast: Every one of
them were slain. Therefore the overthrow shall be universal. But by whom? By
the sword proceeding out of the mouth of Christ. He goes on in the Metaphor:
for the General being taken and slain, usually the rest of the Army goes to
wrack. None therefore that follow Antichrists Army shall escape unpunished.

But shall not these also be cast into the lake of fire, and be damned for
ever? yes verily, as before he plainly affirms, Chap. 14.9.10. and the
Scripture in other places shows; for all the goats standing on the left hand
shall be sent into everlasting fire, and hear that terrible Sentence: Go ye
cursed into the Everlasting Fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. Mat. 25.41. The destruction therefore of the adversaries is so set
forth, that we may understand the punishment of the Beast and the False-prophet
to be more grievous, and the others somewhat less. For there shall be degrees
also of punishments in hell: and they who have sinned most shall there suffer
forest plagues.

And all the fowls were filled with their flesh] After the overthrow, all the
fowls are gathered together to the Supper, and are filled with the flesh of
the slain: by which is signified the miserable and total destruction of the
wicked.

Ribera here is frivolous, in understanding this properly without a metaphor:
for he feineth, that such a battle shall really happen, and that the Carkeises
of the enemies being left in the fields are to be devoured by the fowls. As if
forsooth this event were rare, and that it were not most frequent, that after
great discomfitures of Armies, the fowls and wild beasts should be filled with
the Carkeises of the slain. But the Holy Ghost persists in the Prophetical
Type before expounded, Verse 17. intimating that what of old was literally
done to God and Magog, should allegorically be fulfilled in these, after such a
manner as is agreeable to the last Judgment: for then indeed all the ungodly
shall be killed with the sword of Christ's mouth, that is, being by his
Sentence adjudged to the everlasting torments of hell, they shall be cast as a
prey unto the infernal harpies: but first Antichrist and his purpled Senate
shall be thrown alive into the lake of fire; that is, be tormented with more
exquisite tortures in Hell. This therefore shall be the end of the Roman
Antichrist and his Associates. And here ends the sixth, and most notable
Vision of all.

The Preface of the Seventh VISION.
Which is a Summary Repetition of the former, touching the binding, unloosing,
and judging of the DRAGON: And of the Heavenly Jerusalem, Contained in CHAPTERS
20.21.22.
THe last Vision does summarily represent the Universal History of the
Church, from the publishing of the Gospel among the Gentiles, until the
glorification of the Church, under the type of a Dragon bound a thousand years
in hell: afterward let loose: at last with all the ungodly cast into the lake
of fire: also of the new heaven and earth, and of the Heavenly Jerusalem built
with ineffable magnificence, from Chap. 20. unto verse 6. of Chap. 22.

This Vision therefore being as it were a Recapitulation of the former, does
answer indeed in respect of all the four Acts, unto the three Vniversals of the
second, third, and fourth: but as it respects the two latter Acts, the two
particulars of the fifth and the sixth: Lastly unto all in respect of the last
Act, which is the Catastrophe of the condition of the wicked, and the
calamities of the Church, because it propounds the same very clearly by a far
more evident Hypotyposis or description of the last judgment, the torments of
the wicked, the redemption and glorification of the Saints.

The first Act of this Vision is a Proposition, touching the overthrow of
Paganism through the coming of Christ, and the propagation of the Gospel unto
the Gentiles, Satan being bound by the hand of Christ, that he might no longer
seduce them: and of the various condition of the Church, partly bloody under
the Roman Tyrants, by whom many millions of the Saints were slain with the
sword for the Gospels sake: partly most corrupted and afflicted under the
Roman Antichrist, who forced all to worship him and his Image, and to receive
his Character: all that worshipped not, or received not his character he most
cruelly persecuted.

This Act is contained in the four first verses of this Chapter: The analogy
and in the first part indeed touching the binding of the Dragon, that he
might no more seduce the Nations, it answers to the first Seal of the second
Vision, where Christ riding on the white horse of the gospel, conquered among
the nations, Chap. 6. ver. 2. but in special to the woman traveling to bring
forth the man-child, and to Michael fighting for the woman and overcoming the
Dragon, in the third Vision, Chap. 12. But in the other part touching them that
were beheaded, it answers to the second Seal of the second Vision, where
there came forth a red horse, the Church as it were being in blood, Chap. 6.
ver. 4. and to the three former Trumpets of the third Vision, Chap. 8. ver. 7.
Lastly in the third part, touching them that worshipped not the Beast, it
answers to the fifth Trumpet of the third Vision, Chap. 9. ver. 1. and to the
raging of the Beast in the fourth Vision, Chap. 13. ver. 1.

The second Act is an Antithesis of the Proposition, so far as it respects the
two latter parts, declaring the consolation of the godly that were beheaded for
the testimony of Jesus, and killed by the Beast for denying to worship him,
that they should live and reign with Christ in blessedness.

This Act is mingled with the former, The Analogy.
ver. 4. and is continued verse. 5.6. and answers partly to the fifth Seal of
the second Vision, where white robes were given to the souls of the Martyrs,
crying under the Altar, etc. Chap. 6. v. 9. partly to the joyful multitude of
the Sealed ones, in the same Vision, Chap. 7.10. and to the said multitude of
Sealed ones standing with the Lamb on the mountain, in Vision fourth, Chap.
14. ver. 1. as also to the multitude of harpers standing upon the Sea of glass
and singing to God, in the Fifth Vision, Chap. 15. ver. 2.

The third Act is an amplification of the calamities and Combats of the Church
after the thousand years, and the loosing of the Dragon under both
Antichrists, viz. the Western, who by the seducement of Satan, shall under the
name of Christ bring in new Pagamsme: the Eastern also, who under the name of
Gog and Magog shall most grievously trouble the Christian world yet he shall
not be able to overthrow the Church, God from Heaven protecting the same, and
casting fire upon the adversaries, Chap. 20. verse 7.8. and the first part of
verse 9.

This Act answers to the Sixth Trumpet of the third Vision, The Analogy.
touching the four Angels let loose at Euphrates, and with an innumerable Army
wasting the third part of the earth, chap. 9.14.

Lastly the fourth Act shall be the Catastrophe, or end of the State of all
things, terrible indeed and mortal to the Wicked: because they shall all be
cast with their head, the Dragon, into the lake of fire, that they might cease
to rage against Christ, and that in the last judgment, which is represented by
a most evident Type, from the latter member of the ninth verse of the twentieth
Chapter, unto the end of the said Chapter. But joyful and plausible to the
church and godly, because, the face of heaven and earth being renewed in the
heavenly Jerusalem, they shall enjoy eternal happiness and glory with God and
the Lamb: Chap. 21. the whole, and the first five verses of Chapter 22.

This Act therefore has two parts: in the former touching the punishments of
the ungodly it answers to the Harvest and Vintage of the fourth Vision, chapter
14. and to the seventh Vial of the hail like Talents, in the fifth vision
chap. 16.21, and to the victory of Christ casting the Beast and the
False-prophet, and Kings of the Earth with their Armies into the lake of fire
and brimstone, in the sixth Vision, Chap. 19.20. In the other part touching the
felicity of the godly, it answers unto the end of the second Vision,
describing the blessedness of the godly before the throne serving God day and
night, Chap. 7.

This is the true Order of the last Vision, which indeed seems to be exceeding
obscure in the three first Acts thereof, and has diversely troubled all
Interpreters: But being compared with the former, after the manner which I have
showed, it shall receive much light, that we may not curiously or dangerously
grope in darkness.

The Argument, Parts, and Analysis of CHAPTER XX.
THe Dragon is bound with a chain, and by an Angel cast into the bottomless
Pit a thousand years, that be might no longer seduce the Nations: In the mean
while the souls of the Martyrs and the Conquerours of the Beast and his image,
do live and reign with Christ, as the Blessed and Holy Priests of God and of
Christ, the remnant remaining in death. After the thousand years the Dragon
being let loose, does again seduce the Nations, and raises Gog and Magog to
battle against the camp of the Saints: but they being consumed with fire from
Heaven, the Dragon is cast into the Lake of fire and brimstone; and the
Universal Judgment of the dead is set forth.

The Parts are three. THe First of the Dragons binding a thousand years: in 6.
verses The Second of his loosing after the thousand years: and of his attempt,
verse. 7.8.9. The Third of the casting of the devil and all adversaries into
the lake of fire: from the latter part of ver. 9. unto the end of the Chapter.


In the first part which concerns the binding of the Dragon, 1. Is noted the
Author, An Angel descending from Heaven: and the Insiruments, the Key of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain, Verse 1. 2. His forceable falling on the
Dragon: He laid hold on him. The Dragons Surname and binding: and the time of
thousand years, ver. 2. The place also and the manner of the imprisonment: He
cast him into the bottomless Pit, and shut him up, etc. and the end, that he
should deceive the Nations no more: and the time of his loosing: Afterward he
must be loosed a little season, ver. 3. 3. By a certain Prolepsis or
prevention: whither in the mean while the affairs of the Church should be in
peace? and whither the Dragon being bound, Tyrants should not persecute the
godly, and the Beast rage and invade the kingdom? John sees the souls of
them that were beheaded for the testimony of Jesus, and them that have not
worshipped the Beast, sitting on thrones, living and reigning with Christ those
thousand years, ver. 4.

Whose happiness is figured out by the Antithesis of the wicked, who lived not
again during those thousand years, but remained in the death of sin, ver. 5.
And it is amplified by an Exclamation, ver. 6.




In the second part touching the loosing of the Dragon is showed, 1. when, and
whence the Dragon was loosed, Ver. 7.2. What he attempted being loosed: to
seduce again the Nations, and to gather Gog and Magog to battle, Ver. 8.3.
What was the success of the attempt: They compass the camp of the Saints
about, and the beloved City: this attempt is broken off in the former part of
verse 9.

In the third part, which is the Catastrophe of the Gogish battle: the
destruction of the adversaries is described. 1. Specially, both the overthrow
of Gog and Magog in the latter part of Verse 9. as also the punishment of the
devil himself, verse 10.2. Generally, the last judgment of all: In which
type is noted 1. the majesty and preparation of the Judge, ver. 11.2. The
guilty to be judged: all the dead, and the sentence taken out of the Books,
ver. 12. 3. A prevention touching such as were swallowed up of the Sea, Death,
and Hell: that they were all delivered up, ver. 13. 4. The execution of the
Sentence both on the last adversaries, Death and Hell, Verse. 14. as all
others, Verse 15.

CHAPTER XX. The First part of the CHAPTER.
Of the DRAGONS binding a thousand Years.
1. And I saw an Angel come down from Heaven, having the Key of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand. 2. And he laid hold on the
Dragon that old Serpent, which is the devil and Satan, and bound him a
thousand years. 3. And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and
set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more: till the
thousand years should be fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed a little
season. 4. And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given
unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of
Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither
his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their
hands, and they lived, and reigned with Christ a thousand years. 5. But the
rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished. This
is the first resurrection. 6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the
first Resurrection: on such the second death has no power, but they shall be
Priests of God, and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.
THE COMMENTARY.
ANd I saw] Beza: Then I saw: which must be understood of the order of the
Visions (for this he saw after the former) not of the order of the events, as
if this taking of the Dragon, The order observeable
and these thousand years should in time follow the damnation of the Beast: For
seeing the Beast is Antichrist, certainly his destruction and casting into
hell, shall not be but by the brightness of Christ's coming, and in the last
Judgment, as was showed in the foregoing Vision. 2. These. 2:8
But after the last judgment, there shall not be a thousand years in which
Satan shall be bound, and these things be done, which John now sees. And
therefore the Events of this Vision shall not follow, but in time go before
the events of the foregoing Vision.

This is a certain Argument, that this Vision is diverse from the former: and
is no particular Vision, which supplies the former: and that in the Visions a
continuated order of History, or Times, is not to be observed, as most
Interpreters imagine.

Wherefore after all other apparitions, This last Vision is a recapitulation of
all the foregoing visions.
this last Vision (as it were in place of a conclusion) is exhibited unto John,
in which under new types, and the wonderful binding, loosing, and condemnation
of the Dragon, and of the description of the Heavenly Jerusalem, is set forth
unto John the entire face of the Church, prefiguring the History from the first
gathering thereof among the Gentiles, until its last glorification in Heaven,
not indeed by a vain repetition of the same things, but a most profitable
revealing of things diverse from the former mysteries: viz. touching the
overthrow of Paganism among the Gentiles through the coming of Christ, of the
tempests and distractions of the last thousand years: with which (besides the
cruelty of the Beast) the Church shall be exercised, and of the most joyful end
of all the calamities of the Church. For touching the First, John till now had
seen nothing: Of the Second, he had seen somewhat, but obscurely, under the
sixth Trumpet: Of the third also he had heard but very little by one of the
four and twenty Elders, toward the end of the second Vision. Now it was very
much for John's (and ours) instruction and consolation, that none of these
things should be hid from him. Therefore, there was weighty reasons, why after
the other Visions, this also at last should be exhibited. Thus much briefly
touching the Order.

An Angel come down from Heaven] This Angel figures out CHRIST, as the
adjuncts and effects do prove. For he has the Key of the bottomless Pit, that
is, the power of hell and death, which Christ before attributes to himself,
Genesis 3:15. Heb. 2.14. Luke 11.22
Chap. 18. ver. 18. and he binds Satan, which is proper to Christ: for he it
is, that bruised the head of the (old) Serpent, Who through death destroyed him
that had the power of death, that is, the devil: He, I say, is that Stronger,
taking the house and dividing the spoil of the strong armed man: Neither is it
new that Christ should be represented by an Angel in this REVELATION, as we
see Chap. 7.2. Chap. 8.3. Chap. 10.1, etc.

But that it should be some ministerial Angel, who (while Christ was
suffering on the Cross) coming from Heaven, bound the devil in the
bottomless Pit, is a fiction of Ribera's, contrary to the truth of the
Gospel, Tob. 8.3.
and is not in the least to be proved by the Apocryphal History touching
Raphael, apprehending the devil, and binding him in the deserts of Egypt.

John therefore saw Christ in the form of an Angel, not falling, but
descending from Heaven, to wit, by his Incarnation: Ephesians. 4.10. Ioh. 3.13.
He that descended is the same also that ascended. And no man ascended up to
Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the son of man which is in
Heaven.

But thou will say, to what purpose was it, that John should see the
Incarnation of the Son of God, a thing known and past some while before? Yea it
was to great purpose, at least in a word to note the original of the Author
of so great a work, which then began to be done, and which was to continue a
thousand years, that Satan being restrained from seducing the nations, the
fulness of the Gentiles should come into the Church, he therefore saw Christ
descending from Heaven, that he should bind Satan, that is, destroy the works
of the devil, as other, so chiefly that horrible Idolatry and diabolical
worshippings, by which (Judea excepted) he had hitherto seduced all Nations.

This end of the Angels descending, and this cause of the Dragons binding is
plainly declared ver. 3. For if Satan should have been permitted to sway any
longer among the Gentiles: in vain the Apostles had preached the Gospel unto
them. Therefore Satan was to be bound, that is, by the singular power of God
restrained, that he should no longer bewitch the Nations, who by the preaching
of the Gospel were to be gathered unto the Church of Christ.

Now I see no reason why we should leave so clear and plain an
Interpretation: especially seeing such as like not the same, allege nothing
more probable or agreeable to the present Type. The first birth or beginning of
the Church gathered of the Jews and Gentiles, was somewhat more manifestly
showed unto John, under the Type of a woman in travel, Chapter 12. unto which
the History of this Chapter does much accord, as I touched in the Preface of
the Vision.

Having the Key of the bottomless Pit] Touching this Key and Pit, See Chap. 1.
ver. 18. and Chap. 9.1.

The Key of the bottomless pit is the power of Hell. This Christ has one way,
Antichrist another way, as was there showed. The Pope has the same by
prevarication: How christ and the Pope have the keys of the bottomless pit.
Christ by power given him of the Father. The Pope has it to open the Pit of
Hell, and thence to draw out the pestilent smoke of his doctrine, and the
hellish Locusts. Christ has it to shut up the Dragon in the bottomless pit.

A great Chaine] That is long and strong enough, to bind the most cruel
adversary, as the form of a Dragon Chap. 12.13. shows him to be. This
Chain does metaphorically denote the omnipotency of Christ, and all other
means by which he has bound Satan, as his Passion, Cross, Death, and
Burial, Resurrection, Ascension, the sending of the Holy Ghost, and chiefly
the doctrine of the Gospel, by the preaching whereof, Christ has as strongly
bound Satan, by destroying and rooting out Paganism among the Gentiles, and
converting them to the Faith: as when a mighty adversary is bound by the
Conqueror with a great chain.

2. And he laid hold on the Dragon] What is this, but the casting out of the
Dragon, and his Angels into the earth by Michael, as in Chap. 12.9? This Angel
therefore and Michael there spoken of, is one, viz. Christ, whose Victory over
Satan was there figured out generally, that he should no more accuse the Elect
in the sight of God: but here specially, that he should no more seduce the
Nations, as it is in verse 3.

And that we may certainly know that this Dragon is the same, whom Michael
there did vanquish, The same dragon that is here bound, was overcome in chap.
12.
he is here set forth by the same Titles: The old Serpent, the devil, Satan:
the reason of which we there expounded. Now this so exact a description does
altogether constrain us to understand here by the Dragon none other save the
devil and Satan. For wherefore should he be defined with so many names which
always in Scripture denote the devil, if some other adversary ought to be
understood. Therefore in this place I can no more subscribe to Brightman (who
will have this Angel to be Constantine, the Dragon Maxentius and Maximinus,
whom he destroyed for the good of the Church) then to Lyra interpreting this
Dragon of the Emperor Henry V. being bound with the Chain of Excommunication
by Pope Calixtus.

Bound him] This binding, says ANDREAS, is the casting down of the devil,
which was done by the force of the Lords Passion: The binding of Satan.
for thereby the power of Satan is bound: a token of which thing was seen in
the destruction and overthrow of the heathenish Idolatry, the demolishing of
Idolatrous Temples, the ceasing of Sacrifices on their Altars, and at length
the knowledge and obeying the will of God revealed throughout the whole world:
the sum is, It is Christ's victory over Satan, of which mention is made in the
Gospel: The Prince of this world is judged. Io. 16.11. Luke 10.18 Ioh. 12.13
I saw Satan as lightning fall from Heaven: Now shall the Prince of this world
be cast forth. But the manner of his binding is more exactly expressed in the
following verse.

3. And cast him into the bottomless Pit] That is, thrust him, as it were
fettered, into the Infernal Prison.

And shut him] For, shut him up, locking as it were the bottomless Pit, that
the Dragon might not come forth.

And set a seal upon him] To wit, on the door of the bottomless Pit, that
neither he should break out, or any dare to break open the prison before the
time: as the Jews sealed the door of Christ's Sepulcher. Mat. 27.66. Dan: 6.17.
And Darius with his own Signet sealed the Den of Lions, that there might come
no deliverance to Daniel, save only from God. All these things are spoken
after the manner of men, to signify the fulness of Christ's victory over
Satan, for by his power and dominion Satan is kept as fast bound, as a
Malefactor in Prison, and shackled by the Judge. An evidence hereof we have
often in the Gospel, where the devils beseech Christ that he would not send
them into the bottomless Pit, or prison: Luke 8.31
but the end which is added, is well to be observed

That he should no more seduce the Nation] To wit, with so free and full sway
as formerly he had done. The Particle (...) no more, is very emphaticall. This
is the end for which Christ bound Satan, that he should deceive the Nations no
more. Formerly therefore he had freely seduced them: now he is bound, or
hindered from further seducing them, that is, from hindering any longer the faith
and preaching of the Gospel unto the Nations.

Now hereby is intimated, that Paganism, Aug: l, 4. de C. D. c, 25 and L. 6.
c. 2, etc.
in which diverse kinds of gods were worshipped in stead of the true God, the
Sacrifices that were offered to Idols, the Oracles which they had from devils,
with the exercise of their foul and ungodly worship, came not so much by
humane invention, as by the deceit of the devil: but after Christ's coming and
suffering on the Cross, and the Gospel by the preaching of the Apostles being
published, not only to the Jews, but by little and little to the Gentiles
also: hereupon the Oracles of the devils were altogether silenced, the Groves,
Altars, and Temples of the false gods began to lie wast: yea the Gentiles
detesting the Impostures of Satan, embraced the faith of Christ, giving over
their Magical Books to Vulcan: a remarkable example whereof we read touching
the Ephesians, Act. 19.8.

Suidas also records that Augustus enquiring of the Oracle of Apollo, what
man should rule after him, received this Answer from Satan.

(...)
(...)
(...)
An Hebrew Child, the King of Gods
Commands me to avoid
This place, and forthwith to return
To Pluto's darkesome shade.
From these our Altars bid thou art
In silence therefore to depart.
Augustus having received this Answer went away, and set up an Altar in
Capitolium, with this Inscription in Roman Letters. (...). THIS IS THE ALTAR
OF THE FIRST BEGOTTEN OF GOD.

Thus therefore the Angel has bound the Dragon, Christ by his coming
overthrew Paganism, delivered the Gentiles from the seduction of Satan, and
brought them to the light of the Gospel and faith of the Church.

But it may be demanded: Was not Satan of old thrust into prison, and bound
with the chains of darkness, as it is said, 2. Pet. 2.1. and Jude ver. 6.
Besides, has not Satan even after Christ's coming raged powerfully, and yet
does?

Unto the former it is answered: that the evil Angels indeed from the time of
their first Apostacy, were adjudged unto the prison of hell: yet not so, but
that they might very freely go abroad to hurt the sons of men, so far as the
judgments of God should permit and suffer the same. The devil therefore by
his free raging in Paganism, held as it were his Kingdom among the Gentiles
before Christ's coming, by Gods permission. But now by Christ's coming from
Heaven, Satan is said, by a special judgment, to be bound, and thrust into
the bottomless Pit, because Christ did chiefly destroy his works and kingdom
among the Gentiles, when by the light of the Gospel he opened the eyes of the
blind, that the deceits of Satan being discovered and condemned by them, they
might give themselves on to Christ.

Unto the latter I say: That Satan has very many Emissary Angels under him, by
whom (howsoever bound himself yet) he is hurtful to mankind, and to the
Church: and cease not to reign in the hearts of the children of
disobedience. But the head being bound, what should the servants do? for
though God permit these to wander abroad the thousand years, notwithstanding
they could not any longer uphold Paganism.

But thou will say, In Chap. 12.9. not only the Dragon is said to be cast into
the Earth by Michael, Christ, but his Angels were also cast down with him. I
answer. That more general Type of the fourth Vision noted, that the devil
with his Angels, was so overcome by the death and resurrection of Christ, as
that neither he, nor they could suppress the Church in its birth and growth.
But this more special Type of the last Vision denotes, that the Prince of
devils was so bound in the first thousand years, that neither he himself, nor
his Emissary Angels could any longer uphold Paganism, Satan's binding is not to
be understood absolutely.
or hinder the course of the Gospel among the Gentiles. The binding of Satan
therefore must not be understood absolutely, as if he then ceased altogether to
do mischief, but comparatively, and with limitation, that he could no longer
bewitch the nations with such gross Idol-worship, as he had before done, Lib.
20. de C. D. cap. 7.
of which Augustine: To this end, (says he) the devil is bound and shut up in
the bottomless Pit, that now he should not seduce the Nations, of which the
Church consists, which before he powerfully seduced, so long as they were
out of the Church: for neither is it said, that he should deceive none, but
that now he should not seduce the Nations, in which undoubtedly he would have
the Church to be understood. And in the following Chapter he expounds the binding
more fully: The binding of the devil is this, viz. not to be permitted to
exercise the whole tentation, which he can either by force, or fraud, to seduce
and draw men unto him, by violent or fraudulent deceiving of them: the which if
it should have been permitted in so long time, and in so great weakness of
many, he would have cast down very many whom the LORD would not suffer to be
overcome, and have hindered the faithful from believing, which that he might
not do, he is bound. Thus he. Enough of the binding, how, and why Satan is
bound. Let us see the time; It is said in ver. 2. He bound him for a thousand
years: Here he says, That he should deceive the Nations no more, till the
thousand years be fulfilled: and after that, he must be loosed a little
season. In which he shows three things.

First, how long he shall be kept bound: not always, but a definite, or set
time, until those thousand years should be fulfilled: so that Satan's
Imprisonment shall continue a thousand years.

Secondly, what shall be afterward: He must be loosed, that is, from his chain
out of the bottomless Pit, to rage or sway freely. For as the binding was a
restraint that he could not rage freely among the Nations: so his loosing shall
be a permission to sway freely among them, yea among the Christians also.

But least thou should demand, How satan must beloosed.
why this hurtful Dragon shall not rather be kept up in prison? he says,
(...), He must be loosed, that is, set at liberty, viz. by the Angel Christ,
who had bound him before: which may not be understood of coaction, as if he
should force Christ to let him go, and that Christ through weakness could
keep him in captivity no longer: nor yet of any absolute necessity, as if God
could not do otherwise: but of a necessity of the divine Counsel; the reasons
of whose counsel are known by the events, Why God would have the Dragon loosed.
which shall follow the loosing, ver. 8.9. It seemed good to the divine wisdom
again to make use of Satan's actions after his loosing, for to execute some of
his judgments in the latter times, in the deceiving of the Nations, and Gog
and Magog, that they should trouble the camp of the Saints: but at length be
devoured by fire from Heaven.

Therefore the Dragon must be loosed, because God has so decreed, and that for
most righteous causes: First, that it might appear how great the fury and power
of Satan is, unless he be restrained by God. Secondly, that the glory of God
might be illustrated in the admirable overthrow of the adversaries, and the
preservation of the Saints. For if he should never be loosed, says Austin,
Lib. 20, de C. d. cap. 8.
his malign power would the less appear, and the most faithful patience of
the holy City be the less tried: to be short, it would be the less discerned
how the Omnipotent God has so well made use of Satan to his own hurt, who
has not altogether taken him away from the tentation of the Saints, although
he be cast forth according to the inward man from true believers, that they
might withstand his assaults without: and in this respect has bound him, least
innumerable persons should be infected by the pouring out, and exercise of his
full malice: or that such who ought to increase and multiply the Church (as
some by coming to the faith, others already believing) should be kept off and
withdrawn from the same.

Thirdly, he shows how long Satan shall freely go about after his loosing: A
little season: which Ribera according to the common opinion of Papists,
understands to be three years and an half, or of the Kingdom of ANTICHRIST:
but this cannot stand, because the Beast, or Antichrist, shall also reign some
while before this little season, the thousand years yet during, as shall
appear from verse 4. Alcasar makes it to be a few years or days, from the end
of the thousand years, unto the day of Judgment: But neither can this stand:
because the things shall not be of a few years or days which are spoken
touching the Dragon being let loose, verse 8. I ASSENT indeed that the last
time, from the end of the thousand years, until the day of Judgment is here
to be understood. But this time cannot be meant of a few years or days, as I
shall show, verse 8. What the little season of the Dragons loosing is.
but shall contain some ages. Yea now already from the end of the thousand
years, to wit, from the year of our Lord M LXXIII, when the Beast, Gregory
VII. began to reign with both swords, five Ages, and that which runs on, has
hitherto dured, and shall dure to the day of Judgment.

Notwithstanding he rightly calls the same a little time, for many reasons,
Why it is called little
whither we respect GOD, to whom a thousand years are as yesterday, the seventy
years of the Captivity a small moment: Or the Dragon: unto whom all the time of
his raging is but a little and a short season, though it continue some ages:
Psalm. 90.4. Isay. 52.7.
(See before in Chap. 12: 12.) because his rage and malice can never be
satiated. Or the ages past since the Creation, in comparison of which John
calls the whole time of the Gospel the last hour. 1. Ioh. 2.18
Or lastly (and so I think John intended) in respect of these thousand years
which that short time shall not exceed, but shall be shorter then the same:
because God according to the promise, will for the Elects sake shorten those
days of Satan's rage, and of the Gogish war, Mat. 24.22.
by the sudden coming of Christ to judgment, the which is also intimated in
this Prophecy, v. 9.

To these I add a moral Reason: that as for the comfort of the Godly, the
whole time of our tribulation in this life, is by the Apostle called, A light
affliction for a moment, 2. Cor, 4.17
although in it self it is often long and heavy: so for the comfort of the
Godly, the time of Satan's raging is called a little season, least the Godly for
fear thereof should be dis-heartened: For his rage shall dure but a short
season: now all things that are of small continuance, are tolerable, though
great, says Cicero. Cicero de Ancit.
It commends also the wisdom, goodness, and power of God, who knows indeed
how to prove, and exercise his Church: Notwithstanding he permits not Satan to
rage any longer, then himself pleases, and so far as may stand with our
weakness.

But now at length we come to treat of the Thousand years: The difficulty about
the thousand years.
And I confess that I take in hand this argument tremblingly: because I see
that many Interpreters, both Ancient and Modern, have stumbled at this stone:
And the more I think upon it, the less I find how to unty the knot that has
troubled so many: And having done all that I can, I find it more easy to say
what these thousand years are not, then what they are. For it seems that the
Holy Ghost was pleased as it were to seal this Book to all men by this dark
mystery, the searching whereof might indeed exercise our study, but restrain
the boldness of a rash definition. Wherefore I do not promise, after all
others, so to unloose this knot touching the thousand years, and millenary
reign of the Martyrs, as to satisfy all men: but will speak what the LORD
has given me to see, following the steps of others so far as I may.

First observe, that the thousand years are here six times iterated.

Thrice it is said that Satan was bound for a thousand years and afterward
loosed, verse 2.3.7.

Twice it is said that the Saints shall reign a thousand years with Christ,
ver. 4.6.

Once, that the rest of the dead lived not again, till the thousand years were
finished, v. 5.

There are therefore a thousand years of Satan's captivity, and of the rest of
the dead: There are also a thousand years of the Saints reigning with Christ:
Whence arises the first necessary Question of all, Whether these thousand
years be the same, or diverse?

Of old, the Chiliasts or Millenaries affirmed them to be diverse (whose
opinion is anon to be examined:) And some learned Interpreters of these times
also, and among the rest, BRIGHTMAN, These thousand years, says he, in which
the Saints shall reign with Christ, do begin where the former ended. Thus Satan
should be bound a thousand years, and afterward Christ should reign a thousand
years.

But I judge that one, and the same term of a thousand years is denoted, and
the reason is plain in the Text: because in verse 2. and 6. the thousand years
are said to be (...) without an article: but four times afterward with an
article (...), These thousand years, emphatically, and significantly, as if he
should say, Satan's Imprisonment shall continue a thousand years, and during
these thousand years, the Martyrs shall live, and reign with Christ, afterward
Satan shall be loosed. Wherefore the same term of a thousand years is noted:
although in ver. 6. it be more largely extended, as there we shall see.

There is also another reason, ab incommodo: for it seems not convenient to
say, that the Saints, after Satan's loosing, and when he again rages, should
then reign: Nay, rather they shall reign, Satan being as yet bound: for this
raging enemy being loosed, would scarce suffer them to reign.

Besides, the other opinion does with the Chiliasts and Papists too much
determinate, and circumscribe the time of Christ's coming to Judgment, against
the express saying of Christ: Mat. 24.26:
Of that hour and day no man knows, etc. And therefore I say, that both
Satan's binding, and the Saints reigning with Christ, shall be in the same
thousand years.

Now touching these things, It is demanded, I. Whither the thousand years be
definitely, or indefinitely to be understood? II. If definitely, where they
are to begin and end? III. What condition John did see the Saints to be in,
during these thousand years. IV. What Satan is said to attempt, after the
accomplishing of these thousand years.


In the expounding of these Questions, those things are contained which follow
in Verse 11.

I. WHITHER THE THOUSAND YEARS BE DEFINITELY TO BE UNDERSTOOD: whether I say,
the thousand years be definitely or indefinitely to be understood, in both
appears a difficulty. If thou say indefinitely, taking a thousand for many,
or for all unto the end, then in vain it were said: Afterward Satan shall be
loosed. If definitely, then the difficulty will be so to expound the beginning
and ending thereof, and how in the mean time Satan was bound, afterward
loosed, that we run not into the error of the Chilasts, or some other
inconvenience.

Augustine, whom most of the ancient, and latter Writers follow, Lib. 20, de C.
D. cap. 7
understood the thousand years indefinitely, that is, for the whole time from
Christ's death and resurrection, (when Satan began to be bound, that he should
no more seduce the Nations) unto the end of the world: because that sometimes
in Scripture a thousand signifies indefinitely, a very long time; as: Psalm.
105.8
He has remembered his Covenant for ever: the word which he commanded unto a
thousand generations: Notwithstanding he does not precisely extend the thousand
years, unto the end of the world, but until the time of Antichrist, who, as he
thought, (following herein the error of his Predecessors, mislead by Papias)
should come in the last four years of the world, and reign three years and an
half: but he questioneth whether Antichrists time should be added to the
thousand years, or rather to the little season, in which Satan is to be loosed.

This opinion Ribera prosecutes at large, showing, Com. in Apoc. cap. 20 N.
36.37 etc.
that these thousand years signify the whole time from Christ's Resurrection,
unto Antichrists Kingdom: because by thousand, in Scripture we often
understand a very great, and indefinite number, Joh. 9.3. Psalm. 91.7. 1. Sam.
18.7. Psalm. 90.4. etc. The like also we find in Heathenish Writers. Virgil. 1.
Aeneid. 11. Aene. 2. Pers. Sat. 5. Ovid. Met. Lib. 13. etc.

But this opinion cannot stand, for many causes: for first, we may not rashly,
and without necessity go from the Letter to Figures: Now here no necessity
urges us to turn from the propriety of the letter (about the thousand years)
unto a trope of indefinite signification.

Besides, neither the Subject, Years, nor the Epithet, Thousand, does here
admit a Trope. Not the Subject, because howsoever other names signifying time,
as hours, days, weeks, months, are often in Scripture taken improperly.
Years also attributed to God do improperly signify eternity, Job. 10.5. and
36.26. Psalm. 102.25.28. Heb. 1.12. Or by an Hebraisme the time of divine
Judgment, as Isa 61.2. Luke 4.19. the acceptable year: Isa 34.8. the year of
recompense: Jerem. 23.12. the year of Visitation: Notwithstanding Years with a
numerall Epithet, as in this place, have never any other signification, save
propet and definite. Again, neither the Epithet, Thousand, the which
howsoever it does sometimes, both in sacred and humane Writers, only amplify a
matter indefinitely: as may be seen in the Examples before mentioned:
Notwithstanding being in Histories and Prophesies of Scripture joined to years,
I shall always believe that it is never taken but in a definite signification,
except any man can show me the contrary.

Thirdly, the Text it self yields us a weighty reason: because John indeed at
first in verse 2. determinates the thousand years without the Article, having
it only (...), but afterward emphatically repeats it four times with the
Article, (...) these thousand years, and undoubtedly defines the same.

Fourthly, from the Text we have another evident reason, viz. that during
those thousand years Antichrist was worshipped: for within those thousand years
they also that worshipped not the Image of the Beast, that is, of Antichrist,
lived, and reigned with Christ: and therefore it cannot be understood that
these thousand years were finished before Antichrists coming, nor indefinitely
until his coming.

We are therefore to embrace their opinion who hold that these thousand years
are definite. And now let us come to consider the terms.

II. Where these thousand years have their beginning and ending.

Such as understand the thousand years definitely, are diversely minded about
their beginning, as by and by I will show. I suppose it best to take their
beginning from the Angels descension: because otherwise the determination of
the thousand years, so often repeated, should be uncertain and vain: I say,
in case they should have an indeterminated beginning elsewhere: Now the
descension of the Angel was in the Incarnation of the Son of God, as before we
showed. Notwithstanding Satan was not bound presently upon his Nativity:
because the Son of God did not immediately exercise his power in his Childhood.
But the true beginning is understood from the cause, why the Dragon should be
bound: which was: that he should deceive the Nations no more: to wit, by
keeping them in Paganism, Where we are to begin the thousand years.
and turning them from the Gospel of Christ. Therefore when the Dragon began
to desist from deceiving the nations, then he was bound. Now he desisted from
seducing the Nations any longer, not presently, at the beginning of the
Ministry, or Resurrection of Christ, or of the preaching of the Apostles,
(although the Angel did then begin to cast the great chain upon the Dragon)
but especially after the dispersion of the Jews, and the destruction of the
Jewish Temple, and worship by the Romans: for before that time, the beginnings
of the Gentiles conversion to Christ were but small: because the Dragon never
ceased to hinder the Gentiles from the Gospel of Christ, by means of the
turbulent Jews, as the History of the Acts of the Apostles testifies. But
afterward, Jerusalem being destroyed, the Jews were rejected and dissipated,
and in their room the Gentiles were called, and added to the Church, as Paul
teaches, Act. 13.46. Romans 11.11. etc. Then at length it appeared that Satan
was bound, because he was not able to seduce the Nations any longer, or uphold
Paganism. But that was in the year of our Lord LXXIII. This year therefore we
make the beginning of the thousand years of Satan's binding.

From hence unto the Year of our Lord 1073. The end of the thousand years.
are a thousand years, at which time Pope Gregory VII. a Celtiberian Monk, and
diabolical Iugler, poisoning Alexander II. invaded the Papacy by most wicked
arts: who sitting on the Papal Chair, the devil began again to be loosed,
and to rage tumultuously, filling the Christian world in a horrible manner with
wars and slaughters, by the means of this his cursed instrument.

But thou will say; Whether the Dragon were bound in the first thousand years.
Did not Satan in the first three hundred years after the descension of the
Angel, most cruelly afflict the Church by the Roman Tyrants: and in the three
hundred following years, defiled the Christian world with most gross heresies:
and in the four hundred succeeding years, raised up the Roman Antichrist out
of the bottomless Pit, giving unto him his Throne and great power, working
with all manner of unrighteousness and cruelty in the very heart of the
Church? How then could Satan be said to be bound these thousand years, in which
he raged so outragiously?

I answer: The binding of Satan (as before I said) may not be absolutely
understood, as if he then could not, or did not hurt the Church at all, but
restrictively unto the cause expressed in the Text, so far as he was then
restrained from seducing the Nations any longer, that they should not embrace
the Faith of Christ. To this binding of Satan it is sufficient, that then he
could not by the Tyrants, Jews, or Philosophers, hinder any longer the
propagation of the Gospel among all Nations. And therefore howsoever in great
number, the Gentiles were converted to Christ, and Paganism every where
decayed; yet no marvel, though Satan did rage in his principal members, and
breathed out threatenings by the Tyrants of the Roman Empire, and by Heretics
in the Church it self: Hence arose so many persedutions of the Saints, and
such great conflicts of the Church with Heretics; during six hundred years:
neither is it strange that Antichrist was then raised up by Satan: for seeing
he was bound himself, he gave his throne and power to Antichrist, that the
Beast might be the Vicar of the Dragon while he was in bonds, and the more
furiously exercise all his power. Hence the Dragon is said to have given his
Throne to the Beast, Revelat. 13.2.

By which it plainly appears, how far these thousand years do agree with,
The comparing of the thousand years with the 1260. days and 42. months.
or differ from the 1260. days, and the 42. months, in which the Holy City is
said to be trodden under foot by the Gontiles, Chapter 11.2. and the Beast was
to rage, Chap. 13.5. In some part they agree: for in the last four Ages of
these thousand years, those 1260. days and 42. months began to run on:
because in them the Beast began to tread the Church under foot. But they
differ, in that these thousand years are referred to Satan's binding: the 1260.
days, and the 42. months to Antichrists tyrannical reign: They are already
ended, more then five hundred years: these are not fully ended: because the
Beast has as yet scarcely reigned a thousand years.

Now those things that are brought against this our opinion, Objections taken
away.
are easily taken away.

FIRST, the Order of the Prophecy is objected, viz. that the Dragon shall at
length, after the Beast is cast into the Lake of fire, be bound a thousand
years in the bottomless Pit: but the casting of the Beast, shall be the ruin
of the Papacy; Therefore the thousand years shall not be begun, till at length
after the ruin of the Papacy. But the major is denied: because the casting of
the Beast into hell praecedes indeed the binding of the Dragon in order of the
Vision, but not in order of time: Before, I say, John saw the Beast to be cast
into the lake, in the foregoing sixth Vision: being as it were the last Act of
that Vision: but not in this last Vision, in which is now afterward related the
binding of the Dragon, the which notwithstanding praeceded the casting of the
Beast, or ruin of the Papacy many Ages, being as it were the first Act of this
last Vision. The plain and forcing reason hereof is, that the Beast and
False-prophet shall not be abolished, but by the brightness of Christ's coming
to judgment. But it is absurd to imagine that Satan should be bound a thousand
years after the last Judgment. The cause therefore of the error is, that the
diversity of that, and this Vision, is not observed.

Secondly, they object: That if the thousand years must begin from the
destruction of Jerusalem: then that time, in which Satan shall be again loosed,
cannot be called a SHORT SEASON, because it contains above five hundred, yea
about six hundred years. But the consequence is denied: for although the time
of Satan's loosing, has now bin for these five Ages, and perhaps shall continue
an Age or two more, even until the end of the 1260. days, the which thing the
Lord knows: Notwithstanding we have a little before clearly demonstrated,
that it is rightly called a LITTLE SEASON, both in respect of God, as also in
respect of the Dragon, and of the Ages past, and lastly, and that indeed
principally, in respect of the thousand years of Satan's binding, then which
that time shall be shorter, because God will shorten those days for the elects
sake.

Thirdly, they object: that such as have not worshipped the Beast, nor received
his Character, should not then reign with Christ those thousand years. But
this is denied: for the thousand years were ended in Gregory VII. unto the time
of which filthy Beast more then 460. years of Antichrists reign were run on,
during all which time very many Martyrs and Professors worshipped not the
Beast and his Image. All these therefore after death, did according to their
souls, live, By the figure called Synecdoche, a part is taken for the whole.
and reign with Christ in blessedness those thousand years, by a Synecdoche,
because they lived with Christ in the last four hundred years of the said
thousand. Now in verse 4: I will plainly show that this Synecdoche is neither
unusual in common speech, nor in Scripture, or that it derogates any thing
from the happiness of the latter Martyrs. As therefore the Martyrs lived not
altogether, or were all put to death at one time, but successively: so also
they began not altogether to live and reign with CHRIST in Heaven, but
successively during those thousand years.

Lastly, It is objected, that the devil was not bound in those first thousand
years, because he seduced very many. But this was resolved in the first
Question: for neither are we to imagine, that Satan was so bound, as that he
could not seduce, or hurt none at all, neither by his Emissary Angels, or by
other his instruments, as Tyrants, Heretics, Antichrist: but only (as it is
expressed in the Text) that he should not deceive the Nations any longer, that
is, uphold Paganism, and hinder the course of the Gospel among the Gentiles.

Thus I have laid down my judgment, agreeing with other most learned
Interpreters before me, as Bullinger, Junius, etc. not that I do tie any man
unto it, but leave it to consideration: but they who begin the thousand years
from Christ's nativity, as Aretius, or from his Resurrection, as Chytraeus: or
from the time of universal Christianisme under Constantine the Great, as
Brightman, Napier, etc. although they differ a little in the terms, yet all
have this common with us, that the first thousand years from Christ's birth is
to be ascribed to Satan's imprisonment; and that the Dragon is now long ago
loosed out of prison.

There are two other opinions of them, who refer the thousand years unto the
last times, as if they were not yet begun. One of the old Chiliasts, of which I
will speak afterward in verse 5. The other new, of certain learned brethren,
that these thousand years, are not to begin till after the casting of the
Beast into the Lake of fire, that is, after the overthrow of the Papacy. Then
they think that he shall be bound a thousand years in the bottomless Pit, and
that the Martyrs which have been slain by Tyrants and Romish Popes, shall
then corporally live again, and reign with Christ in Heaven those thousand
years: and then at the end of these thousand years shall be the Resurrection
of all the rest of the dead, and the last Judgment.

Now what I think in this opinion to be wanting, I will here touch only in a
general way, reserving the rest to its place.

First, I cannot approve, that these thousand years are not as yet begun: nor
past: because two false Hypotheses are supposed: One, that Satan has not as
yet bin bound, that he should seduce the Nations no longer in Paganism, the
which is repugnant to the History. The other, that the world should yet
continue a thousand years after the overthrow of Papacy, which is repugnant to
the divine oracles, touching the abolishing of ANTICHRIST by the brightness of
Christ's coming, after which, to expect a thousand years in this world, to me
feemes very absurd.

They object that the Oracles of the Prophets are not yet fulfilled, Ierem. 30.
and 31. Mich. 4.3. unto 8. and Mich. 5.9.15. the answer of Christ, Act. 1.6.7.
and Mat. 23.28. Romans 11.25.

But in all these, not to be tedious: I would first desire them to seek their
thousand years: Secondly, that they diligently consider whether those Oracles
(spoken of in verse fourth) are Prophesies touching the Kingdom of the Martyrs
in Heaven, or not rather of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom and State of the Church
of the Gospel on Earth, partly already fulfilled, and partly not, but in time
to be accomplished.

Secondly, that opinion contradicts it self. For it propounds, that the Pope
before these thousand years shall be cast into the Lake of fire, and that
Popery shall be abolished: and withal: that the Pope during the thousand
years, shall by little and little gather his strength, and at the end of the
said years, join himself with Pagan Kings, to make war against the Saints.
But how shall the Pope do this, being in the Lake of fire?

They answer, that the same Pope indeed that is cast into the Lake, shall not
reassume strength: but there may be some other after him, who shall not be
abolished till the brightness of Christ's coming.

But this is to dally in a serious matter. The ruin of the Papacy, in which
they fix the beginning of the thousand years, we understand not to be the
casting of one or two of the Popes into the Lake, (for many are already cast
away) but the overthrow of the whole Papacy. Here then, let them explain
themselves, whether they understand it of the overthrow of Papacy in part, or
totally. If they understand it only in part, they must say, that Satan has
bin bound above an hundred years, because, since that time Papacy has gone to
decay in Germany, and some other Kingdoms: which thing Bellarmin also
confesses: for, says he, Bell. Lib. 3. de P.R. Cap. 21.
from that time, since you affirmed the Pope to be Antichrist, his Empire has
been so far from increasing, that it has always more and more decreased.
If of an universal or total overthrow, how then shall the Beast gather
strength by little and little, especially while he is in the lake of fire?

Thirdly, they take up another absurdity against the Text, viz. that in the
beginning of the thousand years, the Martyrs shall corporally live again, and
reign with Christ a thousand years: whereas the Text expressly speaks of
their souls, not of the bodies of the Martyrs: neither says it, that they
lived again, or were raised up from death, but that they lived, of which in
ver. 4.

Fourthly, they frame another absurdity, in pretending a twofold resurrection
of the dead: One of the Martyrs after the overthrow of the Papacy: the other,
of the rest of the dead, after the thousand years reign of the Martyrs: the
which is contrary to an Article of our Faith: I believe the resurrection of the
flesh, that is, of all the dead at the last day: and it is refuted by
experience. Again, if they understand the overthrow of the Papacy in part,
seeing this has bin accomplished more then an hundred years ago: they must
show that the first bodily Resurrection of the Martyrs is also past: If total,
seeing this shall not be, but by the brightness of Christ's coming to
Judgment, they cannot deny that then the Martyrs also shall be raised with the
rest of the dead.

Fifthly, I know not how they can make their opinions hang together, for they
say, that Christ shall come to Judgment a thousand years after the overthrow
of Papacy: and that after those thousand years, Gog and Magog shall make war
against the Christians. What? shall this war be taken in hand after Christ's
last coming to Judgment.

Lastly, this opinion does fully agree with the error of the Chiliasts, long
ago condemned by Christians, (of which I will speak by and by) viz. in this,
that the world shall remain a thousand years after the abolishing of
Antichrist, directly contrary to the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. affirming that
Antichrist shall be overthrown by the brightness of Christ's coming. And in
that it imports two particular Resurrections, contrary to the Scripture,
touching the resurrection of all the dead together at the last day: Only
herein it differs, Lib. 20. de C.D.C. 7.
that it makes not the thousand years reign (as they) Earthly but Heavenly:
although Augustine confesses that there were also among the Chiliasts, some
who believed, that the spiritual delights in that Sabbath, should come to the
Saints through the presence of the Lord. But more shall be said of this opinion,
in ver. 5.6. These things therefore shall suffice, touching the Terms of the
thousand years. It follows.

III. What was the condition of the godly, first on earth, afterward in heaven,
in these thousand years.
The Explication of this Question is contained in Verses 4.5.6. which now we
come to Treat of.

4. And I saw Thrones] Beza: Then I saw: but it is better copulatively, And I
saw, for, also I saw, least these things should be thought to be done after
Satan's binding a thousand years. For John saw both Satan bound in the
bottomless pit, and thrones set in Heaven all at one time. Augustine does very
well join these things to the former, and observes the scope, although he
vary in the explication of the Thrones: When, says he, he had said that the
devil was to be bound a thousand years, and afterward to be loosed a little
season, by and by, by recapitulating what in these thousand years the Church
did, or was done in her: And I saw, says he, Seats, and them that sat upon
them, and judgment was given unto them: we may not think this to be spoken of
the last Judgment. Thus far he says well, but he adds: But Seats or Thrones
of the Officers by whom the Church is now governed. In this he strayeth from
the Scope: for John intended to speak, not of the Hierarchy of the Church, but
of the lot of the godly, what that was in the mean while, both corporally on
Earth, and spiritually in Heaven. And indeed, as for the corporal condition of
such as among the Gentiles had received the Faith, he saw the same troublesome
and bloody: for, he says, they were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, that
is, both by Heathenish Tyrants, and Heretics in the first six hundred years of
the thousand: Secondly, they were slain by the Beast, because they would not
worship him and his Image, nor receive his Character This was the lot of the
Godly upon Earth, representing the first Act of this Vision. But their
spiritual condition he saw to be joyful and royal, because these slain or
beheaded, however, in the eyes of the ungodly thought to be miserable, and that
they perished, yet sat on thrones, lived, and reigned with Christ those
thousand years. This was the lot of the Martyrs in Heaven, exhibiting the
second Act of this Vision. If this sense and meaning of the fourth verse be
well observed, there will be little obscurity in the place, otherwise most
obscure. For hence it appears, as I said in the Preface, that in this Verse
is briefly contained the first Act of this Vision, touching the calamities of
the Church, under the Roman Tyrants, Heretics, and Antichrist beginning to
rage: as also the second Act, touching the consolations of the Godly, who in
those thousand years shed their blood for the witness of the truth. John
therefore expounded what he saw, 1. Thrones, 2. them that sat thereon, 3.
their state and condition.

I saw thrones] Thrones or Seats are placed either for rest, for judgment, or
the Kingdom. Before in Chap. 4.4. he saw four and twenty Thrones, and so many
Elders sitting on them, that is, resting from their labors, as also adorned
with judiciary and royal Dignity. These thrones may be understood as placed
for all the said ends: but properly for the Kingdom, as is showed in the end
of the Verse.

And they sat upon them] Kathizein is properly transitive, to place, or cause
to sit. Thuryd: (...) placing his Army. Often also neutrally to sit: Because an
action may pass into the Actor himself, or a man may place himself, which is
to sit. This transition is expressed in the Hebrew (...) he placed himself, in
Hithpael, that is, sat down. So the transitive signification remains,
whether it be rendered they sat, or placed themselves upon them. John therefore
saw thrones, not empty, but having Sitters on them. But who were they? by and
by he names them (...) The souls of the slain with the sword: but first he
shows what honor was done unto them.

And judgment was given unto them] This Judgment some understand actively of
power given to judge the Adversaries: Others passively of the judgment spoken
unto them, against the Adversaries. But nothing of such a judgment does
appear in the Text: And Augustine in the fore-alleadged place has rightly
observed, that here is not yet treated of the last Judgment, which shall at
length be described in the end of the Chapter. I therefore take this Judgment
to be the royal Dignity given unto them, as in Psalm. 72.1. O God give thy
Judgments to the King, because by and by it is referred to the Kingdom: And
they reigned with CHRIST.

And the soules] Now he names those that he saw sitting on the Thrones, the
souls of them that were beheaded. (...) And, is referred to the Verb (...) I
saw, and declaratively to (...) sat: as if he should say: I saw, souls
sitting on the thrones, as Brightman and Tossanus have well observed. Now he
makes two ranks of such as sat, Martyrs and Confessors. The Periphrasis of
the Martyrs is, the souls of them that were beheaded, that is, put to death
any kind of way. These again he destinguisheth by the times, from the distinct
cause of their Martyrdom: for some were slain for the witness of JESUS:
others for the Word of GOD.

The witness of Iesus] He means the Gospel of Christ (as in Chap. 19.10.)
for the cause whereof the Gentiles that were converted to the Faith (seeing
they professed and testified the same with great zeal) were troubled and
murdered by diverse kinds of torments, throughout the whole Roman Empire by
cruel Tyrants, in the first three hundred years. Now he sees the souls of
these sitting upon Thrones, not indeed on Earth, but in Heaven: neither as yet
restored to their bodies, as the Chiliasts would have it, but without them:
(otherwise he would not have said: I saw the souls of them that were beheaded:
but rather: I saw them that were beheaded,) the which Augustine in the said
place has rightly observed: How John could see the souls which are invisible.
neither are we to enquire how he saw these souls, being invisible spirits:
for he saw them by the Spirit of his mind, not with his bodily eyes. Now these
souls, (to add this in a word) for the greatest part are the same which John
saw under the Altar, in the second Vision at the opening of the fifth Seal, who
requiring avengement of their blood, had white robes given them, and were bid
to rest until, etc. Here therefore he sees the same sitting or resting on
Thrones. Touching the other rank of Martyrs, he says.

And for the word of God] It is no Tautologie: for the article (...) is added
to (...) That word, giving us to understand these souls were slain for that
Essential word of God, who in the foregoing Vision Chap. 19: 13. sat on a
white horse, that is, the eternal Son of God, for whose sake many thousands
laid down their lives in the Arian, Macedonian, and Nestorian tempests, etc.
in the three hundred following years. Wherefore he saw both the souls of
these, and of the other Martyrs resting on thrones in Heaven.

And them that worshipped not the Beast] Gr. (...), Whosoever. The Ellipsis or
defect, is to be supplied from the foregoing part, Thus, I saw also the souls
of such sitting, as had not worshipped, etc. These he distinguishes from the
former, because they are latter in time, which the adjuncts show: They
worshipped not the Beast and his Image, etc. Perhaps also all were not Martyrs,
but some of them Professors only, though but few, seeing the Beast caused all
to be slain that worshipped him not, and his Image: Chap. 12.15. These
therefore had to do with the Beast. Now the Beast began to reign, rage, and
to be worshipped in the last Ages of the thousand years, viz. from the six
hundred and sixth year, as we showed in Chap. 13. and 17. whosoever therefore
from that time, even unto the end of the thousand years did constantly oppose
the Beast, and got the victory over him, (which was said of the multitude of
Harpers, standing on the Sea of glass, Chapter 15.17. and unto which multitude
these also belong) are here spoken of, and commended for their constancy in
banishments, torments, and all manner of punishments, which they suffered in
maintaining the Faith of Christ, against the Beast: Whence we gather these
certain conclusions.

I. That the Beast, his Image, and his Character, were within these thousand
years: because there were then some who worshipped the Beast, to wit, all the
Inhabitants of the Earth, Chap. 13.8. and they that would not worship him, were
either Martyrs or Confessors.

II. That Antichrist was again to rage within the said thousand years: because
the Beast then was, and would be worshipped. Now the Beast is Antichrist, as
appeared Chap. 13. and 17. and Ribera confesses Cap. 13. Numb. 1. and Cap. 19.
Number. 31.32.

III. That these years are not indefinitely the whole time from the Vision,
until the end of the world, or until the coming of Antichrist: because
Antichrist began to rage between them, or while they were running on.

IV. And lastly, that the Papists Antichrist, who, as they feine, shall come
and bear sway in the last four years of the world, is but a vain
Skare-crow, by which they deceive themselves and the world: because John
foretold that the true ANTICHRIST should be manifested within the first
Thousand years after CHRIST'S descension.

Ribera saw this knot in Apocal. Cap. 20. Number. 33. therefore to untye the same
he says: that which follows: And lived, and reigned, is not to be referred
to those that worshipped not the Beast, but only unto the souls of them that
were beheaded for the testimony of Jesus. But this subtilty is too repugnant to
the Text, and shows that here the Papists are at a Nonplus: for John says
of the very same: they lived and reigned: Of whom he had before said: they sat
upon thrones. Now these were not only such as were beheaded, but also the
Conquerours of the Beast.

But (says RIBERA) he says not that these were dead or slain: What of that?
It is enough that he makes the Confessors also Conquerours of the Beast, and
says that they sat with the Martyrs, or certainly he means that these also
were slain, because before in Chap. 13.15. he had said: that all that
worshipped not the Beast, and his Image were slain: but these worshipped not
the Beast and his Image: therefore they were either slain, or Confessors,
that were Conquerours of the Beast: and it remains, that they sat with the
Martyrs. It remains that they lived and reigned in these thousand years. It
remains that the Beast was within the said first thousand years: for
between this time, John saw the souls of the slain for the Testimony of
Jesus, and of them that denied to worship the Beast: but the worship of the
Beast could not be refused before he was. Lastly it remains, that the Papists
Fiction touching the Beasts coming in the last four years of the world, is as
repugnant, as the opinion of the Chiliasts, to this most manifest place of
Scripture.

And they lived and reigned with Christ these thousand yeeres] Now comes, as it
seems, the inextricable knot, which of old drove the Millenaries into
by-ways, while they did not sufficiently consider neither the Scope, nor the
words of the Prophecy, nor the Analogy of Christian belief. The which, least
it happen to us also, let us well ponder the sense of the words, directing the
same to the scope before declared. Let us therefore, I say, consider of these
things in order.

I. Who they were that lived and reigned with Christ? II. How, and how long
they lived and reigned with him? III. Who were the rest of the dead, and how
they lived not again? IV. What the first Resurrection may be? V. LASTLY, What
the opinion of the Chiliasis or Millenaries was, and how to be refuted?
What concerns the first, Beza renders (...) and (...), lived and reigned,
(which are Preterperfects) by the Futures, shall live and reign: because he
saw, ver. 6. (...) shall reign, is in the Future. But here the Preterperfects
are to be retained, because they answer to the Preterperfect (...) sat,
notwithstanding the difference in respect of the sense is very little: for John
speaks of things to come, as past, by a Prophetical manner, for the
certainty thereof, but the words (...) with Christ, belong in common to both,
They lived with Christ, Who they are that lived and reigned with Christ.
and with him they reigned. But who? To wit, They, which sat on Thrones: also
reigned and lived with Christ, namely, the Souls of them that were slain by
Roman Tyrants, and by the Heretics for the witness of Jesus, and the Souls
also of the slain or tormented, for denying to worship the Beast, as erewhile
I showed against Ribera's subtilty. For John declares the condition of those
whom he saw sitting on thrones, what it was during the thousand years, both
corporally on Earth, (already spoken of) and spiritually in Heaven, which here
he declares: They lived and reigned with Christ, to wit, contrary to the
foolish opinion of the world touching them, which is for the consolation of the
Godly. The world indeed judged these slain to have miserably perished: but
death to them was life, Oppression a Kingdom with Christ. This is the First:
that the souls of the slain, not restored to their bodies, but being out of
them (as before we showed) did live and reign with Christ.

The Second seems more difficult to be expounded, viz. how they lived and
reigned with Christ, and how long? But the matter is not obscure, if the words
be rightly considered, and not wrested against the Scope and mind of the
Spirit, as the Chiliasts did, rendering (...) they lived, (...) they lived
again, that is, How the Chiliasts corrupted the text.
they rose up out of their Sepuichres: and what the Spirit speaks of the
souls of the Martyrs, they wrested to their bodies, and so feined a corporal
Resurrection of the Martyrs, a thousand years before the last day. This first
Falsehood, was the ground of the Millenaries error, against which we must
firmly hold too, and urge the simple word, (...) lived, in stead whereof, The
ground of the Chiliasts error.
they evilly suborned the compound (...) lived again. For here is spoken of
the souls of Martyrs living in Heaven, which, as being immortal Spirits,
could not die with their bodies, or be slain on Earth, therefore cannot be
said to live again, but (as it is in the Text) they lived with Christ.

They object to the contrary, that (...) lived, is put for (...) lived again,
as before in Chap. 2. ver. 8. (...) for (...). But both is denied, because
these two words do much differ in sound and in sense: and therefore may not be
confounded neither here, nor in the place alleged. Not here, because this
confusion imports two absurdities. ONE Physical or natural, that the souls
of the Martyrs were flaine: The OTHER Theological, that a Corporal
Resurrection of an infinite number of the dead, shall be before the last Day,
contrary to the Faith of all Christians, taught by Christ himself: The hour
is coming, Ioh. 5.28.
in the which all that are in the Graves, shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth: They which have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life, and they which
have done evil, unto the Resurrection of death. Neither before in Chap 2.
because Christ in saying: which was dead, and lived: gives us to understand,
not only that he was dead and raised again, but also that he lived, even
while he was dead in the flesh, or that he was living in his Divinity, to
demonstrate his twofold nature, as before we showed, Chap. 1.18. and Chap.
2.8. Add to this, that although it ought there so to be taken, yet here it
cannot, because of the Arguments following, which admit not the same.

Moreover, they urge the Antithesis of the following Verse: But the rest of the
dead lived not again: By which (say they) it seems to be plain that (...)
is put for (...), but thence the contrary does plainly follow, viz. that the
Holy Ghost by a different word, notes a diverse sense: for the Antithesis is
not of a contradiction in Synonymaes, but of a metaphorical contrariety, both
in the subject and attribute, because the same thing is not denied touching the
Remnant of the dead, which was affirmed touching the souls of the Martyrs
properly, that they lived and reigned with Christ: But another thing, contrary
to a happy life, Metaphorically: that they lived not again in the first
Resurrection, for, that they repented not: which, as by and by I shall clearly
show, is the proper and genuine fense.

To return to the Question, The souls of the Martyrs live with Christ, How
the souls lived and reigned with Christ
not only a Natural Life (for this after death is common to the souls of the
Godly and ungodly, being immortal Spirits) neither only a Spiritual Life of
Regeneration, which the Martyrs had (before they were slain) on Earth: but a
blessed and glorious Life, which John saw them enjoying with Christ in Heaven.
They reigned also with Christ, not in the Kingdom of Grace, which is in this
Life, but in the Kingdom of Glory, which is in Heaven: according to the
promise: I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me:
And: To him that overcomes, Luke 22.29 Rev. 3.21.
will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I overcame, and sit with my
Father in his Throne. But they do wholly err, who suppose that we interpret
this clause of the life of Regeneration, and of the Kingdom of Grace, and
thence draw Sophismes for the Chiliasts opinion, which shall be treated of in
the following Verse. John therefore saw the Souls of the Martyrs that were
beheaded here on Earth, living blessedly, and reigning gloriously with Christ
in Heaven. But how long?

Those thousand yeers] viz. How all the Martyrs lived a thousand years with
Christ
in which Satan was kept bound in the bottomless Pit: not that the Martyrs
were all slain together, about the beginning of the thousand years, and so
all of them lived the whole thousand years with Christ: But he speaks of a
continual succession, that none during the said years, in which they were
slain for the Testimony of Jesus, or for refusing to worship the Beast, did
miserably perish, but lived blessedly, and reigned with Christ in heaven.
Wherefore in the thousand years is a Synecdoche, familiarly used in our
ordinary speech, and in Scripture, as before I said: For example: A man is said
to come to day, though he come not in the Morning, but at Noone, or Evening:
or, A man is said to live or die in this year, not only if he live or die at
the beginning, but also toward the middle, or end of the year: so the Martyrs
are said to live and reign with Christ a thousand years; although all of them
were not slain at the beginning, but some toward the middle, others toward
the end thereof. Mat. 12.39 Ioh. 2.19.
By a like Synecdoche, the Son of man was three days and three nights in the
heart of the Earth, and in three days raised up the Temple of his body,
although he lay not much longer then one day and two nights in the Sepulcher.
The Jews were Lxx. Iere. 29.9.
years in the Captivity of Babylon, although Daniel was longer: Zerubbabel, and
they that were born in the Captivity, were Captives fewer years: Genesis 6.3.
So God granted from the five hundredth year of Noah, unto the flood, an
hundred and twenty years unto men, although, all they that were born within the
120. years, had a shorter time of repentance, etc. Away therefore with their
scoff of 400. The Martyrs shall also reign after the thousand years.
Crowns in stead of a thousand.

Neither is this Synecdoche any way derogatorie to the happiness of the latter
Martyrs slain by Antichrist, for we are not to think that they ceased to
live, and reign with Christ after the thousand years were ended: for they
shall reign with him for ever and ever, as we are taught, Revelat. Chapter
22.5. It was enough for John to show, what condition the blessed Spirits should
be in, those thousand years; in the mean while not denying, that both they and
other Martyrs should further live and reign with Christ.

But thou will say, Why the thousand ^^ers are ^^fined.
to what end was it to define a thousand years, if the Martyrs were to reign
longer? I answer: It was meet they should be defined, because of the wonderful
events that were to come to pass in those first thousand years, bringing as
it were a new face on the whole Earth: for Jerusalem being destroyed, Iudaisme
was to be overt^^owne: Satan being bound, Paganism was to decay: and on the
contrary, Christianisme established in the whole Roman Empire, not without
shedding of very much blood: lastly in the midst of Christianisme,
Antichristianisme was to be erected, and toward the end of the thousand
years, confirmed and brought to its height, with no less spilling of
Christian blood, in Gregory VII. that cruel Beast.

5. But the rest of the dead lived not againe] Having expounded the state of
the Godly, what it was in those thousand years, first on Earth, afterward in
Heaven: now he adds the state of the wicked during the said time on Earth:
that they lived not again, in the first Resurrection, that by this Antithesis
he might the more set forth the happiness of the Martyrs, and withal teach
us, that Satan was not so bound, but that he still held very many, even all the
time of the said years in Paganism and Antichristianisme, who would not
embrace the testimony of Jesus, and live again, or be raised from the death of
sin: least we should imagine that the thousand years should be altogether a
Golden-Age, or that the Church were to expect the applause of the whole world.
This is the sum.

By the Rest therefore, are understood all others (the Martyrs and Confessors
excepted) who embraced not the Testimony of Jesus in all this time, but were
either professed enemies of Christ, as Jews and Pagans without the Church, or
false Christians or Antichristians in the Church: These he says are DEAD, not
by a corporal, but a spiritual death in sin, of which death the Apostle
speaks, Ephe. 2.1. 1. Tim. 5.6 Mat. 8.22. Ioh. 5.25.
When ye were dead in sins: And, she that lives in pleasure, is dead while
she lives: so Christ: Let the dead bury the dead. The dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of man: for he speaks of the state of the ungodly living
on Earth, whom he opposes to the Martyrs, not as then living with Christ in
Heaven, but as formerly embracing and professing the witness of Jesus on
Earth: Therefore in the words The rest of the dead; the distinction is not
betwixt the dead, but after the Greek Phrase the Genitive is put for the
Nominative: The rest of the dead, for the rest being dead, so in Chap. 9.20.
the rest of men, that is, other men, or at least it is a distinction of such as
of old were living on Earth, but dead spiritually: for of old the Martyrs also,
before they repented, and embraced the Testimony of Jesus, were dead
spiritually, as the rest: but because they lived again spiritually on Earth,
therefore after death they lived and reigned gloriously with Christ in Heaven.
But the rest lived not again] To wit, from the death of sin through Faith and
Repentance, but despising the Testimony of Jesus, remained in Paganism, Or
repented not of their Idolatry, Hypocrisy, and other sins in
Antichristianisme: as in Chap. 9.20. The rest of men, which were not killed by
these plagues, repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not
worship devils, and Idols of gold, etc. which place does excellently interpret
this. But that he speaks not of a corporal living again, as the Chiliasts
did interpret it, shall by and by appear by John's Declaration.

Until the thousand years were finished] That is, during the whole thousand
years wherein Satan was bound: for again he adds the Article (...) These
thousand years. But did they live again afterward? no certainly, for they
which live not again in this life, shall never live again in the life to
come. Therefore the Particle (...) Until, limits not a time of living again,
but simply denies the same: they lived not again until, for, never. As:
Thou shall not come forth until thou have paid the very last mite, for, never.
He knew her not until she had brought forth her first borne, for, never. The
Chiliasts said: They lived not within, but after the thousand years: but by
the same reason they should say, that the Souls of the Martyrs lived in, but
not after those thousand years. Both is false: for the Martyrs have never
ceased to live and reign: neither have the rest of the dead ever lived again.
It therefore notes their voluntary contumacie in Paganism and
Antichristianisme: that however Satan was bound in a special manner, and could
not deteine them in Infidelity: yet they would not, after the example of the
Martyrs, repent, and embrace the witness of Jesus, so as the fault of their
destruction was only in themselves. The fourth thing follows, touching the
first Resurrection. This is the first Resurrection] In the Greek IS is left
out: but the Ellipsis is expressed ver. 6. This is the second death. By this
Addition John does expressly declare, what kind of living again he meant, that
the rest of the dead lived not: namely in that, which is the first
Resurrection, as if he should say: they lived not again in the first
Resurrection: the meaning is thus: This is the first Resurrection: for: This
living again, in which I said the rest of the dead lived not, is to be
understood of the first Resurrection: for the monstrative (...) This, is not to
be referred to the souls of the Martyrs which he said LIVED, but only to the
rest of the dead, who he said, lived not again, which the particle (...) in the
Verb (...) lived again, and repeated in the Noun (...) Resurrection, does
intimate. The Declarat o^ also of the contrary shows the same, ver. 14. This
is the Second Death: where likewise the Demonstrative (...) This, is not to be
referred unto all that were judged, ver. 13. but only to them that were cast
into the Lake of Fire, and were not found written in the book of Life.

Now it follows to speak of the manner of this Resurrection, and what it is.
The Chiliasts said it was corporal, but here is solidly demonstrated, that a
corporal raising up of the Martyrs out of their Sepulchers, is not proper unto
the Martyrs, but that it must be understood of a Spiritual living again from
the death of sin, in all that shall be saved.

THE DEMONSTRATION.
That the first Resurrection is not to be understood corporally, but
spiritually.

First, from the differences dividing the whole Subject. This first
Resurrection is either corporal, or spiritual. But it is not corporal:
Therefore it is spiritual. The assumption is proved: If this Resurrection
should be corporal, then it could not be called the First, because many
Corporal Resurrections are spoken of in Scripture before. I. The Resurrection
of the Son of the Widow of Sarepta, corporally raised up by Elias, 1. King.
17.22. which is the first resurrection mentioned in Scripture. II. The
Resurrection of the son of the Shunammite, raised up by Elisha, 2. King. 4.35.
III. The Resurrection of one put into the grave, by touching the bones of
Elisha, 2. King. 13.21. IIII. The Resurrection of a Widows son, raised by
Christ, Luke 7.15. V. Of the daughter of Jairus, Luke 8.55. VI. Of Lazarus,
John. 11.44. VII. The Resurrection of many of those Saints, who came forth out
of the Sepulcher, when Christ suffered on the Cross, Mat. 27.52. VIII. The
Resurrection of Tabitha, raised by Peter, Act. 9.41. IX. The Resurrection of
Eutychus, brought from death to life by Paul, Act. 20.10, etc. And therefore if
the Resurrection here spoken of were corporal, it should not be called the
first, but at least the tenth.

Neither helps it to object, that the foresaid Resurrections were only of a
few: but that this shall be of very many: for the Question is not touching the
number of them that are to be raised up: but of the Quality and Order of the
Resurrection, and it follows (seeing that is not the first of the same Genus,
which has many other before it) either that this cannot be called the First
Resurrection, before which there were many other: or else that it is not of the
same kind with the other Resurrections, that is, it is not corporal.

Secondly, This Resurrection being taken corporally and properly, must be
understood either of the Souls of the Martyrs, or of the rest of the dead, or
of none. Of the souls of the Martyrs it cannot be understood: both, because it
is not said of them, that they were raised, or lived again; But, that they
sat on thrones, lived, and reigned with Christ, as before was showed: As also,
because properly a corporal Resurrection is not agreeable to Souls: seeing
Souls properly die not, as not being bodies, neither of the nature thereof:
nor can it be understood of the rest of the dead: because of these it is
expressly said, that they lived not again. Therefore this first corporal
Resurrection cannot be true of any at all.

Thirdly, The whole Scripture testifies, that ALL, I say, ALL the dead, shall
in one Resurrection, at the last day be raised by the Trumpet and Voice of the
Archangell, some indeed unto eternal Life, others unto eternal shame: John
5.28. The hour comes, in which ALL that are in the Graves shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth: they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of
Life, and they that have done evil unto the Resurrection of damnation, John
11.24. I know that my brother shall rise again in the Resurrection, at the
last day. John 6.48. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one that
sees the Son, and believes in him, should have Eternal Life: And I will
raise him up at the last day. From this universal, the Martyrs cannot be
excepted, because they believed on the Son of God. 1. Cor. 15.52. We shall
all be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last Trumpe, for
the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. At the
coming of the Lord, they that dyed in Christ, shall rise first. Therefore the
Martyrs also who dyed in Christ, shall rise at the coming of the Lord. John
also toward the end of this very Chapter, describes the Second Resurrection,
which shall be at the last day, so universal, as that all the Elements shall
give up their dead, (a great part whereof shall be Martyrs, being destroyed by
Fire and Water.) By all which, I suppose that no Godly man, can, or ought to
gather any other thing, then that all the dead shall be raised together in one
Resurrection at the last day: but that many millions of Saints should be raised
before the last day, cannot without error be believed.

Fourthly, the Apostle Paul most exactly describing the whole History (and what
we ought to believe) of the Resurrection, opens indeed a Mystery unto us: 1.
Cor. 15.51. viz. That all shall not die, but in a moment, in the twinkling of
an eye, all shall be changed. Yet not a word touching the mystery of the
Millinarie Resurrection of the Martyrs before others. If thou say, that it was
not revealed unto him: Consider that the Apostle was caught up into the third
heaven, 2. Cor. 12.4. and heard unspeakable words, that is, all kind of
mysteries, especially such as were to be revealed unto the Church. And
therefore undoubtedly he should have heard that also, for to reveal the same
unto us, and would have revealed it, if it were true.

Fifthly, from the nature of Opposites: So as is the first death, so on the
contrary is the first Resurrection to be understood. For I suppose none will
deny, but that these two are privatively opposites, as being contrary-wise
affected about the same subject. But the first death, was not of the body or
corporal, The first death what it is.
but the death of the Soul, or Spiritual through fin: by which man was first
separated from God, made mortal, and deprived of Life Eternal. For by this
death Adam was dead in Soul, although in the body he lived nine hundred years
after. But the death of the Soul drew with it corporal death, as it were by a
necessary consequence, and so perpetually draws the same with it on all the
Posterity of Adam, by the threatening of God: Thou shall die the death. Of this
first Spiritual death the Apostle speaks: Through sin death entered into
the world, Romans 5.12.
and so death passed upon all men, for all have sinned: including indeed the
Sequel of a corporal death: but especially showing the deliverance from
spiritual death, through the death and life of Christ. Of this death also
Austine: The souls also (says he,) have their death in impiety and sins,
according to which death they are dead, of whom the Lord says: Let the dead
bury their dead: and according to this first Death, we are all dead in sins,
no man excepted: because it is said of all men: when ye were dead in sins,
etc.

Seeing therefore the First Death was a Spiritual destruction and alienation
of the Soul from God, and eternal Life through sin: certainly the first
Resurrection (being an opposite medicine to the first death) must be a
Spiritual conversion, and restoring of the Soul from sin to God.

Sixthly, If the First Resurrection were corporal, and properly belonging to
the Martyrs: then only the Martyrs should be blessed, but all others that
rise at the last Day, should be excluded from happiness. But this is very
absurd. And therefore the other also. The reason of the consequence is, because
in the following verse, only such are said to be blessed, who have part in the
first Resurrection: of which we shall there speak.

Seventhly, from the same verse: If the First Resurrection were corporal, and
proper to Martyrs: then all the dead at the last Day should be raised unto the
second death, or unto eternal damnation, none of them unto life eternal. But
the latter is false, and contrary to Scripture, Ioh. 5.24. Dan. 12.2. etc.
Therefore the former also. The consequence of the Major is grounded on the
following Verse, where the Second, or Eternal Death is said to have power
only over them that have no part in the First Resurrection, as there we shall
see.

Lastly, in the same Verse it is said, that they only shall be Priests of God,
and of Christ, which have part in the first Resurrection, as shall be showed.
Whence again it would follow, that the Martyrs only should be the Priests of
God and of Christ, in case that the first Resurrection were corporal, and
proper to Martyrs. But Peter teaches the contrary, 1. Pet. 2.5.9. And John,
Rev. 1.6, etc.

These things I suppose may satisfy the Godly minded, and such as are not
contentious: unto which I will only add this one thing, touching the
Etymology of the First Resurrection: that as the first death is so called,
because it first seized on man, Why the first Resurrection is so called.
according to the soul, as soon as he had sinned: so the first Resurrection is
so called, because it first vivified man according to the Soul, as soon as he
repented by hearing the promise in Paradise. Or also (which comes all to one
thing) because it is the vivification of the first or more noble part, that is,
of the soul: as also because it is wrought in the First, that is, in this
natural life: and lastly, because it must go before the Second resurrection,
which shall be the resurrection of the bodies to glory or, if the first went
not before, unto condemnation.

Here I could add the Authorities of ancient Divines. But it is needless: Let
Augustine suffice for all the rest, who most diligently searched into this
prophecy; The first Resurrection (says he most truly) is to Grace, the
second to Glory, Lib. 20. de Civ. Dei. C. 7.18. Him Ribera unjustly reproves,
restraining the First Resurrection unto the immortality of souls, that the
Martyrs, though esteemed as if they had utterly perished, yet according to
their better part, they live. Then which, nothing is more unsavory: for in
this he attributes nothing more to Martyrs, then to the worshippers of the
Beast, who themselves also after the death of their bodies, lived in their
better part, and yet never lived in the first Resurrection.

Objections against the First Spiritual Resurrection, cleared.
IT remains that I briefly answer the Objections of the Chiliasts, about
their Corporal Resurrection of the Martyrs.

OBJECT. I. That which falls not, neither dies, is not raised again. The
souls fall not, neither dye, but the bodies. Therefore the First Resurrection
is not of souls, but of bodies.

Austine moving this cavil denies the minor, Lib. 20. de C. D. cap. 10. Rom:
14.4 1. Cor. 10.4 Ephe. 2.2. Mat. 8.22.
that souls fall not, nor rise again: dye not, nor live again. For it is
said: He stands or falls to his own Master. When ye were dead in sins.
Let the dead bury their dead: which things are certainly spoken, not of the
fall or death of the body, but of the soul. The soul of man therefore fell
through sin, and lies dead in sin: lives again through Faith, and rises
again by repentance. Therefore there is a Resurrection of the Souls also: but
not the Second: for this shall be of the Body: Therefore the First.

Object. II. The Souls of Martyrs lived again, either in respect of
themselves, or in respect of their bodies, or in respect of other men, who
professed the same Doctrine. But they lived not again in respect of
themselves, because they were never dead: Neither in respect of other men:
because it would follow, that the rest of the dead should likewise live again:
which is false. Therefore they lived again in respect of their own bodies.

I answer: I do not well understand whether this be in earnest or in jest: The
whole is so frivolous, and hangs no more together, then if they should say: The
Souls fly, either in respect of themselves, or in respect of their bodies, or
in respect of other men, etc. Not in respect of themselves, because they have
no wings, neither in respect of other men, because they also should fly: which
is false. Therefore in respect of their bodies: The Hypothesis is false, the
distribution vain and lame, the consequence nothing, for this is wanting: or
they fly in no respect. So here the consequence is to be denied: because they
take up a falsehood, viz. that the souls did live again, for in the Text it is
said they lived, not that they lived again: Hence the distribution is vain
and imperfect, for a fourth is wanting, viz. that the Souls lived not again
in any respect, to wit, corporally, which is the Question here in hand. For a
false attribute divides not, but overthrowes the subject by its falsitie,
neither is it truly affirmed of the same but denied. Add, that the first
clause, with the reason thereof, is ambiguous: for howsoever souls dye not,
neither live again in respect of themselves, that is, in respect of their
essence, yet they do dye, and live again in respect of themselves, that is, in
respect of Grace and Salvation, as has been showed. The other is superfluous
and figurative. For no man lives again in respect of others, except
metaphorically: as for example: A father lives again in his children, in
likeness of nature and manners: The two Witnesses, Chap. 11.11. lived again
in their Successors, in likeness of doctrine. And therefore in this also is
an aequivocation or ambiguitie. The third, which is concluded, is also a
figurative Synecdoche, or is false. For as properly not the Souls, but the
Martyrs were dead in respect of their bodies, so properly not the souls, but
Martyrs shall live again in respect of their bodies at the last day. Therefore
ingeniously, and without Sophistry, the Object: should thus have bin formed.
The Martyrs lived again either in respect of their souls, or in respect of
their bodies. Not in regard of their souls: therefore in respect of their
bodies. But thus also the whole major is false; the minor ambiguous, the
Consequence nothing: for then the Martyrs lived not again, but lived according
to their Souls: but they shall live at the last day, according to their
bodies. Therefore properly there are as many faults, as words.

Ob. III. From the Antithesis, ver. 4. and ver. 5. If the word LIVED in the
former part of the Antithesis, must be understood of a Spiritual Resurrection,
then by the like reason the words LIVED AGAIN in the latter clause, must be
understood of that spiritual Resurrection. But this cannot be: for it would
follow that none did spiritually live again (that is, were converted) in the
thousand years, but the Martyrs alone. Secondly, this absurdity would also
follow: that the thousand years being finished, all which Spiritually dyed,
did, or shall spiritually rise again: the which thing is contrary to manifest
experience.

I answer: 1. Again they take up a false Antecedent, viz. that in the former
member a spiritual Resurrection ought to be understood: for the former clause
speaks of no Resurrection, whither Spiritual, or Corporal, but of the happy
living of the blessed Souls with Christ: for he says not, (...) And they
lived again, but (...) And they lived with Christ, which two we deny to be of
like force and signification. Now from a false Hypothesis or supposition, the
consequences which are thence drawn are also false. Hence. 2. the whole
conclusion is false, because the diverse words lived, and lived again, make
both members or clauses to be of a diverse sense: neither are they truly
Opposites, as was showed in opening of the Text.

III. The Assumption is also denied, that the latter member cannot be
understood of a Spiritual Resurrection, for a little before we showed, that it
ought so to be taken. IV. The former absurdity follows not, both because to
the Martyrs are added the Professors also, which received not the Character of
the Beast, that is, who refused to embrace and profess the Papists Religion,
verse 4. Hence Ecclesiastical Histories testify, that besides the Martyrs,
there were always some other professing Christians: As also because the Speech
is indefinite, and usual in Scripture: The rest of the dead were not
converted: not as if none at all were converted, but very few: as appears from
a like place, Chap. 9.18.20. where at the sounding of the sixth trumpet, it is
said, that the third part of men being slain, the rest repented not, the which
unless it be indefinitely understood, a greater absurdity then this should
follow, viz. that not one man in the whole world did then repent. LASTLY, the
latter absurdity, that the thousand years being ended, all Spiritually dead
should also spiritually rise again, (which were much to be wished) does no
more follow, then, that the said years being ended, the souls of Martyrs and
Professors should neither live nor reign any longer with Christ.

Objec. IV. From the same Antithesis: If the latter member ver. 5. speaks of
the Resurrection of bodies: then the former in ver. 4. speaks of a
Resurrection of bodies also, where its said of the Souls of the Martyrs: And
they lived, that is, lived again. The reason of the consequence is: because in
every lawful distribution, as this is, (for who should tax the Holy Ghost of
absurdity) members are set down under the same Genus or general word. Now
the Genus here is the Resurrection of the dead.

I answer. The falsitie both of the Antecedent and Consequent of this Objection
has already bin so fully demonstrated, that there needs no more be added. The
reason of the consequence is not solid: neither can hence the Holy Ghost be
taxed of absurdity, both because often a Genus of one and the same name is
taken in a diverse signification: so the living again of the dead in this
place: As also, because it were wickedness to deny that to the Spirit
(especially in this aenigmaticall Prophecy) which Philosophers, Poets, and
Orators frequently take to themselves, viz. in distributions to oppose things
metaphorical to things proper, or proper to figurative, for the thing it self.
Now in v. 4. was showed that this Antithesis is such.

Objec. V. They who so live again or rise, as they begin to reign with
Christ, that is, by Christ in Heaven: they certainly rise in their bodies, But
the Souls of the Martyrs are so to live again, or rise in the beginning of
those thousand years, as that they begin to reign with (that is, by) Christ
in Heaven: for John says: They lived and reigned with Christ. Therefore, etc.

Answer. I. The major is denied a non causa: for to the end, that the Souls of
Martyrs and Confessors should live blessedly, and reign with Christ in Heaven
before the last day, a corporal Resurrection is not necessary. But at the last
day it shall be necessary, to the end that the Martyrs both in body and in
soul, may gloriously live and reign with CHRIST for ever, according to the
promise of the Gospel. II. The assumption is refuted by the proof it self,
or by John's own words: for he says not, that the Souls lived again, or were
raised: but they lived ((...) not (...).) The difference whereof children in
schools do understand, and has bin demonstrated, ver. 4. Therefore the first
falsehood so often repeated, is a continual begging of the Question.

They insist: To live and reign with Christ, is to live and reign after the
similitude of Christ, or so to live and reign, as Christ now reigns in
Heaven. But Christ lives and reigns in soul and body. Therefore the
Martyrs not only lived and reigned with him in soul, but in body also.

I answer. I. This gloss overthrows the former: for if to live with Christ, be
to live after the likeness of Christ in Heaven: then it is false, that it is
to live again, or be raised from the dead on Earth. II. The major shall be
true after the Resurrection of the dead at the last day, when all the Martyrs,
Professors, and Believers being raised from death, shall in soul and body be
always with the Lord, 1. These. 4.17 1. Ioh. ^.2.
and see him as he is. But before the Resurrection of the dead, this is false:
Otherwise the Souls of such as die in the Lord should not go unto Christ, nor
live with him: but the Apostle testifies the contrary touching himself,
Philip. 1.23. and of all the faithful. 2. Cor. 5: 8, etc.

Ob. VI. It is agreeable to the justice of God, that such as suffered more
grievously then others, for the confession of Christ, should also enjoy longer
delight and glory. Therefore the Martyrs are to be raised from the dead before
the rest of the Faithful, to enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven all those THOUSAND
YEARS before the other.

Answ. The major, not being universal, is false: for God does not all what is
agreeable to his justice now, or before the Day of Judgment, but will do the
same at that Day; See 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.7.8.10. Neither is every thing agreeable to
divine justice, which seems so to us, but whatsoever is revealed in the
Scripture: otherwise indeed it might seem to us to be more agreeable to the
justice of God, that the Martyrs should presently be raised after their
sufferings, and be carried with their bodies into Heaven, that so they might
longer, and before others, enjoy the Kingdom of glory.

Objec. VII. The two Martyrs, Rev. 11.11. were corporally raised: Therefore
these also.

Answ. I. The Antecedent is denied: for neither does that type speak of a
corporal Resurrection according to the Letter, but of a successive living
again, as was there showed. II. They who confound them with these, show that
they are but strangers to the Revelation: for these Martyrs and Confessors
belong to the first ten Ages from Christ's birth: The other two unto our last
times, in which the Temple was to be measured, or the Church purged from Popery.

Objec. VIII. The Prophets, and many Martyrs, came forth out of their
Sepulchers at Christ's death on the Cross: Mat. 27.53. according to the
Prophecy of Daniel, Chap. 12.2. Neither was that corporal Resurrection any
way derogatorie to the Article of Faith, touching the future universal
Resurrection: Therefore also these Martyrs lived again corporally, neither is
it any way derogatorie to the universal Resurrection of the dead.

Answ. Whether those Saints (whose bodies came out of the Sepulchers, and
appeared to many, after Christ's Resurrection, to testify the efficacy of his
Death) were Prophets or Martyrs appears not from the Text: neither is it a
point of Faith to know the same. However the Prophecy of Daniel cannot without
wresting be applied to these, which expressly speaks, not only of the
Resurrection of such as shall be saved, but of the damned also, that is, of the
last Universal Resurrection. But that special and corporal Resurrection of
those Saints, is certainly to be believed, because it is written: neither can
it be derogatorie to our belief of the universal Resurrection, seeing the
Scripture does plainly except this from that. But this Resurrection of the
Martyrs a thousand years before that, is not to be believed, because it is not
written: but only (as we have showed) sought to be maintained by wresting the
words of this Prophecy: yea, it derogates from the Faith: because he that
believes this, cannot believe the other, viz. that there shall be a universal
Resurrection at the last day.

Objec. IX. Christ promised it should be so, Mat. 19.28. and Luke 22.28. In the
regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye shall
sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, etc.

Answ. These indeed are most sweet promises of our Savior, touching the
singular rewards of the Apostles in Heavenly Glory, and touching the large
recompense of their labors and loss of all things, which here they sustained
for the sake of Christ. But it is erroneous to believe, that here any thing is
promised touching a corporal resurrection of the Martyrs that shall be before
the rest of the dead, and of a golden Age to continue a thousand years before
the last day, in which (the Martyrs reigning with Christ in Heaven) the Jews
being joined to Christians, and freed from the yoke of all adversaries, shall
(as the opinion of some is) serve Christ in all manner of prosperity and peace.
Let such, I say, see too, least they err: and diligently consider, Act. 3.21.
that those rewards are promised to be fulfilled in the regeneration or
restitution of all things at the last day: promised also, Mark 10.30. with
persecutions: which things are plainly repugnant unto the Millenary
Resurrection, and peace before the last day.

Lastly they pretend, that it were greatly for the comfort of the Martyrs, if
they knew, that a little after their martyrdom (the thousand years being near
at hand) they should rise again, and ascend both in soul and body into
Heaven, and reign with Christ a thousand years before the rest of the Faithful.

Answ. To seek for comfort in a doubtful thing, is to feed upon the wind: in a
false thing: to mock with ones self and with God: neither is it without
impiety, how pleasing soever it seems to humane wit: forasmuch as faith cannot
be had in a doubtful or false matter (such as is this Corporal Resurrection:)
and so no solid consolation. But this is solid and double comfort to the
Martyrs, if from the sure word of God, they do believe that their Souls, as
soon as they go out of their bodies, shall live and reign with Christ in
Heaven, and that at the last day, (when their brethren and fellow servants, who
are to be slain on earth, shall be fulfilled) their bodies also being raised
up by the Son of God, Rev. 20.4. Ioh. 6.40. Rev. 6 11. Rev. 22.5.
they shall reign with him for ever and ever in Heaven.

TOUCHING THE OPINION OF THE OLD CHILIASTS.
HAving expounded and vindicated the true meaning of this Prophecy, it
remains in the last place to lay down, and weaken the false opinion of the
Old Chiliasts, who understanding this Prophecy corruptly according to the
Letter, and not according to the Analogy of Faith, did thence invent this
Jewish Fable, which Austin has set forth in these words, Lib. 20. de C. D. C.
7. That as the world was created in six days, and the seventh was a
Sabbathisme: so the world should continue six thousand years: and afterward
should follow a Sabbathisme in the last thousand years, namely, by the Saints
that shall rise, and celebrate the same: which opinion he says, might be
somewhat tolerable, if it were believed in that Sabbathisme, some spiritual
delights should come to the Saints through the presence of the Lord. For we
also were sometime of this opinion, but seeing they affirm, that such who
should rise again, shall enjoy carnal Feasts, and eat and drink beyond
measure and modesty, these things cannot be believed but by carnal men, and
therefore such as were spiritual, called them that believed these things
CHILIASTS, being a Greek word, and by us may be rendered MILLENARIES.

The first Author of this opinion, Papias author of the Chiliasts opinion.
as Eusebius records Lib. 3. Hist. Cap. 33. was Papias, whom Irenaeus and
Hierom (at which I wonder) make to be a hearer of the Apostle John: where as
Papias himself in the Preface of his work confesses, that he never heard or
saw the Holy Apostles: but says that he received this tradition from the
Elders of the Apostles.

Now Eusebius also writes of this Papias, that being pious, yet too credulous
and of little soliditie, he took up many Fables for Apostolical truths,
because he understood the Apostolical Interpretations amiss, and that he
became ringleader of the Chiliasts error unto many who followed his traditions,
among whom also was Irenaeus.

Hence almost all the Elder fathers, Many of the fathers held the opinion of
the Chiliasts.
following the antiquity of the tradition and authority of so great a man, who
was accounted a Disciple of the Apostles, became Chiliasts: JUSTINIUS Martyr,
dial: cum Tryphon: Judaeo. IRENAEVS Lib. 5. Cap. quinque extremis, not long
since published at Paris, and annexed (as a filthy clout) to his works: but
it had bin better they had buried the same in eternal oblivion, then to
uncover the secret shame of so worthy a Father: NEPOS a Bishop of Egypt, whom
DIONYSIUS ALEXANDRINVS refuted, as Eusebius writes Lib. 7. Hist. C. 10.
TERTVLLIAN: Lib. 3. Cont: marcion: Lactantius. lib. 7. instit. Cap. 23.
disputes at large of this Fable: VICTORINVS PICTAVIENSIS in his Commentary on
the Revelat. How uncertain the antiquity of tradition. and the authority of the
fathers is.
Austin also himself in the aforesaid place confesses that he sometime held
the same.

Hence all men may see how little is to be ascribed to antiquity of
TRADITIONS, and the authority of the FATHERS. For antiquity without truth, What
is it but the oldnesse of error? Who more ancient then Irenaeus? He writes,
that he was the hearer, or Disciple of Papias, and Papias of the Apostles:
Papias on the contrary denies, that he heard or ever saw the Apostles with his
eyes. (Behold antiquity without truth.) The said Papias received the Chiliasts
Fable by tradition of the Elders, and drew many to embrace this error by his
authority. The fable of Antichrists four years reign.
And without doubt from the said Author Irenaeus sucked another fable (which by
this means was generally received) touching Antichrist, that he should reign
not fully four years in the end of the world: for the most ancient Writers
were ignorant thereof. IVSTIN, the oldest Writer extant, affirms, that
Antichrist the man of sin, was already at the door: Dialogo cum Tryphone.
CLEMENT who wrote next to IVSTIN, has not one word of Antichrists three years
reign. Tertullian who lived at the same time affirmed that Antichrist was
near at hand. Cyprian also next to the former writes Lib. 5. Epist. 7. ye
ought to know, hold, Libro Defuga persecut.
and certainly believe, that the day of trial is begun already, and that the
decay of the world, and the time of Antichrist draws on: Ibid: Antichrist
comes. Wherefore the Fables of Papias were not taken on till at length in
latter Ages.

Furthermore the Chiliasts Fable occasioned many which dis-approved the same,
but were not able to refute it, to fall into another error worse then the
former, affirming, that the Revelation was to be rejected, as written by the
Heretic CERINTHVS. Among these were Cajus and others, touching whom (in
EVSEBIVS) DIONISIVS ALFXANDRINVS speaks, who opposed NEPOS the Egyptian.
Others on the contrary to keep up the authority of the Revelation, labored to
divide the opinion of Cerinthus and the Fathers, as if Cerinthus indeed
maintained a voluptuous Millenary kingdom, full of lust and riot. But the
Fathers the spiritual delights of the Saints.

But Ribera affirms, Comm: in Apoc. 20. N. 26.
that there was no difference betwixt the opinion of Cerinthus and the Fathers,
because Irenaeus, Tertullian, Lactantius, etc. wrote the same things about the
Millenary Kingdom, which are contained in the opinion of Cerinthus. And this
Dionysius, and Caius also an old Writer affirms, Eusebius. Lib. 3. Hist. Cap.
28. however it be, the Chiliasts opinion was by the Christians condemned, for
ascribing to Christ contrary to the Scriptures, a voluptuous and earthly
Kingdom, and for bringing in, contrary to the Apostolical Faith, one (and so
making a twofold) Resurrection after another: the which opinion how improbable
it is, has, I suppose, bin sufficiently showed: so as I trust, that such who
think it ought again to be renewed (as far as concerns the latter part
thereof) will, after the due consideration of these things, in the fear of God
(with Austin) change their opinion.

Now for the refuting of this old Fiction of the Chiliasts (which Jerome in the
life of Papias calls a Jewish tradition) we may briefly observe, that it
consists neither with the present Vision, nor with it self, nor with other
Scriptures, nor Christian belief. Now this (besides what formerly has bin
spoken) I will show by four clear Arguments.

First: I have made it manifest already, that the thousand years of Satan's
binding, A refutation of the Chiliasts error by experience.
and the Kingdom of the Martyrs with Christ in Heaven, (beginning from the
overthrow of Jerusalem, unto Gregory VII. that Romish Beast) are now past above
548. years. And yet there has not bin any corporal Resurrection of Martyrs,
or Golden Kingdom of Christ on earth. The experience therefore which we now see
(but the fathers could not) refuteth this Fiction.

Secondly, 2. From the text.
That Millenarie Kingdom is expressly ascribed unto the souls of the Martyrs
and Confessors, when (as Austin well observes) they were not restored to
their bodies. Then, I say, their souls sat upon thrones, lived and reigned
with Christ in those thousand years: this therefore is not to be applied unto
the Resurrection of the body.

Thirdly: This error, as arising from a false Chronology, is plainly
refuted: 3. From the erroneous chronology.
For the Chiliasts following the erroneous computation of the Greeks, affirmed
that Christ was born in 5199. year of the world: since which are past 1621.
years, which number being added unto the former, would make 6820. years from
the Creation. But thus not only the sixth Millenary (or the thousand years)
which they ascribe to the binding of Satan, should be past, but also there
should but a few years of the seventh Millenary, and their voluptuous Kingdom
of the Saints with Christ, should already have dured above eight hundred: the
which is refuted by History and experience, so that if Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Lactantius etc. did now live, they should be necessitated to confess that
they much erred from the truth.

Lastly the whole Scripture holds forth, IV. From the difficulties of the last
times. Ioh. 18.36. Ioh. 18.20 Mat. 24.21 Luke 18.8. 2. Tim 3.1
that the last times shall not be voluptuous in the least, but difficult and
sorrowful unto the Church in this world: Besides Christ did often foretell
that his Kingdom should not be earthly: My kingdom is not of this world. The
world shall rejoice, but ye shall mourn: In the world ye shall have
tribulation. Then shall be great tribulation, such as was not from the beginning
of the world unto this time. Watch therefore, that ye may be found worthy to
escape all these things. When the son of man comes shall he find Faith on
the earth? Through manifold tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. This know that in the last days perilous (or difficult) times shall
come, etc. These and such like testimonies of Scripture: which speak of the
afflicted state of the last times, do abundantly refute the Millenaries
Fiction. Now we go forward with the Text.

6. Blessed and holy is he that has part] By an Exclamation he extolleth, and
commends unto us the felicity, and necessity of the first Resurrection, or
spiritual living again, by which of old those Rest of the dead in Paganism
and Antichristianisme, obstinately refused to live again: by which all, and
they only shall be blessed and holy, Act. 8.21. Ioh. 13.8. What it is to have
part in the first Resurrection. The profitablenesse and necessity of the first
resurrection
who have part in the first Resurrection. To have part in a thing, is to become
partaker of that thing: as appears from the contrary: Thou have neither part
nor lot in this matter, says Peter to Simon the hypocrite: And Christ to
Peter, refusing to be washed by him: If I wash thee not thou bast no part with
me, for, thou shall not have no communion with me. Therefore to have part in
the first Resurrection, is to be partaker of the first Resurrection, that is,
through faith and repentance, to rise from the death of sin unto newness of
Life with Christ. For we clearly showed erewhile, that this first Resurrection,
is not of the body, but of the soul. By which we see the great benefit and
excellency of the first Resurrection: because in it consists true
blessedness and holiness. The necessity also, because no man shall be
blessed and holy without the same. But is it the cause of blessedness? yea
verily: not indeed the meritorious (for that Christ only is, for he has
merited blessedness for us,) but causa sine qua non, a cause without which it
is not: for without holiness, which the first Resurrection brings, Heb. 12.14
no man shall see God: yea it is also the formal cause inchoated or begun. For
the first Resurrection is inchoated holiness, and part of the future
blessedness, which shall be perfected in heaven.

Hence first it follows, that all having part in the first Resurrection, that
is, being truly born again in this life, shall be blessed, and holy with Christ
in the other Life: and on the contrary, that none which rise not again with
Christ, unto newness and holiness of life on Earth, shall be blessed and holy
with Christ in Heaven: Lib. 20. de C. D. ca. 6.
For none can belong unto this first Resurrection, but such as shall be blessed
for ever says Austin. They therefore which have no part in the first
Resurrection, shall not be partakers of blessedness: for we shall be
clothed upon with our house, if so be that being clothed, we shall not be
found naked. 2. Corinthians. 5.3.

Secondly it follows, as before we proved, that the First Resurrection is not
corporal, but spiritual: for if it were corporal, then by this Exclamation,
all that shall be raised at the last day, should be excluded from blessedness,
because none of them should have part in the first Corporal Resurrection. But
this is absurd, because in the last day, some shall rise unto blessedness,
others unto eternal death. The reason of the consequence is, because all, and
they only that have part in the First Resurrection shall be blessed.

All indeed thou will say, but not they only: Yea because all, therefore
only: for in an enunciation of the property touching the subject, or of the
effect touching the cause without which it is not, or else an Antistrophe, such
as this is, not only a simple conversion and contraposition will hold, but a
contrary sense also, which begets exclusives: Blessed are they that have part
in the first Resurrection, therefore they that have no part in the first
Resurrection, are not blessed: which is of like force with the exclusive: Only
they that have part in the first Resurrection are blessed: Ps. 119.1. Psalm. 32
1. Romans 4.7. Rev. 12.14 Rev. 19.9.
like as it follows: Blessed are the pure, therefore the impure are not
blessed: Blessed are they whose sins are forgiven: They therefore are not
blessed whose sins are not forgiven. Blessed are they that keep his
Commandments: They therefore that do not keep them, are not blessed. Blessed
are they that are called to the marriage Supper of the Lamb: therefore they
who are not called, are not happy: and a thousand such like places are found in
Scripture.

But perhaps thou will say, it will not hold: because as in Chap. 1.3. a
special blessedness is promised to the keepers of the words of this Book, so
here also some special and eminent felicity of the Martyrs is commended, by
which notwithstanding other believers are no way deprived of their
blessedness. THIS is nothing: for they that keep not the words of this Book,
shall be deprived both of special and common blessedness. Therefore they
only who keep the words and Commandments of this Book, are blessed: and so
are they alone, who have part in the First Resurrection.

Lastly, either they only that have part in the first Resurrection shall be
blessed, or not they only. If they only, it confirms, what we said: If not
only, then Blessedness shall not be a special privilege of the Martyrs,
agreeable to the justice of God, viz. that they who have suffered more then
others, for the Confession of Christ, should be longer in joy and glory: as
before they said. For either there shall be some other Mart^^rs on earth in
these thousand years, who shall suffer as much, or more also for the Gospel,
at the hands of Antichrist (regaining, as they say, his strength) or of other
enemies, then the former suffered by Roman Tyrants for the witness of Jesus:
or else there shall be none. If some: then either these shall enjoy shorter
happiness and glory in Heaven, which stands not (according to their opinion)
with Gods justice: Or else it was not agreeable to his Justice, that those
other should enjoy longer happiness and glory. If there shall be no Martyrs,
but that the Church Militant during the THOUSAND YEARS shall be free from all
hostile invasion of the ungodly, living in peace and security, as they promise:
then it follows, 1. Cor, 2.18
that the Gospel shall cease to be the word of the Cross: and the true
Oracles of Christ and his Apostles, touching the difficulties of the last
times, Luke 18.8. Mat. 10.34. Act. 14.22. 2. Tim. 3.1, etc. shall cease.

Thirdly, we learn the certainty of the Salvation of all that are borne
again: for if all, and they only that have part in the First Resurrection,
are blessed: and that none can belong unto the First Resurrection, but such as
shall be blessed for ever: then certainly all, and they only that are borne
again, shall infallibly obtain eternal blessedness.

Ribera objects, that very many rise again from sin, and yet die again, In
cap. 20. N. 49.50.
by their relapse into sin, and so depart out of this life in their sin:
Answ. This is true of dogs and swine, returning to their vomit, and wallowing
in filthiness: that is, of hypocrites, who in appearance indeed rise again
from sin, and seem to others to be truly purged from the defilements of the
world, but yet are not truly purged before God: which for the most part the
event shows: but of such as are truly regenerate, and rise again from sin,
it is said: 1. Ioh. 3.9. Ps. 37.24.
Whosoever is borne of God commits not sin: for his seed remains in him,
and he cannot sin, because he is borne of God: And: Though the righteous fall,
he shall not be utterly cast down: for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand.

On such the second death] He adds three causes or parts of their
blessedness, that have part in the first Resurrection.

1. Because the second death has no power on them.

2. Because they shall be Priests of God, and Christ.

3. Because they shall reign with Christ a thousand years.

These are either the effects or consequents of the first Resurrection, and as
it were the privileges of the regenerate, first indeed, they are to be
referred to the Martyrs, but secondly also unto all others that are partakers
of the first Resurrection, or spiritual living again. For least we should
say: shall the Martyrs alone live and reign with Christ in blessedness? he
extends the blessed life, the Priesthood and Kingdom of Christ unto us also,
pronouncing us blessed, and that indeed by a threefold name, not the Martyrs
(I say) alone, but whosoever have part in the first Resurrection: that by so
many spurs as it were, he might stir up all men unto the desire and study of
the First Resurrection.

Therefore the first blessedness of them that live again, shall be an
immunitie or security from the second death: for they that have part in the
First Resurrection, on such the second death has no power, that is, they can
never perish. For the second death, is the casting of the wicked, both in soul
and body into hell fire, which shall be at the last day, as appears ver. 14.
Of which our Savior in the the Gospel: Mat. 10.28
Fear him that can destroy both soul and body in hell. This otherwhere is
called Eternal death: because it shall be an eternal loss of life eternal,
and an everlasting torment in everlasting fire. Here it is called the Second,
to difference it from the First: because as the second does next, and certainly
follow the first: so the second death shall follow the first in order, and
certainly, unless the First Resurrection come in between, and that deliverance
from the First death be obtained by Christ. Now before we showed that the first
death is a spiritual perdition of the Soul in sin, drawing with it
temporal death as its necessary sequel: Romans 5.12
This death entered into the world through sin, and passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned. Therefore it has power over all men, and it is
universal, yet mutable through the First Resurrection, that is, true
repentance and faith in Christ. But the second death shall not have power over
all, but them only whom it finds lying in the First death: for these shall be
thrown headlong from death into death: or rather the Second death shall be
unto them an everlasting continuation of the First death, and a horrible
increasing in eternal fire. But such as through faith and true repentance,
have risen with Christ from the First death, on them the second death shall
have no power: because according to promise of the Gospel, Ioh. 3.36. Ioh.
5.24.
they that believe on the Son of God, do not come into condemnation, but are
passed from death to life. Therefore the second death shall not be universal,
because the First resurrection shall make the particularitie: yet it shall be
immutable for ever, because there can be no redemption from hell, but the
smoke of their torment shall ascend up for ever and ever. Psalm. 49.8. Rev.
14.11 Cont: Demetr:
For after the departure out of this life, there shall be no more place of
repentance: no effect of satisfaction: Here life is either lost or kept, says
Cyprian.

These things ought to awaken and raise up such as lie in the death of sin:
And on the contrary, to confirm the assurance of their salvation, that are
risen with Christ. For if the second death has no power over them that have
part in the First resurrection, then certainly they need not fear condemnation,
but may and ought to be certainly persuaded of their salvation.

But some may say, It is uncertain, who truly have, and always unto the end
shall have part in the First Resurrection. Answ. If it be uncertain to thee who
have not tasted honey, whether it be sweet or not: it is not therefore
uncertain to them who have tasted the same. So likewise, If the First
Resurrection be uncertain to them, which neither have, nor know the same: it
is not therefore uncertain to them which have it, and feel it in their
hearts: for some apprehend not faith in their hearts, Lib. 13. de Trin. C. 2.
but others do which have the same, says Austin. And how should such be
uncertain of their new birth, who daily endeavor, and desire to die unto sin,
and to live unto Christ? They certainly who run on in all wickedness, and as
Peter says walk in laciviousnesse, lusts, excess of wine, revellings,
banquettings, and abominable Idolatry, know that they do such things, yet out
of an evil conscience commit the same with great delight. And therefore why
should not such, who by an earnest desire of mind resist the concupiscence of
the flesh, and labor by good works to make their election sure, know, feel,
and be persuaded (the Holy Ghost witnessing the same to their Spirits) that
they are children of God, and have part in the first Resurrection? Furthermore,
they which now have part in the First Resurrection, shall always have part of
the same unto the end: because, To him that has, shall be given, Luke 8.18.
Otherwise John should have done ill in saying, that they are blessed who have
part in the first Resurrection: which to think were blasphemy: from the part
therefore of the new birth which we have in this life, we may, and ought
certainly to believe we shall have part in the life to come, that is, be
eternally blessed.

Here again by this first privilege of them that rise again, is overthrown
the Chiliasts opinion, touching the first Corporal Resurrection, as before we
touched. For if it should be Corporal, and proper to the Martyrs, it would
follow that the Martyrs alone should be free from the second death: and that
all the rest in the Second Resurrection should remain subject to the same, for
as much as by this privilege they alone are exempted from the power of the
Second death, who have part in the First Resurrection. But this is wholly
contrary to Faith and Charity.

But shall be Priests of God and of Christ] The second part of blessedness,
and the second privilege of the regenerate, is that they shall be Priests of God
and Christ: XLI. Argument of Christ's deity.
Beza in the DATIVE, To God and to Christ, as it is Chap. 1.6. and 5.10. in the
same sense. He distinguishes God and Christ, not to separate Christ from God,
or to deny that he is God: but because Christ the Mediator has made us
Priests to God the father, Chap. 16. and 5.10. Yea hereby he plainly affirms
Christ to be God, in that he says we shall be Priests both to God, and to
Christ. Now we shall be Priests to none but to God. But what manner of Priests?
Of this see Chap. 1. ver. 6. and Chap. 5.10. The future (...) shall be, denies
not that now also the Faithful are Priests of God: but notes the continuation
and consummation of our Priestly dignity in the world to come.

Hence first it appears, seeing the Scripture extends the
Spirituall-Priesthood unto all the regenerate, that are washed from their
sins in the blood of Christ, 1. Pet. 2.5.9. Rev. 1.5.6. that this privilege
does so agree unto the blessed Martyrs, as it derogates nothing from other
Confessors and regenerate. Secondly, that for the same cause, the First
resurrection v. 5. is not to be understood corporally but spiritually: because
otherwise the Martyrs alone should become Priests of God and of Christ, in case
they alone should have part in the first Resurrection.

And shall reign with him a thousand yeeres] The third blessedness and
privilege of them that live again, is to reign with God and Christ a
thousand years. (...) with him, says he, to denote the unity of both persons
in the deity. XLII. Argument of Christ's deity.
But who shall reign? The Martyrs only, or the other blessed also? In my
former Edition, I restrained the same to the Martyrs from verse 4. But having
more seriously weighed the whole Epiphonema or exclamatory conclusion, I am
forced to extend, as the Priesthood and blessed Life, so the Kingdom
generally unto all that have part in the first Resurrection: that is, unto all
the regenerate. And so much the words do demonstrate, if well observed: For
seeing John had said before of the Martyrs in the Praeter Tense (...) They
reigned with Christ: of these he now says (...) They shall reign with him, in
the future: Besides, touching the Dragons binding, and the Martyrs reigning, he
had before said thrice with the Article (...), Those thousand years: Of these
now he says indefinitely, They shall reign (...) a thousand years. Hence I
observe this diversity, both in the persons reigning, and in the thousand
years: that John for the comfort of the rest of the Saints, and blessed ones,
does in this verse extend the Kingdom of the Martyrs with Christ, beyond the
thousand years before defined: as if he should say: The souls indeed of the
Martyrs lived and reigned with Christ those thousand years of Satan's binding:
but with them afterward, others also having part in the first Resurrection,
shall as Priests of God and Christ reign other thousand years, that is, for
ever and ever, as is interpreted Rev. 22.5. Neither matters it, that also in
ver. 2. he said (...) a thousand years, without an Article, and yet definitely:
for no man but understands, that there it ought not to have bin said with the
Article (...), Those thousand years: because no mention was before made of a
thousand years. But afterward, that we might not understand the thousand years
both of Satan's binding, and of the Martyrs reign with Christ (in v. 3.4.5.) to
be diverse, but the same, it is said rightly with the Article (...) those
thousand years: and for the same cause the Article (...) is again repeated
ver. 7. where he mentions the period or end of Satan's binding.

The Second Part of the CHAPTER.
Touching the new attempt of the Dragon (being loosed at the end of the
Thousand years) by the Gentiles, and by Gog and Magog, against the Church.

7. And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his
prison.

8. And shall go out to deceive the Nations, which are in the four quarters of
the Earth, Gog and Magog to gather them together to battle: the number of whom
is as the sand of the Sea.

9. And they went up on the breadth of the Earth, and compassed the Camp of
the Saints about, and the Beloved-City: and fire came down from God out of
Heaven, and devoured them.

THE COMMENTARY.
7. But when the thousand years are expired] Now follows the Second part of
the Chapter, of the loosing, and new raging of the Dragon, after the thousand
fatal years were expired, containing the THIRD ACT of the last Vision, being
an amplification of the Churches calamities and combats, under both Antichrists
of the East and West, who shall again grievously trouble the Christian World,
as we showed in the PREFACE. And thus at length we come to the explication of
the fourth Question before propounded in ver. 3.

IV. What Satan shall do after the thousand years are expired.
He had said that Satan being bound with a great chain, should be thrust into
the bottomless pit for a thousand years, and afterward again loosed, ver. 3.
and showing in the following verses what in the mean while was done in the
Church, and what was the state of the ungodly both without and within.

Now Kat' anaphoran or in relation to what was before, he says that Satan was
to be loosed after the thousand years, and expounds what he attempted, with
the success thereof, yet aenigmatically: so as this part of the Prophecy is
very obscure, neither may we scatcely so much as guess what the meaning
thereof is: notwithstanding the most diligent Interpreters do think, that
somewhat about the same may be observed from the Histories of former times:
whose steps (seeing nothing more certain is revealed unto me) I am willing to
tread in.

When the thousand were finished] In which Satan remained in chains, and in
which in the mean while Christ enlarged his Kingdom among the Gentiles, and the
Martyrs had lived and reigned with him.

Satan shall be loosed out of his prison] Hence it plainly appears (as
before I said) that the thousand years of Satan's imprisonment, and of Christ
his kingdom, are not diverse, but the same: for it is said with the Article:
When THESE thousand years ((...)) shall be fulfilled, Satan shall be loosed.

This very thing Austin well observes, saying: Lib. 20. de C, D. c. 13. The
Chiliasts opinion cannot stand.
That the Scripture by the same thousand years determinates both, to wit,
Satan's binding, and the Saints reigning. Which being observed, it appears
that the Chiliasts opinion cannot stand, viz. that Satan should be bound in the
sixth Millenary of the world (in which they affirm Christ was borne:) and that
in the seventh Millenary the Saints shall reign with Christ on Earth: Besides
neither can the opinion of Brightman hold, that Satan was bound a thousand
years from Constantine, until the year of our Lord 1300. after which Christ
should reign another thousand years, by the Gospel on Earth with his Elect,
until the year 2300. in which Millenary the Gogish or Turkish battles should
be fought: whence he gathers that the truth of the gospel shall triumph
among the Nations seven hundred years: a thing indeed more to be wished, then
expected with any probability.

Thus by what has been said before it is clear: When the thousand years of
Satan's imprisonment began, and when they ended.
that the fatal thousand years of Satan's Imprisonment are finished, and when.
They took their beginning at the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, when
the Jews (who furiously blasphemed the Gospel of Christ, and sought by all
means to hinder the Gentiles from embracing the same) were dispersed through
the whole world, and the fullness of the Gentiles began to enter into the
Church: for then it chiefly appeared that Satan was thrust into Hell, and bound
with the chains of darkness, that he might no longer keep the Gentiles from the
faith of Christ. 2. Pet. 2.4.
Besides before we showed that these bonds continued until the times of
Gregory VII.

Wherefore the thousand years were finished more then five hundred years ago,
and Satan loosed from his imprisonment: When Satan was agoin loosed.
which sufficiently appeared by the fatal tumults that were raised up both in
the East and West, by that raging enemy. For chiefly in these five hundred
years, the Western Antichrist by the impulsion and efficacy of the Dragon,
violently laid hold on the Monarchical power of both swords, miserably
oppressing and enslaving all Christendom in the West: which Bellarmine
himself denies not. And on the other side, Lib. 3. de P. R. cap. 9.
that Thracian adversary of Christ having brought almost all the East and South
under his power, does with so great fury encompasse the Camp of the Saints, as
it seems impossible he should be stopped, but by fire descending from Heaven.

8. And shall go out to deceive the Nations] By the word going out, is
signified Satan's free raging, and outrageous endeavor to turn all things
upside down. In the same sense it was before said of the three Frogs, the
spirits of devils: Rev. 16.14
They go forth unto the Kings of the Earth. And indeed there and here is
treated of one and the same attempt of Satan, being the same third Act, there
of the Fifth, here of the seventh Vision. Satan therefore being let loose out of
prison shall rove about, going to and fro through the Earth, and with great
fury setting all things every where in a flame, both in the world and Church:
not as if he shall no longer be kept in by the bridle of providence: but
because God will let loose the reins unto him more then before, for reasons
expounded ver. 3.

Now his enterprises shall principally be two. One to seduce the nations in the
four corners of the earth. The second, to stir up Gog and Magog to battle.
Thus these things are to be distinguished: for the Verb (...) Deceive is both
to be referred to the Nations, and also to Gog and Magog, because he shall
deceive both the one and the other, yet so, as in a diverse manner and end. The
Nations he shall seduce from the Faith unto new Paganism: The Pagans Gog and
Magog he shall seduce, Satan's twofold attempt after his loosing. Vestigat. page
896.
that is, stir them up to war (in hope of Victory) against the Camp of the
Saints. The former attempt shall be Ecclesiastical, and so more nearly
tending to the destruction of the Church: The latter civil, and tending to the
overthrow of the state and policy of Christians. Which Alcasar also seeing: It
shall not, says he, properly be a war for Religion to speak generally, but
for the Empire.

By the nations, as before Chapter 11.3. I understand false Christians, who having
embraced the Faith of Christ, did again degenerate from the sincerity thereof
in the times of Antichrist. These nations, I say, he shall deceive, that is,
under the name of Christ they shall return unto Paganism, How the nations were
deceived.
as to their old vomit, worshipping God after the manner of the heathens, and
living more heathenishly and enormous then before. This Pest, says he, shall
rage, not in one corner, but in the four corners of the earth] By a Phrase
repeated from Chap. 7.1. that is, in all parts of Christendom, throughout the
whole earth: for no corner shall be free from his seducement: but apostasy shall
every where get the upper hand, yet chiefly in the East and West, where the
Crowns of the Empire shall be, and where ambition and carnality of Priests shall
chiefly reign, and withal corrupt the other corners of the Earth.

For Gregory VII. Gregory the VII. an exquisite Instrument of Satan, loosed.
sitting at Rome, in the Chair of universal pestilence (to the end it might
appear that Satan was loosed from the year 1073.) the devil began to rage
far more cruelly by him, then ever he had done by Romulus, Tarquinius the
proud, Tiberius, Nero, Domitian, Heliogabalus, Diocletian, Decius: or by the
Persians, Scythians, or Saracens: the cruellest of all which Tyrants, being
compared with the said Pope Gregory, (according to what the Cardinal Benno,
and others have published of him) would seem to be a Saint, in respect of this
filthy instrument of Satan.

Its true, he was not the first Antichrist, neither did the seduction of
Christians from the faith, begin with him: for the Romish Antichristianisme had
bin growing and greatly increasing above three hundred years before. But
because Satan was as yet bound (for the Dragon being bound, the Beast was to
ascend out of the Pit, and possess his throne and power as his Vicar) so as
the former times might seem more tolerable, in respect of the times which
followed: for at the end of the thousand years Satan being loosed out of his
prison, began to puff up the Roman Popes with such swelling pride, as they
feared not to tread upon, and oppress the most powerful Princes, Kings, and
Emperors of Christendom.

After much contention, Hildebrand called Gregory under a false pretense of
simonie wrang out of the hands of Henry (that valiant Emperor) and his Son
Henry V. the Episcopal Investures, as they term it, which till then were
belonging to the Right and Crown of the Empire: yea also thrust Henry himself
from the Empire through his wicked son. Priests also that were married, he
cast out of the Church, as Nicolaitans (as if the Apostle 1. Tim. 3.2. and Tit.
1.6. had instituted Nicolaitans:) moreover he published two Cannons which ever
since have bin, and yet are to this day the sinews of the Popes Tyranny. 1. If
any man receive Priesthood at the hand of any Lay person, let both the Giver
and Receiver be accursed: 2. If any Communicate with a married Priest, or if a
Priest having a wife, does not put her away, let him be accursed.

By this compendious way he exempted at once all Bishops, Clerks, Churches,
and all that thereunto belonged, from the power of Emperors, and brought them
under his own Empire: 1. Tim. 3.2 Tit. 1.6. 1. Cor. 7.2.
withal taking unto himself the right of all Ecclesiastical goods: condemning
also marriage estate (not only granted unto Bishops by Paul, but also
commanded, to shun fornication) as the wickedness of the Nicolaitans, by open
Antichristian Tyranny, banishing the same out of the Church: which thing indeed
was justly abominable to Emperors and the Christian world: Genebr. chronol.
lib. 4. pa. 593.
yet formidable, because of the enchantment of the Apostolical Church:
Notwithstanding Popish Writers do glory in this most filthy Beast: That HENRY
was the first among the Western Emperors, whom the Pope deposed.

Histories also testify, that after those thousand years, the God of
Strengths foretold by Daniel Chap. 11.38. that is, the Idol of
Transsubstantation, and Stage-like Mass was chiefly erected and confirmed, in
which the whole strength of the Papacy has hitherto consisted. With this grew
up the innumerable fraternities, and families of Clergymen, Sacrificers,
Monks, and Religious Sects, who all of them being exempted from civil
jurisdiction, are only subject to the Popes Scepter. Then were invented the
Jubilees, the gainefull traffic of Popish Indulgences, or Pardons, and a
thousand tricks to draw moneys from all Provinces into Romes Exchequer. Then
infinite Ceremonies, Superstitions, and Idols were brought in and established:
so that if now thou compare Popery with Paganism, thou shall scarce see any
difference but in names. Therefore it is not said without cause, that Satan
being loosed after the thousand years, should deceive the Nations of the whole
Earth.

Neither was this horrible declining of Christianity in the West only. For it
is known, that many most flourishing Churches of the East, which yet stood in
the first thousand years, were in the next five hundred years, either cut
off, and miserably dissipated, or by the seduction of Satan filthily corrupted.
On the contrary we see that Mahumetisme, although it began somewhat sooner, yet
within the latter five Ages was more generally spread both in Asia, Africa, and
Europe. This therefore was Satan's former seduction.

Gog and Magog to gather them to battle] Greek (...): which commonly is taken
appositively: That he might seduce the Nations Gog and Magog: for: which
Nations are Gog and Magog: but so Satan's fury seems to be lessened, as if
after his loosing he were only to deceive, and draw the barbarous Nations unto
a civil battle. Whereas he shall chiefly be busy about the intestine
seduction of the Church, within indeed laboring to trample her under foot by
the slights of the domesticke Antichrist, and outwardly by force of arms to
suppress her, by a foreign Antichrist. It is therefore an Ellipsis or defect
of the Copulative: for: And Gog and Magog, because the Verb (...) rules the
three Accusatives, (...): the middlemost of which did least need the
Copulative. The seduction therefore of Gog and Magog shall be diverse from the
seduction of the Nations, being not Ecclesiastical, as the former, but
political. For Satan shall stir up, not the nations, but Gog and Magog to
this cruel battle: which appears by the Relative (not (...), but) (...) to
wit, (...) Gog and Magog: by whom he shall set all things in confusion and
blood.

Now what manner of adversaries or peoples these should be, may scarcely be
guest at: For there are almost as many opinions about the same, as Writers,
both Ancient and Modern.

Bellarmine reckons up ten, Lib. 3. de P R. cap. 17. Vestig. page 877.
all which (his own excepted not a whit better then the rest) yea even that of
the five old Fathers Lanctantius, Eusebius, Theodoretus, Hierom, and Austine he
disproves. Alcasar also brings in many more. But we will not weary our selves
in rehearsing the conjectures of other men.

Magog (to begin with this as the more known) was the second son of Iaphet
Genesis 10.3. of whom, Lib. 1. Antiq. cap. 7.
as Josephus writes came the Magogites (so called after him) or Scythians,
that is, the peoples which inhabit beyond the mountain Caucasus, near the Lake
Maeotis, and the Caspian Sea, unto the Northern India. Hierom therefore by
Magog understands the Scythian Nations: unto whom some do join the
Cappadocians and Arminians, seated beyond Coelesyria: lib. 5. c. 23:
whose Metrapolitan City, Hierapolis (where Papias sometime was Bishop) is in
the Syrian tongue called Magog, as Pliny records.

Touching Gog there is nothing mentioned in Scripture save in Ezech. 38. and
39. where you shall find a long Prophecy against Gog and Magog, of which the
Phantisies of the Jews, Mahumetans, and Papists are not much unlike.

The Jews feine that Gog and Magog are the Northern Nations, shut up by
Alexander the Great, beyond the Mountain Taurus, who breaking out toward the
end of the world, shall by war wast the whole earth, especially the Land of
Israel, and the City Jerusalem. But then the Messiah shall be at hand, and
slay Gog and Magog, according to the Oracle of Ezechiel: which Fable Galatinus
has refuted Lib. 5. Cap. 12.

The Mahumetans Fiction touching Gog and Magog is much like to this, Alcor. A,
20.28.32. etc.
save only that it is somewhat otherwise touching the Messiah and Jerusalem.

The Papists dream, that their Antichrist shall come in the end of the world,
with great forces, and that in his Army (which mostlie shall consist of the
barbarous Scythians) he shall have seven Kings (for so many, and no more shall
then be remaining in the world, as Ribera affirms. The Emperor therefore of
the Romans, the King of France, of Spain, etc. shall then either have no
being or fight for Antichrist) among whom Gog and Magog shall be most
powerful, Lib. 3. de P. R. c. 17. Apoc. 20.
(yea Gog, according to Bellarmine shall be Antichrist himself) which Ribera
denies) and in the space of less then four full years most cruelly
over-runne, and bring into subjection the whole world, especially Christendom:
and to this Antichristian war they apply the Prophecy of Ezechiel, and of
John in this place. As the Jews therefore dream, that their Messiah is not yet
come, because Jerusalem has not bin assaulted by Gog and Magog, who are to be
slain by the Messiah: So the Papists feine, that their Antichrist is not yet
come, because Gog and Magog are not come, who with a most numerous Army shall
fight under Antichrists banner, Ezech. 39.4.6.9.12. The fiction touching Gog
and Magog refuted.
and with him oppose the Holy City, that is, the Roman Church. Both Fictions
are alike frivolous, and are easily refuted by the Prophecy it self: for i^
Ezechiel God threatens, that Gog shall fall upon the mountains of Israel, and
that he will send a fire on Magog, whereupon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall
go forth, and burn the spoil with fire seven years: and that the slaughter
of the enemy shall be so great, that the land shall be seven years in
cleansing, because of the carkeises of the slain: But the Papists say, that
Antichrists kingdom, and the Gogish war shall not continue full four years:
and that from this Victory of the Church unto the day of Judgment, there shall
not be seven months (much less seven years) but XLV. days only. Therefore
either this latter Fiction of theirs, or else the former is false.

This difficulty, (by which they see their Fable overthrown) Ribera seeks to
shift off one way, Bellarmine another.

Ribera says, In apoc. 20. N. 70.
the words of Ezechiel signify power, not the Act: not as if they shall spend
seven months in burying the carkeises. But the number of the carkeises shall be
so great, that if all should be buried, there would be need of seven months
time for the doing of it.

Bellarmin understands it, that the Prophet speaks not properly, but
figuratively, putting seven years, for a very long time.

But by these slights they take not away the difficulty in the least.

Riberas gloss de potentia, is by the Text there refuted, ver. 1.3. All the
people of the Land shall bury them. Therefore they shall bury all the carkeises
ipso actu, because the Land must be cleansed of the carkeises, and therefore
they shall spend seven months actually in burying of them. This Ribera saw:
therefore at last he was forced contrary to Bellarmine, and the common opinion,
to grant, not only XLV. days, but seven years after Antichrists slaughter,
unto the day of Judgment.

As for Bellarmines shift, it makes the difficulty yet greater, for whither
the Prophet understands properly and definitely seven months and years, or
figuratively and indefinitely a very long time, it appears the Fiction is
false which Bellarmine there affirms: That after Antichrists death, Ribera
refuteth Bellarmines Fiction.
there shall be no more then XLV. days unto the end of the world: the falsitie
whereof Ribera himself does solidly confute by two places of Scripture, both
because those things which in Mat, 24.38. are spoken touching the security, and
riot of the world at Christ's coming, cannot in the least be done in XLV.
days: as also, because then as soon as Antichrist should begin to reign, it
might certainly be known when the day of Judgment should be: which to
think, says he, is absurd: 1. These. 5.2
because the day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night. But he
pretends, Mat. 24.36.
that perhaps it cannot be known by the unlearned: No, nor by the learned: for
it is said. Of that Day and Hour no man knows, no, not the Angels of Heaven.
Therefore being convinced by the truth, he at length ingenuously confesses,
that no man can know how long time shall remain from Antichrist. Therefore, O
Ribera! thou see that time to be foolishly defined of thee by the space of
seven years, and more foolishly by Bellarmines XLV. days. Behold the power of
the truth, and the Jesuits discord.

Now however it belong not to this place, Whether Ezechiel and John's Prophecy
touching Gog be the same.
to show whither the Prophecy of Ezechiel, and this here in the Revelation be
the same or not: yet contrary to the Jesuits affirmation we are to hold: that
here indeed is an allusion unto the Prophecy of Ezechiel, both in the name of
the adversaries, and in likeness of punishment: yet this Prophecy is diverse
from that. For that did belong unto the times going before Christ's coming: and
indeed has been fulfilled already: but this is to be referred to our, and the
following Ages: in case there shall be any more.

What I said of the accomplishment, is manifest from the Argument of the
prophecy, which is directed unto the people in the Captivity of Babylon: for
first God promises to bring them again into their country: Ez. 39.25.
Now will I bring again the captivity of Jacob, etc. When I brought them
again from the people, etc. Secondly he foretells new calamities, which
afterward shall befall them by their Adversaries Gog and Magog, etc. of whose
horrible slaughter he prophesies: Lastly he promises a Spiritual reformation
of the Church by the benefits of the Messiah, shortly after to come in the
flesh: Ibid ve. 29.
Neither will I hide my face any more from them, when I have poured out my
spirit upon the house of Israel, says the Lord Jehovah. Now it is certain the
first and third part of the Prophecy was fulfilled: And therefore without all
doubt the middlemost also, it being the chief.

It is objected, that Gog was to come in the latter, or last of years, that
is, Eze. 38.8.
in the end of the world. But the Gloss is infirm: It is also said ver. 16.
that he shall come in the latter, or last of days. Now nothing is more
frequent to the Prophets, then by this phrase to denote the term of some
certain time: Ierem. 49.39. In the latter days I will bring again the
Captivity of Elam, that is, at length, or after much affliction, Ierem 30.24.
In the latter days ye shall consider it, that is, after your deliverance out
of Babylon: Ezech. 38.8. After many days thou shall be visited, in the latter
years thou shall come. And afterward, In the latter days I will bring thee,
etc. that is, after I have brought back my people. Therefore here also by the
latter years, an indefinite term may be understood.

Hence Theodoretus wrote, Nehem. 4. and 6.
that these very Nations did straightway invade the Jews after their return,
to hinder them from building the Temple and City. But our Interpreters
Tremellius and Junius do in my understanding more rightly (according to the
circumstances of the name and time) apply the Oracle of Ezechiel, to the
cruel wars raised up against the Jews by the Macedonians, Antiochus, etc.
but often put to the worst (not without a divine miracle) by the Macchabees:
for they learnedly show that Gog and Magog do denote the Nations of the lesser
Asia and Syria (so called after Gyges King of the Lydians) with the Kings
Antiochi, Seleuci, Demetrij, and Nicanors, mighty Oppressors of the Jews:
which happened not presently upon their return out of Babylon, but long after,
in the end of years or days, that is, about two hundred years after the
Prophecy.

To these Ribera does frivously object, In Apoc. 20 S. 57.
that Josephus and the Jews write nothing of the accomplishment thereof, which
had it bin fulfilled, they would have mentioned the same, neither would they
any longer expect the Messiah. As if forsooth, so manifest, or at least so
probable a truth, were to be called into question, because of the blindness of
the Jews.

Therefore in a word, this I do hold: That Ezechiels Prophecy touching Gog and
Magog, grievous enemies and wasters of the Holy Land, was not indeed then
fulfilled literally, (for it clearly appears, that part of the Prophecy is
an Allegory of a Slaughter from Heaven) but Analogically, or with reference,
when the Tyrants of Syria and Asia were repressed by the valor of the
Macchabees. The old and new Goggish war.
But that there by a certain allusion unto the Prophecy of Ezechiel, and the
accomplishment there of (like as the Revelation is full of such Allusions unto
the words and Histories of the Prophets) another war not unlike unto that of
Gog and Magog is here foretold, and the victory promised: The sense is thus:
Like as of old Gog and Magog invaded the Holy Land with very great Armies,
miserably afflicting the people of God: So Satan being loosed at the end of the
thousand fatal years, shall raise up against the Church a new Gog and Magog,
that is, most cruel adversaries, who with most numerous Armies over-spreading
all parts of Christendom shall cruelly make spoil of all things. And as God did
often by wonderful overthrowes suppress Gog and Magog of old, that is, those
Asian, Syrian, and Egyptian Tyrants in the midst of their fury, that they
might not utterly destroy the Holy-City: so he will with fire from Heaven
devour the new Gog and Magog, that is, the adversaries of the last times in
the midst of their fury that they shall not be able to accomplish their design
to blot out the Church of Christ.

Now who should these Adversaries Gog and Magog be, but those four Angels
bound at the River Euphrates? Rev. 9.14. who after they were let loose by Gods
Commandment, invaded the Christian world (most horribly corrupted through
Antichristian Idolatry) with an Army of two hundred thousand thousand
horsemen, Gog and Magog are the four Angels of Euphrates.
cruelly murdering the third part of men: which Angels we interpreted of four
Peoples, most cruel adversaries of the Christian name, viz. the Arabians,
Saracens, Scythians or Tartars, and Turks: for undoubtedly the same
Adversaries, the same battle, and the same overthrow, at the sounding of the
sixth Trumpet in Vision third: and in this Oracle of the seventh Vision is
signified by way of parallel: for after Satan was loosed, the Armies of the
Saracens, Tartars, and Turks began in a special manner to overrun
Christendom, and by horrible slaughters to weaken the state of Christians, as
Histories and daily experience do manifest. We have heard who the adversaries
are.

Whose number is as the sand of the Sea] He amplifies their multitude by a
simile usual to the Scriptures. For it is no Hyperbole, by which is spoken
more then truth: but a metaphor, by which a thing is aggravated. For as the
sand of the Sea is unto us innumerable: so these barbarous Nations use to fight
with innumerable Armies.

9. And they ascended] He foretells the forceable attempt of the Adversary by a
Verb in the Praeter Tense in stead of a Future, being a Prophetical Enallage
or change of Tenses usual to John. By the word Ascend, he notes their obscure
rise or original, intimating that these barbarous Nations did suddenly from a
low condition grow to the greatest height of power: or that being raised up by
Satan, they ascended as it were out of Hell.

On the breadth of the Earth] That is, they shall not remain in one place, but
spread themselves far and near, to wast and destroy all.

And compassed the Camp of the Saints about] By this Camp BRIGHTMAN
understands Europe, in which almost all Christendom is included. But five or
six hundred years ago, Christianisme was larger by far, The Christian world
is the camp of the saints
when there were yet flourishing Churches in all the coasts of Asia and Europe.
Wherefore he calls the Christian world the Camp of the Saints, or the Church
in which the godly do fight against Satan and the world, as it were in a Camp.
But however Christianisme was every where most corrupt, yet it is called the
Camp of Saints, viz. Mat. 4.5. Luke 19.46 The beloved city is the Church.
of right and profession: although not of Fact. Like as Jerusalem is called the
Holy-City DE IVRE of Right, because she ought to have bin holy, whereas DE
FACTO In deed she was A den of thieves.

In the same sense he calls the Church the Beloved-City: because
notwithstanding her great corruption, yet God had, and still has many beloved
ones, and Elect in her. It is a Metaphor taken from JERUSALEM, which of old was
Gods Beloved-City, and the Type of the New Church, as appears by the following
Allegory.

By the word, compassing-about, he intimates the treacherous attempts,
enterprises, and diverse irruptions of the adversaries: as if he should say:
They shall not once, or in one place only, vex and trouble the Christian
world, but often, and in diverse places, one while in Asia, another while in
Africa, and in Europe. He notes their subtilty also, and earnestness in
mannaging their affairs and occasions: for while Christian Princes did weaken
themselves by continual discord, hatred, and intestine wars at home, the
Turks and Tartars were always in readiness with their Forces to devour one
Province after another. The holy war was the occasion of the Gogish war. called
Sacrum quasi minime sacrum.


The first occasion of this Gogish battle was that war in Palestina against
the Saracens, raised by the Popes of Rome after the expiration of the thousand
fatal years, called Holy as it were most unholy: the first Author whereof was
that Hildebrand called Gregory VII. who began to solicit Christian Emperors,
Kings, and Princes to recover the holy Land by force of Arms. After him
Vrbanus II. (for his turbulent counsels called Turbanus) obtained, that many
great Armies, wearing the sign of the Cross, should be sent into Syria under
diverse Captains. And indeed at that time Jerusalem, and all Syria was
recovered out of the hands of the Turks and Saracens, by the prowess of
Godfrey, Duke of Bullen, but was scarce kept LXXVIII. Years by the Christians.
For Saladine a Turkish King, Calyph of Damascus and Egypt, being drawn on
through the intestine discord of Christian Princes, and by the treachery of the
Tripolitan Earl, overthrew all the Christian Forces in one day, bringing their
Princes with King Gwido himself, and all Palestina under his power.

This was the beginning of the Gogish battle: The beginning of the Gogish war
for the Saracens taking this occasion, and seeing that the Christians, whose
power before they much feared, were not unconquereable, they began to thirst
after whole Christendom, and by degrees brought under subjection by their
cruel Armies all the Maritime Africa, all the East and Babylon even unto
Bersia, at last also the lesser Asia, both Countries of Armenia, Thracia,
Pontus, Bulgaria, Greece, Sclavonia, even unto Hungary, and the borders of
Germany: driving Christianisme into the uttermost corner of Europe.

This is that Gogish war, which Satan after the thousand fatal years, has
with great success waged above five hundred years against the Christians by
Gog and Magog, that is, by the Eastern Antichrist.

Against this opinion it is objected, FIRST that these adversaries shall
compass about, or besiege the Camp of the Saints, and the Beloved-City, that
is, the Church. But neither the Christians that undertook that war, can be
understood by the name NATIONS: Neither can these Eastern Nations, against
whom the war was undertaken, be understood by the name of SAINTS, or of the
Beloved-City. I answer: The occasion of the war is distinguished from the
war it self. The occasion indeed of the Holy War begun by the Christians,
is in this Prophecy silently passed over: and touching this it is true what is
objected: but false of the war following thereupon. For it cannot be denied,
that the Eastern People being first provoked by the Christians, have by Satan's
impulsion compassed about the Camp of the Saints above these five hundred
years, not ceasing to trouble the same unto this day.

Secondly it is objected: That the Gogish war shall not begin till the end of
the thousand fatal yeeers: But these thousand years are not as yet begun.
Answer: The former is true, the latter is false: for as we have showed in the
foregoing consideration, those thousand years are expired long ago.

Thirdly they object, That this Gogish war shall continue but a little while:
because in ver. 3. Satan shall be let loose but for a short season. I Answer:
Its a fallacy, figurae dictionis (as it is termed:) for the time of Satan's
loosing is called a short, or little season, not that it shall be but for few
years (for so great a war cannot be undertaken and finished in a little time)
but in respect of the thousand years, then which it shall be shorter, because
God for the Elects sake, will shorten those days: of which see more ver. 3.
Wherefore the Gogish war (as undoubtedly it seems) is not indeed that very
same Holy War raised in Syria by Hildebrand and Turbanus Romish Pontifes: but
the TVRKISH WAR against Christendom, which arose a while after out of the
other, and continues unto this day: The Catastrophe or issue whereof now
follows.

The Third Part of the CHAPTER. Declaring the issue of the Gogish war, the
wonderful slaughter of the adversaries, and the casting of the devil himself
into the Lake of Fire: With a Type of the last Judgment.
9. And fire came down from God out of Heaven, and devoured them. 10. And the
devil that deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where
the Beast and the false Prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night for
ever and ever. 11. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it,
from whose face the Earth and the Heaven fled away, and there was found no
place for them. 12. And I saw the dead, small and great stand before God, and
the Books were opened: and another was opened: which is the book of Life: and
the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books,
according to their works. 13. And the Sea gave up the dead which were in it:
and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were
judged every man according to their works. 14. And death and hell were cast
into the Lake of fire: This is the Second Death. 15. And whosoever was not
found written in the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of Fire.
THE COMMENTARY.
AND fire came downe] Here begins the last Act. The event of the Gogish War
shall be joined with the last Judgment at Christ's coming: the which is set
forth by a most evident Type. First specially, briefly showing what was done to
Gog and Magog with their Army: and what to the devil, in this and the
following verse. Afterward generally, what unto all in the last Judgment, unto
the end of the Chapter. The Gogish Army was at length consumed by fire. It is
an allusion unto the Oracle of Ezechiel 38.22. against Gog of old, I will plead
against him with pestilence and with blood, and I will rain upon him and upon
his hands, an overflowing rain, and great hailestones, fire and brimstone: So
here against the new Gog, Fire came down from God out of Heaven, and devoured
them; by which Phrase the Scripture usually sets forth the wonderful and
horrible Judgments of God upon the Adversaries, by which at length the wicked
are so suddenly destroyed, and the Church delivered out of distress and
oppression, as the Victory cannot be ascribed but to the Divine Power, as in
Psalm. 11.6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest shall be the portion of their cup.

This serves greatly to comfort the Church: for although our sins do too too
much fight against us: this Oracle notwithstanding shows Gods benignity to
be so great, as we may undoubtedly believe, that the Turkish power shall
sooner be overthrown by the most powerful hand of God from Heaven, then that
the Church of Christ should be extinguished by the same. There are some who
think that this kind of destruction by fire from Heaven, shall literally be
accomplished upon the Adversaries. But I rest in the allusion mentioned: for as
God himself overthrew the enemies from Heaven, when as the strength of the
Jewish people was nothing to resist the Asian Tyrants: so when the power of
Christians shall be no way able to chase away, or overthrow the Gogish Armies
of the East, God will suddenly as it were reach out his arm from Heaven to
fight for the Church, and extinguish the adversaries: if not before, yet
certainly at the brightness of Christ's coming to Judgment: for until then,
this Gogish war, as likewise that other of Antichrist, shall continue.

This fire therefore coming from Heaven, and devouring the adversaries, what
shall it be, but that sharp sword proceeding out of the mouth of Christ the
Judge, and killing all the wicked Chap. 19.15.21. that is, that flame of fire,
2. These. 18. Lib. 20. de
in which the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, to take vengeance on
them that know not God.

10. And the devil that deceived them] AUGUSTINE confesses that in this
description are certain (...), that is, C. D. c. 14
some things are before repeated that were done after. Among these, the first
seems to be, that the Enemies being devoured with fire from Heaven, by and by
the devil also is said to be cast into the Lake of fire. For it seems that
this shall not be till the last Judgment be past, which follows after. This
verse therefore by a certain Anticipation cohereth with ver. 14. where John
saw Death and Hell to be cast into the Lake of fire. Now he joyneth the casting
of the devil next with the slaughter of the wicked aversaries, to teach us,
that the devil shall not go free for seducing the Nations, and raising Gog
and Magog to battle against the Church: but at last be punished for his great
malice, together with other adversaries: See also 1. Cor. 15.24.25.26.

By the devil we cannot with reason understand any other, then that wicked
Spirit himself: for he is the same here, who verse 2. is called the Dragon,
the old Serpent and Satan. But the Emperor of the Turks whom BRIGHTMAN here
understands by the devil, belongs in my Judgment unto the Gogish army,
devoured with fire from Heaven. Satan's punishment therefore is described by the
place, companions, and eternity of his torments. The place of his punishment
shall not be simply the Pit, in which he was before shut up a thousand years,
but the very sink of the bottomless Pit, the Lake of fire and brimstome, into
which he shall be cast by Christ the Judge. It is a Periphrasis of hell, which
the Scripture sets forth by the place of torments, unquencheable fire, the
worm that dies not, utter darkness, weeping and gnashing of teeth, and such
like horrible Epithites, to terrify the wicked: signifying, that the torments
of Satan and the ungodly in hell shall be unutterable, like as the glory of
Christ and the Saints in Heaven shall be unspeakeable. Now of the Lake of Fire
and Brimstone has been spoken Chap. 19, 20. unto which place John sends us
back, saying:

Where the Beast and the False-prophet are] For he there says that these were
cast into this Lake. The devil therefore shall find them there as his
companions in torments: The Roman Antichrist, I say, with his Cardinals,
Vassals, and Followers. These shall be cast into the Lake before the devil:
for he shall find them there: yet both shall be done in the last Judgment, as
Christ expounds it in the Gospel: depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, which is prepared for the devil and his Angels. Mat. 25.41


And they shall be tormented] To wit, the devil, the Beast, and
False-Prophet: for they shall all alike suffer everlasting torments: of which
see Chap. 14.11. and Chap. 19.20.

Night and day] Not as if there should be an enterchange of days and nights in
Hell: for in utter daakenesse it is always night: but thus he shows the
eternal continuation of their torments: for that which is continued day and
night, is perpetual. The same he says Chap. 14. of the torments of all the
worshippers of the Beast and his Image. By the same phrase Chap. 7.15. he
shows the continual joy of the Saints in Heaven: Who are before the throne
of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple.

Now that the punishment of the devil and wicked men shall be perpetual, Lib.
21. de C. D. c. 23. Ps. 77.10. The punishment of the damned eternal.
Augustine does largely prove against such as (pretending Gods mercifullnes
from the Psalm: Will God forget to be gracious, will he in anger shut up his
tender mercies:) did imagine, that the devil and wicked men after most
grievous, and long during punishments should be purged and pardoned, thereby to
patronize their own, and other men's wickednesses. But he demonstrates from
this and such like places, that the torments of Satan and the ungodly shall
simply be eternal.

First: because here its expressly said: The devil which deceived them was cast
into the Lake of fire and brimstone, there to be tormented with the Beast and
the False-Prophet day and night for ever and ever: which altogether signifies
eternity. But it were false, if at sometime or other they should be redeemed
out of their torments.

Secondly, Mat. 72.3. Mat. 25.4^ What is meant by Eternal.
because the divine sentence, cannot be made void or weakened: which Christ
will pronounce at the day of Judgment: depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels: what here is said to
be for ever and ever: in the place alleged is said to be eternal, or
everlasting, by which the Scripture denotes time without end.

Lastly: because the life and glory of the blessed Saints shall simply be
eternal. Therefore on the contrary, the death and torments of the damned shall
also be eternal: for Christ in the same sentence pronounces to the wicked
eternal torments, Mat. 25.46
and to the godly life everlasting: And these shall go into everlasting
punishment: but the righteous into eternal life.

11. AND I SAW A THRONE] The Type of the universal Judgment follows, in
which all the wicked being cast into eternal torments, the Church shall be
crowned with everlasting glory and joy. Now that this is a description of the
last Judgment, is so manifest from the words, that I judge it needless to
demonstrate the same. It is proved that here the last judgment is typically
set forth. Mat. 25.46. 1. Cor. 15.16 Dan. 7.10. Mat. 25 41


John saw the Judge on a Throne: he saw the dead to be judged before the
Throne, and them that were judged out of the books being opened, according to
the phrase of the Prophet Dan. Chap. 7.10. where without all controversy, the
Type of the last Judgment is described. Lastly he saw the Devil, Death, and
Hell, which are the last Enemies, to be cast with all reprobates into the Lake
of Fire: which certainly shall not come to pass but in the last Judgment,
when the Judge shall say unto all these: Go ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his Angels. Neither ought we to seek an Allegory
in circumstances so manifestly agreeing with the Evangelicall History, because
it cannot here have place: forasmuch as all things are suitable unto the proper
description of the last Judgment, expressed in both Testaments.

Besides our method confirms the same, by which it has hitherto bin showed,
that every one of the Visions, (the first excepted, which was special) does
end in the description of the last Judgment, either openly or covertly: the
which why it should so often be iterated in this Book, cannot be explicated by
them who give no heed unto the distinct Acts of the several Visions.

Add to this, that all Interpreters (whom I have seen) both old and new are
unnanimously minded: that here is figured out the casting of all the
adversaries into eternal punishment: and the placing of the godly in
everlasting glory, which shall be accomplished in the last Judgment.

Brightman alone leaving this exposition, interprets the whole, Brightmans
Allegory.
Allegorically of the full restitution of the Jewish Nation, which he thinks
shall come to pass after the Dragon is cast into the Lake of fire, that is,
after the destruction of the Turkish Emperor and Empire: This he supposes
shall be about the year 1690. moved hereunto by a conjecture too obscure and
uncertain, from a place in Dan. 12.12. the which how far different a sense it
bears: I shall not at this time (for brevity sake) stand to demonstrate.

But the reasons, which he opposes to the received and manifest truth, to me
indeed seem to have little or no weight in them.

He says, that the following description agrees not unto the New Jerusalem in
Heaven, but to that on Earth only, in that the Holy City is said to descend
from Heaven: that the Bride is prepared and adorned for her Husband, not yet
delivered: that in ver. 7. the reward is put off till afterward: Whether the
description of the new Jerusalem agrees to the Church Militant.
that one of the seven Angels shows all these things to John, whereas there
shall be no such ministry in Heaven: that the Apostles are said to lay the
foundation of the wall of the the holy City, whereas rather that belongs to
Christ: Lastly that the Kings of the Earth are said to bring their glory unto
this City, ver. 24. and that in it shall be medicine for the Nations: which
things are not to be understood of Heaven, but of the Earth.

But there is nothing here touching these things, which may not easily be
applied unto the state of the glorified Church, if we well mind the scope of
the Allegorical Vision, and observe other things, which do not at all agree
with the state of the Church here on Earth, as we shall show in its place.
Certainly the glory of the Church shall never be so great in this life, as to
be altogether without tares, that there should be none in her but Elected
Ones, that she should be stained with no scandals and feined Christians: in a
word that there should be no Temple, nor Sun shining in her, etc.

He says secondly that the vocation of the Jews unto the Church, Whether this
Resurrection of the dead be the calling of the Jews.
is in Scripture often called a Resurrection of the dead, as Romans 11.15. for if
the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world, what shall the
receiving of them be, but life from the dead, Isa 26.19. Thy dead men shall
live, my Carcasses shall rise again, etc. Ezech. 37.12. I will open your
graves, O my People, and cause you to come up out of your graves. etc. Dan.
12.2.3. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake, some
to everlasting Life, and some to shame and everlasting torment. Hosea 13.14. I
will ransom them from the power of the grave: I will redeem them from death.

But verily it would be a long work for him to prove that these places of
Scripture, the first excepted, do at all belong to the calling of the Jews,
seeing Some do manifestly speak of their deliverance out of Babylon: Others
of the Spiritual Redemption of the whole Church by Christ: Others of the last
Resurrection of the body. Only the Testimony of the Apostle is to the matter,
but proves nothing. For neither does it follow from the particular: because
there the conversion of the Jews is called a Resurrection, therefore here
also. There the thing is clear: here not so. Nay here is no mention of a
Resurrection, but it is set forth under other figures. And all the
circumstances do most evidently represent the Type of the last Judgment.

AND I SAW A GREAT WHITE THRONE] After these things, says AVGUSTINE, Lib. 20.
de C. D. c. 14
he briefly declares the last Judgment it self (and how it was revealed unto
him) which shall be at the second Resurrection of the dead, viz. of their
bodies: First therefore he describes the Judge, with his preparation in this
verse. Secondly them that should be judged, ver. 12. Thirdly the process and
sentence. ibid. Lastly the execution of the sentence, viz. the casting of the
adversaries into the Lake of fire, verse. 13.14.15. but the placing of the Elect
in the Heavenly Jerusalem, in Chap. 21. and 22. This is the sum of the things
remaining.

A Great Throne] As set up for the Great, that is, Universal Judgment of the
whole world. White] bright with celestial splendour and majesty.

And him that sat on it] Namely the Judge, him undoubtedly, of whom Christ
himself speaks, Mat. 25.31. When the Son of man shall come in his glory,
and all his Holy Angels with him, The white throne of christ his glory. Ioh.
5.12. Act 17.31.
then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory. Wherefore the white Throne is
the Throne of his glory, or glorious Throne: neither are we to imagine it to be
made of gold or Ivorie, but thus the Iudicatory Power of Christ is called: For
the Father has given all Judgment to the Son: that by him the whole world
should be judged. Here therefore Christ the Judge appeared unto John sitting on
his Throne, in the Spirit: that none should question, but that the world shall
at last be judged. Why the last judgment is so often exhibited: XL: Argument
of Christ's deity:
For this Judgment to come is so often foretold in Scripture, and exhibited to
the sight of John in this Revelation, that the Godly indeed should wait with
joy for that day of their deliverance, but mockers be raised up from their
security.

Furthermore without all doubt this Judge sitting on the Throne is Christ,
because the whole Scripture agrees hereunto. Now a little after in ver. 12. he
is called GOD, before whom the dead shall stand to be judged. Therefore
undoubtedly also, he that sat on the Throne Chap. 4.2. was Christ gloriously
reigning in Heaven. That which follows serves to signify his unspeakable
majesty.

From whose face the Earth and the Heaven fled away] The splendour and majesty
of the Judge is such, Husterosis is when a thing is before put down which
should come after; or, contrariwise. Lib. 20: de C. D. c. 14.
as neither Heaven nor Earth is able to behold or abide the same. How then
shall the wicked stand before him?

Augustine understands it of the future renovation of Heaven and Earth, and
here also he acknowledges an (...), for the Heaven and Earth fled, not before,
but after the Judgment, to wit, says he, the Judgment being finished, then
shall this Heaven and Earth cease to be, when the new Heaven and Earth shall
begin: For this world shall pass away, by a change of things, not by an utter
destruction, the Heaven and Earth, I say, shall flee away, that is, this shape
of Heaven and Earth shall pass away, because they shall be changed from
vanity through fire, that so they may be transformed into a much better, and
more beautiful state: Of which innovation the Apostle Peter professedly
writes: The Heaven shall pass way with a great noise, and the Elements melt
with heat: but we expect new Heavens and a new Earth: wherein dwells
righteousness: And Paul says: 2. Pet. 3.12. 1. Cor. 7.31
The figure or falshion of this world passes away: Of which AUGUSTINE, The
figure, says he, of the world passes not away in nature, for we expect a new
Heaven and a new Earth, in which judgment and righteousness shall dwell: Of
which John in the next Chapter: I saw a new Heaven and a new Earth, that is,
purged from all vanities. Rev. 21. v. 1
Of which innovation, not a total destruction, the words following must be
understood: And their place was found no more] not as if it were no where, but
that it remained not such, as it was before. But whether Heaven and Earth shall
so change their place, as that the Earth should be moved out of the Center of
the universe, the Heaven by its bending down, no longer inviron the Earth; is
not known either by this place or any other. This we must leave to God and to
time. The same was said before in the last Act of the Fifth Vision: Rev. 16.20
Rev. 6.14.
Every Island fled, and the Mountains were not found. Also in the last Act of
the Second Vision: And the Heaven departed as a Scrowle rolled together, and
every Mountain and Island were moved out of their places: Which place
notwithstanding we interpreted somewhat otherwise, because of the
circumstances. But I see not by what show of reason this change of Heaven and
Earth here, can be darkened by an Allegory. Now it shall not be till toward
the last Judgment: and therefore it remains firm, that the same is here
described. The dead corporally are here understood.


12. And I saw the dead, small and great] He had seen the Judge girded about
with Judgment. Now he sees the guilty standing before the Judgment Seat:
whom he describes, First from their former state, by calling them The dead,
after the common Law of nature, but then raised from death to life by the power
of God: he speaks not of men dead in sins, as in ver. 5. but of such as dyed
corporally, and now were raised up to Judgment. But shall not the living also
then be judged? Yea verily: 2. Cor. 5.10 Romans 14.9 10.
for we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, That he may be
Judge of the quick and the dead, and be Lord both of the dead and the living.
By the dead therefore are understood the living also, by an Argument from the
lesser: If the dead shall appear before the Judgment Seat, how much more the
living? But the dead alone are named, either because the number of the dead
from Adam till the last day, 1 Cor. 15.52.
shall be far greater then such as live on Earth, when that day comes: Or
because those that remain living shall be accounted as dead, because they shall
be changed in the twinkling of an eye.

Secondly he describes them from their age and condition: for the words may be
understood of both: Great and Small] That is, as well the powerful Tyrants of
the world, Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Great men: as Subjects and men of low
condition: Or properly, Great in Age and stature, that is, grown men and
women: Small also, that is, dying in their childhood: by this partition he
shows that all and every one without any exception are to be judged: for the
Judgment shall be universal: no man shall be so Great as to escape the same:
none so small as to be excluded, 2 Cor. 5.10
but every one shall have right without respect of persons, as the Apostle
witnesses: We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every
one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad. Lumb. lib. did. 44.


SCHOOLMEN suppose that in the Resurrection all shall be as if they were about
33. years old, which was Christ's age: but we leave it as uncertain. What they
speak of the stature, that every one shall receive his own measure of body,
is more agreeable to this place.

Thirdly he describes them from their future state: Standing in the sight of
God] or before God, to wit, to be judged as guilty. To stand before God,
signifies sometimes in this Book (as above) the Heavenly Ministry of the
Saints and Angels: Here it signifies to be brought to Judgment, as appears by
what follows. By the dead standing, he means them that were raised from
death to life. XLI. Argument of Christ's deity.


Before God] The Judge he absolutely calls God, but CHRIST is the Judge:
Therefore Christ is God absolutely.

And the Books were opened] The judicial process is noted by imitation of
humane Courts, in which the whole process is wont to be drawn into Protocols,
from whence the Judge at length determines and pronounces sentence according
to the Acts and Proofs: not that it shall be so really: for God, from whose
eyes nothing is hid, will not make use of long examination: but the equity of
the Judge is noted, by a Metaphor taken from humane Courts, where the Judge
pronounces sentence according to the written Law, and the Acts and Proofs
agreeing thereunto. It is an Allusion unto the words of Daniel, speaking thus
of this IVDGEMENT: Dan. 7.10.
The Judgment was set, and the Books were opened.

Origene understands it of the books of conscience, Comm. ad Romans 14.
which now are hid, not to God, but to men: For the hidden things of the heart
are not now known: But then they shall be Opened, that is, manifested to the
consciences of all and every one, so as there shall be no place left of excuse,
or withdrawing. Thus no man shall be injured, because every one shall either be
accused, or discharged by his own conscience.

Augustine takes it a little otherwise, Lib. 20. de C. D. c. 14
of the books of the Old and New Testament, in which God has prescribed unto
all what is to be done or Omitted in this life: which shall then be opened,
because according to them the Judge will pronounce sentence: Romans 2.16. When
God shall judge the secrets of men, Mark 16.16. Io. 12.48. Lib. 20. de C. D.
c. 14
by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel. He that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. The word that I have
spoken the same shall judge him in the last day.

And another Book was opened] This Austine understands of every man's Book of
Life, what he has done, or not done according to those former Books: But the
word (...) of every one, is not in the Text: but simply, which is the Book of
Life, to wit, in which God has written from all eternity, the names of them
that shall be saved through Christ: of which often mention is made in this
Revelation, Chap. 3.5. and 13.8. and 17.8, etc. Not that God has need of a
Book, but (...) or by humane affection, is noted the certainty of
Praedestination, viz. that God knows all and every of the Elect, even as men
know a thing, which for memory sake, they set down in writing. This Book
therefore shall also be opened: because then it shall appear, who were Elect,
who Reprobates, who truly believed in Christ, who not: who truly worshipped
God, Mat. 25.32.
who were hypocrites, for then Christ will sever the sheep from the goats, who
in this life were mixed one amongst another.

And the dead were judged] This shall be the denouncing of the sentence, the
equity whereof is commended by a twofold reason: both because every one shall
be judged out of the things written in the Books: As also, because he shall
receive according to his works. For what concerns the Books, whither we take
them for the scriptures, which are now the rules of our Faith and actions: Or
the inward working and witness of the Conscience, Romans 2:5.
which shall suggest to every one the exact memory of his Actions, whether good
or bad, the sentence pronounced shall be most just according to the same: and
Gods judgments shall be righteous: for the Holy Scriptures contain a most
exact written rule of righteousness, unto which most righteously all are
obliged, and whosoever has conformed himself unto the same, shall most
righteously be acquitted: whosoever has swarved from it, Orat. in Plag: gran:
shall most righteously in the day of Iudgemen be condemned.

The Book also of every man's conscience, is of such exact righteousness, as it
deceives no man, does injury to no man: for the conscience, says NAZIANZENVS
is a domesticke and true Tribunal: And the Poet siath well, -- Prima haec est
ultio, Iuven: Sat: 13.
quodse
Iudice nemo nocens absolvitur: improba quamvis:
Gracia fallacis prae oris vicerit urnam.
This vengeance takes, if judge it be,
None that are guilty, quitt does he:
Though that the Praetor through fall Grace,
Sometimes puts wicked men in place.


How much more therefore shall the conscience in the day of Judgment be a
righteous rule to judge by. The holy Scriptures are the rule of truth and
righteousness.


By the way observe: If God will then judge according to the written word, how
much more does he require that faith and our works be now done according to the
said rule of Holy Writ?

According to their workes] Good or evil. This shall be the other infallible
rule of righteousness: for it is a righteous thing with God to render rewards
to the righteous, and tribulation to the wicked. Every one therefore shall
righteously receive either good or evil, according to what he has done.

It is observeable, that here and every where in Scripture it is said,
Judgment shall be according to works.
we shall be judged (...) according to works, never (...) for our works: no
man therefore shall be saved for good works: notwithstanding the wicked shall
be damned for their evil works: because there is a different reason between
good and evil works. Evil works are the wages of (or merit) death: Eze.
184. Rom: 1.28 Good works merit not life eternal.
for the Soul that sins shall dye: And, It is the judgment of God, that
they which commit such things are worthy of death. Good works merit not life:
because all are due to God the Creator and Redeemer. But no debt comes under
the notion of merit. I pass by, that the best works of the Saints are
imperfectly good, polluted with many blemishes, so that if God did judge them
to his severity, they would be found to be nothing but unrighteousnesses: as
the Church of old confesses, Isa. 6.46. We are all as an unclean thing, and
all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags: Therefore we pray: forgive us our
trespasses.

Wherefore least Hypocrites should be bold to infer, if the wicked shall be
condemned for evil works: therefore the Just are saved for good works: The
Holy Ghost would have it no where written, that the judgment shall be (...) for
works, which might signify the meritorious cause: but always (...),
according to works, which signifies the condition.

But why not according to Faith? or infidelity? Why the Judgment shall not be
according to faith and infidelity.
because Faith and infidelity are hid to the eyes of men. But works whither
good or evil flowing from the same, shall be conspicuous and open unto all.
Therefore in that open judgment, Christ the Judge shall allege the clear
rule of righteousness, that it may appear unto all, that the wicked are
justly condemned, having done evil: and the Godly righteously acquitted, who
have done good: this is a great encouragement to good works, that we follow
after them: and touching evil works that we should shun them: because
according to them we shall all be judged.

13. And the Sea gave up her dead] AUGUSTINE by the Sea does not unproperly
understand the world, Lib. 20. de C. D. c. 15
which like to the tempestuous Sea is always tossed with waves: By the dead is
meant wicked men dead in sins, as is the greater part in the world, or all
men having mortal bodies. Notwithstanding I think it is more proper to the
sense, to understand it of such as perished or were drowned in the Sea or
Rivers, or whose burnt bodies, and ashes were cast into the same, in times of
persecution. For humane reason judges it very absurd, that the bodies of such
as have been devoured by the fishes of the Sea, or torn by wild Beasts, and
eaten by worms on land, should be restored. John therefore saw, what shall
come to pass, when all the Elements, through the power of God, shall render up
the consumed Carkeises. The Sea shall vomit up (as it were out of a Sepulcher)
the dead she swallowed up. The same Death and Hell shall do, that is, the
Earth, which has received (in Sepulchers) all the bodies of the dead, as it
were in her lap or bosom: and opening her mouth has swallowed down some
alive also.

By death here AUSTIN understands the dead bodies of the Godly, which the
Earth shall render up: By hell the damned souls of the wicked, which thence
shall be brought forth to Judgment.

Ribera extends it unto the bodies of such, as Hell swallowed down alive, as
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram.

The sum is, by what kind of death soever they perished in this life,
(whatever became of their souls after death) all are seen by John, as brought
forth to Judgment. The Souls therefore of the Saints shall return from Heaven
with Christ the Judge: the wicked shall be called forth out of Hell to
Judgment. All men's bodies shall be raised up to life, and being restored to
their own souls, shall stand before Christ to be judged.

14. And death and hell] In a few words, he touches the execution of the
sentence pronounced against the ungodly. The state of the Godly he more largely
Treats of in the following Chapters. First he sees hell and death to be cast
into the Lake of fire, and soon after all that were not found written in the
Book of Life, that is, reprobates: in which again is an (...) or inversion:
for first the wicked shall be cast into torments: Afterward the last enemies,
viz. death and hell: by which names AUGUSTINE thinks here is signified the
devil himself (as being the Author of death and hellish punishments) and the
whole company of devils, which very thing he had said before by an
Anticipation: And the devil was cast into the Lake, etc. So death should be
put for the devil causing death: 1. Cor. 15.54. 1. Cor. 15.26.
Hell for the devil drawing men to Hell: As by a like metonymia it is said:
Death is swallowed up in victory: And: The last enemy that shall be destroyed
is death.

In my judgment this Prosopopoeia serves to the dramaticall Vision: neither is
it to be pressed according to the Letter: according to which neither Hell can
be cast into the Lake, seeing the Lake is in Hell: nor Death, seeing death is
a mere privation of Entitie or Being, as Albertus M. calls it. The sum is,
whatsoever was deadly, noisome, hurtful, and contrary to happiness: shall all
be cast into the lake of fire: so as nothing shall remain to hurt the New
Jerusalem.

Which is the Second Death] That is, Eternal, of which Christ: And the wicked
shall go into Everlasting Fire. This shall be the last separating of man from
God through eternal damnation: as the first death was the separation of him
from God through sin. See verse 5.

CHAPTER. XXI. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis.
AFter the Capital adversaries, with the rest of the ungodly were judged and
cast into the Lake of fire, here is exhibited unto John the renovation of the
world that shall be, as also the Heavenly glory of the godly, under a twofold
Type, viz. of a Bride gloriously attired, and of a most magnificent City: The
illustration of which Type, this whole Chapter so sets forth, as that the wit,
art, hand, or tongue of man is able to express nothing more beautiful, more
magnificent, more glorious, and sumptuous then this structure. For whatsoever
may seem to conduce to the glory and comeliness of an Earthly City in respect
of walls, gates, foundation, figure, streets, Temples, Air, and lastly wealth of
the Citizens, ornament and pleasantness of life: all this John sees here to be
most eminent and glorious in this Heavenly Jerusalem. By which allegory the
holy Ghost would in some measure shadow out that unspeakable glory and
felicity, which the Church now militant on Earth, shall after the end of her
wearisome labors in this warfare, receive in the Heavens, the which, eye has
not seen, ear has not heard, nor has entered into the heart of man. This
Allegory is continued, unto the 6. verse. of the following Chapter.

The Chapter may not unfitly be divided into two parts: in the former of which
John records, what he saw and heard in a general way after the judgment of
the ungodly in 8. verses. In the latter, what he saw in particular: thence unto
the end.

In the former he generally rehearses. FIrst, what he saw, two things: 1. The
renovation of Heaven and Earth, and overthrow of the former world, ver. 1. 2.
The New Jerusalem, which he sets forth from the adjunct holiness, and its
heavenly original, coming down from Heaven: and the adjunct ornament: which
he amplifies by a metaphor of a Bride adorned for her Bridegroom, ver. 2.
Secondly, what he heard: both a great unknown voice from Heaven: As also, him
that sat on the Throne speaking.


The great voice proclaims the heavenly blessedness of the godly: Behold,
etc. consisting in two things: I. the abundance of good things, which God will
bestow upon the Godly: The tabernacle of God is with men, etc. v. 3. II. The
absence of things evil, all which God will remove: He shall wipe away all
tears, v. 4 The sitter on the throne, 1 testifies the renovation of the world
wrought by himself, v. 5. Behold, I make all things new. II. He confirms the
blessedness of the Godly erewhile proclaimed, I. By a command of writing:
Write. II. By a serious asseveration, that the words of the great voice are
true, v. 5. III. By an asseveration of a thing so certain, as if it were
already done: It is done. IIII. From his nature, that he is eternal and
cannot lie: I am Alpha and Omega. 5. By a promise taken out of the Gospel, I
will give to him that is a thirst.
III. He shows to whom the blessedness belongs, and what it shall be: Ioh.
7.3 7.
He that overcommeth, v. 7. IIII. By an Antithesis he amplifies, what
punishment is laid up for the ungodly: whom he sets forth by eight foul
Epethites, v. 8. But the fearful etc.


In the latter part he expounds, what he saw particularly. I. The occasion,
by which he saw the same: the speech of the Angel: Come hither, I will show
thee, v. 9. II. The manner and place of the Vision: He carried me to a great
Mountain, etc. ver. 10. III. The Vision it self: He showed me a great City,
ver. 10. the magnificence whereof he again declares, first generally,
secondly specially. Generally, 1. From the greatness: A great City: 2. From
the Sanctity: Holy. 3. From the original and architect: Descending out of
Heaven from God, ver. 10.4. From its glory: Having the glory of God, ver. 11.5.
From the splendour or light: which he illustrates by comparing it to a Jasper,
clear as Crystal, v. 11.
Specially he describes 1. The magnificence of the structure both outwardly
and inwardly, ver. 12, etc. 2. The excellency of the light, v. 23. 3. The
felicity of the inhabitants, v. 24, etc.





In the external structure he commends chiefly the wall, gates, form and
matter.

The wall he commends from the greatness and height, verse. 12. And had a wall.

The gates, 1. From the number, There were twelve. 2. From the keepers, At the
gates were twelve Angels. 3. From the inscriptions, Which are the names of the
twelve tribes, etc. Ibid. 4. From the situation or coast, On the East three,
ver. 13.


The greatness and strength of the wall he commends from the number, and
excellency of the foundations, upon which it is built: It has twelve
foundations, and in them the names, etc. verse. 14.

Touching the form of the city he shows. 1. Whence he learned the same: from
the Angel measuring: Whose instrument, A golden Reed, and purpose he shows,
To measure the City, ver. 15. 2. The Figure, it is four square, equal in
length and breadth, ver. 16. 3. The distance on every side: 12000. Furlongs.
The whole City containing 56000. furlongs verse 16.


The height of the wall he shows by the measure, to be 144. Cubits, ver. 17.
and the matter of Jasper, ver. 18.

The matter or substance of the City, was pure gold, like unto clear glass.
ibid.

Returning to the foundations of the wall, he sets forth every thing by the
excellency and variety of the matter, that is, of precious stones, which, he
says, are twelve. The 1. Jasper. 2. Saphir. 3. Chalcedonie. 4. An Emerauld. 5.
Sardonyx. 6. Sardius. 7. Chrysolite. 8. Beril. 9. A Topas. 10. Chrysoprasus.
11. A Iacinct. 12. An Amethyst, ver. 20.


The gates also he commends from the like matter: being cut out of so many
precious stones, ver. 21. Thus much of the outward building.

Touching the internal structure, he commends 1. the street or Marketplace,
from the matter and clearness thereof: Pure gold, etc. ver. 21. II. The
Temple, which 1. he denies to be externally material: Neither saw I a Temple
therein. 2. What kind of Temple it was: The Lord God himself, verse 22.
III. The light of the City: 1. It came not from the Sun or Moon. 2. But from
the glory of God and the Lamb, ver. 23.
IV. The Citizens of the City, 1. who they were: The Nations that were saved,
and the Kings of the Earth that bring their glory unto it. 2. The security and
peace of the City from a sign: The gates are not shut at all, ver. 25. 3. The
glory of the City. ver. 26. 4. The purity and holiness of the City, It shall
consist of Elect only: no Reprobates enter therein, ver. 27.



The Former Part of the CHAPTER. The New Heaven and New Earth: The Heavenly
Jerusalem and its building.
1. And I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth: for the first Heaven and the first
Earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea.

2. And I John saw the Holy City, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of
Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband.

3. And I heard a great voice out of Heaven, saying, Behold, the Tabernacle of
God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people,
and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.

4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: and there shall be no
more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain
for the former things are passed away.

5. And he that sat upon the Throne, said, Behold, I make all things new. And
he said unto me, Write: for these words are true and faithful.

6. And he said unto me, It is done: I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the end: I will give unto him that is a thirst, of the Fountain of the water
of Life, freely.

7. He that overcommeth, shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and
he shall he my son.

8. But the fearful and unbeleeving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their
part in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone: which is the Second
Death.

THE COMMENTARY.
ANd I saw a new Heaven] We have heard of one part of the la^st Judgment, viz.
the casting of the Adversaries into torments: Lib. 20. de C. D. c. 16.
In which, says AUSTIN, he declared what was briefly spoken by the LORD: And
these shall go into everlasting punishment. Now follows the second part, the
placing of the Elect in glory, in which also is expounded, what Christ there
adds: And the just into life everlasting. As the former did serve to strike a
terror into the ungodly, so the latter to lessen the fear and sorrow of the
godly, and stir them up to alacrity and joy. For seeing the Saints in this life
are compassed about with innumerable calamities and miseries: no wonder though
they should wear away with continual sorrow and mourning. But in this part of
the Vision, they are strengthened in their hope. For at last there shall be a
change of all things, an end of all adversity, abundance of all good, as
Christ said: Ioh. 16.20.
Ye shall lament and mourn, but your mourning shall be turned into joy. The new
Jerusalem is not the Church militant: much less the Church of Rome. How far
Alcasars opinion is approvable.


Wherefore after the wicked were judged, John saw a new Heaven and a new Earth.
Afterward a new Jerusalem glistering with gold and precious stones. That this
latter is wholly allegorical, cannot be questioned by any: although it be
diversely expounded: For some say it shadows out the magnificence of the Church
Militant, much spoken of by the Prophets: yea there are some, who specially
apply it to the glory of the Roman Church in this world.

But Alcasar reproves both justly, and gives reasons that the Vision of the
two Chapters is proper to the Church Triumphant. Notwithstanding afterward
foolishly contendeth that it is to be applied in special unto the glory of the
Roman Church in Heaven. Now this he does not because he thought it to be
true: but to flatter the Pope (it may be for the Cardinals hat sake) and vex
the heretics, as he pretends. Which now I pass by.

Now to return to the former again, Touching the new heaven and the new
earth. 2. Cor. 5.17
touching the new Heaven and the new Earth, whither it be allegorically, or
properly to be understood.

Some understand it allegorically of the renewing of the world by Christ,
touching which the Apostle. If any one be in Christ, he is a new creature. Old
things are past away, Behold I make all things new. This Spiritual renovation
began even from the preaching of the Apostles: and is undoubtedly an allusion
unto the Prophecy of Isaias: Isa. 65.17.
Behold I create new heavens and a new earth, etc. which seems to be spoken of
the new state of the Church in the Kingdom of Christ on earth: and so
BRIGHTMAN, as I have showed, interprets it metaphorically of the renewed state
of the Church, through the conversion of the Jews, shortly to be accomplished.

But all these things cannot without violence be applied unto the state of the
Church on earth. The Chiliasts indeed applied it unto that golden age, in which
they dreamt they should voluptuously reign a thousand years with Christ on
earth. But this opinion is repugnant to the praedictions of Christ and the
Apostles, that the state of the Church in the last times, shall not be
voluptuous or joyful at all, but sad and mournful, as above we showed.

Therefore we are rather to understand the former touching the new heaven and
the new earth properly: What is mean by the new heaven and the new earth.
for it is so evident, that here is treated of the last Judgment and the
consequents thereof, as it can scarcely be doubted of. So that this new heaven
and this new earth, which John saw after the judgment of the adversaries, is
that new heaven, and that new earth, which as the Apostle Peter expressly
foretold, 2. Pet. 3; 10
is to be expected after the burning of the world: For these heavens shall
pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with servent heat,
the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up: But we
according to the promise look for new heavens and a new earth wherein dwells
righteousness. By which plainly we gather that a new heaven and a new earth is
to be looked for Historically and properly, and here likewise it is so to be
understood.

Hence also it follows: that the Oracle of Isaias touching the new heaven and
the new earth is to be understood not only metaphorically of the renewed state
of the Church on earth, but literally also of the renovation of the world,
which shall be at the last day. For Peter says that we look for a new heaven
and a new earth according to the promise. Now this promise is no where else but
in Isa. 65.17. and 66.22. Therefore undoubtedly God by the Prophet speaks not
only of the inchoated spiritual renovation which is in this life, but also of
the consummated litterall and proper renovation, which we look for at the
coming of Christ.

Now the Heaven and the Earth shall not be new in Substance, How heaven and
earth are new.
but in Qualities, as purity, brightness, and glory: for that which is added:
The first heaven and the first earth are passed away: and before Chap. 20.11.
From whose face the heaven and the earth, etc. does not signify, that they
should be brought to nothing, but that they are to be purifyed by fire from
all present vanity and defilement.

So Peter interprets the same: The heavens burning shall be dissolved, and
the Elements shall melt with fervent heat. Whence the Apostle gathers this
weighty instruction: seeing that all these things shall be dissolved, what
manner of men ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness? And
indeed to meditate, and do this, tends more to Salvation, then curiously to
search after the manner of the Renovation.

Now if any one should say: These things John saw: but the Heavenly glory, Eye
has not seen, Ear has not heard, etc. therefore the Vision speaks not of
this glory: The answer is easy. John saw not the thing it self: but he saw
certain representations and types of the things to come. Therefore it remains
true, that Eye has not seen, etc. especially seeing John saw not the same
with his eyes, but in the spirit.

And the Sea was no more] AUGUSTINE thinks that the Sea may be understood of
the turbulent world, 1. Cor. 7.31
which then shall no more be: for the world passes away with the fashion
thereof: yet he retains the proper sense also: but doubts whither the Sea
shall be dried up by that fervent heat: or whither that also shall be changed
and purged. Indeed we read that the Heaven and the Earth shall be renewed: but
I remember not that I have read of a new Sea, save only what is said in this
Book touching the Sea of glass, like to Crystal: Rev. 4.6.
but there he speaks not of this world.

Andreas Caesariensis supposes that then there shall be no Sea: The
renovation of the Sea.
for what use should there be of it, seeing then men shall sail no more.
Schoolmen think that the Sea shall so be renewed, as indeed it shall not
retain its substance: because the water is to be consolidated into the globe
of the Sphere, remaining no longer flowing: But these curiosities we leave unto
themselves.

By the New Heaven BRIHGTMAN understands a new worship and purity in
godliness: By the new earth, new Israelites, which then shall join unto the
Church of Christ: By the former heaven that passed away, the Jewish worship
which they shall no longer exercise: By the former earth the Jews themselves,
who of Jews, shall become Christians: By the Sea, which was no more, corrupt
doctrine which shall have no place among the new people: for then the Jews
shall cast off their errors touching the Messiah, which now they maintain
tooth and nail, etc. What manner of Allegories these are, I pass by,
certainly they depend upon a very improbable conjecture, viz. that the
Eastern Jews after the overthrow of the Turkish Empire and burning of Rome,
should be added unto the Church of Christ.

2. And I John saw the holy City] Now also the glory of the renewed Church is
exhibited to the view of John, under the Type of a most beautiful City, as it
were a Bride most curiously adorned. The Kings Bible omitting the name of John,
reads it, And I saw, which John inserts for certainety sake. For John was an
Apostle, an Evangelist, and witness of the truth: therefore he writes a thing
that is certain.

Furthermore the Scripture generally calls the Church of the Elect Jerusalem:
because Jerusalem was the Seat of the Church, and worship of God, according to
the Psalm: This is my rest for ever, here I will dwell, because I have chosen
her. Ps. 132.14
But because that Old Jerusalem polluted with the blood of Christ and his
Apostles, was at length overthrown: He distinguishes this new Jerusalem from
the other by diverse Titles. He calls it a City, because of the beauty of its
building, and afterward adds, holy, because it shall shine with Heavenly
purity and perfect holiness. Here indeed it begins to be holy, Ephesians. 5.27.
Christ sanctifying her unto himself with the washing of water in the word:
but as yet she is not without spot and wrinkle: but then he will present her
unto himself gloriously holy, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. He
calls it New, to difference it from the old, and because of its new brightness.
For then the righteous shall shine in glory as the Sun, Mat. 13.43. Lib. 20.
de C. D. c. 19


COMING DOWN FROM GOD OVT OF HEAVEN] Because says AUSTIN, It is heavenly
grace, by which God has made her. Therefore it is said to descend from God out
of heaven: because God has chosen her from all eternity: therefore originally
she comes down out of Heaven. so Chap. 3.12. Upon him that overcommeth I will
write the name of the City of my God, the new Jerusalem that comes down
from my God. And Hebr. 12 22. it is called the Heavenly Jerusalem. Gal. 4.26.
Jerusalem (...), which is above. How the new Jerusalem comes down from heaven.


But this Epithet seems to be contrary to our opinion, for the Heavenly
Jerusalem shall never come down, but remain firm in Heaven.

I ANSWER: First it may be said, that the Vision is to be distinguished from
the thing it self: The Image of the Heavenly City, which John saw in the
Spirit, came down: or if the City it self came down, it is visionally to be
understood. But Secondly, this coming down, as above Chap. 3.12. must be
taken not of a local motion, but of the original beginning of the new
Jerusalem, for whither her existence be said to be above or here below, as God
from Heaven has chosen, so has he called, justified, and gloried her.

Prepared as a Bride] By another metaphor he amplifies the dignity and glory
of the Triumphant Church: Unto her dignity belongs, that he saw her as a
Bride, to wit, of the Lamb, ver. 9. To her glory, that he saw her adorned for
her husband, that is, in full beauty, now delivered into the hands of Christ
her Husband. For then shall be the eternity of the Heavenly Wedding. Above in
Chap. 19.7. The Bride made her self ready, while as yet she was absent from
the Lord: But now she is prepared, because the Wedding Feast is at hand.

But hence BRIGHTMAN: He saw her, says he, prepared, adorned, not as yet
delivered: Therefore she was not as yet glorified. Answ: The participles
(...), Prepared, adorned, argue the contrary. Now she is a preparing and
adorning her self. But then she shall be prepared, adorned, that is, fully
beautified with Heavenly glory. The same thing the words (...) do import not
(...), for her husband, not for her spouse. Then therefore she shall be
delivered unto her Husband: for before the Marriage Feast, the Bride is
preparing for her Bridegroom: but the Feast being ended, for her Husband. For
he who was before the Bridegroom, is then a Husband.

3. And I heard a great voyce] Thus much touching the things he saw, a new
heaven, and a new earth: and the Heavenly Jerusalem adorned like a Bride. Now
he records, what he heard: a twofold voice: one unknown, the other of one
that sat on the Throne: both confirm the happiness of the Bride. The former
voice comes from heaven. Therefore it shows joyful and true tidings unto the
Bride. It was GREAT, vehemently piercing John's ears, that he might give good
heed: because the matter delivered is weighty: But what was it?

Behold the Tabernacle of God with men] As if he should say, the Marriage Feast
is ended: Hence forward the Bridegroom and Bride shall dwell together under one
roof for ever.

And he will dwell with them] An allusion unto the Bridegroomes abode with the
Bride after the Marriage Feast. Now he fully comprehends the happiness of the
Bride, as above Chap. 7.15.16. in two parts: the fruition of all manner of good
things, and freedom from all evil. The chief good is God. To enjoy his
presence and the sight of his face is the chiefest felicity. This he seems to
describe by a twofold reason: his presence, and his communion with men.
Touching his presence he says, the Tabernacle of God is with men. The which
Tabernacle least it might be thought to be empty and transitory, he adds:
And he will dwell with them: Rev. 7.15.
intimately and unseparably: as above: (...): which seems to sound: His
Tabernacle shall be upon them: namely, thereby to refresh, and preserve them
from the heat of the Sun. By an allusion unto places subject to the Sun:
where men in respect of the heat hide themselves in Tabernacles, or Caves under
the Earth. But here he says (...), he will dwell with them, be in one house,
as it were, constantly and perpetually with them. Therefore they shall enjoy
the perpetual sight and presence of God.

By Men he understands not al, The habitation of Gods grace and glory.
but the Elect acquitted in Judgment. Now he speaks of no personal
habitation (like as God the Word dwells in the temple of his flesh) but of
grace and glory. But does not God now also dwell with his Church? Yea verily,
according to the promise in Levitic. 26.11. whence this whole place seems to be
taken, and is repeated by Paul, 2. Cor. 6. but he shall then dwell with us
after another manner then now he does. For here he has dwelt with us 1.
Personally in Christ; 2. By his gracious presence in the Church, bestowing on
her the benefits of the Gospel, and first fruits of the Spirit: Then he will
dwell with us through his glorious presence, fully enriching the Saints with
Heavenly brightness and glory: and he shall be all in all, and we shall see
him as he is face to face.

Touching his communion with us, it is added: And they shall be his people, and
God himself shall be with them, and be their God] Now also he is our God, and
we are his people: but this communion is only by inchoated grace: for now he
bestows grace upon every one of us but in part, 1. Cor. 13.9 Ephesians. 4.7. 1.
Cor. 12.11 2. Cor. 3.18 Phil. 3.21. Mat 13.43 1. Ioh. 3.2.
according to the measure of the gift of Christ, as he will. Then shall be the
consummated communication of glory, when with open face we shall all behold the
glory of the Lord, and be changed into the same image from glory to glory: when
he shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto the glorious
body of his Son: they shall shine as the sun: we shall be like unto ^im:
the proportion notwithstanding being kept that is between the head and the
members. The sum is: Then the promise made unto the Church, Lev. 26.11. shall
be most fully perfected: I will set my tabernacle amongst you: and my soul
shall not abhor you, I will walk in the midst of you, and ye shall be my
people, and I will be your God. Now God dwells with us by communication of
grace: then he shall dwell in us by communication of glory, the which eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, 1. Cor. 2.4
neither has it entered into the heart of man.

4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes] The second part of
felicity, is that we shall be subject to no miseries, vexation, or troubles of
this life. To be free from evil, is a great happiness, of which also God is
Author. For he will free his people from all evil. Now he reckons up five
kinds of evil, making this life bitter, under which the opposite good things
are to be understood. The evils accompaning this life.


Teares] Tears are expressed by the feeling of evil. Now this life what is it
but a vale of tears? But then God will wipe away all tears from our eyes,
that is, he will make it, that we shall weep no more, by taking away all cause
of tears, turning our tears into joy according to the promise: They which sow
in tears, Ps. 126.6.
shall reap in joy. The phrase is taken out of Isa. 25.8. and is an allusion
unto the natural affection of a mother to her child, which uses to flatter
the crying babe, and wipe away the tears thereof.

And death shall be no more] Neither the first nor second: Isa. 25.8.
for it shall be cast into the Lake of fire, and utterly abolished according
to the promise, He will swallow up death in victory. But has not Christ by
his death, overcome death long ago? True: but not as yet swallowed it up.
Notwithstanding although we now remain subject unto corporal death, yet
whatsoever in it belongs to punishment, that Christ has taken away. But then
he shall abolish death wholly. In the mean while he converteth the corporal
death of the Saints into a resting from sin, and a passage to life: for
whither we live, Romans 14.8 Col. 3.4. Romans 8.38
or whither we die we are the Lords. Christ is the life of the dead: neither
can death separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus. Now death being
taken away, what shall then follow but life everlasting?

Neither mourning] As now we do for the death of friends,

Nor cry] Which arises out of the evils, turmoyles, disturbances of this
life. For there shall be everlasting peace and tranquillity: all tumults and
quarrels shall be far from thence: but on the contrary we shall sing to God
everlasting Songs of joy.

Nor paine] Gr. (...), Labor, which may be taken for any kind of trouble, and
metaphorically for Grief, as BEZA renders it, after the Greek Phrase:
Sophocl. in Antig.
(...), grief by grief brings grief. But then there shall be no labor,
trouble, pain, or grief of body or mind, occasioning tears, death, sorrow,
or crying. There shall be no cause of evil: but on the contrary everlasting joy
and pleasure at Gods right hand.

For the former, (or first,) things are passed away] That is, the miserable
state of this present life: in which all those evils do abound because of
sin. Then they shall pass or vanish away. There shall be a new heaven and a
new earth: A new state, full of joy and happiness.

Unto the illustration of this place, that in Chap. 7.15. helps very much,
where in the end of the second Vision one of the four and twenty Elders
explicated the Heavenly felicity of the Saints almost in the same words: They
are, says he, before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his
temple, and he that sits on the throne shall dwell among them: they shall
hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them,
nor any heat: for the Lamb that is in the midst of the throne, shall feed
them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters, and God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes.

This place does plainly confute their opinion, who hold that here is treated
of the state of the Church Militant in this world: for it is certain, that
this removal of all evils from the Church, neither is, nor shall be in this
world: neither is any such happiness to be hoped for in this life: but it is
reserved for the Church in the world to come. These things therefore cannot be
applied unto the state of the Church on earth, gathered of Jews and Gentiles.

Neither do the Futures, will dwell, will take away, contradict what we say.
For these are retained emphatically out of the Prophecy: as if he should say,
the things which Isaias foretold should come to pass, shall be then
fulfilled: the which the Verb (...) are passed away, in the Praeter Tense,
does easily evince.

5. And he that sat upon the throne] Here follows the voice of the Sitter on
the Throne, of whom above Chap. 4. where we showed it was either the Holy
Trinity, or the Son of God gloriously reigning at the right hand of God in
Heaven: because he says, I am Alpha and Omega, which above in Chap. 1: 8. was
the voice of Christ: I am Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last. Now he
confirms unto John the things before seen and heard. All things were new, a
New Heaven, a New Earth, a New Jerusalem: Least we should doubt or ask, whence
this innovation should come: Behold, says he, I make all things new. This
innovation of things shall be effected by the divine power. Neither speaks he
of the spiritual renovation of the Church, which began long ago by the grace
and power of Christ, but of the super-naturall change of the whole universe
which shall be at Christ's last coming, 2. Pet. 3.13
as Peter shows.

And he says to me write] The Verb (...) says in the present Tense; being
the proper style of the Evangelist John, argues that he was Author of this
Book. He is commanded to write this Vision of the future renovation, and in
special the most sweet voice of Gods eternal abode with men, and the future
blessedness of the godly: that it might always remain extant to future
times, for the Churches consolation: for Christ knew that the Churches
condition should unto the end be mournful, by tears, death, sadness,
pains, etc. Least therefore she might faint in her warfare, the Lord would
have this most joyful Catastrophe of all evils to be set down in Holy Writ.

For these words are true and faithfull] Above Chap. 19.9. after a like
Commandment of writing: Write blessed, etc. He annexed a like reason: These
words are true. Here he adds: faithful, that none should doubt of the future
happiness. He understands by WORDS here, Gods future dwelling with men, as
also the eternal rewards of the faithful, and everlasting punishments of the
wicked.

6. And he said to me, It is done] Above Chap. 16.17. the Angel of the
seventh Vial, in the same phrase proclaimed the end of Babylon and the whole
world, (...) IT IS DONE. It is a weighty asseveration, that the thing is as
certain, as if it were already accomplished.

I am Alpha and Omega] As above Chap. 1.8.11.

I will give unto him that is a thirst] He confirms eternal rewards unto the
faithful out of the Gospel. For this is the voice of Christ Ioh. 7.37. whence
he that sat on the throne is known to be Christ, the Author of this
Prophecy. To them that thirst, he promises the water of life freely, that is,
everlasting joy without any desert of ours. But then no man shall thirst any
more. But these Future Verbes: I will give: shall inherit: and as before, shall
wipe away, seem to make against our opinion, but they do not, as erewhile I
showed. For because it is a Prophecy of future things, he rightly uses Verbes
of the future Tense. He therefore that thirsts, to wit, after righteousness
in this life, to him Christ will give the water of Life: now in a beginning
only, then fully: as if he should say, then I will truly fulfill the
Evangelicall promise, of which I now grant a taste to the faithful.

He that overcommeth, shall inherit all things] Gr. (...) receive it by
inheritance: Not therefore of merit but freely.

All things] As it were an only Heir, that possesses all the substance of his
Parents. But all the Elect are heirs: and yet every one shall receive the
whole inheritance: Therefore this shall not be after the manner of other
inheritances. Now the inheritance is promised to him that overcommeth, to wit,
the world, the Beast, and Satan, because before the victory there must needs be
a fight. Therefore the Faithful are here exhorted to fight courageously
against all their Adversaries. See Chap. 2.10.

And I will be his God] From 2. Sam. 7.14. He then at last promises to them
that overcome the fulfilling of the promise of adoption, which now by faith
they possess in hope. Now are we the sons of God? but it does not yet
appear what we shall be, but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is. This is John's own most true
interpretation of this divine voice. 1. Ioh. 3.2.

8. But the fearful and unbeleeving] From the contrary, he extols the felicity
of the Godly: because contraries being set one by another, they are the more
apparent. Therefore he could not more effectually set forth the excellency and
worth of Heavenly good things, erewhile promised unto the Conquerours, ( viz.
eternal abode with God, his everlasting amity, absence of all evil,
abundance of all good things, the Eternal and Heavenly refreshing, and last of
all the coinheritance with Christ in the new Heaven and the new Earth, and of
all things that are:) then by giving a touch on the contrary, of the miserable
and unhappy portion of the ungodly. But the fearful, says he, and
unbeleevers shall have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and
brimstone: whose horrible judgment he repeateth from the end of the foregoing
Chapter: Whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life, was cast into
the Lake of fire. This part of the judgment he expounds more fully, that the
godly may the more contentedly bear the troublesomnesse of their warfare, and
miseries in this life, which shall shortly be turned into joy: and the less be
grieved at the success and delights of the ungodly, who shortly shall be cast
into the torments of Hell fire.

Furthermore he reckons up eight ranks of reprobates, whose names are not
written in the Book of Life: unto which all the wicked belong, in special the
worshippers of the Beast and his Zealots are set forth in their colors. For of
these chiefly it is said, Chapter. 13.8. That their names are not written in
the Book of Life. And truly these wickednesses have notoriously born sway in
the Papacy.

Fearefull] These he opposes to Christ's strong champions and Conquerours,
Fearful.
understanding indeed generally those delicate professors, who for fear of
danger would have nothing to do with Christ, nor suffer any trouble for his
sake. But chiefly noteing those most base Vassals of ANTICHRIST, unto whom a
servile dread and spirit of fearfullnesse is proper. For they are never taught
certainly to trust in the mercy of God, touching the remission of sins, of
faith and salvation, but torment themselves with perpetual doubting, false
conjectures, and fear of being deceived, all their life time standing in
dread of Purgatory and Hell fire.

Vnbeleeving] Such indeed be all that are Alients from the Faith of Christ,
Unbelievers
Jews, Pagans, barbarous Infidels, of whom it is said: He that believes not
in the Son of God, Ioh. 3.36.
the wrath of God abides on him. Yet none are more bitter enemies of
justifying faith, then Antichrists Zealots: for these both by Arguments, and
force of arms, furiously oppugn free justification by Faith. They therefore
are principally these (...) Unbelieving, seeing the Scriptures of the new
Testament usually call other faithless men, The abominable.
(...), disobedient and obstinate.

Abominable] Both actively, who abhor God and Christ: and passively, who
because of their abominable wickednesses are odious to God and men. Andreas
reads it (...) Abominable sinners: such indeed are blasphemers out of the
Church. But principally it agrees to the worshippers of the Beast: for they
imitate the nature of the Beast, and his blasphemous mouth against God, his
Tabernacle, and those that dwell in Heaven. But what more cursed abomination
can there be, Cha. 13.6.
then for Popish Priests really to sacrifice and kill the Son of God, under
the species of bread in the Mass: mortifying, destroying, and offering him
unto the Father, if they be believed.

Murderers] Such indeed have been all the robbers from Cain, Murderers.
and Nimrod the Tyrants time, cruelly spilling man's blood: but none are more
cruel manslayers then Antichrists zealots and actors in the Inquisition, who
for many Ages have indeed by fire and sword killed innumerable bodies of the
Martyrs: but infinite souls of men by their devilish doctrine.

Whoremongers] Such indeed are all impure adulterers and fornicatours,

Sorcerers] Or such as mingle poisoned cups, Sorcerers.
or serving the devil by magical Art, and so are hurtful unto men. Many Popes
and Monks have excelled in this kind of wickedness: never was Magic more
used or esteemed of, then in the Papacy: Never were Kings and Princes in such
danger of being poisoned as by these men.

Idolaters] Among these indeed are comprehended Pagans who worship false Gods,
Idolaters.
for the true: Govetous men, whose Mammon is there God: Epicures who make a god
of their belly. For all these are Idolaters: but no Idolatry is so horrible, as
is in the Papacy, where under the Image of God and Christ, and of the Saints,
Idols of wood, stone, gold, and silver, are religiously worshipped and adored.

All Lyars] That is, Liars. Pro. 12.12 John 8 44.
all Liars, and framers of lies in general, adversaries of truth, of whom it
is said: Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord: Every liar is of the
devil, the father of lies. But the Papacy is as the very sink of falsehood.
Their head the Pope is a liar, falsely affirming himself to be Christ's Vicar,
Peter's Successor, Monarch of the Christian world, Head of the Church, and Lord
of Kings and Emperors. Their Religion and whole worship is false. Their
doctrine of meritorious works, of Purgatory, of satisfactions, is false. Their
Doctors are liars: To be short, their blasphemies and calumnies, by which they
continually defame the Gospel of Christ, are most false. Thus we see whom the
threatening respects. Now for the punishment.

They shall have their part in the Lake] An Hebrew Phrase: Psa. 11.6. Psa.
16.5. Psa. 63.10 Act. 8.21.
Fire and brimstone is the part or portion of their cup: Jehovah the part of my
portion and of my cup. They shall be the portion of Foxes. So PETER to Simon
Magus. Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter. By an Allusion unto
Heirs, among whom the inheritance is divided into certain parts, that every
one may have his due portion. Now because he had said, that such as overcame,
should inherit all things: Here on the contrary he says: the portion of the
wicked shall be in the Lake of fire, that is, this shall be the inheritance of
the ungodly. Gr. (...), the part of them. The Relative (...) of them, is after
the manner of the Hebrews, a redundance or overplus: And the Verb (...), Is;
or shall be, is wanting. Beza rightly, Is assigned, to wit, the sentence being
now pronounced. For erewhile he said: all that were not written in the Book of
Life were cast into the lake of fire. The lake of fire. Lib. 20. de C. D. c. 14


Touching this Lake of fire and brimstone, we need not with idle Sophisters
dispute, what kind of Lake it is, and where, and what kind of fire, Elementary,
or not. AUGUSTINE: This fire, says he, in what part of the world or things it
shall be, is I think known to no man. Ludovicus his jest on Sophisters
disputing of this fire.
On which place Ludovicus Dives pleasantly jesting and deriding the vanity of
Sophisters: what, says he, to no man? O Augustine, thou have not heard our
Scholasticall Swash-bucklers: of whom the least in degree, is not ignorant,
that it shall be that Elementary fire, whose abode is between the Air, and the
Globe of the Moon, namely it being to descend. But if thou approve not this,
there will not some be wanting to swear religiously, that this fire shall
proceed from the heat of the beams of the Sun, raised in the middle Climate
of the Air, most thick and ardent beams closing there together, as it were
into an hollow glass or mirror. But it is no wonder. In thy time (O Austine)
there was no such use of fire, as now: seeing, not to speak of Divines, our
Philosophers, whither it be in the middle of December, or in the middle of
July, they with mouth, hands, and feet, handle and treat of nothing but fire.
Of Philosophers they become Divines, and so transfer this kind of Philosophy
into the more sacred Schools. They therefore can more casily define the fire,
then either Thou, thy equals, or Praedecessours. Thus he.

These delights therefore we leave unto incendiary Monks, who from the fire of
Purgatory and Hell do daily warm their Kitchins: and daily threaten the
Evangelicall Heretics with fire and fagots. The Holy Ghost himself
interprets this Lake, and this Fire, not by the place or matter, but by the
miserable condition thereof, Which is the Second Death] Of which Chap: 20.6.
The first death.
They that have part in the First Resurrection, on such the Second, that is,
Eternal Death has no power: which shall be the casting of the damned with the
devil and the Beast into everlasting torments. For the first death is the
falling away of the Soul from God. The remedy whereof is the First
Resurrection, which is a raising of the Soul from the death of sin, through
Faith and Repentance in this Life. These are not in danger of the Second death:
because they shall have part in the Second Resurrection, which is a raising up
unto life and eternal glory. See what was said before Chap. 20.5.6.

The Second Part of the CHAPTER. Being a Special VISION and Type of the
Heavenly Jerusalem.
9. And there came unto me one of the seven Angels, which had the seven Vials
full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will
show thee the Bride, the Lambs wife. 10. And he carried me away in the Spirit,
to a great and high Mountain, and showed me that great City, the Holy
Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from God. 11. Having the glory of God: and
her light was like unto a stone, most precious, even like a Jasper stone,
clear as Crystal. 12. And had a wall great and high, and had twelve gates:
and at the gates twelve Angels: and names written thereon, which are the names
of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel. 13. On the East three gates, on
the North three gates, on the South three gates, and on the West three gates.
14. And the wall of the City had twelve foundations: and in them the names of
the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. 15. And he that talked with me had a golden
reed to measure the City, and the gates thereof, and the walls thereof. 16. And
the City lies four square, and the length is as large as the breadth: and he
measured the City with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs: the length, and the
breadth, and the height of it are equal 17. And he measured the wall thereof,
an hundred and forty and four cubits, according to the measure of a man, that
is, of the Angel. 18. And the building of the wall of it was of Jasper, and
the City was pure gold, like unto clear glass. 19. And the foundations of
the wall of the City were garnished with all manner of precious stones. The
first foundation was Jasper, the second Saphir, the third a Chalcedony, the
fourth an Emerauld, 20. The fifth Sardonix, the sixth Sardius, the seventh
Chrysolite, the eight Beryl, the ninth a Topas, the tenth a Crysoprasus, the
eleventh a Iacinct, the twelfth an Amethyst. 21. And the twelve gates were
twelve Pearls: every several gate was of one Pearl: and the street of the
City was pure gold, as it were transparent glass. 22. And I saw no Temple
therein: For the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it. 23. And
the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it: for the
glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. 24. And the
Nations of them which are saved, shall walk in the light of it: and the Kings
of the Earth do bring their glory and honor unto it. 25. And the gates of it
shall not be shut at all by day, for there shall be no night there. 26. And
they shall bring the glory and honor of the nations into it. 27. And there
shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever
works abomination, or makes a lie: but they which are written in the Lambs
book of life.
THE COMMENTARY.
9. AND there came unto me one of the seven Angels] Hitherto of what John saw
and heard generally. Now follows a special Vision and Type of the Heavenly
Jerusalem, in which is allegorically shadowed out, not so much the
pleasantness and magnificence of the place, in which we shall be in
blessedness, in the highest Heaven, as our future unspeakable blessedness it
self. For this City is not Heaven it self, but the glorified Church in
Heaven: for be calls the City here described, the Bride and Wife of the
Lamb. But the Bride and Wife of the LAMB, is not Heaven, but the glorified
Church.

Now he records, as we showed in the Analysis, first the occasion of the
Vision: secondly the manner and place of the Vision: lastly the Vision it self.

The occasion is in this verse. Hitherto John stood in the desert, where he was
carried in the spirit by one of the seven Angels, pouring forth the Vials,
Chap. 17.3
to see the judgment of the great whore sitting upon the Beast. What things he
there saw and heard, he has declared at large. Now that same Angel being one
of the seven Pourers forth of the Vials, (for I understand it of the self
same, who seemed, as above I said, to be the seventh, pouring out the last
Vial into the Air, and proclaiming the end of the world) comes unto Iohn]
that is, returns unto him, (for undoubtedly he had turned aside) and as before
he had said: Come hither, Chap. 17.1
I will show thee the judgment of the great whore: So now he says, I will
show thee the Bride, the Lambs wife. A wonderful affability of the Angel,
touching which above: without being demanded he is present, undoubtedly by
Gods Commandment, now to show unto John, to whom before he had showed horrible
things, things acceptable and pleasing. Before he saw a most filthy Harlot, the
Beasts Whore: now he sees a chaste Spouse, the Lambs Wife. This Bride is the
glorified Church. Therefore he calls her the Lambs wife, now deservedly brought
and delivered unto the Heavenly Marriage Feast.

But how says he, I will show thee] Seeing John saw her before ver. 2. I
answer: he had seen her a far off, being in the wilderness. But now he is
invited to look upon her more near at hand. Hitherto the occasion.

10. And he carried me away in the spirit] This is the third time, that he was
ravished in the Spirit: First in the I Will Patmos, Chap. 1.9. which ecstasie or
trance was without any local translation. Secondly when he was carried into
the Wilderness, Chap. 17.3. Thirdly now being carried to a great mountain.
In Chap. 12. v. 18. it is said, he stood upon the sand of the Sea, when he saw
the Beast ascending out of the Sea: But that place has it ambiguously (...)
and (...), in the first and third person: neither is there any mention of an
ecstasie. But here (...), he carried me, says he, in the Spirit, intimating
a translation, not corporal, but visionall. Thus much for the manner of the
Vision. He adds the place.

To a great and high Mountaine] Some from this Mountain observe diverse
Allogories, touching the greatness and height of things caelestiall, and of
the Church it self: applying to this the promise of God, Isa. 2.2. In the last
days the mountain of the Lords House shall be established in the top of
Mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall flow
unto it: and many people shall go and say, come ye, and let us go up to the
mountain of Jehovah, etc. In which Oracle is contained the calling of all
Nations unto the Church of the New Testament, which of old was shadowed out by
the Temple of mount Sion. But the present place respects not at all the
gathering of the Gentiles unto the Church but the glorified Church is exhibited
to John from this Mountain. Therefore I see no other use of this great and
high Mountain, then that from it John might the better view the Holy City and
Bride of the Lamb.

And he showed unto me a great Citie] He had promised before to show him the
Bride, the Lambs Wife, For which he shows him a City: because the glorified
Church is both the Lambs bride, and the City of God. A Bride, because of her
Spiritual Marriage with the Lamb, and her Chastity and Heavenly ornament,
with which she shall shine for ever with Christ. A City, because of the most
magnificent building, comely order, invincible strength and steadfastnesse, by
which she shall stand for ever against all the gates of Hell. The Greek (...)
is here rather to be rendered by the latin word, Vrbs, then Civitas. For
Civitas commonly signifies the multitude, and the privileges of Citizens, but
Vrbs the building it self, as the Walls, Gates, Streets, Palaces, Houses,
Temples, etc.

He calls it Great (as before v. 2.) viz. in largeness, ornament and glory:
for it is the great City of the Great God, full of Citizens.

Holy in purity and heavenly cleanness, without all defilement and filthiness.

The name thereof is Jerusalem, that is, where peace is seen: from the Hebrew
Jireh salem, Lib. 7. de bello Iudaico, cap. 18.
that is, to see peace: of old it was the head City of Judea, builded by King
Melchisedec, as Josephus writes, and was the Court of David, the Seat of the
Temple and divine worship, and a Type of the new Church: and therefore the
glorified Church retains the same name, because she shall see everlasting
peace.

Coming down from God out of heaven] It did then indeed visionally descend,
that John might see it: But in truth the Church also descends from Heaven,
because hence it has taken her original, See ver. 2.
as being founded in the eternal election and love of God: and all the glory
and happiness she receives, is from the grace of God.

11. Having the glory of God] Being to declare the most magnificent structure
of this City, he begins from the glory and light thereof. For Cities take not
the least commendation from the quality and heathfullnesse of the air, and
pleasantness of the place. This City for its air and most healthful
situation, has the glory of God, that is, the majesty of that inaccessible
light, which God inhabiteth, then which nothing can be thought on more
excellent and glorious. This glory is expounded ver. 23.

And her light] The Gr. (...) signifies properly, not light, but a lightsome
body, casting forth light from the same. Two such great Lights God in the
beginning set in the Firmament, the Sun and the Moon. What this is, he will
show us in ver. 23. Now he speaks of the quality thereof, LIKE UNTO A STONE
MOST PRETIOVS, even like a lasper] By which Allegory he intimates the
unspeakable excellency of the light. For a most precious stone is incomparable,
most bright and most desirable.

Like a Jasper stone] This is a most noble Gemme, of it are diverse sorts, of
excellent virtue: Lib. 37. c. 9
and as Pliny writes it is used in all the East, for a preservative against
the most pernicious poison.

Like to Chrystall] Then which nothing is more bright, See before Chap. 4.3.
or clear, striving as it were with the Sun in brightness. See above Chap.
4.6. It shows therefore that the light of this City is not only healthful,
dispelling all poisonous and hurtful things: but also most bright. Why does he
not liken it to the Sun? This City shall have neither Sun nor Moon, but
that which is clearer then the same: Perhaps also, because the heat of the Sun
is troublesome: the coldness of the Moon is usually hurtful to the body, but
here shall be nothing either troublesome or hurtful.

12. And had a wall] Now he describes the parts of the City most obvious to
the sight, external and internal. He begins with the wall, compassing the
streets about: for it is convenient that a City be environed and fortified
with walls, that the lives and estates of the Citizens may be preserved from the
incursions of adversaries and wild Beasts. For walls are called Mania a muniendo
of fortifying. These must be high, thick, and strong. Such was this wall:
great in thickenesse, and very high: as in ver. 17. ANDREAS says: By this
wall, we may understand the hedge of Gods safeguard and protection. Wherefore
it signifies, that the life and safety of the glorified Church is sure, and in
no danger of external force or hurt: because the wall of Gods omnipotency
defends and keeps the City. But it will not hence follow, seeing the
safety of the glorified Church is out of all danger, that therefore there is no
need of this wall. For this very security is here signified by the Allegory of
a wall.

And twelve gates] In the wall, gates are made, for the Citizens and others to
go out and in. This wall has twelve gates, excellently placed, guarded, and
beautified. For all the gates have Guardians to keep them, not men, but Angels,
who are watchful, strong, and unwearied. Every one has Emblems written on it:
the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel: Three gates are ordered unto the
several corners of the world: that there might be most easy access from all
parts unto the same.

By the Gates they understand the doctrine of the Gospel, by which Heaven is
opend unto us: by the Angels, the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles: who by
their preaching have showed us the way to Heaven: and do all belong unto this
City. By the names of the twelve Tribes written thereon, they understand the
full gathering of all the Elect of the Spiritual Israel into the same. Three
gates stand toward the East, three to the North, etc. because this Church is
gathered from all parts of the world.

Whether by the number of the Gates (being three on each side of the wall) be
a mystery of the Trinity (as Andreas supposes) I neither know, nor date
affirm: least according to the number of the Gates, the number of the divine
persons should be also multiplied. It is more agreeable to observe here an
Allusion unto the type of the holy City described by Ezechiel, Chap. 48.30.
for that also had twelve gates, named after the Tribes of Israel, viz. Three
gates Northward: One of Reuben, one of Judah, one of Levi. Three Eastward: One
of Joseph, one of Benjamin, one of Dan. Three at the South: One of Simeon, one
of Issachar, one of Zebulon. Three Westward: One of Gad, one of Asher, one of
Naphthali. Now that City represents the Church Militant of the New Testament,
because all the Tribes of the spiritual Israel, that is, all the Elect from all the corners of the Earth were to be gathered unto the same. Such also in this
place is the representation of the Church Triumphant in Heaven.

14. And the wall of the City] He commends the strength of the wall from the
foundations, on which it was built. For without a firm foundation a wall is
ruinous, and must needs decay. The foundations he says are twelve, the
precious materials whereof, are expounded ver. 19. to wit, so many precious
stones, most firmly sustaining this wall, and having the Names of the Apostles
in them.

But Christ is the only foundation, holding, and keeping up the Church: 1.
Cor. 3.11
neither can any other be laid, etc. How then are the Apostles foundations? And
if the Apostles be foundations, then says BRIGHTMAN, this is not that Eternal
City in the Heavens. I Answer: Why the names of the Apostles are written in
the foundations.
John says not that the Apostles are foundations. But that the names of the
Apostles were written or graven on the foundations, that is, they were called
after the names of the Apostles, one being called Peter's, another John's, etc.
Why so? for honor sake, because the Apostles in this City shall excel others
in glory. But why written in the foundations? Because they by their preaching
laid the only foundation, which is Christ. For what Paul says of himself: As
a wise Master Builder I have laid the foundation: that every one of them could
say also of himself. Which is the reason, that however the foundation be but
one, yet he says they are twelve, according to the number of the twelve
Apostles, because that one Foundation was so fully laid by every one of them,
How there are twelve foundations
as there might seem to be twelve foundations, the same being as it were laid
twelve times, or by the twelve Apostles.

But why is Paul omitted, seeing he labored more then the twelve? Because at
first CHRIST chose twelve only, unto whom Paul was afterward added, coming as
it were into the labors of the rest. But seeing the names are not expressed,
no one of the Apostles can be said to be omitted.

Of the Apostles of the Lambe] Or of Jesus Christ: for so the Apostles style
themselves in their Epistles.

15. And he that talked] Now also he describes the most ample and absolute
figure of the City: first showing, whence he received the exact knowledge
thereof: viz. from the Angels measuring.

He that talked with me] That is, one of the Angels of the seven Vials, who had
said before unto me, Come hither, I will show thee, etc.

Had (in his hand) a golden Reed] That is a measuring Instrument to mete the
wall and gates, like as Master Builders use to examine the whole building by a
measuring rule, whither all things do well agree. Now the end of measuring was
to make known the quantity, so as John might precisely understand and describe
unto us the most absolute figure of this mystical City. This also is taken out
of Ezech. 40.5. where the Prophet saw the Architect Angel of the Church, that
is, Christ with a measuring Reed of six Cubits and four fingers, to measure
the Court of the new Temple, and of the situation, and of the City.

16. The City is just fouresquare.
And the City lies foure-square] The City he describes to be just four
square: which kind of form is most solid, constant, and perfect: because the
longitude and latitude of all the parts is equal: for this City equally
consists of all the Elect: wherefore he denotes the immovable firmness of
the same.

The quantity is 12000. Furlongs, which make 375. Germane miles. It is
ambiguous, whether this were the measure of the whole Circumference: or of
every of the sides or squares of the City: If of the sides, then the
Circumference was 48000. Furlongs, that is, 1500. Germane miles: but the whole
Circumference seems to be noted: so that every side contained 300. Furlongs,
that is, 93. Germane miles and three quarters.

Therefore this Jerusalem is far greater then Babylon of old, The greatness of
Babylon.
which as Herodotus describes was four square, in Circumference 480.
Furlongs, that is, fifteen Germane miles: each side 120. Furlongs, that is,
three Germane miles and three quarters. It had also a great and high wall,
fifty royal Cubits in thickenes, and two hundred in height, of Brick stone
and mortar. But this City is much more magnificent and strong. For Babylon was
taken by Cyrus, by Alexander, and spoiled by diverse adversaries. But this is
inaccessible, and cannot be vanquished by any enemy, but remains stable for
ever.

17. And he measured the wall thereof] Thus much of the Cities Circumference:
The measure of the wall was 144. Cubits. Therefore he rightly calls it a high
wall, which no adverse power can easily overcome. Hereby, says Andreas, is
signified the fruitfulness of the doctrine of the Apostles: for the measure of
the wall is made up by multiplying the twelve Apostles by 12. A Cubit commonly
is from the Elbow unto the fingers end: hence the measure of a Cubit, is six
hand-breadths or 24. fingers. So much is the common Cubit. The Royal Cubit,
says Herodotus exceeded the common by three fingers. The Geometrical Cubit is
as much as six ordinary Cubits. The measure of a Cubit. Herod. lib. 1
Here we may understand ordinary ones, which seems to be intimated by the
following Addition: This is the measure of a man, that is, of the Angell] The
meaning is, that the Angel measured according to the ordinary measure of men.
But BRIGHTMAN demands, what use there is of this kind of measure in Heaven?
But by the same reason we might ask what of the Angels measuring on Earth?
John saw the City out of Heaven. Therefore he says it was measured of the
Angel by the measure of a man, that is, commonly used among men.

18. And the building of the wall] He goes on to set forth the excellency of
the wall, foundations, and the whole City from the incomparable worth of the
matter. The wall is built of Jasper. Before he said, that the light which the
City had (in stead of the Sun) was like to Jasper, clear as Crystal. Who
ever saw the like? Historians commend the wall of Babylon for the height,
thickness, and soliditie of the matter, which was brick, with sand, Pich and
mortar betwixt the same. This wall is of mere Jasper, a precious stone.
Therefore this structure of the wall denotes the happy and always flourishing
life of the Saints.

The city was pure Gold] The raritie and worth of gold is commonly known, Lib.
37.
and Pliny commends it largely: for it is a most precious metal, and being
often tried in the fire, comes out very pure and without dross: not consumed
by the use thereof as other metals. Such is the excellent matter of the whole
city: wholly Gold, and that most purely cleansed from all dross: what can be
more excellent, more desirable then such a city. That of Horace is known: Auri
sacra fames quid non mortalia cogis pectora?

Now if we are taken up with a desire of Gold, 1. Pet. 1.18
why should we not long much more after this Golden City? All other gold how
excellent soever it be, is corruptible, as Peter witnesses. This is
incorruptible, because it is (...) Pure from all dregs of corruption.

Like to clear glasse] The wonderful brightness of the City glistering with
gold, like pure glass, as it were Crystal. The former belongs to the
excellency of the matter: the latter unto the brightness thereof. Gold
shines, and is solid: Glass is clear, but not solid. Therefore it is both a
Golden City, and brightly shining in glory. The Holy Ghost found nothing so
precious, so beautiful, and dear unto us whereby enough to commend the
excellency and splendour of the Caelestiall City, that so our hearts being
drawn off from the filthy delights of the world, he might stir us up to
long after the Heavenly Jerusalem. Now this most pure gold and most pure glass
sufficiently argues, that this Type is not as yet suitable unto the Church
Militant on Earth: for she is not yet wholly gold, not yet wholly bright, but is
mixed and obscured with diverse dregs of sin, so long as she defiles her feet
with the dirt of this world. Therefore undoubtedly this is the Heavenly
Jerusalem.

19. And the foundation of the Wall] The matter of the Wall and City being
expounded, he also sets forth the matter of the Foundations, not less
precious: gold they are not, but precious stones, more precious then gold. And
this serves to the decorum or grace of the matter. For gold in regard of its
luster and purity is set forth to the view of men, dug out of the Earth, not
put into the same: But foundations of buildings are dug deep into the
earth, being ordinarily of stone (because of its incorruptible solidity) to
support the building-Therefore the foundation of the wall of this City, are of
stones, not cut smooth or made of brick, but of most precious and polished
pearls. In that he says, they were garnished with all manner of precious
stones: it may be understood, either that all the foundations were adorned with
diverse pearls, or that they were all of whole gemmes, as it were so many
props and pillars of the wall: which latter is more agreeable to what follows.

Now because the twelve foundations have the Names of the twelve Apostles, In
chap. 21 S. 38.
Ribera labors much about the order (...) which we should follow in the
numbering of the Apostles names.

But John says not that the Apostles were Foundations, but that the Names of
the Apostles were written in the foundations. Besides, the same order of the
Apostles is not every where observed in the Gospel, as Mat. 10. Mark 3. Luke
6. Act. 1. which he himself confesses. For although Peter be always set in
the first place (not that he was Prince of the rest, but because he was first
called, as Chrysostom and Theophylact have well observed) yet in the rest the
order is not kept: for sometime Andrew is second, sometimes James, sometimes
John: sometime John is the third, otherwhile James: sometime John is the
fourth, otherwhile Andrew, and so forward.

Furthermore he carefully enquireth which gemme is to be applied to each of the
Apostles. Also he searches out the reasons and manner scrupulously, wherefore,
and how this stone should agree to this, or that Apostle.

But verily, seeing there is no certain order of the Apostles set down in
Holy Writ, this labor of his is frivolous: Neither was the Angel troubled
about the same: but counted it sufficient to name every one of the foundations
by several stones.

BRIGHTMAN shows another mystery in the precious stones: for he thinks
that by them are denoted, not the twelve Apostles, but so many Jewish Doctors,
who shall become Teachers of the Christian Church, and bear the names of the
Apostles, because they shall succeed them in number and society of rewards: and
that generally the common excellency of the gemmes shadows out the dignity of
those Evangelicall Doctors: But that the several gemmes signify in what
Regions and Places these Preachers of the Gospel should severally arise, like
as precious stones grow in diverse places: some in the East, some in the Indies,
others in Scythia, or in Persia, etc. The which how solid it is, I leave unto
the judgment of others.

Andreas observes that eitht of these twelve gemmes were of old set in the
high Priests Breast Plate: (four only being changed) whence he draws the
consent of the Old and New Testament: Yet the excellency of the latter. But to
let this pass, we come to the stones themselves.

The first Foundation was Iasper] Here we had need of an Artist or Lapidarie,
Jasper.
fully to lay open the nature and virtue of every of these stones: and the
interpretation also of the Angel to discover the mysteries of them. For mine
own part, I confess my ignorance in the same. Therefore leaving these hidden
mysteries, I will only show the opinion of some Authors touching these gemmes.

Diverse virtues of the Jasper are recorded by Writers says FRANCISCVS RVEVS:
Rueus lib. 2. c. 1. de gemnis.
But that which by the Indians is called Grammatias, by others Polygrammos, and
which is somewhat like to the Emerauld in its green brightness, is the most
excellent.

By this, says Andreas, in probability the Apostle Peter is signified: because
he bore Christ's death in his body, and always showed a lively and flourishing
love toward him, etc. But this undoubtedly the rest of the Apostles had also
as well as Peter, and were crowned with Martyrdom for the sake of Christ, being
full of lively and flourishing love toward him, unto the end.

The second Saphir] This is a gemme of the East Indies: Medes also have
excellent ones: Saphir. Ex. 24.10. Eze. 1.26. Lib. 37. c. 7
It is in color like the clearest sky, blue, and as it were representing
transfused clouds. It asswageth lust, and therefore is chiefly used by such as
love chastity: which makes me to wonder why Interpreters do not attribute it
to John, who only, as it is thought, was unmarried. But Ribera appropriates
the same to Andrew: CAESARIENSIS to Paul because of its bluish color like to
the Heaven: for Paul was rapt up into the third Heaven.

The third a Chalcedony] PLINY calls it Carchedony. notes, that for the
Chalcedonie, A Chalcedony.
there was a Carbuncle in the Breast Plate: and that perhaps it is here to be
understood. And Pliny testifies that Carchedonie is a kind of Carbuncle. It is
said to be engendered of the Heavenly showers falling at Thebae in Egypt. They
affirm also that they are found betwixt Basilea and Argentina. It Is of the
color between the Beryl and Iacinct, or a purple color: and out of Loraine
comes red ones also. They say it is good against the symptoms of the black
choler, that is, sadness and fear. And being made warm it draws out
splinters. This Ribera ascribes to the Apostle James: CAESARIENSIS unto Andrew.

The fourth an Emerauld] Of all precious stones which are of a green color,
An Emerauld.
the Emerauld is the most pleasant: for no color is so delightful to the eye.
The best grow in the highest Mountains of Scythia, and in Golden Mines. They
write that it is of singular virtue against all kind of poison, as also the
Falling-sickenesse which it drives away, if it be hung about the neck, or
worn in a Ring. It is thought also to preserve chastity: And they add, that
it strengthens the memory, refreshes the sight, and increases wealth, etc.
This therefore Ribera and Andreas attribute to John.

20. The fifth Sardonix] Of this stone there are diverse sorts. Sardonix.
Those in the Indies are the most famous: the next the Arabian, in color
resembling a man's nail, and hence it takes its name: for Onyx signifies a
nail. Now the Sardonyx in the upper part resembles the color of a man's nail,
in the nether part the color of a Fish called Sarda: see more of this Rueus
lib. 2. cap. 5. de gem. It is thought to drive away pride of mind, and other
hurtful affections. RIBERA attributes this stone to Philip: ANDREAS to James.

The sixth Sardius] This is of a dark red color. They say it expels fear,
Sardius.
emboldens them that wear it, and frees them from poison and charms,
stencheth the blood at the nose, rejoices the mind, and sharpens the wit.
Ribera attributes this to Bartholomew: Andreas to Philip.

The seventh Chrysolite] It grows in Arabia: Chrysolite.
and also in Germany in the Mines of Misnia. The best are in India glistering
somewhat like the Sea-speakles. They say it much helps the shortness of
breath. RIBERA appropriates this stone to Matthew: ANDREAS to Bartholomew.

The eight a Beryl] It is one of the green and bright gemmes: Beryl.
such are the best which do resemble the greenness of a calm and clear Sea.
They grow almost no where but in India: they are wrought into a form of six
corners, by reflex whereof the color (otherwise dim) is raised. For else
though polished, they scarcely shine. It is good, they say, for waterie eyes,
sighs, and illness of the liver. Andreas because of its Sea-like color, and
place where it grows, appropriates it to Thomas, who by Sea journeyed even unto
the Indians, being sent thither by God to bring that people to life and
salvation. The which Ribera also approves.

The ninth a Topas] The Topas is of a golden color, A Topas.
mingled also with a kind of whitish green tending to graynesse. Andreas says
it is not unlike to the red Carbuncle, casting forth a liquor like milk, which
as some Authors affirm, helps the diseases of the eyes, and is medicinable
against the irruption of blood, and presently, if laid to a wound stops its
bleeding. It gains and loses virtue according to the increase and decrease
of the Moon: whence they say it helps lunatic persons. This stone they
ascribe to the Apostle Matthew.

The tenth a Chrysoprasus] Or as PLINY calls it Chrysoprasius, A
Chrysoprasus.
signifying gold and greenness. For this stone is green like a Leeke,
inclining to the color of gold. It refreshes the powers of the heart, and
helps the weakness of the sight. This Caesariensis ascribes to Judas
Thaddaeus: who, as he says, preached to Abgarus King of Edessa, that Christ's
Kingdom is denoted by gold, and his death by greenness: which indeed Eusebius
records, Hist. Lib. 1. Cap. 13. extremo.

The eleventh a Iacinct] This stone is named after a flower of the same name, A
Iacinct.
whose violet color resembles the purple, though they make a threefold
difference thereof. For some do incline more to red, being of a fiery purple
color, which they say are most esteemed. Others yellow, resembling Saffron,
and are more dark then fire. Thirdly others are yellow, and inclining to blew,
and thence are called Saphirins, being the most precious as some affirm:
because this stone by its color seems to comprehend the nature both of the
Jacinct, and of the Saphir. It causes sleep by its coldness, preserves the
powers of the heart, and such as wear it are kept, as they say, from the raging
pestilence. And therefore it is hung about the neck for a preservative, as near
the heart as may be: some affirm that the Iacinct increases wealth, the which
thing I do believe it will effect in such as have abundance of these stones.
Andreas appropriates it to Simon.

The twelfth an Amethyst] Among the violet colored stones, An Amethyst.
the Amethyst is of chief reckoning, of which indeed there are diverse sorts.
Those of India challenge the supremest majesty, resembling the most absolute
Purple. After these, the Arabian, Armenian, Egyptian, and those of Galatia: the
worst grow in Cyprus. Notwithstanding all of them in some kind resemble the
violet: Neither is the Amethyst much unlike the Iacinct, as Pliny notes. The
difference is this, that the brightness of the Amethyst, Lib. 37. c. 9
is mixed in the Iacinct. It seems to take its name from the virtue thereof: for
Aristotle writes that the Amethyst being laid to the navel, first draws the
vapor of the wine to its self, then dispels the same, and so preserves him
that wears it from drunkenness: Whence this Pearl is a Conservative of
temperance: being derived from the Privative (...) not and (...) to be drunk.
They ascribe it to Matthew the last Apostle.

They who desire to know more about these stones, may consult with Artists and
Naturalists, as Pliny, Isodore: and in special Franciscus Rueus his Book
touching precious stones, whence I have briefly taken most of these things. It
is enough for us to observe, that by so many precious stones (then which
nothing in the world is accounted more precious,) is signified the excellency
and firmness of the foundation of Salvation, 1. Cor. 3.11
the which indeed is, and for ever shall be but one only, viz. CHRIST JESUS. But
set forth under the names of the twelve Apostles: because all of them laid the
same fully by their preaching, all of them (I say) adorning it by their
excellent Faith, admirable Charity, unwearied Diligence, unconquerable
Constancy, and at last gloriously confirmed the same with their blood, laying
down their Lives for the Gospels sake.

21. Ioh. 10.2.9 and 14.6.
And the twelve gates] Christ is the only gate of Salvation, who says: I am
the door, by me if any man enter in he shall find pasture: I am the way, the
truth, and the life, no man comes unto the Father but by me. Notwithstanding
here are twelve gates, according to the number of the twelve Tribes of Israel,
as in ver. 12. or according to the number of the twelve Disciples of Christ, as
it seems to Andreas: because by their ministry we come to know the door and
way of Salvation: so that they may not unfitly be called by a Metonymia the
twelve gates, for the twelve Keepers of the Gates.

The worth of the gates is set forth by the excellency of the matter. For all
of them are of most precious pearls. The difference of gemms and pearls.
Gemmes and Pearls do differ. For Gemmes are little precious stones of diverse
colors growing in the earth, and are reckoned among Metals, called by the
Germans EDELGESTEIN. Pearls also are little precious stones, white in
splendour, but growing in shelles. They are sometimes called in Latin Unions:
because two together are never found in one shell, Lib. 9. c. 35
according to Pliny.

They seem to signify that the Teachers of Righteousness, who have showed
the use of the Gates to bring many to Christ, shall shine like unto glorious
Pearls in the Heavenly Jerusalem. Notwithstanding all these pearls shall
receive their brightness and excellency from that one most precious Pearl,
Mat. 13.48.
which is Christ Jesus.

And the street of the City was pure Gold] Hitherto of the external structure
and ornament of the City. Now he also will show us the inward beauty thereof.

The street] Greek. (...), which denotes the public ways of the City. BEZA
renders it Marketplace called in Greek (...), a spacious place of the City
commodios for public meetings and driving of trade. His reason is because in
Chap. 22.2. In midst of the street, seems to be put for, In the Marketplace.
And because it is said in the singular, Street, whereas usually there are many
streets in a City, and but one Marketplace. The sense is the same: for all
the streets do lead to the Market. The streets and Marketplaces of a City are
fair, if paved with flint, tyles, and smooth stones: and yet (by reason of
continual use) they can never be free from dirt. But the street of this City
is much more curious. It is all gold, and that most purely purged of all
dross, clear as glass, like unto the whole City, ver. 18. Now who should
dare with defiled feet to tread upon a golden Pavement, and a golden Street?
Therefore here is signified the inward cleanness and unutterable brightness
of the City, together with the most pure and sweet habitation and conversation
of the Caelestiall Citizens.

The Market, or rather Court may also metonymically be taken for a civil
Common wealth. This is wholly of gold. Therefore golden righteousness shall have
place among the Citizens. But the gates of the new City in this life, that is,
of the Church-Militant are not yet pure gold, but carry much dirt, by which the
feet of such as walk thereon, are defiled, and have need of continual
washing. Also the Market or Court is not all gold, but as yet subject to many
strifes, injuries, and troubles. So that this Golden-Citie cannot be applied
unto the Church-Militant.

22 And I saw noe Temple in the same] Two things are the principle Ornaments of
a City. The Court, and Temple. In the former judgment is administered. In the
Temple religious worship is performed. The first he says is of pure gold: for
in the new Heaven and in the new Earth shall dwell righteousness, not in
civil contracts, or distribution of civil goods, which then shall cease: but
because in the most sweet converse of the Saints, unrighteousness shall have
no place. He says not that he saw a Temple of gold in the City, for had he
so said, it had bin no great matter: seeing Solomon's Temple did glister with
pure gold within, by which splendour the magnificence of Christ's spiritual
Kingdom was figured out. Therefore he says: I saw no temple therein: whereby
he distinguishes this Heavenly City, from the Earthly Jerusalem, in which
there was a glorious Temple dedicated to Gods worship. But in the Celestial
Jerusalem John saw no temple: for here is no need of a place for Church
gatherings, preaching of the word, administration of Sacraments, Rites, and
outward excercises of Religion: God is externally worshipped only in this life.
Ier. 31.34.
because the Ecclesiastical Ministry shall be no more, neither shall God be
served with external worship, the which in this life he requires of us, to the
end he may be honored of us, and our weakness and piety sustained by these
outward helps: for then all rule, authority and power (both Ecclesiastical
and Political) shall be abolished, 1 Cor. 15.24. Then shall the Oracle of
Jeremy be fullfilled: And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and
every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for we shall all from the least
unto the greatest be fully ((...)) taught of God. And therefore no use of a
temple.

For the Lord God] Least it should be thought that this City should want so
necessary an Ornament (for what City can be perfect without a temple, and
Gods worship?) he shows that God himself and the Lamb shall be for a
temple unto it: However therefore it has no Temple of stone, Marble, or gold,
yet it shall not be destitute of a temple, or perform no worship unto God: for
God himself and the Lamb shall be the temple of it. And as now God is
worshipped and praised with Hymns and spiritual Songs in Temples: So then all
the Saints shall exult in God himself, and in the Lamb himself, with
eternal praises, Jubilees, and Songs. For then God shall be all in all:
because he shall fill all things with joy and with his majesty. Then shall the
Saints worship before God, and rejoice in him without ceasing from one Sabbath
unto another, Isa. 66.23. Rev. 7.25.
as above he said: They shall stand before the throne, serving God day and
night in his temple: which temple is here showed not to be material, but God
himself, the meaning is: In his temple, for, in God himself, who shall be a
temple unto them.

Mention also was made of the Celestial Temple in Chap. 11. ver. 1. and Chap.
15. ver. 5. But that temple was only visionall, shadowing out the
Church-Militant. Notwithstanding that in Chap. 11. ver. 19. And the temple of
God was opened in Heaven, we applied not unfitly to the Triumphant-Church,
because it was the end of the third Vision touching the Catastrophe of all
calamities.

In that he jointly makes God and the Lamb to be that one temple of the
Saints, XLIII. Argument of Christ's Deity.
it is a clear Argument of Christ's Deity. For if Christ be the temple of all
the Saints, of necessity He must be immense, omnipotent, and infinitely good,
as God himself.

Now hence again their opinion is overthrown, who interpret these things of
the glory of the Church-Militant. For neither the Church during her warfare in
this life, can no more be without a Temple or Church gathering, then to want
the outward ministry it self.

23. And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moone] He expounds
what in ver. 11. he had said touching the light of the City. In this life no
City can subsist without the light of the Sun and Moon. But our City shall
need neither: because it shall enjoy a far greater light: the glory of God
himself and of the Lamb, that is, that unapprochable light, in which God
dwells.

He does not say that it shall have no Sun, 1. Tim. 6.16
nor Moon, but that it shall not need them to shine in it: closely intimating,
that then indeed these lights shall be (for neither shall the New Heaven be
deprived of the ornament of the brightest stars, which are now so glorious in
this present Firmament, yea according to that of Isaias, Isa. 30.26.
the light of the Moon shall be like the light of the Sun, that now is, and the
light of the Sun shall be seven times more bright) but then they shall not serve
for use of light, as now. For there shall be no need of a created light, when the
increated light, Gods immense majesty shall enlighten us. Wherefore even as now
the greater light does obscure the lesser: so then the glory of God shall
darken the light of the Sun and Moon. Therefore the whole City shall shine
continually with the immense light of divine majesty, being subject to no
change of days and nights, which now the continual risings and fallings of
the Sun and Moon do effect, so as there is no City in the whole world, no
not under the Pole, which has always light. For although the Polarie Regions
have the light of the Sun six months: yet afterward the Sun going under the
Horizon, they are as many months in darkness.

And the Lamb is the light thereof] In the light also he joins the Lamb unto
God, to show that the majesty and glory of both is equal. For however the
Lamb in respect of his most glorious flesh shall be under God: Notwithstanding
in the majesty of his Deity, he shall be that one light of the City, with the
Father and the Holy Ghost.

Furthermore this place cannot be applied unto the Church Militant. For she
shall need and enjoy the light of the Sun and Moon, all the time of her
warfare in this life.

But the contrary opinion appears rather to be confirmed, Isa. 24.23.
because all this seems to be taken out of the Prophecy of Isaias touching the
illumination of the New Church under Christ's Kingdom in this Life: Then the
Moon shall be confounded, Isa. 60.19
and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount Sion, and in
Jerusalem. And afterward: The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither
for brightness shall the Moon give light unto thee: but the Lord shall be
upon thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. Thy Sun shall no more
go down, neither shall thy Moon withdraw it self: for the Lord shall be
thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended.

I ANSWER: We must indeed confess, that the Prophet speaks of excellent
graces, and of a glorious light of doctrine and knowledge that shall be under
Christ's Kingdom in the Church of the New Testament, which light shall excel
the shadows of the types of the Old Testament, like as the glory of God
himself surpasses the Sun and Moon: so it is said figuratively: The Sun
shall shine no more in thee: nor the Moon give light any longer unto thee:
because Jehovah shall be thy light for ever: for: the shadows and types of
Sacrifices and Burnt-Offerings shall be no more: because Christ being exhibited
(who is as it were the Sun of righteousness) the New Church shall shine most
gloriously beyond the Old, in the knowledge of the Gospel, and the mysteries
of God, by the pouring forth of the light of Gods Spirit upon all flesh.

But we deny, that this is the full sense of these Prophesies. For the Prophets
almost in all their Oracles touching Christ's Kingdom, prophecy not only of
the Inchoation, but also of the Consummation of the glory thereof. Otherwise
the fulfilling but of very few of them could be showed in this Life. And this
chiefly bewitcheth the Jews: in that they seek and expect a literal
accomplishment of the Prophesies touching the Kingdom of the Messiah, in this
world: not observing that the Prophets with the beginnings of this Life, in
which the glory of Christ's Kingdom is only begun, join also the full
accomplishment which shall be at last in the life to come. Therefore the Oracles
of Isaias touching the abolishing of the light of the Sun and Moon, although
they be now figuratively fulfilled: yet the literal accomplishment thereof
shall be at last in the Church gloriously reigning in Heaven: And therefore they
are rightly applied unto the illumination of this City in Heaven.

Neither are the Arguments for this opinion obscure in the Prophesies
themselves. For says the Prophet: Jehovah shall be upon thee an everlasting
light. But Everlastingnesse is not of this Life. He says also: The days of
thy mourning shall be ended. Now the mourning of the Church shall not be ended in
this Life: but in the Church-Triumphant, where God will wipe away all tears
from our eyes, there, I say, shall be no longer mourning, nor cry, nor death,
nor sorrow, as in ver. 4.

24. And the Nations that were saved] Thus much of the building and glory of
the City: Now also he speaks of the Citizens, who they shall be, what good
things they shall enjoy: and who shall be kept out of the same.

For the first, he says, that the INHABITANTS of this City shall be, THE
NATIONS THAT ARE SAVED: consisting not only of the common people, but Kings
also: for he says: Kings shall walk in the light of it, that is, shall
eternally enjoy the glorious presence and majesty of God: How the nations are
the City and Citizens.
And the Kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor into this City.

Here first it is demanded if this City be the glorified Church, how then
are the Nations distinguished from the same, seeing the Nations that are saved,
are nothing else but the Church it self?

I ANSWER: The order of the Vision is to be observed: for seeing he saw the
glorified Church under the form of a City: it was convenient that he should
see also some Inhabitants of the City. Although therefore the saved of the
Nations be the Church it self: Notwithstanding he does not unfitly distinguish
the Church taken collectively; from the Church it self distributively
considered: for thus also an Earthly City may be collectively considered, as a
Commonweal or community of Citizens: and distributively as many, or particular
Citizens. Add to this, that the Nations are not the whole City: for the Elect
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Jews belong also unto the same.

Secondly it may be demanded how the Kings should bring their glory into this
Heavenly City, seeing all Authorities, Kingdoms, 1. Cor. 15.42 How kings
shall bring their glory into the heavenly Jerusalem.
and Powers shall then be put down: and that there shall be no Kings then: and
that in the Heavenly City, no earthly thing can be brought: Lastly, seeing all
shall rather receive their glory there, then bring any into it? Which seems to
be the chiefest argument of them who hold that here is intended not the
Heavenly, but the Earthly glory of the CHURCH in this Life. The Answer is easy.

First, we are to note that this verse also is taken out of Isai. 60.3. And the
Gentiles, says he, shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of
thy rising: the which is spoken indeed of the conversion of the Gentiles and
Heathenish Kings. But, as before I said, that whole Oracle speaks not only
of the inchoated glory of the Church in this Life, but with the beginning
joins the full accomplishment thereof that shall be in the Heavens: as there it
evidently appears in ver. 11.18.19.21. Wherefore that place is to be applied
unto the Heavenly City, not as it began in this Life, but as it shall be at
last consummated in the life to come. And the meaning is, that then that oracle
shall truly and perfectly be fulfilled, when as the Nations that are saved,
shall walk perfectly in the light of Jehovah: And that the KINGS also who in
this life have brought their glory and honor into the Church, that is,
subjected themselves unto Christ, shall enjoy the same light for ever and ever.

Therefore he intends not as if then there should be any Earthly Kings, to
bring their earthly glory into heaven (for we shall al be Kings and Priests to
God) but that the Kings which now bring their glory to Christ, shall together
with the Nations walk in the light. This sense is confirmed by the Participle
(...) Saved. So that then they shall be saved already, and not afterward, Romans
8.24.
as yet being in this life. I confess we are saved also in this life, but it
is in hope. But then they shall be saved in deed: because they shall walk in the
Everlasting light.

Thirdly also it may be demanded, How the kings of the earth are joined unto
the inhabitants of the heavenly Jerusalem.
seeing hitherto in the Revelation the Kings of the Earth are called for the
most part enemies of Christ, and followers of Antichrist, Chap. 6.15. and
16.14. and 17.1.18. and 18.3.9. and 19: 19. How they should here be reckoned
among the Inhabitants of the Heavenly City.

ANSWER: They are here called Kings of the Earth, not that they shall be Kings
when they enter into this City, but because sometimes they were such. For in
Chap. 17.16. it appears, that some (if not all) of the ten Kings of the earth
which had given their power unto the Beast, should desert the Beast, eat the
flesh of the whore, and burn her with fire: therefore some of them shall be
converted unto the Lamb, and with the Nations that are saved shall walk in
the light of this City.

25. The signs of assured peace.
And the gates of it shall not be shut] This is the Second Part, viz. the
felicity and firm peace of the Citizens: the which while Cities enjoy they
flourish in riches and glory: but the peace, tranquillity, and security of this
City shall be perfect and perpetual.

This he shows by two signs: One is,, because the gates shall not be shut by
day. But thou will say, the gates of our Cities also are not shut by day. It is
so indeed in time of peace: but in war, the enemy besieging a City, and
laboring to break in, of necessity the gates must be shut, that the Citizens
may be preserved from hostile invasion. But the gates of the City on high shall
not be shut by day, but always stand open: to signify that there shall be no
danger of adversaries, but everlasting peace to the Citizens thereof.

For there shall be no night there] This is the other sign of their everlasting
peace. For in the night while the Citizens sleep, the gates are shut, least
they should be set upon unawares in the dark. There shall be no night: because
the glory of God shall expel the darkness by everlasting light, so that the
rising, or setting of the Sun or Moon shall not cause night or darkness.
Therefore the Citizens shall never sleep, or shut their gates for fear of
danger. These things being spoken after the manner of men, do in some sort
shadow out unto us that eternal security and peace, which we shall enjoy in
Heaven.

To this also is applied out of Isaias, the 11. ver. of the said 60. Chap.
(though there spoken in a sense somewhat different from what it is here)
Therefore thy gates shall be open continually, they shall not be shut day nor
night, that they may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles, and their
Kings may be brought: where is signified another cause of not shutting the
gates, then here. Here it shall be of security: There for the exercising of
spiritual trading night and day, that is, for the gathering of all Nations,
and the Kings of the Nations unto Christ's kingdom; Therefore the gates shall
not be shut, that is, no man shall be kept out of the Church: but they shall
always stand open, that is, all men shall be called unto the Church by the
preaching of the Gospel. Whence it is evident, that the Prophecy there
speaks properly of the state of the Church-Militant: and that the same is
here applied unto the security of the Church-Triumphant.

26. And they shall bring the glory and honor of the Nations unto it] What in
ver. 24. he had said of the Kings only, he extends unto all Nations, viz. that
hither they should bring their glory and honor. They shall bring the glory of
the Nations, for, the Nations shall bring their glory. By an Hebraism, he names
the GLORY AND HONOR OF THE NATIONS, for the Nations that shall be glorified,
which then shall walk in the light of this City.

Which again makes nothing for the Church-Militant, unto which indeed the
Nations do bring their glory, that is, subject their wealth, Cities, Provinces,
and Kingdoms to Christ. But by doing of it in this life, they also bring the
same unto the Heavenly City: because for this Earthly glory they shall receive
Heavenly glory.

Now this also is taken out of Isa. 6. ver. 11. and therefore is to be applied
in the same sense as the former, unto the Celestial City.

27. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth] This is
the Third: who are to be kept out of the City, as enemies and unworthy
Inhabitants: who on the contrary are to be admitted, as worthy dwellers.

There are three sorts of men to be kept out: Defiled ones, Workers of
abomination, and Liars, they being such, as in ver. 8. he had said should be
cast into the Lake of Fire: namely, the fearful, unbeleeving, murderers,
whoremongers, sorcerers, Idolaters, and all liars: Of whom we there spoke:
neither is the reason obscure, why these should have no entrance: for all such
persons are excluded out of the kingdom of God in this life, by the express
voice of the Gospel: Be not deceived: 1. Cor. 6.9.
neither Fornicatours, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor
abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards,
nor revisers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Romans 2.16
Because therefore Christ will judge according to the Gospel of Paul, all
these shall not only be kept out of the Heavenly City, but also by the Judge
his sentence be cast into the lake of fire.

Now this also is contrary to the opinion touching the Church-Militant: for
much defilement enters in it, and many dregs have as yet their influence there:
forasmuch as the Church of the called is a Field mixed with wheat and tares, a
floor containing chafe and wheat, a not drawing good and bad fish. But the
purity and perfect cleanness of this City, altogether agrees to the state of
the Saints in Heaven.

But they which are written in the Lambs Book of Life] That is, the elect
only, and faithful that are borne again in this life shall enter into the City
above. See our Exposition on Chap. 3.5. and 13.8. and 17.8. and 20.15.

CHAPTER XXII. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis.
THe Heavenly City he further commends by the River of living water running
through it, and by the tree of Life, always bearing fruit, and standing in
the midst of the street, and on either side of the River: Lastly by the Seat of
God and the Lamb in the same, as also by the happiness and eternal glory of
the Inhabitants thereof. At length he concludes the whole Prophecy by a short
recapitulation of the things hitherto spoken, and by the commendation of much
profit thence flowing unto the godly, as also by establishing the inviolable
Authority of this Book.

The Parts therefore are two. THe former ends the description of the
Celestial City, in the first five Verses. The latter is a conclusion of the
Prophecy, thence unto the end.


In the former are four commendations of the City. I. The pleasantness, by
the running River: the excellency whereof he commends both by the purity of
the waters, as also by its original, ver. 1. A River of water, etc. proceeding
out of the throne, etc. II. The fruitfulness and abundance of necessaries from
the tree of life: whose seat or place he first describes: In the midst of the
street, and of either side of the River, ver. 2. Secondly he commends the fruit
both from the abundance: It bears twelve manner of fruits: as also, from its
continual bearing: Every month. Thirdly he praises the leaves by the
excellency of their effects: for healing, etc. III. The purity and majesty of
the City: both by removing of all corrupting causes: There shall be no curse
in it, ver. 3. Neither night or darkness, ver. 5. as also by an exposition of
the great majesty, because it shall be the throne of God and the Lamb: and
because his servants shall serve this great majesty, ver. 3. IV. The eternal
felicity of the Citizens. This he sets forth by four degrees. 1. By the sight
of God. 2. By the name of God written in their foreheads. ver. 4. 3. By divine
illumination. 4. By the everlasting Kingdom, ver. 5.


In the latter part, (which is a very Patheticall conclusion, respecting the
commendation of the Prophecy:) three persons are brought in speaking one after
another, every one almost twice, viz. The Angel: the Lord Jesus, and John.

The Angel first commends unto John the dignity of this Prophecy, ver. 6. And
he said to me, these sayings. Rendering two Reasons: 1. The authority of the
Revealer: The Lord of the Holy Prophets, etc. 2. The truth of the matter
revealed: these sayings are faithful: and from the time: which must shortly
be done, ibid.

The Lord Jesus (first promising his coming shortly) commends the Prophecy
by its saving effect: Behold I come quickly, Blessed is he that keeps, etc.

John setting down his name, repeateth his error in worshipping of the Angel,
and the Angels forbidding him to do it, ver. 8.9. I John, etc.

The Angel in the second place forbids John to keep this Prophecy secret, ver.
10. Seal not: adding a twofold reason. 1. From the certainty, because the
time is short, ibid. 2. From a twofold effect: one hurtful, accidentary: It
shall provoke the wicked to wrath, ver. 11. He that is unjust, let him be
unjust: the other saving and proper: which shall confirm them that are
righteous and holy: He that is righteous, etc.

Again the Lord Jesus by proclaiming his coming to be at hand (ver 12. Behold
I come quickly) commends the Prophecy (ver. 14. Blessed are they that, etc.)
by diverse Arguments: 1. From the end of his coming, ver. 12. My reward is with
me to give to every man, etc. 2. From his eternity and constancy, ver. 13. I
am Alpha and Omega. 3. From the profitable effect of the Prophecy. ver. 14.
Blessed are, etc. that they may have right, etc. 4. From the hurtful effect of
wicked contemners, ver. 15, For without shall be dogs. 5. From his singular
good will to the Churches, to whom he would have the Prophecy revealed. This
he sets forth by an Apostrophe ver. 16. I Jesus have sent: and by titles proper
to himself, I am the root, etc. 6. By an argument from the less: the Spirit,
and the Spouse (the Church Triumphant) desire my coming, therefore every
faithful man in the Church-Militant ought to learn from this Prophecy much
more to long after the same, ver. 17. And let him that hears say come, etc.
This he amplifies by the profitablenesse: Let him take water: and by the
facility, let him take it freely. 7. From the inviolable authority of this
Book, unto which no man upon pain of damnation may add, or take ought
therefrom, ver. 18.19. For I testify, etc. He concludes with a repitition of
the promise of his sudden coming: Surely I come quickly, and closes up all
with Amen, ver. 20.

John applauds, or earnestly wishes the same: Even so come Lord Jesus: and
wishes the grace of the Lord Jesus to all the Churches, and Saints, ver. 21.
The grace of Our Lord, etc.

CHAPTER. XXII. The Former Part of the CHAPTER. Four Commendations of the
Celestial City.
1. And he showed me a pure River of water of life, clear as Crystal,
proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb.

2. In the midst of the street of it, and of either side of the River, was
there the tree of Life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her
fruit every month: and the leaves of the tree were for the healing (or health)
of the Nations.

3. And there shall be no more curse, but the Throne of God, and of the Lamb
shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him.

4. And they shall see his Face, and his Name shall be in their Foreheads.

5. And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, neither light of
the Sun, for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever
and ever.

THE COMMENTARY.
AND he showed me a pure River] He goes on to celebrate the excellencies of the
Heavenly City, by attributing unto it all whatsoever may be required unto the
necessity, pleasure, and happiness of any Earthly City, that under these
types we might in some measure learn to conceive in our minds, and long after
that unspeakable glorious blessedness, which is laid up for us in Heaven.

To the necessity of a City belongs the having of healthful and potable
waters. The pleasantness of the City.
Unto commodiousnesse to have navigable waters. Unto pleasantness to have
Rivers running through the midst of the streets. Hence the Citizens have
cleannes, refreshing, much profit, and delight.

All these things are here in our City, even in a perfect and full degree. For
it has not a Cisterne, or Well, or one Fountain of water to drink off, but a
whole River: not muddie, but most pure, like unto clear Crystal, not of
corruptible water, but of living water, not running down from the Mountains,
whence Rivers take their original, but proceeding out of the Throne of God and
the Lamb: not running about the walls without, but watering the Market and
Streets within: I pray what can be imagined more pleasant and beautiful then
this City? who would not desire to be a dweller therein.

But here we are not to mind any thing Earthly. For thus God speaks to us as
to children, and by earthly things which seem most fair and pleasant unto us,
he in some measure shadoweth out the pleasantness of Heavenly things.

It seems indeed to be in some kind an allusion unto the Earthly Paradise,
which was watered by the River coming out of Eden running through the midst of
it, and divided into four heads. But that River was not clear as Crystal,
but drawing filth along with it, neither was it of living water, but
corruptible, neither did it proceed out of the throne of God and the Lamb, but
out of Eden: namely Euphrates, which is yet to this day in Mesopotamia and
Babylon. Therefore the elegancy of the Earthly Paradise is nothing to the
pleasantness of this Celestial City.

It is also an Allusion unto Ezechiels waters, Chap. 47.1. whence the
description of this is taken in a great part. Allusion unto Ezechiels Waters.
But those waters do not equal the praises of this River. The difference in
special is, that the waters in Ezech. came out of the Temple. But this River
not so, (for the City had no Temple) but out of the throne of God and the Lamb.

The reason of the diversity is this, Their diversity.
that the Vision of Ezechiel sets forth the state of the Church-Militant, under
Christ's Kingdom in this Life: and by the type of waters flowing out of the
temple he shadows out the doctrine of the Gospel, by which Christ (signified
by the temple) should savingly water the whole world. Here is typed out the
state of the Church-Triumphant after this life, whose Chrystaline River shall
proceed no longer out of the temple, but immediately out of the throne of God
and the Lamb. Now this most pure River of living water (above in Chap. 20.6.
called the Fountain of living water, and in Chap. 7.17. in the plural,
Fountains of living water, in the same sense) that is, not only always
flowing, but also preserving eternal life, is nothing else, but the full
knowledge of God, which the Faithful shall have, not by the Ecclesiastical
Ministry, as now: but by the immediate Vision of God himself and of the
Lamb: as also the unutterable purity, consolation, joy, and life, which the
Elect shall enjoy by eternal familiarity with God, Christ, and the Holy Angels.

By the River, ANDREAS understands the washing of Regeneration or Baptism:
but Baptism shall have no place in the Celestial Jerusalem. Therefore he
more fitly adds: that this River of God, which abundantly waters Jerusalem
above, is the holy Ghost, which proceeds from the throne of God the Father
through the Lamb. God therefore shall immediately vivifie the Elect, and shed
forth upon them his own light, righteousness, joy, and life, through the Holy
Ghost, which proceeds from the Father and the Son.

2. And in the midst of the street of it, and of either side] Thus much of the
pleasantness of the City: Now follows the fruitfulness and abundance of all
things necessary to livelihood, and health of the Citizens. Commonly Cities
have their livelihood and gain by handicrafts, commerce, navagation, tilling
of the ground, fruitfulness, and increase. Our City shall be enriched with the
tree of life, the Gr. (...) Wood, by a Synecdoche is put for a Tree.

Of Life] For, vivifying, conferring and preserving life, unto them that eat
thereof: such a tree stood in the midst of Paradise, but might not be touched.
This stands in the midst of the street of the City, kept from none, but all
have free access unto the same. For though it be but one (O wonder) yet it
stands on either side of the river: therefore some do think there were more
trees of this kind standing here and there: because in Ezech. Chap. 47.7. (unto
which he apparently alludeth) mention is made of many trees planted on the side
of the stream. There is but one tree of life.
But this tree is one standing in the midst of the street, and on either side
of the River: because the River runs through the midst of the street: and
because this one tree with his leaves and roots is on both sides of the River,
so as there is no want on either side. And that it is to be understood of one
Tree, the type teaches: for there was but one Tree of Life in the midst of
Paradise, Rev. 2.7.
which shadowed out the tree here: Hence Christ said before: To him that
overcommeth, I will give to eat of the tree of Life, which is in the midst of
the Paradise of God. Hence also it follows that this tree is only one, and
that the street of the Heavenly City is the Paradise of God. Furthermore this
tree of life is Christ himself, the Fountain and Author of our life: for he is
the bread of life, Ioh. 6.51. the water of life, Ioh. 4.7. the Resurrection and
Life it self, Ioh. 11. and 14. He stands by the River, because he never
withers, or is fruitless. For a tree planted by the Rivers of waters is
always green and fructifies. Psalm. 1.3.
Now Christ alone is sufficient for life unto all: for all the Elect he
immediately does quicken for ever and ever. Therefore the Tree is one. Ezechiel
saw more trees on the sides of the stream of the Church-Militant, because
howsoever Christ only vivifies the same in this life also, notwithstanding he
works and communicates life unto the Elect by manifold ways or means.

Bearing twelve manner of fruits] That is, always plentiful (whether of one
sort of fruit or diverse) so as there shall be no want at any time: therefore
he adds: Every month yielding fruit: A year has twelve months. This tree
therefore brings forth twelve times a year, yielding fresh fruit every month.
The like tree was never seen, Poets commend the Gardens of Alcinous, Homer.
lib. 7. Odyss. Lib. 18. c. 17
and Semiramis, etc. For yielding fruit twice a year: and Pliny the Country
of Babylon where were two harvests in one year: but under heaven there is no
place yielding monthly fruit.

Now this continual fruit is nothing else but that perpetual joy, What this
perpetual fruit is. Ioh. 15.16.
by which (as by a most delightful fruit of faith) the Elect are fed in
eternal glory through the continual presence of God and the Lamb. The first
fruits and taste whereof we indeed have in this life according to the promise of
Christ: I have ordained you that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that
your fruit should remain: but these fruits are shaken by diverse tentations and
tempests of failings, yea and sometime do fade: and are again renewed and
increased. But then our fruit shall always remain from the first month unto
the last, that is, eternally: viz. when we shall eat bread with Christ in the
Kingdom of his Father.

But let us remember that this fruit is prepared for such only as conquer, as
in Chap. 2.7. To him that overcommeth will I give to eat of the tree of life,
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. Wherefore until we fully enjoy
this fruit, we must fight courageously and overcome in this life.

And the leaves were for the healing] The leaves also have a medicinal use for
to preserve the health of the Nations, whereas the leaves of other trees fade,
fall, and perish: but this tree is always green with leaves. Thou may say,
to what end, seeing in Heaven is no disease, no sickness? He says not to
recover health, but to preserve health: Not as if the Saints should feed on
these leaves (the fruits are sufficient unto a blessed life) but the Metaphor
signifies that nothing of this tree shall be un-usefull, but wholly serve to
the preservation of life and happiness.

This also is taken out of Ezech. 47.12. Whose leaf shall not fade, neither
shall the fruit thereof be consumed, it shall bring forth new fruit according
to his months, because their waters issued out of the Sanctuary, and the fruit
thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf thereof for medicine.

Notwithstanding it does not hence follow that these leaves serve to cure the
diseases of the Nations, or repair their health. For it is manifest that
Ezechiel speaks of the state of the Church-Militant, yet subject to many
diseases and troubles. Wherefore by the leaves he understands the Gospel,
under which as it were is covered a healing fruit, The leaves of the tree of
life what they are.
satiating all Nations. But here he describes the state of the
Church-Triumphant, in which neither sickness, nor medicine have any place.

BRIGHTMAN urges that of the Nations: whereas in the life to come there shall
be no difference betwixt Jews and Gentiles.

But neither does the Angel make this difference: but he calls the Elect
Saints, the Nations, because formerly they were Gentiles: alluding unto what he
had said Chap. 21.24. The Nations of them which were saved, shall walk in the
light of it: and ver. 26. They shall bring the glory and honor of the Nations
unto it.

3. AND THERE SHALL BE NO MORE CVRSE] He further amplifies the majesty of the
City, and happiness of the Citizens. The contrary whereof he removes. There
shall be no curse, Gr. (...). And opposes the formal cause: But the Seat of
God and the Lamb shall be in it. The Copulative (...) (And) Beza renders by the
Adversitive But: but it seems rather to be put for the causall (...) because
the throne of God is in her: not suffering any curse. And amplifies it from the
Correlate: and his servants serve him: unto which he annexeth the happiness of
the servants: And they shall see his face, etc. This is the sum of the things
remaining.

Curse] Greek. The exposition of Anathema.
(...) or (...), or (...), as some Copies read it, is twofold, says Andreas:
FIRST it is taken for that which is consecrated to God alone, and might not be
meddled with by the promiscuous multitude, as being things devoted to God.
SECONDLY, for that which is not lawful to be put to holy services, or touched
by any creature, as being devoted to the devil, and it is called a cursed or
execrable thing: Hebr. (...). The latter is understood in this place, of a
thing devoted to the devil, and with him subject to condemnation, as being
profane, and to be troad under foot. Such kind of Curse or Katanathema shall
be no more, to wit, as formerly it had been. He understands the Dragon,
Beast, Whore, False-Prophet, Locusts, Sin, Death, Sorrow, Torment, and
whatsoever is adverse to Gods majesty, and the felicity of the Church. Indeed
all kind of Curse shall be in the Lake of fire with the Dragon, Beast,
False-Prophet, and all other reprobates: but no curse shall be in the
Celestial City, or any thing to oppose the majesty of God, or disturb the
joy of the Saints: There, I say, shall be full freedom from all evil.

BEZA expresses the Emphasis of the compound (...), Katanathema.
thus: Neither shall there be any more anathema ((...)) against any man: making
the sense, that then the Church shall be without all spot or wrinkle, from
which it cannot in this life be wholly purged. Thus it should note the absolute
purity of the Church in glory: of which also before: Nothing that defiles
shall in any wise enter into it. Both senses do agree: and lead us to
understand these things of the state of the Church-Triumphant. For of the
Church in this life it cannot yet be said that no curse or (...) is in it. It
is true that Zachary in Chap. 14. ver. 11. says, that in the Church of the
New Testament, there should be no (...) Curse, or devoted thing: but he
understands it finally, or of the consummated state of the Church in Heavenly
glory.

But the Throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it] This shall be the
removing cause of all curse from the City: because it shall be filled with the
majesty of God and of the Lamb, which consumes all pollution and averse
power, as fire does the stubble. For our God is a consuming fire, to wit,
Deutr. 4.8.
consuming all (...) things cursed, devoted. Therefore he says: The Seat or
Throne of God shall be in it, that is, God will dwell, reign, and reside
there, as it were in his Royal Palace: which is spoken (...) after the manner
of men. For by the Seat is noted either the place of abode or government.
Before he had said: Chap. 21.3
He shall have his tabernacle with them. Seeing therefore the King of kings
shall fill the City with majesty, certainly neither defilement, nor hostility
shall have any place there. Thus we see that this most holy City of God shall
be contrary to the Great City where the Whore, Beast, Dragon, and all ungodly
men had their Seat.

In that again he places God and the Lamb on the same throne, XLIV. Argument
of Christ's Deity.
he manifestly confirms that the divinity and majesty of both is alike. For
two Vnaequals cannot sit in the same Seat. He confirms also the unity of both,
by what follows; And his servants shall serve him: for the Relative (...) HIS
and HIM is referred neither to GOD alone, nor to the LAMB alone, but to both
as one.

By the servants of God and the Lamb, he understands the Holy Angels and
blessed Saints, who standing before the throne do serve him day and night, as
in Chap. 7.15. that is, are ready with all reverence, alacrity, and joy to do
his Commandments, and perform most acceptable services according to his will,
not that God needs their service, but that they may partake of his majesty.
This shall be a part of our glory and happiness: 1. Kin. 10.8 2. Chr. 9.7.
for if the Queen of the South said truly of Solomon's servants: Blessed are
thy men, and blessed are thy servants, who stand before thee always hearing
thy wisdom, etc. then much more ought we to count the servants of God
blessed, who stand before the throne, beholding his face without ceasing.
Therefore it follows.

4. And they shall see his face] Christ speaking of the Angels blessedness,
says: The happiness of the Citizens. Mat. 18.10
They always behold the face of my father in Heaven. The same thing the Holy
Ghost attributes to all Gods servants, namely, to be always before God. By the
face of God is meant by an Anthropopatheia the majesty and glory of God. Now
how we shall see him, whither with our minds only, being most fully enlightened
with the knowledge of God, or whither also with our corporal eyes we shall
behold the invisible majesty of God in the glorious face of Christ, it is not
for us to determine. It suffices to know the thing it self, that we shall see
God and the Lamb, and that this shall be our unspeakable blessedness, Mat.
5.8. 1. Ioh. 3.2. Heb. 12.14
according as it is said: Blessed are the pure in heart: because they shall see
God: And: When he shall appear, we shall be like him, ((...)) because we shall
see him as he is. And: follow peace and holiness, without which no man shall
see God, that is, no man shall obtain Heavenly blessedness without the same.
Let us willingly be ignorant of the manner of seeing him, until we know it by
experience: Thom. 4. qu. 92.
wherefore we pass by these Questions of Schoolmen: Whither we shall see God
through his essence? whither with the bodily eye? whither by seeing God, we
shall see all things which God sees? and the like, as too curious and high for
us.

And his Name shall be in their foreheads] The Relative (...) His, is again
referred to God and the Lamb. Therefore the Name of both is the same. Before
also Christ writing to the Churches of Pergamus and Philadelphia, promised that
this should be a part of their happiness, Rev. 2.17. and 3.12.
to have his Name written on them that overcome: and of this John says Chap.
19.12. No man knew it but himself. This Name says he shall be written in
their foreheads, by which some do understand the public profession,
wherewith we shall always praise God and the Lamb: Others take it, to be the
Saints participating of the divine nature, wisdom, life, power, joy, and
glory. It seems to be an allusion unto the Character of the Beast, imprinted
on the right hand and forehead of Reprobates. Now that, what was it but a note
of propriety, that they did properly belong to the Beast? On the contrary
therefore the Name written in the foreheads of the Saints, what shall it be,
but a mark of propriety, that we shall be consecrated to the service and
praising of God and the Lamb for ever and ever.

5. And there shall no be night there] What before he said of the light of the
City, he now applies to the happiness of the Inhabitants. The darkness of
the night is sad: and though it in some measure be supplied by lights and
Candles, yet they cause troublesome vapors and smoke: neither do they give
light any great distance. Therefore we stand in need of the Sun or Daylight.
But the servants of God shall not then want any of these things. For there
shall be no night: and therefore no use of lights: no not of the light of the
Sun it self: because the Lord God shall enlighten them with the brightness
of his majesty: as before he said: Chapter 21.23.
The glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof: and the
Nations which are saved shall walk in the light of it.

And they shall reign for ever and ever] This shall be the very height of our
glory in Heaven, that we shall reign with God and the Lamb for ever more.
Now indeed Christ has made us Kings and Priests to God and the Father, but our
Kingdom is yet hid in Christ. But then the Kingdom of God shall be manifested
in our selves. Now is the Kingdom of grace: then it shall be of glory. Before in
Chap. 20. ver. 4. they that were beheaded, reigned with Christ a thousand
years. Then we shall all of us reign with Christ for ever and ever: and this
is that which he there added in ver. 6. touching the rest having part in the
first Resurrection: They shall reign with him a thousand years: See the
exposition there. Now we shall so reign, as that God and the Lamb shall be the
head of the Kingdom.

But shall not the Son then deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, 1. Cor. 15.28
and be subject to him? Yea verily: but this he shall not do by laying down
the Kingdom, and so cease to reign, (For how should the King of kings, and
Lord of lords, of whose Kingdom there is no end, Luke 1.33.
ever cease to reign?) but by changing the present and mediate form of the
Kingdom into an immediate, and by abolishing all the adversaries of the
Kingdom: as we have elsewhere declared.

The Second Part of the CHAPTER. The Conclusion, asserting the profitablenesse
and Authority of the whole Prophecy.
6. And he said unto me, These sayings are faithful and true. And the Lord
God of the Holy Prophets sent his Angel, to show unto his servants the things
which must shortly be done. 7. Behold, I come quickly: blessed is he that
keeps the sayings of the Prophecy of this Book. 8. And I John saw these
things, and heard them; And when I had heard and seen, I fell down to worship
before the feet of the Angel, which showed me these things. 9. Then says he
to me, See thou do it not: for I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren
the Prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this Book: worship God.
10. And he says unto me, Seal not the sayings of the Prophecy of this
Book: for the time is at hand. 11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still:
and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let
him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still. 12. And
behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man according
as his work shall be. 13. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the
first and the last. 14. Blessed are are they that do his commandments that
they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates
into the City. 15. For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and
murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie. 16. I Jesus
have sent mine Angel to testify unto you these things in the Churches, I am
the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and morning Star. 17.
And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And let him that hears say, Come. And
let him that is athirst, come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of
life freely. 18. For I testify unto every man that hears the words of the
Prophecy of this Book, if any man shall add unto these things, God shall
add unto him the plagues that are written in this book. 19. And if any man
shall take away from the words of the book of this Prophecy, God shall take
away his part out of the book of Life, and out of the holy City, and from the
things that are written in this book. 20. He which testifies these things,
says, Surely, I come quickly: Amen, Even so, Come Lord Jesus. 21. The grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen.
THE COMMENTARY.
AND he said unto mee] Thus far of two Parts of the Book: the Preface and
the Visions. The third or Conclusion remains, in which somethings, respecting
the Authority of the Book, are taken out of the Preface, and some other things
added, by which the great utilitie and sacred Authority thereof is further
commended, as we showed in the Analysis. After the concluding of this
Revelation, an Angel says unto John, (to wit, one of the Seven pouring out
the Vials, who before showed him the judgment of the whore and the Beast, and
afterward the magnificence of the Heavenly Jerusalem) These words are faithful
and true] That is, not only what was last spoken, but the whole Prophecy, as
Chap. 19.9. This is the Proposition, unto the confirmation whereof the whole
Conclusion respects, that we might believe the Prophecy to be ((...))
Divine, true, profitable, and saving unto the Church, and so be stirred up
unto the continual meditation thereof. The Holy Ghost was not ignorant, that
many would call into Question the divine authority of this Book: for it was a
long while rejected, as being composed by the heretic Cerinthus: which error
we have before confuted in the Prologue. But they ought to have believed the
Angel, saying: These words are faithful and true. Faithful, to which we may
safely give credit. True, which shall certainly be accomplished. And indeed so
it is: for we, who are now more then fifteen hundred years after the
Revelation, do, if not see with our eyes, yet certainly feel as it were with
our hands, the manifest accomplishment almost of all the Visions. Here
therefore we have an evident note of divine authority and truth imprinted on
this Prophecy, against the most impudent assertion of BELLARMINE, Lib. 4 de
verb. cap. 1.
which is, that it can no way be gathered from the Scripture it self: that
some Scripture is divine. What I pray is this? but to give the Angel the lie,
who says: These words are faithful and true. But the liar condemns himself
in saying elsewhere: that, besides other arguments, Lib. 1. cap. 2. de verbo.
the divine authority of Canonical Books of Scripture, may be proved from the
scripture it self.

The Sophisters and adversaries of Scripture object, that this Argument is not
sufficient to Faith, unless it be before proved and believed that the Angel
or Writer, uttering these things, spoke truth.

ANSWER: First principles are not proved, but laid down and believed: because
therefore the Holy Scripture is the principle of Christian belief: with
Christians it needs no proof, but belief.

Secondly, that the scripture is divine, and these words of the Angel true and
faithful, is believed either by divine or humane Faith.

That it may be believed by humane Faith, it can be made out by probable, yea
forcing Arguments, as from the majesty of the matter and style, from the
consent of this Prophecy with other Prophetical Scriptures: But especially
from the truth of the Oracles (which we know for the most part are fulfilled)
touching the woman in travel, and fleeing into the Wilderness, also of the
Beast deceiving the world, of false miracles, of the great whore, making drunk
the Kings of the Earth with the cup of her spiritual fornication, etc. For
this is Bellarmines Argument in the foresaid place: If the praedictions of
Scripture touching future things are true, as the event has proved, why should
not the testimonies of things present be true? And indeed this his saying is
always to be retorted against Popish Sophisters, demanding us: How we know
that the Scriptures are true and divine.

But that any man should believe this with divine Faith cannot possibly be
effected by outward arguments, unless God by his spirit does inwardly persuade
the heart. For divine Faith is not wrought by humane Arguments, but wrought in
the heart by the testimony and power of God.

Lastly, by such kind of cavelling all Authority both of God and man is made a
mock of, and all Faith both of God and men is taken away. For thus Adam,
Abraham, Moses, and the Prophets, who heard God to speak, might have excepted:
Who knows whither it be the voice of God? Thus the Apostles might have shifted
off the authority of Christ, and Ecclesiastical men the authority of the
Apostles: And why then I pray, may not we much more the Authority of the Pope?
Touching humane authorities of Histories and Writers what more easy, then to
object: whence know thou, that Cicero, Aristotle, Pliny, or Livie wrote
these things: or ever had a being in nature? Thus no Faith should be safe, but
a mere (...) or uncertainty shall reign in divine and humane matters: which
Satan labors to effect by these his Instruments. But we go forward.

And the Lord God of the Holy Prophets] He confirms the truth of the
Prophecy from God the Author thereof, the faithfulness and truth of whose
words cannot be questioned. The Copulative ((...)) And, has the force of the
causal ((...)) because. He calls Christ the Revealer of this Prophecy, the
Lord God of the Prophets, as appears by the following words, sent his Angel:
for this Christ did, as in ver. 16. I Jesus have sent my Angel: See also Chap.
1.1. XLV. Argument of Christ's Deity.


This Argument of Christ's Deity is beyond all exception: the which Eniedinus
the Samosatenian (of whom mention has often above bin made) durst not meddle
with. For if Christ be the Lord God of the Holy Prophets: then verily he is the
same true and eternal Jehovah with the Father, who by his spirit stirred up
the ancient Prophets, Moses, David, Isaias, Jeremy, etc. by revealing his
Oracles unto them: therefore he was: yea he was the God of all the Prophets, of
Moses, and Author of the Law. These things considered, who can imagine that
CERINTHUS should write this, which he believed not, but opposed with all his
might.

The difference of the reading is also to be noted, which notwithstanding
lessens not, but confirms the Argument. Andreas, and the Kings Copy for (...)
Of the Holy Prophets: read (...), Of the spirits of the Prophets (and so the
Old Latin Version has it) that is, who of old inspired the Prophets, that is,
Prophetical Revelations. The sense comes all to one. For therefore he is
called the Lord God of the Prophets, because by his divine power he moved them
to Prophecy.

His Angell] That is, Me. For they are the words of the same Angel, who
hitherto did exhibit by Christ's commandment diverse Visions unto John.

That he might show to his servants] These things have been expounded in the
Preface, whence they are taken. And that in special, how at the giving of the
Revelation, such things could be said shortly to come to pass, which yet are
not altogether fulfilled after so many ages.

In a diverse respect he says, they should shortly be done. I. In respect of
eternity, unto which all times are but a moment, which is short. II. In respect
of the beginning, for the Prophecy began soon after it was revealed, and yet
is a fulfilling. III. In regard of the security of men, unto whom all these
things have happened, and yet daily do, quickly, that is, suddenly and
unawares. Now thus the Scripture speaks of all future things, that they shall
shortly be done, Luke 12.45 2. Pet. 3.4
to stir us up to watchfulness and care, least with the wicked servant we
should say: My Lord delayeth his coming: or with mockers, where is the promise
of his coming. And therefore it follows.

7. Behold I come quickly] It is the voice of Christ, the Lord God of the
Prophets. By this acclamation he approves the words of the Angel, that the
things revealed must shortly be done: as if he should say, Indeed they shall
shortly be done, for I come suddenly, or, I will come, to wit, unto judgment,
as in ver. 12. For all these things must be done before I come: but I will come
shortly. Therefore they must shortly be done. They are no Prophesies which shall
not begin to be fulfilled til after many ages: even now they begin. Therefore
now, even now there is need of comfort: 1. These 5.3
or, as before, shortly, that is sooner then men imagine. For when they shall
say, peace and safety, then sudden destruction shall come upon them. This
variation of persons belongs to the form of dramaticall representations, in
which diverse persons use to be brought in speaking.

Blessed is he that keepeth] He commends the Prophecy from its
profitablenesse. Now not only they do keep the sayings of the Prophecy,
which diligently search out the accomplishment of them, but they much more, who
conform their Faith and Life according to the same, who worship not the Beast
and his Image, who detest the whoredoms of the whore, flee out of Babylon, and
lastly who in faith adhere to God and the Lamb. This Argument we have more
largely treated of in the Preface, Chap. 1.3. whence it is taken: Now let it
suffice to note, that blessedness in vain is promised unto the Keepers of the
Revelation, if it could in no measure be kept. But surely it is not promised
in vain, and therefore the Visions of this Book are not so intricate, but
that by diligent meditation and observation, we may in some measure find out
the understanding of them.

8. And I John] John also speaks of the same thing, asserting to us the
certainty of the Prophecy, by the testimony of his senses: because he heard
and saw al things to be so. Now an Eyewitness is worthy of credit, especially
he being a good man, yea an Apostle: whom the Character also here does not
obscurely show to be the Writer: for thus also he confirms the truth of his
Gospel by professing himself to be an Eyewitness and Faithful Disciple of
Jesus Christ. And he that saw it, Ioh. 19.35 and 21.24.
bare record, and his record is true. And afterward: This is that Disciple
which testifies of these things, and wrote these things, and we know, because
his testimony is true.

And when I had heard and seene] Again he records his failing about
worshipping of the Angel, and that the Angel reproved him for the same,
commanding him to worship God only. The same thing fell out Chapter 19.10. see
the Exposition there.

Some may wonder how an Holy Apostle should so suddenly twice stumble at the
same stone. For a little before he heard, that the Angel was his fellow
servant, unto whom to ascribe the honor of adoration, due unto God alone, was
sacrilege: notwithstanding forgetting both his failing and reproof, he again
falls into the same error of vicious worship.

Now what should this teach us, but that such is the infirmity, and
inconsiderateness of the Saints oftentimes in this life, that except they be
sustained by God, they fall not once, but many times even into the same error.

In special it shows the pronenesse of our nature unto Idolatry. For if it
happened unto the Apostle John, that he could not, as it were, abstain from
unlawful worshipping of the creature: what wonder though the Christian world
be wholly fallen to worship Angels and Saints? yet least the world should abuse
John's example to maintain their Idolatry: he not only ingenuously confesses
his failing, but also sets down the Angels reproof, attributing adoration to
God only, that such as fall into the same sin might likewise repent.

9. Worship God] By this thunderbolt the whole Idol-worship of Papists is
dash't, who not content after John's evil example, to worship Angels, fall down
also before dumb Idols, Religious adoration is simply demed unto creatures.
and religiously adore the creature. As for the frivolous cavil of Idolaters,
that the Angel refused not the worship of Duleia, but only of Latreia it is
altogether false: for absolutely without any distinction he removes religious
adoration from himself, saying, (...) Adore God.

Brightman thinks that John did not fall down again to worship the Angel:
but tells what happened before Chap. 19. ver. 10. But the order of the
narration argues the contrary. For John seems as it were to bid the Angel
now farewell, and so in a way of thankfullnes would again thus reverence him.
The words also of the Angel, ver. 9. somewhat differing from his former, do
argue that John would have worshipped him the second time. For before he said:
I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren, that have the testimony of Jesus.
But here: I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the Prophets, and of
them which keep the sayings of this Book. However it be, it is observeable
that he says: I fell down to worship him: therefore he did not yet worship
him: but composed his body to do it: wherefore also his unseemly gesture is by
the Angel reproved. Whence it appears that Idolaters falling down before
Idols, sin grievously, not only in adoration, but also in their idolatrous
gesture it self.

10. And he says unto me: Seal not] Before Chap. 10.4. he was commanded to
Seal the voices of the thunders: here he is forbid by the Angel (for the
word SAYS belongs to the Angel) to seal the words of this Prophecy, which
commands seem to be repugnant: but are not: because they respect diverse times
and objects. He was commanded to Seal the voices of the thunders, and not to
write them, to signify that the Gospel should be despised in Antichrists
Kingdom, as there we expounded. Here he is forbid to Seal, that is, conceal
this Prophecy, but to publish the same, that it might be read and known of
all, least any man under pretense of ignorance should not beware of Antichrist.
Now it is a metaphor taken from Notaries who seal Letters, that every one may
not read them: Or from Booksellers who keep such Books shut with claspes, as
they will not have read, as above we said touching the Book that was shut and
sealed. For Letters and Books that are sealed, and shut, cannot be read and
understood.

Now God used to command the Prophets to Seal their Prophesies, when the
accomplishment of them should be a long while after, so as it was not so
needful for the present to be read. Thus Isaias is commanded to Seal the
Testimony. Isa. 8.16. Dan. 8.26. Dan. 12.4.
And Daniel to shut up the Vision: but thou, says he, shut up the Vision,
because it shall be for many days. And afterward: But thou Daniel, shut up
the words and seal the Book, even to the time of the end: signifying that the
Jewish people should not see those things, which were a long while after to
come to pass under Antichrist. John on the contrary is forbid to shut up his
Prophecy: because the time is at hand, to wit, in which the Prophecy shall
begin to be fullfilled, touching the persecutions of the Christian Church, and
the remedies thereof (as we observed ver. 6.) and therefore this Prophecy was
to be spread abroad that all men might know the same.

If then the Angel commands that this Book be published, and made known to
all, it follows that it ought to be read, understood, and observed by us: and
that we in the diligent reading and meditating on the same, do obey the Angels
praecept. But Antichrist on the contrary commands that this Prophecy, The
reading of holy Scripture ought not to be prohited.
and all the rest of Holy Scriptures remain sealed and shut up, saying, that
they cannot be understood, and forbids all (excepting a few of his Clergy) the
reading thereof, that he may the more securely impose his vile impostures upon
the common people.

11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still] Gr. (...), He that does
injury, etc. He alludes unto the words of the Angel, Dan. 12.10. Many shall be
purified, but the wicked shall do wickedly, etc. some take the words, as a free
permission unto every one to do and live according to his liking, as if he
should say, Let every one do what pleases him best: I will force the will of
no man: Andreas. Ribera.
In the mean while let every one expect an issue, according to his deeds: the
latter indeed of which is agreeable to the scope: but the former brought in to
establish free will is altogether contrary to the scope, and to the nature of
God, who does not freely permit, but expressly forbid us to injury or hurt
others, or to give our selves to filthiness and pollutions. Wherefore it is a
prevention of a secret objection against the Commandment of publishing this
Prophecy. Thou command the Prophecy to be published: but the world will
abuse the publishing thereof. For some hereby will do hurt, that is, be
occasioned to do injury to Christians, as Tyrants and Antichrist, applying to
themselves the Visions touching the Dragon, and Beast, the fall of Babylon, the
judgment of the whore, and her casting into the Lake of sire. Others shall be
filthy, that is, will turn all things unto laciviousnesse of the flesh, and in
hope of going unpunished, will commit all foul iniquities, because they shall
see their judgment to be deferred: wherefore it seems far better that the
Prophecy should be sealed then published.

Unto this care of John the Angel answers: first by a comminatory concession
or grant: He that will hurt, let him hurt still: He that will be filthy, let
him be filthy still: as if he should say: It is true indeed, some from this
Book will take occasion to hurt and do injury: others to be filthy: But what
of that? Let them hurt, let them be filthy to themselves, the mysteries of God
are not therefore to be kept secret. These shall be accidentary effects of the
Book, hurtful to none, but to hurtful and filthy persons. For they shall do
injury and be filthy to their own destruction. So Dan. 12.10. The wicked shall
do wickedly: unto which words our Prophet seems to allude. Therefore they are
not words of permission, or approving of injustice and silthinesse: but of
threatening a secret judgment: because the adversaries of the Church, and
impure swine, being delivered up of God unto a reprobate sense, shall by their
wickedness most of all hurt themselves. This is the first cause of not sealing
the Prophecy.

Secondly he answers by a comfortable promise: He that is righteous let him
be righteous still: He that is holy, let him be holy still: The imperatives
(...). Let him be righteous or justified (for which the Kings Copy has it
(...) Let him do righteousness) and (...) Let him be holy or sanctified, with
the Hebrews have the force of futures, for, (...), they shall be justifiyed and
sanctified still. This is the other reason of not sealing the Prophecy:
because properly it works saving effects in righteous and holy persons: as if
he should say, although the wicked shall wrest this Scripture to their
destruction, yet therefore it is not to be kept secret from the Elect, who by
the promises, exhortations, and consolations thereof, shall be more confirmed in
righteousness, piety, and holiness. This I take to be the natural meaning
of the place.

Here first we may see the twofold and contrary effect of the Scripture and
Doctrines. The twofold effect of Holy Scripture.
For some thereby grow worse and worse to their own hurt: but others are
furthered thereby to Salvation: That indeed by accident, because the wicked
understanding the Scripture corruptly, pervert the same to their destruction.
2. Pet. 3.16 Romans 1.17.
But this by it self, because the Gospel is the doctrine of Salvation to
every one that believes: Wherefore although all are not reformed by our
Doctrine, but that some abuse the Gospel unto laciviousnesse: neither ought we
to be offended: nor yet the wicked to accuse the Gospel as the cause of
wickedness. For so the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles was saving unto
believers: but to the offense and destruction of the dis-obedient, by their
own default. 2. Cor. 2.15
We are, says Paul, unto God a sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved,
and in them that perish: To the one we are the savor of death unto death: but
to the other the savor of life unto life.

Secondly we learn, The Doctrine of justification by faith not to be kept
close because of the abuse thereof.
that the doctrine of the Gospel touching free justification by faith is not
to be past by in silence, because some abuse the same unto licentiousness of
life. For he that is filthy let him be filthy still. Neither is the doctrine of
Praedestination therefore to be past over, because some abuse the same unto
carnal security, others to despair, by saying: If I am praedestinated, I
shall be saved, although I defile my self with all manner of filthiness: If
I am a reprobate, although I labor after holiness, yet I shall be damned.
This is the devils most false and unsavory Logic, or rather calumny, of old
objected against Augustine and Orthodoxe Teachers by the Pelagians. For they
join repugnant, Tom. 7. Aug. lib. 5. hypognost. in prooemio
yea impossible things together: for Praedestination cannot stand with the
purpose of filthiness: because it is made not only to Salvation, but also
unto the antecedents of Salvation, viz. Faith, Repentance, and Holiness, as
the Apostle teaches: Ephe. 1.3. He has electe^ us in Christ, that we should
be holy, etc. Reprobation on the contrary cannot cohere with holiness or a
purpose thereunto: because Reprobates by their own malice neither will, nor
can labor after holiness. Now in whom there is a serious desire of holiness,
they have a sure Testimony in themselves, not of reprobation, but of their
election.

Thirdly, this place teaches, Justification and Sanctification distinct
benefits of Christ. 1. Cor. 1.30 1. Cor. 6.11
that the benefits of Justification and Sanctification are distinct: which the
Papists do corruptibly confound. For Justification consists in the free pardon
of sin and imputation of Christ's righteousness. Sanctification in
regeneration and newness of life. The former is in relation, the latter in
action. So the Scripture distinguishes these two, where it says: that Christ
is made unto us Righteousness and Sanctification. And again: Ye are
justified, ye are sanctified.

Fourthly Papists do vily abuse this place to establish their second
justification, which they say, is actual and meritorious through good works.
For the words, let him be justified still, they expound, let him be justified
yet more, or let him being righteous become more righteous. Therefore, they
say, they that are justified can be made more righteous, or more just through
charity and good works.

ANSWER: First although the Particle (...) still, might signify increase of
Righteousness: yet the inference would not follow touching increase of
righteousness through Charity. For we are no where said to be justified by
Charity: but always through, or in Faith.

Secondly (...) does rather signify perseverance then increase. For as he
said: The Particle (...) still, notes continuation of time.
Let him be unjust still, let him be filthy still: for, let him go on to do
injuriously, and to be filthy: so he says: Let him be righteous still,
sanctified still, for, let him persevere in righteousness and holiness: for
the Particle (...) still, does in this Prophecy rather signify continuation
of time, then the increase of a thing: as in ver. 3. There shall be no more
((...)) curse, or henceforward: and Chap. 10.6. The Angel swears that there
shall be no longer ((...)) time: and Chap. 3.12. He shall go no more out: where
RIBERA himself notes that the Adverbe (...) more, does only with the
negative respect the future, not the time past

Thirdly, though we should wholly grant it to be understood of the increase of
justification: nevertheless it would not make for their second meritorious
justification through works. For it will not follow: Let him be justified yet
more: Romans 8.1.
Therefore through works meritoriously: for he may also be more and more
justified by Faith through the grace of God. For although we that are justified
by faith have the forgiveness of all our sins: Lam 3.23
and so are perfectly justified by Faith before God: so as there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: yet this Justification may be
said to admit increase two manner of ways. FIRST in respect of Continuation.
For seeing we sin daily, we have need continually of pardon: and so
Justification which consists in the remission of sins, is daily continued unto
the Faithful, being as it were renewed and augmented: for the mercies of
Jehovah are new every morning: therefore Gods children do daily pray: forgive
us our sins: that is, quit us, and justify us from our sins: How far
justification of Faith does admit increase.
Some therefore of our Writers say well, that justification is effected in an
instant, because it comes not by a successive motion, as Sanctification: but it
is to be understood of an instant flowing, or daily renewed through the mercy
of God. Secondly in respect of our sense: for we have indeed Justification with
God by Faith: but we feel it in our hearts through the effects, viz. Peace of
Conscience, Newness of Life, and desire of New obedience. By how much
therefore th^se do increase in us, by so much also the feeling of our
Justification has its greater increase.

LASTLY; this place cannot be understood of actual Justification by works: for
such a Justification through works is Sanctification it self, as the Papists
confess. Now of Sanctification it distinctly here follows: And he that is
holy let him be sanctified still. Wherefore they either accuse John of vain
Tautologi^, by repeating the same thing twice: ore else they must confess that
Justification here is no actual Justification (so to speak) or Sanctification.

12. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me] These are the words of
our Lord Jesus unto the midst of the twentieth verse. BEZA supposes that these
two verses are transplaced and should come after ver. 16. But we showed in the
Analysis, that after the manner of Dramaticall Representiations, three persons,
the Angel, John, and the Lord Jesus spea^ by course, so that an exact
coherence is not to be required, but the alteration or variation observed.

Once already the Lord Jesus had promised his sudden coming, ver. 7. Behold I
come quickly, to confirm the words of the Angel: which must shortly be done.
Here again he promises the same, to confirm the next words of the Angel: He
that is unjust, let him be unjust still, etc. And the sense is: the Prophecy
is not to be sealed neither in respect of the wicked, nor of the godly: because
the former shall go forward to hurt, and to be filthy to their harm: the
latter shall further be confirmed in their desire after righteousness and
holiness to their own good: For behold I come quickly, and my reward is with
me to give to every one, etc. The reason is taken from the righteous judgment
near at hand: in which every one shall receive of him his reward: The righteous
and holy, keeping the Commandments of this Prophecy, blessedness in the New
Jerusalem: The unjust and filthy dogs, sorcerers, fornicatours, murderers,
liars, etc. torments in the lake of fire and brimstone. This is the coherence
and sense of the four following verses.

My reward] Not passively, which should be given unto me: but actively: which I
will give, as appears by the Infinitive (...) to give, for, that I may give.

With mee] That is, in my power and right: for the Father has given to the
Son all judgment, Ioh. 17.2.
that is, power to judge all men. That his judgment shall be righteous he
shows, in that he will reward every one, both the unjust and impure, as also
the righteous and holy, as their work shall be. In other places it is said, he
shall judge men (...) according to works: here (...), as his work shall be.
The reward of good works shall be good, of evil, evil: because in order of
justice good things appertain to the good: to evil men,evil things.
Wherefore (...) and (...) According, and As: do not signify the meritorious
cause of reward, but the rule of righteous judgment. For although evil works
shall truly be the meritorious cause of damnation: yet the Scripture says no
where (except perhaps in some particular) that the wicked shall be damned (...)
for their works: Romans 6.23. Ephesians. 2.8.
but always circumspectly (...) according to works: least on the contrary
good works should be thought the meritorious cause of Salvation. The gift of
God is eternal life. By grace we are saved through Faith, not of our selves,
it is the gift of God: not of works least any man should boast. Wherefore the
reward of evil works shall properly be called reward, that is, a due
damnation de jure: But the reward of good works, shall not be called a reward
properly, Reward due and not due.
that is, not due of right, but blessedness gratis.

Now wherefore the Lord will rather judge men according to their works, then
faith, XLVI. Argument of Christ's deity.
has been declared above Chap. 20.13.

Futhermore this place does also most clearly prove the eternal deity of
Christ: who attributes here unto himself that which Isaias ascribes unto
Jehovah: Behold the Lord Jehovah will come with a strong hand, and his arm
shall rule for him; Chapter 40.10
his reward is with him, and his work before him. And Chap. 62.11. Say ye to
the daughter of Sion, behold, thy salvation comes, behold his reward is with
him, Psalm. 9.9.
and his work before him. It is proper to Jehovah to judge the world in
righteousness, and the people in uprightness. For none but God can render to
the Righteous life and eternal blessedness: none but God can inflict eternal
punishment on the ungodly. But the Lord Jesus will do both: for he shall
render both to the one and to the other a just reward suitable to their works,
as it is said: Ioh. 10.78 Ioh 11.25. Mat 25.34
I will give unto my sheep eternal life. I am the Resurrection and Life. He
will say unto the righteous: Come ye blessed, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you. And to the unrighteous: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels, etc. Therefore he is truly God-Jehovah.

13. XLVII. Argument of Christ's Deity confirmed.
I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end] He confirms and illustrates
what he said touching his righteous judgment.

He confirms it from his eternity and constancy: I am Alpha, that is, the
beginning, the First: from whom all things had their first existence: I hold
the primacy of justice and power in all things. I am Omega, that is, the end,
for which all things do exist: and the last: unto whom all things are directed
in the last place. And therefore why should I not render to every man righteous
rewards according to his work? The same he said of himself a little before
in Chap. 21.6. and in Chap. 1.8. the which heretics indeed Question whither
they are the words of God or of Christ, saying: I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the ending, says the Lord which is, which was, and which is to
come. But here they cannot question: but that he who says: I am Alpha and
Omega: and a little after: I Jesus have sent my Angel: is one and the same.

Notwithstanding Eniedinus the Samosatenian (that he might put a samous
conclusion of blasphemies unto his Explications, that is, Explicat. locor. p.
400
depravations) bends all his wits in this place, (besides what formerly Chap.
1.8. he had disputed against this attribute of Christ) to overthrow the Deity
of the Son of God: helping himself with most frivolous cavillations, taken
out of profane Authors, as Pliny, Martial, and Homer. Wherefore I thought it
worth the labor diligently to examine all his particulars, least the
heretics wickedness might deceive the more simple Reader.

First: These things, says he, are spoken either by Christ himself, or by an
Angel representing the person of Christ: yea he denies that Christ spoke
them, but a representative Angel. But why, and how Christ should be, and is
called the First and the Last, he says that he has explicated Chap. 2.

Answer: That these things are spoken by Christ himself, the foregoing verse
does evidently show. But if an Angel representing Christ's person should say: I
am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last:
certainly he should lie: like as an Ambassador representing the person of God
or Caesar, if he should say, I am God, I am Caesar, verily he should be as
great a liar, as was Boniface VIII. in saying, I am Caesar. For Ambassadors
indeed, speak or treat in the Name of God, or of Caesar: but cannot without
treason assume unto themselves the names or titles of their Lord. But how well
the Heretic has above declared, or indeed deceitfully handled, why, and
after what manner Christ is said to be the first and the last, we have there
made known unto the Reader.

Secondly he says, that this kind of speech: I am Alpha and Omega: is
proverbiall, by which the first and the last, yet not absolutely, may be
signified: forasmuch as Alpha and Omega are not absolutely the first and the
last, but only of the letters and Greek Elements: neither always and every
where: but only in that order or course, in which the Letters of the Alphabet
are now set down: Lib. 7. c. 56
the which notwithstanding that it was not always the same, we may learn out
of Pliny: for Omega has not always bin the last Letter of the Alphabet: and
that therefore this form of speech signifies neither an absolute, nor natural
prioritie and finality, but rather temporary and arbitrarie.

ANSWER: 1. Whatsoever might be said touching the Phrase: I am Alpha and
Omega: yet the explication annexed stands firm: I am the beginning and the
end, the first and the last: the which Christ speaks absolutely of himself,
nor can it be applied to any save unto God alone: as not signifying an
arbitrarie or temporary prioritie, and finallitie, but that which is absolute,
simple and natural. This alone suffices to confirm our faith and refute the
heretic.

II. What concerns the order of the Greek Letters, Pliny indeed writes,
that Omega was added unto the Greek Alphabet by one Simonides Melicus, after
the Trojane War: notwithstanding the said Author affirms out of Aristotle,
that Alpha with the Ancients, was always the first or beginning of the
Letters: whatsoever therefore may be said touching Omega: yet if Christ be
Alpha, the beginning, not of the Letters, but absolutely of all things, then
verily he is God Eternal.

But neither shall the Heretic thus shift it off touching Omega. Lib. 19 c.
14.
For Gellius affirms out of P. Nigidius a most ancient Writer, that A. and O.
were always the principle Letters. Besides it is sufficient that Alpha and
Omega were the first and the last Letters of the Greek Alphabet in John's time.
Therefore the reasoning of the heretic taken from the Greek Letters is
vain, being grounded upon a most false hypothesis or supposition, viz. that
Christ is called, and is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, no otherwise
then as Alpha and Omega are the first and last Letters of the Alphabet.

Thirdly he objecteth, Lib. 11. hist cap. 30.
that these words Alpha and Omega, do sometime signify time, as in
Nicephorus, the Emperors Valentinian, and Gratian write in their Epistle: We
indeed have used patience, from Alpha it self unto Omega, that is, from the
beginning unto the end. But that this signification is not agreeable to Jesus
Christ, because many things are more ancient and later in age then he.

ANSWER: First Epiphanius Scholasticus, who translated the History called
Tripartita, Trip. hist. lib. 7 cap. 9
following another reading (as the most learned Langus Interpreter of
Nicephorus has observed) has rendered the words of the Emperors otherwise,
viz. We indeed are subject to him, who is the first and the last, that is, unto
God: the which sense the antithesis there following ( but ye do arrogate to
your selves, etc.) does altogether require. For the Emperors by their
humility in submitting themselves to God, reproved the arrogance and
high-mindednesse of the Bishops, who by their continual brawlings and
contentions abused their Imperial majesty's. Let the place be looked into:
Wherefore these words A. and O. do signify, not time, but Eternal God, or
Eternity.

II. Whatsoever may be said touching the place of Nicephorus, the Emperors say
not: We are Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: so as Christ said: I am
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, the first and the last.
Therefore that place makes nothing against the words of Christ.

III. Although those words in the place alleged might signify time and
continuance: yet the reason for which the adversary denies that this
signification is agreeable to Christ, is absolutely false and heretical, viz.
that many things are more ancient and later in age then Christ. For according
to his Deity Christ pronounces himself to be Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the end, the first and the last, as being the only begotten of the Father
before the Mountains were settled. Nothing therefore is more ancient and later,
( Christo (...)) then Christ God-Man.

Fourthly he thus Syllogiseth: Relatives are together by nature. The son is a
Relative having a correlative Father: Therefore the Son cannot be before the
Father and so neither the first and the last.

ANSWER: I. It was never affirmed that the Son was before the Father. II. The
adversary overthrowes himself with his Sophistry: for if Relatives are
together by nature: as indeed they are: then verily God the Father, and God the
Son are together by nature: But the Father by nature is the first and last,
that is, eternal. Therefore also the Son by nature is the first and last.
For the Father was never without the Son.

FIFTHLY he dallieth out of Martial, that these words signify the esteem or
worth which men put upon a thing: so that which is most excellent, is called
First and Alpha, that which is most vile is called Last and Omega: in which
signification Martial should have said. Lib. 2: Epigr. 57. Lib. 5. Epigr. 27.
Ioh. 14.28 Ioh. 01.29


Non ipse Codrus Alpha penulatorum: And again,

Quod Alpha dixi, Codre penulatorum te nuper. But yet that this signification
cannot be applied to Christ: both because the Father is more worthy then he,
himself confessing it: My Father is greater then I: as also because it should
follow, if Christ be called Omega, that he is the vilest and most abject of
all things.

ANSWER: 1. Martial calls Codrus, Alpha Penulatorum, by a poetical taunt or
scoff, not as being the most excellent, but the chief or first of beggars,
that is, poorest, according to the Proverb: CODRO PAUPERIOR, poorer then
Codrus. But whatsoever he may say touching Alpha: where has the Heretic ever
read that Omega is put for that which is most vile? And though he had read it:
will he interpret the Divine Revelation by Martial a scurrilous Poet?

II. Howsoever this signification is taken, it is false that it is no way to be
applied unto Christ. For Christ is Alpha, because according to his Deity he is
most excellent, the beginning and the first of all things: And Omega, not as
the vilest, but because he is the end and last of all things: for so he
himself interprets the same.

That the Father is more worthy then Christ in respect of the assumption of the
flesh it is true: according to which he himself said: Ioh. 10.30. Ioh. 14.10.
Ioh. 5.23.
The Father is greater then I: in respect of his Deity it is false, for in this
respect he says: I and the Father are one: I am in the Father and the Father
in me: The Father has given all judgment to the Son, that all men should
honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. Wherefore as the Father and the
Son are one by nature, so in honor and dignity: for which cause above Chapter.
4.11. and 5.11. the Church-Triumphant ascribes to God and unto the Lamb, the
same honor glory and power.

Sixthly he reasons from the Metaphysickes: That these words, the FIRST and
the LAST signifye the cause: But Christ, as the Trinitaries confess (thus the
Heretic terms Orthodoxe Writers) has a cause: Therefore he cannot be
called the FIRST in this sense.

ANSWER: 1. Nothing is more frivolous then this kind of Logic: for there are
four terms in the Syllogism, to signifye the cause, and to have a cause,
being put for one, which are not one in the least: and from two affirmatives in
the second figure, he inferres a negative, then which nothing is more vain.

II. The major is not true, but of God being absolutely the first and the last,
the beginning and the ending, and therefore he is truly the first and last
cause of all things: and so likewise of Christ saying absolutely of himself, I
am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last, and
therefore the first and last cause of all things: but of all others it is
false. For of what are Alpha and Omega the cause? Is it of the Letters that are
betwixt them? And suppose that the first man may in some sort be said to be
the cause of others: of whom shall the last man be the cause?

III. The assumption unless it be understood with limitation, is false also:
for we confess that Christ has a cause not absolutely, but according to his
humanity, being according to his Deity the creating cause of all things with
the Father: For all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing
made, Ioh. 1.3.
that was made: Neither has he any cause, unless improperly by understanding
the cause of the beginning of eternal generation from the Father, otherwise
the Son should be the effect of the Father, which is false: For God created all
his effects or works (in the kind of substance) in the beginning of time: Ioh.
1.1. Prove 8.25 Mich. 5.2.
But the Son he created not in the beginning of time: (for the word (...) was
in this beginning:) but begat him from eternity: I was brought forth, says
the wisdom of God, before the mountains were settled. Because his goings forth
were from of old, from everlasting.

Thus therefore let the Heretic learn to correct his Paralogism or
deceitful arguing, least he fail in the form: He that has a cause, is not
the first and the last as the cause. Christ has a cause. Therefore he is not
the first and the last as the cause. Thus the whole is granted touching Christ
in respect of his humanity: But in respect of his divinity, in regard whereof
he says of himself, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the
first and the last, the consequence is denied, because of the aequivocation of
the word Cause: or the assumption is false.

Furthermore he says: a thing is said to be first, which is by nature before
the rest. Christ is not before the Father, because correlatives are together by
nature: Therefore Christ is not the first after this manner.

ANSWER: This we willingly grant of Christ according to the flesh, but
according to the Deity the adversary dallieth by four terms: because before
other things: and, before the Father are two terms, or the major universally
taken is false: for in this signification he is not the first, who is before
God: else God also should not be the first by nature, because God is not
before himself: But he which is by nature before others, in whose respect he
is said to be the first: to wit, before all creatures. Besides we may (as
before) retort the adversaries weapon upon himself: Correlatives are by nature
together: The Father and the Son are correlatives, and the Father is the
first, because by nature he is before all: Therefore also the Son is the
first, because he is before all things by nature.

Lastly he says, that a thing is said to be the first and the last, Alpha and
Omega: in regard of order and placing; like as the First Book of Homer is
called Alpha in this Monosticke, or single Verse: (...). Which signification,
says he, is most convenient to this place; because God has appointed Christ
to be the First Messiah and Mediator of the Nations; neither will he give unto
him any Successor in this office: this honor he will not give unto another,
but Christ was, and shall be the First and the Last Redeemer; Hence he is here
rightly called Alpha and Omega.

ANSWER: This indeed is the thing which the Heretic after all his blasphemous
shiftings would needs vomit out. But this signification is the same with the
first touching the arbitrarie priority of the Letters Alpha and Omega: Why then
thus much belching? we deny not that Christ alone is ordained the Redeemer by
God the Father. But we deny these three things.

I. That Christ in respect of his Office of Redemption, calls himself Alpha
and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last: which in
Scripture are titles only of the Eternal Deity.

II. We deny, that this signification and example is agreeable to Christ: for
he which is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last in order and place (like as
the Heretic makes Christ to be Alpha and Omega, that is, the first and the
last Redeemer) he certainly has a second, a third, and others betwixt: like as
after Homers Alpha follows: (...): Gamma, Delta, Epsulon, etc. also follow
even unto Omega. Therefore according to the Heretic after the Redeemer Alpha,
there should follow the Redeemers Beta, Gamma, Delta, etc. unto Omega: Yea
Christ should no way be Alpha and Omega: because Homers Alpha is not Omega
also, neither is Homers Omega also Alpha, and it should be false, that Christ
in this Office had no Successor, and that he was, as the First, so the last
Redeemer.

III. We deny, that the Heretic believes, what he says, or that the thing he
says is true. For he affirms, that Christ was and shall be the first and the
last Redeemer. Notwithstanding he believes not, that Christ was the Redeemer
of Adam, Abraham, and the Fathers of the Old Testament: but believes the
Fathers were not redeemed by Christ, yea that Christ had no being, before he
was manifested in the flesh: Both which assertions are false, heretical, and
blasphemous.

Now briefly we will bring all the Heretics subtilties into this one Sophism.

Christ is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, etc. either in a certain
order, that is, an arbitrary and temporary priority, and finality (like as
Alpha and Omega is in the order or rank of the Greek Letters:) or in time, or
excellency, or as the cause, or in priority of nature, or lastly in order and
place: But he is not the first and the last in time, nor excellency, nor as the
cause, nor in priority of nature. Therefore only by an arbitrarie priority, viz.
in rank, order, and place: because he is appointed by God to be the first and
the last Redeemer.

ANSWER: 1. The Heretic though he reasons much touching A. and O. the first
and the last, yet he meddles not at all with the other title annexed, the
beginning and the end, because he could not darken the same by his cavils. Now
seeing this Title does absolutely denote that Christ is he, from whom, Romans
1.36.
and through whom, and for whom are all things, it alone sufficiently proves
the Deity of Christ. II. The assumption, (as has been showed) is wholly false.
III. The consequence is to be denied: from the insufficient enumeration of
significations: for the Heretic omits the principle signification of
Eternity, by which properly God is the first and the last, Isa. 14.4. and 44.6.
and 18.12.

14. Blessed are they that doe] The OLD VERSION: Blessed are they that wash
their robes in the blood of the Lamb, which words are here repeated (from
Chap. 7.14.) against the authority of all Greek Copies: See Bezas Annotations.
The Relative (...) His, is not referred unto the person of Christ here
speaking: for he would have said in the first (...) my Commandments: but unto
(...) Book, as in ver. 7. Blessed is he that keeps the sayings of the
Prophecy of this Book: Here he repeateth the same: Blessed are they that do
the Commandments (...), to wit, of this Book: There he calls them (...)
sayings: here (...) Commandments, namely which were touching the not
worshipping of the Beast and his Image, the leaving of Babylon, perseverance in
Righteousness and Holiness, and such like. Although the Enallage were not
very harsh, to apply the relative unto Christ: That do his, that is, My
Commandments: like as the Angel in ver. 6. speaks of himself in the third
person: sent his Angel, that is, my self. The reward therefore of them that
do the Commandments of this Book shall be blessedness.

That they may have right to the tree of life] Greek (...): Their power shall
be on the wood (or tree) of life: The blessedness of the Celestial Citizens,
he declares by two benefits: That they shall have power to the tree of life,
(of which ver. 2.) and enter in through the gates into the City: They shall, I
say, be perpetual and most happy Inhabitants of the Heavenly Jerusalem. How
the Saints have right to Christ.
But being Christ is the tree of life, it may be demanded how they shall have
power on Christ? He understands it of a right, not of ruling, but of enjoying
Christ and his benefits. He is the Lord and Head: we Subjects and Members. The
Head has right of Dominion over the Members, to command them: The Members have
right to the Head, of enjoying him, and to be quickened and directed by him. See
more of the Saints blessedness, ver. 4.5.

15. For without are dogs and sorcerers] The reward of the wicked shall be
utter darkness being shut out of this Heavenly City. They shall be without:
because within shall be nothing, but what is pure and holy, neither shall any
thing that defiles enter into it. Chapter 21.27.
Now what shall be without but utter darkness? where Satan, the Beast,
False-prophet, Dogs, and Sorcerers, that is, all Reprobates shall be tormented
in the Lake of fire and brimstone. Of these wretches he reckons up six sorts,
under which all are comprehended.

Dogs: thus he names unjust and filthy men, who with a dog-like madness tear
the doctrine of the Gospel: therefore Christ calls these enemies of the truth
dogs and swine, Mat. 7.6.
before whom he forbids us to cast that which is holy. Of the rest (whose
portion shall be in the Lake of Fire) we have treated on Chap. 21. ver. 8.

He expressly puts liars, both here and before, in the last place, understanding
perjured, double-hearted, and deceitful persons, mockers of religion, that we
might understand, that this kind of men is most hurtful to the Church and
Commonwealth: because by adulterating and falsifying all Divine and Humane
Truths, they with divelish craft overthrow, and teach others to weaken all the
sinews of Ecclesiastical and Political society. Of this sortof men, the
Jesuits are the most emminent at this day in Schools and Churches: And the
Machivellians in Courts, Polities, and Camps. For RIBERA does rightly observe,
that Christ in special mentions those vices, which should most reign in
Antichrists time. Now we know that these evils are most rife in Popery. See
Chap. 21.8.

16. I Jesus have sent my Angell] Least it should be uncertain what person it
was that said: Behold I come quickly: I am Alpha and Omega, he tells his name: I
Jesus: and professes himself to be the Author of this Revelation, and the
more to commend the dignity thereof to our care and study, he shows that
for our sakes he employed and sent his Angel to testify the same unto us.
Wherefore let it not be irksome reverently to read, continually to meditate, and
carefully to observe the same with all readiness of mind.

Here therefore the Lord Jesus confirms what the Angel before said in ver.
6. The Lord God of the holy Prophets sent his Angel: as if he should say: It
is so: I Jesus have sent my Angel: XLVI. Argument of Christ's Deity. Ephesians. 1.21.
Phil. 2.9. Hebr. 2.9. Mat. 18.10 Act. 12.15 Heb. 1.14.
hereby professing himself to be the Lord God of the holy Prophets. What
Heretic dares gainsay this? He also makes himself Lord of the Angels, for
says he, I have sent my Angel, viz. as being my own by subjection He is Lord
of the Angels as God: and as man he is lifted up above all power as Lord and
head over all things. The Angels also are said to be ours, not by natural
subjection, but voluntary service, because they are sent by the Lord Jesus for
our service and preservation.

(...) to testifie] That is, to reveal. Before ver. 6. and Chap. 1.1. he said
(...) to show, and (...) to signify, in the same sense. Andreas refers this to
the publishing of the Prophecy, that John might not keep it secret, but make
it known unto all.

To you] This apostrophe is directed in the first place to the seven Angels of
the seven Churches, unto whom he before had sent seven Epistles: as he shows
by the Addition (...), To you who are in, or, over the Churches. But
consequently also unto all the servants of Christ, who are set over: or are
Members of the Churches, that is, unto all the Faithful: for this Prophecy
was not revealed for them only who then were the servants of Christ, but for us
chiefly upon whom the ends of the world are come: when the greater part of the
Oracles was to be fulfilled. 1. Cor. 10.11


First let us observe, that seeing the Prophes^e is revealed by the Lord Jesus,
it was a great impiety for the Church of old to question the Truth and Divine
Authority thereof.

Secondly, seeing the Lord Jesus sent his Angel: therefore he is Lord of the
Angels and true God: because it is proper to God alone to have and send the
Angels as his Ministers.

Thirdly, seeing the Lord Jesus vouchsafed to reveal this Prophecy not only
to those Seven Churches, but to all that should come after, therefore it
belongs unto the profit and salvation of all of us, and all are seriously to
meditate in the same.

I am the root and the offspring of David] These glorious Titles commend the
majesty of the Author, and of the Prophecy, as also it confirms our Faith.
Above cha. 6, 5. How Christ is the root of David.
Who is this Jesus? The root and offspring of David. Before he was called the
root of David. He confirms that he is the Messiah promised to come of the
seed of David. For the root of David is the Son of David according to the
flesh, Romans 1.4. Andreas thinks he is the root of David according to his
Divinity: For the root bears the tree, but Christ, says he, not as man, but
as God upholdeth and saves David: But without doubt it belongs to the flesh,
which the Messiah took of Marie the daughter of David. Its true the root
bears the tree: but this metaphor respects the original. So that Christ is
the root of David, sustaining David by his divinity: and sprouting from David,
in his humanity.

Off-spring] Greek (...) Genus or Family of David, out of which arose Joseph
and Mary, the Parents of our Lord Jesus Churist, Luke 1.27.

The bright and morning star] As the former Title confirms the verity of
Christ's manhood: so this the majesty of his Deity. It signifies that most
excellent light and glory, whereby the Lord Jesus does excel all men and
Angels, like as Lucifer or the Morning Star, excels all other Stars in
brightness. In Number. 24.17. Balaam prophesies that, a Star shall come out of
Jacob.

BRIGHT] Most glorious in himself: by his brightness dispelling the darkness
and ignorance of our hearts and minds.

Morning] Because, says Andreas, How Christ is called the morning-Starre.
by his beams he not only drives away the night or darkness of this life,
but also in the morning light of the common Resurrection, he will exhibit
himself to be seen of all the Saints. Or, because arising in our hearts, he
dispels the blindness of our mind, as Lucifer exceeding other stars in
clearness, and rising before the Sun, (showing that by and by it will be
day) dispelleth the night-darknesse. So Peter calls Christ the Day Star
arising in our hearts, 2. Pet. 1.19
when as he enlightneth our hearts and minds with the true knowledge and
confidence of himself by the light of the divine Scriptures.

Aristotle to prove that justifice is the chief of virtues, says: (...): that
is:

Neither Hesperus, nor Lucifer (that is, the Evening or Morning Star) is not
so admirable: as knowing nothing more glorious whereunto to compare this
excellent virtue. Now Hesperus and Lucifer is the same Star first appearing
after Sunsetting: and first foretelling the rising of the Sun in the
Morning. What Aristotle calls (...), Christ here calls (...) from (...) the
dawning or break of day: in the same sense.

If then Aristotle does rightly compare created righteousness unto the Morning
Star: with more right does the Increated Righteousnesses, viz. Christ the Son
of God, call himself the Morning Star. Hereby we understand the meaning of
Christ in Chap. 2.28: To him that overcommeth will I give the Morning Star: for
if the Morning Star be Christ: the sense is: To him that overcommeth I will
give my self, or, communicate my self with all my benefits unto him, viz. joy
and glory, in part in this life, but perfectly in the life to come.

17. And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come] These kind of abrupt sentences
full of affection, serve to stir up like affections, desires, and wishes in us.
Here the Lord Jesus commends unto us the study of this Prophecy, by the
example of the Spirit and of the Bride: They say, Come] that is, from this
Prophecy they long for my coming, and that I fulfill the same. Therefore ye
also that hear the Prophecy, ought to have the like desire.

And the Spirit and the Bride] By the Spirit and Bride may be meant the
spiritual Bride, sanctified by the Spirit of God. By the Bride I understand
the Church, especially the Triumphant. She desires me to come, that is, to
fulfill the Prophecy, and to return to judgment, that she might at length be
glorified through a final redemption: like as the Souls of the Martyrs under
the Altar, did desire the full deliverance of the Church from all the miseries
of this life. Or we may understand the Spirit properly of the Holy Ghost,
Metalepsis is a figure whereby a word is put from his proper signification.
who above spoke to the Churches in the Epistles of Christ: in which it is
often repeated: He that has ears, let him hear what the SPIRIT says unto
the Churches. In this sense the Spirit is said to wish the coming of Christ,
by a Metalepsis: because it is the Spirit that makes the Bride to desire
Christ's coming: in which sense also it is said Romans 8.26. that the Spirit
makes intercession for us: that is, stirs us up to make our requests, and
to cry Abba Father.

Come] Namely to the full glorification of thy Bride. This is the reason of the
wish: for the coming of the Lord shall be the full redemption of the Church:
the which, seeing we all do expect, we must also wish for the coming of the
Lord: for as the Apostle intimates, it is a note of Gods children, to love his
coming, 2. Tim. 4.8.

And let him that heareth] This is the consequent of the former, as if he
should say, If the Spirit and the Bride long for my coming, then also let him
that hears the words of the Prophecy, say, COME: that is, ardently desire my
coming for his redemption: Thus he would have us continually to pray: Let thy
Kingdom come: by which we daily desire that the Lord Jesus by his coming
would wholly destroy the Kingdom of Satan, and perfectly set up his own in
us, in eternal glory.

And let him that is athirst come] He teaches us what we ought to do until
we obtain our desire, by a most large promise comforting us against the
temptation of delay: Let him, says he, that is athirst, that is, that desires
full redemption and glory through my coming, Come] To wit, unto me, or unto
the study and meditation of this Prophecy. It is an Answer unto the Churches
wish: as if he should say: ye desire that I should come to your deliverance:
Ye therefore come unto me through Faith, What it is to come unto Christ. Mat.
11.28
Obedience, and true Sanctity, being always (as it were) girded with the
same. For to come to Christ, is to receive his doctrine, trust, obey, serve,
and wholly to give ones self unto him. This is meant in the Gospel, where he
says, Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden.

AND WHOSOEVER VVIL] According to the promise, Chap. 21.6. To him that is
athirst I will give of the Fountain of the water of life, freely. So here to
them that come unto him, he promises the living water of the pure Chrystalline
River of the Heavenly Jerusalem. This water is Christ himself, the Fountain
of Life: Or the Holy Ghost, filling the Saints with Heavenly consolation. This
water is drawn or obtained by Faith and Prayer. Therefore he says, Let him
take] That is, by prayer beg, and by faith obtain the same. It is not thrust
into the hands of unwilling, slothful, and drowsy persons: therefore he
says, Whosoever will. He says not that it is in the power of free will, but
requires the will to receive it. The will is ours, but the will of receiving is
not in us, it is the gift of grace: 1. Cor. 4.7.
For what have thou, that thou have not received? Therefore the will and desire
of grace is required to be in us, that we might be quickened with the water of
life.

Freely] The Fountain of grace which is open to all that desire the same, is
not to be bought with the price of any thing, but is freely bestowed by the
merit and efficacy of the Lord Jesus. Away therefore with the merits of
Hypocrites.

18. For I testifie] These also are the words of the Lord Jesus, not John's, as
appears from ver. 20. Before he said: Blessed are they that keep the words of
this Prophecy: Now he threatens a terrible curse unto all such as presume any
ways to adulterate this Prophecy. For he foresaw that some would despise,
question, and falsify the same by their Additions. He was not ignorant also
that Antichrist with his false Prophets (Falsifiers of Holy Writ) would take
liberty to falsify the Faith, yea usurp to themselves absolute power over the
very Scriptures of God. Therefore he thought it necessary to defend the
Authority of the Revelation, and the whole Book of Canonical Scripture, by
this threatening, as it were with a Seal, that it might be preserved entire
unto the end for the Churches, unto whose profit it was dedicated.

For I testifie] The causall (...) For, seems an overplus to Ribera by a
Graecisme: but, as we showed in the Analysis, it is a seventh Argument
commending the worthiness of this Prophecy, taken from the inviolable
authority thereof. Andreas for (...) reads (...) and for (...) I also testify
(for so it is in the Text) simply (...) I testify. And so the Kings Copy
has it. But all other Copies have it, I also testify: neither is it without
ground: for the Lord Jesus assenteth to his Angel, whom he had sent (...), to
testify these things to his servants: as if he should say, My Angel has
testified unto you, and I also testify with him. For properly Summarturesai
signifies to affirm a thing by a religious testimony, or to urge it with
serious contestation, and so oblidge the Hearers upon pain of vengeance to obey
the same. But let us briefly consider to whom Christ does testify, what it is,
and after what manner.

Unto every man that hears the words] This Protestation belongs unto all that
hear and read the same, not one excepted. And therefore neither Pope nor
Council have any right to add, or take ought from the Scriptures, but with
the hazard of their Salvation.

If any man shall adde] The contestation consists of two heads: The first is:
that this Prophecy may not be adulterated by any Addition. To add, What it is
to add to this Prophecy:
is not soberly and according to the Analogy of Faith to interpret the meaning
of the Prophecy: but to mix other things, besides what the Lord Jesus has
revealed by his Angel. He adds, says THOMAS, which adjoyneth a lie: for
whatsoever is patched to the Scriptures of men's inventions, that it might be
accounted as divinely revealed, is a lie. Such are the Popes Traditions, which
(seeing he will make of like authority with the written word of God) he adds
unto the Scriptures. Therefore they are lies.

The other branch of the contestation is, What it is to take away from this
Prophecy.
that none may deprave this Prophecy, by taking away from the words thereof.
He not only takes away, that derogates from the divine authority of the Book
(which, as Christ foresaw, many would do) but he also that any ways changes,
or maliciously perverteth, or contradicts any thing here written. Of which
offense such are not altogether free, who obstinately deny that the manifest
events of the Types touching the fall of the great Star from Heaven into the
Earth, of the Beasts ascending out of the Sea, and of the worshipping of his
Image, and Character, of the Roman Babylon, of the whore committing
fornication with the kings of the earth, and the like, are not yet manifestly
fulfilled in the Papacy. The sum of the contestation is, that the integrity,
sincerity, and sacred Authority of this Prophecy be faithfully preserved in
the Churches, and that the contemners, falsifiers, and corrupters thereof be no
way suffered, under pain of Anathema or curse, unto which, as it follows,
that man is liable that presumes to add or take away ought therefrom: for he
says: Unto him God shall add the plagues] This is the reason of the
contestation, the horrible curse of them that falsify this Scripture by adding
or detracting. For if Falsifiers of Coin are liable unto the civil curse of
the Law: much more shall the Anathema of eternal damnation be inflicted upon
the Corrupters of the Scriptures, which are the word of God. To them that add
thereto, God will add all the plagues of this Book (to wit, the Seven last
plagues) and cast them into the Lake of fire and brimstone, with the Dragon,
the Beast, and the False-Prophet, Chap. 19.

19. And if any man shall take away] That the righteousness of Gods judgments
may appear, he will punish the Corrupters of his word, according to the
quality of the offense. To Impostors he will add plagues. To them that take
away, God will take away their part out of the Book of life, etc. Their
judgment shall be much alike. For as the former are threatened with plagues:
so the latter shall be deprived of all good.

His part] Not what he has, but what he seems to have. He speaks of the
part or portion of eternal life, which such shall have as are written in the
Book of Life, that blessedness (I say) and Heavenly joy which the Inhabitants
of the Holy City shall be partakers of.

And from the things which are written] To wit, which in the Epistles of this
Prophecy (especially, Chap. 2. and 3.) are promised to them that overcome, and
from the things which in this Book are spoken touching the glorious state of
the Saints in Heaven, Chap. 7.9.20.21.22. Now they that shall be deprived of
Heavenly blessings, must of necessity lie under eternal plagues and
punishment. For betwixt these, there is no medium.

This place is remarkable, against the Popish depravers of the Scriptures. For
two things are evidently proved. First that the Holy Scripture is Authentic
in it self: and that it gives testimony of its own divine authority. For
what is truly said of this Prophecy, is rightly by Expositers extended unto
the whole Scripture. Hence ANDREAS: A fearful curse, says he, shall light on
them, who are not afraid to adulterate divine Scripture.

SECONDLY That the Holy Sriptures are so perfect in themselves, as that the
Romanists are to be held for most damned falsifiers, who deny that all
Doctrines of Faith and Salvation are contained therein, unless the traditions
of Rome be added. Lib. 4. de ver 80. dei. c. 10.


Against this Bellarmine objecteth, that only the integrity of this Book is
established, but not the perfection of the whole Scripture.

ANSWER: Yea both this Book and all the rest of Holy Scripture. This appears:
because this Book is the last, and last written. Therefore this threatening
annexed is as the Seal of the whole Cannon, or of all Books of divine
Scripture. For as God put too this Seal to the Books of Moses: being the first
Cononicall Books: Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32.
Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish
ought from it: So to this last Book he puts the same Seal: that nothing might
be added, made equal or taken away from this, or any other part of Canonical
Scripture.

Bellarmine objecteth to the contrary: that it is not said: which I have
written: but, which I have commanded. But frivolously: for Exodus 24.12. God
says expressly: Which I have written, that thou may teach them. And Hose.
8.12. I have written to him the great things of this Law. Add to this the
former reason, that all Interpreters do acknowledge this Anathema to be
pronounced generally against all falsisiers of Scripture, Why the oracles of
the Revelation are most taken out of the old Canon.
and that most justly. For the evident argument hereof is, that the greatest
part of this Prophecy is as it were taken word for word out of the Old Canon,
so as the Holy Ghost seems purposely in every of the Visions to allude unto
certain Prophesies of the Old and New Testament. Now the reason hereof without
Question was: First indeed, really to demonstrate, that there was nothing
wanting in the Old Testament unto perfection. Secondly that by this apparent
imitation he might show, that in the writings of the Old Testament is
contained the state and condition of the Church of the New Testament. Lastly he
shows that the Revelation is as it were a recapitulation of both the
Testaments, and contains the sum and agreement of all the Holy Scriptures.
By the which again it is plain that this present contestation or protestation
belongs unto the whole Body of Sacred Writ.

20. He which testifies these things, saith] Ribera will have these words to
be John's, because of the like sayings in his Gospel, John 21.24. But the
words following show that they are spoken by the Lord Jesus: for he adds:
Behold I come quickly. Notwithstanding there is no great matter in it. He
calls himself (...) The Testifier, because he testified, that is, revealed,
this Revelation unto John by his Angel. Hence Chap. 1.5. John calls him, the
Faithful Witness.

Surely I come quickly] He confirms what he had twice said: Behold I come
quickly. The Greek (...) And or also has the force of an asseveration or oath
(and is rightly rendered Surely) to take away all doubting: as if he should
say: I shall seem to delay: but it shall be no delay. Mockers will think that
I will never come; but I will come before they are aware thereof.

Even so come Lord Jesus] These are the words of John applauding and
supplicating Christ to do quickly what he promises. He wishes therefore,
that he may come quickly, not in his own name only, but he will have it to
be the common wish of all the godly: Come quickly Lord Jesus: And why should
we not wish for it? To the wicked the day of the Lord shall be terrible. But
to us nothing can come more acceptable: because then our Redemption shall draw
near, and there shall be a perfect deliverance. Then all tears shall be wiped
away from our eyes: then we shall see him, as he is, and live with him for ever
and ever.

O COME LORD JESUS.
FINIS.
A TABLE Of the principal matters and words contained in this COMMENTARY.
ABaddon, an hebrew word 184. Abaddon is Antichrist ibid. Abuse of allegories
corrected 81. Admiration begat Antichristianisme 297. To Add unto the
prophecy what it is 595 Afflictions of the Godly and wicked how they differ
79. Afterward what it notes 145. Air the common receptacle of all living
creatures 398. Air how darkened 175. Alpha and Omega 184. Alcasar answered to
his twofold signs 28 His reasons touching Antichrist answered 286. His fable
432. Alcasar stoutly refutes Haereticks by hearesay 287. his impudent fiction
481. Alexander III. trampled upon Fredrick I. 130. Allegory of the Church, and
Christ's birth of the virgin marie. 256. Allusion to Jerusalem in Ezechiel.
561. Allusion unto the waters in Ezech. 574. Altar in heaven what it is 154.
Alogians their opinion of the Revelation 47. Alphonsus opinion of the mortal
wound of the Beast 296. Amazement of the adversaries of the Church 244. Amurath
king of Turks 189. Amethist 566. Analogy betwixt the seven seals, trumpets
and vials 498. Analogy of the visions ibid. Analogy between a millstone and
Babylon 470. Anathemaes of the Nicean Counsel, and of the Council of Trent 351.
The Anathema of the worshippers of the Beast 354. Anathema and Ka^nathema what
they signify 576. Anatolius a strong opposer of Paulus Samosatenus 74. Angels
sometime denote Church Officers 30. Angels are Gods eyes 90. They are strong
98. Innumerable 104. Whither there be four primarie ones 92. Angels must not be
worshipped 105. The Angel of the East is Christ 140. Who is the strong Angel
198. The Angel with the censer 153. Angels why joined with Christ, and who 266.
The Angels are Michaels messengers 266. Angels of the seven trumpets and vials
376. Angels of the waters 383. Angel coming down from heaven, who it is 453.
The three Angels proclaiming Babylons ruin are not the same mentioned in the
14. Chapter 453. Angels are our fellow servants 486. Angels how adjudged unto
the prison of hell as soon as they fell 504. Angels preparation to declare the
judgments of God 371. The Angel on the earth and sea is Christ 203. Angels and
Men are Gods servants 478. 479. Antichrists two horns like the lambs 100. He
apishly imitates Christ ibid. Antichrist set on his throne in Boniface III 127
Antichrist horribly shakes Christendom by violence and fraud 137. Takes
possession of the Churches of Christ 141. yet could not wholly suppress them
139. though he labored to hold the winds from blowing ibid. Antichrists
character why imprinted on his followers 142. 312. 313. Antichrist whither a
Jew of the tribe of Dan 144. Antichrist opens the bottomless pit, and how 172.
Antichrist who he is, controverted by us and the Papists 286. Antichrist a vain
scarecrow 514. Antichrists kingdom cannot be straightened to four years 367.
Antichrists rise 170. 289 Antichrist fitly figured out by a twofold Beast 304.
And represented in the Revelation under diverse forms 305 Antichrist how both
the woman and the Beast 404. Antichrist how cast alive into the lake of fire
496. Antichrist did rise in the thousand years of Satan's binding 513.
Antiochus a scourge of the Jewish Church, mystically figuring out Antichrist
298 Antipopes 295. The Apostles died all before Domitian, John only excepted
38. Apostles and Prophets wrought miracles by the power of Christ, not by their
own 50. Apostles called pillars of the Temple 72. Arguments for perseverance
61. Arians confuted 94. Aristotle's commendation of justice 593. Armageddon the
place of battle 397. Armies of heaven clothed in white, to denote their purity
and splendour 491. Arnulphus Aurelianus his speech of the Pope 318. (...) what
it signifies 75. Asia what part spoken of in the Revelat. 7. Augustine
vindicated 356. Augustus Altar set up in the Capitolium 503. The Authors
opinion about the silence in heaven for half an hour 152. His opinion of the
third trumpet 162. His opinion touching the particle Aparti 357. His opinion of
the wound of the Beast 293. His opinion of the four Angels hindering the
winds to blow 139.
B.
BAbylon in the Revelation, no city of Chaldea 343. Nor the world 344. But Rome
344. Not Heathenish but Popish Rome 345. Babylon in Caldea taken by Cyrus 392.
Babylons ruin proclaimed 454. Her proud boasting 463. Her greatness 562.
Babylon compared to a millstone 470. Balaam hired by Balack to curse Israel 44
draws the Israelites to Idolatry ibid. Barbarous nations why called Angels 188
How the Beast warreth against the witnesses 232. the Beast his war 301. His
two swords ibid. When the war began 302. The four Beasts continually worship
him that sits on the throne 93. The Beast rising out of the sea agrees with
the little horn in Daniel 285. The Beast overcomming the witnesses is
Antichrist, how he shall overcome and kill them 231. 232 The Beast with seven
heads denotes Antichrist 285. The Beasts attributes agreeing to Antichrist
ibid. How the Beast ascended out of the sea 288. Wherein the Beast differs from
the Dragon 290. The Beast is the Roman Antichrist 297. is worshipped as God
298. has universal power attributed to him by the inhabitants of the earth
302. The other Beast denotes Antichrist and his members 305. his rising out of
the earth 306. The Beast apishlie imitates Christ 313. The Beast rising out of
the sea is Antichrist 367. is the same with the beast rising out of the earth
ibid. Why the Beasts explication is aenigmatical Chap 17. verse. 8. When the
Beast ascended out of the Bottomless pit 417. The Beast Antichrist is the
Eight king: how he came to it 428. 429. The Beast is going into destruction
430. The Beast is Antichrist 494. The Belly of the Babylonish strumpet full of
blood. 413. The beginning of the creation of God ambiguously rendered 75.
Benevenutus Rambaldus a worthy historian 128. Bernhardus Clarevallensis his
invectives against the Pope and Clergy more then 464 years ago 318. Beryl
growing in the Indies 565. Bellarmin touching the liberty of the will either
to admit or exclude God knocking and persuading, refuted 81 etc. Bellarmins
arguments answered 222. Bellarmins subtilties answered 321. Brightmans
conjecture touching the time of the Turks power considered 188. His opinion of
the flood of waters 278. His allegoriall exposition 541. Bishops why called
stars and Angels 27. Bishops have no Apostolical power 20. Bishops or teachers
of Churches how they are said to be in the hand of Christ 31. Bishops must flee
ambition and covetousness 33. many Bishops though in appearance pious, are
mere hypocrites 55. The Bishops did augment the sickness and palenesse of the
Church above measure 117. 118. Roman Bishops ever since Pope silvester have
striven to Lord it over their fellows 126 127. Blasphemy what it is 290.
Blasphemy of the Roman Beast 299. Blasphemy against Marie 300. Blasphemous
verses of Carolus scribanius touching the milk of Marie and the blood of
Christ 301. Whither the Black horse denotes heretics 112. It denotes the
Church made black with heresies ibid. The Black horse has Christ with a
balance on him ibid. The Blasphemous title of Pope Paulus V. does expresselie
contain the number of the Beast 297. 323. Blood in the moon whence 128. The
Book of Gods providence 60. and of universal Judgment ibid. The Book
containing the matters which Christ revealed unto John touching the last times,
is the Revelation it self 96. The open book is that which was shut before 199.
The book eaten up by John 207. what it means ibid. The book of life 60 302.
544. Books how attributed to God in scripture 60. The books of the Ancients
were rolled up 97. Bondmen and free men denote all adversaries of inferior
rank 132. Boniface III. first established monarchical tyranny 118. being
declared universal bishop by Phocas 127. 244. Boniface VIII. a lofty tyrant
129. The Bow of Christ is the Law and the Gospel 108. Brimstone and hell fire
352. Bullingers opinion of the flood 278. To Buy white raiment what it is 79.
C.
CAlamities why foretold 126. Calling of Evangelicall preachers 378. Candidati
Romans so called and why 79. Carkeyses of the witnesses what they are and how
they shall lie in the streets of Rome 233. Carkeyses of the witnesses unburied
240. The Camp of the saints is the Christian world 537. Catastrophe of the
Churches calamities under Antichrist 106. The Cause of Gods connivence is both
his benignity leading the wicked to repentance, as also his counsel for the
completing of the number of Martyrs 121. 122 Catholic Character 312. Character
of the Beast 315. 314. his two fold Character ibid. Character and Charagma how
they differ 312. The proper and common Character how they differ 315. Causes of
Babylons ruin 455. Chaenix a measure containing a days provision for one man
114. Certainty of the saints salvation 527. Chalcedonie 564. Chalcolibanum or
fine brass 24. Chiliarchi, are captains of thousands 123. Chiliasts or
millenaries their ancient opinion 524. the author of it Papias ibid. the
refutation thereof 525, 531. The ground of their error 515. their corrupting
of the text ibid. The Chore or company of Patriarchs, Prophets, saints, Judges
and kings represented by the four and twenty Elders 90. Chore of the 24 Elders
248. Christ why called Amen 75. Has future things revealed unto him as he is
man 3.4. is Lord of the Angels 5. his dietie more expresselie testified by no
canonical writer, then by the Evangelist John 5. his three fold office and
benefits 10.13. His coming why promised 15. He appeared in an humane shape in
the midst of the seven candlesticks 22. He opens and no man shuts 64. How
he is like to the Son of man 23.24. How he attributes the simile of a thief
unto himself 57. Is called a Lamb in respect of his humility and office 100.
Is our fine linen and wedding robe 482. He is the faithful witness and so
called (...) 10.11. Is the first begotten from the dead 11. and Prince of the
kings of the earth 12. He cleanses us from our sins two manner of ways 13.
His body does not lie hid invisibly under the host 15. He is the only (...)
or merchant offering unto us spiritual wares of salvation 78. His
philanthropie 80. His righteousness is the white robe 79. How he suppeth with
us 80. His proper titles 88. Is represented to John under diverse figures 88. By
his spiritual scepter he forces the adversaries unto obedience 103.104 He is
the Lion of the tribe of Judah 109. Has the seven spirits in his hands 54. Js
author of the ministry ibid. He attributes life to himself 26. Is divided by
the Lutherans 44. How he shall deliver up the kingdom to the father, and
reign for ever 248. He is alpha and omega 587. The root of David and the
morning star 593. Is compared to a traveller knocking at our door 80. How he is
heard and let in, with the benefit thereof ibid. He is the beginning of the
creation of God actively and passivelie 75. Why he would rather have men cold
then Lukewarm 76. What is meant by the open book in his hand 199. Christ and
Antichrist have the key of the bottomless pit in different respects 172. 502.
Christians miscalled by the Romans 17. Church. Church discipline in its vigor
in the primitive times 32. the Churches adversaries sometimes converted 67.
Whether the Church may be removed 35. her abode uncertain 36. she was preserved
in the Papacy 43. she sometimes lies hid in the world ibid. she must reprove
notorious and scandalous sectaries 44. The Church of the called and the Elect
does differ 55. The Church abounding in idleness and riot, heathenish and
Jewish rites were brought in 76. The Churches condition in this world was
always red with persecution 111. She became black in the first 200 years 112.
And pale even to death 117. was preserved in the midst of the Papacy 139.
Where she was before Luther 142. she could err, for she needed measuring 213.
Why she is represented by the figure of a woman 257. her variable condition in
this world 258. How she changed her sunlike clothing into purple 259. Vanishing
as the moon 265. The Church triumphant her song 268. How long the Church was in
the wilderness 276. Whether there were no Church under Antichrist 329. Her
condition at first 358. Before Luther the Church was in Babylon 459. The Church
is the bride of the Lamb and city of God 560. Why Compared to Candlesticks 27.
and sometime to a vineyard 363. Chrysolite 565. Chrysoprasus whence it takes
its name ibid. Crystal what it signifies 506. Cities of the nations what they
are 400. the beloved city is the Church 537. Clemanges his speech of Rome 4^4.
Clement VI. excommunicated Ludovick IV. 130. The Color of the Beast and the
woman is one 411. Purple color proper to the Roman court ibid. Communion of
the Saints in heaven with us on earth 122. Comfort of the faithful under
Antichrist 121. Of the Saints under the Altar 106. Of the professors and
Martyrs 355. Conquerers are such as keep faith and a good conscience 52.
Consent of Interpreters about the last judgment 358. Condition of the Godly
under Antichrist 134. 135. Constant profession of the truth, the cause of John's
banishment 17. The Constestation or protestation in the last chapter of the
Revelation belongs to the whole body of the Scripture 596. Conversion of the
Jews described 67, conversion of the adversaries is the work of grace ibid.
Conversion of many unto the faith 245. Conversion why commanded, and attributed
to us 82. Council of constance caused wickleffe to be dug out of his grave
and burnt 241. Condemned John Husse and I^rome of Prague to the fire 226. 241.
Former councils for the most part condemned by the latter 273. Corporal
resurrections in scripture 518. Corrupters of the truth shall be grievouslie
punished 50. Court within to be cast forth 214. Coveteousnesse in bishops
abominable, the root of all evil 33. Crown. crown of life 41. promised not
of merit but grace 42. It signifies life and eternal glory 72. A greater degree
shall be given to such as have converted many 71. Crowns of gold why worn by
the saints 90. Crown of life and righteousness ibid. Proposed unto all the
faithful 250. The crown of Christ 108. Crowns of gold an ensign of royal
majesty 360. How far the crown may be taken from the elect and how it can not
be taken 72. Cubit common and royal of what greatness 562. Cup of Gods wrath
352. Cyprians excellent simile declaring the word of God to be the only rule
of faith 57.
D.
THe Darkning of the sun 127. Death compared in scripture to sleep 56. Christ's
death a full satisfactorie price for sin 103. Death of the martyrs is Christ
victory 108. The first death, why so called 519. 557. Death of the soul 519.
The second death eternal 528. The dead shall all rise together 518. 519. To
die in Christ 355. Dead faith incapable to obtain spiritual riches 77.
Demonstration against Alcasars dream 481. The Description and nature of Locusts
175. Description of the new Jerusalem whither it agree to the church militant
549. The Desert or wilderness is Rome and the Papacy 408. Description of the
beast 290. denoteing the old Roman Empire 291. 292. Description of the
heavenly Jerusalem 560. etc. Description of the last Judgment 488. Description
of Gods majesty and glory on the throne 87. Determination whither repugnant to
the will 446. Dignity proceeds not always from virtue 59. Difficulty about
the thousands years 506. Difference of a gemme and a pearl 566. Dionysius
Alexandrinus refuted 18. Distribution of the second vision 84. The Dragon,
Beast, and false Prophet authors of the Embassage of the unclean spirits 394.
Drying up of Euphrates 390. diverse opinions about it 391. Duty of the Church
and her officers to notorious sectaries 44.
E.
EArth, Sea, trees what they signify 139. Earth swallowing down the flood of
the Dragon 279. Earthquakes proper and figurative 126. 127. A great
earthquake at the opening of the sixth seal 244. an earthquake shaking the
papacy after the council of constance 245. Eastern people girded up their
long garments in traveling 24. Eberhardus Salisburgensis invectives against
the Pope 318. Effect of the word of God 207. Of the Gospel in the latter times
370. Egyptian Idolatry, darkness and bondage 234. 235. The Elder comforting
John 99. The Emerauld a most pleasant gemme 87. 565. The End of Gods punishment
50. The Eight king not like unto the other 429. 430. Eniedinus the Samosatenian
refuted 17. 21. 26, 27. 28. 39. 50. 51. 437. 587. Who shall Enter into the
Caelestial city 571. Ephesus the head city of Ionia 21. Epiphanius refutes the
Alogians 47. Epiphanius corrected touching John 19. The Eternal Gospel cannot
be suppressed 339. the Eternal Gospel of the Monster Cyrillus 340. Events
contingent in themselves how changed 4. Event of the Gogish war 536, etc. The
Evils accompaning this life shall be no more in the life to come 553. Euphrates
a great river 187. The Eyes of JEHOVAH signify Angels 90. The eyes of the
Lamb, his all seeing providence ^00 Eye Salve what it is ^9^ Ezechiels
Prophecy of the measuring of the Spiritual Temple 212. His and John's
Prophecy of Gog and Magog 535.
F.
FAlse distinctions of worship 484. 485 The Fable of Enoch and Elias refuted
226. the Fable of Antichrists four years reign refuted 231. 240. Fable of
Mary's assumption 256. The False Prophet 394. He and the two horned Beasts are
the same 495. Famine, thirst and heat what they note by a Synecdoche 149.
Famine of Samaria 114. Mystical famine when proclaimed ibid. The Fathers why
they termed not the Pope Antichrist 167. The Father how he judges no man 7. 8.
The Fear and amazement of the Churches adversaries 244. The fearing of
Antichrist has troubled the whole world The First Vision not universal 361.
362. it belongs unto the last times ibid. Its scope and use of comfort ibid.
Free Will not simply denied, but in respect of spiritual good 68. Diverse
interpretations of the same 444. 445. Figs signify carnal Bishops 129. Figure
of he city just apiece 562. Final punishment of the wicked 131. Fine
linen how clothing both for the Bride and the Whore 482. how it is
righteousness ibid. Fire proceeding out of the mouth of the witnesses 228. The
fire on which the Angel had power 362. Fiery eyes signify heroical motions
24. Fire from heaven consuming Gog and Magog 539. First death 42. 519. Why so
called ibid. First resurrection is not corporal but spiritual 518. It is
opposed unto the first death 519. Its profitablenesse and necessity 526.
Objections about the same cleared 518. 520. First trumpet answers to the
first seal 158. What is meant by the hayle fire and blood that fell at the
sounding thereof ibid. First vial chiefly poured out upon Germany 380. Fight
of the woman when it began and how long it dured 277. Flood of waters what it
is 277. Fox his opinion about it 278. Form or shape of the beasts diverse,
and why 92. Forgetfullnesse and memory how said to be in God 460. Foundation of
the Church how but one, and twelve 561. 562. Fountains what they denote in the
Revelation 163. the fountains of Waters are to be reckoned among the chief
works of God 342. The fountain of true joy is in the Lord 480. The Four Beasts
whither they type out the four Evangelists 91. They represent the Apostolical
Church 92. Why they are full of eyes ibid. The Four and twenty Elders are the
first Chore 89. The Four periods of the Church of the Gospel 365. The Four
Angels at Euphrates 187. the four Angels at the four corners of the earth who
they be 136. 137. The Four Acts of the second vision 84. The Forty two months
design the time of Antichristian persecution 216. diverse opinions about them
217. 218. 219. 220. The Four years reign of Antichrist refuted 231.
Franciscus Petrarcha against the Romish Sea 235. 319. 320. The Full assurance
of faith, and perseverance proved against Popish Sophisters 46. 47. 71. 269.
The Full sight of God and of Christ shall be at the last day 120.
G.
GAbriel its signification 98. Gagnaeus refuted 20. 133. Garments not defiled,
Metaphorically denote sincerity and purity of the body 58. The Gesture and
habit of the Beast what it denotes 102. The Gesture and voice of mourners 465.
Glory how ascribed to God 93. how given to him 480. Glorification of the
witnesses 243. Glory and honor of the nations 571. The Godhead of Christ
demonstrated and proved against Heretics 3. 4. 5. 12. 15. 16. 26. 27. 31. 37.
40. 42. 43. 47. 50. 54. 62. 64. 65. 75. 78. 80. 88. 99. 100. 102. 103. 104.
133. 149. 369. 437. 492. 493. 542. 543. 568. 577. 581. 586. 587. 592. GOD. His
names are (...) 9. His benignity the cause of forbearance 121. God and Satan do
the same thing after a diverse manner and end 41. He detesteth pollutions 50.
Will have Chaste and holy worshippers ibid. He is holy and loves holiness, he
is true and loves truth 64. How he reigns and shall reign 479. He never
neglects the prayers of his servants 121. How he works in the hearts of men
444. He is not the author of sin 446. 447. How he puts good and evil into the
hearts of Kings ibid. and 448. His ordination is not that we should obtain life
eternal by the Merits of works 250. God alone is to be worshipped 342 God has
a people in Babylon 459. God forgets not the blasphemies of the wicked 121.
Godfrey of Bullen General of the Holy war 190. 537. Gog and Magog who with
the Papists 533. 534. Their fiction refuted ibid. They are the four Angels of
Euphrates 536. Gogish war how occasioned and when it began 537. Gold tried in
the fire what it signifies 78. The Golden censer what it notes 154. it is cast
into the earth 155. The Golden girdle what it notes 371. The Gospel preached
is the sword wounding the beasts head 296. this sword accidentally takes away
peace from the earth and raises cruel persecutions 111. The Gospel is the
word of the Cross 32. Good works how great soever, merit no reward, because
they are debts 59. They merit not life Eternal 545. Good men stand in need of
often admonishings 33. Gratianus a Popish parasite 52. The Great Dragon
described 260. How he differs from the Beast ibid. Why he devoured not the
Man-child 264. The Great city is Rome 233. 234. The Great day of wrath, is the
last day 134. The Great number of sealed ones 142. the Great multitude
represents the Church Triumphant 146. The Great Star falling from heaven whom
it denotes 170. Grecian Empire overthrown by the Turks 192. Green grass, and
trees what they signify 178 Gregory II. bereaved the Emperor Leo of his
revenewes 130. Gregory VII. an exquisite instrument of Satan 532. He was the
first Antichrist ibid. He affirmed that married Priests were Nicolaitans ibid.
He deposed the Emperor Henry IV. 532. 533. Gregory the Great perceiving
Antichrist to be at hand, pointed as with the finger at his successor Boniface
the III. 318. The Greek reading vindicated from the insultation of Gagnaeus and
Ribera 12.
H.
HArpers how they overcame the beast 366. whither they be martyrs or professors
367. Harpes of God are by an He^^aisme put for Excellent harpes 368. Hailstones
of a Talent weight 401. Happiness of the Celestial Citizens 135 577. To Have
part in the first resurrection 526 Heads and horns of the dragon whom they
denote 260. 261. The Healing of the beasts wound 294. 296. The heaven rolled up
is the Church apostating 130. Heaven departing is the closing of the scriptures
in Popery 130. Heretics in several ages 112. 113. Hesperus and Lucifer, that
is, the morning and the evening star, is one 593. Hieroms observation of the
titles of the Revelation 3. His opinion of the seats of the four and twenty
Elders 89. He approues not the Jesuitical fiction 431 Hierom refuted ibid.
Hieracites heresy 334. refuted ibid. Jerusalem is not the Great City 236.
The Holy City trodden down by the Gentiles is the church 215. The Holy war was
the occasion of the Gogish war 537. Hoe his consequence against the
Calvenists refuted 36. Homicide of the Papists 193. Horns what they denote
100. Horns of the Golden Altar 187. Horns like the Lambs 307. The ten Horns
springing out of the seventh head 432. They denote Christian kingdoms 435. Hour
of temptation 69. The profit and end of temptation 69. 70. How it stands with
piety and Charity to stir up the saints to revenge 461. 462. Husse burnt at
Constance 226. his prophecy of Luther ibid. Humane traditions a burden imposed
by Satan 51. How much is to attributed unto the antiquity of traditions 524.
The Hyacinth 565. its color 189. Hypocrisy what it is 55. Hypocrites deceive
not God, but men ibid. Hypocrisy must be avoided as a pest ibid. Hypocrites
are mixed among the saints 71. are compared to lukewarm water 77. Many of the
Clergy are Hypocrite^ ibid. They imagine that they are just and holy ibid. are
very quick-sighted in outward things 78. They put not on Christ by baptism and
the supper ibid. Hydra Lernea a strange Monster 260.
I.
Jasper a precious stone 87. 564. Idols described 193. Idolatry of the
Eastern-nations 192. Of the Papists 193. who in Idolatry exceed the Egyptians
234. why Idolatry is compared to wine 350. Jehovah the sacred name of God,
distinguishing him from all false Gods 203. What it signifies 8. Jesuits
affirm that John did not evil in falling down before the Angel 484. 485.
Jesuits bafling 420. They again roll up the open book of the scripture 130.
Iezabell a false prophetess 48. Her doctrine 49. Ignatius his Epistle to the
Philadelphians 62. Islands denote peoples and nations 130 how they were moved
out of their places ibid. Image of the beast 310. 311. has life put into it by
the dragon 312. Image of babylon 311. the beasts Image excels that of babylon
312. Images of Christ and the saints are not to be set up in temple. 23.
Impatience and desire of revenge how it can be in the souls of the saints in
heaven 120. Impotencie of all creatures 99. Imprinting of the Charactar on the
right hand 312. 313. Impure spirits 394. Incompassing what it signifies 537.
The Infirmities of the saints Gods clemency passes by 44. Incense what it is
155. The Inflicting of punishment on impostors belongs to God alone 50. The
Individual communion of the Saints with the Lamb 3^6. Infidels not written in
the book of life 61. Infidels converted to the faith by the merciful grace of
Christ 65. 66. The Inevitable purpose of divine omnipotency is to be opposed
to the Roman power 464. Inhabitants of the earth in this book denote earthly
minded men, hypocrites and Idolaters 271. 407. The heavenly Inhabitants are
Angels 268, Inhabitation of Gods grace and glory 552 Innocent III. deposes
Otho IV. 130. Innocent IV. deprives Frederick of the Empire ibid. Inscriptions
among the Romans what 73. Ioachimus Calaber calls the Pope Antichrist 9.
Ioels prophecy Chap. 2. verse. 28. expounded 126. John calls the son of God
(...) 5. 6. John banished in 14 year of Domitian 19. put into a caldron of
boiling oil ibid. He returns from Patmos unto Ephesus under Nerva ibid. and
ministered unto the Churches of Asia ibid. He sees seven golden candlesticks
22. How he saw visions 86. He ascended into heaven not by local motion, but
mental illumination ibid. why he wept 99. why he does not expreslie name the
pope or Antichrist 288. He was thrice ravished in spirit 559. His failing about
worshipping of Angels 582. why he would have done it 484. It was no civil
worship ibid. Whither he did well in falling down before the Angel 486. John
wickleffe an excellent teacher in England, Protected by John Earl of Leicestre
232. His doctrine against Antichrist 338. He was the first Angel ibid. Irenaeus
blames the changers of the beasts three numeral letters (...) into (...) 317.
The Iron rod of the manchild 263. Ithacius bishop of Triers 129. Judgment
given to the sitters on the thrones 512. Judgment shall be according to our
works 545. not according to faith and infidelity, with the reason thereof 586.
Julius II. a better soldiour then Priest 129. He took away the kingdom of
Navarre from the great grand father of Henry IV. 130. Justification by faith
maintained 269 This doctrine may not be concealed because some do abuse the
same 584. How far it admits increase 585. It is distinct from sanctification
ibid. The second Justification of the Papists can not be proved from the last
Chapter of the Revelation ibid.
K.
Keys are a Symbol of power 27 Of oeconomical power 63. The ministerial
power of the keys committed unto the Apostles ibid. The Key of the bottomless
pit is the Popes absolute usurped power 171. Kings of the earth why so called
12. how Kings are removed by Antichrist 130. Kings and great men 131. kings of
the East whom they denote 392. opinions about the seven kings 420. 421. kings
receive not their power from the beast but God 434. The kings of the earth and
the ten kings are not the same 436. kings hatred of the whore 439. The kings
whither ten by succession 440. How the kings accomplished the good pleasure of
God in tearing the whores flesh and burning her with fire 449. How the kings of
the earth shall bring their glory into the Celestial Jerusalem 569. 570. The
kings war with the Lamb whither the same mentioned in Chap: 19. v. 18. 435.
436. They have one mind 435.
L.
LAdislaus why called Varnensis 189. The Lake of fire and brimstone 556. 557.
Lake of Gods wrath see Chapt. 14. verse. 16. The Lamb opens the book 99. He is
not to be looked on simply as a Lamb: but respectively, as a Lamb slain for
our sins and risen for our justification 100. The Lamb and Michael is one
Christ 270. How the Lamb was slain from the foundation of the world 303. The
Lamb is Christ 328. Why he stood on the mountain with the scope thereof, ibid.
He was not wanting to the Church while he stood on the mountain 129. the Lambs
victory over the kings is both spiritual and civil 436. He is King of kings
absolutely 437. The Lambs marriage 480 Laodicea what it signifies 76. it is a
city of Caria, or as some affirm, of Lydia. The Laodicean church degenerated
in John's time, but flourished again in Eusebius time 74. The Last judgment
figured out 359. 488. 540. 541. why it is so often exhibited 542. The Last
plagues 365. The Last vision a recapitulation of all the foregoing visions 501.
It is Lawful to swear, but by God only 203. Leaves of the tree of life what
they are 576. Leo III. thrust the Greek Emperors out of the West 130.
Libertines make sins indifferent 48. Their opinion about freewill 66.
Libertines refuted 71. Life Eternal a reward not due unto us 250. Lingering
torments by the Spiritual Locusts 179. The Little season of Satan's loosing how
to be understood 505. Who Lived and reigned with Christ 514 Locusts
Allegorically taken 175. Their devision ibid. Diverse opinions of them 176.
Their application to Antichrists disciples ibid. and to the Pseudoclergie 177.
The Locusts original out of the smoke of the bottomless pit ibid. From whom
they have their power 178. They are no hearb-eaters ibid. Locusts have a
threefold ornament on their head 182 Their kings crown ibid. Their tails 184.
their Monarchical polity ibid. The Lords day 20. The Lot of the Church in
this life is changable 5.8. but in God she has assured help ibid. The Love of
God is the fountain of Salvation 13. Ludovicus his jest touching the lake of
fire 557. Lukewarm Christians in these days 77. How such are said to be in
Christ's mouth ibid. Their vain boasting ibid. Luther the second Angel 343.
Luxuriousness of Popish Rome 467. Lyras mysteries about the seats and Elders
90. His interpretation of the Red horse 110.
M.
MAgog the 2 son of Iaphet 533. 534. Mahumet an impostor, and a robber 171.
Mahumetismes original 186. His answer to the Saracens 186. Mahumet Emperor of
the Turks vanquished Constantinople 190. How many Empires and kingdoms he took
from the Christians 191. The Majesty of the heavenly city 576. Man or Manna
whence so called 45. the hidden Manna ibid. The Manner of judging among the
Ancients 46. Marcionites refuted 24. Martyrs in their troubles fled to Christ
by prayer, not to any creature 133. their future state in heaven 135. Martyrs
described 148. whence they have their white robes, and how they are made white
146. 148. their death is Christ's victory 108. Maximilla a false prophetess 49.
The measuring of the Temple is the Churches reformation 211. The measuring rod
or reed of the Church 212. Melito commended for sanctity and Martyrdom 53. 54.
Whether he were Bishop of Sardis ibid. Merits of ours are nothing before God
33. Christ does not establish the Merits of works 69. Merits of works refuted
13. 59. 357. 384. 545. Metonymicall and Sacramental phrases 24. 419. Michael
is Christ 266. The exposition of the word Michael ibid. Miracles of Antichrist
308. How they differ from true Miracles 309. Antichrists miracles according to
Jesuits ibid Mixture of Ecclesiastical rites with Paganism and Judaisme when
brought in 76 Monks original 117. Montanus blasphemously affirmed that he was
the comforter 49. The Moon red with blood, what it signifies 128. It is the
Church ibid. The Moon receives its light from the Sun ibid. The Moon under the
feet of the woman 259 The Morning Star 52. 53. Moses his twofold song 368. The
Mother of fornications who 41^. Mountains removed 130. They denote Emperors and
Christian kings ibid. The Mountain cast into the sea what it notes 160. MYRIAS
what 189. Mysteries of the faith whither four 92. The Mystery of the Angel with
the Golden Censer expounded 154. Mystical famine proclaimed 114.
N.
Natural misery of all men 78. The Name of God written on the faithful 73.
The Name of the City of God ibid. The Name of Christ ibid. The Name of God the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost is seldom absolutely expressed in the Revelation 8.
The Names of the Elect written in the book of life shall never be blotted out
61. The new Name no man knows but he that has it 46. The Name of the
General how known unto no man 490. why he has his name written on his thigh
492. The Names of the Apostles why written on the foundations of the city 561.
The Nations that were saved, how they are both the city and the citizens 569.
The nations possessing the inward court 215. New heaven and the new earth
whither taken allegorically or properly 549. 550. The New Jerusalem how it
descends from heaven 551. Its original ibid. Etymology 560. walls and gates
561. foundations ibid. foursquare figure 562. quantity ibid. it glitters with
gold 563. the matter of the gates 566. court ibid. temple 567. light 568.
citizens 569. her peace and tranquillity 570. glory 571. pleasantness 574.
purity and majesty 576. her governor ibid. her felicity 577. The New opinion
of some learned brethren touching the thousand years examined 510. 511. Nice
taken by the Turks 192. Nicolaitans their doctrine 36. 44. What their heresy
was according to Antichrists opinion 45. The Nicolaitans openly tolerated in
the Church of Pergamus ibid. Number of the Beast what it is 315. The Numeral
letters denoting Antichrist, whither Greek or Hebrew letters 317.
O.
Oaths how lawful 203. Occasion of rejoyceing over Babylons destruction 475.
Old and new Romes cruelty against the Godly 471. 472. The Old and new Gogish
war 536. One and the same thing why oftentimes represented under diverse
types 109. Open books denote judicial process 544. Opinion of the Fathers about
the said books ibid. Opening of the book what it signifies 98. Opening of the
seals 106. Open door what it signifies 65. Christ Opening no man can shut 64.
The Open door in heaven what it is 86. OPinions of the Fathers without
scripture prove nothing 223. Opinion of the author touching the book that was
closed or shut 96. 97. Opinions about the star fallen from heaven 168. 169.
Opinions about the sea-beast 282. 283. Opinions about the book written within
and without 95. 96. Opinions about the woman's flight 275. Opinions touching the
trumpet of the sixth Angel 185. Oppression of the Church under Antichrist 106.
It came not all at once but by degrees 225. Oracles of the Revelation why for
the most part taken out of the old testament 596. Apollos oracle to Augustus
503. Oracles of the Devil wholly ceased at Christ's suffering on the Cross 502.
503. Order of existence betwixt the Father and the Son 7. Order of the tribes
not observed 143. Ottoman the Turks first Emperor 186. The Out-spread firmament
how created 130. Out of every tribe of Israel how to be understood 142. 143.
P.
PAngs of the Church in travel 259. The Pale horse diversely interpreted 116 It
denotes the Church being sick even to death toward Antichrists rising 117. The
Papacy a filthy sinck of all manner of lies 361. Papacy established in the West
and Mahumetisme in the East 124. 125. How Christ the Son of righteousness is
darkened in the Papacy 127. The Papacy acknowledges not Christ for the only
Mediator 128. The Papacy must be left and separated from 484 Papists by their
Idolatry draw the armies of the Turks upon Christendom 194. the Papists fable
of the two witnesses 221. refuted 222. their opinion of the 2660 days refuted
224. the true and safest opinion 225. the Papists crucify Christ 320. their
gloss refuted 356. Papists glory in their multitude, objecting to us the
paucity of Orthodox Christians 58. Parabolicall declaration of the harvest 361
Parallel of the third and fourth Act 145. Pastors duty 56. They are spiritual
Physicians ibid. Patmos where 18. 19. Paul has set forth Antichrist in his
colors 288. The feined Epistle of Paul to the Laodiceans is Apocrypha 74.
Peace what it is 7. The Pleasantnes of the caelestial city 574. The Pelagian
Heresy 82. 83. Pergamus a city of Troas 22. A Periphrasis of Hell 495.
Persecution, The first persecution of Christians under Tiberius and Nero 5. 19.
the second under Domitian ibid. the nine persecutions under the Roman tyrants
110. A new persecution 272. by the ambition and riot of Bishops 273. A new
civil persecution by Emperors 273. 274. Antichristian persecution how long it
dured 358. Perseverance commended unto us by a consolatory argument 61.
Perseverance under the Cross, is to overcome 72. The Pharisees being hypocrites
were worse then if they had been blind 70. Philadelphia a city of Mysia 22.
64. Phocas gave the key of the bottomless pit unto the Pope of Rome 171. A
Piece of Ordnance of incredible bigness 190. (...) what kind of garment it
was 24. Polycarpus John's disciple 38. The Pope is Antichrist 63. 320. 346. He
lifts up himself above Christ 63. Arrogates the title of Universal contrary to
their own Canons ibid. He impudently assumes to himself what is proper to
Christ 64. He deceitfully sells pardons and heaven for money 78. How he
causes fire to come down from heaven 310. Why he is not expressly named by the
holy Ghost 321. He causes his God to be carried on a white horse 489. The
Popes pride 63. He is author of most cruel wars among Christians 129. He not
content with his spiritual lightnings, draws the temporal sword also against
Kings and Emperors 128. His cruelty against the Martyrs 129. He vaunts himself
to be Christ's Vicar and Monarch of the Church on earth, and will be worshipped
as God 174. The Pope long since called Antichrist 318. 319. He is the
Babylonish Strumpet 320. How he came to be the Eight King 428. He assumed the
Augustall title of Pontifex Maximus, Which of old was the title of heathenish
Emperors 428. 429. He condemns all for heretics who oppose his tyranny and
Idolatry 129. Why he would never be present at the Eastern Councils, but by
Legates 289. His Latin Church 317. Pope Silvester 163. Pope Zachary deposes
Childerick King of France 130. He condemns married Bishops and Priests as
Nicolaitans 45. Popish heathenisme 215. Popish excommunication is that evil
ulcer 379. Diverse opinions about the same ibid. Popish Rome is the woman
sitting upon many waters 443. And the seat of Antichrist 444. Popish idolatry
is fornication 456. The Pouring of the first Vial on the earth 378. Of the
second Vial 380. Diverse opinions about it 381. Of the third vial, and diverse
opinions about it 382. Of the fourth Vial 385. Of the fifth Vial 388. Of the
sixth Vial 390. Of the seventh Vial 398. Power received from the Dragon 298.
Six effects of the Beasts power 308. 309. Preachers of Gods word how they
inflict plagues 376. Praedestination must be taught though many abuse this
doctrine 584 The Praerogative of being the first fruits to God, is an allusion
unto the first fruits of the Law 336. Praetence of Antichristian tyranny is
false 241. The vain pretense of Idolaters 242. Priesthood common to all the
faithful 14. Priscilla a false Prophetess 49. Priscillian declared an
heretic by the Pope 129. The Prison is put for all kind of torments 40.
Privileges of Antichrists marked ones expressed in the Bull of Pope Martin V.
314. Promises how far they become debts 250. The Prophets and Apostles wrought
not miracles by their own power 50. To Prophecy again 208. To Prophecy is to
Preach Prophetical and Apostolical Doctrine 224. A Prophecy of the future
condition of the Godly under Antichrist 121. A prophecy found in the house of
the Governor Salezianus 440. The Prophecy why sealed 583. A Proverbiall
description of the ungodly despairing 133. Punishments of the wicked 251. 252.
Purgatory 357. Purity of the Saints whence it comes 90.
Q.
QVadratus a disciple of the Apostles 64. A Question concerning the order of
the Revelation 365. Quintilla a false Prophetess 49.
R.
REligious worship of Angels expressly condemned in Scripture 9. Religious
worship unto the Creature simply denied 582. It being a most horrible unpiety
486. The Reasons of the Angel against the worship of Angels, cannot be taken
away by Idolaters 486. The Red horse is the Church of Martyrs 110. On whom
Christ is said to ride 111. To Render the double to Antichrist, how it agrees
with Equity and Justice 461. 462. Remedy of pride 77. 78. Repentance
described 34. 49. If true comes never to late 79. Why it is necessary 387.
Representation of the state of the Primitive Church 106. Reprobates divided
into Eight rancks 555. 556. The Rest of the dead who 517. The Rest of the
women's seed who they are 279. Their Epithetes ibid. The Revealing of future
things is proper to God alone 3. The Revelation. It treats of future things
5. How John received it ibid. It was written by the Evangelist John ibid. It is
an holy canonical book of divine scripture 6. Containing excellent doctrines,
precepts and promises of the Churches deliverance and of the marriage of the
Lamb 6.7. It has many phrases proper to it self and excelling 8. Where John
saw and wrote the same, how and on what day 18. 19. Whither the whole was
revealed in one Lords day 20. Revenge in the Saints how it can stand with piety
and charity 461. 462. Reward due and not due 586. Reward of the just is
blessedness, of the unjust exclusion out of the heavenly city 591. 592. Reward
in heaven or degrees of glory may be different, seeing there shall be degrees
of punishment in hell 71. Rewards propounded unto them that overcome 72. Of
whom there are three rancks 249. Ribera taxed 14. 20. His opinion of the four
Angels 137. His argument not solid 138. His litterall exposition cannot stand
ibid. His opinion of the Angel with the Censer 153. His reasons answered 154.
His salving of Papal Rome 346. His eschappatories answered ibid. His new
fiction in the Popes behalf refuted 347. His reasons touching Romes falling
away examined 348. He commits crimen laesae majestatis against the Pope ibid.
Contradicts himself and actuseth the Pope of extreme negligence ibid. His
fiction refuted 409. 410. 411, etc. His false opinion of the beast refuted 416.
With the common opinion of expositors about the same ibid. His quaere why evil
spirits rather frequent the deserts, then populous places 455. The true cause
thereof laid down by the Author ibid. Ribera refuted 514. He refuteth
Bellarmins fiction 535. He confesses the Pope shall be thrust out of Rome 441.
A Ridiculous Etymology of the word Apocalypse 3. The true Etymology thereof
ibid. Rivers and fountains are the breasts of the Sea 383. Roman Legions of
how many soldiers they consisted 132. Roman Merchants buy and sell the souls
of men 456. 457. Rome had no Epistle sent her from Christ, and why 22. She is
the calamity and destruction of the Christian Church 215. Her relapse to
Paganism 347. She must be burnt not before but after Antichrists coming 441.
Whether Antichrist shall be abolished at Romes burning ibid. The Ruin of Old
and New Babylon set forth by the same type 470. Ruin of the tenth part of the
great city 245. The Rule of Articles with the Greeks is not always observed
100. 307. 406. 410. 437. The Rule of final causes 448. Rupertus opinion of the
four Angels 136. He by winds understands teachers of Christian belief 138.
His opinion of the Angel with the Censer 153.
S.
SAbinian a proud Bishop 127. Sackcloth of hair 127. Signifies Roman
traditions 128. The Saints weakness at the beholding of the Divine Majesty
25. How far the Saints may fall away, how not 34. The Saints shall with Christ
judge the world 104. How they require vengeance on the wicked 120. They may not
be called upon, neither do intercede for us 122. nor pray for the Church
Militant 147. The Papists transform them into tutelar Idols ibid. How the
Saints have right to Christ 591. Saladin Emperor of Egypt 190. Saphyr a Gemme
of India 564. Saracens invading the provinces of the Roman Empire 186. Sardica
a city of Illyria 54. The Sardine its color and virtue 87. 565. Sardonix 565.
Satan His proper domicile 44. He dwells in the children of disobedience ibid.
His casting down into the earth is mystical 266. 267. His Epithetes ibid. His
action against the Saints 269. Why he was bound 502. 503. How he must be let
loose again 505. 531. His twofold attempt 531. The Scripture must be read of
all 583. Its twofold effect 584. The Scriptures are authentic and perfect 596.
The Sea of Crystal is the world 90. Diverse opinions about it 91. Why a third
part of the sea was turned into blood 160. The Sea swalloweth up the great
mountain 161. The Sea out of which the Beast ascended 288. The Sea of glass is
the world of wicked men 368. Why said to be of glass ibid. The Sea into which
the second vial was powered 381. The Sea renewed 551. The Sea-beast who it is
according to Pareus 287. Seals their twofold use 97. The general
signification of the seals 107. The Seal of the living God 140. imprinted on
the Elect 141. 142. The Sealed ones distribution according to the several
tribes of Israel is not to be taken literally 143. The Sealed ones who they
were 329. diverse opinions about them 330 The Sealed in Chap. 7. and Chap. 14.
compared together 331. The Second death 42. 528. The Second trumpet answers
to the red horse 160. How long the sixth trumpet was to sound 205. Security and
fear in the Papacy 341. Seducement by signs 310. What it is to Seduce ibid.
Separation from the Papacy commanded by God 459. Serpents have Venom in their
head and tongue 191. The Seven Churches to whom John wrote 7. The Seven spirits
who 9.54. The opinions of Andreas, Lyranus, and Ribera about the same 9. Seven
is a perfect number 10. The Seven stars what they note 25. the Seven sounding
Angels 152. 153. Seven put for an indefinite number 202. The Seven Mountains of
Rome are the heads of of the Beast 420. 421. The Seventh ttumpet forerunner of
the last judgment 247. The seventh trumpet what ibid. It puts an end to the
Churches calamities 205. The Seventh vial answers to the Seventh trumpet
398. The Seventh Angel 246. 247. The Sharp Sickle what it notes 360. How it
was thrust into the Earth by Christ 361. Shortly how to be expounded 4. The
Short time of Antichrists reign how to be understood 121. 271. 272. The Sight
of God is the Saints happiness 251. A Sign what it is 364. Signs of assured
peace 570. Silence for an half hour in heaven what it denotes, with diverse
opinions about it 152. Sins reaching up to heaven 460. Romes sins do reach to
heaven 461. Even small sins come to heaven, that is, unto Gods knowledge, which
refuteth the distinction of Venial and Mortal sins 460. Sinners repenting in
this life, have an assured promise of pardon 50. The Sitter on the Red horse,
and on the Black horse with his balance, is Christ 111. 111. 113. the Sitter
on the throne who he is described 87. Six distinct visions 84. the Sixth vial
truly interpreted 392. 393. Sixtus V. Endeavored to thrust Charles IX. king
of France, and Elisabeth queen of England out of their dominions 130. The Sixth
vision unto what times it belongs 402. 403. Slaughter of Antichristians 245.
Smyrna a city of Ionia 21. The Smoke out of the bottomless pit is Popish
Divinity, humane decrees 172. the Smoke of punishment 353. Whither there be
Smoke in Hell ibid. the Smoke of prayers ibid. Smoke a Symbol of Gods wrath
372. Socinus his blasphemous fiction 13. The Son of perdition destroys the
earth 251. The Son of Man denotes Christ 359. The Son shall deliver up the
kingdom to the Father, how 578. Songs of the Revelation 369. The Sounding of
the fourth Angel 164. Diverse opinions about it ibid. The Sounding of the
second trumpet, how far to be extended 161. The Souls of the Martyrs departed
this life are with Christ 119. How John could see their Souls they being
invisible 513. How they lived and reigned with Christ 515. Whither they reigned
all together at one time ibid. They cease not to reign after the thousand
years are expired 516. How the Souls do fall and rise again 520. The Soul of
signs is the word 470. The Souls of the Saints departed must not be worshipped
105. Spiritual fraternity betwixt Christ's members is the bond of love 18.
Spiritual famine of Orthodox doctrine in the days of Constantius and other
Arian Emperors 114. 115. Spiritual life of the Souls with Christ 514 515. The
Spouse and Wife how differing 480. Ornaments of the Spouse 481. To Stand and
not stand in judgment what it signifies 134. To Stand before the throne 146.
To stand before God 543. The Standing of the four Beasts what it denotes 92.
Stars falling from heaven who they are, and when they fell 129. The Stars
falling signifies Apostacy from the true faith 162. 261. Stars are teachers
and Bishops of Churches 162. 170. why teachers are compared to Stars 25. The
Strong wind blowing down the Figs is the Papal Authority 129. Structure of
the old temple 213. The Subject of the Revelation 4. The Succession of the
Roman Church 408. The Sum of the fourth vision 252. Its four Acts 253. The
Sun (Christ) wholly darkened in the Papacy 173. Sun and heat diversely
interpreted 385. 386. The Susian women were beastly harlots 407. To Swear by
the creature is a horrible impiety 204. The Sword proceeding out of the mouth
of Christ our Captain, with which he smites the wicked, is spiritual 491. The
Synecdoche in the 1000. years of the Martyrs reign 509. is proved 516. The
Synod called Sardicensis took its name of Sardica, not of Sardis 54. The
Symphonie of the heavenly inhabitants is perpetual 147.
T.
TAbernacle of God is the Church 299. To Take of from the prophecy what it is
Tamherlan his huge army 189. The Temple of God is the Church 212. The Ten
kings are to be differenced from the seven former 432. Who the Ten kings are
433. Ten days what they signify 41. The Third part of men slain by the Turks
191. The Third Act of the second vision has two parts 124. The Third
universal vision 150. in what it differs from the former ibid. Its beginning
and ending ibid. Third Act of the sixth vision 476. Third Angel 350. The
Thousand years of Christ's reign and the Dragons binding are the same 531.
these years are not indefinitely to be understood 507. in histories and in the
prophets they are never indefinitely taken ibid. where they begin and end 508.
531. how they agree with the 42 months 509 they cannot be referred to the last
times 510. Why they are defined 516. the condition of the godly during these
1000 years 511. What Satan is said to do at the end of these years 530.
Threatenings of punishment in Scripture are to be taken with a condition of
repentance, either expressly or tacitly 36. What the Threatening of the Harlots
children teaches us 49. 50. Three a number of perfection 394. The Three days
and an half what they signify 241. The Three Legates, how they proceed out of
the mouths of three 394. Why they are said to be three impure spirits ibid.
Who they are 395. Three books attributed to God in scripture 60. 96. The
Threefold distinction of time what it notes 276. Theodoretus his opinion of
Gog and Magog 535. The Throne of Christ 83. The Throne of God denotes his
dominion over all things 87. The white Throne of Christ's glory 542. Thrones why
set up 512. The Throne of the Beast is the Roman Sea, according to Lyra 388.
Diverse opinions about the same 389. Thyatira a city of Lydia 22. Time, times
and half a time what it signifies 276. The Time of Antichrists rising noted.
316. 317. 318. The Time of betroathing and marriage 480. Timothy no Bishop of
Ephesus in John's time 30. The Title of the Revelation answers unto the titles
of the ancient Prophets, and confirms the authority of the book 3. The Titles
of the witnesses are not to be literally understood 226. Their contemptible
habit 227. Their dignity ibid. Their power to turn water into blood 230. Topaze
a precious Gemme 565. Torments of Hell 353. To Tread under foot, signifies to
destroy and wast in hostile manner 215. The Tree of life 37. It is in the
midst of the street 575. and on either side ibid. It is one only, viz.
Christ ibid. What fruit it always bears ibid. Trees denote the Apostles and
chief teachers 158. The Tribes of Israel not reckoned according to their
natural order 143. The Tribe of Dan why lest out 144. Turks cruelty 188.
Their horses are excellent 189. With what forces the Turks Emperors commonly do
ride a hunting ibid. Their success in Graecia, Thracia, Hungary 191. The
Vetians gave them a great overthrow 190. They notwithstanding took Cyprus from
the Venetians ibid. The Two witnesses whither the two Testaments 223. They are
indefinitely taken 224. How they shall smite the earth 230. They lived not
again Pythagorically 242. Under the two witnesses and olive trees are
comprehended Godly Princes 228. Two Eagles wings given to the woman 274. The
Twofold garments of the Saints 60. Two rancks of such as shall be judged 249
Tyrants can do no more then what is permitted them 111. Why God suffers them
ibid.
V.
VBiquitie of Christ's flesh refuted 15.23. It is a burden not imposed by Christ
52. Vials by a double trope, are the prayers of the Saints 102. Vials in the
Greek whence derived 372. Victory of the Saints fourfold 366. The Virginity
spoken of in Chap. 14. is not to be understood of carnal virginity 334.
Visions are threefold 19. Visions why so often iterated 364. Volumina (...)
were books written within and without 97. Voices and thunders what they note
156. Voices of great rejoicing 247. The Voice of Christ the revealer of the
Revelation 86. Voice of the Herald touching the opening of the book 98. Vrbs
and Civitas how they differ 560. Use of examples in punishments 50. Use of the
rejoicing over Babylons ruin in the Thesis, and in the Hypothesis 475. The Use
of the Saints sealing 142.
W.
Walls called moenia a muniendo 561. The Walls of Romish Babylon 392.
VValking in the midst of the Candlesticks, what 31. The War of Michael with
the Dragon 266. The Waters east out after the woman by the Dragon are Heresies
278. Waters signify peoples 130. Waters of Euphrates 392. The most deep Waters
of the Romish Babylon 393. The Way to amend errors of Doctrine and corruption
of manners 57. What things the Church may appoint 20. Which is, which was, and
which is to come: expounded 8. White raiment of fine linen belonging to whom
58. What White robes John intends 79. How we are made White in the blood of
the Lamb 148. VVhitenesse what it notes 79. Whiteness of the horse what it
notes 489. the White horse whence it came forth 107. 108. It figureth out the
first face and purity of the Primitive Church ibid. It has Christ for his
rider ibid. It was made black in the first 200. years 112. The White stone what
it is 45. 46. Whither the Church built upon the Rock can be removed out of its
place 35. Whither the Church may suffer for the sin of her Governor ibid.
Who are blessed after death 355. Whoredom punished with filthy diseases 49.
Whoredoms and luxuriousness of Popes 411. The Whore how she sits upon
waters, the beast and upon peoples 438. The Whore hated, forsaken, made naked,
and burnt 439. Who they were that lived and reigned with Christ 514. Why the
1260. years are not reckoned from Constantines time 277. Wicked men abuse the
long suffering and benignity of God unto carnal security 49. VVindes
withheld from blowing what it denotes 139. The Wilderness signifies Popish
desolation 275. VVings of the 4. beasts why full of eyes 93. VVings of the
locusts 183. Wine and oil what they signify 115. The Wine of fornication
407. The Woman clothed with the sun 256. A difficult question about it ibid.
The Woman is a tipe of the Church in its beginning ibid. an Historical
comparing of this type with Marie and Christ 256. 257. The Woman sitting on
the beast is Rome 409. This woman sits upon waters, upon the beast and upon
the mountains 420. The Women of Susia beastly strumpets 407. Wonderful
copulation of the woman and the beast 420. Wonders litterallie to be
understood 125 and allegorically ibid. The diverse kinds of wonders as
particular, universal Ominous, etc. 126. Wonders in the air, and in the earth
399. In the Sea and on men 401. The Word of patience, is the Doctrine of the
Gospel 69. Wormwood, not naturally, but theologically taken 163. The Worship
of the Heavenly inhabitants what it is 478. Worship due to God belongs not to
Angels 486. Worshippers in the temple who they are 213. A Worthy observation
of the Author 276. All our Worthiness is from God 59.
Y.
Years with a numerall Epithete are never indefinitely taken 507.
Z.
Zeal, Or to be Zealous, what it is 79.
The end of the Table.
ERRATA.
PAge 17. Line 3. blot out Only. p. 21. l. 45. for perished read was reckoned
among. p. 44. l. 23. for comparitively read comparatively. p 49. l. 38 for
consequence read consequent p. 56. l. 28. for (...) read (...). p. 59. l. 7.
for (...) read (...). p. 67. l. 32. for which shows read He adds. p. 62. l.
14. for more of this in its place read this conjecture we leave. p. 80. l. 4.
for philantropie read philanthropie p. 87. l. 13. for manificent read
Magnificent.

Page 115. lines 20.21. Read, He is bidden not to hurt the wine and the oil,
That is, not to overthrow certain fundamental heads of the faith, in which is
founded the faith, hope and consolation of the Church, touching the person and
office of Christ: making the sense thus: Howsoever Heretics shall involve all
things with their darkness, and shall also draw the Orthodox teachers either
by force or deceit on their side; yet they shall not be able to hurt the wine
and oil of the Catholic Faith, but there shall be some to maintain the same,
that the whole be not obscured with Heretical blackness. And such, etc.

p. 122. l. 8. for His read Antichrist. p. 131. l. 31. After the words
Diocletian persecution, add, but (as throughout in the Scriptures) of the day
of judgment. p. 285. l. 20. for war read And the holy war. p. 186. l. 40. for
Cypress read Cyprus. p. 189. l. 21. for Vailachia read Walachia. p. 145. l. 5.
for behold read beheld. p. 194. l. 17. for Mutters read Muttering. p. 323. for
(...) read (...) and add in the line following under the Gr. 1. the figure 5
which will make just 665. p. 324. l. 10. IS is left out p. 360. l. 14. for
judicary read judicatory. p. 363. l. 9. for apparations read apparitions. p.
476. in the margent, for Second vision, read Sixth vision. p. 490. l. 39. for
despare read despair p. 492. l. 48. for worship read worshipped.

Number of Folioes mistaken. 17. for 19. 64. f. 62. 66. f. 68. 188. f. 196.
185. f. 285. 378. f. 379. After Page 408. 4 leaves and an half are amiss
quoted.

Pages twice quoted. 360. 361. 362. 363.

These and other like defaults through the mistake of the Printer, the
Courteous Reader is entreated to correct.

FINIS.

