THE ARGUMENT OF THE LETTER CONCERNING TOLERATION, Briefly Considered and
Answered.

Oxford, Printed at the THEATER, for George West, and Henry Clements,
Booksellers in Oxford. A. D. 1690.

Imprimatur,

JONATHAN EDWARDS Vice-Can. Oxon.
April, 9, 1690.
To my very Worthy Friend Mr. --
Sir,
SEeing you would not be denied; I have in compliance with your Request,
considered the Letter concerning Toleration: but so, as to confine my self to
what respects the proper Subject and Design of it: not meddling with any
incidental matters, though some of that kind are liable enough to
Animadversion. You know I love no long work. And as short as this is, it had
been shorter, if I could well have made it so. I should beg your pardon for the
backwardness I showed to comply with your Request, but that I fear the meanness
of the performance will too much justify it.

Sir, I am Your much obliged, and most faithful Servant.
March 27. 1690.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The Edition of the Letter concerning Toleration, here cited, is that in Quarto.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE LETTER CONCERNING TOLERATION, Briefly considered and
Answered.
IN the beginning of this Letter, Page 1.
the Author speaks of the Mutual Toleration of Christians in their different
Professions of Religion. But toward the end of it he says, Page 54.
If we may openly speak the Truth, and as becomes one man to another, neither
Pagan, nor Mahumetan, nor Jew ought to be excluded from the Civil Rights of the
Commonwealth, because of his Religion. And all that he requires of any, to
qualify them for the benefit of the Toleration he endeavors to promote, Page
48.
is only, That they be not Atheists; That they hold no Opinions contrary to
Civil Page 45.
Society; and, That they own and teach the Duty of tolerating all men in
matters of mere Religion. Page 47.


So that the Design of the Author is evidently, to show, That all the Religions
and Sects in the World, that are but consistent with Civil Society, and ready
to tolerate each other, ought every where to be equally tolerated and
protected, or to enjoy an Equal and Impartial Liberty, as the Preface calls it.

I do not believe this Author intends any prejudice, either to Religion in
general, or to the Christian Religion. But yet it seems hard to conceive how he
should think to do any Service to either, by recommending and persuading such a
Toleration as he here proposes. For how much soever it may tend to the
Advancement of Trade and Commerce (which some seem to place above all other
Considerations;) I see no reason, from any Experiment that has been made, to
expect that True Religion would be any way a gainer by it; that it would be
either the better preserved, or the more widely propagated, or rendered any
whit the more fruitful in the Lives of its Professors by it. I am sure the
Fruits of a Toleration not quite so large as our Author's, (some of which still
remain with us,) give no encouragement to hope for any such Advantage from it.

But I do not design to argue against this Toleration, but only to enquire,
What our Author offers for the Proof of his Assertion, and to examine, Whether
there be Strength enough in it, to bear the Weight he lays upon it. And this I
hope may be done in a very little compass. For, if I understand this Letter,
the whole Strength of what it urges for the Purpose of it, lies in this
Argument: There is but one Way of Salvation, Page 9, 23, 24.
or but one True Religion.

No man can be saved by this Religion, Page 7, 8, 13, 26, 27.
who does not believe it to be the True Religion.

This Belief is to be wrought in men by Reason and Argument, Page 7, 8, 16, 17.
not by outward Force and Compulsion.

Therefore all such Force is utterly of no use for the promoting True Religion,
Page 8, 27.
and the Salvation of Souls.

And therefore no body can have any Right to use any Force or Compulsion, Page
18.
Page 14, 18.
for the bringing men to the True Religion: Page 18.
neither any Private Person; Page 13, 18.
nor any Ecclesiastical Officer (Bishop, Priest, or other;) nor any Church,
Page 8, 18, 28.
or Religious Society; nor the Civil Magistrate.



This, upon a careful perusal of this Letter, I take to be the single Argument
by which the Author endeavors in it to establish his Position. And if every
Point of this were sufficiently proved, I must confess I think he would need no
more for the accomplishing his Design. But whether he has sufficiently made out
this Argument in all the Parts of it, is that which I am now to examine.

As to the two first Propositions, I have no Difference with our Author, but
do fully agree with him in them.

And for the Third, I readily grant that Reason and Arguments are the only
proper Means, whereby to induce the Mind to assent to any Truth, which is not
evident by its own Light: and that Force is very improper to be used to that
end instead of Reason and Arguments. For who knows not, That the nature of the
Understanding is such, Letter Page 7.
that it cannot be Compelled to the Belief of any thing by outward Force?

But notwithstanding this, if Force be used, not in stead of Reason and
Arguments, i. e. not to convince by its own proper Efficacy (which it cannot
do,) but only to bring men to consider those Reasons and Arguments which are
proper and sufficient to convince them, but which, without being forced, they
would not consider: who can deny, but that indirectly and at a distance, it
does some service toward the bringing men to embrace that Truth, which
otherwise, either through Carelessness and Negligence they would never acquaint
themselves with, or through Prejudice they would reject and condemn unheard,
under the notion of Error?

And by this we see how little of Truth there is in the Fourth Proposition,
which is this, That all outward Force is utterly useless for the promoting True
Religion and the Salvation of Souls. For if Force so applied as is above
mentioned, may, in such sort as has been said, be serviceable to the bringing
men to receive and embrace Truth; there can be no reason assigned, why this
should not hold with respect to the Truths of Religion, as well as with respect
to any other Truths whatsoever. For as the True Religion, embraced upon such
Consideration as Force drives a man to, is not the less True, for being so
embraced; so neither does it upon that account lose its Acceptableness with
God, any more then that Obedience does, which God himself drives men to by
chastening and afflicting them.

All therefore that is here requisite to be considered for the clearing this
matter, is, Whether there be any need of outward Force, for the bringing men to
the True Religion, and so to Salvation. For as I acknowledge such Force to be
no fit means to be used for this end, (nor indeed for any other) where it is
not needful or necessary; so if it shall appear to be ordinarily needful for
this end, I suppose what has been already said, may be thought sufficient to
show the usefulness of it in order to the same.

Now here I grant, that if all men were but so faithful to their own Souls, as
to seek the way of Saving them, with such Care and Diligence as the Importance
of the matter deserves, and with Minds free from Prejudice and Passion; there
could be no need of Force to compel any man to do, what in that case every man
would be sure to do voluntarily, and of his own accord.

But then it must be granted withal, That if this were the case; as there is
indeed but one true Religion, so there could be no other Religion but that in
the world. John 7.17.
Because (if we believe the Scriptures) no Man can fail of finding the way of
Salvation, Psalm. 25.9, 12, 14.
who seeks it as he ought; Prove. 2.1, -- 5.
and in this case all Men are supposed so to see^k it. And yet there is nothing
more notorious, than that Men have sought out many Inventions, and contrived a
great variety of of Religions to themselves: so that there is nothing about
which the World is more divided, then it is about the way that leads to Eternal
Blessedness. Which is an evident demonstration, that all Men have not sought
the Truth in this matter, with that application of mind, and that freedom of
Judgment, which was requisite to assure their finding it.

And as all the false Religions now on foot in the World, may reasonably be
thought to have taken their rise from the slight and partial Consideration,
which the Inventers of them contented themselves with in searching after the
True; whilst they suffered their Lusts and Passions to sit in Judgment, and
to manage the Enquiry: So it is obvious to observe, that notwithstanding that
there are so many Religions in the World, and that only one of them can be
true; yet there is nothing in which Men are more generally wanting to
themselves, than they are in the Consideration which they ought to use in
making their choice among them. It Is strange indeed: but yet whoever looks
abroad into the world must see, that in this affair, the Impressions of
Education, the Reverence and Admiration of Persons, Worldly respects, and the
like incompetent Motives determine far greater numbers, than Reason, or such
Considerations as are apt and proper to manifest the Truth of things.

Nor is it less easy to observe, that whatever Religion men take up without
Reason, they usually adhere to it likewise without Reason. That which hinders a
due Consideration of things at first, and prevails with men to choose without
Reason, has commonly the same power afterward to keep them from considering,
and to hold them to what they so choose, without Reason. Besides, men have
generally an overweening conceit of their own Judgments, and are prone to
value what themselves have chosen, even because they thought fit to choose it:
And this prejudices their minds against all that can be said to the
disparagement of their Choice, and possesses them with an opinion that nothing
of that nature can deserve their consideration. To which I may add, that when
once Men have espoused a Religion, it is then become their own: and that alone
(such is the power of Self-love) is enough to endear it to them, and to make
them grow fond of it: as Men are apt to dote upon their Children, because they
are theirs, even when they have little or nothing besides to recommend them.
And this also renders them averse to the consideration of any thing that may be
offered against their Religion, or in behalf of any other.

But though it be so ordinary a thing for Men both to choose and to persist in
their Religigion without Reason; yet it must be confessed that those who do so,
are not willing to think they do so, nor that others should think so of them.
But then this only puts them upon enquiring how their Leaders and the
Champions of their Cause are wont to defend it, and to attack their
Adversaries: And so, studying only their own side of the Controversy, they
come to be the more confirmed in the way they have chosen, and to think they
can show that they have Reason on their side. And when it is come to this; when
such an appearance of Reason strikes in with their Affections and Prejudices,
they are so much the further from thinking it possible that they may be in the
wrong: And then they have no patience any longer to hear of descending to a
severe and impartial examination of both sides of the Questions in debate, but
reject the motion with scorn, and grow angry with him that troubles them with
it.

Now if this be the case, (as I think it cannot be denied to be; being matter
of common observation;) If Men are generally so averse to a due consideration
of things, where they are most concerned to use it: If they usually take up
their Religion without examining it as they ought, and then grow so
opinionative, and so stiff in their Prejudices, that neither the gentlest
Admonitions, nor the most earnest Entreaties shall ever prevail with them
afterward to do it: What means is there left (besides the Grace of God) to
reduce those of them that are got into a wrong Way, but to lay Thorns and
Briars in it? that since they are deaf to all Persuasions, the uneasiness they
meet with may at least put them to a stand, and incline them to lend an ear to
those who tell them they have mistaken their way, and offer to show them the
right. When Men fly from the means of a right Information, and will not so much
as consider how reasonable it is, thoroughly and impartially to examine a
Religion, which they embraced upon such Inducements as ought to have no sway at
all in the matter, and therefore with little or no examination of the proper
Grounds of it: what humane method can be used, to bring them to act like Men,
in an affair of such consequence, and to make a wiser and more rational Choice,
but that of laying such Penalties upon them, as may balance the weight of those
Prejudices which inclined them to prefer a false Way before the True, and
recover them to so much Sobriety and Reflection, as seriously to put the
question to themselves, Wheth^r it be really worth the while to undergo such
Inconveniences, for adhering to a Religion, which, for any thing they know, may
be false, or for rejecting another (if that be the case) which, for any thing
they know, may be true, till they have brought it to the Bar of Reason, and
given it a fair Trial there. Where Instruction is stiffly refused, and all
Admonitions and Persuasions prove vain and ineffectual, there is no room for
any other Method but this: And then I am sure there is need enough of it: and
it is well if that will produce the desired effect. But there is no reason to
question the success of this Method (if it be rightly used) upon such as are
not altogether incurable: and those that are so, must be left to God.

I say, if it be rightly used; i. e. if the Force applied, be duly proportioned
to the Design of it. For, though upon the Considerations here offered, I take
it to be clear in the general, that outward Force is neither useless nor
needless for the bringing Men to do, what the saving of their Souls may require
of them: yet I do not say, that all manner of Force, or all Degrees of it are
fit to be used for this purpose. But then to determine precisely the just
Measures of it, and to say upon good grounds, Thus much may fitly and
reasonably be applied for the purpose we speak of, and no more; This may
perhaps require some consideration. And to me, I confess, this seems to be the
only Point concerning which there is any ground for Controversy, in this whole
matter.

Now here I must profess my self perfectly agreed with this Author, Let. p. 2.3.
That to prosecute men with Fire and Sword, or to deprive them of their
Estates, to maim them with corporal Punishments, to sterve and torment them in
noisome Prisons, and in the end even to take away their lives, to make them
Christians, is but an ill way of expressing men's Desire of the Salvation of
those whom they treat in this manner: Page 21.
And that it will be very difficult to to persuade men of Sense, that he, who
with dry Eyes, and satisfaction of mind, can deliver his Brother to the
Executioner, to be burnt alive, does sincerely and heartily concern himself to
save that Brother from the Flames of Hell in the World to come.

And (besides the manifest Absurdity of taking away men's lives to make them
Christians, etc.) I cannot but remark, that these Methods are so very improper
in respect to the Design of them, that they usually produce the quite contrary
effect. For whereas all the use which Force can have for the advancing true
Religion, and the Salvation of Souls, is (as has already been showed) by
disposing men to submit to Instruction, and to give a fair Hearing to the
Reasons which are offered, for the enlightening their minds and discovering the
Truth to them: These Cruelties have the misfortune to be commonly looked upon
as so just a Prejudice against any Religion that uses them, as makes it
needless to look any further into it; and to tempt Men to reject it, as both
false and detestable, without ever vouchsafing to consider the Rational Grounds
and Motives of it. This effect they seldom fail to work upon the Sufferers of
them. And as to the Spectatours, if they be not beforehand well instructed in
those Grounds and Motives; they will be much tempted likewise, not only to
entertain the same opinion of such a Religion, but withal to judge much more
favorably of that of the Sufferers; who, they will be apt to think, would not
expose themselves to such Extremities, which they might avoid by compliance, if
they were not thoroughly satisfied of the Justice of their Cause.

These Severities therefore I take to be utterly unapt and improper for the
bringing men to embrace that Truth which must save them. But how far, within
these bounds, that Force extends it self, which is really serviceable to this
end, I shall not take upon me to determine. It may suffice to say, That so much
Force, or such Penalties as are ordinarily sufficient to prevail with men of
common discretion, and not desperately perverse and obstinate, to weigh matters
of Religion carefully and impartially; and without which ordinarily they will
not do this; so much Force, or such Penalties may fitly and reasonably be used
for the promoting true Religion in the World, and the Salvation of Souls.

If then this Fourth Proposition be not true, (as perhaps by this time it
appears it is not;) then the Last Proposition, which is built upon it, must
fall with it. Which Last Proposition is this, That no body can have any Right
to use any outward Force or Compulsion, to bring men to the true Religion, and
so to Salvation: neither any private Person; nor any Ecclesiastical Officer;
nor any Church, or Religious Society; nor the civil Magistrate.

And certainly, if there be so great Use and Necessity of outward Force (duly
tempered and applied) for the promoting True Religion and the Salvation of
Souls, as I have endeavored to show there is; this is as good an Argument, to
prove that there is somewhere a Right to use such Force for that purpose, as
the utter Uselessness of Force (if that could be made out) would be, to prove
that no body has any such Right. For this is indeed the Point upon which this
Controversy turns: If all Force and Compulsion be utterly useless and
unserviceble to the promoting these Ends; then to use it for that purpose, will
be only to abuse it; which no man can have a Right to do: But if, on the
contrary, such a degree of outward Force as has been mentioned, be really of
great and even necessary Use for the advancing these Ends, (as, taking the
World as we find it, I think it appears to be;) then it must be acknowledged,
that there is a Right somewhere to use it for the advancing those Ends; unless
we will say (what without Impiety cannot be said) that the Wise and Benign
Disposer and Governor of all things has not furnished Mankind with competent
Means for the promoting his own Honor in the World, and the Good of Souls.

And if there be such a Right somewhere; Where should it be, but where the
Power of Compelling resides? That is, principally, and in reference to the
public, in the Civil Sovereign (whom this Author calls the Civil Magistrate,)
and in those who derive Authority from him: But also, in a lower degree, in
Parents, Masters of Families, Tutors, etc. For I agree with this Author, Page
14.
1. That no private Person (if by private Persons he means such as have no
Coactive Power over others) has any Right, in any manner, to prejudice another
Person in his Civil Employments, because he is of another Church or Religion.
For how should he that has no Coactive Power, have any Right to use such Power,
either upon that, or upon any other account whatsoever? 2. That no
Ecclesiastical Officer, as such, nor yet, 3. Any Church or Religious Society,
as such, has any externally Coactive Power: and that therefore neither the one,
nor the other, can, as such, have any Right to use or exercise any such Power,
upon any pretense whatsoever. (Though I confess I do not yet understand why
Ecclesiastics, or Clergymen, are not as capable of such Power, as other men.)

But in reference to the Civil Magistrate, our Author tells us, Page 6.
That the Commonwealth seems to him be a Society of men constituted only for
the procuring, preserving, and advancing of their own Civil Interests. By which
Interests he tells us he means Life, Ibid.
Liberty, Health and Indolency of Body; and the Possession of outward things,
such as Money, Lands, Houses, Furniture, and the like. And agreeably to this
Hypothesis, he would persuade us, That the whole Jurisdiction of the Magistrate
reaches only to these Civil Concernments: Ibid.
and that all Civil Power, Right, and Dominion, is bounded and confined to the
only care of promoting these things: and that it neither can nor ought in any
manner to be extended to the Salvation of Souls.

But in answer to this, 1. I acknowledge (as this Author here seems to do)
that the extent of the Magistrat's Jurisdiction is to be measured by the End
for which the Commonwealth is instituted. For in vain are men conbined in such
Societies as we call Commonwealths, if the Governors of them are not invested
with sufficient Power to procure the End for which such Societies are intended.
But then, 2. I must say, that our Author does but beg the Question, when he
affirms that the Commonwealth is constituted only for the procuring,
preserving, and advancing of the Civil Interests of the Members of it. That
Commonwealths are instituted for these Ends, no man will deny. But if there be
any other Ends besides these, attainable by Civil Society and Government; there
is no reason to affirm that these are the only Ends for which they are
designed. Doubtless Commonwealths are instituted for the attaining of all the
Benefits which Political Government can yield. And therefore if the Spiritual
and Eternal Interests of men may any way be procured or advanced by Political
Government; the procuring and advancing those Interests must in all reason be
reckoned among the Ends of Civil Societies, and so, consequently, fall within
the compass of the Magistrate's Jurisdiction.

But our Author offers three Considerations, Page 7.
which seem to him abundantly to demonstrate that the Civil Power neither can
nor ought in any manner to be extended to the Salvation of Souls. Ibid.
And the First of them is, Because the Care of Souls is not committed to the
Civil Magistrate any more then to other men. But this seems to be no
Consideration at all; but only the proving the thing by it self, in other
words. For to extend the Civil Power to the Salvation of Souls, is nothing else
but to say, That the Care of Souls is committed to the Magistrate, more than to
other men. And therefore to say, That the Civil Power neither can nor ought to
be extended to the Salvation of Souls, because the Care of Souls is not
committed to the Magistrate, any more then to other men; is in effect no more
than to say, That the Civil Power neither can nor ought to be extended to the
Salvation of Souls, because it neither can nor ought to be extended to the
Salvation of Souls.

But (to let this pass) if what I said but now, be true; it appears from
thence, That besides that Care which Charity obliges all men, especially
Christians, to take of each others souls; and besides that Care of Souls also
which is committed to the proper Ministers of Religion, who by special
designation are appointed, not only to exhort, admonish, reprove, and correct
by Spiritual Censures those, who having embraced the Truth, do find themselves
obliged by it to submit to their Spiritual Authority; but likewise to seek that
which was lost, and to endeavor by wholesome Instruction and due Information, to
bring to the right Way those who never knew it, and to reduce such as have gone
astray from it: I say, besides that Fraternal Care of Souls, which is common to
all, and this Pastoral Care, which is purely Spiritual, and operates
immediately upon the Consciences of men; there is an External and more remote
Care of Souls, which is exercised, not only by obliging under temporal
Sanctions both the Spiritual Pastors to perform their Duties, and those who
own their Authority, to pay them Reverence and due Submission; but also by
laying such Penalties upon those who refuse to embrace their Doctrine, and to
submit to their Spiritual Government, as may make them bethink themselves, and
put it out of the power of any foolish Humor, or unreasonable Prejudice, to
alienate them from the Truth and their own Happiness. Which Care of Souls, as
it can only belong to the Civil Magistrate, so I think it appears from what has
been said, that it is indeed committed to him.

But our Author attempts to prove the contrary. It is not, Ibid.
says he, committed to him by God; because it appears not that God has ever
given any such Authority to one man over another, as to compel any one to his
Religion. But this is quite beside the business. For the Authority of the
Magistrate is not an Authority to compel any one to his Religion, but only an
Authority to procure all his Subjects the means of Discovering the Way of
Salvation; and to procure withal, as much as in him lies, that none remain
ignorant of it, or refuse to embrace it, either for want of using those means,
or by reason of any such Prejudices as may render them ineffectual. And
certainly this Authority may be committed to the Magistrate by God, though he
has given no man Authority to compel another to his Religion.

Our Author adds, Ibid.
Nor can any such Power be vested in the Magistrate by the consent of the
People; because no man can so far abandon his own Salvation, as blindly to
leave it to the choice of any other, whether Prince or Subject, to prescribe to
him what Faith or Worship he shall embrace. To which I answer: As the Power of
the Magistrate in reference to Religion, is ordained for the bringing men to
take such care as they ought of their Salvation, that they may not blindly
leave it to the choice, neither of any other Person, nor yet of their own Lusts
and Passions, to prescribe to them what Faith or Worship they shall embrace: so
if we suppose this power to be vested in the Magistrate by the consent of the
People; this will not import their abandoning the care of their Salvation, but
rather the contrary. For if men, in choosing their Religion; are so generally
subject, as has been showed, when left wholly to themselves, to be so much
swayed by Prejudice and Passion, as either not at all, or not sufficiently to
regard the Reasons and Motives which ought alone to determine their Choice:
then it is every man's true Interest, not to be left wholly to himself in this
matter, but that care should be taken, that in an affair of so vast Concernment
to him, he may be brought even against his own inclination, if it cannot be
done otherwise (which is ordinarily the case) to act according to Reason and
sound Judgment. And then what better course can men take to provide for this,
then by vesting the Power I have described, in him who bears the Sword? Not
that I think the Sword is to be used in this business, (as I have sufficiently
declared already;) but because all coactive Power resolves at last into the
Sword; since all (I do not say, that will not be reformed in this matter by
lesser Penalties, but) that refuse to submit to lesser Penalties, must at last
fall under the stroke of it.

In the Second place, Ibid.
says our Author, The Care of souls cannot belong to the Civil Magistrate,
because his Power consists only in outward force; but true and saving Religion
consists in the inward Persuasion of the Mind, without which nothing can be
acceptable to God. And such is the nature of the Understanding, that it cannot
be compelled to the Belief of any thing by outward Force. But that Care of
Souls which I affirm to belong to the Magistrate, does therefore belong to him,
because his Power consists in outward Force. For it consists altogether in
applying outward Force, in such manner as has been said, for the procuring the
Salvation of Souls. And that outward Force may be so applied as to procure the
Salvation of Souls, notwithstanding that true and saving Religion consists in
the inward Persuasion of the Mind, and that the Understanding cannot be
compelled to the Belief of any thing by outward Force, appears, I hope,
sufficiently from the foregoing discourse.

Page 8.
The Third Consideration is this: the care of the Salvation of Souls cannot
belong to the Magistrate; because, though the rigor of Laws and the force of
Penalties, were capable to convince and change Men's minds, yet would not that
help at all to the Salvation of their Souls. I believe no more then this Author
does, that the rigor of Laws, and the force of Penalties, are capable to
convince and change Men's minds. (Though I hope I have showed that moderate
Penalties may do good service toward the procuring the Conviction and change of
Men's minds.) But if they were capable to work these effects; I confess I do
not see why it should be be said, that that would not help at all to the
Salvation of their Souls. But our Author's meaning appears by what follows:
For there being but one Truth, one way to Heaven; what hope is there that more
men would be led into it, Page 9.
if they had no Rule but the Religion of the Court, and were put under a
necessity to quit the Light of their own Reason, and oppose the Dictates of
their own Consciences, and blindly to resign up themselves to the Will of their
Governors, and to the Religion, which either Ignorance, Ambition, or
Superstition has chanced to establish in the Countries where they were born? In
the variety and contradiction of opinions in Religion, wherein the Princes of
the World are as much divided as in their Secular Interests, the narrow way
would be much straightened; one Country alone would be in the right, and all the
rest of the World put under an obligation of following their Princes in the
ways that lead to Destruction, and that which heightens the absurdity, and very
ill suits the Notion of a Deity, Men would owe their Eternal Happiness or
Misery the places of their Nativity.

Now all this I acknowledge to be very true. But to what purpose it is here
alleged, I do not understand. For who requires that Men should have no Rule
but the Religion of the Court? or that they should be put under a necessity to
quit the Light of their own Reason, and oppose the Dictates of their own
Consciences, and blindly resign up themselves to the Will of their Governers,
etc.? No man certainly, who thinks Religion worthy of his serious Thoughts. The
Power I asscribe to the Magistrate, is given him, to bring men, not to his own,
but to the true Religion: And though (as our Author puts us in mind) the
Religion of every Prince is Orthodox to himself; Page 34.
yet if this Power keep within its bounds, it can serve the Interest of no
other Religion but the true, among such as have any concern for their Eternal
Salvation; (and those that have none, deserve not to be considered:) Because
the Penalties it enables him that has it to inflict, are not such as may tempt
such Persons either to renounce a Religion which they believe to be true, or to
profess one which they do not believe to be so; but only such as are apt to put
them upon a serious and impartial examination of the Controversy between the
Magistrate and them: which is the way for them to come to the knowledge of the
Truth. And if, upon such examination of the matter, they chance to find that
the Truth does not lie on the Magistrate's side; they have gained thus much
however, even by the Magistrate's misapplying his Power, that they know better
than they did before, where the Truth does lie: And all the hurt that comes to
them by it, is only the suffering some tolerable Inconveniences for their
following, the Light of their own Reason, and the Dictates of their own
Consciences: which certainly is no such Mischief to Mankind, as to make it more
eligible that there should be no such Power vested in the Magistrate, but the
Care of every man's Soul should be left to himself alone, Page 21, 41.
(as this Author demands it should be:) That is, that every man should be
suffered, quietly, and without the least molestation, either to take no care at
all of his Soul, if he be so pleased; or in doing it, to follow his own
groundless Prejudices, or unaccountable Humor, or any crafty Seducer whom he
may think fit to take for his Guide.

By what has been said to these Considerations, I hope it sufficiently appears,
that as they afford us no new Argument, so they are far enough from
demonstrating what they are brought to prove.

Thus I have, as briefly as I could, examined the Argument which this Author
makes use of, to prove what he so much desires to make the World believe: not
omitting any thing of his Letter, wherein he seems to place any part of his
Strength. And I hope by this time an ordinary Reader may discern, that whereas
his Design obliged him to show, That all manner of outward Force is utterly
useless to the purpose of bringing men to seek the Truth with that Care and
Diligence, and that freedom of Judgment which they ought to use, that so they
may find and embrace it, and attain Salvation by it: which would have been a
good Foundation for his Conclusion: instead of attempting that, he has
contented himself with making a good Declamation upon the Impossibility of
doing that by outward Force, which can only be done by Reason and Argument, of
using Fire and Sword and Capital Punishments, to convince men's minds of Error,
and inform them of the Truth. Page 16.
Which was much more easy to be done, and might serve as well among weak and
unwary people, though it was not really to his purpose.

FINIS.

