PROCEEDINGS Of the French CLERGY against the Court of ROME, OR, Acts of the
Assembly of My Lords the Archbishops and Bishops that were at Paris, held by
the Kings Order in the Archbishopric, on Thursday the Thirtieth of the Month
of September, 1688. S. N.

Translated from the French.

London Printed for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill, 1688.

A Circulary Letter from the Agents General of the Clergy of France, Written by
the Kings Order to my Lords the Archbishops and Bishops of the Realm.
My Lord,
HAving received from My Lord Arch Bishop of Paris, the Kings Orders for the
Assembling in the Archbishopric My Lords the Archbishops and Bishops that
were in Paris; We have accordingly so done in the usual manner. You will
understand, My Lord, by the Copy of the Verbal proofs which we send you, all
that has passed in the Assembly you will therein see the Kings Intentions, and
His Majesty's carriage so full of Esteem and distinction toward the Clergy of
France. He did not content himself with imparting the present Affairs to the
Prelates now about his person, His Majesty would needs honor with the same
Grace all those of His Kingdom in particular, Ordering us to give you an
Account of all that has passed, and accordingly to send you the Acts of them.
It is with great joy, My Lord, that we acquit our selves of this duty, and lay
hold on this Occasion to assure you, that we are with profound Respect,

My Lord, Your Most Humble and Most Obedient Servants, the Agents General of
the Clergy of France. The Abbot de VILLARS. The Abbot PHILYPEAVX.
Paris this 2d. of October, 1688.
Proceedings of the French Clergy against the Court of Rome, or, Acts of the
Assembly of My Lords the Archbishops and Bishops that were at Paris, held by
the Kings Order in the Archbishopric; on Thursday the 30th. of the Month of
September. 1688.
IN the Year One Thousand Six Hundred Eighty Eight, on the 30th. and last day
of September, My Lords the Archbishops and Bishops that were at Paris on
Concerns of their Diocesses, having by the Kings Order been Convened in the
usual Manner, and according to the Regulations of the Clergy, they repaired
about 10 a Clock in the Morning to the Palace of the Most Illustrious and Most
Reverend Lord Messire Francis de Harlay Archbishop of Paris, Duke and Peer of
France, Commander of His Majesty's Orders, Provost of Surbonne, Superior of
the House of Navarre, the Most Ancient of the Prelates in this City. The Most
Illustrious and Most Reverend Lords Messires Charles Munrice le Tellier,
Archbishop Duke of Reims, First Peer of France, Legate born of the Holy
Apostolical See, Primate of Belgic Gaul, Charles le Goux de la Berchere Bishop
of Lavaur, Nominated by the King to the Archbishopric of Alby, Daniel de
Cosnac Bishop of Valence and Die, Nominated by His Majesty to the
Archbishopric of Aix, Denis Sanguin Bishop of Senlis, Toussain de Forbin de
Janson Bishop Count de Beauvais, Peer of France, Francis de Clermont de Tonnere
Bishop Count de Noyon, Peer of France, Matthew Thoreau Bishop of Dol, Francis
Nesmond Bishop of Bayeux. Anthony Francis de Berthier Bishop of Rieux. James
Seguier Bishop of Nismes, Francis Battailler Bishop of Bethlehem, Lewis Anne
Aubert de Velleserin Bishop and Lord of Senez, Paul Philip de Chaumont Bishop
of Aix. Peter du Laurens Bishop of Bellay, Peter de la Broue Bishop of
Mirepoix, Humbert Ancelin Bishop of Tulles. Jean Baptist d' Estrees Bishop Duke
of Laon, Peer of France, Lewis Marcel de Coetlogon Bishop of S. Brieux. Lewis
Joseph Adheymar de Monteil de Grignan Bishop of Carcassonne, Charles Benign
Herve, Nominated to the Bishopric of Gap James de Maretz, Nominated to the
Bishopric of Riez, Charles de Villeneuve de Vence Nominated to the Bishopric
of Glandeve, Victor Augustine de Mailly, Nominated to the Bishopric of Lavaur,
Henry de Nesmond, Nominated to the Bishopric of Montauban, And Peter Francis
de Beauvon Nominated to the Bishopric of Sarlat.

All having in the usual manner taken their Places according to their Ranks,
the President, My Lord Archbishop of Paris, did, as is Customary, offer up the
Prayer of the Holy Ghost; after which the Abbot de Villars, Agent; being at the
Bar, said.

My Lords,
Having received from my Lord Archbishop of Paris, the Kings Orders for the
Convening you in the Archbishopric: We have accordingly performed them in the
wonted manner with all possible diligence. The same Orders, My Lords, Engage us
to give your Lordships an Account of two Acts, which His Majesty out of the
singular esteem He has for your Persons, is willing to impart to you. The first
is a Letter which His Majesty Writ to my Lord Cardinal d' Estrees on the 6th.
of September, 1688. on occasion of the present posture of Affairs. And the
second is an Act of Appeal put in to the future General Council, by the
Attorney General of the Parliament on the Twenty seventh of September, in the
same Year; which Act His Majesty thought not convenient to make public till
after having Communicated it to you. If your Lordships think it fitting, be
pleased to allow me the Honor of Reading to you both those Acts.

After which my Lord Archbishop of Paris ordered the Abbot De Villars to read
the Acts newly mentioned which he accordingly performed; and that being over,
My Lord Archbishop of Paris spoke in the manner following,

My Lords,
The King Commanded me to signify to your Agents that you should meet in this
Place, that so in Quality of Ancient I might acquaint you with the Confidence
His Majesty is pleased to Honor you withal in the present Juncture of Affairs.
You may have understood by the Letter His Majesty writ to the Cardinal D'
Estree's the posture of Affairs at this time, and the Just and Reasonable
Diffidence His Majesty entertains of the Popes Intentions, who could not be
prevailed upon by all the Submissions he has paid him, not only as Eldest Son
of the Church, which respects the Common Father of Christians, but likewise as
a Prince endowed with an Exemplary Piety, so as to omit no manner of means for
the gaining His Affection.

Nevertheless, My Lords, The Kings most Faithful Servants are now persuaded
that Our Holy Father has worn His Majesty out of all Patience, and has left no
Room to question his Entire Partiality for and Favor to the most declared
Enemies of His Crown.

This induced him to send His Orders to the Cardinal D' Estree's at Rome, and
here to permit the Attorney General of the Parliament to put in an Appeal to
the Future General Council of the Grievances suffered or to be suffered in the
time of this Popedom, and the more since the Pope's late Conduct affords
Reasonable Matter for Apprehension to that Worthy Magistrate that Our Holy
Father the Pope will continue the same Measures in the Process of these Affairs.

And this, My Lords, to the intent that if His Holiness suffered himself to be
led away by his Prepossessions so far as to Employ the Spiritual Arms of the
Church to the Prejudice of His Majesty's Subjects and Dominions, the Attorney
General might by this Act put a stop to all the Ecclesiastical Proceedings of a
Pope incensed against France; and that the Appeal to the Future General
Council, which, according to our Fundamental Maxims, is owned Superior to all
Ecclesiastical Estate and Person without Exception, even of that of the Pope,
might suspend all the Effects of his Ill Will, or render them ineffectual.

My Official has given an Act of this Appeal to the Attorney General, who
required it at the Tribunal of my Jurisdiction; Where this Magistrate did
likewise demand of him Letters called Apotres, for the prosecuting this Appeal
in Time and Place.

The King, My Lords, does not question but that you will with Satisfaction
understand the Wise Precaution of this Ecclesiastical Proceeding, which
reincourages the most timorous Consciences, puts matters into a Regular Course;
nay, and prevents the Troubles which His Majesty indeed could otherwise
disperse by the Power and Justice of his Arms.

But he expects from your Zeal and Fidelity, that you will in your Diocesses
employ your Instructions and Solicitudes for the making His Subjects understand
the Prudence and Moderation of His Conduct.

His Majesty is persuaded that knowing perfectly as you do, the difference
there is between a Dispute of Religion and a War purely Temporal, you will be
able to remove the Alarms of the most scrupulous Persons, and dispell the
Effects of the Malignity of those that should entertain the worst Intentions to
His Service, and the Quiet of the State.

The King has further Commanded me to give his Orders to your Agents to make
His Intentions known to our Absent Brethren; Who notwithstanding their
distance, will by this means partake in the Honor he Vouchsafes us at this
time.

Further, His Majesty does not doubt but that you will employ your Prayers that
the Peace may become General to all Christendom, and that there may be a good
Understanding between our Holy Father the Pope and the King, in Order to which
so many Advances have been made by His Majesty.

His Majesty on his part will omit nothing that is Just and Reasonable for the
bringing about this Design. And He has reason to Hope, that being upheld by his
own Valor and your Zeal, God will hear his Vows, and abundantly bless His
Intentions and Piety.

After this Discourse, the Company with a Common and Unanimous Voice entreated
My Lord Archbishop of Paris most humbly to thank His Majesty for the Honor he
did them in imparting to them what was done and occurred in the important
Affairs contained in the Acts which had been newly read, being not able to do
better at this time than to acknowledge this favor by Vows, That it would
please God to inspire the Pope in this Occasion with Sentiments of Peace by
Eulogies of the Kings Piety, by most humble Thanks and Acknowledgements, and
respectful Applauses on His Majesty's Wise Conduct. Given at Paris on the day
and year abovementioned.

Francis Archbishop of Paris President. Charles Maurice Bishop, Duke of Reims.
Charles Bishop of Lavaur, nominated Archbishop of Alby. Daniel de Cosnac
Bishop and Count of Valence and Die, nominated Bishop of Aix. Denis Sanguin
Bishop of Senlis. Toussaint Bishop and Count de Beauvais. Francis Bishop of
Bayeux. Francis de Clermont Bishop, Count de Noyon. Antoine Francis Bishop of
Rieux. Mathieu Bishop of Dol. Seguier Bishop of Nismes. Francois Bishop of
Bethleem. Louis Anne Bishop of Senez. Paul Philippe Bishop of Acqs Pierre
Bishop of Belley. Pierre Bishop of Mirepoix. Humbert Bishop of Tulles. Jean d'
Estree's Bishop, Duke of Laon. Louis Marcel d' Coetlogon Bishop of St. Brieux.
Louis Joseph d' Grignan Bishop of Carcassonne. Charles Benign Herve nominated
Bishop of Gap: Jacques des Marests nominated Bishop of Riez. Charles de
Villeneuve de Vence nominated Bishop of Glandeve. Victor Augustine nominated
Bishop of Lavaur. Henry de Nesmond nominated Bishop of Montauban. Pierre Fr. de
Beauvan nominated Bishop of Sarlat.
By the said Lords, The Abbot de Villars Agent General of the Clergy of France,
and Secretary of the Assembly.


