THE HISTORY OF THIS IRON AGE: Wherein is set down the true state of EUROPE,
as it was in the year 1500.

ALSO, The Original, and Causes of all the VVarres, and Commotions, that have
happened: Together with A Description of the most memorable Battles, Sieges,
Actions and Transactions, both in Court and Camp, from that time till this
present year 1656.

Illustrated with the lively Effigies, of the most renowned Persons of this
present Time.

Written Originally by J. PARIVAL, and now rendered into English, by B. HARRIS,
Gent.

LONDON, Printed by E. TYLER, and are to be sold by J. Crook, S. Miller, and T.
Davies, at the Ship, and at the Star, in Paul's Church yard, 1656.

TO THE HONORABLE JOHN RVSSEL Esquire, etc. Brother to the Right honorable,
THOMAS, Earl of Bedford, etc.
Honorable Sir,
AS the Sun, by the circumfusion of his corruscant beams, does not only
extrinsically discover the vast extent of the Universe, but intrinsically
foment, and nourish all the particular productions thereof, by the infusion of
heat; the same does Nobility, and Virtue in great Persons, the reputation of
whose worth, and merit being carried through the World, by the nimble, and
happy wings of Fame, makes them not only known, but engenders an Admiration of
their virtues, and a certain kind of respect also, and reverence to their
Persons, even in such as never saw them.

This, Noble Sir, is the principal motive, which not only animates, but
instigates me, to consecrate this Translation to you, with as much assurance of
your benign acceptance, as if Fortune had been as favorable to me, in making
me known to your most worthy Person in England, as Fame has been liberal, in
making me participant, of the report of your high Birth, and Qualities abroad.
Wherefore, being upon the matter, a kind of halfe-stranger to my Country, (not
to the Idiom thereof) to whom should I address the first fruits of my small
labors, after my late return into it, but to so worthy a Branch, of the most
illustrious, and Heroic Stock of the Russells? And to whom should I dedicate a
History, which contains the most renowned Exploits, and the most remarkable,
and most imitable Actions, Transactions, and Examples, both in Court and Camp,
of the bravest Hero's of Europe, for so long a Series of years, but to him, the
reputation of whose in vincible Courage in war, and whose incomparable
Courtesy in Peace, together with his singular Generosity, Clemency, and
Benignity to all persons, of all conditions, and in all occasions in general,
gives me sufficient ground to hope, that he will not only vouchsafe to
patronize the Work, but pardon the presumption of the Workman, whose lively
zeals, and respect, is the only cause of his ambition?

Be pleased therefore, Most noble Sir, to embrave it as propitiously, as it is
presented to you humbly; and excuse the in-elegancie, and roughness of the
style; in regard that (besides that the Subject is an Historical Relation) my
occasions suffered me not to attend, nor correct the Press.

If you meet with any Passage in the Book, upon the reading whereof you may
think fit to entertain your noble Thoughts, in some of your vacant hours (as
doubtless you will, there being great variety of all kinds of humane Actions,
Passions, and Accidents) it will not only be an object of present Contentment,
but a subject also of future Encouragement to me, to speak my self in other,
and better Language, what the height of my Ambition makes me aspire to be,

Honorable Sir, Your most humble, and most devoted Servant, B. H.

TO THE READER.
Dear Reader,
I Have one Request to make thee, which thou will have much ado to refuse me;
and it is, That thou will be pleased to suspend thy judgment, till thou shall
have maturely weighed my Work, that so nothing may fall from thee, which may be
too pracipitate, or too passionate. Thou will find some things which will
please thee, and will make thee pardon such, as will be more for other rains
palats then thine. But above all, I conjure thee by Chri^^an Charity, that I
have spoken according to my opinion, without any flattery at all; and if thou
find some things, whereof thou art better informed then I, thou will do me
the favor to remember, that being in a private Condition, and not having been
admitted into the Cabinet, I am not the first, who has erred through
ignorance. I praise not vice, by praising vicious persons; but the virtue which
is found in them, as a Diamond upon the Dunghill: and if I speak not all. I
know, understand, that there is more danger to utter all, then profit to
silence all.

I call this Age, the Iron Age, in regard that all the Evils, and Prodigies,
have happened in gross, which were in praecedent Ages, but in retail. For if
disorders were then great, in some corners, they are so, now, every where. If
thou laugh at my opinion, Noah was also mocked, for having exhorted the people
to Repentance, and began the Ark, about a hundred years before the Deluge.

No body knows, when the Great Judge will come; but the Prodigies advertise us
to keep our selves ready, that so we may not be found as in the days of Noah,
Eating, and drinking, without care. Farewell.

A TA.

A TABLE Of the Chapters.
PART. I.
BOOK. I.
CHAP. I. THe State of Europe, toward the end of the precedent Age. Page 1.
CHAP. II. Of the war of Hungary. The Mutiny of the French, rigorously punished.
The Duke of Mercoeurs death. Whence came the Inhabitants of Transylvania. Page
3. CHAP. III. Of Russia, or Muscovia: the Religion. The History of Demetrius.
Page 5. CHAP. IV. Of Poland: the Government: the Religion. Henry Duke of Ainiou
elected King, and afterward Sigismund of Sweden, and Maximilian of Austria,
who was taken prisoner in a Battle. Page 6. CHAP. V. Of Sweden. The disorder,
which happened between King Sigismund, and his Uncle Charles, and why? The
success of their Arms. Page 9. CHAP. VI. Of Denmark; the description thereof.
Page 11. CHAP. VII. Of great Britain. The History of the Earl of Gowrey. Page
12. CHAP. VIII. Of Italy, Lorrain, and Savoy. Page 13. CHAP. IX. The jealousies
between the two Crowns, and why? The House of Burgundy. Page 15. CHAP. X. A
relation of the evils which have happened in France, under the minority of the
Kings, and by the diversity of Religions. The jealousy, about the power of the
Guisards, or the House of Guise. Page 17. CHAP. XI. Commotions in the
Low Countries, and why? In fine, the Peace of Vervins follows. The Donation of
the Low Countries, to the Infanta. Page 18. CHAP. XII. The Archduke goes into
Spain, and the Admiral into the Duchy of Cleveland. The death of King Philip.
His admirable patience. Page 21. CHAP. XIII. The difference which happened
between the counts of Freezland, and the town of Embden. The States put in a
Garrison. Page 22. CHAP. XIV. Of the changes which happened about matter of
Religion, in the precedent Ages; and motives for our design, drawn from those
revolutions. Luther writes against the Pope. The Rebellion of the Peasants in
Germany. Page 24. CHAP. XV. The Anabaptists at Munster. The Reformates in
France. A change of Religion in England, by what means? The King repudiates his
wife. The Queens Speech. He makes himself Head of the Church. Luther writes to
him. His miserable death. Page 10. CHAP. XVI. Queen Elizabeth banishes the
Catholic Religion out of England again, by degrees. The Protestant Religion
goes into Scotland, under the Bastard Murrey, who swayes the Scepter. It is
called the Congregation; fortified by Queen Elizabeth; and the Hughenots of
France. Page 29. CHAP. XVII. Religion gives diverse pretexts; causes jealousies.
The Latin, and Greek Religion. Page 32.
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. THe Queen, and the States refuse peace. The Archduke returns from
Spain. Henry polishes his Kingdom, makes war upon the Duke of Savoy. Page 34.
CHAP. II. King Henry gives his sister in marriage to the Marquis du Pont.
Marries Mary of Medicis; wages war against the Duke of Savoy. The Enterprise of
the said Duke, upon Geneva. Page 35. CHAP. III. The Jubily. Biron put to death.
The Battle of Flanders. La Burlotte killed. Rhinbergh yields. Page 37. CHAP.
IV. The Siege of Ostend. Maurice endeavors to surprise Boisleducq, besieges
Grave, and takes it. Page 38. CHAP. V. Peace between the Spaniards, and the
English. King Henry establishes the Jesuits. Father Cotton hurt. The war is
carried on about the Rheyn. Page 41. CHAP. VI. The difference which happened
between Pope Paul the fifth, and the Republic of Venice, and why? the peace is
made. The Duke of Brunswick endeavors to surprise the town. The King of
Denmark goes into England. The continuation of the war in the Low Countries.
Page 42. CHAP. VII. The taking of Ringbergh. The mutiny of the Spaniards. The
Siege of Grol raised, by the promptitude of the Marquis. The first overture for
a Truce rejected. Page 44. CHAP. VIII. The defeat of the Spanish Armada. The
Enterprise upon Sluice failed. The continuance of the Treaty. Spinola arrives at
the Haghe. The Treaty being broaken again, is renewed at Antwerp, where the
Truce is made for twelve years. Page 46. CHAP. IX. The State of France. The
King goes to Sedan. Troubles in Austria, and Bohemia. A Conjuration discovered
in Spain and the Mores banished. Page 48. CHAP. X. A brief description of the
Kingdoms of Spain, and France. Page 50. CHAP. XI. The King of France arms. The
Spaniards do the same. All is full of joy, and fear. He is killed. His
education. Page 53. CHAP. XII. The difference which happened, about the Duchy
of Juleers, or Gulick. Jealousy between the Catholics and Protestants, why? A
tumult at Donawerdt an Imperial town, about a Procession. Gulick besieged by
Prince Maurice, and the French, yields. The Princes will not admit of a
Sequestration. Page 56. CHAP. XIII. A tumult in Poland, and why? They suddenly
arm. The Swedes, and Muscovits serve themselves of this occasion, against the
Polanders, who loose Smolensko. Treason discovered in England. The troubles at
Paris appeased. Rodolph dies. Page 58. CHAP. XIV. The war between the Danes,
and Swedes; the reasons why? Colmar taken. Charles dies. The Queen-Regent
purchases a double marriage in Spain. The town of Aix taken, and Newburgh
succored by Spinola, Page 60. CHAP. XV. The differences which happened in the
United Provinces. Barneveldt is beheaded, and the Religion of Arminians
condemned. King Lewis humbles the Hughenots, and reduces Bearn. Page 62.
THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. THe Prodigies which preceded the wars of Germany. A description of
the Kingdom of Bohemia. Ancient differences about Religion. The wars of Zisca
compared to this. Page 66. CHAP. II. The Bohemians take Arms, and why? All the
Princes interest themselves in this war. Ferdinand elected Emperor. Page 69.
CHAP. III. The following of the war of Bohemia. The Battle of Prague. Frederick
flies, and forsakes the town, together with his people. Page 71. CHAP. IV. War
against the Hughenots, and why? A new difference betwixt the House of Austria,
and the Venetians. Page 80. CHAP. V. The War of Austria, of Lusatia, of
Moravia, and of the Palatinat. Page 76. CHAP. VI. The War of Transylvania. The
King of Poland treacherously wounded. War between the Poles, and the Turks.
Page 78. CHAP. VII. War in the Palatinat. Tilly beaten, takes his revenge, and
defeates the Marquis of Baden. The Bishop of Halberstadt makes himself known
in Westphalia, is beaten, passes with Mansfeldt through Lorraine, and incamps
before Sedan. Page 73. CHAP. VIII. The continuance of the war between the
Polanders, and the Turks. The Tragical end of young Osman, The Death of some
Lords. Page 82. CHAP. IX. Sadness in the United Provinces, for the ill success
of Fredericks affairs. The war begins again between them, and the Spaniards.
Gulick, and Pape-mutz yield themselves. Count Henry suspected, and why? Page
83. CHAP. X. Berghen is besieged. Mansfeldt and his Bishop beaten by Cordua;
come to succor the Hollanders. The Duke of Bouillous death, and a summary of
his life. Spinola quits the siege, Mansfeldt goes into Freezland. The third war
in France. Page 85. CHAP. XI. Of the Swissers, and Grizous, and their
Government. The fall of a Mountain. Soubize breaks the Peace. The death of the
Great Priour, and of the Marshal of Ornano. Page 88. CHAP. XII. Mansfeldt seeks
succor every where; puts an Army on foot again. The marriage of the Prince of
Wales, with a Danghter of France, after his return from Spain. Page 91. CHAP.
XIII. The siege of Breda. Enterprises upon Antwerp. Page 93.
THE FOURTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. The war of Denmark. The Allyances of the Kings of England, France and
Denmark, as also of the States of Holland, against the Emperor. Page 96. CHAP.
II. The prosecution of the second war against the Hughenots. The Peace is made
by the intercession of the King of England, the Venetians, and the Hollanders.
War between the English, and the French, and why? The beginning of the third,
and last war, against the Hughenots. Cardinal Richelieu makes himself known,
admired, and feared. The siege, and reduction of Rochell. Page 99. CHAP. III.
The following of the war of Denmark, unfortunate to the Danes. Wallenstein
besiedges Stralsund in vain. The peace is made. Page 103. CHAP. IV. The war of
the Peasants, or Country People of Austria. Page 105. CHAP. V. The death of
Prince Maurice, and of the King of England. The siege of Groll. The state of
Lorraine. The Jubily at Rome. Bethleem Gabor makes war against the Emperor;
and obtaines peace. Page 106. CHAP. VI. Gustave King of Sweden attacks
Broussia, or Prussia. The Imperialists succor the Poles. Truce is made for six
years. Page 108. CHAP. VII. The siege of Boisleducq, or the Bosse. The
Imperialists under Montecuculi, join with the Count of Bergh, who enters the
Velaw. The taking of Wesel. Page 110. CHAP. VIII. The following of the last war
against the Reformates in France. The Duke of Rohan makes his peace. All the
Towns stoop, and throw down their Fortifications. The end of the Party. Page
112. CHAP. IX. The death of Bethleem Gabor. Ragoski his Successor. The
marriage of Ferdinand the third, with the King of Spaines Sister. Page 114.
CHAP. X. The War of Italy, for the succession of the Duchy of Mantua; where in
the Emperor, and the two Crowns interessed themselves. Page 115. CHAP. XI. The
continuance of the war of Italy. The Venctians beaten. Pignarola taken. Mantua
taken, and pilladged. The peace is made with restitution, on both sides. Page
117. CHAP. XII. Cardinal Richelieu makes peace with the English; studies new
Allyances, to attack the House of Austria. Page 119. CHAP. XIII. A description
of the state of the Empire. The Election of the King of the Romans. Page 121.
CHAP. XIV. A description, of the three States of the Empire. The Hanse-Towns.
Page 123. CHAP. XV. The principal motives of the decline of the Empire. Page
125. CHAP. XVI. The Emperor redemands the Ecclesiastical Lands, and Goods,
taken after the Composition of Passavia. Alteration amongst the Protestants.
Page 126. CHAP. XVII. The Assembly at Ratisbone, where Frithland is
exanctorated, or dismissed from his Charge. Page 128. CHAP. XVIII. The King of
Swedens entrance into Germany. His reasons why? Those of the Emperor.
Allyances with Bogislaus. He blocks up the Sea-towns. Tilly retakes the
Generalate, against his will. Page 129. CHAP. XIX. The Siege of Magdeburgh, The
Duke of Lawenburgh beaten, and taken near the Elbe, The King Gustave takes
Francsurt upon the Oder, and beats the Imperialists. Page 131. CHAP. XX. The
Protestants make Alliance with Gustave. Magdeburgh taken by force. Page 134.
CHAP. XXI. The Battle of Leipsick; the flight of the Imperialists. Page 136.
CHAP. XXII. The Cardinal pries upon the affairs of Germany; abuses the Duke of
Lorraine. Papenheim retakes Westphalia; succors Magdeburgh, and beats the
Swedes. Page 139. CHAP. XXIII. The taking of the Fleet of Shallops near
Berghenup-zoom. Wallenstein resakes the Generallat, with Conditions of too much
advantage. An Earthquake at Naples. The Mountain of Soma vomits fire. Page
141. CHAP. XXIV. George I and grave of Darmstadt obtaines Newtrality, and why?
Horn beaten by Tilly. The King makes his entry at Nurembergh. Tilly retires.
The King takes Donawerdt: passes the Leck: makes Tillies troops retreat with
confusion. Tillies death: his Elogies. The Siege of Ingolstadt. The taking of
Ratisbone. Diverse Instruction of the Ambassadors of France. The Eagle in
danger, succored by whom? Page 143. CHAP. XXV. The Count of Bergues, disgusted
at the Kings service, goes secretly to the Haghe. The Siege of Mastricht.
Papenheim being repulsed, returns into Germany. Limburgh follows Mastricht;
and the Deputies, the Prince to the Haghe. Page 146. CHAP. XXVI. Wallenstein
drives the Saxons out of Bohemia, draws toward Nurembergh. The Tragedy which
happened at Rostock. Gallasso, and Holck, in Misnia. The King goes out of
Bavaria, and incamps before the said town: sends for all his Forces. Papenheims
success. Page 148. CHAP. XXVII. The Armies are encamped before Nurembergh. The
Skermishes. They depart from thence. The Battle of Lutzen. The death of
Gustave. Papenheim, and Feederick. Page 150. CHAP. XXVIII. The Electour of
Trevirs takes the protection of France. Monsieur enters the Kingdoms with an
Army. The brave Duke of Montmorancyes death. Page 152. CHAP. XXIX. The King of
Sweden regretted, and by whom? Wallenstein causes some of his Officers to be
executed. John de Werdt makes himself known. The Battle of Hamelen. The
cruelty of Conquerours. Brisack succored by the Duke of Feria. War in the
Archbishopric of Colein. Page 153. CHAP. XXX. The Siege of Nancy. Rantzow
makes himself known, at the encounter of Haguenaux, and at the Siege of
Andernack. Page 156. CHAP. XXXI. Wallenstein defeates the Swedes in Silesia.
The Inhabitants of Colein, retract the Agreement made before Nancy. The
tragical death of the said Wallenstein. Page 156. CHAP. XXXII. The Siege of
Smolensko raised. The King of Poland forces an Army of a hundred and twenty
thousand men, to have recourse to his mercy. He makes peace with the Muscovits.
Chastises the Turks, The Infanto's death. The taking of Rinbergh. Aitona puts
the Milttia in good posture, and takes some Lords prisoners. Page 160. CHAP.
XXXIII. The Siege of Ratisbone. The taking of the town. Aldringers death. The
Cardinal Infanto joins with the King of Hungary. The Protestants recollect all
their Forces. The bufinesse of Nortlinghen. The Victory of the Imperalists. The
Cardinal Infanto goes into the Low Countries. Page 162.
THE SECOND PART.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. THe peace made at Prague, after the reduction of many places, and
small States. The complaints of the Swedes. Page 165. CHAP. II. The Answer to
the complaints of the Swedes. The Cardinal will besiege Colein, The States
refuse succor. He seeks to ruin the House of Lorraine. The Princess Nicoll
at Paris. Prince Francis carried to the Cittadell of Nancy. Page 167. CHAP.
III. The Imperialists wast in the Duchy of Wirtembergh. The French come to
succor the Swedes. Philipsburgh taken by a prank of war. The Cardinal Infanto
enters Brussels, and the Duke of Orleans departs. Page 169. CHAP. IV. The King
of France declares war against the Cardinal Infanto, and why? The Spaniards are
beaten. The taking of the Fort of Schenck. Page 170. CHAP. V. The Imperialists
beat back the French into Lorraine. Oxensterne passes into France. Bannier
begins the war again, and beats the Saxons. Hatsfeldt gives succor. Magdeburgh
renders it self. The Battle of Witstock. Leipsick succored. Page 172. CHAP.
VI. Coloredo taken. The Spaniards pass into Picardy. John de Werdts Exploits.
The Siege of Dole raised. Gallasso enters into Burgundy. The war agianst the
Duke of Parma, who makes his peace. The truce prolonged in Prussia. Page 175.
CHAP. VII. Ferdinand the second dies, afer the Diet of Ratisbone, where his Son
had been elected King of the Romans. A Recital of his life, Bannier makes new
progress. Many Princes take Newtralities, and then, the Party of the Swedes.
The Archduke Leopold Generalissimo, or chief General. Page 178. CHAP. VIII.
The Duke of Weymar repasses the Rheyn, and besieges Rhinfeldt, John de Werdt,
beaten, and taken. The Duke of Rohans death. Duke Bernards many victories. He
takes Brisack, his death. Page 180. CHAP. IX. Breda yields it self to the
Prince of Orange, Venlo, and Rurem, and to the Cardinal Insanto. Landrecies
taken. The French beaten from before Saint Omers, and Fontarrabie. The
Queen Mother goes into England, returns to Colein, and dies, The Defeat before
Theonuille. The Defeat of the Hollanders before Callo. The ruin of the Spanish
Navy. The revolts of the Normans. Page 182. CHAP. X. The revolt of Catalunia,
and Portugal. The taking of Arras. The Spaniards beaten before Carall. The
Hollanders beaten before Hulst. Page 186. CHAP. XI. The prudence of the
Cardinal-Duke. The Duke of Lorraine goes to Paris, and why? the Count of
Soissons, the Dukes of Guise, and Bouillon, retyres themselves to Sedan; where
they and Lamboy beat the Marshall of Castillon. The taking of Air. The
Cardinal Infanto retyres to Brussells. His death. Page 189. CHAP. XII. Whether
the House of Austria aspire to an universal Monarchy, and whether the reasons
be sufficient, which accuse it of aspiring to it. Why France retains Lorraine.
Page 191. CHAP. XIII. Piccolomini raises the Siege from before Wolfenbottel
with loss. Torstenson arrives from Sweden with a supply. Lamboy beaten, and
taken prisoner. The progress of the Swedes in Silesia. The Imperialists
defeated before Leipsick, recollect themselves, after having punished the
slacknesse of the soldiers, and raise the Siege of Friburgh. The Battle of
Honcourt. The Expleits in Catalunia. The death of Monsieur le Grand. The death
of the Great Cardinal. An Epitome of his life. Page 194. CHAP. XIV. The death
of Lewis the Just. The Battle of Rocroy. The Battle of Dudling. The Swedes
enter into Holstein. Page 198. CHAP. XV. Of the war of Denmark, with all the
circumstances thereof. Page 200. CHAP. XVI. Gallasso retyres out of Holstein,
and is ruined by Torstenson at Magdeburgh. The Battle of Lankewitz. The
Exploits of the French in Alsatia, under the conduct of the Duke of Anguien.
The taking of Philipsburgh. 203. CHAP. XVII. The deplorable state of the
obedient Low Countries. The taking of many of the strongest towns in Flanders.
Page 206. CHAP. XVIII. The war of England, The Tragical death of the King. Page
208. CHAP. XIX. A continuation of the Exploits in Flanders. The Ba^tail of
Len^^. Page 212. CHAP. XX. The Peace between the King of Spain, and the
Confederated States. The remarkable siege of Brin. Torstenson quits the
Generalate. Page 213. CHAP. XXI. The difference which happened betwixt the two
Families of the Landgraves. The Battles of Mergendal, and Nortlinghen. General
Mercy's death. Page 216. CHAP. XXII. The Exploits of the Swedes, upon the
Franteers of Swisserland, alarm the, Cantons. Gallasso's death. Melander
General of the Imperial Armies. Page 219. CHAP. XXIII. The taking of
Swinsfort, and Eger. Lamboy, and Conninxmark encamped before Rene. The taking
of Retschin. The siege of Prague. Page 222. CHAP. XXIV. The breach of the Truce
with the Duke of Bavaria. A tempest upon the Elbe. Melanders death. The Peace
of Germany. The death of the King of Denmark, and of Uladislaus of Poland.
Casimir succeeds him. Page 223. CHAP. XXV. Pope Urbans death. The wars of Italy
and Catalunia. Page 226.
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. THe tumults at Naples begun by Thomaso Aniello, and why? The history
of Conradin Prince of Swaveland; his death; the Sicilian Vespers, or Evensongs.
The history of Catenesa, and of the Tragedies, which happened at Naples. Page
230. CHAP. II. The war of the Turks and the Venetians, and why? The taking of
Canea. The Knights of Malta take a great Booty; a great number of Galleys, and
the young Sultanesse, with her Son. The Venetians obtain succor, but are
beaten. Page 234. CHAP. III. The troubles which happened at Paris. The City is
besieged. The Archduke comes to succor it. The Siege, and taking of Ypers.
Cambray besieged in vain. Hennault ransacked. Page 237. CHAP. IV. Tumults in
the Province of Luke, or Liege. The Election of a Coadjuter. Tumules at
Trevirs. The Lorrains in the Kingdom of Aix, and in the Duchy of Gulick, beat
the Peasants. The war is kindled again at Naples. Page 239. CHAP. V. The Jubily
at Rome. The Princes imprisoned. The Princess of Conde, the Duke of Bouillon,
and other Lords, retire themselves so Bourdeaux. The Duchess of Longueville,
and the Vice-Count of Turenne, to Stenay. The Alliance is made. The Duke of
Orleans in Flanders, and a digression upon that subject. Page 244. CHAP. VI.
Containing what passed in the Summer of this year of 1654. The Offers of the
Portugal Ambassador. The Fleet in the Indies does nothing. The Princes
complaints. The Siege of Amsterdam. The Imprisonment of six Lords, carried to
Louvestein. The Prince of Oranges death. His praises. Page 247. CHAP. VII. The
deplorable death of the valiant Earl of Montrosse. The war of the Polanders,
against the Cossacks. Page 250. CHAP. VIII. Blakes Fleet in Portugal. Charles
Stuart in Jersey. The Kings Goods sold. Charies Stuart goes into Scotland. The
English go thither with an Army. The Scots are beaten. The continuance of the
War in Candy. The war made with the Pen. An Ambassador from Spain, at London.
The Chinese, or people of China, become Christians. Page 254. CHAP. IX. The
Coronation of the Queen of Sweden. The damage at Paris, by the River. The
diliverance of the Princes. Mazarin being banished, departs out of France. The
Great Assembly, at the Haghe. The arrival of the English Ambassadors at the
Haghe. The war against the Cossacks. The King of Scots enters into England with
an Army; is beaten at Worcester, and slyes disguised. Page 256. CHAP. X. The
Coronation of Charles King of the Scots. His entry into England. He looses the
Baetiel near Worcester. The miserable condition of the Scots. Charles's
mavelous escape. He arrives in France. The difference between the Electour of
Brandenburgh, and the Duke of Newburgh. The peace made. Page 258. CHAP. XI.
Cardinal Mazarins retreat into the Province of Liege. The Princes make their
entrance into Paris. The joy for the one, and the other. The Duchess of
Longueville, and the Marshal of Turenne return into France. The Prince of
Oranges Baptism, and the dispute for his tutelage. The Bank broken near
Waghening. Uiefeldt accused of having intended to poison the King. Berghen St.
Winock, taken by the Spaniards. Page 260. CHAP. XII. The Cardinal returns into
France. The Lords, who had been prisoners, restored to their Charges. The
Prince of Conde retires to Paris. The King declared Major. Prodigies seen at
sea. The beginning of the troubles between England and Holland, and why?
Spirings death. Page 262. CHAP. XIII. The miseries at sea caused by Pirates. The
present state of Norway, Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Hungary, Germany, Italy,
Spain, and France, etc. Page 264. CHAP. XV. The Prince of Conde comes to Paris.
The King attacks Estampes. The Duke of Lorraine being to succor the Princes,
receives some money of the King, and returns. The Archduke sends back an Army
to Paris: takes Graveling, and Dunkerek. The English beat the French Fleet. The
Cardinal of Retz induces the King to come back to Paris. The Prince of Conde
retyres into France. Cardinal Mazarins praises. The Cardinal of Retz carried to
the Bois de Vincennes. Page 267. CHAP. XVI. The English attack the Convoy of
Fishermen. Tromp returns to Sea, finds Blake, a tempest separates them, and he
comes back into Holland. De Ruyter attacks Ascue. Van Galens victory before
Ligorne. Tromp conducts the Fleet safely into France. Diverse Combats. Tromps
death. Cromwell, and his Exploits. The Assembly at Ratisbone. The Election, and
Coronation of Ferdinand the fourth King of the Romans. Page 271. The
Continuation. Page 275.
Reader, The Corrector to the Press entreats thee to amend with thy Pen these
faults, which have escaped his eye.

PAge 1. line 28. read sent. p. 2. l. 27. Now. p. 6. l. 16. then. p. 7. l. 1.
other, by p. 12. l. 4. glory l. 30. the time. l. 48. and live after. p. 13. l.
35. States. p. 14. l. 42. States. p. 24. l. last, add, But here we must note
another evil, which partly caused that. p. 36. l. 13. apprehension. p. 37. l.
16. gave any. p 50. l. 40. she is p. 51. l. 9. the point. p. 53. l. 35. to the.
p. 58. l. 16. as they. p. 77. l. 7. and so. p. 73. l. 16. storm. l. 17. port.
p. 83. l. 6. in regard. p. 84. l. 25. of repast. p. 86. l. 18. apprehensions.
p. 87. l. 17. receivable. p. 93. l. 4. how. p. 99. l. 38. inconsiderate. p.
100. l. 11. Rebellion. p. 107. l. 21. brought into. p. 112. l. 6. those two. l.
35. glory. 36. dammageable. p. 113. l. 4. Negotiator. l. 18. them. p. (...) l.
50. adored in Germany then in. l. 53. neighbors with. p. 127. l. 37. such
whose party was supplanted. p. 132. l. 48. in such. p. 1. 5. l. 14. ardout. p.
137. l. 26. will hence. p. 138. l. 5. he. p. 141. marg. 1631. p. 144. l. 41.
Novelty. p. 153. l. 44. noise of his Arms. p. 154. l. 4. at his. p. 150. l. 50.
out of. p. 172. l. 39. There p. 180. l. 10. winnes the laurel near the. p. 188.
l. 6. good reason; yea. p. 203. l. 5. unwillingly. l. 7. disadvantage. p. 213.
l. 25. to escape. p. 239. l. 3. sacked. p. 240. l. 45. at Trevirs. p. 245. l.
54. taken. p. 247. l. 7. praises. p. 255. l. 34. casual. p. 265. l. 1. dele
little. p. 268. l. 7. well enough. l. 19. or for. p. 209. l. 13. of others. p.
276. l. 46. excuse. p. 287. l. 18. now held.

Directions for placing of the Figures.
THe Emperor of Germany. Page 178 The late King of England. Page 208 The King
of France. Page 48 The King of Spain. Page 50 The Protector of England. Page
254 The King of Poland. Page 251 The Queen of Sweden. Page 256 The King of
Sweden. Page 9 Cardinel Mazarine. Page 198 The Prince of Orange. Page 260 The
Farl of Strafford. Page 210 The Archduke Leopold Governor of Flanders. Page
237 Pope Alexander the Seventh. Page 287
THE HISTORY OF THIS IRON AGE.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I
The state of EVROPB toward the end of the precedent Age.

THE Roman Empire enjoyed a profound Peace, France, Italy, Spain, Lorraine,
and the Gallicane or French Provinces of the Low Countries, began to respire by
the Peace of Vervix, All the Partialities of the League grew to be smoothered
by the prudence of that Gaulish Hercules. The Roman Catholics, HENRY Fourth.
and they of the Reformed Religion, with an agreeable harmony (to one another
grief) testified their fidelity to their magnanimous Prince, and to please him
the more, bestowed all their hatred upon his service, and their grudges, upon
the glory of their Country. The Germans, under the government of Maximilian,
Nephew to the Emperor Charles, and Rodolph his son (both meek Princes) no more
remembered the calamities, which they had suffored through the difference about
matter of Religion: Nor knew they now, what belonged to war, but by hearsay
and report: for if by accident they saw any soldiers listed, they were
appointed for France, or the Low Countries. The Forces of the Dubos des deux
Ponts, of Prince William of Orange, of Casimir, and of the Duke of Brunsmick,
The Battle of Anolt.
were soon, the one to be cut in pieces by the Duke of Guise, and the other,
after, having committed great extravagances, and made shameful compositions,
to return with confusion. This part whereof only, which came into the
Bishopprick of Colein, to interrupt the marriage of their Electour, proved not
despisable, Frances married fair Agnes of Mansfeld.
and had almost kindled a great fire: but it passed not over the Lisiere, and
was quenched in the waters of the Rheyn, by the valor of the Duke of Parma.
And so, by a good understanding of the Members with their Head, there returned
a Calm: I mean, of the Electours, and Princes, with their Emperor. Fear was
taken away; but distrust, (which casts her roots every where amongst pleasures
caused by abundance) was not rooted out. This has smothered the good Corn (as
we shall hereafter show) and dried up the fat of these rich Provinces; and that
Germany, which was so formidable to the whole world would not have since been
seen so miserably torn in pieces, if she had known how to keep her self in
unity, and concord.

Now, this desirable Aurora had chased away the darkness of the night; this
Peace had lulled asleep the better part of Europe, and the War was retired
toward the extremities, or uttermost ends thereof; as that at Sea between the
Spaniards and the English; The Low Countries the Academy of the Wars.
the Poles, and the Swedes; the Hungarians, and the Turks. But it was
principally in the Low Countries, where it had fixed its Seat and School. It
was (I say) in this little corner near the Sea, amongst great Rivers, and
inaccessible Fennes and Marshes, where it set up its Academy, so to render the
Discipline thereof immortal. In effect, great spirits not being able to live
at home in sloth and idleness, and inflamed with a laudable desire of making
themselves famous in Arms, for the acquisition of glory, hastened thither from
all parts, there to make their Apprentisage; and some following the humor of
their Prince, and others the interest of Religion, ranged themselves on that
side, to which their zeal addicted them.

How, because from the knowledge of the Revolutions of the precedent Age, are
drawn the truest causes and motives of the bloody and terrible Tiagedies,
which are yet a playing in this of ours; we will reprize our Discourse from the
head, and having reached the source, follow the brooks, and rivers, till we
come into that Sea of calamities and miseries, wherein we see poor Christians
ingulfed at this day; who cannot truly call themselves any more the Disciples
of their Master Jesus Christ, since they have exterminated Peace, and brought
confusion, dissentions and disorders upon themselves.

It is therefore this abominable Age, whereof the Scripture so clearly speaks:
This is that Kingdom of Iron, which shivers and subdues all things. The seven
Angels have powered down their Vials upon the earth, which is filled with
blasphemy, massacres, injustices, disloyalties, and infinite other evils,
almost able to draw even the very Elect to murmuration. We have seen, and yet
see, Kingdom against Kingdom, Nation against Nation, Plagues, Famines,
Earthquakes, horrible Inundations; signs in the Sun, Moon, and Stars:
anguishes, afflictions of whole Nations, through the tempests, and noise of the
Sea. And whereas the Trees, by thrusting forth their buds, give us assurance of
the approach of Summer; in like manner, will I be bold to say, that since those
things are come to pass, which have been foretold us, we ought not to make any
difficulty to believe, that the End is at hand, and that the Son of man is
coming in a Cloud, with Power and Majesty. O Great God! Inexhaustible source of
goodness, and mercy! guide thou my pen, to the end that it say nothing but
what is modestly true; to the confusion of Atheists, and the consolation of the
Elect. Let us therefore begin at that miserable Kingdom, the better part
whereof, which makes the extremity and bound (as it were) to Europe, groans at
this time under the tyranny of Turks and Infidels.

CHAP. II
Of the War of Hungary. The Death of the Duke of Mercoeur. From whence came
the Inhabitants of Transylvania.

NOw since we must kindle our Torch in the age past, which is to light us in
the labyrinth of this of ours, I will take notice by the way of the chief
exploits, and will begin from the Kingdom of Hungary, the Then^er, or Stage of
the War of the Ottomans. This kingdom is most fertile in all the blessings
of the earth, as in Corn, in most excellent Wines, in Gold, The fertility of
Hungary.
Silver, and all other metals. In such sori, as that some Authors have
presumed to prefer it before all the rest of Europe. At present, the greatest
part of it acknowledges the Turk; another is grown desert by the insolency of
the Soldiers; and that which lies next to Germany obeys for their King
Ferdinand the fourth, Son to the Emperor Ferdinand the third.

This Kingdom being tormented by the Arms of the great Turk, had recourse to
the Emperor Rodolph, and he to the Princes and States of Germany: but they
blinded by the prosperity of peace, and plunged in the delights which the
fruits thereof produces; slighting the danger which most nearly concerned the
house of Austria from abroad, slackly promised relief; which yet was retarded
by the jealousy of such, as could not by any means brook the glory of that
Family, and passionately wished the decline, or rather the utter ruin thereof.
Rodolph in the Diet, or Assembly at Ratisbone, made a remonstrance, how Amurat
the Sultan had broken the Peace of the year 1991. and taken many Towns, and
Places of strength, Peace of the year 1591. broaken by Amurat.
but he reaped nothing but wind; for it is in vain to preach to such as will
not hear. He dyed in the year 1595 and his Son Mahomer succeeded him; against
whom the Christians had neither good luck, nor blessing. For Agria was lost
because the succor came too late, as being delayed by the raines; and the Army
appeared not till some days after it was taken; howsoever there first grew
some skermishes, and afterward a Battle, wherein the Turks were roured, and
their Canon taken. But the Conquerors casting themselves too soon and too
inconsiderately upon pillage, made them who fled regain their courage; in such
sort as that they rallyed, and defeated an Army of sixty thousand men, however
they durst not pursue them. By means of this memorable enterprise, the lot sell
upon the impregnable Town of Raab, which issued very happily for the good of
Christendom to the honor of the Count de Swartsbourgh, and Mons. de
Vanbecour, (a Lorraine Gentleman) together with the French, Lorrains,
Low-burgundians, and Walloons. The Duke of Mercoeur, having taken leave of the
most Christian King, Mutiny of the French.
and recollected the fragments of the League, went thither, for the service of
Christendom: but his Troops not having an equal zeal with that of their
General, sell to mutiny in the Fort of Pappeneer Raab, chased away their
officers, and endeavored to sell the said place to the Turks. The Count de
Swartsbourgh offered them their pay, and conjured them to forbear that treason,
but they being obstinate in their wickedness, delivered to the Infidels, (in
earnest of their perfidie) of men, women, and children above six hundred
Christians: and this by way of recompense for some Provisions.

The Place was invested, and the Turks could not succor it; and the brave
Earl of Swartsbourgh killed. These detestable Mutiners, after having made many
desperate sallyes, and fought long against Famine, (the gate of favor, and
pardon being shut to them, who had so wickedly betrayed the Christian Party,)
were at length almost all caught and punished, according to the greatness of
their treason. Canisia was taken by the Turk, and Stoul-Vessembourg by the Duke
of Mercoeur, where he achieved so much glory, that the great Turk entreated
Henry the fourth to call him away. This war was finished about the end of the
year 1606. The Emperors Soldiers mutined for want of pay, and committed a
thousand robberies, which caused rebellious and great famine. The Duke of
Mercoeur, desirous to go visit his native country, began his journey full of
victorious palms, and passed through Vienna, where he was very well received by
his Imperial Majesty, and the whole Court. The death of the Dake of Marcoeur.
But Parca, envious of his happiness, cut off the thread of his life at
Novemberg.

Transylvania is a part of the aforesaid Kingdom of Hungary, and is much
peopled, and most fortill: The Inhabitants speak a language much like to that
of Low-Saxony; and it is also very credible, that they sprang from thence: but
when or how is very uncertain. Some Authors recount that a certain
Quack-salver, or Mountebank not being fully satisfied by the Citizens of
Hamelen (a Town seated upon the River of Weser) according to their promise made
him, (for freeing them from the trouble of an innumerable multitude of Rats,
which he drew out of the said Town with the sound of his Pipe) revenged himself
after this manner. He gathered together all the children of the Town, or, (to
say better) he charmed them so well with the sound of his said instrument, that
he going out, and they following to a certain mountain not far off, the
ground cleft, and swallowed them up, and as soon as they were entered, closed up
again: and sometime after it was published and believed, that the said children
were transported into Transylvania: And even to this very day, Whe^oe came the
^^thubitants of Transylvania.
there are some at Hamelen who write in these terms; such a year, since the
departure of our children. The Kingdom of Hungary for the most part, follows
the Roman Catholic Religion; though yet both the Reformed party, and the
Lutherans (especially in Transylvania) have likewise their Churches. But the
stepping in of these latter created a great deal of distrust; the inseparable
companion of contradictory opinions: The Sovereign authority has lost part of
her vigor; and her power is so much diminished, that the Hungarians could not
subsist but by the Majesty of the Eagle. Let us summarily, and without
deviating from our path, speak of the glory of the ancient Hungarians; of the
virtues, and ill habits which are found now amongst them; and of the troubles
which they suffer, or still apprehend amongst themselves by the neerness and
vicinity of the sworn enemy of Christendom.

Hungary, (anciently called Pannonia) is a Kingdom most abundant in all which
Nature covets for her contentment. She is watered with most fair and great
Rivers; which would make her most flourishing, if she had not the Turk in her
bowels: But she has an air a little too rough for strangers. She has
produced a huge number of great Emperors; most Religious Kings; most holy
Persons, and men most learned in all kinds of faculties. Atilas, that scourge
of God, came from them with his Huns, for the affliction of Europe; and many
other Tyrants, who have often rended Germany, and made the Emperors pay them
tribute a long time, to save their Country from the fury of their arms.

But vice reigns there now with so absolute an Empire, as it renders the
Hungarians very odious, and despicable. Ambition made them loose a King, a
saire Army, and Buda, the capital City of the Kingdom. Avarice hurries them
blindfold upon all wickedness; and makes them sometimes sell the Christians
prisoners to the Turks and Tartars; without sparing so much as their own near
kindred, when the insatiable hunger of money has vayled the eyes of their
understanding.

Their Kings have had frequent experiments of their perfidie; the Turks of
their looseness; and the Germans of their cruelty, treachery, and hatred;
dangerous both to the one and the other, as having made many Fields unfruitful,
and brought much profit to their enemies. The Hungarians (says an old Bishop,
writing to the Emperor Frederick the first) have ugly faces, hollow eyes, low
of stature, and barbarous both in manners and speech. And yet it must be
avowed, that there also dwells virtue amongst them, as well as amongst other
Christians; that they defend Christendom; and that their bodies are such
Bulwarks, as the Ottomans have not hitherto been able to leap, and which they
must first cast to the ground, if they intend to assail Germany. They are
almost always on horseback, and upon prey with them, and they serve
themselves of calamity for an aliment to their virtue. And indeed that of the
valiant Count de Serin amongst so many others, shined with so much glory, and
constancy at the siege of Sigot, that it purchased him everlasting praise.

The Hungarians with their Light Horse do more hurt to the Turks, then to the
Germans; and in this last War of Bohemia they offended more by surprises,
then by standing Fights. In the Battle of Prague not being able to support the
rough onset of the Walloons, and Germans, they quickly gave ground, and so
were partly the cause of that remarkable Defeat.

CHAP. III
Of Russia, or Muscovia: Their Religion. The History of Demetrius.

THis Province, which stretches it self to the Icie Sea, is of a very large
extent, governed by an Emperor, or Great Duke, with most absolute authority,
(after the manner of the Eastern Countries) however it lie very near the North.
The Muscovits follow the Greek Religion, The Greek Religion.
under a Patriarch; though yet it be mingled with very many superstitions,
which will never be corrected, because the Great Duke suffers none of his
subjects to travel, and see other Countries. This people is much tormented by
the Turks and Tartars. They have likewise waged great wars with the Polas and
Swedes; but with many losses. They were very tyrannically governed by their
Prince John Basil, who was succeeded by his son Theodore, a Prince of small
sense, for he let both himself and his Country be ruled by his wives brother
called Borits Fedorits. He died without children, and his Brother-in-law was
Great Duke after him. He had a brother named Demetrius, who (as many Authors
worthy of credit have written, The History of Demetrius.
with great apparences of truth) was stolen away in his infancy, so to be saved
from the evident danger wherewith he seemed to be threatened by the authority
of the said Borits; and another very like him put in his place, was exposed
dead to the view of the people.

Now, this Demetrius being brought up in Poland, with the Palatine Sandomir,
after he had traveled in Germany and Italy for the space of twenty years,
gave himself to be known for the son of Basil, Brother to Theodore; and by the
assistance of the said Palatime, the Jesnits, and the favor of the King
himself, he entered the second time into Muscovy, well accompanied by Germans,
Poles, and Cosacks. Borits raises a most puissant Army to oppose him, but the
infidelity of his people, together with some losses, deprived him both of
courage, and desire of life: And so he died the 13th of April, in the year
1605, not without suspicion of having voluntarily prevented his misfortune by
despair. His son was received by such as were of his faction: But the City of
Mosco, together with all the Country, having admitted Demetrius for their
Prince, he was forthwith cast in prison.

Now Demetrius had no sooner made his entry into the said City, but they began
to murmr and say, that he was not the true Demetrius. The Lord Basil
Chimouskie, for having said that he had caused the right Demetrius to be
buried, brought his head upon a scaffold, which yet, by special favor, he
brought back again to wear the Crown, and succeed the unfortunate Demetrius. O
strange effect of Fate!

The aversion of the people from poor Demetrius appeared yet more, when they
understood that he had acknowledged the Pope, and introduced the Jesuits, to
work-about a Reformation. He married the daughter of his Foster-Father, who
made her entry into the head City the 26 of April, in the year 1606.

The persidy of this treacherous people was clearly discovered a month after;
namely, the 27 of May, and their rage began its first effect upon the Poles and
other strangers, (who yet sold their skins dear enough) and others passed on to
the Court, there to finish the last Act of the Tragedy. The Prince hearing of
the tumult, left the company of his wife (wish whom he then was) got away, and
leapt down from the top of a Tower, through a window, at the foot whereof
(being found yet alive) he was forthwith dispatched. This was done under the
pretext of Religion.

He was a Prince of a great wit; a lover of hunting and war, he had read
much, was very ambitious, and went much in quest of the allyances of the Kings
of Europe; and nominatively of that of the Great Henry of France, Thus
unhappily ended Demetrius his days, in the very April of his age, and the
cruelty of the barbarous multitude continued even upon his dead body, which
they tore in pieces: so violent is hatred stirred up by Religion, against such
as endeavor to change it, when fury has gotten the upper hand.

He was accused by a Declaration, to have been a Monk, an Heretic, and a
Witch; and to have endeavored to change the Religion of Russia; supplant the
Nobility of the Country, and introduce that of Poland; to have layen with his
wife in the presence of an image of our Lady, and many other things, which are
tedious to rehearse. A memorable example of the instability of Fortune, who
when she most smiles is then most ready to shoot her inevitable shots of her
irradicable hatred against such as love virtue and constance. It was necessary
to recount this for the greater knowledge of what we are to publish concerning
Muscovy, which has selt the tragical effects of Bellona, as well as the rest
of Europe, whereof she is a good part.

CHAP. IV
Of Poland. The Government; and Religion thereof. Henry Duke of Anioii chosen
King, and afterward Sigismund of Sweden, and Maximilian of Austria, who was
taken prisoner in a Battle.

THis Kingdom was governed by Sigismund of Sweden, and had no other enemy at
that time then the Swedes, for the interest of their Prince. But before we give
an account thereof, we will speak of the manners, and Origin of the Country.

Poland is of very vast distent, and takes her name from the great Fields which
produce a huge quantity of Corn. The great Dukedom of Lithuania, is a part of
this Kingdom; which is bounded on the one side by Muscovy; and on the other,
Hungary, Germany, Livonia, and Prussia, or Borussia, to the Baltic Sea, there
are many Fennes, Lakes, and huge Forests; Poland full of Forests and Fennes.
as there likewise are through all the North, where, in the Trunks of Trees, is
often found great store of honey, whereof they make a certain Drink (chiefly in
Lithuania) which is most delicate, and yields not awhit in goodness to Spanish
wine. Now here well deserves to be inserted, the story of a certain Peasant or
Countriman, who being fallen by accident into one of the Trunks, which was full
of honey, ran great hazard to be drowned, The story of is Peasant saved by a
strange accident.
without an almost miraculous succor, which came to him by chance: And it was,
a Bear approaching the said place, to lick the honey (whereof these creatures
are very lickorish) the poor man laid hold of his tail; and the beast
violently endeavoring to run away, drew the man out of this sweet, but fatal
precipice. The winter is there very long and sharp; against the rigor whereof,
the Inhabitants (who have no want of wood) serve themselves of stoves, and good
furred gowns, as all the Northern people do.

The Nobility is very studious of War, and desirous of Travel, and in short,
of an humor much like that of the French. They express their gallantry in the
beauty of their Clothes, Weapons, and Horses; in the sumptousness of Feasts,
Weddings, Funerals, Christenings; and in numerous Trains of servants too, when
they go a woing. They are very stout, and decide their quarrels for the most
part by encounters: so that there are more Fights, then Duels. They are very
good soldiers, whereof they have given frequent testimonies against the Turks,
whom they oppose not with Fortifications and Bulwarks, for the defense of their
Kingdom, and all Christendom; but with their Bodies, in the Field. The
Tartars do them much hurt by surprises; who as soon as they have done their
feat, and find the Poles advancing, betake themselves to their heels with their
pray, and fell their prisoners to the Turks, by whom they are made slaves.

The Polanders, (anciently called Sarmass) were very redoubtable to the Romans,
and contemned their power, they embraced the doctrine of the Gospel, and since
learning and sciences have been in Vogue amongst them, they are extremely
civilized; as all other nations like wife are, which have changed the darkness
of ignorance into light, and their brutish manners into amiable society. The
Latin tongue is so common amongst them, that there are very few Gentlemen who
do not speak it. The custom of drawing a sword, when the Priest recited the
Gospel in the Mass, is now abolished, for some misfortunes which happened
thereby: however by this zealous action, they signified themselves to be
willing to loose their lives for the defense of the Gospel, and for the
ingrandizement and propagation whereof they have often tought against the
Pagans, and do protect Christendom to this day against the puissance of the
Infidels: Though yet, they were moved by this very zeal, both inconsiderately
and perfidiously to break the sworn Peace with the Great Turk; and were
consequently all cut off, together with their King Vladislans, near Varne. They
are very strong and tall, and have faces able to imprint the figure of fear in
the countenance of the most confident. They slight the rigor of the cold, and
all other obstacles, which may hinder them from a glorious death. Yet is it
also very true on the other side, that vice has placed its dwelling there, as
well as elsewhere; and that the contempt of the Laws is not less amongst
them, then in any other part of Europe. They who travel through Poland and
Hungary, carry their beds with them yea, and sometimes their victuals too, to
shun the hazard of an ill supper, and a hard lodging. These two Nations have
a fashion of clothing almost alike, which does differ very little, and they
both wear furred Bonnets. The Roman Catholic Religion is the chief; however
there be other also permitted, and freely exercised amongst them; as namely,
the Arrian, and many other old Heresies which are still croaking there:
besides, the Greck Church has also a great number of adherents there.

The Kingdom of Poland is Elective; and when the King is dead, the Archbishop
of Gssue takes the Government of the State, and assembles the Senate and the
Nobility for the election of another. During the Interreign, or vacancy, there
is committed great store of murders and insolences, which moves such as love
the public Quiet, to speed the Election. The Nobility has most high
privileges, whereby the Kings authority is much bridled and retained within
the Laws of the Kingdom whereof in a word they are so jealous, that they
always mistrust their Prince, and imagine every moment, that he will either
take their laws from them, or at least diminish them, to make himself more
absolute.

Murders are not so rigorously punished here as in other parts of
Chrislendome. For a Gentleman shall be quit for killing of another with one
years imprisonment, and if the person murdered be of a mean condition, for a
small forfeit.

The Ecclesiastics have huge Revenues, for which they are much envied. The
most eminent dignities amongst them are to be Senators, whom they call
Waiwodes, Chatellans, and Starosts, which are charges of Captains. In a word,
they are all equal, like Brothers, not enduring any superiority at all.

The Duke of Anioll elected King.
The Kingdom being vacant by the decease of Sigismund, Queen Katherine de
Medicis, sent the Bishop of Valence thither for the Duke of Anioll her son, who
was chosen with applause; and the eloquence of the said Bishop, prevailed much
therein. The magnificencie of the Dukes Reception, made the French see that the
Polanders skorn to fall short of any in gallantry. But his Reign proved not
very long: For hearing of the death of King Charles, and preferring the
Hereditary Crown of France before the Elective of Poland three months after
his arrival, he secretly departed; leaving the Polanders the repentance of
having chosen him, and the trouble to choose another; Stephen Batorins succeeds.
who sell out to be Stephanus Batorins Prince of Transylvania. He reigned ten
years, reduced Dantsick to her obedience, kept the bordering places within
their duty, and rejoyned Livonia to the Crown. He governed the Kingdom both
happily and wisely, died in the resolution he had taken to subdue Muscavy to
Poland; left great grief for his so sudden death amongst tho Poles, and a good
odor of his virtues to posterity.

The Polanders, after the decease of King Stephen, found themselves in a
dangerous sickness, by a division which threatened utter ruin to the Crown.
The great Chancellor Samotskie, the Bishops, and many other of the great.
Lords, elected Sigismund of Sweden son of King John, and Queen Katherine of
Poland, daughter to Sigismund of Jaguellonne.

The other party had chosen Maximilian of Anstria, who entering (...) Poland
with an Army made up in haste, besieged Warsaw; from whence being repulsed,
Maximilian forces.
and recruting his forces in Silesia, he was the second time defeated and,
taken prisoner by the Great Chancellor aforesaid.

After these two victories was crowned Sigismund in the year 1587, and called
by the name of Sigismund the third. He married Anne of Austria, who brought him
a son named Vladislans, who afterward was King of Poland. And this is that
which we thought very sit to recount, and which must serve us for the present
History of this Age.

Let us now pass into Sweden, and hear what the Swedes allege against the
Polanders, with the reasons and arguments both of the one and the other.

CAROLVS GVS'TMVS' King of S'wethens, Goths; and Vandalls, great mince of
Finland, Duke of Esthonia, and Carelia, Lot of J^^ria. and Ciou'ned An? Dom:
1654.


CHAP. V
of Sweden. The discords happening between King Sigismund, and his Uncle
Charles, and why? The success of their Arms.

SIgismund King of Sweden, endeavoring to put two Crowns upon his head, lost
the Hereditary one. See how all passed, This young Prince had been brought up
in the Roman Catholic Religion, though yet he were the son of King Erick who
embraced the Confession of Ausbourgh, and introduced it into his Kingdom. This
Erick was son to King John, and Nephew to Charles Duke of Sudermanic, whom he
left in Sweden to govern that Kingdom in his absence, in the quality of
Viceroy.

Now it often chances, that Princes who have more then one kingdom, grow by
little and little to loose the affections of their remote subjects, and their
authority comes also by degrees to be eclipsed; in regard that their said
subjects are not warmed by the heat of their favor, and prudence; and so
others grow insensibly to take place, as well because their presence winnes the
affections of the said subjects; as also for that reasons are never wanting to
such as have no will to obey: And besides, every one stands in fear of foreign
Rule. But the most powerful argument of the coldness of subjects toward their
Sovereign, is diversity of Religions; which causes a change in State, and
alters and shakes it so, as that many Princes for the strengthening and fixing
of theirs, have believed that they neither could, nor ought to permit any more
then one.

Sigismund goes into Sweden.
King Sigismund hearing many complaints from Sweden, and conceaving some
jealousies of his Uncle Charles, resolved, with leave of the States of Poland,
to transport himself thither with some Polish and German forces. He departed
from Dantsick with a fleet of sixty Sail, and was well received by the
Governor of Colmar; from whom he went to see his sister at Stebourgh.

Duke Charles hastened toward him from Finland, with an Army to defend the
kingdom against the King himself; Sigismund beaten.
who (as it was published) came to take the Vice-King prisoner, and change the
State by subverting Religion. So there occurred a fierce skirmish, wherein the
Vice-King had the better, and Sigismund the King was forced to retite himself
toward the Confines of Denmark. In fine, he was beaten again near Lincopin,
and his Fleet taken. Upon which, seeing his Uncle thus courted by Fortu^e,
through the mediation of some Lords, he was fain to make peace with him under
certain conditions, by virtue whereof his Fleet was restored to him to go by
Sea to Stockholm; Makes Peace
and Duke Charles (in whose hands were put the prime Lords of Sweden, who had
been to fetch the King in Poland) went thither by land.

Sigismund instead of going to the Assembly of States at Stockholm, went
secretly out of the kingdom, which he thereby lost, He retires our of the
kingdom.
and regained Dantsick Some Authors have written, that he had been advertised
of some ill design of his Uncle Charles against him: and a certain person who
was then at Stockholm affirms, that he sighed for his having let slip the bird
which he had in his hand. However, those Lords were beheaded, and their heads
set upon stakes, which were since taken away upon the request of a great Wanyer.

Duke Charles quickly recovered those places of strength, which were in the
Kings possession; chastised the Citizens of Lubeck who had favored him, caused
the States to approve of all his actions, and ranged the Finlanders (who held
the Kings party) under obedience to himself. Some months after, the States
deposed the King by a public Decree, declaring him fallen from the Rights he
had in the kingdom, and renouncing all fidelity to him; though yet still they
were ready to receive his son Vladislans for King of Sweden, in case he would
forthwith send him thither to be bred in the Religion and customs of the
Country.

But these conditions not seeming receivable, were not accepted by the King,
and the proceedings of the States of Sweden cried down by the Poles, who
resolved to take an account of them with the sword.

This is the sum of what is known of that difference, which is yet remaining
between the Heirs of these two Princes, and which is debated by very contrary
reasons, according to the predominancy either of Passion or Religion, and
according to the knowledge also of the Right of the Parties concerned.

The Polanders reproach the Swedes, for that without any available reason, and
upon some ill grounded suspicions only; yea, even against all Right both Divine
and Humane, they took the kingdom from Sigismund, to give it to Charles. To
which the Swede; answer, that the King against his promise had endeavored
under hand to bring in the Jesuits, so to replant the Roman Catholic Religion,
and strangers to check and curb them; and many other arguments there are both
upon the one side, and the other, which I let pass in silence, and which are
found at large elsewhere. Now you have had the words, take also some effects of
their arms.

Duke Charles, after the reduction of Finlande, went into Livoma, where he
gained some advantage upon Samonskie; besieged Riga, but in vain, and returned
into Sweden in great danger to be drowned. When he had gotten the Crown upon
his head, he gave the reasons thereof to all Christian Kings and Princes;
justifying his proceedings the best he could, and seeking the alliance of his
Neighbors, and chiefly that of the States General, Samonskie the Great
Chancellonr aforesaid writ against him, and cried our upon his ambition, which
greatly offended him, and gave subject of great grudges between them, which
grew at length to implacable hatred.

Chules looset the Battle.
Fortune frowned upon him at Riga: for his Army being much stronger then that
of Poland, was rooted by General Cockevietz, who having senr four hundred of
the Livonian horse over a River, to attack the Swedes in the Rear, won the
Battle by this stratatagem; and so Livonia came to be under the Polanders, till
the Reign of the Great Gustavus Adolphus, who reduced it to his obedience. All
Livonia has embraced the Lutheran Religion as well as Sweden, where it is held
for one of their Fundamental Laws; as it also is almost through all the North.

Sweden is the biggest of all the Northern kingdoms, the Head City whereof is
Stockholm, a Town (the Suburbs and Sea-thore, or strand comprised) of great
distent. There are many huge Mountains, Rocks, and Forests, where are
sometimes heard great illusions, and phancies, as there likewise are in the
water, which are very troublesome and terrible both to men and horses, which
pass that way. The country is not much inhabited, and the chief Provinces are
West-Gothland, East-gothland, from whence (as also from the rest of Sweden)
according to the opinion of some Authors) came the Goths, who so much vexed
the Roman Empire. This kingdom is full of Copper and Iron Mines. The Swedes
are good soldiers both by Sea and Land, and have given incredible examples of
their valor both in Germany and Denmark, they are of a strong Complexion, and
sit to endure hardness and labor. The Nobility is very mild and frank; loves
learning and languages, but especially Latin, and French; travels much abroad,
is very dexterous at exercises, and honors and seeks learned company. Yea, and
they have this virtue above all other nations, wherewith I have conversed; that
they heartily love one another our of their own country, hide the vices of
their Compatriots, and stand much for the honor of their nation.

The Peasants, or Country people send their Deputies to the Assemblies of the
States, to the end that nothing be coucluded there, to the prejudice of their
privileges. King Gustave, and Queen Christine his Daughter now reigning,
created much new Gentry, (which in some sort is disdained by the ancient
Families) in regard the Nobility of the kingdom was almost exhausted by the
Wars.

CHAP. VI
Of Denmark. The Description thereof.

DEnmark is a kingdom, the best part whereof consists of Islands, as namely,
Zeland and Fionia. The Province of Scania reaches up to Sweden, and Jutland to
Holstein. It was peacefully governed by the prudent conduct of King Christian
the fourth, successor to Frederick the second his Father, and Duke of
Holstein. During his minority he had four Counselors, to help him to bear the
charge of the Government. He was crowned the 29th of August, in the year 1596.

The principal strength of this Kingdom consists of good and stately ships,
whereof the King has a considerable number, as well for the defense of his
said Islands, as for that most important passage of the Sownd, which is the
straight that separates Scania from Zeland, and which is of huge advantage, by
reason of the infinity of ships which must pass over it to go into the Baltic
Sea: in the same manner, that those of all the Havens of the said Sea, and
bound for the Ocean, are forced to pass that way.

The Nobility of Denmark, as also that of Holstein, is much more inclined to
wars then learning; zealous for their liberty and Rights, and makes no
alliance by marriage with the common people; a maxim much observed through all
the North, Poland, and Germany. They rufuse Ecclesiastical Honors as below
their condition, defend their privileges, and make no esteem of others, though
by their experience and knowledge, they may merit the best Offices and
Employments in the Country.

The Government is not much unlike that of Poland, in both which Elective
Kingdoms the Kings undertake nothing of importance, without the consent of the
States and Nobility. The Gentlemen are all equal, and as it were of one
Family; there being neither Earl nor Baron. The Officers of the Crown, and
Counselors of the kingdom, have the preheminency, and assist the King in the
most weighty affairs of the Country.

Norway (an Hereditary kingdom) opposite to Great Britain, or England, It is
very big, but very desert, and has no considerable Towns, but such as are near
the Sea side. It yields great store of fish, wood, boards, and good skins.

These three kingdoms were heretofore under the government of the King of
Denmark: But the Swedes not being able to suffer the tyranny of Christian the
second, divided themselves from his obedience.

They all follow the Lutheran Religion; and the Capital City of Denmark is
Coppenhaghen; a very fair town, situated upon the straight of the Sownd near
the Baltic Sea; a passage of about four leagues, most pleasant and recreative,
by means of a Forest which borders upon the Sea from Coppenhaghen to Elsener:
of which passage, because it is so much envyed, we will hereafter speak more at
large.

The Peasants of Denmark and Poland are treated almost like slaves; for the
greatest part of the Nobility licentiously abusing their liberty, despises all
who are not Gentlemen: A fault which has drawn ruin upon many Families, which
boasted of the story of their Ancestors. But it is not enough to be born a
Gentleman, unless it appear by virtuous, laudable, and generous actions.

CHAP. VII
Of Great Britain. The History of the Earl of Gore.

ENgland is a most fertile, and most potent Island, as well for situation, as
men and ships. There reigned Queen Elizabeth, a Princess as happy in her
allyances, success of arms, and love of her subjects, as ever was. She was
Daughter to Henry the 8th, and Sister to Mary and Edward. She changed the
Religion, and declared her self Head of the Church. She was always well
served: She sent strong succors to the King of Navarre, and her subjects won
many victories by Sea from the Spaniard, against whom she continued her hatred,
even till her death, in favor of the United Provinces of the Low Countries.
She was a sworn enemy to the Roman Catholic Religion, and seemed to have made
it her task to destroy that, as well as she had the King, who bears the surname
of it.

Scotland is a kingdom which makes a part (but not the better part) of this
Island. There reigned as King, Lames Stewart; a Prince esteemed very wise, who
resented not at all the death of his Mother Mary, who was beheaded in England,
preferring the hope of succession to the said kingdom before revenge, courting
the favor of the Queen, and treading all other considerations under foot. But
heaven left nothing unpunished, which often revenges innocence upon the
Innocent themselves, to chastise them who have not revenged it.

He married Anne Sister to Christian King of Denmark, and lived in peace: which
yet was disturbed by dreadful conspiracy of a certain Earl called Gore, whose
Father was beheaded in the end of the said Kings minority. Now this Gore
returning from travel, sent his brother to the King as he was hunting, whom
when he had made believe, that there was a certain man who had found a great
pot full of gold, he led him into his said brothers Cabinet, or Closet, where,
had he not been succored by his followers, he had been unhappily murdered.
The Tragedy was afterward acted upon them, who intended themselves to have
been the actors thereof, and the murderers were justly murdered. In this
tragedy, they who were curious, found such mysteries, as their modesty kept in
silence. The Scots are held good soldiers, but they were never very fortunate
against the English.

Ireland is an Island both big and fruitful, between Spain and England; where
the English have exercised great power and authority, as well in respect of
Religion, as for the Rebellion of the Irish against Queen El'zabeth, and
calling the Spaniards to help them. But they grew at length to be conquered,
and have long been governed since by Deputies, or Vice-Kings, under a most
austere Disciplipe, which has constrained some of them to fly to the main
Land, and others to retire themselves into the Woods and Forests, amongst the
wild beasts, to seek their liberty, after their own fashion.

This Island was heretofore conquered by the Saxons, and a long time after by
the Norman under William the Conqueror. Their laws have some resemblance to
those of Normandy, and Guienne, which they had some ages in their possession;
where the Eldest sons take almost all the succession of their Parents,
leaving but very little to their Brothers, and Sisters. A very rough Law, and
almost quire contrary to that of Poland; where when the Eldest has divided the
said succession, the younger takes the first Portion, and after him the other;
so that the last of all is left to the Eldest.

The English are good Soldiers both by Sea and Land, not in valor and courage
inferior to any one Nation whatsoever, and are more apt to offend by temerity,
and overmuch forwardness, then cowardice.

Inghilterra, bona terra, and mala gente.
The Nobility is generally very courteous, and chiefly such as have traveled.
England (says a famous Italian) is a good Country, but the Inhabitants are
very bad. The English are little affected to other Nations, and especially to
the French, from whom they have a great aversion; nor can the French or Scots
on the other side endure the incompatible humor of the English.

After they had lost what they possessed in France, and all the intelligence
they had there, they fell for a long time to Civil Wars: But since, under
the reign of four Kings, and two Queens, they have seen various persecutions,
not only about Religion, but for matter of State too, where of we will speak in
the sequel of this History.

The women are incomparably beautiful, and consequently have a great influence
upon the men; yea, the Queens have commanded there more absolutely, and have
been much better obeyed and respected then the Kings. They treat their servants
and horses very roughly; which gave birth to the Proverb, That England is
Heaven for Women, Purgatory for servants, and Hell for horses.

King James, to smother the hatred and partiality which had always been
between the people of these Islands, by laudable advice, entitled himself King
of great Britain.

The Title of King of France, which was possessed by many Kings of England,
has always checked the Salick Law, which excludes the Heirs Femall of France
from the Crown: so that though the English possessed almost the whole kingdom
of France, it was more by the right of Arms, then by that of the Laws and
Customs.

Let us now leave Great Britain, and look upon Italy, where there are many
Seats and Republics, whereof we shall make but little mention, to shun
superfluities, and keep our selves within the limits prescribed in this History.

CHAP. VIII. Of Italy, Lorraine, and Savoy.
POpe Clement the 8th held the Chair, and by the prudent administration of
him, the Venetians, and the Great Duke of Tuskany, there flourished a Peace
throughout all Italy. Every one preserved himself within his own interests; nor
could any little jealousies take root, to the loss of the public Quiet: but it
was suddenly strangled in the Cradle, by wise conduct, and most subtle policy.

The Popes, as well by donation as other practices, have not only augmented
the Patrimony of St. Peter, but drawn also all the Sovereign Authority to
themselves, by removing the Emperors from the knowledge of the Affairs of
Italy.

The Faction of the Guelphes for the Popes, the Gibelms for the Emperors,
reigned there long, and was not consopited or quieted, but by eclipsing almost
the whole Majesty of Emperors by endeavoring to constrain them to receive the
Crown from their hands: A difference not quite extinguished yet. Besides, that
they have ever been unhappy enough in pursuing their Right by Arms, the
Italians cutting them out work enough amongst themselves, and often hindering
their coming out of Germany; so that all the splendor of the Empire remains
there, and is no otherwise known throughout almost all Italy, then only by name.

Under the Reign of Valentinian, the Western Empire was much tottered by the
Barbarians, which forced most of the principal Families near the Sea, to
retire into the Islands of the Adriatic Streights, and there lay the
Foundations of that most puissant City of Venice, and of that most Serene
Republic, which has increased, maintained, and conserved herself these twelve
ages, by an unparallelled blessing; by the most perfect observance of the
Laws, and by a policy worthy of admiration. This gives just cause to judge,
that they who began her, were of the most elevated and prime of all Italy; and
not slaves, as they were who laid the first stone to the Commonwealth of Rome.

In the Peace which was made between the Emperor Charlemayne, and the Emperor
of Constantinople, it was concluded, than that Commonwealth which had already
stood more then three ages and a half, should serve for a bound and gate to
the two Empyres. They had for a long time in their possession the kingdom of
Gypres, which the Turks have now taken from them. They have had many enemies,
and have often by their great prudence diverted the storms which have been
ready to fall upon them, and by the dexterity of their mannagements, regained
that which they had lost by the fate of Arms. That mad League of the Pope, the
Emperor, and the Kings of France and Spain, would have invaded any other State
but theirs: so much amazement did it strike into those Areopages; who yet, by
their rare industry were able to untangle this fatal conjuncture, and save
their Commonwealth from the shipwreck wherewith she was much threatened. In
fine, after that peace which they had made with the Turk, and which followed
close upon the glorious Battle (but with small fruit) of Lepante, they finished
that Age and began this present, in good intelligence with their Neighbors.

The King of Spain enjoyes in Italy the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, and the
Duchy of Milan, upon which States the French have also their pretentions, which
often cause frequent wars between the two Crowns, whereof we shall speak
toward the end of this Treatise, in the revolution of those last tumults.

The Grand Duke of Tuskany, the Dukes of Mantua, and Parma, keep their Seats
in peace, and the Commonwealth of Genoa hers, tied fast (for her profit) to
the interests of Spain. Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, a Prince as subtle as
inconstant (but yet unlucky enough) for having seized upon the Marquisat of
Salluces, found himself forced to put on his harness, and to leave his rest in
the first year of this age, as we shall hereafter show; neither his journey to
Paris, nor all the politic craft he could use, being able to warrant him from
this check. The Dukes of Savoy are very potent, and often seen to make the
skale hang toward that Crown, to which they lean. France seeks their
friendship to have the gate open into Italy, in the intrigues whereof she finds
her self passionately concerned.

Lorraine was governed by Duke Charles, a mild Prince, who still complained of
the wrong which the enemies of the League (whereof the Princes of that house
were the chief) had made him suffer. This Province (which divides Germany from
France) is very fruitful, and takes her name from the Emperor Lotarius and
her Princes, their Descent from Charlemagne. They have always been great
Warriers, and Godfree of Bouillon, through zeal of piety, went and conquered
the Holy Land.

The Dukes of Lorraine, for interest of State, keep good correspondence with
their Neighbors; and the last misfortune which happened in this Duchy, was
caused rather by the decline of the Emperors Affairs, and the ambition of him
who thought all lawful to him, then by the fault of the Prince, who could not
shelter himself from that storm, which had already shivered both Masts,
Sails, and Helm.

These States aforesaid, in regard they never knew any Religion but that of
Rome, suffer not any other so much as to bud, or spring there, and if
peradventure there be any one found in Lorraine, who has embraced the
Protestant Religion, he retires himself to Metz, or Geneva, and they of the
Country of Luxenbourgh to Sedan. Diversity of Religions parts humors, gives
desire of motion to such as are ambitious, and makes a Prince very little loved
by them who are not of the same opinion.

We have already gone round about Europe, therefore let us now enter into the
middle, and speak of those great Monarchies, which by their motions have shaken
all other States, as being governed according to the influences thereof, and
accommodating their interests to the balance of their greatness. For since
War has been declared between Spain and France, very few Princes have stood
Neutrall; some having joined their forces to the party most necessary for them,
and some others (though but spectators) have not yet forborne to poise more to
the one side then the other. But none have been willing to have either of these
Crowns suppressed by the other, for the apprehension and fear wherein they all
are of a General Monarchy.

CHAP. IX
The jealousies between the two Crowns, and why? The House of Burgundy.

NOw to get entire knowledge of the interests of these two Crowns, of the
Causes which so often arm them, to the great detriment of Christendom, and the
apprehensions which they give of aspiring to a general Monarchy, though by
unequal and different ways, we must go up to the source, and so come quickly
down again, drawing from thence a true explanation for our subject, which we
will follow as our guide, to the end of our Course.

France being delivered from the wars with England, and wholly restored to
her self, as well by the help of foreign, as the help of her Neighbors, and
even the very Spaniards themselves, with whom she had a close friendship at
that time. Having (I say) shaken off the yoke of the English, who were expelled
from Guyenne, and Normandy; she became the most puissant Monarchy of Europe.

King Charles the 8th went to feaze upon the kingdom of Naples, which was no
sooner got then lost by his departure thence, Lewis the twelfth having made an
Alliance with Ferdinand of Castile, for the recovery of the kingdom enters
Italy, surprises Milan, and the unjust usurper Sforce, and so retakes the said
kingdom of Naples. But it sometimes happens, that the sharing of stakes makes
friends foes; for these Allies fell to odds, and Consalve having in many
Encounters routed the French, settled the kingdom upon the Castilians: and the
power and reputation of the Spaniards increased much, by the valor of the
great Captain.

The first reason of the hatred between the Spaniards, and the French.
Francis the first, having broken the Swissers in a great Battle, easily made
himsel Master of the Duke dome of Milan and consequently of the kingdom of
Naples. But Fortune smiled upon the French only to betray them: For she
suddenly turned to the Spaniards, who took King Francis prisoner, and
established themselves in the said kingdom, and in the State of Milan. Now
from hence proceeded the hatred between the two Nations, which has since been
augmented according to occurrences of State-jealousies, and other considerable
accidents, whereof we will here give a short hint.

The second reason.
But there is a second and a more pregnant reason, for which not only France,
but the neighboring States also have conceived apprehensions of jealousies,
which is that of the Union of Spain by marriage with the houses of Austria and
Burgundy, and the latter of these began thus. Philip de Valois, (none to John
the sixth King of France, for having well defended his Father in a Battle
against the English, was by marriage made Duke of Burgundy, and Prince of the
Low Countries, and John his son succeeded him not only in all the Provinces
of his Parents, but in the hatred also which he bore to the House of Orleans.
Now, this young Prince going with a great force of the Nobility of France, and
the Low Countries into Hungary, against the Turk, fell into the hands of
Bajazet, who would have caused him to be beheaded, as well as the rest of the
prisoners, had he not been advised to put him to a Ransom, and send him home;
and this because it was discovered in his physiognomy, that he should one day
become the Author of much disturbance to Christendom: which afterward proved
true. For he caused the Duke of Orleans to be massacred, which raised a huge
war between these two illustrious Houses, to the great advancement of the
English affairs in France. But now, for the remedy of all those evils, a
Peace was made, and Duke John assassinated in a Conference in the presence of
the Dolphin. Now this dismal chance, this unseasonable revenge, and this mad
Counsel was the cause why the English assisted by the Burgundians and
Flemmings, made themselves masters of almost all the kingdom of France. For
Philip surnamed the Good, joined with the English, to revenge the death of his
Father against Charles the seventh.

In fine, there happening a civil war in England between the Houses of
Lancaster and York, the White and Red Rose, and Duke Philip drawing his stake
out of the play; the English came by degrees to loose all they had gotten in
the said kingdom. This good Prince instituted and established the Order of the
Golden Fleece in the year 1430, and tied so by succession all those Provinces
into one body, to which Charles the Combatant annexed the Duchy of Guelders
sold to him by Duke Arnolt, for the sum of 92 thousand Crowns. The
pretensions of the Duke of Juleers, or Gulick, were also granted by consent of
the Emperor Frederick in consideration of the sum of eighty thousand Florens
in gold. He left one only Daughter named Mary of Valois, who was a very
virtuous Princess, and was married to Maxmilian of Austria; and her death
proved fatal to the Low Countries in respect of the war which followed there.
Her son Philip having renewed his alliance with Henry the seventh, went into
Spain and married Jane of Castile, who brought him Charles of Austria. And
thus, these Provinces being bound first to the House of Burgundy, and then to
that of Austria, came last into the possession of that of Spain; which by the
discovery and conquest of the Indies (happening almost at the same time) is
become most puissant and terrible, as well to other States and Princes, as also
to the Ottomans themselves; who seeing the Roman Empire governed by a Prince
of this Family laden with so many Crowns and so many potent States, take no
small pleasure in seeing so many Schisms amongst the Christians.

Charles being chosen Emperor, had Francis the first for his Competitor, which
kindled great Wars between them. The success whereof was, that Francis being
taken prisoner, promised (though he performed not) to restore the Duchy of
Burgundy and renounce the Rights which the Kings of France had had in some
Provinces of the Low Countries, land Italy: so that the Heirs of Charles
remained a long time in the quiet and peaceful possession of them; France
being enough embroyled at home by the tender youth of three Kings (all sons
to Henry the second) and by Civil War, without looking back into old
quarrels. The House of Austria increased by Marriages and Navigation.
And here we may see how by marriages and Navigations, the House of Austria is
both amplified and elevated; which has maintained her self by arms, given
jealousies to the Princes of Europe by her victories, and struck sear and
hatred into the souls of the Protestants; who have made Leagues to uphold
themselves, and put a flea into the ear of France; which has abandoned the
interests of Religion to make her self great, and check this formidable power.
From this Knot or Tie of so many Crowns, and great States together, (wherewith
the King of Spaines head is burdened,) sprang that ticklish, and indissoluble
difference of precedence or preheminency, which the Kings of France by the
title of (Eldest sons of the Church, and most Christian Kings) have always
attributed to themselves.

CHAP. X
A Relation of the mischiefs happened in France under the minority of the
Kings, and by the diversity of Religions. The jealousy about the power of the
Guilards.

The Evils in France through State-jealousie.
FRance by the deplorable death of Henry the second, grew in a very short space
to sink into calamities, which dured to the end of the last Age. The evil began
in the minority of Francis the second, and under the Regency of Katharin de
Medicis; through a jealousy which thrust it self in amongst the Princes of the
Blood, the Constable Montmorency, the Counts of Chattillon, and Andelot,
Admiral Caspar de Colligny, and other Lords on the one side; and the Dukes of
Guise, the Princes of the House of La^rraine, and other Noblemen on the other.
The Princes complained of the Guisards, or them of the House of Guise (whom in
mockery, and to make them odious, they termed strangers) had the mannagement of
all the Affairs of France in their hands. They almost all embraced the
Reformed Religion, which at that time began to increase much through the whole
kingdom, whereof they declared themselves Protectors.

The chief motive of hatred betwixt these two most illustrious and ancient
Families, grew from a jest which the Admiral de Colligny cast upon the Duke of
Guise, concerning the taking of Theonnille. A prick of a Lance, which drew such
a deluge of blood, as no Surgeon was able to stench. Hatred between these
two Houses for a jest.
The greatest part of the Ecclesiastics, and the most zealous of the Roman
Catholics took the Party of the King, and the Guisards. Many Battails were
fought, many Siedges of Towns laid, and many Peaces made, and no sooner made
then broken. In fine, under Charles the ninth, at the Wedding of the King of
Navarre at Paris, upon the Eve of Saint Bartholomew, happened that abominable
Massacre so much, and so justly exclained against by the Protestants, and
blamed even by the Roman Catholics themselves. In the Reign of Henry the
third was made a League, called the Holy League, for the exclusion of Henry de
Bourbon from succession to the Crown, as being an Heretic, whereof the Duke of
Guise, (a Prince of courage and high esteem) was the Head, who having routed
the Reyters, or Germane Horse, ented Paris in despite of the King, where he
was received by the Citizens with excess of honors; and when the shows of joy
were ended, they raised certain Barricadoes, which made the King retire himself
to a place of safety. A Fatal Honor to all subjects, how innocent soever they
be.

For redress of these disorders, there was a Peace endeavored betwixt. the
King and the Duke. The place of Treaty was Blois, where the King (contrary to
his Royal Word given him) caused both him and the Cardinal his Brother, to be
treacherously murdered. His Children were saved by the Queen Mother; for the
King had resolved to extirpate the whole Race, thereby to prevent the danger of
revenge.

Paris revolted, and in imitation thereof, many other Towns besides: The King
applied himself to the Huguenot Party, and sent for the King of Navarre, which
rendered him still more odious, and caused him to be published for an Heretic.
He besieged Paris, but was unhappily stabbed by a Monk, whereof he died, having
already declared Henry of Bourbon for his true successor, and Heyr to the
Crown; to whom he also left a third Dispute for the kingdom of Navarre. This
stab extinguished the Race of the Valois, ended the life of the Prince, and
there with also the desire he had to inflict a rigorous chastisement upon the
City of Paris,

CHAP. XI
Disturbances in the Low Countries, and why? The Peace of Vervin follows. The
donation of the Low Countries, to the Infanta.

THe King of Spain was in no less trouble about the Low Countries, for the
conservation whereof, he spared not his Treasures brought him from the Indies;
nor followed less the Counsel of Cardinal Granvel, then the Roman Catholics
of France did that of the Cardinal of Lorraine. But the Prince of Orange
assisted by the Protestants of Germany, eluded their care, in such sort, as
that neither the wise conduct of the Duchess of Parma, nor the rough
proceedings of the Duke of Alva, nor the very presence of King Philips Brother
himself, no nor the inimitable valor of that Great Italian Alexander, was able
to prevail so far, but that seven Provinces untied themselves from obedience
to the King, and formed a potent Commonwealth amongst themselves, by the change
of Religion; without which, it is very probable, that neither the situation,
nor the Rivers, not all that which could hurt the Spaniards, would have been
able to secure or defend them against the potency of Spain.

But now from whence came all these disorders? Who laid the first stone, and
fixed the foundation of so dismal and fatal a War? There are many causes,
and diverse pretexts thereof to be noted. We will therefore go to the fountain,
since the streams are sufficiently known. Under the General Title of
Low Countries, are comprised seventeen Provinces; so rich, so well peopled, so
full of fair Towns, and big Villages, together with the situation and strength
of the Inhabitants, that if they were united together, I know not who would
presume to attach them, how powerful so ever he were, either by Sea or Land.
But plenty does not more disunite people then want, and the wind of ambition
raises not less storm, then ill-taken zeal in Religion. These Countries have
been almost a whole Age the Theater of a most sad, and dreadful War, caused
by the two aforementioned Passions, which have brought them to this state,
wherein they are seen at present. They had every one their Prince or Go^ernour
apart; but by little and little, as well by Marriages, and Successions, as
other means, they grew to be devolved under the House of Burgundy, and
afterward under that of Austria, as we have noted already. For, during the
Wars of the Emperor Charles the sift, and Francis the first, they were
governed by the Queen of Hungary, Sister to the aforesaid Charles. In fine,
this good Prince having with an unparallelled example of resolution,
transferred all his States upon his son Philip, and the Empire upon his
Brother Fordinand, so to retire himself into a private condition; the said King
Philip his son before his departure, gave the government of the aforesaid
Provinces in general to his Sister, and in particular, to some certain Knights
of the Golden Fleece, who had faithfully served both his Father and himself in
the Wars against France. Now the Order given to pluck up the tender plants of
new opinions in Religion, was by such as hunted after a Change in State,
interpreted for the Spanish Inquisition, and the retardment of the foreign
Militia for the maintaining thereof. The introduction of new Bishops made a
double operation, by giving an Alarm as well to the Clergy, as to them who had
embraced the profession of a Religion, which excluded both Old and New. The
Governesse (notwithstanding the coldness of some prime Ministers) stopped the
disease with agreeable nutriment, and a slight bleeding; and so rendered a
superficial kind of health to this Body, so much stuffed with ill humors. But
King Philip irritated by the contemp of his authority, and commandments, had
recourse to the arms of Justice; which by violent proceedings, applies both
Sword and Fire; amazes the Good, represses the audacity of others; inexorably
punishes the bad, and by demanding the tenth penny reversed or overthrew all
that, which was no more then shaken before.

Thus have you the seeds of the Evils, which gave birth to those long wars,
which have had diverse qualifications and various successes under many
Governors; who like unskilful Physicians either performed not their care, or
else prescribed all things contrary, because the Disease was incurable. Some
make William Prince of Orange Author of all those troubles; and others impute
it to the cruelty of the Duke of Alva. But be it what it will, this People
(being very intense upon the conservation of their privileges, and most prone
to jealousy, motion, and surprise) was more agitated by the passion of others,
then by their own, so that Ambition urging them to act under the pretense of
privileges and liberty of conscience; and rigor falling upon them, to make
them unseasonably stoop to the commandments of their Master, urged them to fly
to the Sword. Insomuch, as sometimes, neither naked Justice, nor Treaties of
Reconciliation, were able to soften their exasperated and irritated Hearts: And
such of these Provinces as are nearest the Sea, showed then another kind of
countenance both to the Church and Government; and being succored by their
jealous Neighbors, continued this war with much advantage.

The King gives the Low Countries to the Intanta his Daughter.
The King therefore being tired with so prolix a war, made over all the the
Provinces to his Daughter Isabell; but it was, after he had sent Alexander
twice into France, to relieve the Leaguers, or Confederates, which much
advanced their Affairs, and gave them means to lay about them, for the
settlement of their Commonwealth. And this was the state of things in the
Low Countries, toward the end of the Age.

Now Cardinal Albert was sent from Spain to govern the aforesaid Provinces, who
brought the Prince of Orange with him, and falling in his Enterprise upon
Marseilles, through the vigilancie of the Dake of Guise, he took possession of
his aforesaid Government, by the resignation of the Conde de Fuentes, who had
not long before seized upon Cambray and Dourlens. Albert hearing that La Fere
was straightened by King Henry, resolved to make a diversion, which might either
be able to raise the siege, or at least to recompense the loss of the said
place, in case it were taken. Wherefore, he sent Monsieur de Rosne, to besiege
Calis, which he quickly took, together with the Town of Ardre, notwithstanding
the succor from England and Holland. La Fere rendered it self at the end of
seven months siege; and that which happened afterward of most importance for
the good of the Crown of France, was the Reconciliation of the Duke of Mayenne,
and the rest of the League with King Henry.

Albert resolved to make the united Provinces also feel the stroke of his
Arms: And so he presented himself before Ostend (an Apple not yet ripe) and
afterward before Hulet, which after many Assaults, he at length carried. But
the Marshall de Rosue had his Head taken off by a Canon Bullet, and more then
three thousand soldiers were also slain. The year following, Prince Maurice
had his revenge near Turnhawt, where he cut off the Troops of the Count de
Varax.

In the month of March of the same year, Hernantello Governor of Dourlens,
like a Fox surprised Amiens by a stratagem, to the great astonishment of all
France, and the King retook it like a Lion, after six months siege. He passed
thither with strong forces, and thought to have given a just retaliation to the
Spaniards by surprising Arras; but he was repulsed by the young Count of
Buquoy, who after wards rendered great and remarkable services to the Emperor,
as we shall shortly show.

During the time of these changes, the Pope forbore not to represent to the
King the misfortunes and mischiefs which this long War brought upon
Christendom; and beseeched him to hearken to a good and firm Peace with the
King of Spain; especially, being invited thereto by the disorders of his own
kingdom, and the fear of a new Revolt, more dangerous then the former. There
was none but the Queen of England, and the Confederated States who endeavored
by advantageous offers to divert him, and keep him on horseback: Though yet he
dissembled their reproaches, and answered, that the Queen was a gainer by this
war; but for his part, that his people was exhausted, and that he received
many and great damages from the Spaniards, who promised by this Peace, to
render all they had gotten in France: That he was obliged as a good King, and a
good Father, to solace and refresh his poor subjects. So that all their offers,
and many more, the Peace of Vervin. 2598.
were not able to hinder this holy work, which was concluded and established at
Vervin in the month of May, 1598.

The King of Spain also for his part was urged to make Peace, as seeing himself
crazed with age, and having a young Prince, and a Princess (his children) to
marry, and Fortune very often against him: Besides three enemies upon his back;
as France, and the Confederated Provinces, which threatened him with the utter
loss of the Low Countries; and England, which either destroyed or spoiled his
Fleets upon the Ocean, endangered thereof the Indies, and put him to great
charges to secure it; and lastly, their taking of Cales, the prime key of the
kingdom, and other Places.

Now by virtue of this Peace, the places were restored: But the pretentions,
which each of these Kings has to some certain Demaynes of the other, were not
taken away: From whence sprang the seed of new Wars, which were one day to
smoother the promises of arming no more, even though there should be occasion
for it. The Peace was received by the poor people with such shows of joy, and
tears of tenderness, as cannot be comprehended but by such as have suffered,
and almost lost all.

The States in the mean while, let not these occasions slip, by the great
distance of the Cardinals forces. For Prince Maurice marched into the Field,
took Bergh, Grol, Oldenseel, Lingen, and some other places; which progress
purchased him the reputation of a very great Captain, and of understanding the
profession of the Militia, as well as any man of his time.

After the publication of the Peace, Philip the second by his Letters Patents
dated at Madrid the 6th of May, 1598. conferred all the Low Countries, together
with the Duchy of Burgundy upon the Infanta Isabell his Daughter; to which the
Prince her Brother consented, and confirmed it both by oath and writing; upon
condition, that if the said Princess came to die without children, the said
Provinces should return to the Dominion of Spain; besides many other Clauses,
too long to recite.

Now, forasmuch as the actions of great persons are examined, and either
approved or disapproved, according to every ones passion; this which I here
note, was not forgotten by the contrary party. All things are profitable; yea,
Lies themselves (provided they last four and twenty hours) are of utility and
advantage.

CHAP. XII
The Areh-Duke goes into Spain, and the Admiral into the Duchy of Cleveland.
The death of King Philip. His admirable Patience.

THe Allies of both parties were invited to the Peace of Vervin; but the Queen
of England not being able to induce the States to it, resolved to join with
them in war, under conditions of more advantage to her then before. This gave
the Archduke subject to complain of her, for continuing a war with so great
stomach and grudge upon him, by whom she had never been offended.

But he having now received the Procuration of the Infanta his Wife, was
acknowledged, and received for Prince of the Low Countries, and he wrote a
Letter to the Confederated States, but received no Answer. The Archduke goes
into Spain.
He departed for Spain with the Prince of Orange, and passed through Germany to
conduct Queen Margaret of Austria, nominating for Governor during his absence
Cardinal Andrew; and the Admiral of Arragon for Captain General; who led a
strong Army into Cleveland, and Westphalia, where he took Rinberg, and many
other small places; and made his Winter-Quarter there, notwithstanding the
complaints of the Lower-Ceroles. He sent La Bourlette to the Isle of Bommel,
took Crevecoeur, laid siege to Bommel, which he was forced to raise; and so
after he had built the Fort of St. Andrews, he retreated into Brabant, where
his soldiers began to mutiny for want of pay. The Ceroles had raised another
Army, which was disbanded for want of order; some of them being for the
Spaniards, and the other for the States. It is in vain to lead great forces
into the Field, without a good purse to maintain them, and good counsel to
encourage them.

The death of King Philip.
King Philip lived not long after the conclusion of the Peace, which he also
wished both with the English and Hollanders, as being desirous to die in Peace.
He was long tormented with a fever, and two impostumes; and in fine, his whole
body was so wasted, that it was pitiful to behold, But more admirable was his
patience, to suffer all as he did without murmuring. He commanded like a great
Prince, and died like a good Christian. In the beginning of his Reign he was
happy, but in the decline of his age, he saw the loss of one part of the
Low Countries, and received many other damages from the English. He was much
blamed for not coming himself in person into Brabant, and for proceeding too
roughly with that people, which had been so affectiona^e to the Emperor
Charles, and in fine, for constituting two Generals over the Fleet, surnamed
The Invincible.

The Father stripped himself of his States two years before his death, to
attend to pious exercises; And the Son two years before his: was afflicted
with grievous pains and torments, which he suffered with superlative patience.
Some Writers, who take pleasure in looking back into the Causes of such
accidents, within the secrets of the Almighty, have presumed to publish that it
was a punishment from heaven, for the cruelties which his Governors had
practiced, as well in the Low Countries, as in the Indies. Others of more
moderation have believed, that God had a mind to show in the person of this
porent Prince, that all the Greatness of this world is nothing but dust and
vermin.

There is nothing constant in this world, but the constant order of Change and
Vicissitude. The I'underbolt strikes none but the highest Towers, and loftiest
Mountains.

By his endeavoring to succor the League in France, he lost the confederated
Provinces: And in the design of invading England, he lost a most powerful
Navy, and armed enemies against his States, who gave him much displeasure and
trouble.

CHAP. XIII
The differences which happened between the Earls of Fr^ezland, and the Town of
Embden. The States put a Garrison there.

THe knowledge of the difference of the Town of Embden, with the Earls thereof,
is to be joined to that of the Low Countries; and so by consequence, it is
convenient to mention it here. When Towns grow strong, they ordinarily loose
their will to obey; for which they never want either examples or pretexts,
whether it be of Religion or Privilege; yea, and to accuse the weaker party of
injustice too, if they get a good issue in it.

Now this Town whereof we are speaking being very much increased and enriched
by the great number of people which repaired thither, there to seek (as it
were) a sanctuary, from the rigorous execution of the Placarts of the Duke of
Alva, against all such as had licentiously, (and perhaps by old privileges)
broaken Images, and thrown down Altars; as also for the conveniencie of the
Haven, which was held then, and still is, one of the best of the Low Countries,
and of the North Seas.

In the first place, the Citizens began to murmur against their Count; saying,
that he would clip their privileges and Religion: That he bad already
introduced a new one into his own House; That he raised soldiers underhand;
That he forbad the Consistorial Assemblies, and the like. A bold, and
licentious pretext.

T^^^ults in the Town.
Now, their humors being thus prepared, there wanted nothing but a hot, ^iry
and zealous Preacher to set them a work, who also was quickly found in the
person of one Mentzo Alting (a man odious to the Count for some important
reasons) who got up into the Pulpit, desplayed his Rhetoric, cried down his
Masters actions, foretold the ruin of the Town, endeavored to excuse himself
of what was imposed upon him, protested to be gone with the consent of the
Townsmen; however he were content to stay with his Flock, and live and die with
his sheep, and the like. Words no less audacious, then those of the Priests
(whom a certain learned person called Baals elsewhere) for the League in
France. It concerns not Churchmen to blow the Trumper, nor such as thrust
their noses into State-matters through passion of Religion, to excuse in some,
what they accuse in others.

Iliacos intra muros peccatur, and extra.

These reasons were as welcome to the people (which loves Novelty in State,
provided it be preached) as a draught of water uses to be to a thirsty person.
In short, they arm, they choose six Colonels amongst the Citizens; they invoke
that Great God, who hears and sees all; and at length, they turn their Ordnance
upon the Counts Palace. O brave proceeding! O true forms of Justice! The Count
asks the reason of this novelty, and whether they disowned their obedience to
the Emperor, the Empire, and himself? They answered, that they had taken arms
for Religion, and their own defense, against many falfe accusations: That they
made no difficulty to acknowledge the Emperor and him as their Lords, and
whatever else should be reasonable. In these Contests they rush upon his House,
making themselves Masters thereof by force, and dispatch their Ambassadors to
the Haghe, as the Count also did his; he to complain of the insolency of his
subjects, and they to justify their actions. The effect of these Embasies was,
that they put themselves under the protection of the States, A Garrison of the
States in the Town.
and took a Garrison of a thousand men into the Town, to the disadvantage of
the said Count; who at last was fain to suffer his House to be shut up, and
some other extremities, which have much weakened and skattered his authority-The
Townsmen embraced the Reformed Religion, yea, and they threw the Bowl yet
farther: For, by a more ancient privilege they had a grant of a Religion,
conform with that of Ausbourgh. See Emmanuel de Merten.

From this disorder sprang much good to the united Provinces, by securing to
themselves this so advantageous Port, which otherwise by these divisions might
have fallen into the hands of their enemies.

But this agreement being made in have, could not last long, and so there
happened some disturbance; which is an ordinary thing, when any one party gets
too much interest. The Count complained to the Emperor of the said Town, by
which he was accused to have had some intelligences there, so to make himself
absolute Lord of it: But these complaints; as well as that which followed
afterward for the Traffic in Spain, were quickly patched together with a weak
thread. In the mean time Count Edzard died, and left five sons; Enne, Gustave,
John, Christopher, and Charles, the Eldest whereof reconciled himself to the
Town. Christopher went to serve the Archduke, and was afterward Governor of
Luxenbourgh.

The Count will repair his authority.
In the year 1602. Count Enne propped by some Gentry, (as Cuiphanse, and
others) endeavored to repair his authority by imposing Taxes, forcing the
small Towns, and nourishing a faction in Embden. And so he raised soldiers,
under pretext of going against the Turk; gave his Daughter to his Brother John,
who married her by a dispensation from the Pope, and embraced the Roman
Catholic Religion; and fortified some villages to block up the River. The
States of Holland (moved more by their own interest, then by the complaints of
the Town) sent to oppose him, drove him out of the Villages (who retired into
Germany) and justified their proceedings by suspicions, and informations, which
they said they had received from Brussels, that the said Count acted for the
Spaniards, and would bring them into the Town,

Now he had remonstrated before both to the Emperor and Empire, that it would
be expedient to exercise an Admiralty upon the River of Enis, so to prejudice
the nearest Inhabitants; with reasons strong enough to move that great and dull
Body, (if it could be moved) which so many Dyets have had so much ado to
awaken.

In sine, Whatsoever is profitable in matter of State, seems lawful: But what
we do our selves, we ought not to condemn in others.

the Peace made 1506.
The suspicion daily increased, and that chiefly because Count John of
Ritsbergh was become a Roman Catholic. But at last, by the intercession of the
King of England, and the States-Generall, the Peace was made at the Haghe, in
the year 1606 as also that of the Christians and Turks, and all jealousies
which could come from thence, quite take off.

CHAP. XIV
Of the Changes which happened in precedent Ages about matter of Religion, and
the motives of our Design, drawn from these revolutions. Luther writes against
the Pope. The Rebellion of the Peasants of Germany.

THe differences which have happened amongst Christians upon the diversity of
Religions, the distrusts which have sprung from thence, as the fire from the
flint; and the reasons of State (precious covers for manifest wickedness) have
proved the cause of the greatest part of all our present mischiefs, and
languishments. Therefore let us seek out the true root of it, and leave passion
to such as cannot receive any other impressions, then those by which they are
utterly blinded. My purpose is not to dyve into questions of Divinity, but only
to search in History after the causes of so many alterations, and so much
hatred drawn from so holy and innocent a subject.

Pope Julius the second.
We will therefore begin with Pope Julius the second, who died in the year
1513. This Pope more careful of the Temporal then of the Spiritual; and more
studious of propagating the Jurisdictions of the Church, then the kingdom of
God; made an Alliance with the Emperor, and the Kings of France and Spain, to
the utter ruin of the Venetians. But he quickly changed his Cards, forsook the
Allies, reconciled himself with his enemies, animated Henry the Eighth, King of
England against the French; and Ferdinand against the King of Navarre, whom he
spoiled of his kingdom, for refusing him passage. He embroiles Europe.
He also dissolved the Alliance between the Emperor and the King of France;
and called the Swissers into Italy, to drive the French out of the Milan. In
fine, having sunk all Europe into inexplicable confusions, and scandalized his
Flock, he made place for Leo the 10th, a man who loved rest, and was less a
soldier then Julius, of whom is written this great praise, that he once cast
some Keys into the Tyber, saying, that St. Paul's Sword should have more power,
then the Arms of St. Peter. The duty of a good shepherd is to keep his sheep in
peace, and feed them; and not scatter them, and send them to the shambles.

Whilst these wars lasted, which ruined the Public and Human Laws, the
Divine ones were also very ill kept. The ignorance of the Prelates, caused
superstitions; and their loose and vicious lives, together with their great and
vast possessions; the hatred of the people. The learned desired a redress in
the Ecclesiastical Policy, as well as Peace required in the Secular.

Divorce, which continues to this day, with as little appearance of Reunion, as
there is of seeing the Rivers run back to their springs. And it is, that the
Pope published a Iubily for the collection of moneys to resist the Turk, which
was most necessary at that time. But the impudence of a certain Monk called
Te^zel, exceeded so far, as to presume to sell the Indulgences or Pardons,
for the sins committed, and to be committed (I have horror to recite this
chea^erie, the companion of superstition, ignorance, and avarice) and forthwith
to draw souls out of Purgatory. Martin Luther, Martin Luther opposes Tyrzel.
Dector of Divinity at Witembergh, and Monk of the Order of St. Austin, briskly
opposed this Impostor; made a Thesis or General Position, which he dedicated to
the Pope himself, to testify the will he had to rely upon his definition. But
through excess of indignation, he passed the limits of Christian modesty, and
Catholic Truth: Insomuch, as that at length he grew to write against the Popes
authority, wherein he was impugned by a Divine called Eckins. See Florimoud of
Remond.

He is excommunicated.
Now Pope Leo, desirous to quench this spark, excommunicates Luther: but that
was to cast oil into that fire, and put poison to the wound. For Martin raises
his Batteries against him, and calls him Antichrist; which the Pope too much
slighting, applied all his thoughts to war. Those enemies, who are most
despised, are very often most hurtful. But the God of Peace drove him out of
this world, to make room for another more worthy, and more v^^tuous, (though
less politic) then he: However Policy be a very convenient Science for such,
as govern great States and Empyres.

Pope Adrian, the Preceptor or Tutor to Charles the 5. was born at V^rick, and
promised to bring a wholesome Balsom to the diseases of Christendom, For, he
had already elevated the hopes of the Good, by abolishing Simony, punishing
sins against nature, and not alienating the possessions of the Church: But his
too sudden death declared, that God had otherwise disposed of him; that his
two Predecessors had too much embroyled the Flock, that the sickness must have
its course, and that the Body was filled with too many bad humors, to be cured
by one single purge, or one Blood-letting only.

His doctrine in Saxony.
Now Luthers doctrine passed from Saxony into Sweden, King Gustave, and
Frederick of Denmark being leagued together, against Christian, who deserted by
his people, was fled; and they also forsook the Pope, as well as their King,
and much ranged the authority of the Bishops, of their kingdoms. And as
Luthers Doctrine grew to be received, so diffidence and hatred grew equally up
with it; together with a desire also to maintain it, against all who
endeavored to suppress it. There was besides, another accident, which very
much troubled the Church: and it was, that Charles the Emperor, and King
Francis the first, had very often entreated the Pope and Cardinals to call a
General Council, for the reformation of abuses, in the Church and Clergy: But
this song was little less unpleasant, then the opposition of Luther. And so
these two Princes laying aside that care, they being too nearly tied to their
own interests, meditated nothing but war upon each other.

Pope Clement successor to Adrian, seeing the King of France prisoner, made
speedily a secret Alliance with his own subjects, and almost all the Princes of
Italy, so to put a limit to the power of the Emperor; who in revenge thereof,
abrogated his Authority in Spain; surprised Rome, and took him prisoner; who
was very ill treated by the Germans, as being for the most part Lutherans. Now
these two Monarchs, being the chief Pillars of Europe, ought to have favored a
Reformation, and hindered a separation. But what? The impiety of the people
whets the sword of the Almighty, who comes slowly to vengeance, though his
strokes be heavy; and the justice of his wrath will reduce this wretched
world into dust.

In Germany, they who labored to revive the Gospel, fell to odds principally
about the Sacrament of the last Supper. It is easier to pull down an old
Building, then to set up a new one. Erasmus of Rotterdam, (that great Wit)
flourished at this time, and contented himself only by scoffing the Monks,
without meddling with the party of the Reformers: For he well knew, that the
abuses came from men, and manners, and not from the (...) Doctrine, heretofore
taught by the Church.

The horrible Rebellion which arose about this time, did not a little deform
Doctor Luthers newborn Doctrine. For the Peasants thinking all things lawful
to them for the liberty (so called they this new Reformation) of the Gospel,
took arms, and assailed the Churchmen, Cloisters and Gentry. Their number was
grown to be a hundred thousand men, and their chief leader a Minister, called
Muntzer. The holy Scripture teaches us to obey our Magistrates, and not to
exterminate, and cast them out. But ambition dwells both in Cabans, in
Churches, and even under ragged Cloakes.

They are defeated
They were routed in three distinct Battails; the first, by the Lord Trueses;
the second, by Philip Landgrave of Hassia; and the last by Anthony Duke of
Lorrain, who cut them off when they were endeavoring to enter France, where
they hoped to play Rex, by means of the Confusion which they imagined they
should find there by the Kings captivity, who was carried into Spain.

Charles endeavors to humble the Protestants.
Now the greatness of the Emperor Charles being reconciled to the Pope, and
counseled by him to reduce the Protestants (for so were the Princes and States
termed, who had received Luthers Doctrine) into the lap of the Church, either
by threats, or force; gave no small apprehension to the German Princes: And he
being glad of any subject, to establish his power in Germany, was not willing
to lose this fair occasion. So the Armies marched into the Field; and Francis
the first, after him his son Henry were requested to give relief for the
maintaining (as they styled it) of the German liberty, now like to be lost
under the Spanish Domination: which was granted by the French for
State-interest, though they were enemies to the Religion. But neither Arms, nor
Victories, nor Disputes, nor the Majesty it self of the Emperor; was able to
deracinate or root out this Doctine; and so in fine, it was permitted by his
Authority at the Diet of Ausbourgh.

Now, it was not Luther alone, who rose against the Popes authority: For a
certain Revolted Monk called Menno, began also to preach a Doctrine different
enough from his; and his Adherents were called Anabaptists. Besides, that
learned man John Calvin, carried on that Reformation much farther then Luther,
as well in France, as elsewhere, and fixed his Chair at Geneva. They agreed
well about combating the Pope, and some other points; but yet since they
remained not in perfect unity of Doctrine: In so much, as that this party, and
that of Luther, are very little better friends amongst themselves, then either
of them is with the Roman Catholics, as we shall see in the sequel of these
Tragedies.

CHAP. XV
The Anabaptists at Munster. The Reformers in France. The Change of Religion in
England, and by what means. The King repudiates his Wife. The Queens Speech.
The King makes himself Head of the Church. Luther writes to him. His unhappy
death.

NOw we have seen the Lutherans established in Germany, let us see what the
Anabaptists do at Munster, an Episcopal Town in Westphalia, which was to be
the Head of a Chimerical Kingdom, and serve for a precious testimony of the
wrath of that great God, which for a time suffers his Word to be abused, and
the wicked to cover their pernicious Designs under the Cloak of Religion, and
the mask of Hypocrisy. Oh Lord! Thou do hour^ly admonish us by so many
prodigies, and monstrous accidents: but our eyes are shut, our ears stopped, and
our hearts hardened.

John de Leide King of Munster.
John of Leiden by trade a Tailor, and his adherents, seized upon the aforesaid
Town, and he was made King thereof, and fought long against the Bishop; by whom
they were at length subdued, and chastised according to the measure of their
crimes. The extremity of their rigor was against the Church men, a clear
argument of the indignation of God against them, because they had deviated from
their duty, and were lulled asleep in ignorance, idleness, and pleasures. They
likewise desclaimed the Authoriry of the Pope, and brake down the Images,
without sparing the very Pictures of the Church-windowes. A zeal too violent to
proceed from the Holy Ghost, and of little conformity with that of the
Primitive Christians. These insolences being once repressed at Amsterdam,
returned there no more. The Anabaptists which are now in the united Provinces,
and the Confines thereof, disown the proceedings of the former, and count them
in the number of Heretics.

The Reformed Religion in France.
Now the Doctrine of Martin Luther passed into France, under the reign of
Francis the first; though yet it could not take fast root enough there; as well
because of the persecutions, and the Kings aversion from it, as also for that
it was too far distant from the Author, and Teacher thereof. And so it quickly
grew to be transformed into that of John Calvin, and his Disciple Theodore
Bez^^, and so much increased in few years throughout the greatest part of the
Country, during the troubles caused by Envies of State, and the League; that
the Kings, after many bloody Wars, were constrained by various Edicts or
Proclamations, to grant them free exercise of their Religion through all the
Kingdom. King Francis was a great persecutor of the said Doctrine; Obtains free
exercise.
and made open protestation, that he would not spare even his own Arm, if it
were infected with Heresy. And yet the ^^^lousie which he had conceived
against the prosperity of Charles the Empe^our, moved him nevertheless to
succor the Protestants.

King Henry succeeded in his Fathers hatred to them, but being sent to his
grave by the thrust of a Lance, they began to respire; saw the end of their
persecutions, lost the smell of the Faggot, and propped by some Princes of the
Blood, rendered themselves at length no less considerable in France, then the
Protestants are in Germany.

The Protestant Church in England.
Let us now make a step into England, and see how the Protestant Church has
sown her first seed, supplanted the ancient Doctrine, and established her self
as Mistress there. King Henry the eighth, for writing a Book against Luther in
defense of the Roman Church, and her seven Sacraments, was honored by the Pope
with the Title of Defender of the Faith, His prime Minister, was that great
Cardinal Wolsey, who ruled all. So that it is not only from this day that
Cardinals have introduced them selves into States, to have the total
administration of them. This man being eminently ambitious, hoped to come to be
Pope by the recommendation of the Emperor: The story of C^^ ^ina^ Woll^y.
But seeing himselt frustrated of his expectation, he turned his hate upon him;
whispered the King in the ear, that his marriage with Katharine of Spain, (Aunt
to the said Emperor) was incestuous, because she had formerly been married to
his Brother. O! How great is the wickedness of such as have for saken God to
serve their ambition and revenge? This Prelate, who ought to have framed the
reformation of abuses, and opposed Heresies (since himself held for such all
the Doctrines which checked the Pope) was not content with so much honor and
wealth as he enjoyed, without seeing the Emperor thrown down, and buried under
the very ruins of that Church, the Religion whereof he professed with so great
Majesty, and under the Purple of so great luster. The King entangled in love
with a young Lady newly come from the Court of France, and disgusted with the
Embracements of that most ve^^^ous Princess his Wife; was glad of this scruple,
and solicited the Pope to grant him a Divorcement upon the aforementioned
reason. But the Pope temporizes, and sends in sine his Legate to examine the
matter. The King and the Legate sir; the Queen being summoned, appears; and in
presence of the chief of the Kingdom, makes a Speech in Latin, to the King,
which is able to move a very rock to compassion.

How is it possible Sir (says she) that after having lived almost twenty
years together in great concord, and having had so many children as we have
had, it should now come into your thought to repudiate me? Your Brother Arthur
fell sick the very first day of our marriage, and some days after dyed. I take
the great God and your conscience to witness, that you found me a Virgin. And
if you are resolved to separate me from your Bed, expect at least so long, as
till I may have advertised my Nephew Charles thereof, to the end that I may
know how to behave my self in this affliction; since I can hope for no support
in the equity of my cause here, where you are Absolute King. If I have offended
God since I have been your wife, it has been in being a little too curious to
please you, Ah Virtue! This is not the first time that thy adversary endeavors
to suppress thee. Thy luster is too bright, not to d^^le the eyes of the wicked.

This poor Princess in this tribulation had this imperfection, that in regard
Nature had been sparing to her of her rich gifts of beauty, she had had
recourse to innocent Art, thereby to draw her Husband from the levities to
which he was too much inclined, as well by his own natural Passion, as by the
attractive Charms of his fair subjects. Her Speech being ended, (which produced
but faint pity in the soul of the King, and some of the Auditory) she retired
her self, together with her Daughter into a private House, where the spoke thus
to this ambitious Cardinal, who came to her in behalf of the King, to entreat
her to yield to his will. It is thou (said she) O wicked and disloyal Minister,
who returnest^^s this recompense: To my Nephew, for not advancing thee to the
Holy Chair; and to me, for not being able to suffer thy impudicity and
na^ght^^esse.

The King divorced himself from the Church of Rome, because the Pope would not
condescend to his demand; and from his Wife, (by whom he had always been so
respectfully loved) to conjoyn in public marriage with Anne of Bolein. The
King leaves his Wife an I the Church of Rome.
The Cardinal died in the year 1530, being not long before deprived of all his
employments, and fallen from the favor of his Prince, which he had preferred
before that of his God, as he restified by these words, full of christian and
holy repentance, which issued our of his dying mouth, Ah! I would to God (said
he) I had taken so much pains to serve my Creator, as I have done to serve my
Prince!

He put into the Letanies, From the tyranny of the Pope, good Lord deliver us;
whose authority was abrogated thorowout the whole kingdom, and the King by Act
of Parliament declared, Head of the Church of England.

He seized upon the possessions of the Church, by the advice of Cromwell, and
some others, who all ended their days unhappily. Takes away the possessions of
the Clergy.
He also bestowed part thereof upon the nobility, for fear of commotion. He
hanged such as refused to subscribe, that he was Head of the Church, as
aforesaid; and condemned the protestants to the fire. In fine, after having
crushed the Church, and lived like a tyrant, he died miserable, and little
regretted by his people. Sir Thomas More, that great Hero, fell under the
rigor of his command, and so did an infinite number of other noble persons.

Luther seeing him in ill terms with the Pope, and encouraged by the King of
Denmark, very humbly beseeched him, Luther writes to the King, and receives an
affront.
by a letter which he wrote to him, to embrace the doctrine of the Gospel: but
he received such an answer as he little expected, namely, that he should
forsake his apostacy, and his wife, and return to his Monastery.

Now the Church of Rome seeing her head disclaimed, and his authority banished
out of England, felt her self much shaken, as well by Peter Martyr, as orther
Protestant ministers: in such sort as that Edward, Edward establishes the
Protestant Religion.
son to the said Henry, having taken the reins of the English Monarchy, had
no great trouble to throw her quite our, and fix the Protestant. But he dying
very young, and Queen Mary succeeding him, she had an intention to pluck up
this tender plant, and re-establisheth the old doctrine, which yet could not
recover its full strength before it was exterminated again, Young trees by
being re-planted get vigor, but old ones wither and dye.

CHAP. XVI
Queen Elizabeth banishes the Roman Catholic Religion again by degrees. That
of the Protestants passes into Scotland under the bastard Murrey who swayes the
Scepter. It is called the Congregation, and is fortified by the above said
Queen, and the Hugenots of France.

QUeen Elizabeth (who, during the life of her sister Mary, feigned her self a
Roman Catholic, and was like to lose her life, by giving some suspicions of
her being a Protestant) being raised to the royal Throne, forthwith unmasqued
her self, and began to treat of the means how to annull the one, and revoke
the other; which was easy to be accomplished. For the ignorance of the Priests
was great; the desire of their possessions greater; and the curiosity to check
a Religion full of ceremonies, which few could solidly defend, greatest of all.
It was represented to the People both here and elsewhere, that the doctrine was
falsified, and in no wise congruous with that of the four Primitive ages: that
Lay men were forbidden to read the holy Scriptures, that so they might remain
in darkness, and not see the light of evangelicall truth, etc.

The Queen assembled a Parliament, which acted to abolish what Queen Mary had
done, by the authority of the Pope, and against the Protestants: The Bishops
and some secular men also opposed it. A specious conference was offered, in
which there was forced upon them a Judge who was an enemy to their Cause. They
complained of this proceeding, and said, that they were very hardly dealt with,
and that they had been advertised of the Theses, or Argument but two days
before, In fine, not being able to agree about the form of the Dispute, the
Protestants, before the combat, cried victory; and the other, When shall we be
assured of our Faith, if there be always leave to dout, and dispute? Some of
them were so much moved, that they would have excommunicated the Queen: But
others being better advised, alleged, that the disposal thereof must be left
to the Pope. See Cambden.

Reformation in England by degrees.
The Queen proceeds to a change by degrees, She prohibits to speak ill of the
Sacrament of the Altar, and suffers the Communion to be given under both
kinds. A little while after, both Mass and Pictures were banished out of the
Churches, and then the Oath of superiority was tendered to the Bishops and
other Roman Catholics, and in case of refusal, they were dismissed from their
charge. All this passed without any tumult, and hitherto the Reformation was
carried on very conform with the Confession of Ausbourgh.

And in Scotland under the Bastard Murrey who weildes the Scepter.
About the end of the year 15^8 the Protestant Religion began also to spring up
in Scotland, and the Authors of it, styled themselves the Brethren of the
Congregation. They carped at the Kingly Authority, as much as they did at the
lives of the Priests, and the abuses of the Church. They refu^ed to pay their
duty to the Queen-Mother-Regent, a most wise and modest woman. The Head and
Ringleader, was James Priour of Sr. Andrews (since called Earl of Murrey)
natural Brother to the Queen, who gave very great suspicions of his intending,
by favoring these changes, to make himself Master of the Scepter of Scotland.

They wanted no pretext to cloak their Design. For James protested, that he
sought nothing but the glory of God, and the liberty of the kingdom, oppressed
by the French, and the Queen-Regent, who was daughter to the Duke of Guise.
Hammelton, and diverse other Gentlemen raised by the Possessions of the Church,
ranged themselves in their Party. Complaints against Religion are ordinarily
accompanied by those of the violation of Privileges.

They draw up theirs, (For there will never be wanting such as seek their
advancement in the change of the State) and implore the assistance of the
Queen; who always attentive to her profit, and fearing the power of France,
undertakes the defense of the said Congregation; promises to expel them out of
Scotland, and by consequence the Roman Faith with them. Whil^st this was in
agitation, the Queen-Regent died, and her Daughter Mary, Widow to Francis the
second, departed from France toward Scotland. Her Brother aforesaid (who was a
mere Bastard both in blood and heart) counseled Queen Elizabeth to surprise
her at Sea, so to secure both her person and Religion. But she being arrived at
Ede^bourgh, made no change at all, but expressed great clemency toward her
subjects, thereby to give the lie to those false reports, which those Rebels
had dispersed of her, and to convince them also of cruelty and treachery.

But the Queen of England stopped not there: For she made a Law, by which all
were declared guilty of High Treason, who refused to make Oath that she had
full power, and absolute authority in all spiritual things, and over
Ecclesiastical persons. O good God! How little comparison is there between
those times, and these? Was not this to force men's consciences? The Hugenots of
this present Age would be ashamed to accept such a Law as was received with so
much alacrity, by these first Reformers. The Scots during these Interludes,
cast the Archbishop in prison, for saying Mass, and astronted another Priest
for the same subject, even within the Court, and before the very face of the
desolate Queen; who nevertheless with tears in her eyes, took them out of the
hands of their enemies: though yet all her clemency mingled with so many sweet
charms as accompanied her Majesty, was never able to soften the hearts of these
mutiners; who never left, till she had her Head cut off from her shoulders, as
we shall hereafter show, together with a part of those misfortunes which have
since happened to her posterity.

Now Queen Elizabeth, who thought not her authority sure, unless she put her
helping hand to the supplantation of the Roman Catholic Religion in Scotland,
as well as in England; strengthened so well the party of the Congregation, that
the Queen, no longer able to endure so many indignities, nor to disintangle her
selt from the snares, which the perfidious Crew had laid for her, was fain at
length to betake her self to flight. She also did for the Hugenots in France,
that which has been so much condemned in the King of Spain. For she took them
into her protection, assisted them with men and money; and showed her self
every whit as zealous for the exaltation of her Religion, as the Catholic King
did for his. So that she rendered her self as odious at Rome, and to the Roman
Catholics, as he did in the Low Countries, amongst the Calvinists and
Lutherans.

The Reformation came into the Low Countries.
The Confession of Ausbourgh entered on the one side into the Low Countries,
and the Reformed Religion from Geneva, from the Palatinate, and from England on
the other, the one by the communication of German soul-diers and the other by
that of the Nobility which had traveled, the Ministers who came from France,
and the Merchants who daily arrived at the Islands opposite to it. It slipped
in at first very secretly, found favor in the Houses of some great persons,
and affection in the hearts of some people. But being at length discovered, and
the Inquisition of Spain intervening, it grew to be much thwarted. But Fire and
Sword cannot extinguish a doctrine: nay rather, the patience of such as suffer
Racks and Torments, begets compassion to them, and hatred to their persecutors.
In fine, both parties arm, and ambition being the one half of the game, the
Spaniards regained ten of the Provinces, by the sword: the others, who vaunted
themselves to have had recourse to these extremities, by the violence and
cruelty of the Spaniards, for their privileges and liberty of conscience;
embraced through all the Towns and Villages the Reformed Religion, as it is
taught at Geneva, in some Cantons of Switzerland, in the lower Palatinate, and
in the Distinct of Hass^^. The Roman Religion was sent packing, contrary to the
first Agrcement: and even they, who either out of compassion, fair promises, or
hate of the Inquisition, had born arms for them, were deprived of the free
exercise thereof. The general complaints of all such, as fought against the
Church of Rome, were grounded chiefly upon these points.

Were grounded upon these points.
First, They disclaimed the too great Authority of the Pope, that he m^dled too
much in Secular Affairs; They blamed the disorders of the Court of Rome;
Prayers made in an unknown language; and maintained, that every one was to be
permitted to read the Bible: They cried out against Purgatory, Mass,
Invocation of Saints, the superstition of good Works, and the like.

These were demands strong enough to amaze and astonish them, who were not
versed at all in the Scriptures, and understood not even their own Belief, but
by rote.

The order of the Jesuits begins in the rise of the Reformation.
During these emborrasments, sprang up the order of the Jesuits, who have made
it their business ever since to defend the Pope, and the Romans Religion; to
repai^e the loss of Erudition and Sciences, and awaken the sluggish Monks, and
encounter in fine these new Champions; But they have met with great repugnance
and hatred, as well from the adverse party, as amongst the Roman Catholics
themselves; though not peradventure with so much reason from these latter. They
are made pass for murderers of Kings, for having a Doctrine, discrepant from
that of the Catholic Church; and to persecute the Monarchy of the whole
Universe, for the House of Spain. Yet they leave not for all this to hold up
their heads, and despise the calumnies and reproaches of their Adversaries. And
indeed, their Discipline in the Schools is both laudable and profitable: In
their Disputes, they are Aristotle's, and in their Pulpits Cicero's. In fine,
without them (I speak out of the mouth of Reformats) the Roman Church would be
quickly beaten down: And so it is to be seen amongst them, painted, under the
form of a stooping Tower, propped by the shoulders of the Jesuits, for fear
lest it fall. The Author and Founder of their Order was a Spaniard, and it was
very necessary to speak a word of them by the by, because they are made pass
for Incendiaries, Plotters of all Sedition, and Treasons, of many perfidies,
and wickednesses. Yet God howsoever has served himself of them, for the
conversion of the Indies, and China; for the restoration of learning, and for
the illumination and illustration of Sciences, wherein they are looked upon
with admiration.

CHAP. XVII
Religion affoards diverse Pretexts; causes jealousies. The Latin, and Greek
Religion.

IT was expedient for me to make mention in this Treatise of the Religions,
which existed in the precedent Age, and of the Changes they caused; the fatal
effects whereof are resented even in this of ours. We have also added thereto
the ambition of many, who endeavored to throw all things topsy-turvy, thereby
to ascend to the greatness which they proposed to themselves, and which it was
most facil to acquire by these Religions Pretexts.

O God! How are the hearts of poor mortals overwhelmed in darkness, under the
appearance of Religion? And how many are there in the world, who whilst they
are plotting mischief, hide themselves under the mask of devotion?

Religion indeed was, wont to reign in the souls of many, as Mistress of the
State, and was a just cause of taking arms; but at present, she is little
better then the servant thereof. True it is, that some years since, she has
done wonders both in Germany and France: But the conclusion has manifested,
that this pretext has served for the most part, Religion serves for a pretext.
but for interest of State, and to cover the martial humor of Princes; who
incited by the insatiable hunger of honor, for the ingrandisement of their
power, have very craftily made use of the cloak of conscience.

This therefore is that, which causes jeaulousie, distrust, aversion, and
hatred, and chiesly amongst the people, Causes hatred, and divides humors.
who cannot penetrate into the ambition of Potentates. This I say it is, which
causes violent suspicions, and divides humors in the same nation, in the same
Parentage; yea, and in the very self-same Family too. For if it have had force
enough to arm particular persons a against their own Parents, no marvail if it
make all that, which depends upon humane strength and science, contribute to
the suppression of any Party, of a different opinion; and if Princes have
occasion to make use of it, to cover their irregular appetites. But this
hatred, which proceeds from the diversity of opinions, is repugnant to the word
of God, which commands us to pray for our Brethren, and not to persecute and
vex them. We must let the tares grow till the time of Harvest, for fear of
plucking up the good corn with them. Now let us briefly turn back, to seek out
the motives, which seem to have caused these diversities, which have proved so
dammageable and pernicious to christian charity; as forerunners to the wrath
of God, and most undoubted marks of the latter day.

In the beginning of the fifteenth Age, there were in the whole uniuers^ but
two christian Churches; namely the L^^me, then under the authority of the Pope,
and the Greek, under that of certain Patriarcks. The difference (unworthy of
such a division) was, and even yet is, about ambition and preference, contrary
to the advertisements of our common Master; and because the Greek maintained
that the Holy Ghost proceeds but only from the Father. For all the rest is most
easy to be rejoyned, and reconciled. Now the Latin, being received throughout
all Europe, The Latin Church under the Pope, and Grek under Patriarchs.
there have happened from time to time very many complaints against abuses,
superstitions, and the ill discipline of the Priests; yea, and against the
Popes themselves, who too much busied with the wars, and intrigues of the
world, have forgotten that command, which says, Feed my Sheep: Feed my Flock:
whereof they are yet apt enough to serve themselves against the checks of their
enemies. There was no memory left of the Waldenses and Albingenses; The
Waldenses.
nor yet of the dangers, into which the Bohemians had brought all Germany, by
the doctrine of Witcliffe, and the so prodigiously victorious Arms of Zisca.
Witcliffe.
For instead of opening our eyes and ears to the admonitions of John Hus, we
reduced him into ashes. Charles the 8. King of France declared his
coffeehouse, and so did some other Kings his Predecessors. But it was held
for a crime sufficient to convince all men of Heresy, who spoke of a
Reformation by a General Council. So that superstition being swollen big, and
the world kept in most excessive ignorance, (as a very great and Orthodox
person writes) for the space of three hundred years by the Franciscans and the
Dominicans; as also by the carelessness of the Bishops, there started up a
German Doctor, Luther and Calvin.
(whom we have so often mentioned) and a French one likewise, who first
preached against those said superstitions; and then ventured to set up their
Standards against the Church her self, with so universal applause, that in a
few years even whole kingdoms grew to separate themselves from the communion
of that Body, which acknowledged the Pope for the Supreme Vicar of Jesus Christ.

The Jesuits oppose.
Now at the same time (as we have formerly showed) sprang the Jesuits, and
armed themselves to quell these valiant soldiers, who skipped out of their
holes so openly to attack a power, which all the States of Christendom held in
so much veneration.

They stopped the course of this Torrent, which neither Fire, Persecutious, nor
strict Prohibitions were able to effect; and they have united to the Body, a
good part of those people which had untyed themselves from it. It is not by
fire, but by force of Doctrine; and not by words, but by exemplary life, that a
remedy must be put to all these disorders, which happens amongst Christians.
Now this Society could not but meet with meet with envy enough amongst the
Clergy, which felt it self so reprehended and pricked by such new men. For
Admonitions and in structions, how necessary and profitable soever they be,
leave not to imprint some harshnesse upon the soul of the receivers. An exact
Captain is displeasing to lazy soldiers.

Violent remedies served for nothing.
In fine, recourse was had to such violent remedies, as so sharpened and stung
the parts affected, that there will never be means to introduce a
reconciliation; unless perhaps it fall out to be by ways full of suavity, and
charity. For interest took this powerful occasion so fast by his fore-lock, and
these Divisions are grown so firmly rooted, that it is probable, they will not
finish but with the world. And this is the principal source of the evils,
which we have seen, and yet daily see happen; to the grief of all good men in
this last Age. And thus we have showed about what, when, for what reasons, and
by whom began these Reformations: Nor must we wonder at the monstrous effects,
since they could not be more noble, then their Causes. If we would reflect
often upon it, we should find Ministers and instruments enough thereof. The
holy Scripture says, that there must be scandals, but cursed be they, who
shall give them.

THE HISTORY OF THIS IRON AGE
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I
The Queen of England, and the States of Holland refuse Peace. King Henry of
France polishes his Kingdom, and makes War against the Duke of Savoy.

THE Peace of Vervin filled with joy, not only the subjects of the Kings, but
also all such as acknowledged the Sea of Rome. The Protestants invited to the
said Peace by Henry the Great, shut their ears to the Propositions, and
studied only how to make most straight Allyances for their preservation. Where
Diffidence gets the mastery, Reason is not understood, unless it be ushered in
by strong and irrefutable assurance. It was impossible for the Archduke
Albert, to bring the States to a very advantageous Peace (as the Ministers
said) for them, since the arguments of King Henry could obtain nothing from
them. For his offers were as stints, out of which they drew sire to kindle the
war, with so much the greater animosity. They sent their Ambassadors into
England, Elizabeth and the states refuse Peace.
where they sound the Queen most disposed to receive theirs; so that it was
most facil to draw her to their opinion.

In the mean while, the Archduke receives a Procuration from the Infanta, his
future Spouse, in virtue whereof he was generally and solemnly received; and
nominatively at Antwerp, where the oath of sidelity was paid him by the
Deputies of the obedient Provinces.

Albert goes into Spain. 1598.
And so he went into Spain; but before his departure, he signified to the
confederated States, that he went to marry the Infanta, and that he had the
Low-conntries for Portion with her, and was already acknowledged Lord thereof:
Therefore he conjured them to associate themselves to the other Provinces, in
respect that the King had divided them from his other Demaines; and that thus
all distrusts being taken away, he withed nothing more, then to see that Body
entire, and in peace under his Government: But all in vain. For Religion and
liberty were too charming subjects to be abandoned; and they who are grown to
be Masters, abhor to fall back into forvitude.

He began his journey in the month of September, in the year 1598, leaving
Cardinal Andrew his cousin, for his Licutenant, and sent his army toward the
Rheyn, which, at his return he found full of confusion and revolt, for want of
pay. He was received in all places where he passed (together with the Princess
Margaret of Austria, spouse of Philip the third, whom he conducted in his
company) with honors due to the greatness of their quality. He stayed not in
Spain; but as soon as he had married the Princess Clara Eugenia, The King of
France repolisheth his Kingdom.
he brought her into the Low Countries, and they made their entry into Brussels
in the month of September, 1599.

He brings the Infanta, 1599.
King Henry of France, having given his subjects a peace, made it all his care
to repolish his kingdom, much depraved by the prolixity of the civil wars, to
revive the laws stricken dumb, by the licentiousness of the soldiers, to place
good order every where; and in fine, to establish two Religions in very good
union, as well for his own service, as for the repose of his people: Whereas King
Philip, on the other side, in his, would have but one. But some persons of very
great experience, have conceived, that if he had embraced the same Maxim, he
might have preserved the seventeen Provinces, though others have believed, that
he would rather have lost them all, as being too far distant from them, and
consequently unable to accommodate himself to all occurrences, which required a
diversity of temperaments.

But this Prince (namely Henry) had been educated in the reformed Religion, and
so knew the humors, and the forces of that party not to be contemptible. He
was Son to Anthony of Bourbon, who was slain at the siege of Rouen. The Prince
of Conde being slain in the battle of Jarnac, and the Admiral remaining
General of the Hughenot army, he advised them to nominate for their General
Henry of Bourbon, a young Lord, who had ever defended their party; and so he
being turned Catholic, and upon that made King of France, had always a
particular care to uphold them, as a people, from which he had received great
services. But there was very great danger of taking from them that, which had
been promised them by so many Proclamations or Edicts, nor did they indeed
forbear to cry up their services, and bragg, that it was they only who put the
Crown upon his head.

Henry the 3. last King of the race of Valois
Now the Royal race of the Valois being extinguished by the death of Henry the
third, son to Henry the second, he succeeded to the Crown, though with much
dispute, and repugnancie: but his justice was accompanied by his valor, and so
by rejecting that, which was most prejudicial to him (to wit, the reformed
Religion) he quieted all his subjects, and reduced them to their duty.

CHAP. II
King Henry gives his sister in marriage to the Marquis du Pont, espowses Mary
of Medicis, and wages war with the Duke of Savoy. The enterprizt of the said
Duke upon Geneva.

Henry gives his sister to the Marquis du Pont
THe King not content with giving the Hughenots all they had ever desired,
intended besides, to obliege the house of Lorraine, by allying the Princes
thereof with his own. And so he matched his sister to the Marquis du Pont, who
retained the exercise of the reformed Religion; lived in most perfect amity
with her husband, and deceased without issue.

The Kings marriage being declared null, and Madame Gabriell, by whom he had
many children, (the eldest whereof is the Duke of Vandosme) ending her days by
sudden death, Marries Mary of Medicis.
he married Mary Medicis, sister to the grand Duke of Florence, who arrived in
France in the month of December, being the last of the precedent age.

Upon the delay of the Duke of Savoy, to restore him the Marquisat of Saluces,
he prepared himself for war: And the Duke to divert the storm, came to him at
Lions, with store of presents, and promised to render him the said Marquisat,
Makes war upon the Duke of Savoy.
or else the County of Bresses, within the term of six months: But the effect
thereof not following, the King quickly made himself master of all Savoy. There
is no amusing or retarding a potent creditor, who has both will and means to
make himself paid. In fine, by the mediation of the Pope, a peace was made,
whereby the Duke remained in possession of the Marquisat, and the King of the
aforesaid Country of Bresses. Through this peace Italy was delivered from a
great oppression, and so the Troops of the Conde de Fuentes marched out of the
Duchy of Milan toward Flanders.

During the civil wars, a little before the terrible execution at Blois, the
aforesaid Duke easily recovered the said Marquisat, by virtue, (as it was
believed) of Pistolls. Gold.
He caused money to be coined, with a Centaur, treading under his feet a
Gawlish Hercules, with this Motto, Opportune. But Henry after his Conquest, and
the accomplishment of his Pretensions, stamped another sort, representing a
Gawlish Hercules, treading upon a Centaur, with this, Opportunius. We must
never let our hearts be too much puffed up with prosperity, but consider that
the conquered, grow often to be Conquerours.

We will not leave Savoy, till we shall first have spoken of the enterprise
Which the Duke had upon the City of Geneva. The City of Geneva.
She is situated upon the Rhine, near a great Lake, and was before that
reformation, the Seat of a Bishop. She changed her Religion in the year 1535,
since when, no Roman Catholic (as it is published) is tolerated there above
three days.

Now Charles Emanuel, the aforesaid Duke, attempred to make himself Lord of her
by surprise. He secretly listed twelve hundred men, under the command of
Monsieur d' Aubigny, who by means of great store of ladders, and other
instruments, got to the number of two hundred into the Town, whilst the Duke
was following with some Regiments of recruit. But being discovered, and the
Citizens running to their arms, they were stricken with terror, and returned
the same way they came, without having been able to seize upon so much as one
of the Gates, to let in the forces, Thus this great design, so long
premeditated, so secretly carried, so well begun, and almost completely
executed, at last failed: But whether through the valor of the townsmen, or
the cowardlinesse of the Savoyers, I know not: they were so nettled by this
fright, that Father Alexander, a Scottish Jesuit, with all his remonstrances
and exhortations, could never infuse any courage into their hearts. But this
hot Camisado or assault, made them of Geneva stand upon their guard, for their
own preservation; and to this effect, they raised some soldiers, and implored
the assistance of the King, who declared them comprised within the Peace of
Vervin, and gave them a pension: since which time they have kept themselves in
peace.

The Princes of the aforesaid family affirm, that the said City is seated
within the district of Savoy, and consequently belongs to them. But that which
cannot be gotten by force, will not be acquired by allegation of right.

CHAP. III. The Jubilee. Biron executed. The battle of Flanders. La Bourlotte
killed. Rinberg taken.
The Iubile.
THe first year of this age, Pope Clement celebrated a Jubilee at Rome, whether
there flocked an infinite number of people from all parts, some out of
curiosity, and to see Italy, and others out of devotion, and to gain the
Indulgences.

But let us now return toward the Low Countries, in regard that France grew to
be even steeped in delights (the fruits of peace) and no body in motion, but
Marshall de Biron, Biron beheaded
who attainted and convicted of the crime of high Treason, for having kept
correspondency with a foreign Prince, was beheaded in the Court of the
Bastill. Indeed, that infinity of brave actions, which had crowned his head
with laurel, ought (methinks) to have saved him from this stroke. But what?
Fortune had elevated him very high, so to tumble him down headlong into this
precipice.

The Archduke Albert, seeing it was but labor lost to solicit the States of
Holland to a reconciliation, and that all the exploits of the Admiral did more
sharpen the bordering provinces, then fright the confederates, and that the
enterprise upon Bommel proved as fruitless as that of La Bourlotte, upon some
places thereabouts, yea, and that one part of his forces mutinied, and had
taken up their quarter apart, under the conduct of one Eelcto, The mutiny of
the Spaniards.
he began to lay about him, to find money to content them, and reduce his
Militia to a good discipline: but he could never be brought to pardon them, who
sold the Fort of St. Andrew.

The States upon the other side, and Prince Maurice, having shut up their
Common wealth, by the taking of such places as gave them entrance to the
enemy, and by consequence deprived him of all means of drawing contribution
out of the said Provinces, resolved to keep one foot in Flanders (the most
fertile Province of all) thereby the more to incommodate the Archduke, who
hearing that the Prince was entered with a puissant army near Newport, made his
troops march with all speed, cut off seven or eight hundred Scots, who kept the
Bridge, and being proud upon this happy encounter, advanced to affront his
enemies, without granting his soldiers, who were tired with their long march,
so much leisure as to breath. But Maurice, having drawn back his fleet into the
main, thereby to hinder his soldiers from flight, and obleige them rather to
die honorably, The Battle of Flanders.
then to seek a shameful retreat; made a generous resistance, and won a
glorious victory. The Mutiners gave a remarkable account of themselves, Gotten
by Maurice, and the first of this Age.
and almost all lost their lives in the dispute. The Admiral was taken
prisoner, and many Officers of note. And this was the first battle of this
age, which proved favorable to the Hollanders, who conferred all imaginable
honors upon their victorious Prince, by shouts of joy, Bonefires, etc.

The Archduke, having tasted the bitter fruits of bad counsel, forthwith
reinforced his army, and sent troops into all the forts about Ostend, in such
sort as that Maurice, finding no gap of advantage, imbarqued his foot, and
repassed into Holland.

La Bourlotte killed.
Collonell La Bourlotte, going to defend Fort Issabell, was killed there by
musket shot, and his death much regretted by the Archduke, he having given
great characters of himself, in diverse actions and occasions of his service, as
the taken of many towns, and fighting of many battles. His life.
He was a Gentleman born in Lorraine, ascended to very high military charges,
by his huge courage, esteemed one of the greatest Captains of his time. Henry
the fourth endeavored to disingage him from the service of the Archduke, in
case there happened a good agreement: but he being too passionate for the
service of the House of Austria, would not hearken to it at all.

Now the war was continued by enterprises, which for the most part issued to
the damage of the undertakers; and almost ever, of the Treaties. The greatest
incoveniences were by Sea, where the Dunkerkers, who were snapt, were hanged
without mercy; who likewise often repayed the same coin to the Herring-Fishers,
and others.

The Zelanders continually complained of the mischiefs they received from
Spinola's Galleys at the Sluice, which indeed were neither small nor insensible.
But this thorn was quickly taken out of their sides, and the said Town taken by
famine, whilst the Spaniards were engaged at the siege of Ostend.

Rhinl e^gh taken by agreen ^nent.
Rinbergh was besieged by Prince Maurice 1601. and well defended by the
Garrison, which was strong: But the relief coming too late, and sinding the
Hollanders well entrenched, durst not venture; and so the Governor D'Avila was
constrained to yield up the place (not without having performed the action of a
valiant Captain) upon honorable conditions, about the beginning of August the
same year: And Meurs likewise followed the victorious Chariot of Prince Maurice.

CHAP. IV
The Siege of Ostend. Maurice attempts the surprise of Bois-le-Ducque and
besieges, and carries the Grave.

ALbert, importuned by the States of Flanders, to free them from their ill
neighbors, and those Birds of prey at Ostend, in regard that the Forts thereof
could not stop their occasions, nor hinder them from fixing their cluches in
the flat Country; suffered himself to be induced to that high and most
difficult enterprise: partly to draw Maurice from Rinbergh, and animated also,
partly by the vast sum of moneys, which the said States undertook to furnish,
at different terms for this work. For their interest urged them to unnestle
those enemies; and it belonged only to the Eagle to make so high a flight. But
a place, which has always one Gate open, and where so many neighbors pretend
an interest, is not so soon gotten.

The said Town was ever very carefully conserved and kept, as well by the Queen
of England, as by the confederated States; so to draw great contributions from
it. It was before the troubles, but a very small paltry place, a Retreat for
Fishers; but very well known since by the most famous and memorable siege that
ever was.

The siege of Ostend begun these. of July 1601.
It was invested, as much as possibly it could be, in the year 1601 upon the 5.
of July; and first revictualled afterward by an English Knight, called Veer,
and above three thousand fresh soldiers of his country, sent by the Queen. In
the month of September, Admiral de Varniont, came with a hundred and seventy
Sail of Ships, laden with all kinds of Munition, both for wat and mouth, for
the winter; so that all was better cheap there, then even in Holland it self.
This made the Prince resolve about All-hallown-tide, to go and attack
Boisle-Due: And the Archduke well knowing the importance of the place, sent an
Armythither, and put some colors into the Town. But the coldness of the
weather proved the strongest enemy, and forced him to pack up his Baggage, and
march another way.

In the monoth of September aforesaid, the Queen of Spain was delivered of a
Daughter, and the Queen of France of a The title of the eldest son of the Crown.
Dolphin; who by a happy destiny were afterward joined together in marriage,
as we shall show in fit place.

Prince Maurice, finding his enterprise upon Boisleduc crossed, and that the
Spaniards continued their siege, raised more soldiers the year following, and
toward the end of June, with a terrible train, he marched down into Brabant.
The Archduke, informed of his great preparation, enabled by some money from
Spain, and the reasons for the continuation of the siege, in which the Honor
of the House of Austria was engaged, and all difficulties well balanced by
that most cautelous and advised nation, resolved for his part, to make a great
defense. It is in trouble, that virtue shines with most luster. He sent the
Admiral into Brabant to stop the progress of the Princes, who having some
Italian Regiments with him, entrenched himself near Tirlemont, a Town grown
famous since by her deplorable misfortune, and buried in her own ashes.

The Hollanders, not being able to draw the Spaniards, (who were yet mindful of
their loss received before Newport) to a general decision, diverted their
course, and encamped themselves before Grave; which Town being well fortified,
was two months after surrendered upon conditions: Grave yield upon agreement.
Mutiny. The Spaniards seize upon Hoochstrade.
And the Admiral not able to raise the siege, was constrained to retreat:
neither could he hinder the disbanding and mutinies of some of his Soldiers,
who seized upon the Town of Hoochstrade, and began a new policy amongst
themselves.

The Archduke hastens thither; and the Admiral draws his stake out of play,
and retires himself into Spain, But Albert instead of water, cast oil into the
sire; and, contrary to the advice of the States under his obedience, proscribes
them, and declares them Rebels, Traitors, attainted, Mecauban.
and convicted of High Treason in a superlative degree, etc. But it is in vain
to be angry without strength; and the weak Laws, yield to the unjust violence
of Arms. The Squadron of Mutiners remained not mute, and the intercession of
the Nuncio proved fruitless: the Archduke being resolute, and they
re-inforcing themselves with men and money, by the near neighborhood of the
consederated Provinces.

Now these Revolts gave advantage to the States, and means to go in execution
through all the Country of Luxembergh; and such as refused contribution, had
the grief of seeing their house set on fire. This Cavelcada, or Inroade was
finished in less then a month, and without any resistance at all. During
these interludes, the Mutiners governed themselves in form of a Republic,
observing a most exact discipline; and amongst other Laws, forbidding Cards
and Dice. They were besieged in Hoochstrade, Are besieged and succored by
Prince Maurice.
and succored by the Prince upon certain conditions: which done, he returned
again before Boisleduc: But this Conquest was reserved for his Brother, as we
shall hereafter show.

The Archduke, notwithstanding so many inconveniences, mutinies, vexations and
losses, stood as firm and immovable, as a Rock against the greatest storms
before Ostend, though to his no small displeasure, saw it often relieved. And
Prince Maurice not yet satiated with so many victories both by Sea and Land,
resolved to vanquish his contumacie by a more sensible diversion. The expenses
of this siege could not choose but be great; but the people liberally consented
without grudging. So pleasant is victory, how dear soever bought.

Money.
The arrival of Marquis Ambrose Spinola with the Golden Fleece was a Spinola
came into Flanders with money.
wholesome Balsom to cure the disease of the mutinied Squadron; for it made
them return to the Archdukes service, and hastened the rendition of the Town,
by the order of continual mining, which was given by the said Marquis. The
Prince in the interim was not asleep, for he departed in the month of April,
with a huge number of Boats, took many Forts, besides the Towns of Isendike and
Ardenbergh; and encamped himself before the renowned Town of Sluice, Sluice taken
by famine.
which, with some Galleys, was rendered three months after, by famine, though
Spinola acted all the parts, which could be invented by the most subtle wit,
and used all the force, which the most valiant and resolute soldier could
manifest, to relieve the besieged: But his enemies were too well entrenched,
and his provident Rival, kept himself too much upon his guard.

Ostend taken 1604.
The taking of Ostend 1604, followed close upon the heels of that of Sluice, and
the composition made by the besieged, was very honorable. There marched out,
of diverse nations, about three thousand men, the number of the dead, as well on
the one side, as the other, surpassed the belief of man; and the issue of this
siege, kept all the power of Europe in suspense. This Age, which was to be all
Iron, fire, blood, and slaughter: This Age (I say) which was to be the total
ruin of Christendom, together with that of Faith and Charity; could not begin
better, then by such a siege. This was the most famous School of war, that
ever was before, as where all the Martial Spirits resorted, to learn
Discipline, and to put it in practice (as they have done since) in their own
Countries. The French, the English, the Germans, and the Scots, The Siege
lasted above three years.
together with the Hollanders, defended this place about three years, through
the advantages and commodities afforded them by the Sea. The Spaniards,
Italians, Walloons, Burgundians, and other Germans, attacked it with all the
force, and industry the greatest courages were able to invent. All such as were
not present at this bloody exercise, but remained mute at home, at the noise of
so much bloodshed; expected the dubious issue of so hazardous a siege, upon
which the Monarchy of the whole world seemed to depend. Yea, even the Great
Turk himself, ravished with joy by the ruin of the Christians, was not a
little glad, to see such an obstinate resolution on both sides.

Let us here take notice of the Divine Providence, which (like another Jupiter)
laughs at the folly of Mortals; who like other Giants, will needs make
themselves masters of all, and endeavor to outbrave the very Elements
themselves. The fiercest enemies to mankind are War, Plague, and other
Infirmities: The Reward of victory a morsel of earth, and houses buried under
their own foundations. And now, if courage and generosity egged on many to
this; certainly pity moved infinitely more, there to bewail their friends,
buried under the ruins of this second Troy, and view a little piece of ground,
which had cost so much pains, so much sweat, so much time, so much blood, and
so much money. All the industry of man was set on work there on both sides; and
the Archduke, and Arch-Dutches, had both the trouble, and the charge of
repairing this place, and putting it into that state, wherein we now see it.
Necessity caused this siege (at first judged easy) to be begun, Reputation to
be continued, and power (in despite of interest) by the industry and valor of
Spinola, brought it to an end.

CHAP. V
Peace between the Spaniard and the English. King Henry of France
re-eshablishes the Jesuits. Father Cotton hurt. War about the Rhein,

Peace made between the Kings of Spain and England. 1604.
THe Spaniards, having sufficiently tried the great hurt done them by the
English, during the life of Queen Elizabeth, as well in Spain it self, as by
Sea, and in the Low Countries; yea, and at the Siege of Ostend also; and
finding, that all satisfaction endeavored to procure from them, either in
Ireland, or England, had not any kind of good success; began to think, that a
peace with these insulary people, would prove necessary for the State. Nor had
they much trouble to obtain it; King James being easily inclined to it by some
certain jealousy, which had taken root in his soul. The Archduke and his
Duchess were comprehended in it, and it was concluded the very same day, that
the Garrison went out of Ostend.

France, through the enjoyment of seven years peace, was so well restored,
that there seemed not to have been any war in more then half an age before.
King Henry, being a great husband of his Finances, or Exchequer; made a journey
to Metz, where two Jesuits cast themselves at his feet, beseeching him with a
very elegant speech, to vouchsafe to re-establish them through all the
kingdom. The Parliament of Paris, and the Sorbon opposed them; but the King,
by special grace admitted them, The Jesuits reestablished in France.
and demolished the Pyramide, which had been erected against them, for that one
of their Scholars had hurt the King in the mouth; And the Mines, which the
Hughenots sprung against their Society, were either discovered or despised: At
least, they wrought no effect. But Father Cotton, going once to the King, was
attacked in the Louure by a great number of Lackies, Father Cotton hurt by
Lackies at the Lonure.
who after many quipps and scoffs, very dangerously wounded him, and would
have killed him, if a Count had not hastened to the stir, and taken him out
of their bands. His Majesty seemed much displeased herear; and all issued to
the confusion of the one, and the glory of the other.

The year following, Prince Maurice had an enterprise upon the Dike of Antwerp,
from whence he retired with remarkable loss, before the Castle of Wowde, which
he took by capitulation. The Archduke on the other side, disgusted at the
loss of Sluice, and desiring to keep Flanders free from contribution, sent
Spinela to the said place, whose credit was already much augmented amongst his
enemies, as well as amongst them of the Spanish party. But Maurice, having
prevented him, and put all things in good order, he found himself fain to seek
the same way, which the Count de Bucquoy had taken, with a flying Camp, toward
the Rhein; which he passed, and took Oldenzeel, and Lingen; and if he had
prosecuted his business with the same ardor and promptitude, wherewith he
began, it was very probable, he might have seized upon Coeverden, Groening;
yea, Embden it self, and so have taken footing in Freezland; War about the
Rhein.
in regard that he would have found no great resstance, for want of men;
especially coming upon an exploit, both unforeseen and unexpected. There was
yet another very dangerous encounter toward the Rhem, where Prince Henry had
incurred great hazard of being killed, or taken, if he had not been seconded by
his Brother; wherein he was more happy, then in the enterprise of Guelders.

The Designs upon Grave, and Bergh upon Zoom, were hurtful to the
undertakers, and served for an advertisement to them, upon whom they were
practiced, to keep themselves upon their guard. The Count de Buequoy quickly
brake the garrisons of Wotchtendone, and Cracaw; and so winter was as a trumpet
which sounded a retreat, to both armies.

The morning is never so fair, but that there appears some cloud upon the
Horizon, before the day be quite spent. France is never so well at rest, but
that there is some stir, either in one corner or other, or in the middle. For
they are people of a fiery spirit, and enemies to quiet. The conspiracy, which
was discovered in Provence at that time, and the author whereof was a gentleman
of that Country, (who was appreheded at Paris, together with the Secretary to
the Spanish Ambassador) caused the the said Ambassador to complain, and
reproach, that the Peace was not well kept: to which the King answered by other
objections, which were the seeds of the contrariety since, between these two
nations, who yet by different ways, seem to have both, but one object for
their end.

The birch of Philip the fourth King of Spain, the^^ of April.
This very year 1605, upon the 8th. of April, was born Philip the 4th. who
holds the Spanish Monarchy at this day. And the same year, died Pope Clement
the 8th. and Theodore Beza, and the year following, Justus Lipsins, Professor
of the University of Lovain.

CHAP. VI
The difference which happened between Pope Paul the fifth, and the Republic
of Venice, and why? The peace made. The Duke of Brunswick endeavors to take
the Town. The King of Denmark goes into England. The continuation of the wars
in the Low Countries.

VVHiles the war was thus hot in the Low Countries, there happened a spark of
division in Italy, between the Pope, and the Venetians, which if neglected,
might have caused an emborasment no less perilous then that; the one, (namely
the Roman Catholics) ministering all kinds of means, and reasons to quench
it; and the Reformates, all sorts of invention, to kindle it. The knot of the
controversy was, that the said Republic had made a Law, prohibiting all the
Ecclesiastical persons, to buy, or receive by Will, or Testament, any
immovable goods, or other inheritances. This Order, being ill taken at Rome,
caused a Bull, which was published against the said Republic, with the
thunderbolt of excommunication, in case it were not revoked within the term of
four and twenty days; interdicting the Priests to say Mass, The difference
between the Pope and the Venetians.
under pain of the same excommunication. The Senate protests against it, and
so from words to blows. Italy was instantly in arms. The King of Spain ofters
assistance to the Pope, and Henry the fourth as much, but under condition, that
he being eldest son of the Church, his Holiness would receive no aid from any
other but himself. This proposition, together with the information which he
had, that the King of England and the Hollanders (enemies to the holy See) had
presented all kind of help to the Venetians, and being also moved by his own
prudent goodness, and the evident danger, to which the Catholic States would
be exposed) caused him to hearken to the perswations of the two Kings, and take
off the excommunication, whereby the business was appeased, Taken away by the
intercession of the two Kings.
and all the Ecclesiastics, who were gone out of the City during this fogg,
had leave to return, except only the Jesuits, who carried the whole burden,
and were banithed for perpetuity; The Jesuits banished out of the Commonwealth
of Venice.
nor have all the intercessions, and addresses which have since been made in
favor of them, by the King of France, and many other Potentates, served for
any thing, but to renew the said order of banishment against them.

The Protestants (their capital enemies) have not failed to serve themselves
of this occasion, as also of many other, to cry them down every where by
accusing them of some conspiracies against the said Commonwealth, whereof yet
there is no clear mention made at all. For they make profession to be forbidden
by their rule to meddle with State business. But a good Game, good Gain. They
are not without fellows, for England furnishes them likewise with matter
enough.

Now these animosities being appeased, there returned a calm to all Italy,
which we will now leave to come back into Germany and Holland; For here it is
that men are always in action both by Sea and Land, whilst the rust of
Christendom are at rest. It is true that the Duke of Brunswick seeing Spinola
with a great army near Lingen, took a pretext to raise one to, but it was in
effect to attack the chief town of the Duchy. An attempt upon Brunswick.
His forces seized upon one of the gates, and the wall, without much trouble;
but they weakly desended those advantages, which they had gotten, and so were
shamefully beaten often. He besieged the town twice, but the Emperor interposing
his authority, all was quickly accommodated. Enterprines never snoceed well but
by the courage of the under takers.

The King of Denmark goes into England.
The King of Denmark went to see his brother inlaw King James, and his sister,
where having been regaled the space of a month, he returned toward his own
Kingdom; not without admiring the pomp, and magnificence of the English, and
giving marks of his royal greatness, to that glorious nation. The principal
motive of this enterview could never hither to be truly discovered; and
whatsoever has been said thereof, has been grounded only upon conjectures,
suspicions, and mistrusts.

Spinola comes from Spain, and takes, Grol.
In the spring of the year 1606 Marquis Spinola returned from Spain, and
brought a vast sum of money with him, which is the true sinew of war, and the
most excellent oil to anoint the dull arms of the soldiers; and having
therewith; put the Militia in good discipline, he sent the Count de Bucquoy
toward the Rheine, himself following shortly after: but the continual rains,
and the vigilance of Prince Maurice, made him lose the hope of re-gaining any
access to Groening, and the other places of strength on the way. The Count de
Bucquoy staying behind, attempted to pass the Vehal, with Pontons and small
Boats, by the favor of a battery, but he was repulsed. But Spinola took
Lothem, and seeing then, that amongst so many enterprises, none of them all
prospered so, as to get over the Rivers, either near the Soul, or elsewhere, he
turned his arms against Grol, which by furious attacks, he quickly compelled
to yield, notwithstanding the Garrison were strong enough. And not yet conrent
with this Town, he caused the Count de Bucquoy to invest Rhinbergh, who could
not hinder Count Henry from putting fourteen Colors into the place, and some
Cavalrie besides, together with many French Gentlemen Volunteers.

The complaint of the Spaniard against the French Catholics.
The Spaniards and the most zealous Roman Catholics of Europe, have very
often accused the French of levity, and especially such of them as are
Catholics, in regard that, being of the same Law with the Spaniards, and in
peace with them too, they (contrary to the Treaty of Vervin) embraced the other
party, not only to strip their master of his Demaynes, but the towns also
themselves of the exercise of the Catholic Religion. If there went none but
Spaniards, out of our States (said the obedient Towns) the passion of the
French would be in some sort lawful, but, since our Religion is banished,
together with their government, they can allege no receivable excuse, to
exempt them from injustice and blame. The Priests maintaining, that it was a
matter of conscience, refused to give absolution to the soldiers, as favorers
of Heresy, and enemies to the Church. But they, always covered themselves
under the cloak of policy, and made the same answer which Henry the fourth
their Master did, to the Spanish Ambassador, that it was not a war of Religion,
but of State. The complaints often enough made by the Archduke and Duchess,
upon this subject, had no other satisfaction, then that there might likewise be
found enough, in their Armies; and that it was free for every one, to choose what
party he pleased. But the French, followed rather the inclination of their
Prince, then scruple in Religion, laid more to heart the weakening of the Power
of Spain, then the ruin of Heretics; and the interest of their Master, then
that of the Catholic faith. So that the Protestants made use of them, and have
prevailed much, by the jealousy of State, which reigns betwixt these two
potent nations.

CHAP. VII
The taking of Rinbergh. The mutiny of the Spaniards. The siege of Grol, raised
by the promptitude of the Marquis. The first overture for a Truce received.

WE left Spinola so well entrenched at Rinbergh, that the Princes courage was
cooled to attack him, who bethought himself a little too late, of sending his
brother to Venlo, so to make a powerful diversion. For the Town being
battered, by a rough, and smart assaulter, and defended by resolute men,
Rinbergh rendered.
was at last, forced to render; and so the Garrison, to the number of three
thousand dislodged, the second of October. Now the taking of so important a
place, just at the nose of so strong an Army, produced such discourses, as
blind passion dictated, to men of blind judgment; and the Marquis, as
victorious as he was, was not yet able to divert some mutinies in his Army for
want of pay: and therefore, considering the huge inconveniences they suffered,
by so many marches, sieges, enterprises, and the harshuesse of the season, he
thought fit to refresh them, in the County of Gulick.

Now, the Prince, who desired to put nothing to hazard, but be ever prying upon
occasions, met at length with this. He caused Lochom to be besieged, which
quickly submitted, Maurico besiges Grol. Spinola rayses him thence, and gives
Diet to the inutiners.
and then went to attack Grol. But the unexpected arrival of Spinola, made him
change the vexations of that siege, (which bred so many diseases in his army)
into a most advised retreat, and send his soldiers into their winter quarters.
It is the part of a good Pilot, to take his measures well, amongst the rocks;
and of a good General, to accommodate himself to time; and not to struggle
against the harshnesse of the season; but make his retreat, to save his army,
the conservation whereof is as landable, as the hazardous gaining of a battle.
The Marquis having surmounted many inconveniences, to deterr his enemies from
the continuing the siege, and made them at length dislodge; endeavored
besides, to sweeten the mutiners, by granting Diet, for their winter quarters,
where we will leave them, and follow him to Brussels, to contrive the first
propositions of the Truce.

Never was there so much trouble to decide a business of importance, as there
was to bring the confederated States, to hear of any overanes of Peaces, or
Truce. It seemed more easy, to make an agreement betwixt fire and water, and
all the metals together, then to reconcile these two parties. But indeed, the
distrust was too great, the hatred too much rooted, and fortune too favorable.
And whereas other Countries, grow poor by war; this, most rich, most potent,
and most flourishing. For on the one side, the enemies army could not enter, in
regard of the frequencie of great rivers, and on the other, they are guarded by
the sea, in such sort, as that by trafique, they are risen to such a height,
that every body courts their friendship.

Many assemblies, and mediations for Peace, and accommodation were made, but
all vanished into smoke, and served rather for a spur to war, then a balsom, to
mollify the ulcerated wounds, of such as make their profit by Alarms. For this
was the common talk; There is no trust to be given to the Spaniards, or the
Papists; for they teach, that they are not to keep their faith with Heretics:
The fowler sings sweetly to draw the birds into his Nets: and many other such
reasons, which served only to destroy all propositions of Peace.

Nay, even the Embassies of the Emperors, so often reiterated, were able to
reap nothing but ceremonies, and those of other Princes, yet less. The
complaints of the neighbors endammadged and oppressed by the soldiers, were
not heard, or at least requited, with excusing the necessity of times, and
affairs. For the sea was too much agitated by the winds, and hatred of them,
who would have this potent house, in obedience to the feeble commands of this
The United Provinces living by the winds and waters.
Aeolus. In brief, they who spoke to the States of peace, were as welcome at
the Haghe, as they were at Venice, who spoke for the Jesuits, notwithstanding
their propositions were just, and equitable, and could not be rejected, but
upon mere distrust. But what is impossible to man, is facil to God; and all
fruit grows ripe in time. Let us now see the reasons of this resistance.

The States could not imagine, that the King of Spain would ever renounce the
Soverainty, of so many, and so illustrious Provinces; and again, they who were
become Masters, had lost the will of returning to obedience. They were grown
powerful, by the allyances of France, and England, by the trafique of the
Indies, by the picoryes, or spoils which they had made upon Spain, and the
obedient Provinces, with which they offered to make an agreement, and alliance,
by excluding the King, and his heirs, but by no means, with his Majesty;
whereto the other could not listen, as to a thing impossible and shameful, and
which checked the oath of fidelity, which they had taken. The summons, which
the Infanta gave them of her arrival at Brussels, moved them not at all,
either to acknowledge her for Lady, or induce them to peace, or truce. In fine,
in the year 1607. Great storms at Ester. 1607.
(memorable for the great storms, which happened throughout all the
Low Countries toward Easter) this resistance began by little and little, to
grow warm, and this ice to thaw. For they opened their ears, to the charming
persuasions of that worthy Prelate; and their hearts, to the great successes of
Spinola, who surpassed, or equaled all his Predecessors, in military science.
So that the reverent father John May, Provincial of the order of the Franciscan
Friars, was a worthy instrument, of this holy work, who, by his infatigable
care, and most painful journeys, sometimes from Brussels to the Haghe, and
sometimes from thence into Spain by Brussels, brought the two parties, to a
truce of seven months, which grew afterward to be prolonged.

CHAP. VIII. The defeat of the Spanish Armada. The Design upon Sluice failed. A
continuance of the Treaty. Spinola arrives at the Hague. The Treaty again
broken, was renewed at Antwerp, where the Truce was made for twelve years.
The Flect beaten at Gibelaltar.
DUring these goings and comings to and fro, Admiral Heemskerk went to attack
the Spanish Fleet designed for the Indies, which he defeated in the Streights
of Gibelaltar, to the great amazement of the Spaniards, to see that people
which they had so often beaten, and so often despised, come to assault them
even in Spain it self: a strange quipp of Fortune. Times have their turns. And
so the first fruit which Spain tasted of a Cessation of Arms, was the calling
home of the Ships of the said Commonwealth, which much incommodated her Costs,
and lay as snares to snap the Gallions coming from the Indies, with some
whereof they very often met; slighting the danger for the advantage of the
booty. The enter prise upon Sluice failed for want of courage.
But before we sheathe our sword, and hang it upon the nail, let us speak a
word of that memorable Enterprise upon the Town of Sluice, which was in the year
1606.

The Spaniards being advertised by two soldiers of the State of the Garrison,
of the Gates, and of the Wall of the aforesaid Town, sent three thousand six
hundred men, with that renowned French Gentleman Du Terrail, who was since
beheaded at Geneva, for having but so much as thought of an Enterprise upon the
City. Now this valiant Cavallier had promised the Archduke either to deliver
him the place, or die in the Attempt. And so he marched with his Troops through
the Drowned Lands, without being discovered; approached the Town, set three An
Engine to force Gares.
Petards on work about the Gate, the last whereof got it open; but the hearts
of the soldiers grew so cold, that they durst not venture in. Never was there
an Enterprise of importance more easy to be effected, without either danger or
resistance; and never was there any which more loosely failed for want of
courage, and good command: so that it proves most true, that a Coward can never
do a good action. Du Terrail not having authority enough to animate these
Cowards to enter the Town, was constrained to retire with them, and ask leave
to withdraw himself from them, to a Nation which never failed in any occasion
for want of courage, as being more apt to offend in the other extreme. Besides
that, danger urged him away in respect of the execution of three Captains, who
paid the score dear enough for all the rest. Thus God disposes of all things
contrary to the expectation of man. Let us now come back to the begun Treaty.

The arrival of the Archdukes Depaties at the Hague.
Spinola, Richardot, Mamicidor, Father John Nay, and the rest of the Deputies
arrived at the Hague, and were received there with many complements, and
tieated according to the dignity both of their employments, and their persons;
and chiefly at the Court. The Prince, and the Lords of prime quality, went to
meet them at Riswick; where after the ceremonies were performed, the Marquis
went into the Princes Coach. A strange Metamorphosis; to see the two chief
Captains of the world, most bitter enemies a little before, court one another
now with true respect, and draw the eyes of the people to admire thew. Persons
of honor and glory may be hated by the wicked, but virtue never. Now, because
it is not my design, nor can this History permit me to particularize all along,
upon what passed in this illustrious Assembly; I will content my self with
saying, that the demand of the said Ambassadors concerning the forbearance of
Traffic to the Great America.
Indies, and the reduction of the exercise of the Roman Catholic Faith, had
almost broaken off this Treaty.

In effect, some advices from other parts, and the retardment of the
Provincial aforesaid in Spain, moved the States to sen forth a Protestation,
containing their final intention: And the Ambassadors of the Princes who were
Mediators between them, counseled the States, to hearken at least to a Truce,
since there was yet no room for Peace.

They retire.
But they, sticking fast to their resolution, and the Ambassadors of Spain
likewise persisting within the limits of their Commissions, there was no means
at all to make them join, or come to a conclusive Definition. And so in fine,
they parted from the Haghe, not without Protestations on both sides, of the
sincerity of their intentions for the good issue of the said Treaty; each
casting the fault upon the other. But after their departure, the States were
advised by the Kings of England and France, (with both whom they had made a
most straight Allyauce, for the maintaining of the Peace, in case it were
concluded) to renew the Treaty of a Truce: And to this effect it was again
taken into deliberation by the said Ambassadors at Antwerp in the month of
March, The Treaty renewed at Antwerp.
whether the States likewise sent their Deputies; namely, Count William of
Naffaw, and the Lord of Brederode, the ^5. of the same month, and they
concluded a Truce for twelve years, upon the ninth of April 1609, which caused
great rejoicing every where, as well amongst the Neighbors, as the Parties
themselves concerned; Truce made.
and the Ambassadors were regaled, and honored with great presents.

During this Treaty, many libels were made and dispersed; some with reasons, to
countermine this sweet Peace; and others to advance it. Birds of mischief seck
the dark and like Owlas, blame the light as hurtful, and discovering their
actions: And so their fluttering was despised.

And here we see the end of this war for a while, which sprung up at the
beginning of the reign of King Philip the second, and that upon diverse
pretexts; as namely, that of liberty of conscience, and privileges; and under
various Governors, of different humors; fomented by ambition, Religion, and
diffidence, under the Princess of Parma, the Duke of Alva, Don Lewis, Don John
of Austria, on the one side, and Prince William, and the States-Generall, on
the other, the latter whereof made a strong union amongst themselves at Vtrick,
the Articles of which (namely, for the free exercise of the Roman Catholic
Religion) have been much altered. They formed their Commonwealth under the
Archduke Matthias, and the Duke of Alanson: under the Prince of Parma, they
begged the assistance of the King of France, and the Queen of England: They
continued the War with much success against Count Mansfeld, and Cardinal
Andrew: They repaired what was amiss in their Republic, by the factions which
arose under the Earl of Leicester: They valiantly defended themselves against
the Archduke Albert, and the Brave Spinola, even till the very publication of
the Truce. We will now stay awhile, and repose our selves in the rest of the
Low Countries; which we so much desired, as being the part where the War was so
long time carried on with so much expense, and no less industry, then good
discipline; though it were often disturbed, by the frequent mutinies of the
Spaniards, for want of pay, from whence the Confederares knew how to draw most
considerable advantages.

CHAP. IX
The State of France. The King goes to Sedan. Troubles in Austria, and Bohemia.
A Conjuration discovered in Spain; and the Mores banished thence.

THe have we had, to see an interruption of the misfortunes, wherewith the
Belgic The Low Countries.
Lion had been tormented above fifty years together, and his roaring heard
throughout the whole Universe, to the astonishment of all the greatest States
of the world; made us slight the reasons of them, who, partly out of hatred to
the House of Austria, and partly for the Roman Catholic Faith (the utter
abolition whereof they passionately desired) endeavored to hinder the Truce.
We will therefore turn back a little toward France, which flourished now, as
if there had never been any wars at all. Courtesy, the essential virtue of
that Nation, together with the Beauty, Bounty, and Fertility of this kingdom,
founded upon most excellent Laws, fine Sciences, and laudable Exercises,
attracted the Nobility of all Europe thither, as to a School of virtue and
glory. In effect, there was no remarkable Commotion, able to give any
apprehension or disturbance to the Public Rest: For the War of Savoy, and
the conspiracy of the Marshall Biron, were almost as foon smoothered, as known.
It was a kind of Terrestrial Paradise, where they who were enemies about the
difference of Doctrines, lived in friendship, by the authority of their Master,
who maintained peace both abroad, The death of Charles Duke of Lorraine.
and at home. Charles Duke of Lorraine, a Prince laden with age, adorned with
singular virtue and piety, lest his Son Henry his Heir, to retire himself to
the Celestial lerusalem, in the year 1608.

The King of France goes to Sedan with an Army.
In brief, the fruits of Peace were most delicious, when the King suddenly
raised a great Army, and conducted it to Sedan, For there were some
misunderstandings between him, and the Duke of Bouillon, which were taken away,
by the intercession of the foreign Ambassadors. However, this Cavalcada gave
no small jealousy to the Spaniards, who found themselves obliged thereby to
put strong Garrisons through all the country of Luxemburgh; and the
Confederates reaped great profit from it. For it made men believe, that it was
but a fiction, or rather a prelude of that huge preparation, which we shall
shortly relate. However, much talk there was of it, and great indagation into
the reasons thereof, by men of curiosity. The Duke of Bouillon, feeling the
pulse of the Protestant Princes, his neighbors, judged it not necessary to
draw blood yet: and that which was differred, shall be found in sit time.

Misunderstandings amongst the Princes of house of Austria.
We are now revoked into Germany, to see what passed in Austria, amongst the
Princes of that Family. Hungary was in disorder, because the Peace was not
confirmed with the Turks; which was redressed by the Archduke Mathias, and so
a peace was concluded for twenty years, upon condition, that Achmet should call
the Emperor Father, and the Emperor him Son: and that since they were both
Emperors, they should renew their amity every three years, by reciprocal
Presents. He remedied the disasters of the said kingdom, by granting liberty of
Religions, and Transylvania, to Borskay; after whom succeeded Stephen
Ragotskie, who transferred it upon his Cousin Bethleem Gabor, of whom, as
having been a great Instrument of many troubles, we shall make frequent mention
hereafter. Now, the Emperors brother Mathias, by this so necessary a
pacification, gained the hearts of the people, strengthened his Authority, came
into Bohemia, encamped LEWIS THE XIIII KING OF FRANCE AND NAVARR
himself before Prague; granted the same liberty to the Bohemians, made his
entry into Vienna, received the Oath of Fidelity, was Crowned King of Hungary,
married his Kinswoman, and at the request of the Duke of Saxony, and some
Hungarian Lords, granted the Exercise of the Confession of Auxbourgh,
throughout all Austria: Which license won him the affections of the
Protestants, who were ever spying after some means, to put division into the
said Family; but on the other side, it gave no small offense to the Pope, the
Emperor, and the King of Spain, though yet all were appeased in those parts
for some years. But hereupon there was very great difficulty to reconcile
Rodolph with Mathias, for he complained that all this was done out of contempt
of his authority. Yet in fine, by the submission of Mathias, and the
intercession of the Pope and Princes, it was brought to a temperament, and the
Emperor declared him his Successor in the Crown of Bohemia, in case himself
came to die without issue.

Now these divisions between Brothers, and Cousin-Germans of the same House,
were taken (by such as meddle not a little to pick out the actions thereof) but
for artifices, or tricks; and men said, it was the only right way to preserve
Hungary, Moravia, Bohemia, and other Provinces depending upon the said
kingdom, from falling into the hazard of a new Election: A conjecture,
grounded upon probabilities of consideration enough.

Spain in the mean while, looked not only upon the troubles of the
Low Countries, and means to bring them to an end; but she had likewise a
particular care, to steer her Indian Fleets into a good Port: For, as for the
rest, there had in some years passed nothing, which could disturb the
tranquillity of that kingdom. But in the year 1609. there was discovered a
Conjuration, which, had it taken effect, would have involved it in a total
ruin, supplanted Christian Religion, and reduced the King to fly for Sanctuary
elsewhere. But the greatest storms are those, which often do least hurt, and
are diverted by slight causes: Yea, a gentle rain often allayes the most
furious winds. The Mores implored the assistance of the Grand Signior, The
Conjuration of the Mores discovered in Spain.
and other Mohammedan Princes, the Doctrine of whom they followed in effect,
though in appearance Christians: and they had also for a long time been heaping
up Arms, and with the slight succor of twenty thousand men, (they being
already at the least a hundred thousand in Spain combatants) they promised
themselves to bring all Spain under their subjection. But being detected, They
are banished into Africa.
and the King of France having refused them his aid, they were all embarked in
the kingdom of Valencia, and transported into Barbary, by the Kings command.
Now this expulsion of them, together with so many Colonies, as the Spaniards
have in the Indies, and an infinite number of other Islands, has much
dispeopled the Continent of Spain, and greatly retarded the progress, The
cause of dispeopling Spain.
which this Warlike Nation might otherwise (peradventure) have made upon her
enemies. And this was very well foreseen by a certain Spanish Don, who told
King Philip the second, that the transportation of the Natives, would one day
be the ruin of Spain. But before we pass any further, let us speak a word of
this kingdom, the power whereof is so great, that it gives jealousy to all the
States of the Universe.

CHAP. X
A brief description, of the Kingdoms of Spain and France.

Spain is separated from France, by the Pirenaan hills; and from Africa, by
the Levant, or Eastern Sea, which communicates it self, with the Ocean, by that
considerable passage, called the streights of Gibelatrar. The Romans made two
Provinces of Spain; and in those two desperate sieges of Segungum, and
Numantia, as well they, as the Affricans, tried the constancy, and courage of
the Spaniards; from whom they received great services, in their armies. So that
it is not now only that they are valiant soldiers.

The Goths enter into Spain 168.
The Goths, Sweves, and Vandals, after they had ransacked the Empire, made
choice of Spain, for the seat of their domination, as being very proper, to
command both Europe, and Africa. They entered about the year 168. and remained
in possession thereof, more then four hundred, that is, till Rodrigues, with
almost all his nobility, was defeated by the Saracons, who were brought in by a
certain Earl, in revenge of the honor of his daughter, whom the King had
ravished. Vengeance is against Christian Religion, and yet this young Lady made
her own native Country a prey to the Barbarians. They maintained themselves
there, above seven hundred years, as well against the French, as the Spaniards
themselves, who endeavored to expel them. In precedent ages, there were
numbered about twelve Crowns, or Kingdoms, which were all reduced to one, by
Ferdinand, and Isabell, in the year 1474. except that of Portugal which being
subjugated by Philip the second, both by arms, and right of succession, has
been peacefully possessed, by him and his heirs, till the year 1640. when the
Portugezes withdrew themselves from obedience to Philip the fourth, and chose
for their King, the Duke of Braga^sa, under the name of John the jourth. It was
in the reign of the aforesaid Ferdinand, The Indies found our under Ferdinand
of Castill.
that the Indies, and many other Islands were found out, the riches whereof
has much augmented the potency of Spain, and made her aspire (as her enemies
say) to the Monarchy of the whole world.

Spain, in some parts, is very sertil; as for example, in Andaluzia, which
Province, as well for plenty of all blessings of the earth, as for the
pleasures, and delights of the fields, is a mere terrestrial Paradise. The
horses which she produces, are so swift in course, that they seem (according to
the proverb) to be engendered by the wind. She feeds an infinite of sheep,
almost every where; but chiefly, in Castill, where there is made most excellent
cloth; and the wool, for the superlative finenesse thereof, is transported,
into the Low Countries, and store of cloth wrought in this very town of Leyden,
which is much sought for by the French, and other nations. But in some parts
also, there is barren enough, through the laziness (as it is reported) of the
inhabitants, who love much better, to put their hands to the sword (to walk
with it by their sides) then to the plough. The wines which grow in Spain, are
much esteemed in England, and the Low Countries, and through all the North. The
Spaniards great Catholics.
The Spaniards are much commended, for their fidelity: they are very zealous
for the Church of Rome; very devour, and carry so great respect to the virgin
Mary, and the relics of Saints, that it causes them to pass, amongst them of
the reformed Religion, for hypocrites and idolaters: They are both melancholy
and choleric; very sober, and content with little; they spend more upon the
back, then the belly. Philip the iv King of Spain.
They are very ambitious, and good Soldiers; for they know as well, how to use
victory, as to gain it, and are much more exactly observant of discipline,
then any nation of the world, Above all, they do wonders in places besieged,
both by rejecting attacks, and patiently enduring the inconveniences of a
siege. They are enemies to all such, as follow not the doctrine of the Roman
Church, upon whom they have exercised great cruelties, whereby they have made
themselves very odious, But, as the Germans are wont, with much importunity,
and unseasonablenesse, to require their pay, just upon the pain of a battle;
so do the Spaniards, by sedition, after they have fought, which corrupts the
fruit of their victory. They faithfully serve their King, but they will have
their privileges kept. Spain an hereditary Kingdom
The Kingdom is hereditary; and forwant of an heir male, it falls to the
Distaff.

Now, besides tho reasons aforementioned, why there are so few inhabitants in a
Country of large extent, there is yet another, which is this. Ferdinand and
Isabell, having finished the War with the Moors, resolved to expel the Jews
also, out of the territories under their obedience; who transported themselves
into Affrion, Italy, the Levant, and Portugal, The Jews vanished out of
Spain, and Portugal.
, from whence they were likewise chased some years after. And besides, the
women are sterill enough; especially toward the south; and again, the wars,
which their Kings have so long had, in Germany, Italy, France, and the
Low Countries, not forgetting the infinity of Garrisons, which they are obliged
to keep, to contain their people in their duty) have so much exhausted Spain,
that the King has given great freedoms, and immunities to such as have five or
six male Children: Yea moreover, strangers are invited to come and dwell there,
under profitable conditions, provided still, that they be Roman Catholics;
for the Inquisition suffers no other Religion then that.

Now, this Inquisition, so much cried down, and reviled by other Nations, was
instituted at the first, for the rooting out of the Mahometisme, The
Inquisition.
and Jud^^sme, though it now extend it self, upon all such, as give but the
least suspicion, of not adhering totally, to the definition of the Church of
Rome. If the said Kingdom were as well peopled as France, the King would have
made far greater conquests then he has, and would not have been forced, to
expose his money, and his armies, to the infidelity of some strangers. In fine,
the King of Spain has so many Kingdoms, so many Provinces, and so many
Islands, in all parts of the Universe, that it was with good reason, that a
certain great person, in the year 1624, refuted Sleidan, concerning the four
Monarchies, in these terms. Philip the fourth, who now reigns (says he) upon
whose lands the sun never sets, is more potent, then was any one of those
Monarchs for the continuance of near four score years together.

This nation walks slowly to conquest, but she keeps well what she has gotten:
She is tardy to resolve, but she stoutly pursues what is resolved; She is not
frighted at the encounter of any difficulties, and accomplishes her ends, for
the most part, by pertinacy, and obstinacy. She foresees afar off, and never
looses, either patience, or hope; howbeit, that length of expectation, makes
her often loose good occasions. She does marvels, under an Italian General;
which was observable, in the Prince of Parma, Marquis Spi^ola, and others.

The Spaniards constant and haughty.
This proud Nation better understands the art of governing, then all other; and
she has in her, some wits so subtle and acute, that her very enemies
themselves, who hate her, are fain to praise her. And now, let us come back
again, over the hills, to take notice, of the complexion, of that brisk Nation
her rival, which has often stopped her victories, in the height of their
course, both in the Low-Conntries, Germany, and Italy.

France most populous.
France is a most large, most rich, and most populous Kingdom, divided from
Italy, by Savoy and the Alps; from High-Germany by Lorraine; from England by
the Sea; and from Low-Germany by Luxemburgh, Hennanlt, Artoise, and
French-Flanders.

The Romans who subjugated the Gawles, and distributed them into Belgic,
C^ltick, and Aquitanick, were beaten out (by the opinion of some Authors) by
Clo^^^s, the first Christian King, about the year 500.

The Francks passed the Rhein under Pharamond the first King. Clodion went not
beyond Cambray, and was forced to return by Stilicon. Aetins cut off his Army,
made him repass the Rhein, und hurried him back in Francony-Mero^e laying hold
of the advantage of the confusions of the Empire, took Trevers, passed into
Campaign, from thence to Paris, and then to Orleans; and so then, and there
began to establish the French Monarchy; giving to Gawl which he had conquered,
Gawl takes the name of France.
the name of France.

This kingdom by succession of time, has been been very much augmented, and
has soon raised to the Throne Royal, two and twenty Kings, of the first
Family, Bre^^ o^^.
and thirteen of the second; the first whereof was Pepin, Father-in-Law to
Charlemagne. Hugh Capet, the first King of the third Family, by the exclusion
of Charlos Duke of Lorraine, through force of Arms, and the favor of some of
the Grandies, got the Government of the French Monarchy, about the year of our
salvation, 993. Lewis the fourteenth, who reigns at present, is the thirtieth
of that Family. This kingdom is composed of four and twenty Provinces, wherein
there are fifteen Arch-Bishoppricks, ninty seven Bishoppricks, ten Parliaments,
fourteen Universities, and four Orders of Knighth^od; that of the Star was
eclipsed under Charles the fist: that of St. Michael, now little valued; and
the third, and that which has most luster, is of the Holy Ghost, instituted by
Henry the third: The fourth is not much pursued. In ancient times, there were
but twelve Pe^rs of France; six Ecclesiastical, and six Secular, and they
were, the Archbishop of Rhenns, the Bishops of L^ton, Langres, Chalons, Noyon,
and Beau^ais: The Dukes of Burgundy, of Normandy, of Guienne, and the Earls of
Flanders, tholose, and Champagne. But the number of Dukes and Peers, is now
very very much increased, as also that of Marshals and the Rights of both, very
much diminished.

The French inclined to ams.
The French areso naturally inclined to Arms, that the Proverb says, they are
born Soldiers, nor can they indeed stay long at rest; for if they have no
war with their Neighbors, they quickly make it amongst themselves, by the
ambition of some Lords or other, as also by the Martial humor wherewith they
are tormented. Points of honor make them run into the Field, as to a Feast;
in such sort, as that the greatest part of the Nobility unhappily falls in
Duels. They are very impatient, and enemies to the Spaniards, by maxim of
State; whom, by all means possible they oppose, to the end that they may not
arrive, to the Universal Monarchy; or else, that, under this pretext, they may
atchieve it themselves. They go like Thunderbolts, to Combats, and Conquests,
and reverse whatsoever oppugnes them; but, as soon as this heat grows to be a
little cooled, they turn their backs, and suddenly loose what they had gained
with so much reputation. It is no less laudable to keep, thou to get, which
the Spaniards know very well. Prosperity easily makes them slight their
enemies, and jeer their Allies, to whom they render themselves suspected, by
the vanity of their tongues; in such sort, as this kind of levity does them
much harm. The French are more then men (says the Proverb) at the beginning of
a Fight, and less then women, toward the end. But, they have given a contrary
account of themselves in many Battails in Italy, and the Low Countries; where,
after they been repulsed or routed, they have rallyed, and carried away many
glorious victories, as we shall hereafter see.

Besides, it must be confessed, that the French Cavalry is the stoutest, and
best of the whole world. There is also a saying, that the French are wise after
the business, and the Spaniards before it. In effect, they are rash; yea, and
they have very often won Battails, by this very Passion. Their generosity is
remarkable, in regard they grudge not to give praise to the virtue even of
their enemies, when they deserve it: They are of so gentile an humor, that
they make themselves admired by strangers: but they agree so ill, out of their
Country, by occasion of petty envies, and shameful detractions, that they are
generally blamed every where for it, and make themselves disesteemed by it, The
Clergy, the Gentry, and the People, are the three States, Three States.
upon which the Monarchy rests; the Privileges, and Liberties whereof, if well
maintained, would make it the most flourishing in the World. But let us now
see, what passed there, during the Peace; for it is not our scope, to make a
most ample relation of the particulars of every kingdom.

CHAP. XI
The King of France arms. The Spaniards do the same. All is full of joy, and
fear. The King killed. his Educacion.

Croupir.
KIng Henry having too generous a heart, to be longidle, was meditating War,
even during the Peace: For which effect, he had always a special care, by the
admirable economy, or stewardship of the Duke S^illy, to Preparation of war in
France.
to manage and husband his Finances, or Exehequer, and accumulate great
treasures. On the other side, he saw a brisk Nobility, which longed for nothing
more, then the occasions to express their Martial courage, under the conduct of
so great and valorous a Captain. He therefore resolves to raise an Army, for
the execution of some huge Design, which he kept private to himself, to give
exercise to his warlike People. The pretext was, the War of the Princes,
Heirs to the Dukedom of Gulick, Cleveland, and Bergues. But, because the
truth, of the principal motives of this arming of his, Under pretex of the war
of Juliers, or Julick.
could never yet be known, we will only note such conjectures thereof, as are
grounded upon very receivable probabilities.

He would not so easily have pardoned the Heads of the Leagus, for the
mothereing of the Civil Wars, had it not been, to revenge himself one day,
upon the Spaniards, who had so powerfully traversed, or thwarted his lawful
succession the Crown. He saw himself cherished by his subjects, feared by his
enemies, loved by all his Allies, and chiefly by the States Genera^^ of
Holland. Moreover, the interest of the Crown seemed to invite him, to reduce
under his States, all such Provinces as speak French, and consequently, the
greatest part of all the Low Countries, which had formerly been of the Demaynes
of France; as namely, the Counties of Flanders, and Artoise, the Duchy of
Luxemburgh, and many other, which would not have been able to esape his
ambition. The flight of the Prince of Conde, caused this speedy Arming; and the
honorable, and Christian protection, which he found in the States, as well of
the King of Spain, as in those of the Archduke in the Low Countries, seemed
likewise, to give some color of justice, to the most Christian King, irritated
against a Prince of his own blood. This Prince, when he was two and twenty
years old, married Margaret, Daughter to he Constable Montmorency, a most
beautiful, and virtuous Princess, whom he veretly carried to Brussels, so to
quench the fire, which her Charms had kindled in the heart of the King. But
Love holding the Empire, over the Reason of this generous Alexander, commanded
him to recover by force, that which virtue so justly denied him. In so much, as
that, for this chaste Helen of France, all Europe was like to be cast into most
dangerous troubles.

Now the Princes of Germany weary of seeing the Empire, so long in the
possession of the House of Anstria; as also of the prolix rest they had
enjoyed, together with the increase of their Treasuries; would not have been
offended to see the Imperial Crown, upon the Head of King Henry: And he, seeing
the disorder which happened in that Family, and strengthened by the friendship
of some Catholic Princes, Paxadge demanded of them of Colem.
as well as most assured, of that of the Protestants; leaned visibly that way.
The Magistrates of Colein, being entreated by his Deputies, to grant Provisions
for money, and passage for his Army, were fain to avow, that it would be
temerity to opposeso great a King, who had been always victorious; Besides the
noises which some scattered up and down, that he would allow and maintain three
Religions; to wit, the Roman, the Lutheran, and the Reformed. In brief, his
Design seemed to be, to extend the bounds of the French Monarchy, at the cost
of the House of Austria, and some neighbour-Princes.

In the mean time, the King Don Philip stood not with his arms a cross, at the
news of this terrible Preparative, The Archduke puts an Army on foot.
which rejoiced all such as were enemies to his States. The Archduke Albert
contracts all his old forces, raises new, and sends a strong Army toward the
Consines of France, under the command of Spinola, who entrenched himself near
Gambray. In fine, men talk of nothing but Arms and Horses, in the Countries of
both Crowns; and the Pope sends his Nuncio to divert the King from his
Design; but he was dispatched to Monzon.

Amazement every where.
Now all Europe stood amazed, and the Princes of Italy, seeing the Duke of
Savoy in alliance with Henry, by means of the marriage of his Son, with the
Daughter of France; begin to think of their preservation. The King, in the
interim, confirms his Intelligences; gives the Rendezvous of his Troops in
Campaign; and after having extraordinarily courted the Ambassadors of the
United Provinces, conjures them, to to send Prince Maurice with some Troops to
attend his coming, at the fronteer of Cleveland. The Protestant Princes could
hardly dissemble their joy: The joy of the Protestants and fear of the
Cathol^^ks.
and the Cartholick strangers their fear, at the approach of so formidable an
Army, Infine, both friends and enemies, were ballancing or staggering, in
apprehension, joy, and uncertainty; and every one in pain, to know what he was
either to hope, or fear.

It came so far, as to be published, that the King was to march with an Army
of forty thousand men, and leave as many to guard the kingdom, whereof he
declared the Queen Regent, after her Coronation, But he was treacherously
murdered, in his Coach, the fourteenth of May, 1610, and this fatal blow put
all France in mourning, his Corpse into the Tomb, and his great Designs into
Smoke, Above all this misfortune was impatiently taken by them of the Religion,
as also by the greatest part of his Allies, amongst whom his Arms had not as
yet moved the least jealousy. The most general opinion was, that after having
established the Princes in the possession of the Dutchyes of Galick and
Cleveland; he was to go for Germany. And indeed, the House of Austria had
reason to keep her self upon her guard, as well knowing how much this Prince
was affected to her opposers.

His death gave matter enough every where, for men to inform themselves, of who
might be the Author; and the Jesuits were not forgotten to be called in
question by the Protestants, however Ravillia^ never confessed any such thing.
This King was brought up in labor and toil, and noursed in the the Civil
Wars. His first wife was Margaret of Valois, His Life.
whom when he was come to the Crown, he repudiated. He had been Head of the
Hugenots, and won many Battails, against them of the League. When he was
become Catholic, and after the reconciliation of the Dukes of Mayanne, and
Mercoenr, all stooped, and laid down their arms. He had a quick wit, brave
thoughts and excessive high points of judgment; had in fine such eminent
qualities, as would have ranged him in the number of the grearest Kings, that
ever wore a Crown, had ho not been too passionately inclined to handsome women;
a vicious habit, which is familiar to Princes. He always loved the United
Provinces of the Low-Conntr^es, and assisted them with men, money, and
counsel, notwithstanding the complaints of the Archdukes. He was the Restorer
of the French Monarchy, which was horribly tottered: and obtained by general
consent (in regard of his heroic actions in arms) the surname of Great. He was
beloved, feared, and redoubted; and amongst all his Kingly virtues, none shined
more brightly then his Clemency. Why suspected to be a Hugenot.
Many were in doubts of his Religion; for the G^genots believed him of theirs,
and some others also besides, in respect of the favor ge showed to the
Protestant Party: and for that it was imputed to him, to have said, that the
Crown of France was well worth a Mass. It is only God who can judge of the
Conscience of Sovereigns; and therefore men must be silent, and abey. However
it were, he much loved Conferences, and Disputes; as it appeared by that of
Cardinal Peronn^, against Du Plessis Mornay.

The Confederated States had good reason to love him, in regard of the care he
always took to conserve them; though their seeing him expected by Prince
Maurice, with the forces of the Low Countries near Wesel, and a Letter written
by him to the Princess Dowager of Orange, intimating, that he would come and
visit her at the Hague, not as a King, but as her kinsman, thrust a flea into
their ear. The said Prince of Orange, above all, impatiently took this strange
and unexpected accident. But indeed, his death freed a good part of Europe,
from a great terror; filled the other, with sadness, and amazement; gave way
to the Prince of Conde, to return into France, with his wife; and so the Armies
to retire to rest till another season, and another conjuncture, which
afterward presented it self in the War of Gulick.

CHAP. XII
A difference happening, for the Duchy of Gulick. Jealosic between the
Catholics, and Protestants, and why! A Tumult at Donawert, an Imperial Town,
about a procession. Gulick besieged, by Prince Maurice, and the French yields.
The Princes will not admit the Sequestration.

WE have already showed, how the pretext, of the Arms of Hebry the Great, was
the succor promised to the Princes of Brandeabourgh, and Newbourgh; therefore
let us now look upon the justice of the Competitors, since the quarrel is not
quite consopited yet. Sone weeks before the the conclusion of the Truce, Death
of the Duke of Gulick.
deceased John Wolliam, Duke of Cleveland, and Gulick, leaving no Children by
the Countess of Baden, his former wife; no^ yet by the sister of the Count of
Vandemon, his later. Now, this Princess, passing through Colein, was received
by the illustrious Magistraces, and Citizens of that ancient City, with great
magnisicence, acclamations, and wishes of fertility in this match; and all this
for their interests, which are visible enough in themselves, without any need
at all, to speak thereof.

Mary Eleonor, her eldest sister, was married to Albert Frederick, Duke of
Prussia, who died without issue male, and left four daughters behind him.

Anne, who was the eldest, was given to John Sigismund Duke of Brandenbourgh,
and Elector of the Empire.

The second, to the Old Elector.

The third, to the Duke of Courland.

The fourth, to Duke John George of Saxony, brother to the Elector.

The second sister of the said Duke, called Anne, in the year 1574. married
Philip Lewis, Duke of Newbourgh, in which marriage she brought Wolsgang
William, who kept his Court at Dusseldorp, and died in the month of April, in
this year of 1653.

The third, who was Magdalen, was made wife to the Duke der Deux-Ponts.

And Sibill, the fourth, was bestowed upon Charles Duke of Austria, who had no
child.

Difference for s^^cession.
Now Duke John William, dying without children, John Sigismund Elector of
Brandenbourgh, who married Anne, (as we have already said) eldest daughter to
the eldest sister, of the said last Duke, presented himself to be received by
the States of the said Duchy, wherein he was opposed, by the Duke of
Newbourgh, son to the second daughter Magdalen, who was then, yet living.

The Dukes of Brandenburgh and Newburgh
The Elector of Saxony, and the Duke of Neuers, declared themselves also
heirs: so that the Emperor Rodolph, summons the Parties to appear before him:
endeavors to sequester the Dutchies, and to that end, dispatches the Archduke
Leopold, N^wburgh refuse the sequestration, and demand relief from France.
Bishop of Straesbourgh, who makes himself master, of the Town, and Castle of
Gulick. Whereupon the two first presumptive Heirs, upon some articles of
governing the Country, made an agreement between themselves, and in stead of
addressing themselves to Prague, before the Lord of the Fief (who is the
Emperor) had recourse to the King of France. O! How great is the strength of
distrust, which ties the hands of justice, and gets authority over ber? They
obtained a promise of strong relief. The other Princes, both Protestants and
Catholics, yea, even the Emperor himself, sent their Ambassadors likewise to
Paris; where the King sounded them all, one after another. In the mean time,
they take Arms, make Excursions, awaken the Neighbors: The Germane Protestants
receive the Alarm, Germany takes the Alarm.
and assemble themselves at Hal: and the Catholics, on the other side, at
Hirtsburg, there to provide for their safety, propose the Election of a new
King of the Romans, and bring the said Protestants, to a more strict
observance of the accord of Passavia.

These, are the first seeds, of the divisions; which, being come to maturity,
will quickly fill all Germany, with horrible disturbances, as being watered by
strangers, (for fear least they perish) with moisture, or humanity drawn out of
the essence of Religions, as we shall briefly show, in fit place.

The business of Donawerds, Atumult at Donawerdt, which is proscribed and
foreed by the Duke of Bavaria.
which had already irritated the Protestants, passed thus. Some Religious or
Conventuall men dwelling in the town, and endeavoring to make a Procession,
were desired by the Magistrates to desist, for fear of some tumult. But they
answered, that they would not quit their Rights, which depended upon the
Emperor. In short, they make a Procession; the people falls upon them, and
affronts them. The Emperor informed of the insolence, demands an exemplary
punishment; wherein being disobeyed, he proscribes the Town, and gives the
execution thereof to the Duke of Bavaria, who by a siege forced it to submit.
Now this proceeding very much displeased the Protestants; and principally such,
as were grieved, to see the Empire so long, in a profound Peace. But the enmity
was not yet grown so strong, for it shortly after brake out, to the ruin of
all this great Body. But let us return to the Country of Gulick.

The Princes excessively afflicted at the death of the King of France, Gulick
besieged and taken.
solicited Prnice Maurice, to besiege Gulick; which he did, and by the
assistance of the French Army, under the conduct of Marshall de la Castre,
constrained Leopold, to render the said place into the hands of the said
Princes, upon an honorable composition. Now it is to be observed, that they
would not admit of a sequestration, nor the decision of the Emperor, to whom
it belongs by right, but it looks as if they all endeavored, to weaken the
Principal head of Europ. And so, the Princes were reproached, for having
ejected the Garrison of Gulick, with foreign forces, which was immediately to
conremne the Imperial authority; and that they had thereby, given cause to the
Emperor, to arm against them.

The Duke of Saxony, bears also the title of Duke of Gulick, Cleveland, and
Montagues, and draws his pretentions from Sibill, Aunt to John William, and
Daughter to William, who was given in marriage, to John Frederick, Elector of
Saxony, who lost the Electorac, for having taken arms, against the Emperor
Charles. He was admitted by the two Princes, to govern the Country till the
definitive decision of the difference. It seems, that diffidence and suspicion,
in affairs of State, authorize the taking up of Arms, without any other form
of Justice, and that it is no more lawful, to the Lord of the Fief to dispose
of his Right.

CHAP. XIII
A tumult in Poland, and why? They arm. The Swedes and Muscovites, serve
themselves of this occasion, against the Poles, and loose Smolensko. Treason
discovered in England. The troubles appeased at Paris. Rodolph dies.

WE left the King of Poland very busy, about recovering his Kingdom of
Sweden, and the expulsion of the Swedes, our of Livonia: and now, we find him
as busy to maintain himself in the Elective, after having lost the
Hereditary. Fortune never ceases to trouble Virtue, and one disaster comes not
without another. The beginning of the troubles, was by a little blast, or slash,
which kindled a fire, that carried it self, to the very highest loft, or story
of the building. The scholars of the Jesuits, through an impious zeal,
Yu^^^nlss in Poland.
rushed one day upon the Church, of the Protestants of Posen, and set it on
fire. Prince Radzivil, and some other Ranting blades of the Party, took arms,
for the defense (as others said) of their liberty, and to revenge this injury,
under the veil of Rakozians. Fortune smiling upon them at first, and they
puffed up with a small victory, endeavored to expel the King, and choose
another, unless he would subscribe to some certain insupportable articles
proposed by them. Ill intentions grow to be discovered, by good success. In a
word, the War was kindled in good earnest, and the cloak of Religion not
forgotten. The Rakozians being beaten make Peace.
The Rebels, or Rakozians being defeated, and vanquished, returned to be
friends, and good subjects. But some space after, the wound having been dressed
by too mild a Surgeon, opened and gangroened, and could not be shut up,
without strong salves, and fresh bleedings.

King Charles of Sweden, having crowned himself, and renewed the War in
Livonie, made use of this intestine sedition: Sigismund made a brisk
opposition, as well to him, as to the Swedes, and Muscovites also, whose Empire
was then full of factions. The siege of Smolensko.
He besieged Smolensko, and after two years siege, carried it. This was a
second Ostend, if we consider the length of the siege, and the number of the
dead, which, if those authors who gave us the description thereof, be worthy of
credit, amounted to more then twenty thousand men. There was another Polish
Army, employed, to force the head City called Mosco, whilst the rest of the
Troops got huge victories, and took the Yown of Novogrode, and the great Duke
Suiskie, together with his two Brothers, prisoners. The the great Cham of
Tartarie, astonished at so many high Victories, offered to submit himself, to
the King of Poland. But Sigismond returned, and the confederated Muscovites, to
be paid their Arreares, followed him; and being satisfied, they were a further
means to get yet more Victories, The Muscovites rejell Uladislaus.
upon the adverse Party. In fine the Muscovites, tired, and vexed by a
foreign Rule, rejecting Vladeslaus, whom they had formerly chosen, elected a
new Emperor, and endeavored to compose their difference with Sigismund, but
in vain; for, they were chased away from before Smolensko, and paid for their
perfidie.

Now the King of great Britain, being the spectatour, and very often the
Arbitratour, of the Controversies of his Neighbors, lived in peace, and his
subjects of the Roman Catholic Profession, were reduced to some discresse,
upon the discovery of that abominable conspiracy, The son in England discovered.
against him, his children, and the whole Parliament. For it seemed not enough
to extend the punishment upon the guilty, who received it according to their
m^rit; but all the whole body of them also, mast be made feel it. It was then,
that the doctrine of the Jesuits was carped, and reviled, and their Order
brought into horror, through the whole Island; as it was in France, upon the
death of Henry the great, though yet they could not be convinced, of having any
hand in that, as they evidently were in this. But what shall we say of the
English Puritans, whom King James himself accused, of having attempted to
stifle him, in his Mothers womb? I know, there are also some, who make the
Jesuits the cause of the Tragical death of King Charles; so great an aversion
has the contrary party, from this Society. I neither accuse, nor excuse any,
but only make a plain, and simple relation, of what is passed, and blame the
rash judgment, of such as are too passionate.

Whilst other Kings were in extreme jealousy of their interests, King James
amuses himself with playing the Philosopher, and the Divine, by composing books
of controversies against Cardinal Perronn, and Monsieur de Coeffetean, Bishop
of Marseilles. And since he had no war with any body else, he raised one,
against the Puritans, and the Jesuits; as making declamations against them
both, and their Doctrine; which he said, was most pernicious, to the Potentates
of Europe. Take heed, my son, (says he, in his Book entitled, the Roy all
Present) of these Puritans; mere Plagues both in the Church and state; a race
not to be obliged by any benefit, nor tied by any Oath, or promise; breathing
nothing, but seditions, and calumnies. And a little lower. You will not find,
amongst any Highway Robbers, more ingratitude, or more lies, and perjuries,
then amongst these Fanatic Spirits, etc. The Duke of Savoy demanded his
Daughter Elizabeth, for his eldest Son, and offered him his for the Prince of
Wales: but in regard of the difference of Religions, it was honorably refused.
Fate had reserved this Princess for Prince Frederick, Palatine of the Rheyn,
who arriving in England, Frederick, Prince Palatine marries Elizabeth Princess
of England.
married her, and carried her to the Palatinat, through Holland, where they
were received, and regaled all along their passage, being accompanied by Prince
Maurice, as far as Colein, 1614.

The never sufficiently lamented death of Henry the great, one of the bravest
Princes that ever wore the Crown of France, was like to put Paris, and all
France into great tumults, for the prevention whereof, the Queen Mother was
declared Regent of the Kingdom, and Lewis the thirteenth succeeded him, at the
age of nine years, being consecrated at Rheims; and all this great preparation
for war, was dissipated, either because the Kings design was not known; or
else, to say better, because it could not be executed, except the reserve of
ten thousand men, who were sent into the Duchy of Gulick, under the command of
Marshal de la Cateres, as we have lately expressed.

Now, some time after all these embroiles, and perturbations, both in Bohemia,
and Austria, were past; the Emperor Rodolph, either through vexation and
trouble, or otherwise, Death of the Emperor Rodolph the twentieth of January.
1612.
( for death has always a cause) departed out of this frail life, to the
immortal one. He was son to that good Emperor Maximilian, whose steps he
followed. He was a lover of sciences, and chiefly of the Art of Painting. He
passed his time much in distilling, he was fearful, and by consequence little
undertaking, and little feared by his enemies; who knowing his nature, did many
things to the diminution of the Imperial Authority. He died at Pragut, in the
year 1612. upon the 20th. of January. The Empire had no need of a distillator,
but rather of a good Operatour, to act powerfully, against the ill plants,
which cast forth strong roots, both under him, and his successor, and which
have given so much pains, and troubles to the Empire.

CHAP. XIV
The War between the Danes, and Swedes; the reasons why? Colmar taken.
Charles dies. The Queen-Regent purchases a double Marriage in Spain. The Town
of Aix, or Aquisgrane taken, and Newburgh relieved by Spinola.

Chules Duke of Sudermain, and afterward King of Sweden, sends an Ambassador
into Holland.
CHarles Duke of Sudermaine took the Crown away from Sigismund his Nephew, and
possessed his States quietly enough: but there rose a huge war between him,
and the King of Denmark, who very much disturbed his rest, and whereof (in his
complaint of King Christian) he takes the Jesuits for the Authors. They are the
Atlases, who must bear upon their shoulders all kinds of Calummes, and
Detractions: They must swallow down the faults of others. He had had many
conflicts with the Polanders, and had tried the various effects of Fortune: But
this of Denmark touched him so much to the quick, that they two came from
complaints, to brawles and reproaches; and thence to the lie: yea, and at last
to desie one another. A strange thing, that men disapprove in others, what they
do themselves. Charles a little before, had sent an Ambassador to the
States General, to beseech them to make a close Alliance with him, against his
Nephew, the Spaniards, and the Jesuits (for it was upon them, that he chiefly
aimed, and whom he so much mistrusted, who yet peradventure, dreamt not at all
of him) and demanded a speedy succor, before the Poles had quite subdued
Muscovie. He also mentioned the quarrel between him and the King of Denmark,
offering to refer it to them, or any other Neutrall Princes, and to acquiesce
in their Decision. The States also sent theirs to him, but he was able to
effect nothing with him.

The King declares a war upon him.
In the month of April, 1611. King Christian declares a War, founded upon
four points: The first, upon the Fishing of Lapponia, or Lapland, the third
part whereof he pretended to appertain to himself. The second, a complaint,
formed upon Charles his having fortified Guttemburgh, to the disadvantage of
the Sound: the third, was the redemanding of the Isle of Oesel, held by the
Swedes: And the last, that Christian would not suffer him, to put in his Arms,
the three Crowns, nor the Title of Lapland, and North-land. Kings have never
any better reason to make War, then that which is offered them by occasion.
It is a Royal thing (says a Disciple of that so much disclaimed Italian) to
attempt the Possessions of others.

Colmar taken.
The Danes seized Colmar, the prime key of the kingdom of Sweden, and besieged
the Castle, both by Sea and land; which, unless it were famished, was held
impregnable, by reason of the situation: Neither was it taken now by that way;
but yielded up by the levity of the Governor, who went to fix his habitation
in Denmark. That which cannot be dug by Iron, is often done by Gold,

The King of Sweden found work enough to do, with two so potent enemies upon
his skirts; but that which most troubled him was, that he could not bring the
Danes to any Composition, Fonce.
so that in sine, having lost Colmar, with above a hundred pieces of Canon, six
ships of War, the Isle of Bornholm, and some other, The death of Charles.
also forced to bow to old age, and afflictions (caused by these losses) he
fell sick, and coming to die, made way for that great Captain Gustavus
Adolphus, the very relation of whose victories makes the world tremble.

Charles was a Prince of great courage, and lover of his Law, for the only
defense whereof, the Swedes affirm, that he accepted the Crown; and not through
any ambition he had to be a King. He inclined a little toward the Reformates,
and could not endure to have prayers made in Latin. He was speechless some
time before his death, and was much more prone to rigor, then moderation; yea,
even to Tyranny it self; which is a vice much observed in the successors of
Erick, after they are past forry years old.

The Danes, sailing with the wind in poupe, took many ships near Elsburgh,
together with the Castle it self. But the Swedes were fully revenged upon them,
by taking their measures well, as it will appear in the continuation of this
History. With patience all things are effected. In fine, Peace made.
a Peace was made, and Colmar, upon agreement, of some barrels of Gold,
restored to the Swedes: The Kings were friends, and afterward an Enterview,
and an Alliance both Offensive, and Defensive, concluded against the King of
Poland. But let us go back to the South.

Italy produced no seed of sedition at all, every one keeping himself within
his own jurisdiction; but the Duke of Mantua being taken out of his by death,
without sons, his Brother succeeded him; who, assisted by the Spaniards, waged
a long war against the Duke of Savoy, who was supported by France.

Since the Truce in the Low Countries, and the expulsion of the Mores, there
passed nothing in Spain worthy of memory, but some Fights at Sea, against
Pirates, who were defeated by the Spaniards, and the Hollanders.

The match sought in Spain.
Queen Mary of Medicis, willing to keep her subjects in Peace, during her
Regencie, and prevent all occasions of disorder, mediated a double match with
Spain; that is, of her Son, and Daughter, with Prince Philip, and the Infanta,
his Sister; but the marriages were differred, in regard of their too tender
age; though yet, this good news caused great rejoicing throughout all the
Territories of the two Crowns, with Tilts, and Tournaments, worth anmiration;
wherein the French Lords expressed as well the agility, and fine disposition of
their bodies, as the gentilnesse of their minds.

Let us now draw back to the Low Countries again, which observe the Truce; but
let not their soldiers rest, in favor of their Neighbors. For, the Dukes of
Brandenburgh, and Newburgh (this being grown a Roman, and that a Reformat)
renewed their old unhappy quarrel; either for want of a right and mutual
understanding, or else for being the object of the ambitious passion of some
other Princes. The Archduke had sent Spinola into the Field, to execute the
sentence given upon them of Aquisgrane, Aix or Aquisgrane yields. The Spaniards
succor the Duke of Newburgh, and the Hollanders, the Duke of Brandenburgh.
who had incurred the disfavour of the Emperor, by expelling the Roman
Catholic Magistrates out of the Town; and their sudden submission, gave the
Spaniards convenience to hasten to the relief of the Duke of Newburgh, by whom
they were expected. They took Wesel, and some other small places; and Prince
Maurice on the other side, who was sent by the States to succor the Electour,
took and fortified Emmerick, and Rees. It is most dangerous, to have a
Neighbor stronger then ones self; for his succor is always dammageable, to
him who accepts it. These two Princes know it, as well as any others. But what?
Passion very often prevails over Reason, and the error of the Hunters, gives
the Hare opportunity to escape. But let us reprize this Web contrived of many
threads of different colors, and woven by diverse Weavers. The Emperors
Authority proving inefficacious, and his threats, as it wore, our of breath,
and saint, (as coming from so great a distance) with these two Princes; who
proud of the assistance of two Kings, and shouldered by a strong Commonwealth,
equally shared the Government of the Duchy, for some time, making their
Residence together at Dusseldorp. But, by means of some small jealousies, were
quickly disunited; and the Marriage of the Duke of Newburgh, with the Duke of
Bavaria's Sisters, awakened as great suspicions, in the Duke of Brandenburghs
breast (being a Reformate) as the Alliance of the united Provinces, in that of
the Duke of Newburgh, who was become Cathohok. The Design upon Dusseldorp, had
no success; and that which was so prosperously executed upon Gulick, by the
Governors means, manifested to the Archduke (a peaceful Prince) that the
Reformates in a fair occasion, want no boldness, no courage. The Spaniards
took the Alarm so much the more powerfully, as the Treaties went on slowly,
and as the French seemed to favor the Duke of Brandenburgh, more, to put an
obstacle to the Arms of Spain, then for any other consideration. Brief, the
Army marches into the Field, under the conduct of Spinola. Aix, or Aquisgrane
stooped, and the Roman Catholic Magistrates were re-established. Mullem was
battered down, and Otroy taken; besides many oaths places, where there was no
Garrison of the united Provinces, for fear of a breach. The taking of Wesel,
seemed to countervail that of Gulick; swelled the hearts of the Spaniards, and
made those people know, that their Masters should have but a seeming
Government, as long as these puissant forces stayed in their States. But if
they had relied upon the judgment of the Emperor, it is likely, that these
misfortunes had not happened. At that troublesome and vexatious Treaty of
Santen, all the Princes laid open their Interests, the Leaven of partialities
about. Religions began to swell, the Deputies went away discontented, leaving
the Business imperfect, the occupated Towns retained their Ghests, and the
two Princes learnt (to their own cost) what many other had tried before them.

CHAP. XV
The Differences which happened in the United Provinces, Barnaveldt beheaded,
and the Religion of the Arminians, condemned. King Lewis humbles the Hugenots,
and reduces Bearne.

THE Peace without the united Provinces, had shut up many turbulent and
seditious humors within them; which not being able to get out, hatched some
very dangerous tumults. Commotions in the united Provinces.
The precious names of Peace and Rest, were both odious, and insupporatable to
them. We often fly from that, which is advantageous to us, and follow that,
which is hurtful. The first was at Al^mar, the second at Liewerden; and the
third, and most perilous, at Vtrick, where some of the bolder sort of the
Mutiners, fortified by a huge crew of their Caball, constrained the Magistrates
to abdicate their charges, and chose others in their places; who were most of
them, the Heads of their sedition. But this sickness requiring a more violent
remedy, then the first Lepitives, and the Town threatened with a siege, all grew
to be appeased, and the Garrison augmented.

Disputes about Predestination.
Yet this was nothing, in respect of that mischief which arose, from a
controversy in Divinity concerning Predestination, and some other Articles
annexed to it; which, like a thick Fogge, so blinded all the Inhabitants, that
it left not any use of light at all to any, but to such as served themselves
thereof, to the^^ own profit. The two Champions, who by their Sermons, and
Disputes, divided all Holland into two Factions, were Arminins and Gomarus.
Such as followed this latter, who ardently maintained the said Predestination,
were called Contra-Remonstrancers; and the other, Remonstrancers, of Arminians,
who were said to profess a Doctrine, disagreeing from that of John Calvin.
This was too high, and difficult a passage to be comprehended by the common
people, and so it brought with it nothing but confusion. Yet, the Dispute ended
not with the life of Arminins, but was more and more kindled by his Disciples,
and chiefly by Verstius; who, upon the Recommendation of the Remonstrancers,
was made Professou^. From Disputes, came Factions, and Vorstius was deposed, by
the threats of the King of Great Britain. In brief, every one takes arms, for
his own defense. They of Harlem, Leiden, and Vtrick, by the counsel (as was
reported) of Advocate Harnaveldt, raise forces, Prince Maurice hastens,
surprises Vtrick, disarnis the Citizens, and changes the Magistrates (a
remarkably action) as he also did, at Harlem, and Leiden (where they had
barricaded the Townhouse) and imprisons the chief of the Arminian Faction. But
the Ministers, notwithstanding all these proceedings, ceased not to dispute,
not the Printers to set forth Books, concerning this controversy. Wherefore,
there was a Synod convocated at Dort, where the Arminian Doctrine was
condemned; the Ministers who persisted in it, imprisoned, and some were
banished, and sought their abode in Holstein, and other places.

Barnaveldt beheaded.
The great Statesman Barnaveldt, formerly much cherished by King Henry of
France, and greatly renowned for his services done to the Commonwealth (and
chiefly for having drawn out of the clutches of the English, the three places
engaged to Queen Elizabeth, as also for having made diverse Embassies, and
sweated under various burdens of State) finished his life by an infamous
punishment. This man, being about seventy two years old, was accused of being
Head of the Arminian Faction; of disturbing the tranquillity of the Towns, and
checking the authority of the Prince; whose power he wished indeed, to see
lessened, thereby to secure the public Liberty. In sine, there was a rumor
scattered, that he should have had a design to usurp the Government of the
Commonwealth. They who were of his party, for proof of his innocence,
represented the greatness of his services and cares, to maintain the power of
the States. And yet howsoever, all his friends, melted (as it were) like snow
before the Sun, of the Princes Authority: and one of the most famous Writers of
this Age, says, that he was condemned in the name of the States, but by the
practices of King James, and Prince Maurice. There is nothing sure in this
world, and the greatest fortunes, are very often those, which are upon the
slippery top of their prac^pice. If all they, who are ambitious to go out of
their condition, to get up to another more clevated, and high, would but
represent to themselves, the disasters and misfortunes, which we see fall upon
those great persons; they would have no other desire, then to stay where they
are. The Treaty of the Truce, which by his advice, was made for twelve years,
against the reasons of Prince Manrice (who being a soldier, and for his own
interest, endeavored to break it) purchased his disfavour; and his very great
credit, his hatred besides his dissuading the War of Bohemia, together with
what we have just now said, and many other accusations, abbreviated his life
for some days. When Jupiter chides, all the rest of the Gods are silens.

Hugo Grotius, went to keep company with the other Ministers, who were
prisoners at Louwestein, though by the prudent counsel of his Wife, he brake
quickly off from it afterward.

Thus, was this mist, which threatened the Commonwealth with a dangerous
convulsion, dispelled; the Churches employed by the Contra-Remonstrancers only;
and the Arminians reviled, and disclaimed, as no better then half Traitors, by
the very dregs of the People. But really, the blamable treason of the children
of Barnaveldt, who breathed nothing but revenge of their Fathers death, was the
cause why many retired themselves from this Party, which, for a time was much
discredited.

It King James, on the one side, ardently prosecuted his destruction: King
Lewis solicited his deliverance as hotly on the other: and would scarce give
ear to the multitude of excuses, which was brought by the Ambassadors, for so
passionate an execution. Howsoever, all these changes, were not able to change
the happiness of these Provinces; the popular Tumults, growing by little and
little to slacken, to the great good of the whole Country.

But now, the women had also a mind to show, that they likewise knew how to
handle their arms, and gave an experiment thereof at Delpft, about some
Imposts, or Taxes, where they so stoutly assailed the Townhouse, that it was
nec^ssitated to send for both Soldiers, and Counsel from the Hag^e, to make
them retire to the distaffe. Perhaps, there were amongst these, some of them,
who had beaten the Franciscan Friars out of their Cloister: so great a
reputation of courage have the good wives of D^lft. And these are all the
perturbations, and whatsoever else of note, happened in the confederated
Provinces, during the Truce.

Before we contrive our Discourse of the Wars of Germany, we will return a
little toward France, which is the kingdom, where Fortune, by her various
effects of mutability, seems rather to have established the Empire, then
elsewhere. The nature of the Germans is such, as not to suffer themselves so
easily to be induced to take arms; for it costs much trouble, to bring them to
it, and they walk with leaden heels: but having once taken them up, they lay
them not down, till they be able to bear them no longer, and till all be
brought to the extremity of desolation. But the French, on the other side, both
easily take them up, and more easily lay them down; in such sort, as their
Wars are very often finished, and pacified, before it be known, that they
were in arms. After the consecration, or unction of King Lewis, during the six
first years of his reign, there were rather Tumults, then Wars. The Malcontent;
the Complaints as well of the Princes, as of the H^genots; their ill-grounded
distrusts, and jealousies, exercised the mind of that great Queen; who
dissipated their bad designs, sometimes with money, and augmentation of
Pensions, and new Governments; and sometimes also, by making them exactly
observe the Edict of Nantes; an interest, which the said Prinoes are accustomed
to take, during the minority of their Kings; so to add to their own power,
what they take away, from that of their Master. The Moon, and the Stars,
endeavor to weaken the light of the Sun, by borrowing a part thereof of him.
But that which is to be lamented, is, that all this is done at the charge of
the poor people. In effect, the great care of this wise Queen, dispelled many
mists, and no less preserved the kingdom for her son; then the succeeding
Ministers, who have labored to augment it. France, having smothered with the
blood of the Marquis d' Ancre, all the grievances, both of the Princes and
people, saw likewise the end of that, The troubles in France appeased.
which the Prince of Conde gave the King, by the obstacles which he was
resolved to put, to the confirmation of his marriage.

The Duke of Guise conducted the young Princess of France, to the Confines of
Spain, and reconducted the Infanta of Spain; and the Prince of France was
lodged in the Battle. The Constable Luynes became the subject of a new
Commotion, and his great favor, the object of hatred, to some Grandees, who
absented themselves from the Court, under pretext of defending the
Queen Mother; who was extremely exasperated against Luynes, for that he being
the Counselor, of the ruin of the Marshall d' Ancre, had taken possession of
his Place, and gotten his spoils; and so she retired her self to Angonlesine,
to be secured by the Duke d' Espernon. Now this fire, being kindled, by the
just disgust of an afflicted Queen, begot an opinion, that it would be
scattered through all France. For men began to be active and busy already, as
well at Metz, as within the very middle of the kingdom: and the motion being in
a fronteer Town, gave cause to fear, lest, perhaps, strangers might put
themselves into the dance. For the Duke d' Espernon departed from Metz, to go
serve the Queen Mother, to whom he was reconciled, by the common necessity of
an equal Banishment: The Nobility, and the Armies, began already to march, all
was full of fear, and fury; and such as loved novelty, The Prince of Conde.
leapt already for joy. But the King, assisted by the Counsel of the first
Prince of the Blood, (who was now reconciled to him) instantly seized upon the
Castle, and Town of Caen, went and beat the Queens Troops, before the
Malcontents joined with theirs and reduced them all to a necessity of
submitting to his Grace. From thence, he conducted his Army into Bearne,
Reduction of Bearne.
and by his presence, effected that in few days, upon the Ministers, and chief
of that Country, which the Edict of the year 1617. had not been able to obtain.

He reduced the whole Province under his obedience, re-established the Exercise
of the Roman Catholic Religion; rendered the Ecclesiastical Benefices, put
other Garrisons into the places of strength: and four months after, returned to
Paris, where he was received with an universal applause, though he left behind
him, an immortal disgust, amongst the most zealous of the Hugenot party, by
the re-establishment of a Religion (without striking stroke) which in sixty
years before, was not so much as known there, but by calumnies and reproaches,
and matter also for a new war, with such stomach, and animosity, as wanted
nothing but the occasion, to draw the sword.

The Marriage of the Lady Christine of France, with the Duke of Savoy.
In the mean time, the Cardinal of Savoy, arrives at Court, to thank the King,
for the care he had vouchsafed to take, of the preservation of his Fathers
Dominions; as also to mediate a Match, of the Lady Christine of France, with
his eldest Brother. He was made very welcome, and obtained, in fine, a
favorable grant, of all he demanded. We will now give to the Hugenots of
France, leisure to study a way, to revenge themselves, of so sensible a
displeasure, and stop the King, from getting thenceforth any so great success,
as might increase their diffidence, and bring a detriment upon their Religion.
Let us now pass on to a War, of much more horror, and larger extent; for we
can no longer forbear, it being high time to speak of it; we cannot, I say,
withdraw our selves, it furnishing us with matter enough to believe, that the
Age wherein we live, is the most unhappy of all Ages; yea, the very sink, and
last of all.

THE HISTORY OF THIS IRON AGE.
THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I
The Prodigies, which preceded the Wars of Germany. A description, of the
Kingdom of Bohemia. Old differences about Religion. The wars of Zisca,
compared to these.

I Abhor, to begin the discourse, of the longest, and most cruel War, that
ever was in Christendom, and which drew more blood, more altered the Christian
Faith, and caused more ruin and desolation, then all that ever were in Europ.
Let no man tell me, of the Exploits of Atilas, with his Huns, for he did but
pass like lightning. Let there be no comparison made, of the Warts of the
Goths, Visigoths, Daces, and Vandals, who came altogether, to dismember the
Roman Empire, and the Franks, and Burgundians, who drove the Romans out of
Gawl. For these People, having expelled the old Usurpers, by the success of a
battle, or two; leagued themselves forth with, with them whom they had freed
from the yoke, and instantly laid the foundations, of a new Kingdom. But this
War, which we are now going to describe, involved all Europ; and there is not
so much as one Province, which does not resent it; yea, that which is more
deploreable, is, that we see not the end of it yet; for, for my part, I am of
opinion, in this wicked age, Men will sooner be wanting, then Will, to such as
are ambitious, to continue this bloody exercise.

The Prodigies, which both went before it, and happened during the continuance
of it, like waves of the sea, have two much informed us, that it would ingulf
all the Provinces of Christendom, one after another, and such as thought to be
exempted from it, as well for the advantages they had upon their enemies, as
for the impossibility of introducing the Babes of Mars amongst them, by reason
of their situation; feel, at present, the scourge, with as much sharpness, as
the former.

That facall Torch, which appeared toward the end of the year 1618, with a
long, and formidable tail, seemed to announce to us the wrath of God; thereby
to prepare us to repentance, or else patiently to suffer the evils, which we
could not avoid. Those sights, which were seen in the air, Prodigies happened in
Europe.
in many places, those Tempests, those exundations of Rivers, those
disruptions, or shiverings of Bars, by the merciless Ocean; those
earthquakes, and inundations, those monstrous Productions, those waters turned
into blood, those impetuous winds, which have overthrown so many Towers, and
rooted up so many trees; those bloody raines, and so many other supernatural
accidents, are the messengers of Divine indignation, to such as are obstinate
in their wickedness. Fools, who say in their hearts, there is no God, have
despised these advertisements, and lead a life, worse then that, of the people,
of the time of Noah.

Germany, by a Peace of so many years durance, being grown extremely opulent,
the Princes potent, and the Towns much elevated; The State of Germany.
began to withdraw herself, by little and little, if not wholly from servitude,
yet at least, from duty. The Courts were full of debaucheries, and the excess
of drinking, was recompensed, with a Crown of victory; the Tables laden with
meat, The debawches
were sometimes overturned, with brutall insolence; and that, which could not
possibly bring any good, was, that the greatest part of the Grandees there,
left the management of their affairs, to their Chancelours, or their
Favorites, whilst themselves were plunging in delights, luxury, ranting, and
superfluities, together with the pleasures of the Court, and the Chase. The
Emperor Matthias, who was Crowned in the year, 1612, made not his Authority in
the Empire, shine a whit brighter then his Predecessors had done; in such
sort, as that the State wasfallen (as it were) into a Palsy, and languishment.

Not withstanding all these voluptuousnesses, and debauches, distrusts were
grown so high, that it was impossible, for the Banks or Damns, to stop these
Torrents, without letting some part of them loose. The children were then
matching in Troops, and Bands, through the streets, with Arms, Drums, and
Colors; and the old men sighing and crying out, Prognostications of Wars.
We shall quickly feel the effects, of a cruel War. That, which arrived at
Donawerds, brought some of the imperial Towns to a league, to which they
invited the Electour of Saxony; but not receiving so good an answer as they
hoped, threats remained without effect, and all stayed in apparent enmity (the
one party casting the fault upon the other) till the occasions which we are
going to recount. But let us enter upon the War of Bohemia.

Bohemia, is a little Kingdom, but very fertile, in Corn, Wine, Mines of Gold,
Silver, Tin, and all which is necessary for the life of man. The King is
ranged in the number of the Electours; and his Vote, or suffrage, is so
necessary, that when the Parties are equal, he who receives it, is elevated to
the Imperial Throne. This said Kingdom, is almost quite environed by Germany;
and it stretches, on the one side, to Moravia. The Inhabitants speak the
language of Slavonia, though yet the High Dutch be as common there, as the
French is, in the Low Countries. The Metropolitan City is Prague, which is
watered by the stream of Moldaw. The Country is very great, most populous, and
adorned with a most famous, and most ancient University, wherein, for a time,
were numbered above thirty thousand Scholars. Now, because the first
controversies about Religion, which caused the separations, and hatreds amongst
Christians, proceeded from thence; it will not be out of our way, and much for
the contentment of the Reader, to take notice of the source, and Origin
thereof. About the year of Grace 1400. John Huss, having found, and read the
Books of W^tcliff, John Huss.
betook himself publicly, to teach a doctrine much like that of the Waldenses,
condemned by the Church of Rome, as much checking the Points, and Tenets
thereof received: as namely, the authority of the Pope, Purgatory, Worship of
Images, and the like; God permitting a diversity of Doctrines, during the
Schisms of the Church: for the disputes of the Popes, gave subject, to attack
the Points of Faith, exhibited by them, and their own Authority.

The Council of Constance.
A Council was assembled at Constance, whether Jerome of Prague, and John
Huss, were invited, under a safe conduct, or pass, from the Emperor
Sigismond: But for all that they persisted in the Doctrine of Witcliff, and
maintained, that the Churches diffused up and down the world, were deviated
from the traditions of the Apostles; they were both contrary to public Faith,
and the Emperors Paste, given them, sentenced to be burned, and their ashes
cast into the air. And from thence came the Axiom, so often and so justly
chanted, and iterated, by the Protestants, and whereof they serve themselves to
quicken their distrusts. Faith must not be kept with Heretics.

The Fathers of the said Council, were moved on by a too inconsiderate, yea,
and unjust zeal; which (if we may have leave, to deduce the consequence of the
effects thereof which have followed) very much displeased the Father of Truth.
The Roman Catholics disprove of this Maxim, and the Emperor, Charles the
5th. expressed, that he was no friend to it, by keeping his word so truly, with
Doctor Martin Luther, at the Assembly at Worms.

The disciples of John Huss ^ake arms.
Now, the disciples of the aforesaid John Huss, being very impatient at the
death of their Masters, and not content with the Churches which were granted
them, took arms, under pretext of desiring more. But I find the zeal of all
them, who have withdrawn themselves from the Church of Rome, and taken up their
Quarters apart, to be very different from that of the Primitive Christians,
amongst the Pagans, and Gentiles, those remaining in the Predicament of Passion
only; and these, adding also that of Action. True it is, that ambition, and
desire of novelty both in the one and other State, have been the efficient
causes of these great changes. If they, who have cried out with a loud voice,
for the reformation of manners, had been heard, as well as they, who have
called in doubt many Maxims of Faith; we should really now live in the Golden,
and not in the Iron Age.

They assault the Images. Zisca tames Bohemia.
The first war they made, was upon the Images, the Prelates, the Cloisters,
and the Magistrates, who opposed their unbridled licentiousness. A Truce was
made, and no sooner made, then broken. Zisca that famous Head of the Faction,
made himself Master of Bohemia, and commanded all the Churches dedicated to the
Saints, to be battered down; alleging for his reason, that they must be
consecrated only to God. He defeated all the Armies, that oppugned his
Designs; like a Torrent, which carries away, and destroys all, whiles Fate
made him loose that one eye, which was left him. He marched into Austria, and
quite blind as he was, left not nevertheless to crush his Enemies; and arrived
time enough to chastize the Citizens of Prague, who were revolted from him,
because of the demolition of the Churches, and Ima^es. In fine, Fortune by an
occult mystery of the great God, averted the Prelates, from their duty, and
humbled the Emperor so far, as to bring him upon his knees, before this blind
man; yea, and constrained him moreover, to offer him the Government of the
Kingdom, and the Militia. But that Eternal power, having served himself
sufficiently of this scourge, drew him out of the world, by a contagious
sickness; though even at his death, His death.
he signified his martial humor, and the passion he ye had, to further
mischief; for he commanded, that after his decease a Drum should be made of his
skin, saying, that his enemies would fly, at the very sound thereof. Let
Divines discourse upon these mysterious chances, where they will find work
enough to entertain themselves.

The Hussits continued the war, under the orders of a certain person called
Procope, at the very report of whom, whole armies were suddenly terrified;
yea, forty thousand men, being entered into Bohemia, and having taken some
towns; through a certain panick, or fantastical fright, threw down their arms,
and betook themselves to their heels, Zisca's skin works miracles
to save their infamous an I cowardly lives, even before the Bohemians
appeared. Perhaps Zisca's skin wrought all these miracles, and would have
merited a Temple, if he had not demolished those, which were dedicated to the
Saints. It is therefore no wonder, if in this last Age, there have happened such
strange changes, proceeding from causes so little foreseen, or wholly
contemptible; in regard that a handful of men at that time, rendered
themselves Masters of a Kingdom, and beat the forces of the Emperor, as often
as they durst encounter them: besides that their mere reputation, put their
enemies to flight, as much as their arms, Athists, open your eyes, and confess,
these changes proceed from an infinite power

The Turks, a barbarous, and despicable people, have subdued a great part of
Asia, and destroyed the empire of Greece. Tamberlaine, from a shepherd,
Tamberlaine.
being become a soldier, was the instrument, whereof God served himself, to
abate the pride, of that great Emperor Bajazet. These are revolutions, the
reasons whereof are not discovered to man. It is lawful to seek the causes of
them by probable conjectures; but not to pronounce a definitive sentence, or
conclusion upon them. I was willing to relate a part of this History, because I
find therein, a great similitude or resemblance, with that of our Age, as well
in order to Causes, and effects (though not successes) for a proof, of this
instability, of the things of this world.

CHAP. II. The Bohemians arm, and why? All the Princes interest themselves in
this War. Ferdinand chosen Emperor.
NOtwithstanding the license granted to the Bohemians, by the Fathers of the
Council of Basil, to receive their Communion under two Forms, or Species;
there ceased not still, to be Factions amongst them, against the authority of
the Pope, and favor to such as oppugned it.

Now, because the greatest Rivers draw their Origin, for the most part, from
some small, abstruse, and unknown springs; just so, this deplorable war of
Bohemia, which being once kindled, and diffused, in that Kingdom, grew to
skatter, and sly up and down like wild fire, throughout all Europ, and is not
extinguished even yet, began at first, from so contemptible a spark, as might
have been quenched by one single tear, had it but chanced to fall right upon
it; But it must needs draw deluges of blood, and general destruction of
Christendom. Where Sins are great, Repentance must be proportionable.

And why?
In the year 1616, the Hussits laid the foundations of a Church, at Brunaw: The
Abbor, who was Lord of the Place, opposed them, and complained to the Emperor
Mathias; who commanded the Magistrates to appear before him, and to suspend the
building, till the Cause were decided; but in vain, for the Church went on, and
was finished, without answer; as if it had suffised, that it pleased them, who
loved novelty, to build it.

Whilst this passed, Mathias, finding himself without issue; by the consent of
the House of Austria, adopted his Cousin Ferdinand, and Crowned him King of
Bohemia, with the general applause of the Bohemians. Which done, it was showed
to the abovesaid Hussits, that the States only had power, and authority to
build Churches; and so they were all condemned; and such as presumed to resist,
imprisoned, and their Church demolished. And this was the first motive of this
war; and this the leaven, which hidden, for two years together, under the Past
of ambition, of the chief of that Kingdom, made it rise, and sharpen so much,
as that there was nothing expected, but only the hour to put it in the oven.

The Lutherans Jubily.
The year following, the Lutherans by way of a general thanks giving to God,
for having already preserved their Religion the space of an hundred years,
made a Iubily; as they also did some Leagues, amongst themselves at Heilbron,
against the Roman Catholics, which proved advantageous to the Bohernians, as
seeming (as it were) to give them the Sign, or Watchword, to which all their
humors were disposed and prepared: for in regard that after so many Books
composed, and so many Disputes held, there could be no Accord made, in matter
of Religion; there seemed a necessity, to try the strength of their Arms, All
tends to War.
and come from words to blows. The demolition of the aforesaid Church, was of
hard digestion to the Hussits, and so it caused murmurations, Monopolies, or
private Conspiracies: and in fine, open seditions. The Emperor being busy,
about the Coronation of his Cousin, caused his Ambassadors to rebuke the
priucipall of them; as namely, the President Slauata, Iarislae Bazite, and
Philip Platore; who, without the knowledge or consent of his Imperial Majesty,
had convocated such an Assembly. But they having (having by-like forgotten the
rank and quality they held, or else desiring war) fell upon these persons,
who were sacred by their Commissions, tumbled them down from the top of a Tower
through the windows, expelled the Jesuits, dismissed the Kings Officers from
their charges (which was to attack both Church, and State) and took up arms,
against all such, as should endeavor to impugn this insolent kind of
proceeding.

The Emperor laboring, both by Letters, and fair Propositions to remedy these
disorders, was already gone very far in it, and it is likely would have
accomplished it, had not the despair of some, withdrawn the most moderate
persons amongst them, from continuing the Work. But in the interim, Death of
the Emperor Mathias.
the Emperor died, leaving it to Ferdinand, to untangle this inrricate, and
troublesome bottom. This Prince had worn the Imperial Crown about six
hundred years; he had sometime governed the Low Countries, though with small
authority, but as it were only by form, and more in title, then in effect: He
was religious and gentle, and beloved by all such, as loved the peace and quiet
of the Empire.

Ferdinand elected limperom.
Now the Electours met at Frankefurt, and chose Ferdinand to bear the most
illustrious, but most painful burden of the whole Universe. And therefore let
us see him go, weakly enough accompanied, to finish the War of Bohemia; the
cause and pretexts whereof we have already demonstrated. The Bohemians, under
the Counts, de la Tour, and Mansfield (Natural son to Count Ernest, so well
know in the Low Countries) raised very puissant Armies, contemn Ferdinands
Remonstrances, deprive him of the Crown, as a Tyrant ( For such are all they,
whom powerful factions have a mind to suppress) give out, that he was not
lawfully Elected; and fortify themselves with Alliances, and succors. On the
other side, the Pope, Italy, Spain, and Poland, will not suffer Ferdinand to
perish; The beginning of the war.
whereof he seemed to be in imminent danger by this tempest, without speedy
relief; for his ship leakes on every side, and the wind of this Conjuration
will infallibly sink both him, and the Catholic Religion with him, if he be
abandoned by his Allies. The Archduke Albert sends him the Count de Bucquoy,
attended by the flower of the Walloon, and Luxemburgh Gentry.

Of Bohemia.
The Bohemians, though amazed to see so many potent States interest themselves
in the preservation of Ferdinand, lose not their courage, and resolve to add
politic craft, The Wectour Pal^time chosen by the States of Bohemia.
to open force. They draw to their party the Silesians, and Moravians, keep
their Intelligences in Austria, and all Germany; present the Crown to the Duke
of Saxony, and then to the Duke of Bavaria, though with visible dissimulation,
and refusable conditions; and last of all, to Frederick Prince Palatine, who by
the advice of some Lords (who yet basely deserted him afterward) accepted it.
Since he had married the Daughter of a King, he might very take a Crown, which
was so freely offered him, and so he was Crowned, with his Son, at Prague.

CHAP. III. The prosecution of the War of Bohemia. The battle of Prague.
Frederick flies, and forsakes the Town, together with his People.
THus, we see the Match made, and the Game a playing, between Ferdinand, and
Frederick, the House of Austria, and the Palatin, and the Christians divided.
For, almost all the Roman Catholics, either in inclination, or effect,
espowsed the Party of Ferdinand; and all the Reformates, and the most zealous
Lutherans, that of Frederick. These, after their prayers to God for the defense
of the Gospel; and those, to the same Author of all good, and to all the
Saints, for that of the Church. The King of France was solicited by both
parties; but he contented himself, with sending thither the Duke of Angoulesme,
to mediate a reconciliation. Let us note here, such as declared themselves for
King Frederick. The united Provinces of the Low Countries, by the solicitation
of Prince Maurice, who disposed the States to this Alliance, contrary to the
opinion of Barnavelds, who wished them was not to meddle at all with it. And it
is held, that this opposition of Barnaveldts, so greatly offended the Prince,
that he ever afterward, looked upon him as his enemy; and so at length, it
grew to be partly, the cause of his fall. It is always dangerous to cheok the
Grandees, and to crack nuts with them. Christian, Duke of Anholt; John
Frederick, Duke of Win^^^bergh; Maurice, Landgrave of Hassia; John Ernest,
Marquis of Ansbach, and some Imperial Towns also; together with the people of
England: for the King could never be induced to help his Son in Law, alleging
that he had no right to the Crown.

For Ferdinand, besides the aforementioned Allies, were leagued the Dukes of
Saxony, and Bavaria; together with the Ecclesiastical Electours, Soldiers were
listed every where, and the Rendezvous, Bohemia; the Theater of this fatal
war. The principal Heads, were the Duke of Bavaria, with Monsieur de Tilly,
his Lieutenant General; the Count de Bucquoy, and General Dampiere: On the
other side, the Duke of Anhok, the Counts de la Tour, and Mansfieldt. Now these
latter being sooner prepared then the other, and having subjugated almost all
Bohemia; marched into Austria, and besieged the Emperor in Vienna. Bucquoy
hastens thither, routs Mansfeldt, Vienna besieged. Mansfeldt beaten.
and forces La Tour to raise the siege. Dampiere enters the City with the
Horse, intending to chastise the insolence of the Citizens toward the Emperor
their Master, who yet vouchsafed to pardon them.

The Count de la Tour faced about, and marched toward the Capital City of the
kingdom, to divert the storm which threatened it. But, in fine, after some
encounters favorable to the Emperor, and the Duke of Bavaria, being entered
with his Army into Bohemia, and having reduced such as were gone astray into
the right path of obedience: the two Armies met, and resolved to finish the
disterence by a general Battle, the price and reward whereof, was the kingdom
of Bohemia.

Anholt pitched his Camp upon the White Alountain near Prague, entrenched
himself, and performed the charge of a great Captain. The Imperialists,
inflamed by the Remonstrances, and Exhortations of Father Dominick a Carmelit
Friar, slighted the dangers and difficulties which there were to come to an
Onset, in regard of the situation. The Poles and Wallons began the skirmish,
which was followed by the whole Army; and the Hungarians, not able to sustain,
Prague receives the Conquerours; as also all the Kingdom.
or withstand their attack, basely gave ground, and disturbed the Orders of the
Generals, in such sort, as that the Camp being suddenly staggered, after the
resistance of some Regiments, the whole Body fell into confusion, and such as
could save themselves, got into Prague. There perished more by water, then by
the sword; and the terror was so universal, that there was no other thought
left for the conquered, but to fly toward Silesia. King Frederick, not daring
to trust himself in the Places of strength which remained, nor yet to his new
Subjects neither; retired speedily toward Breslaw, where, entering into
conference with the States of the Country, and finding neither forces, nor
safety to stay there, he put himself upon the way toward Holland.

This General Decision fell out upon the eight of November 1620. the very day,
upon which was read the Gospel of Give Casar that which is Caesar's; and God,
that which is Gods. And indeed, it was manifested by the Augures, or Signs
from heaven, to whom Godthad determined to give the victory. The number of the
slain and drowned, was very great; as being related by some of the most
moderate writers, to have amounted to six, or seven thousand. The Conquerours
lost but very few of theirs, but Count Godfree of Papenhein^ was found lying
amongst the dead, so extremely wounded, that he could hardly declare his own
name. But his hour was not yet come, as being reserved for exploits, which were
to fill the whole distent of the world, with his glory. The number of the
prisoners was not equal, to that of the dead; the City being near enough, for
the retreat of such, as were timely spurred on by fear.

Prague, being abandoned by the principal Heads of the Party, remained the
price of the Victory. The nest was there, but the Birds flowne. The Duke of
Bavaria, after this Master-blow, retired himself to Mun^^ken, leaving the
Command of his Army to Monsieur de Tilly, and the rest of the Business, to the
Conquerours, who quickly brought all the Places of the kingdom, to the
Emperors obedience. One, and the same cause, often produces very different
Effects. The Bohemians, being of the race of them, who had defeated so many
Armies, not only with the sword, but even with the very noise of their names;
fighting now for the same Cause, and upon the same pretexts, obtained not the
same good issue. It is true, that those others, had to do with people, who, in
respect they had lived long idle in peace, had not any knowledge, or
understanding of arms: and these here, with men, who came out of a School,
where Mars praesided; where the best Lessons were taught: and where experience,
had made them Captains, Let us now return into France.

CHAP. IV. Wars against the Hugenots, and why? A new difference, between the
House of Austria, and the Venetians.
THe Hugenots, not being able to digest the reduction of Bearne, which was
performed more by the venerable luster of the Kings Majesty, then by that of
the sword, which remained unsheathed; and fearing to be one day overwhelmed, by
his good successes, through the instigation of their good friends the Jesuits;
discovered their distrust, A second war against the Hugenots.
by Assemblies in diverse parts of the kingdom; and last of all at Rochell,
where all the Churches met, to consult, and provide for their Business. The
King being informed, that this General Convocation of theirs without his
knowledge, and permission, too visibly checked his Authority; that that which
he had granted them at Londun, proved prejudicial to him, and that it was to
his Grace, and not to Arms, that they were to have recourse; gave them to
understand his Royal Will; which was, that they should separate themselves
within a few days, under pain of the crime of High Treason: But in vain; They
whose courages are so inflamed, by the clattering of Arms, as to hold it for
pleasant music, are not to be terrified by threats. They send their Deputies
to Paris, to make protestation of their fidelity, and excuse the necessity of
their affairs. But, the King required nothing but obedience, and so he
advanced his Troops toward Saumur, which was delivered him up by Monsieur de
Plessis. Saint John d' Angeli, after having suffered some Attacks, implores the
Kings pardon, Benjamin Duke of Soubise comes, and casts himself at his Royal
feet, and promises him, to wear his sword no more, against his service, though
afterward he quickly forget that promise. The Walls were demolished, upon
which the choler of Lewis the just was stopped; and his elemencie extended,
upon the Inhabitants. This good success made him resolve, to march into
Gascony, nor did a whit disanimate the Gascons, who had determined on the other
side, to sell their liberty at as dear a rate as they could. Many Towns were
constrained, to humble themselves, to the victorious Arms of their Prince. The
women were often seen, most desperately fighting upon the Breach of the Walls;
and really, if the chief of the Party had showed as much stability, as the
Common people did zeal; the prize had not been gotten so good cheap, nor their
Republic (the foundations whereof they were suspected to have already laid) so
easily destroyed.

The prosperity of this virtuous Prince, together with the promptitude he used
to surprise the Hugenots, before they could have means to put any considerable
forces into the Field, facilitated to him, that which could not be denied to
his justice; and since has declared that his will was, to command his Towns,
and not the consciences of his People; for the Hugenots who put all their
confidence, and security, in the fortifications of theirs, were at length
constrained, to rely only upon his Royal Word.

His exploits, against his Subjects of the Reformed Religion, are amply
described by many Authors, and therefore it suffices me, to take notice only,
of the course, or Current of them, insert the misfortunes; briefly follow my
way, and return with him to Paris; there to hear his victories sung by the one,
and see the displeasure done, to the other.

The siege of Montaubanc.
The liege which was laid before Montaubanc (a Town of superlative strength)
at the beginning of Autumn, was raised, by the great resistance of the
Besieged, seconded by continual rain, and diseases, which much afflicted, and
diminished the Kings Army: not without the loss of many brave men; The Dake of
Mayenne killed.
as the Constable de Luynes, and the Duke of Mayenne, who was lamented most of
all Now these two Lords, who had most excellently acted their parts upon the
Stage, or Theater of France, and danced a Gig and Round most different in
cadency to one another; as they were of a very contrary humor, so had they
likewise a very distinct death. And in regard that all the most tragical, and
most memorable accidents which happened, are found annexed to their lives, we
will succinctly pass through them. The Castle of Amboise gave the beginning,
and the Birds laid the foundation of the fortune of Monsieur de Luynes.
Reletion of the life of the Constalle Luynes.
His credit glittered, by the death of the Marquis d' Ancre, and by the return
of the Princes leagued against the said Marquis; and his greatness, by that, of
the unfortunate wife, that unhappy Favorite, whose Possessions and Goods were
liberally bestowed upon him, The death of the Marquis d' Ancre.
by the King. He was killed by his Majesty's command, and by the counsel of
this new Minister, just as he was entering into the Louure; and his Body torn
in pieces, by a people, which thought it self going into a Golden Age, after
this Execution. And his Wife.
His wife, who had been the companion of his Greatness, was likewise to be so,
of his disaster and fall. She was cast in prison, and notwithstanding she
baffled, and eluded the vanity of the witnesses, who accused her of magic, or
witchcraft; she was nevertheless condemned to suffer a shameful death, upon
the Marketplace of Greve. Her Exccution caused pity, in the souls of some;
contentment in others, and amazement to strangers, the eyes of whose
understandings were not dazzled, by the clouds of passion. For it was a strange
thing, to set a Lady, upon a base and infamousscaffold, who had been but a
little before, with so much power and greatness, at the Court. Ah false, and
treacherous Fortune! How much gall do thou hide, under thy honey? and how
many treacheries, under thy favors? No marvel, if thou destroy, what thou have
made, since thou overturnest even Kings, and Kingdoms themselves, which had
taken their foundations, from the hands of the Almighty himself. This tragical
Beginning being brought to his desired issue, Luynes counseled the King, to
banish his Mother from the Court, whom he knew to be in implacable indignation
against him. Her Exile (which was taken for a Retreat) the advancement of his
two Brothers, companions of his fortune, and the total and entire disposal, of
the favor, of the good King; cast him into the hatred of the people, which he
could not fail to inherit, as well as of the Queen; and into the aversion of
the Princes, who took his government for a pretext, of their discontentments,
and for a cloak, to disguise their interests. From the quality of an ordinary
Gentleman, he rid Post (as it were) to honors, and was created Earl, and
Viceroy of Picardy, Duke, and Peer of France; and within a very short time
after, Constable. In fine, all smiled upon him; every one adored this Golden
Calfe; yea, even they, who if they could have gotten him in their power, would
have crushed, and shivered him to pieces. To secure himself from the
Queen Mother, he procured the deliverance of the Prince of Conde: but common
necessity, obstructed the course of his greatness, though it hardly
extinguished the hatred, which all the French bore him, and left him but two
friends, who caused his miserable Body to be secretly interred, for fear, lest
be should receive the same treatment of him, whose place he had taken. O short
felicity! full of troubles, disquiets, cares, and vexatious apprehensions! O
vain Glory! so much hunted after, so much envied, and so dearly and painfully
bought? how deceitful is thy end? O vain Honors! How are you steeped, and
drenched in gall? And how different from those, which are prepared by Eternity
for us? On the other side, Prince Henry was beloved, almost throughout all
France, as well for his great virtue, as for the open hatred he carried to the
Constable; ended his days upon the bed of honor, before Montanban, for the
Catholic Faith, and for the restoration of the Authority of his King, and the
whole Kingdom. His life.
He was son to the deceased Duke of Mayenne, so well known, in the History of
the precedent Age; to whom France had this obligation, that she was not
dismembered, and crippled, during the fury of the cruel Wars. Whilst he
courted the Widow of the Count de Soissons, she moved both him, and the Duke of
Nevers, 1614.
to this pernicious War; to whom the Prince of Conde, and the busy Duke of
Bou^^lon joined themselves also; which kindled by some certain Princess, who
respired nothing but vengeance, and terminated, by the prudence of that most
wise Queen, at Saint Menehout. He retired from the Court, for the hatred he
bore to the Constable, and followed the party of the Queen Mother, 1620.
together with other Princes: in regard of the ill treatment she received. His
choler caused him to commit a great fault, before Moissac in Quercy, whereof
the of a frank, and open humor, without dissimulation; such as is fit for a
Prince, and not for a Courtier. He was also free to speak, and deliver his
opinion, and very courteovs to his inferiors; much more intense, upon the
ruin of the Hugenot Party, then upon prolonging the War, as many have done,
for their own proper interest. In fine, a Bullet sent him to his grave, put the
Army in disorder, France into mourning, The mourning of all France for his
death.
an end to so many brave exploits, which which will cause him to be eternally
hurt, to the siege of Montaubane, and to the fear of the Hugenots, who called
him the great Butcher: and the tears interrupted by sobbes, expressed the true
love, which all the Orders of France really bore him; and which was besides,
most amply decleared, by the elegant Orations made at his Funeral. The news
of his death being divulged at Paris, so much moved the Common People, that
they cast themselves upon the Reformates, and fired the Church of Charenton,
yea, and the mischief had yet gone further, had it not been prevented, and
stopped, by the Queens, and the Lords of the Parliament. Some days after, the
Pontan Change (in English, the Exchange Bridge) and the Pont des Orfebures, (in
English, Goldsmiths Bridge) were likewise set on fire, with inestimable loss;
for which the Reformats were much suspected by their enemies, thereby to
revenge themselves of the affronts which had been done them; for vengeance is
sweet. But much more diligence was used, to find out the riches, which was
fallen into the River, then the cause of two such disasters. However it be, the
War grew hot the next year after, and the King made himself Master of the
Isles St. Martin, d'Oleron, and Bronage. After some small victories gotten upon
the Duke of Rohan, and his Brother, The Peace made at Montpeillier. 1622. A
Tumult at Paris against them of the Religion. The Peace made.
the Peace was concluded at Montpeillier; by which the said Town (more by
force, then by inclination) returned to her duty; and all the party, which had
been attacked by many Armies throughout all the Provinces, after frequent
losses, began to respire, and showed, that it was no more invincible. This
Peace separated the Navies, hindered the Duke of Guise, from prevailing upon
his advantage; and the Fort Lewis built upon the Haven of Rochelle, gave
subject to renew the War, as we shall hereafter show.

The Venetians, to procure reparation of the damages received from the Croats,
1617.
in the year 1617. found themselves obliged to arm, against the House of
Austria. And they entered by force into the Territories of the Archduke
Ferdinand, The Venetians against the House of Austria.
from whence they were repulsed. Then, they made an Alliance with the United
Provinces, and received succor from them, under the conduct of Count John of
Nasseaw: But both parties, having had experience of the mutable lot of Arms,
they returned into their former good intelligence. At the same time the War
began again, between the King of Spain, and the Duke of Savoy. Vercelly was
taken by the Spaniards; and the Savoyers entered into the Duchy of Milan. But
this Difference was quickly appeased, by the intercestion of the Pope, and the
King of France. When Fortune is equal, and humors capable of reason, Peace is
quickly made. Let us go now to Vienna.

CHAP. V. The wars of Austria, Lusatia, Moravia, and the Palatinat.
WE left Ferdinand, ill enough accompanied on his way to Frankfurt, and the
Landgrave, William of Darmstadt came to meet him, and conducted him into the
Town, where he was received, and saluted Emperor; though he easily marked a
sufficient aversion in that people, from the Princes of his family. What cannot
Religion effect, upon weak, and ill-informed minds? It begets a blind zeal,
which being grown big, produces as much mischief as it can possibly effect; and
hearkening to nothing but Passion, thinks it does well, whilst it does ill.

Whilst the Emperor was detained by the reception of these honors, they of
his Party were in daily action with their enemies, and that often with
advantage; But this war was terminated the year following, 1620, by the Battle
of Pragne. A notable observation, that one only Battle purchased the
Conquerours a whole Kingdom. The War of Austria.


Austria was also exercised, by a revolt no less dangerous, then that of
Bohemia; chiefly, because it chanced at the same time, and for that it deprived
Ferdinand of all safe retreat.

The leagued Mutincers took arms upon this captious pretext; That the Archduke
Albert was their Lord, and not the said Ferdinand. How bad soever the Cause be
which the Lawyer pleades, he forbeares not yet to speak alond. He on the other
side alleged the donation made him by Albert, inviting them to renounce the
League, and pay him the Oath of fidelity; which they refusing, he proclaimed
them outlaws, and gave the execution of the Proscription to the Duke of
Bavaria, who reduced them to reason, time enough to come to succor the Count
of Bucquoy.

Lusatia, depending upon the Kingdom of Bohemia, was the alliance, and must
needs, for sooth, have her finger in the Pie. This Province was recommended, to
the Electour of Saxony; who choosing rather to proceed by way of
accommodation, then presently to fly to extremities, made the States acquainted
with his Commission; showed then the danger of persisting in obstinacy; and
would have certainly have persuaded them, had not the Marquis of Lagerendorp
broken the negotiation by force of arms, and brought the Negotiatours away
prisoners. This impertinent action much displeased the Electour; who finding
that they had violated the Law of Nations, resolved to tamper no more with
them. Baudissa burns.
The Town of Baudissa, first felt his cholar, and the violence of his arms,
which after she was almost wholly reduced to ashes, at length yielded her self
up; and all the rest followed her example. This exploit made the Duke of
Saxony very odious, to the Protestant Party; but, the Emperor, for recompense
of his services, and to keep him fast in his friendship, made him a present of
both the Lusatia's. It is impossible to please all, and especially two contrary
Parties, filled with acrimony, and hatred, through the zenl of Religion.

Austria, Bohemia, and the two Lusatia's, were no sooner under obedience, then
there was a necessity to turn the sword another way; as namely, to Moravia;
Moravia.
which was undertaken and quickly accomplished by Bucquoy. Favor wheels about
with Fortune, and Envy lies in wait for it.

The town of Iglaw forthwith stooped; Swaim followed, and General Spet, being
returned to his duty, brought all the other Towns also (partly by force, and
partly by inclination) to theirs; and to that war which seemed by the
animosities thereof, as if it would have lasted whole ages, was ended, for some
time in all those Provinces. The Silesians, The Silesians make peace.
fearing the victorious Duke of Saxony, who added threats to reasons, and had
already lifted up his hand to strike, chose rather to hearken to a friendly
Composition, then run the hazard of being forced to it, to the ruin, both of
their Country and Privileges: and consequently, they sent their Ambassadors
to Dresden, where the Peace was concluded, all forgotten, and all pardoned,
upon condition, that they should pay three millions of money, and renounce the
aforesaid allyances: whereupon they took the Oath of Fidelity to their Master;
and he granted them free exercise of their Religion. Let us step back to wards
the Palatinat.

The war of the house of Austria
The House of Austria, not content with having extinguished the fire at home,
carried it into the Territories of the Prince Palatine. Now the Princes of that
great Union; to wit, the Marquis of Anopach, the Landgrave Maurice of Hassia,
the Marquis of Dourlarch, the Duke of Wirtembergh, and some Imperial Towns,
had contracted great forces, for the defense of the Pala^inat. It is most
facile, to re-kindle new quenched firebrands, put together by means of the
heat, which remains in them some hours after. Spinola went to second them, and
Prince Henry Frederick, who was sent by Prince Manrice, with a Renfort or
Supply of some Horse; not finding a perfect harmony amongst them, nor being
able to put such an one as was needful, retired himself into Holand, leaving
the Peace to be treated by those Princes; after they had basely suffered
almostrall the Country to be taken by the Spaniards: Upon which the Spaniards
seized.
And so, this great and needless stir, vanished into smoke, and melted, like a
great Colosse, or Pillar of snow, before the Sunbeams; for the Principal
Heads, having promised not to assist the Palatine, either with men, or money,
betook themselves to rest, after they had finished so fine a Masterpiece as
this, which merits, to be inserted in Commentaries; namely, that Spinola, with
an army of eighteen thousand men, went and took a Province which was guarded by
thirty thousand, and many Princes besides. Dis-united strength is easily broken.

Some Heads of the Hughenot Party, endeavored to represent to the King the
interest he had, to hunder the progress of the House of Austria, upon his
Allies, their brethren; but in vain; he well enough remembering the succor
formerly sent them from thence, which failing them now, disabled them from
resisting, against his triumphant Arms. Let us now see, what the Hung arians
did, whilst these Tragidies were a playing. They are Neighbors to the
Germans, and have the Cross on the side, and the Half-Moone, on the other.

CHAP. VI. The war of Transylvama. The King of Poland treacherously wounded.
War between the Poles, and the Turks.
BEthlem Gabor, having made an alliance with Frederick, and seeing Ferdinands
forces employed in Bohemia, began to consider, not only of making a powerful
diversion, but also of winning a Crown, We have Ambition, and we shall also
quickly find Religion. He raised a great Army, under very abstense, and
farre-fetch'd pretexts, thereby to puzzle, and baffle such as had power to
resist him. This man, for a fine beginning, oppressed Gabriel Batorius his
Lord, by the assistance of the Turk; and so being grown Master of Transylvania,
and propped by the Ottomans, he possessed it, in the quality of Prince thereof.
He made a League with the Archdukes; but seeing them entangled in dangerous
Wars, he pricked up his ears, and raised a potent Army, to seize upon the
Kingdom of Hungary. Convenience moves men to break ally ances, as well as
necessity; and good success covers the injustice of the Cause; or at least,
urges the doubt, that if Right be to be violated, it ought to be only to win
a Crown. War of Transylvania.
In fine, he secretly armed, took occasion by the forelock, and clothed the
Lion, with a foxes skin. He got possession of Cassovia, before the people
thought themselves in danger. They, whose affections he enjoyed, were
discovered by their Religion: The Roman Catholics, and such others also, as
had any resentment of their duty, being frighted, some armed, Gaber takes Posen.
and others fled. He took Posen, under the title of Prince of Hungary; marched
to Vienna, and joined with the Confederates to besiege the Town. But the
Polanders, having defeated his Troops, which remained in Hungary, Is declared
King of Hungary.
made him return, and mould his business after another form; so much did he
stand in awe of the King of Poland: though he went backwards, only to leap the
better: For he obtained a Truce, which he quickly brake, proclaimed himself
King by them of his Caball, entered again into Austria, and if Fortune had not
turned her back upon the Confederates in Bohemia, it is very likely, he might
fully have accomplished all his pretentions, and ruined the said House of
Austria it self. There is something wanting, we rise, either too early, or too
late. The Emperor was shut up in the Town, and constrained both to hear, and
suffer the insolency of some seditions Citizens, which was repressed by the
Count of Dampiere, who departed not long after toward Posen, with intention to
surprise it; but he was killed by a Musket bullet. Dampiete killed.
He was by birth a Lorrain; had done the Emperor many most considerable
services, and was much deplored, by the whole Patty. Bethlem finding this thorn
out of his foot, and having bought the amity of the Turk with money, brake the
Truce, but his Letters, by which he invited the Tartars, and wherein he gave
them testimonies of what services he would perform to the Grand Signior, at the
cost of the Empire, and all Christendom, by allying himself with the Turk,
being intercepted; he disobleiged the prime Lords of Hungary, who cast
themselves into the Emperors arms, and fell upon Gabors forces, and handled
them almost as ill, as the Polanders had done the year before.

The Count de Bucquoy in Hungary.
Hereupon the Count de Bucquoy entered into Hungary, took many Towns, and
amongst others, Posen it self: and the Tartars, coming to relieve Gabor, were
cut in pieces, by the Poses, under the command of that great Captain,
Cotqueviets.

The Emperor had run great hazard of loosing the Kingdom of Hungary, Is
killed.
(had not Fortune saved it) by the death of the brave Count of Bucquoy; who
attempting to repulse the Hungarians, when they sallyed out of Newhewsel, was
laid upon the ground, with no less then sixteen wounds. He could not more
generously surrender his soul, nor find a more illustrious bed of honor, to
crown the greatness of his actions, had not his soldiers so basely forgotten
their duty, His A, my disbands it self.
and disbanded themselves so ignominiously. For they might, by carrying the
body of this Mars, with as much reason, have expected to win Victories, as
the Spaniards did, by that of their Rodrigues; but after the loss of their
General, they found themselves without pulse, life, and motion. And so, we may
easily think, how sensible a loss this was, to the Emperor, and all his
family, to whom he had rendered so potent services.

Thus by the death of this one brave Captain, Fortune changed, and the
Conquered became Conquerours. They, who before, were reduced, to a mere feeble,
and fearful defensive War, regained courage, and returned to besiege the
places which they had lost. But Fortune, lighter then the wind, made Bethlem
know, how necessary it was for him, to make Peace; and Ferdinand, desirous to
remedy so many evils, as surrounded him on every side, easily suffered himself
to be induced to it, by his own natural inclination: And so, upon the
restitution of the Crown, and the relinquishment of the Title of King, the
Peace was made, and Arms laid down, for a while; though Gabor never cast off
the desire of moving, nor the hatred, which he carried to his Lord, the
Emperor.

The King 'of Poland hurr.
Now, since we are gotten so near Poland, let us deliver that which happened
there, in the year 1620, The King being at Wartsawe, where the Diet was held;
and going into the Church upon the fifteenth of November, a Gentleman gave him
two blows with a Pole-axe upon the head and another on his shoulder, which very
much endangered his life: But the Parricide received his reward, and the King
was heard by the standers by, with a faint and feeble voice, to pronounce these
words: What (said he) do the Polanders learn of the French, to kill their
Kings?

Let us go hence, till we shall first have related the subject, for which Osman
the Emperor of Turkey with an Army of above four hundred thousand men,
attempted to swallow up all this puissant Kingdom, which was this.

The Waywood of Walachia being revolted from the Grand Signior, and calling in
the Poles to relieve him, was attacked by the Tartars, and Turks; who, in the
first fight, having the worst, and in the last, the best of the day, the
Waywode was killed, and the Polish Nobility defeated: and this Victory so much
inflamed the heart of the Great Turk, that he shamefully banished the Poland
Ambassador from his Court, and declared a war upon the King. Fortune, is the
Mistress of young Princes, for by good successes, Osman attacks Poland.
she fills them with temerity, to destroy them.

CHAP. VII
The war in the Palatinate. Tilly beaten, revenges himself, and defeates the
Marquis of Baden. The Bishop of Halberstadt, makes himself known in Westphalia,
and is beaten; passes with Mansfeldt, through Lorraine, and incamps himself
before Sedan.

THe prosperous progress of the Emperors Generals, repaired, and raised his
Authority, to so much splendor, that every body desired to keep himself fast
with him, and gain his favor; there remaining none who durst openly act for
Frederick, but such as were droven by despair. For, the Duke of Anholt,
finding the gate open to a reconciliation, stooped to get in; and many Towns
also did the same. And the Landgrave William, son to Maurice of Hassia, who
finding Bellona too hard, and rigorous a Mistress, betook himself to the
society of the Muses, followed the example of the former, and was received with
the same benevolence; yea, and adorned with a new Title of Honor besides. We
are forced, in a scorn, to make a good Part, which, when the danger is past, we
do not value.

Mansfeldt recollected fragments of the Armies, found means to repair his
losses, Mansfeldt uses deceit in the Palatinate.
and grew likely to restore things, to the point from whence they were fallen.
In effect, not being able to get into Bohemia, he wheeled about toward the
Palatinate: where, by the taking of some places, and fighting some prosperous
skirmishes, he raised the courage of his soldiers, and struck astonishment
into his enemies. But, the Duke of Bavaria, seized upon the upper Palatinate,
reduced him to such extremity, that, upon the condition of a sum of money, and
some very high title of Honor, he was content to seek Peace with the Emperor;
however it were intended by him, but only to save his Army, and so to kill two
birds with one stone. Foul play, or cheaterie, when it succeeds well, passes
for a gallant piece of warlike craft; and wickedness never seeks long, before
it finds an occasion. For as soon as he arrived in the Lower Palatinate, he
threw off his Vizard, broke his word, took many Towns (which served for a Fee
to his hunger-starved soldiers) sacked Alsatia, Takes Hagenaw.
and surprised Hagenaw.

Frederick, upon the noise of these successes, left Holland, passed incognito
through France, and not without huge pains, and danger, got to the Army. There
happened a surious Encounter near Wisloch, The Bavarians beaten.
where the Bavarian; lost abost above two thousand men, a great number of
Colors, and four Fieldpieces; which were testimonies, that the victory was
not coutemptible.

But Tilly was not long, before he found means to revenge himself of this
affront. It is good to lend to such, as are always read to render. For, having
joined his Troops with Don Cordocia, and being informed, that the Marquis of
Baden was separated from Mansfeldt, he followed him so close, that he overtook
him near Wimpfen; where, after a stubborn fight of some hours, he put the
Cavalry to flight. But the Infantry, or Foot, finding themselves abandoned with
a masculine resolution, mingled with despair, and desire of an honorable
death, fought very valiantly, and made Tilly know, that he should not have
their lives at so cheap a rate, They have their revenge.
as not to wrangle stoutly for them; howbeit, by an unlucky chance, they were
deprived of the means, though not of the will, Victory of the Imperialists
near Wimpson.
to continue it. For, by the perpetual playing of the Ordnance, the fire got
into the powder, which sprung the Wagons with so unfortunate hurt, that all
the Foot fell into disorder, and was cut in pieces: And eight and thirty Pieces
of Canon; a great deal of Baggage, and money, with six score Coulors falling
into the hands of the Conquerours, made the Conquered confess, that they
received a huge, and most sensible loss. The Field was strewed with dead
Bodies, and the perishing of six thousand men upon the place, gave cause to
count this, for one of the greatest Battails of this Age.

The Bishop of Halberstadt in the interim was not asleep; but having contracted
great forces, The cruelties of the Bishop of Halberstadt in Westphalia.
he went ravaging and pillaging all Westphalia; sparing neither Monks, Nuns,
nor Ornaments of the Church it self, to satiate his cruelty, leachery, and
avarice. Indeed, the scandal he gave, was too great; for his proceedings were
blamed, even by them of his own Party: and he purchased the name of the Mad
Bishop. But the Catholics were too much tied to the Emperors service, and
therefore he thought fit to chastise them, since there was no other means, to
hurt their Victorious head; and besides, the disgust of their so often singing
Te Deum, was too sharp and hot to be endured. At Paterborne, he took a Statue
of Sains Liborius, of massive Silver, and melted it into Rex Dollars, which he
signed, with an Arm stretched out, and a sword, with this motto, A Friend to
God: and an Enemy to Priests. The youthful insolences, and unreasonable
actions, which he committed in a certain Cloister of Nuns, must be buried in
silence; for the like could not happen, but in a corrupt Age. This Army cast
the greatest bulk of the war, War again the Ecclesiastics.
upon the Ecclesiastics; nor can there be imagined any kind of sacrilege,
which was not perpetrated by them; neither went they in fine; very far,
before they received the Crown of their works. For being coasted, or overtaken
by the Count of Anholt, who was now joined to Tilly, they were strenuously
assaulted, near the River Maine; and endeavoring to pass in confusion, the
Bridge brake, and made fine sport for the Imperialists, who cut off such as
were stopped: and the River conspiring to their destruction, thruzled a great
many more, so that only they who could swim escaped, and through their great
diligence made a shift at length to reach the Avantguard of the Army, where
their Bishop marched, and so ranged themselves under the wings of General
Mansfeldt, so that the River shared stakes with the Imperialists, in the honor
of this victory, as having drowned about three thousand of them. Frederick
after this so rough a check, having no means at all left to maintain his forces
any longer, disbanded them, and retired himself back to the Hague, there to
expect the issue of the Treaty at Brussels, by which Frankendal, with the
consent of King James of England, was sequestered into the hands of the Infanta.

Tilly went afterward, and took Heidelberg by force, and Manhein, by
composition; and that great renowned Library, Heidelbergh taken, and the
Library carried to Rome.
was transported to Rome (for the Pope would have also his part of the booty)
to the great trouble of all the Electorall Family: but, who can resist against
Fate? Mansfeldt, and his Bishop, marched on toward Lorrain, through which they
passed, without any repugnance, the Duke being surprised by their unexpected
approach, and stayed some weeks at Sedan; and Card^^^a, who was at their heels,
encamped himself at Ivoy. We will leave them there, to plot new Designs with
the Duke of Bo^^llon, and return into Poland, to see what great body of
Nobility march so briskly on, to face that potent Emperor Osman.

CHAP. VIII. The continuance of the war between the Poles, and the Turks. The
tragical end of young Osman. The death of some Lords.
THe Polanders, being resolved to revenge the affront done their Ambassador,
received besides some kind of check in Moldavia; but Prince Vladistans hasting
thither with a puissant Army, defeated the Turks in a ranged Battle; which
kindled so great fury in the young Emperor Osman, that he swore he would be
revenged, and destroy the kingdom of Poland, with that terrible Army, whereof
we have spoken already. King Sigismund received the Alarm, and sent his
Ambassadors to all Christian Kings, imploring their assistance against the
Common Enemy. King James aforesaid sent five thousand men, whom the King of
Denmark would not suffer to pass, in respect of the Alliance between him, and
the King of Sweden. In fine, the Polanders finding nothing, but excuses every
where, were fain to get all on horseback, together with their King, and go to
deliver their Prince, who was so engaged, that he had almost no means left him
to escape evident danger. It was a worthy object, They make all the Nobility
march, to succor ^lad^slaus.
to see a King march at the Head of two hundred thousand Gentlemen: whereof the
Grand Signor being advertised, sent to offer a Peace to the Prince, who
embraced it, as an Embassy come from heaven; because the third part of his
Troops of sixty thousand men, which were left to defend the Confines against
this huge multitude, was quite consumed, partly by continual attacks, The Yeate
made
and partly by diseases, as having been compelled, for want of victuals, to eat
many of their own horses.

The Tucks, after having wanted half their Army, made their retreat; which,
together with the Peace, was about the month of October, 1621. Let us follow
them to Constantinople, where we shall see the tragical, and pitiful end of
their Prince.

Osman, the aforesaid young Prince, by some deportments of his, gave suspicion
to the Innisuries, of his having a mind to transfer both the Treasure, and
seat of the Empire, from Constantinople, under pretext of making a pilgrimage
to the Sepulcher of their Prophet Mahomet. Osman strangled, and Mustapha
cl^^led in his place.
Whereupon, his ships were stopped, his Favorites massacred in his presence,
and himself, after having endured a thousand indignities from the Soldiers,
strangled by the command of his Uncle, whom they had drawn out of his
Hermitage, to succeed him. But he did not long enjoy those honors, whereof
indeed he was unworthy. Happy are they, who live content in the lowness of
their Condivion, and are not exposed to the blows of the Thunderbolt; at those
Captains also are, who for sake the Armies, to return to the Plough, without I
stening to the voice of the charming Sirens of ambition. But it is not only
here, that we have seen unheard of changes.

Now these fatal Tragedies were advantageous to the Christians, who were so
divided by the two so often mentioned Passions, The Count de la Tour obtaines
suco^^^ of the Turk.
that there was no appearance left to reunite them. The old Count de la Tour,
and the Marquis of Lagerendorf, were knocking at the Grand-Signors Gate, and
displaying both their Rhetoric, and their Presents, seconded by the
Ambassadors of the inconstant Gabor; so much were they seized by desire, to
ruin the House of Austria, which almost all Christendom banded together, has
not been able to effect hitherto; no, nor so much as to deprive it, of the
Imperial Crown. S^^ks Moravia.
However, they obtained some succor, sackaged Moravia, and joined with Gabor;
but the Turks were defeated, and their Mustapha compelled to yield up his place
to Amurath, Is be^^ (...).
Brother to Osman. And these Tragedies were the cause of the war, which
chanced between the Turks and Persians, to the great good of Christendom; and
gave occasion also to the Gossacks to make a Cavalcada, or Inroade, to the very
Gates of Constantinople. The Cossacks at the Gates of Constantinople.
For, after they had passed many great Forests, and vast Deserts, the Alarm
grew so hot, that if the said Cossacks had not speedily retreated with their
prey, the poor Christians in the Town had had their throats cut, it regard that
it was published, that they had intelligence with them. Let us now take leave
of the Countries, of the Half The Turks.
Moon, for many years, and return by the Mediterranean, into those of the The
Roman Catholic Countries upon the Mediterranean Sea.
Cross, which being momentarily sprinkled with blood, cannot choose but
multiply abundantly.

The Venetians were very attentive to the successes of the Bohemian war, and
being more propense to their own interest, then their Religion, occultly
favored the Bohemians. But the rest of the States of Italy, leaned more to the
other side; however Peace remained amongst them, just as they did in Spain,
where they received the news of a great victory, upon the King of Maroco, and
saw (after the expiration of the Truce) some Holland Vessels brought into their
Ports, which came from Venice, and were taken in the Sreights of Gibelaltar.
This year 1621. in the month of March, deceased Philip the third, King of
Spain, and was followed some months after, The death of Philip the third King
of Spain, and of and Cardinal Bellatmine.
by the pious Archduke Albert, who left the Country to his Isabel, and the
Command of the Militia, to the Marquis Spinola. That famous Cardinal Robert
Bellarmin, so well known by the Books he left written, both against the
Reformats, and others, paid likewise his tribute to Nature, this very year,
being above fourscore years old. England continued in Peace; and therefore we
will step into the Low Countries.

CHAP. IX
Sadness in the Low Countries, for the bad success of the Affairs of
Frederick. The War begun again, betwixt them, and the Spaniards. Gulick, and
Papemutz surrendered. Count Henry suspected, and why?

HOlland was full of loy, upon the termination of the Domestic Disorders, and
the condemnation of the Arminians; a great part whereof withdrew themselves out
of united Provinces; some others embraced the doctrine of the confession of
Auxbourgh, and the rest fought so long against their Crosses, that they
surmounted them at length, by obtaining in many Towns free Exercise of their
Faith. But this joy was quickly turned into mourning, by the arrival of the
news of the unhappy success of King Fredericks Arms; and the loss of his
Kingdom, which he had already had, some months in his possession. Though yet
the Gazets sung always of his victories, and of the decline of the Emperors
Affairs: yea, and the Painters represented him already, sitting in the
Imperial Throne; Ferdinand, on his knees before him; and the Eagle all peeled,
and debilitated. The Eagle peeled.
It was also published, that the Battle before Prague, was won by him and
the contrary tidings contemned, as suspects, and given out by the Papists; till
himself arrived, and brought the naked Truth with him, and showed in fine, that
all was lost. There are many persons so passionate, that they cannot endure to
hear truth spoken, if it be contrary to their expectation; and others prefer,
before the infamy of lying, the unsteady profit which comes from it.

Prince Maurice had often enough bid the Generals of Bohemia, have a care of
themselves, for that they had to do with a great Captain, full of courage, and
experience. Many have believed, that it was his design, to make Frederick be
raised to the Imperial Crown; neither were the means thereof so difficult, had
not God disposed otherwise of it. They of Brabant, on the other side, by way of
equal return to the Hollanders, pictured the Emperor in his Throne, Laden
with with feathers.
elevated on high, with a King fallen at his feet, and the Eagle laden with
feathers, plucking the Crown off his Head. But Painters, and Poets have always
been permitted, to set forth their fancies; and the Common People feed
themselves with them, as with solid food.

Now, the Contra-Remonstrancers, as well by means of the Synod of Dort, as by
the company of the Prince (who declared himself of their party) having won
the Day, Maurice changes the Magistrates.
stayed not there. For Maurice, by the advice of some Lords, having changed the
Magistrates in many Towns, as I have hinted already; put in their places, such
as he liked, and such as approved of the said Synod: In such sort, as the
Arminians were fain to leave the Cushion against their wills, and were ill
treated too, in some parts, for making too free use of that, which by virtue of
their birthright, and the success of the Arms of the Commonwealth, they
conceived, could not be denied them.

These changes begat many Libells, and gave ground to the Politics, to make
sine observations, upon those proceedings, which remained secret No definitive
sentence can be pronounced, upon what may be done, but upon what is done.

Now, as men's humors which were agitated, began by little and little, to
relent, or slacken; and partialities, partly for fear, and partly for want of
nourishment, to be choked in the desire repose; just so did the Truce draw
toward an end. And it must be noted, that these people, how much soever
divided in faction, return forthwith to a coherence, when they apprehend any
foreign Enemy: For really, common danger has so great a power upon their
minds, that it makes them speedily reunite, to resist the attempts of
strangers: and if that come once to fail, farewell Liberty; for they will
never, want private enemies; and their pride is grown too high, not to be
envied by many. Their virtue is accompanied by envy, but their Power is too
considerable, to be easily, and openly attacked. One of the greatest wits of
our times, advised the King of Spain, to make a Truce with them if he had mind
to tame them. The nature of the Hollanders.
For they are (said he) like over, which join together, to repel the Wolves;
but as soon as the danger is once past, they fall to odds amongst themselves.

The Archduke sounded them, to see if they would hearken to a Peace, and
acknowledge him for Sovereign, under such terms, as seemed to divide the
Sovereignty; but they bore a deaf ear, and would not hear of so much, as a
prolongation of the Truce: and the Ambassador passing through Delph, was
entertained by the dregs of the people, with dirt and mud, and most
unworthily treated, before it could be remedied. An Ambassador cannot be
welcome, where his Master is hated. This affront was dissembled; Spinola being
returned out of Germany, went, and encamped himself near the Rhein, whilst
Count Henry of Berghen, blocked up Gulick, which surrendered it self for want
of food, in the month of February, 1622. The same year Pape^^tz (in English,
Priests-Cap) was likewise taken, by means of the huge quantity of Granadaes,
which were cast into it. This was a Fort so called, seated upon an Island, in
the middle of the Rhein, built during the Truce, to exact Contributions of the
circumjacent Countries, and to incominodate the Boats, which could not pass
without being examined, and visited by it; and it was sacrificed to the
vengeance of the Priests, because it carried both the name, and figure of their
Quadrangular Bonnets.

Count Maurice, by the decease of Philip of Nassaw, his eldest brother (who
died like a Catholic at Breda, a little before the expiration of the Truce)
being become Prince of Orange, and Heir by will, to all his said brothers
goods; sent his other brother with four thousand men, to enter into little
Brabant, and force the Contributions. The Hollanders in Brabant
This surprise very much amazed Spinola, cast the Country people into despair,
to see their houses fired: and moved the soul of the Infanta (who beheld this
spoil from the walls of Brussels) to compassion. The Citizens would have marched
out with their arms, to revenge this wrong; but Spinola, commanded the Gates to
be kept shut, and would not suffer them, to go, and expose themselves to
slaughter, and an inevitable defeat. The inhabitants of a Town do enough, when
they defend their own walls; for the Field is fatal to them, against old Bands
and trained Soldiers. Count Henry of Bergues arriving too late, to hinder the
return of the Hollanders, (which he might have effected, either with his
forces, or by stopping up the River of Demer) grew to be suspected, of
intelligence with his Kinsmen. He was reproached, that he might have come six
and twenty hours sooner; and that, if he had used all requisite diligence, the
enemies could not have escaped: But he excused himself the best he could; and
satisfied most of the Council, though not all; and after his retreat, it was
all more maturely examined, and considered by the most judicious men. The
complaint of the Spanish Ambassador, in his behalf.
The Ambassador of Spain complained once to King Henry of France; for his
endeavoring to disingage the said Count from his Masters service; to which the
King answered, that he was by birth a Germane, and no subject of the King of
Spains. And thus passed this complaint, together with many more, which the
ignorant people imputed, to the hatred, which the Spaniards (according to their
saying, and belief) carried toward him.

CHAP. X. Berghen besieged. Mansfeldt, and his Bishop being beaten by Cordoua,
come to succor the Hollanders. The death of the Duke of Bouillon, and a
summary of his life. Spinola quitts the siege. Mansfeldt passes into Friezland.
A third War in France.
THe burning of many fair villages, in the sight of the Court, caused so much
spite in Spinolas soul, that he studied nothing more, then the means of
revenging himself of it. He kept his design secret; and assembled a great
Army, one part whereof he assigned to Don Lewis de Velasco, and conducted the
other (which was far the greatest) himself. He made a show to draw toward the
Rheyn, thereby to amuse the Hollanders, whilst the said Don Lewis had order to
march with all speed, to Berghen op Zoom, and to seize upon Emblee, the Haven,
and the two Forts, which defended it; but, whether out of jealousy, or
otherwise, he want, and took Steenbergh; giging the Hollanders time, to
reinforce the Garrison, and secure the Isle of Tertollen. The Marquis
nevertheless arrived, and besieged the Place; Berghen besieged.
but not being able to gain the possession of the said Haven, he wasted a good
part of his Army about it.

We left Mansfeldt, and his Bishop, at Sedan, in consultation with the Duke of
Bouillon; Minsfeldt at Sedan.
and let us now call them from thence, since we are sure to learn nothing of
their private conferences, but only by conjecture. The King of France was then
before Montauban; and fearing least they might serve themselves of the fair
occasion, to make a strong diversion, in favor of the Hughenots, who were very
much weakened; he commanded the Duke of Neuers, The Duke of Neuers.
to raise speedily a Body of an Army in Champague, and entertain the said
Mansfeldt with Treaties, till his Troops were in condition, to hinder his
passage. He also wrote to Don Cordona, who promised him to come, and relieve
him, in case the Germans made but the least show of moving against his service.

Mansfeldt dares not succor the Hughenots.
Now this proposition of succouring the Hughenots, being found most difficult,
and of too dangerous a consequence, and the means of returning the same way
they came, taken from them; they resolved to traverse, or pass through
Brabaus, and go to succor Berghen, which Spinola attacked both with Mines; and
Assaults, as he had done Ostend; and this so much the rather, because they were
invited thither, by the States General, and the Prince of Orange. And so they
marched, and by their departure, freed Campaign, from the great oppressions,
wherewith they had very ill treated the Lasiere. Cordona, and Anholt followed
them; and having overtaken them near Floury, compelled them to stop, and face
about. The battle began hotly; Is beaten by Cordona.
and Cordona was in danger of losing it, if the enemies horse had stood fast,
and better seconded the foot, which was almost all cut off by the Canon. But
five hundred Peasants of the Province of Liege, who presumed to set upon them,
were cut in pieces, and sacrificed, to their displeasure; which yet, was quite
forgotten, as soon as they came to the Hollanders Camp.

The Mansfeldians excused their loss, by the necessity they had, to get the
passage; which, since they had obtained, by the sword, the Imperialests (said
they) ought not so much to boast of their Victory. The Bishop was hurt in the
arm, The Bishop loses his arm.
which was forced to be cut off; which gave the Roman Catholics ground to
publish, that, that arm which made war against the Priests, had deserved to
be struck off. It is very likely, that if the Protestants had not feared to
alienate the King from their Party (of whose favor they hoped one day to feel
some effects) they would have made no difficulty at all, to set the Hughenots
upon their feet again in such sort, as that the King could not lay hold of a
more opportune season to humble them, then during the decline of the affairs,
of the Protestants in Germany.

The Duke of Bouillon, after the departure of the Germans, being quite crazed
with age, paid his tribute to Nature: and it concerns us, to speak briefly of
his life, that so we may come both to the knowledge of his experience, and
exploits, The death of the Duke of Bouillon.
and of his right also to Sedan. Religion, and Nature tied him fast to his
Kings service, whose secrets, and savor he enjoyed for a long time. His first
wife was the Princess, who was heiress to Sedan; and notwithstanding that she
died without Childrein, and that there was another heir of the same House, His
life.
he left not to retain the said Principat, by the support of the Kings favor.
He marries the heiresse of Sedan. He keeps the Principate, and passes to the
second marriage. Believed, in Germary, 1609 Surprises S^^^^y.
In his second marriage, he had the daughter, of Prince William of Orange, by
whom he had begat two sons, who grew very famous afterward; and by this
Alliance, he acquired a most straight correspondence with the States Gonerall
of the united provinces. He much molested the Dutchies of Lorraine and
Luxenburgh by arms, wherein he purchased great reputation. He went and
surprised the Cittidell of S^endy, the very day of his wedding, and was always
redoubted by his neighbors, and in most high esteem with the Princes of
Germany; and it is believed, that it was chiefly he, who counseled the Prince
Palatine, to take the Crown of Bohemia. After his designs, and Communications
with the Marshal of B^ron, were blown up, he kept himself always close in
Sedan, till the King at length, came to awaken him. But his peace was quickly
made, in consideration of the good, which he was to perform, and of the high
enterprises, whereof he was both the most worthy, and principal instrument.
After the sad death of Henry the Great, the Prince of Conde, being returned
into France, he used his utmost endeavor, to tie him to the interests of the
Hughenots, by describing his to him, quite otherwise, He embroils France.
then they were to be understood; which were in effect, to embroil the
Kingdom. But the Prince would not revenge the injury, which he pretended was
done him, to the detriment of Religion, and the destruction of the poor people;
which yet not long after he did, against his promise to the Queen: though yet
that promise were quickly dissipated, as well as many other, which came out of
the shop of his breast, more for his particular advantage, then that of the
Public, which he always pretended. Now, howbeit, he had been brought up in
the civil wars, and factions, he yet refused the generalship, He refuses the
Generalship of the Hughenot Party, 1621. Why?
of all the Hughenot Armies, which was offered him, by the Assembly of Rochell;
and that upon very reasonable reasons: as first, his age: then the Gout,
wherewith he was much tormented; and lastly, for the difficulty, which he was
likely to find, to govern so many Heads, as composed that popular State. Let us
return to the siege of Berghen.

Spinola finding his enemy recruited with so great a Body of Horse, and his
own, Army much diminished with toil, assaults, sickness, and disbandings;
speedily raised the siege, for fear least the way should be stopped, Spinola
raises the siege.
and went, and encamped himself three leagues short of Antwerp; where having
put himself in posture, and sent away his sick, and wounded men, he offered the
Prince Battle; but he contenting himself with having succored the Place, made
answer, to some French Lords, who advised him to accept the offer; that it was
better to make a golden Bridge for his enemies, then engage them in fight,
which is often gained by despair: And so he retired to the Hague, where he was
well received by the States. Mansfeldt showed himself likewise there, and the
Bishop grew to be known, and hated, and was sometimes in danger of being well
rubbed, for his former insolences. But these two guests, after some
consultations, quickly dislodged; for Mansfeldt, having received five thousand
men from France, Mansfeldt and the French in East-Freezland The Bishop
defeated, in the year 1623. near Statloo.
was sent into East-Freezland, for fear least Tilly should come, and take up
his quarters there: and the Bishop returned into Westphalia, where living after
the old fashion, he was snapt near Statloo, and most basely defeated.

With much more reason, might that have been said of Tilly, which the Emperor
of Turkey, said of the French, when he heard the news, of the huge Victory
gotten by them, upon the Venetians: namely, That they had to do with Calves.
Six thousand Imperialists, cut off an Army of eighteen thousand men; and the
Bishop, in stead of retyring himself to his Bishopric, returned speedily into
Holland, with the nimblest runners of his broken Army, to take new counsel,
and recollect his scattered Troops, in the Fronteer Towns. There were about six
thousand of his men taken prisoners, and the Spanish Garrison of Grol,
contributed no small matter to this entyre Victory, in the year 1623. If the
Bishops Soldiers used great cruelties, the Mansfeldians did not much better in
Freezland; in such sort, as that good Country, which was able to maintain
above fifty thousand men, in good order, for fifteen years together, was
exhausted in less then seven months; These two Generals return into Holland.
and the Count of Oldenbergh sound reason to complain of them besides, as bad
neighbors, for making excursions upon his lands. But they got not all off; and
of five thousand French, there returned not twelve hundred into France, to
revile their General, and relate the good treatment, which they had both
given, and received, in these parts; all the rest being knocked in the head by
the Peasants, Mansfeldt being rejoyned to the Bishop, with the fragments of
both Armies, performed no great exploits; but being beaten again at Frisoit,
they both went back again into Holland, where they plotted new designs
against the House of Austria. But now, let us go visit the Swissers, in their
Mountains, for they will give us matter also, to discourse of them.

CHAP. XI
Of the Swissers, and Grizons; and their Government. The fall of a Mountain.
Soubise breaks the Peace. The death of the great Priour, and of the Marshall
Ornano.

Description of the Cantons.
BEfore we enter upon the motives of the Wars, which happened in the Grisons,
we will first show, that the Swissers area People of Germany, divided into
thirteen Cantons; of whose valor, Julius Caesar, in his Commentaries of the
Gawlish War, makes very honorable mention. They are shut up within Mountains,
and great Lakes, which make their Country inaccessible. The Tyranny of some
Governors, caused them to shake off the yoke, both of the House of Austria,
The first League
and their own Nobility. Their first League was made between three Country
men, or Peasants, who within a short time after, grew much augmented, by the
aversion of the People, from the abovesaid Government. Let no man trust to his
own power, and maintain it by rigor; for enemies often come, from whence they
are least expected. They have, upon the one side, the States, of the Republic
of Venice, and the Duchy of Milan; and Burgundy, Alsatia, and the Dukedom of
Wirtemberg, on the other. They were long in peace, and rest, being protected by
their Hills, and their poverty; till Charles Duke of Burgundy, at length,
stirred them up, to his own confusion. For, having a desire to extend his
domination as far as Italy, he (notwithstanding all their humble supplications,
for peace, and liberty, and offers to serve him) brought a war upon them.
Irregular ambition prepares her self a fall. Charles of Burgundy beatea.
For, their humility being turned into despair, they fell to the use of arms,
which they had almost forgoten; and defeated his Army, without so much as
almost any fighting for it, and glutted themselves in fine, with the spoils,
both of the Burgundians, and Flemmings. Since which time, their Alliance has
been sought, by the Popes, Kings, and Princes of Europ; and especially by
France, Their alliance.
which by keeping her self fast with them, through a yearly pension, has drawn
no small advantages from them. Let us speak a word also, of their beginnings,
which are worthy consideration. They were heretofore, wont to receive their
Governors, from the Emperors, by whom Justice was administered, Their beginings
and their Privileges maintained: so that they lived in peace with the
Ecclesiastics; upon whom, by donation of the said Emperors, if not all, yet a
great part of them at least, depended.

In fine, they being a people of a strong nature, and lovers of Liberty (as all
such as dwell within the mountains are) found themselves contemned by the
Nobility (which, through delights, produced by great riches, was grown
insolent) and from contempt, drawn into servitude; and therefore, laying hold
of the opportunity, of the confusions of the Empire, they assaulted the said
Nobility, and expelled it by force of Arms, and so redeemed themselves from the
Yoke.

The Emperor Albert, having a great charge of Children, endeavored to join
also that, which immediately depended upon the Empire, to what he held there
already, as well by inheritance, as by donation, and purchase; but in vain:
wherereupon he turned his desires into threats; but still in vain: For his
Governors had used tyranny, The Governors Tyrants.
and brought this people to seek entyre Liberty, by way of revenge, of some
crimes committed, and some affronts done to some particular persons; the first
whereof was to him, who had always dissuaded them, from putting themselves
under the yoke, of the House of Austria: The second and principal, was for
having attempted the chastity of a woman, a vice, which caused the Kings to be
expelled from Rome; the Infidels, to enter into Spain, and whole nations, to go
out of Conquered Countries: The third was a most absurd, and ridiculous
Command; namely, to do reverence to the Hat of a Governor, which was at the
end of a perch, when they passed by it: And it happened once, that a certain
follow being brought before the Governor, for having slighted this order, he
commanded him to shoot a Apple from his childs head with an arrow, which he
performed, to the great amazement of all such as were present.

The first League of three men.
Now, in revenge of these, and the like cruel proceedings, a secret League was
made, amongst three Husbandmen; the number whereof being quickly increased,
they cunningly seized upon the Castles, of the said Governors, and drove them
out of their Country, in the year 1307. Within a short space after the Emperor
Albert was assassinated, and his children, being more busy about revenging his
death, then punishing the proceedings of the Switzers, left them long enough in
peace. In fine, Germany being divided, by the Election of two Emperors, Lewis
of Bavaria, and Frederick of Austria, they (chiefly out of the jealousy they
had of the said House, which they had offended) constantly adhered to the Party
of Lewis, notwithstanding he were excommunicated, and made no account at all,
of the Ecclesiastical Counsel, which followed Frederick.

Leopold beaten.
Leopold, son to Albert, being puffed up by some Conquests, and by a fair
Army, together with the motives of the expelled Lords; led his forces against
the Villages, but they were defeated in the Mountains, near Morgarte^. And
this victory of theirs, produced the perpetual Alliance of the three Villages,
which take their names from the woods; to which the rest have likewise adjoined
themselves since, for causes, which would be too long to recite: yea, and very
many Imperial Towns near them, have also leagued themselves with them; in
such sort, as that now they have no enemy at all to fear.

The physic too strong.
Now, it must be avowed, that the Physic wrought too much, and exceeded the
bounds of duty and justice. But ordinarily in Civil Wars, when subjects
exasperated against their Governors, grow to get the upper hand, they break
through all fear, and pass to another manner of Policy, as egged on, by the
ambition of some particular men. Hatred furnished Arms, fury gave victory, and
fear of chastisement, made them shake off the yoke of their Prince, whom they
accused of having violated their Privileges. Ambition is the moving cause, and
soul of tumults, Revolts, and Changes of State; and injuries done to
particular persons, are the pretexts.

The form of their Common wealth.
Their Republic is composed of three Classes, or Orders; the Villages to the
number of thirteen; the Associates, or Confederates; and the Towns, which
depend upon their direction. Now, these Cantons have diverse forms of
government: for that of the Villages, is Democratical: and that of the Towns,
Aristocratical. In such sort, as that this Whole, being contrived of Parts
entire, of variours humors, and conditions, may well be called a mixed
Commonwealth, which is kept in unity, by the only care she has of her own
preservation.

At their Assembly, which is made by a general Convocation, to treat of War,
Alliance, Peace, and other affairs of importance; the Ambassadors of every
Town are to meet: A form, much like that of the United Provinces, which took
Arms against their Governors, and framed their Commonwealth, by the advantage
of their situation, as well as they; the Sea, and the great Rivers being the
same to those, which the mountains are to these.

They serve their Allies, with much fidelity; but if their wages once fail,
they take their leave, from whence that Proverb so much quoted in France, No
money, no Switsers. They are accused of being clownish, and simple; but in
requital thereof, Their fidelity, and their virtue in ar^^s.
they are not stained with enormous vices (except only drinking) as some other
nations are. Above all, they detest cheatery; and their fidelity has been much
esteemed, in all times; their verue in Arms, very remarkable, as much
surpassing that of the rest of the Germans; the one appearing about their
Prince, and the other in the Field: however, at present (all being subject to
change) it does not much cutstrip that of other nations, and Francis the first,
made them know, by a huge rout in the Duchy of Milan, that they were not
invincible, as themselves also manifested at the Battle of Pavia, where they
could tell how to leave Play, when the Game did not please them.

Their Government (as we have already said) is in some parts Democratical; and
their Alliance, amongst themselves incorruptible, though it proceed rather from
a common necessity of their own preservation, then from perfect amity: the
Religion.
Their Religion, in some of the Cantons is only, and purely, Roman Catholic;
in other, Reformed: and in some again, mingled. This Age of ours, being the
most fatal, and most martial, that ever was, has not spared them; bloody
Mars having as well skip't over their Mountains, as through the Seas, the
Deserts, and vast Forests.

The same year that that fatal scourge-bringing Torch appeared, there happened
an accident to the Grisons, which sufficiently testified, that there is no
place secure from destruction.

The story of the year 1618.
For, upon the fourth of September, 1618. toward the evening, one of the
highest Mountains, fell down by means of an Earthquake, and overwhelmed a
Burgh, Pleura overthrown by a Mountain.
or little Town called Pleura, and crushed the Inhabitants in such manner, as
that neither their cries, nor groans could be heard; no not so much as any
trace, or sign at all, lest of the place.

A tumuh in the Valteline.
Two years after, the Inhabitants of Valteline, being very ill treated by the
Grisons, in the Exercise of their Religion, conspired against them, and by the
help of Rodolph Plant, killed a great multitude, and beat the rest out of the
Valley; and being succored by the Spaniards (for the advancement of their own
interest) made many Fortresses, for their own defense.

The Venetians jealous to see the Spaniards there.
But, the Venetians, jealous of their interest, and laying aside that of
Religion, were terrified by seeing the Gate of Italy shut up: and the King of
France also, advertised by them, of the common danger; declared his interest,
by an Ambassador, whom he sent to Madrid, the fruit of whose negotiation
produced a Promise of restitution, provided that the Roman Catholics were
entyrely assured of there Exercise. For, the Policy of the Spaniards, is, to tie
the interest of Religion to that of State, as many other Princes toward the
North, also do: and upon these grounds, cold, and disinteressed Catholics,
endeavor to make them pass for Hypocrites, and persuade all the world, that
under this Cloak, they will strip all Princes of their States.

Who are attacked by the Grisons.
The Grisons, loosing their patience, in the long expectation of the departure
of the Spaniards, fell upon them, and were shamefully repulsed. The Archduke
Leopold, and the Duke of Feria, hastened thither, who compelled the poor
Grisons to a peace, and thereby acknowledge, that themselves alone, were not
able to expel such Guests as these, who were so advantageously lodged.

Yet, this was not enough; for the Spaniards, though well entrenched, for they
could not remain there, without continual fear: and so the quarrel was renewed,
and Allyances made, to force them out: Upon which the Marquis de Cocurre entered
with some Troops, and rooted them out of their Holds.

On the other side, the Savoyers, joined with the French, under the conduct of
that famous Constable, de l' Edigniores; brought a war, into the State of
Genoa. took many Towns, and gave an Alarm to all Italy. But this fine
appearance, being stopped by a misfortune, made the Troops return, as being
destinated for a supply, against the Duke of Soubize, and obliged the King, by
the request of the Pope, to give peace to Italy, The Valteline in the hands; of
the Pope.
and sequester the Valteline into his hands; save only that both the Kings,
were to have their passage with their forces that way.

About the same time, there was discovered a Conspiracy against the King of
France, and the Duke of Vandosme his Brother, the great Priour, the Marshall d'
Ornano, and many others put in prison, where the two last ended their days,
without much noise: and the Count of Chulois, by the hands of a Common
Executioner. These accidens raised much hatred upon Cardinal Richelieu, and
produced many Pasquils against him. Envy and Harred, are ever companions to the
virtue of great Ministers; and their actions are never free from blame.

CHAP. XII. Mansfeldt hunts every where for relief, and sets an Army on foot.
The Marriage of the Prince of Wales, with a Daughter of France, after his
return out of Spain.
HAnnibal, was no sooner out of his infancy, then he vowed the ruin of the
Romans, and being revoked from Italy, after he had domineered there the space
of seventeen years, to save Carthage, he there ran his ship a ground, which
had been laden with so many victories, against the great Scipio. But now, what
did he, when all the strings of his Bow were broken? He made to his wits, for
new ones. He remembered his Oath, begged succor, animiated the Kings of the
East, against the insatiable ambition of the Romans, and continued his hatred,
even to the very last gasp of his breath.

Mansfeldt, and his Bishop seemed to have taken the like Oath, against the
House of Austria, and by consequence, for the continuance in action against it,
they must have new forces. Holland could furnish them with matter, convenience,
money, and hatred enough; England, with desire enough, to see Frederick again
in the Palatmate; and France, with jealousy enough, in regard of the growth of
the aforesaid House.

There wanted no bellows to kindle this fire; men's humors being already
disposed that way, by diversity of Religions, hatred, envy, self ends, and
Maxim of State; a Cover, which is never, either too long, or too short, and
stronger then even Justice it self.

But now, as these Captains had not so much trouble to persuade, as that Great
Affrican; so had they notwithstanding to do, with people of much better
understanding, then those Barbarians. They went into France, where Mensfeldt
received some affronts, from some particular persons, for ill treatments given
the French in Freezland. Mansfeldt demands succor in France.
However, he obtained his demand: namely, some Force; the Minister, who then
began to climb the Horizon of favor, being now no more mindful of the
services both asked by, and granted to the Imperialists, before Sedan, in case
of necessity, Maxims of State are more forcible then obligations, and
Ministers turn their Allyances that way, which their passions carry them.

Now, King James, though by the negotiations with Spain, he had disgusted many
of the Reformed Religion, showed himself nevertheless willing to have as good
intelligence with the Catholic States, as the King of France had, with the
Protestant, and so he sent Prince Charles his Son into Spain, to espouse the
Infanta Mary: but, after the loss of much time, he came back into England, and
demanded in France (through which he had passed disguised) the Kings Sister,
who was more easily granted him.

Men have labored, to penetrate into the Mystery of this Treaty; but all, by
conjecture only. The Roman Catholics of England, who began already to feel
some warmth of the business, were extremely afflicted, at the breach of the
aforesaid Match; and the misfortune which befell them, was a testimony of the
perpetual Cross, which was ordained for them, in the Britannick Islands: A
misfortune at London.
for, being met in a private Assembly at London, to hear mass, the Loft,
overburthened by the multitude, sunk down, and bruised near a hundred persons,
together with the Priest.

When the aforesaid Prince had married the Daughter of Henry the fourth, and
sister to Lewis the thirteenth, he, and his Father, undertook the care of
re-establishing his Brother-in-Law, in the Palatinate: In such sort, as that
Mansfeldt had no great difficulty to transport ten thousand English into
Holland, who almost all of them perished at Gerthrudenbergh, and served for
bait to the Fish.

The French Cavalry, consisting of three thousand, did likewise, no very long
service: for, the Generals marching toward the Rhein, and tormenting the
Archbishop, after their old fashion, their Army diminished much, by
disbandings; and themselves fell into a quarrel, which had almost brought them
to a Duel: though at last, they returned into Holland, and went from thence to
the North, to warm those people against the Emperor.

The Spaniards pass the Isel.
Upon the seventeenth of February, 1624. the Spaniards passed upon the Ice,
over the River Isel, and caused a terror, as fair as Holland. Whereup-the
Prince was constrained again to lay about him, and pass to Virick: and the
States, to command the Country People to break the Ice of the River of Vecht.

But Count Henry expected neither his enemies, nor the thaw, which would have
made him to be caught in a Pit-fall; but retired himself much faster then he
came, and many of his soldiers found their graves in the River of Welaw. His
design was, to fright the Peasants, and not to hurt the States.

CHAP. XIII. The Siege of Breda. The Enterprises upon Antwerp.
SPinola was every moment devising, now to wipe off by some notable enterprise,
the affront he had received before Berghen. He marched into the field, sent
Count Henry toward the Rheyn, who made a show of besieging Grave; and Count
John of Nassaw, with the Horse toward Breda; who, at his arrival, took a
great multitude of Boats, laden with Provisions. Himself followed with the
Foot: and in his Council of War, there was found no more then one Colonel,
who thought fit to begin the siege; The siege of Breda.
and that upon the same reasons, whereby Spinola himself was moved to it.

On the other side, the Prince of Orange, glad to see his Rival engaged,
before a place so well provided of all necessaries, as also of a strong
Garrison, did not so soon dispose himself to succor it, but gave the Spaniards
leisure to entrench themselves, and they him to repent himself of it.

But he hoped, by the success of his design upon Antwerp, long before
premeditated in his thoughts, and held by him infallible; The enterprise upon
the Castle or Cittadell of Antwerp.
to unnestle them from thence, and cast their state into an irremediable
confusion.

He was well informed, that there were but very few Soldiers in the Cittadell,
and they, for the most part, dismembered, and cripled. Wherefore, he sent some
Troops, which made a show of coming from the Camp before Breda, as carrying the
same Motto's and Colors, which Spinola carried; they arrived undiscovered, to
the very Mote, applied their Ladders; and set all their rare Engynes on work,
to render themselves Masters of the Place; whereof they could not have failed,
had not their own hearts failed them first. For one Who goes there of the
Sentinel, followed by the discharge of a Musket, made theirs fall our of their
hands, and left them no more courage then only to fly.

It was thought, that he had a mind to bestow the honor of this expeditiupon
the Hollanders, whom he only employed in it; and that if he had mingled any of
the other nations with them, the business would have issued to his contentment.

This news struck the Marquis almost into a fever; and sent the Prince laden
with Melancholy, to the Hage, where toward the end of the winter, he died,
leaving his Army to his brother Henry Frederick, and Spinola before Breda; who,
seeing no means to take it by force, resolved to famish it.

A former enterprise upon the same Cittadell.
The aforesaid Prince, had had a former enterprise, upon the said Cittadell,
and held himself so sure of it, that he told the Burgomasters of Dort, at his
departure, that none but God could hinder it: And indeed, he was no sooner
embarked, but there arose so violent, and so extremely cold a tempest, that it
put both his life and his Fleet in danger; and so he was forced to return.

God has put limits to Victories, which cannot be passed by humane wisdom.

Spinola, having sufficiently learnt, how needful it was to be vigilant, with
an enemy who slept not; reinforced the Garrison of the aforesaid Cittadell;
kept himself fast in his trenches before Breda, expecting the consumpsion of
the Provisions of the Town; and made magazin for the Winter; and being
advertised besides, that the Enemy was assembling some forces, and that four
Kings had interested themselves in this Siege: He sent for some Regiments, from
the Emperor.

Uladislaus, Prince of Poland before Breda.
Prince Vladislaus, since King of Poland, came to see this famous siege, and
was received by the whole Army, with such military honors, as were due to the
Son of a King, and a very great Captain.

The King of Spain having foreseen this tempest, which was contrived against
his Low Countries, and being unwilling, to hazard the whole, for one piece
thereof; wrote to his Aunt, that it was better to leave the siege, then
obstinately to persist, in the impossibility of taking the Town, with the
loss of all her States.

This savoured well with the Emulators of the said Marquis, as Don Lewis de
Velasco, etc.

A Magazin burnt.
There happened also another misfortune, which was, that the Hollander, fired a
Magazin, which would have staggered any other General, but such a one as he;
who quickly requited this loss, and by his vigilancie, repulsed the English,
who with a most martial courage, went to attack a Quarter of his Camp.

Breda copitulates.
In fine, after a Siege of ten months, Breda was yielded; and it happened the
very same day that the Kings Letters arrived, with his absolute command, to
draw off the Army.

We left the King of Poland, with his Nobility, marching against the great
Turk; and therefore let us now look what the Swedes, in the mean while, are
doing. Gustavus laid hold of that occasion; passed an army into Livonia; and
after the siege of five weeks, to the great trouble of the Citizens, took Riga.

The Swedes take Riga.
The Polanders hereupon, made loud complaints of him, for beginning the War,
just when they were busied, against the Common Enemy: and for breaking the
Truce; in the articles whereof it was comprised, that the one of the Kings
should not enter into the Lands of the other, without having denounced the War,
three months before.

To which, the Swedes made answer, that they had sent their Ambassadors; And
m^^k at the complaints of the Foles
and that they were not able to dispatch their Commissions any sooner, being
hindered by winds, and tempests; which were to be accused, and not they: a
trick of War, which must be made pass for good, according to the Maxims of
this Age.

In short, this occasion was favorable to the Swedes, who cared as much for
their reasons, as Monsieur de Montmorancy did, for those of the Magistrates of
Metz, when he was gotten into possession of their Town. This War was finished
by a Truce, whereby the Swedes were obleiged to return by Sea, after they had
well fortifyed Riga, with intention never to restore it again.

Now, the Electour Palatine, after being spoiled of his States, was deprived
also of his Dignities, and his Electorat transferred upon the Duke of Bavaria,
his Cousin, 1623. which much augmented hatred, against the Emperor, Duke
Maximilian, and all the Catholics; and caused, in fine, many new Allyances to
be made, which put spurts to the War we are going to discribe, in this next
Book.

The Electour Palatin spoiled of his States, and banished.
This Prince was crowned King of Bohemia, the fourteenth of November. 1619. in
the month of January following, he made his Allyances; and in the same year
also, he lost his Kingdom, and his States, was proscribed by the Emperors
Edict, and his Coronation declared Null. He who grasps much, holds little; and
it often falls out, that whilst we are in pursuit of other men's good, we lose
our own.

THE HISTORY OF THIS IRON AGE.
THE FOURTH BOOK.
CHAP. I
The War of Denmark. The Allyances of the Kings of France, England, Denmark,
and the States of Holland against the Emperor.

GEneral Mansfeldts arguments, had as much efficacy in the North, as they had
toward the South; because the dangers, which seemed to threaten that Country,
were grown greater, and besides, a Prince which becomes potent, makes himself
both feared, and hated. Tilly wintered in Hassia, in despite of the Landgrave
Maurice, nor were the States of Low-Saxony a little troubled, to see the
Imperial Eagles fluttering up and down upon their fronteers; and that not
without giving them great incovenience; besides, that they feared, lest they
should peradventure come to replant their old authority there.

The King of Denmark, together with many other Princes, and States thereabouts,
were moved to much impatience, by the ruin of Frederick; as apprehending, lest
these Guests should come, and take up their lodging amongst them. Wherefore
being advertised by common danger, and by that, which themselves, perhaps,
would have done, if they had had the same power, and right which the Emperor
had, they made a League for the defense of the Circle of the Lower Saxony, into
which entered the Kings of England, France, and Sweden; together with the States
General, and the King of Denmark himself was the Head, A League against the Em
perour.
as being General of the said Circle. The Dukes of Brunswick, Mekelenburgh, and
Holstein; the Administratour of Magdeburgh, and the Bishop of Bremen,
subscribed also to it.

The Emperors forces, in the mean while, grew strong, and Tilly began to
smell, that under the mask of amity, there were some new designs a brewing;
however they protested, that they were doing nothing against the Emperor. But
he answered, that the Ambassadors of the States of Holland, were not there,
Tilly in Hastis.
to thread pearls; and that he was sure, that nothing was treated to his
Masters advantage, where they had any credit; and consequently, for a greater
testimony of his diffidence, he sent for Wall^stain, with an Army, to come and
succor him. Causes lie hidden, under pretexts drawn from necessity, and
justice, but they are easily discovered, by people of the same profession.

Many Prodigies preceded the fatal wars; as Armies fighting in the Air,
raining of Blood, great Tempests; bearing down Trees, Houses, and Dammes.

But that, which was by all interpreted for an ill Augure, or Token, was, that
the King going one evening to walk upon the Rampars, The Prodigies.
or Walls of the Town of Hamelen, to visit the Sentinels, his horse stumbled at
a plank, and threw him into the Mote or Ditch, out of which he was drawn two
hours after, and conceived to be dead, for more then three days together.

In the mean while, they who laid most to heart, the love of their Country, and
Rest, employed all diligence, to find a means to reconcile this Difference,
thereby to divert the misfortune, wherein all Lower Saxony was likely to be
involved. To which effect, a Treaty of Peace was held at Brunswick, and it was
already agreed, that the Armies should be licensiated, They treat of peace in
vain.
by Regiments; to wit, that the King should casheer the first, Tilly the next,
and so consecutively by turns, to the end. But this Treaty was broken off by
ambition, and so, such advantages as could not be reaped thereby, were sought
by way of Arms. The Gamester is more willing to hazard another man's money, then
his own.

I will note only the principal actions of the war, and content my self with
saying, that it is very probable, that the Emperor had a design, to make his
Authority, and Religion flourish afresh, in those Countries, where there was no
more left, then a faint, and languishing knowledge thereof; and, The ayne of
the League.
that mingled with coldness, contempt, and hatred. But as for the contrary
Party, they endeavored, not only to repel the aforesaid Guest, but also by
virtue of the Alliance, to restore the Prince to his States, by force of Arms,
since it could not be done by intercessions; and so, in fine, deliver all the
Princes, from the jealousy which was given them by this House, puffed up with
so many victories.

The King retired with his Army, as far as the Bishopprick of Werden, and
thereby gave the Imperialists opportunity to seize upon many places: But
Fortune varied at Niemburgh, from which Town, after the loss of a very great
number of their men, they were constrained to retreat, though yet the said
loss, were repaired shortly after, by the taking of Calembergh, and the
defeating of some companies of Dragoons.

Tilly follows the River of Weser, and Wallenstein, that of the Elbe.
Wallenstein followed the River of Elbe, and Tilly, that of Weser, who having
occupated the Bishopprick of Hall, entered the Duchy of Anholt, and fortified
the Bridge of Dassaw. Mansfeldt attacked this Fort, and being repulsed, joined
with the Administratour of Hall, to besiege that Town. Wallenstein hastened
thither; so they fell to work: and the Fight, as well through the valor of the
soldiers, as the experience of the Generals, was long time dubious enough, but
at last, the Horse giving ground, the Foot found themselves reduced to the
necessity of doing the same; and such as could not save themselves by flight,
were either killed, or taken,

Mansfeldt beaten near the bridge of Dassaw.
In this memorable Battle at the Bridge of Dassaw, all Mansfeldts glory was
buried; howsoever he lost not his courage by so furious an overthrow, but
having gotten on foot, a fresh Army of sixteen thousand men, (for Germany, and
the Septemtrion were yet full of brave Soldiers) he drew toward Silesia, took
in some places, passed thence into Transylvania, where he gave up his Army to
the Duke of Wimar; and accompanied by some of his principal Officers, put
himself in the way toward Venice; but a Dysentery, or Bloody Flux, or rather
(according to the opinion of some) a Potion, stopped the course of his journey,
His death.
designs, and life, altogether; and delivered the Emperor from a troublesome
Enemy: and the Duke of Wimar also a short space after, followed him, not to
Venice, but to the other world. Thus ended the life, of this famous General,
who had been fortunate enough in raising Armies, but not in fighting Battles.

Wallenstine, having stifled the War of Transylvania, marched back into
Silesia, dissipated Wimars Troops, and retook the occupated places: And Baudis,
and Holck, being sent to join with the said Duke, were cut off by Merode, and
Beckman: So that Wallenstein, having put an end to all their disorders,
returned toward Brunswick.

Tilly being intent upon the occasions of hurting his enemies, went, and
unexpectedly attacked a Quarter commanded by that Valiant Soldier Obertrawt;
who, together with one of the Dukes of Anholt, and some hundreds of Soldiers,
Obertrawt killed.
was slain in this encounter; and when Tilly went to visit, and comfort him,
he answered him, Monsieur de Tilly, in such waters, are taken such fish.

Now the King finding himself in great danger, by the loss of Mansfeldt, and
the Bishop of Halberstadt, (who died at the same time, at Wolfenbottel, after
he had vomited up a Worm of about four else long) did not yet lose his courage.
The death of the Bishop of Halbersiadt.
Nature shows her strength in despair, and Virtue hers, in extremity. He saw
two Armies upon his skirts, to be opposed by him, and therefore he resolved to
attack the one of them, being more inflamed to vengeance, by the loss of
Munden, which he slighted, and the furious blow, which was given his Cavalrie,
by Count Furstembergh. But, he was a little too tardy, in going to drive Tilly
from the siege of Gothing: Besides that he stayed at Luther, against the advice
of his Lieutenant General Fucks: and Tilly, thereby to make himself as
glorious as Wallenstein, desired nothing more earnestly, then to slight.

I fine, the Battle was given with so much obstinacy, that the old Bands,
which had been accustomed to vanquish, Battle of Luther the twenty seventh of
August, 1626.
began almost to stagger toward flight; but their time was not yet come, and
the puissant Gemus of their General, had a great advantage upon that of the
King; who perceiving his Horse fly, and not being able, either by his presence,
or exhortations, to detain them: was compelled to abandon his Foot, to the
mercy of the Enemy, and retire himself as fast as he could gallop, to
Wolfenbottel. This was a great and bloody Fight, and the Imperialists remained
entirely victorious in it.

The Victory of the Imperialists and the death of General Fucks
Brave General Fucks, who had dissuaded the Battle, lost his life in this
occasion, and gave the King sufficient testimony, that it was not through
baseness of heart or cowardice, but upon strong arguments, that he desired him
not to precipitate. Many other Officers were also slain, together with above
six thousand Soldiers: Thirty Pieces of Canon, three thousand Prisoners,
fourscore and ten Colors, adorned the Conquerours Chariot; and all the booty
was given to the Soldiers, in recompense of their Valor.

This was that famous Battle of Luther, which happened upon the 27th. of
August, whereby the Emperors authority, and the joy of his Allies was much
augmented, and their Enemies fear redoubled: and after this there followed a
continual thread of Victories, and taking of Towns, even to the very seaside.
Favor flatters Fortune, and when there is no more means lest, to make open
resistance against the storm, the sails must be taken in, or the Vessel
steered for safety, to the shelter of some Wood, or Rock.

The Duke of Brunswick quitts the League.
The Duke of Brunswick followed this Maxim, by making his Peace, and
renouncing the League with Saxony. Tilly lost no time, seized upon Rotemburgh,
and many other places; whilst the King recollected the fragments of his Army,
and put it in Equipage, during the Winter, but to no purpose, For this vessel
was too much tottered, to do any more service at all.

In conclusion, Tilly having taken Nontheen, drew near the River of Elbe, which
was also to be conquered, after the conquest of so many enemies. But, we leave
France too long in Peace, which yet was not all this while quiet.

CHAP. II
The prosecution of the second War against the Hughenots. The Peace made, by
the undertaking of the King of England, the Venetians, and the Hollanders.
War between France, and England, and why? The beginning of the third, and
last War against the Hughenots. Cardinal Richelieu makes himself known,
admired, and feared. The siege, and reduction of Rochell.

The Duke of Soubize takes some ships.
WE have already showed, how the Peace was made in Italy, as well upon the
request of the Pope, as to put a remedy, to the inopinated Invasion of the Duke
of Soubize; who against all expectation, and in full peace, launched with a
Fleet from Rochell, came before the Port of Blavet, and seized upon some ships,
which he found there. But, the Duke of Vandosme, who was Governor of the
Province, transported himself thither, with so much promptitude, that he
hindered the aforesaid Duke from making any farther progress, and forced him to
retire, with two or three great Vessels, and some of a middle burden. In such
sort, as that by this invasion, The peace is broken.
the Peace, which was made in the year 1622, before Montpellier, was broken, in
that of 1625, and the Duke of Rohan his brother, recommenced the War in
earnest, both in High, and Low Languedock, under pretext that the Treaty of
Peace had been ill observed.

The King sends an Ambassador to the Hague.
This surprise so much displeased the King, that he forth with sent all those
Troops which were destinated for Italy, toward Brittany, and an Ambassador to
the Hague, to summon the States, to his assistance, with twenty ships,
according to the tenor of the Alliance made betwixt them. But, the Ambassador
found some repugnance in the College of the said States, in respect of
Religion; though yet, when he had remonstrated to them, that the business was
only to humble the Kings subjects to their obedience, and threatened them also
with a breach, in case of refusal, they granted his demand. My Master (says
he) is of the same Faith with the King of Spain, and yet, he makes no
difficulty to assist you against him. And will you in a War of State,
express an inconsiderable zeal of Religion?

He obtaines twenty ships. Soubize being beaten retyres into England
Hereupon, the States dispatched Admiral Hantain, who being joined with the
Kings Navy, carried himself like a Mediator of a Reconcilliation, and
obtained a Truce of three days, which yet, was ill enough kept by Soubize, who
hoped to draw some advantage from it, but his Fleet was defeated, and he forced
to retire into England, with six or seven vessels, and so the French took the
Island of St. Martin, and built two Forts there.

The King, upon the intercession of the States, pardoned them of Rochell, but
the Zelanders did not pardon Admiral Hautain, who had for his recompense his
house demolished, by the people, which were mad at the loss of the said Place.
But these were ruled by the passion of Religion; and those, by that of the
preservation of the State. The reason why Monsieur de Soubize, brake the Peace,
was, because the King had differred the demolishment of Fort Lewis, raised near
Rochell, which served for a bridle to the Town, and a Prospective to the
Townsmen. But the Governor indeed, refused to do it, upon some informations
which he had received from the Town of some sinister designs.

In fine, the Fort still remained entyre, for all this, and was to prove fatal
to the Party, illustrate the Kings Majesty throughout all France, and cut off
the root of all Religion: It was believed, that the Duke of Rohan, had begged
succor from the King of Spain, in this discord of the Reformates, and his
own, and his brothers disaster; but being pressed by the King of England, the
Venetians, the Hollanders, and the Savoyers, he expected not the return of his
Ambassador, The Peace is made by an alliance against the Emperor.
and so upon the instance of the aforesaid King and States, who could not
endure the ingrandishment of the Imperial Majesty in Germany, the Peace was
renewed, the same year thas it was broken, and the League was knit up in
Denmark (as we have lately said) in the year 1625. But before that war, which
was fatal to the Danes, was finished, began the disorders, which thrust
themselves in, between the French and English: the reason whereof, as also of
the third war, which consummated the ruin of the Reformed Party, you shall
forthwith understand.

King James a peaceful Prince
King James, jealous of his Royal authority, and more prone to study then
fight, could never be induced, to assist the Hughenots in France. But after his
decease, King Charles his son, by the reasons of Monsieur de Soubize, and his
Favorite, the Duke of Buckingham, suffered himself to be persuaded to it;
manifesting thereby, in imitation of his Brother in Law, that that Friendship,
which grew from the alliance of marriage, was weaker, then that of interest.

There wanted no pretexts, as well of Religion, as otherwise; and the English
being already pricked against the French, and these against them, for the bad
treatment of the Priests, and Officers of the Queen, they were easily brought
to break, as well by the arguments of Soubize, as of the whole Body together:
The English enter the Isle of Ray 1627.
and so the English Fleet, made a descent, or disembarkment in the Isle of Ray,
in the month of July, of the year 1627, and besieged the Fort of St. Martin,
which was not yet quite finished.

This War, which in outward appearance, had no other scope at all, then that
of Religion, with many other petty punctilios, which merited not so much as an
ill look from either to the other, proved fatal to the English, and glorious
to the French, Are beaten off with shame.
by the entrance which they made into the Island, and the chase they gave
their Enemies, from thence: but yet more glorious to Monsieur de Toir as, who
defended the Fort near four months, both against them and famine; and most
glorious, to the Marshal of Schoenbergh, who put in the succor, and forced
them, after they were lustily beaten, to retire to their ships. So that, upon
the matter, the English went away with the shame, and the Rochelers stayed,
with the loss. And this war, helped to forward the King of Denmarks ruin,
in regard that these Kings gave him not the assistance they had promised him,
by the Contract, and so he struck a ground.

Rochell.
The Confederated States, after the reduction of Rochel, were saine to hear, as
well the reproaches, and calumnies of the whole Body of the Hughenots of
France, as the taunts, and raylings of the English, Where blind Passion rules,
there is no room for Reason. For it was not their fault, that this difference
was not decided by some other means, then that of arms. But let us now note
the success of this siege.

Rochell, is a Town situated in the Country of Asins, which is grown to have
great traffic, and riches, through the convenienie of the Haven, The growth of
the Town.
and by consequence insolent, against the Kings authority.

The Inhabitants mutined, under Francis the first, but as soon as they saw him
in Arms, and that he would be obeyed, their audacity quickly turned into
humility.

After they embraced the Reformed Religion, they became by little and little,
so powerful, and so considerable, that the Kings through that the necessity of
their affairs, were often obliged, to make a show, not to see, or connive at
that, which was not invisible to any. When we cannot correct Vice, we must seem
to be ignorant of it.

For, having the principal Key of the Kingdom, they made themselves chief of
the Party, and all such as for any coffeehouse, absented themselves from
Court, and bent themselves against the King, and his Authority, could never
fail to be welcome unto Rochell.

It is besieged by Henry the 3.
They were once besieged by Monsieur, who was afterward Henry the Third: but,
upon request of the Ambassadors of Poland, the siege was drawn off, just at
the time when they were in hazard of being tamed.

But, since that, their strength, together with their Intelligence, both
within, and without the Kingdom is so much augmented; they have relied upon
their fortifications, and have subtracted themselves from the yoke, nor more
nor less, then the Imperial Towns have done, from that of the Emperor.

Cardinal Rechelieu, having gotten full possession of the Kings favor, for
having dissipated some tumults, and found out the Mine (whereof the Count of
Chalais paid the whole score, as a Complice, for all the rest) had no more left
to do, then to acquire also that of the Clergy, and People, by some remarkable
service to the State, whereof he could not fail, by the reduction of Rochell.

And then by Lewis the 13. in the year, 1627.
Now, the King being informed, of the descent of the English in the Isle of
Ray, commanded his Troops to march, and as soon as he was recovered of a
dangegous sickness, which he had at that time, he made them also entrench, and
advance all the ships of France, to stop the Haven, even the Spaniards
themselves, coming to take possession of the place, which the Hollanders had
left, under a specious pretext of mending their Vessels.

The Damme being perfected, and the ships sunk, in the deepest, and hollowest
place of the Channel, the besieged were reduced to a famine, which exceeded
that of Jerusalem.

All their hope was in the English; and Buckingham made all the haste he could
to succor them, who had furnished him with victuals for his Army, and now
with most instant, and urgent supplications, begged some back again from him:
but he being assassinated by a certain Englishman, Buckingham killed by Felton.
called Felton, who went expressly out of Holland, to sacrifice him to the
hatred of the People, the Fleet was retarded.

This murderer committed this fact, by the mere, and only impulse of zeal, to
the Religion, and so, by thinking to forward the business, he hindered it.

We very often aspire, to that which is against us, and reject that which is
for us.

This Duke of Buckingham, had entirely disposed of King James, and was no less
in the favor of the King his Son: though neither his good countenance, nor
his graceful carriage, nor his liberality, nor his courtesy, was ever able to
win the People, who held him still, for the Author of all imaginable
mischief to the Kingdom.

The Reason of State, whereby Princes maintain.
Now, the King of England being in some misunderstanding with his Brother in
Law, the King of France, sent the Lord Montalgue, to the Dukes of Lorraine and
Savoy, to animate them to a powerful diversion, thereby to withdraw him from
this siege.

What cannot reason of State work upon Princes, who ought to have a care to
preserve their interests, by all rational means?

By this same reason, have the Kings of France maintained the Hollanders and
the Protestants. By this, might it seem lawful to these two Princes, to pass
by the consideration of Religion: By this do the Swissers, and the Venetians.
uphold themselves. And the two aforesaid, knew well enough, that the French
having fastened this pin, would not, fail to trouble their Neighbors, upon
the very first occasion, since there wanted no pretext; besides that
persuasion, whereby some flatterers will needs make them believe, that all
Europe belongs to them.

The Cardinal, to whom all these plots, and practices were not unknown, as
having his Pensioners in England, as well as elsewhere, provided himself for
them.

The Aequinoctiall brought the Fleet, which was to break the Damm, and put some
food into the famished Town. The Damm.


The Nobility posted thither, to serve their King, and purchase glory. All was
hemmed in with Artillery and Soldiers: and the passage so stopped, as well by
the said Damm, and variety of Engines, as also by the Vessels; that the English
not seeing any means to penetrate, retired.

The Rochelers, of whom there was not above the tenth part left (so much were
they wasted with hunger) rendered themselves into the hands of their King,
Rochell being starved yields.
who took them into his mercy, and granted them the free exercise of their
Religion: but he discharged his just choler, upon the Bastions, and Works,
which he caused to be thrown down.

Never had the Hughenots a more sensible loss then this, nor ever had the
Catholics a more grateful Victory. Nor was the Cardinal without his share
thereof; the French every where singing his praises, raising him to Heaven;
making him their Angel Guardian, and even a God upon earth.

But, this love was quickly changed, and this second Tiberius made them feel,
that he was a Fox, and governed himself merely by the Maxims of Machiavell.

CHAP. III. The prosecution of the War of Denmark, unfortunate to the Danes.
Wallenstein in vain besieges Stralsund. The Peace made.
Tilly passes the Elbe.
SInce we have left Tilly near the Elbe, let us march on with him, and see what
resistance he finds. The terror was so universal, that every body fled: yea,
the soldiers themselves forsook their Canon, Forts, Arms, and Baggage, at the
very name of this great General. Only the Marquis of Dourlac presumed to face
about; but the Count of Slick quickly made him turn his back, and stick to his
heels. The number of the Gunnes, and Colors, much illustrated this victory.
There were no more left, Dourlac, Calembergh, and Nell are beaten.
then the Generals Calembergh and Nell, who being found entrenched, were
invested by the said Slick, and having no hope at all of succor, yielded
themselves to him. Three thousand horse, and two Regiments of Foot took part
with the Conquerors. But, the Generals having gotten possession of Holstein,
and Iutland, there remained yet some Towns to be subdued; so that it was
necessary to divide the forces, to accomplish the work, Papenheim was before
Wolfenbottel, which after it been long blocked up, opened him the Gates.

Nerbrot defeated by Anholt.
There chanced yer another misfortune in the Country of Bremen, which drove
the Allies quite out of the Field: and it was, that General Nerbrot was
attacked, and without scarce having fought for it, utterly routed by Anholt; so
great power had fear, upon such as were staggered by the puissant Genius of
victorious Tilly; and the soldiers being deserted by their General, forgot
their duty, and embraced that party, to which Fortune most inclined. What
strange felicity had this man? yea, even higher then that of Julius Caesar
himself, since he could more clearly and truly say, I came, I saw, and I
overcame.

Towns besieged by the Imperialists.
The Armies finding now no more Armies to combat, were employed about the
taking of Towns; by the resistance whereof, many soldiers, and much time was
lost; and leisure given the King, to fortify himself in the Isles of Funds, and
Zeland. Stade, after a huge opposition, yielded to Tilly; and Newburgh to the
Duke of Brunswick. The Imperialists attempted several times to pass to the
Islands, but were repulsed with loss. God had put bounds to their victories,
and would not suffer this generous Prince to be quite dispoyled of his kingdom.

The Conquerors in Meckelenburgh.
The Dukes of Meckelenburgh took part with the King; for Fate, it seems, would
needs involve them in the same disasters: But, at the arrival of the Imperial
Troops, all gave way, all stooped; the Towns opened their Gates, to receive
Garrisons, and their purses, to sweeten the insolences of the victorious
soldiers. A hard condition, for that poor people, who had so long enjoyed the
sweet fruits of Peace! But who can resist against the cruel lot of Destiny?

Having recovered some ships, they tried for the last time, to pass, and
re-invest the poor King; but were soundly cudgelled, and compelled to make
toward Pomerama, which was already conquered, except Stralsund, and Steene:
the former whereof being a Maritime Town, was besieged by Arnhem, upon the
command of his General. And here it was, that Fortune made the Imperialists
confess, that if they could domineer by land; Wallenstein besieges Stralsund
in vain.
their enemies could do as much, upon the water, For Wallenstein thought to
terrify the besieged, by frequent Assaults; but not being able to hinder the
entrance of the ships, he lost an infinity of good soldiers, his own labor,
and some part also of his glory. There was a rumor scattered, as if he had
vanted, that he would take Stralsund, The King ha^cen again.
even though it were hung in the air, and tied with Iron chains.

The King regained courage, and footing in Pomerania, but found still, that
Fortune was yet but his Stepmother; as suffering him again to be benten near
Wolgast; so that he could do no more, then reinforce the besieged, who were
ready to yield, and retire himself into Denmark.

Canipo was forced by famine; and there it was, that the French, who came to
succor the King, manifested their valor. Gelucstat, a strong place upon the
River below Hamburgh, was long time beleaguered in vain by Tilly, who lost both
his time, and his labor, about that; as Wallenstein did his, before Stralsund.

In fine, a Peace was treated; and a War finished in five months, which had
lasted five years. Peace made. 1629.
The King abandoned by almost all his Allies, (who had work enough at home)
with a Royal and indemptable heart, employed all his abilities, and industry,
not only to defend his Islands, but also to expel his enemies out of Holstein.
But the peace concluded at Lubec, put a period to all his troubles; dislodged
the Imperialists (since they had lost the hope of conquering the whole Kingdom)
out of his Territories; and freed all the North, from the danger whereby it was
threatened, of a change, both in Church, and State.

By this Peace (which a certain French Writer terms shameful for the
Conquerours, as being with intention to dispossess a Catholic Prince of his
lawful succession) the King renounced the Provinces of Saxony, and so the
amity between the two Princes was renewed. The Emperor writing to the King,
told him formally, that their quarrel proceeded from nothing, but the craft and
practices of some certain Merchants.

The States General, being fearful, left by so many losses heaped together,
and the felicity which accompanied this valorous Count, the Imperialists should
gain Zeland, The Hollanders will defend the Sound.
and make themselves Masters of that famous Straight, which is of so much
consequence; offered to defend it with their ships. But the most desired news
of the Peace, and Retreat, stifled all these apprehensions. Whatsoever was
past, was sunk into the gulf of oblivion; all settled, is it had been, before
the War; and the Emperor gave sufficient testimony, that he knew as well how
to restore, and pardon, as to vanquish; and that he had taken arms, to defend
the Majesty of the Empire, and his own Authority; not to strip the King of his
kingdoms.

This Peace was received by all the Subjects of the King, as a special grace
sent them from God: but that, which was deplorable in it, was, that he was
forced to abandon the cause of his Cousins, the Dukes of Meckelenbergh; who,
for having embraced his, and followed his Party (or rather, for having
conjoined their arms with all the members of the Circle) were proclaimed
Out-lawes, The Dukes of Meckel^nbergh excluded from Peace. Their Duchy given
to Wallenstein.
and their Duchy engaged to Wallenstein, who was afterward put in possession
thereof as true Duke, by the Emperor. This proceeding, as being very rigorous
against Princes, of so ancient, and so illustrious a Family, and totally
contrary to Ferdinands clemency, made the House of Austria suspected, not only
of intending to establish her Authority in the North, but of making also the
very Empire it self Hereditary, and to go yet farther too, if occasion were
offered. And this, upon the matter, was partly the cause of the Swedish war,
as we shall shortly demonstrate. But let us go into Austria, where we shall
find very fine housekeeping.

CHAP. IV
The War of the Peasants in Austria.

VVHilest all the North trembled at the Imperial Eagles, and that nothing but
the salt air of the Ocean was able to stop, either their flight, or their
victories: behold a little spark in Austria, both contemptible, and contemned,
raised within a few months, such an embarasment, as frighted that invincible
Monarch, at the same time that all the Princes began (with good reason) to
apprehend him, through the constant felicity of his Generals. These disorders
were caused by diversity of Religion, and the Politicians, together with such
as aspired to change, moved them on to that point, which we are now going to
describe.

The cause of the Revolt of the Peasants.
Ferdinand, being a very zealous Prince, thought it his duty to draw, either by
fair means or foul, all his Subjects to the Roman Catholic Religion; and his
Council alleged, that his Authority would still be wavering, as long as there
should be any Heretics in his States. And so it was facil to persuade him, to
a thing which he conceived to depend upon his conscience. Whereupon he
commanded all his Subjects, either forthwith to embrace the Catholic Religion,
or depart out of Austria, within a certain term prescribed them. A bold
resolution, and found strange opposition. He declared in his Letters Pattents,
that Heresy, under the pretext of Liberty of Conscience, and Privileges,
hatched nothing in her bosom, but Revolts, Sedition, and Devices to shake off
the yoke of Sovereigns, and lawful Magistrates. Princes look upon the interest
of State, and the People, that of Religion; which once lost, farewell all
respect with it. The Peasants must therefore be stirred up, to try if luck
would turn, and whether Fortune would be always fixed with a Diamant-Nayle.
Complaints were rejected; Count Hebersdorf, the inexorable executor of this
importunate and unseasonable Command, was first chased away with stones, and
afterward fury affoarded other weapons. For the said Peasants, to the number
of ten thousand, cut off his forces, seized upon many Castles, and small
Places; and being at lenth, reinforced by forty thousand men, and forty Pieces
of Ordnance, pillaged all Austria, sparing neither Priest, Monk, nor Gentleman.
The Clergy has ever served as Fee, or prey to the seditious.

The Emperor wrote to them; but they, endeavoring to obtain by force, what
was denied to their supplication, disdained to answer him. Upon which, he
dispatched other Ambassadors, to endeavor to reduce them gently, to their
duty; but they retained them, and sent some from themselves to Vienna, to
demand free exercise of their Religion: dismission of the soldiers, and a
general pardon for what was past: All which they had obtained, had not their
prosperity, by the defeat of some of the Duke of Bavaria's Troops, made them
undertake more. If any grow blind by happiness, it is chiefly the abject sort
of the vulgar, which waxes temerarily bold, when it thinks it self feared. But
the Town of Lintz, which they besieged, cowed their courage, and speeded the
punishment, which they had deserved, by their rash Rebellion. They assaulted it
often, but were still repulsed, with huge loss: so that Papenheim, who was
appointed to chastise them, effected it not with so great facility, as Trucses,
and some other Generals had done, that of the like seditious Rabble, above a
hundred years before. For he was fain to combat them at least seven times,
before he could vanquish them; so cheerfully and stoutly would they rally, and
defy their victorious enemies, even in the fight. The Romans found themselves
once in great trouble by the revolt of their slaves, and yet they more easily
quenched that fire, though it were even within the Walls of Rome; then the
Imperialists were able to do this, because here was more combustible matter.
But under what Heads or Leaders, Their Generals, a Scholar, a Shoemaker, and a
Smith.
did this desperate Crew fight? A Scholar, a Shoemaker, and a Smith. With what
weapons? Sticks, Stoones, Whips, Forks, and Muskets. And what more? Potion, and
Enchantments. To what end? If we must judge Effects by their Causes, it was for
the exercise of Religion, and to beat out their Sovereign Magistrate. Who were
those Aeoluses, who letting loose the winds, disturbed the Calm, and raised
their storms? It is more easy to conjecture, and believe, then to prove.

They are at last defeated in many Encounters, by Papenheim.
After the last defeat, the most mutinous of them ran away; and the rest pent
up at home, like slocks of sheep.

Thus ended this dangerous war; which teaches us, how perilous a a thing it
is, to endeavor to command men's consciences. We must contend with the word of
God, and not with the sword; or, to say better, we must pray with charity for
one another, and not persecute our selves with arms, unless we be commanded by
Politic necessity. The holy Scripture says; Let the rares grow, fear lest you
root out the good corn. Papenheim acquired no less glory, nor merited less
to Triumph, then the two other Generals. And thus was the Emperor delivered
from a most apparent danger, by the remoteness of his Armies. Let us now make
a leap to the Low Countries, and see what passed there, at the beginning of the
year 1625.

CHAP. V
The death of Prince Maurice, and of the King of England. The Siege of Groll.
The State of Lorraine. The Jubily at Rome. Bethleeem makes war upon the
Emperor, and obtains peace.

The death of Maurice 1625.
PRince Maurice being returned to the Hague, expressed no more then a certain
pensiveness, and melancholy, proceeding from age, and (as it was believed) from
the error committed, in that memorable Enterprise upon Antwerp; which grew to
augment his fever, and brought him at length to his grave. His reputation is
too much known, to speak much of him; and the United Provinces would have had
cause to be infinitely afflicted at such a loss, had he not left them that
worthy Brother, and that strong Atlas, who forthwith took the burden of the
Government upon his shoulders. This was he who firmly fixed this reeling
Commonwealth, by his Arms; took many Towns in Freezland, Overysell, and
Guelders, with small charge, few men, and little bloodshed: in such sort, as
that he merited to be termed, as he was, the Father of the Soldiers.

And of King James, a peaceful Prince.
In the same spring also, died King James; a Prince, who much loved Peace and
learning. After he had the Crown of England upon his Head, all the disasters,
and misfortunes of his House, begun upon his Praedecessours, were stopped by
him, as water is by the opposition of a Dam, or Bank; so to gush out with the
greater violence, upon his children, and succesours, as we shall hereafter
show. But, who can penetrate into the secrets of Gods Judgments? He governed
his kingdom in peace, and maintained his Subjects in riches, and delights: but
there grew up a little Venim, which wrought afterward, in fit time. The ^vills
which we see often happen, draw their cause sometimes, from afar off.

Prince Henry, having paid the last duties to his magnanimous Brother,
departed from the Hague, to hinder the design which the Spaniards had, The
Spaniards will join the Rhein to the Mo^^, 1626.
to join the Rhein to the Mose; and by the erection of many Forts, keep the
Hollanders from passing over; an Enterprise, which unprofitably exhausted their
money and made them seem able, to make no more then merely a Defensive war.
Jupiter laughed at the Giants who would scale Heaven. Time has declared the
inutility of this work, and to what intention also that advice was given: For
the Hollanders are Masters of that liquid Element, and pass it when they will.
There chanced nothing worthy of note, in that toylsome March; save only that
Count Henry of Bergues, beat up the Horse-Quarter, brought away the Count of
Stirum his Cousin prisoner, with some Horse; Count Stirum prisoner.
In revenge whereof, the Prince sent Count Ernest, to unnestle the Spaniards
from Oldenzeel, and destroy the nest.

The Siege of Grol.
In the year 1627. he laid siege to Grol, a small, but strong Town, upon the
Confines of Westphalia, which he carried in less then a month, in the sight
of a puissant Army. Spinola, in the mean time, was busy about the fortifying
of Sandflect, a Village between Antwerp, and Berghen op Zoom, which was a
design of more advantage, and consideration, then that of uniting the two
Rivers.

By this exploit of the Prince, it was judged, that his Government would prove
happy; and the vessels laden with money, which were brought out of Holland by
Peter Hein, moved him to undertake the siege of Boisleduc, which was begun the
first of May, and ended the seventeenth of September; a fatal day to the House
of Austria.

Lorraine was peacefully governed by the wise conduct of Duke Henry, son to
Duke Charles; but his term was but of sixteen years. The death of the Duke of
Lorraine.
He departed to a better life, the twentieth of July 1624. and shortly after
him, the repose, and tranquillity of all that Country, by the ambition of her
Neighbors. He left but two Daughters; the elder whereof was married to the
Count of Vandomonts son, her Cousin-German.

The Salick Law in Lorraine.
The year following, the Salick Law having regained vigor, and Francis of
Vandomont being next heir by the said Law, which excludes Females; surrendered
his right in that Duchy to his son Charles; which was approved by the States
of the Country; and so Charles Duke of Lorraine, made his entry into the good
City of Nancy, and took full possession of the whole Dukedom.

Now, some have written against this said Law, as if it were to be observed no
where but in France, as coming thither with them, out of Franconie. But most
Writers affirm, that the ancient Franks established their habitation from the
bank of the Rhein, to the River of Loire; in such sort, as that Lorraine being
comprised therein, and having been also a parcel divided from that kingdom, it
follows, that the Predecessors had the same intention, to establish it as well
in the kingdom of Austrasia, as in that of France, and that it has been
tacitly, and quietly observed, without any dispute. Besides, that it is proved
by the Testament of Rene of Jerusalem Duke of Lorraine, and Bar, made in the
year 1406. by which the Male are called to Succession, and the Female excluded,
as it further appears also by experience it self.

A Jubily ar Rome.
This year of 1625. Pope Urban celebrated an universal Jubily, at which the
Prince of Poland, coming from the Low Countries, was present; and the same
year, the Emperor Ferdinand Crowned his Son King of Hungary; invited thereto,
by the States of that kingdom, to be defended by so great and powerful a
Prince, against the perpetual ambushes, and snares, of the inconstant Gabor.
Nor was it enough, that he had one Crown; The Crowning of the King of Hungary.
for that of Bohemia was also resigned him by his Father, with the accustomed
Ceremonies.

Let us not leave the Danub, which was yet all red with the blood of the
Peasants, till we shall first have seen that of the Transylvanians, and Turks,
stream also there, together with the motives of that War.

Gabor breaks the peace.
This Gabor, being swollen with pride, by the Alliance of one of the most
illustrious Houses of Germany; honored at his wedding, by the presence of the
two Emperors, besides those of Kings, and other Princes; found himself
tickled, by a new desire to Reign: and the occasions were so fair, that they
stifled the Peace so often sworn, and so often broaken. For the Armies were
drawn toward the Baltic Sea; and the Bavarians, and Pahouheim, had work
enough, with the revolted Peasants. Whereupon he passed out of Hungary into
Moravia, and took many Towns; the fear of so unforeseen an evil, making the
people have recourse rather to God, then Arms. But Mansfeldt having redressed
his Army, after being cudgelled in Saxony, marched out of Silesia, into
Hungary; and Wallenstein traced him: affronted them all together, and defeated
them. Upon this he called the Tartars, who passed through Poland to his
assistance; but they being laden with pillage, were so hotly charged by the
Poles, The Tartars beaten.
that they were fain to lay down both their packs, and their lives; in such
sort, as that there remained not so so much as one alive, to carry the news:
so that there were only the Turks, upon whom to look now; and them he invited:
but it was only to augment the Triumph of Wallenstein, And the Turks by
Wallenstein.
, who beat them, took their Canon, and pillaged their Camp, which was full of
riches.

The Grand-Signor, desirous to keep the Peace, called back his Troops, and
their departure gave Gabor, Gabor repents, and obtaines peace.
both disgust, and repentance, for having so often offended the Emperor, who
was laden with victorious laurel: and therefore he sent his Ambassadors, who
found Ferdinand as ready to pardon, as their Master had been light to offend;
and so he was content to accept all the conditions proposed to him by the
Conquerors, sign the Peace, and be quiet. The Hungarians rejoiced hereat,
because those disturbances held them in continual Alarmes. And this was the end
of the wars of Hungary, and Austria, besprinkled with the blood of the
Peasants, and Barbarians. Let us now suffer them to repose some years, and
return again toward the Septemptrion.

CHAP. VI. Gustave King of Sweden, attacks Borussia, or Prussia. The
Imperialists succor the Polanders. A Truce is made for six years
PEace being made being made, between the Emperor, and the King of Denmark,
the Imperialists departed out of Holstein, and all the other occupated places,
The Stralsundians under the protection of King Gustave, who enters into Prussia.
and dispersed themselves throughout all Meckelenburgh, and Pomerania, The
Citizens of Stralsund, grown sturdy, and proud by having eluded the Attacks of
Wallenstein, put themselves by content of the King of Denmark, under the King
of Swedens protection. This action much displeased Ferdinand; begat the most
dreadful war of this Age, and opened the passage to the Swedes, to come and
usurp a good part of the Empire, after having troubled it all.

Gustavus Adolphus, having made himself Master of Livonia, endeavored to do as
much with Prussia, where he had powerful Correspondents. When there there is
not strength enough, recourse must be had to shifts. He entered unresisted, with
a puissant Navy, took, and fortified the Pilaw; passed to Elbing, which yielded
out of affection, as also many other Places. Only Brunsbergh, a Catholic
Town, durst make defense, and was taken by constraint. Takes many Towns.
All trembled, between hope and fear, love and hate, and the desire of novelty
seemed to prevail over ancient duty.

We desire (says the Poet) always that, which is denied us, and labor to
obtain that which is forbidden us.

I have heard some men of that Country, worthy of credit, affirm, that if the
King had drawn near Dansick, with the same bosdnesse, and resolution that he
did before Elbing, it is very probable, that the Citizens would have made their
accommodation with him. But opinion, is as much subject to falsehood, as truth.

The River Wistule, parts it self into branches, the one whereof bathes Elbing,
and the other passes through Dansick, and a little below it, shoots it self
into the sea.

Makes a Fort at the separation of the River.
The King lost no time, but gained the Point, and built a Fort there, like that
of Schenck, at the separation of the Rheyn.

The River being thus bridled, the Polanders who were wont to bring their corn
to Dansick, in certain long Boats, which they call Canes, chose rather now, to
let it moulder, and perish at home, then carry it, at a most vaste charge,
through their Enemies Quarters: which caused a dearth in Holland, and
incommodated the Traffic so much, that had this War lasted any long time, it
would have done the Spaniards business there.

The Polanders, who boasted, that they could easily drive out the Swedes, made
no great haste to put their Army into the Field: The Polanders slight their
enemies.
but were much amazed, to see so many Trenches, and the Towns which were lost,
half fortified in a trice.

There occurred many ambiguous Fights; but the matter was never brought to a
general decision.

The Swedes made War, after the Holland fashion, and the Poles, after the
French; and these, were beaten before Strasburgh, and those, before Torn.

General Arnhem came to succor the Polanders; but he brought them more hurt,
then good.

A truce made for six months
In sine, by the intervention of the Count d' Auanx, Ambassador of France, and
those of the States General, a Truce was made for six years, to the great
contentment of the Hollanders, who were full of joy before, by the gaining of
Boisleduc; which, how it came to be taken, the strength thereof making it held
impregnable, I will forthwith declare.

King Gustane, being fortified by the relics of the Polish Army, marched back
into Sweden, to deliberate of the Germane War; which was undertaken not by
any Right, but Usurpation: and more for convenience and jealousy, then any
justice at all.

Whatsoever other Princes do, is lawful, merits praise, and is put into the
necessity of their affairs: only the House of Austria is guilty, and
culpable: She must endure all, and if the Lot of War favor her, against such
as presume to shook her, she must not resent it, but make a stop to her
Victory, to avoid the being accused of Usurpation. The Empire has been too
long in her possession, it must be torn out of her hands, though it were to be
done, by the destruction of the Catholic Religion, and the fundamental Laws.

But great Preparatives call us back into Holland: there is some huge Design,
to which they are invited, by the disorder of the Spaniards.

CHAP. VII. The Siege of Boisleduc. The Imperialists under Montecuculi, join
with the Count of Bergh, who enters in Velaw. The taking of Wesel.
THe Hollanders, well knowing the Situation, Fortification and Importance of
Boisleduc, were wont to say, as by a common Proverb, to demonstrate the small
appearance there was of taking it, I will pay you, when Boisleduc is Ours, or of
our Part^, all which were called Gueuse;
Gueuse; that is to say, I will never pay you. But the event has manifested
the contrary; this Town having closely followed Rochell, which was conceived to
be unbesiegable, in regard of the Haven. But in this detestable Age, there has
been nothing found impregnable, for wickedness being every where, the Sword
enters every where, all gives way to Injustice, and Impiety. Nothing is able to
resist insolence, nothing so sacred, but it is profaned, nothing so solid, but
it is moved, and nothing so firm, but it is broken.

The Prince of Orange, seeing the Emperors forces employed in Denmark, and
Austria, and those of Spain a ground, by the taking of the Indian Silver
Fleet, and carrying it to Amsterdam, egged on from abroad, and inflamed also,
with desire of taking this place, by the very difficulties there were in it,
resolved, after having maturely picked out all the circumstances, to go a
Maying there, the last of April 1629. His Intelligences, both within, and
without the Town, were not small, and the obstacles, which offered themselves
in bulk, very great. But considering, that the greater the difficulties be,
the more luster they give to Virtue, he slighted all. Fortune forwards the
stout, The Siege of Boisleduc.
and hinders the timid. He invested it with an Army of thirty thousand men, and
speedily finished his Trenches, and Lines of Communication, whilst they were
disputing at Brussels, who should command their Army. Henry of Bergh General of
the Army.
Count Henry was chosen, but he marched so slowly, that he found the Prince too
strongly entrenched for his defense, to be possibly forced out.

For, he had dammed up the Rivers, and brought them round about his
Fortifications, in such sort, as it was like a broad Sea. And on the other
side, the Summer was so fair, A dry Summer.
and so dry, that it looked, as if heaven had entered into contract with the
Prince, to give him the fruition of the Victory. For had it chanced to be
moist, and rainy (as it is ordinary in that climate) their mills of so rare
workmanship, would have proved useless, and Nature would have jecred Art out
of countenance.

The Spaniards in the Velaw.
The Spaniards endeavored to succor it in vain: which made them pass the
Rheyn, at Wesel, to join with the Imperialists; and the passage of the Isell
being open, and maintained with the sword, gave them a fair prize, together
with the defense of some Companies which followed. But, the Prince drew out
part of his Army, which so well coasted the Spaniards, that they made no
remarkable progress at all.

Never had they Fortune so favorable, and never did they loose so many men, as
in that field, not by the sword, but by other inconveniences: Whereas had they
gone forward at first, they had found no kind of resistance, all the Country
being full of fear, and consternation.

The Prince stood so fast before Boisleduc, that he could not be parswaded by
the States of Guelders, Overysel, and Vtrick, to quit the siege, though it were
to save the Country; bidding them, by way of answer, to have patience, and put
all in good order, etc. that the enemy would give them more fear, then hurt.
All which proved true: for, the Hollanders, having taken breath, and done all
which was necessary for the defense of their Country, with some of the
licensiated Troops of the King of Denmark, put the Armies to a sudden stand,
without either Counsel or courage, upon the dry sands of the Velaw. Yet
howsoever, Take Amersfort.
they were bold enough to attack Amersfort, which not being tenible, was
forthwith yielded, and some other small paltry places near the South Sea, were
attempted, and not taken, in regard their design was discovered, before it was
fit to be executed. Besides, to increase the misfortune of the Enemies, upon
the nineteenth of August, being a very fair morning, Wesel was taken, Wesel
being surprised, makes the Spaniards draw out.
and the booty of the Imperialists snapt: which forced them to draw out of the
Velaw faster, then they went in, without having so much as seen Amsterdam,
which was always in their mouths. But the grapes were sower, because the Fox
could not reach them.

Count Henry retired not to Brussells, but to his Government; and could not so
well clear himself, but that there remained some suspicions greatly
disadvantageous to his reputation, in the souls of the more clear-sighted men;
which were verified, by the open retreat he made, grounded upon slight and
frivolous excuses only, concerning the Kings service.

Boisleduc yields for want of powder,
In fine, Boisloduc was rendered; the Imperialists returned into Germany, much
lighter then they came; and the Spaniards into Brabant, almost half of them
wasted, by hunger, sickness, and disbanding, not without loud murmuring, and
plainly cursing their General. Count John of Nasseaw left the passage of the
Isel, and the Prince went into Holland, where he was received by all, with
mavelous acclamations of joy, and unparallelled applause.

This Place, being one of the most important the King had, was taken for want
of powder, and a sufficient Garrison; and the Prince, on the other side, having
no want of money, commanded a Bank to be raised from Holland, overthwart the
Fennes, or Marshes, which cost the United Provinces much treasure, and much
hastened the taking of the Town: besides, that to say truth, the Magistrates of
Amsterdam, were not backward to advance money, to declare the zeal they had, to
the preservation of the Commonwealth. Never did Fortune smile more upon the
Spaniards, with a more unhappy issue; and never frowned more upon the
Confoederates, to give them a more glorious victory. The loss of this most
important place, frustrated the Spaniards the hope of regaining Holland, and
served for an invincible Clausure to the Commonwealth for the future, if we
look upon the outside of it; but it is subject to corruption, in regard of the
abundance of ill humors, wherewith it is stuffed within, as rising from the
fenny grounds about it, which yet easily are voyded by weak and slight physic,
as will shortly appear. But let us now go see the conclusion of the War in
France, against the Hugenots, and the ruin of that Party, which gave the King
means afterward to shock the House of Austria, and afflict his Neighbors.

CHAP. VIII
The prosecution of the last war, against the Reformats in France. The Duke
of Rohan makes his Peace. All the Towns humble themselves, and throw down
their Fortifications. The end of the Party.

DUring the siege of Rochell, that two Brothers (namely, the Dukes of Rohan,
and Soublse) did all they could to succor the Center of their State; moving
even Heaven and Earth, with the most zealous of the Party, to save the Place
from the shipwreck whereof it was in danger. The one made insurrections every
where, saying, that if the Town were taken, all they of the Party would be
massacred: but the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Montmorancy charged him so
often, and so closely, that he had almost ever the worst.

The other encouraged the English, and urged them to make haste, before the
Damme were finished, about which the French wrought with great ardour, ^^^o
re^sons retard the succor.
and good success. Two reasons in my opinion, retarded the succor so long:
the one, that they could not imagine, that the said Damme (at which they
laughed) would be able to hinder their passage; and that being stronger by Sea
then the French, they should easily break all obstacles. The other is, that
they would not relieve the Town till it were in extremity; to the end that (the
Townsmen being for the most part starved, or debilitated with hunger) they
might make themselves masters thereof, and place a Colony of their own nation
there; to be ready at all times, to incommodate France, and awaken their old
pretensions. They who ask relicfe, have one design; and he who gives it,
another. Besides, that it is also very credible, that the Cardinal (who was not
ignorant, of how great his credit would be, after the reduction of this Place,
(which was judged impregnable) had corrupted the chief of the Counsel of
England, with money, that so the succor, which was hastened by zeal, might be
delayed. Whatever it were, neither the great Arsenal, nor the strength of the
Bastions, nor the Purse at Porrette, nor the desperate resolution to die, and
to hang him who should first speak of yielding; served to any other purpose,
then to make the constance of the Townsmen admired, augment the story of King
Lewis the Inst, and elevate that of the Cardinal, above the Stars. A very
great, and most acceptable Victory to France, had she remained in the same
liberty which she enjoyed, during the potency of this Town. A most damnable
victory to the House of Austria, which the French themselves accuse of having
then forgotten her interest. A victory, which ruined, and brought to a full
stand, or Nonplus, all that Party, which divided the Kings Authority. A
Victory, which gave that great Cardinal one half of his honor; and upon which
he founded the highest, and most constant power, that ever any Minister had; to
the ruin of many most illustrious Families, and old Privileges, the confusion
of all Christendom, and even of his own great Benefactresse her self.

Now since the English had rather hindered, then furthered the Party, and were
accused of being the cause of this irreparable loss; a resolution was taken to
seek to some other support elsewhere: and so an Ambassador was dispatched into
Spain, to represent to that King, that interest he had to keep this Party; The
Duke of Rohan de^^ands si^^cour in Spain.
and to beseech him to send money only, and to remember the King of France's
Alliance with the Hollander, whom he maintained with as much heat and zeal, as
if they were his own subjects, and of his own Religion, Whereupon the
Spaniards, by the permission of the Counsel Conscience, resolved upon it;
thereby to give as many vexations to the King of France, within his kingdom; as
they received from him in the Low Countries. But the said Ambassador, The
death of the Negotiatour.
or Necessitator, though a subject of the King of Spaines, was taken and
condemned to death, by order of the Parliament of Tholosa; his innocence,
founded upon the action of a public Minister, serving him for nothing; however
this Decree were censured by such as had not their eyes veiled by passion, and
who could speak freely of it without danger.

Makes his peace with the King, and all obey.
King Lewis discovered all their plots, and prevented them, by the prudence of
the Cardinal; and having made but a slight peace with the said Duke, he fell
with his Army upon the Vivaret, surprised Privas, and took it by open force;
chastised insolence, by putting all to sword: treated well the Towns which
submitted, and assured them of the free exercise of their Religion. Upon this,
the Duke had recourse to his clemency, and he graciously embraced him, and
augmented his Pension. Castras, Niemes, and some other places, which might have
given a long trouble, also submitted, without any other punishment inflicted
upon, then the demolishment of their new Fortisications: which Commandment was
of hard digestion to them of Montauban, who were nevertheless disposed to
obedience by the Cardinals presence, and the force of his eloquence, who
alleged that the King could not endure any fortified place in his kingdom, And
so in fine, they stooped, and with regret enough brake down that, which gave
the jealousy; which could not be obtained from them, by violence, and the
noise of the Canon. Time ripens all things; and that, which in the precedent
Age was judged impossible, has been found feasible, in this.

The end of the Hughenot Party.
This was the end of the Hughenot Party in France, which had given so much
labor and toil, to the Kings, and so divided their jurisdiction. It took
birth, from the doctrine of Luther, and Calvin; passed infancy, under Henry
the second: got vigor, and strength, under Francis the second; grew to strong
youth, under Charles the ninth, and Henry the third, through the favor of the
Princes of the Blood, enemies to the power, and authority of the Dukes of
Guise; and by the valor of the King of Navarre. It obtained free Exercife, and
some Towns of safety, under Henry the fourth; and remained quiet, and without
commotion, out of respect and reverence, to so great a Prince. But, under Lewis
the thirteenth, finding it self abandoned by some of the principal Heads, it
began to stagger; and at last vanished quite away; in such sort, as that though
the Religion be still there, there is yet no formed party, and the root of the
ambition of the Grandies, who under the shadow of Religion, did very often
disturb honest people on both sides; is quite cut off. Their distrust (which is
called, the companion of safety, which they conceived, they should not be able
to find in the Kings word) made them often importune the Queen-Regent, and the
marriage with the Infanta of Spain (a Nation which they abhor above all
other) made them join to the Prince of Conde, to hinder it; which much hastened
their disgrace.

The King, being declared Ma^or, recovered Bearn, more by veneration, then by
force; and more by the brightness of his Majesty, then by that of his sword.
He was the pralude of the first war, speeded by their Assembly at Rechel,
Father Arnour.
and counseled by Father Arnour, who was preferred by the Duke of Luynes, to
the direction of the Conscience, and partly also, of the favor of his Majesty.
But as the said Luynes made the Fortune of this able ^esuit; so did he also
soon unmake it, thereby to free himself from the jealousy it gave him Saumur,
The taking of Towns.
Saint Ieand' Angeli, and a great number of other Towns, Burghs, and Villages
fortified, were taken, with incredible success. There was no more left then
Montauban, which forced the Conquerours to retreat, and in some sort, dimmed
their Triumph. The year following produced the Kings constant resolution to be
obeyed, and to punish the revolted Towns; the reduction of Moutpeill^er, and
the Peace which followed, by the counsel of the Constable d' Edignieres.
Edigniere^.
This Lord being of a mean extraction, grew to be elevated to the highest
Charge of France, through all the degrees of a soldier, His life.
and had heaped up a huge deal of treasure. Not with standing his Belief,
which was the same of the Reformates, he always kept his faith inviolable with
the King, and was by consequence, but little loved by the most zealous of the
Party. Makes himself a Catholi^^^.
A little before his death, he embraced the Roman Catholic Religion; as having
promised it in a frollick to Urban, as soon as he should come to the Pontificat.

The second war made the Hugenots loose the Lordship of the Sea. The third,
being begun with the assistance of a stranger, was consummated by the direction
of that potent Cardinal, and so the whole conduct of that great Vessel, was
restored into the hands of the just, and mild King Lewis. Let us go into
Hungary, to see the end of the fickle, and busy Gabor.

CHAP. IX
The Death of Bethleem Gabor: Ragoski his Suceessour. The Marriage of Ferdinand
the third, with the King of Spain's Sister.

The death of Gabor.
BEthleem Gabor, grown wise by so many losses, inviolably kept the Peace, and
maintained himself in amity with the Emperor, till the coming in of the King
of Sweden; who being his Brother-in Law, would easily, with his arguments, have
persuaded him to take up Arms again, had he not been prevented by a dropsy,
which drowned all his smoakie ambitions, together with his life, and deprived
the aforesaid King, of a man, who would yet according to occasions have much
tormented the Empire; and whose life deserved no more admiration, then his last
Will and Testament did. For he bequeathed the Emperor forty thousand Ducats,
His Testardent.
and a brave horse, with a saddle embrodered full of Pearls, and precious
stones: to his son Ferdinand the third, as much; to the Emperor of Turkey,
as much; to his wife, Katherine of Brandenburgh, a hundred thousand
Rix-Dollars, and a hundred thousand Florins, besides three Provinces. The
Execution of the said Testament, was recommended by him to the Grand Signor;
the widow, and Transylania, to the Emperor. And this was the end of that
Gabor, who was so much renowned; who so often re-incouraged them of the Party,
when they groaned under the Emperors forces; and who was so soon beaten down
by his own inconstance, or rather, by the unhappiness of the said Party,

Ragoskie, having bribed the Ambassador whom the widow sent to Constam inople,
was created Duke of Transylvania. She opposed him, and called her Tutour, the
Emperor, to her assistance, who sent her the Palatin of Costonia, Ragoskie
brough an Army into the Field, His Successor by deceit is often beaten.
which was defeated, and he in great trouble to raise another, which had the
same success of the former, as well as which followed. Thus finding the Cross
too strong for him, he looked toward the M^on. Three Bashaws came to succor
him, who were all beaten, one after another, by the aforesaid Palatine. In
fine, since he had no better issue by Arms, then his Predecessor, he was fain
to have recourse to the same practices, and follow the same steps. Wherefore,
he desired peace with Stephen Gabor, brother to the aforesaid Bethleem, and
made him Governor of the Province, restored the widow her Treasures, and
served himself of their mediation, Make peace.
which was not infructuous to him; for he obtained peace, and Transyl^ania
remained under the Emperors protection. Let us now go to the wedding of
Ferdinand the third.

This Prince being destinated to wear the Crown of the Empire, as well as that,
of the Kingdoms of Bohemia, and Hungary, sent to demand the Infanta Mary,
Sister to the King of Spain, who was granted him. The King her Brother,
accompanied her to Barcelona, where she embaiked for Italy, The marriage of
Fordinand the third.
passed by Naples, and made her entry at Vienna, with so great pomp, and
gallantry, that there could nothing more be added, to augment the splendor
thereof. Before her arrival, her husband was Crowned Emperout at Ratisbone;
shortly after, at Posen. Let us leave them with all the joys of the Court at
Vienna, and return into Italy, to see a war of Catholic against Catholic.

CHAP. X
War in Italy, about the succession of the Duchy of Mantua, wherein the
Emperor, and the two Crowns took part.

THe difference, The war of Italy, for the Duchy of Mantua.
which chanced about the succession of the Dutchies of Maentua, and Monferrat,
embarassed all Italy; awakened the ambitious jealousies of those two potent
nations, and so much exercised them in war, that it proved partly the cause
of the entyre breach, and desolations which followed.

In the year 1627, the twenty sixth of December, Duke Vincent deceasing without
Children, the succession fell to the Duke of Nevers, who received it, and
praecipitated his inauguration or investure, without the knowledge of the
limporour, who is the Lord of Fief, or Supreme-Heredirary thereof. The
Spaniards, more through jealousy, then by right, or title, took Arms; as the
Duke of Savoy also did, for an old pretension; he seized upon many places in
Mon^ferrat, and they besieged Casal. O interest of State, thou Idol? how
powerful art thou, and how many mischiefs do thou cause? The apprehension,
which the Spaniards had of the Duchy of Milan, made them undertake this war,
and hasten the Peace in the North.

The Duke of Nevers, put good Garrisons into the most tenible places, and
joined with the Venetians, who could not endure, that the House of Austria
should make any further progress in Italy, and shut up the gate to the French.

Ferdinand commands them to lay down Arms, but is not obeyed.
The Emperor, desiring to extinguish this sire, by a remedy just enough,
though a little too suspect; sent his Ambassadors, to enjoin both Parties to
lay down Arms; and in regard that the Duke of Nevers had not first demanded his
investure, in due form; to remit the said Dutchies, by way of sequestration,
into his hands, that so he might proceed therein, according to Right: But he
was obeyed here, just as his Predecessor was, at Gulick. For, the Duke
rejected the conditions; endeavored to succor Casal, and cut in pieces the
forces, which opposed his generous design.

The King of France, in the mean while, was busy at the siege of Rochell,
which seemed long to the poor Duke, who found himself oppugned in his lawful
succession by the Spaniards, Succor from France.
the Savoyers, and the Imperialists, and that, without hope of any strong
relief from France. The King dispatched away Marshall of Crecquy in Autumn,
and he went into the Field two months after the reduction of the Town, which
was in the heart of Winter.

The Duke agrees.
The Duke, who conceived that the said Marshall marched too slowly and that he
would busy himself about the taking of the Marquisat of Saluces, and make a
war in Savoy; changed his maxim, promised the Emperor to obey him, and to
receive his Garrisons, into the Towns; and consequently, sent his son, the
Duke of Duke of Rhetell to Vienna, to make protestation of his obedience, and
innocence. The Spaniards, however much harassed, and tired, by the frequent
sallies of the besieged, the length of the Siege, and inundations of the Po;
disapproved this Treaty, and (to their own damage) continued the said Siege.
The Emperor sent other Ambassadors, to command observance: The Spaniards
continue the siege at Casal.
But Dou Card^^^a, who during these intrigues, hoped to carry the place,
pressed it hard, lent a deaf ear to the Emperors ouder, and dispatched a
Envoy, or Messenger-Express, to Madrid. Nevers, being irritated beyond measure
to sind himself thus treated, and that that the equity of his Cause was
combatted with so much injustice, and animated, on the other side, by seeing
his King slight the rigor of the season, to come and aid him, turned all his
thoughts to war.

The King of France passes by force through Savoy, and makes them rise.
The Duke of Savoy refused the King passage, but he got it by force, defeated
his Troops, assured himself of the Pass, or Straight of the Suze; and
compelled the Spaniards to raise the Siege: wherein he was better obeyed, then
the Emperor himself. But the short durance of the Peace with the Hughenots in
France, obliged him to return, and humiliate the^o.

It is now time to send part of our forces from the Baltic Sea, to carry the
Eagles thither, where they first commanded.

Fordinand, to uphold his Authority, dispatched thither an Army of twenty
thousand men, under the conduct of the Generals Al^ring, and Galasso; who,
having seized upon the Passage of the Grisons, effused themselves into Italy,
and got into their clutches the whole Duchy of Mantua, with as much good luck,
The Imperialists in Italy lesiege Mantua in with.
as the French did that of Savoy, except only the Head City, which they also
besieged: but the jealous Venatians, endeavoring to remove all such, as might
be able to give their State any cause of apprehension, were not slack in
setting their hands stoutly to work, for the Duke: though yet the Imperialists
took Goite from them, and carried away all the booty, or pillage thereof to
their Camp. But the French coming in the nick, craftily snapt two Sentinels;
entered into a Quarter, and put a huge number of them to the Sword. So that the
other finding the season improper, and the small appearance there was of
carrying the place, retired themselves much diminished into Garrison.

CHAP. XI
The continuation of the war of Italy. The Venetians beaten. Pignarola taken.
Mantua taken, and pillaged, The Peace made, with restitution on both sides.

The Venetians beaten by Galasso.
THis retreat gave the Venetians a desire to retake Goite, but they were broken
by Galasso. Whereupon, they re-assembled their forces, and having recruited and
engrossed them, put them selves again in a posture of fighting, wherein they
were the second time put to flight, and above six thousand killed and taken,
together with all their Artillery. This loss much amazed the Republic: But
Fortune was more favorable to the French; who (as we have already said) after
the taking of Rochel, showed themselves very hot, for the defense of the Duke
of Nevers. True it is, that the Kings dangerous sickness at Lions, had almost
been the cause of slackening this generous ardour; and they, who looked asquint
upon the Cardinals potencye, seemed to prognosticate, that his ruin was at
hand, Envy still follows the Charrior of a growing Power.

And the Savoyers by the French.
The French took Pignarola, and were reinforced by the Swissers: and this
loss, which was most sensible to the Duke, was followed by many other. The
Spaniards were beaten by Monsieur de Bassompiere; Cambery taken, and Montmclian
besieged. The Duke of Guise landed near Nice, to go join with the Army. The
King sent the Duke of Montmorancy toward Piedmont, and followed himself
afterward. Prince Thomas presuming to dispure his entrance with twelve
thousand men, was beaten; the Colors presented to the King, being the honor;
and all Piedmont, the reward of the victory. In such sort, as that the poor
Duke of Savoy, who had so often ventured to contest, sometimes with one of the
Crowns, and sometimes with the other; found himself quite spoiled of his
States, For having nothing lest but Turin, and not daring to shut himself up
there, he resolved to keep the key of the Fields, and let the Mountains oppose
the victorious Party, by seeking to preserve his liberty in desert, and
inaccessible places.

We must, here take notice of the Martial generosity of the French, who, in the
beginning of war are invincible, make all bow to their Arms, break through
all oppositions, and as soon take whole Provinces, as other Nations do Towns:
but by the too sudden loss of patience, on the other side, Their impatience.
they grew also to loose whole Provinces, almost as soon, as other Nations do
Towns.

Now Fortune favored the Imperialists every where, which they made both the
Venetians, and the Duke of Nevers feel. For they returned the Siege upon
Mantua, and took it at length, by a fine Stratagem. Mantua taken by atrick of
war.
For the besieged, by their frequent Sallies, being reduced to a very small
number, demanded the succor of five thousand men, from the Venetians, and
Letters being intercepted, gave the Besiegers occasion to serve themselves of
this trick, to catch besieged. They secretly drew into the field the number of
men demanded, who by a fight with powder without shot, got near to one of the
Gates, which being forthwith opened by some, who thought them to be Venetians,
they made themselves Masters of the Town, to the great astonishment of the
Inhabitants, who were sacked by their imaginary Auxiliaries; and the Duke
yielding up the Castle by Composition, was conducted, together with his wife
and children, to Ferrara.

Spinola before Casal.
This victory swelled up the spirits of the Imperialists, and made the
Spaniards continue the Siege of Casal, under the command of Marquis Spinola,
who had acquired so much glory in the Low Countries: and Toiras, who was all
crowned with laurel, for the honor he achieved, by the defense of the Fort
of Saint Martin against the English, defended the Citadel. The French, making
a show to go and attack the Duchy of Milan, wheeled suddenly about upon the
Besiegers, the state whereof was this. The Town and Castle were already yielded
to the Marquis, and the Citadel had capitulated, that in case there came not
sufficient succor to beat them from thence, within a certain term, which was
the fifteenth of October, Monsieur de Toiras was to march out.

The French Army appeared in Battle array near the Trenches, and the
Spaniards put themselves in posture to receive it. The death of Spinola, and of
the Duke of Savoy.
All seemed to laugh upon the French, by the death of the Marquis, who was
taken out of this world by the Plague: and Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, being
being stripped of his States, and overwhelmed with grief and war, paid also
his tribute to Nature.

When two great Bulls are ready to rush together, and shock one another, the
whole Heard stand still, and attend with trembling, the issue of the Combat. In
the same manner, was Italy the spectatresse of this furious shock, and had no
cause at all to rejoice. But it pleased God, that by the Popes intercession,
The peace was made by the address of Cardinal Mazarin.
and Cardinal Mazarin's dexterity (who made himself known by this first
negotiation) the Peace being concluded at Vienna, was brought to the Armies,
just when the Trumpets were going to sound, to draw the sword. A fair escape:
happy news!

By virtue of this Peace, the French returned into France, and restored all to
the Duke of Savoy, except only Piguarola, which had been privately bought by
the said Cardinal. A politic subtilty, to have the Gate into Italy, always
open; mixed with Cousenage, as the Spaniards say; who rendered Montferrat, as the
Germans likewise did Italy, to go against the King of Sweden. The Duke of
Nevers was fain to ask pardon, and Investure; which accordingly was performed,
and peace and rest restored to Italy. How many combats, how much bloodshed was
here, for a sum of ambition? For Religion had nothing to do in the matter. But
it is credible, that the Spaniards would not suffer so potent a French Prince
at the entry into Italy, and so near the Duchy of Milan, which they keep as
tenderly, as the ample of their eyes: and that the French, on the other side,
would establish him, and uphold him, without acknowledging the Emperor. God
makes justice appear, when men will throw it under foot with Arms.

Prodigies in Italy.
This war had been praemonstrated by many Prodigies, and Portents, which
praeceded it; as namely, by Earthquakes in Apalia, whereby more then sixteen
thousand persons were overwhelmed; by dreadful floods, streams of blood, and
the like. And really, these two Nations, after having stoutly wrangled, and by
sword, famine, and contagious sicknesses, lost above a million of mortals; came
neither of them to the principal, but secret end, which they had proposed to
themselves, and reaped no other salarie, then that of vainglory, drawn out of
jealousy of State. The Countries were destroyed, the Neighbors oppressed,
Christian Religion contemned, and altered; and in the one of the aforesaid
nations, by many persons quite annihilated. The Ministers, who love to fish in
troubled waters, and blow the bellows of their Masters ambition, so to carry
them rashly on to wars, which might be diverted by one single conference;
will one day have much to answer, before the fountain of all Equity and Justice.

The enemies of Cardinal Richelieu.
But let us leave this point to be picked out by the Casuists, and return to
France where we shall discover, how the Cardinal falls as deep, into the hatred
of the Grandies, as he is strong in the possession of the Kings favor. The
Queen Mother repented her self of having promoted a Minister, who was to
destroy her. Gastion was vexed to see the management of all the affairs of
France in his hands, without participating therein. That devout Prelate the
Chardinall of Berulles, labored to stop him from forging some designs, as
pernicious to the Catholics abroad, as they had been to the Hughenots in
France. But Parca cut off the thread of his life, and deprived Richelieu of a
most Religious Enemy, who survived him, to accomplish his end in other; yea, in
all such, as gave any jealousy: and the Hughenots themselves were grown to
sing his praises, when many Catholics had him in horror and execration.

CHAP. XII
Cardinal Richelieu makes peace with the English, and devises new Allyances to
attack the House of Austria.

WHEN the Cardinal, by his great prudence, had broaken that puissant Party,
which in some measure, both divided and shocked the Sovereign Power;
re-established every where the Catholic Religion, and a fresh springing Amity
amongst the people; he perceived himself in danger to be cast out of the
Saddle. But, he had acquired so great an influence upon the mind, both of King
and People, by the good success of his Counsels, that he was not a jot moved
at the puissant factions, which he saw growing against himself, at the Court;
all which he surmounted afterward, by a certain felicity, which always
accompanied him, and which after the Peace of Italy, shined with more force,
and luster. His designs seemed to be carried to a breach, between the two
Crowns: The King makes peace with the English.
for the more eafie achievement whereof, and to involve the Church in this
pernicious war, from which some Grandies were averse, by the intermission, or
mediation of the Venetians, he made peace with the English, whom he could not
attack by land; and thought of finding another enemy, whom he might lay aboard,
when he would. His Master had deserved, and possessed the name of Just, by
humbling with great moderation, the Hughenot Party, and there was no better
means left to obtain it also amongst the Reformates, who were yet very hot,
then by poasting to the succor of the Protestant, against the Emperor.

The King of England, after the fall of the Hughenots, in whose defense he had
lost both many men, and much money, finding the lot of arms unfavourable (which
was to be also fatal to him afterward) chose to sit still in Royal vacancie
and repose: The first war of the King against the Spiniards, the second against
the French, and the third against his Subjects.
He was unfortunate in the first Expedition he made, when he sent that Fleer,
with the Admiral of Holland, who joined with a great number of ships, to
surprise Cales. For after having suffered many inconveniences, and losses, it
was fain at length to return; and the King of Spain remitted many prisoners
into England, to be punished like Pirates, because their King had not denounced
the War. One affront was paid by another. In his second undertaking against
France, Fortune favored him yet less; and his third and lasi, was the ruin
of his Family, as we will show, toward the end of this Epitome. Suddenly after
the reduction of Rochel, the Cardinal pressed hard for the succor of the Duke
of Nevers, against the opinion of such, as could not endure so glittering a
Purple, and who apprehended a breach. But he began it, and ended it (as we even
now said) in the year 1633. The said Duke sold his homage, and duty to the
Emperor: which gave contentment to the Duke of Savoy, and the Marquis de
Guastala, in regard of their pretensions to the aforementioned Dutchies.

Now, having already dissipated the smallest and weakest enemies of his
Greatness, he crushed that Party, which had been so formidable to the
precedent Kings: and being confirmed by the assurances, which his Master had
given him, of covering him with his Crown, against all such as endeavored his
mine; he resolved upon this great design, against the house of Austria. A
design I say of huge danger; and which could not be undertaken, and set on
work, The Cardinal disposes the Protestants to War against the Emperor.
but by means of potent Allies, for fear of incurring the hazard of destroying
the State. Therefore he thought it fir, to awaken the Protestants, all the
North, and all such as hated the Roman Catholic Religion: nor were the
Hollanders the last, though the Spaniards courted them (in vain) to a Truce.

The King of England was easily disposed to it, in regard of his Son in Law,
and so great a Family, as wherewith both himself, and the Hollanders were
burdened in a strange Country: however the Communion of Religion, and
compassion made this charge seem supportable, and gentle. In brief, for the
common interest of upholding themselves, and for the apprehension which every
one in particular had of this puissant House; they were all resolved. A
powerful Orator cannot fail to persuade; when he pleads the Common cause.

But now, there wanted both a Captain, and Cause sufficient, to cover both this
apprehension, and the ambition also of some certain people; the former whereof
they were resolved to find quickly out, though they were forced to go seek
him in the Ice, and amongst the Deserts of the North; and as for pretexts, as
well false as true, they could not be wanting; for since they were about to
play their last Game, they would hazard all; and if they lost, the consequence
would be an universal Monarchy.

In the Treaty of Peace at Vienna, the Ambassadors of France promised, that
the French should not meddle with the affairs of Germany; and yet there was
another Treaty at Stockholne at the same time, about an Alliance, for the quiet
of the Empire, and a War against the Emperor.

But for the better understanding of what I shall say, of that cruel fatality,
which has made both Germany, and all the Provinces near it, a kind of a
Churchyard; it will very much import, to make some short mention; First of the
quarrels and pretensions of the Emperors against France; and then of the
state of the Empire it self, the Theater, of the most destructive, and
deplorable War that ever was. But there was a necessity in it, to the end that
the Prophesies might be accomplished: nor is there any end even yet.

Henry the second, seeing Germany in great combustion, by jealousies drawn from
the difference of Religion, and being invited into Germany by the Protestants
in arms against Charles, and offered the protection of that Party, and invited
also on the other side by interest of State; sent thither the Duke of
Montmorancy, with a puissant Army, who seized upon those three Bishoprics, by
way of correspondence; and would have done the same to Strasburgh, if he had
been able to get leave to march with his Troops through the Town, as he had
done at Metz. But the conclusion of a Peace between the Emperor, and the
Princes, stopped the progress of the French, and made them return; as Metz did
that of the Emperor, and forbide the Eagles any further flight.

Ferdinand the second, having triumphed over all his Enemies (whom the French
by virtue of their Allyances, The affront of the Bishop of Verdun.
had succored with Council, Men, and Money) and being irritated besides, by the
affront newly done to the Bishop of Verdun; seemed willing to require
satisfaction; so to give exercise to his triumphant Forces, and make War with
better conveniencie, and more advantage, in Lorraine then in Italy. At least,
the Cardinal was fearful least, he should take old quarrels into deliberation
again, and send his Troops to replace the Eagle at Verdun, which was beaten
down to set ut the Flower de luce.

Wherefore, for the diversion of this tempest, and to make it burst upon
Germany it self; he complotted, and projected with all his Allyances, hoping
the luck would turn, and take away that Party, The utility of those Allyances
through France.
puffed up with so many Victories, redoubted for greatness, hated for the
contributions, by which it exhausted Germany; and execrated, for the
redemanding of the Eeclesiastical Possessions, which was executed about that
time. If this Dam were broken, but by one single Victory, of what a vast profit
would it be to France? The people would fall upon the Imperialists, as they
formerly did upon the Lutherans; and so all that Party would be in confusion.
Lorraine and Alsatia, would be but a Breakfast; the three Ecclesiastical
Electors would infallibly cast themselves into the King of France's arms,
thereby to shelter themselves from the fulminating fury of the Protestants; and
by consequence, the Imperial Crown could not escape the head of his most
Christian Majesty.

The Spaniards being shut up, and deprived of succor from Germany, would be
easily droven out of the Low Countries; The secret Alliance.
and thus a certain secret Alliance, which was discovered and miscarryed since
that time, would one day be a plank, or foundation to the universal Monarchy.

This great Cardinal, so admired, and glorious, after having broken the
Hughenot Party, succored the Duke of Nevers in Italy, and trodden upon the
belly of the Savoyers; prepared himself (I say) for this most dangerous
design; disposed the Protestants to it, by Father Joseph, in the Assembly at
Leipsick; Father Joseph at Leipsick.
and labored earnestly for the destruction of the House of Austria; as well
knowing, that it was better to prevent, then be prevented, and in what credit
he should be, amongst all such as sought the ruin of the Roman Catholic
Faith, and that of the aforesaid Victorious House. But let us speak of the
State of the Empire, before this horrible tempest began to bruise it.

CHAP. XIII. A Description of the state of the Empire. The election of the King
of the Romans.
WE find in history, that Charlemagne, King of France, Son to Pepin, and
Grandchild to Charles Mared, going to Rome to defend Pope Leo, was saluted by
him (to crown his merits, and recompense his services) Emperor of the West. I
will not here enter into the dispute between the two Nations, of whether he
were a German or no: But sure it is, that he was King of France, before he was
Emperor; and the Germans themselves affirm, that he transferred the Empire,
upon their Nation; yea, and that none can be elevated to that dignity, unless
he be born a German: And so Maximilian of Austria being dead, Charles was
preferred before Francis the first, King of France, for that he was born at
Gaunt, a City of Low-Germany: and the arguments of the Elector of Trevirs, in
the behalf of Francis, were refuted and rejected. Others allege, that to save
the West, which was exposed to the excursions of the Barbarians, by that
remorenesse, or slacknesse of the Emperors of the East; it was transferred by
the Pope upon the Gawles, or French; and that the race, or Charlemagne coming
to sail, Pope Gregory the fifth transferred the Right of Election upon the
Germans; abolished the Hereditary, and gave hope to Princes of virtue, to be
able to ascend to this charge, which is the most glorious in the World.

The Emperors have been more absolute, then they are at present; and in the
contentions with the Popes, from whom they receive their Crown, or at least
their Confirmation, they have been much disadvantaged.

Henry the seventh, coming to die in Italy, every several Town assumed to
itself, a peculiar principal; in such sort, as that the Emperors have had
little there since, save only the bare Title. Besides, the same Popes have
caused troubles in Germany, on purpose to leave the domination to them there,
and cut off the opportunity of coming to rub up old quarrels in Italy. Our
Savior indeed said, that his Kingdom was not of this world, and that his
Apostles should not reign. The Primitive Supreme Bishops declared it, by the
Crown of Martyrdom; but some others spurred on by ambition, have wrangled for
another, which both made them odious, and their Authority despicable, in many
places. And moreover, the peaceful nature of some Emperors, has made them
seek rest, and neglect the Rights of Majesty.

The Empire is not Haereditary, but Elective; and when the Emperor is dead,
The King of the Romans is elected for great affairs.
the Archbishop of Mentz writes to the rest of the Electors, to assemble
themselves at Francfurt, within three months, either in person, or else to send
their Ambassadors. During the Interreign, or Vacancy, the Elector Palatin is
the Vicar, or Lieutenant; and he who is elected King of the Romans, is declared
Heir. There three Ecclesiastical Electors, and four Secular. The Archbishops
of Mentz, Trevirs, and Colein. The King of Bohemia, the Prince Palatin, the
Duke of Saxony, and the Marquis of Brandenburg; who are not Kings, but may
style themselves the said Kings Companions.

Being assembled at Francfurt, they make Oath to the Elector of Mentz, they
will choose one, who shall be capable of the Charge. They are obliged to finish
the Election within thirty days; and may not go out of the Town, till all be
accomplished. If the voices happen to be equal, he who receives the King of
Bohemia's Vote, is infallibly proclaimed Emperor.

The King of the Romans is not chosen during the life of the Emperor, but for
great Affairs; and he cannot any way fail of succession, as soon as the
Emperor is dead. All is observed, according to the Golden Bull of Charles the
fourth. The King of the Romans is obliged to take Oath, that he will not seek
to make the Empire Haereditary to his House; but that he will maintain all the
Rights, and Splendour thereof,

There are two Fundamental Laws, namely the Golden Bull, and the Imperial
Capitulation; to the maintaining whereof he is bound by Oath. Which makes me
find their opinion very weak who praesume to sustain, that the Emperor is a
Mouarch; in regard that his Authority is so parted, and divided between him,
and the Electors, that it looks, as if they were associated, to help him bear
this heavy burden. Besides, since Germany has been so distracted by the
diversity of Doctrines, the Protestants have inhaunced so much of the Majesty
to themselves, through the too timorous bounty, and moderation of some
Emperors, since Charles the fifth, that his has been but little more
acknowledged, and adored, both in Germany, and Italy. And therefore, it is no
wonder, if the Eagles Triumphant by so many Victories, have endeavored to look
back, upon some Rights which are now so many years old; and if a general
Conspiracy of the Neighbors of the said Protestants have been made, to hinder
old Praetensions, though grounded upon very much equity, and justice. But those
foreign Princes, who have thrust themselves into this quarrel, have stopped
their eyes to justice, opened them to interest of State, and to the means, of
either praeserving or ingrandishing themselves.

CHAP. XIV
A description of the three States of the Empire. The Hans-Towns.

SInce we have spoken as much as is necessary to our purpose, of the Emperor,
and the King of the Romans, his Vicar, or Successor; it concerns us to say
also somewhat, of the States of the Empire.

The first State.
The first, and prime State therefore, is that of the Electours, as being the
nearest to the Head, or Chief. They are the Fathers, and Senators, and the
maine, and firm Prop of this Edifice. They assist with their prudence, the
Head which they have chosen, and are compared with the Kings of Europe.

The Ecclesiastics have the precedencie in this rank; first, the Archbishop
of Mentz; next, he of Trevirs; and then, he of Celein. The King of Bohemia, the
Duke of Bavaria, who was advanced to the Electoral dignity, by the deposition
of the Prince Palatin; and then he of Saxony, and he of Brandenburgh.

The second State is constituted, first, by four Archbishops: namely, of
Magdeburgh, Salsburgh, Bremen, and Besansow; The second State.
after whom follows the great Master of the Tentonick Order.

And afterward, there take place, one and thirty Bishops, who are followed by
ten, or eleven Abbots, with the Title of Princes, as the Abbot of Fulda etc.
The secular Princes are placed after these Ecclesiastics, and are in number,
eighteen Families; the first whereof, is that of the Archdukes of Austria,
divided into two branches, namely of Germany, and Burgundy And this Family has
of much praeheminence above that of the other Princes, as the Archbishops have,
above the Bishops. Then, follows that of Bavaria, of Saxony, of Brandenburgh,
etc. After which sit the Abbesses, as there of Quedelemburgh, of Esson etc.
Some whereof have both the effect, and title, of Princesses, And lastly sit the
Counts, and Barons, whereof there is a great number. Reinking to whom I refer
the curious, calculates about eight and fifty of them.

The third State.
The third state is completed, by the Imperial and free Towns, which are
sixty five in number, or thereabouts: and they are to be considered two ways;
the former, and more noble whereof, is, that they immediately depend upon the
Emperor, and have nothing at all to do with any body else, and the other, that
these also depend upon the Emperor; but yet they owe some small recognitance,
to the Prince, Lord, or Praelat, in whose territories they are seated: however
they leave not thereby to be free, and to enjoy the rights of Royalty. So that
these Towns possess the ancient liberty; the privileges of Princes; have
their Session, and Vote in the Diets, and are termed the Noble member, and
Pillars of the Empire, wherein they are incorporated, neither more, nor less,
then the Princes, and Praelats. They are divided into two Benches. The four
first, are Lubeck, Metz, Auxburgh, and Aix, or Aquisgraue. The other being in
the quality of Subjects to Empire, are not called.

There is yet another company of Towns, which by virtue of the union are
called Hans-Towns; The Hans-Towns;
which are composed, partly of such as are free; and partly Provincial, and
obnoxious. This said company, or V^^^ns has no other aim, or end, then that
of commerce, and it was approved first, by Charles the fourth. It has four
Classes, or Metropolitan Cities, to wit, Lubeck, Colem, Brunswick, and Dansick;
and they have an annual Assembly at Lubeck, where they have their Charters, or
Rolls. But their last wars have much altered all the orders, which were
formerly kept.

The ten Gerclet.
The German Empire is distributed into ten Cercles; Franconia, Bavaria,
Austria, Swevia, that of the upper Rheyn; and that of the four Electours
toward the Ribeyn^ Wastphalia^ Saxanie, Low-Saxonie and Burgundy.

Now the Emperor, as he is head of the Roman Empire, is bound to swear, that
he will defend all the privileges of the Empire; but that does not at all
derogate from his Majesty, in regard that all Kings, at their consecration do
the same and he is also greater, then all the Members of the Empire, and may
command them, as having received homage from them: and if when they be cited,
or condemned, they ^esose to appear, he publishes and proscribes them, by
commanding some Prince neet hand, to execute his order by arms: from whence it
follows, that as he is obliged to defend, and protect both them, and their
privileges, so are they also bound to obey him, by Oath, and by virtue of the
Fief he possesses. A happy Government, and a happy Germany, when the Members
agree with the Head.

CHAP. XV
The Principal motives of the Decline of the Empire.

The motives of the Declime of the Engire.
BEfore we speak of the causes of this last war, which put Germany into that
condition wherein we see her yet, and from which she begins by little and
little, to be repaired; our Subject requires us to give a brief hint, of those
which have so weakened this Empire, which all history, both profane, and
sacred, tell us, is to be the last.

The Pojes.
The Popes were the first, who weakened it in Italy, and gave matter thereby,
to the most ambitious of that Nation, to appropiate some States to themselves,
as being either vacant, or desecred, by the troubles, or care lesness, of the
Emperors: wherein they served themselves of diverse pretexts; as either through
zeal of devotion, and respect; or for the punishment of some faults, which they
imputed to the said Emperous; or through the immensity of their own ambition;
or else, by favoring the factions, of the Ghilphes, against the Gibellins, or
Imperialists: in such sort, as the Papal Authority obumbrating, or
overshaddowing, the Imperial, has both now quite away the heat thereof, as I
have already said.

The Translation of the States. The Barbarians.
Secondly, by the translation of the Seat of the Empire to Constantinople, and
by the inundation of the Barbarians, which have come at certain times from
beyond the Rheynt and from the North.

Besides, the Empire is much diminished, by some Provinces, and Towns, yea, The
Kingdoms.
and whole Kingdoms also, which upon diverse praetexts, have loosened themselves
from this great Body, which are mentioned in history, and not for our purpose
here. And moreover, since the Germans have reduced the Empire within the
praecincts of their nation, and chosen the Emperors anoughst themselves, by
the exclusion of all strangers it is no wonder, if others have separated
themselves from them, and erected particular Governments, according to the
hunour of theirs.

But let us now come to the principal subject of all, drawn from the Germans
themselves: which makes the Empire so weak, that any neighboring Prince very
often dares brave and affront it: The diversity of Doctrines, and ambition.
and this is the diversity of Religions; the over great porencie of the
Princes, and States, and distrust, in side, or dissidence, mingled with
ambition. For remedy whereof, the Emperoun and Princes have had many
conserences and it has been agreed, and resolved, that there should be but two
Religions tolerated in Germany; as namely, the Roman Catholic, and the
confession of Auxburgh, which is the Lutheran. But the disease being too great
to be cured by so gentle physic; and the house of Austria too powerful, both
in Spain, and the Low-Conntreys, not to give jealousy; distrust, and ambition,
(sicknesses of State) have always peeped out their heads, in the Diets, after
much time lost in disputing for place, and praecedeucie. So that these being
gotten into the interior of the first, and making little account of the
languishing authority of the Emperous, have produced the hatred, seditions,
and wars, which we have relared already, and those also, which are now going
to describe.

From this diversity of Religions, sprang the war, between Charles the fifth:
John Frederick, Electour of Saxony, Philip Landgrave of Hassia, and some other
Protestants, which rendered the said Emperors luster, more glonous, and begat
such a hatred in all the Protestant States, as is now grown almost
irreconciliable.

There was a temperament, or kind of agreement in Religion concluded
afterward, which was called The contract of Passavia, The contract of Passavia.
which yet, being taken again into deliberation, has since made a marveilous
operation, as we are about to show. In this aforesaid Treaty, it was ordered,
and settled, that the Protestants should enjoy all such ecclesiastical goods,
and revenues, as they had formerly possessed; and that the rest should remain
in perpetuity, to the Catholics. For example, the Catholic Bishops coming to
embrace the Luheran Religion, should forthwith religne the place, to be
occupated by another, who should make open, not feigned profession, of the
Catholic; and so consecutively, of all the Cloisters, Abbeys, and other
dignities: which yet, the Lutherans cannot deny but they have conterveened, and
contradicted, and that they retain all such aforesaid goods, and revenues,
against the will of the Testatonrs, and against all Rights, Justice, and Equity.

Complaints against the House of Austria.
But we must not also let pass in silence, the complaints which have been made
by many of the States of Germany, against the house of Austrin, which has
uphold her self about two hundred years, in the Imperial dignity, as if it
were haereditary: a suspicion, full of efficacy, which shocks after a manner,
the elective right, and strongly opposes the justest maxim of State. To which
it has been answered, that the elections have always been lawful, and that
at present, This house by means of her two Kingdoms, serves for a Bulwark to
Germany, against the Turk. Besides that, their is hardly any one to be found in
the whole body of the Empire, who is able, with the reveneues of one Family, to
sustain, or uphold the greatness of the Majesty; wherewith Charles the fifth
reproached those Princes, which were revolted from him. Were is is not (said
he) for my Low-Countryes, I could not maintain my Table: What profit have I of
your Empire, but a great charge, and porpetual troubles? Inferting thereby,
that the glory of this weighty burden, was deat enough bought, without
addition of disobedience.

After the decease of this invincible, and most vigilant Emperor, his
successors, either through too much timidity, durst not make show of seeing
the sults, and errors which were committed, or cast them off, to the following
Diets, which were often extinguished, in the very dispute of precedencie only,
as I have said already. And so the impunity of Vice enccuradging men to sin,
not only the Bishops married, and kept their Bishoprics; but the saecular
Princes also seized upon other ecclesiastical Lands, and Goods, as it were for
decencies sake, and every one in fine, would have his share thereof. The long
possession of a thing ill gotten, warrants not the propriety therein, nor
excludes the true Owner from his lawful Right. But they who can defend it with
arms, either mock, or defy the strength of the Laws.

CHAP. XVI
The Emperor redemands the Ecclesiastical Goods, taken after the composition
of Passavia. The alteration amongst the Protestants.

AFter so many Victories gotten, by the Emperors Lieutenants; after having
humbled the King of Denmark, and all the Protestants of his Party: after having
so often chastized Bethleem Gabor, destroyed the dreadful revolt of the
Peasants of Austria, and pardoned such, as were too deeply engaged in the
Prince Palatines patty, who was deprived of his Stages, and fled for resuge,
into Holland; and after the death of Mansfeldt, and his faithful Bishop, the
Emperor resolved, She complaints of the Catholics.
to satisfy the complaints of the Roman Catholics, who demanded justice, upon
such as by usurpation, detained many Possessions, and goods, after the contract
of Passavia. For being the Head of justice, he could not deny them; and the
Bishops are as well members of this great Body, as the other Princes: but it
was to move a stone, which threatened the fall of the whole building. It was
represented to him, that the Prorestants had very ill observed the Peace, and
that the Catholics had not dispured with them, what was already granted them,
by the said contract; however it were done by force, and for the establishment
of firm repose: but that they, not being glutted with those Prebendries, had
leapt beyond their bargains, and against the Signed Promise, violently ravaged,
and taken many other. But, we must not keep our word with Heretics. Who must
be upbraided with this maxine; he, who says it, or he, who does it?

The Emperor, upon mature deliberation, finding the equity of the cause,
slighting the danger, which yet was most vilable; for he went about to shock
the Electours, Princes, States, and Towns of the Empire, who would not suffer
such dainty bits to be plucked out of their mouths, with out contesting, and
hazarding all; even though they were forced to call in strangers.

A command to rander all eccle siesticell goods, taken after the Control of
Passavia.
Wherefore, upon the sixth of March 1629, he sent a most express command from
his good City of Vienna, to all the Princes, and Towns of the Empire, forthwith
to restore all ecclesiastical Lands, or Goods, seized, or occupated after the
composition of Passavia, upon pain of loss, of all P^^viledges, Rights,
Immunities, and the Imperial Eccommunication. The Thunderbolt, which falls
before the feet of the travayler, does not so much astonish him, as this
sentence did all the Protestants. But before we pass to this disasterous War,
let us see the motives, and reasons of both patryes.

I have already showed, upon what Right the Emperors command was grounded;
There son why:
the execution whereof was assured him to be facil enough, by so many
victorious Armies, which it would be no less then evident temerity for them to
oppose; since he had already ventered to expel the Heriticks out of his own
Haereditary Countries, and had brought the sedition of the Peasants to a good
issue. But, the occult causes were, that he could not better fix his Authority,
then by this way; in regard that, it he would be generally adored, and root the
Imperial Crown fast in his Family, he must needs first resorm, and reestablish
the Roman Catholic Religion every where. That he had a fooring in the Bahick
Sea; and that since he had so well begun, he ought to prosecute, and finish:
That he was obliged to God, the Church, and the Holy See; and that at serves
for nothing, to undertake, without perseverance, and the Iron must be struck
whilst it is hot, etc.

Now the Protestants found this Command, of as hard digestion as the Belgicks,
or Low Country people did the exaction of the Tenth Penny, A hard Proposition.
imposed upon them by the Duke of Alva. Men fight sometimes (says a learned
Writer) with more resolution, for the Harth, then for the Altar. Wherefore, Pro
arri and focis.
it was held sit to oppose it, by some Protestation: and so, they beseeched his
Majesty to suspend the execution thereof, till it were decided, in a General
Diet. But, in the mean while, there grew murmuration, and grumbling every
where, the hatred for Religion was renewed; and a most manifest aversion of the
people, discovered.

The Emperor granted them a General Assembly at Ratisbone, The Assembly at
Rathbone.
and transported himself thither, at the same time, that the news was brought
him, that the King of Sweden was entered with an Army into the Territories of
the Empire. Whereupon, the Protestant Ambassadors, even ravished with joy,
required not only a Revocation of the said Edict, or Command, in order to the
Ecclesiastical possessions, but also that all might be restored to the same
state wherein it was, before the Revolt. But Ferdinand would not hearken to
this; for either he must make himself obeyed, or leave to Command. Hereupon,
the Ambassadors sneaked away, And at Leppsick.
and assembled themselves at Leipsick.

The Neighboring nations seeing this alteration, were not a little glad, to
understand that there was a preparation made, to give this Majesty a general
check in the very foundation, and root thereof. In a word, Leagues and
Confoederations were concluded, and strangers, (who, by occult ways, helped to
fabricate this fire) called in, and embraced; the ambition of Spain not
forgotten, which aimed at nothing but the Universal Monarchy: the Inquisition
canvased, and the Jesuits, as Parricides, Incendiaries, Enomies to peace, and
Authors of all sedition, coupled: The Roman Antichrist carried also his pack,
by the writings of such, as whose whose party was supby the cruel lot of
Arms; and in fine, by all the Protestants: The Imperial Majesty it self was
exposed to the rage of the people, which wished for nothing but a change. Yea,
even the Imperial Towns, which suspected that Majesty, and which, by the
license of the change of Religion, had appropriated to themselves all the
aforesaid Lands and Goods, thrust on the wheel, augmented the distrust, and
offered the profusion of their treasures, thereby to hinder the drawing of the
principal source thereof.

It was also alleged, that the Princes and States, had had ground and cause to
employ the Ecclesiastical Lands, and Goods, to better uses; and that the
Priests; and Monks, lived ill, fatted themselves like hogs, and gave scandal,
to the whole world. That they had peacefully enjoyed them above sixty years,
and that such of them, as were left them by their Ancestors, might be retaken
by them, to provide for their children. In fine, complaints, reasons, and
libels were not wanting: And after a great wind, commonly sollowes rain: so,
all here being disposed, they came from words to blows.

CHAP. XVII
The Assembly of Ratisbone, where Frithland is dismissed from his Charge.

The Alliance of the Duke of Bwaria, with the King of France, 1630.
DUring the Assembly at Ratisbone, in the year 1630. Maximilian Duke of
Bavaria, and Electour, made a League Defensive, and Offensive, with the King of
France; whereby his Majesty promised to maintain the Electorat in the House of
Bavaria, and defend it against any, who might be so bold as to attack it, with
an Army of fifty thousand men, and he promised the King to succor him, with
four thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse, and he wrought so much by his
frequent suites, and instances with the Emperor (induced thereto by Cardinal
Richellen) that he procured the Dignity of General to be taken away from the
Duke of Frithland, Frithland dis^ missed from his charge.
who had always so well served him, though by his behavior he were grown
insupportable, chiefly to such as loved not the House of Austria. Those powers
which are trayled by so many puissant Aemulators together, run post to
destruction. This council proved dammageable to the Emperor, and yet more to
him who gave it; and he who invented it, was very likely to overthrow the whole
Empire.

The King of Sweden invited to come into Germany.
The King of Sweden, being advertised of all which passed in Germany, invited
by the Germans themselves; incited by France, England, Venice, the United
Provinces, and by occasion (which he took up by the Forelock) as also by his
own peculiar interests, began to make his preparatives. There wanted nothing
for a potent League, but Causes, and Pretexts, whereof there would be found
enough, though it were no more, then every ones own advantage apart, which is
so strong, that it ordinarily carries the balance, how full soever it be of
reason and justice. Men of this Age adore it: neither is it without ground,
that a certain learned person calls it, the Idol of these times.

Toward the beginning of the year 1630. Europe was in a kind of Crisis, war in
Italy, Germany full of old soldiers, who struck terror wheresoever they
passed. France, apprehending lest this storm should fall upon her, and that the
Eagles should come and nestle again in those three Towns, which were taken
from them (as I have noted already) hindied a Treaty of Truce, by hindering the
acceptance of the Propositions, and sent to the very bottom of the North, to
awaken Gustavus Adolphus to a League. Nor needed there much eloquence to pers
wade him, who looked asquint already, upon those puissant Troops, upon the
Baltic Sea, which draw near him. But, knowing how he had been caught by his
Neighbor, he would not be content with promises, but required a surety at
Amsterdani, before he would pass any further,

England, besides the general interest, had that of the Prince Palatine, which
she conuld not handsomely abandon, in such a conjuncture; and yet was she also
fain to give assurance for moneys, before she could enter the League of this
great Captain.

The States General were much concerned therein, since by the growth of the
House of Austria, they foresaw their certain ruin, in regard of the succor,
which she would be able to give the Spaniards. And moreover, they might well
fear, lest all the States of Germany humiliated, or joined to those of the
Emperor, he might come to redemand some Towns amongst them, which are yet
noted at the corner of the Eagle or Empire.

The Venetians, not warmed with the zeal of Religion, as the Protestants were,
as being of the same with this House; found for the interest of their State,
that it was necessary, to put the said House into such terms, as might not
give so much jealousy. And so, the Protestants being inflamed, and encouraged,
by the Catholics, which were interessed, and desirous to see some disorder
spring up in this powerful Body; undertook the same design. And then it was,
that the Empire was to be torn in pieces, since the Germans themselves
conspired her ruin, with her Enemies, and subtracted themselves from her
obedience, because they could not endure her Majesty. The House cannot fail to
be burnt, when the very owners themselves, as well as the enemies, help to set
it on fire. This unhappiness was reserved for the latter times. Let us see the
King of Sweden come in; for he will dance better then all who came before him.

CHAP. XVIII
The entry of the King of Sweden into Germany. His reasons why? Those of the
Emperor. Allyances with Bogistaus. He blocks up the Sea Towns. Tilly takes the
Generalate, against his will.

Where shall I be able to find terms, and Ink black enough, to express,
and write tragically enough, the cruel, and dismal effects, of this sanguinary,
and horrible War? Where shall I choose words of energy, or force enough, to
curse the inhuman actions, and unnatural Tragedies, which have been acted in
wretched Europ, and which are not yet ended; and that, only by the immense
ambition of some few persons? It is lawful openly to blame Vice, but not such
as commit it: It is God only, who must judge, and we poor Subjects must bend
our shoulders, and expect our deliverance from above.

About Mid-Summer, in the year 1630. the King of Sweden entered Germany with an
Army; having first cleansed the Isle of Rugia, and the borders of Stralsund,
from the Imperial Garrisons. The reasons which he published, for his coming as
an Enemy, were.

First, because his Ambassadors had not been admitted, to the Treaty of Lubeck.

Secondly, in regard the Imperialists came against him in Prussia.

And thirdly, for that some Letters of his, which he sent to Bethleem Gabor,
had been intercepted, in full peace. But these, were but pretexts: for the
true, and moving grounds were these.

His reasons.
First, because the Emperor had deprived his kinsmen, the Princes of
Meckelemburgh, of their Dutchyes.

Secondly, for that he had built Forts, in all the Havens; and made Ships, to
render himself potent upon the Baltic Sea, with design to pass one day
further into Sweden, then he was to expect, that the Eagles would be suffered
to coast.

And lastly, in respect there was some apperance of extending his domination in
Germany; and in a word, it is always profitable to fish, in troubled waters.

The answer to the aforesaid reasons.
The Emperor answered, that he himself had begun, by putting a Garrison into
Stralsund, and that there could be no treating with him, without drawing it
from thence.

As for his Letters, besides that all the plots, and practices, both of
himself, and his Allies, were already discovered; it was impossible, but they
must tend to his disadvantage, being directed to a man, who had as often
revolted, as opportunity was offered him to do it; and who never kept his
faith, but when he wanted occasion to break it.

In relation to the Baltic Sea, he had at least (being Chief, and Emperor) as
much to do with it, as Gustavus had.

That the succor which he sent the King of Poland, was sounded upon the same
Maxims, upon which himself had succored the King of Denmark, and Stralsund.

In order to the Dukes of Meckelemburgh, he objected, that he had nothing to
do, to controwl him in Germany; and that himself would not take it well, that
he should meddle with any of his kingdom.

That his cares were open to Intercessions, but not to Commands.

But, all these arguments served for nothing; there must be blows. For, the
King was sure of his Allies, and of the inclination of all the Protestants,
whose Cause, and Religion, he vanted, that he came to defend. Moreover, this
generous Prince, being brought up in arms, was sure, that, could he but once
come to beat that old Captain, Tilly.
that victorious Rock, against which all his Enemies had made shipwreck; all
the Lutherans would lend him their hands, from the one end of the Empire, to
the other; and then, what honor, and what glory should he obtain? And if it
happened otherwise, he might consolate himself, with all such other Warriers, as
had suffered the like disgrace; though yet still, with this advantage beyond
them, that his Enemies could not follow him, into his kingdom. In brief, he
wanted but the getting of one General Battle, to put into his hands the two
thirds of the Empire: and one more for all; and Italy in, to the bargain.

King Gustave leagues with the Dake of Pomerania.
Whilst he was treating the League with Duke Bogislaus (who received him in
Stetin) and driving the Imperialists out of Pomerania, and Meckelenbargh; being
fortunate in many Encounters, and chiefly, in that which was offered for the
succor of Colbergh (where the Imperialists were knocked, and Torquaro Conty
forced to incamp himselfo at Gartz) the Protestants assembled themselves
secretly at Leipsick, from whence they communicated with him, and amongst
themselves, about the means of retaining the Ecclesiastical Lands, and Goods in
question; of maintaining their Religion; and reducing, and restraining the
Empire, to the same state, wherein it had been before the troubles. All kinds
of defense are authorized, when there is fear of the diminution of estate, and
State, together with that of Religion. It seems, that in these times, men may
dispense with their faith or word given, even upon mere doubts; and that it is
lawful, upon mere apprehensions only, though without any ground, to withdraw
ones self from obedience. But dissidence, and power to hurt upon occasion,
have more weight in Stateinterest, then in Right; and they, who have not Peace,
and Justice, for the scope of their arms, do not make War, but commit
robberies; for the end of War, ought to be Peace.

He blocks the sea Towns.
Now, the King spent all the Summer, in blocking up the maritine Places;
raising new Troops; exciting the Inhabitants to expel their Guests, and
receive their old Masters; wherein they showed themselves so good Servants,
that their fear effectively appeared in all parts. Bogistans wrote complaints,
and excuses to the Emperor; but they brought nothing back, but reproaches, and
condemnations.

In the mean time, the Imperial Army and that of the League, were without a
Head; because the Duke of Frithland had obeyed the Emperors Order; and General
Tilly had a mind to submit to some pious inspirations, which commanded him to
leave this Trade, and pass the rest of his days in the service of his
Heavenly Master: In such sort, as there was much a do, yea, and many great
Divines were faint to display their eloquence, to make him re-admit this
Burden upon his shoulders. For he considered, that he had always had Fortune
as his Handmaid; that he had acquired as much glory, as any one Captain in the
World; and that all this might change; that in a great Calm, a great Storm is
to be feared; and that it often happens, that the soundest, and best disposed
bodies, are those, which most easily fall into grevous sicknesses. No, no,
(said he) let another younger then I am, untangle this Web: It is a fair Field
to win the Laurel; since the dispute is about Religion, and the Authority, of
the Prime man of the World; the Cause is just; and the more difficulty it has
in it, the more glory will it also have. Sweat, and Dust mingled with blood,
will always revive, and quicken the Palms, and Bays, wherewith his head
shall be crowned. Mine begin to way old with me; and I will now consecrate them
to the foot of a Crucifix.

O how happy had he been, had he followed this connsel, and put himself into a
Monastery, as he had projected! But his delights were to be mingled with
bitterness; his glory was to be obscured; and he was to taste the condition of
a Conquered, as well as that of a Conqueror. The Cross, which he had a mind
to embrace in a Cloister, The praise of Tilly who retakes the Generalate.
was but exterior, and voluntary; but this was to be active, and essential.
There were published of him, these three things; That be let no day slip,
without hearing Mass: That he had never touched a woman; And that he never
lost Battle.

Let us leave him taking the charge, and care, of ranging the Soldiers again
into good order, and discipline; and see what passed at Magdeburgh, since the
year 1628.

CHAP. XIX
The Siege of Magdeburgh. The Duke of Lauemburgh beaten, and taken, near the
Elbe. King Gustave takes Francfurt, upon the Oder, and beats the Imperialists.

MAgdeburgh is an Imperial Town, in the Country of Saxony, situated upon the
River of Elbe, grown very rich, and puissant, and by consequence insolent, by
the convenience of Trade; It put Charles the fisth to much vexation, and
trouble, and he proclaimed an Outlawrie against it, and gave Maurice Duke of
Saxony the execution thereof; who, either through collusion, or otherwise,
forbore to take it; and from thence came the German Proverb: Magdeburgh, the
first disturbance thereof.
Metz and Magd refused to dance with the Empetour. After Luthers Doctrine was
planted there, the Archbishops authority began to be much vilifyed, and
consequently, that of the Emperor. But let us now come to the state of the
controversy.

This Town chose Augustus Son to the Elector of Saxony, for her
Administratour. Ferdinand consented not to this Election; and the Pope,
desirous to restore his credit in that Country, together with that of the
Emperor; established the Archduke Leopold, who is at present Governor of the
Low Countries, for the King of Spain. The Imperialists seized upon some places
near it, and extorted a sum of money from it for their Sold, or Pay; and by
continuing to demand a greater, provoked the aversions of the Cirtizens, and
encouraged them to take arms, and chase them away.

They seized also upon some Barks, which went to the Country of Meckelenburgh;
so that Wallenstein at length was feign to come and revenge that Commotion.
Appeased by Wallenstem.
Brief, the Town was invested, temerity turned into repentance, and arms into
supplications: in conclusion, all was pardoned, they dispensed with for a
Garrison, and the Forfeit of a hundred and fifty thousand Riv.-Dollars, which
was liberally remitted, out of respect to some certain Princes: though yet, all
this made them not a whit better Servants, to Ferdinand. Thus, was the first
bout past; but there followed a second, which brought an utter ruin, and that
the most miserable one, that ever fell upon any Town; I will be bold to say,
then that of Troy, even though all were true, which has been written thereof
by the Greeks, and then that of Forusalem, Saguntum, and Numantia: yea, of
Sancorra, and Tirlemour. But we will deliver the motives thereof, and the
Prodigies, which praeceded it.

The couse of the disturbance.
The Archdukes Ambassadors were sent to Hall, and Magdeburgh, to press the
Inauguration, or Investure, re-demand the Churches, and dismount the
Evangelical Canonries. This infinitely displeased the Administratour Christian
of Brandenburgh, who could not brook, that such a dignity, together with so
great Revenues (wherewith he could maintain himself according to his quality)
should be forced from him: Nor was he ignorant, of how the Electour of Saxony
took this proceeding, with what eyes these new Catholics were looked on, and
that Fortune did forward the valiant, and hinder the timid: and therefore, he
fell to work.

On that one side, he perceived the Assembly of Leipsick, and the intention
thereof: on the other, the King of Sweden, who made great progress, and who was
expected by all, as a true Liberatour, or Deliverer, and in the middle, all the
people extremely affectionate to the Party, and desirous of nothing more, then
to be in action for it. We always covet that which is hurtful to us, and ask
that, which we ought to shun.

The A Iministratour enters into the Town, and gains the people.
He entered into Magdeburgh disguised, with Marshal Falkenbergh, and brought
things so to pass by his practices, and shifts, that he gained the Principal
of the Town privately; and they, the people publicly. He asked them, whether
they would hold with the King Sweden, and with him? To which they answered with
a loud voice, Yea. Ah! Blind people, what do you? You tumble both your
fortunes, and lives into apracipice, by a fatality, which no body can
comprehend, and yet less, resist. You have forgotten your first sickness, but
you will perish, in the relaps. You see not any of the Prodigies, which
admonish, and threaten you: One part of your Walls, and Bulwarks, tell you by
their tottering, that they are to be thrown down, and that flaming sword,
which appeared aver your Town five or six months before your ruin, whilst you
stepped, announced to you, that fire and sword should destroy you. Prepare your
selves to suffer Arms, since you demand war; he who laves danger, shall
perish in it.

Now this was a Masterpiece for the King of Sweden, as being one of the chief
Instruments, to smooth the way to his victories. For this Town retarded the
Arms of the Imperialists, and opened the passage, to those of the Swedes; who
thereby got means to hunt them quickly out of all Pomerania, and
Meckelenburgh, and terrified them, in fine, like an Earthquake, so that they
knew not to what Saint to pray most. They had their enemies within, without,
and on every side. If they opposed such as were before, they were beaten
behind: The victory of the ^wedes in Pomerania, and Meckelenbergh.
so such sort, as that the first year, Gustavus having made an Alliance with:
Duke Bogislaus, cleansed Pomerania, and Meckelenbergh, by almost a general
Insurrection of the people, and General Tilly's absence, The Maritine Towns,
as Colbergh, Rostock, Damitz, and Wismaer, when they had been very long blocked
up, yielded themselves one after another, for want of succor; and the King,
having wedged up the Imperialists, asfar as into Silesia, carried on the war,
to the very bank of the Elb; but it was after the elestruction of Magdeburgh,
as we shall forthwith show. He found a little repugnance in Pomerania, from
them, who knew Perdinands forces; but his violent arguments made them bow, and
his complaints moved the Electors also to change their note, who had not
qualified him, in their Letters, with the title of: King. He frighted the
Ladies at Berling, and got Spawdan for his retreat. In brief, they who invited
him, were constrained to se-joyn themselves in appearance from him, and make a
show to apprehend, and fear him; though in their souls, they adored him, as
their deliverer: but this dissimulation caused the ruin of Germany, and
repentance in them, who so dexterously served themselves of it. The
Administratour being glad boyond measure, to see that his design had succeeded
so well, hoped to be very shortly in a condition, not only to expel his
enemies, but to advance the war also, to some other part. Papenheim hastens,
and begius the Siege, 1630.
But Papenheim posting thither, succored the Castle of Hall, retook forth with
all all the Towns, stopped up the Fox in his hole, and began the fatal Siege of
^hisu^happy Town, the 18. of December 1630.

The King, seeing his enemies engaged in a long and tedious Siege, and desirous
to serve himself of the advantage, thought of another diversion; and so, he
sent Francis Duke of La^enburgh, with some Troops, toward the Elb^, to raise a
great fire there; Chastises Duks Francis near the Elbe.
but Papenheim quenched it with their own blood; took the said Duke prisoner in
a small Bark, and sent him to the Emperor, for not having kept his promise,
which he gave him, never to bear Arms against him. Having thus furiously
dispatched this Commision, he came back to the Siege, and Tilly having mustered
his Army, though he found it not so great as he conceived, Tilly in
Meckelenbergh.
marched nevertheless to Meckelenbergh.

Gustave, the other side, seeing his onemies melt before Magdeburgh, and having
performed very great Exploits, both in Summer, and Autumn, marched in the
month of December, up the Oder, to manifest thereby that he was more vigorous
in the winter, then the Summer. In effect, Tilly returns to the Siege, and and
the King beats the Imperialists as Francfu^t.
the Imperialist durst not expect him at Gartz; but, after the lost of many of
their men, retired themselves in confusion, and made a stand again at
Francfurt, upon the same River, though yet he returned, and entrenched himself,
without hazarding any combat at all, or opposing Tilly, who took
Newbrandenburgh, and put the Garrison to the sword, before his face. But he had
his revenge, and made Tilly return toward Magdeburgh, whilst himself took
Frankfurt, in the month of April 1631. with incredible felicity, beat the
Emperors old Bands; flew above three thousand upon the place, and forced the
rest to double their pace, toward Silesia.

After having plucked out this thorn, he bent all his thoughts, to the succor
of Magdeburgh, where we will leave him, to see what passed at that famous
Assembly of Leipsick, where there was present that renowned Capucin, Father
Joseph, to animate, together with the other Ambassadors, the Protestants, to
war against the Catholic League. But interest of State is more considerable
then Religion; the Body, then the Soul: this world, then the other, and man,
then God: If Right must be wronged, it must be done, only to gain a kingdom; in
all other other things, piety must be reveranced. This proceeding had no other
justice, then reason of State; and yet, the Reformates will be sure, not to
excite the Catholics to the destruction of any nation, which purely
followestheir Doctrine. When you shall see the abomination of desolation, save
your selves upon the Mountains.

The Assembly of Leip sick was convocated by the Electour of Saxony, as Head of
the Protestants, thereby to hinder the restitution of the Ecclesiastical Lands,
and Goods; to succor a Magdeburgh, and join with the Swedes, to resist the
Emperor, whose potency was too formidable to them. And this was the ground of
their calling King Gustave into Germany, to be Captain General of all the
forces; who, being fortified by the Allyances of France, England, and the
Conforderated States of the Low Countries, promised himself no less then the
Empire it self, if he could win but one Battle.

CHAP. XX
The Protestants make an Alliance with King Gustave. Magdeburgh taken by force.

They arm every where.
VVHilest the Ambassadors of the Princes, Imperial Towns, and Protestans
States, were treating an Alliance, and the King was growing formidable; the
Drums were beating, and the Trumpets sounding every where; in such sort, as
that the two Electours, in the month of July 1631, seeing themselves with an
Army on foot of twenty thousand men, threw off their vizard, wrote to the
Emperor, as accusing him of having broaken his Oath, overthrown the Peace, and
Liberty of Germany; and in fine, Complaints against the Emperor.
of having taken away the bonds of Religion: And if he revoked not that Edict
for Restitution of Ecclesiastical Lands, and Goods, and that there were not
some means found out to remedy these diforders, the whole Empire would go to
rack. But it was now too late to talk of remedies; strangers being already
gotten in, and Ferdinands honor too deeply engaged. Nor did their distrusts,
and jealousies derogate one jot, from the justice of the Edict; no more then
their possession of so many years made them true, and lawful Proprietaries:
For, That which is differed, is not lost. And for the praescription, it served
for nothing; it being as lawful for the Emperor, to take the said Lands, and
Goods from them by way of Justice, as it had been for them to dispossess the
Ecclesiastics thereof by violence, or to retain them, against the agreement
made, after they had withdrawn themselves from the ancient Church, Refused by
other.
to marry: and so much the rather, because he was obliged thereto by his
Authority, Right, and Interest. Besides, he wanted not arguments to retort.
For, he accused them of deceit; for that, under pretext of consulting, they had
assembled themselves, to take Arms, and join which Gustave: That it was they,
who had long ago, ruined the supports of Religion, and divided Germany by
factions, and distrusts, to the detriment of the public quiet; and that
himself, as being the Head, was bound to restore all to the former splendor,
and good intelligence. So every one pretended to have right on his side; and
the sword was to do the office.

Now Tilly, who by the strength of Gold.
Ducats, had opened the conscience, had purchased the Pen of a Secretary, knew
all that was treated in the said Assembly; and effectively saw, that there was
neither Burgh, nor Village under the jurisdiction of the Protestants, where
soldiers were not listed.

Tilly passes into Hastia.
Wherefore he passed into Hassia, where he found the Landgrave William much
changed, as being far more mindful, of what he had concluded at Leipsick, then
of what he had promised the Emperor at Vienna: For, he refused both Garrison,
and Pension, as also the casheering of his forces; and showed himself resolute;
in fine, by the most manifest signs of aversion he gave, to defend himself, if
he were attacked. Upon which, Tilly preparing himself to make him sing another
tune, Returns to the Siege.
was informed, that the King advanced toward the Elbe, and so his menaces were
but Chimera's; for he was forced to return to the Siege.

Count Turstembergh in Swave and Wittemberg.
The Count of Turstembergh, an old Soldier, stood not with his Arms acrosse;
for there was work enough cut out already, without expecting any more.
Wherefore, he was sent into, Swaveland, and Vlme, both which he quickly ranged,
and from thence, into the Duchy of Wirtembergh, where the eleven thousand men
newly raised, were not strong enough, to keep the Duke within the League: in
such sort, as that those Provinces were constrained, to renounce the Protestant
alliance, almost as soon as it was known, that they had sworn to it.

All these commandments were prosperous enough, in High Germany: but the face
of all things was changed, in Low- Saxony, and the Maritine Towns (the
principal subject of the distructs) which had long been blocked up, and put
themselves again, into King Gustaves hands.

Tilly and Papenheim, being resolved rather to dye, then abandon the Siege,
dissembled their losses received, and continued it with so much order, that
they quickly made themselves masters, All the Forts taken.
of all the Forts and Outworks; so that there remained nothing but the Town,
which perished, more out of hatred, and by the industry of wise Falkembergh,
then by her own strength. The Inhabitants were summoned to render; the Mines
were ready, and the hand listed up to strike: and yet, through their obstinacy
and blindness, they would needs expect extremityes, which at length they
found. For Papenheim, irritated, as well by their flowts, as by their
contumatious resistance, entered first by force, and was repulsed by the Valor
of the Marshal, who being killed by a bullet, And the Town by force. which is
all burnt.
the Inhabitants quickly retreated into their houses; the nearest whereof he
commanded to be fired; and almost at the very same instant, the fire was seen
very far from thence, near the Elbe, and so, in less then four hours, this
fine Town was reduced into ashes, whilst the Soldiers were fighting with the
Citizens, for plunder, without taking any care at all, to extinguish the
devouring flames.

This was the end of that deplorable Town, the ashes whereof produced such
animosities amongst the Lutherans, and Reformates, against the Imperialists,
that they cannot be highly enough expressed; and principally against Tilly,
whose actions they carped, and said, that he had stained all his gallant
Victories, with the smoaky ruins of Megdeburgh. What ever were in the matter,
true it is, that Tilly, after this ransack, found fortune always against him;
and the Protestants reproached him with the indignation, and vengeance of God,
for the shedding of so much innocent blood.

The Catholics, on the other side, retort the fault upon the insolency of the
Burghers, or Townsmen, who refused honorable conditions, when there was time
for them: and whilst the gate was yet open to favor, and pardon: and say
besides, that the Swedes, seeing the place lost, lest it on fire, for fear
least it should fall entyre, together with the Magazin, into the hands of their
enemies; alleging for proof thereof, that the fire was kindled, in many parts
of the Town, from which the imperialists were very far off; though yet indeed,
when soldiers are once gotten into a place by force, they make no account at
all of command. But really, had they been able to enjoy this victory, by an
honorable composition, they would have been able by the conveniencie of the
passage, and the Bridge, to keep the war always in Meckclemburgh; succor
the places besieged, and have Westphalia behind them: for; a little before the
taking of this Town, they had forsaken the Bridge of Dassaw, upon information,
that the King was coming thither, and for fear least he should serve himself of
the said passage. But however, these sparkles encompassed all Germany with a
fire, which lasted till the year 1649. Change of Religion, Commodityes,
Allyances, Situation, and Traffic, had made this Town very insolent, with
impunity: but the pot goes so often to the water, that at length, it returns
cracked. As long as the Relics of St. Norbert rested there, they saved
(according to the opinion of many) the Town from the thunderbolt; but after
they were secretly stolen way, the wrath of heaven fell upon it, and crushed
it, Had not Vlyffes stolen the Image of Minerva, Troy had not perished.

Magdeburgh, being lost in her ruins, and the poor inhabitants buried, or burnt
in their houses, nothing was left to the conquerours, but a just displeasure,
to see the desolation thereof. Tilly marched with his army; entered into
Saxony; Tilly goer into Saxony.
took many Towns; wrote to the Duke, and assured him, that if he renounced not
the League, he would compel the Emperor to call strangers, into Germany, as
well as the Protestants had done, by inviting the Swedes, and all the Princes,
by choosing Gustave, for head of the union, and Protector of the Interests of
the said League.

The Electour was extremly afflicted, to see his country was become the
Theater, where all the Armies were to begin the tragaedie. But he was
reproached, that it was the recompense of the so many, and so great services,
as he had done his Imperial majesty; and that, as being a Lutheran, he ought
to be chased our, as well as the rest. Wherefore, he beseeched the King to make
haste; but he temporizing, and demanding Wittembergh for his retreat, he
offered him all his Country: by which franknesse, he gave him so much
contentment, that he resolved to succor him, without any condition at all.

Before this, Gustave worsted Tilly before the Fort of Werben, for he suffered
him to draw near him, Tilly beaten near Werben.
under praetext that his Canon was nailed, and Tilly having sent spies to his
Camp, for this effect, and understanding that all was quiet, conceaved that his
enterprise would not fail to succed; and so was repulsed with much loss; and
a little after, he lost yet three Regiments more; whereby he was taught, that
he had to do, with a man who was neither Novice, nor. Apprentice, and that he
must dispute lustily, to get any advantage upon him.

But, he was not aware, that his mifortune followed him to closely, and that
his thirteen years Victory was to be shortly contaminated, by the loss of one
only Battle: a Battle, I say, which overthrew the house of Austria; destroyed
so much, and so great progress, and exposed the Catholics, to great
afflictions. Lansbergins foretold, There shall come a King from the North, who
shall cause troubles in Germany. Oh Bishops! (said he), how much will you have
to suffer? etc.

CHAP. XXI
The Battle of Leipsick. The flight of the Imperialists.

The battle of Leipsick the 17 of September, 8631:
KING Gustave being joined to the forces of the Electours, a resolution was
taken, to go, and face General Tylly: who having the wind favorable, and
taken the Town of Leipsick, encamped himself hard by, and stood fast, to expect
the Armies of the confederates. This Battle, wherein were hazarded the Capps
of two Electours, the liberty of the Princes of Germany; the conquests of so
many years, and the whole hope of the Roman Catholics, was very bloody, and
the old bands, which had never been scensly, gave ground here.

The Saxons began the Shock, or Onser, whilst the king enlarged his Camp, to
get the wind. But they withstood it not long, before they ran; and their very
flight made the King win the Victory. We are taught by hurt; and misfortune
it self is good, for something. There needed nothing to cause disorder, for
the Imperialists pursued the Saxons so far, that they gave the Swedes occasion
to gain, with little trouble, their Camp, their Canon, and the Wind; and
General Horn, flanking them in their pursuit, put them into such confusion,
that they knew not one another, and hindered them from returning to their own
Body, from whence they had more hotly, then wifely unfastened them selves.

Tilly, seeing this rowte, gave order for the Canon to be regained; whereupon,
Papenheim with his Horse, gave the Swedes two such furious Charges, as that had
it not been for the presence of brave King Gustave, it was likely, that they,
who had always been accustomed to vanquish, would also have triumphed now. But
he exhorting his men, both by his Majesty, actions, and eloquence; and a
terrible execution, being done upon the Imperialists, as well by their own
Canon, as by that of their Enemies; their Cavalrie began to fly. Tilly
followed, though he were wounded, and thereby gave the lie to such as had
impudently published; that he was invulnerable, by virtue of some certain
Characters, or Charms.

If the Imperial Horse, had done their duty, as well as the foot theirs, the
confederates had run hazard to loose all. But the Foot being abandoned, The
valor of the Imperial Foot.
fought so valliantly, that they were feign to turn the ordnance upon five
Regiments, which were rallyed, and fortifyed a part before they could break
them. All the Baggage, Artillery, Munition, and sixscore Colors fell into the
Conquerours hands.

Now, who will have forward trust, to his own strength, and power? Who will
presume to rely upon the number of his Victories? Who will believe that fortune
can be stopped, with a Nail of Diamant? You see, that an Army of four and
twenty thousand Caprains (that is, all old Soldiers) were broaken, in the
plain, and open Field. Was i^ for want of courage, or experience. By no
means. By whom? By Soldiers, who understood it better then they? Neither
shall we find the cause, in the Justice of the Party! Least of all: for every
one thinks, he has equity on his side; and besides, we must not judge of Right
and Valor, by ambiguous, and underraine events. Moreover, we are taught by
practice, that Fortune ranges her self ordinarily with usurpers, because they
are full of courage, and the Countries, they hold, of ill humors, factions,
and partialities.

This bloody battle, which was the seventh of September, 1631, which was
called a Day of blood, by the famous Astrologer Horlicins; and which changed
the countenance of the Affairs of Germany. And the news of this victory,
(which got strength by going) unspeakably rejoiced, not only all the
Protestants, but also all such, as to whom those glorious Fiagles seemed too
proud, and so much undertaking.

The number of the dead, was very great, by the obstinat resistance of the
combattants; nor was that of the prisoners small; which amounted (according to
the opinion of some Authors) to thirteen thousand men. The darkness of the
night, sheltered such as fled; however they could not all escape the rage of
the Peasants, who cut: the throats of three thousand of them.

Tilly retired, by the way of Hall, toward the Weser; passed through Hassin,
conferred with the Bishops of Wurtzburgh, Tilly retired himself into Bavaria.
and Bamburgh; whom he upbraided, with the contempt of his advice, which was,
that they should open their purses, to raise a new Army, and not expect, till
he were oppressed, by all the forces of Germany together. This done, he
departed toward his Master the Duke of Bavaria. And General Aldrwiger, hearing
of this defeat, and observing small desire in his Army, to make head against
the Swedes, who were already reported to be invulnerable, by virtue of certain
Spolls, or Characters; was forced to return toward Franconie, and from thence,
also into Bavaria.

The King, having received the Congratulations of his victory, and protesting,
that he would pursue the old Corporal (so called her old Tilly) to the end of
the world; The King goes goes into Franconie.
prosecuted his point toward Franconie, took Coninxhoff, and Wurtzburgh, after
having reduced Halberstade, and Erfurt; (and this last voluntarily received a
Garrison from him, though it had flatly refused any from Tilly) and from
thence, he went to salute the River Main, where Francfurt threw open her
Gates, and Hannaw yielded her self to him, This done, he divided his Army, sent
one part of it toward the Elbe, let the Duke of Saxony recover his lost
places, And the Duke of Saxony, in Bohemia.
and afterward march toward Bohenia, with General Arnham, who took Prague,
and Eguer.

A little before this glorious victory, he received news, that his Queen was
arrived at Stetin, with eight thousand men, which were come out of England,
under the conduct of Marquis Hamilton. Oh poor Germany? What miseries, and
mischiefs are thou about to suffer, all thy Provinces being full of soldiers?
Fortune, by her inconstancy, courting now the one side, and then the other,
will destroy thy Towns, and Villages, and make thy great Empire, no better the
a Churchyard! Thy fine Lands will become vast, and savage, there being no body
left to culituate them! Famine will cause the dead to be unburied; Contagion
will sweep away such as escape the hand of the soldier, and thy fields will
grow white with bones?

The first Post, which arrived at Vienna, brought news, of the defeat of the
Saxons; the second, that of Tilly, which disturbed the joy; and the third,
filled the whole Court with sadness, and made it think of a way how to repair
this great loss. If the Affricans, being puffed up with so many victories, and
with the ruin of the Romans, (whereof they held themselves cocksure) were much
amazed to see them before Carthage; so, to say the truth, the Bishops, and the
Roman Catholics, were not a whit less, by the destruction of this Army, A
terreur amongst the Catholic.
which had always been victorious, and by means whereof, after the gaining of
one Battle, they hoped to see the Mass, and the Imperial Authority, restored,
throughout all Germany.

A flock of sheep is not more scattered, when if sees it self environed by
Wolves, and without a shepherd; then were the Ecclesiastics by this accident;
for terror having thrust it self in amongst them, they betook themselves all
to flight; The flight of the Reclesiasticks.
some, to the other side of the Dannb: and others by the Rheyn, to Colein. But
that, which troubled them most, was, that they were fain to forsake their
money, which they might better have employed for the raising of an Army, at
that time, when all the Lutherans took Arms. In fine, the confusion of the one,
and the joy of the other, was so great, that it could not be expressed, and the
money of the Priests served for a bait to attack them. Indeed, their avarice
was ever blamed, and the great Revenues they possessed, purchased them hatred:
They were too much at ease, it was necessary to unfatten them a little. The
hope of plundering upon them, encouraged an infinite multitude to bear Arms for
King Gustave; who never let them be quiet, but kept them continually in action,
thereby to disable the Emperor from recollecting himself. Thus luck turned,
and Fortune took part with the Swedes, whom we will now leave, in the honors
which are done them, and the shouts of joy, which the Lutherans make, for this
glorious victory.

Now, the King seeing himself thus adored by his own party, and so much
redoubted by his enemies, coursed them every where; imagining that from thence
forward, he should easily find the way to the Universal Monarchy: But in an
alliance, every one has his design apart, as I shall more amply demonstrate,
France calls me now back thither. Ill news ought to be sooner carried to a
Prince then good, that so a more speedy and prompt temedy may be found for
disorders.

CHAP. XXII
The Cardinal watches upon the Affairs of Germany; Abuses the Duke of
Lorrain. Papenheim retakes Westphalia; succors Magdeburgh, and beats the
Swedes.

CArdinal Richelieu, having finished the Civil War of the Hughenots, as also
that of Mantua, found himself almost overwhelmed, by the plots and practices of
such, as liked not that he alone should have the mannagement of the Affairs in
his hands. But he came most gallantly off, by sheltering himself under his
Kings favor, in such sort, as that the said Kings only Brother, was fain to
retire himself from the Court, The Duke Ocleans in Lorrain.
and pass through Orleans into Burgundy; and then, to the Duke of Lorrain. The
Queen Mother also unable to ruin him, whom she had raised so high, and to undo
him, whom she had made so powerful; being fled from Camplegne (where she was,
as it were, guarded) retired her self to the Infanta at Brussells. And the
Queen Mother at Brusselst.
He made use against her, of that authority, which she had procured for him,
which she could not now take from him. Ingratitude amongst private persons, is
a vice; in business of State, but a necessity; and so all is pald with excuses.

The said Cardinal was revoked from his banishment, to induce her (upon whose
minds he had a very great influence) to a peace, and give her such advice, as
was most useful to the King, and most dammageable to her self; and which
served him for rongs or steps, to climb to the top of that greatness, to
which he had ascended. Thus destroyed he her, who labored to elevate him, and
who trusted wholly in him, and made him, in fine her prime, and principal
Minster. But, they who relate this proceeding, to save him from the attack of
ingratitude, allege forsooth, that the Kings Cause ought to prevail, and that
it is by no means necessary to observe, and keep a Contract, which is made
against the Laws, and Rights of the kingdom. But, there was peradventure, no
other way to surmount the Eagle, then to thrust himself into her feathers.
Whilst the Queen Mother, and Monsieur de Luynes, possessed the Kings favor,
the fortune of the whole Court depended upon them two; but he having lost his
life, resigned it totally to Cardinal Richelieu only, who most absolutely
tetained it till his death.

Kings Gustaves victory wonderfully rejoiced, all the Reformates, and all them
of the Cardinals Cabal; however the zealous Catholics were afflicted, and
murmured much at him; blaming him as an impious man, and a favourer of
Heretics, but he was an immovable Rock: and so having shaken off his
Benefactresse, and her faithful servants, he bent all his cares to the
direction of the Affairs i^ Germany, and to the means which was to be
followed, to arrive to a point of so much difficulty, as he had praemeditated.

He conducted the King with some Forces, into Lorraine, took Vic, and Moyenvic;
procured a Cessation of Arms for fifteen days, The King of France in Lorrain,
with the Cardinal.
between his Master and the Catholic Electours, and labored by most secret
ways, to induce them to seek his Majesty's protection; wherein he succeeded
but little better, then they had done in the Embassy, which they sent to the
King, to beseech him to divert the Arms of Sweden, from their Terriories, and
from the Catholic Countries. For, the Electour of Trev^rs oaly, sought his
Sanctuary, in the Arms of Lewis, because he could not hope for it, in those of
Philip; and yet less, in those of Ferdinand.

Gustave engry at the protection given to the Electour of Tievirs.
King Gustave, unwilling to let his soldiers cool, could not cadure to hear
Monsieur de Carnasse the French Ambassador, who beseeched him to think of a
prolongation of the Truce, for a month, to whom, (being vexed at the
protection given to the Electour of Trevirs, and clearly perceiving the
intention of France) he very cholerickly said, that be can not to dismember the
Empire, but to deliver it from oppression; ^^rather, to retain, and keep it
entyre: and that, if his Muster angered him, he would go see Paris, with fifty
thousand men. To which Carnasse coldly replied, that his Master would free him
from that trouble, by meeting him more then half way, with the like Train.
But these little stings vanished in the common Cause, and by the dexterity of
the Cardinal, who judged, that it was not yet time, to come to that; and that
it was needful to dally with the haughty humor of this Septemtrionall Prince,
so to weaken, and attenuate the House of Austria yet more, by his Arms. It was
too great an Oak, to be cut down at one blow. They who labored to exasperate
them, did but loose their labor: for, they had to do with Politicians, who had
good noses, and who would be sure, not to become enemies, but by sharing the
whole Prey.

The Duke of Lorraine lays down Arms, and gives three Towns to the King.
The Duke of Lorraine had raised an Army of twelve thousand men, to succor the
Emperor, and was already advanced as far as the Confines of Hassia: but he was
constrained to retire into his Duchy, and promise the King of France, who was
at Metz, not to meddle with the Affairs of Germany; and for pledge of this
promise, to put three Towns into his hands, for the space of three years. A
hard condition, for a Sovereign Prince, who could not see the Emperors ruin,
but with his own. But he was forced to yield, to a more potent then himself,
for a time; for there grew a change afterward.

If the Protestants had cause to complain of the insolency of the soldiers;
the Catholics had also their turn, and were no less trodden down, then they;
and especially the Priests, Monks, and Bithops; but above all, the sIesuits
carried, the pack.

The Landgrave of Hassia, attacks the Bishops.
The first, who cast himself upon them, was William, Landgrave of Hassia, who
pillaged the Country of the Abbot of Fulda, a Prince of the Empire: from
whence, he returned into Westphalia, and to the Diocese of Colcin, upon which
he cast irreparable damages. But Count Papenheins came to Colein, Papenheim
retaits an Army.
to put a remedy to these mischiefs; nor could there be a braver man then he
found out to do it, if it were within humane wit, to invent a way for it; which
he did, and brought it to so good an issue, that he merited thereby, to be
styled the Captain of Captains.

He began his march with Lamboy, recollected the seatterings of the old
soldiers; and put them in discipline together with the new ones. Being arrived
at Hamelen, he joined with Groensfeldt, retook many places without the loss of
a man; and the more he advanced, the bigger was his Army; so great power has
the reputation of a General, to draw forces together. He resolved to beat
Bannier from the Siege of Magdeburgh, to which end, he drew to himself the
Garrison which was gone out of Wismar, and with this small Body, and much
military science, mingled with cunning, he fell upon the skirts of the Swedes,
when they thought him yet far enough from them; so that they retired with
confusion; Beats Bannier.
and he charging them in the Reere, put them into great disorder, and entered
the Town, Draws out the Garrison of Magdeburgh.
and judging it not tenible, blew up the Rampars, and the Church, and drew out
the Garrison, to the number of four thousand, to do better service elsewhere:
He continued his victory, drew contribution from such Towns, as into which he
would put no Garrisons, because he would not diminish his Army, ruined the
Landgrave of Hass^^s Leavies, and beat Bannier, who came to succor him. In a
word, Beats Bannier again as also the Landgrave, the Duke of Brunswick, and
General jot.
all gave way, all stooped. He charged the Duke of Brunswick in the Field, with
so much fury, that he had much a do, to save himself, with one only Regiment
of Horse. He afflicted the Bishopric of Bremen, as well as the Duchy of
Branswick; and hearing, that General Jot had besieged Staden, he went, and
chased him thence, with the loss of above fifteen hundred men; The exploit of
the Westphana.
drew out the Garrison, and found himself, in a short time, at the head of a
brave Army, and crowned with many victories: He repassed into Westphana, which
he restored to the Emperors obedience, and came, in a word, very near King
Gustave, by the number of his great exploits. Let us now look back upon the
United Provinces, where we shall see Bone-fires: but we must know for what?

CHAP. XXIII. The taking of the Fleet of Shallops, near Berghen op Zoom:
Wallenstein takes the Generalat, with conditions of to^ much advantage. An
Earthquake, at Naples: the Mountain of Soma vomited fire.
THe Hollanders, amazed at the admirable progress of the King of Sweden,
conceived, that it would be for the interest of all the Allies, as well as
their own, for them to assail their enemies. They were Masters by Sea, without
controversy: And after the taking of the Money-Fleet, they seized upon the
Bay, and Town of Todos los Santos, or All Saints; where the booty they got, was
great enough, to excise their desire, to seek more. But the King of Spain
taking it from them again, obliged them to go and attack the Town of Olinda, in
Pharnambus, which deligne issued well, and all the Country there about followed
quickly after, without much resistance. In such sort, as that the two Branches
of the House of Austria, tried, almost by turns, the cruel effects, of that
inconstant Goddess; however she have not strength enough, to make them loose
their courage, they having means sufficient to maintain, and uphold themselves.

Now, the Spaniards were afflicted with so many losses both by Sea, and Land;
that they resolved to endeavor some revenge. They secretly prepared a Fleet of
Shalops, and vanted of great secrets; yea, that there was a certain Priest, who
would make soldiers go under the water, and fly in the air, etc. The
Hollanders were allarmed at this; and Prince Henry encamped himself in the Isse
of Tertollen, to watch the designs of the Enemy. The Fleet hoysed Sail,
passed through the mouth of Safting, The Fleet of Shallops taken the thirteenth
of September 1651.
and turned round about the Island: but for want of good Pilots to observe the
Tide, and staying for some Shalops, which were aground in the sands; they lost
the time, and gave it to the Hollanders to attack them, and take them, as it
were, in a field of corn; and that, without so much as fighting: for they all
rendered themselves up to the mercy of their Enemies, and their Cavalry, which
was come to the bank to help them, was fain to return, as it came. There were
more then four thousand prisoners, who were all pillaged, and then put to
ransom, by a singtilar favor of the Prince of Orange; for they were taken,
because they could not fly, not walk under water, and in a place where there
was no quarter to be given. The truth of their design was never yet known: some
thought, it was upon Willeinstadt; others, to make Fortresses, and separate
Holland from Zeland. This great victory happened the thirteenth of September
1631, and that of the King of Sweden, four days after.

An Earthquake at Naples.
About two months after, there chanced a terrible Earthquake at Naples, and
the Mountain of Soma, after many horrible bellowings, vomited out burning
streams of fire, which tumbled into the Adriatic Sea, and cast out a huge
deal of ashes. The Hill of Soma.
This was renewed the year following, in the mo^eth of February, with so great
hurt, and loss, to the circumjacent places, is well in houses, men, women,
children, and cattle, that it cannot be expressed, nor comprehended.

Those three aforesaid losses astonished the House of Austria, which, to put a
powerful stop to the impetuous torrent of the victories of King Gustave, her
most dangerous Enemy, who was inseparably accompanied both by Fortune, and
Favor, cast her eyes upon the Duke of Frithland, a most happy, and most
experimented Captain, who, in the affront of having been deprived of his
charge, received an incomparable contentment from Count Tilly's misfortunes:
And so Ambassadors were dispatched to mitigate him, Wallensiein retakes the
Generalship.
and offer him the Generalship again, and with most ample Commissions, and a
huge sum of money. He suffered himself to be much entreated, and courted;
covering his ambition, or rather his vengeance, with a thousand dissimulations.
But at last, under conditions, which divided the Sovereign authority, he was
brought to accept it, and forth with gave Pattents, for the raising of sixty
thousand men; and so there was an Army of forty thousand on foot, as it were,
in the twinkling of an eye, as if with striking his foot against the ground, he
had raised soldiers; and he Generalissimo, or Chief Genorall, of all the
Emperors Armies, and Arbitratour of Peace and War. It often happens, that
when we endeavor to shuune one kind of Rocks, or Sand-banks, we hit against
another.

Necessity seemed to command this extremity, and to remit the course of
affairs, to the Divine Providence: He did both good, and evil, and received
at length the Crown of his works.

CHAP. XXIIII. George Landgrave of Darmstadt obtains newtrality, and why? Horn
beaten by Tilly, The King makes his entry at Nuremberge, and Tilly retires. The
King takes Donawerdt passes the Leck; makes Tillyes forces retreat with
confusion. Tillyes death, his Elogies. The Siedge of Ingolstadt. The taking of
Ratisbone. Diverse instructions, of the Ambassadors of France. The Eagle in
danger; succored by whom?
THe rejoicing which was caused by the Kings victory before Leipsick, in the
United Provinces, to see themselves freed from great apprehension, was very
much; whereas, the other, as also all the subjects of the Crown of Spain,
expressed no less sadness, and cried aloude, that it was high time to arm,
and stop the progress of these Goths, least both the Empire, and all Europ,
should come to be destroyed by them.

Between this joy, and fear of the people, King Gustave played not truant, King
Guestave posses the Rheyn.
but having made his entry into Francfurt, like a great Conqueror, he received
the Ambassadors, and Congratulations of his Friends. His Arms had droven his
enemies over the Rheyn; and therefore, he resolved also to pass it, and the
Spaniards, who came to relieve the Electour of Mentz, endeavored to hinder
him; but they were not able to resist his happiness, and so they gave way to
force, though not to industry. He took Worms, Spiers, and Oppengeim; only
Mentz, and Creutznach, made a show of defense; but were quickly compelled to
follow the other; and the Spaniards, either to repasse the Mosell, or to be
shut up in Frankendal. The King, having visited the Seat of the mouth of the
Main, resolved to build a strong Town, Gustave, burgh.
under his own name, opposite to Mentz, below Francfurt; and so he set men on
work about it, and many great Lords built fair houses there, but both this
Town, and the Victories of this great Prince, vanished away a few years after,
as we shall shortly show.

Amongst all the Princes of the confession of Auxburgh, The Landgrave of
Darmstedt obtaines new trality.
there was none but George Landgrave of Darstadt, who kept newtrality, and
fidelity to the Emperor. He sent to demand it also of the King, by his
Ambassadors, whom he answered, that he wondered, that he came not himself in
Person, since he was so near. Whereupon, the Prince assembled the principal
Ministers of his Country, and proposed to them, the Oath, which he had made to
his Father, never to bear Arms, against the Emperor, unless he forced him in
his Law, or Religion, and made war upon him, and asked them, whether in this
conjuncture, it were lawful for him to break it, without any wrong done him by
the said Emperor, or any damage at all brought upon him, by his Soldiers?
They all held the Negative: and with this sentence, he went to the King at
Francfurt, and so handsomely represented his reasons to him, that he obtained
what he asked.

Whilst Gustave was in doubt, whether he should go down the Rheyn, (where all
was full of fear, and trembling) to seize upon Colein, he received news, that
Tilly had beaten Horn in Bambergh, defeated four thousand of his men, took
twenty Pieces of Canon, a multitude of Colors, Horn beaten by Til'y.
and made a show, to attack Nuremberge. This was the last favor Fortune did
this Darling of hers, whom she abandoned, to court another. Whereupon he
instantly marched which all diligence; and Tilly, not knowing what to do, was
constrained to retire speedily, by a strong accident; which was, that his
powder took fire, did a great deal of hurt amonst the Baggage-Waggons, and drew
this complaint, out of the mouth of this old Soldier; Let us retire (said he)
For it is high time, since fortune turns her back to us. Indeed, he had reason:
for she was preparing him a bed of honor, Who repasses the Danub.
upon which he was quickly to repose.

He was followed by the King, who entered Nurembergh in Triumph, and that
illustrious Senate presented him with a Goulden Globe, as a Symbol of the
Monarchy, which they prognosticated for him. But he foresaw not the
misfortune, which he was to suffer that Summer: For, being accompanied by King
Frederick, who came from the Haghe, in the middle of Winter, to see his
Country, and his Deliverer, and after compelments falling to treat of
business, the conditions displeased him, and changed the love which the
Princes bore him, into diffidence; which was so much the greater; by how much
the less they durst show it. Oh! the inconstance, of things in this world? Oh
I how subject is all to change?

Is refulsed.
He took Donawerdt, and passed the River Look, in despite of poor Tillyes
resistance; who, though crazed with age, left not yet, to encourage his
Soldiers, His death.
till he was mortally wounded; and then they retired a gallop, (though with an
orderly retreat enough,) to Ingolstadt, where this famous Captain dyed of his
wounds. His elogies.
He was by birth, a Walloon, and a Gentleman: He had always been happy, til
the last year, when he tried the effects, of the inconstancy of fortune: He
was one of the most Valliant, and Prosperous Warryers, that ever bore Arms. He
dyed on a bed of honor, for the defense of the Church, and his Prince.

Honors to Gustave, at Auxburgh.
Rain, and Newburgh were yielded to King Gustave; and the Citizens of Auxburgh,
opened their gates, singing his praises, and exhibiting all the honors, and
testimonies of amity, that could be given, to any mortal man; Yea, I know,
there were some, who wore his Medall, with as much love, and reverence, as the
Roman Catholics do their Relics, or Agnus Dei. They took the oath of
Fidelity to him, as to their lawful Lord, and consented to the destroying down
of the fair Gardens about the Town, to begin the fortifications.

This done, he turned toward Swaveland, where the Lutherans, who make the
biggest party in that Province, The exploits of the Swedes in Swear.
rendered themselves to him, and received Garrisons from him: nor was there
scarce any but Lindow, a Town situated upon the Lesk, which remained constant.

Italy was allarmed, by the report of so great prosperity; and Feria, the
Governor of Milan, made an Army, to defend the entry. Some trembled; and
others, who desired change of State, and Money, rejoiced. But the mischief went
no further; the Italians had but the fear; for their punishment was able
enough to fall upon them, without expecting it from the hand of strangers.

The Siege of of Ingolstadt. Ratisbone taken by the Bavarians.
The King, having brought so many fair Towns in Swaveland under his Laws,
whilst the Saxons afflicted Bohemia, and Papenheim domineered in Brunswick;
returned to the Siege of Ingolstadt (a fatal Town to the Protestants) full of
spite, to hear, that the Elector of Bavaria had craftily seized upon
Ratisbone, an Imperial Town, which he fortifyed, as being wholly his own; and
upon which depended the ruin of that, which he went to besiege in vain. The
Letters, which had been written by the Inhabitants of the said town being
intercepted, gave the Bavarians opportunity to enter, at a Gate which was
opened them, as thinking them to be Swedes. The traitors went to pot, the town
was saved from pilladge, and the Inhabitants condemned to a forfeit of Money,
and to work about the fortifications. They had forgotten gotten their Oath to
the Emperor, and the Empire; and novelty, and the triumph of the Swedish
Armies, had dazzled the eyes of the Protestants, who like Israel, sung their
deliverance.

Ingolstadt in the mean while saw the principal forces of the Protestants,
before her Walls; and if she yielded, farewell Bavaria: But the King found work
here; and this; was the first town, which taught this great Conqueror, that he
was to have bounds to his Victories; besides, that he was very likely to loose
his life, by a Cannon Bullet.

The Elector feeling himself so roughly attacked, by an enemy whom he had
never offended (unless Princes take the occasion to hurt, for an offense) sent
the French Resident, Monsieur de Saint Estienne, to the King, to remonstrate
to him, that in regard he was so deeply engaged in the Alliance with the King
of France, he could not be assailed by him, A notable observation.
without making himself his enemy. The Resident spoke confidently with him,
and endeavored to divert him some other way: but the King interrupted him, and
said; I know your Masters intentions, better then you do; and for the rest, I
pardon your French liberty; for, you are not sent to me, in the quality of an
Ambassador. But the President followed his instructions, and Monsieur de
Carnasse his; in such sort, as that these two, being both Officers of the same
Master, fell to difference, and were very like also, to come to blows. This
was not the first prank of activity, which the Cardinal played in Germany;
though it were well observed by the Elector, and would have been taken for
couzenage, in another Age; but in this, for politic craft. Howsoever, he made
his profit of it; stood fast with the Emperor; and so neately, and dexterously
retorted the ball upon the French, that the Cardinal himself was feign to
avow, that the Duke of Bavaria was the most cautious, and subtle Prince in
Germany. When we have to do with Cheaters, we must take heed of all things, and
give them like for like, if we can. Indeed, when jealousy, and mistrust has
once taken root, in the hearts of the Germans, there is no means to pluck it
out.

The designs of the Confederats.
The Confoederated Strangers, were almost all resolved to make a Capiratado, or
Minct-meat, of the Imperial Eagle; but they could not agree, about the sawee;
for King Gustave would have it sower, and intended to eat it himself alone, as
the Lion did the Stag, which he had taken, in the company of the Wolf, and the
Ass: The King of France would have it sweer, and praetended to both the wings
at the least. The King of England would have a share to his Brother in Law. The
united Provinces desired not her death; but only to cut off her Tallants, that
so she might not scratch. The Venetians were of the same opinion with the
Protestants, who would only make her change her nest, and render her so tame,
and gentle, Differences.
that she might be no more so fierce, nor able to beck them. Every body
endeavored to hurt her, and turmoile her; every one laid gins to catch her:
But, when the Princes saw, the King Gustave tormented her too much, and handled
her after such a-fashion, as they liked not; and that the French began to pluck
off her feathers; they apprehended both her ruin, and their own too. She was
not succored by the Polanders, because thy were most exact observers of the
Truce, between themselves and the Swedes. She got but very small aid from
Italy; for the Pope himself, preferring the odor of the Flower de luce,
before all other considerations; seemed not to care for the dangers, to which
she was exposed, together with the Church, whereof he possessed the supreme
Dignity. And yet for all this, she defended her self with great resolution,
being succored by the Spaniards, and the Obedient Provinces; as also by the
City of Colein, which was escaped out of a most evident danger.

The Eagle defended, and by whom.
The Catholic Electors showed themselves willing to die with her; and the Duke
of Lorraine made no difficulty, to loose his States, and hazard his life, for
her safety, and preservation. But, the Elector of Trevers despairing of her
health, and endeavoring to save his own States from shipwreck; and charmed
besides, by the eloquence of that great Cardinal; cast himself into the arms
of France, as we shall hereafter find; though yet, he could not escape the
misfortune, which was prepared, both for his Archbishopric and himself. But
let us return into Brabant, to the Siege of Mastricht.

CHAP. XXV. Count Henry of Bergues disgusted with the Kings service, goes
secretly to the Haghe. The Siege of Mastricht. Papenheim repulsed, returns into
Germany. Limburgh follows Mastricht; and the Deputies the Prince, to the Hague.
The death of three Kings,
THis year was memorable, for the death of three kings. Sigismund of Poland,
who very piously departed the 29th of April. The King of Sweden, who lost his
life upon the bed of honor; and King Frederick, who rendered his by sickness,
at Mentz. The last year, the Hollanders triumphed by water; and they did it
this, by land, as we shall see.

The Spaniards had sent the best part of their forces, to the Palatinat, and
left the Low Countries, without men, money, and counsel, and in great terror,
for so many losses. Count Henry of Bergues, disgusted, by some pretended
affronts, with the service of his Prince, whose Armies he commanded, and by
whom he could not be made greater then he was; seeing the huge progress of the
King of Sweden, and the occasion most opportune, to beat out the Spaniards;
went to the Prince of Orange, at the Haghe, with whom, together with Monsieur
de la Tilillerie, the French Ambassador there, he had a very secret
Conference; Count Henry of Bergues goes to the Haghe.
the effects whereof appeared the first Field: and the Prince being at the head
of his Army, marched the tenth of June, from Grave, up the Moze, presented
himself before Venlo (from whence the said Count was already departed the same
day) and summoned it to render, Venlo and Ruremund, yield. The end of the War.
upon such conditions, as he sent it, in Blanke. There was a report published,
that this Field would produce an end of the War, and of the Spanish Government
(which was the only thing aimed at) with the safety of the Catholic Religion,
and the Infanta's authority, and person, The bird cannot choose but be taken, if
she hearken to the fowler.

Venlo was forthwith yielded; none going out of the Town, but the Garrison; for
the Priests, and Monks remained: and the Reformats were content with one
Church. Count Ernest of Nasseaw went, with a part of the Army before Ruremund,
which defended it self; but through despair of succor, yielded at last, upon
the same conditions that Venlo had done; and a shot of a Harkebuse, Ernest of
Nassaw killed:
or Gun (which was the last that was shot from the Town,) stopped the course of
the said Counts life, retarded the design for some hours; and gave Count John
of Nasseaw means, to put two and twenty Colors into Mastricht. This recrute
brake the neck, of all great designs, purchased the Count of Bergues, Savo^sr
into Mastricht.
and them of his Cabal, much disreputation, and blame: put the Hollanders in
danger; and preserved the succession, for Philip the fourth King of Spain, how
bitterly soever it have been disputed since.

The Infanta, being fully informed of the said. Count Henry's intentions, whom
she had always loved, and supported, against all such, as envyed him; was at
length induced to permit, that an Order might be sent to the Governor of
Guelders, to seize upon his person, and bring him with a good Guard to
Brussels, since he had refused to come, of his one accord. But he, having smelt
the design, retired himself forthwith to Liege; The Count of Bergues goes to
Liege.
where he labored to draw the Kings Army to him, by promising them an end of
the War; but none would follow him; even they who had accompanied him thither,
forsook him: for the Soldiers desire not an end of War; because they have no
other Trade to live. The Count of Warfuze, And the Count of Warfuze.
who was of the Plot, got also thither; but the Duke of Arschot, who was
suspected for it, stirred not at all, but remained firm in his duty.

As soon as the Holland Cavalrie appeared before Mastricht, Count John marched
out with his; in such sort, as that the Prince, not being able to win the
Town with fair words, Mistricht besieged.
as he had done the other, was constrained to change his note, and keep measure
with the Canon: So that he entrenched himself before it, and gave the
Spaniards leisure, to put an Army into the Field; who sent for their forces out
of the Palatinat, which beat the French, who endeavored to hinder their
passage, and joined in a Body, under the conduct of the Marquis de Santa Crux;
The Spaniards come from the Palatinat.
though so late, as that it was impossible for them, to drive away their
Enemies. Papenheim being sent for, came with all possible speed; and though he
found the Prince so extremely well entrenched, yet would he not return, before
he had tried, And Papenheim from Wostphalia. is repulsed.
whether the Hollanders could well withstand the assault of the Germans;
wherefore he fell upon them at high-noon, with so desperate a resolution, that
he made himself feared; and had the Spaniards done their duty, as well as the
Germans, it was very likely, that the Hollanders would have run hazard to be
worsted: but he retired with notable loss; left a noble testimony of his
bravery; and returned into Germany with a generous displeasure, for having
undertaken such a hard task, Returns into Germany, and the Spaniards into
Brabant.
without being seconded.

The Spaniards marched toward Brabant, not without murmuring against their
General, whom they accused, to have played away their money; and one part of
the States Army, toward Limburgh, which was surrendered up to them, upon the
same conditions that Mastricht was. The Baron of Led, Commander of this Town,
acquired great reputation, and was as highly praised by the brave, and amiable
Prince Henry of Orange, as he was honorably recompensed by the King his
Master. Never was the aforesaid Prince in greater danger; and if the people of
Liege had forsaken his friendship, he had been in a poor condition, for want
of Victuals. Let us finish this Field.

The States General, and the Prince of Orange, invited the Obedient Provinces,
to a Treaty of Peace; and these resolving to hear their Propositions, by the
Infanta's advise, the Duke of Arscot, And the Prince to the Haghe, with the
Deputies for the Peace.
the Archbishop of Mecklin, the Abbot of St. Vast, and some other Syndicks, or
Agents, went to the Haghe, where the Prince was received by all, with a
multitude of praises, and benedictions; and where we will leave them in a
Business, whereof they will find no end, and go see the King of Sweden march
out of Bavaria, to save Naremburgh. But let us first look, in what equipage
General Wallenstein is.

CHAP. XXVI. Wallestein beats the Saxons out of Bohemia; and draws toward
Nuremburgh. The Tragedy, which haphed at Rostock. Gallasso, and Holck, in
Misnia. The King goes out of Bavaria, and incamps himself before the said
Town: he sends for all his Forces. The success of Papenheim.
ALl the World admired Wallenstein in his prosperity; many lamented him, in his
disgrace; and every body wondered, to see him now, at head of so puislant an
Army, with so much glory and Majesty. The first dart he shot, was against the
Elector of Saxony (and it was a Proposition of Peace) the point whereof not
being yet well sharpened, was quickly unrusted, and cleansed afterward. Waller
stein beats the Sayons out of Bohemis
. The second he shot, had so much vigor, that he dislodged the said Electors
Troops out of Prague, and all Bohemia, and made them return into Misnia,
leaving Gallasso behind them, with some forces. But he was not troubled at
all, to see the Duke of Bavaria chastised by the Swedes, nor did he hasten to
beat them out of his Country; in respect of the hatred he bore him, for his
having disposed the Emperor, by the advice of Cardinal Richelien, to deprive
him of the Generalship. In fine, after having been often beseeched to come, he
moved at lengh, toward the upper Palatinat, He joins with the Bavarians.
complimented the said Duke, and joined with him.

Gustave Horn was not idle in Alsatia, and by the assistance of the
Magistrates of Strasburgh (for so many Imperial Towns, so many little Armies
for the Swedes) he besieged the Fort of Benefeldt, which by the slacknesse of
the Governor, Horn takes Benefeldt.
he quickly took; and so, by breaking the Irons, wherewith the Towns seemed to
be bound, the Swedes forged other, to stop them. He took many Towns, and would
have made greater progress, had he not been called by his King, to succor him
near Nuremburgh.

The Dukes of Meckelemburgh were also still in action, and had so cleansed
their Duchy from the Imperial Garrisons, Stirrs at Rostock, and why?
who were not expected to be ever seen again in those parts. But there chanced
a Tragedy at Rostock, which was like to have destroyed the Town, and the
Inhabitants also with it; and it was this. A certain Burgher, or Townsman,
having a mind, according to the example of Judith, to deliver the said Town,
from the oppression (as he said) of the Imperialists; went to the Governor in
his Chamber to desire a Pastport; and when he saw him busy in writing it, he
struck him so many blows with a hatchet, that he cut off his head, and carried
it away in a bag, and threw it into the Cellar of another Burgher. This murder
being discovered, gave an alarm to the Soldiers, who gave it also so hotly to
the poor Citizens, that they thought no less, then to be all knocked in the
head, and plundered. But inquiry being made, the head was found, and the
murderer shortly after, who was examined, and made suffer the punishment of
his Crime, for the discharge of the innocent; and his ill settled head flew off
his shoulders, for an example, to such as should undertake, falsely to imitate
that aforesaid Lady, who was accompanied by the Holy Ghost.

The Duke of Wirtembergh, and all who had renounced the League of Leipsick,
took arms again, with as much facility, as a Candel newly put out, and yet hot,
takes fire: All must be changed; there must be another Golden Bull, other
Electors, and another Emperor; for they scoffed at this, and all his designs:
but as soon as the Armies were seen before Nurembergh, all was hushed, and every
body stood mute, at the expectation of a success, which was to give the Law.
When the King came out of Bavaria, he found but only Ingolstadt, which
resisted him; and in revenge thereof, he dispersed all his forces throughout
the whole Country; and Minnecken, one of the finest Towns in Germany presented
him her keys; where he seized upon a huge Treasure; and being informed, that
there were many pieces of Ordnance buried under ground, he caused them to be
dug up, and found them full of Ducats. In fine, being laden with booty, and
not able to stay there, he extorted three hundred thousand Rix-Dollars more
from the Town, to save it from plunder, as he did some other, after the same
rate. Many Villadges were set on fire, for a sign that the Enemy had been
there; who retired himself with speed, letting the Bavarians take breath by
his departure, and leaving Garrisons in three Towns only, to assure them of
his return, at his pleasure; and so he went, and encamped himself before
Nurembergh; a place of much renown, for the industry of the Inhabitants, and
for being one of the principal Imperial Towns besides. It is seated, almost in
the Center of Germany; has always been extremely jealous of the Emperors
happiness, opposed his designs, by many direct ways; Nurembergh contrary to
the Emperor.
as by Embassyes to the Protestants, and by Leagues which it has made, with
the Enemies of the House of Austria. Wallenstein resolved, to go thank the
Citizens of the Town, for the good reception they had given his Masters Capital
Enemy, and by the same means, to recall him to their succor.

The Armies drew near the Town, and invironned it, together with the King; who
not being strong enough, to oppose so great, and terrible forces, sent for all
his Generals; as Marshal Horn, the Landgrave of Hassia; Duke Bernard of Wimar;
Axel Oxensterns, and a multitude of other Officers, with their Troops, who all
arrived happily to his camp; All the forces before Nurembergh.
save only Tupadel, who had three Regiments cut in pieces, and himself taken
prisoner. Upon the other side, Gallasso, and Holck gave the Protestants like
for like; pilladged Misnia, and took all the Towns, Friburgh, to save the
Sepulcher of the Duke of Saxony, paid eighty thousand Rix-Dollers: Leipsick,
Galasso in Misnia.
took Garrison, the second time, and saw them return, whom it thought never to
see again; and that song was proved false, which said, that the Emperor was
escaped like a These, and a Highway-man. But respect was lost, and detraction
praised. Oh depraved Age! Thou art full of injustice, and perfidie.

Papenheim in Westphalia.
Papenheim being repassed the Rheyn, made all his Enemies forthwith know of his
return; and all the Birds, smelling the approach of the Falcon, hid
themselves. He tore some in pieces, and made others fly from their nests;
without letting any body take, either rest, or breath. Baudis, His exploits.
and the Landgrave felt the prickings of his tallons: Duke George of Luneburgh,
who had besieged Wollfenbottel, found himself oppressed, before he knew of his
Enemies coming; and he was so well cudgelled, that he could hardly get safe to
Brunswick. This success so much inflamed the courage of this brave Soldier,
that he presumed to attack the great Towns; and so he took H^ldesheem, and
Mulhuse, with three hundred thousand Rix-Dollars for ransom; and Erfurt was
already mennased by him, when he heard, that the King was departed out of
Franconie, and was coming toward Saxony, there to find his Tomb: And indeed
he said, a little before the Battle of Lutzen, that he should not live long,
because he was too much loved, honored, The words of Gustave.
and respected by the people: which prediction of his proved true, as we shall
forthwith demonstrate.

CHAP. XXVII
The Armies encamped before Nurembergh. The Skirmishes. They depart from
thence. The Battle of Lutzen. The death of King Gustave, King Frederick, and
Papenheim.

I Shall not mention all which passed, between the two greatest Armies, that
have been seen these hundred years, composed of so many Generals, as well as
others. Every one labored to excel his companion; and whatsoever art, and
subtilty, can be in Arms, was here set on work.

The King, who boasted, that he had to do with a Priest, which was Tilly; with
a soldier, Tilly called Priestly the King Papenheim, Soldier, and Willenstein
Fool.
meaning Papenheim; and with a Fool, which was Wallenstein, (who gave him more
exercise then all the rest) not being able to draw him to a general Battle,
offered him the Crown of Hungary; but that not succeeding, and the Impostume,
which Wallenstein had in his soul, not being yet ready to burst, and vent the
filth which was in it; recourse must be had to force. For the Imperialists were
grown Hollanders, and served themselves of the Spade, instead of the Lance. But
Gustave, longing to be Master of the Empire, resolved to unnestle him from
thence, and assembled his principal Officers, to dispose his Army that way:
But finding them of a contrary opinion, through the impossibility of the
Enterprise; he fell to reproach them, and utter such injurious language against
them, as had not their interest been tied to his, Gustave abuses his Officers.
and their aversion from the House of Austria, too great; would have made many
of them disband. In so much, as that Duke Barnard rising full of generous
choler, answered him in these terms. Sir, the Germans are not Cowards. But, the
King appeased him, saying, that it was not he whom he taxed, and so disposed
him, together with the other Officers, to a General Attack.

The loss of the Swedes.
The Swedes advanced; and the Imperialists, covered with their Trenches,
withstood them; and after a stubborn fight of many hours, and the loss of the
Flower of their Army, repulsed them; There were above five thousand killed upon
the place, besides hurt, and taken. Then, was the gold of great Gustaves
wisdom ecclipsed, and appeared that it was near an end. The Imperialists lost
about fifteen hundred men. And the King fearing, least he should loose the
Electour of Saxony, left a good Garrison in the Town, to secure it, and
marched with all his Army, toward Saxony, to preserve that Country for
himself. But, whilst the Armies were encamped near Nurembergh, and the
circumjacent Countries for more then ten leagues compass, ruined, by the
excursions of so many men; General Arnem, domineered over Silesia at his
pleasure, and being reinforced by some Troops, constrained Holck, to cast
himself into Misnia, with Galasso.

The Masters of Politic Science were of opinion, that if Wallenstein had had a
mind to destroy the King, he might have done it, without putting himself in the
danger of hazarding a Combat; had it not been upon very great advantage; but
that he let him pass, so to play his part the better. Whatever were the
matter, his actions were more nearly, and narrowly pryed into afterward,
which, when the right side of the Meddal was turned upwards, were discovered to
be all criminal.

The King, not having been able to ruin Wallenstein, passed to the Duchy of
Wirtembergh, and sent General Bannier over the Danub. The Duke separated
himself, to go and defend his Country; and Wallenstein followed the King, but
suddenly changed his resolution, and marched into the Duchy of Saxony, there
to take up his Winter quarters. Gustave hastened thither: Wallenstein speedily
sent for the Valliant Papenheim. The King, whose genius seemed to apprehend
that of the Soldier, labored to hinder this conjunction, and desired to
destroy him, but could not; for the Soldier had too much craft, and dexterity;
and he was very well received by his General, who sent him, with ten, or twelve
Regiments, to surprise Hall, and keep Galasso, and Holck with himself.

The King being encamped before Nurenburgh, had notice from Wallensteins Camp
near Lutzen, of the departure of him whose valor he so much esteemed; and
being desirous to end the difference by a Battle, The Battle of Lutzen.
disposed his Army thereto with a short speech; And Wallenstein, having
discovered his intension, sent speedily after Papenheim, and resolved to stand
fast, and expect the Enemy. The Shock, or Ouset was furious, and bloody: The
Croats did well enough, at the beginning, and the Swedes better; and if
Papenheim had stayed a little longer, the Imperialists had fled. But, he came
time enough, Papenheim slain.
to redress the Army which already began to stagger, and to repulse the enemy:
but the shot of a Falkon (a piece of Ordnance so called) put a period to his
life, and all his glorious enterprises. Germany has produced but few such
Soldiers as he was for Valor, Felicity and Courage; His elogies.
and the Emperor has had few, who have equalled him in fidelity. He first
made himself known, in the Valtelme; and at the Battle of Prague, he was found
amongst dead. He finished the Tumults of the Peasants in Austria, and above all
after the Battle of Leipsick, he redressed his Masters desperate party in
Westphalia. He seemed to dye content, when he was told that the King was
killed, and it is held, that if he had lived yet some years more, he would have
restored the Imperial Majesty, to the first splendor.

The Horse basely gave ground, as they had done in the first Battle. It is
believed, that the King was slain, about the beginning of the Battle, having
received five wounds, two whereof were mortal, but it could never be learnt, by
whose hand he fell, and opinions were so different, that the truth could never
be discovered. The Swedes have reported, that he was killed, Gustave slain.
by a great Lord of his own Army; others, by Papenheim: but neither the one,
nor the other is very likely to be true. He was found amongst the dead, so
trodden, and tumbled by the Army, which had passed over his body, that he was
hard to be known. What shall we say of the potency of this world, since so much
glory, and merit is trodden under foot by horses? This Prince, who, like
another Alexander, was grieved, and vexed to stay so long in Germany, and
wished nothing more, His praises.
then to go seek new Trophies elsewhere; is borne down, and that so venerable
Majesty, so much respected, and feared every where, is now reduced to dust:
This great Warrier, this invincible Monarch, the delight of the Protestants,
the terror of the Catholics; the Darling of Fortune: lost his life in the
middle of Triumphs, and of Germany. His fall caused so much rage, and despair,
in the souls of his soldiers, that they chose rather to die, then retire; and
obliged the Imperialists, after they had fought till dark night, to make a
retreat, but little more modest, then plain flight, toward Leipsick.

His life.
Duke Bernard, and Cniphanse, gave great testimonies of themselves, in this
bloody Fight; and the whole Army melted in tears, to see the King their
General, without sense and motion. He was Son to Charles Duke of Sudermam, who
had taken away the Crown, from his Nephew Sigismund, King of Poland. It is
reported, that he had made his Apprentiship in War disguised, and unknown,
under Prince Maurice, and that even after he was King, he made a journey into
Germany, in the quality of an ordinary Horseman. His Governors son has told
me, that he was in the war of Bohemia. saw the Count of Bucquoy's Army;
discovered himself to some Princes; and then sowed the first seeds of his
intelligence, in the Empire. He made War in Livonia, and Prussia, with a most
singular odor of his great felicity. His many Victories changed his sweet, and
tractable nature, into a too rough and austere severity; an hereditary Vice in
the race of Erick, as soon as they are past forty years old. Thus gloriously
ended Gustavus Ad^phus his days; and Parca, by cutting off the thread of his
life, made him triumph, to manifest, that if he had lived some years longer,
Europ would have been too little, for the number of his Conquests, and his
glory. He presumed, against the content, and opinion of the Chief of his
Council, to come into Germany, with an Army of eight thousand men, to defend
the Lutheran Religion; and to check so vast, and formidable a Power, as that of
the House of Austria; but he was sure of his Allies, and of the affections of
all the Protestants, in general: Also that though Fortune should have treated
him, as she had done others; he had still the means left, to save himself in
his own Kingdom, and draw up the Bridge after him. But she was too kind to
him, to break company with him so soon; and his designs too high, to please
his Allies.

Never was there Prince more regretted, and deplored, then he; and all the
North put on mourning, whilst the South, rejoiced at his fall, but it felt the
rough Attacks of his Generals, after his death; and the Swedes went not out of
Germany, till they got a Peace, the spoils, and a share of the Empire; a
notable recompense, The Battle of Lutzen the sixteenth of November.
for having whipped it so well. This Battle happened the sixteenth of November;
some days after, deceased King Frederick at Mentz; a mild Prince, and much
bewailed by his people. He accompanied Gustave into Bavaria, who was willing to
restore him to the Palatinat, The death of Frederick.
but under hard, and unreceiuable conditions. Let us see what passes in France.

CHAP. XXVIII
The Elector of Trevirs takes the protection of France. Monsieur enters into
the Kingdom, with an Army. The death of the brave Duke of Montmorancy,

THe fidelity of the Ecclesiastical Electors was so great, that they chose
rather, to suffer all the rigor, and extremity of Fortune, then untie
themselves from the Emperor: The French drivo the Sp^ni^ds from Trevirs.
save only, that the Elector of Trevirs, sought to shelter his Country, under
the protection of France, and received a French Garrison into Harmestein, an
inexpugnable place, near Cobelents, where the Mosell casts her self into the
lap of the Rheyn. And he would have done as much at Trevirs, if he had not been
prevented by the Chapter, which put a Spanish Garrison in before; whereby the
King was moved to send the Marshal De'stree, to dislodge it, and put in another.

Whilst the said King and Cardinal were looking upon the affairs of Germany,
Monsieur his Brother marched out of Brabant with an Army, and published, that
he would deliver France from the Tyranny of the Cardinal. The Duke of
Montmorancy ranged himself with him; Monsieur enters France.
and it looked, as if all were disposed to Richelnis ruin. Many of the
Grandees in^lined also that way; being jealous, to see the King of Sweden
destroy the Catholic. League in Germany, shouldered by the Alliance, of the
Eldest Son of the Church, upon the suscitation of this proud Minister. The
Marshal of Schoonbergh followed this said Army, with some ordinary forces.
There happened a Skirmish, wherein the Duke of Montmorancy would needs be
nibbling, and so was wounded, and taken, and his Party ruined, by his temerity.
It is in a general Definition, and not in a particular fight; that a General
ought to show his dexterity, and valor, A Peace was made in haste; and the
strangers who were engaged with Monsieur, very ill handled; and he hoped to
obtain the aforesaid Dukes pardon, but in vain: for he ended his life, The
Duke of Montmorancy beheaded.
by the hand of an ordinary Executioner, and his House ended also with his
life. This brave Lord, who had performed so many remarkable services, was
sacrificed, to the interest which was taken in the Swedish Party, his aversion
from which was discovered by himself. It is great wisdom, to hide ones
passions, and to lay open those of others; to hear much, and say little. This
violent proceeding much amazed all the Lords of France; augmented the Cardinals
hatred, and gave Monsieur a good horse, to be gone again, out of the Kingdom.

This very year, the Ambassador of Spain arriving at London, brought things so
to pass, with his frequent pursuits and instances, Peace between Spain and
England.
that he terminated the difference, between his Master, and the King of
England, notwithstanding all the oppositions which were made, and the
thwartings which were brought, by the Ambassadors of France, and the
confederated States.

Pope Urban, to purge himself from the hatred, which was born him by all the
zealous Catholics, Pope Urban little loved, by the zealous Catholics.
for their seeing him in secret intelligence with the Cardinal, whom they made
Author, of all the misfortunes, and mischiefs suffered by the Church, published
a Jubilee; but all that, was not able to wash away the ill opinion, which was
conceived of him; and in a Synod, which was held in Spain, they treated of
abrogating his Authority, in regard they saw him favor them, who endeavored
to destroy a House, which will never fall, but with the ruin of the Catholic
Religion; Yea, because he appeared not abroad, at the public rejoicing, which
was made at Rome, for the death of King Gustave, who had been so much feared;
many were heard to mutter, and speak such bad, and rash words, as the
licentiousnes, and unlimitednes of the miserable Times produced. When the
Shepherd takes no care of his Sheep, the Wolves get some of them very cheap:
Piety waxes cold; and the weeds grow at length, to stifle the good corn.

CHAP. XXIX
The King of Sweden regretted, and by whom? Wallenstein causes some Officers to
be executed. John de Werdt makes himself known. The Battle of Hamelen; and the
cruelty of the Victorious. Brisac succored by the Duke of Feria. War in the
Archbishopric of Colein.

THe Body of this great Warrier was embalmed, and carried into Pomerania, and
from thence to Stockholme, to be laid in the Tomb of his Ancestors. He
resuscitated the ancient glory of the Goths, and the notice of his Army, struck
both Europ, and Asia, into terror. There was a report given out, It is
published, that Gustave is not dead
and believed by some of them who were most affectionate to him, that he was
not dead; but had secretly transported himself into Sweden, for some affairs
of importance, and to discover the humor of the Princes: but this fiction, was
grounded upon Maxim of Policy, and having gotten some Vogue, was not
unprofitable to the Party. He was given, neither to wine, not women: and he
inexorably chastized all such as failed of their duty. He much changed at last,
from what he had been, as his first entry into Germany: and no marvail, since
his very Subjects themselves, having been as gentle as Lambs, before, were now
become arrogant, by so much good success, so many spoils, and the enjoyment of
a Country, so much better and happier, then their own. The Princes of the
Party lamented him extrinsecally; but were in effect, glad enough, to be rid of
such a Conqueror, who had gotten a far greater possession of the hearts of
their Subjects, then they had themselves. But the King of France, and the
Cardinal were truly sorry for him, because they had not brought that House
lowenough, which they had a mind to strip of some fair States, as it has
since appeared. And now, in regard they had paid the charge, they prepared to
go to the Banquet, by buying the Towns, which the Sweeds had taken, near the
Rheyn.

He left one Daughter only.
He left behind him, only one Daughter, Heyress to her Fathers virtues, as
well as his Crown; and he left his Lievtenants, and Allies, the care, to
finish the work, not yet perfected.

The Hollanders began, more to fear him, then love him; and by consequence,
expressed no great resentment of his death; nor did they desire him at all, for
their neighbor; wherefore, they were not a little glad, to see him leave
Colein, and march up into Bavaria. He will never be forgotten, either by his
friends, or his enemies; and his memory will live, to the end of the world.

The Hughenots call the Lutherans Brothers.
The Hughenots of France, for his sake, began already to call the Lutherans
their Brethrea; and it is held for certain, that he was endeavoring to awaken
the old quarrels in Italy, and else where. He was about two years and a half in
Germany, accompanied by so much happiness (yea too much to last long) that his
own very friends were amazed at it.

The Swedes make the Offensive every where.
To declare to all the world, that he had obtained the Victory when he dyed,
his enemies retired into Bohemia; and the Swedes made every where, the
offensive. The Duke of Brunswick, and the Landgrave of Hassia, brought War upon
the Bishops in Westphalia, who had lost their Soldier: Gustave Herne, and some
others transported it into Alsatia, and Swaveland; and General Bawdas, in the
district of Colein: Duke Bernard cleansed Misuia; and Arnem subjugated Silesia.
But what did Wallenstein, during all these floods? He cut of the Heads of many
of his Officers. Wallenstein execut^s some Officers, and why?
And why? for not having performed their duty? Yea rather, to begin thereby to
warp the web of his treason, and put in execution what he had hatched in his
Soul: and therefore, he put to death, such as he knew, were most affectionate
to the Emperors service. Virtue comes upon the Scaffold, as well as Vice.
There was no remedy; for he had full power, without appeal: but the innocent
blood spurted in his face, sooner then he thought: for the cry thereof, never
finds the ears of the great God, stopped; is must be revenged.

Baudits design upon Tuits, a small town upon the bank of the Rheyn, opposite
to Colein, issued well; but he was beaten out again, and his proceeding
abhorred, for breaking the new trality. So that, he retired to Siburgh, a
convenient place, to incommodate the Archbishopric.

Aldringers Victor^.
General Aldringers Victory was greater near the Leck, where he cut of the
Troops of the Marquis of St. Andrew, and retook some places in Sweveland: and
John de Werdt did as much in Franconie; who grew by little and little, to make
himself so formidable, that it was believed, he was another Papenheim, sprung
up out of his ashes. But, all these were but Skermishes, in comparison of the
huge Victory, gotten by the Hassians, and Luneburgians near Hamelen, in the
month of July, 1633. They had besiedged the Town, and the others would succor
it. Colein, the Mother of Armies, The seventh of July.
quickly produced one. But, in stead of Papenheim, there was nothing but
discord amongst the Generals: Soldiers there were enough; but there wanted a
good, The defeat of the Imperalists near Hamelen 1633;
and perfect intelligence amongst their Leaders. However, they advanced; and
General Merode thought, that in this occasion, the Commanders would lay aside
all partiality, for the Public good. The Foot fell on; but was deserted by the
Horse; and the poor Soldiers, who were almost all Wallons, found themselves
shut up in a dale, and cried to them to stand, and make good their ground; but
their cries and groans were carried away by the wind, to follow the base
Cowardice of the Horsemen, and the slacknesse of some of the chief Officers.

General Merode, and Baron Quad, a Soldier of merit, chose rather to dye with
their Swords in their hands, then follow this infamy. The Foreign Foot threw
down their Arms, hoping, for quarter; but they were all massacred without
mercy, and so above six thousand of them miserably perished. Hamelen was
rendered, and Bonichawse took party with the Swedes.

The discord of the Generals appeared.
This Army was sacrificed, to the hatred, which Wallenstein already carried, to
such as were able to hurt him; and therefore, being Generalissmo, he s;ent the
chief command to Grondstfeldt, against the opinion, and advice of the Electour
of Colein. Had there been a good harmonic amongst them, they had not only
succored Hamelen, but easily brought the War also into Meckelenburgh, and
Pomerania. But it was to beat the Dog before the Wolf.

This check advanced the Swedish Party: favored Frithlands design; aflicted
all the Archbishopric of Colein; and put the French in mind, that it was time
to go into Lorraine, to catch some planks, of that ship, which threatened to
make ship wrack.

The Italians succor Brisat.
The Duke of Feria came, with an Army of Italians, to succor Alsatia, where he
had the same vexations, though a little better end; for he succored Brisac,
crossed Horns Progress; and made those Catholic Provinces a little respire
but the poor Peasants had the worst of it; and the Italians being much
ransacked, and wasted by diseases, he was forced to return the same way he
came, Wallenstein would have had him obey his Orders, as Generalissmo; but he
made a deaf ears; however the other laid so many ginns in his way, that he had
much ado to escape them; and so all Alsatia, save only Brisac, suffered the
Swedish yoke. But since we are upon the Fronteer of Lorraine, let us look what
passes there, before we take our flight to any other place.

CHAP. XXX
The Siedge Nancy. Rantsaw makes himself known, at the Encounter of Haguenaw,
and at the Siedge of Andernack.

GReat Princes are always obliged, to maintain their Stats, conserve their
Subjects, and by the Maxims of prudence, and justice, divert the storm, before
it fall, and overwhelme them.

The Duke of Lorraine arms.
The Duke of Lorraine, seeing almost all Alsatia subdued by the Swedes, and
knowing, the danger could not be far from himself, when his neighbors house
was on fire, judged it more then time, to look about him. Wherefore, he made
levyes; whereat the King of France formalized, and marched into the Field. A
sad condition for a Sovereign Prince, that he may not be permitted to raise
men, for his own defense! But, the weakest must to the Wall: For, neither were
the reasons which they alleged, sufficient to justify their proceedings; nor
his strong enough to secure him from shipwreck.

The Cardinal of Lorraine went to meet the King, and endeavored to divert him,
by acquainting him with his brothers intentions, which were all good: but all
this was not able to stop him. It was in vain to speak; for words are
fruitless, to such as are already condemned. All Europe belongs to the Crown
of France, and by consequence, Lorraine. See Arroy.

The Siedge of Nancy.
The King besieged Nancy: The duke protested, that he had desired nothing but
peace, and good correspondence with his Majesty. Whilst this was a doing, the
Princess Margaret made her escape disguised, and went into the Low Countries
to her husband, who came to meet her at Namurs, and conducted her to Brussels,
where she was received by the Infanta, with honor, agreeable to her quality.

They of Colein took the protection of France.
The Swedes, and their Allies, having obtained so great a Victory, as that
whereof we have lately spoken, with so little loss, entered into the
Archbishopric of Colein, and tormented it so much, that the Magistrates
induced by the arguments of their Syndick, and some others, together with the
necessity of their assayrs; concluded upon the dispatch of their Ambassadors
to the King of France, to implore his protection. They had recourse to a
Catholic Prince, to shelter them from the insolence of Protestants; and that
by consent of the Clergy; but the Citizens, being most affectionate to their
old Master, would not be satisfied by these reasons.

The said Ambassadors were most honorably received, at the Camp before Nancy:
where the Cardinal spared none of his Compliments (the holy water of the Court)
nor feats of cunning, and skill, to accomplish so huge a Conquest as this;
which would be sure to draine all the Emperors resources or fresh springs
about the Rheyn; hinder the Communication of the Spaniards with the Empire; and
serve for an infallible means to seize upon the Low-Countryes. But it chanced,
that some inopinated accidents, and the good success of a Battle, made them
of Colein, repent; and this Bargain miscarry, to the said Cardinals great
displeasure.

Nancy rendered
The Duke of Lorraine, found himself obliged, for the obtaining of peace, to
yield up Nancy, upon the same conditions that he had done the three other
Towns; being counseled not to expect extremities, lest peradventure, he might
thereby incur the hazard of losing all his States. Wherefore, he did it with
much freedom, and submission: but it had been better for him, to have sustained
the siege, and expected the worst; for his Country was not restored to him, nor
ever will be, till his Enemies shall not be able to keep it any longer, and
shall have enough to do also to keep themselves, in regard of foreign
revolutions.

They reproached him, that he had given his Sister in marriage, to the Duke of
Orleans, against the laws of the Kingdom; and that he had refused to do homage
to the King, for the Duchy of Bar. The former of these, was excused by the
said Duke of Orleans himself, upon the difference, which was between him and
the Cardinal: and for the Homage, he had offered to do it, in his own name; but
not his wives, according to the Maxims of the Salick Laws, whereof we have
spoken already.

But these complaints, were but pretexts, to cover the design they had to
seize upon the Duchy, which is upon the passage into Germany, thereby to get a
footing there with more facility, so that they might be hindered by nothing,
from conquering the better part thereof: For, if the Eagle could not be taken
whole, and alive: they were resolved to have some of her feathers at least, and
so leave her without strength, and vigor.

After Nancy, quickly followed all tho rest of the Duchy under certain
colors, which offered themselves, without being sought. And all Lorraine.
And this Country being thus subdued by his Eminences activity, nothing which
was on that side of the Rheyn, could escape him. His wisdom was drvine; he
disposed, of the influence of the Stars, and of this lower world, at his
pleasure: but there was a power infinitely just, above him, which brought both
him, and all he had gotten by unlawful ways, into dust. Oh ye Flatterers,
Plagues of this corrupt Age; And you, Mercenary Pens, instruments of all
mischief, who have employed all your talents, upon the excessive praises, of
one of the greater persons that ever wore the Purple? Why have you not been
content, to represent his fine actions to the world, in a more modest, and true
style, without mingling therewith, the contempt of the infinite Essence, and of
Princes unjustly oppressed? Why do thou accuse of pride, and ambition, such as
repel force by force; and seek revenge, after they have been attacked? Open
your eyes, to what has happened, and does yet daily happen, and look upon the
end? It is laid that the good Cause shall triumph at last; and you shall agree
with me, that afflictions will one time be Universal.

The King of France having given order for the building of a Cittadell, to a
Town, which (in appearance) was but borrowed, put himself upon the way toward
Paris; and the Duke of Lorraine, toward Germany, to charge the Swedes near
Hagnenaw: The Encounter near Haguenaw.
where his Foot ran basely away without fighting at all; as his Enemies Horse
also did, after a furious combat; But he, with his, was not able to force their
Foot, which defended it self bravely. It was here, and at Andernack, a Town
seated upon the Rheyn, that Monsieur de Rantsaw, a Gentleman of Holstein, gave
a high account of himself; and this was the first step, whereby he ascended to
the dignity of Marshall of France. But let us go seek Wallenstein, upon the
Confines of Poland; and leave the French the care, of disposing of Lorraine,
for the expenses of their journey into Germany; whereof, because it is a Land
of Conquest, every one must have his share.

CHAP. XXXI. Wallenstein defeats the Swedes in Silesia: The Colonians, or they
of Colein, retract the Accord made before Nancy. The Tragical death of the
said Wallenstein.
VVHilest the Princes, and States, which were enemies to the House of Austria,
rejoiced extremely to see the Eagle lose her strength, under their noses; by
the weakening of so many Provinces; by so much bloodshed; by the total
occupation, or seazure of all Lorraine; and by so many rubs, and traverses, as
the Hollanders gave the King of Spain; (who yet like a good Physician defened
her with his forces, and fortified her, His money from the Indies.
with his Aurum potabile, or liquor of life, from the Indies) it seemed high
time to that ambitious General, to hatch his pernicious designs, for that by
so many brave actions as he had performed, he thought, he deserved to wear a
Crown, though it were at the charge of his Masters.

Behold here, the most ungrateful of mortals, and the most dangerous of all
the Emperors enemies, who was likely to have effected alone, that which all
the rest together, had not been able to do. Desire of revenge, and ambition,
made him forget his duty; and cruelty, moved him to undertake this detestable
Treason.

He sent General Holck into Misnia, who reduced many Towns, and even Leipsick
it self, for the third time; but a contagious sickness stopped the course of
his prosperity, and greatness. He was a Dane borne, and a Gentleman, that had
acquired reputation in Stralsund, whereof he was Governor; and after the peace
was made, he obtained the honor of commanding an Army, in the Emperors
service.

Galasso passed into Silesia, and Wallenstein, not being well satisfied
concerning the conditions of Peace, The Swedes defeated toward Stenaw the 18.
of October, 1633.
followed him with the Body of the Army, and employed so much promptitude, and
address, that he surprised the Enemies near Stenaw; defeated the Horse, (which
was much in number) and surrounded the Food, which yielded, and put into his
hands above six score Colors, with all the Baggage and Artillery. Whereupon
all Silesia instantly submitted; and it was firmly believed, that he
endeavored to bring back the war, to the mouth of the Baltic Sea, to recall
the Swedes to defend that passage, by which they entered, and sent home their
booty. But he, on the other side, did the direct contrary; and as if he had
been vanquished, marched from Pomerania; and sent General Henry Count de la
Tour, with Tubal, and his forces, to take up their Winter quarters, in the
Emperors Hereditary Lands.

Which proceeding amazed the Court at Vienna, gave the Swedes time, and means
to recollect, and discovered to the whole world what he had hatched in his soul.

None made any profit of this victory, but they of Colein, who were much
encouraged by it; and consequently, they declared, that they could not ratily
the Treaty which they had made with the King of France, nor receive any
Garrison of his, into their City; but that he might put four hundred men into
Andernach, The Colonians will not ratisy the Agreement made with the King of
France.
and as many at Zonts: founding their excuses, upon the insolence of the
people. In effect, the Citizens, being singularly affected to the Emperor,
memeed both the Magistrate, and the Clergy it self, to beat them of Town, if
there were any more speech of changing their Master.

Let us now show the tragical end of the ungrateful Wallenstein; for since we
have already seen the recompense of his services, let us also publish the just
punishment of his crimes, and treasons.

Biron was advanced to the high dignity of Marshall of France, to crown his
vertnes; and his head was stricken off by the public Executioner, for having
plotted against his Master.

This said Wallenstein (whom the Emperor had made Duke of Frithland) collected
his forces near Eguer in Bohemia, gave them three months pay, and made them
take an oath to himself, without mentioning the Emperor at all. Thus the
Impostume brakes' ambition brought forth Rebellion: all was discovered, and his
practice with the Swedes, known. But what remedy for so desperate a business?
Weallenstein's designs discovered.
The Vessel could not choose but run aground, when the Pilot himself cast her
upon the Sand-bank, and against the Rocks. This Traitor had all in his hands;
and the Emperor seeing that his own servants had resolved his ruin, implored
the help of heaven. However, it was thought fit; in this disorder, to send
money, to the Garrison of Prague, so to be sure of that, as being the Capital
City of the Kingdom, and to retain the King of Hungary, who was ready to march
into the Field, with too weak forces. Frithland sent his Brother-in Law Count
Terskie to Prague, but it was too late, for they made him understand, that they
would acknowledge none but the Emperor. Whereupon our design (said he) is
discovered, let us pack away, and Join with the Swedes.

Now this infamous treason was known to Gordon, Leasly, and Butler; the two
former Scotch, and the last an Irish Officer; but all the difficulty was, how
to stifle it in the Cradle; to which effect, they invited Terskie, Kinskie,
Illaw, and Newman, (all his Creatures) to supper, Supper at Eguer.
where they took their lives to pay the score, and save their Master
Ferdinands: And thus the Tragedy being begun upon them as the Members, must be
ended upon him, the detestable Head; the Commission whereof was faithfully, and
laudably undertaken by Butler, who thrusting open his door, and finding him up,
so staggered and hared him, Wallenstein massacred.
that he could not make one word of answer to this fatal salutation. Oh
Traitor, to the Emperor, and Empire, art thou there? And therewith, run him
through with his Partizan, so that he fell down dead, and an Irish soldier
having crushed his head, with the But-end of his Musket: took him by the heels,
and threw him out at the window.

This was the end of this ungrateful Minister, who from an ordinary Gentleman,
was risen to so much greatness, that he could climb no higher, without being
a Traitor, and a Parricide. As he had done great services, on the one side, so
had he also received great recompenses, on the other; his Master having created
him Prince of the Empire, and made him so potent, that he had trouble enough to
unmake him again; yea, and much ado, to save both himself, and his House, from
his cruel perfidie. Never were Traitors seen to make a good end, ambitions
persons fall into the praecipice, which they intend for others.

He was very much hated, and that chiefly by the Emperors enemies; and yet
some, to make the Prince odious, have presumed to excuse him, as if he had been
wrongfully killed. Men, who are overballanced by Passion, have no solid
judgment. It is said of him; that for having only awaked him out of his sleep,
he had caused many to be hanged, with this sentence; Hang that beast: And yet I
say, he has found pens, which have justified his proceedings, and accused
the House of Austria of cruelty, and ingratitude, But, that Polish Bishop, who
has defended him against the sense of the very Swedes, the French, Di^seck a
Polish Bishop.
and other of the Emperors enemies, has rather discovered his own antipathy
against that Family, (which was then combatted by so many Protestants) then
reasons, and arguments sufficient to prove his innocence; nor are they indeed
valued, but where blind

(...) passion praedominates: though yet still, this praeoccupated old man has
not failed to find applause amongst such of his nation, as disapproved the
straight Alliance of their King, with the aforesaid House.

Whatever be reported of him, he was a good, and judicious soldier, but
ambition, becoming the Mistress of his reason, made him (according to the
opinion of almost all Authors) machinate, and contrive the death of his Master,
and his Children: by which cruel affect, he stained all his gallant exploits,
and rendered his name infamous to posterity. The end crowns the work; and it
serves for nothing, to have well begun, unless we finish so too. The Polanders
are in action; it is time to speak of their virtue, which has produced
miracles.

CHAP. XXXII
The Siege of Smolensko raised. The King of Poland compells an Army of a
hundred and twenty thousand men, to have recourse to his mercy. He makes peace
with the Muscovits, and chastises the Turks. The Infanta's death. The taking of
Rhinbergh. Aitona ranges the Militia, and takes some Lords prisoners.

ULadislans the fourth, King of Poland, was, after the death of his brother
Sigismund, by the consent of the Stares and Nobility, preferred to the Throne;
and there suddenly presented it self a fair occasion, to signalize the
beginning of his Reign, and let the Polanders see, that he would be the terror
of his enemies.

The Muscovits after having done much spoil in Lituania, besieged the Town of
Smolensko, the walls whereof are extremely thick. The King sent his Army
thither, and went himself shortly after, to command it. Great skirmishes were
made, but small means, to beat up a quarter: whereupon he resolved to storm two
Fortresses, or Holds, which were upon the River, and would needs be there
himself in person. The more difficult this Enterprise was, the greater was the
glory; for, more then six thousand Muscovits were put the sword. Upon these
advantages he entrenched himself, and not being able to unnestle them totally
from thence, he cut off all their Provisions, in such sort, as they quickly
found themselves reduced to the extremity either of starving, An Unheard of
victory.
or rendering themselves to his mercy. A terrible thing, and not heard of
before; that a hundred and twenty thousand men should bring their Arms, and
Colors, and cast them at the feet of this victorious Prince. This was not a
victory, but a monster of a victory. He pardoned them all; and made the
strangers, (which were about fourteen thousand men) promise never to bear arms
more, against the Crown of Poland. A while after, peace was made between them
upon conditions, that the King should relinquish his Title, Peace made.
and praetentions, upon the Great Duchy, and the Grand Duke his, upon
Smolensko and some other places.

The Turk, and Tartars, seeing the Polanders busy, entered into Poland, to
make a diversion, The Turks ^eaten.
and give the Muscovits breath. But the King had done his work time enough, to
come and put sire in their tails; for he bear them, and forced them to beg
peace, which he granted them, upon most honorable terms for himself. At the
same time, the third part of the City of Constantinople was burnt to the
ground, with incredible loss. A prodigy, which threatened the Turks with that
misfortune which is now befalling them.

Let us now return into Holland, through England, where we shall find King
Charles as much in love with peace, and quiet, as King James his Father was. He
went into Scotland, and was crowned there the twenty fifth of June, 1633.

We lest the Deputies of the Obedient Provinces very busy: about seeking the
end of their evils, in a happy peace; but there was a wind, which hindered the
sprowting forth of this good seed. During the time of their negotiation, the
Infanta went to enjoy everlasting beatitude with her husband, The death of the
Infanta.
with whom she had so religiously lived. Her subjects expressed very great
grief, for the departure of so good a Mother, by whom they had been so gently
governed; and that which most afflicted them, was to foresee, that these
Treaties would produce no good effect, as it was easy to judge: for the States
stood fast upon impossibilities; and these could not by any means exclude their
Master; besides, the Prince going to besiege Rhinbergh, (which he took in three
weeks) made them conceive, that they treated with them almost no other wise,
then Conquerors use to do, with such as they have vanquished. For, they offered
them conditions of advantage enough, to testify, that their thoughts were very
much inclined to peace: but the wind of France, quickly cooled that pious heat.
Charnasse made use of the two most potent ways in the world, to make this
Treaty infructuous; that is, of Eloquence; and of that divine Metal, which
Inpiter knew to be the strongest. In fine, he effected so much by his diligent
pursuits, The Treaty of Peace vanishes.
and solicitations, that he brake off the whole match, and brought the States
to take Arms again, with his Master.

The Marquis of Aitona not having force enough to face the Prince before
Rhinbergh, was content to fortify the Isle of Saint Stephen upon the Moze,
whereby to have the passage free. And the Prince, agitating in his mind a
greater exploit, then that of a Siege, went, The siege of Rheynbergh.
and encamped himself beyond Boisleduc, or the Bosse; and having sent for
eighteen or Twenty Troops of Swedish Horse: departed, with a multitude of
Wagons of Victuals, and marched directly toward Aitona; who (though he had
also received some Horse from the Imperialists for his defense) kept himself
upon his advantages, as judging it beyond the maxims of a soldier, to put the
Country into a general joy, by hazarding the Battle offered him. For if the
Prince had gained it, he had found no resistance; but if he had lost it, he had
left the Conquerours nothing but the glory of having won it, without any
other profit at all, save only (peradventure) of a Town, or two, as Wenlo, and
Ruremund.

The Prince sent a supply to Mastricht, and retired himself faster then he
came, which caused the disbanding of many of his men. And the Marquis hastened,
with three thousand horse, to defend the Isle of Saint Stephen; and thus ended
the Field of this year of 1633, upon which the Swedes, who had committed
unknown insolences in this Militia, and some dissolutions, which spoiled the
Holland discipline, repassed the Rheyn; as the Imperialists on the other side,
also did. But let us see the Field following, before we repasse with them.

Some Lords prisoners.
Aitona, having received money from Spain, and ranged his Militia in a good
state of obedience, took some Lords prisoners, who were suspected of having
complotted with Count Henry of Bergues. The Prince d'Espinoy was already fled
into France, and the Duke of Arscot, gone into Spain; and so this thick fogge
being dissipated, and Count Henry's Cause tried, he marched with his Army
toward the Moze, whether he had already sent the Marquis de Led, who took the
strong House of Argenteau, and retook the Duchy of Limburgh, and so made a
show of besieging Mastricht, to have the passage open into Germany. The Prince,
to divert him from this design, went, and planted himself before Breda; but
having received notice, that the Spanish Army drew toward him, to dislodge him
from thence, he retired five days after. Thus ended this Field, in the
Low Countries; let us go see other sport in the Empire, much more bloody then
this.

CHAP. XXXIII
The Siege of Ratisbon; the taking of the Town. The death of Aldringer. The
Cardinal Infanto, joins with the King of Hungary. The Protestants draw all
their forces together again. The Business of Norlinghen. The victory of the
Imperialists. The Cardinal Infanto passes into the Low Countries.

THe chief of the Protestant Party had so great cause to mistrust General
Wallenstein, whose plots and practices they knew, that it was no wonder if Duke
Bernard gave no credit to the promises he made, to hasten a Conjunction, the
retardment whereof was fatal to him, and all his friends. Duke Francis-Albert
of Saxony, Lailemburgh, who was the instrument chosen, to tie these two metals
of a different nature together, proved not his Crafts-master; and so was
carried prisoner for his apprentisage to Vienna.

Ratish me taken by the Sweden.
Duke Bernard having taken Ratisbone by the good will of the Inhabitants, and
being assured (too late) of the intentions of the Duke of Fruhland, was
advancing already toward Bohemia, when he received the news of the just
disaster, which was befallen him; whereupon he changed course. Inpiter is
patient; but when his goodness is too much abused, he darts his Thunderbolt,
and crushes all. It is always dangerous to meddle with ones Master, and to
crack nuts with him. This great Symptom was advantageous to the Swedes, as
giving them opportunity to take Towns in Swaveland, and toward the Lake of
Bregants; in such sort, as that the terror which King Gustave had cast into
Italy, was now renewed more strongly then ever.

The King of Hungary, having cured the Army with a sweet shower of Gold, and
taken a new Oath from the soldiers, made them march toward Ratisbone. For,
since the servant had betrayed the Father of the Family, it was necessary, to
sond the child, who was received by all of them, with incredible joy, and
alacrity. I will not stay upon the particulars of this famous siege, which cost
very much blood; but content my self, with only saying, that news being come
to the Camp, of a notable victory gotten by Arnem, upon the Imperialists in
Silesia, and of his moving toward Prague; the King sent so strong a supply,
And retaken by the Imperialists.
that the said Armens, was constrained to raise the Siege, and retire himself
into Saxony, Aldringer (...)
at the very same time that Ratisbone began to parley, and capitulate, which was
near the end of July: and some days before, the famous General Aldringer was
slain, near Lanshut. He was born in the Country of L^xenburgh, and his virtue
had drawn him out of the obscurity of his birth, to raise him to so eminent a
Charge. He had fought happily with John de Werdr, and his death was much
regretted, by the principal of his party.

Donawerds followed Rarisbone, and the Cardinal Infanto, who had now staid long
enough at Milan, passed, with the old Spanish, Italian, and Burgundian Bands,
through Swisserland, into Germany, where they quickly taught the Swedes, what
it was, exactly to observe Military Discipline.

The Armies joined, and marched into the Duchy of Wirtembergh, after which
they sighed and longed, as the Children of Israel did, after the Land of
Promise: but they must first pass the Red Sea, and win a Town whole Garrison
was strong, and required a Siege, before they could arrive to the bank.

The Swedes sent for all their own forces, and those of their Allies: Horn
joined with Duke Barnard, and argued against him, that it was better to let go
one Town, then hazard the Public Cause; and that an occasion, for fighting
would be found in time, with more advantage. The Duke disputed the contrary;
alleging, that the winning of this Bartail, The Siege of Northinghen.
Austria would be open, Bavaria a prey? and their Party, our of all danger:
That they must venture it, before the Spaniards came. In fine, it was concluded,
that it should be the next day, being the sixth of September; and the
proceeding of that Imperial Colonel, who asked to speak with a Kinsman of his
of the same Charge in the Swedish Army, upon the word of a Cavalleer (to whom
he proposed an overture of Peace, in his Masters name; which was rejected by
the Party) was taken by the Swedes, for a good augure. It would require a
volume, to recount the particulars, of the most bloody fight that ever happened
amongst Christians. The forces of the Duke of Wirtembergh, the Landgrave of
Hassia, and Count Cratz, (who left the Bavarians, when he saw that his Treason
was discovered, which was to deliver Ingolstadt to the Enemy) were already
arrived; so that there wanted none, but the Rhingrave, who was beyond the
Rheyn, with four, or five thousand men. But they would not expect him, for fear
lest the Imperialists, who, had gotten to them the Armies of the Duke of
Bavaria, and Cardinal Infanto, might chance to escape them.

The Battle of Nordinghen. 1634. the sixth of September.
The Fight began in the morning, the most furious shock was given, for the
getting, and keeping of a Hillock; and the Swedish Infantry received great
loss, about the storming of a mined Fort. The Canon it self being hidden
behind some thick bushes, did terrible execution, by piercing quite through
all the squadrons: and the Swedes, upon the other side, amazed to see the grave
motion of the Spaniards (who did not recoyle or start back, but gently retreat,
and advance with a sure discharge) were constrained to fly, and the Cavalry
being pursued by the Duke of Lorrain, and John de Werdt, The absolute victory
of the Imperialists.
(who gave a brave account of themselves that day) was almost utterly defeated;
and the quarter given at Hamelen was exactly observed, till the the King of
Hungary ceased the slaughter. All the Canon, to the number of eighty Pieces,
and three hundred Colors, were the irreproachable marks of an entyre victory,
which crowned the heads of both the Ferdinands. It is held, that there were
above twelve thousand men killed upon the place, and near six thousand
prisoners, amongst whom was that brave General, Gustave Horn, who was
received by the King, with such testimonies of benevolence, as were suitable to
the merit of so courteous, and valorous a Captain.

The pillage was for the soldiers, and the fruit of the victory, a peace,
which poor Germany enjoyed not long, for she was not yet enough drained,
Whereof the first was a peace.
and she had still some ill humors left within her, which were not suffered to
settle, by her Neighbors. But, if the Protestants, and they who had mixed
their interest with them, received much joy, by the first Battle of Leipsick;
no less, were the hearts of all the Catholics both in, and out of Germany,
accumulated with alacrity and gladness, by this. The joy of the Catholics.
And the Generals divided this great Army, into many small Bodies, as the
Swedes had done theirs, after the Battle of Lutzen, to carry an offensive war,
up and down, into many places, whereof we will speak as briefly, as out matter
will permit us.

Nortlinghen forthwith surrendered; the Duchy of Wirtembergh, quicky in her
Enemies power; and the Duke, unwilling to be spectator of so pitifulla State,
got himself, together with the most prompt of his party, to Strasburgh.

The luster of the Eagles Majesty, and of the glory acquired by her, as well in
Germany, as Denmark, had been much discolored, and obscured, by the happiness
of that great Septemtrional Mars; But now she sufficiently recovered it, The
Swedes will have war in their victory, and the Imperialists peace in theirs.
by this memorable victory of Nortlinghen; and to show, that she durst follow
her enemies, she contraried their proceedings. For, they would have war, in the
continuation of their Conquests; and she declares her desire of Peace, in hers.
They would carry away all, with violence, and extremity; and she would restore
all, to the first order, and state, by a moderate accommodation. In effect, the
King of Hungary offered it to the Duke of Saxony, and the rest of the Princes,
by whom it was accepted; but it lasted not long, no more then the deceitful
favors of that variable Goddess did, by the puissant odor of the Flower de
luce, as the drift of this History will show.

The Cardinal Infanto, after having embraced, and taken leave of his
Brother-in-Law, departed toward the Low Countries, whether we will let him go,
and stay yet a while in Germany, to note the carreer of Ferdinands victories,
in the disorder of the Protestants.

THE HISTORY OF THIS IRON AGE.
BOOK I. PART II.
CHAP. I
The Peace made at Prague, after the reduction of many places, and small
States. The complaints of the Swedes

ALL the Towns of Swaveland, and the Lake of Bregants, returned to the
Emperor, their Lord. The Imperialists divide themselves,
Auxburgh was taken by famine, and pardoned: Rain, and Newburgh followed; Vlme,
and Neuremburgh were invested: but this Prince, who fought for nothing but
Peace, and won it, for no other end, then to give it such as would have it,
received them into favor. take many places.
The Castle of Wurtzburgh held out a long time, for fear of not being forgiven.
Gonnixhof, after a long Siege, was taken by Hatsfelt. Piccolommi played Rex in
Turing, and Coloredo in Saxony; in such sort, as that he compelled the Elector
to hearken to a Peace, from which indeed, as also from the Emperor, he had no
aversion at all, but only his own interest, and that of Religion: Which the
King of Sweden very well observing, in the midst of his prosperity, and knowing
the amity, which was between these two Princes, was fearful least it should
come to be renewed. I know, there were some who believed, that he was the
first, who discovered to his friend, and Master the Emperor, the Treason,
which the Duke of Frithlund had brewed against him. However it were, the Peace
was made at Pragne, The Peace made at Prague, 1635.
in the month of May 1635. with advantage enough to the Ghospellers; for their
Religion was settled, and all reduced to the same state wherein it was in the
year 1627. and all such Ecclesiastical Lands, and Goods, as the Protestants had
appropriated to themselves, after the agreement of Pastavia, confirmed upon
them, for forty years; and at the expiration of this term, the difference to
be composed, in an amicable way.

Which displeases the most zealous.
But now, the most zealous of both Parties, not being pleased with this Peace,
the Emperor perceived, that France was cutting some work for him; and that of
the Empire being but roughly framed; he wisely considered, that he who will
make war abroad, must make peace at home.

Such as would be comprised in this Agreement, were obliged to give their
forces to the Emperor their Head, under pain of being declared Enemies to the
Empire; and so they resolved (though many of them with grudging) to enter this
holy Temple of Peace: from which yet (since they could not force it) many of
them flinched afterward upon the first occasion, with greater animosities then
ever, as we will shortly demonstrate. A Peace constrained, is like a rapid
Brook, which may be stopped for a time, by a strong Dam, or Sluice; though at
length, it either pierce it, or flow over it.

The Dukes of Meckelemburgh were pardoned, and re-invested in their Dutchyes:
And all participated of this common Good, save only the Lands which had been
occupated, or seized on by the Swedes; and Duke Bernard, Duke Bernard goes into
France.
who not having been able to recover what his Ancestors had lost, cast his
eyes upon the Flower de Luce; whose favor with that King, had kindled a great
jealousy in the Electors Soul, which turned into hatred against the Swedes, as
it appeared in the continuation of the War.

The scatterings of this Army rallyed near Francfurt; and the Ryngrave, who had
had his singer in the pie, and saved himself by swimming, was there, with the
Great Chanceller Oxenstern, who did all he could, to hinder this Peace, or
Reunion of the Members with their Head. For, he pretended, that being the
Queens Lieutennant, the direction of the Affairs belonged to him: but neither
his arguments, nor any such as sounded like them, could be heard. Indeed, if we
must seek the justice of a Cause, in good success, and argument; the
complaints of the Swedes seemed, in some sort lawful, and the reproaches which
they cast upon the Germans, proceeded from a strong resentment. Is this the
recompense (said they) of so many labors, and troubles as we have suffered,
and so many Battles as we have hazarded for your liberty? Do you make us this
ungrateful payment, for the blood which we have shed, and for the life which
our King has lost, to free you from the oppression of the Spaniards, and save
your Religion? How will you endure to hear, that they who have been your
Deliverers, shall be called your Enemies? These notes rung loud every where,
and found both the ears, and the hearts, of a multitude of Protestants open,
to produce a seed, the bitterness whereof was soon tasted; however they had to
do with a Nation, which was but too grateful, and acknowledging.

The Elector of Saxony, both in his own name, and that of the whole Protestant
Body, offered them a hundred thousand Rix-Dollars for a reward, and ordered
them to withdraw; A reward offered the Swedes, which they refuse.
but they would have more, and stayed hankering, and hunting after many
difficulties; for they saw, that they had yet many good Towns, and Provinces;
and that the whole Empire was not able to beat them out of Pomerania. They had
the Alliance of France; the affections of the people; yea, and of some Princes
alsounder hand, who had signed the Peace, but by constraint, and with regret.
And so, in fine, they took a firm resolution to stand it out. There is
collusion, and cheatery, as well in Germany, as in other Nations; and
Macchiavels lessons are very much practiced there, in this Age.

The Chanceller Oxenstern, environed by a great number of Counts, Barons, and
great Lords, kept his Court at Francfurt; but finding the approach of the
Conquerours, he made a stronger Alliance with the King of France; put
Philipsburgh, and all that, which the Swedes held thereabouts, into his hands,
for a huge sum of money, and retired himself, with Rautzaw, through France,
and Holland, into Sweden; having sent before his departure, his Train of a
hundred and fifty brave horses for breed, into Pomerania; which fell all into
his Enemies hands.

A Vessel laden with Spoils makes Shipwreck.
We must here take notice of the shipwreck, of a certain Vessel, which departed
with a fair wind, from Wismar, fully laden with the richest spoils, and
principally, those of the Churches; for besides some silver Organs, the twelve
Apostles of Wurtzburgh, were all shut up in this belly of wood: But being near
her time, she was delivered, without a Midwife, and all was lost, within a
league of Sweden, save only one man, who escaped, to carry the news, and bid
them not expect her. The spoils of the Church, produce nothing but misfortune.

CHAP. II
The answer to the complaints of the Swedes. The Cardinal of Richelieu, will
besiege Colein. The States refuse succor. He endeavors to ruin the House of
Lorraine. The Duchess Nicoll at Paris, Prince Francis carried prisoner, to
the Citadel of Nancy.

THe complaints of the Swedes had their answer; which was, that they had had
wages, and booty; that the Germans did not send for them; but that they joined
together amongst themselves; The reproaches of the Germans to the Swedes.
and that the Princes were not obliged to continue the war, to glutt their
ambition, and avarice: That they had obtained that, for which they took arms;
That the recompense which was offered them, freed the Princes from ingratitude:
That it was not lawful for them, to sell, or alienate the Lands, and Goods of
the Empire; and much less, to draw the French (their old enemies) into
Germany. In brief, that their pretexts were but illusions, to amuse, and
battle the Plaicsends of the Germans. But, let us now bring the French upon the
Stage, who will peradventure beat down this tottered Building, since they are
invited to it by the Swedes.

That great Cardinal, the worthy Instrument of all bloody Plays, and principal
mover of that furious Ball, or Revel, which was so long danced amongst
Christians; was always, either near, or in Lorraine, to provide for all
occurrences, and remedy the sudden changes of Fortune.

He was so extremely angry, at the inconstance of the Colonians, The Cardinal
demands succor of the Hollanders, to besiege Colein, but in vain.
or Citizens of Colein, that he could not long dissemble it: And therefore, he
sent to entreat the Sates-General of Holland, to assist him, in his design:
and by virtue of the straight Alliance, to succor the French Army (which he
had destinated to besiege that City) with Victuals, Munition, and some
Shallops. But they answered, that they could not condescend to it, for fear of
offending the Emperor, and Empire: nor did they ever render him any other
answer at all, to all his replies; which gave him excessive rancour, and
disgust, however he thought fit to make but little show thereof. For it was
not, indeed, the fear of offending Ferdinand, which kept them from it; for
they had done that enough already by many oblique ways; and especially, by
sending Coronel Pinsen, with a strong Brigade, into Westphalia; But it was,
because they had rather have for their Neighbor, a weak Bishop of Colein, then
a strong King of France. It is Maxim of State which carries it, above all
obligations; and Allyances, how strong soever they be, are easily broken in
these times, if Interest command it. They sent General Bandits word, that if he
did not retire himself from thence, they would drive him away by force. So
that, these former circumstances, and the utter route of the Swedes, being
motives to make the Cardinal differ his design upon Colein for a sitter season
(for vengeance waits occasion) made him he fixed his thoughts upon things of
nearer concernment; as thus. He had already almost ruined, or quite depressed
the branches of the House of Lorraine in France, and persecuted the Duke of
Guise, The House of Lorraine afflicted.
even till his death; and therefore he resolved to unroot the maine Stock, and
destroy the whole Family.

The Duke of Lorraine, after being stripped of all his Places of strength, and
of Nancy it self, to get a peace; found, that France sought nothing but his
destruction; and that when he resented any of the astronts which were done him
by the Cardinal, the King (who was often ignorant of the cause) was forth with
made believe, that he had broken his faith; and so his lawful excuses had no
access, where his enemies were stronger then he. We very often judge ill,
because we know not the principal Causes. Wherefore, having no other rolyance,
then upon God, and his Sword, and not being able any longer to dissemble his
just resentment; The Duke of Lorraines Manifesto.
he published a Manifest; wherein he declared, that being a Sovereign Prince
borne, and seeing that his Enemies (whom he could not content) sought after his
Country, and his life; he transferred all his Rights, upon his brother;
absolved his Subjects from their Oath of fidelity to himself, and commanded
them to obey him. Which done, he returned into Germany, to serve the Emperor,
whom the Cardinal studied to ruin with him; from whom he received the quality,
of General of the Catholic Army, and passed toward the Danub, with the
Cardinal Infanto: And three, or four months after, the Princess Nicoll his
wife, The Princess Nicoll at Paris.
made her entrance into Paris, where she was well received by their Majesty's,
and entertained according to her condition.

Richelieu, being well informed of all; and imagining, that this Transport, or
Deed of Gift, was but conditional, and for a time; and knowing also, Prince
Francis marry, his Cousin; is imprisoned; retiers to Vienna.
that the Cardinal, brother to the said Duke, had sent to Rome, for a
Dispensation to marry his Cousin German, and render the Cap into the hands of
his Holiness; judded it expedient, to cross this match; and so sought to
surprise the Post; but in vain; for he passed through the Guards, and the same
evening, the marriage was consummated: But both he, and his Princess were
carried prisoners to the Citadel; out of which they both secretly escaped, as
also out of the Town, disguised in the habit of Country people; and passing
through Savoy, Florence, and Venice, arrived at length at the Imperial Court in
Vienna.

It was indeed, in vain, for him to attempt the extinction of this most
illustrious, and most ancient Race, issued from Charlemagne, and so many other
Kings, who have performed so considerable services to Christendom; yea, and
even to France it self, in the Battle of Crecy, and during all the Wars with
the English. For God raised a young Maid of this Family, like a second Judith,
The Maid Jane of Orleans.
to save the Kingdom from the oppression of Strangers; and the Cardinal after
having deprived it of the lawful Prince, called in the Gothic. Nations, to
ruin it. This noble House I say, has afforded Princes, which have defended
and maintained the Catholic Religion, throughout the whole Kingdom; and the
Cardinal made the Lutherans flock to subdue it. Indeed, there are none but the
Hughenot Party, who have any ground to complain of it, since it has furnished
many noble Lords, who have always showed themselves enemies to that Doctrine.
We must confess, that this Duchy merited better treatment, since it had never
offended France; That it is a poor maxim of State, to oppress a Prince, who
desires nothing but Peace, and upholds himself in the justice of his Cause.
This proceeding will produce much misfortune; for they who accuse him of having
so often falsyfied his faith, silence the cause thereof, either through malice,
or ignorance.

CHAP. III. The Imperialist's wast in the Duchy of Wirtembergh. The French
come to succor the Swedes. Philipsburgh taken by a prank of War. The Cardinal
enters Brussels, and the Duke of Orleans departs.
FRance, hitherto waged War against the House of Austria, obliquely, and
indirectly enough, though yet with advantage; and seized upon Lorraine, more
like a Fox, then a Lion, as more by craft, then open force. But, it was time,
to throw off the Vizard, and lay hold of all Europe, since it appertains to
it, according to the opinion of that famous Impostour, who is so learnedly
refuted, by Jansenius a Professor of Lonain; and a certain Spaniard, who
argues thus. If the Empire belong to France, because it was governed by
Charlemagne; with much more reason does Languedoc, and some other Provinces in
France, occupated by the Goths, belong to the King of Spain, as he is
Successor of the said Goths, who established their Monarchy in Spain, and
preceded the said Charlemagne in time. But let us leave these old trifles, and
fond Commentations, and stay in our corrupt Age, where Might, amongst many, is
more esteemed, then Right, and where, the most crafty Cheats, are held the best
Politicians.

Duke Bernard being escaped, with many other Officers, had recourse to the
favor of France; where, being a German, he was judged capable, and fit to
bear the burden of the War, together with Marshal de la Force. The French in
Germany.
Such as are least suspected, and most interessed, as well in matter of
Religion, as otherwise, are always chosen, for the expedition of any great
Enterprise.

Make a huge Magazine at Philipsburgh
There passed nothing worthy of memory between the two Parties, the
Imperialists being grown slack and lazy by the abundance and fertility of the
Duchy of Wirtembergh; and the French making a Magazine at Philipsburgh, the
like whereof was never heard: as being sufficient to pay, and feed whole Armies
together, for the entire Conquest of the Empire. The more judicious sort of men
conceived, that it was to fall suddenly, and unexpectedly upon Colein, the
most important Town in Germany; thereby to have communication with the
Hollanders; take it away from the Spaniards with the Empire; and so (this gate,
together with that of the Sea, being shut, by the States Ships) beat them out
of all the Low Countries. But, an unforeseen blow, an unthought of thunderbolt;
a strange accident, brake that, which all the invention of man was not able to
divert; and this it was.

Gasper Bamberger, being advertised of the slacknesse, and carelessness of
them, to whom this Golden-Fleece was recommended, and in whose custody this
Horn of plenty was; sent some of his most faithful Officers, in the habit of
Peasants, and a party of his Regiment, Which is taken by craft.
who passed upon the Ice (for it had frozen, and the Winter was one of the
sharpest of this Age) killed all the Court of Guard, and with small resistance,
grew Masters of the place. And this Enter prize quashed all the fair
advantages of the French; made them take other resolutions; freed Colein from a
most evident danger, and disposed the rest of the Winter, together with the
beginning of the Springs, to a Treaty of Peace.

There were found two millions of Gold; above a hundred Brasse-Pid^es of
Orduance; above four hundred thousand Sacks of Corn, Oa^^ Barley, Pease, and
Beans; twelve thousand Sacks of Salt; an incredible Magazine of Powder,
without counting the riches of particular persons, which were brought thither,
as it were to Jupiters feet; that is, to be secured. It was easy enough to
judge, by this preparation, of the greatness of their designs, and
confidently to affirm, that it is in the disposal of States, that the great
God makes his Divine Providence shine brightest.

The loss of Philipsburgh was not sufficient, without the addition of that of
Trevirs, together with the Elector; the Town being taken the six and twentieth
of March, 1653. and he carried to Brussels, by the Garrison of Luxeburgh.

The Cardinal Infanto, having by this great Victory, eluded the ambushes or
snares, The Cardinal Infanto at Brussels, and the Duke of Orleans retires
himself into France.
of such as envyed that Government, made his entry into Brussels, in the month
of December. The Duke of Orleans, for some reasons which were clear enough,
would not be present at his reception; but, by the advice, of Puilanrent his
Favorite, retired into France, where he was received by the King, with the
wonted testimonies of affection; however he caused his marriage with the
Princess Margaret to be declared Null, in Parliament. This Puilanrent for this
service, was proclaimed Duke, and Peer of France, and married the Cardinals
Niece; but they raised him on high, to make him catch a heavy fall.

CHAP. IV
The King declares war against the Cardinal Infanro, and why? The Spaniards are
beaten. The taking of the Fort of Schenck.

THe King, being irritated by the loss of this most important Place, and for
that his protection had not been sufficient to cover the Elector of Trevirs;
sent to re-demand him from the Cardinal Infanto; who answered him, that he
could hot dispose of such a business, without the knowledge, and consent, of
the Emperor, and the King of Spana: which answer not pleasing him, and finding
no hope of any orther; he resolved to declare war against the said Infanto,
under this specions pretext.

The King of France declares war upon the Spaniards
Now, in regard that this War'v as derived, like a contagion, from that of
Germany, by which, as by a great fire, all the circumjacent parts were so
scotched, that they kindled with the first wind: we will return again to the
Source.

The Civil Wars (as we have already showed) stopped the motion of those old
quarrels, and Henry the fourth was diverted from them, by a violent death. But
the Cardinal, having well weighed the strength of the House of Austria, and the
furious shocks or foiles she had sustained, conceived that it was now time, to
make her fall: for he was fully confirmed, that some Provinces (as that of
Flanders, Artoise, and Luxemburgh) had formerly depended upon France: howheit
King Francis had renounced his propriety in them for all perpetuity, by way of
Ransom from his captivity; which the French themselves do not deny; but they
say, that the Kings cannot alienate the Rights of the Crown. If so, how can
there be any firm, and sure Treaty made (...). For, there may as much be said,
of the Emperor, the King of Spain, and other Princes; and so it will be a
business without end. But it might with more equity be alleged, that in
regard they lost those Rights by arms, a hundred years ago, they may upon a
fair occasion, endeavor to recover them by the same means.

Now in these so confused embarassments, there might some pretext be found,
which might, perhaps, be rendered just by the lot of Arms: and that of the
Elector made all the French murmr nor was there ever a fairer opportunity, to
beat out the Spaniards; and therefore it was not fit to neglect it. However the
Spaniards rejected it, and affirmed that they were punctually informed, that
the King had signed the League for the Offensive war with the Hollanders, at
the Loivire, upon the eighth of March, at seven of the clock in the Evening:
Insuch fort, as though they had not taken the Elector, they were nevertheless
sure of a War fifteen days after, as by consequence they had.

They would not make mention, of many frontier Towns, which the French had
attempted to surprise by treachery, as Cambray, and Graveling, to the Governor
whereof they offered a hundred thousand Pistols. All which infractions they had
prudently dissembled, to keep that part of the Country in quiet. Neither was it
the vanity of the Spaniard, A French writer accuses the Spaniards of vanity.
which sought that war, so to make themselves great by the loss, and at the
charge of others: but their admirable prudence labored to divert it, and their
power preserved it self still hitherto, in the Low Countries. But let us leave
disputing, and make the Armies march into the Field.

The French were to scuffle with a Nation, which is not startled at noise. The
King contracted formidable forces, near Sedan, under the conduct of the
Marshals of Chastillon, and Breze, and sent them to enter the King of Spaines
territories, at the same time when the Herald arrrived at Brussels, A brave
Army near Sedan.
to denounce the war; they having begun their march three days before with the
bravest Army that could be seen; A trick which couzened the Spies, The Spanish
Spies couzened.
and proved to be of much advantage. Their order was, to join with the Prince
of Orange, and proceed under his experience, to the conquest of the whole
Country, that so it might be shared between them. The Skinn was sold before the
Bear was taken; and they who reckon before their Host, must reckon twice.

Prince Thomas his Troops defeated.
They cut of Prince Thomas's Troops, which presumed to oppose such an Army, as
that; the Vant-guard whereof only, put them to flight; and which was a terror
both to Friends, and Foes: yea, the Prince of Orange himself, and the States
when they beheld this so gallant an Army, and above seven thousand Horsemen
with scarlet Cassocks were so amazed, that they would have made the sign of
the cross thereat, had they been accustomed to it. But afterward, distrusts,
and jealousies (the obstacles to all brave exploits) wriggled themselves in
amongst them, and continued till the end of the Field.

The first prey was Tirlemount, famous for the ruin thereof; for all
imaginable cruelties, and unnatural actions were perpetrated, and executed, in
this unhappy Town. The Churches, Tirlemount taken, and burnt. Great cruelties.
and whatsoever the Catholics held in greatest Veneration, was handled with
less reverence, then if they had been mere Tartars. All was pillaged, all
violated, and burnt, and almost all massacred. A fine beginning, cannot choose
but have a fine end.

The Cardinal Infanto, in the mean time, retired, and encamped himself before
Brussels, expecting succor from Germany, and gathering together the forces of
the Provinces; all which were not sufficient to stop this impetuous torrent,
which carried all before it.

The Armies pitched their Camp before Lovaine, the seat of the Muses, which
Mars ought to spare; and by consequence he did nothing; for Jupiter saved it.
Grotendonck, with six or seven Regiments, commanded in the Town; and the Enemy
stayed in this Siege, about twelve days; Lovaine besieged.
but French at length, being better furnished with Pistolls then Bread, found
themselves besieged by hunger, which caused fierce muttering, and then
disbanding.

Is succored, and the Hellanders retire.
The Prince of Orange, seeing this disorder, and the relief came out of
Germany, under Piccolommi; concluded with the French Marshals, to make a
retreat; and the Infanto, with his Supply, to pursue them.

They went and encamped near Grave, and the Spaniards, near to the Fort of St.
Stephen, where they stayed not long; for the Prince, being advertised that the
fort of Schenck was surprised, hastened thither speedily, with three thousand
men; and the Armies followed him. This Fort stood upon a point, which divided
the Rheyn into two Arms or Branches; and was so well strengthened, and
furnished, that it was not besiegeable. But Captain Eenholt, a native of those
parts, desiring nothing more, then a favorable occasion to revenge the death
of his Father, who was beheaded at the Haghe; pryed so well into matters, and
laid so fit hold of his time, that he got it with small trouble, and loss, to
the great cost of the United Provinces; whose Army camped at Besaw, and the
French, at Emmerick, and Rees.

And besiege the Fort of Scheck, taken a little be fore.
The Spaniards, who vanted that they found the key of Holland, kept this Fort
nine mouths, but the Lock was changed; insomuch, as that they were in
deliberation of blowing it up. Thus Fortune played the wagge with them, by
giving victory sometimes to the one, and sometimes to the other.

The French demi much diminished, and afflicted.
This French Army, which was the lustiest and gallantest that had been raised
since the beginning of this Age; being reduced to five or six thousand men of
forty thousand which it was, felt the whole winter, the crosses of
irreconcilable Fortune; or rather, the effects of that great God, who was so
much irritated by them: for the soldiers were constrained to sell their
Horses, and Cassacks, and go a begging. It was a pitiful thing, to see
Gentlemen of good birth, dye of sickness in Hospitals, and the soldiers
miserable, by the expectation of the wind, which was almost four months quite
contrary. Thus passed the first Field, which looked at first, as if it would
swallow, and devour all, and so both Parties were equal. But, if Fortune
smiled upon the Assailants in the beginning; she did so yet more, upon the
Defendants, who prepared themselves, to attack the other the year following:
and so the war grew hotter then ever, toward the Rheyn, in the Low Countries,
and in France.

CHAP. V
The Imperialists beat back the French into Lorraine. Oxenstern passes into
France. Bannier renewes the war; and beats the Saxons. Hatsfeldt succors them.
Magdeburgh yields. The Battle of Witstock. Leipsick succored.

THen offers it self so much to be said, in the carrcer of this deplorable war,
which, (as streaming Rivers swell big by receiving many other brooks into
them) embraces so many other in it, and grows so universal, that if I made
any longer stay, then only to pick out every one in their particular
circumstances, I should never come to an end. Wherefore, having sufficiently
declared the motives and praetexts, I will speak of them only in bulk,
especially since we are now descended to those, which are known to all men; for
the wounds thereof are bleeding yet, in the most illustrious Families, and the
Villages still smoking; some whereof have so far lost their form, that they
are reduced as it were, into a certain First matter, or Chaos, and serve for
nothing but a retreat to Wolves and Scritch-Owles, or Birds of ill augure,
which advertise us, that it is time to aspire to some other place, since this
land is cursed, and desert; producing nothing but nettles, and thistles. The
abomination of desolation is in the holy place; let us hope for no amendment,
but fly to the mountains.

An inundation in Holstein.
This year of 1635. by means of a flood, which happened near Glucstat, there
were drowned about six thousand persons, and more then fifty thousand beasts.
The like misfortune chanced in Catalunia some years before, and the Plague,
which began in the North, passed through Holland, and carried away above twenty
thousand mortals, in the Town of Leyden only; without counting such as were
consumed in Amsterdam, The plague at Leyden.
and other Towns: And this contagion seemed to be fomented by the famine,
which had been in Germany, where the very dead were disinterred, to be eaten,
in the Palatinat, and Alsatia.

The French beaten out of Germany.
The French had no better luck at fighting in Germany, from whence they were
expelled with loss of men, Canon, an Baggage; and John de Werdt went beating
them to Monthelgard; and Galasso, having made them quit Mentz, Gust aveburgh,
and other places, went pursuing them in the Rear as far as Metz; in such
sort, as that Weimar, and Cardinal de la Valette were compelled to forsake
all; and the Imperialists being tired with following them, and want of food
were fain to return, and give them leave to take breath.

In other Ages, such revolutions as these, would have produced peace; but in
this, these losses, were but as matches to kindle them to a continuation; for
he who got a great victory, hoped forthwith to suppress his enemy: and if
Fortune changed, desire of revenge suggested no less to the adverse party.

Now, since the French are driven almost quite out of Germany, and the
Low Countries, we will go see, in what posture the Swedes were, and how they
silently breath nothing but vengeance, by spying out such as were affectionate
to them, and attracting by fair promises, them who were wavering, or ballancing
between both.

The Great Chanceller Oxenstern, one of the best wits of this Age, not being
able, by his protestations, to stop the course of the Treaty for peace, and
not finding too much safety at Francfurt (as we have already said) went into
France, where he was received with such honors, as the King communicated to
few. He conferred often with the Cardinal; and these two great Stars never
made any conjunction, but they cast some ill influence upon the House of
Austria, and canvased whatsoever was for their own interest. In such sort, as
that they both having taken a firm resolution (the effects whereof we have
already seen) he passed into Holland, where he was generally honored, and then
retired toward his Mistress, from whence he stirred not afterward.

Bannier renewes the war.
In fine, General Bannier, after having wrangled, and huckled a long time,
received his Orders, and a supply from Sweden; began to lay about him, shake
off his Ecstasy, and attack the Saxons: Hitherto, we have seen wars of
Catholics against Catholics, and the Lutherans against the Catholics, but
now we shall see Lutherans openly against Lutherans; and then the Reformates,
against the Reformates; in such sort, as the Papists will now be reproached no
more, that if their Law were good, they would not tear one another in pieces,
so like Wolves, as they do.

Behold here, the most irregular and extravagant war that ever was, wherein
the most unbridled passions of man had the Helm. Vengeance produced
licenciousness, and licentiousness, all the cruelty, and barbarity, which can
be imagined.

Beats the Saxons.
The County of Brunswick felt the first mischiefs thereof, for despair gave an
Army to the Peasants; and military science victory, to the Swedes, Dom^ts was
be sieged by the Saxons; Bannier hastened thither, and charged them so
suddenly, and so unexpectedly, that he brake them, before they knew, that the
Swedes were in the Field. This check abated the reputation of Bandits, but not
the courage of the Saxons, who presumed to engage themselves again in Battle;
but were again defeated by Bannier. In the third shock, Passes into Misnia.
he had the worst; but he, (who played his last Game and ventured all) cast
himself into Misnia, with so much animosity, that he took many Towns, and
extorted some hundred thousands of Rix-Dollars: the greatness of which sum
made many persons repent themselves of their faint-heartednesse, and stiffled
those complaints which rung too loud, and too freely: We cannot with good
conscience, make war against the Swedes, in regard that they are of the same
Faith we are; and for that they have preserved us, and saved us from the
Tyranny of the Papists etc.

The Elector of Saxony being sufficiently unsatisfied with his General, and a
part of his Subjects, found himself not strong enough to dislodge these
Guests; The Imperialists in the succor of the Elector of Saxony, take
Magdeburgh; are beaten near Wistock, the fourth of October. 1636.
and therefore he had recourse to the Emperor, who dispatched him an Army,
under the conduct of General Hatsfeldt. What a change is this? It is not full
four years, since the Swedes came to chase the Imperialists out of Misnia; and
now these are recalled, to chase out them; which they also did, and besieged
Magdeburgh, even a place redoubtable in her very ashes. Bannier made a show, of
succouring it; but was met by Hatsfeldt, and forced to retire, with great
loss; whereupon the Town yielded, and Harsfeldt went to seek his Enemy, whom
he constrained to forsake Werben, Tangermond, and the Field it self, to the
Duchy of Meckelenburgh, where he stayed near Wistock, and contracted as many
forces as he could. The Battle was fought the fourth of October, 1636; wherein
the Swedes did more then men; for at the first, they had the worst of it; but
toward the end, they so furiously charged the Imperialists, and Saxons, which
were upon their retreat, that they made them double their pace, and
acknowledge the Swedes for Victours, and themselves for Vanquished; the proof
thereof is this.

Bannier returned in Misnia, with resolution to do better then before, and to
make the poor Subjects feel the hatred which he bore their Master. He took,
pilladged, and fired Torgaw. He pardons now no more; for it is the trick of
base fellows only, to forget offenses. This Age is all martial, and breathes
nothing but blood, and slaughter. To be a good Christian (said a Gentleman of
Holstein) it to have a faint, and cowardly Soul.

Leipsick stopped Banniers impetuous course, and the valliant Adolph Transdorf
made him gnaw his thumbs, Leipsick besieged,
by answering the Drummer, (who threatened to put all to fire, and sword, if he
did not render the Town) that he should do his worst. It is not always the
Rampars, or Walls, but the valor of a Governor, which makes a Town strong.

William Landgrave of Hassia, seeing Fortune favor that side which he loved,
And Lamboy beaten before Haguenaw, by the Landgrave.
brake the peace of Prague, and went to surprise Hamboy, who had blocked up
Hanaw; defeated him, and freed the Town; for which fine action, he was
proclaimed an Outlaw, and a Rebel to the Empire. General Goetz being sent to
follow him, took many Places from him, defeated Melander, and shut him up in
the Town of Castle.

Hatsfeldt, being declared Genetal, of the Imperial, and Saxon forces, made the
Victorious Goetz come through Ice, and Snow, to succor Leipsick: so ready was
the Emperonr, Bannier departs from Leipsick 1637. and intrenches himself near
Torgaw.
to manifest his benevolence to the said Elector.

Bannier being prepared to make them of Leipsick feel his choler, was
advertised of this conjunction, and of his Enemies design, which made him
hasten toward Torgaw, a Town situated upon the Elbe, below Dresden; where he
entrenched himself, and showed, that he would not willingly quit his Country,
whom he desired to destroy. Never was Prince so much cried down, as the Elector
was, by the Swedish Party: There was not that vice in nature, whereof they made
him not the Slave; and it seemed to them, as if their rage could not be
satiated, till this Prince were ruined.

Never could the Imperialists draw him to a Battle, he contenting himself with
toiling, and tyring them: but having heard, that Gallasso, and Marazin hastened
with new forces to overwhelme him; he made a show of going toward Erfort, and
departed in the night, for Pomerania: They followed him, and cut his Foot in
pieces; but he made his Horse foard the the River Oder, and fled into the Isle
of Vsedom; no less proud, Flies into Pemerania.
of such a retreat, then the Duke of Mercoeur had been before Canisse, in
Hungary. Hatsfeldt fell sick, and the Swedes being reinforced, divided
themselves into two Bands, or Bodies; the one, under Bannier, to go toward
Silesia; and the other, under Wranghel, toward March; but this latter was
met, and defeated by General Bredaw; which loss obliged them to stay in
Pomerania.

During this bloody knocking, where Fortune remained not constant; the
Landgrave William, being advertised of the retreat of the Swedes, began also
to think of his own; for Cassel was not able to shelter him; and so he retired
into Holland, with his Wife, and Children: himself, and his Army, The
Landgrave retires into Holland with his Wife. His death.
put themselves into East-Freezland, to be shouldered by the States, and the
North-Sea; but Parca cut off the thread of his life, by a pestilent Fever, and
left the Game to be played by his wife, who did it with much felicity. Let us
leave them forging new designs; and pass to the other side, toward Lorraine.

CHAP. VI. Coleredo taken. The Spainards pass into Picardy. John de Werdts
exploits. The Siege of Dole raised. Gallasso enters into Burgundy. War against
the Duke of Parma; who makes peace. Truce prolonged in Prussia.
DUke Bernard of Weymar, and Cardinal de la Valette, having, with very much
ado, gotten loose from their Enemies, by whom they were both followed, and
flanked, retired themselves fighting to Metz; but with the loss of Canon,
Baggage, and a great number of men, as well by the Sword, as Famine: And John
de Werdt, and Gallasso tracing them, were also so received by this scourge, and
sickness, that after a good part of their Army was consumed, they were forced
to retreat; the latter, into Germany, and the former, into the Province of
Liege. The defeat of young Coleredo by young Crecqui in Lorraine, brought the
war back again into Alsatia.

The Spaniards in Picardy with a potent Army.
The House of Austria, to make France feel what she had made her suffer in
Germany, and the Low Countries, resolved to carry the war into her very
bowels, and to the very Gates of Paris it self. The greatness of the Spanish
Nation was engaged herein, to make the French know, that they had force enough
to revenge themselves effectively, and not by vain rodomont ados, or ranting.
For which end, the Cardinal Infanto was making huge preparations all the Winter
long; He entered by the way of Picardy, with an Army of sixteen thousand Horse,
and fifteen thousand Foot. The Imperialists were conducted by Piccolomini, and
John de Werdt; and the Low Country Country Forces by Prince Thomas. It was
thought, that Army would have devoured all France, there being none but the
Count of Soissons, with ten or twelve Regiments, to hinder their passing the
River of Some.

Take some places.
Catalet, Capelle, and Corbie, made small resistance; and the other places
served but for pillage. Count Soissons retired with some loss; and the ransack
which John de Werdt made, together with the dust of his Army, cast terror into
the City of Paris. He surprised some, beat others, and went on with so much
speed, that he compelled his Enemies, who were very much steeightened, to keep
themselves upon their guard.

The King raised a puissant Army, and marched directly to his Enemies; who, not
being willing to hazard the Country by a general Battle, retired, and he,
having after some weeks siege, retaken Corbie, and finding the the winter near
at hand, did the same. But the Hollanders, upon the other side, not enduring to
see the Spaniards, in the Fort of Schenck, after a siege of nine months,
constrained them to change their lodging.

Let us pass into Burgundy, and see in what condition the Prince of Conde is
there.

The Burgund ans say, that he attacked them, contrary to his own word given
them, Dole besieged, 1626. is sue^ured by the Duke of Lorraine. G^llasso
retired into Germany.
and that a Prince who breaks word, can never have good luck. He laid Siege
before Dole, and the Inhabitants were resolved, rather to perish all with their
swords in their hands, then yield themselves to him. The Duke of Lorrain came
from the Low Countries, and made him raise the siege; and Galasso went out of
Germany, with an Army of thirty thousand men, and fell upon France; but stayed
not long there, and returned with small glory, and a smaller Train, after he
had showed the French, that the Germans knew how to plunder as well as they:
However, he left no mark at all of his valor behind him; for his Army being
diminished by almost the one half, as well through famine, as flight, he
returned from whence he came; and Monsieur de Rantzaw, behaved himself so
valiantly against him, that he acquired the Marshalls staff.

These Attacks upon the one side and the other, between these two Crowns, not
having wrought the effects, which were both feared and expected; it looked, as
if the Kings would open their ears, to the holy propositions of Peace, which
were made them by Pope Urban. But this Iron Age admits no such Remonstrances,
and all the mischiefs must be fulsilled, because they have been foretold: it
is an Age of slaughter, and not of peace.

Piccolomini returned into Germany, and John de Werdt, to the Diocese of
Colein, after having humbled the Country of Liege, and carried the Eagles into
the Kingdom of France; but the Flower de Luce had yet too strong a smell for
thern to suffer.

Hermestein b^eked, renders by fa^^in the sixteenth of June, 1638.
The Fort of Hermestein had been two years blocked up, and the Garrison forced
by famine, to consume all their horses: for the Hassians were in Frienland, and
in France, too far off, to give succor to a place which was like to be lost
for want of it.

Some Wagons there went from Wesel with Victuals and Clothes, but John de
Werdt having notice thereof, marched, and charged the Convoy with so good
success, that he routed the Cavalty, and took all.

They of Hannaw, went more cunningly to work, and put three Barks laden with
provisions, into their Town, which passed before Mentz, with a Burgundian
Cross, and two soldiers clad like Monks, thereby to cozen their enemies. It
is not the Habit which makes the Monk. This Euterprise issuted well, but the
second was not so happy; and so the French were constrained to render this good
place, into the hands of the Imperialists.

Ferdinand the Think Emperor of Germany etc:


The Italians were not exempt from the fury of war; for, after the Cardinal
Infanto's departure, the Duke of Parma, upon some discontentments, made a
League with the Duke of Savoy, and took the protection of France, which was of
much more advantage to him, then it had been to the Electour of Trevirs, and
his subjects. The two Confederates besieged Valencia, where they lost their
time, money, and a multitude of men.

The Dake of Parma at Paris.
The said Duke of Parma was received at Paris, 1636. with great ceremony, and
many complements; from whence, after a while, he repassed into Italy; and the
French, and Savoyers, into the Duchy of Milan, where they were beaten; and the
said Duke, being almost spoiled of all his States by the Spaniards, and seeing
no succor come from France, nor any effects of the promises made him; chose
rather to reconcile himself with them then lose all the rest: Reconciles
himself with the House of Aust (...).
wherefore he subtly dismissed the French out of Parma, and Placentia, and as
soon as he had renounced the Kings Protection, all his said States were
restored to him, 1636. Yet for all this, the War departed not out Italy; for
the Spaniards besieged, and took the Fort of Brema, Brema taken. The death of
the Marshals of Crecqui, and soiras.
and the Marshall of Crecqui coming to spy by what means it might to be
succored, was taken out of that trouble by a bullet, and sent to eternal
repose from all his labors. The same end had the Marshall of Toiras the year
before, and in the like occasion, who was regretted by all, for his
incomparable dexterity, and valor. Verseil fell also into the hands of the
Spaniards, after the defense of about two months; and so Cardinal de la
Valettes succor proved fruitless.

And the Dukes of Mantua, and Savoy.
In the months of September, and October, the Dukes of Mantua, and Savoy,
passed to a better life: but let us go into Poland, to see if that King will
draw his sword any more.

There was a Truce for six years, which expired in that of 1635. Vladislaus
raised a puissant Army, with intention to drive the Swedes (who were much
engaged in the German war) out of all Prussia, and Livonia, and reconquer the
Kingdom of Sweden. The House of Austria animated him in this fair occasion,
both for her own interest, and his; France, and Holland, for theirs, counseled
a peace; which not being to be found amongst so many difficulties, The Truce
prolonged for six and twenty years, between the Pole, and Swedes, 1635.
there was concluded a prolongation of the Truce, for six and twenty years;
and that, by the persuasion of the Count of Avaux, who had gotten a great
influence, upon the Senators of the Kingdom of Poland. By virtue of which
composition, Prussia was restored to the Poles; Livonia remained to the Swedes,
and the interest of the two Houses neglected, by the address of these
fortunate, and able Ministers: though it were not indeed without regret, that
Vladislans, being a great Captain, re-sheathed his sword; and suffered his
magnanimous courage to cool, in Royal, and pompous vacancy.

CHAP. VII. Ferdinand two days after the Diet of Ratisbone, where his Sons
had been Elected King of the Romans, dies. The Relation of his life. Bannier
makes new progress. Many Princes take newtrality, and afterward, the Swedish
Party. The Arthduke. Leopold Generalissimo, or Chief General.
THE Emperor Ferdinand the second, feeling himself debilitated in body, by the
burden of so many years, and so many Wars, as whereby he had been tormented;
took nothing more to heart, then the means, how to provide for the
establishment of that Empire, which Domestic partialities, seconded by the
ambition of Strangers, had much shaken. Holy thoughts, and worthy of such a
Pilot, as merited to govern such a ship, in a storm, which threatened this
great world with destruction. But it had passed the bounds of all Justice; the
great Sun-dyal of the Sea, had no more strength; recourse must be made to the
Stars, to implore their assistance, and direction for fear of making Shipwreck,
by the extraordinary violence of the winds. Wherein he was graciously heard,
against the expectation of his enemies, whose practices were feign to give way,
to the incomprehensible decrees, of the divine providence.

He called a Diet at Ratisbone, and sent for the Electour of Trevirs, who was
prisoner in the Low Countries. The assembly at Ratisbone 1636. Ferdinand the
third, King of the Romans.


In this assembly, the Poland Ambassadors speech had more weight for Ferdinand
the third; already King of Hungary, then the underhand dealings of the French,
for the Duke of Bavaria, so that the voice fell upon him; and the affection of
the Protestants was declared with so great harmony, that the General Showt was,
Live Ferdin and the third, King of the Komans. The ceremonies being
accomplished the 22. of December, 1636. the Emperor, in most Christian manner,
rendered up his Soul to God, the 15th, of February, following. The death of
Ferdinand the second, the 15th of February. 1637. His life


Here we may admire the stupendous, and supernatural effects of the Divine
goodness, in this Prince; who, by the good success, and prosperity of his
Lieutenants, maintained his Scepter, directly, and indirectly, at several
times, and all together, against almost all the world. For, he was no sooner
Crowned King of Bohemia, then that people revolted, and chose another. When he
was Emperor, he had the seditions of the Hungarians, and of his own subjects
in Austria, Mansfedt, and the Bishop of Halberstadt, never lelt to hate him,
nor ceased to hurt him, till they ceased to live. The Danes provoked his Arms,
and felt the effects thereof. The English, Scots, and Hollanders, conspired
against him. In fine, the Swedes, with an Army of six thousand English, under
the conduct of Marquis Hamilton, and the whole Protestant body; and the French,
by the profusion of their Treasures, and the effusion of so much bood, openly
manifested the desire they had, to pull the Crown from his head; or at least, to
take it away from his House: nor was it enough, to excite the Peasans, but they
must also corrupt the faith of that impertinent General. In a word, this poor
Prince was no sooner got out of one War, then there sprung up two other; and
the weapons whereof he served himself in these extremities, were the prayers
he daily addressed to God; which King Gustave seemed more to apprehend, then he
did all his Armies.

He experimented the Arms of the Tuks, Catholics, Lutherans, and Reformates;
over all which he triumphed, saw his Son Crowned King of the Romans, in
despite of all his enemies; the Swedes shut up in Pomeranta; and the French
beaten out of Germany; yea, and his own Army, together with that of the
Spaniards, almost at the Gates of Paris, a year before his death. He was a so
mild a Prince, that the Lutherans themselves found nothing to blame in him, but
that he hearkened too much to the Jesuits, and that he was too zealous for the
Reformation. Strong reasons for them to revolt, Very zealous for the
Reformation.
and call in the Swedes: but they had cause to repent afterward.

Let us now drive the Swedes out of Pomerania, and hear the complaints of the
Imperalists, upon the disorder of their Army, for want of bread.

The Swedes had formerly taken the Town of Luneburgh, and put the Table, or
Altar of Gold to Ransom. Duke George besieged it in August, and carried it, in
September following: but General Bannier caused the Governor to be beheaded,
for not having done his duty. Galasso marched out of Pomerania, and passed the
Elbe; Glitznigh the General of Brandenburgh, stormed Gariz; and he of Saxony,
the Fort of Varnemont near Rostock; where he lost his life.

Now, who would believe, that the Swedes, being forsaken in appearance, by all
the States of Germany; droven back to the Baltic sea; beaten in many
Encounters; despoiled of the Isle of Vsedon, and many other, with considerable
loss; should ever have been able to rise any more? But General Hatsfelds
sickness made them take courage; though General Bredaw defeated them, and made
them start back again into theit Islands. And yet all this was not able to
hinder them from afflicting Germany yet more, and that with more confusion,
then it had been before. The fever required yet greater blood-lettings, which
made this Body, once so puissant, and formidable, grow faint, and languish. Let
us accompany them, to the banck of the Danub, and to the Gates of Ratisbone.

Bannier having received from Sweden, a supply of eight thousand men, and
ruined Gartz, passed the Elbe, in the Duchy of Luneburgh; which might have
been hindered by the Princes of that House, had they not taken newtrality, and
confirmed the good opinion of them at Venice. But he marched into Misnia, where
he found great facility every where, and very little aversion any where; so
strong was the zeal of Religion even yet, amongst those people.

It was to much purpose, to prohibit the Germans from taking part with the
Swedes, under pain of being declared Traitors to their Country; The Sweeds
again in Misnia, in Bohemia, and Silesia.
for the hatred they carried to the Catholics, their inclination to the
Swedes, and the desire to plunder, made them slight the ruin of the Empire; but
it was chiefly in Saxony 1639, that they declared their sense, concerning the
Peace of Prague.

Bannier went into Bohemia; Torstenzon, into Lusatia, and Stalhans; into
Silesia and God knows, into what condition they put that Country, where they
found more friends, then the Imperialists did in Pomerania. He defeated General
Marizim near Chemniz, and encamped before Prague, where he also defeated
General Hoskirck.

Beats the Impe^alists.
All the world was amazed at this progress, which was against all appearance,
and all expectation; and which cost so much blood, so much desolation, and so
many inflagrations, throughout all Saxony, and even to the very Gates of
Prague. Fortune had again turned her back, upon the Imperalists, who changed
their Commander. For, the Archduke Leopold was declared Generalissimo, or
Chief-General, and Piccolomini his Lieutenant. Many encounters happened, in which
the Swedes had almost still the better, and Fortune accompanied them even to
the last, according to the assurance which was given Bannier, by a certain
Peasant, who was become his Prophet.

He marched into Thuringe 1640, to join with the Weymarians, Hassians, French,
and Luneburghians, who returned to his Party. The Imperalists encamped
themselves near Salfeldt, and the Swedes over against them; so that there was
no other separation between them, then that of the little River Sale, from
whence as the French writers affirm, The famous Salick Law, derives its name,
and Origin. The business passed on both sides, with some small Skermishes, and
with looking upon one another. In sine, the Swedes departed, and took their way
toward Brunswick; and the Imperalists theirs, toward Hassia, where they
carried themselves no better, then the others had done in Bohemia. But the Duke
of Weymar ruins the Laurel winns the Rheyn; therefore let as retire that way.

CHAP. VIII. The Duke of Weymar repasses the Rheyn, and besieges Rhinfeldt.
John de Werdr beaten, and taken prisosoner. The Duke of Rohans death. Duke
Benrards many Victories; he takes Brisack: his death.
SInce we have carried on the progress of the Swedes, to the year 1640. Let us
go see what the French, and Weymarians do for their part. Indeed, after General
Gallasso departed, the Burgundians were always much afflicted, and their
constance wraher brought misfortune upon them, The Burgundians ill treated.
then diverted it from them. They refused to admit of Garrisons from him, and
the Lorrianers were not able to defend them: The Waymarians, in Alsatia beaten.
so that they were beaten near Besanton, and that Victory opened that way for
the Weymarians again into Germany, who, with certain Barks which they sound,
passed the Rheyn, made many Forts, and a Bridge, to keep the River at their
devotion. John de Werdt, having notice of it, omitted not to come and charge
them, and made them turn their backs, so that he quickly got possession of the
said Forts, and Bridge; delivered his Masters, this second time, from the fear
which was given them, by the Duke of Weymar, in those parts; and then, sent his
Troops into Winter quarters.

However the Duke of Weymar were much astonished at his loss, yet did not he
loose his courage. For it is in the crosses of Fortune, that great men show
virtue, and testify that they are never able to despair of good success. He
repassed the Rheyn, Repasse the Rheyn. 1638. and besiege.
took Lanfenburgh, and besieged Rheynfelt, in the month of March, 1638.

John de Werdt, knowing the importance of this place, marched with all speed;
attacked the Enemy; raised the Siege; beat some Foor; and took two
Fieldpieces. But this Victory, having cast the Imperilites into a kind of dull
security; and the said Duke having gotten to himself the Duke of Rohan with
five Regiments; he came, and charged them so happily, that he routed them, John
de Wedrt defeated, and taken prisoner, is sent to Paris.
and took John de Werdt, and the Duke of Savelly (who afterward made his
escape) prisoners; besides Enkefort, Sperrenter, and many other Officers,
together with sixty Standards, and Colors. This was a great blow; for it
brake open all the bars of the Rheyn, and John de Werdt, with Enkefort, was
sent to Paris to witness it, and was lodged at Bois de Vincennes; where all
the world flocked to see so renowned a Soldier; in such fort, as had he been
an Emperor, A da^^^ageable loss to the Hause of Austria.
there could not have been more crowding.

This defeat was the cause of great trouble to the House of Austria; as the
loss of Alsatia, and the taking of Brisack: but upon the other side, it
brought no less joy to France; especially, to such as were tied to the
interests of that great Cardiual, the main mover of this low world.

The Duke of Roham death.
the Duke of Rohan, being grown old under the burden, and toil of Arms, dyed
of his wounds. He was newly come back from the Valieline, where he had archived
new Laurel, which he besprinkled with blood, in this last battle. Rhinfeldt
yielded; Rotued followed, Friburgh made a show of defense, but the Governor
quickly flinched.

Duke Barnard marched to Brisack: the Imperialists victualled the Town; but the
magazine being spoiled by fire, they were constrained to send other Provisions,
which happily arrived; but Fortune smiled upon them, to deceive them: For they
were furiously attacked; which they sustained with advantage; and the fight was
stubborn, the Generals being both old Soldiers; but the inconstant Goddess
forsook them; and so their Army of twelve thousand men was utterly defeated.
The besieged had patience, The Imperalists beaten again. Brisack besieged
till another was raised: where with Lamboy made such a happy assault, that he
got possession of a Fort near the Bridge; but not being soon enough seconded,
he was forced to quit it again. The Duke of Lorrain, who took to heart the
praiservation of this place, had no better luck then the Imperialists. General
Goetz, being suspected of having too much temporized, was made prisoner: And
Reinaker the Governor, after having combated a desperate famine, was compelled
to surrender, (with a huge magazine, Renders by famine, in the maneth of
December 1638. And the Weymarian, go into Burgundy
and much riches) the said Town of Brisack, the very pillow, upon which the
House of Austria reposed, and the best key of the Empire.

If this Victory were glorious to France, it was so much the more dammageable
to her Enemies; and Duke Bernard, to take off all impediments from the French
in Germany, fell in upon the Free County of Burgundy, which he so quelted with
Sieges, Encounters, Picories, or Robberies, that he reduced in almost all,
under obedience to them, by whose power he had fubsisted after the Battle of
Mortlingen. He did also as much in Lorraine; and it looked as if fortune would
never abandon him.

Duke Berrard refuses to go to Paris.
The King, in the mean while, invited him to Paris, under pretext to thank him
for so many Victories obtained; but he chose rather to stay at Brisack, which
was his heart, the center of all his praetentions, and the inestimable Pearl of
all his conquests. His refusal, though colored with some reason, pleased not
the Cardinals palate, who desired to asture himself of that Gate, whatsoever it
cost him. In matters of State, interest is only observed; and all other
affections pass not beyond civility.

This brave Prince wanted no judgment, and knew well of what importance this
place was, and therefore had no mind to give it the French: but he had to do
with a man, who was more cunning then himself. In fine, he fell sick, and after
having made his Will, died, in the flower of his age, in the midst of his
Victories, and of his Army. Some Germans published, Falls sick and dies.
hat he dyed of poison wihich was sent from afar off; as if a natural death
were not as well to be found in Armies, as a violent one.

His life.
This Prince was desended from the Electoral House of Saxony; which, dignity
was taken from his Praedecestors by Charlos the fifth, and transferred upon
them, who have, and dopossess it ever since; upon which account, he was always,
an enemy to the house of Austria, even to the very last gasp of his breath.
After the King of Sweden, no Prince was more lamented, by all the Protestants,
then he; and indeed, withour lying, he was one of the most valliant, and
prosperous Captains of this Age.

The King sent forth with, a hundred thousand Dublous, to pay the Army, and
keep it in his service; and the Duke of Longueville went out of Burgundy, to
command it, who left the Germans the possession of Brisack. Let us leave them
to untwist their jealousies, and make a turn through Germany to see what
passes in Westphaha, since it is all in trouble again. Our right way thither,
is by Hannaw, a strong Town near Francfurt; which, being well seated, and
considerable, was in the hands of the Earl of Ramsey a Scotch Coronel, who
commanded there like a petty Tyrant, without sparing any; yea not not so much
as the Count himself, who was Lord of the Place. But this domination of his
proved short; Hannaw taken.
for as good a Soldier as he was, he found himself attacked upon a fair
occasion, and taken in it, though he left not his small Empire, but with his
life. The Count of Dillingburgh was chief of this Enterprise, and of all the
Associates who had interest in it.

P^terbone by the Swedes, and Meppen by the Imperial^^ts.
The Hassians, upon the other side, took Paterborne by force, and the Baron of
Velleen, the strong Town of Meppen, by an enterprise upon the Prince Palatin.
His Army was defeated by Hatsfeldt, near Lemgow; and Prince Robert, his brother
taken prisoner, and carried to Vienna. Which blow made him return to the
Haghe, and confess, that Fortune was not yet weary of afflicting his Family;
and let us go the same way with him; let us be gone I say, out of this poor
Empire, all tottered by a Tyrannical war, to see another be^t^r disciplined.
Indeed, if Evils grow worse, Prodigies went also multiplying; and Christian
virtues being ecclipsed, gave way to all forts of imp^eti^s, horrors,
blasphemies, and sacriledges.

CHAP. IX. Breda renders it self to the Prince of Orange. Venlo, and Ruremund,
to the Cardinal Infanto. Landrecies taken. The French beaten from before St.
Omers, and Fontarriby. The Queen Mother goes into England; returns to Colein,
and dies. The defeat before Theonuille; and that of the Hollanders, before
Callo. The ruin of the Spanish Armada, or Navy. The revolt of the Normans.
ALbeit, that these two unfruitful Fields, and these huge Armies on both sides,
made more noise, then effect, as it ordinarily falls out; yet could not the
Popes exhortations dispose the Sovera^gne Heads, ever the sooner to a good
peace: but that they would needs begin again the year following, 1037.

The Prince of Orange, having affronted the Spaniards, with his Fleer, went
unforeseen, and unexpectedly, to besiege Breda, which, in eleven weeks space he
took; Breda besieged, and taken.
and Charnasse the French Ambassador was killed there, with a Musket bullet.

The Spaniards defeated before Leucate.
This year was happy for France, by the defeat of the Spaniards before
Leucate, a strong place in the County of Rossillion. (which was both
beleaguered, and succored on Michaelmasse Eve, by the Duke of Alvin;) and by
reprize, or retaking, of the Isles St. Margaret, and St. Honorat (which had
been held by the Spaniards two years) by the brave Count of Harcourt, with but
a handful of men. Landrecies, a most strong Town in the County of Hem^nwlt, The
French take ^^^y Towns in the Low Countries.
was taken by the Marshal of Chastillon, after a Siege of six weeks, and many
other small, and untenible places, followed it. Capell was also retaken; and
Danvilliers, having sustained some assaults, yielded to the Count of Soissons.

The Cardinal Infanto, not being able to succor Breda, marched toward the
Moze; took with small trouble, Venlo, Ruremund, And the Spaniards Venlo, and
Ruremund.
and a great Magazine appointed for Mastricht, which was of much advantage to
him, and in some measure, recompensed so many losses; and had not the
Enterprise so excellently begun upon Rhinbergh failed by the cowardice of the
Enterprizers, all would have remained equal enough: For the Spaniards had cast
bridges of bulrushes into the Motes, without being discovered, the self same
evening that the rejoicing was made for the taking of Breda; upon which having
passed, and made themselves Masters of some Bastions, they fell into the Town
it self; but the Soldiers of the Garrison, tumultuarily, and suddenly taking
arms, put them to a retreat; and the Horse, seeing the Gate open, durst not
enter; and so the Town got a fine escape.

The next year 1638. Fortune returned to the Spaniards. For the French laid
Siege before St. Omers, a strong, and well munitioned Place, si^^ted upon a
little River, which empties it self into the Sea near Graveling: St. Omers
^^sieged, the birth of the Dolphin. the fifth of Se^tember, 1638.
but, having lost the Fort near the Bat, and a great Convoy, they were
compelled to rise, with great loss; which was mollified by the birth of the
Dolphin, the fifth of September; the joy whereof was universal; and the Queen,
after a marriage of three and twenty years sterility, manifested an admirable
exception to that Rule, which says, that the Spanish Ladies bear no children,
after they are four and thirty years old. But it is true, that this blessed
fecundity was sent by the Divine Providence, for the good of France.

Two days after this, the French were beaten from Fontaraby, and their Army
defeated; The French beaten before Fontaraby.
which misfortune happened (as it is believed) by the Prince of Condes bad
correspondence, with the Duke de la Valette; and the loss of this victory
obscured the luster of that which they got at Sea; as their taking of Reuty, a
place considerable enough, softened a little, the wound received before St.
Omers. Cattelet was also retaken, and the Governor, together with all the
Captains, beheaded, for not withstanding so much as one assault, and expecting
the succor, which was already near the Town.

When Fortune laughs too much, she ordinarily carrye^ venim in her tail; which
the Hollanders experimented this year. For, they craftily got into Planders,
took two little Forts; and besieged that of St. Mary, where they were so well
entrenched, that had they kept that Station, they had gone near to make Antwerp
quickly change her Master. But they were so briskly, and frequently attacked by
the Spaniards, that they grew faint-hearted, And the Hollanders before Callo.
and endeavored to return by flight, the same way they came, but were almost
all taken prisoners; and all their Artillery, and Shallops fell into the
Enemies ^iands^ There were of them more smothered in the marshes, then killed
in the fight; and Count William had very much ado to save himself, with a few
more in his company.

The prisoners had the same treatment, which the Spaniards had received, who
were taken in the Sallops, in the year 1631. Nor was the Prince of Orange
himself much happier before Guelders, though he retired with less loss, and
trouble.

These alternative victories, and these great Changes of Fortune, (constant in
her inconstance) ought to have made the Princes remember, that being
Christians, they were bound to lay aside their animosities; but they were so
fle^hed upon one another, that they aspired to nothing less then peace, and
took nothing more to heart, then the utter ruin of each other. Their thirst
was not yet quenched with humane blood, The Queen Mother arrives in Holland
goes into England, comes back to Colein. Her death.
nor their heat deminished, by reposing all the Winter.

The Queen Mother departed from Bruffels, passed through Holland, where she was
received with respect enough in all the Towns (but principally, at Amsterdam,
where that illustrious Magistracy performed the honors of the Republic) and
then embarked for England, where she was embraced by her Son in Law, and her
Daughter, with honor, and sense of tenderness, and joy.

There was a report, that it was she, who counseled the match of the Prince of
Orange, with the eldest Daughter of England; and the English imputed the first
seeds, of the divisions, and wars of their Kingdom, to her; as if this
unfortunate Princess, had every where carried ill luck in her company, like
some contagious sickness. But seditious persons are glad, to cast the fault,
and guilt of their ill intentions, upon such as are not beloved by the ignorant
people; nor is there any more vicious, and corrupt Soul, then that of a
detracter. She repassed by Zeland, to Colein; and seeing, that he, whom she had
raised so high, slighted her disasters, stood fast in favor, and in the entire
administration of the affairs of the Kingdom, she fell sick, and after having
pardoned all her enemies, dyed.

This great Queen, Mother to so may Kings, being overwhelmed with miseries, and
old age, left this mortal habitation, and taught us thereby, that there is no
sure, and steadfast felicity, in this pilgrimage. She had most wisely governed
the Kingdom of France, during the Kings minority, and elevated to the highest
degree of honor, him, who rendered her most miserable afterward. If the
little ones are trodden under foot; the Great ones are also precipitated, and
tumbled down headlong, from the highest honors, and dignities, into the abyss
of calamities; to the end that every one may resent the disasters of this
constantly deplorable Age.

The Season being proper, the Armies were led again into the Field, and Fortune
shared the Victories. The French be^ten before Theonuille.
The Army of Campaign, under the command of Monsi^ur de Feuquieres, went to
besiege Theonuille, where it was quite defeated by Piccolomini, and Beck, who
presented himself before Monzon; but the Duke of Chastillon, having
recollected the fragments thereof, and joined them with his Troops (for
Fenquieres was dead of his wound) made him change his route, and follow the
Infanto's order, to come to the relief of Hosdin, which was furiously attacked
by Marshal de la Meilleraye, and most excellently defended by the Garrison.
Though yet at length, the Governor having sustained many assaults, and spent
all his powder; and seeing, on the other side, the Assaultants animated by the
Kings presence, was saine to yield it upon a good composition, Hosdin rendered
to the French, ^638.
1638. It was bel^eved, that had he been able to hold it out, two days, and
two assaults more, the Siege would have been raised; but P^ccolomini came too
late; and the Ambuscado which he had laid for the King in his return from the
Field, was discovered too soon.

The Prince of Conde seized upon the strong place of Salces, in the County of
Rossillion, which was quickly afterward retaken by Marquis Spinola; and the
King of Spain, who often sent forces into the Low Countries, found himself
quickly in a condition, to draw some from thence, into Spain.

This very year, Prince Cassimir, now King of Poland, going into Spain to be
Viceroy of Portugal, was beaten by a tempest, into a Port of Province; where
being stayed prisoner, and conducted to Paris, he was detained a very long time
there, and not enlarged, till after many reiterated Embassyes from the King,
and Commonwealth of Poland.

Charles Prince Palatin, having in England received the news of Duke Bernards
decease^ and conferred with the King and the Spanish Ambassador there;
departed secretly, and passed through France, to win the favor of that
Orphan-Army, and take possession of Brisack: but he was discovered at Mo^^lins
in the district of Burbon, and carried prisoner to the Bois de Vincennes.

The Duke of Lorraine fought very unhappily, against Monsieur du Hallier; saw
himself quickly stripped of the rest of his States, and his poor subjects very
ill treated. The distressed Burgundians had also their share of the mischiefs
of war, and sufficient cause, to repent themselves of having refused the Troops
offered them by Galasso.

The Spanish Fleet beaten in the Downs, 1639.
We will finish this year, with the huge victory, which the Hollanders got of
the great Spanish Armada, or Navy, upon the Coast of England, which was almost
all burnt, and ruined the twenty one of September, 1639. and a good number of
ships carried into Holland. The account of the dead, and wounded men, was very
great; and Spain resented this wound a long time, by the dispeopling of her
Inhabitants. It has not yet been known, upon what design this Navy came into
the North; and all the discourses, which have been held thereof, have been
founded, but upon simple conjectures.

A Revolt in Normandy, and in P^^ou.
The Normans fell into Commotions, and seditions, which quite ruined their
Province. The people were so oppressed by Gabells, and Taxes, that they had
nothing left them, but their miserable lives, and those full of despair too.
To what purpose is it, to take some Towns upon the Fronteers of their enemies,
if it be done, with the blood, and ruin of the poor people? I would take Towns
enough (saida certain great Warrier) but they would cost my subjects too dear: I
desire to win them, not to buy them. In fine, not being able to support so
many exactions, they took Arms, under the conduct of a certain Jean
Vanuds-p^eds, in English, ^ohn Go barefoot. At first, they were despised, and
slighted; but finding favor, credit, and intelligence, it was needful to send
forces, to defeat them, which was done; and General Gassion entering into
Rouen, disarmed the Inhahitan^s, and used them, as if it had been a Town taken
upon the Spaniards, without carrying respect, so much as to that Illustrions
Company, some whereof he ignominiously cashe^red. Oh Times! Oh manners! If the
reverence which we ought to bear to Justice be taken away, in what esteem,
think you, can the Laws be? The Inhabitants of Caen, had almost the same
treatment.

The revolt of the Croquans in Boi^o^^, had no better issue; and all such as
would endeavor to check this Great Cardinals authority, made shipwreck of
both body and goods. It was not lawful to complain; for that blind Goddess,
had perhaps taken up her lodging in the head of this great Minister, who could
not fail.

It is said of the French, that they Ride, and not fail. In effect, were their
potency so great upon the one of these Elements, as it is upon the other, and
they as prudent to preserve, as they are generous to atchieve; they might
openly pretend to an universal Monarchy. For they have manifested in these last
wars, that they know how to correct their defects, and that they can as well
defeat Navies at Sea, as Hosts ashore: and Monsieur de Breze, (with the
Archbishop of Bourdeaux) showed no less address, and dexterity in the conduct
of his Vessels, then he had done, in that of the Army, which he led into
Brabans; so that work was every where cut our, for the King of Spaines Subjects.

CHAP. X
The revolt of Catalunia, and Portugal. The taking of Arras. The Spaniards
beaten beaten before Cazal. The Hollanders beaten before Hulst.

THe House of Austria was not enough afflicted yet, by so many losses, and so
many Plots, and Treasons; but she must be yet more tottered by other disasters,
and rebellions. Spain, was indeed within her singers breadth of destruction, by
the revolts, which are yet in durance, and which, it was believed, would make
her loose the Low Countries, and her States in Italy. But, as a great Oak,
agitated by the winds, resists strongly, and raises it self up against them;
just so does this House, which men labor in vain, to overthrow. For there are
too many Allies to maintain her. It is in the deepest misfortunes, that she
shows least apprehension; and in the most imminent dangers, that she makes her
valor known.

This year of 1640, was almost fatal to her, by the defection of Catalunia,
Portugal, and part of the Indies; the loss of Arras, and the unhappy success of
her Arms in Italy, besides the approach of the Swedish war, to the bank of the
Danub. Let us take notice in due order, as much as brevity will permit us, of
the motives of these stirs.

King Philip the fourth, (who now reigns in Spain) being a mild Prince, and a
little more addicted to his pleasures, then the state of his affairs required,
left the administration thereof to the Count of Olivares, who (as changes grow
not without a cause) rendered himself odious, to almost all his Masters
Subjects; yea, and complaints came of him, even from the Low Countries
themselves: besides, that the Grandies, who ordinarily pry upon all occasions
to get themselves rid of a potent Minister; so well fomented the grievances of
the people, that they brought them to open revolt, upon these pretexts.

He had great forces, of Spaniards, and Walloons in Catalunia, ordered to guard
that Province, against the invasion of the French. But Rule, and Discipline was
not so exactly kept, but that the licentiousness of the soldiers, made the
Inhabitants murmur; who suddenly rising up in Arms, slew their Guests, and beat
such as came to revenge the sedition: Yea, upon Corpus Christs-day it self, The
revolt of the Catalunia^s, 1640.
they cruelly murdered their Governor. With a mutinous people, there is
nothing sacred, no more then there is reason. The King was not able to stop
this torrent by mildness, and clemency; and so since the Sluice was broaken, the
water must be let run. For the very Bishops, and Priests themselves, wore plain
Incendiaries; and Don Joseph of Margarita, with some other great persons, made
them subtract themselves from the obedience of their Prince, to embrace the
protection of France.

A certain great Politician of this Age, discoursing one day upon this matter,
said, that the Catalunian took Arms for their Privileges, and to be succored
by a Nation, which made profession of observing none at all. The Marshall of
Schoonbergh, desirous to advantage himselt by this occasion, offered them his
forces, and obliged them to send their Deputies to the King, to conclude a
Treaty.

Fortune was not less adverse to the Spaniards in Italy, where the Marquis of
Leganez had besieged Cassal, a fatal place to them, and an unhappy siege, for
this third cime. For the brave Count of Harcourt, brother to the Duke d'Elbenf,
and of the generous blood of the Guisards, (who had done that Kingdom so many
services) hastened thither, with a less and weaker Army; attacked them, in
their Trenches, and after two several repulses, The Spainiards beaten before
Caza.
fell on again, killed above four thousand men, put in as much relief as he
would; and forced this so provident and cautious Nation, to raise the siege.

Let no body say now. That the French are not valiant, but in the first fury,
in which they are more then men, and in continuance, less then women. For,
this glorious action being conducted by one of the most strenuous men of his
Time, descended from a House which has always swarmed with brave Captains,
and others; declares the contrary. They know how to fight, and when they are
broken, to rally, and carry away the victory.

After this miracle, he wrought yet another, which could not be done, but by a
Hyperbole. The Count of Haicourts valor, who takes Turin.
Saint full of merits, and it was this. He besieged Turin, where Prince Thomas,
Uncle to the Duke, whom he would dispossess, commanded. The Marquis of Leganez
attacked him, and pierced through his Lines, but the soldiers which were
entered, could not get out again; in such sort, as that all their victuals
being consumed, they were forced to submit to an enemy, who was weaker then
themselves. Which glorious exploits of his, redressed that State, when it was
going to ruin; made him admired, and reputed by all men for one of the best
Captains in the world, and the French Nation for brave soldiers. Wherefore the
Cardinal could do no less, then cherish such a Warrier, and so by consequence,
he honored him with his Alliance.

Their victory obtained in the the Low Countries was not of less consequence,
nor less famous for the difficulties, which they encountered therein. The
Marshalls of Chaunts, Chairislon, and Meillieraye, made a show of going to
besiege Marienburgh, (where two German Canoneers set the powder on fire) but
suddenly wheeled about toward Arras, Arras besieged and yielded, 1540.
the Capital City of that Country; and fort with began to-intrench themselves
before it. An Enterprise, of no less audacity, then generosity; but Fortune
helps such as these, as it disdains them, who are fearful.

The Cardinal Infanto, the Duke of Lorraine, and six Generals more, with an
Army of thirty thousand men, went to visit them, with intention to make them
sorry for their temerity. Wherefore they pitched their Camp upon Mount Saint
Eloy, near the way where the Provisions were to pass: so that the Besiegers
were in worse condition, then the Besieged; for all the small Convoyes were
beaten, and a pound of bread was worth forty Pence.
Solls, and more

Upon notice given, that the great Convoy was almost ready, the Duke of
Lorraine went, and ruined above a thousand Wagons, at the very Gates of
Dourlens, and returned victorious to the Camp. The Spaniards were very busy in
consultation, about what good resolution they were to take. The great Convoy
advanced, and La Meillieraye went to meet it, with fisteen thousand men. The
Infanto being advised by some, to make a firm stand, and fight it (though it
were guarded with above twenty thousand men) chose rather, to attack a quarter;
which, had it been done two hours sooner, as it was concluded, the Town had
undoubtedly been succored. However, they succeeded pretty well, and were
already become Masters of a Fort, but the bickering happened in a part, from
whence they were repulsed, with great slaughter, and at the same instant,
arrived the Convoy, which dulled the heat of the Spaniards, and the desire in
the Besieged to make any further defense; and showed besides, that the most
considerate, and advised, are often deceived, and that the greatest wits
incur the foul^st errors. Temerity surmounted prudence, and the Proverb,
which was written upon the Town-Gate, proved false.

Quand les Francois prendront Arras,
Les Souris prendroat les Chats.
When the French shall Arras take,
The Mouse the Cat her prey shall make.
Jealousies, and distrusts, made the Spaniards lose so fair an occasion, to
whom the loss of this strong place is imputed, The revolt of the Portugueses,
1640.
not indeed, without occasion: yea, and many have believed, that this accident
animated the Portugueses, to revolt, and shake off the Castillian yoke.

They elevated to the Throne Duke John of Braganza, without any bloodshed at
all, which deserves admiration, and whereof we will speak hereafter. This year
of 1640, made the Arms of France triumph, and produced the revolts which we
have now described.

The Infanto was a little more happy against the Hollanders, for the Prince of
Orange, desiring to repair the affront received at Callo, and aiming at
Antwerp, sent Count Henry Casimir, and the Marquis of Hauterive, to attack the
Forts, which were upon the approaches of Hulst; one whereof called Nassan, was
taken by Hauterive, but Count Henry had no good issue, by the fault of his
spies; Count Henry of Freezland slain.
and therefore resolving to die, or gain honor, he went, and assaulted the
Fort of Saint Iohnstone, where he was repulsed, with the loss of his own life,
and many of his soldiers, and was lamented by all.

The Prince went the third time before Guelders, and being able to effect
nothing, retired again to the Haghe.

So great a bulk of victories together, accumulated France with joy, and the
Cardinals life, with glory, who was not yet free from danger, in regard of the
many enemies, his Ministry had acquired him.

The birth of the Duke of Anicii, 1640.
It was not enough to have a Dolphin; for the Queen to augment the joy, was
delivered the twenty one of September, of a second Son, called the Duke of
Anion.

We left the Imperialists in Hassia, who separated themselves, some one way,
and some another, to seek their winter quarters, as the Swedes also did; but
because they are redoubtable, in the rigor of the cold, (as being accustomed
to it) Bannier made his Troops march, at the beginning of December, in the deep
snow, faced about toward the upward Palatinat, and presented himself before
Ratisbone, where the Emperor held the Diet. Some bold adventurers passed the
Ice, and made great booty in Bavaria; but others paid the score soundly for
them.

Piccolomini was not asleep, but being advertised by his Spies, of the posture
of the Swedes; he invested General Flang, and sent him prisoner, with above
three thousand men, to Ratisbone; and pursued Bannier, who retired with
confusion enough, His death, 1641.
as far as Magdeburgh, in the month of April, 1641. who being seized upon by
a burning fever, died the tenth of May, as Halberstadt, and his Body was
carried to Stockholm.

His Elogies.
He was a valiant soldier, and more happy, after the death of his King, then
before. Bohemia, and chiefly Saxony, felt the effects of his cruelty, which was
covered with the title of vengeance. He redressed the Swedish affairs in
Germany, after the Peace; and Forstenton his Successor, made them glorious.

The Swedish, and Weymarian Armies being joined together, and fearing lest the
Imperielists should succor Wolfenbottle, which was besieged by the Dukes of
Brunswick; they all marched, and encamped themselves before the said Town,
where we will leave them wasting and consuming, in expectation of the success
of the Siege.

CHAP. XI
The prudence of the Cardinal Duke. The Duke of Lorraine ^goes to Paris, and
why? The Count of Soissons, the Duke of Guise, and Bouillon retire to Sedan.
The fight with Lamboy. The Marshal of Chatillon. The taking of Air. The
Cardinal Infanto retires to Brussels: his death.

GOod Mariners very often foresee a great Storm, in a great Calm. In high
prosperity, we must apprehend some misfortunes, which being prevised, will be
less able to hurt, by means of the preventive remedies, which may be procured.

This potent Minister, during the time of good success, had his eyes upon the
Poupe of that vast Vessel, the government whereof he had in his hands, thereby
to observe which way the Tempest might chance to come. He easily discovered by
the coffeehouse of some certain Princes, a kind of fog, which by
condensing, might cause a furious blast. It is not sufficient, to know what
passes, but to foresee also what is to come. Wherefore he secretly caused the
Duke of Lorraines pulse to be felt, and labored to untie him from the interest
of Spain, by rendering him his States. The Duke, who had so often experimented
his pranks, and who never had any other then good thoughts for France (and
never changed them, till he saw, that they endeavored to deprive him of his
Duchy) listened to the overtures made him; received the Promises, which were
sent him signed to Brussels, for his entire re-establishment; and thereupon,
departed toward Paris, where he was received with much honor (more then a
hundred and fifty Coaches going to meet him) and the King expressed great
kindness, The Duke of Lorraine goes into France.
and benevolence to him. They would make him swear to the Treaty, and yet they
would keep Nancy, for a pledge of his promise. So that, the poor Prince,
perceiving the Cardinals jugglings, and the aversion of the Courtiers;
dissembled some affronts, and endeavored to withdraw himself thence, to
return into Lorraine. For, they would needs engage him against the Spaniards,
which he neither could, nor would do. The Cardinal, conceiving that he would
not be able to do any harm, nor find any credit, in the Council of Spain,
suffered him to go. A piece of cunning, whereby he had couzened many.

In the mean time, the discontented Princes contracted forces at Sedan; with
whom the Duke of Lorraine, The discontented Princes at Sedan.
(having already gotten a small body of an Army on foot) refused to join, but
kept his word with the King: But seeing, that La Motte, and some other small
Places, were not restored him, and that he was but scoffed at by them; at
length, full of generous resentment, and zeal of revenge, he cast himself
again into the interest of Spain, with intention to remain therein, till a
General Peace.

Why would they needs retain Nancy? What assurance could he have, of the
restitution? And what hope, or appearance of constraining so great a Monarch to
render it to him, if he were untyed from the Spaniards? If, when he was
re-established, he should not keep his word (whereof yet there was no doubt at
all) the King had but too much means, with the forces in Germany, and France,
to make him repent himself of any such light Change. No, no; had it not been
for the full restitution of his Country, he would not have gone from Brussels;
and had they performed what they promised him, he would have lived in pence,
and quiet, with his Subjects. But such as penetrated into this Ministers
designs, saw well enough, that they would never render it him, because they
intended to add to France, such other Conquests as they had already made, and
hoped to make, in Germany. Those Writers, who flattered the Cardinal, and
accused the Duke of levity; either did not, or would not, know the bottom of
the business, and had a mind, to make men believe, that a Prince ought to
want resentment, and interest, when they break their word with him: in order
whereunto, I could produce the example of some others, if it might be done
without offense.

As soon as the season permitted, the King of France put a strong Army into the
Field, Air besieged, and taken.
under the command of Marshal de la Meillieraye, who took some small places (as
the Islers) and laid Siege to Air, a strong Town in the Province of Artoise;
but the strength thereof, served for nothing, but to kindle the generous
courage of the French, who, notwithstanding all the desences both within, and
without, took it in lest then two months 1641.

The Princes disemtented, and why?
He sent also another Army, under the conduct of Monsieur de Chatillon, to
watch the designs of the Princes; of whose discontentments, and the grounds
thereof, it is necessay to speak.

The Count of Soissons, a Prince of the Blood, having received au affront at
the Siege of Corbie, and many other at the Court, too sensible to be endured;
removed himself, and retired to Sedan; where the Duke of Guise came to him;
and all complaining of the Cardinals unjust Ministry, and of the oppression of
the Kingdom; they published a Manifest, containing their complaints, and the
subject for which they took Arms, which was for the peace of Europe, and the
expulsion of him, who fomented the War.

They make Alliance with the House of Austria, Beat the Duke of Chatillon, and
the Count of Soissons.
They made an Alliance, with the Emperor, and the Cardinal Infant, and joined
their forces with those of General Lamboy. In fine, there grew a Battle,
wherein the brave Count of Soissons, against the advice of all the Great ones,
would needs engage; and the Duke of Chatillon lost it, and was pursued as far
as Resol. This Victory was bought, by the death of this brave Lord; brought
small profit, to the Vanquishers, but much more to him, who was vanquished.
For, if he had lived, he would have raised more then half France. The King
left the Frontier of Flanders, but the Cardinal would not leave him; and so
being followed by a gallant Army; which shouldered that which was before Air,
they marched toward Sedan. The Infanto lost no time; for whilst the King was
setting his Minister on work, to make the Duke of Bouillon abandon the Party,
by promising him mountains of Gold; he besieged the Besiegers, who not having
leisure to raise then Trenches, retired into the Town, which they had gotten
but few days before.

Lamboy arrived with his Troops; and the Infanto, not being well in health,
Melo ^^^^kes Air.
left the charge of the Army to Don Francisco de Melo, and retired himself to
Brussels. La. Meillieraye, hoping for no relief, saved his small Army, but
could not save the Town, nor his Artillery, which were yielded in the middle of
Winter. The coffeehouse of the Princes, caused this loss, and stopped the
course of Victory for that Field. There is always some obstacle in the carrere
of affairs; and the water is self which bears the Vessel, gives it some
retardment.

The Duke of Bouillon made his peace, and put his trust in a man, who never
pardoned; for the more dead, the fewer enemies: but he repented himself of it,
before much time was past. His Uncle the Prince of Orange, labored for this
reconciliation, and with much more ardour, for his deliverance, as we shall
shortly show.

The Cardinal Infusto's death.
The Infanto, being arrived at Brussels, gave now and then some likelihood of
recovery; but God had otherwise disposed of him, into whose hands he very
piously rendered his Soul; and the people being in much confusion were ready to
knock the Spanish Physicians in the head, for having let him too much, and too
often, blood. He was a most beautiful Prince of body, and yet more, of mind;
the delight of the Low Countries, which he left in extreme regret for his
departure. He was suspected, of having intended to reader himself absolure
Master of those parts, and to make an Alliance of marriage, either with France,
or with the Prince of Orange; and yet this suspicion taking root in Spain, was
the cause of shortning his days. God knows what it was; but the least
jealousies of State are irremissible offenses. Jupiter will not have the Giants
come up to his Throne. These distrusts, or rather, these chimera's, having no
foundation, or ground in reason, disappeared, and vanished, before they were
borne.

The Count of Soissons being killed (very likely by treachery) the Infanto
dead, and the Duke of Bouillon reconciled; Cardinal Richelieu will overthrow
the House of Austria.
our great Cardinal was delivered from a huge fear; and therefore he armed
potently, to continue his ambitions Enterprises against the House of Austria;
but all in vain; for she will not fall (said a certain great person) but with
ru^^^ of the Roman Catholic Church; or at least, it will not be, during his
life. True it is, that he persecuted her with all extremity, and without
intermission, and did her more hurt alone, then all her enemies together. He
undermined her in her foundations, and endeavored, both by his own writings,
and those of his Hirelings, to persuade the World, that she was full of
Hypocricy, and not truly Catholic. A lie which lasts four and twenty hours,
makes great operation; and wounds are not cured, without scarrs. He made her be
painted, with an immense ambition; the reasons whereof our Subject commands us
to pick out, before we pass any further.

CHAP. XII
Whether the House of Austria aspire to the universal Monarchy; and whether the
reasons of such as accuse her thereof, be sufficient, or no. Why France retains
Lorraine.

AMongst all the Nations, which combat the House of Austria, at this time, none
does it with greater animosity then France: indirectly, by favoring her
enemies, and succouring them with men, and money; and directly, by open war,
which was declared in the year 1635. Nay she has yet, other Arms, which are
not a little dangerous, and which insensibly surprise such; as have no other
interest in their quarrels, then that of Religion, and Justice. For she,
labors to persuade all Potentates that this House will not relinquish the
design she has taken, to ascend to an Universal Monarchy; and to make the
Catholics bel^^ve, that her zeal which seems to burn so hotly, is but a
painted fire. But, let us examine these two last points, which stick so much in
the brains of the World, and cause so many evils, and mischiefs, as wherewith
this last Age is so ^^^erably torn; for the only finding of the truth
whereof, we will answer those arguments of a certain modrene writer.

The arguments of such as say that the House of Auftria aspires to the Monarchy.
First I find not in Ferdinand of Gastile, any subject at all to believe, that
he had a mind to found an universal Monarchy, because he discovered some
certain Islands in America, For his life was too full of vexations, disquiet,
and jealonsies, cast upon him by his Sonne-in-Law, and Don Gansalvo, to give
him leave to think of a design so full of chimera's as this. For we must secure
what we have, from peril, before we seek more.

Charles the fifth, is the principal object of his propositions, and over whom
he labors to triumph. But I stay not upon words; I come to effects, which make
us judge of unknown causes: The advantage which Fortune gave this said Charles,
upon Francis his Competitour for the Empire, made him obtain the Renunciation
of the Fiefs, or hereditary Titles, which the said Francis had, upon some
Provinces in the Low Countries; though the restitution of the Du^chy of
Burgandy, the patrimony of his Grandmother Mary of Valois, did not follow his
promise.

The many victories he got in Italy, Germany, and Barbary, crowned his head,
and more glorified his memory, then amplifyed his States. He bought the
Sovereignty of Vtrick, and the Duchy of Guelders. That of Milan was carried by
Arms, and juridically disputed. Had he aspired to the universal Monarchy, he
would not certainly have been diverted, by some small crosses of Fortune; but,
on the other side, being some months elder then Henry the Great was, when he
prepared himself to give his Enemies a furious shake; this great Monarch,
(invincible to all but himself) stripped himself of ad, to choose a private life.

His Son Philip, found by the Wars of the Low Countries, that his life would
be too short, to see the termination of them; and as for his meddling with
those of France, the effects thereof have declared, that it was more through
passion of Religion, then to acquire the possession of that Kingdom^ unless by
losing the hope of getting the whole, we be voluntarily induced to render the
parts, we have gained.

If the said House, being considered all together, had had this design, she
would have endeavored to retain the conquests which she made in the North,
which upon occasion, would have opened her the passage to other. Besides that,
she has always restored such States as she has purchased by quarrels, both in
Italy, and elsewhere; in such sort, as that I see not by what means, and in how
many Ages, she would be able to reach to this pretended Monarchy.

But, upon what Branch of this Family, shall this Monarchy be placed? Upon that
of Germaty? The Emperor Charles, could not endure to see (according to the
report of that learned writer) the Imperial Crown, upon his brothers head,
because he would rather have had it, upon his Sons; and the Germans will not
see it upon that of a Spaniard.

How then, shall these instruments be tuned? I conclude, that she has been
moved to act by Interest only, to uphold her self, and not to hunt aster this
chimericall Monarchy.

The Emperors which have been since, have manifested no excess of ambition;
and Philip the third made no stir at all. So that it must be either F^rdinand
the second, or Philip the Fourth. Let us examine the grounds which may give
these jealousies, and authorize these opinions.

The said Ferdinand the second, had War with the Bohemians, and the Prince
Palatine, every one knows for what. He would have the three Episcopal Towns;
had he not right to them? The Victories he got in Low-Saxonie, moved him to
restore, and re-established his Authority there; was he out of reason?
Here-demanded, as Sovereign Judge, the Ecelesiasticall Lands, and Goods,
according to the tenor of the contract at Passavia; was he illgrounded? The
Lutherans themselves will not say so. Shall we therefore suffer this House to
swallow up all? Now it is, that we must have recourse to the interest; which
every body ought to have in commendation, and not stray from the path of
Justice.

As for Hypocrisiy, whereof he accuses them of this Family, by comparing their
piety to the colors of the Rainbow, which are but deceipts and illusions; it
is acalumnie, which confutes it self, and a malice convinced by the testimonies
of the Lutherans, who have frequented the Imperial Court, A calumny convinced.
and have wished, that all the Courts of the Protestant Princes were regulated
like that. Indeed, the words which he uses, to cure (as he says) the minds of
such as are praeoccupated by error, are not strong enough, to make them pass
for good, even in his own opinion. For, a may be cannot form a determinate
truth, of future things.

Yet it is not my intention, to approve all the actions of this House, and
defend her ends; and much less, to deliver the Bordering Princes, from the
fear which they may have, of her greatness; by the refutation of those
arguments; but only freely, and plainly to lay open the justice of her Arms,
and the strong necessity of her interests, to maintain her self, against so
many enemies. I combat no Sovereign Family, but reverence them all, without
exception, and praeoccupation. I only demonstrate the practices, cheateries,
and effects of ambition, together with those of self-advantage, which render
whole Provinces desert, and breed general calamities.

In the Treaty of peace at Manster, we shall discover the intentions of all the
Princes, without amusing our selves any more, with the words of interested
Clarks. But we must first consider, why France, which has always restored to
the Dukes of Savoy such of their States, Why France wi! keep Lorrain.
as she has seized upon by arms; does now yet so obstinatly retain Lorrain,
as she also did, the three Bishoprics? I answer, that she has done the
former, to avoid giving jealousy to the Princes of Italy, whole good
correspondence she holds necessary for her, so to maintain her interests there.
But, she will not let Lorrain go, in regard of her conquests made in Germany,
and because the Princes of that Country, being divided into Parties, are not
sourgent for the restitution of the losses of their Neighbors, as those others
are.

France calls the Princes of the House of Austria, and all such as are tied to
her interests, her Enemies; and in regard that this irreconcitiable-hatred is
not very ancient; we shall quickly find out the source thereof.

During the English Wars in France, the Spaniards being then great friends,
and Allies with France, always succored her; and there were some Lords of that
Nation, who possested great Charges in the said Wars. Yea in that memorable
assembly of Arras, where, to the confusion of the English, the Peace was made
between the King, and the Duke of Burgundy; a certain Spanish Knight, in a
contention of honor, took the White Cross; without giving any other reason for
it, then that it was a sign of Amity. But now, The causes of the hatreds
between France and Spain.
the said House being annexed to Spain, the first spark of division sprung up
in Italy; the second, and the greatest, was about the Imperial ^^^^n, and
jealousy of State, which lasted til the death of Henry the second; a (...) as
a wakened again under Henry the third, by the counsel of the Hughenots, and
his brother the Duke of Alencon, sudddenly made Duke of Braba^t. Philip the
second of Spain, ^
did the like for him, by favoring the Heads o the League, to the deminution
of his Authority, and the Hughenot Party. Henry the fourth took his revenge,
advanced the hatred, always contraried, opposed, and labored to weaken this
power, which gave him jealousy. And then it was, that not only the Hughenots,
but the Catholics also, began to hate that Nation: Not did the Spaniards
remain their debtors therem: In such sort, as the hatred of the people is
formed by that of State But this kings death stopped the currnet of those
partialities; and that double marriage seemed quite to stifle them; out in
vain; ^
for these two proud Nations (the most potent of Christendom) have many
pretensions upon each other, and cannot endure any praeeminence at all; In so
much, as that when the one makes any progress, the other endeavors to stop
it: besides sides, the same Ministers of State spurred on by ambition, and
desire to raise their Families, have from time to time, kindled these
suspicions, which have hatched these fatal wars, to the destruction of all
Europe.

The one of these Houses styles her self most Christian; and yet meddles not
much with the business of Religion; for she ordinarily attracts the Reformates
to her interests, who are enemies to the Pope, and by consequence to the other
House, which suffers not their Doctrine in her Dominions.

The other is termed Catholic, and abandons not the interests of Religion, no
more then she does her own, unless it be by force; proceeding from the
necessity of State-affaires, through some new conjuncture, as we shall see in
the sequel of this work.

Lewis the thirteenth shocked this House, with so much authority, and power,
and procured her so many Enemies, that she had very much ado to keep her self
up: in such sort, as that great Cardinal, the Angel-Gardian of France, by his
puissant Allyances, begat an opinion in the Souls of many Politicians, that he
sought the Universal Monarchy. In effect, by this great Conquerours means, he
hoped to overthrow the Emperor, and had already devoured the possession of the
Low Countries, by the help of the Hollanders. But man purposes, and God
disposes.

But let us withdraw our selves out of this Labyrinth, since we have already
gone round about it; and if we enter into it, we have not a sufficient thread of
Politic knowledge, to get out, wherefore, let us untangle our selves (I say)
from a matter, which is understood, only by them of the Cabinet, and go rowze up
the sluggish Protestants near that Banck, or Damm, by advertizing them of the
approach of the Imperalists.

CHAP. XIII. Piccolomini rayses the Siege of Wolfenbottel, with loss.
Torstenton comes from Sweden, with a supply. Lamboy beaten, and taken. The
progress of the Swedes in Silesia. The Imperialists defeated before Leipsick,
who after having punished the stacknesse of the Soldiers, recollect
themselves, and raise the Siege of Friburgh. The hattail of Honcourt. The
Exploits in Catalunia. Mons. le Grands death. The Cardinals death. An Ep^^^e of
his life.
The Siege of Wolfenbottel.
WE lest all the Protestants forces, with the Duke of Brunswick, before the
strong Town of Wolfenbottel, which they labored to reduce to their obedience,
by means of a certain Damm, or Banck, wherewith they stopped a brook, which
watered the said Town; and the water was already grown so high, that the
Inhabitants were fain to forsake the lower parts of their houses.

Ficcolomini, knowing the importance of the place, and the affront he should do
this great Army, if he constrained it to retire from thence; advanced with his
Troops, And the loss of the Imperialists who constrain the besiegers,
entered into the Town, and commanded some Regiments, to attack them who guarded
the said Dike. The combat was furious; but the Sea^e, and advantage of the
Protestants, put the Catholics to a retreat, with the loss of about two
thousand men.

This frighted him not at all; but he took another way, and surprised some
Towns from whence they received their provisions, To retire.
which made them resolve to abandon the Siege, and march often; though first they
peirced the Dike, and the Impetuosity of the water did as much hurt to
Brunswick by slowing, as the detention thereof had been little profitable
before; for of this water, it is, that they brew that good beer called Mum,
which is so much esteemed through all Low-Saxony, and chiefly in Holland.

The Armies divided themselves, as they had done the year before; the Swedes
expected General Torstenson, who was come from Sweden with seven thousand men;
to whom Coninxmarck, and Stalhans being joined, they all advanced to wards
Silesia, the Imperialists toward Bohemia, and the Weymarians, to the Rheyn,
whether we will accompany them, to see the Bridge of Boats which they made to
pass the River near Wesel.

The Confederated States had not yet forgotten the Cavalcade, or Inroad of
Papenheims, and the favor he found in the Diocese of Colein. It is most
dangerous, to offend such as can revenge themselves, when they please.

Lamboy was in the said Country, and his Regiments being distributed amongst
the Villages, were defeated one after another, Lamboy beaten and taken; the ^7
of January, 1642.
for want of good Guard, upon Saint Authony's day, 1642. and in one of the
Villages, which was dedicated to the said Saint, bore his name, and
acknowledged him for Patron, or Defender, the General himself was taken
prisoner, and carried together with many others, to the Bois de Vincennes, to
visit John de Werdt, and tell him, that it was time, to go and make head,
against the Weymarians. This Army being uttery cut off, the victorious enemy
made great booty in those parts. The Count of Guebriant, for having behaved
himself so well, merited and received the Marshals staff; took many small
Towns, as Ording, Nuits, Campen, and other, and was supplied by some Regimens
of Britany, which stayed not long in that Country.

The Swedes, under their new General performed exploits of no less renown.
For, in May they took Glogow by force; and in June, Such^^t; And the
Imperialists in Silesia. Olm^^z surprised.
after having beaten the Imperial Troops, commanded by Duke Francis Albert, who
died of his wounds; and finally, in July, Olmitz, the Head Town of Moravia.
These sensible losses were followed by one of more note.

The Archduke Leopold, together with Piccolomini marched into the Field to
stop this progress. Torstonson passed into Misnia, and besieged Leipsick: The
Imperialists charged him, and Piccolomini, who commanded the Right Wing, brake
through the Left; The defent of the imperialists near Leipsick the 2. of
November, 1642.
but his men falling forthwith to plunder, the said Swedes rallyed, and
attacked their enemies so sharply, that they slighted the Archdukes command,
refused to fight, and through cowardice mixed with treachery, began all to run.
So that the Swedes had a good bargain of it; for there were found above six
thousand men, who never shot Pistol, nor Musket. The Archduke retired with
extreme displeasure into Bohemia, and Piccolomini was full of confusion, and
spite, to see so much perfidy, and the loss of so fair a Game.

After this Battle, which was fought the second of November, 1642. the Swedes
showed themselves before Leipsick, which forthwith submitted to them; and in
January following, before Fribergh, which sustained the siege for two months,
to the great amazement of all Saxony, and Piccolomini, after having chastised
some. Regiments in Bohemia, and redressed his Army, succored it, and so wiped
off the affront, which the base dastardliness of his soldiers had made him
receive. Which done, he took his leave of the Emperor, and the Electour of
Saxony, Fribergh succored.
who feasted him, and did him great honors, for this advantageous exploit. But
he, being loath to hazard his reputation amongst men of Arms, so forgetful of
their duty, came back to Brussels, and put himself into the King of Spaines
service. The Swedes returned to Torgow, and the Imperialists to General
Gallasso.

The Weymarians domineering at their pleasure upon the Rheyn, Hatsfeldt was
commanded to face them; who sound himself too weak; but soon after, there
happened another change. For Don Francisco de Melo, now Captain General for the
King of Spain, having received some millions of money, put the soldiery in
state of action, and marched from Brussels, the last week of Lent, 1642.
forthwith took Lent, and the first day after the Holydays, encamped himself
before La Bassee, which within seventeen days after, opened him the Gates, and
the Garrison of above three thousand men, marched out. The French beaten by
Melo near Harcourt, and he came and surprised the W^ymarians.
The Count of Harcourt endeavored to succor it, but found it too perilous an
enterprise: And so Melo went to attack the Marshall of of Guiche, whom he
utterly defeated, and made it appear, that Fortune was divided in her self.

This victory laid France open to him, and his Vanguard, by a fine stratagem,
was already entered, when the news came to the Prince of Orange, who was
encamped at Littoye, that his Rear and the Battalia, or full Body of his Army,
were near Mastricht. This crafty Spaniard would not leave so potent forces
behind him, and would also surprise the Weymarians, before he fell into France.
A great Design, had it not been both prevised, and prevented by the aforesaid
Prince, who made his Army march at one of the clock after midnight, and
pitched his Camp near the said Weymarians in such sort, as that Melo coming
some hours too late, durst not meddle with them, and avowed that he had to do
with one of the cunningest Captains in the world. But whilst these things
passed, Baron John de Werdt returned out of France, and showed that he had not
forgotten his Trade by the discontinuance thereof; for, in less then two
months, there were above two thousand horses sold at Colein, which he had taken
from the enemy.

Let us now pass into Catalunia, and see the condition of the affairs of that
Country, commanded by Monsieur de la Motte Houdancour, who so often beat the
Castilians, took so many Towns, and succored so many more, that he deserved,
and had the Marshalls staff. The King and Cardinal went thither, The great
progress of the French in Catalunia.
and the French took Salces, Perpinlan; and all the County of Roussillion;
which had been formerly engaged to the Crown of France, but was restored by
Charles the eighth.

Monsieur le Grand had such an advantageous possession, of the Kings favor, at
that time, that the great Cardinal was alarmed by it, and found himself ready
to be cast out of the Saddell. For, he let the King know, how necessary a Peace
would be for his kingdom, which was impoverished, and exhausted, by so many
Taxes, and Wars, and had already disposed him to listen to an Accommodation,
with the King of Spain. But he warped a Web, into which he so involved himself,
that he was not afterward able to put it off. For they who recommended Peace,
were held for malefactors, and worthy of death. Monsieur le Grand beheaded, and
the Duke of Bouillon saved by whom?
Wherefore, he was sent to Lions, with Monsieur de Thoii, where they were both
beheaded: and the Duke of Bouillon had run the same Fortune, had he not been
saved by the high, and sharp intercession of the Prince of Orange, and the
consideration of the Town of Sedan. For, the said Prince had newly preserved
the Weymarian Army, and rendered France a most remarkable service, whereby he
could not merit less, then the safety of an innocent man's life.

The execution of the two young Lords aforesaid, augmented the hatred, which
all the world bore this ambitious Cardinal, yea, and the King himself expressed
some coldness to him; The great Cardinals death.
which, together with so many other inconveniences, increased his sickness, and
the fourth of December, 1642, sent him to the other world, since he had
troubled this enough already.

Never did any man ascend to such an immense greatness, and maintain himself so
well in it. His life was very like that of Seianus, but their deaths were
different; this being natural, and that violent.

Don Alvarez de Luna rose very high, but his fall was so heavy, that it brake
his neck. Cardinal Wolsey disposed absolutely enough of his Master, but his
credit never passed the Sea, but by sits; and yet was he degraded before his
death, and in houtly expectation of the Hangman.

He was born at Paris, of a noble extraction, was well learned, A brief
relation of his life.
and took the Orders of Priesthood at Rome. It is said, that Pope Paul the
fifth, looking him once in the face, told him, That he would one day be the
greatest cheat upon earth. The Queen Mother finding him a man of great wit,
procured him the Bishopric of Luzon, where he wrote a Book of controversy,
upon which she recommended him to the King her Son, and afterward to the Pope,
who sent him the Cardinals Cap; and the taking of Rochel, gave him so great an
influence upon his Masters Mind, that he left him almost the total direction
of his Kingdom. He got himself shut of the Queen, and all who favored her, cut
off the Marshall of Marillacs head, and destroyed all such as gave him any
jealousy. He never pardoned such as he had offended. He was a most
accomplished Politician, beloved by the most zealous Protestants, and hated by
the most zealous Catholics. He made it his task to ruin the House of Lorrain,
by beginning with that of Guise; as also that of Austria, by laboring to
conquer the Low Countries, so that he could not fail to be beloved, by all
such as hated the Church of Rome.

He is accused of having embroyled England, to the end that for interest of
State, it might not hinder his seazing upon Flanders. For an English
Ambassador imputes to him the destruction of his King, by most unjust, and
malign practices; and of setting all Europe by the ears in general. But he
cannot be deprived of the praise, of having done the Kingdom of France
superlative services, though it were with the huge oppression of the poor
people. A Polish Waywodt of great age, and experience, desired to outlive the
said Cardinal, to see what end he would have. As he had done many people a
great deal of hurt, so was he always in perpetual apprehension, and fear,
nor was there eyer Tyrant, who lived in greater disquiet then he. A great
Volume might be made, of the observations of his life, which being wholly
miserable, was sustained but by a blast of ambition. In fine, whilst he was
thinking to triumph over Europe, his infirmities and troubles redoubled upon
him, till they made his soul go out of his wretched Body; His death was
lamented by few, and such as had either feared him, or fled from his
persecution, returned into France, not to put on mourning, but to give God
thanks; and repossesse themselves of their Charges, and Estates.

CHAP. XIV
The death of Lewis the Just. The 'Battel of Rocroy. The Battle of Dudling. The
Swedes enter into Holstein.

THe same Play was still acted, under different names. For, they who had so
much longed for great Gustaves death, for the establishment of the Emperors
Affairs; were all amazed to see his Generals accompanied by the same
prosperity, as if they had been destinated to consummate the begun-work. Upon
the other side, many Princes, and Towns, openly favored them; in such such
sort, as the Emperors affairs weakened so fast to men's sight, that they began
to despair of his redress. And so, it was held for certain, that that Great
Cardinals death, would cause a huge alteration in France, and give the
Spaniards the prize, but it happened quite otherwise; for the French defeated
all their forces before Rocroy. Let us therefore confess, that it is the
Almighty, who governes all, changes, destroys, subverts, and augments States,
both when, and how he pleases; and that for the bringing of this Great All to
an end, he permits the Destruction to be Universal, and the Confusion General.

Lewis the Just, being arrived at his good City of Paris, quite altered with
the toil and trouble of his long journey, and extremely sad, and melancholy,
began by little and little, to lose his health; and finding himself decaying,
employed the small strength he had left, upon the care of his foul, and the
quiet of his Kingdom. The death of Lewis the Just.
He declared the Queen, Regent, or Governesse of his Son the King;
recommended Cardinal Maz^^^n to her, and then rendered up his spirit to God.

This Prince always loved Justice, and was carried to war, more by the
ambition of his Minister, then any motive of his own; and consequently, would
have been glad to see a Peace made (which he much instanced) before his
decease. He destroyed the Huguenot Party, which gave jealousy, and obscured
his Majesty, after which, he assisted the Duke of Nevers, in his succession to
the Duchy of Mantua; seized upon Lorrain, made an Ally-ance with the King of
Sweden, and all the Protestants, against the Emperor; and waged war, both
against him, and the King of Spain, under the pretexts which we have already
recounted.

The B^^tail of Rocroy glorious to the French.
Don Francisco de Melo went to besiege Rocroy, 1643. with a most gallant Army;
but having declared the Duke of Alburquerque a young Portuguese Lord, General
of the Horse, he so much offended the Officers thereof, that when the French
came, they would not do their duty, but forthwith began to run; so that all the
Foot was defeated by the Duke of Angnien, now Prince of Conde. This victory was
very great; (in which General Gassion gave a high character of himself) and
was the cause of the taking of Theon^ille. And Melo was so much discredited,
that the King was constrained to call him away, and give the government to the
Marquis of Castel-rodrigo, who kept it till the Archduke Leopold arrived.

The success of the Armies was various, and if one Party lost a Battle, the
Allies got another; so that there could not fail to come a total mine.

The Wey^^^rians, reinforced by the French Troops, conducted by four Marshalls,
threatened to go take up their winter quarters in Bavaria. The Duke of Lorrain,
who had taken the direction of the Forces of the Catholic League; intended to
stop their course, cross their design, and destroy them CARDINAL MAZARINE:
Rgoywood focit P Stent excudit
by a remarkable defeat. John de Werdt, accompanied by General Mercy, went with
the Spanish Cavalrie, to spy them; and so they took a resolution to attack them
the next day; which they did with so much felicity, that they rowted one
quarter, after another, and took the four Marshals prisoners, The battle of
Durling glorious? to the Imperialists 1643.
with more then four hundred Officers, and about six thousand Soldiers,
without counting the pillage, and Baggage. And this victory saved Bavaria from
that flood, for that time, and gave the French trouble, to raise another Army,
under the same name, though with a new General; for the Marshal of Guebriana
was killed the day before the fight.

These were two of the most memorable Battails of our Age; the one whereof
happened in the month of May, and in the beginning of the reign of Lewis the
fourteenth, given-by-God, by the conduct of the young Duke of Angulen; and the
other, toward the end of November, under that of the Duke of Lorrain; and they
may be compared to those of Leipsick, and Nortlinghen.

After this glorious Victory, the French treated with him, but without any
fruit at all. For, he had been once at Paris, to be jeered, and he would
return thither no more, but with forces to take his revenge. Wherefore, he
marched back to the Low Countries, took Falkenstein, a strong place, in his
way, and left the command of the brave Army to Francis, Baron of Mercy; who,
after having taken Rotweil, went and besieged Vberling, a place of importance
upon the Lack, seazest upon before by Stratagem, for want of good Guard: but it
yielded now upon composition, for want of Victuals, sower months after.

In the meau time, the Garrison of Brisack mutinied for want of pay; and
whilst the disorder lasted, there was found a certain Merchant, who offered
about four hundred thousand Rixdollers; but General Erlach by his care, brake
this bargain, and punished five or six of the Authors of the sedition.

General Mercy having failed to retake Hoheniwiel by treaty, left it blocked up
by five Forts, and went to attack Friburgh, and Brisgaco; where we will leave
him, till the valliant Duke of Anguien came, and disolodged him, and see in
what terms the Swedes are.

We said, that General Torstonton, having been compelled to raise the Siege
from before Friburgh, marched, and planted himself upon the Elbe. General
Counixmarck slept not in the interim, but skipped up and down, to and fro, with
so much speed, and activity, that he always surprised his Enemies, and never
returned without booty. Crackow was sent into Pomeranid, to make a diversion;
but he had not the wit to faise the Siege of Domitz, not resist Connixmark,
though enough, to run away, though Poland Torstenton, went into Moravia,
where he beat Bucham, and came back into Misnid.

At the beginning of December, he entered Holstein with so much promptitude,
that he was seen pass before Hamburgh, when he was thought to be upon the
Fronteer of Bohemia.

The Swedes enter into Hollstein, 1643.
At that same time, came news, that Gustave Horns was entered into Scania, with
an Army of twelve thousand men, whereat all the world was amazed; and men began
to believe, that the Imperialists would grow to respire, by this new War: but
it proved quite contrary; for they made no protis of it at all; and the Swedes
marched our, to earry the terror to the very Gates of Vienna. Let us speak a
little, of the pretexts of this expedition, since the Danes themselves were
ignorant of the cause, which could not well be found; but in the General
Maxim. This the French, and Weymariant were beaten; and the Swedes gone out of
Germany, to ingago themselves in a frest quarrel; so that the Imperialists had
fine sport, and did wonders.

CHAP. XV
Of the War of Denmark, with all the circumstances thereof.

NEver did Fortune more undertake the Swedish Interest, then in this War; and
never was good King Christian in more danger of being stripped of his States,
then in this perilous conjuncture. It is said, that that great Astrologer
Ticho Brahe had foretold him, that he should be droven out of his Kingdom;
that he should depart with a staff in his hand, and that this immutable fate
should defal him, in the month of Jannary, in the year 1644. I know not,
whether this report be true; but sure I am, that the prediction was false;
though yet, there were once very great appearance, and probability, that it
would come to pass. For, had the Swedes been able to snap the ships and Barks,
which were in a certain haven of that Province, as their design was to do;
they would easily have entered into the Isle of Fune, and crastily rendered
themselves masters of the whole Kingdom, at unawares, and without striking
stroke. The war of the Swedes, against the Dams.
But the most premeditated Enterprises, are sometimes hindered, and overthrown,
by a mere matter of nothing: for the Soul of great designs, is silence; and
he who knows not how to keep that, will never bring any thing to good effect.
The Swedes failed not of themselves; but God only, made them fail.

The King was stricken with as much amazement at the first notice of this
invasion, as it a thunderbolt had fallen upon his head; and writing to his
Resident at the Haghe, he commanded him to tell the States General, that this
irruption seemed so strange to him, And why.
that he would father have believed, that the Sky would fall, then that he
should see the Swedes enter into his dominions. But what could move the Swedes
to begin a new War, having so great a one already in Germany; and knowing, that
this latter endangered the loss of all their conquests, yea, of their very
Kingdom it self? For, the reasons, which they alleged, of the stopping, and
visiting some of their ships, are neither valid, nor sufficient; and therefore
we will show another.

The King of D^nmarke always wished to see an and of that destructive war; and
consequently, ceased not to solicit the Parties to assemble themselves, for
the remedy of those mischiefs; yea and he offered himself for Arbitratour of
the controversy. The Swedes consented thereto; and the Emperor, being much
troubled, at this too long, and too bloody dance, very freely condescended, and
accepted him for Judge. Munster was chosen for the dispute, and the
Ambassadors were invited thither. The King sent his; and wrought so far with
the Emperor, that he withdrew his Garrison from Wolfenbottel, and rendered it
to the Duke of Lune burgh. This gave the Swedes jealousy, as imagining, that
the King was more affected to the Emperor, then to them; and that he would
infallibly make them let go their prize. In such sort, as that, in stead of
sending their Ambassadors to Munster, they sent their Armies into his
territories; as also Commission into Holland, to hire ships, and raise Seamen,
whereof that little Province is the Nursery.

Torstenton advanced into Holstein; and his Cavalrie being almost all
dismounted, by the continual march he made, was quickly remounted in that good
country. He surprised Kiel whilst the Marohants, and Gentry were assembled
there; took away the money; passed on further, and seized, with facility
enough, The Swedes occupats Intland.
upon Intland.

The King provided the small Isle of Fune; entrenched the approaches, and made
all take arms, who were able to bear them; so that Torstenson was repulsed
with loss, as often as he offered to pass. In the interim, the King applied
all his thoughts to the Sea; prepared a little Fleet, and went with it before
Gotemburgh; and having given charge to make a greater, he distributed Patents
for the raising of men; and dispatched his Ambassadors toward the Emperor,
to implore his assistance, in a far greater danger, then that of the year
1628. He complained of this invasion, to all Neighbors, Friends, and Allies;
and informed them, that they made war upon him in full peace, and without
having denounced it before.

The Swedes in the mean while, got ground in their Enemies Country; and
Coninxmarck subjugated the Archbishopric of Bremen, The Archbishopric of
Bremen.
which belonged to the King, when he was Prince: so that the good old King had
but two Islands left; namely, Zeland, and Fune. They having obtained leave to
hire Vessels in Holland, sent for a Fleet thence, under the orders of Admiral
Martin Ties: The King attacked him with so much resolution, that he forced him
to retire into a Port.

All the World wondered, at the report of this Kings Expeditions; who, being
about sixty seven years old, was not startled at all, The courage and valor of
King Christian.
to see many brave Lords fall on every side of him, by Canon, and Musket shot,
but breathing all blood, cheered up his Soldiers, and Mariners, to stand
stoutly to it. Nor was there need of any other exhortations, then his example;
and whosoever could have lost his courage by seeing him act, would have
deserved to loose his life. He left the Seas to command the Land Army, after
having attacked the Swedish Fleet himself in person, with so much magnanimity,
that after a long resistance, it was constrained to retreat with full sail, to
the Haven of Kiel; where the passage was so stopped up by the Danish Navy that,
in humane appearance, it was in danger, to fall into their hands.

The war in Holstein was waged by Skermishes; and Torstenson had made himself
master of the strong place, called Christianprys; so that there were no more
then two more of importance, left for the King; to wit, Gluckstat, and Cremp,
which much hurt the Swedes by surprises.

Gallasso comes to succor hun.
In fine, Gallasso arrived at Oldesto, entered Hamburgh, and Lubeck, and began
to treat with the King, about a League Offensive, and Defensive, against the
common enemy.

Monsieur de la Tuillerie, the Ambassador of France, went into Denmark, under
pretense of being a Mediator; but in effect to quash the House of Austria's
Negotiation. The Politics displayed all the subtility they had, Who offered a
League.
to server their Masters in this conjuncture; however those of Vienna had as
bad an issue here, as they had in Poland, when they counseled war, with a very
fine show of well doing, in the year, 1635.

The Dunkerekers, being considerable at Sea, offered to maintain at their own
charge, a Fleet of a hundred Ships, and Frigots; as well to defend the Sownd,
as to offend, in all the Ports of Sweden; and that the King might only keep
the said Straight, with his own, and forty of their Ships against all such as
should come from Holland. To which Leagve he much inclined, as finding himself
strong enough to attack Gustave Horn; and the Imperialists able, with some
forces, to stop Torstensons passage; who could neither assault any more places,
nor hold those he had taken, if he were compelled to put himself into a
posture of defense.

The Ambassadors of France and Holland, represented to him, the danger there
was for him to involue himself in such an Alliance, not forgetting the old
argument, that that formidable House, which was in her decline, and had always
aspired to the Universal Monarchy; sought no other occasion to set her self up
again, and make his Kingdom the seat of the war. They promised him, to mediate
an honorable, and advantageous peace for him; Which the other Ambassadors
hinder.
threatened him, if he engaged himself so deeply; and said aloud; that they
should find themselves obliged to follow their own interests, and succor
their Allies; yea, and they skared the States of the Kingdom, by using the same
language to them; and weakened in fine, the Imperial Party, which had bad luck,
both in Camp, and Court.

During these Transactions, the Swedish Fleet escaped without any damage, and
got into the maine. The King beheaded his Admiral Galde, for not having well
kept the passage, and marched into Scania, with a brave Army of sixteen
thousand men, almost all Germans, intending to give Horue Battle. But La
Tuillerie seeing the Party unequal, run betwixt the two Armies, and with his
Rhetoric, stopped the Onset which was ready to be give, promising the King
mountains of Gold; and so both Hosts retired; and the Imperial Forces suffered
Torstenson to pass before them, and return into Germany, without stirring at
all. But Gallasso follwed him, who, when he might have hindered him from
marching out, or compelled him to fight upon disadvantage, in the Duchy of
Holstein; commitred a fault just like that of the Admiral of Denmark; Gallasso
suspetiet.
whereupon he was held by some, for a traitor, and as if he had been corrupted
by the Swedes; and such as defended him, made use of a common argument, to wit,
that he had no Order to hazard his Army. But the most probable judgment is,
that he was commanded, not to advance, unless the League were first concluded,
upon the the same terms that it was between the French, and the Swedes which it
was conceived that the Danes could not refuse, in regard that the Emperor came
to extinguish the fire amongst them, whilst he left it burning at home; and
for that, being leagued together, they might restore things to the same stare
wherein they were, before the war; especially, since the interest of that
kingdom apart, seemed to require it, thereby to dessen, and abase the Swedish
potencie.

King Christian deceived.
These reasons were strong, and inclined the King to the match, but he was not
absolute; and so the Dunkerkers came not: the Imperialists returned, and left
the business to be managed by the Danes themselves, who were sufficiently
penitent, when they heard, that their Fleet was beaten by the Swedes; to wit,
six as fair, and stately ships, as could be made, taken, and two fired. And
then the Treaty of peace went slowly, and feebly on and La Tuillerie was not so
hot as before: For much of that which was granted before, was now taken off,
and the King, being of a different sense, from the States, reproached them,
with the disorder of the kingdom, and told them, that they were the cause of
the ill success of affairs.

The Swedes promised themselves no less, then the Conquest, of the whole
kingdom, since the principal strength thereof (which consisted in the ships)
was very much maimed. But the Kings virtue overpowring all his misfortunes, he
reassembled his whole Fleet before Copenbaghen, to preserve the Isle of Zeland;
made the Peasants work upon the approaches; and placed a good Guard, to hinder
there the Descent or Disembarkment of the Swedes there, which they were every
minut projecting.

The Hollanders, who have as much care of their interest, as any Prince, or
Commonwealth in Christendom, and who could not suffer the Swedes to be so
puissant, without betraying them; and being morcover satisfied, for some
affronts, which they pretended to have been done them, as well in the Sound,
The Fleet of Holland before Copenhaghen.
as elsewhere; and moved to compassion (if there be any in matter of State) by
the troubles which this old Prince endured; sent a Fleet, under the conduct of
Admiral Witteson, who anchored before Copenhaghen, and landed the Ambassadors
of the said Commonwealth. The King, conceiving this said Fleet to be come to
assist his enemies, was ready to defend self; but the Ambassadors moved him to
a Peace, and resumed the heat, which La Tuillerie had left. But the Swedes,
hoping to grow Masters of the whole kingdom, and thereby continue the War in
Germany the better, would not hearken to it; till seeing the said Ambassadors
so much in earnest, and interest; they suffered themselves willingly to be
induced to it.

The peace mad^
In fine, the Peace was concluded to the advantage of the Danes, who renounced
some Islands; gave up some good Holds; and King Christian, being restored to
rest and quiet, died like a very good Christian, some time after, having
reigned above fifty years.

He manifested by his death, that the Prophecy was false, and that
Astrologers, are men, who very often abuse themselves, by abusing others. There
was nothing remarkable in this war by land, for the Danes, but the generous
resistance of the Garrison of Rensburgh, which constrained the Swedes to quit
that long Siege; and the Enterprise of Bromorfund, which issued happily for
them.

CHAP. XVI. Galasso retires out of Holstein. Is ruined by Torstenson near
Magdeburgh. The Battle of Lankewits. The exploits of the French in Alsatia,
under the conduct of the Duke of Anguien. The taking of Philipsburgh.
POsterity will not be able to comprehend, how the Swedes could make war, in
so many parts of the world, and from whence they got so many men; because
though the Kingdom of Sweden be very great, yet it is very desert, and
dispeopled; in such sort, as that in all these wars, there never came sixty
thousand men, from thence, by the confession of one of the Grandies of that
nation it self? I answer, that two Reasons furnished them with so many, and so
strong Armies. The former, that almost all the Protestants leagued themselves
with them, like the Ivy to the tree; and most of them believed, that in the
ruin of the Swedes, was included that of all the Lutherans. And the latter,
because Fortune being favorable to them, favor turned also toward them;
principally, in regard of plunder. It is most certain, that in Horus Army,
there were many women, in the habit of men; who, like so many Amazons,
performed the actions of brave soldiers; so much was the courage of this
generous Nation inflamed by prosperity. But let us go seek the Armies again.

Galasso ruined near Magdeburgh.
Galasso pitched his Camp near Magdeburgh, and Torstenson, a little above him;
who so much ruined him by famine rather then by skirmishes, that he returned
with very few men into Bohemia, and his Charge (whereof he had very ill
acquitted himself) was taken from him. Coninxmarck, one of the most prosperous,
and dexterous Captains of this Age, Coninxmarck in the country of Bremen.
and another Papenheim in the Swedish Party; after having defcated General
Enkefurt, returned into the Bishopric of Bremer, took Staden, Boxtehawdt, and
all the Country, whilst Torstenson marched into Bohemia.

Who could have believed, but that after so great success as accompanied the
Bavarians, and the departure of Torstenson, with the chief forces; the
Imperialists would have every where redressed affairs? We must confess what
we cannot deny, which is, that God clearly shows his power, by the disposal of
several Governments. For it was in vain, that they blocked up Ohnitz in
Moravia, took Wolow in Silesia, and made Ragosky some resistance. However they
put their Army on foot, under the Orders of the Generals Goetz, Hatzfeldt, and
other brave Officers, to whom John de Werdt, joined with sour thousand men. The
Battle of Lankow.
Inbtief, a Batrail was given, which was a long time ambiguous, victory
inclining sometimes to one side, and sometimes to another! General Goetz was
slain in the beginning; and John de Werdt made so close an impression, that he
forced the Swades, to retire in confusion. The Imperialists, thinking the Day
was theirs, cast themselves, according to their custom, upon the Baggage, where
General Torstensons wife was, who letting them alone awhile, fell upon them at
length with his reserve and put them all to flight. He surprised them laden
with booty, charged them off their horses, easily routed them, and went
fighting with them above four Leagues long. Unhappy for the Imperialists the 6.
of March, 1645.
This was a most sensible defeat to the Imperial Party, for it lest Bohemia as
a prey; and opened the passage into Morayin, and the Empetours Hereditary
lands, as far as the Danub. There were about three thousand killed upon the
place, four thousand prisoners, together with the Generals Hatsfeldt, Mercy,
Broy, Zaradeske, and six or seven Colonels. This Battle fell our, upon the six
of March 1645. near Iankow; which caused the Emperor to retire to Prague, and
expose his kingdom to the Conquerours; made the siege be raised from before
Olmitz, and brought the enemy, even to the Gates of Vienna; in such sort, as
there was nothing but the River betwixt them. A strange thing, and a prodigious
felicity. Fortune constantly continued victories to diverse. Generals; and every
one thought, that the Emperor was lost, if the Swedes chanced to pass the
Danub.

This Nation, which was little known in the fourteenth age, was now become so
puissant, that she thought, by the help of her Allies to stumble that
formidable house which is composed of so many other.

The Roman Emperor was almost destroyed by the Goths, Visigoths, and Vandals,
who came from the North; and those Writers wrong the Swedes, who say, that they
came not out of their Country, it being too sterill to feed so many people.
However, it is not my design to refute that opinion, which refutes it self; but
I remain within the limits of that war, and in great amazement, to see the
Swedes, at one, and the same time, at the Gates of Vienna, Copenhaghen, and
Bremen, every where tredding down their Enemies.

Baron John de Werdt, who was wronfully blamed for not well mannaging his
advantage through over much rashness; met with some Weymarian Regiments, the
fifteenth of May, and sacrificed almost fifteen hundred of them, to the souls
of such as were slain in the Battle of Iankow, from which he got off with as
much temerity, as felicity; but his Party was more afflicted, by the loss of
two hundred men, then his enemies were by that of six hundred. I should never
have done, if I should particularize upon so many takings of Towns; so many
furprizes, and encounters; so many Provinces grown desert, and so much poverty,
by continual invasions: but it suffices me to note the Fields, and Battails.
And to the end that we may not go a stray, in the constant victories of the
Swedes; we will return to the French Weymarians.

The defeat of Durling seemed to have annihilated all that Body, and buried the
memory of that illustrious Prince Bernard of Weymar. His Troops were ill enough
handled, after his death, by the Bavarians, toward the Rheyn; but they had
their revenge upon the bank of the same River, against Lamboy. This last
blood-letting, made them become French, and had nothing left of Germans, but
the mere name. A politic prank to preserve the amity of the Nation. The Duke
of Anguien, a most Martial Prince, went to succor the Marshall of Iurenne in
Atsatia.

The Siege of Friburg.
The Baron of Marey besieged Friburgh, 1644. and after the taking thereof,
seemed to threaten Brisack. The French Weymarians passed the Rheyn, and
endeavored to draw the Bavarians to a Combat; but they contented themselves
with repulsing their ardour, by a moderate defense. The French lost an infinity
of men, at the attack of some certain Forts, and constrained their enemies
rather to abandon their advantage, with the loss of four pieces of Canon,
then to engage in a general Decision, against the express Commandment of
their Master, who would not expose his States, to the temerity of a Nation,
which wanted neither people, nor intelligence, nor practice. This said attack
deserved to be published, in regard that the Generals themselves affirmed, that
they had never been at a Feast of this kind, where there was greater effusion
of blood, with more obstinacy, without defining the difference: And indeed the
onsert was made, by the boldest Nation of the world, and which more despises
danger, then all other.

The furious attacks near Frib^^gh.
The magnanimous Duke of Anguien, being joined with the Marshall of Turenne,
resolved to storm a Fort; but he was fain to retire with loss. The day
following, the Assault was begun again upon the other, with so much fury, that
the report thereof cannot be heard without trembling. Yea, the sky it self,
being quite absconded with clouds, at such a slaughter, shed so many tears in
the afternoon, that it dulled the ardour of the Babes of Mars, and made them
retire into their Quarters, leaving the ground quite covered with dead corpse.
The last attack was so horrible, and the bloodshed so great, that one would
have said, that they had a design to kill all, and perish like Barbarians, not
like Christians. A massacre worthy of this present Age. A detestable slaughter,
to win one Fort, and a morcell of ground.

The French, who were much superior to the Bavarians, in Cavalry, having
refreshed their Infantry, and not being able to draw them into the plain Field,
departed from thence, leaving the ground strewed with dead bodies. Never was
death seen so much braved by two contrary Patties, with more courage and
resolution, and less fear, then in these reiterated Encounters. It was not for
Religion, but for Rule. Oh great God, thou comesb with a soft pace, but how
hard, and heavy are thy blows, when thou strikest?

The conflict of some Lorrain Regiments near the Rheyn, with Colonel Test de
Corbean (in English Crowes-head) by whom they were surprised, and at first
worsted, till they were seconded by one of the Counts of Nasseaw, was glorious
to them, but with less slaughter. For the victorious Hassians were constrained
to fly, and acknowledge, that they who go about to catch, are very often the
first caught.

Philipsburgh taken by the Duke of Anguien.
The Bavarians marched into the Duchy of Wirtembergh, and the French being
reinforced toward the Rheyn, where they seized by incredible success, upon
Philipsburgh, for want, either of sufficient Garrison, or sufficient
resolution; and afterward, upon Spiers, and Mentz; made the Flower de luce
spring again upon the Rheyn, and carried the terror of the French Name, into
the very heart of Germany. In fine, they returned toward Bavaria, and met the
Electours Army, near Nortlinghen; where the brave Baron of Mercy, The second
Battle of Nortlinghen.
(who was born at Longui, and by his valor, and address, was ascended to this
high degree) cooled their courage a little, and put them to a gentile retreat,
but he being slain in the shock, and they seconded by Giese a Hassian General,
they defeated some Regiments; and the Bavarians having been all the night in
Battle, marched away the next morning, by the Electours Order, with sound of
Drums and Trumpets) sixty three Colors being carried away the day before)
and left their enemies nothing, but the pride of seeing them depart, without
resuming the Dance; for this retreat of theirs, gave the praise of the victory
to them who stayed: and the Duke of Auguien after having been in danger to be
taken in this Combat, returned into France.

The Duke of Saxony, being troubled, and tired by so many disasters, demanded
Newtrality of the Swedes, The Duke of Saxony takes Newtrality.
and obtained it by the Emperors consent; who alone, together with the Duke of
Bavaria, entertained the Minstrills of the Revel; but his Companion danced
better then he. For, had he abandoned the Party, at the persuasion of the
French, he would not have danced much longer; and had he been willing to hazard
any more, neither the Swedes, nor the French had danced so well; but he chose
rather to dance sure, for fear of tripping.

Let us now withdraw our selves from the Labyrinth of Germany, and see in what
condition the affairs of Flanders are; for, as for those of the Emperor, they
are sufficiently afflicted, and have almost no other support, then that of the
justice of their Cause; besides that so many fine actions as are performed in
those parts, away from hence.

CHAP. XVII
The deplorable state of the Low Countries, under obedience The taking of a
great number of strong Towns in Flanders.

AFter so remarkable a Victory as that of Rocroy (which happened after the death
of Lewis the thirteenth) and so many losses in Germany, which had so peeled the
Eagle, that there was no more appearance, or possibility left of herflying
far; after the defection of Portugal, and so many Battles lost in Catalonia;
it was conceived, that the King of Spain would have neither power, nor will, to
succor the Obedient Provinces; as having work enough at home; and that the
first Field following, the French, and Hollanders would carry all; yea, that
the people, being abandoned, would revolt, and to hinder a total ruin, join
themselves with the Conquering Party. In effect, the Ecclesiastics, and the
Nobility cast their eyes already upon France, in regard of the Religion: and
the people turned their heads to wards Holland, for love of the Traffic; but
the only deprivation of the exercise of their Faith, made them, as it were
weeping, follow the Spaniards. Peace was necessary for them, and for that, they
held up their hands; but the Treaties walked too slowly on. Nothing but the
rigor of the Placarts of these Provinces, and the preaching of their Priests,
made them resolve to endure all the extremities of war, rather then submit
themselves to the Reformates. For, if we must needs change our Master (said
they) let us range our selves under the French, so to have, and retain our
Religion; rather then under the Heretics, who destroy Souls.

The Plenipotentiary Ambassadors of France passed by the Haghe; renewed the
Offensive Alliance for three years more; The League renewed for three years.
spoke in the behalf of the Catholics of Holland, but obtained nothing, it
being too ticklish a matter. For, where the Reformates are Masters, they give
no liberty to them of that Profession, and will not have them amongst them; not
being able to suffer Idolatry; and the Papistical Ceremonies shook their
over-tender Conseiences.

Let us leave them going to Munster, to begin a work, which they will not
perfect; and let us go see the bloody fruits of this Field.

The Duke of Orleans, being declared Lieutennant-General of all the King his
Brothers Armies, sent La Meillieraye, Gassion, and Rantzow toward Flanders;
who made a show of going to Dunkerke, but sat down before the strong Town of
Graveling; and seized upon all the Forts about it; and Admiral Tromp came and
ranged himself before the Haven, The French take many places in Flanders, 1645.
to shut up the passage. This Town was taken in less then two months, and
thereby made the Spaniards avow, that there is nothing impregnable, when men's
lives are not spared. For, the French lost above six thousand before it; and
all the industry of the Spaniards could not save this Bulwark of their State.
Don Francisco de Melo, who hindered the Prince from passing the River into
Flanders, hastened with all the best of his Forces, gave the Hollanders means
come over, The Sass of Gaunt taken, 1945.
and take the Sass of Gaunt, with many other Forts; and the loss of the said
Sass, and Graveling, the two maine defenses of the Country, laid it open to an
entire Conquest.

The Duke of Orleans followed his Carriere, and all stooped to him: he took
Bourburgh, the Fort of Linck, Lens, Bethune, St. Venant, Lillers, Armentiers,
and Mening; and put all the rest into Contribution: besides that Mardyke was
also surrendered after a Siege, and so this Field of 1645. ended.

The Victories of the French were little less splended in Italy, by the taking
of Piombino, and Portolongono, 1646 to wipe away the affront of Orbitello,
where they were beaten, and constrained to discamp; and many other places were
also taken, besides the defeat of the Spaniards, at the passage of Mora.

Count Harcourts Victory in Catalunia, 1645.
The Count of Harcourt, who was not wont to be idle, when any thing was to be
done, got a glorious reputation, by winning a Battle, and taking some Towns in
Catalunia 1645.

Notwithstanding that Flanders was almost quite conquered, the Subjects
remained firm in their fidelity, amongst so many troubles; Mardyke surprised
by the Spaniards.
and the surprising of the Fort of Mardyke in the Winter, made them take fresh
courage. This Place cost but ten, or twelve men's lives, to retake it, and had
cost above five thousand to tear it out of the Spaniards clutches. Let us see
the begin-of this Field of 1646.

The Duke of Orleans being entered into Flanders with a tertible Army, resolved
to compel the Enemy to a General and final Decision, or to take some Towns of
importance in the heart of the Country, which might give the State a mortal
blow. And though the Spaniards, were too wise to hazard the former, yet could
they not hinder the latter, Courtrack taken.
which was the taking of Courtrack, in the middle of Flanders, seven leagues
from Gaunt. But the enemy making a Defensive war only, forced them for want of
victuals, to draw back toward the Sea side; where they took Berghen St.
Wynock, and besieged Mardyke, which they hoped to carry by many assaults,
before the Holland Fleet arrived; but their temerity was so well chastised by
the supply which entered every Tide, into the said Fort, that Monsieur de la
Trisllerie, who was newly come out of Denmark, was constrained to complain to
the States, of the delay of their Fleet. And they, who walked a slow pace, and
observed the falling back of the French (with their bravado of saying that this
Field would make them Masters of Flanders, and the next after, of all Holland)
judged by the rash discourse of the Soldiers, of the intention of their
Master, and showed themselves very cold, in the pursuance of the design, to
come to the concluded Stake sharing; for in this knot it is, that the best
friends become foes; and this was the stumbling block, as it shall shortly
appear.

However at length, they sent Admiral Tromp, who was no sooner come, then they
lowed their colors, to signify that they would render themselves up; and so
the Garrison of three thousand men, marched out, Mardyke retaken by the French.
and were all detained prisoners, contrary to the Agreement made, by a maxim
little usual; for they would not release them, because they would not draine
the Source of them, and exhaust the Country of Soldiers. It is to be noted,
that this said Fort, before which there perished the Flower of the French
Nobility, and which merited not to be attacked, had it not been for the
consideration of the Haven, yielded, to testify to the French, that the honor
thereof was due to the Hollanders: And these small grudges served but to
sharpen their stomachs, hasten the taking of Dunker, and Fuernes. The eleventh
of October, 1646
Thus, almost all Flanders being conquered, they doubted no more of expelling
the Spaniards, since there wanted only one effort, or last blow for it,
whereof France for her part, was resolved.

Wherefore, the King sent to entreat the Prince of Orange, to lay siege before
Antwerp, and promised him the succor of six thousand men, demanding only four
Churches for the Roman Catholics in lieu thereof; to which the Prince
consented, but the found some difficulty in the determination of the States:
For they of Zeland protested against it; and they of Amsterdam, would not have
the said Town taken, for fear least the Commerce should return thither again.
But there was yet another stronger, and more considerable reason; and jealousic
had already taken too firm root, to be so easily plucked up.

The Marshals Gassions, and Rantzaw, after having put good order at Courtrack,
advanced with their Troops toward the Channel between Gaunt and Bridges,
secured the Princes passage, and drove back Piccolomini, who durst not venture
any thing against them. The Prince, after having passed, made a circuit, found
plunder for his Soldiers, rendered the Duke of Orleans a visit; then crossed
the River Skelde, and entered the Land of Wass.

General Back, seeing this storm ready to fall upon him, after having stopped
the Hollanders below Gannt, retired himself, and pitched his Camp a league
beyond Antwerp; for the safety whereof (all being in confusion) he left the
fruitful Land of Wass to the Enemy, as also the Town of Hulst, which the Prince
forced to yield, Hulst besieged, and taken.
after a months Siege. Fortune, which had always accompained him, made it
appear, that he was yet her Darling in this occasion; for, though it were in
the month of October, it was fair and dry weather; and had it been rainy,
according to the Season, he had run hazard of loosing the benefit of this
Field, and of blemishing in some sort, the splendor of so many gallant
exploits, as had been happily accomplished by him.

CHAP. XVIII
The War of England. The Tragical death of the King.

FErdinand the third at present Emperor, had good reason to say these words
which are reported to have been once uttered by him, by way of deploring the
calamity of this Age. The Princes of the Empire (said he) will be r^^ved; and
the evils, and disasters which we suffer, will rebound upon the heads of them,
who make us suffer them. He is now in repose, and sees all the calamities of
Germany, transported into England, and other places. But let us first begin
with England, without seeking the speculative Causes or casting them at all,
upon the sins of men.

To the end that we may speak with the more ground, of what has passed in this
Kingdom, we will derive the Source thereof from William the Conquerours time.

CHARLES PAR LA GRACE DE DIET-ROY D'ANGE ETERRE sold by P. Stent


The curses of Fathers and Mothers upon their Children, are of most dangerous
consequence. Behold here a proof thereof, by which this said Kingdom has
b^^^n afflicted, since many Ages past, and by the late Tragical Act, which
turned it into a Commonwealth.

Robert, Son to the abovesaid William, being gone to conquer the Holy Land,
gave his brother Henry (the first of that name) occasion by his absence to
seize upon his Crown; who having a desire to marry the Princess Mawde, Sister
to King Edgare of Scotland, (who had been long before an enclosed Nun in a
Monastery) caused her often to be asked with great instancy; but the devour
Princess remained constant to her Vow; but, finding that she would not
voluntarily yield, her brother Edgare, King Henry of England marries M^wde
Princess of Scotland.
fearing Henry's fury, was constrained to make her condescend; so that she
perceiving it to be a business of force, made a prayer to God, that all the
issue, and posterity which should spring from them, might live in perpetual
disquiets and quarrels.

This malediction of hers hit right, and extended it self, not only to the
third, and fourth generation, but even to our Times also; in such sort, as that
there have been few Kings ever since, who to reign in security, have not been
either necessitated, or induced, to kill their Brothers, or near Kinsmen, and
who have not also experimented Civil Seditions, whereby the Brothers, Uncles,
Children, or Brothers in Law, have seized upon the Crown.

In fine, the Division under Edwards Children, between the Houses of Lancaster,
and York, existed, under the Colors of the Red, The quarrels between the
Houses of Lancaster, and York.
and the White Rose; which quarrel, after having caused many Battles, and the
death of above eighty Princes, was composed by the marriage of Henry the
seventh, with Elizabeth of the House of York; and so the Roses were reunited,
to bury the two Factions, and terminate the Difference; however the Kingdom
were not thereby cured of Mawdes Curse; for in the year 1587. Queen Elizabeth,
who then reigned, put to death Mary Stewart her Kinswoman, after detaining her
prisoner almost twenty years. Thus far reaches Stephen Basker a Writer of
very much esteem: but I must pass further, and call a mild King upon a
Scaffold.

After Queen Elizabeth's decease, it looked as if the course of misfortune were
stayed by the reign of King James, and the Union of three Crowns; but this
great Calm continuing yet about fifteen years after his death, turned into
the blackest, and most furious Tempest that ever was; and those waters had not
been stopped, but to overflow this Field with so much the more violence, and
desolation.

James Stewart King of Scotland was murdered by a detestable Treason; The
misfortunes upon the House of Stewart.
and the Queen his Wife was; beheaded in England, where she thought to sinde
her Sanctuary, from the Faction of her subjects. Her Son (afterward King of
England) was likely to be stifled in her womb: Her Grandchild ended his
days, as she did hers, by the hand of an Executioner, and his distressed
Children retired into France, to their Mother. A strange Catastrophe, and a
malediction, more Tragical in the end, then in the beginning! But let us begin
this Tragedy, by this first Act.

The English, under a pacificall King, lived in such superlative delight, and
riot, produced by an uninterrupted course of many years Peace, that they grew
almost to forget God: ( For it is but in adversity only, that we are apt to
remember him) and such as were not content to live in such delicious idleness,
betook themselves to the war, either in Germany, or the Low Countries.

King Chales will have a Conformity of the Chu ches of Scotland; with that of
England.
King Charles made Proclamation, for a Conformity, as well in Ceremony, as
otherwife, of the Churches in Scotland, with these of England. The Puritans
opposed i^, a tumult was raised against the Bishops, and principal parsons of
quality, and a new Alliance, or Covenant amongst the Puritans. The King warned
them to renounce it; ^ut they on the other side, persisted; published
scandalous Writings, made a League, abrogated the Episcopal Authority,
fortified some places, and constrained him to leave his rest, and take arms.

The Scots arms.
The Scots having gotten possession of the Castle of Edinburgh, entered in, to
England; took Newc^stle, and Durham. The King called a Parhament, which (being
for the most part, composed of Puritans) he found them inclined to favor the
Scots. Whereupon he marched with an Army toward the Botders, where he slighted
the advice of one of the chief of his Kingdom, who told him, that if he would
be a King, and were not weary of reigning, he must hazard a Battle: But he,
preferring a pernicious peace, before a necessary war, made an accommodation,
and at the same time, called a Parliament; which forth with assembled; and the
Scots, after having finished a fine Masterpiece of business, whereof they
felt excessive inconveniences after wards, returned home.

The Deputy of Ireland prisoner, his death.
The King gave this Parliament all full, and absolure power (provided that in
any wife it touched not his Prero^ative, nor such as were near it, (an
individual point) by ver^ue of a Law made in Henry the seventh's time. But the
first thing they did, was to imprison the Lord Deputy of Ireland, who could not
be saved by the Kings requests, nor his own defense; but that he must needs be
sacrificed to the hatred of the ignorant people; who expressed their brutality,
by demanding his death, and their folly, by being moved to compassion, at his
firm, and immutable constance to the last.

The Prince of Orange in England.
The Prince of Orange having demanded the eldest Princess for his Son, and
obtained her, he sent him thither to espouse her, where he heard the said
Deputies arguments, and saw him brought upon the Scaffold; and after his
departure, the Queen conducted her Daughter to the Haghe, where she was
received with very great honors, but found the States more inclined to
Neutrality, then to meddle with that intestine war: For the King finding his
Authority sensibly checked, was already retired to York, where he set up his
Standard; sent for the Knights of the Garter; and having neither Ships, nor
money, sought some, support, in the affections of his subjects: but too late;
for the forces, whereof he had dif-invested himself, were in the Parliaments
hands: however, he was succored by the greatest part of the Nobility, The
Malignants, and Roundheads, who?
and Gentry, upon whom was imposed the name of Malignants, as that of
Roundheads, was upon the Parliament soldiers.

The Queen having received some money upon her Jewels, and drawn a good sum
from the Prince of Orange, repasted into England; War between the King, and
Parliament.
but was cast back by a most horrible tompest, upon the Coast of Holland;
though yet some weeks after, she arrived in safety, with all the Munitions
which she had been able to purchase; and afterward retired into France:
leaving her husband in this storm, wherein he was swallowed up.

He was prosperous enough at the beginning, by the taking of Bristol, and some
other places; however it be true, that his design upon Hull, and Gloncester
failed. He defeated the Earl of Essex's Army, and reduced the Parliament to
such extremity as mennaced their certain, and visible ruin: but his boumy was
so great, and his credulity too prejudicial to his Affairs, Sr. Thomas
Wentworth etc. Lord Debuty of Ireland. sold by P. Stent.
in so deplorable a time, when distrust was more necessary.

In sine, understanding, that the English had called in the Scots, by virtue of
the Covenant concluded, and confirmed by Oath on both Parcies, (wherein they
swore the destruction of the Bishops) he dispatched Prince Robert against them,
The Roy^lists beaten by the Scots.
who joined his forces (though not his opinion) with the Earl of Newcastle; for
he would needs venture a Battle, which he lost, and the said Earl fled into
Germany, and all the Kings felicity with him.

During these interludes, the Earl of Montroffe did wonders for the King in
Scotland, for with a very small Army, he gained a Battle, came off with
advantage in many encounters; and repaired in fine the Kings affairs there,
Montrosse for the King in Scotland.
whilst they impaired in England; for having lost another victory, to Fairfax,
he was compelled to retire to Oxford, where he was besieged. Whereupon, his Son
went into France, and himself fled disguised to the Scotch Army, The King flies
to the Scotch Army, and is sold.
who received him at first with great honor, and complement; though
afterward, they delivered him up to the Parliament Army, for a sum of money.

He was made pass amongst the people for a Papist, and a Tyrant; and that he
had a design, to annull all the Privileges of England, etc.

Ah ungrateful People! Ah Scotch Captains! You, who have the renown of being
Soldiers; how could you consent to such a baseness? Had avarice more power
over your souls, then respect, virtue, and duty? For though you had an opinion
that the King were a Papist, is it lawful for subjects to act against the
Anointed of the Lord, that which they would not have done to themselves?

As soon as the news of the Deputies imprisonment arrived in Ireland, The
revolt in Ireland.
the Irish took Arms, to free themselves from the Captivity of the English, as
they called it; but with so much barbarity, and cruelty, that they rendered
themselves detestable thereby; especially to such as knew how they had been
treated by the English. But what will not people undertake, which from a long
time, are grown brutish, and savage, when they crush the head of their
Governors, with their own Chains? The Collections, which were made in Holland
for the succor of the Reformates in that Country, The Collections in Holland,
for what?
begat as well the admiration of the Charity of that Nation toward their
Brethren; as doubt also, on the other side, whether such large sums ever
arrived there.

The King being near London, found himself reduced to the extremity of granting
them of the Parliament whatsoever they asked; and not being able to suffer some
inconveniences which were cast upon him, he made his escape to the Isle of
Wight, where he was treated like a prisoner. But, in fine, being led back again
to London, and the Upper House being abolished The King is executed the 30. of
January, 1649.
, he was accused by the Army, and brought before a High Court of Justice, where
he was tried, condemned to be beheaded, and executed the thirtieth of January,
1649.

There have happened enormous accidents in this Age; but none which has so
much astonished the world, as this strange proceeding. Such as are curious,
have made a shift to pick out some kind of similitude of his death, to that of
the Savior of the world, but for my part, I will be silent.

Since that time, the English have fought prosperously against the Irish, and
Scots. But let us now end the war, and the difference between the King of
Spain, and the States General; and see the success of the Arms of France.

CHAP. XIX
The continuance of the Exploits in Flanders. The Battle of Lentz.

THE Prince of Orange made his last Field in the year 1647. when he passed into
Flanders; and received a supply of six thousand French, conducted by Marshall
Gramment, who did nothing but plunder, and gave proof of their courage, and
irregular Discipline, to the soldiers of this Commonwealth. He took a Fort
before Antwerp, which he presently after lost again. He found so much
repugnance in the States, against the Siege of this Town, that he changed his
design, Hemy Prince of Orange sick. His death, 1648.
and marched toward Venlo; but after the loss of many men there, he retired to
the Haghe, where he fell sick and died, in the month of March, 1648. and was
interred at Delft, by Prince William his Father. This generous Prince gave so
many testimonies of his valor, in so many perilous Sieges, that he made
himself admired by all the world.

Armentiers and Landrecies taken, 1647.
The Archduke Leopold being arrived in the quality of Governor of the
Low Countries, besieged Armentiers the thirteenth of May, which the French had
fortified, and made a Magazine there, which he gained the twenty sixth of the
same monoth. But Gassion being entrenched with eight thousand men near Esterre,
hindered him from any further attempt upon Artoise, and chiefly Arras, upon
which he seemed to have cast his eye. Wherefore, he went and invested
Landrecies, and brought it under obedience, in less then three weeks. The
French take La Banee, Diemude, end Tortoza.
But Gassion recompensed the first loss, by the taking of La Banee, which he
effected by an Assault only, without a siege, as Rantzow also did Diemude: In
such sort, as Piccolomini was forced to lay a formal Siege to it, and tear it
our of the hands of Monsieur Palvaw the Governor. Rantzow had an enterprise
upon Ostend; which being discovered, was hurtful to the Enterprisers: Nor had
that of Beck upon Courtrack any better success, and La Banee remained as a Curb
to Lile.

But the Arms of France had better luck in Catalunia; where the Marshall of
Schoonbergh recompensed the loss which the Count of Harcoart made in raising
the Siege of Lerida, in doing the like for the Spaniards before Flix, and by
easily taking Tortoza, From whence the name of Hibernia to Ireland.
a Town situated at the mouth of the River Ebro, called by the Romans Iberus.
But Terragona was a stumbling block for them, as well as Casal had been to the
Spaniards.

The next years Field, must do miracles, and show the Hollanders, that without
them, they were able to beat the Spaniards out of Flanders. Indeed the Army was
very great, and the General had both luck, and courage enough to undertake
impossible things. The French take Ypers, and the Spaniniards Courtrack, 1648.
The fair, and strong Town of Ypers, was attacked, and taken in twelve days;
and Courtrack retaken by the Spaniards, in five. Indeed, the want of Victuals
was so great, that if Ypers had held out four days more, the Army had been in
danger of suffering much.

The forces of both Parties met near Lentz, a Town though small, yet famous for
brave Gassions death, Gassion killed.
who was killed by a musket bullet in the Approaches to the Town.

The Sraniards were about seven thousand, and the French much sewer. The Foot
did their duty well enough, The Battle of Lentz.
and especially the Lorraines; but the Horse (according to their custom) sled,
and would not hearken to General Becks exhortations, who was taken, and died
rather of vexation, then of his wounds.

In sine, the Spaniards lost the Battle, and had almost lost the Imperial
Prince too, had he not been succored by the Prince of Ligne, The victory of
the French.
who remained in pawn for him. For want of Foot, the French were fain to be
content with the Town of Fuernes, which was afterward retaken by the
Spaniards, to guard Dunkerk.

It was conceived, that this victory would have been a means to ingrandish the
French Monarchy; but it was likely on; the other side, to make it stumble; and
indeed, it gave it such a shogg, that it has not been able to recover it self
wholly hitherto.

For this great Body being strong, and nimble, is fallen into a fever, which
makes it frantic. It is like a Watch, the principal wheels whereof being
broken, keeps no true course, or measure. But let us go, and finish the war of
the United Provinces, since the news thereof is already come; for, if we should
stay to note all things, we should never have an end.

CHAP. XX
The Peace made betwixt the King of Spain, and the Confederated States. The
remarkable Siege of Brin. Torstenson quits the Generalate.

THe last Field, having produced no remarkable effect at all, was taken by
many, as the shooting off of a Musket, without a bullet, rather to content the
Allies, then to advance upon the enemy; rather to drive away the time, then to
make use of advantages; and rather to tire the French, then to come to share
stakes with them. Indeed, the Hollanders had a fine game of it; for the enemy,
not being able almost to stoop, was fain to avow, that all their defenses being
taken away in Flanders, they had nothing more left to oppose against them, then
the Walls of Amwerp, Gaunt, and Bridges; for Guelders was half conquered,
Brabant open, and Flanders almost quite subjugated; so that there remained but
one and the last Bowt to come to the sharing of stakes.

In the mean while, the Ambassadors which last arrived, were the first
dispatched; for they found so much inclination in them of Spain, that the
Proposition for a Truce, being changed into that of a Peace, all their demands
were granted them. In such sort, as more then a twelve months time was spent,
in attending and uniting the two Parties; howbeit they had brought them so far
already, that whatsoever the French had gotten by conquest of the Spaniards,
and other enemies, was to remain as their own for perpetuity; and they had
confirmed it amongst them, by a sure, and fast League; in order to which
Monsieur de Seruient had taken great pains at the Haghe; yea, he indevoured,
under this pretext, to draw the States to a continuation of the war, The Peate
made between the Spaniards and the Hollanders.
and the utter expulsion of the Spaniards out of the Low Countries; and
therefore it was no marvel, if Prince William leaned that way with him. For
this young Eagle, being newly received as Governor, and Captain General,
desired to accomplish, what his Predecessors had begun. But Seruient found
himself repugned by such as had power, and was not able to hinder (however his
arguments sufficiently encumbered the College) but the Peace, which was signed
at Munster the 8. of January, was ratified at the Haghe, published at Munster,
and proclaimed through all the Towns, and Villages of this puissant, and
glorious Republic the 5. of June 1648. And here, by the way, we may take
notice, of the admira ble conduct of the Spaniards; who, though at a great
distance, and having no other passage then by sea, have nevertheless, against
all human appearance, defended these Provinces the space of thirteen years,
against three most potent Enemies.

Such as have more sense of particular, then public interest have condemned
this Peace, as having been too much precipitated; alled ging, that the States
ought not to have separated themselves from the French, but that they ought to
have helped them to drive out the old enemies, and come to share stakes, and
many other arguments making for the prolongation of the War. To which it may be
answered, that all Wars which have not a necessary defense, and true Peace, for
their scope, are unjust. Besides, if the Hollanders obtained by this Peace,
whatsoever they desired, and asked, it needs must follow, that they were
obliged to ratify it. And as for the interest of France, which was also to
accept it for the repose of her Subjects, and for the great advantages offered
therein; they clearly perceived, that that great Minister would not have it;
and therefore they resolved not to obey his passion; besides, that the
Ambassadors themselves advised them to embrace it, in case they could bring
the King of Spain to an utter renunciation, both for himself, and his
Successors; which, after the attendance of a whole year togegether, was
effected. All the world is also of opinion, that for the good of their State,
it is better for them, to be separated from the French. There are likewise some
other reasons which remained in the Cabinet, and which some events, not
foreseen by many, have made to be judged very pregnant.

France has sufficiently declared by the taking of many Holland-Marchants
ships, how displeasing this Peace was to her, but Holland has dissembled this
proceeding with admirable prudence, as attributing it, to the passion of the
great Ministers Creatures. Allies of different nature, bold good in common
necessity; but at the end of the reckning, that frienship grows faint.

This War, which had lasted almost ninety years, and which was conceaved to be
immortal, expired in the Spring time, 1648. to the great contentment of such as
love peace, and tranquillity; and the great coffeehouse of the French, who
had much reason to be angry at it, for two subjects; the one for the division,
or Stake-sharing; and the other, because they had not quite chased the
Spaniards out of the Low Countries.

The pence was not pleasing to all.
It was observed nevertheless, that this joy was not universal, and that some
others beside the French, would have been more glad to carry on the War, to the
total expulsion of the Spaniards. Indeed, the Bonefires were kindled with more
zeal, and shined with more light, in one Town, then in another, and coldness
appeared in the countenances of many persons. But above all, they who made
their advantage of following the Armies; and such others also, as with whom
passion of Religion prevailed more, then interest of State, expressed their
dissatisfactions.

The number of such as embraced the Reformed Religion, and the doctrine of
Luther, growing, in despite of all Placarts, and Prohibitions, to increase,
and multiply, sowed the first seed of the division; to which was added the
ambition of some certain Governors, (who according to their own sense, The
causes of! the first tumults
were ill enough divided) the coffeehouse of the Nobility, the Clergy, and
all in general, for augmentation of the Bishops, and the retardment of the
Foreign Militia, in the Low Countries.

Cardinal Granvels authority, and the report which ran of the Inquisition,
caused excessive commotions in the Provinces; but ambition, change in Repigion,
the exaction of the tenth penny; the bloody proceedings of the inexorable Duke
of Alna; the weakening of the Royal Prerogative, and the pretexts of
maintaining privileges, were the winds, which brake the bounds of respect,
and concord, and caused the Wars against the Governors; and the Duke of
Parma's Victories, having made the King bury the confederates, moved them to
begin the War against him, which lasted till the valliant Henry's death.

In the beginning of the tumults, they first indirectly set upon the Catholic
Church, by destroying Altars, and Images, under color of abuse, Idolatries,
and liberty of conscience; and then upon the King, under that of the Tyranny of
his Governors together with the avarice, cruelty, and licentiousness of the
Soldiers. But in fine by the succor of strangers, the War was carried on
directly; and that with so much dexterity, and good success, that the King
has lost seven Provinces, and the said Church, her exercise; in such sort, as
that Philip the fourth now reigning, by the articles of this Peace, has
declared the said Provinces Free States.

Let us now see in what coudition the Emperors affayrs are, after a loss so
little expected.

All his Subjects on this side the Danub were fled for fear; and some also, ou
the other side, saved their goods in Stirmark, and in the district of
Salsburgh; in such sort, as that had the Swedes endeavored to pass the River,
though it were very large, all the hereditary Countries of the House of
Austria, would have run hazard of being handled like the rest of Germany. They
took Grembs by assault, and laid Siege to Brin. And hear it was, that Fortune
made a pause; gave the Imperialists leisure to breath, and look about them, The
siege of Brin.
as also the Inhabitants beyond the River, to put themselves into better
posture.

Mons de South governor of Brin.
The Governor of this place, was one Mons. de Souch, a native of Rochels, who,
upon some very great disgust, had abandoned the Swedes, whom he had served with
great zeal of Religion, and affection, and in the quality of a Colonel, which
charge he now possessed on the other Party. Torstenson, after three weeks
Siege, summoned the Town, advertizing him, that in case of refusal, there would
be no quarter for him. He answered, That he would never ask any; and that he
would also give none. When a Gentleman of merit burns with desire of revenge,
and acquisition of honor, there is no difficulty which he will not surmount.

The Siege raised.
Torstenson, after having made many assaults, mined, undermined, and cast a
multitude of Granada's into the place, was forced to retire. And this Siege
lasted four months, destroyed about four thousand Swedes, without counting
run-awayes, and attcheived the Governor an immortal reputation; besides the
Emperors favor, who being desirous to distinguish this rare virtue from the
common, made him a Boron, and gave him, some Lands, as also a place in his
Privy Counsel.

Torstenson quits the Generalat 1646.
Torstenson, as brave a General as ever was, after this cross of Fortune, not
being w^l in health, withdrew his Army out of Moravia, resigned the Generalat
into the hands of Wranghel, and passed to those new Medicinal Fountains newly
discovered at Hornhawzen, in the Bishopric of Holberstadt, 1646. where there
was then so huge a conflux of people, as if Germany had still been completely
inhabited. General Wranghel took up his quarters in Turinghe, in the Duchy of
Wirtembergh, and in Silesia; and Connixmarck, in the Bishopric of Bremen,
where it seemed, as if he intended to establish his residence.

He retires into Sweden.
The Swedes changed their General, but not their prosperity: for the
Imperialists were as ill handled by Wranghel, as they had been by Torstenson,
who retired himself into Sweden, and was received by the Queen with honors due
to his merits, and the great services he had rendered that Crown.

His death.
He dyed in the year 1650, and left a most excellent odor of his virtues every
where, yea, even amongst his very Enemies themselves.

Before we set down the motions of that fortunare Warrier Charles Gustave
Wranghel, we will relate the difference which chanced between the Landgraves of
Hassia, Darmstadt, and Cassel; the rather, because it is mingled with the
success of his first Field.

CHAP. XXI The difference which happened between the two Families of the
Landgraves. The Battails of Mergendal, and Nortlinghen. General Mercies death.
Why the Landgrave George remained consant.
AMongst all the Protestants of Germany, none remained faithful to the
Emperor, but only George Landgrave of Darmstadt; all the rest being entered
into the Swedish League. And he, finding no subject to take Arms, and so
slightly to break his Oath, obtained Newtrality of the King of Sweden; and
merited besides to be called by Ferdinand himself, the Faithful Prince. The
chief motive of this immovable constance of his, shall be inserted beer, as I
have learnt it.

The Landgrave William his Father, feeling himself decaying in his strength,
and drawing near his end, sent for this George his Son; to whom, after many
good lessons, and instructions, he declared, as it were by a Prophetic Spirit,
that there would happen many Wars in Germany against the Emperor, under the
pretext of Religion; wherein Strangers would be also engaged, being attracted
by the desire, and occasion of making themselves great. And therefore, that he
should be sure to take heed of casting himself into that precipice; but that he
should remain faithful to the said Emperor; without suffering himself by any
means to be distracted, or carried away, to the ambition of any such people.
Promise me (said he) that you will never abandon the Emperors Party, unless
he endeavor to force you, and your Subjects, in your Conseience. Which he did
by Oath, and has always observed it hitherto; so that he could not be loved by
the Protestant Party; neither was the Newtrality he obtained, and so
religiously observed by him, sufficient to keep him out of the dance; for the
Fiddlers played about him, and made him dance in despite of his heart. But
there must be a pretext, which was not long to seek. Oh cursed, and detestable
Age!

Apretext to make War upon him.
Butsback, a place belonging to the said Landgrave, was taken by General Giese,
for a punishment (as was said) because it had refused passage to Colonel St.
Andrews Forces; or rather, for that indeed the Politic necessity of affairs
required it. For, where this Maxim has the upper hand, Justice is shut out of
door.

From thence the said Giese went to Marpurgh in Novem. 1644. which Town
forthwith yielded, and lest the dispure to the Castle; which was also, after
having briefly defended it self, forced to bow the knee, in regard that the
Foot was already taken away.

By this unheard of, and unexpected proceeding, against all Right, against
faith, and promise; this agreement, which had bin solemaly made, and sworn
between the two Branches of this most illustrious, and most ancient House
Hassia, this Agreement, I say confirmed by the Emperor, approved by the of
Electoral College, and the whole Empire, was quashed, by this invasion; and
that pacisicall Prince George, induced to defend his Countriel by Arms, since
the Laws, and the Column, or Pillar which supported them, was too weak.

In a word, a War was kindled in that district, and the Swedes, who defended
the Lutheran Religion, and the Liberty of Germany; ranged themselves against
this poor Lutheran Prince, in favor of the Calvinsticall Landgravinne, or
Princess Landgrave their Alley. Maxims must be changed, according to
occasions, and the pretext of Religion, is but to amuse the Vulgar.

Some Lutherans were not a whit sorry, to see this Prince tormented: but such
as yet cherished right, and justice, openly pittyed him. In brief, he armed
powerfully, and set forth a Manifest, against which the Landgravinne published
another; so that the War was begun, both with the pen, and with the pike.
Indeed she could not take a fitter time; For it is always good, to fish in
troubled water, 1646.

General Wranghel returned toward Hassia, took Hoxter, and Paderborne at
discretion, and cleansed all those parts from the Imperialists, whilst they
were very busiy about doing the like, in Moravia; where they retook Crambs with
much trouble, and Corneuburgh with more. So that when Austria was beginning to
respire, by the retreat of the Swedes, and unexpected misfortune put all the
Court into Mourning, the Emperesse into her Tomb, and the Religious Prince
Ferdinand, into the greatest sadness that any invincible Soul could be able
to sustain. This Princess, The death of the Emperesse.
being great with child, was stifled by a Catharr or Rheum, and universally
regretted by all, for her bounty, and other Imperial Vertucs. The King of
Spaines only Son followed her, which so much afflicted his Father, And of the
Prince of Spain.
that it caused him a sickness.

Whilst these things passed, General Mortaigne was taken by the Imperialists,
and found furnished with certain papers, Mortaigne prisoner.
which contained so exact, and perfect a List of the Imperial Army, and all
other particulars belonging to it, that many of the principal, and highest
Officers, had not so complete a knowledge thereof. Yea, and he affirmed
besides, that there was nothing done, nor any Order given, which was not forth
with discovered to the Swedes; and therefore no wonder, if Victory marched with
them, since Traitors marched with the Imperialists.

Whilst the Conquering Army was approaching Hassia, and the Generals were
making good cheer at Cassel, the Count of Holtsappel General of the Elector of
Coleins Forces, endeavored to redress his Party, and to offend her, whose
Troops he had long Commanded.

Zonts, a little Town near Nuits, and five leagues from Colein, Zonts.
seated upon the Bank of the Rheyn, was very convenient for the Hassians, and
very often courted both by enterprise, and open force; but always so
valliantly defended, that it never changed Masters.

Whilst this small war was mennaged in this Bishopric, the motion of these
great. Armies made all tremble, all fear, and all hope. For, never were all
parties seen so hot, as after the Treaty was begun at Munster; in such sort, as
that some took it for an amusement, and that the Strangers would win the
whole Game, since they had the better of the play.

Let us return to the French Weymarians who were grown proud by the taking of
Philipsburgh, and Memz. The Duke of Anguien, after these brave exploits, which
made the Germans know, how much the valor of that Nation is to be redoubted;
returned into France with two Regiments. The Bavarians, being encamped upon the
River Necker, retook some places, revictualled Friburgh; and having repulsed
four thousand men, who attempted to cross their design, took up their winter
Quarters; as the Imperialists also did theirs, in Alsatia, Lorrain, and upon
the Rheyn; where being reinforced with some Regiments, they repassed the River
to feck the Bavarians, who assembled their Troops, and to show that they were
willing to strike for it, presented themselves before their Enemies, upon the
fifth of May in the morning, 1645. The Conflict was horrible, and the dexterity
of that brave General Merey was the maine instrument of the whole Victory. John
de Werdt (who was now a Count) Colonel Colbe, The Battle of Mergendal.
and Spork, made themselves famous there. General Rosa, Smithergh, and a great
number of Officers, fell into the Enemies hands, without counting the dead, and
the Viscount of Turenne was pursued as far as the Country of Hassia. There
were two Regiments, which were not at this Feast, because they came too late;
but howsoever, they were charged with the Run-awayes, and paid their share of
the Reckoning, as well as the rest.

This Battle being gained near Mergendal, raised the drooping hearts, and hopes
of the Imperialists, when they were almost quite sunk, by that furious blow
two months before, near Jankow in Bohemia; caused the conjunction of the
Hassians, and Connixmarck, with the Marshal of Turenne; and was likely to have
saved La Mote, The Duke of Angui^n returns into Germany.
(which was besieged by Magalotti, and defended it self bravely) made the Duke
of Anguien hasten, who with twelve thousand men (for that kingdom is very
populous, and the French are Soldiers from their Cradle) arrived at Mentz;
joined with the other Generals; made a stand near Heidelbergh, and with a
lusty, and puissant Army, marched in quest of his victorious Enemies; who
wondering from whence such a multitude so suddenly came, reinforced
themselves with four thousand men under General Gleen, and stayed near
Nortlinghen, to the great contentment of the said Duke, that young Mars, who
sought nothing but Combats to feed his generous ambition: Nor did his enemies
desire it less then he, as not being men who were long to be sought. In
brief, they closed with so much resolution, and courage, that it looked as if
the Monarchy of the whole Universe had depended upon this Conflict. The last,
Battle of Nottlingo hen, 1645.
In effect, the number of persons of condition slain, was very great; and the
Germans have written, that the French Army was so much engaged, that without
the succor of the Hassians, after so fierce a Blood-letting, it would have
fainted.

The Bauel lasted till night, and the death of brave Merey, that Lorrain Baron,
gave the Enemies some advantage; for they kept the Field, as I have already
said. And really, after this Lords death, the Bavarian Army made no more then a
mere Defensive war; rather for want of good Command, then gallant Troops; but
it was too dangerous to vener again, without huge advantage, both Armies being
so extremely weakened. The French took Dunkelspiel, which was quickly retaken;
and the Duke of Anguien, no less courteous, then valliant, released his
prisoner General Gleen, with a noble present; as Maximilian Duke of Bavaria,
(who would not by any means be vanquished, in courtesy) also did to the Marshal
of Grammont, whom he sent back with a rich Coach.

In the mean time, the supply of four thousand men, formerly conducted by
Gallasso, arrived, and advanced with their General Gleen, to relieve Hailbrun,
which the French (though reinforced with some fresh Troops) were constrained
to forsake, The Duke of Angui^n returns into France.
and the Duke of Angui^n, for want of health departed out of Germany. In sine,
the Archduke being come, the French made a disorderly retreat, and took up
their winter quarters in Alsatia, and Lorrain, where La Motte was rendered, and
dismanteled.

General Wranghel upon the other side, attacked Starbergh, which yielded upon
the same conditions with the Towns before taken; but the Burghers, or Townsmen,
for having showed too much zeal for their own defense, were sacked, as a
forfeit, for their duty, and constancy. This approach gave an Alarm, not only
throughout Westphalia, but also upon the Kheyn: For the Swedsh Army marched
straight to Marpurgh, and thence to Giesen, which caused the Imperial, and
Bavarian Troops to advance to the relief of that Prince.

Hitherto, we have seen the Armies march apart; but now we will relate what
they did after this Conjunction; for the Weymarians, having left the Siege of
Frankendal, went also into Hassia; The Armies march together.
and then both Armies encamped at Weteraw. The Swedes got the Van, marched
toward Hailbrun, and so straight to the Land Bavaria.
of Promise. The Elector raised his Subjects, who could not hinder their
passage, nor their pilladge; so that they took Rain upon the Leck, and besieged
Auxburgh; from whence they were repulsed by the Catholic Armies; but they got
Landsbergh, and entered into Bavaria.

Whilst these things were in agitation, there was a Treaty for a Truce, at
Vlme; though every where else, the War was carried on by parties; as General
Wittembergh in Silesia, against Monte-Cucoli; and Test de Corbean, against
Melander, in the Diocese of Colein.

The Conquerors in Bavaria; the Imperialists pursue them.
When the Swedes, and French had been some time in Bavaria, the departed
thence, and circumfused themselves, throughout all Swaveland, even to the very
Frontiers of Tirol, and the Lake of Baden. They attacked the Castle of
Bregants, which they took with incredible success, and made thereby appear,
that their valor was conform with the report which flew every where, of their
repution, and glory. They also destroyed an Army of Peasants, and chased them
out of many Holds; in such sort, as that this victory alarmed all Swisserland,
and made men believe, The Swedes before Lindaw.
that Wranghel would take Lindaw, Constance, and all the Places upon the said
Lake. He beset the former of the two, which taught him that God limits
Victories; for the Besieged made so generous resistance, that he was compelled
to quit the Siege, after he had continued it two months. But the Imperialists
had better luck, Wysembergh taken.
at the Siege of Wysembergh in Nortgaw, of which place, though it were
excessively strong, they grew Masters, after the attack of some weeks. Had they
made such a business of it before Wysembergh, as the Swedes did before Lindaw,
they had been reduced to the state of a troublesome and weak Defensive, for
many months after.

CHAP. XXII
The exploits of the Swedes, upon the Confines of Swisserland, alarm the
Cantons. Gallasso's death. Melander, General of the Imperial Armies

THe prodigious Successes of the Swedes alarmed all that part of Swisserland,
which lies near the Lake, The Swissers are alarmed.
and carried terror to the very Gates of Italy. Whereupon, the Archduke of
Inspruck solicited the Cantons to an Offensive, and Defensive Alliance,
against these Conquerours; but found less warmth amongst the Protestants, as
being farther from the fire, then amongst the Catholics. However, some
Assemblies were made, wherein a resolution was taken, to raise some thousands
of men, to guard the approaches, and order for more, in case of necessity; and
then, Ambassadors were dispatched to General Wranghel, who well knowing how
dangerous it was to move this strong Body, treated them with more courtesy,
then he had formerly done Charles Duke of Burgundy, and promised them to
maintain good friendship, and Newtrality with them, The French Ambassadors,
on the other side, Whom the French cannot lull asleep.
endeavored to lull them asleep, by assuring them of their Kings sincere
intentions. But, after the taking of Bregants; of the strong Castle of Argents;
of some Islands, the danger wherein Constance was by this new progress, and
the Siege of Vberling begun by General Tisrenne, and that of Lindaw by the
Swedes; the said Swissers rowsed themselves out of their drowsinesse, and
calling to mind their own interests which were stronger then all the
assurances these cunning Conquerours could give them; run to their Arms, and
advised their new Neighbors to retire from their Borders; They run to their
Arms.
for that their Subjects had been ill treated by some Swedish Soldiers; und
moreover, because they had taken Constance into their protection. The Swedes
wanting Forradge, blew up the Castle of Bregants, razed some Forts, and marched
toward Francony; and the French, toward Wi^temberg. This retreat manifested
that their Mine was discovered, and that it was most dangerous to stay till
they were farther detected. The Swedes retire.
The Fowler sings sweetly, to catch the Bird.

This action hindered not the Treaty at Vl^^e for a Cessation of Arms; which was
granted the Elector of Bavaria; but the Emperors Deputies could obtain
nothing; They treat of a Truce, which is granted only to the Duke of Bavari^.
for they had resolved to pluck off his Crown, and destroy his House, but in
vain; for it will not fall, how sierce assaults soever they give it.

It looked, as if the Emperor would not be able to uphold himself any more,
since both his Arms (namely, the Electors of Bavaria and Saxony had sought
their repose, in the promise of the two Crowns, which aimed at no other Peace,
then that of entire Victory, or Conquest. Howsoever, he lost not his courage,
though he were in the middle of so many Enemies, and abandoned by his Allies,
yea, of almost all his States; which, for their own particular interest, left
that of the Empire destitute, and exposed to Strangers; and yet
notwithstanding, in the Treaty for redress, or rectification of A^fairs, every
one of them would enjoy his Right as well as he, though they forsook the Common
Cause. On the one side, Ragoski kept him always in action; and on the other,
the Conquering Armies, after having dulled, or subjugated, almost all Germany,
came and fell in upon his Hereditary Lands. And this Field having given them
plunder for their labor, and appeased a potent Enemy; what had they more to
do, then to seize upon Austria, and share the Double, or Spred-Eagle betwixt
them? For behold the Ship split amongst the waves, and raging Seas, abandoned
by all the Seamen; attacked by three terrible winds at once, and guarded only
by the Master himself; so that she must needs make Shipwreck. But if she do,
they who have deserted her, will not get ashore; and the Confederates, who
think now, to have her good cheap, will snap them one after another, without
any difficulty at all. Their procedings sufficiently discover what their
intention is.

Ferdinand the third, notwithstanding so many troubles; the retreat of so many
friends, and the number of so many enemies, lost not his care of the Empire.
Ferdinand bolds o^t, he calls the Mother of God to help him.
For, it is after the loss both of Masts, and Anchors, and at the point of
splitting, or sinking, and when all counsel is lost; that the good Mariner
makes his industry appear. Great spirits never lose hope, nor courage. To whom
does he address himself in this revolution? Not to Turks, or Infidells; but to
him, to whom his Father had also recourse, when he was besieged in Vienna. For,
he is Heyr to his Christian verutes, and has nothing short of his devotions.
He caused to be erected an Image of the Virgin Mary, Mother of God, directed
his Vows to her; took her for Patroness, and Advocate; not only of himself,
but of all his subjects of Austria, his People, and his Armies, with a fine
prayer to God Almighty, and with so much religious zeal, that all the
bystanders could not sufficiently admire this good Prince. They, who know not,
that the honor which is given to that Mother, returns to God himself, to
glorify his Incarnation, disapproved of this piety; others stood amazed, to
see, that in so thick a cloud as was ready to burst upon him, there was no
other defense, or opposition made, then that which would not be able to stop
that impetuous torrent. But cheer up; for the water riscs much above it,
without passing; and the enemies violence will slacken.

Melander, called Holizapp^^ General of the Imperial Army.
General Gallasso having paid his tribute to Nature, the Command was conferred
upon Melander, Count of Ho^zappel, who put the Militia in Discipline again, and
made the Rendezvous of his forces, near Budiceis. And Wranghel being retired
out of Swaveland, (as we have already said) unexpepectedly attacked the strong
Town of Swinsfort, which by great fortune, he brought under obedience to the
Mistress thereof; and the Governor, for having slighted the notice of the
enemies approach, had sufficient time to repent.

We left the French-Weymarians in Wirtembergh, and now we will follow them to
the Rheyn, and into the Country of the Landgrave of Darmsta^^, where they made
a deplorable shipwreck, upon the Lands of a Prince, who had not displeased, but
by his too constant fidelity. Some little while after, the Marshall of Turenne,
having received order to join with the Marshalls Gassion, and Rantzaw in
Flanders, so to stop the course of the Archdukes victories, found himselt
surprised by a sudden disunion amongst his Troops; for the Germans divided
themselves from him, and sent Complaints to the King. In a word, they would not
go out of Germany, but ranged themselves under General Connin^inarck, which
had almost brought some disorder, betwixt the two conquering Crowns. But a
small rain makes not the Rivers overflow their banks; and they, who thought, in
this alteration, to attract them to their party, advantaged nothing at all; for
the Tower which they attacked, was not yet fallen.

Upon the other side, John de Werdt, and Sporck were like to have debawched, or
corrupted seven, or eight Regiments of the Bavarian Cavalry, to conduct them
into the Imperial Army in Bohemia: but they issued not so well as Spar upon
Warendorf in the Province of Munster; and so they betook themselves ill
accompanied, to the said Army, there to possess great Offices. But this action
stirred up jealousy; and the Electour had much ado to quench it. They who
possess Goods by force, are all always mistrustfull.

CHAP. XXIII
The taking of Swinsfort, and Eger. Lamboy, and Conninxmarck camped before
Rene. The taking of the Retschin. The Siege of Prague.

General Wranghel, having taken Swinsfort at discretion, and refreshed his
forces in the Bishoprics of Franconie; marched into Bohemia, and sent for
General Wittembergh, who was in Silesia; and so, with a very gallant Army
ingrosted or augmented by many Troops, Eger besieged.
he besieged Eger, a strong Town in Bohemia. Melander with the Imperial Army,
hastened all he could, to succor a place of so great importance; but either
the Eagles appeared too late, or else the Governor yielded too soon; and
indeed the Swedes so much exercised the Garrison with continual Aslaults,
Yields upon dis cretion.
notwithstanding the loss of men, that he surrendered at discretion; and that,
at the same time when the Vanguard approached, to give notice of the succor;
but he paid dearly for it; for he was beheaded. It is true, that Ladron, who
had rendered Swinsfort upon the same terms (for Wranghel gave no other) was
acquitted for a forfeit of money; a chastisement little proportionable to the
crime committed: For what cannot Gold, and favor do? But this proceeding of a
for rain General, in the middle of the Empire, and in Towns, which enjoyed
many Privileges, was abhorred; for it diminished the Sovereign who chastised
the Rebels, for having taken Arms against him. Was not this to remove himself
from the pretext of the Liberty of Germany.

The Army encamped near Eger, a league beyond that of the Swedes, where there
happened many sharp skermishes; and Ferdinand being once surprised in the midst
of his Troops, The Swedes beaten.
found himself in some danger. But there grews fierce encounter, wherein his
enemies were worsted, and Helm Wranghel killed, with more then thirteen hundred
of his men; and so the Swedes, after the loss of sorne Standards, retreated
into Turingh, Go into Brunswick, and the Imperialists into Hassia.
and Brunswick, and Melander being still at their heels, and not able to draw
them to a General Battle, and unsatisfied besides, with the Landgravinne of
Hassia; fell upon that Country, where he played Rex, retook the Town (not the
Castle) of Marpurgh, and so returned into Franconic. But General Wrangh^ found
no less freindship in the Duchy of Brunswick, then his Predecessors had done;
for he recruted his Army, and put it in good order; one part of his Cavalry
mounted, and the soldiers in the Field, to drive the Imperialists out of
Hassia, who melted like snow before the Sun, whilst the Swed^^ recollected
themselves, and grew stronger. Oh strange Metamorphosis!

Upon the other side, Conninxmarck that brave Captain, was in the Bishopric of
Bremen, where he stood not still, but in a very short space, took the Fortress
of Wecht, and many more, with almost as much success, as Papenheim had done;
Conninxmarck in Westphalia.
but by drawing so near Munster, he went so far beyond his duty, and promise
made, that he had almost disturbed, and broaken that most illustrious Assembly,
in so holy and necessary a work, for all Christendom. Insomuch as Lamboy,
reinforced with some of the Duke of Lorraines Troops, was sain to go into
Westphalia, and East-Freezland, to make a notable diversion. Lamboy makes head
against him.
But this Inroad was displeasing to the States, who in favor of their Allies,
made him depart, and Conninxmarck hasted thither, to beat him. They were almost
the whole Summer encamped near Rene, a little Town of the aforesaid Bishopric,
which was set on fire by the said Conninxmarks Bombs, and not taken: for, not
being able to draw his Antagonist to a Combat, nor cut off his victuals, he
forsook that Country, and left the Inhabitants as little sorry for his
departue, as the Saxons had been before. It is said, that his hat falling once
from his head, when he was on horseback, was found, and brought to him full of
water; and he being wholly amazed at this mystery, showed it to his Minister,
who not moved at all thereat, presumed to tell him, that it was the tears of
the poor people, whose houses he had caused to be fired. I know not, whether
this be a story made on purpose, to render him odious, and the better to paint
out his rigorous proceedings, and to deface so many gallant actions as he had
performed; but howsoever, it is also true, that he was very cruel. Be it what
it will, he did the Crown of Sweden many most remarkable services; the last
whereof which was the most admirable, most profitable and most important, was
that memorable enterprise upon the great City of Prague, which hastened the
Peace; as you shall forth with see in few words.

A certain Colonel of the Imperial Army, being disgusted with the service, and
having conceived some disdain against his Master, showed him this trick;
whereby Ferdinand found himself necessitated to conclude the Treaty of Munster,
and surrender his enemies, many of his Rights. Poor Prince! The wicked rise up
against thy virtue, and Traitors endeavor to dispatch that, which thy open
enemies cannot destroy or subdue. Connixmark being advanced to the Fronteer of
the Kingdom, he addressed himself to him, showed him the facility of surprising
the Retschin, or Small side, as they called it (for by reason of the River,
there are many Towns within Prague) offered himself to lead on his Troops, and
be the first to scale the wall, in the Assault. Conninxmarck being confirmed by
some Horsemen which he had taken, The enter prize upon the Reischin succeeded.
that the condition of the place was just as he told him, marched speedily,
entered easily, and surprised many Officers in their beds (amongst whom was old
Coloredo) and found so much booty, as was more troublesome to be carried away,
then the place had been to be taken. This Cross of Fortune must also needs fall
upon this pious Prince, which had been enough to stagger him, had he not fixed
the anchor of his hopes, upon an immovable foundation.

The Prince Palatine Charles-Gustave being created Generalissimo or chief
General, arrived from Sweden with five or six thousand men; and having
increased his Army by some Regiments drawn out of Pomerania, Prince
Charls-Gustave goes to Prague.
and the Archbishopric of Bremen, he advanced toward Prague; where we will
let him do a great work, and make a turn back into Bavaria.

CHAP. XXIV
The breach of the Truce with the Duke of Bavaria. A Tempest upon the Elbe.
Melanders death. The Peace of Germany. The death of the King of Denmark, and
Uladislaus of Poland. Cassimir succeeds him.

THe Truce which was made between the French, the Swedes, and the Bavarians
1648. lasted not long; for it was broaken, about the beginning of this Field,
not without great complaints on both sides; the one party being accused of
perfidy, and the other of cheatery. Indeed if we would seek in the success of
this last action, him, who deserved the blame, through the unhappiness of
chance, we should find it to be the good old Duke of Bavaria, who was little
beloved by the Conqueting Patty, because he was too wise, and well advised. But
if we will hearken to his reasons, we shall be quickly of another opinion;
though when there is question of Conquest, words are rejected, as weak, and
idle; and such as wear the sword, to make themselves masters of other men's
goods, without any other form of proceeding then that of occasion, very often
pass the bounds of newtrality, and tocomplain of them, is to offend them.

He saw all the conjurated Nations cross the Danub again, and fall upon
Bavaria, and ruin it; except only one part thereof guarded by a River, (which
they could not pass) and by his Troops which were mad to see their hands tied
up.

They, who have made any observations upon the Tragedies of Germany, have
reported, that the greatest losses incurred by the Imperialists, proceeded,
either from casting themselves too soon upon pillage, in the advantage of some
Battle; or else from jealousies. I will not touch upon the inevitable Rule of
Fate, nor Treason, by which the bravest men lare sometimes attrapped, nor many
other accidents, from which the most considerate, and vigilant are not able to
defend themselves; in such sort, as if we weigh the forces by Politic
Prudence, we shall find, that it would not have been possible, in humane
appearance, any way to hurt this most August House.

Upon the 24. of November, there rose so surious a tempest in Holstein, A
storm at Hamburgh, 1648.
and especially at Hamburgh, and upon the Elbe, with such an Earthquake, that
it was imagined, that Doomsday was come; and that both Heaven, and Earth sled,
before the face of the Judge, irritated by the effusion, of so much innocent
blood: The death of the Kings in D^nmark, and Poland.
but the end is not yet arrived. Good King Christian, survived not this storm,
which seemed to have Prognosticated his departure, he was followed by King
Vladislans, a Prince of much happiness; however he met with some repugnance,
and much jealousy amongst the Nobility, about the design which he had, to make
a new order of Knighthood; as also about that great Army, which he had newly
raised, with the Duke of Valachia, and some other Allies, against the Turks (in
appearance) and with the money of the Venetians. For the Swedes having smelt the
business, and the Polanders yet more, it was remonstrated to him, that these
Leavies ought not to be made, without the consent of the Senators. In fine,
being tired, and almost transported by these importunities, and distrusts, he
condescended to the licentiating, or disbanding of the forces, and so that fire
was excinguished, without noise. But this dismission was advantageous to the
Swedish General Wirtembergh, and to the French also, who got three thousand of
the Soldiers to their service.

Indeed, all other Kings acquired by their great prosperity, and success, more
authority, and respect from their subjects, and more liberty to undertake; but
this, The Polanders jealous of their Privileges.
by his famous, and remarkable Victories, made the Poles more studious of the
preservation of their privileges which they wilnever loose by flattery, for
which they are rather to be praised, then imitated.

This warlike Prince was much troubled, after having so well danced in the
round against the Turk, and Muscovits, to sit still, whilst the said dance
was hottest, almost every where. For his generous Spirit was bound, by the
plots of his enemies, who feared the effects thereof, for that they might,
peradventure, have redowned to the profit of the House of Anstria. His Brother
Casi^^ir succeeds him.
His Brother succeeded him by election, and by a dispensation, married the
Princess of Nevors, his Widow.

Melander the ^^^perours Generali.
Melander, having for many strong reasons, been elevated to the dignity of
commanding all the Imperial Armies, promised no less, then the redress, or
restoration of the Emperors credit, through all Germany; but that foolish,
and dammageable passion had more praevalencie upon the minds of some certa in
persons, then their Masters service. For, they murmured, that this charge was
given to a Calvinist; and that a man of mean condition, was preferred before so
many great Lords of merit, and illustrious extraction; whereof he not being
ignorant, labored upon the first occasion, to render so great proofs of his
virtue, and zeal, as that every one might be moved by his example to prefer
their Princes occasions, before their own particular interests;one whereof you
shall forthwith see.

The Swedes passed the Danub at Lawing; and he faced them magnanimously near
Auxburgh; but not being seconded by Greensfeldt (a fault like that which he
committed at the Battle of Hamelen) he chose rather to dye, Is killed, 1648.
then flinch, and so sacrificed his life, and that of two thousand men besides,
to the passion of his Emulatours.

By this Combat, Bavaria was laid open, and the Inhabitants ruined by both
Armies; for however the Imperialists, and Bavarians were stronger then the
Conquerours, they were feign nevertheless, to content themselves with
tormenting them only by surprises, and Encounters, whilst the old Town of
Prague defended it self stourly, and so repulsed the Chief General that he
could not take it, and lost above four thousand of his men before it.

Now, whereas there be some Seasons so rainy now and then, that though the Sun
do show himself by fits, and thereby give hope of some change; the weather
nevertheless returns to rain, and continues so long, that it makes folks
despair of ever seeing it fair again: Just so, this dismal war, which began
in the year 1618, looked, as it would last always: however there were many fair
intervalls: For men's hearts were so pufted up with ambition, that it was
believed, that it would never be ended, but with the end of the world. But what
seems impossible to man, is not to God.

Moreover, the most zealous Protestants fancyed to themselves, that the
Catholic Religion being divided by the Arms of France, might be easily
annihilated, and then the Conquerours would have all or nothing.

The Plempotentiary-Embassadours, had already treated at Munster, and
Osuabrugh, the space of four years, when it pleased at length, the Father of
light, to dissipate the darkness of ambition, and to send back peace into poor
Germany: which was so much tottered, dispeopled, and desert, that it was not
any more to be known. The Tragedy both began, The war begun and ended in Prague.
and ended in the City of Prague. Great God grant this Peace may last, tul the
coming of thy Son our Lord, Amen.

It is here to be marked, that after the death of King Gustave, of Lewis the
thirteenth, and the Landgrave William, the Daughter of the first, and the
widows of the two others, continued the war against the Emperor, by their
Generals, with so great constance, prosperity and glory, that he had very
little less trouble, and loss, then he had before. Moreover, the hatred, which
the Conquerours showed toward the Hollanders, for the Composition which they
had made, rendied their design evident enough.

The Peace was conlud d, ordered, and signed at Munster, and the Instruments
there of sent to the principal persons concerned, to be ratified: which was
effected, and a Diet convocated at Nurembergh, The Peace made at M^^st^, 1649.
there to treat about the restitution of Places, and the disimission of the
Armies, as also of the means to content the Swedish Militia.

Such as had their swords in their hands, were not ill handled; The kingdom of
Bohemia was declared Hereditary to the House of Austria, and put out of dispute
with Silesia, and Moravia. The upper Palatinat, and the Electorall Dignity to
the H^use of Bavaria.

The Crown of Sweden retains Pomerania, except only that part, which is called
the H^nder-Pemerama, and the Archbishopric of Bremen, which is secularized
into a Dukedom; Item the Town of Wismar, The gain of the Conquerours.
and Meckelemburgh. The Marquis of Brandenburgh has, in recompense, the
Bishopric of Magdeburgh, which is also secularized, and some other besides.

There are most ample Treatises written of this Peace, to which I reser the
Reader: but I will first tell him, that there are eight Electors, and that the
Prince Palatin is re-established in the lower Palatinat. France has Brisack,
and a good part of Alsatta, with the renunciatton of the Empite, to the
pretensions of the Bishoprics of Metz Thoul, and Verdun.

The Complaints of the House of Burguady, and the Duke of Lorraines affairs,
were remitted to a particular Treaty between the two Crowns.

Thus ended the great Revel, or Dance in Germany, which lasted about thirty
years, wherein all the Nations of Europe had their pate.

Thus was the Emperor Ferdinand the third delivered from so many troubles, and
vexations, who sits yet at the Helm of this noble Vessel.

Thus every body was contenred, in appearance at least, however there be some,
who could have wished to dance longer.

Thus was the Mask laid aside, and the design of the French and Swedes
discovered, who vanted, that they took Arms, only for the liberty of Germany.

Thus, were the Germans in excessive joy; and in some care also, to find money,
to pay the Charges, content the Minstrills, and the Dancers, and take their
leave.

Let them go to Nurembergh so weary with having danced so much, that they can
hardly stand upon their feer, and let us transport our selves into Italy, to
see, whether that prudent Nation, dances with better grace, and more judgment.

CHAP. XXV. Pope Vrbans death. The wars of Italy, and Catalunia.
THe war which was made upon the Emperor by the Swedes, had so divided the
people of Europe, that there were very few persons to be found, who showed not
themselves either glad, or sad, upon the issue of any remarkable Battle.

The Lutherans, who looked upon it only for the interest of their Doctrine,
were afraid least, if the Emperor grew victorious, he should deprive them of
the exercise thereof by a Reformation, and retake from them all the
Ecclesiastical Lands, and Possessions.

The Catholics, guided by zeal, were inwardly afflicted, at the decline, or
decay, of that Great House, which alone sustained the hatred of the
Protestants; and could not forbear to murmur, and cry our aloude against Pope
Urban, The Complaints of the most zealous Catholics.
whom they conceived to be tied to the Interests of France. How is it possible
(said they) that the Common Father of Christians should, either by secret
agitations, plot the ruin, or resist the designs of a House, by which he is so
powerfully propped? She has raised a just quarrel, both for her own interest,
and that of the whole Clergy; is grown odious to the contrary Party, and bath
hazarded her States. And not with standing all these essential reasons, he
depended wholly upon Cardinal Richelieu. What can he expect, after the
destruction of the Empire, but another inundation of the Goths in Italy, who
will sack Rome, and evert the Holy Chair? He prefers the advancement of his
Nephews, before the care of the Church, whilst the Protestants, and some
feigned Catholics, are laboring to abolish, and overthrow her.

The praises which the Protestants gave him, by saying that he was a most
learned, and able man, and a good Politician, and that he did very well, to
contribute to the humbling, and abasing of this House; which if she could once
come to her end, would make but a simple Chaplain of him, and take away part
of his Authority; augmented, and grounded their complaints yet more. But he, in
despite of all these noises, Pope Urban affellionate to France.
leaned always toward France. For the interests of States enter as well into
the Conclave, as those of the Church. He forbore not for all that, to exhort
the Princes to Peace, and to promise Ferdinand some succor, whereof there
appeared some effects now and then.

This unhappy Age could not produce but miserable fruits, since the
Ecclesiastics, as well as the Seculars, forsook Gods Cause, to serve their own
irregular Passions, and evil Customs. Some, instead of quenshing this fire,
kindled it on every side, and in Italy it self, yea, they were the Minstrills
themselves of this Universal Revel, or Dance, The Cardinals the Minstrilis of
the great Ball.
which has violated the Church, and her Sacraments, destroyed the Theological,
and Cardinal Virtues, and utterly extinguished Christian Charity.

This good Pope left this mortal habitation the nine and twentieth of July,
1644. after having held the Chair about two and twenty years; The Popes death,
1644.
a very knowing man, and a goot Poet. A little before his decease, he had
almost all Italy in arms against him, for the Duchy of Castro, and some other
pretentions of diverse parties; but by the King of Frances intercession all was
accommodated; for this war, being dammageable to the Catholic Doctrine, and
advantageous to the Protestant, was quickly lulled asleep; and so St. Peter's
Ship has not quite made Shipwreck yet, by the tempest of scandals.

The Duke of Bouillon goes to Rome.
The Duke of Bouillon, being forced to make a change of Sedan, for another
piece of Land, went secretly, with his wife, out of France, and so to Rome, to
Command Pope Vrbans Army; but he arrived there after the Peace was signed. In
this quarrel of State, the Treasures of the Church were consumed, and scandals
took also their place.

Cardinal Pamphilio being seventy two years old, was elected to the Holy
Chair, and the Faction of the Barbarins mistically overthrown. Cardinal
P^mphilio chosen Pope.
For the succor demanded of the King of Spain being refused, and a Victory
gained upon them near P^tigliano, Te deum was sung at Florence, and other
places.

The loss of Tortona by the French, a strong place which opened the passage,
from Milan to Genna 1643. was recompensed by the taking of Trino, and
Pontestura; and the same year, Piccolomini extorted Mouzon from them also,
which much incommodated the Arragonians, notwithstanding the damage which the
Portuguezes put upon the Castillians, by a puissant diversion.

This great General, after having given marks of valor, as well in Spain as
in the Empire, repassed with much danger into Flanders, where Affairs required
his presence.

In this conjuncture, the Mores were desired to fall upon the King of Spain,
who, as it seems, had not Enemies enough yet. They did it, The Mores besiege
Oran, and are beaten.
and besieged Oran; but twelve Gallyes made them repent of thrusting themselves
into the Dance, and abandon the Siege, together with the desire also of dancing
any more. But the Portugnezes had better luck then these Barba^ans, in a
certain Encounter, wherein being routed, and the Conquerours upon pilladge,
they raylled, defeated them, and killed above fifteen hundred of them upon the
place.

Te Deum sung at Madrid, and at Paris.
The great Victory gotten upon the French before Terragona, and Lerida, (which
were retaken by famine) caused Te deum to be sung at Madrid, at the same time
that it was also sung at Paris, for the taking of Graveling. But very shortly
after, both Courts put on Mourning, for the death of the Queen of Spam, Sister
to Lewis the Just; and the Count of Harcourt went to take the Place of Monsieur
de la Morte, who was fallen, by these losses, so far into disgrace, that all
his former gallant actions were not able to maintain him; as if forsooth, it
were possible to be always a Conqueror, and keep Fortune in a chain. But he
who governs all things, disposes also of Victories as he pleases. For this
brave Count before he came thence, experimented the same disgrace, and the same
lot, and had enough to do, to save himself from the Conspiracy of the
Catalunians, and such others as envyed his glory.

The French, who had won so many Battles, taken so many Towns; subdued so many
Provinces, and refused so advantageous a Peace, had the same luck which their
Generals had, and saw their Enemies again, in the heart of their Kingdom. When
a work is done, it is easy to finds out faults.

Harcourt, having by his presence, and a strong succor, put thing in security,
besieged, and took Rosa, after such a defense, as made him in doubt of a good
issue; Harcourt victorious in Catalunia.
passed the River of Segra; beat the Enemy almost as often as he durst show
himself, and made Te Deum be sung as often at Paris, as the other Generals
did, who were in Flanders: He took Balaguer, by an admirable chance, repulsed
his enemies, who endeavored to relieve it, and sent the fright even to the
very Gates of Madrid. The Spaniards hands were benumbed with blows, and their
eyes dazzled, by the glory of so great a Captain, and some Towns, in such
confusion as is ordinarily brought by tumult. But let us see how they do in
Italy.

Prince Thomas, having seized upon Pontestura, made St. Ja, and Vinguevano also
submit, Prince Thomas in Italy.
the Spaniards not being able to exceed the terms of a Defensive War. But this
prevident Nation defended the blows by retyring, and craftily gave way to the
heat of the French, expecting in the cool thereof an occasion to hurt, and
take revenge.

The Barbarins, being hated by the Pope, and necessitated to give account of
the Treasures of the Church, The Barbarins disgraced.
besought the favor of France, from which they were not fallen, but to return
with more splendour, and obtain her protection. But Cardinal Anthonies flying
away with vast Sums of money, so much kindled the choler of his Highness,
that he stopped his ears, to all such as interceded for their reconciliation;
slighted the menaces which came from beyond the Mountains, and the reports
which would needs make him pass for a Spaniard. In effect, he disapproved the
Alliance made with the Enemies of the Catholic Church, whose interests he
embraced with more zeal then his Predecessor.

This mist troubled the serenity of Italy, and made the French arm, and lay a
Siege, both by Sea, and Land, before Orbitello. But they were beaten upon both
Elements; Cebitello besieged, 1645.
Monsieur de Breze's head taken off by a Canon-ball, and Prince Thomas
compelled to raise the Siege in confusion. They complained of the Pope, for his
having permitted the Neaples Forces to pass through his Countries; to which he
answered, that he had done them the same favor.

This loss was repaired in the year 1646, by that happy Captain La Meilleraye,
who having fitted the Fleet, went, and seized upon Piombino, and Portolongono,
which he fortified.

Lerida besieged.
The Count of Harcourts eyes being dazzled by the charms of smiling Fortune,
went and laid Siege before the strong Town of Lerida, and assaulted it
violently; but the great resistance of the Garrison, and the difficulty he
found to mine, made him resolve to take it by Famine. The Governor, to spare
his provisions, sent all the women, and children out of the Place, who almost
all died with hunger, in the ditches. A great cruelty, though it passed for a
feat of war; for a necessity of State, and for acquisition of honor. But
behold the inconstance of this imaginary Goddess; They, who had been so often
knocked by this great General, recollected themselves, and ventured to affront
him in his Trenches, out of which they beat him after the third assault, and
made him leave Camp, Canon, and Baggage, with a great number of dead men, and
prisoners behind him. This Attack was made the twentieth of October by the
Marquis of Leganes, Is succored by Leganes, the French beaten.
who had express Command, either to succor the Town, or to die in the attempt.

This mischance was followed by another at Sea, where twenty French Gallyes
were beaten by seventeen Spanish, and near two thousand French perished in the
Combat.

In fine, Harcourt obtained leave to return into France, and the Prince of
Conde succeeded, to make Shipwreck of so many Victories as well as he, against
that enchanted Rock, which was as fatal to the French, as Casal had been to the
Spaniards; nor was all that great preparation both of men, The Prince of Comde
in Catalunia.
and money able to save him from it. For, thinking to overcome a Place, which
had in vain been attacked, by two so great Warriers, he besieged it, whilst
Harcourt was at Paris in great esteem, where his virtue had already so far
triumphed over all such as envyed him, as that nothing was wanting, but the
issue of this Siege.

The King of Sweden, when he was going to give the brave Count of Tilly battle,
was heard to utter these words; If Fortune be against me, it will not have been
any grent affront to me, to have lost, against a man; who has always been
victorious; but if she look upon me, with a propitions eye, what glory will be
due to me, for having surmounted a Mars who has been always invincible?

Besieges Lerida in vain.
This young Alexander, swollen with Victories, continued the Siege; but meeting
with the same impossibilities, the same disbandings, and the strong relief
which was near at hand; he was feign to with draw himself, from a place, which
was so disasterous to the French. God has limited Conquests; and therefore let
him come back into France, Leaves the Country.
where he was reserved for great affairs. For the horrible Change, which happened
at Neaples; the Comedy mingled with blood; and the Tragedy interlarded with
ridiculous accidents; will not suffer us to stay any longer in Catalunia,
whether the King sent the Marshal of Schoonbergh, who, by a remarkable felicity
repaired these disasters.

THE HISTORY OF THIS IRON AGE.
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I
The tumu'ts at Naples begun by Thomaso Aniello, and why? The History of
Conradine Prince of Swaveland. His death. The Sicilian Vespers, or Even-Songs.
The History of Catenesa, and of the Tragedies which happened at Naples.

PEace, is an effect of Gods Grace; and War another, of his just Choler. For,
since Charity is grown cold, Faith almost dead, and the wickedness of man
universal; we must not wonder, if the punishment of this present time, be
extended upon the whole Body of Christendom, without exception of Age, Sex, or
Condition. But that which is most insupportable, is, the wicked have the wind
in poupe, and prosper, and as the exhalations are ordinarily drawn from the
vapors, which offuscate, or darken the Sun, just so impunity of offenses,
causes this disorder.

The Kingdom of Naples had been often enough advertised of a scourge which was
prepared for it, by that Mountain near it, which so often vomited up lumps of
fire, and sent it snowes of ashes, but the Preservatives hindered not the
disease.

The strange accidents happened in the kingdom of Naples in former ages.
The strange accidents which happened in this kingdom, in the twelfth, and
thirteenth Age, make us confess that wickedness, parricides, and perfidies
were already known in those times, but not so universally, as in these. For, if
there were found great vices amongst some great persons, there were also found
more virtues, more piety, and a quick, and lively Faith in general, through
all Christendom.

But at present, Justice is trodden under foot, money does all, virtue is made a
laughing stock, even by them, who boast to have drawn their Origin from it; and
vice, being a la mode, or in fashion, is esteemed: yea, many sin rather by
example, then by inclination in this depraved Age; and more to please the
vicious, then for that they approve of the vice. By how much the more the Great
ones, retire themselves from the Commons; by so much the more do the Commons
endeavor to withdraw themselves from their service. But let us stay at Naples.

The infamous death, to which Charles of Aino^u put Frederick Duke of Austria,
and his young Cousin Couradine, the last Duke, of the most ancient Imperial
House of Swaveland, for having sought his own Right, (which was taken from him
by the Pope, and given to the said Charles) teaches us, that this is not the
first time that Sovereigns have ended their lives by the hand of an ordinary
Executioner; and that a good cause has not always a good issue. For the three
hundred French Gentlemen who were sacrificed to the spirits of these two Lords,
and the Torches of the Sicilian Vespers, or Even-songs, which were extinguished
in the blood of the same nation; tell us, that vengeance has always been
sweet, and that it is most dangerous, to put an irritated people into fury.

This Gatenesa, from a mean Landress, being grown the Nurse of a Prince, and
afterward, Governess of six Princesses, one after another, with such an
absolute power upon their minds, (and chiefly upon that of the last) that she
grew to dispose of the greatest Charges, and Offices of the kingdom, and
distributed the best part thereof amongst her own children; saw her self at
last, with all her family, dragged to the execution: Yea, a King was hanged at
the Grate of a window, by consent of his wife; and she some years after,
strangled by a just judgment of the Great Judge. These were the miracles, or
rather the prodigies of those Ages, which hapened all in the said kingdom with
so many other, as make us conclude, that usurped possessions seldom pass to the
fourth Heyr, or else always cause troubles.

Toward the end of the fourteenth Age, this kingdom being revolted from
Alfonso of Arragon, the States thereof offered the Crown to Charles the eighth
King of France, who easily got it into his possession, and the Neapolitans,
with the same facility, shook off that yoke afterward, for being frustrated of
their Charges, and recalled the aforesaid Arragonian. The French returned
thither, by the commandment of Lewis the twelfth, who ought to share it with
Ferdinand of Castill; but they could not agree about the spoils; and so
Gonsalvo, rather by might, then right, drove them both our. It has been
attacked since, but not subdued, and so remains to the King of Spain.

Now the wars being grown hot, both in Germany, and the Low-Coumtries, and the
House of Austria finding her self taken to task by so many enemies; the State
of Neaples was oppressed by so many Imposts, or Taxes, that that House being
strong and vigorous before, became so lean, and feeble, that he could not
longer carry so heavy a burden.

This mischief began first to operate almost throughout all Sicily, where the
people constrained the Vice-King to take off the Imposts. From thence, it
passed to Neaples, and by that good success, made the Ne politans take the same
resolution; and that, by such means, as you shall forthwith understand.

The beginning of the troubles at Neaples.
The tears of the poor peeople; the advices, and admonitions of some great
ones; the libells, and burning of the Custome-Houses, were all able to draw but
faint promises of ease, without any effect at all.

Whereupon, a certain Fellow of the very dregs of the People, who had dyed in
the obscurity of his birth, had not this furious revolt, And why?
(whereof he was Head, and Author) elevated him to the highest top of this
Theater, to make him seen by all the world, and to teach as well Noblemen, as
Gentlemen, that God serves himself of abject and contemptible means, when it
pleases him to chastise them. He first entered this Dance.

A Fisherman begins.
Now this instrument, being a man of nothing, by trade a poor Fisherman, seeing
the dearth of Victuals, together with the said Imposts, which imposed the
necessity of despair upon the people; began to act upon Sunday, and the
Tragedy lasted ten days, or rather the Reign of this Fisherman, being four and
twenty years old, or thereabouts; He armed the children with staves, taught
them a prayer against the said Customs, or Taxes, attacked the Gabellors or
Collectors thereof; animated the people with a fine speech, and put them into
condition to enterprise what he would.

The said custome-Houses being burnt to ashes, they began to run up and down
the City, crying out, Live the King, and the Devil destroy the ill Government;
and went to the Vice-Kings Palace, who, not being able to mitigate them by fair
pronuses, (nor the Archbishop, by gentle words, and writings) sled to the
Church, and from thence, to the Castle of Saint Elm.

The Vice-King being thus retired, they entreated the Duke of Carafa, to be
their Head, and Leader; who not being able to stop their rage, retired himself
also privarely, thanking God that he was escaped out of their hands.

Called Mas-Aniello, the just day.
Mas-Aniello was chosen Ringleader of these Mutiners, who commanded the people
to take Arms. Thus, was the first day spent; the Officers of Justice disarmed;
the people masters, and the Fisherman, their Conductor.

2. The second being Monday, they were all in Arms, and cried nothing but
vengeance; and Mas-Aniello casting off the Visard, made answer to the
Vice-Kings Letters, that the Privileges must be restored, and the Original
thereof put into their hands, as well as the Imposts or Customs taken off; and
that the people must have as many voices in the Chapter, as the Nobility.

By his command, above sixty Palaces, and Houses, were sacrisiced to Vulcan,
with goods, Many Palaces hurnt.
money, and Papers; yea, the very Coaches, and Mules themselves, and the
Procession refused. Oh God! where are thy Thunderbolts? When the multitude
grows master by the sword, all respect of things both sacred and pro^hane is
taken away; licentionsnes undermines the foundation of all discipline; and the
condition of the great ones is more miser able, then that of mere Brutes. And
really, when patience being wounded, turns into fury, it is not to be stopped
by any sweetness.

3. The third day began with the embarassement of other Palaces without sparing
any thing at all. Thus treated they all such as had either counseled the said
Imposts, or participated of them; yea, the Cloisters were fain to restore the
goods of such as were only suspected (which were given in custody) to cast into
the fire.

The Tower of Saint Laurence taken.
The Tower of Saint Laurence falling into their hands, with the Arms, so much
pussed up their courage, and contumacy, that the Original of the Privildges it
self being brought, was not able to send them back peacefully to their houses.
The obstinacy of a people, which gives the Law in fury, passes from destrust to
despair, and admits of no reconciliation.

4. The fourth day they fell upon the Palace of a certain Duke, without giving
quarter either to Movables, or Books; but the discovery of the conspiracy
against Mas-Aniello, brewed by some great persons, caused their destruction,
together with that of the Treaty of Peace, and the Bandites to be massacred,
even in a Church with unspeakable fury, The Church and Market mined.
and without respecting the very throne of the Divine Majesty. It was also
discovered, that the Marketplace, and the Church of the Virgin del Carmine,
were under mined, to blow up perhaps, above a hundred thousand persons all at
once. Was there ever any thing seen more dreadful, then this disorder? And
shall there yet be a doubt of the near approach of the end of the world, after
so many miseries? can there be greater seen or imagined?

The Duke of Carasa be headed.
The Duke of Carafe's head being set upon a stake with a hundred and fifty
more, much terrified the principal of the City, and made all the people bow to
Mas-Aniellos commands, with more speed, and promp^itu^e, then if he had been
the greatest Monarch of the universe. Thus the world was turned upside down,
and all in confusion. Who will hereafter trust to his own power, since a young
Sot, a man of nothing, attracts to himself the authority of so potent, and rich
a City?

5. The fifth day tells us, with what order this fellow governed the City;
which was with so exact, and so judicious a policy, that the sharpest wits,
yea, even the Spaniards themselves were amazed at it. For he ranged his forces
in Battle. Array, and exhorted them to valor, and discipline, as much as if he
had been all his lifetime Commander of his Masters Armies.

The Nobility disarmed.
The first Commandment he made was, that upon pain of death, neither man, not
woman, should wear either Cloak, Coat, or Gown; which was observed without
contradiction by the Monks, and Gentlemen; yea, and even by the Cardinal
himself. And the second, for all the Nobility and Gentry, to bring both their
own and their servants Arms, and put them into the peoples hands.

The Peace made.
In fine, by the Archbishops, address, the Peace was made, in the presence of
the Vice-King, and Aniello, at which conference he showed the unheard of
Authority he had over the people; for by putting only his finger to his mouth,
he hushed a hundred and fifty thousand men.

These things will seem as incredible, as the enchantments of Urgenda the
Unknown, and the Rivers of the Amadises. This peace, which was to be published
the seventh day, was received by all with great contentment, and acquired our
Fisherman much glory.

6. Long hair forbidden.
The sixth day produced the effects of distrust by the cutting off of so many
heads, and bringing them to the great place: Long hair was forbidden, as also
to walk the streets, after eleven of the clock. He had seven Sec^etaries, and
ten Executioners; and so by his rigorous justice, men went up and down the Town
in safety. Doria being arrived with 13. Galleys, asked leave of the Vice-King
to come a^hore, to buy provisions; but he ^^mitted him to Aniello, who granted
it. But the end of this day discovered the beginning of the vain glory, which
was to shorten the days of this our Stage-Monarch.

8. The seventh day brought the confirmation of the Peace, discovered his
folly, (who protested to have done all for the Kings service, and the peoples
liberty) and offered to return to his former condition.

8. The eighth day, all the City rang of his praises, for the Peace made; but
his behavior made him hated, and manifested, that he had a mind to command,
and be obeyed like a Tyrant. For, he forced the Cloisters, and rich, Citizens
to give money, and made it appear, that he would not forsake the Government.

Aniello insented.
In fine, as wine troubles the brain of such as are not wont to drink any thing
but water; in the same state was Aniello troubled by so many honors done him,
and by so prompt obedience. For he seemed to be rather a drunken man, then one
of right sense; by tunning up and down, doing actions, and uttering words,
which prognosticated the end of this Dance, or Maze, and his own too. The Gig
follows the Play. The shepherd thinks always of his Pipes; and it is far
more easy for a King, to act the part of a Peasant, then for a Peasant, to act
that of a King.

9. The ninth day was full of horror, and cruelty; he hurt one, killed
another, and played the pranks of the Furious Rowland.

10. Insomuch, as that the tenth day, being abandoned by the people, and even
by himself also, through a certain vain, and fantastical terror, he was
killed by fowr Gentlemen, and his head separated from his body, He is killed.
which was dragged about the Town.

This was the end of that famous Thomas Aniello, of whom God Almighty served
himself, to punish that proud City, and make it feel the rough strokes of his
wrath; and afterward, cast the rod into the fire.

It is to be observed, that be never spoke of his Catholic Majesty, even in
his very frantic fit, but with respect.

Whosoever would make reflection, upon all the circumstances of this Tragedy,
would embrace a business of much prolixity; and therefore, I will say no more,
then that it is a lesson for the Great, and a Mirror for the small; and that
all these evils are fore-ruaners of the Lords Day. But it is now time, to
frame the war of the Venetians, and Turks.

CHAP. II
The war of the Turks, and the Venetians, and why? The taking of Canea. The
Knights of Maltha take a huge booty, or prize, as a great number of Galleys,
and the young Sultanesse, or Emperesse of Turkey, with her Son. The Venetians
obtain succor, but are beaten.

WE had so much trouble to sinde an end of this war of Germany, which the
Swedes, and the French terminated with regret, and as through spite with the
Hollanders, for having too soon left the Dance, which they had no mind at all
to finish, till after the Conquest of the whole Empire; that we signified
thereby, the small care we had to set down the other wars in fit place and
order; which yet were not despicable, neither in success, not proceeding;
according to the boundless irregularities of the Age; however they were not
considerable in any other respect, then for being dependent upon that great
Body, which makes (according to the sense of some learned persons) the fourth,
and last Monarchy.

Under the prerext of stopping the prosperity of this laudable House of
Austria, there was formed a puissant League to ruin her;yea, and the Eagle was
already painted naked every where, The Eagle peeled.
panting, and grieving, and even at the last gasp, by the Arms of the said
League; and the Duke of Lorrame holding her head, and giving her physic. The
Confederates, on the other side, had their hands full of her feather, and stood
waiting for her death. But all these riddles served to no other end, then to
amuse the people, feed the eyes of the curious, and discover the intention of
the said Confederates.

In fine, Peace, which it was thought, would never have come down again, but
with the Revenger himself of innocent blood, and oppression;checred up the
hearts of such as were timorous; made the Birds of prey withdraw, and the
Husbandman live in hope; however let him who stands upright, take heed of
falling; for there is nothing sure, in regard, that though the winds be
r^tyred home to their God Eolus, the waves leave not still to beat against the
bank.

Indeed, the war, having like a fire, encompassed all Germany, passed on into
Denmark, Sweden, England, and France; in such sort, as that there is not so
much as any one Province, which can boast of being, or of having been free, and
exempt from this universal Disaster. The Germans are hard to be moved; but
having once taken Arms, they are very hardly brought to lay them down again.

The Turk in the kingdom of Candy.
In the interim, the sworn enemy of Christendom, took his time, and measure,
kept his cadency, entered into Candy, besieged Canea, and couzened the most
clear-sighted of the whole Company; who thought that this storm would burst
upon the Isle of Malta. Let us lay open the counterfeit, and mark the pretext,
and subject, which kindled the Grand Signor's wrath; who covering all the
Levant, or Eastern Sea with an infinite multitude of Vessels, thought to
surprise, and devour that most serene Commonwealth, which must not perish,
but with the dissolution of the world. The Mahometans serve themselves also of
dissimulation, and when they make a show of drawing one way, they go another.

The effects of the hatred which they bear the Christians, had not been
differred so long in so many fair occasions, had it not been for the war
between them, and the Persians.

This war, I say, had taken away the means of prevailing against us, by those
disorders which had so much weakened us: For neither the brooks of blood which
was spilt, not the Towns and Villages which were burnt; not the fields which
were made desert, hastened them to come, and dispatch the rest. They seemed to
have lost their interests, and rejoiced to see the Name of Christian destroyed,
by the Christians themselves. But when it seemed to them a fit time to act,
against a Body, which was grown faint by the loss of so much blood, and
whilst they were momentarily deliberating amongst themselves, where, and how
to begin the Round; the Knights of Malta showed them the way, and let them see,
that there were yet Christians enough, to give them exercise, and make them pay
the expenses of the Revel.

Ibrahim, the Sultan, being a bloody Prince, and spurred on to war by the
Counsels of his Minion, or Favorite (for the Barbarians, as well as our
Princes, have some who make them condescend to their passions) was much more
moved by spite, and rage, when he received the vexatious news, that the
Knights of Malta, had taken, near the Isle of Rhodes, The Knights of Malta take
the young Sultanesse, and her Son, with a huge Ireasure.
the great Gallion, and some Gallyes, which conducted the young Sultanesse, her
Son, and an Aga, toward Alexandria, with so great riches, as amounted to more
then three millions of Gold. The affronts which we receive from such enemies as
we despise, are much more tormenting, then those of such as we fear. This
Golden Fleece, and this fair Medea, was gained at the point of the Sword, with
the loss of many brave Knights, and carried to Malta. And this news, I say,
did so much inflame his choler, that he swore, he would reven^e himself upon
all the Christians; and to this effect, he contracted the principal Forces, of
all the Provinces, and fitted a Fleet of near four hundred sail, and lulled
the Venetians asleep in the mean while, by assuring them, that it was not
against them, but to draw satisfation from the aforesaid Knights, who put
themselves into a posture to undergo the storm, by sending for all the
Knights, demanding the succor of Princes, and fortifying all the approaches.

The said Venetians, and other States of Italy thought also of their defense,
but a little too late; and so they tried, to their cost, and loss, the Great
Turks perfidy; who, having made a show of attacking Malta, returned toward
Candy, and took Canea by composition, after he had battered it by a Siege, and
many assaults.

Some States showed their zeal for the Common Good; but the relief came too
late, like physic to the dead; and the cause thereof was jealousy. But this
inopinated Invasion much astonnished the Illustrious Republic of Venice,
(which asked assistance every where, and in Holland, Ships for their money) but
was not able to restore Christendom to peace. When the Wolves attack a flock of
Sheep, the courage of the dogs is cooled, from falling upon the Common Enemy.
The ambition of Christians was too great; the opinions in Religion, too
different, and various; their charity too much chilled, and the ruin of the
House of Austria (which was judged infallible) too much in their hearts.

This punishment seemed to have been drawn upon them, by their not having well
administered justice in the said Island, upon the Governors Son, who had
committed a rape; and violated a woman, 1646. which crime made the Mores invade
Spain, and has caused many afflictions in the world besides. One misfortune
follows another: Fire got into the Arsenal at Venice.
for the fire got into the Arsenal at Venice, and endangered the blowing up of
that brave City: which so much frighted the noble Senators thereof, that as
well for this mishap, as also for many other advertisements, they resolved to
provide it well, to the end that the Traitors might have no power to hurt it.

In this conjuncture, the French were in danger to be ill treated, being
accosed of intelligence with the Turks, and of having kindled this fatal war:
But that which is without ground, is also without existency; and what is not
proved, ought not to be believed.

The Turk caused his General to be beheaded, for having lost too many men
before Canea, and failed to seize upon the Haven of Suda in the same Island;
and not with standing so many prodigies as appeared at Constantinople for many
days together; Prodigies at Constantinople.
he resolved to continue the war with all extremity, for the space of seven
years. For, the year before, one part of the said City was consumed by fire;
and this year, the contrary Element threatened to drown it, and made the
Inhabitants go up to the tops of their houses, to save their lives. In brief,
these supernatural signs make us hope, that heaven, being angry with these
Barbarians, will dissipate their Monarchy, together with the impiety of their
Alcoran: but the incredulity of Christians, together with their ill lives, will
quickly involue Mortals in the vengeance of the Almighty.

The Venetians blocked up Canea, and the Turks being ill Neighbors to the
Hungarians, labored to enter into Frioll, and caused the Tartars to march into
the Field; but the Cossacks made a powerful diversion, toward the Black-Sea,
which divided the said Turks Troops. The Muscovits joined themselves to the
said Cossacks, and the Basshaw of Aleppo revolted; so that the Grand Signor
found work enough to do. The Pope, and Cardinals furnished thirty thousand
Crowns a month, toward the expenses of the war, with many Gallyes; The Popes
succor.
and the Duke of Parma, some Forces.

The State of Venice, being mennaced by three Armies, implored the relief of
Christian Princes, The defeat of the Venetions.
and beat the Turks in Dalmaria, but received a furious overthrow in the
Kingdom of Candy.

General Moresini took a good number of vessels appointed to re-victual Canea;
but he could not hinder the Fleet; and so the Army was defeated there; six
thousand men, with two Generals killed: Retimo taken, and all the Christians
massacred.

This misfortune so much startled the Commonwealth, that however Grimani had
very happily taken a great many Gallyes, Which implores the help of Princes.
she made it highly known at Vienna, Paris, Madrid, and throughout all Italy,
that she was not able alone, to sustain the weight of the Half Moon; and that
having already consumed about two and thirty millious of Crowns, she should, at
last be constrained to enter into such unequal conditions, with this devouring
Wolf, as would be shameful to all Christendom.

Though Fortune had been unkind in the Kingdom of Candy, she yet showed so
gay, and cheerful a countenance in Dalmatia, and in many Encounters at Sea,
that she made the Republic break off all Treaty of Peace, and resolve to
continue the war.

There arrived forty vessels from Holland, and some from Denmark, without
counting the succor of Genna, and that of the Pope, who took the said
Republics Cause to heart, as also the repose, and quiet of Christendom.

Grinnani got many Victories; and so much tormented the Turks, that famine
thrust it self amongst them in Canea; The Commonwealths Victories.
where we will leave them scuffling for that fair Island, without entertaining
our selves to pick out the circumstances of Combats, and Cruelties, where with
the Barbarians stuste their actions; since Christians, being become Barbarians,
do yet worse the^ they.

LEOPOLD WILLIAM Arch Duke of Austra and Go^ueruour of ye Low Countries (...)
P. Stuat Excu^it


CHAP. III. The troubles at Paris. It is besieged. The Archduke comes to
succor it. The besieging, and taking of Ipers. Cambray besieged in vain,
Hennawlt ransacked.
THe news which came to Paris, of the Victory obtained against the Archduke
before Lens in Art^ise, upon the twentieth of August, 1648. would have filled
all France with perfect joy, had not an unexpected accident disturbed the
feast, and almost put that great City into confusion, mingled with blood, and
slaughter. For whilst they were giving God thanks for this said Victory; A
tumult at Paris; and why?
the people hearing of the imprisonment of Messiours de Brussels, de Charton,
and de Blancmesnil, (President of the Parliament) whom they acknowledged for
their Fathers, and Protectors; began to cry Alarm, and run in flocks to the
Palace Royal, to require their liberty. The Shops were shut up; the Chains
made fast; and all the approaches barricaded: So that Paris was in greater
disorder now, or else the danger was greater, then that which chanced in Henry
the thirds time, till the Queen being supplicated to release them, was content
to grant it. And thus, Appeased.
was the first bout (which was but precursory to greater evils) past; and a
calm restored to that little world, for three, or four months.

It is very reasonable (say the Strangers) that the Shop where the Counsels of
so many wars had been forged, should feel a part of the Calamities, by which
Europe has been so miserably tottered; but the mischief falls upon the heads
of the innocent. Strange effects of the Divine Providence; which leaves nothing
firm, and stable, in this detestable Age; and nothing unpunnished, though
deferred.

Let us pass to the second, much more dangerous, then the first.

The Queen, together with the King, and Princes, went out of Paris, upon the
fifth, or sixth of January at night 1649, which clandestine retreat, The King
goes out of Paris, which causes a tumult.
gave the Inhabitants such an Alarm; as imagining that she would revenge her
self of the former Commotion, that they took arms again, with as much heat as
they had done before, and raised forces to conserve themselves, under the
command of the Duke of Beaufort, Elbouf, and Bouillon, as also the Marshal de
la Motte; and their chief General was the Prince of Conty.

The King raised some also, and there came many to him from all parts, to
reduce this great City to reason; he had already seized upon some approaches,
and some hot Skermishes were made, in one whereof, The pretended Duke of Rohan
killed. His education.
that pretended Duke of Rohan was killed, of whose education the Reader will be
pleased to hear a word or two, as I have been able to learn it.

Being yet an Infant, he was carried into Holland by a certain Captain, and put
to nurse to a Country-woman in North-Holland; where together with his milk, he
sucked in the love of the Roman Catholic Religion. When he was grown pretty
big, he was sent to the Latin Schools at Leyden; but with so little care, that
he was as it were, quite abandoned; and almost reduced to the extremity of
betaking himself to learn some Trade. During this small state, and low
condition, he told his School-fellowes (and namely my son) that he remembered
well, that he was come of a good House, and that he well knew, that he was the
son of a French Gentleman. He went publicly to the Sermons, and privately,
when he could, to Mass; which being come to the knowledge of some, to whom he
was recommended, without knowing who he was, they forbid him to go to the
secret Assemblies of the Papists. But in fine, the vizard was taken off, and
the Duchess of Rohan acknowledged him by Letters, for her son; sent him
men, and money, to set up his Train, and bring him into France, where he soon
sound his grave; for a Pistol bullet decided the sure, and the doubt, of
whether he were the true son of the deceased Duke of Rohan, or no.

Paris was in a more dangerous State, then it had been in a long time before;
for the King held S. Dennis, Mewdon, Corbeil, and Lagny; so that, to get out of
one extremity, recourse must be had to another, and that to the uttermost parts
of the Kingdom; I mean, they were feign to implore assistance of their Enemies,
which being favorably offered, they received it.

The Archduke goes to sucour. Paris 1649.
The Archduke Leopold promised to succor the Parliament, against the
Perturbatour of the Peace, and quiet of Christendom; for so they termed
Cardinal Mazarin; with whom he refused to join in Arms to his own great
advantage, and the ruin of the Partsians. Wherefore, he departed in March 1649.
with very good order, in all parts where he passed; but with coffeehouse to
his Army, which marched in the Enemies Country, with their hands tied, without
receaving money, or daring to take any thing from the Peasants. Goodness is
sometimes dammageabe; and to spare ones Enemies, is to give them will to hurt
him, and deminish his strength.

Cardmal Mazarin, seeing the Archdukes approach, and Parliaments care for the
remedy of the disorders, which threatened the Kingdom with a great breach; gave
way to this sterme, which being once joined, might come to destroy him. So that
the Peace was made, all those insurrections were pardoned, and Leopold found,
at the bottom of this business, what the Duke of Lorrain had told him before.
For he was advised to retire with all speed, for fear least his passage were
stopped. A considerable favor indeed, for having saved Paris from ruin, with the
loss of almost two thousand Horses, which dyed for want of sorrage. This
deceit was imputed to the necessity of the rhyme; which, when it has any
ground, passes for craft; for otherwise, The peace made
it is but mere malice. Parisians, it will be paid you, and your inconstance
will be chastized; for the business will not be forgotten.

The Archduke being amazed at this piece of levity, speedily retreated toward
his borders, Ypers besieged.
and gave the Marquis of Sfondrato order to invest Ypers, which he did the 11th
of April, with incredible diligence, having taken some Forts, which facilitated
the succor of the Town from Dunkerk; but he found more to do, then was
imagined; for they of the Garrison being, (in number three thousand) having
thrust out some fifteen hundred inhabitants, (such as were most suspected) and
shut up the Magistrates, the Clergy, and some of the Nobility, in a Cloister,
til the Tragedy were finished; made their Artillery sound loud, and their
blows fall heavy in many sallies; and especially, in that of the 24. of April,
when they went and beat up the quarters of the Spaniards; which was a most
glorious action; for had the succor been ready, the Town had been infallibly
delivered from the Siege. In fine, after having well defended the
Countersearpe, and a Half Moon, they yielded themselves up the eighth of May,
Renders it self the eighth of May, 1649.
after having consumed their powder; and the Garrison, in respect that it was
Sunday, went out the tenth, which was Tuesday. St. Venant submitted at
discretion, the sixth of April, and the Garrison were made prisoners of War.

The French Army, made Rendezvous between Perone, and Guise being a body of
five and twenty thousand effective men, under the orders of that fortunate
Warrier, the Count of Harcourt; who knowing that the Spanish Troops were
scattered and dispersed, marched with speed, encamped, and entrenched
themselves before Cambray.

Cambray besiged and t^^en
This un-thought-of surprise did not a little puzed the Archduke, who
contracting all his forces, hastened, with the Duke of Lorrain, to succor the
place; and so having put in a supply, he obliged the Besiegers to raise the
Siege. This done, he sent his Army into Garrison; and the French, out of
revenge for this affront, fell into Hennawlt, took Conde, and asked both that,
and all the whole County, in such manner as if they had had no intention ever
to return thither again. Then they entered into the Duchy of Brabant, and
carried themselves not a jot better where they passed, then they had done in
Hennawlt; so that the Citizens of Brussels found themselves almost in the same
apprehension wherein they were, in the year 1635. And so this Field was passed
at the loss of the Country People, and of the lives of some Soldiers, who
were killed in the skermishes.

Champagne, and Luxemburgh rifled.
The Duke of Wirtembergh, with four thousand men pillaged Champagne; and
General Rose did as much, in the Duchy of Luxemburgh, and so they all retired
into their Winter Quarters. Obmiserable condition of this most miserable Age,
the Sink of all other, which is turned to corruption, by the infection of so
much stanghter! They who had tilled, and sowed the land, were knocked in the
head for their pains, or starved with their poor Children, in the rigout of
Winter, to leave their Harvest for their murderers! And such as escaped, sled
into Holland, to save their unhappy lives by Day-labour. When shall we see an
end of all these misfortunes? Alas! It will not be possible, but with the end
of the universe.

Now, we have finished the Wars of Germany, and Holland, let us go into the
Bishopric of Liege, and see with what fuel that fire is made.

CHAP. IIII. The tumults in the Province of Liege. The choosing of a
Coadjutour. Tumults at Trevirs. The Lorraines, in the Kingdom of Aix, and the
Land of Gulick, or Juleers, beat the Country people. The War kindled again at
Neaples.
THis fatal War is like the Hydra; the more heads are cut off, the more grow
up; out of one smothered in one place, their sprang many, in another. If this
impetuous torrent be stopped, but with the least appearance of good success, it
forthwith breaks out in many places. It is a great embarassement; the more
water is cast into it, the more it kindles. Nor may we hope for any amendment,
since those horrible effects, which we have now described, and which we yet see
daily happen, will not permit us to doubt, but that this is the last Age.

The people of Liege are very firm Roman Catholics, and very much love
novelty, as well as the French; they are stank, and single-hearted, A
description of the City of Liege.
but a little too choleric, and jealous of their privileges. The Town is
fair, and great; and the Palace, and S. Lamberts Church, of an admirable
structure. It is situated in a Bottom, and surrounded by Mountains, which take
away the sight of it, (unless one be very near it,) and it is bathed by the
River Moze, which passes both through it and before it. Sciences so much
flourished there heretofore, that History affirm, that there were fourteen
Princes at one time, all Sons of Kings, or Sovereigns. At least, it is no
hard matter to judge, that it has been one of the most flourishing Cities of
Europe.

In the time of Ferdinand Duke of Bavaria, Elector of Colein, Prince, and
Bishop of Liege, there were some tumults, and complaints tending to the
destruction of his authority. For, they cried aloud, that their Privileges
were not maintained; that the Prince came not to dwell in the Town, and that he
did not say Mass, etc.

The power of these factions increased, which pretended nothing but the
conservation of Privileges, and Liberty, the general pretext of all such as
love novelty; and strangers endeavored to blow this fire of division;
especially, after the taking of Mastricht.

La Ruelle murdered by the Count of Warfuses treachery, who was also cut in
pieces.
The Burgher. Master, or Mayor of the Town called La Ruelle, who favored of
the people, and was cherished by them, was justly suspected by his Prince; for
Sovereigns will not have the affection of their Subjects divided. So that it
was judged, that this thick cloud would power down a great Shower. The Count
of Warfuse, after having betrayed his Master, retired himself into the said
Town; where, thinking to wash away the old treason by a new one, and win the
favor of the Prince, to return to that of the King; caused the said.
Burghermaster to be unhappily murdered, at a Dinner, to which he was invited
both him, and the Abbot of Mouzon Resident of France, his confident, who had
great intelligence and authority, in the said town: which murder being
discovered, whilst it was hot, made the Citizens take Arms, and cut the
murderers in pieces, and so their grew great tumults. Since which time, the
leven of the Sedition has always remained and faction has held up her head
there. Faclions in the Town, under the names of Chiroux, and Grignoux.
Such as kept their respect toward the Prince, took pride to be called
Chiroux; and they, who professed themselves for Liberty, Grignoux.

In fine, the Prince being no longer able to suffer the deminution of his
authority, nor the affront which was done him, when he desired to enter into
the Town, armed himself to chastize the said Grignoux. He put some thousands of
men into the field, under the conduct of General Spar; armed the Peasants, and
drew near the Town, whereof he quickly grew Master, by the intercession of the
Chiroux, The Prince enters into the Town.
and so the difference was drowned, in the blood of both the Burghermasters,
and some others who followed. A Cittadell was built, to defend the one from the
oppression of the other; yea, to maintain Justice, and the Princes authority,
and to repress the insolence of the common People.

A calm being restored to the Town, every body in quiet, and the cabal of the
Grignoux destroyed, who had so much labored under hand for help from the
Hollanders, and the French, a coadjutour was elected, and the votes fell
unanimously, by divine providence, not upon the Prince of Conty, (whom his
Brother endeavored to establish by fair means, and foul;) but upon Prince
Maximilian, Maximilian of Bavaria ^^adje tour.
Henry of Bavaria, a most worthy Prelat, and great ornament of the Church, who
ought to be imitated by all the other, as being the most noble example that
could be proposed. There wanted a holy Pastor, for so ir^egular and
undisciplined a Flock.

The difference at Trevirs.
Almost the same difference happened of Trevirs for the same subject, but without
bloodshed, and with less heat, the temperament, or constitution of these
being more moderate, then that of the Liedgers. In fine, by the intercession of
some Electors, all was appeased, and the Election fell upon the Lord Charles
Gasper of Leyen, at present, Archbishop, and Elector.

The Lorraines beat the Liedgeoises. 1549.
The people of both these Electors had absolution, but they were fain to do
penance; and the Duke of Lorraines Soldiers have often, and some years
together since, disturbed their rest. For, they went to seek their
Winter-quarter in the year 1649. in the said Province; beat the Country people
who presumed to oppose them, and the Characters, or Charms wherewith most of
them were furnished, served them for nothing.

In the last Wars of Germany, these superstitions, and obcecations of the
Devil, were much put in practice, and were useful for sometime, but to the
ruin of such as trusted in them.

The said Duke of Lorrain, having received some satisfaction, drew his forces
out of the said Bishopric, and sent them toward the Kingdom of Aix: which
invasion put such a flea in the ear of all the bordering Princes, and the
Governor of Mastricht, that they were already complotting an Alliance to fall
upon them, who had pillaged some Carts, coming from Boisleduc, and sent some
Regiments into the land of Ravestein; but they changed their way, and went to
the Duchy of Gulick. There wanted not Muskets, but Gold so talled.
Pistols, to drive them into the Bishopric of Trevirs, where they shore the
sheep, which had very little more left, then the bare skin, because they had
been shorn so often before.

One part of them repassed, at the beginning of Summer, into Flanders, and the
rest stayed, to hasten the contributions.

This Army is at present the most odious, and most revyled of all Europe,
because the last evils are more sensible, then the first, which are
half-forgotten. Indeed, they do much harm; but the Swedes did much more in
Sazony, through the spite which was caused them by the peace of Prague, and
through a resentment which they made ring very loud, nor does this Prince want
any indignation, as not having been comprised in that of Munster; thought yet
the tyrannies, which his Soldiers have exercised, as well in Germany, as
elsewhere, be not excusable. But all these desolations must be imputed to the
corruptnesse of this Age, which being cursed, cannot produce any thing but
abomination, not to be remedied by humane understanding.

The end of that destructive War of Germany, made all the world see, that the
ay me of the French, and Swedes, was quite contrary to what they pretended. For
they said alowd, that they took Arms, and came into Germany, to defend the
Lutheran Religion, the Liberty of Germany, which lay gasping under the Tyranny
of the House of Austria, and for the re-establishment of such as were oppressed.

I entreat the reader, whose judgment is not stolen away by passion, to
examine with me, the proceedings of both Parties.

In the year 1635. the Swedes would not accept of an excessive sum of money
for a recompense, offered them by the Duke of Saxony; in such sort, as that at
the Treaty of Munster, they were feign to leave them in the possession of
Pomerania, W^smar, and the Archbishopric of Bremen to obtain peace, and they
abandoned the cause of the Ghospellers, and Reformates, from whom they had
drawn most remarkable services, in Austria, Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia.

For the satisfaction of France, which served it self of the same pretexts,
they were constrained to yield it the Rights in the three Bishoprics; leave it
Brisack, and a good part of Alsatia (to the loss of a Prince allied to it by
blood) and forsake the Duke of Lorrains cause. For though Peace were treated,
War was nevertheless carried on with extremity, and the said Allies imagined
that they should have brought all the forces of the Empire to an end, before it
were concluded. But the Hollanders being pacifyed, obliged them to consider,
that Fortune often changes; and to content themselves, with what they seemed
able to keep in all occurrences, or accidents.

Thus were the Protectors of the German Liberty, against the Sovereign Head.
The Emperor being attacked by a Vassal of the Empire, despoiled him of his
States; and having many times defeated them who acted for him, imposed nothing
more upon him for restitution of all his Lands and Goods, then a mere single
acknowledgement of his fault, and a feigned humility, by asking pardon. I mean,
the King of Denmark who entered Germany in an hostil manner, and was beaten; and
Ferdinand for the expenses of the war, manifested, by restoring him all, that
he would have the world know, that he sought not to give jealousy to any, by
retaining such States as he had occupated by a just Cause, and by the lot of
Arms. Oh you Clarks, who vant so much of the sincority of the intentions of
your Masters, and who desire to make things appear quite otherwise then they
are; confess, now what you cannot deny; namely, that their design was, to fish
in troubled waters; and that in stead of the liberty of the Empire, they
effectively sought the ruin thereof. Before you make a Family guilty of
Usurpation, look first what they are, whom you defend. Give her leave to
maintain her interest, as well as your Masters do theirs; and never blame that
in others, whereof you are culpable your selves.

In this Treaty, the King of Spaines complaints, and the protestations of his
Ambassadors, concerning the Circle of Burgundy, obtained not that satisfaction
they hoped, and expected; for the French had there, too much authority; and so
the aforesaid King expressed his resentment thereof, by retaining his Garrison
in Frankendal (as we will show) and manifested, that he was able to cast yet
more prejudice upon his enemies.

Let us return to Neaples, where there grew to be a greater Combustion, and
that of greater vogue, then it was under the command of Aniello.

The nearness, and terror of the Turkish Arms, had not quenched the desire of
the Spaniards from punishing (against the Agreement made) the people of
Neaples. The Comparison of the troubles of Neaples.
For the Prophecy concerning Aniello was to be accomplished, as well upon this
miserable City, as in his person; the loss of his authority was to be
lamented. Let us make a brief discourse upon this last misfortune, which both
for beginning, progress, and end, was not much unlike that of the
Low Countries.

Margaret Duchess of Parma, by the wisdom of her Council, dissipated, and
quashed all the disorders which sprang up during her Regency, Together with
those of the Low Countries.
and appeased the complaints both of the one, and the other; as the Duke of
Arcos also did, by publishing a General Pardon. But the Duke of Alna, by
violent examinations, and inquires, awakened what was consopited before, (since
all was forgiven, all ought to be forgotten, the relapse very often causing
death) cast the people into despair, and into a resolution of shaking off the
yoke, both of his, and their Master.

Don John of Austria, instead of receiving the honors which were prepared for
him, commanded the people to lay down Arms, and thereby aggravated the wound
(by the saying of the Pope himself) which was not yet well skinned. For, upon
the refusal of some quarters, or parts of the City, the Spaniards began to
batter her from three Cittadels, and from some Gallyes also, The cruelties in
the Kingdom of Neaples.
with so much fury for the space of three days together, that it looked, as if
they would have buried her under her own ruins. Nor was this all; for they
made an attack upon the Citizens, and exercised such cruelties, as are suitable
to the conditions of this cursed Age; as pilladging houses, ravishing women,
and maids; massacring Fathers, and Husbands, and committing certain other prime
pranks, and exercises, which were wont to be done there, and which are
ordinarily practiced in one Times; besides cutting the throats of Infants,
murdering the sick in the Hospitals, through reciprocal hatred, and
demolishing Churches, to serve them for defenses. Albis profaned: all Society
broken! Oh God! O Great Judge! I may say, with the great St. Jerome, that when
I consider these slaughters, me thinks, I already hear thy trumpet, which bids
us march. Ah! how dangerous a thing it is, to break promise with a people,
which have newly laid down Arms? For if you once bring them to despair, there
will be no means to appease them by any promise.

The Duke of Guise goes to Neaples.
The Neapolitans armed again, breathed nothing but vengeance; desired the
protection of France, and the Duke of Guise for their Commander-General. All
which being promised them, they stopped their ears to a Reconciliation, and
strangled their Governor Foralto, after having barbarously dismembered, and
mangled him, for having advised them to peace; yea, there were no cruelties so
enormous and unnatural, but they put them in practice.

Gennaro Annese caused the Streets which led toward the Cittadels, to be
stopped up; and the Spaniards, seeing the fire too great to be extinguished by
their Arms, endeavored to restore the said Cittadels into the Popes hands, who
refused them. The Adjacent Parts succored the City with victuals; the Bandites
took, and sacked other Towns; and the Duke of Metelona, who kept the Field with
some forces, gave the Neapolitans no quarter; but they rendered him quid for
quo. The Duke of Guise arrived, ordered all things, and besiedged Capisa in
vain. In short, all was full of plunder, blood, and fire. Oh! Austria? where
art thou? Faith, Hope, and Charity, where are you? Where are the Commandments
of God?

Let us go out of this Labyrinth, for these particulars make ones hair rise on
ones head; let us see the end (I say) of these abominations here, to go and
seek them elsewhere.

The Count of Oneate, newly made Vice-King, and a second Prince of Parma in
prudence, allayed all these disorders, by an enterprise, the good success
whereof made him renowned, and glorious. For, upon a fair opportunity, he
rendered himself Master of the Gates, and all the people also, with small
resistance; some will needs say, by treason. In so much, as all the said people
began suddenly to cry Live the King of Spain, which some days before had
cried, Live the King of France. All was pardoned, and the Imposts taken off by
favor, without constraint. The Duke of Guise was pursued, taken prisoner, and
carried into Spain, Is made prisoner, and carried into Spain.
together with some other French Lords. All was re-established as it was before
the troubles, Te Deum sung, and the Count of Oneates merits elevated to the
Skies. Oh the inconstance of things of this world! For this Sedition was
appeased, The Peace made.
when it was conceived, that it would have made the Flower de Luces flourish
again, throughout the whole Kingdom. Thus was the blood stenched, which by the
continual streams thereof, was to stifle the Authority of the House of Austria.

These were the effects of the Divine goodness, which by a special grace, would
save a City, when human prudence saw it tending toward utter desolation,
without being able to recover it.

Now, after the description of so many calamities suffered, and after the
publication of the Peace, amongst all the Towns of this great Body, which was
fatigated, and exhausted both of blood, and strength, we will rest a little,
and take breath with it; and then prepare our selves to go to the Jubily.

CHAP. V
A Jubily at Rome. The Princes imprisoned. The Princess of Conde, the Duke of
Bouillon, and other Lords, retire themselves to Bourdeaux; and the Duchess of
Longueville, and the Vice-Count of Turenne to Stenay. The Alliance is made. The
Duke of Orleans in Flanders; and a digression upon that Subject.

I Was thinking to make a full stop in the middle of this Age, as hoping that
the Great God, being moved by so much bloodshed, would stop his scourge, and
cast his rod into the fire; but alas! It is not yet done; for it seems, that
they who contributed to the desolation of the Empire, must now feel the effects
of his indignation, in their own States. They danced in Germany, and now the
Revel is amongst them at home, to the end that all may be accomplished. If they
have made some Conquests, they will pay dear enough for them.

Whosoever takes a fiery coal in his hand, shakes, and stirs it gently, and
shuts not his hand for fear of burning it. My design, in the remnant of this
matter, is to do the like, and to handle it so tenderly, as not to burn my
self, in a season, when the World is so easily touched, and when truth is
hardly able to find a lodging.

The great Jubily.
Whilst the City of Rome was full of Strangers, who came thither either out of
curiossity, or for devotion, to the great Jubily, and whilst Pope Innocent was
addressing his prayers to God for a General Peace, the war marched still on, as
before.

The Imprisonment of the Princes of Conde, and Conty, and of their Brother in
Law the Duke of Longueville, The Imprisonment of the Princes, 1550.
was likely to bring Paris againt into trouble, in order to the Duke of
Beaufort, who was reported to be of the number; and gave such as were curiours,
desire to find out the ground of so great a Change.

The Princess of Conde retired her self to Bourdeaux, where the Duke of
Bouillon, and many other great Lords came to her, who for the hatred they bore
Cardinal Mazarin, and the Duke Espernon, were all most welcome to her, and
found both safety, and authority there; and the Marshal of Turenne found favor
also at Brussels. The Duchess of Longueville got abord a Vessel, which lay
off before the Haven of Deep, and passed into Holland, and thence to the
Province of Luxemburgh, to make a straight Alliance with the Archduke Leopold.

A Manifest published, concerning their detention.
The King published a Manifest concerning the detention of the Princes, the
chief points whereof were the Prince of Conde's too great power, and
insatiable ambition, which too visibly checked the Sovereign Prerogative.

This proceeding caused a great alteration in the Court, and burdened the
Cardinal with too much hatred, to let him sleep so securely, as to forget the
care of his own preservation. The Queen her self was not spared, and such
Officers of the Court, as were the said Cardinals Creatures, wanted not their
full measure.

The Alliance with the Archduke.
The Viz-Count of Turenne having raised a great sum of money in Stenay,
caused the Drums to be beaten, and confirmed a most straight Alliance with
the aforesaid Archduke; the principal conditions whereof, were, that neither
Party should lay down Arms, till the Princes were released, the Duke of
Lorraine restored to his States, Sedan rendered, and a firm Peace concluded
between the two Crowns. Which done, they began to raise forces, and the
Spaniards disposed themselves to put theirs into the field.

The common opinion, that the Spaniard sowes dissension in France, refuted.
It is the opinion of many persons, that the King of Spain endeavored to
corrupt the greatest part of the Nobleman of France with money, and sowed
sedition, and revolt amongst them, with this glittering metal; as if that
Nation were not unquiet, and turbulent enough of it self, without his being
necessitated to draine his Treasures to move it. And yet suppose that he did
it, it was no more, then what is ordinarily practiced every where, when there
is an appearance of profit, (being incited thereto by Reason of State) and then
what was done by King Lewis the eleventh in England, and elsewhere. But to what
purpose should it serve him, save only to spend his money unprofitably enough,
as appeared by their inconstance?

Many of them have often retired themselves into his Dominions, to seek their
own security, and his protection: both which they have found, and an honorable
maintenance to boot; but how have they taken their leave? Lewis the eleventh
being yet in his Dolphin-age, withdrew himself to the Duke of Burgundy; and for
recompense, as soon as he was in the Royal Throne, he began, and continued a
war upon the Burgundlans. But let us stay in our Age, where we shall find
matter enough.

The Duke of Orleans twice at Brussels.
The Duke of Orleans fled twice to Brussels, cast himself into the King of
Spalnes arms, who succored him, protected him, and gave him an honorable
allowance, together with his Mother the Queen. But being once reconciled, (and
even after the King his Brothers decease) he employed himself with as much heat
as the most mortal enemy in the world, to make war in Flanders; so to
destroy his own Sanctuary, And other Lords.
and spoil his Protector, when all that people thought, he would fix all his
thoughts upon Peace. The Dukes of Guise, and Elbenf, followed the same trace;
the former in Italy, and the latter, in Flanders. And what shall we say of the
Marshall of Turenne, and the Alliance so solemnly sworn with the Archduke?
The issue showed, that he returned with the same levity, before the work was
finished, and so rendered that fair Field intructuous. This is the profit of the
Spanish Cathalicon, and this the foundation, upon which the King built his
Conquests; or rather this is the recompense of his liberality.

I praise the fidelity of the French, but I blame their inconstance; and
presume to say aloud, that the first obligation cannot dispense with the
second, made freely, and without constraint. Nor are there many such examples
to be found amongst other Nations; yea, and it would be very ill taken in
France, if a stranger, after having found his sanctuary there, should, after
his reconciliation, labor to make war against it.

Maurice Duke of Saxony, Albert of Brandenburgh, and some others, made a League
with Henry the second, for the Liberty of Germany; but findings that the
French, instead of Liberty, laid hold of some Places, they reconciled
themselves with the Emperor; and yet were they taxed of perfidy, at the Court
of France. The Count of Fustenbergh, having withdrawn himself from the service
of King Francis the first, and returned into the Emperors favor, was beaten,
in seeking a passage upon the River of Marne, and like to be knocked in the
head for his ingratitude. But let us return to our purpose.

The renduclion of Belle-garde. 1650.
The King having assured himself of Normandy, and many Places held by the
Prince of Condes Lieutenants, caused Bellegarde to be besiedged, which quickly
submitted for want of succor, and he rendered the Inhabitants their
Privileges. Let us pass the Sea.

Charles Stewart goes into Scotland.
The Scots being Assembled at Edinburgh, resolved to take Charles Stewart for
their King; to which effect they sent Commissioners to treat with him at the
Haghe, and proclaimed him King of Scotland, and England; which extremely
offended the Parliament at London.

He departed from Scheveling; and we will let him go in great danger, to behold
the honor which was done General Cromwell, for having reconquered almost all
Ireland; the Natives whereof being moved to take Arms by zeal of Religion, and
respect to the said Charles, implored the assistance of the Pope, and some
other Christian Princes, but not being seconded, The Irish tamed, and pu^ished.
and falling into division amongst themselves, they were easily tamed, and
chastized, as well for having taken Arms, as for having abused the English.

The Diet at Nurembergh.
In the same year, the Diet was held at Nurembergh; where, after the agreement
was made about the restitution of Places, and the Assessement for moncy to pay
the soldiers, the rest of the time was spent in Visits, and sumptuous
Banquets, Festivities, and Fireworks of rate workmanship, and skill. The Duke of
Amalsi (formerly Piccolomini) was there on the behalf of the Emperors, and
acquired great admiration, and Duke Charles for the Crown of Sweden?

Some Counts were forced to pawn their wives Jewels, and other Ornaments, to
be so much the sooner rid of these troublesome Guests. Thus, the Germans were
whipped, and paid for the Rod; for they were feign to give whatsoever they had
left, to recover that which was grown savage, and desert.

The States of the Empire sent an Ambassador express into Spain, to beseech
the King to draw his Garrison out of Frankendal; which was granted at length,
that so the Peace might have full vigor, as we will show hereaster.

But since the Ambassadors depart from Nurembergh, let us go also out of
Germany, and hasten down the Rheyn into Holland, to see what passes there,
concerning the reduction of the Militia, and other accidents. Who will be able
to hide himself from the face of the Lord;

CHAP. VI
Containing what passed in the Summer of this year of 1650. The Portugal
Ambassadors offers. The Fleet in the Indies does nothing. The Princ 's
complaints. The Siedge of Amsterdam. The Imprisonment of six Lords, who were
carried to Louvestein The Prince of Oranges death. His Prayer.

THe Zelanders, before they would ratify the Peace, (which they did with an
ill will, as well in regard of France, as for the profit of some particular
persons, who were wont to go to the Cape of Grip) would needs be assured of a
prompt supply for the Company of the little Indies, The estates of Orphans in
Zeland, employed in the Company of the Indies.
which was grown to decay by the revolt of Portugal. Which was granted them,
because the Goods, and Estates of many widows, Fatherless children, and other
persons of mean condition, had been employed for the erection of the said
Company.

The Portugueses make themselves Masters of Brazil.
The Portugueses, complaining of the cruelty, and avarice of the soldiers,
took Arms, and by the help of some certain Traitors, made themselves Masters of
the whole Country, save only the Rocif, a strong place, built in the Sea. This
action stirred up the United Provinces to revenge; and so they speedily
accommodated a great Fleer, to go and reconquer the said Country. The Portugal
Ambassador at the Haghe, used all possible diligence, to divert this storm,
and made offers of high consideration; to wit, either to render the said
Country, or to give so many millions for the Reinbursement of the Zelanders;
but it was in vain, for the Fleet set sail with a multitude of good soldiers;
but the Expedition proving fruitless, and the Expenses unprofitable, the said
Company remained almost without pulse, and Vice Admiral Wit Wittenson, having
been constrained to abandon the said Country, for want of releif, was arrested
at the Haghe, to answer the objections made against him for his so speedy
retreat.

The States of Holland will dismiss some Troops.
Since that time, there has been other fish to fry, and other knots to untye,
which have caused that to be for gotten. For the States of Holland being
willing to play the good husbands, thereby to discharge themselves of a part of
their debts; considered that it was necessary to licentiate, or dismiss part of
their forces on foot, to be eased of so much useless expense. The Prince
opposes it.
The Prince of Orange opposed this design, alleging against them, how
dangerous it was, to disfurnish themselves of the souldiets, during the war
between the two Crowns. They urged a Reduction, and a yearly Pension for such
Officers as should be deposed; but the difficulty being found greater, by the
oppugnance of some Provinces, and chiefly the Duchy of Guelders: it was held
fit, And goes amongst the Towns.
that the said Prince should go amonst the Towns to dispose the Magistrates to
let the Militia remain in the same state wherein it was, and to content
themselves with that dismission of the new Troops, which was already made. In
effect, the Colonels, having received orders, to keep their soldiers together,
the Prince went to Dort the ninth of June, and after he had been at Delfe,
Rotterdam, Gorkom, Dergawde, etc. He returned the sixteenth of the same month,
to the Haghe.

The Petition which was made him by two Deputies of Amsterdam, not to come into
their Town, seemed not pleasing to him, as appeared by what followed.

Upon the twenty seventh of the aforesaid month, the Deputies who had
accompanied him, made report to the Assembly of States, that the Answer of the
Towns had been different; Some whereof refuse to give audience.
ane that, some of them, as Harlem, Dolst Amsterdam, and Medemblick, had
refused him audience, and had remitted the business to the Haghe, to be there
decided by their Deputies.

Complains.
Upon the 30 the prince complained alowd, to the College of the States, of the
refusal made him by them of Amsterdam, which was against his dignity, and
respect, as also against the greatness of the Province of Holland, whereof he
was Governor: affirming that this proceeding tended to the deminution of his
authority, and contempt of his person; wherefore he desired that reparation,
and satisfaction might be made him, by the Magistrates of the said Town. The
answers.
To which the Deputies wanted no answer, but alleged their Rights, as may be
seen in the Declaration of both parties, to which I refer the Reader.

It was generally believed, that these complaints would have gone no further,
and that they would have been peacefully resolved in the Cabinet; when on a
sudden, Six Lords taken.
the news came, that the Prince had caused six Lords to be seized upon; namely
De Wit, Burghermaster, or Mayor of Dort; John Du^st of Delft; John de Wael,
Burghermaster, and the Syndick Reul, both of them of Harlem; the Syndick Keyser
de Horn, and Stellinguerf of Medemblick; some of them Deputies, and others
Counselors.

Whilst all the world was waiting to know the subject of this so extraordinary
Imprisonment, there came other news more strange then this; which struck the
ears of every one in particular, filled all Holland with amazement, and the
curious with desire to see the Issue.

When waters which have been stopped, find passage, they make themselves heard
with more violence, and at a greater distance; then those which have but their
natural course.

The Prince not having received satisfactions, his complaints were to be
manifested; but in what manner? Every body knows.

The night of the twenty ninth, or thirtieth of July (a remarkable night and
day) till next morning, being Satterday, and all quiet at Amsterdam, the Post
of Hamburgh arrived about eight of the clock, and brought word to the
magistrates, Troops straight to Amsterdam.
that he had met a Troop of Horse; which was confirmed by the Drossart of
Muide, and that there were many more which marched straight to the Town;
along the Coast of the South Sea. There was but one of the Burghermasters
then in Town; who forthwith assembled the said Magistrates, and provided the
Town, against these forces which the people thought to be the Duke of
Lorraines. Thought to be the Duke of Lorrains.
The Gates were instantly shut, and resolution taken to put some companies of
men in Arms; to which effect, the Drums were beaten, with so great concourse,
that in a very few hours, They run to Arms.
the Soldiers, and Canon were seen upon the Walls, and all in a posture of
defense, as well on the side of the water, as that of the Land.

This City, being the most famous, and most celebrated of the whole universe,
in regard of the Traffic, and infinity of the vessess which arrive there from
all the Havens of the world, had not had any Alarm, in eighty years before;
and yet she lest not to bestir her self for her own preservation, and the
security of the commerce.

A very dark night.
It is to be noted, that that night was so dark, and rainy, that it deprived
the Soldiers of the knowledge of the ways, and of the strength to march
steadfastly: In such sort, as the guydes stayed, and being puzzled at a
crosseway, made the Van march as soon as they found themselves right; but the
rest wandered so much up and down, that they found themselves, in the same
Village an hour after.

The Magistrates, having caused the Bridges to be drawn up, dispatched their
Deputies to ask Count William, to what end he came thither with so great
forces? Whereupon he put this little Paper of the Princes into their hands,
which said, That he had lately been very Ill received in their Town, The
Princes Letter.
whether he came for the service of the Common Native Country; and to the end
that the like might be done him no more, he had sent Count William of Nassaw;
to put all in quiet, that so that which he had yet to propose for the Countries
service, might not be hindered by such as were ill affected. Let us return to
the Hague.

The Prince having made himself sure of the aforesaid Lords, sent for the
Pensioner Gatz, and acquainted him with his having secured them, and told him,
that he had sent sixty companies of Horse and Foor, to Amsterdam, under Count
Williams conduct, whom he believed to be infallibly already, The States
separated themselves.
in the Town; which being reported by him to the Assembly of the States, they
forthwith retired; and the Deputies of Amsterdam, having taken a cow ple of
Wagons went by the way of Harlem, and arrived at Amsterdam, The guard invirons
the Court,
at eight of the clock in the evening; and about eleven, the Princes Guard with
five companies more invested the Court.

There were so great changes that they made some murmour, and others blame the
Peace with the Spaniards; and cast in fine, all the Hollanders into such
astonishment, that they knew not how to free themselves from it. The Peasants
fly.
The Country people about Amsterdam fled; and no body knew, either what to
hope, or fear.

The rich were silent, and the dreggs of the People spoke. What State can be
sure of being free from War, since Holland, being in the middle of the Water,
sees her self precipitated into these disquiets, in full peace? God, who
governsall, knows why, since nothing is done, without his providence.

The reasons why those Lords are detained; they are carried to Louvestein,
The Prince gave the six other Provinces to understand, upon what grounds he
had seized upon the aforementioned Lords, whom he sent with a good Guard, to
Louvestein the last of July; and having received notice, of what had passed, he
transported himself on Sunday, to Amsterveen, a Village near Amsterdam. In the
mean while, Soldiers flocked thither from all parts; and it looked as if they
would besiege the Town, in good earnest: which being perceived by the
Inhabitants, they opened the Sluices, and made a show of breaking the Damms, The
Slucer open
in case they were put to greater extremity; so that by little and little, the
Country began to be covered with water, when the Inhabitants of Harlem,
observing the Prince was come to lodge, with some companies, near the banck
between their Town and Amsterdam, took a fright, and resolved at the same time,
to dispatch their Deputies toward him, who returned with answer, that they
should be quiet, and that he had nothing at all to say to their Town. But they
of Amsterdam seeing his resolution, forgot nothing which concerned their
liberty. In fine, the third of August, the accommodation was made, with
articles of advanrage enough to the Prince, who withdrew his forces, The peace
is made and the forces withdraw.
and thereby rendered Peace to all Holland: and indeed, had this Siege lasted
yet some days longer, it would have caused an irreparable damage; which was
grown already, by the interruption of commerce, to be of some millions to the
besieged.

The Siege knows before.
We must not omit to take notice here, of a very remarkable things which is,
that some Merchants, some weeks before this Siege, received advertizements from
London, Dantzick and Genna, that Amsterdam was besieged by Prince William.

The States, in this conjuncture, determined to draw the difference to the
Haghe; The Libels run.
and malicious Pens lest not to vomit up their venim against them of Amsterdam;
for a certain Libel ran up and down of articles ordered with them of the
Parliament of England. In brief, ill tongues were as busy, as ill Penus, and
the Prince himself was not spared. Thus passed this first attack, which was but
precursory to a pernicious war, whereof weshal make mention in fit place.

Albeit it seemed, that the poison was taken off, and all pacified, distrust
increased daily, Distrust.
and they of Amsterdam had always es an eye upon the Country. The Prince sent
the reasons of his proceedings to the Assembly of the States, in writing; but
the Paper was sent back, without being opened, and the Prisoner's released,
without any other condition, then that of being thenceforth deprived of Public
Employments. The Prince goes to the Assembly of the Stares of Guelders.
He went to the Assembly of the Duchy of Guelders; where having, by his
prudence, scattered some disorders between the Nobility and the Towns, Returns
is the Haghe.
he returned to the Haghe, in some indisposition of health, the twenty nineth
of October was let blood, the thirtieth, the day following, the small pocks
appeared upon him; and the sixth, His death.
against the opinion of all the Physicians (his sickness being augmented) he
departed out of this world, in the four and twentieth year of his age, leaving
behind him a young widow with child, who being afterward delivered of a
young Prince, delivered the House of Nassaw, and such as were well affected to
it, from part of the grief which was caused by his death.

The vecital of his life.
He was a Prince of a great wit, which he testified in the Conference he had
with the Deputies of Amsterdam, as also in many other occasions. He was
handsome of body, and given to such vices as are ordinary companions to youth:
Above all, he was infatigable on horseback, and sooner tired his horses, then
himself. He was already his Crafts-master in war, to which he much inclined,
and promised to follow the steps of his Ancestors. He knew well how to make
himself both feared, and obeyed. Let us now see the miserable end of the brave
Earl of Montrosse.

CHAP. VII
The deplorable death of the magnanimous Earl of Montrosse. The War of the
Polanders, against the Cossacks.

Brave Montrosses praise.
Virtue was never so universally oppressed, as in this miserable Age: Witness
Montrosse, a Souldior of merit, and illustrious extracton; who had rendered his
Master so considerable services in the Kingdom of Scotland, that his enemies
effectively feared him; and after, he had laid down Anns, by his said Masters
commandment, he did him yet such other services by Embassyes, as made him
admired, for the dexterity of his wit.

During the Treaty of the commissioners with Charles Sinart his young Master at
Breda, he went into Scotland, contracted some Forces, to such as he carried
with him from abroad, and entered the Kingdom upon hope of the good success of
the said Treaty. Is beater.
But his Troops were defeated, he escaped by swimming, and lay hid some days
amongst the Reeds. In fine, after he had been forced by hunger, His mistry.
(which drives the Wolf out of the Wood) to eat his gloves, and the very flesh
of his Arm, he was discovered by a Peasant; taken prisoner, brought before the
Parliament at Edinburgh, and accused of entering into the Kingdom, against the
order of his bannishment, and other crimes: To all which, he answered with a
consident aspect, that he had done nothing but for his Masters service, and
that by his partionlar Command.

During the reading of his Sentence, he neither changed color, nor
countenance; and when he was upon the Cart, His igneminious death.
he made a speech, which declared his innocence, and so was hangged upon a
gallows fifty Cubits high, Gosimirus King of Poland Great Duke of Lithuanice.
etc / etc. Ao. 1649
and then quartered. This, was the end of the best, and noblest Servant his
Master had in Scotland; and had be lived, it is very likely, that the Scots
would not have fallen into so many calamities, nor his said Master have been so
easily overthown, in the middle of England.

But what do the Polanders do? Are they in peace? Are they exempt from the
mischiefs, under which all the rest of Christendom lies growning? Let us step a
little that way.

After the Truce was made with the Swedes, the Commonwealth of Poland was
without enemies, and in repose, which yet was disturbed by the Cossacks; a
people which follow the Greek Religion, and depend upon the Government of
Poland, The Cossacks.
which they are obliged to serve on horse back against the Turks, and Tartars,
whose passage they stop. But for the rest, they are hard to be ruled, and are
wont to receive the Peasants, whom the tyranay of the Gentry drives out of
Poland, as also many others, for any wickedness, or oftence committed.

The death of victorious King Vladislans; some Churches which were taken from
them; and a certain Gentleman called Chimenelisky, who was their Head, and
Leader, made them take Arms, Take Arms.
against the said Commonwealth. For this General, seeing the occasion fair to
revenge himself of the affront which had been done him by some certain Lords,
put the Cossacks into the Field, beat the Polish Armies twice, and by these
Victories, opened the way into the Kingdom, which was exposed to the cruelty,
Beat the Polanders.
barbarity, and infamous avarice of this dreggy people.

The Peasants chastised in Lituania.
The fire flamed up again toward Litnaria, and the Peasants began also to
revolt; but Prince Radzivil repressed them. Pinskow was reduced into ashes, and
the Inhabitants, for example to others, put to the Sword.

The King goes into the Field, a Battle.
Prince Casimir being chosen and crowned King at Warsaw, went himself into the
Field, with his Army, to stop the progress of the said Turks and Tartars, who
were joined together. The Battle was given, and the Enemies, The Peace made.
after a stubborn Combat of five hours long, retired with confusion enough, and
put themselves in posture again the next day; for the number of them amounted
to above three hundred and ninety thousand men. In fine, the Peace was made,
the Tartars returned malcontent, the Privileges of the said Cossacks were
confirmed, and Chimenelisky pardoned.

This news came to Prince Radzivil, who was in these terms with his Army. He
had beaten the Rebels; taken many Towns, and was of resolution to go and
affront the rest; but he returned, and retired to Vilna. Religion acted her
part, in this war, as the jealousy which, the Polanders ordinarily have of
their King, did also hers. The Peace had so much rest, and quiet, as distrust,
and turbulent spirits are wont to afford; and so by consequence, It dares not
long.
it lasted not long; for Chimenelisk, having attacked the Prince of Moldavia,
would needs compel him to give his Daughter in marriage to his Son, which
Prince Radzivil the said Princes Son in Law, endeavored to hinder. This
General seeing the Armies in the Field, and the war resolved (he, who had
corresponce in Poland) sent his Ambassadors to Constantinople, of whose
expedition we shall speak hereafter. For France, in the bickerment of Civil and
Foreign wars, gives us no more leisure to stay any longer here.

The French, being the most affectionate almost of all other Nations to the
service of their King, could not endure to see the direction of affai^sin a
foreign Ministers hands (and indeed other Nations would never have suffered
it) so jealous are they of the confirmation of their Rights: and by consequence
were extremely irritated by the imprisonment of the Princes; The Orders of the
Parliament of Bourdeaux.
and the Parliament of Bourdeaux renewed the Order given against the Marquis
d'Ancre, which contained that no Stranger should ever more have the great
Ministry, or Intendency of the Kingdom.

Whilst the Archduke, and the Vice-Count of Turenne were busy about sending
the Armies into the Field, and that this latter refused all the conditions
which were offered him; the French presented the said Archduke a Peace, with
the Articles of Munster, which he would not accept of; whereupon a certain
French Writer exclaimes, and says, that it is a convincing argument that the
Spaniards will not have peace. But this, is but to amuse the poor people. For
does he not know, that the time is changed; and that there was then a necessity
of taking whatsoever was offered. Occasion is bald behind.

The Spanish Army attacked Guise, and took it by Assault; but the Castle
holding out, The Spaniards before Guise.
and the news of the defeat of the Convoy being come, made them retire in have,
with the loss of many men, which hunger caused to runaway. The said Convoy
consisted of about fifteen hundred horsemen, who had every one a bag of powder
upon his back, Retired with loss.
and carried bread to the Camp; but being attacked by four hundred men only,
they threw down their burdens, and fled.

Thus were the first fruits of this Field spoiled; and the Cardinal, who knew
not which way to turn himself, to quench the fire, went toward Bourdeaux, to
force the Allies, and the said Town, to repentance for their faults, leaving
Champagne open to the enemies. It was conceived, that the King, by his
presence, would have reduced them all to their duty: but it proved quite
otherwise; for Mazarin raised more partialities, hatred, and obstinacy.

The Archduke, seeing the occasion fair, sent his Army into the said
Province, took Retel, and many other small Places, and gave terror to the
Gates of Paris. The Princes, for better securities sake, were carried to
Marcoussy, and from thence, to Haure de grace.

Take Retel. And the propesition of Peace being vain. They go to Mouzon, and
take it.
The Archduke wrote from Basoche to the Duke of Orleans, about a Peace, who
sent him an answer of the same substance, but without effect. The Spaniards
having unprofitably consumed this Field, went and besieged Mouzon, which they
took with much difficulty; as wrestling with the raines, and the overflowing of
the River, which caused many sicknesses amongst the soldiers, who were beaten
into their winter quarters by the season. Te Deum is (...) is sung at Brussels,
and at Paris, and why?
Te Deum was sung at Brussels, for the happy success of the Kings Armies, as
well in Catalunie, for the reduction of Tortosa; as in Italy, for the taking of
Piambino, and Portolongone, as also that of Mouzon in France, which had been so
faithfully defended by the waters of the Moze. It was also sung at Paris, with
no less joy, for the recuperation of Bourdeaux, and Retel, with the defeat of
the Vice-Count of Turennes forces. See here, how things passed.

The Inhabitants of Bourdeaux, having conceived an irreconcilable hatred
against the Duke of Espernon (as we have already said) declared themselves for
the Princes. The Duke of Bouillon and the Duke de la Rochefancant raised a
great Army. But by the intercession of the Duke of Orleans, all such as acted
for the Princes, The Accord made at Bourdeaux. 1650
were pardoned, Arms laid down, every body restostored to favor, and the
Duchess of Bouillon delivered. There was none but the Princess Dowager of
Conde, who could not digest this bitterness; for taking the detention of her
children too much to heart, and the repulse of her suits, The Princess
Dowagers death,
she grew at last to yield under the burden of her afflictions, and left this
vale of misery, to go and take possession of the holy Jerusalem.

The King made his entrance into Bourdeaux the first day of October, in a most
sumptuous, and stately Gally, which was sent him by them of the Town, where he
was received with all testimonies of joy, and a General Vive le Roy where he
passed: And the seventh of the same month, he departed for Paris.

Cardinal Mazarin seeing the number of his enemies increase, resolved to stop
their months with a glorious action, which proved useful to the State, and
served for an evidence to all Europe, that his Ministry was advantageous both
to the King and kingdom of France. He puts the Militia in order, gave the
soldiers money, conducted the Army straight to Retel, and after having given
it three Assaults, Mazarin retakes Retel.
made the Spaniards march out.

The Vice-Count of Turenne being a brave soldier, (for whose valor some
certain Towns in Germany had declared themselves for him) forthwith brought his
Troops into the Field, hastened to succor the Place, and gave the besieged an
advertisement of the relief, but too late. He advanced with six thousand
horse, for his foot could not follow; but he was charged by the Marshall of
Prastin, and after a resistance which cost much blood, defeated.

The Spaniards beaten.
The Spaniards recollected themselves in the Province of Luxemburgh, and the
Conquerours went to take up their winter quarters in Normandy, and Lorraine,
where the Count of Lignevills progress was soon stopped; And the Lorraines.
for being beaten by the Marquis of Seneterre, he was compelled to march away,
with the loss of about nine hundred men, and four pieces of Canon.

This year, the Deputies of the Cantons of Swisserland arrived in France, to
present their complaints, and they were contented. There needed no less then a
whole Army to force the Leidgers, or people of Leidge, to open their purses;
and the Swedes, having obtained the tax of Contributions, repassed the Rhein.

The Princes demand the Investure.
The evacuation being finished in Germany, and the Ambassadors retired, the
Princes sent an Embassy to the Emperor, to demand the Investure of their
Fief. The King of Denmark asked it, for the Duchy of Holstein, by Monsieur de
Rantzow, who returned with the honor of the title of Count.

After these honors, followed the Reformations almost every where; I would to
God, that abuses, andill customs were also reformed, with as much zeal! The
Goods of the Swissers arrested since the precedent year, caused many
complaints, and menaces, which produced a mere restitution only. Let us take a
turn into Spain, with the Emperors daughter newly espowsed to the Catholic
King, who was every where received, with magnificent pomps, and honors; but
principally, at Madrid; where there was at the same time, an Ambassador from
the Grand Signor, The Ambassador from the Turk in Span.
who being brought to a most stately Audience, adorned with Diamants, and
precious stones, first condoled the Queens death, then congratulated the new
marriage, and demanded a private audience for his Commission. The tenor of his
letter of credence was, To the most Glorious of all Christian Princes, from Aly
Solomon Lord of the House of the Ottomans, etc.

First, He offered the Holy Sepulcher.

Secondly, True Commerce, without further exercise of Piracy.

Thirdly, He proposed a match between Don John of Austria, and the Sultanesse,
(of whom we formerly spoke, and who was now become Catholic at Maltha)
promising him a kingdom under the Turk.

And Fourthly, and lastly. That all prisoners might be released on both sides.
The Presents were rich, and noble, and the Embassy (in appearance) fair; but
the issue thereof declared, that all was but Complement.

The Residents of the Parliament massacred at Madrid, and at the Haghe.
Mr. Anthony Ascam being arrived at the same Court, in the quality of Resident
for the Parliament of England, found his Tragical end there, as Doctor
Dorislaw had already found his, at the Haghe, Charles Stewarts Ambassador
being introduced to his Audience, fell forthwith a weeping, and thereby moved
the King to compassion.

The King of Portugal by favoring Prince Robert, caused the English Fleet to
come, and lie before his Havens, which put him to so much damage, that both
he, and his subjects had leisure to repent themselves, of having offended that
Parliament.

CHAP. VIII. Blakes Fleet in Portugal. Charles Stewart in Jersy. The Kings
Lands, and Goods sold. The aforesaid Charles goes into Scotland. The English go
thither, with an Army. The Scots are beaten. The continuation of the war in
Candie. War by the Pen. The Spanish Ambassador at London. The Chinese turned
Catholics.
IT is in the Britannick Islands, that Bellona now exercises her rage; for she
has established her sear there, and looks, as if she would stay some time.

Charles was in the Isle of Jersy, where he distributed Commissions, to fall
upon the English ships, and spoil their Trade. But, upon a certain advice
which was given him, General Blake before the River of Lisbone. The Kings Goods
sold.
he departed; and General Blake went, and shut up. Prince Robert in the River
of Lisbone, whilst the Kings Goods were sold at London; as namely, his three
Crowns, his Scepter, the Golden Garter, all the Jewels, Pictures, Images,
Rarities, and whatsoever else of price, and value. Some put the Crowns upon
their Heads, the Garter about their Legs, and took the Scepter in their hands,
saying, Look, how well these Ornaments become me. Who would have imagined such
a change? The money which was made of these said Goods, was employed upon the
States service. They passed yet further, they brake down the Kings Statue, upon
the old Exchange, and set up this Inscription; Exiit Tyrannus Regum ultimus.

The Parliament searing lest Charles, through some good success, should come,
and disturb the Peace of England, by means of some Creatures of his there,
labored to prevent him; and Fairfax having surrendered his Commission, to that
most renowned Captain General Cromwell, he marched with an Army of sixteen
thousand men, to face the Scots, who were above five and twenty thousand;
killed above three thousand of them upon the place, Cromwels victory over the
Scots.
and took above ten thousand prisoners; for the rest run away, to publish the
glory of the Nation. Indeed, he had as good success, as Don John of Austria,
who lost but nine men in the Battle near Namurs; and he lost but about twenty
in this; yea, and he got this as good cheap, as he had that of Marquis
Hamilton, whom he utterly defeated the year before in England, with a handful
of men. It was conceived, that there were some Traitors amongst that Nation
(which yet is faithful enough) and that they who had sold their King, were yet
alive to sell this Army.

This great victory rendered General Cromwells name most renowned and glorious;
Who takes Edinburgh and other places, 1651,
opened him the Gates of Edinburgh, Leeth, and many other Towns; and cast the
poor King of the Scots into great apprehensions; who entering once into
Edinburgh, and seeing the miserable relics of the unfortunate Montrosse,
Charles in Scotland.
had much ado to abstain from tears: but upon the sad news of the death of his
Brother-in-Law the Prince of Orange, he obtained leave to take them down.
Amongst all other vexations, he had much ado to satisfy the importunity of
the Ministers, and to discern the faithful, from the OLIVER Lord Protector of
the Commonwealth of England Scotland and Irelande etc. Sold by P:Stent.
perfidious, who would have carried him into the very hands of his enemies Let
us leave him putting on mourning for his said Brother-in-Law, and for his
Sister Elizabeth both together; for which he was full of sorrow.

There was no difficulty found in the Empire, but about the Toll, or Custom,
upon the River of Wiser, adjudged to the Count of Oldenbergh, The Tell upon the
Wiser.
whom they of Bremen earnestly opposed; but being affrighted by the Imperial
Thunderbolt, they obeyed. The Emperor sent Ambassadors to Mantua, to demand
the Princess for his Wife: and the Duke of Bavaria his, to fetch the Princess
of Savoy.

The Grand Signor being tired by a war of so much durance, offered the
Venetians a peace, by yielding them the Kingdom of Candy, whereat they laughed,
and resolved to continue the war. The Turks attacked Candy in vain, and after
having lost very many men, returned toward Canea. The Victory of, the
Venetians.
But the Venetians were yet more happy by Sea, then by Land; for they defeated
the Fleet, which carried tells to Canea, retook the strong Castle of S.
Theodore, and ruined some Gallyes besides; in such sort, as Te Deum was sung at
Venice, with great solemnity.

The Chinese Converted.
Amongst all the disasters, and afflictions of Christendom, came the news of
the Coversion of the Chinese, or People of China, to the Roman Catholic
Religion, which much rejoiced all such as took more to heart the propagation of
that Religion, then the interests of fading States.

As war was made with the Pike; so was it also with the Pen. For Salmasius,
wrote a Book in defense of the King of England; and a certain Englishman called
Milton, who was not known before, Milton writes against Salmasius.
and grew famous by entering the Lists with this triumphant Champion, most
acutely, and elegantly answered it.

The Scholars, and even the very Women have been seen in Arms in many places;
and both Sexes have showed that they know how to handle the Sword. The
Elements, the Servants of this great God, being irritated, rise up to stifle
the rest of Mortals; the Mountains vomis fire; the Earth trombles; the Air,
being infected with pestilence, wastes, and ransacks Poland, as it has already
done other Parts of Europe; the continual raines make the Rivers break over
their banks. The Danub, the Rheyn, and the Moze do irreparable hurs; The
overflowing of Rivers.
and the carnal Embarasments which happen in many places, destroy what was left
by the Soldiers.

The damages which were caused by the overflowings of the Sea, and the raines,
were also excessively great in Italy, from whence the war began by little and
little to retire it self, and was not carried on with so much fury as it had
formerly been.

This world is full of wonders, and unheard of accidents. The Spanish
Ambassador at London acknowledged England for a Free Commonwealth, The Spanish
Ambassador in England acknowledges the Parliament.
and was treated with were great respect, and honor. This business astonished
all the World, to see a great Catholic King, who has always been an Enemy to
Protestants, make friendship, with a people, who had always in times past,
beenutter enemiesiro his Family.

But the Politicians penetrated to sownd the grounds, which might bring Philip
the fourth, and his Council to make amity with them. Why?
Considering the assistance which the English had given the Hollanders against
the Crown of Spain; the ruin of the Spanish Fleet in the Downs; the Alliance
of the French, with the Lutherans in Germany; the wars with France, and many
other motives, made him think it fit to make an Alliance with this Republic.
Let us accompany such as are curious, to the Crowning of the Queen of Sweden.

God has a mind to chastise mankind, he easily finds means to do it; for no
body can hide himself from his face.

The Laurel which Cardinal Mazarin had upon his head, could not secure him from
the Thunderbolt; for the Parisians, having already forgotten his services,
would needs have him bannished. The Parliament went to the Queen at the Palace
Royal, and demanded the liberty of the Princes, for the tranquillity of the
Kingdom. She, and her Council being surprised, required some time, to advise of
what should be most expedient for the good of the State, which was granted. But
the answer not coming after the expiration of the term, the Court of
Parliament assisted by the authority of the Duke of Orleans, concluded, to give
an Order, or Decree, for the justification of the Princes. The Queen seeing the
hear, wherewith their deliverance was pursued, consented, and dispatched the
Marshal of Grammont; The Princes delivered.
and the Cardinal, giving way to the powerful aversion of such as would not
suffer him to be any longer Minister of State; left Paris; The Cardinal retires.
went and spoke with the Princes, and departed out of the Kingdom.

There is no place in this lower world, where Fortune more absoludy reigns,
then in the Court of France: For many began now to speak ill of him, who were
soon after glad enough, to win his favor. Mottals, put not your trust in
this inconstant Goddess, who often inebriates you, to throw you under her
wheel. His departure amended not the business.

The United Provinces fell into some alterations, which required a speedy
remedy. The Belgic Lion put them in mind of their first Symbol. The Country
was without a Governor; the choice of Magistrates, and Officers returned to
the Towns; and the deceased Princes Guards, took the Oath of Fidelity, to the
States of Holland, from whom they received their pay.

The Deputies of all the Provinces were sent for, the great Hall was prepared,
and they of Zeland arrived first.

The Ambassadors of the Parliament in Holland.
The Ambassadors of the Parliament of England came to the Haghe, and were
received with much honor; however the people effectively expressed their
aversion from them, by breaking their windows, and other insolences; in such
sort, as the States, to hinder greater inconveniences, The aversion of the
people.
and save Persons Sacred by the Law of Nations, placed a great Court of Guard
before their house.

But let us return into Poland, and we shall hear that the perfidy of the
Cossacks, and their General, suffers not the new King to taste a little rest,
in the very beginning of his taign. For they brought back the Tartars; The
second war of the Cossacks.
The Grand Signor sent them a Sable; and the Patriarch of Constantinople
brought them a Benediction: and yet they left not to loose four thousand men in
a Battle, where the King was present; and were constrained some days after,
Who are beaten.
to retire themselves by night in confusion, leaving part of their Baggage,
their Canon, and many thousands of prisoners behind them. This Victory sent
from above, rejoiced all Poland, and caused Fireworks; and the Ambassadors
who were at Lubeck, treating the Peace between them and Swedes, imparted the
news to their friends, who expressed great rejoycings, as the ancient Town of
Lubeck also did, by their example.

Hitherto, we have seen Traffic almost abolished by land, by means of the war,
which has ruined, and devoured all things; and we shall forthwith see it in
almost as miserable a condition by sea, though there be no Mountains, nor
Forests to receive, and shelter Rovers.

After the Peace was made, the Great Master of the Knights of Malta, sent his
Deputies to the Haghe, to redemand the Lands, or Goods, The Knights of Malta,
take the Holland Ships. The French do the same.
belonto his Order; but having obtained nothing, he got Letters of Reprisal,
and his Knights took many Holland Ships in the Levant; as the French also did;
so that the complaints and mennaces of the Merchants were heard against France;
yea Monsieur Boreel Ambassador for the Commonwealth at Paris, made them sound
loud; but he reaped nothing but promises, with very small effect, which would
have caused a great alteration, had it not been moderated by the prudence of
this solid, and stayed Nation.

Robleries at Sea.
Prince Robert also being favored by the Portugueses, did what he could, to
hurt the English, the effects whereof were so much resented by the Merchants of
that Commonwealth, that they had no will at all to laugh. And besides, the
Pirates having Commission from the King of Scots, did extreme mischief, and had
their retreat at Jersy, and Sicilly, two Islands, situated at about fifty
degrees, between England, and Ireland; for they took all, without distinction;
in such sort, as it was necessary to send Admiral Tromp thither, and the
English Fleet which unnestled these Thieves, and a little while after, seized
upon the said Isle of Iersy. The Irish were also bold enough, to seek their
advantage, with the same Orders, though with less strength; But small Thieves
make themselves sometimes feared.

These losses, which were praecursory to greater evils, much diminished Trade,
by the great Guards, or Convoyes, which it was needful to send with the
Merchants ships, and by the Charges of insuring the Merchandises. The
Dunkerkers did no great hurt. But they aforesaid made themselves feared, by the
number, and bigness of their Vessels, and the convenience of their Havens.
Envy, Avarice, and Vengeance produced these misfortunes.

We have already spoken of the triumphant Coronation of the Queen of Sweden;
therefore let us now go, and see that of the King of Scots, amongst the
tumults, and disorders of war; yea, and as one may say, on horseback, and with
his sword in his hand.

CHAP. X
The Crowning of Charles Stewart. His entrance into England. He lost the
Battle near Worcester. The miserable State of the Scots. His admirable flight.
He arrived in France. The Difference between the Elector of Brandenburgh. and
the Duke of Newburgh. The peace made.

CHarles being arrived in Scotland, found many difficulties, as we have already
said, The Crowning of the King of Scotland.
which after he had happily vanquished, and taken a solemn Oath, the Earl of
Argyle, together with a Baron, and a Citizen, put the Crown upon his head, to
the great contentment of the Assembly, which cried Live King Charles the
second. Whereupon Douglasse the Minister went into the Pulpit, and exhorted him
to revenge his Fathers death; but he had enough to do to save his own life,
within a short space after. For not being able to drive his enemies out of
Scotland, he resolved by a very hazardous design, to transport the war into
England, there to animate his friends, to take Arms for his service; He enters
into Scotland.
and so he entered upon a sudden with an Army of about eighteen thousand
fighting men, and by often skirmishing came as far as Worcester; but (either
for want of Arms, or will) no body stirred for him, but the Earl of Derby, with
some three hundred men, which were cut in pieces, very few escaping, but the
said Earl himself, who carried him the news.

General Cromwell, being recovered of his sickness, and informed of this
inopinated invasion, followed him; and the Parliament raised also new forces to
resist him. The Battle was given near the said Town of Worcester, where the
Seots, and Royalists, animated by the presence of their King, carried
themselves well at the beginning; but the Horse being broaken, took flight; and
such as were not killed, could not escape, Is defeated by Cromwell.
in regard that all the passages were stopped; so that the condition of these,
was more miserable, then theirs who died fighting. There were seven thousand
taken prisoners, together with the whole Train of Artillery; for they were all
caught in a pit-fall, except their young King, who made a mavelous escape, as
we will forthwith show.

He was conceived to be slain; but the Parliament ordained, that no body, under
pain of death, should either lodge, or relieve him, in any wise; which begat a
suspicion, that he was living, and enjoyed some kind of fearful liberty. For
when he saw, that the Battle was lost, he fled with twelve Gentlemen in his
company, whom he was forced to leave, for fear of being discovered, and known,
retaining only the Lord Wilmot, with whom he hid himself in an hollow Tree, for
the space of two days, The King of Scots mai^ailously escaped.
and at length retired to a certain Gentlewomans house, who changed his
clothes, conducted him to Bristoll, and afterward to London, in the habit of
a Gentlewoman, where he stayed above three weeks; and then he passed into
France, (though he were known to the Master of the Vessel) and arrived at
Rouen, where he was received by the Duke of Longueville, and next at Paris, by
the King, the Queens, and all the Court.

Thus we see how Fortune raises some, and pulls down others: For had Charles
gotten the Battle, it is very probable, that England had been the price of the
victory.

The victory advantageous to the Parliament.
This victory confirmed the Parliaments authority, and destroyed that of the
other Party, lost the kingdom of Scotland, cast an infinite number of Widows,
and Fatherless children, into excessive affliction, and the poor prisoners into
unexpressible calamities.

The first who appeared upon a Scaffold, was the Earl of Derby; and his Wife,
after a capitulation, put the Isle of Man into the Parliaments hands. The
prisoners of note were put into the Tower of London; and the most famous, and
victorious General Cromwell, was received with such applauses, as were wont to
be heretofore given to the first Roman Emperors. The Lands of the principal
Gentlemen, and such as were most affected to the other Party were confiscated.
But let us now leave England, and the Parliament; let us leave Scotland in
tears; let us leave the different opinions concerning the success of this
war; for those of our Continent call us speedily back, and especially the
difference which happened in Cleveland.

Wars between the Electour of Brandenburgh, and the Duke of Newburgh.
The Electour of Brandenburgh, in full peace sent four thousand men into the
Duke of Newburghs Country, who attacked the strong House of Angremont, and
performed all acts of hostility, without having denounced the war. This
invasion much displeased the Emperor, and much more him, whom it more nearly
concerned. Religion, served here for a pretext, and this affront put a flea in
the ear of the bordering parts, which yet by the intermission of the Emperor,
and the States of Holland, was soon taken out; the Lorrainers who went to
succor the Duke of Newburgh; sent back the forces casheered; and the Princes
returned to their former good intelligence. This war gave Colem much
apprehension, and no small distrust to the United Provinces, which feared lest
if the fire increased, it might grow to burn their Neighbors houses, according
to the Latin Proverb.

Tum tu^res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet.
When thou see the next house burn,
Be sure the next will be thy turn.
Let us go seek out Cardinal Mazarin in his disgrace.

CHAP. XI
Cardinal Mazarins retreat into the Province of Liege. The Princes make their
entry into Paris. The joy for both the Duchess of Longuevilles, and the
Marshall of Turennes repasse into France. The Baptisone of the young Prince of
Orange, and the dispute about his tutelage. The Damme broaken near Waguening.
Uleseldt accused of having intended to poison the King of Denmark. Berghen St.
Weynock taken by the Spaniards.

THe Queen being very often petitioned by the Members of Parliament, to set the
Princes at liberty, for the Kings service, and the kingdoms quiet, and seeing
the Resolute run up and down the streets of Paris, requiring their deliverance;
condescended to it: but the Kings Counsel, on the other side, was not a little
staggered, to hear the importunate voice of the people, Live the King, Live the
Princes, no Mazarin.

His eminence finding France disgusted by his Ministry, retired himself, as we
have have already said; and the Princes made their entry into Paris the 16. of
February, where they were received by the Duke of Orleans, and all the great
ones, with very strong resentments of joy. The conditions upon which they were
released, were that the hostility of Stenay, and Turenne should cease,

The Cardinal departs out of France, and takes an order for his banishment.
The Cardinal not being able to prevent, or hinder this return of theirs so
prejudicial to his Authority, and seeing the Duke of Orleans, who had consented
to their detention, so urgent now, under pretext of the kingdoms good, for
their releasement; got the King, and Queen, to approve of his retreat. The joy
for his departure was incomprehensibly great; for every one gave him a wipe,
and acccused him of having exhausted the Finances, or Exchequer, nor is there
in fine, that wickedness in nature; wherewith he was not branded; in such sort
as it was believed, that his absence would bring back the golden Age. But his
banishment touched him much more to the quick.

His enemies had now their time, and he not long after, had his. It is better
to laugh at last, then at first. His departure was ignominious, but his return
was glorious. The Spaniards offered him all kindness of favor in his disgrace,
which he discreetly refused, upon the consideration of a former obligation. The
Parliament of Rouen Decreed also against him. All the world, yea, even the Pope
himself hated him; And yet for all this, the mischiefs whereof he was held to
be the Author, ended not by his retyrement,

The King and Queen made a Manifest, wherein they declared the Princes
innocent, Goes to Dinant, and then to Bruel.
and approved all that which was ordered against Mazarin, who passed by Perone,
Sedan, and Dinant, where he stayed some days, and then went to Liege, and in
fine, retired to Bruel to the Electour, who received him according to his
qualities. Thus was he exiled, cried down, and hated by all; his services were
forgotten; and even they themselves, who showed him some courtesy in his
retreat, were made guilty thereby. None but great spirits make their
magnanimity appear, in misfortunes.

The Vice-Count returns into France.
The Duchess of Longueville, the Marshal of Turenne, and the Count of
Grandpre, returned into France with their Troops, where they were welcome;
leaving the care of finishing the work to the Spaniards; who could not
sufficiently wonder at this change; however the Princes sent to Brussels, to
thank the Archduke for his care of their deliverance.

Small tumults in Holland. The Prince of Oranges Baptism.
The little tumults which happened at Middleburgh in Zeland, at Dort, and at
Culemburgh, were appeased before they were known; and therefore we will not
speak of them at present, but relate the Baptism of the young Prince of Orange,
which was performed with great magnificence at the Haghe. The States General,
Wilhelmus Henrious Prince of Orange nassau son of the Princis, Royal. London
Printed sold by P Stent.
the States of Holland, and Zeland, and the Deputies of the Town of Delfs,
Harlem, and Amsterdam, were his Godfathers. But there chansed a great
controversy concerning his tuteladge (which was adjudged to the Princess
Royal his mother) which caused some coldness between the two Ladies, and much
ado there was to end it.

The great assembly at the Haghe.
In the mean while, the great assembly persevered in the care of making the
union stronger then ever and repayting some disorders; in relation to which it
was judged necessary to grant an Act of oblivion; to put the Militia into good
method; to maintain the Reformed Religion to keep the bitt in the Roman
Catholics mouths, and exclude such as followed that Doctrine, from all
Public employments.

Separates.
All being concluded, the Assembly sent for a Minister to give God thanks, and
parted with most perfect intelligence. A day of prayer was held, and alms was
distributed, and the Firewords, and Ordnance made a concert, for the Simbole of
the union.

The Bank broken.
The year of 1651 toward the end of Winter, the Snowes melting by a thaw, the
Waters of the Rheyn swol up in such sort, that the Bank between Rhene, and
Waguening brake, and put the inhabitants about Amerssort into great
perplexities. Indeed, Many Inundations.
this year deserved to be called the year of deluge; for there were very few
Rivers in Europe, which did not, by the continual raines exceed their bounds,
and bear down their banks. The Scourge of God, as water, fire, and sword, are
every where felt.

Let us go to the septemptrion, where we shall find one of the greatest Lords,
yea the high Steward of the House of the King of Denmark himself, suspected,
and accused, of having intended to poison the King. A wickedness unknown
heretofore, in the colds of the North.

Ulefeldt the high Steward of the Kings household accused of having intended to
poison him.
It was Mons. Vlefeldt, a man of great experience, and much renowned for the
Embassayes, wherein he had rendered the King, and Commonwealth great services,
who was accused of this treason, by a lewd woman, who not being able to prove
the said accusation, was beheaded. One Colovel Walter was also suspected, who
having defended his innocence, summoned the said Vlefeldt; but he, in stead of
appearing before the King, departed secretly with his wife, into Holland, and
afterward into Sweden; His flight was extremely ill taken, and Hannibal
Zeestadt, for having contemned the Kings Authority, was degraded, from his
charge, and deprived of almost all his Estate. These two Lords had married each
of them one of the dead Kings natural Daughters, and were Brothers-in-Law to
Count Wolmaor, The Count Wolmaer goes into Muscovie.
who during his Fathers life, went into Muscovie, to marry the Grand Dukes
Daughter, where he tried the perfidie of those Barbarians, who, in
consideration of an advice come from another place, would not give him the
Princess, but upon unreceivable conditions. In fine, having unpesterest
himself from their hands, and received his liberty, he repassed through Poland,
put himself into the Imperial Armies, whore he acquired great reputation, and
high employments, and the Emperors favor to boot. Thus all was appeased in
that Kingdom, and let us now return post back through Germany, where we shall
find nothing but a reformation, and some complaints which rang every where, of
the Garrison of Frankendal.

The French forces marched toward the Low-Countryes, and committed some
robberies, and violences upon the Fronteers of Flanders: the Spaniards opposed
them; and toward the end of the Summer, drew out some regiments, and made them
march under the conduct of that great Captain the Marquis of Sfondrato, who
took Fuernes with small resistance; Sfondrato, takes Fuernes and Berghen St.
Wynock 1651.
but Berghen St. Wynock, a strong place, and aided by the waters of the Sea,
(which the Sluices being drawn let pass) and which gave the Soldiers great
vexations, opened her gates the eleventh day, to let the Spanish Garrison in,
and the French out. The Fort Linck was also soon reduced; and Burburgh being
abandoned, was put again into condition to defend it self. It was conceived,
that the Spaniards would make an attempt upon Dunkerk; but the continual rains,
the lateness of the season, and sicknesses amongst the soldiers, sent the Army
back to rest.

CHAP. XII. The Cardinal returns into France. The Lords who had been
imprisoned, are restored to their employments. The Prince of Conde retyres from
Paris. The King declared May or. Prodigies seen upon the Sea. The beginning of
the troubles between England and Holland, and why? The death of Spi^ing.
The Cardinals forces pass through Holland.
HOwever Cardinal Mazarin was unhappy in a Cross of fortune, yet he omitted
not either his care, or any occasion to serve the King of France. For he
contracted some of the forces which were disinissed in Cleveland; and sent them
secretly down the Rheyn to Rotterdaim; where being discovered, and their leader
summoned to the Haghe, the Soldiers constrained the Boatmen, to put them a
shore, and so every one went whether he pleased.

In the month of August, there arrived near two thousand Neapolitans before
the Rammekens, in four ships, who tried the courtesy of the Zelanders, heard
their grumblings, and were forced to return to Sea, since the passage to
Antwerp was not allowed them.

The Printe of Conde retyres himself from co^rt.
After the Princes departure, the Lords who were released, were restored to
their former charges. But a sudden gust, or blast, which surprises the Mariners
at Sea, in a great Calm, does not more hare them, then the Prince of Condes
sudden retreat did the French, upon an advertizement which had been given him,
that the Queen would secure his person again. She sent a protestation to him,
that she had no such design, and that it was nothing but false reports
scattered by the Enemies of France: and so upon conditions that the Cardinals
Creatures (as Servient Tellier, etc.) should retire from the Court, he came
back to Paris: but these conditions were ill enough observed.

The King declared Mayor the seventh of September 1651.
The seventh of September, the King being at the Parliament, the Chanceller
declared him Mayor, as being entered into the fourteenth year of his Age, and
the Queen discharged her self of her Regencie.

The Prince of Conde upon another information given him, that they would
murder him, retired himself again to St. Maur, and from thence to Bourdeaux,
where he drew the inhabitants to his party, and the Spaniards came to succor
him with seventeen Ships.

Mezarin returns into France.
The King and Queen went to Poictiers, where they sent for the Cardinal, who
forthwith obeyed, and came to them with some thousands of men, and was received
by them both, with superlative testimonies of benevolence. Thus was the fire
grown greater then ever, and more certain appearance of a general combustion
throughout the whole Kingdom. An order of Parliament was proclaimed against
Cardinal Mazarine, declaring him guilty of High Treason, as a Perturbatour of
the Kingdom; all his Lands, and Goods confiscated; his fine Library sold; a
hundred and fifty thousand Livers, or Florins adjudged to any body who would
bring him alive or dead, The Spaniards come again into France.
and the Spaniards called again into France by the Prince of Conde under the
conduct of the Duke of Nemours.

The Kings complaints were answered by other, and the conclusion was, that if
his Majesty would expel the Cardinal, the foreign forces should retire out of
France.

Let us leave the French thus divided, some leaning to the Princes side, and
some to Mazarins; and these latter were styled Mazarinists: for we must take
notice of the motion of the English, toward a War with the United Previnces,
which were of the same Religion, their Friends, and Neighbors.

For the English put out an Act forbidding the importing any commodities from
any place, but those of their own growth, and in their own ships, to the
intention of increasing the shipping, and Mariners of that Nation; which act
how highly it disgusted the Hollanders, the effects of a most fierce War will
demonstrate. Some Prodigies preceded this War, which I will set down briefly,
without staying upon the circumstances thereof.

Oh unhappy Age! No sooner are we delivered from one misfortune, then we fall
into a greater. For these united Provinces had no sooner given thanks to the
Almighty for Peace, then they found themselves ill looked upon, by many
Potentates; envied by some, and incommodated by others, in their trade. In
fine, the mischief came from that part, which they least suspected.

Take here the Prodigies which were seen by men of credit, and report thereof
made to the States, in this substance.

Prodigees seen near the mouth of the Sea.
That upon Fry day the twenty second of December 1651; about nine of the clock,
ten or twelve leagues from the mouth of the Moze; they saw a plain Field, of
the hight of a man, about the Horizon, and therein many Soldiers, both foot,
and Horse, which forthwith disappeared.

Next, they saw, near about the same place, a great Fleet coming from the
North, some of the Vessels whereof had their Sails but half up. By and by,
there appeared another from the South-east, which came straight to attack the
Former; and then it seemed as if all the Ships were sunk to the bottom; which
yet showed themselves again so distinctly, that they were able to discern the
Ropes, and Cables.

Last of all, they saw the great Vessels again, which they had discovered
first. These visions lasted about three hours. A Lion, on the North side of
the Ships, performed the last Act, under which there appeared animals of
different shapes, which turned into Ships.

The Parliament of England being grown formidable, by Charles Stewarts
expulsion, whom they quite expelled the Island; and by the conquest of the
Kingdom of Scotland, was much intense upon War, and desirous to diminish the
traffic which has enriched these united Provinces; as by taking the Ships
which they met either at Sea, or came into their havens, and then, by giving
Letters of Mart. The beginning by Letters of Mart.


Whereupon, the complainrs of the Holland Merchants obliged the States to send
their Ambassadors, to acknowledge them for a Free Common Wealth: to renew
friendship; and to redemand their Vessels taken.

The first point pleased them; and the second was paid with silence; and the
third differred, as never to be granted. The Propositions which they made the
said Ambassadors, were so high, and beyond their expectation, that the High
and Might Lords resolved upon War.

Whilst these things were in agitation, there happened an encounter betwixt
General Blake, and Admiral Tromp, about striking, The first attak.
wherein Tromp was so briskly received, that he had much ado to get handsomely
off, leaving two ships behind him, in the possession of the English.

This action hastened the return of the Ambassadors; and set the States on
work, for the fitting of a second Fleet, which was retarded by the wary
Hollanders, out of hope of composing the difference, by representing the
necessity of a good harmony betwixt the two Nations. They wanted neither
strength, courage, nor convenience to hurt^ but other considerations made them
seek an accommodation, which these new Republicans rejected.

Mousieur Spiring, the Ambassador of Sweden used all diligence, to prevent the
States Ambassadors departure, Every one goes into England to acknowledge the
Parliament.
and encouraged them to acknowledge England for a Free State. The Title in his
Letter of Credence not being well adjusted, he met with some little difficulty,
yet nevertheless obtained Audience; but death taking him soon away; deprived
that State of a great friend.

After the Spanish Ambassador had acknowledged them, every body hastened to
the Offering, as fearing to be the last. Only France seemed not much to care;
but after having suffered a very rough check, she at last came, as we shall
shortly demonstrate. But we must yet make another great circuit, before we
conclude our Work.

CHAP. XIII. The miseries at Sea caused by Pirates. The present state of Norway,
Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Hungary, Germany, Italy, Spain, and France. etc.
HItherto, we have seen the wars begun, and carried on, first for the authority,
and occupation, or seazure of Countries, under the princtpal pretext of
Religion; and then there happened so great a Hotchpot, and such a confused
variety, by the shuffling together of so many different Allyances, and
deceiptful practices; that this precicus Cloak being grown quite threadbare,
could be no longer worn; and therefore the hatred of Nations, and old
quarrels, must now be brought upon the Stage.

Indeed, if (according to the saying of Tertullian) by forging so many
Religions, there grow at length to be none at all left; with the like
foundation, may I also say, that by making so many various Allyances, which are
so easily broken, and so dexterously patched together again, there is no
Alliance at all. I have to do (said a certain Monarch) with a bordering people,
which never keep their Faith, but when they perceive no occasion to hurt me.

By this it is, that there is so much trouble to make a peace; and they who
labor to join the two Parties, find so much difficulty, and repugnance, in
regard of the indelible distrusts, and jealousies between them, that they
cannot accomplish it. Sea-Rovers.
Besides, that there have always been Sea-Rovers, who, as The The eves, hidden
in the Woods and Forests, have surprised passengers, and laid wait for the
Merchants Ships; and at present, we see whole Fleets, the Sea laden with
Vessels, to attacke, not by stealth, but open force, the said Merchants Ships,
and the men of War also, which accompany them. Some years ago the Sea was
free, and safe enough; but now, there are more, and greater dangers there, then
there ever were by Land.

Let us pass through the North, and end our Carrer in England.

The Kingdom of Norway, being secured by its poverty feared not, the year
before, nor this present year neither, the war, wherein the King of Denmark
seemed ready to involve himself. Thirty English Ships stopped in Denmark.
For he redemanded the Portion of his Aunt Anne, Queen of England; which being
refused, he stopped, and confiscated some thirty English Merchant Ships, and
made a straight Alliance thereupon, with the States of Holland, for their
Common Interests.

That Libell which was made in Sweden, being washed, and wiped off with the
blood of the Authors thereof, all was there in good order, and diligence was
used for the setting out of a little considerable Fleet; which gave the
bordering parts so much jealousy, that King Frederick sent his Ambassadors
thither, who returned with a good answer.

A Spanish Resident at Stockholme.
There was then a Spanish Resident at the Court of Sweden, who treated
secretly; and the affairs of the last Assembly were conducted there so
occultly, that there was no light at all to be found thereof: But true it is,
that Silence is the Soul of great Expedtions.

Livonia was well guarded against the invasion of the Polanders; and the
Treaties at Lubeck between them and the Swedes produced no good operation at
all; so that the Ambassadors retired, to the great displeasure of such as
meddled in them.

The Muscovits did nothing in a long time, which deserves to be noted here. But
the Polanders felt, as well as the rest of the Nations of Europe, the Rod of
the Almighty, by pestilence, inundations, and wars, which continue even yet,
against the Rebellious Cossacks, under the direction, and authority of King
Casimir. The accidental fire, which was like to burn the young Princess, was
taken as an ill augure, by such as were curious; but the Kingdom is yet in
vigor, and the Armies in condition to ruin their enemies.

The Turks, and Tartars made some irruptions into Hungary, which gave both
damage, and fear by the marching of some Troops, but at present, the Peace is
exactly kept.

The Empire enjoyes the Peace made at Munster; and every Prince labous, by the
offer of fair Privileges, to revive both his Country, and the Religion he
professes. The Emperor, who shows that he took the redress of the Empire
more to heart, then the preservation of his own life, assembled all the
Electors the last year at Prague, The Electors at Prague, 1692.
and courted them with so free, and open a breast, that they were all most
satisfied, and promised to meet at the Diet of Ratishone.

Germany seeing her Head and Members in so perfect a harmony, hopes that this
Union will prove a wholesome Balm, to cure the wounds of the Empire.

Italy is restored to a better state; there being only the Venetians, who alone
sustain the weight of the Ottoman Arms. They sent their Ambassador to
Constantinople, The Venetian Ambassador arested at Constantinople.
being advertised of the Grand Signors desire to compose the Difference; who,
against the Law of Nations, arrested him, and would not listen to any overture
of Peace at all, unless the Republic would yield him up the whole Kingdom of
Candy.

The Pope was disgusted at the disobedience of the Christians, who stopped
their cares to his remonstrances.

The heat of the war in Piemont cooled by little and little, for want of
nutriment.

The King of Spain, after the Conjuration made against his person, and stifled
in the blood of the Authors; after the peace restored to the States of
Neaples, Sicily, and Perin; had no other care left, then to protect his
Subjects; maintain the peace with the United Provinces; keep up his Armada, or
Navy; send moneys into Flanders to continue the war; and succor the Princes of
France, thereby to divide, in effect, or weaken that Kings Authority; as he
has also, on the other side, endeavored by all means possible, to deminish
that of the House of Austria.

The Civil wars of France had taken away the vigor of that of Cataluni^^ and
Barcelona, having been blocked up, about fifteen months, Barcelons renders her
self, 1652.
rendered her self in Autumn in the year 1652. La Motte Hodincour not having
been able to succor it, though he entered the Town by force; no more then the
Duke of Mercoeur was Tortoza; and so they both returned into France, with Don
Joseph de Marguerita.

Cazal, and Dunke^k taken.
Cazall, and Dunkerck being taken from the King of France, with very little
trouble, and charge; gave full joy to the one Party, and grief to the other, to
see that their Conquests made with the money, sweat, and blood of the poor
people, were torn from them, as it were playing, and without loss of men, as
we shall demonstrate. They imputed all these misfortunes, to the Civil wars;
but others, to the injustice of their taking arms, upon mere distrust, and
occasion, in so favorable a conjuncture.

During this deplorable Civil War, wherein this poor Kingdom finds it self
miserably involved, after having waged, and kindled so many other wars
throughout all Europe; The Second State assembles it self at Paris.
the Second State began to hold their Assembly at Paris, according to the
example of the first; but being broken by fair promises, the true jealousy
which proceeded from it, vanished. The poor Subjects were not yet enough
oppressed by the Taxes, but that they must be so more, Bat it is broken.
by the dissolute, and undisciplined Soldiers, whose insolency was
insupportable; but their chastisemens was proportionable to their barbarity:
besides, despair made both the Nobility, and people of Campague take arms
against them, and dispatch a very great number of them; and they of Senlis
Meanx, The Soldiers killed by the Country people.
Anergue, and other places followed their example, and massacred a great part
of those Robbers; in such fort, as it was horrible to see all these disorders.

Moreover there has been a perpetual Traffic, or buying, and selling of
Charges, The Venality, or selling of Offices damm^^gable.
and Offices, since the Ministry of these two Cardinals, which has caused
almost mortal Commotions, to the State.

The troubles in Provence, Guyenne, Anergne, and other parts, proceeded from
this turmoyle. For a sum of money has often been given to some, for such a
Government, and to others for such another, whilst the Subjects have been
averse from it: And we must here add, that the venality, or selling of Offices
has corrupted Integrity, and Justice; in such sort, as that this Goddess,
having lost her strength, all sorts of impieties, extortions, and blasphemies
are now in vogue: for the fear of God, and equity being taken away, men run
post into vices, and welter in wickedness; yea, and Princes very often make
their Subjects sin, by their example.

Regis ad exemplum, totus componitur orbis,
What ere the King is, that we ever find,
The people apt to be, in their own kind.
The Prince of Conde, having received a supply from Spain, and Paris another
from Brussels by land, Suttour from Spain.
as I have noted already, the War was made in Xaintongue in the year, 1652, and
in the district of Aunts, against the Count of Angnon, Governor of the Isles
of Broiiage, and Oleron, by the Count of Harcourt, who retook some places, and
the Tower of Rochel. But having received notice, that the Cardinal would
accommodate himself with Brisack, posted thither, Harcourt at Brisack.
and left his Army an Orphant.

This retreat, of one of the most illustrious, and most fortunate Warriers in
the World, who was so necessary, and useful to the State, was a Pill of hard
disgestion, which yet must needs be swallowed down, without showing the
bitterness thereof.

Let us here mark the inconstance of the French Nation, which they themselves
confess to be as it were essential to them. For, they, who had quite
abandoned, yea, contemned the just choler of their Sovereign, and incurred the
Crime of High Majesty; by pursuing with the naked Sword, the deliverance of the
Princes, Renlarkal le Vihanges.
and calling in Strangers into the Kingdom; both were astewards, and yet are,
the only men who fight against the Prince of Coinle.

The Duke of Bouillon was raised very high, and cherished by the King, and all
the Court, part of the year 1652. but he quickly lest those vain, and
inconstant honors, to go and receive incorruptible ones; The Duke of
Bouillons death.
for he died at Pontoise.

He was a great Captain, and had learnt the discipline of War in Holland, where
he had the honor to Command the Cavalry, and govern the Town of Mastricht. He
lost the affection of all the Hughenots, by having embraced the Roman Catholic
Religion; and that of the King, by having put himself into the League of the
Princes of the Peace; in such fort, as being suspected of I know not what kind
of intelligence with Monsieur le Grand, and imprisoned, the Town of Sedan, and
the high intercession of the Prince of Orange, saved his life.

The Marshal of Turenne after having refused many courtships, and a present of
great value from the Prince of Conde, was chosen to command the Kings Army.

CHAP. XV
The Prince of Conde comes to Paris. The King of France attacks Estampes. The
Duke of Lorraine, being come to succor the Princes, receives some money of the
King, and returns. The Archduke sends an Army to Paris; Takes Graveling, and
Dunkerck. The English beat the French Fleet. The Cardinal of Retz induces the
King to come back to Paris. The Prince of Conde retires into France. Cardinal
Mazarins praises. The Cardinal of Retz carried to the Bois de Vincennes.

THis young Mars, this invincible Courage, judging his person to be more
necessary at Paris, then at Bourdeans; left his Lieutenants the direction of
his own Forces, showed himself quickly amongst those of the Duke of Orleans,
and the Strangers, and made the Marshal D'hoquincour feel, that he was no more
in Guyenne; for after having lost his Troops, Marshal D'hoquincour beaten.
he was constrained to sly. The King made his Army march, under Turenns orders,
who went to attack Estampes; but finding the Duke of Lorraine to draw near, he
retired, and confessed that the Strangers who were in the Town, defended
themselves bravely.

It looked, as if the Princes would have a good bargain of all such as made
head against them; when upon a sudden, the Duke of Lorraine, by the
interposition of the King of Englands Eldest Son, made a contract apart,
received money, and retired himself out of the Kingdom; but he sent back his
Army shortly after, with the Spaniards, because the restitution of the three
places promised, was not performed.

The Prince being irritated, and the Parisians extremely amazed, began to
revile the said Duke, and all in fine, discoursed of him, according to their
passion. Some accused him of inconstance, and others of avarice: but such as
had a strain above the vulgar, judged that there was some vengeance hidden
under this action; and that the levity both of the one and the other so often
manifested, to them whose assistance they had both implored, and felt; ought to
be recompensed by a just retaliation. Be it what it will, the Princes Troops
being tired by frequent Skermishes, and by that furious, and bloody shock given
in the Faubourgs, or Suburbs of St. Anthony, (wherein the Mazarinists, or
Royalists had the worst) being very much diminished, the Archdukes succor was
sent for again, which being conducted by the Baron of Clinchant, advanced quite
to Paris. But let us come back into Flanders.

Graveling besieged, Mardyke abandoned, yields, and Dunke^k afterward.
The Archduke finding that the fire was too great in France to be so soon
extinguished, made a show of besieging Dunkerk; but his design was upon
Graveling, one of the most important places of the Low Countries, which
defended it self enough; but for want of sufficient Garrison, was yielded upon
the same Conditions, that it had been formerly taken.

Mardyke was abandoned: and Dunkerk expecting the relief by Sea, which was
dofeated by the English, was retaken without either; loss, or bloodshed. Thus,
were three places reduced to obedience with a hand-full of men, which had cost
the French mountains of Gold, and Seas of blood. Who would have said so much
six years before, when there seemed to be no doubt at all made, of the utter
expulsion of the Spaniards? Times change, men change, victories are
alternative, and nothing is constant, but the immutable Order of the Decree of
the Everlasting.

This reduction deservedly rejoiced all Flanders, which saw her Traffic, and
Inhabitants slourish again. The Town of Dunkerk had been offered to the States
of Holland, for Mastricht; for a sum of money, but the bargain was not made.

The City of Paris seeing it self in violent, and murtherous factions; the
Parliament in confusion; the Country People frighted away strangers in the
Kingdom; the Princes in a very difficult passage to be cleared, and the Clergy
afflicted by these unhappy disorders; resolved to dispatch the Cardinal de Retx
to the King, (who was with a new Parliament at Pontoise) to beseech him, The
King returns to Paris.
to return to Paris. This Embassy was well received by his Majesty, who,
having published an Act of Oblivion, was so much better at Paris. The Prince of
Conde retired himself with the foreign Troops, took Retel, and St. Menhout, and
his winter quarters, at the beginning of the spring, 1653.

And the Duke of Odeans departs.
The Duke of Orleans having received order, either to come to the King or to
retire himself; rather chose the latter, then to suffer Cardinal Mazarins
presence, who quickly caused the order to be annulled, that was made against
him: because there was no body found, who had a mind to earn a hundred and
fifty thousand Crowns by killing him.

Thus, we see the figure turned up-side down; the Cardinal above the wheel, and
the Princes under it; so that Conde chose rather, to cast himself into the King
of Spaines arms, then to trust his own Masters Act of Oblivion; and Conty was
received at Bourdeaux, together with the Duchess of Longueville his Sister,
whilst her husband stayed amongst the waves of this raging Sea, in his
Government.

Reader, be not amazed at these Metamorphoses, or changes, for the causes
thereof are not so hard to be comprehended, as that of the Tide of the Sea was
to the Prince of the Philosophers. What do you hope to see, but monsters,
prodiges, and miracles?

The Province of Gasconie being fertile in subtle wits, and brave soldiers,
was no sooner got out of one danger, then she fell into a precipice yet more
perilous, through blind temerity, and as well to serve the passion of others,
as for not receiving the satisfaction promised them, or rather for seeing their
Complaints despised, and that which had been promised them, very ill performed.

The puissant Armies, which were to ruin Mazarin, returned without having done
any memorable action at all. The Parliament being in division, knew not where
to sinde it self; the Citizens changed like the wind, and wedded sometimes the
one Party, and sometimes the other. Yea, the Princes themselves were in
discord; for the Duke of Ne^o^^s was killed in a Duel, by his Brother-in. Law
the Duke of Beaufort, and the Count of Ri^^^ carri^d prisoner to the Bastill,
by the Duke of Orl^a^^'s order, for having resisted Go^de. In such sort, as all
issued to the Kings advantage, by the Great Card^nals wise Counsel, who, like
an experienced Pilot, saved the vessel from shipwreck, and brought her over so
many Rocks, amongst so many Quicksands, in the darkness of a cloudy night, and
amongst ^o many contrary winds, to the Port. For, he knew how to sow the tares
of distention amongst them who would take the Helm from him, and threw them out
of that ship, which he never abandoned, in the very height of the storm.

Indeed to say the truth, the King had need of such a man; though he be more
useful to him, then to the poor subjects; and some have reviled him, by
following the passion others, or for resentment, rather then by the knowledge
of affairs; and therefore are as incapable to judge of him, Cardinal Mazuins
praise.
as a blind man is of Colors. The rash judgments of the ignorant people,
cause tumults, and seditions, and kindle a fire, which invirons a whole State;
for which there there must be a speedy remedy.

True it is, that he is blamed, and that upon very probable arguments, for not
having made peace at Munster, for the necessary rest, and tranquillity of the
French, and for the superlative advantage of France. But, Wherefore he did not
make Peace.
he hoped to come to share stakes, and conceived, that the United Provinces
would forsake their interests, to follow his passion, and his designs. But God
had otherwise disposed of it.

Why the Prince retired himself.
The Prince of Conde, being privileged by his birth, after having performed
the Crown such services as surpass the belief of man, after having spilt his
blood, and exposed his life to so many hazards; after having gained so many
Battails, and forced so many Towns, was not able to digest an Imprisoment,
grounded upon conjectures, which the brightness of his glory had engendered in
some distrustful souls. It is a great heart-sore to a generous spirit, to
have any other Guard imposed upon him, then that of his ^^us honor.

The information which was given him of that design, and then of the attempt
projected upon his person, (as was reported) moved him to endeavor to destroy
his eneme; which not being able to atchieve by almost a general Insurrection,
he chose rather to withdraw, then to see a man at Court, who overshadowed him,
and made his heart swell with vengeance.

His Father retired himself to Brussels.
The Father, to save his honor, had retired himself also to Brussells, and
depositated his wife in the hands of that most virtuous Princess, the Cardinal
Infanta. And the Son, to revenge the affront which he precended to have been
done him, and for which he could get no satisfaction in France, took the same
course, sound the same protection, and the honor to command the Armies. The
issue will show us how to judge of the intentions, and of the cause, by the
effects.

In fine, every one would have the superiority, and no body would stoop, to
make place for another. For, the Citizens of Paris, The Cardinal of R^tz at the
Bois de Vincennes.
who thought to find their own interests in those of the Princes, seeing the
Game in danger to be lost, easily disingaged themselves from the affections
which they had vowel to them. And the Cardinal of R^tz, And Beaufort, with the
Duke of Orleans to Blois.
who had mediated the Kings return to Paris, and rendered him superlative
service, was soon after, carried prisoner to the Bois de Vincennes. The Duke of
Beaufort, who had swumme in the affections of the Parisians, not finding his
safety any more amongst them, retired himself with the Duke of Orleans, The
reduction of Retel, and Bourdeaux, 1653.
to Blois.

This last Field began with the taking of Ret^l, saw the Prince of Ca^^e, with
the whole Army, in Picardy, and the reduction of Bourdeaux. God grant, that the
end thereof may produce a peace, for which so many people long, and earnestly
expect. It must be looked for from his band; for it is only he, who can give it
in our days; it is he only, who fights for us, and who will graciously hear
the prayers of his affected people. The Duke of Guise returns into France.
Upon the intercession of this Prince, the King of Spain set the Duke of Guise
at liberty, who was taken in the tumults of Neaples, as has been already said.
He retured into France, but took not his intercessours part, because he had not
the same interests, nor had received the same affronts.

Before we conclude our work, we must pass once more into England, to see how
that Commonwealth is governed, which as soon as it was out of the Cradle, sell
into a difference with that of Holland, which had fought fourscore years for
her liberty, and in whose preservation the bordering Countries have their
interest, as we shall forthwith demonstrate.

The situation of Holland.
Holland is so situated, and her number of shipping is so great, that there
arrive merchandises from all the Havens of the world, which are transported by
the Hollanders, to other parts, as well by Sea, as by the Navigable Rivers
which surround it. The People are very open, and plain, and govern their Trade
with so much industry, craft, and cunning, (I speak in general) that they
surpass all other Nations of the Universe therein. Now, as the Liver in man's
body makes the Chylus, or Concocoction, and diffuses the blood through all the
veins; just so Holland receives the Merchandises into her bowels, and sends
them through all the veins of this world. But the Liver being corrupted, the
body cannot long subsist: so the Traffic being spoiled; not only this Country,
but the other also would have too much to suffer. Their knowledge in order to
the Sea, is so perfect, and their proevidence so laudable, that they seldom
make shipwreck.

The English slight the friendship of the Hollanders.
All things being well considered, it may be asked why that new Common-wealh,
being yet in her infancy, full of danger, and in the middle of so many enemies
both at home and abroad, sought not the friendship of this, being almost
conform in doctrine with her, as also Aristocratical Government? To which I
answer, that two Commonwealths, so near one another, which have but one, and
the same scope, or aim, i.e. the Traffic, are less able to agree, then
Rivals, who court one Mistress, or two Neighbour-Kings. Religion may do much
to animate a people; but profit, mility, and gain carries it quite away.

There is yet somewhat more; for ambition makes face of the Piramide, which
does not show it self, and is stolen from the eyes of the most clear-sighted
persons. Rome and Carihage were in perpetual controversies. One of these two
Republics must needs perish, to open the passage to the other, for the
Conquest of the Universe.

When prepare themselves for the war.
I leave the other reasons to be picked out by acuter wits, and say that the
States not being able to make any profit of theirs, were constrained to lay
about them for their own defense, and to provide all approaches, or Inlets.
They reinforced the Garrison of the Brill, and of Zeland; gave order to sit a
good number of ships, and to raise money upon the people, to furnish the
expenses, whilst the English continued their hostilty. But a certain faction
flipt in amongst the people, by such authors as were enemies to the public
quiet; and we will first recount some particular misfortunes.

The tumult at Middleburgh 1653. was soon appeased. That at Dort, was yet of
less consequence. The fire which happened to the Townhouse at Ams^erdam, The
Town house at Amste^dam burnt.
1652. brought some damage, and caused the hastening of that, which was
already begun to be built. The audacity of the Seamen, who brought back the
vessels which remained in Hitland; was repressed by the punishment of some
amongst them. A small ^^nult appeased.
But a rash Commandment, more unfortunately executed, and which cost the life
of some Citizens, who were killed by Musket Shot, was like to have put that
illustrious City into a deplorable confusion.

The English, not content with taking their ships, attacked, and took also many
other vessels, which go every year to catch Herrings, and other fish; so that
they hurt, and do yet hurt this Republic, by all the means, and ways, they
could, or can devise.

The Propositions of the English not receivable.
The Propositions which they made our Ambassadors, were so high and unequal,
that they sufficiently evidenced their design against this Commonwealth; the
principal whereof was this: That we should enter into a League Offensive and
Defensive with them, and that we should make all their enemies, ours, etc.
Points of most dangerous consequences. But let us go further.

CHAP. XVI
The English attack the Convoy of the Fishers. Tromp returns to Sea, and finds
Blake. The Tempest separates them; and he comes back into Holland. De Ruyter
attacks Ascue. Van Galens Victory before Ligorne. The English take all without
distinction. Tromp safely conducted the Fleet into France. Diverse combats.
Tromps death. Cromwell, and his Exploits. The Diet at Ratisbone. The Election,
and Coronation of Fetdinand the Fourth, King of the Romans.

When Nations, cannot be reconciled by all kinds of reason, and justice, war
must be endured. The Astrologors foretold this, in the observation of that
Comet of the year of 1618. and that of the year before, and advertised us, that
the wrath of God was not appeased.

The States having received the troublesome news of the taking of those ships
of war which accompanied the fishermen, gave order to attack the English, by
way of retorsion.

The Fleets at Sea.
Tromp departed in July, with resolution to make the English repent their
having neglected, and slighted the Hollanders friendship; and espying Sir
George Asene in the Downs, with a Squadron of Ships, was not able to bear up
with him, by reason of the Calm; and so going to seek Blaks in the North,
where some Vessels which came from the Great Indies, were to pass, he
discovered him. The prayers were said, and the Onset begun; A storm dammageable
to the Hodanders, 1952.
but a great wind separated the two Fleets, made the English retire into their
Havens, and some of our Ships perish upon the Rocks; and the rest were saved in
Hitland, and about forty came home, with the Admiral.

Thus the Calm, and the Tempest parted them two several times; but de Ruyter,
going to convoy the Marchant-Fleet with forty Ships, met Ason^ with his
Squadron, and faced him so stoutly, that he was constrained ^o ^^treat into
England, and give him passage.

General Badiley bravely defended himself against twice his number of Ships in
the Streights; but being over-powred, lost the Phanix, which was after wards
recovered by Captain Cox.

The Victory obtained afterward before Ligorne by Admiral Van Galen, was
successful; Van Galens Victory before Lavorno.
for three Vessels were taken, and some other burnt: yet was in some manner
otherwise, the said Admiral receiving his deaths wound in the engagement.

It very often chances, that they who gain the Battle, have not the greatest
booty; for there are some who go out in Party, and sometimes make their
Fortune. The Capes of Grip are certain particular persons, who go to Sea with
small Vessels, set out at their one charge, and they make huge profit: and they
lie at present, about the Coast of England, and cause much danger.

The conjunction of Vice Admiral Wit Wittenson was rendered infructuous by the
Cowardice of some Holland Captains, who forgot their duty, whilst the English
performed theirs, with great advantage, by taking the Spanish money, which was
destinated to pay the Armies in the Low Countries, and carrying it to London
where it was stopped, The English detain the money which comes from Spain.
and rever restored, because there were some Holland Merchants Goods, or Wares
in the Vessels; and albeit the instances made by the Archduke Leopold, and the
Spanish Ambassadors were heard, they yet took no effect; whereupon some have
believed, that they were but feigned; but however it were, they kept the money,
and have served themselves of it.

The Rendeznous of the Ships, near Roch^l, 1653.
The States considering the greatness of the danger, gave all the Merchant
Ships order to assemble themselves, in a General Rendeznuous before the Isle of
St. Martin, near Rochel, and there expect the Navy, consisting of seventy six
Men of War, and eight Fireships, which departed the first of December, under
Admiral Tromps orders, to convoy home the abovesaid Merchant Ships, which were
above three hundred, all laden with Commodities.

The English approached; but came off with loss, and returned into the Thames;
and so the Fleet arrived in France, without any damage. But during these great
Attacks, the little War was carried on, with much partiality and prejudice to
the Merchants.

For the mitigation of Gods wrath, and the diversion of his scourge from the
United Provinces, the States ordered prayers to be made every Weducsday at four
of the clock in the afternoon, all Shops to be kept shut, and all negotiations
forborne during the time of the Sermon.

Thus was the War indirectly mennadged upon this blew Element, between the two
most potent Nations that are at present, or ever have been in all the North,
for the Dominion of the Ocean, and for the retention of Trade. None but the
Sea Monsters, are able to render an account of all the brave Actions which are
done there, as being Spectatours of them.

The said States, being advertised of the great preparation which their Enemies
were making to attack Tromp in his return with the Marchant-Fleet, gave order
for the speedy equipaging of some other Ships, to go to meet him; but they were
hindered by contrary winds.

The Navall Battle which lasted three days, 1653.
Tromp being arrived near Bolein discovered the English Fleet, and a little
after began a Battle, which continued three days, the most furiously that
could be: Nothing was feen but fire, and flame; and one would have said, that
the Ocean was become combustible, and had taken the nature of the contrary
Element. The Land had been already sufficiently steeped in blood; and now the
Sea must be also colored, with it. The indignation of that just God extends it
self upon all the Elements; malediction is upon the Land, and upon the Water,

The end of the Combas was, that Tromp retreated into Calais Road, and brought
back the most part of the Fleet into Holland, all which the English thought to
eatch, though they were feign to becontent, with the taking of some Merchant
Ships, and some Men of War; and with letting the Hollanders see, that they had
to do with most generous, and redoubtable Enomies. But our Admiral had two
difficulties to overcome; the one to charge the Enemies in their retreat, and
the other, to guard the Merchandise.

When a Shepherd sees many Wolves coming to attack his flock, he keeps it
behind him, and cannot serve himself of the advantage be has upon any one
alone, by pursung him, for fear of giving the rest the occasion of seizing upon
his sheep. This brave man did wonders; Tromps praise.
but he had the displeasure of seeing seeing above twenty of his men of War
fly, without fighting at all.

The States ceased not, during these fatal actions, to employ all possible
inventions to disingage themselves from these troubles, which obstructed the
Commerce, either by force, or friendship. For the advantages which the Enemies
had by the convenience of their Havens, before which they are necessitated to
pass, as at the mercy of the Canon, oblidged such Fleets as were not furnished
with sufficient Convoyes, The Ships pass behind Scotland.
to pass behind Ireland and Scotland, and before Norway: a long, paineful,
and perilous Voyage, and which very often caused the merchandises to be
corrupted, and spoiled. (...)

The great Fleet, which departed this Spring from Rochel, made this huge
circuit, and by an admirable felicity artiyed safely, without having me^ the
Enemy, who expected it at the passage; that which was appointed toward the
Baltic Sea, was all the Summer at the Fly, without daring to come out; and
that of the great Indies is not yet arrived.

In the Battle against General Deane, Tromp, was forced to retreat with
considerable loss, because he had a contrary wind, General Deane beat the
Hollanders.
and stayed before Flushing to repair his Ships. But the English kept the Sea,
and showed themelves before the Brill, and then before the Taxell, where we
will leave them, to see what passes in the Province.

Seditions in Holland, and chiefly at Enchuien.
During these Tragedies at sea, murmurations, and mutterings were heard a
shore, and certain Libells entitled the Lords of Louvenstein. It was said, that
there was a design to ruin the House of Nassaw, and that the Prince of Orange
ought to be Governor of the Country; and many other Calumnies which deserve to
be suppressed. When the Drum was beaten for the raising of Soldiers, the
common people would needs have it done under the conduct of the Prince of
Orange; in such sort as that at Enchuysen, there happened a Tumult of very ill
example.

The States considering the potency of their Enemies, and many other affairs
which might be thought of for security, sent for a great Body of Horse, into
the very center of Holland, and placed it near the Seacoast. The Horse comes
into Holland.
But they chiefly expressed their infatigable care, in the fitting, and setting
forth of a Fleet, to chastise a Nation which neglected their friendship,
whereof the were deceived, as the sequel will demonstrate.

Tromp having put his Fleet into a fighting posture again, and the soldiers
being paid, and assured of maintenande in case they were may med, set sail
toward the end of July, and went generously to face his Enemies; and Wit
Wittenson departed from the Texel to second him: The fight began, and the
Hollanders charged twice through the English Fleet, and in the third time it
was, A furious Battle wherein the Hollanders are worsted.
that this warlike Nation of the English showed their magnanimity and courage,
by forcing the Hollanders to a retreat into their Havens; three Dutch
Fireships fastened on three of their Flag-ships. But the English, contemning
all danger, flung themselves into the flame, and disingaged their Ships.

Tromps deaths
The valliant Tromp dyed in this bed of Honor. He was beloved, and regretted
by all in general, for the mildness of his nature, and for the services which
he had done his Native Country.

He was ennobled by Lewis the thirteenth King of France, in recompense of those
services which he had done him, and very much esteemed by Cardinal Richelieu;
E^nobled by the King of France.
but Rarea took him a way, before he had finished this War, which drew the
attention of the whole World upon it,

General Cromwell, a most prudent Politician, and most magnanintous Captain,
having surmounted the Royal Party, subjugated the Irish, defeated in many
Battles, Victorious Cromwell dissolves the Parliament.
and humbled the Scots, as well in their own Country, as in England, and
dissipated Charle's Forces, had now no more to do, then to dissolve the
Parliament, which he performed with as much glory to himself, as shame to them:
So that he is now more absolute in Authority, then any of the Kings ever were,
by virtue of his Army, whereby he keeps the people in awe, and order; who
governs the State not only like a Brutus, but like a Caesar also. He
constituted a new Parilament, which changed not their resolutions to hurt the
Hollanders, who had also the power to defend themselves.

This we see the State of England, not only under a Brutus, but a Caesar afso,
Confusion in the Church of England.
the Church governed by Independents, and full of confusions; yea, the women
have preached, against St. Paul's express Commandment, and the Cl^^thes turned
into Stables: But a regulation of all these exorbitances, is expected from the
government of so sage a Ruler. But in what condition have we lest Holland? In
the care of choosing a new Admiral, and maintaining the Union of the
Consoederated Provinces.

For conclusion, we will go back to see that most famous Assembly of Ratisbone,
where there is nothing treated but what is of high, The Assembly at Rausbone.
and noble consequence. The saines are past, the storms scattered, and the
Mariners repair the Vessels; the Sun of Justice shows himself; and such as
have escaped shipwreck, dry their Clothes, and rake together the fragments of
what is left them.

However Ferdinand the third, that most Religious, and most August Emperor,
were arrived at Ratisbone together with the Electours, and had sufficiently
declared, that for the good of the Empire, is was necessary to provide a worthy
Successor; they endeavored not yet, to elect a King of the Romans, till after
the hews was come, that the Swedes had restored into the hands of the Marquis
of Brandenburgh, The Hinder Pomerania rescorred.
Heir to the last Duke of Pomerania, that Portion, or Parcel which is called
the Hinder-Pomerania; the time being passed in visits, divertisements, and
honest recreations. But then, the said Emperor, transporting himself, together
with the Electoral College, and an infinite multitude of other Princes to
Auxburgh; his Son Ferdinand the fourth, King of Bohemia, and Hungary, was with
a common voice, proclaimed King of the Romans. Ferdinand the fourth proclaimed
King of the Romans.
By the happy Conjunction of these Stars, nothing could be expected, but a
previous influence of long repose, through the whole Empire of Germany; a
reparation of disorders, and an establishment of a good Peace, by there-union
of minds.

Great God! How infinite are thy wonders, and how immovable is thy Providence!
The choose the Sen of him, out of whose hand they labored to pull the Helm,
to whom they give, both with him, and after him, the government of this Vessel.
But the winds are either appeased, or gone into other Countries, to make them
also feel their violence, and rage.

Great Prince! Worthy Fruit of that most August Plant! Rose picked out of the
thorns of confusion, to Command! Star of good Augure, who rejoycest the
Mariners, and annowucest them the end of the Storm! Receive, amongst the
Public Acclamations of the whole Empire, my vows, conceived upon the Coast of
the Ocean, and in the uttermost parts of Low-Germany, for the prosperity of thy
youthful age. Long may thou live, and revive the anthority of the Laws
borne down by these monstrous Wars. Let Christian Faith, Hope, and Charity,
reflourish, under thy glorious, and pacifical Empire. Let the hatreds of
Religion be taken away; and let distrusts, jeadousies, and partialities be
stifled, to the end, that by the termination of so many, and so great
calamities, we may all render due thank to our Creator, Amen.

The continuation of the Iron Age.

I Have spoken briefly, of the misfortunes of this abominable Age; and have
represented as in a picture Sacriledges, Massacres, Revo^s, Wickednesses, and
all other mischiefs in gross, together with their causes, and deceiptfull
pretexts, to prove that it is the last. Such as doubt hereof, do infallibly
expect more dreadful prodigies, more universal, The evils of the latter days.
and more destructive Warts, more enormous changes, more frequent Earthquakes,
more ample Embarassements, more ordinary Inundations, more common Scandals,
more absurd Ingratitudes, more pernicious Penns, more coldness of Charity, more
hatred amongst Christians; more diversity in Religion, and more general
contempt of the Laws, both Divine, and Human, For, such crimes as in former
Ages, were abhorred, and not committed, but in private places, and by the favor
of darkness, are now perpetrated in public, and with freedom and boldness.
Wherefore, we must not wonder, if disasters continue, since the wickedness of
man goes always increasing. We endeavor to cure the wounds, but it is but
superficially, for they are inwardly festered. No no; there will be no end of
our exorbitant Wars, but with the end of that great day, since the point which
feeds them, is too powerful, and the Almighty too much inflamed with
indignation, to differ his Vengeance, and stop his Angels, who are ready to
descend, and consummate all.

There are no more Williams of Hennawlt, to do the oppressed speedy justice;
nor more St. Lewises, inexorable to punish blasphemers, and to make a Temple of
devotion, of a Court.

The Emperor Ferdinand at Ra^thone.
We left the Emperor Ferdinand, the third, with the King of the Romans his
Son, at Ratisbone, in a very painful cate of putting the Empire into solid
rest, and quiet, if it could possibly be found, after so long a tempest, and in
an Iron Age; the Princes in pain, to contract new Subjects, by fair promises,
and the Germans in alacrity, to repair their battered Houses; which they will
not have so soon done, but that we may have leisure to run through the other
Provinces, before they be in condition to call us back thither. Wherefore, let
us hasten into France, by the way of Brisack, where we must give brave Count
Harcourt a visit.

Count Harcourt at B^isack.
This most happy Warrier, advantaged by his birth, and the good success of his
Arms, kept himself close shut up in his Government like another Narces, since
he saw some Belisars in his House. For, neither affronts received, nor the high
promises of Strangers, not advantageous Allyances were able to shake his
fidelity, or obscure the splendor of his enterprises, but that he made it
appear, in the Issue of the negotiation, that he ought to be considered, as a
great Servant to the King, and that he belyed not the blood of the Guses so
often shed, for the glory of the Crown: however the Hughenots cry him down, in
regard that he was head of the League, directly contrary to their intention.
But let us turn a little to the left hand, to see how dexterously the Swissers
come off with their civil War.

There is no Province in Europe, though environed by Waters Fenus, or
inaccessible Mountains, but has had a share of the evils, and mischiefs, of
this deplorable Age; as the Swissers can witness, who covered by their
Mountains, feared nothing less then this following Rebellion, which was
likely to overthrow the State.

A revolt in the Cantons of Swisserland.
This fire began about Lucerne, in the month of March 1653. and run in a short
space, through all the Cantons. The Pesants, and Subjects of the said Town,
took Arms, to punish (as they said) ill Goverments: but neither that, nor the
pretext of some Coms cried down, where able to conceal the malice of some, who
would needs imitate Catiline, as well in his end, as in his beginning.

The delicateness in the Air of Italy, and the gentilenesse, and gluttony of
the kitchen of France, had corrupted the old manners of some, emptyed the
purse, and filled the brain with smoke, which sought its center above, and the
destruction of such as endeavored to hinder it, and keep it below. As the
number of the Seditious went augmenting; so did not the apprehension go
deminishings in such sort as that an Assembly of the thirteen Cantons was
judged most necessary, for the good of the Commonwealth, and an Army to quell
thern; whose resistance not being answerable to their arrogance, they were
cowed by some Skermishes, frighted to their habitations, and reduced to their
duty, by the proceeding of a gentle kind of justice upon them. A happy people,
and a Province endowed with wise counsel, from whence God so soon drew off his
Rod. Fare you well, wise Swissors, a thousand times wiser then they, who
contemn you; for we must now return^ into our way again, to reach the
Low Country Army in Picardi^, and view the posture thereof, as also the
success of this Field.

The Prince of Coud^ finding himself surrounded by a puissant Army, longed for
nothing more then a good occasion, to come to action with the Marshall of
Turenne, who being no novice in the trade, nor in the politic Maxim, (which
forbids him to hazard any Battle in his own Country, unless he were forced
thereto) satisfied himself, with hindering both the Sieges of Towns, and the
generous desire of this young Alexander, whose true Element is more in
Battails, The Spanish Army in Pica^dy.
then the Salamanders is in the fire. The poor Peasants were drawn from their
harvest, and the Province quickly freed from this invasion; though yet however,
autumn must needs give fruits, in regard that the Spring had made a show of so
many flowers.

The Prince retyres, and will besiege Guise.
The said Prince, in his retreat, was advised by the counsel of War, to attack
Guise, which was unprovided of a sufficient Garrison. The Knight, who bears
the name thereof gave him to understand, either by his own motive, or by that
of his master, whose forces he commanded, that this Siege was unseasonable, how
much appearance soever there were, of repaying the affront received before it
the precedent year. The time passed in contest; the Garrison of the Town
reinforced, and the Knight after two days sickness, The knight of Guises death.
dead; which death, for the Violence thereof, was suspected of some malignity
as well to the Soul, as to the body. The sudden deaths of great persons give
occasion of talk; but those of mean ones, are put into common necessity.
However it be, one of his Masters drew profit from it, and the other disavowed
it.

Commandments are dangerous, to such as execute them, for not having their
Commission in writing. This unforeseen accident amazed such as were clear
sighted, filled his most illustrious House with mourning; cansed great
alterations, and designs which made more noise then effect.

During these irresolutions, the Archduke departed from Brussels, and arrived
at the Army near Cambray, to advice how, and with what advantage the Field
should be finished. The siege of Rocroy.
Rocroy (glorious by the defeat of the Spaniards) was a subject, which deserved
to be brought under obedience; wherefore the resolution was taken to besiege
it; and the French, who had coasted their enemies to the Frontiers, without
hazarding any thing, went and encamped themselves before Mouzon. And of Mouzon,
I will say nothing in particular of these two Sieges, (though I were present
at one of them,) but that Heaven, being angry to see the two most generous
Nations that ever bore the Christian Name, ceased not to outrage or vex one
another to their mutual disadvantage; powered down so many tears, and the
winds raised so many storms, Ill weather.
that both men, and horses felt excessived stresses. It parted the victorres,
to open their eyes; for Rocroy, which was the first attacked, These two Towns
renders themselves.
yielded two days after Mouzon; i. e. the thirtieth of September; and the
Armies being fatigated by the over much wetness of the season, went to seek
shelter, almost naked.

The French, being very impatient, and desirous to be lodged more at large,
unnestied the Garrison of St. Menehout; and the Lorrains, And St. Menchout.
conducted by their own Master the Duke, went to affict the Bishopric of
Liege.

The Lorraines in the Bishopric of Liege.
The small success of the three last Fields, in respect of the great
advantages, (which were promised by the disorder, caused by the discontentments
of the Princes of the blood,) at least a: second Peace of Vervins; made fools
talk, who open their mouths, when the wise, or at least, the wary (a most
usual maxim in these present times) keep them shut. There was a misfortune
foreseen and it fell upon the Abbot of Mercy, and the Count of Bassigny, who
were cast in prison; The Count of Bassigay, and the Abbot of Mercy, prisoners.
and their imprisonment gave such as were curious ground to scrue into the
cause thereof, and made others believe, that it would discover some great
mystery, for which the lovers of novelty longed much.

This first Thunderclap struck but one only steple; but before it was
dissipated, it crushed a Rock, which so many Mariners, in this Sea of miseries,
both doubted, and feared, and against which so many Vessels made Shipwreck.
For, the Liedgers took an Alarm, as also a resolution to make an Alliance with
the French, against the House of Spain. Which blow must needs be fatal to his
Catholic Majesty, if not prevented; and Cardinal Mazarin full of joy, to see
himself at the Helm of the Ship, began to hope, that the webs which he had
woven in that Country, would be more difficult to untangle, then it was to unty
the Gordions knot.

The Duke of Lorraine was sent for to Brussels, taken prisoner, and carried to
the citadel of Antwerp.

And the Duke of Lorrain.
Neither the exploits of Mas-Aniello; nor the death of the King Charles brought
more astonishment to all Europe, then this detention, which gave things another
countenance, brake the neck of many designs, sent back the great Faber with
his forces, to Sedan, and retained the Liedgers in their liberty, which they
were about to loose, together with their Peace.

The Imprisonment of this Sovereign Prince, smothered all his Counfels, which
seemed to be great; and was taken for one of the strangest accidents of the
time, and discovered, that he was beloved by almost no body. He is suspected,
to have imitated the constable of St. Paul, Suspected to imitate the constable
of St. Paul.
and to have sought his profit, in this pernicious War, where he danced better,
then he did in the great Ball, or Revel, which was made at Paris 1642.

France blamed this proceeding, more for her own interest, then for that of the
Prisoner; his Troops expressed so great discontentments; and fell into such
disorder, Prince Francs arrives a^ Brussels.
that it was needful to send for Prince Francis to put them into the state of
obedience, who having taken leave of the Emperor, and all the Court, departed
from Vienna, being well received, and cherished every where, and principally at
Brussels, where he arrived with his two Soanes.

Whilst the Count of Fuensaldania in busy about securing the Lorrains to his
Masters service, and assigning them good Winter Quarters, to the great
displeasure of the Inhabitants of Lile, we will go down a little lower.

Promps last battle.
The last Battle in the month of August, wherein the valliant Admiral Tromp,
lost his life, proceeded partly from disgust, by seeing the Enemies brave, or
domineer so long, upon the Coast, before the havens of Texel, and the Moze,
hindering the going out of the ships, and obstructing the commerce.

The Hollanders, who had made so many bravadoes, throughout all the whole
Ocean, and imagined that the Lordship of the Sea belonged without controversy
to them; were even almost dead with spite, and displeasure, to see themselves
so highly, and grossly affronted, even at their own doors.

This ba^tail, Isay, (whereof I have hitherto made very little mention)
declared in the beginning, the addres of both Parties, by striving for the
advantage of the wind: and at the end, their generous, and obstinate
resolution to overcome. The loss which the Hollanders sustained, was of about
fifteen or sixteen Vessels; and that of the English, little (as to Vessels) but
many were extreemly indammaged on both sides. In this surious fight, as also in
all the former, the English Vessels, by reason of their hight, and their number
of bigg Brass Gunns, had almost the same advantage, upon the Hollanders, which
Curasseers, In which as in many former, many Captains did not their duty.
or Corsler-Horsmen have, upon the Light Horse. Besides, that many Dutch
Captains, did not their duty; in such sort, as that the Hollanders reaped no
other profit of their valor, then that of removing their Enemies from their
Coast, and were forced themselves into the Texel. The English considering in
what equipage their fleet was, and fearing the violent storms, that usually
happen about that season of the year, withdrew themselves likewise, into
Harwich, and Yarmouth Roades.

Let us leave them both, laboring to repair their ships, without examining
the number of the dead, and wounded, or lending ear to the cries, and groans
of Widows, and Orphans, (which ring even to heaven it self, in all parts of
Europe) to see what passed at that time, in Guyenne; and we shall meet by the
way some Vessels richly laden, The French ^^bes some ships of the Spaniands.
which Mons. de la M^ilheraye carried in triumph from Spain to Nantes.

We have told you already, that Bourdeaux had recourse to the Kings clemency,
The reasons why Bourdeaux yealds.
the cause of which change was this: The length of the siege; the Plague,
Famine, and more then all, secret Intelligence, and the Act of Oblivion
prevayled for the King: The ^p^nish Fleet ^^rives too late.
In such sort, as the Spanish Fleet, which arrived two days after the
accommodation, returned into Spain to see the Admiral thereof beheaded; and the
Princess of Conde retired into the Low Countries, to her husband, who, after
this reduction, had no body lest in those parts, who sides with him. Indeed,
the tardity of the Spaniards, and the proceeding of the Prince of Conty, gave
France glory, and such as knew the affairs of the world, matter, to examine
the reasons thereof.

All these successes were attributed to the Cardinals prudence, who, by
destroying the Princes Party, fortifyed his own, and prepared himself to have
the King anointed; The tumult in Languedock passes like a flash.
for that tumult of Languedock, between the Count of Rieux, and them of the
Religion, which looked as if it would have caused an embarassement, proved but
a flash, and forthwith disappeared; so that the troubles were allayed, in those
two great Provinces, and they in condition to see thenceforth, no other forces
there, then they that are usually raised for Catalunia. The heat of the English
recalls us speedily toward the North; besides there passed nothing worthy of
memory, in the County of Rossillion.

After that bloody Navall Battle, which makes the hair stand on the heads of
such as hear it related, and which looked, as if it must needs have cooled the
courage of these Champions for entering the lists any more, (which all
Christendom beheld with terror) the English were the first, who endeavored
to resume the Dance; A tempest ind^^^ages the English Fleet.
but a horrible tempest arising made them repent their temerity, and sent them
back to their ports, many of their ships being much incommodated.

In fine, these most valorous Sea-souldiers gave the Belgic Lion so many
jerks, and ^hogs, that almost all the States of Europe, foreseeing, and
apprehending this terrible Power, desired to gain their amity; amongst which,
the Swedes were not the last, The Swedes make Amity with England.
to evidence that interest of State was not less near their hearts now, then
the pretext of Religion was formerly, from which they drew so great advantage.

The Hollanders, fearing lest the prosperity of their enemies should make them
enterprise somewhat upon them by land, as well as by water, made the Country
people take Arms, and keep good Guard every where, without neglecting what
belonged to the Sea, and the furnishing of Ships, The Country people take Arms
in Holland.
about which they labored incessantly. But this was not sufficient, for they
must choose an Admiral, who fell out to be Opdam, of the most ancient House of
Wassenaer, who forthwith transported himself to Amsterdam, Opdim Admiral.
and thence to Texel, at the mouth of the North Sea, to put all things in good
order.

Eukhayse drawn out of the hands of the Rabble.
At the same time the Town of Enk^sen, seated upon the South Sea seven Leagues
from Amsterdam, was drawn out of the hands of the Rabble, by means of some
soldiers, who entered very craftily, whilst they were all running to the
Townhouse, to heat a Proclamation.

This tumult was of so dangerous a consequence, that it had dismounted the
Magistrates; but that of the Haghe, about the young Prince, A tumult at the
Haghe and
was begun by Children, and augmented by some malicious persons, who brake the
glass-windowes of many houses, made the Burghers, or Townsmen run to their
Arms, and the Nobility get on horseback, to stop these petulances, which
deserved somewhat more then the rod. at Alckmaer.
That of Alckmaer had the same issue, and was refrenated by the prudence of the
Magistrates. All which seditions, had but one, and the same Cause; and their
Pretexts were also very little different. Indeed the Red-Lyon had very much to
do, both at home, and abroad, by the strength of his enemies, Murmur against
the States.
and by disunion of wills amongst his friends; and such as were bound to the
Helm, were not a little exposed to the venomous traducements of evil tongues.

A tumult in England.
England felt also some Commotion for want of pay; but that was smothered; and
no body stirred, but some certain Seamen, some whereof paid the score for all.

In the moves of November, the Holland Fleet having conducted another toward
the Sownd, and being fallen too near the Coasts, was surprised by a sudden
storm, which cast many of the Ships so a ground, A tempest afflicts the
Holland Fleet.
that they could not ger off into the Main; and many poor Seamen miserably
perished, about a Musket Shot from the Mountains of Sand; so that Fortune
treated both parties alike in sight of the Coast, laughed at their Enterprises;
but the more judicious sort of men foreseeing, that at long running, the
Traffic would be utterly annihilated, and the ruin of Holland advanced,
(which was so much envied for her riches) considered that a Peace, though
little glorious, was better then a thousand triumphs. The Ambassadors of
Holand return into England, to begin the treaty of peace again.
Wherefore the States sent their Ambassadors again to London, to begin the
Treaty, for the last time; and in case of refusal, to tell the English, that
they would enter into a Confederation against them, with some other Princes,
thereby to bring them to reason.

The confusion which was made by the plurality of voices, and the roaring of
the Red Lion, rung so loud, that the most considerate Lord Protector, and his
Parliament, who regorged with booty, taken from the Hollanders, opened their
ears to the Propositions of Peace. But whilst these things were in agitation,
who would have believed, but that many should needs be well disposed for the
Kings eldest Son? For the High-landers in Scotland had taken Arms, and had
received some from Holland; the French spighted at the taking of their Fleet,
without a denunciation of war, arrested all the English Merchants goods in
Normandy; the Hollanders made a show of preparing themselves in good earnest
for the war, which yet notwithstanding they endeavored to shun, as most
pernicious to them.

Some believed, and would needs make others also believe, that the States of
Holland, chose rather a way of Accommodation, then to enter into a war, which
if it had proved successful to them, would have redressed Charles Stewarts
affairs, and his Nephews, to the detriment of their Authority. Others
maintained, that this Peace being utterly broaken, the Country would quickly be
lost. Be it what it will, men's passions have been so much the more discovered,
upon this matter, as the liberty of speaking is greater in Holland then
elsewhere.

A tumult at London raised by the Portugucles.
The tumult which was so temerarily excited at London, by the Portugal
Ambassadors brother, made him carry his head upon a Scaffold some months
after; and all issued so well for the great, and most prudent Cromwell, that he
acquired, together with the Title of Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, the renown of the most acute Politician of this Age. For good success
made the Enterprizers admired, gave the Protector full power, and authority,
and left desolate Charles nothing but complements of compassion.

France the sanctuary of the afflicted.
France, which has always vanted her self to be the Sanctuary of such as are
poor and afflicted, labors at present to strip her self of that glorious
quality, through a maxim of State. She has already felt the strength of the
English, Will have no war with the English.
by the loss of her ships, and so knows how dangerous this enemy is, and the
trouble she had in former Ages, to pluck him out of her bowels. Wherefore, it
is better to appease him by politic craft, and comply with the Times, The
reasons.
then to fall into another war. The motions are great enough yet, in the
Kingdom; and it suffices to have the Spaniards for her enemies, without drawing
the English upon her back too. We must sometimes kiss the hands of such as we
would have far enough from us, for fear of irritating them. And therefore it
is, that the King sent his Ambassador to London, to acknowledge the Republic,
and treat of a good peace, and settle Traffic.

The Lord Pre^^^tour a great Politician.
General Cromwell has expressed his incomparable dexterity, in the mannagement
of Arms, in the direction of Affairs, in his Allyances with strangers, in
dissipating the ambushes, and treacheries, which have from time to time been
land against his designs, and his authority; and principally, in the wars
against the Hollanders. And you shall now sce how he came to rise higher.

He assembled another Parliament, some of the members whereof being inclined to
him, proposed one day in full Assembly, that the burden of the Commonwealth
was too heavy for them, and that it was necessary to impose it upon the
shoulders of General Cromwell. Some of them not approving of this change,
retired secretly to shelter themselves from the contrary winds, and the rest
were dismissed by him; and so the rest went forthwith to confer that honor
upon him, congratulate with him; and gave him the Title of Protector, England
hat's changed her Gevernment three several times.
(which is not new in that Island) and occultly, the Sovereignty of England: so
that in a few years, this said Island has changed her government three
several times; and yet leaves not to flourish, and to be most formidable to
all the powers on earth.

Some months before the dissolution of the Parliament, the Kings youngest Son,
commonly called the Duke of Gloucester, was sent to Dunkerck, in the condition
of a private Gentleman, with a sum of money to defray his expenses.

Whilst the Peace is treated at London, with many dissiculties, by the
intervention of the Reformed Cantons of Swisserland, and the recommendation of
the Queen of Sweden, we will take a turn through the North.

The King of Denmark being fortified by the Alliance of the States General, and
the jealousies which the King of Swedens Leavies gave him, The King of Denmark
fortifies himself.
being taken away; had no other care, then to keep his Subjects in arms, to
hinder all surprises, and to entrench the Approaches, at the same time, when
the scourge of God went ransacking all the Inhabitants of the North.

At Stockholme, Fortune manifested her Empire, by casting for a time, Count
Magnus de la Gardia under her wheel, Count Magnus de la Gardia disgraced.
and depriving him of his Mistresses favor; but she was not so rigorous to
him, as she was to the brave Earl of Essex, in Queen Elizabeth's time, in
England.

Whilst this August Queen is disposing her self to do, in the greatest vigor
of her youth, what the Emperor Charles the fifth did in his decline, we will
make an in-road into Poland.

Searce had King Casimir unlaced his Armor, yet all stained with the blood of
the Rebellious Cossacks, The King of Poland attacked by the Muscovites.
when he saw himself oblidged to put his foot in the stirrup again, to resist
the Moscovits.

This Kingdom, which had been so much afflicted by the excursions of the said
Cossacks, by Inundations, contagious Diseases, Partialities, and Distrusts,
which are ordinary in Free Countries; finds her self now in the necessity of
making a Defensive War; and the Natives, to make resistance, against a
barbarous Nation, which they have so often beaten, and chased as far as the
very heart of Russia, and the very Gates of the Capital City Mosco. But Changes
are as well universal, as Chastisements.

The death of that great Minister, Mons, de Brum
In the beginning of the year 1554. religiously deceased at the Haghe, that
great man, and most faithful Minister Monsicur Anthony de Brun, Baron of
Apremont, and Ordinary Ambassador for the King of Spain, to the States. He was
born at Dole in Burgundy, had served his Master from his youth, in very great
affairs, and nominatively, in the General Peace at Munster.

Toward the Spring, the Peace was concluded at London, against the opinion of
many, and the news thereof was most agreeable to the Hollanders; but when the
Articles came to be published, The Peace made between the English and the
Hollanders.
whereby the young Prince was excluded from all Charges, or Offices, it much
troubled the Provinces, and was like to cause divorces, and great partialities;
in so much as the other Provinces set forth complaints, and Protestations,
which were amply enough answered in a Manifest published by the States of
Holland, and which the Reader may see at good leisure. But there were nothing
but murmurations; they taxed the said States with ingratitude, and reproaches,
and slanders were scattred at random. Is this the recompense (said they every
where) of so many services rendered? The Princes, his Predecessors, The cause
of the murmurations, in behalf of the Prince of Orange.
spared not their blood, nor their lives, nor their means, to purchase our
liberty; and in lien thereof, we make Agreements, so prejudicial to his
Authority, and so contrary to our duty! Ah! what will not the Allies of this
Illustrious Family say? Will they not accuse us, and our posterity of the
blackest ingratitude in the World? Then were the obligations of the
Commonwealth, to the said House, tepeated, the services laid open, and the
merits so highly exalted, and found so infinite that there was no means to
recompense them.

A Manifest published by the States.
These noises (I say) and this liberty of censuring the procedings of their
Masters, with impunity; produced that Manifest, which by little and little,
swallowed up the tattle of such as were most hot amongst them; refuted the
Objections of the other Provinces; and put Holland into firm tranquillity
again. For my part I content my self with having hinted a word thereof, for
proof of the general malignity of this corrupt Age.

This war, having been prudently counseled by the most accomplished Politician
of these Times, against a Nation, which was able to give the Law upon the whole
Ocean, The war began in regard of the jealousy which was amongst the Provinces.
had it not been unfortunatly divided by an unforeseen Siege, and an unexpected
Death; was continued by him with very much dexterity, utility, and glory; and
terminated with so great advantage abd reputation, that he has rendered himself
far more formidable, then any great Conqueror ever was.

Has much excreised the English.
This war restored the English to the perfect knowledge of the maritime
Militia; and oblidged the Hollanders, who opened their eyes too late, to seek
this Peace, for the redress of their Traffic half ruined.

Whilst the sea was agitated by so many different humors, there arrived news
of the utter loss of Brezill, The utter loss of Brezill.
together with the Recif, which was believed, when it could be no more doubted
of, and caused some to cry louder, and especially them of Zeland, who could not
digest some Articles; But General Schup, who brought the confirmation of the
said news, was forthwith imprisoned, together with some others.

Let us briefly dispatch what we have to say, because it is quite fresh.

Cardinal Mazarin finding no more contradiction in the Council, and perceiving
that the heat of the French against him began by little and little to cool; The
Consecration of the King of France.
had now no other care, then to get the King Anointed; which accordingly was
done at Rheims with the accustomed Ceremonies, for the illustration whereof it
was held necessary to add a Triumph to it. Stenay, a small place, but of great
consideration; between Verdun, and Sedan, was the Lawrel-branch worthy to guild
the Head of this great Kings; The Siege of Stenay.
and so it was invested, and the Trenches opened in his Majesty's presence. The
Prince of Conde; who was not asleep, led his Troops into the Field, and made a
show of going another way, whilst some other Forces seized upon the approaches
of Arras, And of Arras.
with so much felicity and speed, that such as endeavored to enter the Town,
were repulsed, and beaten.

The Archduke hastened thither, the Peasants were commanded to come, and work
about the lines of Circumvallation; and the Horse, to hinder the French from
entering into the Town, the Garrison whereof was very weak. A bold Enterprise;
and which could not be accomplished with so few men, without making some
diversion. But let us make another turn through the North, for the last time.

The Queen of Sweden quits the Crown.
Queen Christine, performed a most extraordinary action, and which is more
easy to relate then to imitate; for having worn the Crown of Sweden, which
was so much illustrated, and augmented by the brave exploits of the Great
Gustave her Father, for some years together; put it in the presence of all the
States of the Kingdom, upon the head of her Cousin King Charles in the month of
June; and after this Ceremony, departed from Stockholms to Hamburgh. Our Age
produces nothing but Prodigies, and Miracles: Some loose their Diadems by
force; and others, of their own accord.

The Polanders being extremely disgusted, to see the Muscovits keep Smolensko
blocked up, The Muscovits ravage Lituania
and make havoc at their pleasure in Lituania (who had been formerly so often
defeated by them, though they were six times stronger) and receiving no relief
from Christian Princes; knew so well, how to represent to the Great Turk by
their Ambassador, their firmness, and stability in the exact observance of
their former Treaties with him; and how they had constrained their King
Vladislans to casheere his Forces, which he intended to employ, The Turk
promises the Po^anders suce^ar.
to the disadvantage of the said Treaties; that he promised them, in fine, to
assist them. It is already confirmed, that the Tartars are joined with them,
and that the rest most make an Invasion upon Muscovy, but it is after the loss
of Smolensko, Smolensko, taken.
which was most sensible to the said Commonwealth. The cruelties which those
Barbarians exercise in those parts, would be incredible in an Age which were
less cursed then this; and we are made hope, that the Poles will quickly have
their revenge; however, such as are of opinion with me, by the consideration of
the giddy course, of the affairs of Christendom; suspect the relief of these
Infidels, The succor of the Insidels suspelled.
and fear, least in the general Commotion of the Levant, or Eastern people,
they may chance to seize upon this Kingdom, instead of succouring it, and
effuse themselves, according to the old prediction, into Germany. Time will
show us strange revolutions, and it is best, not to apprehend such evils as
must needs happen. The Greeks are groaning even yet, for having desired, and
tasted the like succor.

This war of the Muscovits, and Cossacks, wherein Religion, Rebellion, and some
other Causes make a concert, is very dammageable to this strong Bulwark of all
Christendom, and teaches us, that such as have always been beaten heretofore,
have now the advantage. Luck is turned every where; Governments are changed;
Policy is reversed; and men follow another, and a very different habit.

Reformations in Germany.
The Germans, by their dissentions, and distrusts, have very much weakened the
Empire; and there is no coffeehouse heard now, but about the Reformations,
which are made in the Emperors Hereditary Countries; But such as council them
would do well to begin upon themselves, or proceed at least more civilly
therein. For I know not, whether Persecutions for diversity of opinions have
ever been useful to the Church. St. Martin disapproved them; and indeed, they
engender more hurt, then they bring good, in these latter times.

This Emperor continuing his care, for the Roman Catholic Church, the
redress of the Empire, and the restoration of his most serene House to her
first splendor, by the Election, and Coronation of his Son; sees now his joy
turned into mourning, and the hope of almost all his people, overthrown, by the
inopinate death of this young King. The pains which were taken to remove him
from infected places, and where the fimall pocks domincered, was useless. No
no, most devoute Monarch; it is in vain, to endeavor to conserve this dear
Plant; the Infinite Essence is too much provoked to wrath, by the sins of
Christians, to grant them this precious Pledge of Justice. There is no more
fidelity to be found amongst them; and when the Pillars shog, the Building
cannot stand.

The Archbishopric of Bremen secularized.
The Archbishopric of Bremen being secularized by the Peace of Munster, fell
to be shared by the Swedes, for having tormented the Eagle, and saved the
Protestant Party from shiprack; or rather for having crossed the House of
Austria's designs. They would not be content without the Capital Town it self,
which is situated upon the Weser, a large River, which discharges her self into
the North Sea; for the gaining whereof, and to hinder the communication of the
Sea; The Swedes will have the Town.
Count Conninxmark caused a Fort to be built below the said Town, which was to
bring it to the last gasp.

This strange proceeding, which offended both the Emperor, and Empire, opened
the eyes of the bordering people, and discovered the ambition of the Swedes.
Montecuculi went into Sweden; but was put off with delays; for the North
understands dissimulation as well as the South.

Ferdinand threatened this haughty General,, with the Imperial Thunderbolt, but
it moved him not at all. The impunity of offenses provokes men to continue
them. The Inhabitants of the Town took Arms, The Townsmen take Arms.
with resolution to defend themselves, and sent to implore the Succor of the
Head, together with that of their Allies.

And gaint the Forts.
About the Summer solstice, or Sun-stead, in Conninkmarks absence, they put
their men into the field, took those places, which lighted them to near; and
made the whole Duchy contribute to this Wat.

Connixmarck retakes them, and shut up the Sweden, Town.
These affronts were so sensible to this great Warrier, that he quickly after
revenged himself of them; for being seconded by some new forces from Sweden, he
did not only reconquer the said places, but also so straightly shut up the
Bremeners, that loosing all the confidence they had in their own forces, they
had recourse to those of their Allies, and especially the Hollanders.

The States General send their Ambassadors thither.
Interest of Religion, which is more potent amongst the Reformates, as being
more popular, and less tied, then the Catholics, together with that of state,
and some other considerations, made the States General resolver to send their
Ambassadors, to mediate an accord, and temper the hot demands of the
Assailants, which were so much preludiciall to the Empire.

They forthwith declared their Commissions, and by mixing the strength of their
interests, with that of their arguments, brought the Swedes to condescend to a
more gentle Treaty, for fear of obliging the mediators to become Parties, in
favor of such as had the same law, and whose assistance themselves had
received, according to their ability, in other necessities, and whom they could
not abandon, without being accused of ingratitude; yea, and there were forty
ships equipaged for their relief, in case the Swedes would needs try
extremities.

The peace made.
Thus, was this War of the Lutherans against the Reformates, soon finished.
This is the state of the North, and that of Germany, which is not very safe, by
the death of the King of the Romans, the Emperors indisposition, and the
Arming of some Princes in Low-Saxonie; for as for that of the Marquis of
Brandenbrgh, and the Duke of Newburgh, time will show us what scope it has.
The King of Swedens marriage with a Priacesse of Holstein.
But let us now run to the mysterious Siege of Arras, and we shall find Queen
Christine at Antwerp, who receives the news of her Cousins marriage, with a
Princess of Holstein.

Arras, which was taken by the French, in the year 1640, before the face of
thirty thousand men, and had struggled against famine, and some other
difficulties, which made the most judicious despair of good success; was
likely to be lost playing. Wherefore they were thinking to quit the Siege,
which the youg King had begun, presently after his consecration; but yet they
found means to continue it, for his Majesty's honor, and to send the Marshal
of Turenne, The Marshal of Turenne at the succor of Arras.
with ten thousand men, to succor this place.

Our young Alexander, that accomplished Captain, who in his first essay had
showed his mastership, thought fit, to go ruin those Troops whilst they were
feeble, The Prince of Conde proposes to go and attack him, but be is not heard.
and tired by their long march, (according to the example of that German Mars,
that Tamer of Brisack) and before they were reinforced by the Nobility; but
this too judicious, and prudent Nation, which chooses rather to fall into the
other extremity, could not be brought to resolve it; choosing rather to cover
themselves in their trenches, to hinder the reinforcement of the Garrison; and
to expect the Enemy, with a firm foot.

The French Nobility comes to the succor. Stenay yeeldeds.
The French Nobility, which does more for the love of Virtue, and for the
favor of their King, then many other Nations do, for wages, hastened thither.
Stenay was yielded, the Troops increased, and the King himself, thereby to
animate his subjects to behave themselves well, drew near the place appoinred
to get honor. All the world expected the Issue of this Siege; and some
wondered, how the Spaniards were able to hold out against such terrible forces,
The Spaniards ^^o weak to ^ard so many works.
which so small ones, and the attacks went so slowly on, against so weak a
Garrison. For, there were not men enough to defend the lines of so great a
circuit, to guard the Convoyes, and force the Town. It was believed that there
was yet some Arrow hidden, and more then one string, to the flow. Every body
turned their eyes toward the sea, and the Ambassadors set that Divine Metral,
together with all their Rhetoric, on work, either to raise or stop the tempest.

In fine, the twenty fifth of August, being the day of S. Lewis, was designed
to attack the Lines, which were bordered by the Spaniards much deminished, and
fatigated. The French advanced, gave the Alarm, The Siegeraysed.
in all the quarters; entered by a turn-pike which was ill enough guarded, and
beat down part of the Lines, to make way for the Cavaltie. There began a
confusion in the Camp, which made some fly, Confusion in the Camp. The Prince
of Condes valor, and address, tosavt the Army.
and others resolve to defend themselves. The Archduke seeing the cowardice of
some, tesolved to fly; and the Prince of Conde, vigorously to charge the
enemies, who contenting themselves with having gained the Artillery, succored
the Town, and made some hor Skermithes; let this rock retite, being too hard to
be scaled, and most dissicult to be surmounted. The Princes valout cannot be
highly enough extolled, nor the order which he kept, to save the Army, and make
a dexterous retreat, sufficiently admired.

Sadness in the Low Countries, for this defeat.
The news of this so little expected disaster, gaining force upon the nimble
wings of Fame, and growing much greater then it was; was likely to cast the
Flemmings into despair; but the following Posts manifested, that the hurt was
not yet past remedy; that the Prince of Conde had done more thena man, and had
merited the Laurel, by this retreat. The number of the dead, was but little;
that of the prisoners, greater; and that, of the victorious Bnemy, most grear.

As this blow filled the King of Spains subjects, in the Low Countries, with
sbrrow; so did it make all France skip for joy, and accumulate praises upon the
Cardinal, as well as upon the Generals; who, Joy in France. They King at Arras,
and the Army in Hennawlt.
after having accompanicd their Victorious King to Artat, took leave of him,
and fell in with their forces upon Hennawlt.

During the joy of the one, the forrow of the other, and the amazement of all,
I will make reflection with such, as to whom this war is infinitely
displeasing, for Heavens sake, upon some Sieges, on both sides, since the war
was first declared, in which the indignation of the Almighty most clearly
appears.

A calculation of the unhappy Sieges on both sides, which denotes, that this
war is displeasing to God.
The King of Spains Armies found Fortune against them, before Cazal, Leucatu,
Rocroy, Guise, Rosa, Balaguier Arras. -- The King of Frances, were unhappy,
before Theonnille, Dole, St. Omers, Fontarrabie, Lerida and Cambray; so that by
these alternative losses, and by the obstinate continuance of the war, there
can be nothing expected, but an excessive weakening of both Crowns, and an
insufficiency to resist, one day, other Enemies. These are the misfortunes of
this depraved Age; which it not remedyed, we shall soon see yet greater
changes. The bowl being cast, goes very often further, then the bowler desires.

Quenoy fortifyed and Clairmont taken.
The French having ransacked the County of Hennawlt both sart, and wide, and
fortifyed Quenoy, whilst the other forces feazed upon Clairmont; left a good
Garrison there, and retreated into Winter Quarters.

The Veneiuns resist the Turk.
The Venetians, by their generous resolution, show, that they will reconquer
the kingdom of Candie; and hinder the Half Moon, from perfecting her Circuit.

The Gennezes have sent their Ambassadors into Spains, to end their
difference, and into France, for some negotiation, the effect whereof depends
upon Time.

The Pope quiet, and the Duke of Savoy constant in the Dance.
The Pope, not having been able to persuade the two Kings to a peace, keeps
himself in peace, and with him, the rest of Italy; save only the Duke of Savoy,
who stands fast in the Dance with the French.

The Duke of Guise, having better retained in memory, the courtships of the
Neapolitans, then his own misfortunes, and his promises made as Madrid; set men
at work the whose summer long, for the atring of a great Fleet, to go to the
Conquest of that Kingdom, which has been sooften taken, and retaken, with so
great facility. He departed at the beginning of Autumn: The French expedition
under the conduct of the Duke of Guise, unhappy.
but having been resisted by storms at Sea, and by the Spaniards ashore; he
lost the hope of seizing upon it, and returned toward France, with notable
loss. In such sort, as that the French have found Fortune against them in
Italy, and the Spaniards, in the Low Countries.

There are misfortunes every where, if not by Arms, at least by sicknesses, and
other accidents. For whilst the Hollanders (who were not resolved, to take any
Governor yet) had trouble enough to get their proceedings approved by the rest
of the Procinces, Misfortunes happaning at Delft.
and the Inhabitants thereof; that horrible blow happened at Delft the 12 of
October, between ten and eleven of the clock, where the fire got into the
Magazine of powder, and so destroyed one part of the Town, that few houses
remained whole, and untoucht, either in walls, or windows.

And at Graveling by powder.
The like misfortune happened at Graveling, toward the spring, which killed
many people, as well as that of Delft. These prodigious accidents made many,
who were astonished at them, believe, that the Great Day of Judgment was come,
and others, that they prognosticated nothing but misery.

The English Fleet.
The English keep two Fleets ready; and have already sent one under General
Blake to the Levant, to succor the Spaniards against the French But the said
General falling short of the Duke of Guises Navy, which was returned from the
Kingdom of Naples, General Blake burns the Tukish ships near Tunnis.
almost a fortnight before he came, he plied into the Port of Ligorn, where he
was most honorably received, and from whence, after almost three weeks stay
there, he set sail for Tunnis, where he sired a Castle, and nine Turkish ships
in Port ferino, upon the disdainful refusal of the Dye of that place, to give
satisfaction for some wrongs, and damages formerly put upon the English Nation.

The Count of Broglio forces the Suburbs of Lile.
The Count of Broglio, Governor of La Bassee, for the French, after the taking
of the Fort, and Abbey of Breclean, being informed that there was a Regiment of
Horse quartered in one of the Suburbs of Lile, commanded part of the Regiment
of Piedmont, together with part of a Foot-Regiment, to go and beat up their
quarters; but having notice upon the way, that they were removed, and entered
into the City, he nevertheless advanced, and having given a very strong onset,
fired the Suburbs, and burnt about sixty houses to the ground. This done,
hearing that some Lorraine Forces were marching from Lents toward Doway to
join with a body of Horse of about four thousand, commanded by Don Carlo del
Campo Governor of Lile; he resolved to set upon some Foot left behind about
the Town, in the absence of the Horse, and so stormed their Works, about
midnight, in three distinct places, and forced them out of their Outworks;
Retreats from before Lents.
yea, and would have gone over the Mote, had he not been advertised of the
enemies speedy return, and thereupon thought sit to retire with his men,
(himself being dangerously wounded) to La Bassee.

The Parliament of England, called by the Lord Protector, calculated the
charge of the Nation, Account of the yearly expense, of England.
which in the whole amounts to thirteen hundred thousand pounds Sterling, per
annum; whereof two hundred thousand pounds yearly for the said Lord Protectours
support; four hundred thousand pounds for the maintenance of the Navy, and
Ports, and seven hundred thousand pounds, for the Armies.

A monster found in Catalunia.
There was found in Catalunia, in the mountains of Cerdania, a certain Monster
described thus. He has humane shape as far as the waste, and downwards is like
a Satyr, or Wild-man; he has many heads, arms, and eyes, and a mouth of
extraordinary bigness, wherewith he makes a noise like a Bull. His picture
has been sent by Don John de Austria to the King at Pope Alexander the Seventh
Madrid, and afterward many Copies thereof drawn, and sent abroad by
Ambassadors, and other persons, to several Princes, and States in Europe.

The Popes death.
Pope Innocent the tenth, after a tedious, and dolorous sickness, died the the
seventh of this month of Iannary, and the Cardinals, after a long deliberation
in the Conclave, and the colluctation of the French and Spanish Factions,
elected Cardinal Ghisi to the Sea, Cardinal Ghisi elected Pope.
who took upon him the name of Alexander the Seventh.

The States of Austria, upon the twenty sixth of February, did homage to the
young Archduke Leopoldus Ignatius, Son to the present Emperor, which was
performed with great State.

The Treaty being ratified between the King of Sweden, and the City of Bremen,
the said City disbanded many Companies, and gave General Conninxmark passage
over the Bridge.

The Duke of Newburghs forces so much much straightened the Lorrainers in their
quarters, that they had much ado to subsist there, and the difference lately
hapened betwixt the Electour Palatine, and the Electour of Mentz not being yet
ended, but referred to the Assembly now here at Frankfurt, the orther two
Ecclesiastical Electours, kept a small Army on foot, to be able to stand in
readiness, upon all occasions.

The Governor of Theonville, who had boasted upon a certain time, that he
would be in Arlon at dinner the next day, having notice that the Prince of
Simay (who is governor of Luxemburgh) was marching with a considerable
strength to meet him, changed his design, returned to Theonville, and sent his
men into winter quarters.

The Factions in Hungary about the choosing of a Palatinate, being grown very
high, the Emperor resolved to go thither, as well to allay the said troubles,
as also to have his Son Leopoldus Ignatins crowned King of that Country at
Presburgh; The Emperors Son Crowned King of Hungary.
which, after many difficulties, and some satisfaction given by him to the
States, and people of the Kingdom, was performed with the accustomed Ceremonies.

An Insurrection in England.
There was a great Insurrection of the Cavalier-party, in various parts of
England, against the Lord Protector, and present government, which had it not
been seasonably discovered, and dissipated, might peradventure, have involved
the whole Nation, in a most fierce, and bloody war. One Party of them was under
the conduct of Sir Joseph Wagstaffe, and was routed near Salsbury, in
Wilishire, many principal persons taken prisoners, amongst whom was Mr.
Penruddock, who with some others, was afterward tried, and executed at Exeter,
but Wagstaffe himself, as also many others, made their escape beyond sea. There
were many of the said Plot, taken in diverse others parts of the Nation.

About the same time, a Gentleman of great quality of the Country of Provence
in France, was arrested, and imprisoned, upon suspicion that he kept
correspondence with General Blake then at Ligorn, and that he intended to have
betrayed the Port of Tonlon, together with the ships therein, to the English:
but after the said General was gone with his Fleet toward the Coast of
Barbary, he cleared himself so well of that charge, that he was set at liberty,
and his said accusation found to be but a mere suggestion of some enemies of
his.

The Polanders beat the Muscovits, and Cossacks.
The Polanders obtained a great victory over the Muscovits, and Cossacks near
Vsman, where, after a shrewd fight of three days, they put them to a total
rout, and killed about fourteen thousand upon the place, themselves losing not
above two thousand, save only some persons of condition. The booty, and spoil
they got was very great, besides seven hundred Wagons, and near a hundred
Color of Horse and Foot.

Whilst the Cardinals were busy in the Conclave, about the Election of a new
Pope, An Antipope chosen at Ascoli.
there met seaventy two Archbishops, and Bishops, with some Abbots, at a
certain place called Ascoli upon the borders of Neaples; where after some days
conference, they chose one of their Members to be Pope rendering him all the
usual honors, even to the very worshipping him. This Antipope called himself
Eugenius. But the news thereof coming to the Conclave at Rome, it so much
startled them, that they sent to the General of the Church-Militia, to march
speedily thither with some Forces, to secure the Chief Authors of this great
Schism; but they, having notice thereof, to prevent being apprehended, brake
up, and parted, and the new Antipope fled.

The Tinkish Emperor Crowned.
There was such a concurse of people at Constantinople, to see the Coronation
of the young Emperor, that lodging was hard to be found there; and provisions
were also at an excessive rate, the Cossacks, according to their old custom,
having so wasted, and spoiled the Country on that side near the Black-Sea, that
it made them very scarce.

The Dogi, or Duke of Venice being dead, the Forty one shut themselves up
according to custom, and after some debate, unanimously elected the Lord
Contarini, heretofore Ambassador Plenipotentiary at Munster, and one of the
most ancient Senators, who was Crowned with the Dukes Crown, with the wouted
Solemnity the five and twentieth of March.

The Queen of Sweden, widow to the great, victorious King Gustave, having lain
long sick of a Quartan Ague (followed by a strong Rheum which fell upon her
breast) died the last of March, in the Town of Niccoping.

The Duke of Savoy cast a cruel persecution upon the Protestants in the Vallyes
of Angrogna, The persecution of the Protestants in Piedmont.
Lucerna, and St. Martins, by sending the Marquis of Pianella, together with
the Count of Quince, one of the French Licutenant Generals, who set upon them,
beat them our of the said Vallyes, and forced them tofly to the Mountains,
where they suffered much hunger, and cold. The news hereof coming into England,
the Lord Protector being moved with compassion, The Lord Protectours charity
to them.
and charity, dispatched one Master Moreland, one of his own Gentlemen, by the
way of Paris, to the foresaid Duke, to mediate with him in the quality of
Agent, in behalf of the said distressed Protestants, sending them also some
relief of monyes out of his own Treasury, and animating the people besides, to
contribute, and collect publicly in the Churches, considerable sums for them;
which accordingly was performed with remarkable zeal, and remitted them; as
they have at large acknowledged by a most humble, and ample Letter of thanks,
which they wrote to his Highness, the transcript whereof would be too long to
set down here: and so would that of the King of France, to his said Highness,
in answer to his to his Majesty, wherein the King clears himself of having had
any hand in the persecution of the said Protestants; and friendly assures his
said Highness, to intercede with the Duke of Savoy, in favor of them: So that,
in fine, after many debates, the difference between the aforesaid Duke, and his
said Subjects is accommodated, and Master Moreland returned.

Upon the two and twentieth of June there happened such an extraordinary Thunder,
A Tempest at Gulick.
and Lightning at Gulick, or Juleers, that it pat all the people in excessive
fear; and there fell a Thunderbolt upon one of the Magazins, whereby not only
the House, and all the Ammunitions were blown up, but many other houses also
thereto adjoining were fired, and rent in pieces; however, through the mercy of
God, there were but few persons killed, but great store of goods spoiled, The
Garrison of La Bassee five some Villadges.
and lost.

The Licutenant Governor of La Basses having notice that the Spaniards had
quitted the Fort of Lilers, which they kept all the last Winter; sent out a
Party of that Garrison consisting of about three hundred and fifty, to which a
Party of Bethane being joined, they marched under the command of the Count of
St. Front, and plundered, and fired the Town of Altembergh, and four Villadges
beyond Ypers, which refused to pay their Contribution; which put such a terror
into the adjacent Country, that most part of the people sled with their best
goods, to secure themselves, in the strong Towns.

The Spaniards began to discover their apprehensions of the English Fleet; viz,
that of General Pen in the West Indies, and that of General Blake, which after
the business of Tunnis, was fallen back upon the Coast of Spain; in order to
which take here the Clause of a Letter from the Count of Linares General of the
Spanish Gallyes, written to a friend of his at the Court of Madrid, upon the
tenth of June, from St. Lucar.

A Clause of a Letter from the Count de Linares.
We are now in sight of thirty of the English Men of War, who lie at sea, three
leagues from the Bay; and this is the very same Squadron with which I spoke at
Alicant in November, 1654. The Commander then told me, that they were going to
chase the French: but now, though they know where to meet with the French in
Catalunia, they come hither. When this said squadron went by this way at first,
they showed more friendship to us, and more confidence in us; for they came in
hither; but now their sliness; and strangness makes us presume (and I do
presume) that they have some unhappy designs against the Gallions of silver,
which are expected. It is also feared, that another squadron much greater then
this, which went to the Indies, may do us much greater mischief there, that we
shall hardly know what belongs to a Piece of Eight in Spain. Wherefore, it will
concern men of prudence, to hoard up what they can; for if that design
prosper, all manner of Rents in Spain will come to nothing.

The Town of Landrecies, after a long, and sharp siedge, was rendered to the
French the twelfeh of July, upon these following condition. 1. That Monsieur de
Maugre the Governor, and Don John Morphy Colonel of an Irish Regiment,
together with all Officers, and Soldiers, Horse and Foot, should march out the
next day at eight of the clock in the morning, with their Arms, Baggage, Goods,
Horses, Cattle, and other things belonging to them, Colors flying, Bullet in
mouth, and Marches lighed at both ends, and should be safely convoyed to
Valenciennes the nearest way. 2. That for that end, a hundred Wagons, and
Carts should be affoarded them, for the security whereof they should leave two
Captains behind, who should be sent to Valenciennes presently after the said
Wagons were returned. 3. That all Prisouers, and also the Horses taken on both
sides, should be restored; and the Soldiers, who were run away, delivered. 4.
That such soldiers as were either sick, or wounded, and not able to march out
presently, should remain safe there, and be maintained, and attended till
their recovery, and then have Passes to be gone. 5. That all Magazines, both of
Provisions, and Ammunitions, and all the Artillery not embezeled, should be the
same day surrendered to such as should be appointed to receave them, with
restitution of whatsoever might be found to have been diverted by sale, or
otherwise, to the benefit of any private person. 6. That the Inhabitants should
be free to remain there, enjoy their Goods, and accustomed Immunities, and
Privileges; and if any would be gone, he should have three months time
granted him, to sell his Goods both real, and personal. 7. That the Officers
of the Magistrate of Judicature should be maintained in their Places, they
taking an Oath of Allegiance to the King. 8. That such Churchmen as were fled
into the said Town, should have power to go out with their movables, and
Church-Ornaments; yea, and even with those belonging to other Churchmen,
Cloisters, and Monasteries, which were absent. 9. That he Country People, who
were there for refuge, should have liberty, either to return home, or go any
whither else with their goods, within the term of three months. 10. That the
said Governor, and Colonel should, upon the subscribing of these Articles,
deliver the whole Bastion of the Attack, for security of the performance of the
said Articles.

The success of the French.
Near about the same time the Prince of Conti took Castillon, and Solsona in
Cataluma; and the Spaniards having made many attempts, upon the later for the
recovery thereof, were always repulsed with loss: so that, in fine, Te deum
was sung at Paris, for the prosperity of their Arms in both Countries.

The King of Swedens great success in Poland.
The King of Sweden finding no likelihood of bringing the difference between
himself and the King of Poland to a desired accommodation, sent General
Wittembergh with a great Army into the said Kings Territories, who making a
very great, and fortunate progress there, the King himself followed shortly
after in person; whereupon fifteen thousand of the King of Polands Soldiers,
and three great Provinces revolted to him, besides diverse other remarkable
successes, the particulars whereof will appear by these following, Instructions
for a solemn day of Prayer, and Thanksgiving, which I here insert for the
Readers satisfaction.

Whereas his Majesty, our most gracious Lord, and Sovereign has been moved by
just, and most necessary causes, to make war against the King, and Crown of
Poland, and for that purpose, ordered General Wittembergh to enter that part
of the Enemies Country near Kron, which lies next to Germany; It has pleased
the most high God, so to bless, and prosper his Majesty's Armies, and
undertakings, as that the said General has not only taken diverse Castles, and
Garrisons in the said Country, but making progress also as far as Wsee, in
the province of Posen, the two Palatinates of Posen, and Calissen, together
with the Cities of Posen, Calissen, Lesno, and Micdzirez, as also an Army of
fifteen thousand men, immediately renounced all Allegiance to the King of
Poland, and came under the tuition, and protection of his Majesty, our
Sovereign; which was done before the fifteenth of July 1655. Now, seeing that
it can be no other then the wonderful work of God, that so great a part of
our Enemies Dominions should, without so much as one blow, be reduced under his
Majesty's obedience, we are bound to render thanks to Almighty God from the
bottom of our hearts for so great mercy. etc.

Besides these aforesaid advantages, the Earl of Oppalinski, nothing content
to have forsaken the King of Polands Party himself, drew also many of his
friends, and neighboring Lords, into the same engagement, and they jointly
made an agreement with the King of Sweden, containing these heads. 1. That they
should no longer own the King of Poland, or acknowledge him for their
Soverargne. 2. That all such as should refuse to do the same, should be
pursued with fire, and sword. 3. That the King of Sweden should have the same
Authority over them, which the Kings of Poland had; and that for security of
the performence of this Article, they should deliver, all their strong Holds,
to General Wittembergh. And lastly, That the King of Sweden should dispose of
all the forces already raised in great Poland.

The French, after the surrender of Landrecies, besieged, and took Conde, St.
Ghistain, and some other small places, and made excursions, even to the very
walls of Brussels.

The Spaniards Embargo.
The Spaniards after having set out a Fleet to watch General Blake, upon their
Coast, upon the news of the miscarriage of the design of the Generals Pen, and
Venables at St. Domingo in Hispamola, put a General Embargo upon the English
Merchants Goods (and imprisoned many of their persons also) in all the Ports of
Spain, and the King published a Manifest, which was quickly, and roundly
answered by the Lord Protector, whereupon there instantly followed actions of
hostility at sea.

The Siedge of Pavia raised.
The City of Pavia in Italy, which had endured a long, and fierce Siege by the
Duke of Modena, and Prince Thomaso, was at length delivered by the valor of
the Townsmen, and the succor brought them by the Marquis of Caracena Governor
of the Duchy of Milan; and the two aforesaid Princes forced to a disorderly
retreat, with the loss of many of their men, some Canon, and Baggage, and the
said Duke dangerously shot in the Arm.

The Provaditore Morofini, General for the State of Venice against the Turks,
got possession of the Island of Egina in the Archipelago, and of the strong
Hold of Vola, which was surrendered the twenty second of March, and which is the
more advantageous, in regard that the Turks had made their chief Magazine there
for this summer expedition so that the Venetians gained, besides their
Ammunion, a very great quantity of Bisquet, and seven and twenty pieces of
great Ordnance, most of them Brass. As much of the Provisions as could be
carried away, was put on shipboard, and the rest syred, that so the Enemy
might not be benefited thereby, and the best of the works demolished.

Victories of the Venetians a against the Turks
About a month after they gave a total defeat to the Turkish Fleet, which
endeavoring to come out of the Dardanelles upon the fourteenth of July at
night, after a very hot fight of eight hours, was utterly routed, and
dispersed, and forced to get shelter under the Castles of the said Dardanelles,
having lost in the battle, sixteen ships, six Gallyes, two Mahones, and many
other Vessels, four thousand men taken prisoners (who were all made slaves)
and a greater number killed. This victory was so much the more remarkable, for
that the whole Venetian Fleet was not there, a party thereof having been sent
toward Canca a few days before, to prevent the Turks relieving that place.
The Turkish Navy consisted of about a hundred ships, and Gallyes; and the
Venetians, but eight and thirty, with eight Gallyes, and two Galleasses.

The King of Sweden, puts forth a manifest.
The King of Sweden, upon his entry into Poland, published a Manifest, and sent
a Letter also to the Emperor, comprehending the reasons of his taking Arms
against that King, wherein he accuses him of eluding the Treatyes held between
them; of usurping the Title of the Crown of Sweden; of endeavoring to debauch
the people of Livonia, or Leefland, and to draw them to a defection; of sending
a Fleet into the Baltic Sea; of attempting to entice the States of the Isle of
Oesely to a revolt; and many other charges he imputes to him, in order to his
having broaken the Articles of Truce concluded between the two Crowns.

From the very time that he entered Poland, he went on with a conquering, and
irresistible hand, all submitting, partly by force, and partly by composition,
and voluntary inclination, to his obedience. After he had taken, and stayed
some time at Warsovia, he endeavored by all means possible, to join with
Field-Marshal Wittembergh so to meet, or seek the enemy with the more security;
whereof the Poles being advertized, labored to cross that design, and hinder
their conjunction; to which effect they placed themselves in the woods, so to
sally out at unawares upon the said Field-Marshal, as he marched by, as not
imagining that the King could possibly be yet arrived to him. So that his
Majesty being sufficiently informed of their purpose, fell in very good order
upon them, and advanced with such success, by entertaining them, with his
Ordnance and Forlorn, The Polanders beaten.
that however they sometimes endeavored to rally, and draw to a head again,
they were constrained to quit the Field in great confusion, with the loss of
all their Baggage, consisting of three thousand Carts, and the Swedes pursued
them in the Rear, almost as far as Cracovia, putting most part of them to the
Sword.

Nor was their prosperity a whit less in Lithuania, the Nobility of that
Country having abandoned their obedience to the King of Poland, and sworn
fidelity to the King of Sweden, (howbeit some of them shortly after began to
repine at that yoke) and the Muscovits, desirous of amity with the conquerours,
departed.

Hereupon the Count of Steinbock, Master of the Ordinance, passed the River
Vistula with his Troops, and advanced against the Marsovians, being there
between nine, and ten thousand strong, where both he, and his, behaved
themselves so valliantly, that they rowted the said Marsovians, killed, and
rook many of them, and put the rest to flight.

The King and Queen of Poland fly.
The King of Poland finding the progress of his Enemies so prosperous against
him, and himself deserted as well by his own Subjects, as by Fortune; and
seeing at present small hopes of making any advantageous opposition, to so
impetuous a torrent, fled, together with his Queen, into Silesia.

In the interim Christina, lately Queen of Sweden, being departed from
Brussels, Queen Christine declares her self a Roman Catholic.
betook her self toward Rome, through Germany, and made a solemn, and public
Renun^ation of her former Belief, embrancig the profession of the Roman
Religion, at Inspruck in Tiroll; after which, proceeding to her journies end,
she was received by the Pope with great magnisicence, and splendom.

The Lottain Army goes to the French together with Prince Francis.
Whilst tu^s^ things passed, a Brigade of the Lorrain Army, consisting of five
Regiments, ^eserted Spanish service, and went to the French, and shortly after,
Prince Francis of Lorran^ himself did the same, with the maine body of the
Army, upon conditions that he should enjoy the Duchy of Bar, and the County of
Vaudement, as also a penssion from the King of France, sufficient to maintain
himself, and his Family; and the Lords, who had been Commanders in his Brothers
Army under him, and were come with him, restored to their Estates. The faid
Forces were all dispersed, and ranged under Marshal Tur^nns orders, in Picardy.

The disgust of some Fronteer Governors. The lansenists in France.
There happened a great disgust between the King of France, and the Governors of
Dourlans, Arras, Peronne, and Corby, about some contributions, and other
Advantages belonging to their Goverments; in so much, as it looked a great
while, as if they intended no less then to revolt, and undertake the Prince of
Condes party; but seasonable satisfaction being given them, they returned to
their obedience, to the great elusion, and frustration of the expectation of
the Spaniards; and the Duchess of Chatillon, who was imprisoned for having
endeavored to incite the Marshall D'hocquincourt Governor of Peronne, toward
a defection, was also set at liberty.

About this time, Complaint was made to the Court of France, of the great
increase of the Iansenists, or such as adhered to the doctrine of Iansenius
Bishop of Ypers in Flanders, which notwithstanding it had been consopited by
Pope Innocent the Tenth, some years before by a special Bull authorized, and
sent by him to that effect, began now to be again resuscitated by Doctor
Arnault, and some others of the Sorbon, as also some of Lovain, in such sort,
as had there not been very mature prevention used, it might have grown by
degrees, to be a business of difficulty enough to allay; the principles of the
said doctrine having much affinity with what was held by Saint Augustine, and is
now in conformity with that of the Reformed Churches, (touching Predestination,
Free Will, Merit of Works, etc.) besides, that it is no way displeasing to many
learned, and considerable persons amongst the Roman Catholics themselves, on
this side of the Alps, and therefore the more caution was used for the timely
silencing thereof.

The King of Sweden, after his former great victory, the King of Polands
flight, and the general success of the Swedish Arms in Poland, and the
Dominious thereupon depending; besieged Cracovia, and took it by Composition;
called a Diet, or Assembly of the States of Poland at Warsovia, drew an Oath of
Fidelity from them, The Polish Quartians submit.
and settled the affairs of the Kingdom under obedience to himself, at which
time the Polish Cavalry called Quartians together with their General Podolskie,
Great Standard Bearer of Poland, submitted themselves to him; five thousand
whereof he took with himself: sent two thousand of them with Licutenant
General Muller into Great Poland, and employed the rest upon other occasions.
This done, and an agreement being made with Chimlinskie General of the
Cossacks, who came to offer himself to the King of Sweden, with about sixty
thousand men, he sent his Armies into Prussia, which took Thoren and Strasburgh
by Composition, and marched to Marienburgh.

An Ambassador from Portugal at Rome.
Upon the twentieth of November, Francisco de Sowza arrived at Rome, in the
quality of Extraordinary Ambassador to his Holiness, in the behalf of the
Churches of Portugal, in despite of all the powerful opposition made by the
Spaniards, and their Faction in that Court.

The Swedish Fleet consisting of fifty ships, commanded by General Wranghel,
after having layn long near Wismar, launched into the Road of Dantzick, and
attempted to seize upon the little Town of Host, but was repulsed by the stout
resistance of the Inhabitants, and forced by ill weather back into Pomerania.

The Protestants of the Valleys of Piedmont, finding the Agreement made between
the Duke and them, to be very disadvantageous to them, as well in regard of the
rigor of some of the Articles thereof, as also for that the demolishment of
the Fort Saint Martin; and some other promises made them by their said Duke,
go slowly on toward performance; feel themselves in as much calamity, and
insecurity, as before; and consequently cease not to send their complaints, and
implore the assistance of their Brethren abroad, as much as ever.

There happened also not long ago a great controversy between the Protestant,
and Catholic Cantons of Swisserland, about the falling off of about thirty
families from the Romish Religion, and embracing the other, which if not
quickly pacified, may peradventure produce much misfortune.

It is said, that the Pope having offered the King of Poland some assistance of
money, the said King made answer, That the sum was too inconsider ble to
advance him to the recovery of his States; and that for his own subsistence as
a King, he thanked God, he had treasure enough; and finally, that however he
had lost his Crowns, yet could he not lose his Kingly Title. But it is fully
conceived, that the Emperor, and some of the Catholic and Ecclesiastical
Princes of Germany, will at length resolve to affoard him such relief, both of
men, money, and other necessaries for war, as may enable him to appear in the
Field against his Enemies, and make the Game fairer for him, then hither to it
has been, not withstanding the Emperor aforesaid have made a kind of
Declaration to the contrary, and sent his Extraordinary Ambassador to the King
of Sweden, to complement him, and intercede for a friendly Accommodation; for
he has already sent diverse Regiments into Silesia, and still goes on with his
Leavies, which he distributes, and ranges near the fronteers both of Sweden,
and Poland: and indeed this prodigious prosperity of the Swedish Arms in
Poland, gives an Alarm not only to all Germany, but even to Italy also, and
makes them stand upon their guard, not knowing whose turn may be next.

During the distractions of Christendom, the Pope has not been much asleep
since his coming to the Chair, but has uncessantly labored by Letters to the
Kings of Spain, and France, to draw them to a firm peace; yea, and he has sent
two of the most eminent, and most potent Cardinals of all the College (namely
Cardinal Barberini, and Cardinal Grimaldi) who have showed themselves upon all
occasions, great servants to the French Interest, to the Court of France, to
negotiate the matter; and it is thought, that the Spaniard, being on the
loosing hand, and almost desperate, will give France whatsoever she asks,
rather then miss a peace: however some be also of opinion, that they will be
able to effect little therein, in regard that France has made her Peace with
England, which was published at Paris and London, with extraordinary joy, and
splendor, the ninth of December, 1655. with very much advantage to the English
Nation.

FINIS.

