THE HIND AND THE PANTHER TRANSVERS'D To the Story of The Country-Mouse and the
City-Mouse.

Much Malice mingled with a little Wit.
Hind. Pan. Nec vult Panthera domari.
Quae Genus. LONDON: Printed for W. Davis, MDCLXXXVII.

PREFACE.
THE Favorers of the Hind and Panther will be apt to say in its Defense, That
the best things are capable of being turned to Ridicule; that Homer has been
Burlesque'd, and Virgil Travested without suffering any thing in their
Reputation from that Buffoonry; and that in like manner, the Hind and the
Panther may be an exact Poem, though it is the Subject of our Raillery: But
there is this difference, that those Authors are wrested from their true Sense,
and this naturally falls into Ridicule; there is nothing Represented here as
monstrous and unnatural, which is not equally so in the Original. First as to
the General Design, Is it not as easy to imagine two Mice bilking Coachmen,
and supping at the Devil; as to suppose a Hind entertaining the Panther at a
Hermits Cell, discussing the greatest Mysteries of Religion, and telling you
her son Rodriguez writ very good Spanish? What can be more improbable and
contradictory to the Rules and Examples of all Fables, and to the very design
and use of them? They were first begun and raised to the highest Perfection in
the Eastern Countries; where they wrote in Signs and spoke in Parables, and
delivered the most useful Precepts in delightful stories; which for their
Aptness were entertaining to the most Judicious, and led the vulgar into
understanding by surprising them with their Novelty, and fixing their
Attention. All their Fables carry a double meaning; the Story is one and
entire; the Characters the same throughout, not broken or changed, and always
conformable to the Nature of the Creatures they introduce. They never tell you
that the Dog which snapt at a shadow, lost his Troop of Horse, that would be
unintelligible; a piece of Flesh is proper for him to drop, and the Reader will
apply it to mankind; they would not say that the Daw who was so proud of her
borrowed Plumes looked very ridiculous when Rodriguez came and took away all the
book but the 17th, 24th, and 25th Chapters, which she stole from him: But this
is his new way of telling a story, and confounding the Moral and the Fable
together. Before the Word was written, said the Hind,
Our Savior Preached the Faith to all Mankind.


What relation has the Hind to our Savior? or what notion have we of a
Panther's Bible? If you say he means the Church, how does the Church feed on
Lawns, or range in the Forest? Let it be always a Church, or always the
cloven-footed Beast, for we cannot bear his shifting the scene every Line. If
it is absurd in Comedies to make a Peasant talk in the strain of a Hero, or a
Country Wench use the language of the Court; how monstrous is it to make a
Priest of a Hind, and a Parson of a Panther? To hring 'em in disputing with all
the Formalities and Terms of the School? Though as to the Arguments themselves,
those, we confess, are suited to the Capacity of the Beasts, and if we would
suppose a Hind expressing her self about these Matters, she would talk at that
Rate.

As to the Absurdity of his expressions, there is nothing wrested to make 'em
ridiculous, the terms are sometimes altered to make the Blunder more visible;
Knowledge misunderstood is not at all better sense than Undetstanding
misunderstood, though it is confessed the Author can play with words so well, that
this and twenty such will pass off at a slight reading.

There are other mistakes which could not be brought in* for they were too
gross for Bays himself to commit. It Is hard to conceive how any man could
censure the Turks for Gluttony, a People that debauch in Coffee, are voluptuous
in a mess of Rice, and keep the strictest Lent, without the Pleasures of a
Carnival to encourage them. But it is almost impossible to think that any man
who had not renounced his Senses, should read Duncomb for Allen: He had been
told that Mr. Allen had written a Discourse of Humility; Difference betwixt a
Protestant and Socinian, p. 62.
to which he wisely answers, That that magnified Piece of Duncombs was
Translated from the Spanish of Rodriguez, and to set it beyond dispute, Page 92.
makes the infallible Guide affirm the same thing. There are few mistakes, but
one may imagine how a Man fell into them, and at least what he aimed at; but
what likeness is there between Duncomb and Allen? do they so much as Rhyme?

We may have this comfort under the severity of his Satyr, to see his Abilities
equally lessened with his Opinion of us; and that he could not be a fit
Champion against the Panther till he had laid aside all his Judgment. But we
must applaud his Obedience to his new Mother Hind; Page 90.
she Disciplined him severely, she commanded him it seems, to Sacrifice his
darling Fame, and to do it effectually he published this learned Piece. This is
the favorable Construction we would put on his faults, tho he takes care to
inform us, Pref.
that it was done from no Imposition, but out of a natural Propensity he has to
Malice, and a particular Inclination of doing Mischief. What else could provoke
him to Libel the Court, Page 87.
Blaspheme Kings, abuse the whole Scotch Nation, rail at the greatest Part of
his own, and lay all the Indignities imaginable on the only established
Religion? And we must now Congratulate him this Felicity, that there is no Sect
or Denomination of Christians, whom he has not abused.

Thus far his Arms have with Success been crowned.

Let Turks, Jews and Infidels, look to themselves, he has already begun the War
upon them. When once a Conqueror grows thus dreadful, it is the Interest of all
his Neighbors to oppose him, for there is no Alliance to be made with one that
will face about, and destroy his Friends, and like a second Almanzor, change
sides merely to keep his hand in ure. This Heroic temper of his, has created
him some Enemies, that did by no means affect Hostility; and he may observe
this Candor in the Management, that none of his Works are concerned in these
Papers, but his last Piece; and I believe he is sensible this is a favor. I
was not ambitious of Laughing at any Persuasion, or making Religion the Subject
of such a Trifle; so that no man is here concerned, but the Author himself, and
nothing ridiculed but his way of arguing.

But, Gentlemen, if you will not take it so, you must grant my Excuse is more
reasonable than our Author's to the Dissenters.

THE HIND AND THE PANTHER, Transvers'd to the Story of the Country and the
City-Mouse.
Bays. Johnson. Smith. Johnson. HAH! my old friend Mr. Bays, what lucky
chance has thrown me upon you? Dear Rogue let me embrace thee.


Bays. Hold, at your peril, Sir, stand off and come not within my Swords
point, for if you are not come over to the Royal party, Pref. p. 1.
I expect neither fair war, nor fair quarter from you.


John's. How, draw upon your friend? and assault your old Acquaintance? OF my
conscience my intentions were Honorable.


Bays. Conscience! Ay, ay, I know the deceit of that word well enough, Pref.
ib.
let me have the marks of your Conscience before I trust it, for if it be not
of the same stamp with mine, Gad I may be knocked down for all your fair
promises.


Smith. Nay, prithee Bays, what damned Villainy have thou been about that
you are under these apprehensions? upon my Honor I Am thy friend; yet thou
look as sneaking and frighted as a dog that has been worrying sheep.


Bays. Pref. ib.
Ay Sir, The Nation is in too high a ferment for me to expect any mercy, or
I'gad, to trust any body.


Smith. But why this to us, my old friend, who you know never trouble our heads
with National concerns till the third bottle has taught us as much of
Politics, as the next does of Religion?


Bays. Ah Gentlemen, leave this profaneness, I am altered since you saw me,
and cannot bear this loose talk now; Mr. Johnson, you are a man of Parts, let
me desire you to read the Guide of Controversy; and Mr. Smith, I would
recommend to you the Considerations on the Council of Trent, Page 5.
and so Gentlemen your humble Servant. -- Good life be now my Task.


John's. Nay Faith, we wont part so: believe us we are both your Friends; let us
step to the Rose for one quarter of an hour, and talk over old Stories.


Bays. I ever took you to be men of Honor, and for your sakes I will
transgress as far as one Pint.


John's. Well, Mr. Bays, many a merry bout have we had in this House, and shall
have again, I hope: Come, what Wine are you for?


Bays. Gentlemen, do you as you please, for my part he shall bring me a single
Pint of any thing.


Smith. How so, Mr. Bays, have you lost your pallat? you have been more
curious.


Bays. True, I have so, but senses must be starved that the soul may be
gratified. Page 21.
Men of your Kidney make the senses the supreme Judge, and therefore bribe 'em
high, but we have laid both the use and pleasure of 'em aside.


Smith. What, is not there good eating and drinking on both sides? you make the
separation greater than I thought it.


Bays. No, no, whenever you see a fat Rosy-colored fellow, Ibid.
take it from me, he is either a Protestant or a Turk.


John's. At that rate, Mr. Bays, one might suspect your conversion; methinks
thou have as much the face of an Heretic as ever I saw.


Bays. Such was I, Page 5.
such by nature still I am. But I hope ere long I shall have drawn this
pampered Paunch fitter for the straight gate.


Smith. Sure, Sir, you are in ill hands, your Confessor gives you more severe
rules than he practices; for not long ago a Fat Friar was thought a true
Character.


Bays. Things were misrepresented to me: I confess I have been unfortunate in
some of my Writings: but since you have put me upon that subject, I Will show you
a thing I have in my Pocket shall wipe off all that, or I am mistaken.


Smith. Come, now thou art like thy self again. Here Is the Kings Health to thee
-- Communicate.


Bays. Well, Gentlemen, here it is, and I Will be bold to say, the exactest
Piece the world ever saw, a Non Pareillo In Faith. But I must bespeak your
pardons if it reflects any thing upon your persuasion.


Ioh. Use your Liberty, Sir, you know we are no Bigots.


Bays. Why then you shall see me lay the Reformation on its back, I'gad, and
justify our Religion by way of Fable.


John's. An apt contrivance indeed! what do you make a Fable of your Religion?


Bays. Ay I'gad, and without Morals too; for I tread in no man's steps; and to
show you how far I can outdo any thing that ever was writ in this kind, I have
taken Horace's design, but I'gad, have so outdone him, you shall be ashamed
for your old friend. You remember in him the Story of the Country-Mouse, and
the City-Mouse; what a plain simple thing it is, it has no more life and spirit
in it, I'gad, than a Hobbyhorse; and his Mice talk so meanly, such common
stuff, so like mere Mice, that I wonder it has pleased the world so long. But
now will I undeceive Mankind, and teach 'em to heighten, and elevate a Fable.
I Will bring you in the very same Mice disputing the depth of Philosophy,
searching into the fundamentals of Religion, quoting Texts, Fathers, Councils,
and all that, I'gad, as you shall see either of 'em could easily make an Ass
of a Country Vicar. Now whereas Horace keeps to the dry naked story, I have
more copiousness than to do that, I'gad. Here, I draw you general Characters,
and describe all the beasts of the Creation; there, I launch out into long
Digressions, and leave my Mice for twenty Pages together; then I fall into
Raptures, and make the finest Soliloquies, as would ravish you. Will Not this do,
think you?


John's. Faith, Sir, I don't well conceive you; all this about two Mice?


Bays. Ay, why not? is it not great and Heroical? but come, you will understand
it better when you hear it; and pray be as severe as you can, I'gad I defy all
Critics. Thus it begins. Page 1.
A milk-white Mouse immortal and unchanged,
Fed on soft Cheese, and over the Dairy ranged;
Without, unspotted; innocent within,
She feared no danger, for she knew no Ginn.



John's. Methinks Mr. Bays, soft Cheese is a little too coarse Diet for an
immortal Mouse; were there any necessity for her eating, you should have
consulted Homer for some Celestial Provision.


Bays. Faith, Gentlemen, I did so; but indeed I have not the Latin one, which
I have marked by me, and could not readily find it in the Original. Yet had She
often been scared by bloody Claws Page 1.

Of winged Owls, and stern Grimalkins Paws
Aimed at her destined Head, which made her fly, Page 2.

Tho She was doomed to Death, and sated not to dye.



Smith. How came She that feared no danger in the line before, to be scared in
this, Mr. Bays?


Bays. Why then you may have it chased if you will; for I hope a Man may run
away without being afraid; may not he?


John's. But pray give me leave; how was She doomed to Death, if She was fated
not to dye; are not doom and fate, much the same thing?


Bays. Nay Gentlemen, if you question my skill in the Language, I Am your
humble Servant* the Rogues the Critics, that will allow me nothing else, give
me that; sure I that made the Word, know best what I meant by it: I assure you,
doomed and fated, are quite different things.


Smith. Faith, Mr. Bays, if you were doomed to be hanged, whatever you were
fated to, 'twould give you but small comfort.


Bays. Never trouble your head with that, Mr. Smith, mind the business in
hand. Not so her young; their Linsy-woolsy line, Page 2.

Was Hero's make, half humane, half Divine.



Smith. Certainly these Hero's, half Humane, half Divine, have very little of
the Mouse their Mother.


Bays. Gadsokers! Mr. Johnson, does your Friend think I mean nothing but a
Mouse, by all this? I tell thee, Man, I mean a Church, and these young
Gentlemen her Sons, signify Priests, Martyrs and Confessors, that were hanged
in Oats's Plot. There Is an excellent Latin Sentence, which I had a mind to
bring in, Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae, and I think I have not wronged it
in the Translation. Of these a slaughtered Army lay in Blood,
Page 2.
Whose sanguine Seed increased the sacred Brood;
She multiplied by these, now ranged alone,
Page 3.
And wandered in the Kingdoms once her own.



Smith. Was She alone when the sacred Brood was increased.


Bays. Why thy Head's running on the Mouse again; but I hope a Church may be
alone, tho the Members be increased, may not it?


John's. Certainly Mr. Bays, a Church which is a difusive Body of Men, can much
less be said to be alone.


Bays. But are you really of that Opinion? Take it from me, Mr. Johnson, you
are wrong; however to oblige you, I Will clap in some Simile or other, about the
Children of Israel, and it shall do.


Smith. Will you pardon me one word more, Mr. Bays? What could the Mouse (for
I suppose you mean her now) do more then range in the Kingdoms, when they were
her own?


Bays. Do? why She reigned; had a Diadem, Scepter and Ball, till they deposed
her.


Smith. Now her Sons are so increased, She may try the other pull for it.


Bays. I gad, and so She may before I have done with Her; it has cost me some
pains to clear Her Title. Well, but Mum for that, Mr. Smith. The common Hunt,
She timorously past by,
For they made tame, Page 3.
disdained Her company;
They grin'd, She in a fright tript over the Green,
For She was loved, wherever She was seen.



John's. Well said little Bays, In Faith the Critic must have a great deal of
leisure, that attacks those Verses.


Bays. I gad, I Will warrant him, who ere he is, offendet solido; but I go on.
The Independent Beast. Page 3.




Smith. Who is that Mr. Bays?


Bays. Why a Bear: Pox, is not that obvious enough? In groans Her hate expressed.
Which I gad, is very natural to that Animal. Well! there is for the
Independent: Now the Quaker; what do you think I call him?


Smith. Why, A Bull, for ought I know.


Bays. A Bull! O Lord! A Bull! no, no, a Hare, a quaking Hare. -- Armarillis,
because She wears Armor, it is the same Figure; and I am proud to say it, Mr.
Johnson, no man knows how to pun in Heroics but my self. Well, you shall hear.
She thought, and reason good, the quaking Hare
Her cruel Foe, because She would not swear, Page 3.

And had professed neutrality.



John's. A shrewd Reason that, Mr. Bays; but what Wars were there?


Bays. Wars! why there had bin bloody Wars, tho they were pretty well
reconciled now. Yet to bring in two or three such fine things as these, I don't
tell you the Lyon's Peace was proclaimed till fifty pages after, tho 'twas
really done before I had finished my Poem. Page 3.
Next Her, the Buffoon Ape his body bent,
And paid at Church a Courtier's complement.


That Gauls somewhere; I gad I cannot leave it off, tho I were cudgel'd every
day for it. Page 4.
The-brisl'd Baptist Boar, impure as he.



Smith. As who?


Bays. As the Courtier, let 'em e'n take it as they will, I gad, I seldom come
amongst 'em. Page 10.
Was whitened with the foam of Sanctity.
The Wolf with Belly-gaunt his rough crest rears,
And pricks up. --
Now in one word will I abuse the whole Party most damnably -- and pricks up.
-- I gad, I am sure you will Laugh -- his predestinating Ears. Prithee Mr.
Johnson, remember little Bays, when next you see a Presbyterian, and take
notice if he has not Predestination in the shape of his Ear: I have studied men
so long. I Will undertake to know an Arminian, by the setting of his Wig.

His predestinating Ears. I gad there is never a Presbyterian shall dare to show
his Head without a Border: I Will put 'em to that expense.


Smith. Pray Mr. Bays, if any of 'em should come over to the Royal Party, would
their Ears alter?


Bays. Would they? Ay, I gad, they would shed their Fanatical Lugs, and have
just such well-turn'd Ears as I have; mind this Ear, this is a true Roman Ear,
mine are much changed for the better within this two years.


Smith. Then if ever the Party should chance to fail, you might lose 'em, for
what may change, may fall.


Bays. Mind, mind -- These fiery Zuinglius, Page 11.
meagre Calvin bred.



Smith. Those I suppose are some Outlandish Beasts, Mr. Bays.


Bays. Beasts; a good Mistake! Why they were the chief Reformers, but here I
put 'em in so bad Company because they were Enemies to my Mouse, and anon when
I am warmed, Page 39.
I'gad you shall hear me call 'em Doctors, Captains, Horses and Horsemen in the
very same Breath. You shall hear how I go on now, Or else reforming Corah
spawned this Class, Page 11.

When opening Earth made way for all to pass.



John. For all, Mr. Bays?


Bays. Yes, They were all lost there, but some of 'em were thrown up again at
the Leman-Lake: as a Catholic Queen sunk at Charing Cross, and rose again at
Queenhith. The Fox and he came shuffled in the dark, Page 11.

If ever they were stowed in Noah's Ark.
Here I put a Quaere, Whether there were any Socinians before the Flood, which
I Am not very well satisfied in? I have been lately apt to believe that the
World was drowned for that Heresy; which among Friends made me leave it.
Quickened with Fire below, Page 12.
these Monsters breed
In Fenny Holland, and in Fruitful Tweed.
Now to write something new and out of the way, to elevate and surprise, and
all that, I fetch, you see this Quickening Fire from the Bottom of Boggs and
Rivers.


John. Why, Faith, that is as ingenious a Contrivance as the Virtuoso's making a
Burning-Glass of Ice.


Bays. Why was there ever any such thing? Let me perish if ever I heard of it.
The Fancy was sheer new to me; and I thought no Man had reconciled those
Elements but my self. Well Gentlemen! Thus far I have followed Antiquity, and
as Homer has numbered his Ships, so I have ranged my Beasts. Here is my Boar and
my Bear, and my Fox, and my Wolf, and the rest of 'em all against my poor
Mouse. Now what do you think I do with all these?


Smith. Faith I don't know, I suppose you make 'em fight.


Bays. Fight! I'gad I Would as soon make 'em Dance. No, I do no earthly thing with
'em, nothing at all, I'gad: I think they have played their Parts sufficiently
already; I have walked 'em out, showed 'em to the Company, and raised your
Expectation. And now whilst you hope to see 'em bated, and are dreaming of
Blood and Battles, they sculk off, and you hear no more of 'em.


Smith. Why, Faith, Mr. Bays, now you have been at such expense in setting
forth their Characters, it had been too much to have gone through with 'em.


Bays. I'gad so it had: And then I Will tell you another thing, it is not every
one that reads a Poem through. And therefore I fill the first part with
Flowers, Figures, fine Language, and all that; and then I'gad sink by degrees,
till at last I write but little better than other People. And whereas most
Authors creep servilely after the Old Fellows, and strive to grow upon their
Readers; I take another Course, I bring in all my Characters together, and let
'em see I could go on with 'em; but I'gad, I will not.


John. Could go on with 'em Mr. Bays! there is no Body doubts that; You have a
most particular Genius that way.


Bays. Oh! Dear Sir, You are mighty obliging: But I must needs say at a Fable
or an Emblem I think no Man comes near me, indeed I have studied it more than
any Man. Did you ever take notice, Mr. Johnson, of a little thing that has
taken mightily about Town, a Cat with a Top-knot?


John. Faith, Sir, it is mighty pretty, I saw it at the Coffee-House.


Bays. It Is a Trifle hardly worth owning; I was the other Day at Will's throwing
out something of that Nature; and I'gad, the hint was taken, and out came that
Picture; indeed the poor Fellow was so civil to present me with a dozen of 'em
for my Friends, I think I have one here in my Pocket; would you please to
accept it Mr Johnson?


John. Really it is very ingenious.


Bays. Oh Lord! Nothing at all, I could design twenty of 'em in an Hour, if I
had but witty Fellows about me to draw 'em. I was proffered a Pension to go
into Holland, and contrive their Emblems. But hang 'em they are dull Rogues,
and would spoil my Invention. But come, Gentlemen, let us return to our
Business, and here I Will give you a delicate description of a Man.


Smith. But how does that come in?


Bays. Come in? very naturally. I was talking of a Wolf and that supposes a
Wood, and then I clap an Epithet to it, and call it a Celtic Wood: Now when I
was there, I could not help thinking of the French Persecution, and I'gad from
all these Thoughts I took occasion to rail at the French King, and show that he
was not of the same make with other Men, which thus I prove. Page 15.
The Divine Blacksmith in the Abyss of Light,
Yawning and lolling with a careless beat,
Struck out the mute Creation at a Heat.
But he worked hard to Hammer out our Souls,
He blew the Bellows, and stirred up the Coals;
Long time he thought and could not on a sudden
Page 16.
Knead up with unskim'd Milk this Reasoning Pudding:
Tender, and mild within its Bag it lay
Confessing still the softness of its Clay,
And kind as Milk-Maids on their Wedding Day.
Till Pride of Empire, Lust, and hot Desire
Did over-boile him, like too great a Fire,
And understanding grown, misunderstood,
Burned Him to the Pot, and sour'd his curdled Blood.



John. But sure this is a little profane, Mr. Bays.


Bays. Not at all: does not Virgil bring in his God Vulcan working at the
Anvil?


John. Ay Sir, but never thought his Hands the fittest to make a Pudding.


Bays. Why do you imagine Him an Earthly dirty Blacksmith? 'Gad you make it
profane indeed. I Will tell you there is as much difference betwixt 'em, I'gad as
betwixt my Man and Milton's. But now, Gentlemen, the Plot thickens, here comes
my the other Mouse, the City Mouse. Page 19.
A spotted Mouse, the prettiest next the White,
Ah! were her Spots washed out, as pretty quite,
Page 23.
With Phylacteries on her Forehead spread,
Page 22.
Crozier in Hand, and Miter on her Head.
Three Steeples Argent on her Sable Shield. Page 84.

Lived in the City, and disdained the Field.



John. This is a glorious Mouse indeed! but, as you have dressed her, we do'nt
know whether she be Jew, Papist or Protestant.


Bays. Let me embrace you, Mr. Johnson, for that; you take it right. She is a
mere Babel of Religions, and therefore she is a spotted Mouse here, and will be
a Mule presently. But to go on. This Princess --



Smith. What Princess, Mr. Bays?


Bays. Why this Mouse, for I forgot to tell you, an Old Lion made a left Hand
Marriage with her Mother, Page 20.
and begot on her Body Elizabeth Schism, who was married to Timothy Sacriledg,
and had Issue Graceless Heresy. Who all give the same Coat with their Mother,
Three Steeples Argent, as I told you before. This Princess tho estranged from
what was best,
Was least Deformed, because Reformed the least. Page 23.

There Is De and Re as good I'gad as ever was. She in a Masquerade of Mirth and
Love, Page 22.

Mistook the Bliss of Heaven for Bacchinals above,
And grub'd the Thorns beneath our tender Feet,
To make the Paths of Paradise more sweet.
There Is a Jolly Mouse for you, let me see any Body else that can show you such
another. Here now have I one damnable severe reflecting Line, but I want a
Rhyme to it, can you help me Mr. Johnson. She --
Humbly content to be despised at Home,



John. Which is too narrow Infamy for some.


Bays. Sir, I thank you, now I can go on with it. Page 63.
Whose Merits are diffused from Pole to Pole,
Where Winds can carry, and where Waves can roll.



John. But does not this reflect upon some of your Friends, Mr. Bays?


Bays. It Is no matter for that, let me alone to bring my self off. I Will tell
you, lately I writ a damned Libel on a whole Party, sheer Point and Satyr all
through, I'gad. Called 'em Rogues, Dogs, and all the Names I could think of,
but with an exceeding deal of Wit; that I must needs say. Now it happened
before I could finish this Piece, the Scheme of Affairs was altered, and those
People were no longer Beasts: Here was a Plunge now: Should I lose my Labor,
or Libel my Friend? It Is not every Body's Talent to find a Salvo for this: But
what do me I but write a smooth delicate Preface, wherein I tell them that the
Satyr was not intended to them, and this did the Business.


Smith. But if it was not intended to them against whom it was writ, certainly
it had no meaning at all.


Bays. Poh! There Is the Trick on it. Poor Fools, they took it, and were
satisfied: And yet it mauled 'em damnably I'gad.


Smith. Why Faith, Mr. Bays, there is this very Contrivance in the Preface to
Dear Ioys Jests.


Bays. What a Devil do you think that I Would steal from such an Author? Or ever
read it?


Smith. I cannot tell, but you sometimes read as bad. I have heard you quote
Reynard the Fox.


Bays. Why there is it now; take it from me, Mr. Smith, there is as good
Morality, and as found Precepts, in the delectable History of Reynard the Fox,
as in any Book I know, except Seneca. Pray tell me where in any other Author
could I have found so pretty a Name for a Wolf as Isgrim? But prithee, Mr.
Smith, give me no more trouble, and let me go on with my Mouse. One Evening,
Page 29.
when she went away from Court,
Levee's and Couchee's past without resort.
There Is Court Language for you; nothing gives a Verse so fine a turn as an Air
of good Breeding.


Smith. But methinks the Levee's and Couchee's of a Mouse are too great,
especially when she is walking from Court to the cooler Shades.


Bays. I'gad now have you forgot what I told you that she was a Princess. But
pray mind; here the two Mice meet. She met the Country Mouse, Page 16.
whose fearful Face
Beheld from far the common watering Place,
Nor durst approach --



Smith. Methinks, Mr. Bays, this Mouse is strangely altered, since she feared
no Danger.


Bays. Godsokers! Why no more she does not yet fear either Man or Beast: But,
poor Creature, she is afraid of the Water, for she could not swim, as you see by
this. Nor durst approach, Page 30.
till with an awful Roar
The Sovereign Lion had her fear no more.
But besides, it is above thirty Pages off that I told you she feared no Danger;
and I'gad if you will have no variation of the Character, you must have the
same thing over and over again; it is the Beauty of Writing to strike you still
with something new. Well, but to proceed. But when she had this sweetest Mouse
in view,
Page 30.
Good Lord, how she admired her Heavenly Hiew!
Here now to show you I am Master of all Styles, I let my self down from the
Majesty of Virgil, to the Sweetness of Ovid. Good Lord, how she admired her
Heavenly Hiew!
What more easy and familiar! I writ this Line for the Ladies: The little
Rogues will be so fond of me to find I can yet be so tender. I hate such a
rough unhewen Fellow as Milton, that a Man must sweat to read Him; I'gad you
may run over this and be almost asleep. The Immortal Mouse who saw the Viceroy
come
So far to see Her, did invite her Home.
There Is a pretty Name now for the Spotted Mouse, the Viceroy!


Smith. But pray why do you call her so?


Bays. Why! Because it sounds prettily: I Will call her the Crown-General
presently if I Have a mind to it. Page 55.
Well. -- did invite her Home
To smoke a Pipe, and over a sober Pot
Discourse of Oats and Bedloe, and the Plot.
Page 31.
She made a Court'sy, like a Civil Dame,
And, Page 32.
being much a Gentlewoman, came
Well, Gentlemen, here is my first part finished, and I think T have kept my
Word with you, and given it the Majestic turn of Heroic Poesy. The rest being
matter of Dispute, I had not such frequent occasion for the magnificence of
Verse, tho I'gad they speak very well. And I have heard Men, and considerable
Men too, talk the very same things, a great deal worse.


John. Nay, without doubt, Mr. Bays, they have received no small advantage
from the smoothness of your numbers.


Bays. Ay, ay, I can do it, if I list: though you must not think I have been so
dull as to mind these things my self, but it is the advantage of our
Coffee-house, that from their talk one may write a very good polemical
discourse, without ever troubling ones head with the Books of Controversy. For
I can take the slightest of their Arguments, and clap 'em pertly into four
Verses, which shall stare any London Divine in the face. Indeed your knotty
Reasonings with a long train of Majors and Minors, and the Devil and all, are
too barbarous for my style; but 'i gad I can flourish better with one of these
twinkling Arguments, than the best of 'em can fight with the other. But we return
to our Mouse, and now I Have brought 'em together, let 'em 'en speak for
themselves, which they will do extremely well, or I Am mistaken: and pray
observe, Gentlemen, if in one you don't find all the delicacy of a luxurious
City-Mouse, and in the other all the plain simplicity of a sober serious
Matron. Dame, Page 32.
said the Lady of the Spotted Muff,
Methinks your Tiff is sour, your Cates mere stuff.
There did not I tell you she would be nice? Your Pipe's so foul, that I disdain to
smoke;
And the Weed worse than e're Tom. I -- s took.



Smith. I did not hear she had a Spotted Muff before.


Bays. Why no more she has not now: but she has a Skin that might make a
Spotted Muff. There Is a pretty Figure now unknown to the Ancients. Leave, leave
( Poeta Loquitur.
she is earnest you see) this hoary Shed and lonely Hills,
And eat with me at Groleau's, smoke at Will's.
What Wretch would nibble on a Hanging-shelf,
When at Pontack's he may Regale himself?
Or to the House of cleanly Renish go;
Or that at Charing Cross, or that in Channel-Row?


Do you mark me now? I would by this represent the vanity of a Town-Fop, who
pretends to be acquainted at all those good Houses, though perhaps he nere was
in 'em. But hark! she goes on. Come, at a Crown a Head our selves we'll treat,
Champain our Liquor, and Ragousts our Meat.
Then hand in hand we'll go to Court, dear Cuz,
To visit Bishop Martin, and King Buz.
With Evening Wheels we'll drive about the Park,
Finish at Locket's, and reel home in the Dark.
Break clattering Windows, and demolish Doors
Page 63.
Of English Manufactures -- Pimps, and Whores.



John. Methinks a Pimp or a Whore, is an odd sort of a Manufacture, Mr. Bays.


Bays. I call 'em so, to give the Parliament a hint not to suffer so many of
'em to be exported, to the decay of Trade at home. With these Allurements
Spotted did invite
From Hermits Cell, the Female Proselyte.
Oh! with what ease we follow such a Guide,
Where Souls are starved, and Senses gratified.


Now would not you think she is going? but I gad, you're mistaken; you shall
hear a long Argument about Infallibility, before she stirs yet. Page 69.
But here the White, by observation wise,
Who long on Heaven had fixed her prying Eyes,
With thoughtful Countenance, and grave Remark,
Said, or my Judgment fails me, or it is dark.
Lest therefore we should stray, and not go right,
Through the brown horror of the starless Night.
Have thou Infallibility, Page 37.
that Wight?
Sternly the Savage grin'd, and thus replied:
That Mice may err, was never yet denied.
That I deny, said the immortal Dame,
There is a Guide -- Gad I Have forgot his Name, Page 37.

Who lives in Heaven or Rome, the Lord knows where,
Had we but him, Sweetheart, we could not err.
But hark you, Spotted Mouse, Loquitur.
Sister, this is but a Whim;
For still we want a Guide to find out Him.


Here you see I don't trouble my self to keep on the Narration, but write white
Speaks or dapple Speaks by the side. But when I get any noble thought which I
envy a Mouse should say, I clap it down in my own Person with a Poeta Loquitur;
Page 69.
which, take notice, is a surer sign of a sine thing in my Writings, than a
Hand in the Margent any-where else. Well now says White, What need we find Him,
we have certain proof
That he is somewhere, Dame, and that is enough:
For if there is a Guide that knows the way,
Although we know not him, we cannot stray.


That Is true, I Gad: Well said White. You see her Adversary has nothing to say
for her self, and therefore to confirm the Victory, she shall make a Simile.


Smith. Why then I find Similes are as good after Victory, as after a Surprise.


Bays. Every Jot, I Gad, or rather better. Well, she can do it two ways, Page
37.
either about Emission or Reception of Light, or else about Epsom-waters, but I
think the last is most familiar; therefore speak, my pretty one. As though it is
controverted in the School,
If Waters pass by Urine or by Stool.
Shall we who are Philosophers, thence gather
From this dissension that they work by neither.


And I Gad, she is in the right on it; but mind now, she comes upon her swop! All
this I did, your Arguments to try.


And I Gad, if they had been never so good, this next Line confutes 'em. Page
54.
Hear, and be dumb, thou Wretch, that Guide am I.


There Is a Surprise for you now! How sneakingly the other looks? Was not that
pretty now, to make her ask for a Guide first, and then tell her she was one?
Who could have thought that this little Mouse had the Pope and a whole General
Council in her Belly? Now Dapple had nothing to say to this; and therefore
you will see she grows peevish. Come leave your Cracking tricks, and as they say,
Page 101.
Use not, that Barber that trims time, delay
Which I gad is new, and my own. I Have Eyes as well as you to find the way.
Then on they jogged, and since an hour of talk
Might cut a Banter on the tedious walk;
As I remember said the sober Mouse,
I Have heard much talk of the Wits Coffee-House.
Thither, says Brindle, thou shall go, and see
Priests sipping Coffee* Sparks and Poets Tea;
Here rugged Freeze, there Quality well dressed,
These bafling the Grand-Seigniour; those the Test*
And hear shrewd guesses made, and reasons given,
That humane Laws were never made in Heaven. Page 111.

But above all, what shall oblige thy sight,
And fill thy Eye Balls with a vast delight;
Is the Poetic Judge of sacred Wit,
Who does in the Darkness of his Glory sit.
And as the Moon who first receives the light, Page 28.

With which she makes these neither Regions bright;
So does he shine, reflecting from a far,
The Rays he borrowed from a better Star:
For rules which from Corneille and Rapin slow,
Admired by all the scribbling Herd below.
From French Tradition while he does dispense,
Unerring Truths, it is Schism, a damned offense,
To question his, or trust your private sense.


Hah! Is not that right, Mr. Johnson? Gad forgive me he is fast a sleep! Oh the
damned stupidity of this Age! a sleep! Well, Sir, Since you are so drousy, your
humble Servant.


John's. Nay, Pray Mr. Bays, Faith I heard you all the while. The white Mouse.


Bays. The white Mouse! ay, ay, I thought how you heard me. Your Servant, Sir,
your Servant.


John. Nay, Dear Bays, Faith I beg thy Pardon, I was up late last Night,
Prithee lend me a little Snuff, and go on.


Bays. Go on! Pox I don't know where I was, well I Will begin. Here, mind, now
they are both come to Town. But now at Peccadille they arrive,
And taking Coach, toward Temple Bar they drive;
But at St. Clement's Church, eat out the Back;
And slipping through the Palsgrave, bilkt poor Hack.


There Is the Vtile which ought to be in all Poetry, Many a young Templer will
save his shilling by this Stratagem of my Mice.


Smith. Why, will any young Templer eat out the back of a Coach?


Bays. No, I gad, but you will grant it is mighty natural for a Mouse. Thence to
the Devil, and asked if Chanticleer,
Page 133.
Of Clergy kind, or Counselor Chough was there;
Or Mr. Dove, a Pigeon of Renown,
Page 126.
By his high crop, and corny Gizzard known,
Page 130.
Or Sister Partlet, with the Hooded head;
No, Sir. She Is hooted hence, said Will, and fled.
Why so? Because she would not pray a Bed.



John. aside. 'Sdeath! Who can keep awake at such stuff? Pray, Mr. Bays, lend
me your Box again.


Bays. Mr. Johnson, How do you like that Box? Pray take notice of it, 'twas given
me by a person of Honor for looking over a Paper of Verses; and indeed I put
in all the lines that were worth any thing in the whole Poem. Well, but where
were we? Oh! Here they are, just going up stairs into the Apollo; from whence
my White takes occasion to talk very well of Tradition. Thus to the place where
Johnson sat we climb,
Leaning on the same Rail that guided him;
And whilst we thus on equal helps rely,
Our Wit must be as true, our thoughts as high.
Page 45.
For as an Author happily compares
Tradition to a well-sixt pair of Stairs,
So this the Scala Sancta we believe,
By which his Traditive Genius we receive.
Thus every step I take my Spirits soar,
And I grow more a Wit, and more, and more.


There Is humor! Is not that the liveliest Image in the World of a Mouses going
up a pair of Stairs. More a Wit, and more and more?


Smith. Mr. Bays, I beg your Pardon heartily, I must be rude, I have a
particular Engagement at this time, and I see you are not near an end yet.


Bays. Godsokers! Sure you will not serve me so: All my finest Discriptions and
best Discourse is yet to come.


Smith. Troth, Sir, if 'twere not an Extraordinary concern I could not leave
you.


Bays. Well; but you shall take a little more, and here I Will pass over two
dainty Episodes of Swallows, Swifts, Chickens, and Buzzards.


John's. I know not why they should come in, except to make yours the longest
Fable that ever was told.


Bays. Why, the excellence of a Fable is in the length of it. AEsop indeed,
like a Slave as he was, made little, short, simple stories, with a dry Moral at
the end of 'em; and could not form any noble design. But here I give you Fable
upon Fable; and after you are satisfied with Beasts in the first course, serve
you up a delicate Dish of Fowl for the second; now I was at all this pains to
abuse one particular person; for I gad I Will tell you what a trick he served me.
Varillas.
I was once translating a very good French Author, but being something long
about it, as you know a Man is not always in the Humor; What does this Jack
do, but put's out an Answer to my Friend before I had half finished the
Translation: so there was three whole Months lost upon his Account. But I think
I have my revenge on him sufficiently, for I let all the World know, Page 137.
that he is a tall, broadback'd, lusty fellow, of a brown Complexion, fair
Behavior, a Fluent Tongue, and taking amongst the Women; and to top it all
that he is much a Scholar, more a Wit, and owns but two Sacraments. Don't you
think this Fellow will hang himself? But besides, I have so nickt his Character
in a Name as will make you split. I call him -- I gad I will not tell you unless
you remember what I said of him.


Smith. Why that he was much a Scholar, and more a Wit --


Bays. Right; and his name is Buzzard, ha! ha! ha.


John's. Very proper indeed, Sir.


Bays. Nay, I have a farther fetch in it yet than perhaps you imagine; for his
true name begins with a B, which makes me slily contrive him this, to begin
with the same Letter: There Is a pretty device, Mr. Johnson; I learned it, I
must needs confess, from that ingenious sport, I love my Love with an A,
because she is Amiable; and if you could but get a knot of merry Fellows
together, you should see how little Bays would top 'em all at it, I gad.


Smith. Well, but good Faith, Mr. Bays, I must leave you, I am half an hour
past my time.


Bays. Well, I Have done, I Have done. Here are eight hundred Verses upon a rainy
Night, and a Birds-Nest; and here is three hundred more, Translated from two
Paris Gazets, in which the Spotted Mouse gives an account of the Treaty of
Peace between the Czars of Muscovy, and the Emperor, which is a piece of News.
White does not believe, and this is her Answer. I am resolved you shall hear
it, for in it I have taken occasion to prove Oral Tradition better than
Scripture. Now you must know, it is sincerely my Opinion, that it had been
better for the World, if we nere had any Bibles at all. E're that Gazet was
printed, said the White,
Our Robin told another story quite;
This Oral Truth more safely I believed,
My Ears cannot, your Eyes may be deceived.
By word of Mouth unerring Maxims slow,
And Preaching's best, if understood, or no.
Words I confess bound by, Page 3.
and trip so light,
We have not time to take a steady sight;
Yet sleeting thus are plainer then when Writ,
To long Examination they submit.


Hard things -- Mr. Smith, if these two lines don't recompense your stay, never
trust John Bays again. Hard things at the first Blush are clear and full,
God mends at second thoughts, but Man grows dull.


I gad I judge of all Men by my self, it is so with me, I never strove to be
very exact in any thing but I spoiled it.


Smith. But allowing your Character to be true, is it not a little too severe?


Bays. It Is no matter for that, these general reflections are daring, and
savor most of a noble Genius, that spares neither Friend nor Foe.


John. Are you never afraid of a drubbing for that daring of your noble Genius?


Bays. Afraid! Why Lord you make so much of a beating, IN gad it is no more to
me than a Flea biting. No, No, if I can but be witty upon 'em, let 'em en lay
on, I Faith, I Will never baulk my fancy to save my Carcass. Well, but we must
dispatch, Mr. Smith. Thus did they merrily carouse all day,
And like the gaudy fly their Wings display;
And sip the sweets, and bask in great Apollo's ray.


Well there is an end of the Entertainment; and Mr. Smith, if your affairs would
have permitted, you would have heard the best Bill of Fare that ever was served
up in Heroicks: but here follows a dispute shall recommend it self, I Will say
nothing for it. For Dapple, who you must know was a Protestant, all this while
trusts her own Judgment, and foolishly dislikes the Wine; upon which our
Innocent does so run her down, that she has not one word to say for her self,
but what I put in her Mouth; and I gad, you may imagine they will not be very good
ones, for she has disobliged me, like an Ingrate. Sirrah, says Brindle, Thou
have brought us Wine,
Sour to my taste, and to my Eyes unfine.
Says Will, all Gentlemen like it, ah! says White,
What is approved by them, must needs be right.
Page 38.
It Is true, I thought it bad, but if the House
Commend it, I submit, a private Mouse.


Mind that, mind the Decorum, and Defference, which our Mouse pays to the
Company. Nor to their Catholic consent oppose
My erring Judgment, and reforming Nose.


Ah! ah! there she has nick't her, that is up to the Hilts, I gad, and you shall
see Dapple resents it. Why, what a Devil shall not I trust my Eyes?
Must I drink Stum because the Rascal lies?
And palms upon us Catholic consent,
To give sophisticated Brewings vent.
Says White, Page 5.
What ancient Evidence can sway,
If you must Argue thus and not obey?
Drawers must be trusted, through whose hands conveyed,
You take the Liquor, or you spoil the Trade.
For sure those Honest Fellows have no knack
Of putting off stum'd Claret for Pontack.
How long, alas! would the poor Vintner last,
If all that drink must judge, and every Guest
Be allowed to have an understanding Taste?
Thus she: Nor could the Panther well enlarge,
With weak defense, against so strong a Charge.


There I call her a Panther, because she is spotted, which is such a blot to the
Reformation, as I warrant 'em they will never claw off, I Gad. But with a weary
Yawn that showed her pride,
Said, Spotless was a Villain, and she lied.
White saw her cankered Malice at that word,
And said her Prayers, and drew her Delphic Sword.
The Other cried Murder, and her Rage restrained:
And thus her passive Character maintained.
But now alas --


Mr. Johnson, pray mind me this; Mr. Smith, I Will ask you to stay no longer, for
this that follows is so engaging; hear me but two Lines, I Gad, and go away
afterward if you can. But now, alas, I grieve, I grieve to tell
What sad mischance these pretty things befell
These Birds of Beasts --


There Is a tender Expression, Birds of Beasts: it is the greatest Affront that
you can put upon any Bird, to call it, Page 129.
Beast of a Bird: and a Beast is so fond of being called a Bird, as you cannot
imagine. These Birds of Beasts, these learned Reasoning Mice,
Were separated, banished in a trice.
Who would be learned for their sakes, who wise?


Ay, who indeed? There Is a Patho's, I Gad, Gentlemen, if that will not move you,
nothing will, I can assure you: But here is the sad thing I was afraid of. The
Constable alarmed by this noise,
Entered the Room, directed by the voice,
Page 135.
And speaking to the Watch, with head aside,
Said, Desperate Cures must be to desperate Ills applied.
These Gentlemen, for so their Fate decrees,
Page 115.
Can n'ere enjoy at once the But and Peace.
Page 144.
When each have separated Interests of their own,
Two Mice are one too many for a Town.
By Schism they are torn; and therefore, Brother,
Look you to one, and I Will secure the the other.
Now whither Dapple did to Bridewell go,
Page 98.
Or in the Stocks all night her Finger blow,
Or in the Compter lay, concerns not us to know.
But the immortal Matron, spotless White,
Forgetting Dapple's Rudeness, Malice, Spite,
Looked kindly back, and wept, and said, Good Night.
Page 145.
Ten thousand Watchmen waited on this Mouse,
With Bills, and Halberds, to her Country House.


This last Contrivance I had from a judicious Author, that makes Ten thousand
Angels wait upon his Hind, and she asleep too, I Gad. --


John. Come, let us see what we have to pay.


Bays. What a Pox, are you in such have? You have not told me how you like it.


John. Oh, extremely well. Here, Drawer.


FINIS.

