THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Home-Circuit. ON THE King's Commission On the Crown
side, at the several ASSIZES, (Viz.) Hartford, Brentwood, Croydon,
East-Grensted, and Rochester.

Being a Goal Delivery held for the several Counties, etc. And in the Fourth
year of his Majesty's Reign.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by George Croom, at the Blue-Ball in Thames Street,
near Baynard's- Castle. 1688.

THE PROCEEDINGS AT HARTFORD IN Hartford-shire, On Monday and Tuesday, being
the 23d. and 24th. days of July, 1688.
AT the Assizes Held at Hertford on Monday and Tuesday, being the 23d. and
24th. days of July, 1688. the Commission was read before Sir Richard Allibon
Knight. one of His Majesty's Justices of the Court of King's Bench, and the Grand
Jury Sworn; it was to proceed to deliver the said County of the Prisoners
therein.

Nicholas Marshal, John Baldwin, John Sell, Walter Cook, Samuel Holland, John
Worslely, Thomas Gutteridge, Thomas Crawley, Thomas Raymond, Solomon Pratt,
James Jackson, Henry Baker.
The Trials of the Prisoners were as follows.
John Norris and Philamon Bonniss both lately of the Parish of Bishops
Hatfield, were Indicted for that they the 29th. day of June last in the same
Parish, did Rob one John Medcalfe on the Highway, and took from him a Whip,
one Linen Cap, and 3 l. in Money; the mature of the Evidence was such, Mr.
Medcalfe returning to St. Albans, met in his way a Carrier's man and acquainted
him with his Misfortune of being Robbed, and in the mean time passed by the
very Men that committed the Robbery, who were immediately followed by the
Cirrier's man, and seen to go into an Inn at St. Albans; and the Constable
being sent for, Apprehended them, and found the Whip and Cap in the same Room
with them, and a Vizard Mask in one of their Pockets: Mr. Medcalfe Swore that
he knew their Faces, and they were both found Guilty of Felony and Robery.

Ann Dale of the Parish of Sabridgworth, Spinster, was Indicted for the Murder
of her Male Bastard Child, on the 28th. day of April last. This great Crime was
laid to her Charge upon this account, that a Child being found in a Pond near
the House where the Prisoner lived with its Throat Cut, all the Servants of the
Family upon this Allarm, were very ready to see the Child, but the Prisoner
when she was with great difficulty persuaded to it, appeared to be under a
great Distraction. Several of her Fellow Servants deposed that they had
observed her to be bigger than ordinary before the Child was supposed to be
Born, and at that time to be so Sick that she kept her Chamber. She did not
positively deny the Fact upon her Examination, but on her Trial insisted upon
her Innocence, and the Jury Acquitted her, the Proof not being clear enough
that she had any such Child.

Joseph Jackson of the Parish of All Saints in Hartford, was Tried for the
Murder of one William Kentish: Most of the Evidence consisted of what the
party slain said before he Died; he was heard to say that the Prisoner had
struck him and that he should never recover it. The Surgeon that viewed him
said he found no Bruise about him when Dead, and did believe that he died a
Natural Death by the Providence of God; and so the Prisoner for want of further
Evidence, and upon this Affirmation of the Surgeon, was Acquitted.

Susan Barber alias Crane of the Parish of Buntingford, was Indicted for the
Murder of a Female Bastard Child about five years ago: Sarah Dew a Witness
for the King, proved that about the time in the Indictment laid, the Prisoner
brought a dead Female Child to her, telling her that she was Delivered of a
Child three Months before its time, and so it appeared to the said Witness, and
so she not endeavoring to Conceal the Child, she was Acquitted.

Susan Ansell of Ware in the said County, was Arraigned for stealing
feloniously from one Tho. Griper, one Crape Gown and Serge Petticoat, both
amounting to the value of 20 s. One Witness proved that she had such Goods in
her custody; but the party from whom the Goods were stolen being a Quaker, and
refusing to Swear, the Prisoner was Acquitted for want of Evidence.

Lawrence Hasledoom was twice Indicted for Burning the Houses of Daniel Flindon
and Bridget Ansell, both in the Parish of Ikleford; he confessed the several
Facts before several Persons, and a sharp Iron Rod was produced in Court, with
which he confessed he had thrust Touch-wood into the Thatch wrapped in Paper; but
the Court and Jury believing the Prisoner to be of Imperfect memory, both at
that time and ever since, he was Acquitted, and left in Goal to be taken care
of by the Justices of Peace at their next Quarter Sessions.

Samuel Mead and Jane his Wife both of the parish of Stondon, were Indicted for
the Murder of one Joan Coal, an Infant, which the said Mead was supposed to
have Begotten on the Body of one Jane Cole. The Prisoners appeared to be of
indifferent good Fashion, and therefore suffered not the Child to be kept by
the Parish, but provided a Nurse themselves, and the Child Dying quickly, they
were accused of the Murder, but were both without much suspicion, Acquitted.

The Trials being over, the Court proceeded to give Judgment as follows, viz.
2 Received Sentence of Death viz.
John Norris, Philemon Baines,
Several old Convicts pleaded His Majesty's Gracious Pardon, under condition of
Transportation, viz.
George Marshall, Marjory Roberts, William Harrison.

And so the Court Adjourned:

The Proceedings at Brentwood in the County of Essex, on Wednesday, and
Thursday, being the 25th. and 26th. days of July. 1688.
AT the Assizes held at Brentwood in Essex, on Wednesday and Thursday, being
the 25th. and 26th. days of July, 1688. the Commission was read before Sir
Thomas Street Knight. one of His Majesty's Justices of His Court of Common Pleas,
and the Jury was Sworn whose Names follow.

Wignol Gilman, Stephen Winston, Daniel Hamm, Hugh Petchy, Anthony Lodwiske,
John Sharp, Bartholomew Tisby, Willliam Dale, William Francis, John Horner,
William Shambrooke, John Debney.
The Trials of the Prisoners were as follows.
Robert Pierce was Indicted, for that he in the Parish of Chinckford, did
Feloniously, Traitorously, and of his Malice before thought, Kill and Murder
one Richard Hemings his Master. It appeared that Hemings the Master who is
Slain, refused to give leave to the Prisoner his Servant to go to London to buy
new Clothes, and the Servant giving some saucy words, the Master corrected him
by striking him, and thereupon the Servant disarmed his Master, and so they
fell to Fighting, and were parted by some that saw the Scuffle; but the Master
after he had called help returned with a very large Stick in his hand, and the
Servant caught up another that lay by him; the Master then struck at the Man
very violently, and the Servant being so provoked, struck his Master upon the
Head, of which stroke he Died; and this matter being given in Evidence by all
the Witnesses, the Prisoner was found guilty of Manslaughter.

John Cole alias Alsop, alias Sheppard, and John Fisher, were both Indicted for
Breaking open the house of Robert Harvey Esquire in the Night, at Low Layton in the
County of Essex, on the 24th. of March last, and taking thence one silver Comb
box, value 10 l. one silver Saltsellar, value 13 l. two round silver Boxes,
value 10 l. three silver Castors, value 12 l. one Gold Ring with a Table
Diamond infixed, value 30 l. and other Goods, in all to the value of 156 l. 19
s and 20 l. in Money. Two of the Witnesses positively Swore they saw Cole in
their several Chambers, and one of them was forced by him to rise and go about
the House with him, to show where the Booty lay, and that at the Stair-foot his
Mask fell off, so that his Face might be easily discerned by the light of the
Candle; and some broken pieces of Plate were found about Fisher the other
Prisoner, which one of the Witnesses verily believed to be part of Mr. Harvey's
Comb box, from some Stains she had formerly observed in it: She likewise
affirmed, she did verily believe him to be one of them that Robbed the House,
but she could not swear positively to it: But it appearing that Cole did
usually lie at Fisher's House, it might possibly he that Fisher might only
receive the broken pieces of silver from Coal; so that the Jury brought in
Cole only Guilty of the Burglary, and Acquitted Fisher.

John Cole alias Sheppard, was likewise Indicted for Feloniously stealing one
Gray Gelding, value 8 l. and one Mare, value 4 l. from one Richard ^^yly* This
Felony was likewise plainly proved upon him, and he was found Guilty.

Charles Lee, Richard Stroud, and Richard Thomas were all three Indicted for
Felony and Burglary, in breaking the House of one Robert Levitt of Stibbing in
the Night, on the 26th. of June, and taking thence Money and Goods to the value
of 14 l. several of the Goods laid in the Indictment, were found about the
Prisoners, but Levitt being a Quaker, did refuse to Swear, (...) no body the
could prove those Goods to have been his Goods and therefore the Prisoners were
found not Guilty.

Thomas Newcomb was Indicted for stealing Feloniously one silver Cup value 30
s. in the Parish of Carringham, from one Wood, who kept an Alehouse, and the
Prisoner coming to Drink there, conveyed privately the Cup, as it is thought
into his Breeches, which was missed immediately, as soon as he was gone out of
the House; and the Prisoner was proved to have pawned the same Cup to a Broker,
and so was found Guilty.

Martha Wood was Indicted for Murder, and Concealing the Death of her Female
Bastard Child, on the 20th. day of March last: The Evidence was thus, she had
been observed to have been bigger than ordinary about her Middle, and of a
sudden to grow less; and she being so suspected, was Searched by a Midwife, who
found Milk in her Breasts; and then being asked to discover where she had laid
her Child, she presently discovered the Place, which was in a Chamber, where
she was Delivered about three days before in an old Lodge in a Gentleman's
Park, and there covered it with Hay: And so the Prisoner not being able to
Prove that the Child was Born Dead, or that she called Help at her Labor, but
on the contrary, concealed all the matter, she was found Guilty by the Jury.

Mary Portway of the Parish of South-hanningfield, was Indicted for Murdering
of her Female Bastard Child, and concealing it, on the 9th. day of June last;
the Prisoner though she was much mistrusted, never discovered that she had any
such Child, till it was found out by the Stench, and then she alleged that she
was Delivered in the Yard belonging to the House where she Dwelt; and that it
was Dead, and so she hid it: The Witnesses proved the Child to the best of
their apprehension, to have been of full Growth, or near it; and she proving
nothing of its being Born Dead, was likewise found Guilty.

William Saffold was three several times Indicted of several Felonies, and
confessed them all, and all others within Clergy; b^ing demanded why the Court
should not proceed to Judgment, and thereupon award E^^cution of Death against
him, he prayed the benefit of his Book; but the Ordinary putting him to read
out of the common Place, he had not his Lesson without Book, and so 'twas
returned that he could not Read, and the Court gave Sentence of Death against
him, but did Reprieve him afterward for Transportation.

Thomas Davis and Thomas Davison were Indicted for stealing one Mare colored
Gray, value 6 l. and one Gelding colored Bay, value 4 l. of a Person unknown.
No Evidence could certainly prove that they were stolen, and therefore they
were found Not Guilty.

Ann Dixon of the Parish of West Tilbury, was Indicted for forging a Brief,
under the Hand and Seal of William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the 10th.
day of June last; she confessed the Indictment, but said she was induced to do
it by some of better understanding than her self, who told her there was no
hurt in it. She was Sentenced to stand in the Pillory.

William Mumford of the Parish of Mucking, was Indicted for stealing three
Bushels of Wheat, from one Sarah Edwards of the value of 3 s. 6 d. The Wheat
was found upon him, and he found Guilty.

The Trials being over, the Court proceeded to give Judgment as follows.
3 Received Sentence of Death viz.
John Cole alias Alsop, alias Sheppard, Mary Portway, Martha Wood,
William Saffold, To be Transported.
3 were Burnt in the Hand, viz.
Robert Pierce, Thomas Newcomb, William Mumford.
Ann Dixon was Sentenced to be set upon the Pillory for two Hours, at
Chelmsford.
These several Prisoners under named pleaded His Majesty's Most Gracious
Pardon, under condition of Transportation, viz.
Daniel Caster, Mary Tie, Thomas Plain, alias Pagden, Richard Price.
2 were Pardoned Absolutely, viz.
Ambrose Holland, Tobit Bedford.

And so the Court Adjourned.

The Proceedings at Croydon, in the County of Surry, on Monday, Tuesday, and
Wednesday, being the 30th. 31st. days of July, and 1st. of August, 1688.
AT the Assizes held at Croydon in Surrey, on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday,
being the 30th. 31st. of July, and 1st. of August, 1688. the Commission was
read before Sir Richard Allibon Knight. and the Jury was Sworn, which were, John
Theobald Thomas Smith Daniel King John Dakins Thomas Strong John Francklyn John
Kidgell Thomas Smith Joseph Story William Ellis Thomas Hovil Daniel Hostins.


The Trials of the Prisoners were as follows.
Owen Moriarty late of the Parish of Lambeth, was Indicted for Murdering one
Thomas Carey, the fifth day of June last. It appeared that the Prisoner and the
Deceased fell out, and several angry words passed betwixt them in the Lord of
Canterbury's Palace; Moriarty thereupon went into the Churchyard and drew his
Sword, but Carey not following, he returned, and more words passed; and then
Carey said, if they must Fight, it would be convenient to go into the Field,
and accordingly they immediately went and Fought; several followed them and
stood near, not daring to part them, and after some time the Prisoner's Sword
was broke, but he had first given the Deceased his Deaths Wound. Upon the
Evidence he was found guilty of Manslaughter.

Peter Heasey was Indicted of Felony, for stealing Goods to the value of 10 l.
10 s. on the 8th of March, in the 2 d. year of this King, from Mr. Francis
Stone: The Prisoner upon his Examination confessed some of the Goods to be by
him taken, before the Justice of Peace, and Mr. Stone went to the Broker where
the Goods were Pawned or Sold, and there found them; but all the Goods being
not found upon him, he was found guilty to the value of 10 d. only.

Lawrence Crockford, William Price, John Morey, Nathaniel Lee, William Probert
and Thomas Emerson, were Indicted of Felony and Burglary, committed in the
House of one Judith Parrat, the 15th. of June last, and stealing Goods to the
value of 20 l. or thereabout: The Proof was very short, for all that appeared
against them was that Morey's Wife brought several of the Goods to the House of
one Drinkwater; and Crockford confessed some of the Prisoners brought some of
the Goods to his House: But no Evidence being given of Breaking the House, and
what Morey said being no Evidence against the rest, they were all Acquitted,
none of the Goods being found upon them.

Matthew Eldridge Indicted of Felony, for stealing 3 l. in Money from Ruth
Dines, the 26th. of May last; the Money lost was the new Milled Coin, and such
Money was found upon the Prisoner by Dines her Father, which he thought to be
his Daughters: But no particular mark being upon it, he could not Swear
positively it was his Daughters, so the Prisoner was Acquitted.

The same Matthew Eldridge was Indicted of Burglary, for Breaking the House of
Timothy Wilson in the Night, and Stealing thence Goods to the value of 2 l. 8
s. and 11 l. in Money; the Money was most in Crown pieces, some of which were
found about him; the Prisoner confessed to the Prosecutor that he had those
pieces out of his House; that he came in at the Window, having first broken a
Wooden Bar in the middle of the Window. He was found Guilty of Felony and
Burglary.

Daniel Wogan and Philip Mackquire, were Indicted for a Robbery committed upon
Mary Shaw, the 20th. of April last past, and taking from her one Gold Ring,
value 10 s. 1 l. 12 s. in Money: Shaw Swore she was Robbed, but knew not the
Persons. The Ring was offered to be pawned to one Nathaniel Skinner, for 2 s. 6
d. and was accordingly left with him by Wogan: The Person that was Robbed told
the Posey of the Ring before she saw it. Wogan proved by one Woman that the
same Ring was offered the day before he Pawned it to her, to be Pawned by
another Man; and she being a Woman of some Credit, the Jury believed her, and
the Prisoners were found not Guilty.

James Hopeway was Indicted for Killing one Richard Sealy with his Drawn Sword,
the 28th. of May last; the manner was thus, Faldow a Soldier and the Prisoner
Lodged in the House of one Price; and it seems the Prisoner took away a Candle
that Faldow had, and being asked why he took it; he in great heat threw down
the Candle, and told Faldow that he would Stob him, and presently went up two
or three Steps into his Chamber, and fetched down his Sword, and run the said
Richard Sealy, being in the yard, twice into the Body, whereof he Died; 'twas
believed the Prisoner took Sealy for Faldow, for it appeared Sealy was never in
the House, and had never seen the Prisoner. He made but a small Defense, and
was therefore found guilty of Murder.

John Wo^ral was Indicted for Feloniously stealing the Goods of one Thomas
Gardener of the value of 10 l. 10 s. the 31st. of May last: He pleaded not
Guilty; but upon his Examination he had confessed the Fact before the Justice
of Peace, that he stole some of the Goods, and likewise confessed the same to
the Constable who took him, and was found guilty to the value of 10 d.

John Bibby and Edward Haines were Indicted for a Robbery upon Thomas Jenkes at
Clapham the 31st. of May last, and taking from him a silver Box and other
Goods: Jenkes he was Robbed, and did believe the Prisoners to be the Persons,
but would not swear positively to the Faces. The silver Box was found near the
Place where the Prisoners were taken, which was not far from the place where
the Robbery was committed, with Strings in their Pockets: But the Evidence
consisting only in Circumstances, they were Acquitted.

Jane Field and Joseph Field were Indicted for Feloniously stealing on the 7th.
of June, Goods and Money to the value of 5 l. 18 s. 6 d. from one Butler Noads:
The Prisoner, as it did appear by the Evidence, was taken into Noads's House
for a Wet Nurse, and she absenting her self from the House, the Prosecutor
Noads missed his Money, and presently pursued the Prisoner, and took her, but
found no Goods or Money about her; but being no body else had been in the
House, she was greatly mistrusted, yet for want of Evidence she was Acquitted.

James Ball Indicted of Felony, for stealing one Weather Sheep value 19 s. from
Thomas Curd, the 29th. of May last; the Sheep was first taken in Middlesex and
conveyed over the Water into Surrey. One Rauson a Witness for the King,
followed the Sheep upon Enquiry over the Water to the Falcon, and found it
where the Prisoner was supposed to have tied it; but the party that could prove
the bringing of the Sheep thither by the Prisoner, did not appear in Court to
give Evidence; and so he was found not Guilty.

Jacob Suttibey was Indicted of Burglary, for Breaking the House of Thomas
Roffey in the Night, and stealing thence 40 s. in Money: Suttibey the day
before this Burglary was committed, was delivered out of the Marshalsea, where
he had lain some time. Roffey proved his House Broke open that Night, and 2 l.
to be stolen from him; his Man found an old Knife behind the Counter, and then
going down into the Cellar, he found the Cellar door open; other Witnesses
proved the Knife to be the Prisoners, and that they had seen him cutting his
Victuals with it the day before the House was Broken: Another Witness likewise
proved him to be in an Alley near Suttibey's House, about Twelve a Clock that
Night: But because it might possibly happen that Suttibey might have lost his
Knife, and another have found it, which might commit the Burglary, the Prisoner
was Acquitted

Elizabeth Waterman was Indicted for the Murder of Mary Waterman her Daughter,
upon the 9th. of May last: It appeared that the Prisoner lay with her Daughter,
and had been sometimes of unsound Memory, and all in the House had endeavored
to hide from her every thing whereby she might do her self Mischief; but
another Daughter being below Stairs, and hearing some unusual Noise above, ran
up and found the Child Mary Waterman lying on the Ground with its Throat Cut,
and the Prisoner preparing to do the like Execution upon her own Throat, which
she prevented by snatching the Razor which she had got out of her Hands: And it
appearing that the said Elizabeth Waterman had been before frequently
Distracted, she was Acquitted of the Murder.

William Saunders was Indicted for stealing one Cabinet, value 2 s and two pair
of Worsted Stockings, and 3 l. 15 s. in Money, from one Samuel Hur^^ck, the
28th. of April last. The Prisoner when taken confessed the Fact, and told the
Prosecutor where he had put his Cabinet and Stockings, and there they were
found, as the Prisoner had said, and thereupon the Prisoner was found guilty of
Felony.

A^ice Parker and Mary Crook were both Indicted for Breaking the House of one
Ma^^ell Chapman in the day time the said Mabell being in the House, and
stealing thence a silver Tankard value 5 l. and one silver Spoon, value 5 s.
one p^ece of Angel Gold and a silver Chain on the (...) of Ja^ last. Upon the
Evidence it appeared that two Women and two Men came into Chapmans House and
called for Drink and after they had stayed there some time, they paid their
Reckoning and departed, and in a little time after, the Goods were missed, and
no body else was observed to come into the House between the missing of the
Goods and their Drinking there: The two Prisoners were Sworn to be the two
Women that were in the House, and the Men were never found: But no Goods being
found upon the Prisoners, and because some body else might possibly come into
the House unobserved, the Prisoners were Acquitted.

Mary Adds, Matthew Wright; and Daniel Barret, were Indicted for stealing Goods
to the value of 3 l. 19 s. ^^. from William Bistow; but the Evidence amounting
but to a bare Suspicion, and the Goods nor any of them being found about the
Prisoners, they were brought in not Guilty.

Black Peter a Negroe, was Indicted for the abominable sin of Buggery committed
with a Mare the 7th. day of June last: Upon the Evidence it appeared that the
Prisoner was seen with the Mare in an unseemly manner; but the Witnesses being
at a considerable distance from the place where the Mare stood, could not prove
enough to amount to an Evidence that could Convict the party, and therefore the
Jury found him not Guilty.

Thomas Webb was Indicted for stealing one Cock, value 2 s. and five tame
Pigeons, value 2 s. from one Peter Harwood, on the 11th. day of June last
past; he was taken by the Watch with the Fowls about him, and that being given
in upon Evidence, he was Convicted of Felony to the value of 10 d.

William Buroughs was twice Indicted; the the First was for Breaking the House
of one Nathaniel Collins, no Person being there, and stealing Goods, to the
value of 1 l. 1 s. 5 d. and 30 l. in Money. The Second Indictment was for
Breaking the House of one Mary Loyd in the Night, on the 4th. of March last,
and stealing Goods to a considerable value, and 90 l. in Money. There was but
little Evidence given to prove the first Indictment, and the party was
Acquitted thereof. But as to the second Indictment a Gentlewoman that was then
in the House, proved that the Prisoner was in the House, and particularly in
her Chamber, and that he was there for above an hours space; that she saw and
observed his Face, being without any Mask; that he held her Hands whilst
another Bound her, and then Kissed her: She being frequently asked whether she
were sure that was the Person she still permited that she knew him. There were
several other Witnesses bound to give Evidence, but they appeared not upon
their Recognizance; and upon the Evidence, the Prisoner was found Guilty.

William Ball was Indicted of Felony, for stealing Goods to the value of 13 s.
from one Thomas Guest, the 1^th. of July last. Some of the Goods were found in
his Breeches, and not being able to prove how he came by them, was found Guilty
of Petty-Larceny.

John Francis, for Felony, in stealing five Bushels of Oats of the value of 7
s. and 6 d. and one Bushel of Tares, from one William Hughes. It appeared upon
the Evidence, that a Horse was tracked without a Shoe from Hughes his House to
Francis; and Oats were sprinkled by the way, and more found in Francis's House;
but no being able to Swear positively that they were H^ghes his Oats, he was
Acquitted.

The same Francis was a second time Indicted for stealing seven Ducks and eight
Chickens, the 30th. of August, the Third of this King. The same number of Fowls
were found in a Wood by a Shepherd, and taken away by him. And after the
Prisoner was observed to come to the place where the Fowls had been found. But
there being no further Evidence, he was Acquitted.

John Notteridge, Indicted of the Murder of one Andrew Reballow, by throwing
down and kicking him on the Head, Breast and Stomach. It appeared that they
were first at a Play, called Baiting the Bear, and after fell out and fought at
Fifty-cuffs, and Reballow gave several Falls to Notteridge; but the Party
deceased lived not above a Fortnight after. And the Jury not believing him to
die of an Injury gotten at that time Acquitted the Prisoner.

William Benson, Indicted of Burglary the 24th. of June, for Preaking-open the
House of Mr. Richard Hill, in the Night, and stealing 32 s. and 6 d. Hill was
not positive in his Evidence that his House was Broke, because possibly he
might leave his Windows open. But the Prisoner being charged to confess when he
was first taken, told where some of the Goods were, and they were found
accordingly. And the Jury found him Guilty of stealing the Goods found upon his
Confession, and that they were of the value of 10 d.

The Trials being over, the Court proceeded to give Judgment as follows.
3 Received Sentence of Death, viz.
James Hopewas, Matthew Eldridg, and William Buroughs.
2 were Burnt in the Hand, viz.
William Saunders, and Owen Moriarty.
5 To be Whipped, viz.
Thomas Web, Peter Heasey, John Worral, William Benson, and William Ball.
Matthew Eldridge was after Judgment Reprieved by the Court for Transportation.
7 Pardoned to be Transported, viz.
William Sedgewick, Henry Potenger, William Jones, John Powel, Francis Low, Ann
Spencer, and Thomas Johnson.

The Proceedings at East-Grinstead, in the County of Sussex, on Thursday and
Friday, being the 2d. and 3d. of August, 1688.
AT the Assizes held at East-Grinstead, in Sussex, on Thursday and Friday,
being the 2d. and 3d. of August, 1688. the Commission was read before Sir
Thomas Street, Knt. and the Jury was Sworn, which were, Edward Head, John Rown,
Jasper Wheeler, Robert Maynard, Thomas Pelling, Abraham Higget, William Storer,
William Smith, Robert Cornish, Thomas Jessop, Jeremiah Pain, John Chapman,


The Trials of the Prisoners were as follows.
Lydia Stocker was Indicted for that she on the 20th. day of February last did
Kill and Murder her Male Bastard Child. Upon the Evidence it appeared that
Milk was found in the Prisoners Breast: Those that saw it, charged her with
having had a Child; she confessed that she had had one, but that it was born
dead, and she threw it into a Well; but the Child was found before any such
Confession made; so the Woman not being able to Prove that the Child was born
dead, according to the Statute of King James I. she was found Guilty.

Philip Clark, Indicted of Felony, for Breaking the House of one Thomas Lomas,
in the Daytime, on the 11th. day of July last, and stealing a Serge Wastcoat
of the value of 2 s. one Cloth Coat of the value of 6 s. one pair of Leather
Breeches of the value of 10 s. two Handkerchiefs of the value of 6 d and one
pair of Gloves of the value of 6 d. from one Thomas Howicke. The Prosecutor
gave Evidence, That he found some of the Goods about the Prisoner, and he was
found Guilty of the Felony only to the value of 4 s.

The Trials being over, the Court proceeded to give Justice as follows.
Lydia Stocker had Judgment of Death, but was Reprieved after by the Court. 1
Burnt in the Hand, viz.
Philip Clark.
Mary Knight attainted of Felony for stealing a Gelding, was Pardoned
absolutely. Charles Bitrow and Wiliam Castleden attainted of several Felonies,
now Pleaded his Majesty's most Gracious Pardon, under condition of
Transportation.
The Proceedings at Rochester, in the County of Kent, on Monday, Tuesday and
Wednesday, being the 6th. 7th. and 8th. of August, 1688.
AT the Assizes held at Rochester, in Kent, on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday,
being the 6th. 7th. and 8th. of August, 1688. the Commission was read before
Sir Richard Allibon, Knt. and the Jury were Sworn, which were, William Morphew,
Robert Goddard, Thomas Shores, Abel Pennell, Henry Tilby, James Mead, James
Not, Samuel Firmes, William Harvey, John Street, James Andrews, Daniel
Creswell.


The Trials of the Prisoners were as follows.
Elizabeth Nash was Indicted for the Murder of her Female Bastard Child, the
19th. day of March last past. It appeared by Mrs. Codd, the chief Evidence,
with whom the Prisoner had some acquaintance formerly, that the night before
the Child was found, the Prisoner came to the House where Mrs. Codd dwelt, in
the Night, and having knocked at the door, she said she came from London, and
was bit by a Dog, and desired some Drink, and Wood to light a Fire, with which
when Mrs. Codd had supplied her, she went to Bed,; but perceiving that the
Prisoner had gone into some place where she was not directed, Mrs. Codd rose
again, and then the Prisoner asked her where the House-of-Office was; and being
shown, she went thither, and the next morning a Female Child was found. But
there being no other Evidence to prove that it was the Prisoners Child, or that
she did Murder it; and Mrs. Codd alleging that the Child was not full grown,
the Prisoner was Acquitted.

Edward Stedwell was Indicted for Stealing a pair of Sheets of the value of 50
s. the 8th. of February, the Third of this King. The only Witness was
Daughter-in-Law to the Prisoner, and she missing the Sheets, went to an
Alehouse where she thought to find her Father,, and there did demand the
Sheets; which her Father as readily denied to give her, but did not deny his
having them, but alleged that they were his Wives. So the Jury presuming that
the Prisoner took them as his own, without any Felonious Intent, found him Not
Guilty.

Richard Pulley Indicted of a Burglary in the House of Mr. Robert Goulet, the
17th. day of May last past, and stealing one Gown value 5 s. one Petticoat
value 3 s. five Yards of Kirsey, value 5 s. seven Yards of Linsey-woolsey,
value 7 s. and two pair of Breeches, value 2 s. The Evidence against the
Prisoner proved that his House was Broke, and that he lost the Goods
aforementioned, and presently he sent Hue and Cry, and thereby the Prisoner
was taken with the Goods about him. He made no defense, but that he found the
Goods upon the Road, neither could he bring any Witness to prove his
Reputation, and therefore was found Guilty of the Felony, and Acquitted of the
Breaking the House.

Abraham Rodean, alias Rodon was Indicted of the Murder of one John Hornet,
the 28th. day of April last. The Prisoner and the Party slain were left
together in a Room by one John Delnael a Frenchman, about Ten a Clock that
Night, and before Eleven, Murder was heard to be cried out by the next
Neighbors; but all things being still again, and the door shut, the Neighbors
took no notice of it; but the next morning the deceased was found with his
Throat Cut, and and several Wounds in his Breast, lying over a Threshold of an
Inner-door. The Prisoner confessed the Fact, before his Trial to several, and
appeared to be under a great remorse of Conscience, a bloody Knife was found
upon the Seat where the Prisoner was used to work (being by Trade a Shoemaker;)
he had likewise confessed the taking of fifteen Shillings in Money, and some
Farthings, out of the Deceased's Pocket, and told where he had hid it, and it
was found accordingly, in the Tiles of the Chamber where the Prisoner lay
before he was taken, being asked what he could say for himself, he in Court
Confessed the whole Matter, and that he did it with the Knife there produced;
and being asked why he did so Barbarous an Act, he answered, That he had left
God, and God had therefore left him: He was under great Apprehension of Hanging
in Chains, and therefore made it his chief request to be Buried after
Execution; which the Court did not deny, and he was found Guilty.

James Philips was Indicted for the Murder of one William Beckton, the 18th
day of April last past, by stabbing him with a Sword a little above his Navil.
The Prisoner and the Deceased fell out, and went out of the House where they
had been together, and being followed by some that would have prevented the
mischief, they both drew at a Corner, so that it was not known who made the
first Pass. The Prisoner Disarmed the Deceased, and after gave him his Sword
again; but the heat not being over, they fought again at Fifty-cuffs for some
time, and afterward drew their Swords again, and the Deceased was killed upon
the spot. All which matter appearing upon the Evidence, the Prisoner was found
Guilty of Manslaughter.

William Tongue was Indicted for stealing a Bay Gelding of five Pound price,
from one William Randolph, Esquire The Gelding was put out to Grass, and being
missed for four days, Hue and Cry was sent after him with his Marks. The Horse
was found at the Post House in Canterbury, and the Constable left this Charge,
That when any one came to take the Horse, that he might be sent for; and the
Prisoner coming, was accordingly seized, and alleged that it was his Master's
Horse, and giving a good Account of himself, and that his Master had one very
like him, which he might mistake, the Prisoner was found Not Guilty.

Patrick Key was Indicted of the Murder of one John Smith, with his Sword, the
18th. day of April last. The Prisoner and Deceased were Drinking together, and
the Deceased by threatening, forced the Prisoner to go out into the Field. And
one Vine another Soldier, would have parted them, but the Deceased told Vine,
That if he would not stand clear, but interpose in this matter, he would run
him through (having then his Sword drawn) and so Vine withdrew for a little
space, and the Deceased made his Pass at the Prisoner, who then guarded the
Blow, and gave the Deceased presently at the next pass, his Mortal Wound, which
the Deceased perceiving, darted his Sword at the Prisoner, and cried out that
he was Mortally wounded, and bid the Prisoner shift for himself. Upon this
Evidence, the Prisoner was Acquitted of the Murder, and found Guilty of
Killing the said John Smith in his own defense.

James Skiffe was Indicted for the Murder of one Richard Hither, the Fifth of
July last past, by throwing him down upon a Sithe, which made a Wound half an
Inch broad, and five Inches deep. Upon the Evidence it appeared, that they were
at work, and were used to play together; the Prisoner thrust down the Deceased,
and he fell upon the Sithe. It did not appear that there was any malice in the
Prisoner, and so he was Acquitted, but confessed an Indictment for Killing the
same Man by Misfortune.

William Stace was Indicted of Felony, for Breaking the Hou^e of one Richard
Frencham, in the Daytime, the 28th. day of June last, no person being then in
the house, and stealing Goods and Money to the value of Three and twenty
Shillings, or thereabout. The Prisoner being very young, about Twelve years of
Age, Confessed the Fact before the Justice of Peace, and that one Underwood was
with him, who is fled, and stands Indicted for the same Fact. The Prisoner
alleged in his Defense, that he was under a great Indisposition for want of
sleep, and being under great Threats, he Confessed it, to procure his Ease at
present, and so the Jury considered the tender years of the Prisoner, and found
him Not Guilty.

John Devereux was Indicted for throwing one John Baker into the Thames, with
intent to drown him. It appeared that Baker was in a Lighter, and Devereux
being in an Hoy, the Hoy fell foul upon the Lighter and split it, so that Baker
was forced to get into the Hoy, where being found by Devereux, he was ordered
by him to be put into the Lighter again, which being ready to sink, Baker was
forced to commit himself to the Water, and had perished, had he not been taken
up by a small Boat that came by when he was in the utmost extremity. The
Prisoner was Convicted, and ordered to Stand upon the Pillory, at
East-Greenwich, and Fined Ten Pounds, and to lie in Prison till he paid it.

The Trials being over, the Court proceeded to give Judgment as follows.
1 Received Sentence of Death, viz.
Abraham Rodon, alias Rodenn
2 Were Burnt in the Hand, viz.
Richard Pullen, James Philips.
3 Pardoned Absolutely viz.
Hester Floyd, John Merchant, John Bakenham,
9 Pleaded his Majesty's Gracious P^^^ for Transportation,
Henry Shorter, Isaac Badford, alias Bradford, Robert Welsh, alias Shipmarsh,
John Baker, Cornelius Hill, Richard Pritchard, Jonathan Davis, Ricus Cole,
Henry Thompson.

FINIS.

