The Prisoners Remonstrance.
To the right Honorable, the Lord General Fairfax, and to his Council of
War, to all the Officers and Soldiers of the Army, and to every Freeborn
Commoner of England.
The humble Remonstrance and Complaint of all the Prisoners of this Nation for
Debt, in the several Goales and slaughter-houses of this Land.
LAM. 1.2. She weepeth continually in the night, and her tears run down by her
cheeks, among all her lovers, she has none to comfort her, all her friends
have dealt unfaithfully, and are her enemies.

IT has been, and still is as the ardent desire, so the great work and labor
of some eminent persons in place and authority, though not in goodness and
reputation, to render odious the honest and integrall party of this Nation,
(especially you who have endeavored so much for the public, without hope of
remedy) redress or ease, by misrepresentations of all their just causes and
actions, to undermine that credit and honorable respect, which God the
Fountain of all Justice and mercy is pleased to attribute unto his beloved
Ones, the poor oppressed and despised people of this Nation; but Counsels too
subtle and forced, use oftentimes to produce contrary and unthought of ends;
but as God makes us instrumentally subservient to his will, in the transactions
of his providentiall determinations, so we ought laboriously to endeavor and
stand fast in all just and rightful oppositions, to such contrary interests
and proprieties, as neither by the Law of Creation, or nature was ever imposed
on us: and as the Gospel of Christ gives liberty and freedom in the inward
man, so by the rule of proportion, as well as by the same Law, our bodies and
outward man, should receive and be invested with the like privileges and
Prerogatives; but man has resisted his Maker, the clay has said to the
Potter, why have thou made me thus? although (says he oppressor) God be a God
of order, and not of confusion, although his Government be principled upon the
foundation of mercy, and Justice toward the sons of men, yet will we alter the
frame of his Government; and whereas he has given us the hearts of Lambs, and
harmless Doves, we will not have this man rule over us, but we will serve the
God of this World, and according to his nature, assume the cruelty of Tigers,
Wolves, Bears, Lions; this is the cause why a man rules over another to his
own hurt: and hence it is, that disorders, wars, tumults, seditions, strife,
envy, hatred, murder, tyranny, oppression, servitude, imprisonment, and all
such cruelties, are exercised toward men; and the more the God of darkness
rules in the spirits of the children of disobedience, there certainly men
become more impudent in wickedness; Their Judges judge for a reward, Jer. 5.35.
their Prophets prophecy lies, and the Priests receive gifts in their hands,
and the people delight therein, our Magistrates establish iniquity, by a Law,
they overpasse the deeds of the wicked, Jer. 5.28.
they exercise no judgment, no not the judgment of the Fatherless; and
therefore as the Lord, in the visitations of Jerusalem, Ezech. 9.4. set a mark
upon the foreheads of them that mourned and cried for all the abominations that
were done in the midst thereof; so we are assured that the God of this world
has set a mark on the right hands, and on the foreheads of them that worship
the beast and his Image, Rev. 14.9.10. and we are persuaded that the buying and
selling, and grinding the faces of the poor, and sending and giving gifts one
to an other, is to us an external manifestation of this out ward mark, and
impression in their foreheads, and in their hands. These shall drink of the
wine of the wrath of God, yea of the pure wine, which is powered into the cup of
his wrath.

But above all the inhumanities wherewith this distressed Commonwealth is now
incombred, there is none exceeds either for termlesse durability, end less
misery, or height of torment, the this involving of our persons (which are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost) into miserable and transcendent slavery, to be
incaged in such loathsome dens, and hateful dungeons, amongst horrible stinks
and noisome vermin, which challenge the whole world and every Commonwealth of
this Universe, and every distinct member thereof, to give in but one parallel
comparable to those horrible Parisian massacres and murders, cruelties and
barbarities, which are exercised on the persons of men imprisoned for debt in
this our English Nation; besides the every way unlawfullnesse, and disusage of
this action in all other Countries, Christian or Pagan. A Sessions or Goal
delivery puts an end to the fears and expectations of Murderers and Traitors,
Mat. 25.41, 42, 43
but what Law or what person relieveth a man imprisoned and in bonds? the Law
which should have been his antidote, is become his poison, and the Judges, the
interpreters thereof are become his hangmen; nay our very Lawmakers decree
wicked decrees, and write grievous things, by keeping back the poor from
judgment, Jer. 10.1^.
and by taking away the judgment of the poor of this people, that widows may
be their prey, and that they may spoil the fatherless, Isa. 10.1, 2 Mica 6.16.
the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the manner of the house of Ahab, and
they walk in their Counsels; therefore they shall bear the reproach of this
people: the statutes and decrees of the Norman Conqueror, and his Successors
are still observed, and the bastards yoke of slavery continued unto us and our
posterity: those Iron fetters which should have been removed, and those
liberties, which with so much blood and wealth we have regained are still
denied, and instead thereof, endless imprisonment, hereditary imprisonment is
entayled unto us and our posterity for evermore. And now notwithstanding, the
late many years restless labors and endeavors of the poor prisoner, and his
fellow laborers in this our English Vineyard, for liberty and freedom,
notwithstanding the many solemn Engagements, Oaths, Promises, Vows, and
Declarations of this present Parliament in general, and of every individual
Member there of in particular, notwithstanding the numberless Petitions and
endeavors of all parties and interests in so just a cause, notwithstanding
there wants nothing at this present for the passing of that laudable Act for
our release, yet by the malevolent influence, Mat. 23.14
23.25.27.28.32.33.35.36.
and supernatant power of the Lawyers it is still obstructed, and by an
overpotent hand more then ordinary pressed, and repressed by it, that something
may be found therein pretendedly consequentiall and unseasonable, and so be
made liable to a new Commitment, and our prosecutors deterred and overthrown in
their apprehensions of any future perfection and accomplishment thereof. Yea
our condition is yet more deplorable, by reason of their resolvedness and
violent nature, not at all to be moved by the complaints of those, Psalm. 12.2.
who seek redress at their hands; so that now deprived in a manner of all hope
(which is usually a comfort to those in affliction) we are become so much the
more sensible of the hardness of our present condition.

It were endless to remonstrate unto you, the many several orders and
expresses that have issued out unto a selected Committee of that House, for a
speedy dispatch; and drawing up of an Act for our release, and how many
several times it has been imprisoned, and recommitted again upon mere
delusive objections, on purpose to protract the miseries of the afflicted; what
a profound diseased Lethargy did it fall into about the year 1642, from whence
it received a resurrection and reviver in the year 1645, since which time, it
has been tossed like a giddy ball from one hand to another, by the Members of
that house to this day, sometimes awakened with a sudden Alarm of pretended
rights, and again laid asleep as oppressed with two much watchfullnesse, until
at last it fell into the hands of Col. Martin, and from him to Col. Rigby,
which for some amendments was recommitted; after that into the hands of Mr.
Lechemore, where it was like to have been buried in everlasting silence, but
after many long demurres, it was recommitted to Col. Rigby, who after some
amendments, reported the same unto the House, yet by Mr. Speakers obstruction
(as Mr. Lechemore affirmed) it received a new Commitment (poor thing, for its
faults no doubt as well as the poor prisoners) and committed it into the hands
of Mr. Reynolds, who by the former unnecessary delays spun out the length and
time of the last Term in promises, and repromises, Protractions and
Rejoynders, whereupon on the 17. of July last, M. Whitlock made some objections
against it, and upon his motion it was referred to a new Committee, where
Colonel Martin had the Chair, who on the 23. of July reports the same into
the house again; but it was then ordered to be reported on Friday afterward,
thereupon the 27. of the same month (after the report and reading thereof) it
was again recommitted into the hands of M. Martin and Mr. Fell, who reported
the same into the House the third of this instant August, but it was put of
until Monday afterward, and on the seventh of this month again reported,
and again delayed until the morrow morning but not reported until the eighth
of this month; whereupon the House made two several Orders: First, for a
Commission ^ Grace, for the release of such as cannot pay their debts, and the
M. Garland do bring the same into the House the next morning which is not yet
performed; the other was, that after the fin and second time reading of the
Act, it was again recommitted to the same Committee, who were ordered to sit de
die in diem, an^ to report the same with speed, and yet that Committee has
never met at all unto this day, and we are confident never intend to do;
Gentlemen, what shall we say unto you? the potency of the Marshall of the
King's Bench, M. Speakers elder brother, the power of the Warden of the Fleet,
with the same person, and all Lawyers is so great, and their bribes so large,
that we fear some persons have seen a vision of Angels lately, upon which two
wheels of the King's Bench and Fleet, the very doors and orb of this
Commonwealth does move, and turns round, and from which is extracted in one
year out of prisoners pockets many thousand pounds, to the upholding of that
wretched and abominable kingdom of contention and oppression in the Law, as
the Puteus inexhaustus of this Nation, a well that can never be drawn dry.

It were innumerable to reckon up the many Petitions and Addresses, which have
been made by the imprisoned Soldiery unto the House of Commons in this nature,
and to their Committees, Sub-Committees, the Council of State, the Committee
of Indemnity, by Letters, Advocates, Suits, and unexpressible humilities and
demonstrations of our endless groans and miseries, wherein we are become the
unmerited objects of scandal and contempt, and our persons exposed without
remedy to the merciless rage of many hard-hearted persons, whose revenge would
reach those black Parliamentary objects sitting in the clouds, Psa. 82. to the
end.
if they were within the compass of their power, wherein our misery is yet
more lamentable, that we who have undergone the utmost of all dangers for them,
and in whose service we have consumed and spent our estates, and lost the
dearest blood of our selves, children, brothers, cousins, and friends, in their
cause, yet we are left naked, open and bare, and exposed to the mercy of a
malignant crew of infernal Machiavells, notwithstanding the many Contracts,
Vows, Oaths, Declarations, and promises of protection from their revenge: and
although we are become Creditors to this Parliament in such large and ample
sums of money in several loans and various debts accruing and depending upon
our service, since the transaction of these bloody wars. Bracton. See the
Plea of the Crown, 1. p. 31.


Gentlemen, we desire you to consider, that all Laws are comprehended under a
threefold division: 1. The Law of Nature. 2. The Law of God, of Faith, or of
the Gospel. And 3. The Law of Man, made upon the dictates of right reason: The
Law of Nature requires of us, not to do that to another man, which we will not
have done to our selves, to render to every man his own, and to confirm and
distinguish his inheritance, birthright, propriety and possession; the Law of
God is a law of love, upon which principle all Statutes, Acts of Parliaments,
and Constitutions, made and used for the Government of the people are founded,
and whatsoever is against this Law has ever by the worthy Sages of our Law
been declared void. Thirdly, the Laws of men and the Municipall Laws of this
Realm have not their progeny from men, Alured, Alfred, Athelstan, Edmundus,
Edgar, Canutus, Mirror of Justices, made by Andrew Horn.
Edward the Confessor, Henry the first, called Beuclerke, were the chief
promoters of many necessary and good Laws, yet if we look into them, we shall
find that most of them have their original from a higher power, even from the
Law of God, and of Faith; and although Historians to please the Successors and
lovers of the Norman yoke and tyranny, write that the original of our common
Laws flowed first out of Normandy, yet that is not true in general; for
although the Conqueror introduced several Laws from thence, yet seeing that
the spirits of the English would not be bounded within such unnatural
Prerogatives, without a bloody and uncertain war, was content to suffer the
English Saxon Laws to remain in force, and be hereditary to the Commonwealth
of England, amongst which all imprisonments for debt was utterly against the
great Charter of the English Liberties, Mirror of Justices, p. 27.28.29.30.192.
and never came in force but in special cases, until Henry the seventh and
eighth introduced on the freedom of the people by a prevailing party of wilful
Lawyers, since which time our fundamental Laws and Liberties have been
trampled on, and as the Proverb is, lie now in water, and as Tully said of the
Senate of Rome, we have Laws only written in Tables, like a sword in a sheath,
the people being governed by others wills, and not by public Laws; if we
should trace now our English Lawyers through these foundations, we should
hardly discover any footsteps of them, who having forsaken the right way have
gone astray, following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor, which loved the
wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.15. And therefore Gentlemen, it is the
desire of our souls that you will begin at last to weigh the state of your
own affairs, and considering the proceedings of the present government, to
resolve no longer to stand by as idle Spectators of your own disgraces, but
find out some remedy for the time to come, in the behalf of this distressed
Nation, which may recompense our past losses, and stop the precipice of our
future ruin, which we see so undoubtedly lie before us: and let our humble,
yet honest Counsels exhort you to abandon the society of self-interests, and
factions, and not so cruelly wound and rend asunder the bosom of your own
Country, the welfare whereof you are obliged to maintain with the hazard of
your own persons, even to the last period of your lives; and how great a glory
will it be for you to purge your selves from those jealousies the people have
so wondrously conceived of your inclinations and proceedings, and you will
merit much more of your Country by this so pious a resolution, then by all
your former actions put together, though seeming in your own eyes never so
glorious and beneficial, Ezekiel. 16.7 Esa. 58.6, 7, 8.
for this will bring safety to your persons, and satisfaction to your souls,
whereas those add only greatness, reputation and uncertainty to your
affairs.

And therefore Gentlemen, amongst the many Remonstrancers, who with their
desires have presented themselves unto you, we are bold to intrude our selves
unto your sight and public view, desiring you to consider that amongst the
many honorable requests which the Irish Officers made unto the House, one was,
that prisoners for debt might be released, who we are sure had the same
consideration and fellow-feeling of our miseries, which themselves in
particular might one day participate of, if this burden were not taken off,
whose estates, trade and means have been totally consumed in the service of the
State, as well as their brethren, which are now in prison, whose present
desperate condition and the forlorn and abject hopes of their affairs is
such, that they are enforced to remonstrate to you, and the public view, their
unparalleld cruelties and oppressions, as not longer willing tacitly to be the
causers of their own woe, wherein some of us your Soldiers and Officers are
now close imprisoned, and have been shot at, and extremely abused otherways,
in being guarded through the streets, as in the time of the high Commission and
Star Chamber, in a most shameful and disgraceful manner, (like Murderers and
Traitors) to the Committee of Indemnity, to be examined upon Interrogatories
against themselves, contrary to the very Order of the House, only for
appearing active for the passing of this laudable and truly Christian Act of
Mercy, and Humanity. Seeing therefore life is denied us, the precious jewels
of our beings, our liberty detained from us, and our persons thus subjected
unto endless slavery, and oppression, we invite you, and beseech you, as you
tender the honor of Almighty God, and the welfare and liberty of this
oppressed Nation, to assist us in these our just desires: and do implore you
all, and every member of this honorable society, every faithful and well
principled Soldier, and all that love the peace and freedom of this Nation,
to stand up as one man in the defense of your poor afflicted brethren, and not
suffer the many hungry and unpitied cries, and dying groans of your
fellow-brethren and soldier in prison, still to call for justice, and without
speedy remedy to draw down some heavy judgment from the God of heaven o^ this
whole Nation, that so we may be freed from the power and tyranny of our
unmerciful Depositors, and hard-hearted Goalers that all Capias's in Law for
the future may be taken off, and excessive Fees, and Chamber-rents mitigated,
and reduced to the form and mdell of the ancient Statutes of this Kingdom,
desiring you to consider also, that whatsoever cross or calamit has now
befallen us, may endanger, if not totally subvert, you persons, reputations,
callings, families, and estates, the succeeding day and hour at hand to come.
If there be therefore any fellow ship of the Spirit in you, if any bowels and
mercies, think upon these things, and the God of mercy, peace, and perfect
libert^ be with you all. Amen.

From our close imprisonments in the sever all Dungeons and Goals of this Land,
August 20. 1649. the first year of Englands declared liberty, but of our
further and perpetual bondage and slavery.
FINIS.

