Private Occurrences; OR, The Transactions of the four last Years, Written in
Imitation of the Old Ballad of Hey brave Oliver, Ho brave Oliver, etc.
1.
A Protestant Muse, yet a Lover of Kings:
On The Age, grown a little Satirical, Sings,
Of Papists, their Councels, and other fine things.
Sing hey brave Popery, ho rare Popery, oh fine Popery.
Oh dainty Popery, oh.
2.
She hopes she offends no Englishman's patience;
Tho Satyr's forbid on all such occasions,
She Is too good a Subject to Read Declarations.
Sing hey brave Popery, etc.
3.
If the saying be good, of Let him laugh that Wins,
Sure a Lo^er may smile without any offense:
My Muse then is gamesom, and thus she begins;
With hey brave Popery, etc.
4.
When Chapter -- deceased, to His Kingdoms dismay,
By an Appoplex, or else some other way;
Our Brother with Shouts was Proclaimed the same day.
Sing hey brave Popery, etc.
5.
His first Royal Promise was never to touch
Our Rights, nor Religion, nor Privilege grutch:
But Pet -- swore Dam him, he granted too much.
Sing hey brave Popery, etc.
6.
Then Mon -- came in with an Army of Fools:
Betrayed by his Cuckold, and other dull Tools
That Painted the Turfe of Green Sedgmore with Gules.
Sing hey brave Popery, etc.
7.
That Victory gotten, some think to our wrong:
The Priests braid out Joy in a Thanksgiving Song,
And Teague with the Bald-pates were at it ding dong.
Sing hey brave Popery, etc.
8.
Then straight a strong Army was levied in have,
To hinder Rebellion; a very good Jest;
For some Rogues will swear 'twas to Murder the Test.
Sing hey brave Popery, etc.
9.
A Politic Law which Recusants did doom;
That into our Senate, they never might come;
But Equivalent since, was proposed in its Room
Sing hey brave Popery, etc.
10.
As if a True Friend should in Kindness demand
A Tooth in my Head, which firmly does stand,
To give for it another he had in his hand.
Sing hey brave Popery, etc.
11.
Then Term after Term, this great Matter was weighed,
Old Judges turned out, and new Block -- ds made:
That Cook or Wise Littleton never did read.
Sing hey brave Popery, etc.
12.
The good Church of England with speed was ru(...) down
Whose Loyalty ever stood fast to the Crown,
And Presbiter John was made Mayor of the Town
Sing hey brave Popery, etc.
13.
The Bishops Disgrace made the Clergy to sob:
A Prey to Old Pet -- and President Bob;
And hurried to Prison as if they did Rob.
Sing hey brave Popery, etc.
14.
Then into the World, a Dear P -- of W -- slipped.
'Twas plain, for we hear a great Minister peeped.
The Bricklayer for prating had like t'a bin whipped.
Sing hey brave Popery, etc.
15.
Thus EnglandS Distresses more fierce than the Plagu(...)
That during three Years, of no Quiet could brag(...)
The Prince van Auraignia has brought from th(...) Hagu(...)
Sing hey brave Popery, etc.
16.
A strong Fleet and Army t'Invade us are bent;
We know not the Cause, tho there is something in
But we doubt not, ever long we shall see it in Prin(...)
Sing hey brave Popery, etc.
17.
Ah England, that never could value thy Peace:
Had matters been now as in Elsabeths Days,
The Dutch had never ventured to Fish in our Seas.
Then Curse of Popery, pox of Popery, plague of P(...)per(...)
Oh Senceless Popery, oh.
FINIS.

