THE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST Sir Thomas Armstrong, In His Majesty's Court of
King's Bench, at Westminster, upon an Outlawry for High Treason, etc.
AS ALSO An Account of what passed at his Execution at Tyburn, the 20th. of
June 1684. Together with the Paper he delivered to the Sheriffs of London at
the same Time and Place.
De Term. S. S. Trin. Anno Regni Regis Carol. II. xxxvi. Die Sabbati, 14. Junii
An. Dom. 1684. B. R.
Dominus Rex versus Thom. Armstrong, Mil.
THis day Sir Thomas Armstrong was brought to the Bar of the Court of
King's Bench at Westminster, by Virtue of a Writ of Habeas Corpus directed to
the Keeper of the Goal of Newgate; which Writ was on His Majesty's behalf moved
for on Thursday last by Mr. Attorney General.

The return of the Writ was Read by the Clerk of the Crown, by which it
appeared he was in the Custody of the Keeper of Newgate, by a Warrant from the
Honorable Sidney Godolphin, Esquire one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of
State; which Warrant follows in haec verba.

Sidney Godolphin, Esquire one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and
Principal Secretary of State.
THese are in His Majesty's Name to Authorize and Require you to receive into
your Custody from on Board His Majesty's Yatch the Catherine, Captain Davis
Commander, the Person of Sir Thomas Armstrong, Knight, Outlawed for
High Treason, and him safely to keep in His Majesty's Prison of Newgate, till
His Majesty's pleasure be farther known. And for so doing this shall be your
Warrant.

Given under my Hand and Seal at White Hall this 10th. day of June 1684. In the
36th. Year of His Majesty's Reign. S. Godolphin.

To Captain Richardson Keeper of His Majesty's Prison of Newgate.
Lord Chief Justice. What would you have, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. G. Have you the Outlawry there?


Cl. of the Cr. Yes, Sir, here it is.


Mr. At. G. That which I humbly pray, my Lord, is an Award of Execution for
the King against Sir Thomas Armstrong, upon the Outlawry.


L. Chapter Just. First we must File this Return.


Mr. At. G. I pray it may be Filed.


L. Chapter Just. Let it be Filed: Now what do you desire Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. G. My Lord, I pray an Award of Execution upon the Outlawry.


L. Chapter Just. Arraign him upon the Outlawry.


Cl. of Cr. Thomas Armstrong, hold up thy hand. (Which he did.) Thou have been
Indicted in London by the name of Thomas Armstrong of London, Knight, of
High Treason, for Conspiring against the King's Majesty's Life, and the
Government: For not appearing to Plead and Try that Indictment by due Process
of Law issued against thee; upon that Indictment, thou stand Outlawed, and
thereby Attainted of the same High Treason. What have thou to say for thy self
why Execution should not be Awarded against thee upon that Attainder according
to Law?


Sir Thomas Armstrong. My Lord, I was beyond Sea at the time of the Outlawry; I
beg I may be Tried.


L. Chapter Just. That is not material at all to us; we have here a Record of an
Outlawry against you, Sir Thomas.


Sir T. Armstrong. I desire to be put upon my Trial, my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. We cannot allow any such thing, we have nothing to do upon this
Record before us but to Award Execution. Captain Richardson, which are your
usual days of Execution?


Capt. Richardson. Wednesdays and Fridays, my Lord.


Mrs. Matthews. Here is a Statute, my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. What is the matter with that Gentlewoman?


Sir T. Armstrong. Hold your tongue. My Lord there is a Statute made in the
6th. year of Edward the 6th. which I desire may be read.


L. Chapter J. To what purpose would you have it read, Sir Th^mas?


Sir T. Armstrong. It gives the Prisoner, or Person Outlawed for High Treason
a years time to reverse the Outlawry, if he were beyond S(...)sire it may be
Read.


L. Chapter Just. Ay let it (...) is it do you say?


Sir T. (...) year of Edward the Sixth (...).


Mrs. Matt. (...) is a Copy of it -- showing a Paper.


L. Chapter J. Why? how now, We do not use to have Women Plead in the Court of
King's Bench; pray be at quiet, Mistress.


Sir T. Armstrong. Pray-hold your Tongue. My Lord, I could not come to allege
this before, because I have been a close Prisoner, and no Body permitted to
come at me. I desire Council to be assigned me at this Bar.


L. Chapter Just. For what, Sir Thomas?


Sir T. Armstrong. To argue whether this Outlawry ought not to be reversed.


L. Chapter Just. Read the Statute he desires.


Mr. At. G. Ay let it be Read. Sir Thomas will not find it to his Purpose.


Cl. of the Cr. What Chapter is it?


L. Chapter Just. You may easily find it about Outlawries for Treason.


Cl. of the Cr. reads. Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That if the Party --


Mr. At. G. Read the Clause before that, Sir Samuel.


Cl. of the Cr. reads. And that all Process of Outlawry hereafter to be made
and had within this Realm, against any Offenders in Treason, being Resiant or
Inhabitant out of the Limits of this Realm, or in any the Parts beyond the Sea,
at the time of the Outlawry pronounced against them, shall be as good and
effectual in the Law to all intents and purposes, as if any such Offenders had
been Resident and Dwelling within this Realm at the time of such Process
awarded and Outlawry pronounced.


L. Chapter Just. read on the next Paragraph.


Cl. of Cr. reads. Provided always, and be it enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That if the Party so hereafter to be Outlawed, shall within one Year
next after the said Outlawry pronounced, or Judgment given upon the said
Outlawry yield himself unto the Chief Justice of England for the time being,
and offe^ to Traverse the Indictment or Appeal whereupon the said Outlawry
shall be pronounced as is aforesaid: That then he shall be received to the said
Traverse, and being thereupon found not Guilty by the Verdict of Twelve Men he
shall be clearly acquitted and discharged of the said Outlawry, and of all
Penalties and Forfeitures by reason of the same, in as large and ample manner
and form as though no such Outlawry had been made, any thing herein contained
to the Contrary in any wise notwithstanding.


Mr. At. Genesis Sir Thomas, I suppose, now will show he Yielded himself to your
Lordship.


L. Chapter Just. This is the first time I have seen Sir Thomas.


Sir T. Armst. My Lord I have been a Prisoner, and the Year is not yet out; I
now render my self.


Mr. At. Genesis Before he went out of England he might have rendered himself, and
been Tried, if he pleased.


Sir T. Armst. I am within the benefit of the Statute, I conceive, my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. We think otherwise, Sir Thomas.


Sir T. Armst. I think, my Lord, the Statute is plain in the Case.


L. Chapter Just. We are of another Opinion then you are; it does not reach your
Case.


Sir T. Armst. The Year is not yet out, and therefore I come time enough now;
and here I am, and desire the benefit of this Act.


L. Chapter Just. Sir Thomas, you should have rendered your self to me.


Sir T. Armst. I do it now my Lord, and the Year is not yet out.


L. Chapter Just. We cannot take notice of that; we have nothing but the Outlawry,
and you did not render your self according to that Act, but are brought as a
Prisoner before us now.


Sir T. Armst. My Lord, I beg I may have Council to Plead for me in this Case.


L. Chapter Just. For what reason. We are of Opinion it is not a matter of any
doubt. For you must not go under the Apprehension that we deny you any thing
that is Right; there is no doubt nor difficulty at all in the thing.


Sir T. Armst. Methinks, my Lord, the Statute is plain.


L. Chapter Just. So it is very plain that you can have no advantage by it. Cap.
Richardson, you shall have a Rule for execution on Friday next.


Sir T. Armst. I would only take notice of one thing, my Lord, may I speak?


L. Chapter Just. Ay Sir Thomas, very freely what you please.


Sir T. Armst. A little while ago there was one in this place had the benefit
of a Trial offered him, if he would accept of it; that is the thing I desire
now, and I thank God, my Case is quite another thing than his, I know my own
Innocence; and I desire to make it appear by a Trial.


L. Chapter Just. Sir T. Armstrong, you may go away with what Opinion you please of
your own Innocence: but you are here Attainted by Outlawry. That which was
done, to him you speak of, was the Grace and Mercy of the King, and he may if
he please extend the same Grace and Favor to you; but that is not our
business: We are satisfied that according to Law we must award Execution upon
this Outlawry.


Mrs. Matthews. My Lord; I hope you will not Murder my Father; this is
murdering a Man.


L. Chapter Just. Who is this Woman? Marshal, take her into Custody. Why, How now?
Because your Relation is Attainted for High Treason, must you take upon you to
tax the Courts of Justice for Murder, when we grant the Execution according to
Law? Take her away.


Mrs. Matthews. God Almighty's Judgments light upon you.


L. Chapter Just. God Almighty's Judgments will light upon those that are Guilty of
High Treason.


Mrs. Matthews. Amen, I pray God.


L. Chapter Just. So say I. But Clamours never prevail upon me at all; I thank God,
I am clamor proof, and will never fear to do my Duty.


[Then she was carried away.] Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I would only acquaint you
with one thing in reference to what Sir Tho. Armstrong has said: The King did
indulge Holloway, that he speaks of, it is true, so far as to offer him a
Trial, and his Majesty perhaps might have some reason for it, but the Prisoner
truly deserves no Sort of Indulgence or Mercy from the King. For it has
appeared by the Evidence that has been given of this Late Horrid Conspiracy,
that after the Disappointment that was given by the Providence of God, by the
Fire at New Market, to the meeting at the Rye; this Gentleman was one of the
Persons that actually engaged to go upon the Kings hasty coming to Town then,
and to destroy him by the way as he came to Town. And this appears upon a full
and clear Evidence, as positively testified as any thing can be. And when he
was taken beyond Sea, Letters of Communication with Foreign Ministers and
other People were taken about him, and will be --


L. Chapter Just. We are not to meddle at all with the Evidence, Mr. Attorney; that
is not our business; here is an Outlawry, upon this Outlawry he is Attainted;
we have nothing more to do, but to do the Duty of the Court upon this Record
before us, to Award Execution upon that Attainder, and we must give a Rule for
it. If the King will be pleased to do for Sir Tho. Armstrong what he did for
Holloway, and indulge him a Trial, and wave the Outlawry, with all our hearts.
We are not disposers of his Grace and Favor, but the Ministers of his Justice.
If the King will pardon him, he may* that is not our business; but all we have
to do upon what is before us, is to consider the Record, and what the Prisoner
says against our awarding of Execution. We have Considered whether this be a
Yielding within the Proviso of this Stature, and we think it is not, nor can
be, by any means.


Sir T. Armst. My Lord, I am within the Statute, I was Outlawed while I was
beyond Sea, and I come now here within the Twelve Month. That is all I know, or
have to say in this Matter.


L. Chapter Just. We think quite the contrary, Sir Thomas.


Sir T. Armst. When I was before the Council, my Lord, they ordered that I
should have Council allotted me, but I could have no benefit by that Order; for
when I was taken, I was robbed of all the money I had, and have not had one
Penny restored to me, nor any money since; I know not whether the Law allows
persons in my Condition to be robbed and stripped.


L. Chapter Just. I know nothing at all of that matter, Sir Thomas.


Sir T. Armst. My Lord, I know Lawyers will not plead without money, and being
robbed I could not have wherewithal to Fee them.


L. Chapter Just. Sir Thomas Armstrong, you take the Liberty of saying what you
please; you talk of being robbed, no body has robbed you that I know of.


Sir T. Armst. No body says you do know of it; but so it is.


L. Chapter Just. Nay be as angry as you will, Sir Thomas, we are not concerned at
your Anger. We will undoubtedly do our Duty.


Sir T. Armst. I ought to have the benefit of the Law, and I demand no more.


L. Chapter Just. That you shall have by the Grace of God; see that Execution be
done on Friday next according to Law. You shall have the full benefit of the
L^w.

Then the Prisoner was carried back to N^wg^te, and afterward upon a Petition
the Court ordered Mrs. Matthews to be released out of Custody without Fees.
An Account of what passed at the Place of Execution.
Sir T. Arms. MR. Sheriff, do you purpose to ask me any Questions?


Sh. Daniel. No Sir; you have leave to say what you please, and shall not be
interrupted unless you upbraid the Government.


Sir T. Armst. Sir I thank you: But I shall not say any thing by way of Speech
to the People. Pray take this Paper, which contains my Mind; and I desire no
other person may ask me any Question. I desire you to make Way for Dr. Tennison.


(Which was done, and then they went together into the Cart.) Sir T. Arms. Mr*
Sheriff, I have given you a Paper, and that will set forth my Mind; that is all
I have to say.

Turning to Dr. Tennison, he said, Sir, I desire you to pray with me.


Dr. Tennison's Prayer.
ALmighty God, with whom do live the Spirits of Just men made Perfect, after
they are delivered from their earthly Prisons; we humbly commend the Soul of
this thy Servant into thy Hands, as into the Hands of a Faithful Creator, and
most Merciful Savior, beseeching thee it may be precious in thy Sight. Wash
it, and Sanctify it by the Blood of the Immaculate Lamb, that takes away the
Sins of the World; that whatsoever defilements it may have contracted, in this
miserable, sinful and naughty World, through the lusts of the Flesh, or the
wiles of Satan, being purged and done away, it may be presented Pure and
Spotless before thee. And now, O Holy and most Merciful Savior, thou most
Blessed Judge Eternal, suffer him not, suffer him not at his last Hour, for any
Pains of Death to fall from thee. Support him by the assistance of thy Spirit
in all Agonies of Soul and Body at his last Moment; and teach us by this, and
all other Spectacles of Mortality, to number our Days, and to apply our Hearts
to that Holy and Heavenly Wisdom whilst we live here, which may bring us
hereafter to everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Our Father, etc.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God the Father, and the
Fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us, and in a particular manner with this
thy Servant, now in the Minute of Death, and in the Day of Judgment Amen, Amen.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Now Sir, commend your self to God by your private Devotions, make your self
Ready, and then let that be the last thing you do.

Sir T. Arms. Sir, I hope in God my Sins are Pardoned, and I do Pray for it
heartily. I forgive the whole World all offenses they have committed against me.

Dr. Tennison. I pray God show Mercy to you, as you express Charity to them.

Then Sir Thomas kneeled down and Prayed, and afterward thanked Dr. Tennison
for his great Care and Pains with him.

And then he turned to his Servant, and desired to be remembered to his Wife and
Children.

The PAPER he delivered to the SHERIFFS.
I Thank Almighty God, though I have had but a short time allowed me, I find my
self prepared for Death, and my thoughts set on another World, and trust in
God, well weaned from putting my heart on this; yet I cannot but give so much
of my little time to set down in Writing my Answers to some Calumnies raised
since my close Imprisonment, as well as what Mr. Attorney accused me of at the
Bar: I was told a Very Great Person says, I was a Spy of Cromwell's. I have been
sent from England by the best and considerablest Friends the King had then,
with Bills of Exchange for His Majesty's Use, and Letters of very great
Importance to His Majesty then at Bruxels; I appeal to His Majesty, if I
delivered them not safe to Him, and His answers too when I returned; Which I
had not been above Six Days, but I was Clapped up Ten Weeks a close Prisoner in
the Gate House, and in no small hazard of my Life for that Journey; Before this
time, I had been a whole Year at least in Lambeth-house a Prisoner, and after
both these times a Prisoner in the Tower, when the Usurper Died, and near
Starving in every One of them: Very ill Treatments for a Spy and Pensioner; My
Lord of Oxford, and many others of Quality will, I think, testify my Innocence
in this point; I protest before God I was never a Spy to Cromwell, or any other
Man.

O^ Saturday last I was brought to the King's Bench Bar on an Outlawry of High
Treason, I was asked what I had to say for my self, that Judgment of Death
should not pass; I was beyond Seas when the Outlawry came out, I thought a Writ
of Error to Reverse it the Law allowed, I prayed I might be allowed a Trial
for my Life according to the Laws of the Land, I urged the Statute of Edward
the 6th. which was expressly for it, it being within the Twelve Months allowed
by that Statute; It signified nothing, I was with an unordinary Roughness
Condemned, and made a President, though Mr. Holloway a little before had it
offered him; I cannot but think all the World will conclude my Case very
different; else why refused me?

Mr. Attorney said, I was accused for being one of those that was to Kill the
King as he came from Newmarket, after the Fire, I take God to Witness I never
had any Design, nor ever had such a Thought to take away the King's Life;
neither ever had any man the Impudence to propose so Barbarous and Base a thing
to me; neither was Fever in any Design to alter the Government of England: What
I am Accused of more, I know no otherwise than by Reports and Prints, which I
take to be uncertain; So that it cannot reasonably be expected I should make
particular Answers; If I had been Tried I could have proved my Lord Howard's
Base Reflections on me to be a Notorious Falsehood* For I know there is at least
Ten Gentlemen, besides all the Servants of the House, can testify I Dined
there that day.

I have Lived, and now Die of the Reformed Religion, A True and Sincere
Protestant, and in the Communion of the Church of England; and I heartily wish
I had more strictly lived up to the Religion which I believed; and I have found
the great comfort of the Love and Mercy of God, in and through my Blessed
Redeemer, in whom I only trust, and I do verily hope, that I am going to
partake of that fullness of Joy which is in His Presence, the hopes whereof does
infinitely please me.

I thank God, I have no repining at my heart, for the condition my sins have
most deservedly brought upon me; I have deserved much worse at the hands of
God, so that I cheerfully submit to this Punishment, as being taken off but a
small time sooner.

I do freely forgive all the World, even those concerned in taking away my
Life. As for the Sentence of Death past upon me, I cannot but think a very hard
one, being, I think, denied the Laws of the Land.

To conclude, as I never had any Design against the King's Life, or the Life of
any man, so I never was in a Design to alter the Monarchy.

I Die in charity with all the World, and therefore I heartily pray God to
Bless the Church of Christ every where, these poor Nations, the Kings Majesty;
and I heartily commend my Soul, to Gods Infinite Mercy, through my Blessed
Savior Jesus Christ.

We do Appoint Robert Horn, John Baker, and John Redmayne, to Print and Publish
this Paper, and that none other Print the same.

Peter Daniel. Samuel Dashwood.


LONDON, Printed for Robert Horn, John Baker, and John Redmayne. 1684.


