The PROCEEDINGS OF The Grand Jury OF MIDDLESEX, In Easter-Term. 1681.

ON Wednesday the Fourth of this present May, 1681. the Grand Jury for the Body
of the County of Middlesex, in the Hundred of Oswalston, were attended by a
considerable number of Knights, Gentlemen, and Free holders of the said County,
and there made these following Requests to the Grand Jury.

1. That they would present their and the Counties Thanks to their Knights who
Represented them in the last Parliament, for their good intention to have
served them to their utmost, in these times of eminent danger, had they not
been prevented by a sudden and surprising Dissolution.

This first Request the Jury agreed to immediately? but Sir Will. Roberts being
concerned as Foreman, the Jury ordered Sir Will. Cooper to give their Thanks
both to him and Mr. Rainton (the other Knight) which immediately he did
accordingly.

2. That they would present their and the Counties hearty and unfeignned
Thanks, to those truly Loyal Patriots, and Noble Peers of this Realm, who
asserted the Ancient and Fundamental Rights of the Commons of England in
Parliament to Impeach any Subject, by their protesting against the Lords
rejection of the Commons Impeachment against Ed. Fitzharris.

Which was also unanimously agreed to by the Jury; and Sir Will. Roberts, Sir
Will. Cooper, Mr. Herbert, and Mr. Edw. Biscoigne, were desired to wait on his
Grace the Duke of Monmouth to give him Thanks accordingly; and by him to the
rest of those Noble Protesting Peers, which was done upon Saturday last.

The Names of the Protesting Lords, viz.

Monmouth, Kent, Huntington, Bedford, Salisbury, Westmorland, Clare, Stamford,
Sunderland, Essex, Shaftsbury, Mackelsfeild, Mordant, Wharton, Pagitt, Gray of
Warke, Herbert of Cherbury, Cornwallis, Lovelace, Crew.
3. That they would in their and the Counties Name, Petition His Majesty for
the speedy calling, and effectual Sitting of a Parliament, until the great and
many Dangers and Grievances of this Kingdom be effectually prevented and
redressed, which cannot be done but by the Wisdom and Authority of Parliament.

This also was unanimously agreed to by the Jury, and this day (being the last
day of the Term) a Petition was presented by the Grand Jury, Jury, to the Lord
Chief Justice Pemberton and the Court, in these following words.

To the Honorable Sir Francis Pemberton Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench; and to the rest of the Honorable Judges of that Court. The Humble
Petition of us the Grand Jury for the County of Middlesex.
Humbly shows,
THat we being appointed the Grand Jury for this County of Middlesex, and
having immediate address to this High Court of King's Bench, cannot perform our
Oaths and the duty of the place we are in, without laying before your
Lordships, and the Court, the imminent danger we all lie under, and most
particularly the Royal person of our Soverain Lord the King, being exposed to
the fury of the wicked and bloody designs of the Papists, by reason their
horrid Plot seems only stifled and laid asleep, whilst they are still restless
to procure the destruction of us, our Religion, and Liberties, having
opportunity given them, as we have great reason to fear, by the ineffectual
sitting of Parliaments; all which evils may be easily and only cured by
effectual annual Parliaments, which only keeps all the rest in its due bounds,
and without which his Majesty cannot have Safety or Counsel according to his
and the Nations Interest; his people cannot enjoy what is left them by their
Ancestors, nor Justice be done on the most dangerous Offenders. We therefore in
the Names of many of the Freeholders of this County, as well as in our own,
humbly offer it as our request, that your Lordships and this Court, will in the
most effectual and favorable way, make their humble Petition known to his
Majesty for the immediate calling a Parliament, that his People may enjoy that
benefit His Laws and the Constitution of the Government intends them: which is,
that they may not be sent away before they have made provisions necessary in
these most important Points. And your Petitioners shall, etc.

FINIS.
London: Printed for T. Baldwin in the Old-Bayly. 1681.


