VERSES Humbly presented to the KING At His Arrival in HOLLAND, After the
DISCOVERY Of the late horrid CONSPIRACY Against His most Sacred Person.

By Mr. PRIOR.

Serus in coelum redeas, diuque
Laetus intersis populo Quirini,
Neve te nostris vitiis iniquum
Ocyor aura
Tollat, hic magnos potius triumphos
Hic ames dici pater atque Princeps,
Neu sinas Gallos equitare inultos
Te duce, CAESAR.
Hor. ad Augustum. LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judge's Head, near
the Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet, 1696.

VERSES Humbly presented to the KING At His Arrival in HOLLAND: After the
DISCOVERY Of the late horrid CONSPIRACY Against His most Sacred Person.
YE careful Angels whom eternal Fate
Ordains on Earth and humane Acts to wait;
Who turn with secret Power this restless Ball;
And bid determined Empires rise and fall:
Your sacred Aid religious Princes own
When first they merit, then ascend the Throne:
But Tyrants dread you, lest your just Decree
Transfer the Power, and set the People free.
See rescued BRITAIN, at your Altars bow,
And hear her hymns your happy care avow.
That yet her Axes and her Rods support
Her Judges hand, and grace her awful Court,
Where Law with all her pompous terror stands
To wrest the Dagger from the Traitors hands,
Where rigid Justice reads the fatal Word,
Poises the Balance first, then draws the Sword.
To your blessed guidance She her safety owns,
That she can separate Parricides from Sons,
And boldly give those Criminals their doom,
Who would, like Nero, rip their Parents womb:
That, Death and Hell disarmed, She lives and reigns,
Her freedom Kept by Him who broke her chains.
And thou, blessed Guardian, destined to defend
That Sacred Life on which all ours depend:
Thou sure, whose charge of old was Israel's Court,
When sent from Heaven great David's strong support,
Thy arm unseen eluded cruel Saul,
And struck the useless Javelin to the Wall.
Thy later care over WILLIAM'S Temples held
On Boyn's propitious Banks the heavenly Shield,
When EUROPE pale betwixt two Armies stood,
And trembling BRITAIN doubted to be good,
Till Miracles did WILLIAM'S right declare,
And Cannons marked whom they were bid to spare*
Still, blessed Angel, be thy care the same,
Be WILLIAM'S Life untouched as is his Fame:
Let Him own Thine as BRITAIN owns his Hand;
And save the King, as He has saved the Land.
We Angels forms in pious Monarchs view,
We reverence WILLIAM, for He acts like You;
Like You commissioned to chastize and bless,
He must avenge the World, and give it Peace.
Our Prayers are heard, new Miracles are shown,
The Powers that rescued will preserve the Throne:
The Hero dear to Earth, by Heaven beloved,
By troubles must be vex't, by dangers proved;
His Foes must contribute to make Him great,
And fix his Glory sure on their defeat.
So though with sudden rage the Tempest comes,
Though the Winds roar, and though the Water foams,
Fair BRITAIN on the angry Sea looks down,
And smiling sees Her Rebel Subject frown;
Heaven in assaulting Her confirms her power,
The Waves but whiten Her triumphant Shore;
In vain they would advance, in vain retreat,
Broken they dash and perish at Her feet.
It Is done, once more through BRITAIN's joyful Sea
Her glorious Monarch plows his Prosperous way,
Armed with those Fleets who have in thunder said
To distant Worlds, whose Empire they obeyed:
He lands, and sees united Nations stand,
Their parts of Glory dealt by His command,
Their glowing Breasts with fresh Ideas fired,
How WILLIAM conquered, and how FRANCE retired,
When fixed as Fate he stood in Namurs Field,
Till Rocks and Floods and Fire were taught to yield,
Till Flanders freed the Hero's arm confessed,
But trembled for the Courage which she blessed.
He comes; pale GALLIA dreads his Arms a-far,
And bent on Parricide refuses War,
But 'well she knows his Vengeance never will tread
Those Paths of horror which her guilt has led.
The Trumpets Sounds shall tell the arming Foe
When WILLIAM meditates the noble Blow,
Before the foremost Troops in open fight
The Hero's arm shall prove the Monarchs right.
It Is done, and EUROPE freed must own his hand,
Whilst THAMES shall flow, or BRITAINS Empire stand.

