FOR THE NEW YEAR: TO THE SUN.
Intended To be Sung before Their Majesty's on NewYears Day. 1693/4.
Written by Mr. Prior at the Hague.
LIGHT of the World, and Ruler of the Year,
With happy Speed begin thy great Career;
And as the Radiant Journey's run
Where e're thy Beams are spread, where e're thy Power is known,
Through all the distant Nations own,
That in Fair Albion thou have seen
The Greatest Prince, the Brightest Queen,
That ever Saved a People, ever Graced a Throne.
So may Thy Godhead be confessed,
So the returning Year be Blessed,
As its Infant Months bestow
Springing Wreaths for William's Brow;
As its Summer's Youth shall shed
Eternal Sweets round Mary's Head:
From the Blessings They shall know,
Our Times are Dated, and our Aera's move,
They Govern, and Enlighten all below
As Thou do all above.
Let our Hero in the War
Active and Fierce like Thee, appear;
Like Thee, Great Son of Jove, like Thee,
When clad in rising Majesty
Thou Marchest down over Delos Hills confessed,
With all thy Arrows Armed, with all thy Glory Dressed.
Like Thee, the Hero, does his Arms employ,
The raging Python to destroy,
Cho. And give the injured Nations Peace and Joy.


From Ancient Times Historic Stores
Gather all the smiling Hours,
All that with Friendly Care have guarded
Patriots and Kings in Rightful Wars,
All that with Conquest have rewarded
His Great Forefathers Pious Cares,
All that Story have Recorded
Sacred to Nassau's long Renown,
For Countries Sacked and Battles Won.
Cho. March Them again in fair Array,
And bid Them form the Happy Day,
The Happy Day designed to wait
On William's Fame, and Europe's Fate.
Let the Happy Day be Crowned
With great Event and fair Success,
No brighter in the Year be found,
But that which brings the Victor home in Peace.

Again Thy Godhead we implore,
(Great in Wisdom as in Power)
Again for Mary's sake and ours,
Choose out other smiling Hours,
Such as with lucky Wings have fled
When Happy Counsels were advising,
Such as have glad Omens shed
Over forming Laws and Empires rising;
Such as many Lustres ran
Hand in Hand a goodly Train,
To bless the Great Eliza's Reign,
And in the Typic Glory show
The fuller Bliss which Mary should bestow.
As the Graver Hours advance,
Mingled send into the Dance,
Many fraught with all the Treasures
Which the Eastern Travel views,
Many winged with all the Pleasures
Man can ask, or Heaven diffuse.
To ease the Cares which for Her Subjects sake
The Pious Queen does with glad Patience take.
Cho. To let Her all the Blessings know
Which from those Cares upon Her Subjects flow.

For Thy own Glory sing our Sov'raign's Praise
(God of Verses and of Days)
Let all Thy Tuneful Sons adorn
Their lasting Work with William's Name,
Let chosen Muses yet unborn
Take Mary's Goodness for their Theme:
Eternal Structures let Them raise
On William's and on Mary's Praise,
Nor want new Subjects for the Song,
Nor fear They can exhaust the Store,
Till Nature's Music lies unstrung*
Till Thou shall shine no more.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for I. Tonson, at the Iudges-Head near the (...)


