PROPOSALS FOR A more Beneficial and Equal Establishment of a Regulated Company
to carry on the Trade to the East Indies.
THat a Company be Established by the Name of The Adventures to East India, who
shall have Power every Year to choose from among themselves a Governor,
Deputy Governor, and Twenty Four Assistants, together with a Treasurer, etc.
That whosoever pleases may at all times become a Member or Freeman of the
said Company, paying for his Admittance 5 l. (more or less) as shall be thought
fit.

That every Freeman of the said Company shall have liberty to Trade to any
part of the East Indies, when, and how, and for as much as he pleases; paying
to the Treasurer of the said Company Four per Cent. on all Goods and
Merchandises Imported from India, which shall be Esteemed or Termed a single
Duty.

That the Money Paid by every Member of the said Company for his Freedom, and
the Four per Cent. paid by all on the Goods they Import, shall be the Stock of
the said Company.

That the said Stock of the Company shall be Employed and Disposed by the Court
of Assistants for the Payment of the Present company for their Forts, etc. And
for Maintaining an Ambassador at the Court of the Great Mogul, and Consuls in
the Principal Places of Trade, and all other Public Charges that shall be
found Necessary for the better carrying on the Trade.

That over and above the foresaid single Duty of Four per Cent. on all Goods
imported, the Governor, Deputy, and Court of Assistants, shall have Power to
raise half Duty more, or Double the Duty, according as the Occasions of the
Company may from time to time require.

The Advantages of a Company thus Regulated, above that of a Joynt-Stock, Viz.

I. The Mischief as well as the Wrong of a Monopoly will be prevented, and
every One will have Freedom to Trade as he sees fit, whereby the Trade will be
extended to many Places yet unfrequented; for it will be a great Incitement to
Industry and Diligence, when every Man may reap the Fruits of his own Labors.
II. Greater Quantities of our Manufactures will be Exported, and the makers of
them not necessitated to Sell them to Loss, as they often are, when there is
but one Buyer; and contrarily Commodities of the Growth and Manufacture of
India will be imported more plentifully, and sold cheaper. III. By such an
Establishment many of the younger Sons of Gentlemen will have Opportunity of
credible and advantageous Employments, both at home and abroad. IV. The
Revenues fo the Crown, and our Navigation will be hereby very much increased.
V. It will most effectually prevent the Mischiefs that may arise to the Trade
of this Nation from the late Act of Parliament in Scotland, for Erecting an
East India Company.

