A PROSPECT OF HUNGARY, AND TRANSYLVANIA, With a Catalogue of the Kings of the
one, and the Princes of the other;

Together with an account of the qualities of the Inhabitants, the Commodites
of the Countries, the chiefest Cities, Towns, and Strongholds, Rivers, and
Mountains.

Whereunto is added An Historical Narration of the bloody Wars amongst
themselves, and with the Turks; continued to this present Year 1664.

As also A brief Description of Bohemia, Austria, Bavaria, Steirmark, Croatia,
Dalmatia, Moravia, Silesia, Carinthia, Carniola, and some other adjacent
Countries contained in a Mapp affixed hereunto:

In which Mapp all the places that are in the power of the Turk, have a
Crescent, or half Moon over them; and those in the possession of the Christians
have a Cross.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North Door. 1664.

The Description of the Kingdom of Hungary, with the History of the late Wars,
and Changes there.
Hungary is bounded on the East with Transylvania, and Walachia: Hungary
described.
On the West with Stiria, or Steirmark, Austria, and Moravia: On the North with
the Carpathian Mountains, which are a long and craggy ledge of Hills, beginning
near the City of Presburg, and the borders of Austria, and so pass on in a
continual course till they come to the very Euxine Sea, dividing Hungary from
Poland, and parting Transylvania, and Moldovia, from Rusianigra, and Podolia,
two Provinces of the Polonian Kingdom: and on the South with Sclavonia, and
some part of Dacia.

Hungary extends in length from Presburg, The length, and breadth of it.
along the Danow, to the borders of Transylvania, for the space of three
hundred English miles, and one hundred and ninty of the same miles in breadth:
The longest Summers Day in the Southern parts, is fifteen hours, and a half,
and not above sixteen hours in the Northermost parts. The Division of it.
Hungary is commonly divided into the Upper Hungary, and the Lower: The Upper
lies on the North of the River Danow, out of the bounds, and territories of the
Roman Empire: The Lower lies on the South of the Danow, and comprehends all
Pannonia Inferior, and part of Superior, which were formerly two Roman
Provinces.

The Upper Hungary is subdivided (before the coming in of the Turks) into
thirty two Counties, thar is to say, twenty four on the West side of Tibiscus
(or the River Tisse) and eight on the East side of the same River. The Lower is
divided into eighteen Counties, of which ten were between the Danow, and the
River Dravus; and the other six between the Danow, and the River Savus. But
this Division, and the Subdivisions depending upon it, being, since the coming
in of the Turks almost out of use, we will now look upon it as it stands
divided for the present (or lately did) betwixt the Emperor, as King of
Hungary, by a mixed Title of Descent, and Election, and the Great Turk, as Lord
of the most part of it by Arms and Conquest, two parts of three at least being
in his Possession.

The chief Towns in the Emperors Part.
The chief places in the Emperors Part are, 1. Sabria, anciently the chief City
of Pannonia Superior, by the Hungarians called Kimarorubath, and by the Dutch,
Leibnits. 2. Stridon, the Birthplace of St Jerome, one of the four chief
Fathers of the Latin Church, situate in the confines of Hungary, and Dalmatia,
commonly called Strigman. 3. Agria, a Bishops See. 4. Nitri, a Bishops See
also, on the River Boch. 5. Sopran, on the Borders of Austria. 6. Komara, a
strong piece, standing in an Island of the same name, made by the Danow. 7.
Presburg on the edge of Austria, on the North side of that River, called by the
Latins, Possonium: It Is seated in a pleasant healthful Country on the River
Lyet, which there falls into the Danow: in the Suburbs whereof, upon the top of
an high Mountain, stands a Stately Castle, the ordinary residence of the
Emperors, as Kings of Hungary. For though it be a little City, and not very
beautiful, yet being secured by the neighborhood of Austria, it has been made
the Regal City of Hungary since Buda was lost. Before the walls hereof died
Count Dampier, one of the chief Commanders of the Emperor Ferdinand the second,
in the wars of Hungary, and Bohemia. 8. Gran, called Strigonium, which was
taken by the Turks, Anno Christi 1534, and won again by the Christians 1595, at
which time Sr Thomas Arundel of Wardour Castle in Wiltshire, Sr Tho. Arundels
valor.
carried himself so gallantly by forcing the Water-Tower, and taking thence
with his own hands, the Turkish Banner, His reward.
that the Emperor Rodulph created him a Count of the Empire, and King James
afterward made him Lord Arundel of Wardour. It is seated on the Danow, but
opposite to the mouth of the River Gran, which arising in the upper Hungary,
does there end its course. Its also the seat of an Archbishop, who is the
Primate of Hungary. 9. Raab, which stands on the meeting of the Danow with the
River Rab, coming out of the Lower Hungary: its called in Latin Jaurinum. It
was heretofore memorable for being the boundary of the two Pannonia's,
Superior, and Inferior, hereabouts divided. Of late its famous for a strong
Fortress against the Turks, by whom it was taken Anno Christi 1594. but not
long after again recovered by the Industry of Monsieur de Vandre Court, a
French Gentleman. 10. Newsol, or Newhausel, a strong Town in the higher
Hungary, not far from the Springhead of the River Gran, which in the year
1621. proved fatal to that great Commander the Court of Bucquoy, who at the
siege hereof (the Town being kept by the Hungarians against the Emperor
Ferdinand the second) lost his Life. For going privately to view some places of
advantage whereby to make a general assault, he fell into an Ambush of
Hungarians, who suddenly set upon him, discomfitted his small Party, killed,
first his Horse under him, and at last himself, having in that Skirmish
received sixteen wounds. Here was also slain with him at the same time,
Torquato, an Italian Prince, Count Verdugo, a Spanish Earl, and one of the
Gouragas, of the house of Mantua. It is lately taken by the Turk. 11.
Altenbourg. 12. Tockay, both of them strong by the natural site: and 13.
Castel-Novo, made strong by Art.

Places of most Importance in the Turks possession, The chief Towns in the
Turks part.
are 1. Buda, by the Dutch called Hoffen. This City is unevenly seated amongst
Hills, on the South side of the Danow, but in the most fruitful part of all the
Country; Its exceeding strongly fortified, and adorned with many fair
buildings, both private and public; and furnished with some Medicinal Baths,
which owe much of their pomp, and sumptuousness to their New Masters, the
Turks, who took it from the Christians, August 20. Anno Christi 1526. Solomon
the Magnificent being present at the taking of it. Before that time, it was the
seat Royal of the Kings of Hungary, and the chief City of the Kingdom; As now
it is the seat of the chief Bassa, or Lord Lieutenant for the Grand Signior. 2.
Abba Regalis, by the Dutch called Stul-Weisenburg, situated between the Danow
and the Dravus, strongly, but unwholsomly seated in the midst of an
inaccessibile Marish, which is joined to the firm land by three broad Causeys,
blocked up at the ends with three great Bulworks. But notwithstanding its
strong situation, it was taken by the Turks, Anno Christi 1543. Before which
time, it was the usual place, both for the Coronation, and Interment of the
Kings of Hungary. 3. Volue, on the Danow, taken in the same year also. 4.
Fiese-kirken, called in Latin Quinque, Ecclesiae, from five Churches in it. A
Bishops See, It was this last year burned down by Count Serini.
which was taken by the Turks, Anno Christi 1566. and gave them a great command
upon the River Dravus, upon which it is seated. 5 Sirmisch, situated between
the Danow and Savus, noted for yielding the best Wines, but it is a City
otherwise of no estimation for the present, though formerly of the most account
in all this Province, the Metropolis of Pannonia inferior: honored with the
presence and personal residence of many of the Emperors, and in those respects
made the Stage of many great and memorable Actions. Here was held a Council
against the Heretic Photinus, Bishop of this City, who held, that Christ had
no existence of God the Father, till he was conceived, and born of the Virgin
Mary, Anno Christi 356. 6. Zigeth, a strong Town, situate on a Marish ground on
the North side of the River Dravus, which was taken by Solomon the Magnificent,
Anno Christi 1566, who there ended his Days. 7. Keresture; nigh unto which, in
the year 1596 Mahomet the third gave unto the Christians so great an overthrow,
that probably, if he had pursued his Victory, he had made a full Conquest of
all Hungary. 8. Mursa, upon the confluence of the Dravus, and the Danow. 9.
Belgrade, on the confluence of the Savus and the Danow: called by the Dutch,
Greek Wessenburg: Its called Belgrad from the beautiful situation of it. Its
hemmed in on the North with the Danow, on the East with the Savus, on the other
sides its defended with very strong Walls, deep Ditches, and impregnable
Ramparts. It belonged anciently to the Despots of Servia, by whom it was
consigned over to Sigismund, King of Hungary, as best able to keep it, the
Despot being satisfied with Lands and other Territories of a better value.
Heretofore it was the Bulwork of Christendom against the Turks, who received
before it many great, and notable repulses, of which the most memorable were
those of Amurath the second, and Mahomet the Great: It was taken at last (to
the great loss, and shame of the Christian world, who relieved not the besieged
in due time) by Solomon the Magnificent, Anno Christi 1520.

On the North side of the Upper Hungary, there is, 10 Pesth, over against Buda,
on the River Danow. 11. Vaccia, on the same River, a Bishops See. 12. Colocza,
an Archb shops See, on the same River also. 13. Zegedin, on the West side of
the River Tibiscus. 14. Temeswar, on the East of that River toward
Transylvania: which is the ordinary residence of a Turkish Bassa. 15. Gyula, a
strong Town on the Borders of Transylavania, which was betrayed by Nicholas
Keresken, the Governor thereof, in the last year of Solomon, upon promise of a
great reward: But Selimus, the Son of Solomon, caused him to be shut up in a
Barrel, knocked full of nails, with the points inwards, and so to be tumbled up
and down till he dyed most miserably. On the Barrel there was this Inscription
written: Here receive the reward of thy Covetousness and Treason: Gyula, thou
soldest for Gold. If thou best not faithful to Maximilian, thy Natural Lord,
neither will thou be true to me. 16. Singidon, on the South side of Gyula,
betwixt which, and Belgrade are the Fields of Maxon, famous for the slaughter
of fifty thousand Turks, slain here in Battle, under the prudent conduct of
John Huniades: Anno 1456.

The People of Hungary are strong of Body, The quality of the People.
but somewhat rude of behavior, respecting neither the Liberal Arts, nor
Mechanic Trades. The greatest aspersion is the name of a Coward, which cannot
be wiped off, without the killing of a Turk, after which they are privileged
to wear a Feather, and by the number of their Feathers to show how many Turks
they have slain in Battle. They delight in Wars, and like no Trade better,
desiring rather to live upon other men's labors, then upon their own. They are
extreme covetous, yet they have rather a desire, then any Art to enrich
themselves, permiting the Dutch to ingross all their Trading, and to manage
such Commodities as their Country yields, which is the cause (seconded by the
oppressions of the Turks, and Austrian Family, under whom they are) that none
of them rise to any considerable Wealth. And for such as have lands, they grow
poorer every Day then other. For though the Females be excluded from inheriting
their Fathers Possessions (to whom they give no Portion, but new clothes on
their Wedding day) yet, seeing the Sons do equally share their Fathers estate
amongst them (as such who hold in Gavelkind, do here in England) it must needs
be, that by so many Divisions, and Subdivisions, the greatest Patrimony that
is, will be brought to little. Both Sexes in their education are inured to
hardship, being not suffered to lie in Beds till the night of their marriage.

The Hungarians at this day contemn ease, and pleasure, and live not in Towns
but as strangers, with a design to be soon gone. Great men lodge their delights
in their Gardens, and Baths, and care not for their Buildings, but desire to
live at large. The Common People live in Cabins, and little lodgings ill made.

Their Habit.
Their Garments are long and stately, their Women's Garments are straight, and
cover them unto the neck; they wear upon their Gowns, long Cloaks, and they
cover their Heads with Vails, or Linen Cloth, and hide all but their eyes and
nose; and most of them wear Pearls, and precious stones. Also both men and
women wear Buskins up to the calf of the Leg; they mourn a whole year for their
Friends and Kinsfolks when they die, and sometimes two years; they shave their
Beards, and leave nothing but their Must^ches, which are sometimes very long.
They have a particular Language, which differs not much from the Bohemians: and
they have also a particular form of Letters, The Sclavonian Language.
yet most commonly they use the Roman Characters; they are very proud and
haughty, strong in War, and are better Soldiers on Horseback th^n on Foot;
they are very obedient to the Prince, and his Leiutenants. In the parts
adjoining to Germany the Dutch Language is most used.

The soil in Hungary is wonderful fruitful, Their commodities.
yielding Corn and Fruits in great abundance: The Grass in some places (as in
the Isle of Comora) exceeds the height of a man, which does breed such a number
of Cattle, that this Country alone, is thought to be able to serve all Europe
with flesh: they yearly send into Germany and Sclavonia eight thousand Oxen.
They have Deer, Partridge, Pheasant in such superfluity that any man that will,
may kill them. The other commodities of the Country are, store of Silver,
Copper, Iron, Steel, Tin, Lead, Vitrial, which they send into diverse Countries;
Yea, and Gold, which they not only find in Mines, but also in the Sand of some
of their Rivers. There are also great store of Sheep, Stags, Fallow Deer,
Goats, Hares, wild Boars, Wolves, Bears, and such like beasts: Besides
Goshawkes, and many other Birds.

There is scarce any other Country that has more and greater Rivers than
Hungary, nor more Navigable, The Rivers.
nor better stored with Fish: There is the Danow, which, rising out of Nigra
Sylva, or the Schwartzen-Wald, as the Germans call it, at a little Village of
Schwaben, about two Dutch Miles from the Shoars of the Rhine, passes through
Schwaben, Bavaria, Austria, Hungary, etc. and runs by the Cities of Ulm,
Regensberg, Passaw, Vienna, Rab, Buda, etc Belgrade, beyond which it begins to
be called Ister, and receiving into its channel, from the long Tracts of the
Alps, the Sarmatian, and Carpathian Mountains, above sixty Navigable Rivers,
besides lesser Brooks, disgorgeth his full stomach out of seven Mouths into the
lap of the Euxine Sea: the whole length of his course being fifteen hundred
Miles. Whence a modern Poet said, Cedere Danubius se tibi Nile negat.
O seven-mouth'd Nile, I plainly see,
Danow will scare give place to thee.


2. Savus, which rising in Carniola, falls into Danow. 3. Dravus, which rises
in Carinthia, and falls into Danow. 4. Tibuscus, or the Tisse, which rises in
Maramufia, under the high tops of the Carpathian Mountains, and abounds more
with Fish than any other of the Rivers of Hungary: for they find in it great
store of Surgeons, Pikes (which sometimes have Livers of an Ell long) Carps,
etc. whence they use to say, that in this River two parts are water, and the
third Fish. There are also many other Rivers, wherein are great store of
Trouts, Salmons, Perches, Lampries, Barbels, etc.

A famous Lake.
There is also a famous Lake called Balatan (by the Dutch Platse) which is in
length forty Italian Miles, but of breadth unequal: In some places its ten
Miles broad, in others but three. The Rarities of Hungary.
There be also many Medicinal waters, and more hot Baths than any one country
has in Europe. Some waters their be of a strange nature, whereof some falling
upon the ground are turned into Stone: Others, about the Town of Smolnice,
which falling into Ditches, make a kind of mud, out of which, being tried, and
melted, they make very good Copper: and some again which flow in Winter, and
freeze in Summer. And near unto Bistrice, or Mensol, there is a Spring or
Fountain out of which comes a green Water, whereof they make Solder for their
Gold. This Country also abounds in Mineral Salt at Maromarusia, and other
places, which they cut like unto a stone. There are also hot waters, whose Fish
being taken out, and put into cold water dies presently. The waters of the
County of Liptove, near unto the Village of St John, are good against Scabs. In
the Territory of Zepus there are waters in which Wood is turned into Stone: and
near unto St Martins Church, in the same place, there is a water which seems to
boil, the which turns into stone, both above and under ground, and this Stone
is almost like unto the Pumeise.

In the Country of Zolie, there is a Gulf, or breach in the ground, which casts
forth such a deadly stink as it kills the Birds that fly over it. Near unto
Javerin upon the Banks of the River Danow, toward the East, are to be seen,
some remainders of Trajans Bridge, Trajans Bridge.
built upon that River in Moesia, an admirable and memorable work, consisting
of twenty Arches of square stone, which Arches were a hundred and fifty foot
high, besides the foundation, and sixty foot broad, and each Arch was seventy
foot wide. Its a thing to be admired by what means, force, or Art they could
build these several Pillars in this deep and violent stream, and lay the
foundations of so great a burden, the bottom of the River being so deep of mud,
and there being no means to turn the course of the Water, he Arches above the
Water were demolished by the command of Adrian the Emperor, but the Piles stand
still, for a Testimony ^o Posterity, that there was nothing impossible to the
power and wealth of the Roman Empire.

The Principal Mountains of this Country are 1. Carpatus, The Mountains.
the Sarmatian, or Carpathian Mountains, spoken of before. 2. Matzan, near to
the City of Agria, whereon grow brave Trees in abundance. 3. Erdol, the highest
of all the rest.

The Christian Faith was first planted here in the time of King Steven,
surnamed the Saint, They receive the Christian Faith.
being invited and persuaded thereunto by the Emperor Henry the second, who,
upon this condition, gave to this Steven in marriage his Sister Gilla; and it
was effected by the preaching and industry of Albert, Archbishop of Prague.
Anno Christi 1016, or thereabouts. Since which time Christianity has continued
here without interruption, having been defended gallantly, and bravely against
the Turks for a long time. But now, Mahumatism is much spread over a great part
of it; by reason of those many places which the Turks hold in it. As for the
Christians, some pertinaciously adhere to the Church of Rome; Some follow the
Doctrine of Luther; and some that of Calvin; Their Divisions.
Besides which, there are Arians, Anabaptists, and other Heretics crept in
amongst them. Yet all these different parties agree in this, to punish
Adultery, and Fornication with Death. The Father forcing his Daughter; the
Husband his Wife, the Brother his Sister, to the place of Execution.

The worthiest Scholar that ever this Kingdom produced was St Jerome, The best
Scholars, and Captains.
a worthy Father of the Latin Church who was born in Stridon; and of later
years, Steven Kis, surnamed Zegedine, from the place of his birth; and the most
worthy of their Soldiers, were, John Huniades, who so valiantly resisted and
repelled the incursions of the Turks, and slew of them fifty thousand at the
Battle of Maxon; and after, him, was Matthias Corvinus, his Son, King of
Hungary, of whom a Poet writes thus, -- Patriae decus, unica stirpis
Gloria, Pannonicae caedis fortissimus ult^r.
His Countries pride, the Glory of his Race,
Revenger of the Hungarians late disgrace.


Their Government.
The King of Hungary Governs his Realm chiefly by two Magistrates; yet in the
Upper Hungary there used to be three Magistrates. The first Governs the Realm
in the Kings Name. The chief Magistrate is the Palatine of the Realm, who is
next unto the King, and Judges the King himself, if he be accused. He is chosen
by the People, and his Office is not Hereditary. There is also the Judge of the
Court, who is one of the ordinary Judges of the Realm. Then the perpetual
Chancellor, who is the Archbishop of Strigonium, the Primate of the Kingdom,
and the Chief Secretary; His Office is to Anoint the King when he is chosen;
and to Seal all Patents, and Privileges. There is also the Master of the
Court, who must of necessity follow the King, and is his nearest Counselor.
There is also the Master of the Royal Tavernies, who has the charge of Mines,
and Saltpits, and does Judge of causes which concern the Kings revenues in
Towns, Buroughs, and Castles.

The second Magistrate is appointed for matters of Justice, and this Magistracy
comprehends three Officers of very great authority, that is, the Vice Palatine
of the Realm, the Personal Judge of the Presence, who holds the Kings place in
Judgments, and is above all other Judges, and the Vice-Judge of the Court. The
Inferior Officers are those, who are rather Executioners of Judgment than
Magistrates; and there are two Protonotaries of the Personal Judge, one of the
Vice-Palatine, and one of the Vice-Judge of the Court. All these are called
Masters, and have joined to them the Archbishop of Strigoniums Secretary, who
is called Fiscall, besides twelve Assistants, and certain sworn Notaries.

Besides all these, there are the Kings Officers, as the Treasurer, the High
Chamberlain, and other Chamberlains; the Lord Steward of the Kings House, and
other Masters of the Household; the Chief Cup Bearer; Gentlemen Servants;
Ushers, and many other Inferior Officers.

This Kingdom of Hungary has ever been Elective, Their Kingdom is Elective.
and has had special Privileges indulged them by their former Kings. King
Andrew gave Authority to his Prelates, Peers, and People, that without any
imputation of disloyalty, they might contradict, oppose, and resist their King,
if he did any thing in Violation of their Laws and Sanctions: as Dr Heylin
says in his Geography. p. 189. But since the house of Austria came to possess
this Crown of Hungary, they have made their Government more absolute, and the
People more servile, having lost much of their former Liberty, and Privileges.
For in their ancient Government, when as their Kings meant to undertake War, to
conclude a Peace, or to alter any thing in the Government of the Commonwealth,
their manner was to assemble the Barons, Bishops, and Gentlemen at a certain
place, where, by the consent of the greater part, their Kings had power to
confirm, abrogate, or make Laws; To denounce War, to conclude Peace, and to
charge their Lands with Impositions, and Taxes according as necessity required;
Which Assemblies are still in use, but the freedom thereof, is much retrenched,
and impaired, there being now nothing propounded to these Assemblies by their
new Governors, but to raise a Contribution of Money to resist the Turk when he
threatens any Invasion, to which demand, the Estates give their resolution by a
certain Day.

They Judge according to Written Laws; but they have another kind of deciding
controversies which happen amongst them; For if the matter be difficult to end,
Trial by Combat.
they ordain that it shall be tried by Combat betwixt the Parties, the which
is performed in the presence of the King or his Lieutenant, and the victory is
adjudged to the stronger; and he is judged Victorious, that does so amase his
enemy at his first approach, as that he retires out of the Field, or being in
combat, is so pursued, as that he is forced to abandon the place that is
limited to them. They that fight on Horseback, charge first with their Lances,
and then they fall to it with their Swords; and for such as fight on foot, they
have their privy parts covered, and all the rest of their body is naked.

Only the males (as was said before) inherit; and if they die without Sons, the
Daughters do not succeed, but the Lands of the deceased fall by Escheat to the
King.

Their strength.
The forces of this Kingdom whilst it was entire, may best be Judged of, by
those great Armies which they have brought into the Field against the Turk: But
now two parts of three of Hungary being subdued by the Turks, that which
remains is not able to answer the proportion of former times.

The foot Soldiers are commonly but meanly armed; the defect whereof is rather
to be imputed to Prince than to the People, who can but bring their Bodies
(which is all they have) for the defense of their Country. Their Horsemen
(which are called Heiducks) are maintained in a continual readiness, at the
charge of the Nobility, and principal Gentry. These are Cousin-Germans to the
Cossacques, almost as cruel, and mischievous as they.

Their Revenues.
The chief Revenues of this Kingdom come from the Silver Mines, out of which is
yearly raised about a Million and an half of Guilders. But Maximilian the
second, made it up two Millions by seizing on the Lands of the Cathedral, and
Collegiat Churches; and assigning annual Pensions to the Bishops, Canons, and
other Religious Persons: Most of which sums come clearly to the Emperors
Coffers; the Presidiary Soldiers being paid with Contribution Money, raised
out of the Peoples purses; and the Lieutenant Generals Salary, which comes to
thirty thousand Dollars by the year, is defrayed out of their purses also.

Not to speak any thing of the first Inhabitants of this Kingdom of Hungary, so
many ages since extinct, we will come to the Hungarians, the last and Principal
Actors upon the Stage of this Kingdom, and the givers of the present Name to
it: before whose coming into it, Called formerly Pannonia.
it was called Pannonia. These Hungari were a Scythian People, first known in
Europe by their acts in the time of the Emperor Arnulphus, when wandering in
Sarmatia Europaea, they were by him called into this Country to assist him
against Suantobogius, King of the Moravians, from whom they took Transylvania,
and so much of Hungary as lies on both sides of the River Tisse, inhabited at
that time by the Sclaves, and some scattered remnants of the Avares, whom they
killed, or forced to seek new habitations, planting themselves in those places
which they took from them, which is now the Upper Hungary, after which they
passed the Danow and subdued Pannonia.

Their Government at first was under Dukes: The first King.
But Stephen the fourth, upon his embracing the Gospel, was honored with the
title of a King, enjoyed by his successors to this very day. In the time of
Ladislaus surnamed the Saint, Dalmatia, and Croatia were added to the Crown of
Hungary, as bequeathed to the King by his Sister Zelomira, the Widow of the
last King of those Countries.

Anno Christi 1248. Under the Reign of Bela the fourth, The Tartars invade it.
the Tartarians, to the number of five hundred thousand fighting men, brake
into Hungary, and like a violent whirlwind, carried all before them,
tyrannizing here for three years together, comitting many merciless Massacres,
and infinite ravages wheresoever they came. In the Reign of Steven the fourth,
Mysia, and Bulgary were made Tributaries to the Kingdom of Hungary.

The Dukes, and Kings of Hungary.
Cusala, the first Duke (or Captain) of the Hungary; He subdued Transylvania,
and the Upper Hungary, and passed over the Danow; but was slain in his Wars
against the Dutch, who then possessed Pannonia.

Toxus, the next Duke, who subdued Pannonia, or the Lower Hungary.

Grisa, the Son of Toxus was the third Duke.

Stephen, the fourth Duke, and the first King of Hungary. Anno Christi 1000.

Peter surnamed the Almain, and Nephew of Stephen. He was deposed by Andrew and
Bela, the Sons of Ladislaus, the Son of Geisa the first, and Brother of
Stephen, the first King. Anno Christi 1039.

Andrew, who was the eldest Son of that Ladislaus Anno Christi 1047.

Bela, the Brother of Andrew, succeeded him. Anno Christi 1059.

Solomon, the Son of Andrew, who was expelled his Kingdom by Geisa. Anno
Christi 1062.

Geisa the second, the Son of Bela. Anno Christi 1075.

Ladislaus, surnamed the Saint, who was Brother to Geisa the second. Anno
Christi 1078.

Coloman, the Son of Geisa the second. Anno Christi 1096.

Stephen the second, who was Son of Coloman. Anno Christi 1114.

Bela the second, the Nephew of Geisa the second by his Son Almus. Anno Christi
1132.

Geisa the third, the Son of Bela the second. Anno Christi 1142.

Stephen the third, the Son of Geisa the third. Anno Christi 1162.

Bela the third, the Brother of Stephen the third. Anno Christi 1172.

Emaricus, the Son of Bela the third. Anno Christi 1191.

Ladislaus the second, the Son of Emaricus; He Reigned but six Months being
slain by Treason, when he was very young, and died without Issue. Anno Christi
1201.

Andrew the second, the Son of Bela the third, and Brother of Emaricus. Anno
Christi 1201.

Bela the fourth, the Son of Andrew the second. Anno Christi 1236.

Stephen the fourth, the Son of Bela the fourth. Anno Christi 1271.

Ladislaus the third, the Son of Stephen the fourth. Anno Christi 1273.

Andrew the third, Nephew to Bela the fourth by his Brother Stephen. Anno
Christi 1290.

Charles, surnamed Martel, the Son of Charles, King of Naples, by Mary the
Daughter of Stephen the ^ourth, against whom was chosen Wenceslaus, King of
Bohemia, Son of King Wenceslaus the second, and Anne his Wife, who was the
Daughter of Bela the fourth; and after three years, Otho of Bavaria, descended
from Elizabeth, another of the Daughters of Bela the fourth, was chosen also by
a Faction against Wenceslaus: But Wenceslaus surrending his title to Otho, and
Otho being not long after forced to surrender his title, Charles Martel
remained King of Hungary. Anno Christi 1302.

Lodovicus, Nephew to Charles Martel by his Son Carlcobert, succeeded not only
in the Kingdom of Hungary, but of Poland also, in the right of Elizabeth his
Mother, Sister of Casimir the second. Anno Christi 1343.

Charles the second, King of Naples, descended from Charles of Naples, and
Mary, the Daughter of Stephen the fourth before mentioned, by their Son, John
of Durazzo, one of the younger Brothers of Charles Martel, which Charles the
second, after a short reign, was poisoned by the Widow of the former King to
make way for her Daughters coming to the Crown. Anno Christi 1383.

Sigismund, Emperor of Germany, King of Bohemia, and Duke of Luxenbourg, was
chosen King of Hungary in right of Mary his Wife, who was the youngest Daughter
of Lodovicus. Anno Christi 1387.

Albert of Austria, Emperor, and King of Hungary, and Bohemia, in right of
Elizabeth his Wife, the Daughter of Sigismund. Anno Christi 1438.

Ladislaus, or Vladislaus, the Son of Jugello, King of Poland, succeeded in the
minority of Ladislaus, the Son of Albert, he was unhappily slain at the Battle
of Varna against the Turks, together with thirty thousand of his men. He had
made, and sworn a truce with the Turk; But the Popes Legate, upon a seeming
advantage, persuaded him to break it, and absolved him from his Oath; and when
they came to the Battle, the Christians at first had the better: Whereupon
Amurath the second, against whom they fought, drew the writing out of his
bosom, and with his eyes lift up to Heaven, he desired Christ to look upon the
perfidious dealing, wherewith his followers dishonored him; and so encouraging
his men, he obtained the Victory. Anno Christi 1440.

Ladislaus the fifth, the King of Bohemia, the Son of Albert by Elizabeth the
Daughter of Sigismund, and Mary, succeeeded. Anno Christi 1444.

Matthias Corvinus, the Son of the famous Huniades, after the Death of
Ladislaus the fifth, was chosen King of Hungary. Anno Christi 1458.

Vladislaus the second, or Ladislaus the sixth, the Son of Casimir the fourth,
of Poland, and of Elizabeth the Daughter of Albert; succeeded in the Kingdom of
Hungary, and Bohemia. Anno Christi 1491.

Ludovicus the second, King of Hungary and Bohemia, who in the one and
twentieth year of his age, and the tenth of his Reign, was drawn into the Field
against Solomon the Magnificent, the Battle was fought at a Village, called
Mugace, betwixt Belgrade, and Buda, in which nineteen thousand Hungarians were
slain, and the young King drowned in his flight. Lewis thus dead, John de
Sepusio, Vayvod of Transylvania, was by the States chosen King of Hungary; But
Ferdinand, Archduke of Austria, challenged the Kingdom, in the right of Anne his
Wife, who was Daughter and sister to Vladislaus, and Lewis, Kings of Hungary
and Bohemia. On this prentence he invaded the Kingdom, and drove out John, who
to recover his right, called in Solomon the Magnificent, who took such fast
footing in Hungary, that his successors could never since be removed. Anno
Christi 1571.

John de Sepusio, Vayvod of Transylvania and King of Hungary. Anno Christi 1527.

Ferdinand of Austria, Brother to the Emperor Charles the fifth, was Elected
King of Bohemia in respect to Anne his Wife, Sister of Ludovicus the second,
and in the same right, laid claim to the Crown of Hungary, whereunto he was
chosen by a party prepared for him; but upon the Death of John de Sepusio, he
was received by all. Anno Christi 1540.

Maximilian, the Emperor, was King of Bohemia, and Hungary, and Archduke of
Austria. He was the Son of Ferdinand, Anno Christi 1562.

Rodulphus his Son succeeded him in all. Anno Christi 1572.

Matthias, the Brother of Rodulphus succeeded him. Anno Christi 1608.

Ferdinand the second, of Gratz, next heir to Matthias of the House of Austria,
intruded, against whom the Hungarians called in Bethlem Gabor, Prince of
Transylvania, whom they Elected for their King; But upon the Emperors great
successes in Bohemia, against Frederick, Prince Elector Palatine, Gabor
relinquished his right, and hearkened to a Peace. Anno Christi 1618.

Ferdinand the third, the Son of Ferdinand the second, was chosen and Crowned
King of Hungary in the Life of his Father. Anno Christi 1637. And succeeded him
in the Empire, and Kingdom of Bohemia.

Ferdinand the fourth, the Son of Ferdinand the third, was Crowned King of
Hungary in his Fathers life time. Anno Christi 1646. And died before his
Father. Anno Christi 1653. being but two and twenty years old.

Leopold Ignatius, his Brother, the Son of Ferdinand the third, was also
Crowned King of Hungary in his Fathers life time. Anno Christi 1653. and is now
living.

An account of the Controversies which have happened in the Kingdom of Hungary,
since the Peace that was made with the Turks. Anno Christi 1605, to 1663.
The controversies which happened in Hungary, as well for Religion, as for the
charges, and Commands in Armies, were the causes of many, and great mischiefs.
For Botzkay Istham, Duke of Kismaria, and Prince of Transylvania, revolted from
the Emperor, having drawn many Noble men of Hungary to join with him upon
assurance of assistance from the Turk; Then did Botzkay take the field with
great numbers of Heiducks, and made a Declaration against the Emperors
Lieutenants, which were four, who joining their Forces together, went against
Botzkay. When the Armies met, the Hungarians, both Horse and Foot yielded to
Botzkay; The fight continued six hours, and the Imperialists were routed,
Belliceuse, one of their Generals, fled, and the Germans, and Silesians were
cut in pieces; Pets, and Pallas Lippay, were taken Prisoners, and Botzkay sent
Pets, and some Ensigns to Herder Bassa, to show his affection to the Turk: and
Pallas Lippay remained Lieutenant to Botzkay: and they published another
Declaration, that they took up Arms for their Civil Liberties, and Consciences,
and to hinder the Persecution of the Gospel.

Hereupon the Roman Clergy, and Jesuits were forced to fly to Vienna; and the
Citizens of Cassovia thrust the Priests and Clergy out of their Towns, and
became Protestants of the Augustane Confession. Baste, the Emperors Lieutenant,
published a General Pardon in his Masters name, but it prevailed nothing; He
also besieged Cassovia in vain, the Garrison consisting of six thousand men.
Having raised his Siege, in his return, he took Epper, and some weaker places,
upon condition to suffer them to enjoy their Religion according to the
Confession of Ausbourg: But being pursued by Botzkay, he lost thirty Wagons
laden with Silver, and store of Clothes that came from Vienna. This so amazed
the neighbor places, that the Germans, and other Strangers were cut in pieces.

Then did Baste persuade Botzkay by his letters, to hearken to peace, and to
draw the Emperors Subjects to their obedience: Botzkay answered, that he was
content, upon condition that he should enjoy the Principality of Transylvania,
and be the Emperors Lieutenant in Hungary. That the French and Walloons should
depart the Country: That the Soldiers should be paid; That the Protestants
should not be molested in the exercise of their Religion: That Belliceuse (who
was the cause of these troubles) should be delivered into his hands to do
justice upon him; and that the Emperor should come in Person to the Estates at
Ponson, and in the mean time the Germans should not stir out of the Garrisons to
plunder the Country.

Baste seeing these demands so high, returned no answer. All Transylvania
obeyed Botzkay; and he received Money from the Turk, wherewith he paid his
Soldiers, and called the Estates of Hungary to a General Assembly upon the
last of April. In the mean time the Earls of Herin, Nadaste, and Buda, who
before had fought with the Turk, fell to Botzkays Party, having an Army of
twenty five thousand men; Moldovia, and Wallachia also obeyed him. This made
Matthias the Archduke, in the Emperors name, to seek for peace; and Botzkay
sent Helias Hali, Helias Hasky.
who met with the Emperors Commissioner, and told him that his Master would not
refuse Peace if the Emperor would grant him the Conditions which he had before
propounded; as also that no Bishop should be of the Senate in Hungary, but he
only that was Chancellor.

Then did Botzkay send Ambassadors to Vienna, Peace concluded.
where at last a Peace was concluded in the year 1606, and the Month of
September, which consisted of these six Articles.

1. The Articles with the Emperor.
That they should enjoy liberty of Conscience throughout all Hungary, namely
the Catholics, Lutherans, and Calvenists, and that no other Religion should be
tolerated.

2. That the Archduke Matthias should be Lieutenant General for the Emperor
through all Hungary, and that all things should remain in the same estate as
they were in for the present.

3. That Botzkay should continue Prince of Transylvania, Earl of Sicules, and
Palatine of high Hungary, and for want of Heirs Male, all should revert to the
Emperor, and that Botzkays Daughters should be married according to their
quality at the Emperors charge.

4. That from thence-forth the Palatine, and the General Treasurers should be
chosen by the Estates of the Country.

5. That a General pardon should be published, to the end that all matters
might be forgotten on both parts.

6. The Chambers and New Courts to be abolished; the Hungarians to redeem the
Castles pawned to the Germans; the Government of the Kingdom to be administered
by the Hungarians, only Raab, and Comorra may be Governed by deserving Germans;
and that Bishops descended of the Nobility, to have voice and place in Council,
others not. Bonefires were made at Vienna, and all other Places for this happy
Peace.

Shortly after also a Peace was concluded between the Emperor and the Great
Turk for twenty years, The Articles with the Great Turk.
whereof these were the Articles.

1. That every one should return into his Possessions, reedifie his Houses and
Castles, and remain in the same Estate that he was in before the War.

2. That the Emperor should be called Father, and the Turk Son; which titles
they should give each to other by their Ambassadors, and in their Writing
should use the word Emperor, and not King.

3. That the Tarters should be comprehended in this Peace, with a prohibition
not to make any spoil in the Emperors Country, nor in Hungary.

4. That all the Signiories belonging to the House of Austria should be
comprehended in this Peace.

5. That all Acts of Hostility should cease, and transgressions be punished by
exemplary Justice.

6. That neither Part shall surprise any Fort, Town, House, nor take any
Prisoner, nor send any Spy into Hungary.

7. That the Treaty of Peace made with Botzkay should be truly observed.

8. That Merchants might pass and Traffic freely through their Countries; and
that there should be four or five Fairs in every year in such places as should
be appointed.

9. That the Bassa of Buda, the Governor of Javerin, and the Governor of
Sclavonia shall have Authority to pacify all factions, and divisions that may
arise, and if they were of importance, the Emperor and great Turk should be
Mediators.

10. That all Prisoners shall be set at liberty according to their quality.

11. That the Archduke shall send an Ambassador with a Present to the Vizier,
and the Vizier Amurath shall send a Present to the Archduke Matthias, and the
Emperor shall send a Present of two hundred thousand Florins to the Great Turk.

12. That the Great Turk shall send another to him of the like value.

13. That this Peace shall continue firm for twenty years, and they shall every
three years send Ambassadors one to another with rich Presents.

14. That it shall be lawful for them of either Part to sue for debts, and
they shall enjoy all Privileges, and immunities, as before the War.

15. That Vactia shall remain to the Emperor, and Gran to the Turk.

The Bassa of Buda treated the Christians with great Magnificence, giving to
each of them rich Presents. There was great joy at Constantinople, and in the
Emperors Countries for this Peace.

But Botzkay dying shortly after, New troubles.
caused great alterations in these Provinces; and the Peace was ill observed in
Hungary by reason of the Roads that were made by the Imperialists and others;
To prevent which, there was an Assembly called of all the Nobility of Hungary,
and Transylvania, who desired that their King might reside in Hungary, that his
presence might suppress these combustions; and the Archduke Matthias not coming
within seven days, they made a Protestation against him for not coming, and so
departed to their homes. The Noble men of Upper Hungary held another Assembly
at Cassovia, October the 14th, where they resolved, that Hungary should not be
divided from Transylvania. But the Heiducks being discontented notwithstanding
these Assemblies, did not forbear their ravaging; they took diverse Castles, and
declared themselves Friends to the Turk, and enemies to the Germans, and
Walloons.

Then came the Archduke Matthias to Presbourg; the Bishop of Javerin, and all
the Nobility were there to receive him. The Cardinal Archbishop of Gran arrived
also, and Helias Hasky, with many Deputies from High Hungary; A Parliament.
the Parliament began, Jan. 23. 1608. The Cardinal and the Clergy would have
moderated the Peace made with Botzkay, but Helias Hasky, with the Deputies of
Upper Hungary, opposed it, saying, that this Assembly was called only to
suppress the Heiducks; the Archdukes Deputies proposed that there might be a
League Offensive, and Defensive; and some dissension arose betwixt the Clergy
and Nobles, but at last it was pacified, and concluded that they should not
alter any thing in the peace made at Vienna; and that the said League should be
made betwixt the Estates and the Country. As for the discontented Heiducks,
Helias Hasky, and Turso undertook took to go to them, and either to pacify
them, or to proclaim War against them.

Then did the Archduke return to Vienna, where he called an Assembly of the
Estates and acquainted them which what had been done at Presbourg, entreating
them to provide money in case the Heiducks did not lay down Arms; He also
aspired to be King of Hungary, and to further his designs, he resolved to
settle peace, as well with the Heyducks as with the Turk; and Hasky and Turso
so far prevailed with the Hyducks that fifteen Troops of them entered into their
pay, and the rest were dispersed.

The Archduke forces the Emperor to make him King of Hungary.
Presently after did the Archduke raise an Army of twenty Thousand old
Soldiers, with which he marched through Moravia into Bohemia toward the
Emperor, his Brother, who was at Prague, and there he enforced him to resign
the Crown of Hungary to him, and to discharge the Hungarians from their Oath,
who should choose him King, etc. And accordingly the Crown of Hungary, with
other marks of Royalty were sent out of Prague, and against they came, the
Archduke put his Army into Battalia to receive them. There were brought to him
the Sword of King Stephen, he Golden Ball, the Buskins, the Antique Roab, and
the Royal Scepter; the Archduke, attended which many Noble men, went forth to
meet them. All the Ordinance was shot off thrice, and the Soldiers discharged
their pieces as often.

These things being thus dispatched, the Siege before Prague was raised, and
the Archduke, dividing his Army into three parts, He comes back to Vienna.
retired to Vienna; and when he came thither, the Inhabitants went forth to
meet him July 14th, and made him an entry, as to their Sovereign Lord.

At the same time there came to Vienna an Ambassador from the Turk, sent by the
Bassa of Buda, for a confirmation of the Peace, before concluded, and with rich
Presents, October. 22. The Archduke parted from Vienna, He goes to Presbourg.
and came to Presbourg, were he was received with great Pomp by the Noble men
of Hungary there being ten thousand men at Arms. Nov. 6. they presented to him
the Articles, conformable to the Edict of Pacification made in the year 1606,
whereof you have an account before.

These Article being presented to King Matthias (for so now we must call him)
he confirmed them, and chose Helias Hasky Palatine; and then was he Proclaimed
King of Hungary, November. 14. His Coronation.
and upon the 19th Day he was Anointed and Crowned in St Martins Church in
Presburg, whereof these were the Ceremonies, which I have set down to please
the Reader.

The Crown was brought upon a Royal Chariot from the Castle to the Church, with
ten Ensigns, The Ceremonies of it.
it being in a little Coffer covered with Cloth of Gold, and then put into the
Vestry. Four of the Chief Senators, were at the four Corners of the Chariot,
and the other Senators and Chief Noble men followed it. The King being attired
after the Hungarian manner, mounted upon an Horse with a rich Caparison, and
accompanied by his Brother, the Archduke, and many other Noble men of diverse
Nations, came unto the said Church, where having staid a little in the Vestry,
two Bishops came to conduct him to the Altar, and before him there went ten
Noblemen carrying the ten Ensigns, and five others followed them, whereof the
first carried the Cross, the second the Pix, the third the Royal Sword, the
fourth the Scepter, and the fifth, which was Helias Hasky, the Crown. Cardinal
Fortgasi did the Office, being assisted by many Bishops and Prelates, who
Anointed the King when the Mass began, and set the Crown upon his Head whilst
the Gospel was reading, all the People crying with one voice, God save the King
of Hungary.

Mass being ended, the King took the Royal Sword, which Colonita, the Marshal
of Hungary held, and laid it thrice upon the Clergy in the form of a Cross:
then received he the Communion at the hands of the said Cardinal: After which
they cast a larges of Gold and Silver amongst the People. Which done, the King
went by a Gallery from St Martins Church to another called the Deschausses,
where, after they had read the Gospel, he made two and twenty Knights; Then
being attired in his Royal Ornaments, and the Crown upon his Head, he went to
Horse, and was brought to a bank of Earth, which he leaped thrice over, and
then he flourished his Sword thrice in the air in form of a Cross; which done,
he returned to the Castle where the Feast was prepared.

The Germans discharged.
The Ceremonies being over, he was forced to deprive the Germans of the
Dignities, Charges, Estates, and Offices which they held in Hungary; and so
having pacified the Country, and reduced under his Crown that which the
Christians held there, he returned to Vienna. Thus in the space of seven
Months he caused himself to be Crowned King of Hungary, and to be acknowleged
Archduke of Austria, and Marquess of Moravia.

Botzkay, a little before his Death, declared Valentine Hamonnai, for Prince of
Transylvania; But the Transylvanians (not pleased therewith) chose Sigismund
Rakoczi, Rakoczi Prince of Transylvania.
who was very desirous to have evaded it; but they forced him to Clausenburg,
and made him assume the Principality, the Turk also consenting and confirming
him therein.

About this time Matthias, King of Hungary, held a Diet at Cassovia, where
Sigismund Rakoczi, as Prince of Transylvania, did him Fealty, and soon after
resigned the Principality to Gabriel Bathori, He resigns to Bathori.
wherein he showed his great modesty in declining the Sovereignty, and
transfering it to an other, when he was so beloved and honored by the People.

Jesuits wickedness.
Shortly after (by the instigation of the Jesuits) Matthias infringed and
invaded the Hungarians liberties about their Religion; but the Electors of
Saxony, and other Protestant Princes arming themselves in their behalf,
overruled Matthias, whereby they were suffered to live in Peace.

Then did Radulo, the Vayvod of Walachia, refuse Homage to Bathori, whereupon
he raised a very great Army, and it came to a Battle betwixt them, wherein
Bathori was totally routed, and forced to fly into the Mountains. Matthias King
of Hungary, taking advantage of this his overthrow, seized upon Clausenburge,
and some other strong Holds that belonged to Bathori; yet shortly after,
Bathori raising a new Army, beat the Kings General out of his Dominions, and
forced him to hide himself in the Woods of Bohemia, after he had suffered very
great extremities: yet Bethlem Gabor was by the Great Turk made Prince of
Transylvania, which so enraged Bathori, Bathori murdered.
that he committed great ravages amongst the People, and at last being forced
to fly from Clausenburg to Varadine, he was there murdered.

Bethlehem was immediately owned by the Transylvanians, Bethlem Gabor succeeds.
and confirmed by the Great Turk, and Matthias, who was now Emperor, his
Brother Rodulphus being dead, shortly after died also, leaving his Crown to
Ferdinand the second, who the next year, was Crowned King of Hungary, at which
time three Suns appeared in the Heavens, portending the Wars and mischiefs
which shortly after ensued.

Ferdinand, after his Coronation, being excited thereto by the Jesuits, brake
the Articles of Peace made with Botzcai, and recalled the Jesuits in hatred to
the Protestants; Presently after also, the States of Bohemia being wronged by
him in their liberties both Civil, and Religious, Frederick, chosen King of
Bohemia.
conferred the Kingdom upon Frederick, Prince Elector Palatine, the Issue
whereof is so well known to all, that I need say nothing of it.

Anno Christi 1624. Ferdinand Ernestus, the eldest Son of Ferdinand the second,
in his Fathers life time, was Crowned King of Hungary at Ovarum; and at the
same time Bethlehem Gabor married Catherine, the Daughter of John Sigismund,
Marquess of Brandenburgh, at Alba Julia; and 1626, Bethlem advanced with an
Army into Hungary to join with Count Mansfield, and the Duke of Saxon Weymar;
but hearing that forty thousand Tartars, his Confederates, were slain in
Poland, he made peace with Ferdinand, and retreated into Transylvania, and not
long after dyed; Gabor dies
whereby all the places granted to him in Hungary, reverted to the King.

After the Death of Gabor, Rakoczi chosen Prince of Transylvania.
George Rakoczi was made Prince of Transylvania, by the Election of the People,
and confirmed in it by the Turk: At which time the King of Hungary sent
Esterhasius, the Palatine of Hungary, with a great Army to possess himself of
Transylvania: but Rakoczi being now settled, sent an Army into Hungary that met
with Esterhasius and overthrew him, and took several Cities: the Grand Signior
also sent him ten Thousand men in testimony of his affection to him, who wasted
the Country all about yet the Emperor, not willing to fall out with the Turk,
sat still.

Ferdinand de Gratz dies. Jesuits wickedness.
Anno Christi 1636. Ferdinand the second died, and left all his Dominions to
his Son Ferdinand the third, which change, probably, would have brought Peace
to Hungary and Transylvania: but the Jesuits wrought new troubles; and the
Catholic Nobles of Hungary grutched that the Protestants, by the late Wars,
had procured some things in favor of their Religion, and the Lutherans had
built a very beautiful Church in Presburg: The Emperor incensed hereat, sent
to prohibit them, and disallowed his former concessions. The Protestants
hereupon had recourse to Rakoczi, who was offended with the Emperor upon this
account; There was found at Varadin in the Vault of Ladislaus, and Sigismund,
some Treasure, together with a Crown, Scepter, and Jewels, one being a Diamond
of a vast bigness that shone like a Torch, there being a curse added to any
that should presume to meddle with them till some extreme necessity should
require it: These Ferdinand sent for, and Rakoczi refused to deliver them;
Another thing that widened the difference was this; Some Hungarian Nobles
turned Catholics, and others that were such, got Lordships where the
Protestant Religion was professed, and these took upon them to restrain them
from the exercise of their Religion, and took their Churches from them, and
placed Priests in them.

These irregularities Rakoczi complained of to the Emperor; desiring him to
remove them, and to observe those immunities and privileges which he, and the
Estates had confirmed to the Protestants: and whereas the Emperor had caused
three hundred of the Protestant Churches to be shut up, he desired that they
might be restored to them: But the Emperor slighted him, and put him off with
delays: Hereupon Rakoczi proclaimed open War against the Emperor, Rakoczi
proclaims War against the Emperor.
raised an Army of seventy thousand, with which he invaded Hungary, publishing
a Manifesto to justify his proceedings: He took in diverse Castles, and forced
Cassovia to a surrender.

To stop his Progress, the Emperor sent an Army of twenty thousand men under
Count Bucaine, but the Hungarians daily falling to Rakoczi, the other did
little or nothing; In the mean time Rakoczi besieged and took in Tyrnaw, where,
He prospers.
at the request of the Protestant Preacher, he used much clemency to the
Popishs Bishop, and Noblemer. Peace made.
But at last a Peace was concluded betwixt him and the Emperor, wherein seven
Lordships in Hungary were settled upon Rakoczi, ninety Churches were restored to
the Protestants, and the rest of their Privileges were confirmed to them.

Anno Christi 1646, Ferdinand 4th, King of Hunga y. His death.
Ferdinand the fourth in his Fathers life time, was crowned King of Hungary,
and in the year 1648, Prince Rakoczi died, and was succeeded by his young Son
George Rakoczi; and in the year 1653, King Ferdinand the fourth died, having
been Crowned King of the Romans, being but two and twenty years old, leaving
all his Dignities, and Dominions to his Brother Leopold Ignatius.

Anno Christi 1656, the King of Sweden, Charolus Adolphus, having invaded
Poland, and Conquered much of it, invited Prince Rakoczi to his Assistance,
Rakoczi goes into Poland.
who entering into Confederacy with him, raised a great Army, with which he
entered into Poland, where he made great spoils, beating down the Images in
Churches, out of an hatred to the Romish Religion: At last he joined with the
Swede, and both of them besiged Cracovia, which, after a short defense, was
surrendered to them; they destroyed most of the City of Casimer, which stood on
the other side of the Weysel: and in Lituania they took in the strong City of
Biscea. But the King of Denmark at this time falling into some of the Swedes
Countries, and the Duke of Brandenburg also renouncing the Kings Interest, the
King of Sweden was faign to retreat out of Poland to look to his own home, and
thereby Rakoczi was left in the lurch. He is deserted.
The King of Poland in the mean time by his Ambassador at Constantinople,
having bribed some of the Chief Officers, procured a Command from the Great
Turk to Rakoczi to return into his own Country: He had also made a League with
the Emperor, who sent him sixteen thousand men to assist him against the
Transylvanian.

These considerations moved Rakoczi to send to the King of Poland for Peace;
but he returned delatory answers till they had hemmed in the Transylvanians,
that there was no possibility for their escape but by fighting their way
through them; which accordingly they did, His return
and so retired into their own Country.

This same year 1657, died the Emperor Ferdinand the third, Ignatius Leopold
made Emperor.
leaving two Sons behind him, Ignatius Leopoldus, and Charles Joseph; the Elder
succeeded in the Empire, though with much regreat, because he was but seventeen
years old; and by their Golden Bull, and Custom, none should be chosen under
eighteen.

Rakoczi opposed by the Turk.
Prince Rakoczi being returned into his own Country, a Chiaux from the Great
Turk met him, and commanded him to resign his Principality to one Radus; but he
delayed to do it, and sought to strengthen himself by the help of Neighbor
Princes, who yet forsook him, all but the Princes of Moldovia, and Walachia,
But the Turk meeting with troubles at home, suffered him to be quiet for the
present; yet the next year he sent an Army against him through Walachia,
against which the Vayvod opposing himself, was totally routed by the Turks, and
forced with rich Presents, and large promise of Hostility against Rakoczi, to
make his Peace.

Soon after the Bassa of Buda was commanded upon the same service, who marching
into Transylvania attempted the taking of Arad, but the Transylvanian and
Hungarian Forces, being near, took advantage of some confusion amongst the
Turks at their first coming, set upon them, and with their great Guns so
shatered them, that they were forced to fly, and leave their Camp, many of them
perishing in the River Mur. Here were taken some of their Chief Officers; which
so incensed the Great Turk that he threatened to flea the Bassa of Buda unless
he presently brought him the Head of Rakoczi.

Anno Christi 1660, the Turk sent greater Forces into Transylvania, and Prince
Rakoczi encountered them at Hermanstadt, and he behaved himself very Valiantly,
killing seventeen men with his own hands, whereupon the Turks were routed, and
left the Victory to the Transylvanians, about seven Thousand of them being
slain upon the Place; and Prince Rakoczi in their pursuit, received five
wounds, and five days after, being brought to Great Waradin, Rakoczi dies.
he there died.

His death gave great advantage, and encouragment to the Turks, who with
renewed forces so pressed upon the Transylvanians, that they were forced to
betake themselves to their strong holds: whereupon General Souches had order
from Vienna to march into Transylvania, and defend it against the Turks; This
he did, and possessed himself of some strong places. In July this year, the
Turk, with one hundred thousand men, besieged Great Waradin, Waradine besieged.
which was bravely defended by the Governor, Colonel Gaude, a Scotchman, but
in August that Gallant man was slain by an unhappy shot, which so discouraged
the City, that being without hope of relief, they surrendered it upon Terms,
being a passage into Transylvania, Hungary, and Poland.

Rakoczi being dead, Radus Prince of Transylvania.
and his Cousin Radus disliked by the Turk, there was one Barckay that made
himself Prince of Transylvania, and was assisted by the Turk, by which means he
took in some places, pretending that he would resign them to the Emperor,
though it proved otherwise. About this time there appeared a Comet with the
Head toward Transylvania, A Comet.
and the tail toward Dalmatia, which seemed to Portend the great evils and
mischiefs that did ensue.

The right successor of Rakoczi was Remini Janos, who was owned by many of the
Transylvanians, but strongly opposed by Barckay, and the Turks. Yet Anno
Christi 1661, he fought with them at Thassabat, and made a great slaughter of
them; but at last, being oppressed with numbers, he was forced to leave the
Country.

The Emperor perceiving that the Turks had a design upon Hungary, he raised an
Army, sending part of it into Transylvania, and at that time Count Nicholas
Serini raised a strong Fort over against Canisia, or Chanischa, naming it
Serinswar, Serinswar built.
which so provoked the Turk that he demanded that the Fort should be
demolished, that Serini should be punished, and Transylvania left to him: This
made the Christians to understand his meaning and to look to themselves.

The preparations of the Turk.
In the mean time the Turk raised a mighty Army, and provided an answerable
proportion of Victuals, Ammunition, and Artillery; and the Emperor had in
Hungary an Army of thirty eight thousand Germans, whom the Hungarians favored
not by reason of their difference in Religion, so that by October, The Emperors
Army moulders away
through want of accommodations, and by surfeits which they took through
immoderate drinking of Wine, and eating of Fruits, it mouldred almost to
nothing; and being advanced as far as Clausenburg in Transylvania, they were
distressed for want of Victuals and Forage, and almost environed with their
enemies: About this time Barckay fell into disgrace with the Turk, who
preferred Apaffi to be Prince of Transylvania; Apaffi made Prince of
Transylvania.
against whom Remini Janos opposed himself with eight thousand men, but he went
daily to the worst, and the Germans were forced to retreat, which made him
betake himself to places of more security.

Thus things continued till the year 1663, at which time the Turks did not only
invade Transyvania and Hungary, The Turks success in Hungary.
but some of the Emperors Hereditary Countries also, and in July the Grand
Vizier came into Hungary with an Army of above an hundred thousand men, at
least an hundred great Guns, and all other provisions answerable. His first
work was to lay two Bridges over the Danow, one near Gran, and the other near
Parkham; so that it was doubtful whether he would fall upon Newhausel, or upon
Raab; but the continual rains, which caused the Danow to overflow, hindered him
for a time; yet at length he passed over some of his Army at the Bridge near
Parkham, whereupon Count Forgatz, the Governor of Newhausel, with six thousand
men assaulted those that were come over, July 28, but the number being greater
than he expected, and more hastening over to them, he was compassed about with
his enemies, The Imperialists beaten.
and though his Germans and Heyducks fought stoutly, yet being overpowred, most
of them were cut in pieces, himself with some few others getting into
Newhausel: Newhausel taken.
This the Vizier presently besieged, and at length it was surrended to him upon
honorable Conditions: So that September. 26. the Christians marched out being
two thousand and almost five hundred able men, with Arms and four pieces of
Ordinance, the enemy finding in the City, seventy Pieces of Ordinance, and
great store of Arms, Powder, Wine, Meal, and Corn.

About the same time some Tartars, and others, forced away over the River
Wargh, cutting in pieces such Christians as guarded the pass, and so crossing
the Mountains they went into Moravia, Moravia plundered, and Austria.
where they plundered, and burnt Towns and Villages for ten days together, and
then they passed into Austria, where also they made great spoil, and having
laden themselves with Booty, they returned to the Camp at Newhausel.

Then did the Vizer, and the Turks make an attempt upon Serinswar, and another
upon Clausenburg, but at both places they were repulsed: Serini invades the
Turks.
and Count Serini in the mean time with an Army of Croats, and others, made an
incursion into some of the Turks countries, where he did them much harm, and at
his return was made Generalissimo of all the Emperors Forces, then rendevouzed
at Presburg, under their former General Montecuculi: Toward which place the
Vizier now advanced, giving out rumors that he meant to Attaque it. But such had
been the care of Serini in furnishing of it, himself also being in it, that the
Vizier, contenting himself with the taking in of some other Towns and places of
lesser concernment, he made an Honorable retreat, and presently besieged
Niutra, Niutra taken, and other places by the Turk.
a very strong City, not far from Newhausel, which after a while, was
surrendered to him upon Articles: which Victories, and his faithful performance
of Covenants, made way for his successes elsewhere: For Tyrnaw, and some other
Towns opened their Gates to him, upon his promise that they should enjoy their
Religion, and Liberties without disturbance.

Then did he besiege Schinta, a very strong Fortress, but October being almost
gone, and Winter coming on apace, he was forced to raise his siege, and to
provide Winter Quarters for his Army. The Vizier retreats.
He left four thousand men in Newhausel and fifteen hundred in Niutra, besides
ten thousand others to be ready upon all emergencies; and to increase the
danger of the Imperialists, Apaffi, Prince of Transylvania, declared himself an
enemy to them, having a promise from the Great Turk of the Kingdom of Hungary
to be conferred upon him when it is conquered.

Apaffies successes.
Apaffies first design was upon the Mine-Towns, whence they have their Gold:
but that which hindered his proceeedings was this; there were Novigrad, and
Leventz in his way, two very strong Places and well fortified and Garrisoned.
Leventz was first attaqued by him, and though there was nothing wanting for the
securing of the place, yet after a while it was surrendered upon Articles, which
were punctually performed.

From thence he marched to Nevigrad in Upper Hungary, which after a stout, but
short resistance, was surrendered to him: and though some Regiments were sent by
the Emperor to secure the Mine-Towns, yet Apaffi took in Shomnitz, Cremnitz,
and some other of them.

The Emperor himself went from Vienna to Regenspurgh, where he had summoned a
Diet, A Diet at Ratisbone.
to consider with the Princes of Germany how these evils might be prevented,
leaving to Govern in his absence, the Archduke Charles Joseph his Brother, who,
not long after, fell sick and died.

Serini's successes.
In the mean while Apaffi had surrendered to him Zekelkeyt, and Clausenburg,
which strong holds had been held by the Emperor ever since the death of
Rakoczi. The Tartars that were quartered in Hungary, expecting Frosts wherein
they might be enabled to action, the Winter proving open, and mild, the places
and Garrisons wherein they were being overburthened, they began to want
provisions, so that they were forced to disperse themselves for better
accommodation; which advantage Count Serini taking, by the benefit of a sudden
Frost, with an Army of about thirty five thousand, he fell into the enemies
Country in the lower Hungary and Croatia, advancing as far as Esseck, where
there was Bridge near to the conjunction of the Danow with the Dravus, over
which the Turks used to pass from Belgrade, now Greek Weissenburg, into the
Lower Hungary; the Count knowing what disadvantage the breaking down of this
Bridge would be to them in reference to the ensuing Campagnia, notwithstanding
all opposition made by the enemy, he so maimed, and disjoynted it, that part of
it fell into the Dravus: since when they have been very busy in repairing it.

Count Serini having succeeded so well in this enterprise, laid all the Country
wast with fire, and sword, and so returned: Yet in his way, he came by Quinque
Ecclesiae, and summoned it; the Town seemed to be willing to Parlie till they
had drawn some of his forces within the reach of their Cannon, and then let fly
amongst them, at which time many of his men, and some eminent Officers were
slain, which so incensed Serini, that he took the Town by storm, sacked, and
burnt it, Quinque Ecclesiae burnt.
the Soldiers and many others retreating into the Castle; which Serini thought
not fit to besiege, then passing by Zigeth, he fell upon Segess, which he took
by assault, but with the loss of more of his Officers of note; and so by
Canysia (which he durst not adventure upon) his Army being much diminished) he
returned home.

The Description of Transylvania, with a Catalogue of the Vayvods, and Princes
thereof.
TRansylvania is bounded on the East with Moldavia: Transylvania described.
On the West with the Upper Hungary: On the North with Russia Nigra, a Province
of the Kingdom of Poland, from which it is separated by the Carpathian
Mountains: On the South with Rascia, and Walachia.

It took its name from the great Woods lying betwixt it and Hungary, the Latin
Name signifying the Country beyond the Woods. By the Dutch it is called Seber
Burgen, from seven Castles, or strong holds, that were anciently built in it,
to defend the Frontiers.

It is environed round about with high Hills and Woods, It Is strong situation.
as with Walls, so that the passages into it are very difficult; by reason also
of certain Rivers, and Brooks, amongst which there is the River of Alutha,
where there is a strong Castle built, called Roteth, to defend the passage: And
upon the River of Mariscus, there is another Fort, called Brosch.

The Commodities of it.
The soil does naturally abound with Wines, Corn, and Fruit, of which it yielded
such plenty in the time of the Romans, that the Emperor Trajan caused a piece
of money to be coined, which had the Figure of Ceres, holding in one hand a
Cornu-Copia, and in the other a plain Tablet, with this inscription, Abundantia
Daciae. The abundance of Dacia. More particularly, besides the great plenty of
Wheat, and most excellent Wines, it yields great store of Cherries, Damascens,
Malacotoons, Musk-melons, not inferior to those of Italy. As also Centaury
great store, and many other Medecinal Plants. Some Mines of Gold, and Silver
they have, and many more of Iron, Brass, and Copper; and not a few Veins of
Salt, and Sulphur. Of Cattle they have such abundance, that many times large
Oxen are sold for a Floren, or half a Crown a piece. They have also a notable
breed of Horses, which are exceeding swift, whose manes hang down to the
ground: Not to say any thing of that variety of wild Beasts which they have in
their Woods, and Forests; and of all sorts of Fowl, both for food, and
pleasure.

The quality of the People.
The People are much of the same nature with the Hungarians, to whom they have
been of a long time subject, but somewhat more stubborn, and untractable; they
speak the same Language that the Hungarians use, The Sclavonian language.
with some difference in the Dialect only. They were converted at the same
time to the Christian Faith, and have the same forms of Ecclesiastical
Government; and the same variety of Religions. In former times they used to
read as the Jews do, from the right hand to the left: but of late, they conform
herein to the Western Nations, from whom they are generally descended.

Their Original.
It Is evident that the People of this Country are the Progeny of the Saxons by
their Saxon Language, yet in part retained: For we find that Charlemayne, like
a Politic Conqueror, transplanted many of Saxons hither, that thereby he might
weaken their strength at home, and by them fortify the Bounds of his Empire.
There is also a Story cited by Verstigan to confirm it; Which is this,

Halberstade was beyond credit, troubled with Rats, A strange story.
which a Musician, which they called the Peed Piper, undertook for a great Mass
of Money to destroy, which they agreed to. Hereupon he tuned his Pipes, and all
the Rats in the Town dancing after him, were drowned in the next River. This
done, he asked his pay, which they denied him; Whereupon he strikes up a new
fit of mirth, and all the children, both Males, and Females in the Town,
followed him into the Hill Hamelen, which presently closed again. The Parents
miss their children, but could never hear news of them (believe it who pleases)
till now of late some have found them in Transylvania. This mavelous accident
is said to have happened July 22. Anno Christi 1376, Since which time, it is
said, that the People of Halberstade permit not any Drum, Pipe, or other
Instrument to be sounded in that street: and they established a Decree that in
all writings of Contracts, and Bargains, after the Date of our Lord Christ's
Nativity, the date also of this their childrens transmigration should be added
for the remembrance of it.

But though the Dutch or Saxons make up the main Body of the Transylvanians,
yet, having been conquered by the Hungarians, they have received many of their
Colonies amongst them; and in the Northern parts of Transylvania there remain
still some of the old Scythians, whih were planted there by Attila. Out of all
these, The populousness of it.
the Body of this Country is composed so strong and populous that they are able
to raise an Army of ninety thousand men; and actually they did Arm six thousand
Horse, and twelve thousand Foot for the Battle of Keresture; Anno Christi 1596.
being more than all Hungary sent to that service by two thousand.

Chief Towns in Transylvania of the foundation of the Dutch, or Saxons, are; 1.
Hermansted, in Latin, The chief Towns.
Hermanopolis, situate on the River Cibin, so named from one Herman, who was
the Founder of it. It Is little Inferior to Vienna for strength or greatness.
It Is well fortified both by Art, and Nature: for it stands in a Moorish place,
so that the access unto it is very difficult. 2. Cronstad, called in Latin
Corona, by some Brassovia, by others Stephanopolis, which name was given to it
by Stephen King of Hungary, who repaired, and beautified it. It Is situate on
the borders of Wallachia, amongst fruitful Mountains. It Is adorned with a fair
Library, a kind of University, and it is the most noted Empory, or Mart-Town in
all this Country, unto which there is great resort, especially in the time of
their public Fairs, by Turks, Arabians, Greeks, Armenians, Polanders,
Walachians, and other Nations. 3. Bistricium, called by the Dutch Noren: It
receives it is name from the River Bistrice, which runs through it; It Is so
pleasant, and so sweet a Town, that there is no mire or dirt to be seen in it
at any time, or if there be, the People presently cause the River, by stoping
of it, to swell over it is Banks, and so to cleanse the streets. 4. Mediesus
(called by the Dutch, Meduish) so called, quasi Medius Consessus, because it is
situate in the midst of the Country. It Is a Town almost as neat a Bistrice. 5.
Segoswaria, or Schesburg, which stands on the declivity of a Hill. 6. Zabesus,
or Laiz, which was onee the chief Town of the Saxons, but now it is much
decayed. It Is situate in a very deep Valley, well fenced with waters, and those
waters full of Fish. 7. Clausenbourg; called in Latin, Claudionopolis from the
Emperor Claudius the second, who re-edified it. At the first, it was a Colony
of the Saxons, or Dutch only; But of late times the Hungarians coming in as
Strangers, were at last privileged as Citizens, and inhabit it together with
them. The Town is well seated in the midst of a pleasant Plain, encompassed
with a hand some wall, and beautified with Elegant buildings. 8. Alba Julia,
called now Weisenberg. It Is situate on a simall Brook called Oratas, whence it
had it is Name. It Is built on the side of a Hill near the River Maruch, or
Murse: It overlooks a large fruitful Plain. It was heretofore a Bishops See,
and the ordenary Residence of the Prince, or Vayvod of Transylvania: but of
late it has been a Garrison of Hungarian Soldiers, who held it for the
Emperor, as King of Hungary.

The Chief Towns belonging to the Hungarians, The chief Towns belonging to the
Hungarians.
and by them inhabited, are 1. Varadin, much mentioned in the stories of these
later times since the Invasion of the Turks: It Is situate on the Borders of
Hungary. 2. Thorda, built in or near the place, called by Ptolmoy, Salinae,
because of the abundance of Salt Pits which were then about it. 3. Enguedine,
by the Romans called Annium, from a Causey leading to it, which was raised by
one Annius, and from him so named; some fragments whereof are still remaining.
4. Deva, which is remarkable for having a vein of the best Wines about it, not
inferior to those of Venusium in Italy. 6. Zilahi. 7. Gela, of both which,
little is memorable. 8. Millenbach, not far from which, betwixt it, and the
Town of Brass, is a very strong Fortress, commanding a straight, and narrow
passage leading into the Country of Hungary.

In the North part of Transylvania, The Siculi in part of it.
lies the Province called Zacultia, inhabited by the Siculi, or the old brood
of Scythians, brought hither by Attila, when he first conquered this Country.
They are a People which have much in them of the ancient Hunn, and heretofore
had a Language peculiar to themselves; But now they speak the Hungarian
generally, differing only in the Dialect. But though, by the necessity of
Commerce, and co-habitation, they have learned the same Language, yet they
still retain their ancient customs, and are Governed by their own Laws. They
are a Warlike People, and live after the same manner as the Switzers do, being
divided into seven Cantons, each Canton being absolute in and of it self; but
all united with the Transylvanians, and amongst themselves, for the defense of
their Country against the pretention of the German, and Turkish Emperors; and
though they acknowledge some subjection to the Emperor, as King of Hungary, yet
it is but what they list themselves, being anciently privileged from all
Taxes, more than the paying of a Bull for every Household at the Coronation of a
new King; when, and how often so ever it falls out. In former times, no
Nobility, nor any one of better means, and greater eminence than other, was
known amongst them, but of later times some have overtopped others, both in
power, and title, as in other places.

They embrace the Gospel.
Transylvania was Conquered by Stephen, the first King of Hungary, surnamed the
Saint, by whose persuasion, and inducements, they received the Gospel, after
which time, as a member of that Kingdom, in was Governed by Deputies, whom they
called Vayvods of Transylvania (the word Vayvod signifying as much as
Praefectus Militiae, or a Lord Lieutenant) a name, by reason of the greatness
of his place and power, of most authority in that Kingdom.

The Vayvods, and Princes of Transylvania since the time of John Huniades.
Anno Christi 1400. John, surnamed Huniades, was made Vayvod of Transylvania by
Vladislaus the fourth. He was a Valiant, and Renowned Champion, and a great
defender of his Country against the Turks, whom he overthrew in many Battles,
especially in that of Maxons, where he slew of them fifty thousand. He dyed
about the year 1458.

Steven, of the Noble Family of the Battori; He was Vayvod in the time of
Matthias, surnamed Corvinus, Son of Huniades, and King of Hungary, about the
year 1470.

John the second, surnamed de Sepusio was Vayvod of Transylvania, about the
year 1527, and was afterward chosen King of Hungary upon the Death of Lewis
the second; and was thence ejected by Ferdinand of Austria, and restored to his
Kingdom again by Solomon the great Turk. He died Anno Christi 1540.

Americus, Bishop of Veradium, was made Vayvod of Transylvania by John de
Sepusio, when he took the Crown of Hungary. He was treacherously murdered for
not complying with the Turks. Anno Christ 1534.

Stephen Maysat, a Noble, Hungarian but extremely ambitious; Not long after the
Death of Americus, he usurped the Vayvodship, and was confirmed therein, Anno
Christi 1540.

Stephen the third, the Son of John de Sepusio, was made Vayvod of Transylvania
whilst he was an Infant by Solomon the Magnificent. Anno Christi 1541.

Stephen the fourth, surnamed Battori, was made Vayvod by the great Turk; and
afterward, upon the commendation of Amurath the third, was chosen King of
Poland.

Christopher Battori, Brother to Stephen, succeeded him in the Vayvodship, when
his Brother Stephen was chosen King of Poland. He was the first that, leaving
the Title of Vayvod, called himself Prince of Transylvania. 1575.

Sigismund, Son of Christopher Battori, was the next. He was a gallant Prince,
who shook off the Turkish yoke, defeated many of their Armies, and slew some of
their Bassa's. But not being able to hold out against so Potent an Enemy, he
resigned his interest in Transylvania to the Emperor Rodulphus, having for it
in Exchange, the Dukedoms of Oppelen, and Ratibor in Silesia, and an annual
Pension of fifty thousand Joakims. But finding his Pension ill paid, he
reassumed his Princedom and resigned it again to a Kinsman.

Andrew Battori, Cousin to Sigismund; He was slain within the year by the
Vayvod of Walachia. Anno Christi 1599.

Rodulphus, Emperor of Germany, and King of Hungary, was admitted Prince of
Transylvania. Anno Christi 1601. upon the second Resignation of Sigismund: But
his Soldiers behaving themselves very insolently, Sigismund was called back
again, but never was well settled.

Justin Battori, surnamed Botscay, succeeded in the Principality of
Transylvania, upon the Death of Sigismund, by the power of the Turks, by whose
help he cleared the Country of the German Soldiers, Anno Christi 1604.

Gabriel Battori, of the family of the former Princes, succeeded in that
Principality by the favor of Achmet, the Great Turk.

Sigismund Ragotzi, upon the death of Gabriel Battori, was made Prince by the
power, and favor of the Turks. An. Christi 1610.

Bethlem Gabor, by the Great Turk was made Prince of Transylvania; He was a
professed enemy to the House of Austria, and maintained great Wars against it.
Anno Christi 1620.

George Ragotsy, or Rakoczi, succeeded his Father in the Principality of
Transylvania. Anno Christi 1648. He died June the sixth Anno Christi 1660.

George Rakoczi the younger, succeeded him, who died the last Winter. 1663.

Radus was by the Great Turk made Prince of Transylvania in the life time of
Prince Rakoczi, upon some distaste that he took against him for assisting the
King of Sweden in his expedition into Poland. But when Rakoczi was dead, the
Turk laid asides Radus, as unfit for his turn; whereupon one Barkay, a Creature
of the Turks, made himself Prince of Transylvania; whom the Turk Protected, and
supplied with forces against Remini Janos, the right successor of Rakoczi, whom
many of the Transylvanians received for their Prince; This Janos fought Barkay,
and made a great slaughter of his men; But at last being oppressed with the
number of his enemies, he left Transylvania, and retreated to Tockay. Anno
Christi 1661.

Not long after, Barkay falling into disgrace with the Great Turk, he put him
down, and preferred to his place one Apassi, who is now living. Anno Christi
1664.

A brief Description of those Neighboring Countries which bound upon, or are
near unto Hungary, and are contained in this Map.
Sclavonia Described.
Sclavonia described.
SClavonia is bounded on the East with Servia, Macedonia, and Epirus: On the
West with Carniola: On the North with Hungary: On the South with the Adriatic
Sea. It Is so called from the Sclavy, a People of Dalmatia. It contains in
length, from Arfia to the River Drinus, about eight hundred Italian Miles, and
in breadth about three hundred twenty five of the same miles; the longest day
is about fifteen hours and an half in Summer.

The Country abounds with most of those commodities that are found in Italy, to
which it is little inferior. The Commodities of it.
It yields Wine and Oil in great plenty; and has good store of Cattle, and
some wild Beasts: It has also some rich veins of Gold and Silver. The Northern
parts are Mountainous and cold, not yielding Wine, or such fruits as require
heat; yet they yield good Pasturage, and breed a race of Sheep that have young
twice a year, and are shorn four times. The Sea coast yields store of Fish, and
very good Havens.

The People are courageous, proud, stubborn, The quallities of the People
and untractable, of strong bodies and constitutions, able to endure much
drudgery, wherein they are employed by the Venetians. The Christian Faith was
first planted here, about the time of Charles the Bald, Emperor of the West.
Anno Christi 877. Then Religion.
Sueropilus being the first of their Kings that embraced the Gospel. In the
Eastern parts toward Greece they embrace the Religion of the Greek Church; and
in the Western toward Italy, that of the Romish Church; The Mahumetan Religion
in those places which are subjected to the Turks. The Sclavonian Language is
common to them all.

The Chief Mountains in this Country are called Scardonici; The mountains and
rivers
the Chief Rivers are; 1. Varieca, which parts it from Dalmatia; 2. Arsa, that
bounds it on the West; And 3. Drinus, that bounds it on the East. 4. Narento,
not far from Epidaurus. This Country was anciently called Illyria, or
Illyricum; and is subdivided into Windismark, Croatia, Bosnia, Dalmatia, and
Contado Di Zara.

Windismark described.
Windismark is bounded on the East with part of the Lower Hungary; On the West
with Carniola, or Krain: Windismark described.
On the North with the River Dravus; and on the South with Croatia. The
Chiefest Towns in it are; 1. Windisch greits, The chief Towns.
seated on the Dravus. 2. Sagona, near unto the Savus. 3. Gradischa on the
South: And 4. Zagabria, on the also South of the same River. 5. Novigrod, on
the Savus, near to Germany. 6. Petrowya at the foot of the Mountains which are
between the Savus and the Dravus, and divide Hungary from Sclavonia. 7. Sissag,
or Sishaken, situate on the Savus, over against Zagabria, where it receives
the River Zulph, famous for the defeat here given to the Turks, Anno Christi
1593. who hoped by the Conquest hereof, to open a free passage for themselves
into Germany; for which end they sat down before it with a great Army; but the
Town held it out gallantly till it was relieved by the Germans, who slew of the
Turks eight thousand in the place, and most of the rest were drowned in the
Savus, as they fled hastily from the Conquering Sword.

This Province is much of it under the House of Austria, as Kings of Hungary,
to which Crown it belongs, but the North, and East parts of it, now groan under
the yoke of the Turk.

Croatia described.
Croatia described.
Croatia is bounded on the North with Windismark, from which its parted by the
River Vna, or Wana; On the East with Bosnia; On the South with Liburnia, or
Contado di Zara: On the West with Carniola; the Country for the most part is
cold, and mountainous, yet resonably fruitful, having necessary provisions for
the life of man, and would yield far more profit to the Inhabitants were it not
for the ill neighborhood of the Turk, to whose Tyranny, and oppressions it is
enthralled; the People are good Soldiers, and are called Crabats.

The chief Towns.
The Chief Towns in it are; 1. Masch, or Mosth, bordering upon Germany. 2.
Ostrowits, a strong Fort on the same Frontire. 3. Wihits, by the Dutch called
Bigihen, the Chief Town of the Country, standing like an Island in the River
Vna, and strongly fortified by Art; yet was it taken by the Turks. Anno Christi
1591. 4 Zeng. 5. Wackat. 6. Tarnow. 7. Modrisch. Part of this Country is held
by the House of Austria, and the other Part by the Turks.

Bosnia described.
Bosnia described.
Bosnia is bounded on the East with Servia; On the West with Croatia; On the
North with the River Savus; On the East with the Lower Hungary; and on the
South with Dalmatia. The chief Towns.
The chiefest Towns in it are; 1. Jaitza or Jaziga, situate on the top of an
high Hill, the bottom whereof is almost compassed with two Rivers, which there
uniting, pass into the Savus. The Town, by reason of the steepness of the Hill,
the unfoardableness of the River, and the inaccessible Castle, is counted
impregnable; 2. Warbasoni, the Chief Town of the Country, but unwalled. 3.
Cazach. 4. Schwanica. 5. Dorobiza, the first Town taken by Mahomet the Great in
his Conquest of this Kingdom. 6. Clyssa; This Country did formerly belong to
the Crown of Hungary; till it was surprised by the Turks, Anno Christi 1464.

Dalmatia described.
Dalmatia, Dalmatia described.
is bounded on the East with Albania, from which it is parted by the River
Driso; On the East with Variecha, which divides it from Liburnia: On the North
with Bosnia, and on the South with the Adriatic Sea.

Places of most note in it are: 1. Sebenic, The chief Towns.
on the Sea shore. 2. Salona. 3. Spalato, a Sea Town, and an Archbishops See;
Of this See was Marcus Antonius de Dominis, who seeming to loathe the Romish
Superstition, fled into England, Anno Christi 1618, where he found favorable
intertainment; and having here, both by Preaching, and writing, labored to
overthrow the Church of Rome, yet Anno Christi 1622, he declared himself to be
of another mind, and returning again to Rome, he wrote very reproachfully of
the Church of England; yet it seems, they durst not trust him, but imprisoned
him in the Castle of St Angelo, where he died, and his dead body they burnt to
ashes. 4. Almissa, situated on a high Rock, and defended with an impregnable
Castle. 5. Stagno, which stands upon the Point of a long and spacious
Chersonese, not far from which, the River Narento falls into the Adriatic Sea.
6. Castle Novo, a strong Fortress within the Gulf Catharo, now in the
possession of the Turks. 7. Antibari, on the Eastern side of the Bay, an
Archbishop See, but now in the hands of the Turks. 8. Catharo, on the same side
of the Bay; A strong hold of the Venetians against the Turks; It gives
denomination to the Bay, now called Golpho de Catharo. 9. Deleigno. 10.
Scutari, more within Land, founded on a steep Rock; It resisted for a year, the
whole power of Mahomet the second, that battered it continually with seventy
pieces of Ordinance, whereof some of them carried a Bullet of twelve hundred
weight, and at last was taken by the Turks, Anno Christi 1578. Not far from
this Town is the great Lake of Scutari, an hundred and thirty miles in compass,
environed on all sides with Mountains; but only on the North, out of which
Issues the River Driana, which parting Sclavonia from Macedonia, and Servia,
runs into the Savus. 11. Alesio, the furthest Town of all Dalmatia toward
Greece; where the famous Scanderbeg was buried. 12. Medon, where the Emperor
Dioclesian was born. 13. Dalminium, once the Metropolis of this Country,
situate on the River Drinus.

Betwixt the Chersonese of Staguo, and the Gulf of Catharo stands the Town,
and Territory of Ragusi, Coverned by their own Laws, and Magistrates, as a free
Commonwealth, paying only to the Turk fourteen thousand Zechines yearly for a
Tribute, and as much in Presents, for which they are discharged of all customs,
and impositions within his Dominions; It has a commodious Port; the Town is
well built, fortified with Walls, and a strong Castle. It Is an Archbishop See,
and is made rich by Marchandising.

Dacia described.
Dacia described.
Dacia is bounded on the East with the Euxine Sea, and some part of Thrace; On
the West with Hungary and Sclavonia; on the North with Podolia, and some parts
of Poland; and on the South with the rest of Thracia, and Macedonia: it lies on
both sides of the Danow, frontiring all along upon the Upper, and Lower
Hungary, and part of Sclavonia: It contains in it these Provinces; 1.
Transylvania before described. 2. Moldovia. 3. Walachia. 4. Rascia. 5. Servia.
6. Bulgaria; the first four are on the North side of the Danow; the two last on
the South thereof. Of these in order,

Moldovia described.
Moldovia described. The Comdities.
Moldavia is bounded on the East with the Sea; on the West with Transylvania;
On the North with the River Niester; and on the South with Walachia. It Is
fruitful in Corn, Wine, Grass, and Wood; It Is most used for Pasturage, wanting
People to till it: It breeds store of Beef and Mutton, whereof it send much
abroad into other Countries. The Port Towns are full of Armenians, Jews,
Hungarians, and Ragusian Merchants, the Country is almost round, the Diamiter
near three hundred English miles. Its under the Turk.

Walachia described.
Walachia Walachia described.
is bounded on the East with Moldovia, and a branch of Ister; On the West with
Rascia; On the North with Transylvania and some parts of Moldavia; and on the
South wholly with the Danow that parts it from Servia, and Bulgary. It Is in
length five hundred miles, and in breadth an hundred and twenty. For the most
part it is plain, The commodities.
and fertile, abounding with Cattle and an excellent breed of Horses; Has some
Mines of Gold, Silver, and Iron; Saltpits, and all things necessary for the
life of man; They receive their Vayvods from the Great Turk.

The other Provinces beforementioned, not touching upon Hungary, nor contained
in this Map, I shall say nothing of them.

Austria described.
Austria Austria described.
has on the East, Hungary, from which it is parted by the River Rab; On the
West Bavaria; On the North Bohemia; On the West Teya, that separates it from
Moravia, and on the South Styria, or Steirmark; The commodities.
The air is generally healthful, and the earth fruitful, yielding a plentiful
increase without soiling, and so easy of tillage, that on the North side of
the Danow, they plow with one Horse. It Is plentiful of Grain and Wine; yields
great store of excellent Safforn, and some salt. It Is divided by the River
Danow into the Upper, and Lower Austria.

The Chief Towns in the Upper Austria are; 1. Gmund, The chief Towns.
seated on a Lake called Gemunder See, bordering on Bavaria. 2. Lints, seated
on the confluence of the River Draun with the Danow. 3. Walkenstein on the Ens,
near Steirmark. 4. Ens, on the fall of that River into the Danow. 5. Waldhoven,
near the head of the River Ips. 6. Ips, seated on the River so called. 7.
Newful, on a great Lake so named. 8. Wels, on the Danow. 9. Haimburg, on the
confluence of the Danow and the River Mark, where grows some Ginger. 10.
Newstat, built of late. 11. Vienna, Vienna described.
seated on the Bank of the Danow, well stored which private and Public
Buildings, each house having great store of Cellaredge; The streets are
generally spacious, and well paved, clean and sweet even in Winter. It Is fenced
with a mighty wall, and very deep ditches on all parts, and many Bulwarks,
Towers, and Ramparts; Esteemed the strongest hold in Christendom against the
Turks. Anno Christi 1526, it gave a famous repulse to them, at what time
Solomon the Magnificent besieged it with two hundred thousand men; But by the
valor of Frederick the second, Prince Elector Palatine, and other Princes, he
was compelled to retire with the loss of eighty thousand men. It Is the usual
residence of the German Emperors; It was made a University Anno Christi 1356.
It Is adorned with an Episcopal See, many Magnificent Churches, and stately
Monasteries; with a sumptuous, and Princely Palace. In the Lower Austria there
are few Towns of any note.

Stiermark described.
Stiermark described.
Stiria, or Stiermark is bounded on the North with Austria; on the South with
Carinthia; On the East with Hungary; and on the West with Carniola. It extends
in length an hundred and ten miles, and in breadth not above sixty. The whole
Country is Mountainous and Hilly by reason of the branches of their
neighboring Alps, and rich only in Minerals.

The chief Towns.
The Chief Towns in it, are: 1. Grats, seated upon the River Mur. A Town once
full of Protestants, who could not be forced from the free exercise of
Religion, till the year 1598, in which Margaret, Sister to Ferdinand de Gratz,
was by the Citizens Nobly entertained, with whom entered so many Soldiers, as
overpowred the City, and fourteen Protestant Ministers were presently banished.
2. Rachelspurg. 3. Pruck, both situate on the Mur. 4. Stechaw, an Episcopal
See, seated on the Dravus. 5. Petaw, standing somewhat higher on the Dravus, 6.
Lamboch, on the Dravus also. 7. Veitisperg, on the River Kainach. 8. Cely. 9.
Cainisia, a well fortified Town, and the strongest Bulwork in this Country
against the Turk.

Carinthia described.
Carinthia, Carinthia described.
by the Dutch called Karnten, which is bounded on the East with Stiermark, and
the River Levandt: On the West with the District of Saltzburg, and the River
Saltzach; On the North with Austria; and on the South with Carniola, and the
River Dravus, It Is situate in the worst part of the Alps, and is poor and
barren, except only in Minerals; extending all along the Dravus for a hundred
English miles in length, and forty seven in breadth, betwixt that River, and
the Mur, by which it is bounded.

The chief Towns The chief Towns.
in it are. 1. St Veit, situate at the meeting of the Glan, and the Winies,
adorned with a spacious marketplace, and a beautiful Conduit. 2. Vittach,
seated on the Dravus in a fruitful Valley, encompassed about with Rocks; the
Houses are adorned on the outside with painted Sories, very delightful to
behold. 3. Gurch, a small Town, but an Episcopal See. 4. Clangfoot, on the Lake
called Werd-Zee, a well senced place. 5. Wolsperg, on the Lavandt, near to
Steirmark. 6. Lavamundt, an Episcopal See on the same border, situate where
that River falls into the Dravus. 7. Freisach, a very ancient Town, etc.

Bavaria described.
Bavaria, Bavaria described.
is bounded on the East with Austria; On the West with the River Lech, which
parts it from Schawben; On the North with the Upper Palatinate; and on the
South with Tirol, and Carinthia. It Is divided into three Parts. 1. The Higher,
lying toward the Alps of Tirol. 2. The Lower, extending all along the Bank of
the Danow. 3. The commodities.
The District of Saltzburg, situate betwixt the Inn, and Austria: all three
being much overspread with Woods and Forests, the remainders of the once
famous Hercinian Forest; The Higher lying toward the Alps, is cold and
barren; the Lower is more fruitful and better planted. All have great store of
Timber for building, and of fuel for the fire; and multitudes of Swine are sed
with Mast in the Woods.

The chief Towns.
The principal Cities in the Higher Bavaria, are, 1. Munchen, the Dukes seat,
standing on the River Iser, in a very sweet, and pleasant foil, amongst Ponds
and Groves, daintily interlaced with pretty Rivulets, and enriched with
fruitful Gardens; that of the Dukes being hardly to be Paralleld: It Is a large
and Populous City, adorned with many specious Public Buildings, as Churches,
Turrets, Libraries, the Senate House, or Guild Hall, and Marketplace of rare
and excellent Structure. Amongst which is a Library in the Dukes Palace,
wherein are about eleven thousand Volumes, most of them Manuscripts. This City
was made by Maximilian the late Duke, the receptacle for all the spoils which
he got in his German Wars: So that when the Town was taken by Gustavus
Adolphus, King of Sweden, he found in it an hundred and forty Brass pieces of
Ordnance, in one of which, he had thirty thousand Crowns of Gold. 2. Landsberg,
upon the Leck, near the Alps of Tirol; once a strong City, but dismantled by
the King of Sweden. 3. Mertenwald, a beautiful Town, seated near the Alps. 4.
Fridberg, a well fortified Town.

In the Lower Bavaria these places are of most note; 1. Rain, seated on the
Leck, near to the place where it falls into the Danow; Memorable for the fight
between the King of Sweden, and Bavarians, when the said King passed his forces
over that River, in which John Earl of Tilly received that wound whereof he
died shortly after at Ingolstad. 2. Newburg upon the Danow, not far from the
Rain; the first Town in Bavaria, taken in by the Swedes after the former fight.
3. Ingolstad, made a University, Anno Christi 1410 A place so strongly
fortified both by Art and Nature, that it seems impregnable: Here the King of
Sweden found a check to his proceedings, being forced to raise his Siege, and
follow other enterprises. 4. Regensberg, or Ratisbone, on the Danow also, where
the late Diet was held; It Is a fair, rich, and populous City, beautified with
Multitudes of Churches, and Monasteries, made of late the ordinary place for
the General Diets of the Empire. It Is an Imperial City, but was unexpectedly
sieized on by the Duke of Bavaria when the Swedes first got footing in his
Dominions, and was held by him with a very strong Garrison after the loss of
Munchen, till at last it was won from him by the Swedes, Anno Christi 1633. 5.
Passaw, seated on the Danow where it meets with the Inn, and the Ils, by which
it is divided into three Towns, Passaw, Innstade, and Illstade. A rich City, and
Episcopal See. A place famous for the many meetings of the German Princes,
especially for that, Anno Christi 1552, wherein it was agreed, that, all
quarrels laid aside, the Protestants should enjoy the free exercise of their
Religion. 6. Frisnig, situate on the rising of a fine round Hill, near the
River Ambra. An Episcopal See; One of the Bishops was Otho Frigensis, a good
Historian. 7. Landshut, upon the River Isar in the richest, and most pleasant
part of all Bavaria; A beautiful City, adorned with a Church of most curious
building, and a magnificent Palace for the use of the Duke. 8. Freistet, the
only Imperial Town, except Regensburg in all this Dukedom.

Saltzburg described.
The Bishopric, or District of Saltzburg Saltzburg described.
extends from the Inn toward the confines of Austria; It Is a Rocky, dry, and
barren Country, excepting only a few Valleys, being seated in the midst of the
Julian Alps. The principal Town is Saltzburg, seated in the River Saltzach; The
chief Towns.
It Is a City strongly situate amongst those Mountains, and beautiful; and an
Archbishops See; when Luther first endeavored a Reformation, the Bishop hereof
(Mattheus Langius) confessed that the Mass had it is faults, and the Court of
Rome was much corrupted, and the vicious Lives of Priests and Friars fit to be
reformed, Sed quod Misellus Monachus omnia reformet, id non esse tolerabile:
But that such a sorry fellow as Luther should attempt the Reformation, that, by
no means was to be endured. 2. Newkirch, on the same River, and near the Head
thereof. 3. Rotenburg, on the East side of the Inn, bordering on Bavaria. 4.
Traunshaim, upon the River Traun. 5. Wildesmet, one of the farthest Northward;
and 6. Bishops-staffe, one of the most Southern Towns in all this Tract.

Maximilian, the late Duke of Bavaria, out of his zeal to Popery, sided with
Ferdinand the second, Emperor of Germany, in his Wars, Anno Christi 1620, and
was General of his Armies against Frederick, Count Elector Palatine, chosen
King of Bohemia: In which, having done great service to the Imperial, and Roman
interest, he was by the said Ferdinand invested in the Upper Palatinate,
together with the Electoral dignity, which at first was conferred upon him but
for his life: yet did the Electors of Menz, Saxony, and Brandenburg then
Protest against it. But afterward in a Diet at Prague, Anno Christi 1628, the
Electorship was settled upon him and his Heirs for ever, wherein he was also
confirmed in the Treaty of Munster, and the Palatine was made an eighth Elector.

The Kingdom of Bohemia described.
Bohemia dscribed.
Bohemia is compassed about with Woody Mountains, sometimes part of the
Hircinian Forest: It Is bounded on the East with Moravia; On the West with the
Upper Palatinate, and Voitland: On the North with Misnia, Lusatia, and some
part of Silesia: On the South with Parts of Bavaria, and Austria. It contains
in compass about five hundred and fifty English Miles.

The Commodities.
The Soil is indifferently fruitful, and enriched with Mines of all sorts, but
Gold; Tin they have in good plenty, which was first found out there, by a
Cornish man, banished out of England, Anno Christi 1240. They have great store
of Wood, and in some of their Forests, a Beast called a Lomie, which has a
Bladder under it is neck full of scalding water, with which, when he is hunted,
he so torments the Dogs, that he easily escapes them; of Corn they have
sufficient, but no Wine, the air being sharp and piercing; It yields store of
exellent Safforn.

The Rivers.
The principal Rivers are; 1. The Elb, or Albis, having it is Spring here. 2.
Egra. 3. The Muldaw; and 4. The Warts, which three last, empty themselves into
the Elb, which runs through the midst of the Country.

The best Captain.
The famousest Captain was Zisca, who in eleven Battails fought against the Pope
and his Confederates in the defense of the Hussites; In all which, he
prevailed, and went away victorious; Insomuch as at his Death, he willed the
Bohemians to flea him, and make a Drum of his skin, the sound whereof, would
drive away their enemies.

The best Scholars they had, The best Scholars.
were John Huss, and Jerome of Prague; both burnt at the Council of Constance;
Anno Christi 1414. They learned their Doctrine from the Books of Wickliff,
brought thither by a young Scholar who had been a Student in Oxford.

Towns of most note in Bohemia, are, 1. Budweis, The chief Towns.
toward Austria. 2. August, near the head of the Elb. 3. Tabor, a strong Town
built by Zisca to be a place of retreat for his Hussites, thence called
Taborites. 4. Jaromir. 5. Molmuck, both upon the Elb. 6. Littomissel, a Bishops
See, bordering upon Moravia. 7. Pilsen, the last Town taken by the Imperialists
in the War about the Crown, betrayed to Tilly for money by some of Count
Manfields Soldiers in his absence. 8. Elbogen, situated on the River Egra,
much esteemed for it is Baths. 9. Egra, upon the same River; A strong Town upon
the borders of the Upper Palatinate: It;s a large City of three miles Compass;
having a sweet air, elegant buildings, a pleasant site, and a rich Soil:
Superior in these things to Prague it self; 10. Prague, Prague described.
the Metropolis of the Kingdom, seated in the midst thereof, upon the River
Mulda; It consists of four several Towns, each of which has it is several
Customs, Laws, and Magistrates: The principal is called the Old Town, adorned
with goodly Buildings, a spacious Marketplace, and a stately Counsel-house.
The second is called the New Town, separated from the former by a deep and wide
Ditch; The third is called the Little Town, divided from the Old by the River
Mulda, joined to it by a beautiful Bridge, consisting of twenty four Arches;
and in this part is the Hill Rachine, on the sides whereof are many fair and
stately buildings belonging to the Nobility: and over them is a strong Castle,
and Palace for the Kings place of residence: The fourth Town is that of the
Jews, wherein they have five Synagogues, and live after their own Law; The
whole City is rather large than fair, the streets in Winter dirty, and yielding
an ill smell in Summer; and it is but a weak place. In it is a University.

Near to it was fought that Battle between the Duke of Bavaria, and Bucquoy for
the Emperor Ferdinand the second, on the one side, with fifty thousand men, and
Frederick, newly Elected King of Bohemia, and the Prince of Anhalt, and Count
Thurne, with thirty thousand men on the other side, wherein the Imperialists
prevailed; the young Prince of Anhalt, Thurne, Saxon Weimar, and many others
were taken Prisoners, the Kings Ordinance surprised, and Prague forced to yield
to the Conquerers, and the King and Queen of Bohemia were driven presently to
fly into Silesia.

Moravia described.
Moravia described.
Moravia is bounded on the East with Hungary; On the West with Bohemia; On the
North with Silesia: and on the South with the Lower Austria, and the River
Teja. It Is the most fruitful place for Corn in all Germany, and has much
Frankincense, which (as other does) comes not out of Trees, but grows out of
the Earth.

The chief Towns.
Places of most note in it, are, 1. Olmunts, on the River Mark, wherein is a
small University. 2. Brinn, on the River Schwats, the seat of the ancient
Marquesses; and diverse others about which there is nothing memorable. In this
Country near Silesia, is the Springhead of the River Odera.

Silesia described.
Silesia described.
Silesia, called by the Dutch Schlesi, is bounded on the East with Poland; On
the West with Lusatia; On the North with Brandenburg, and on the South with
Moravia. It Is wholly encompassed with Mountains except on the North, which lets
in a sharp air upon them; and the Midland is full of Woods.

The chief Towns.
The Chief Cities are; 1. Jagendorse. 2. Munsterberg. 3. Glatz; the last Town
that held out for King Frederick. 4. Glogaw, a strong Town on the River Odera.
5. Niesse, on a River so named, a Bishops See. 6. Breslaw, in Latin,
Vratislavia, a Bishops See, on the River Odera: It Is well built, populous, and
well contrived with open and even streets. 7. Oppolen, upon the Odera, well
fortified both by Art and Nature, having a strong Castle in it, etc.

The Arms of Hungary are Barre-wise of eight pieces, Gules, and Argent.

A famous story.
About the year 1600, Ferdinand de Gratz, who was afterward Emperor, was
Governor of Steirmark, Carinthia, and Carniola; He married Mariana, the
daughter of William, Duke of Bavaria, which Lady was such a Jesuited Papist,
that she would not enter into the limits of his Dominions until they were
purged of Here ie, and Heretics (as she called them) and till the Liberties
granted to those of the Augustine Confession were taken away, which
accordingly, the Archduke (by the persuasion of the Jesuits) did abrogate, and
by Oath obliged himself to the Pope, that he would severely prosecute all the
Protestants which were within his Dominions; Papish cruelty, and inhumanity.
and accordingly he either banished them, or Plundered, and Murdered them,
which was prosecuted with such cruelty and inhumanity by his Popish Agents,
that they blew up their very Churches with Gunpowder, and raged against the
very bones of the Dead, not suffering them to lie quietly in their graves
(which are common and allowed to all men) insomuch as what the Turks had
spared, was not spared by them. At the demolishing of their Churches in Gratz,
they dug up the Body of William Zimmerman, an eminent Protestant Minister of
that place, and threw it into the River Mur.

Against these outrages the Protestants pleaded the Treaty at Passaw, and
challenged the Oath and Faith plighted to them by this Archduke himself, by
which (in the year 1581) he confirmed his Fathers agreement with the States,
during which space of above eighteen years, he had received from them the Sum
of nine hundred thousand Florens of the Rhine, is the price of their Liberty of
Conscience; yet nothing would prevail to stop his violent proceedings against
them.

But Ferdinands success was answerable to this Injustice; For about this time
he was engaged in the siege of Canysia, held by the Turks, wherein he was
assisted by Aldobrand, the Popes Legate, with his Italian Forces; and by the
advice of Sigismund, Count of Thurne, there were none suffered to be listed in
their Army but Roman Catholics, lest the presence of any Protestants should
cause the enterprise to miscarry. The Governor of Canysia at this time, was
Hasanes, who with eight hundred men, and as many more from Zigeth, and Buda,
that through the negligence of Orphus Gailonius, Ferdinands General of the
Ordinance, gat into the City, he defended it resolutely. This Orphus whilst he
was busy in filling the ditches with wood from the adjoining Forest, was shot
with a Culverin bullet, and killed. The Turks made frequent, and vigorous
Sallies wherein they killed many; and though the Emperor Matthias sent six
thousand men to assist and animate his Cousin, yet was the Siege spun out till
Winter came, which with Frosts and Storms, enforced them to leave their Station
(a thousand Horsemen being frozen to Death in one night:) They were also worn
out with Snow, Hunger, Weariness, and Watching in attending the Active and
Inductrious Enemy, so that they were faign with dishonor to raise their Siege,
and that in such have that they left all their Ordinance for a prey to the
Turks, who presently after their departure, slew all their sick, and wounded
Soldiers that they left in their Camp; and thus it pleased God to preserve the
Protestants, whom they would not admit into their Army, and the blow fell upon
them, who were the Persecutors of them.

FINIS.
NEWLY EXTANT KNOWLEDGE and PRACTICE, Or, a Plain discourse of the chief things
necessary to be KNOWN, BELIEVED, and PRACTICED, in Order to SALVATION; Very
useful for Private Families; By Samuel Cradock; Sold by William Miller, at the
Gilded Acorn in St Paul's Churchyard.


