A TRACTAT OF THE Universal Panacaea Of SOUL and BODY.

Published by William Park, Hermetick Philos. and Physician.

In him was life, and the Life was the light of men; and the light shines in
darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not,

John. 1.4, 5. LONDON Printed in the Year, 1665.

THE DEDICATORY.
TO them that are Elected of God, and Born of Nature.

Supposita.
1. GOd is Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity.

2. God is all things possible and existent.

3. All things are in God, as Rays in their Center.

4. The reflection of Gods Image, in speculo trinitatis, was the beginning of
the Creation.

Axiomata of the Creation and Harmony of the World.
1. THe Image emanating from God, is the first matter of all things: The first
termination whereof constituted the Circle of Intelligence; The second
termination whereof constituted the Circle of Souls; The third termination
whereof constituted the Circle of Nature; The fourth termination whereof
constituted the Circle of Metals.

2. By the Reflection, each Circle was impregnated according to their distance
from their Center: viz. The Circle of Intelligence with Forms; The Circle of
Souls with Ideas; The Circle of Nature with the Seminal Reasons; The Circle of
Matter with Material Forms.

3. These Circles being Univocal and Homogeneous, are linked together by the
Golden Chain of Unity, Love, and Harmony: viz. The Intelligences, with Nature;
the Souls, with the Quintessence; Nature, with Matter, as with a Vehicle.

4. The Intelligences are defined both to the power and knowledge: for they
cannot operate any thing without the command of God.

1. Proposition.
GOd operateth; by the communication of his Velle or Decree, to the first
matter of Creation; the first matter, to the Intelligence; the Intelligence, to
the Soul; the Soul, to Nature; Nature, to Matter; does communicate the Velle
Dei.

1. Demonstration.
GOd communicated his Decree of the Creation of Adam, to the first Matter; the
first Matter, to the Determinate Intelligence; the Intelligence, to the
Determinate Soul; the Soul, to Nature; Nature, to Matter.

These being concentrated by the Velle, or Decree of God, into one Microcosm;
hence flows the Creation of Adam.

2. Demonstration.
IN the Generation of Eve, God communicated his Decree of her Generation to the
first Matter; the first Matter, to the Intelligence of Adam; the Intelligence,
to the Soul; the Soul, to the Fancy; the Fancy, to the Animal, Vital, and
Natural Spirits.

The Animal, Vital, and Natural Spirits, being concentrated and fermented in
the Spermatick Vesskials, by the Phantasma of the Fancy Sigilled upon them.

From the Spirits thus concentrated and fermented, by the Image of God in them;
resulted the Generation of Evc. The Generation of our Savior was after this
manner, as has been demonstrated.

3. Demonstration.
IN the Conception of Christ', the Essence of God united with the humane Nature
of Christ, by Concentration of the first matter of Creation, in humane Nature:
Therefore Christ is Light and Life, the Light that illuminateth every one that
comes into the world; the Life that gives Life, and reviveth all Mankind:
from him we live, move, and have our being. The Universal Panacaea, or Elixer
that cures all by the water of Regeneration, and fire of the Spirit: The
Philosophers Stone, who transmuteth the Signature of the Spirit of the
Universe, and liberats the Image of God, or Spirit of Man from Darkness and
Captivity, into the glorious light of liberty.

2. Proposition.
LVcifer and his Concomitants desiring to be equal with God, united themselves
with the first Matter or Image of God in the second, viz. Light, whereby they
might have absolute power over Matters.

4. Demonstration.
LVcifer and his Concomitants being in Fermentation, through the desire of Union
with the first Matter, communicated the Signature thereof to Matter, by the
Vihicle of Nature. Matter being thus fermented with the Signature, became
pregnant; Matter being thus conceived, God therefore eclipsed the Conception,
whereupon followed Abortion.

Lucifer and his Concomitants being eclipsed, in the Conception of the glorious
light, Sigilled the circumference of Nature, viz. the Elementa Elementata, and
Principia Principiata, with the Signature of the desire of Dominion each over
another: Hence follows contention and contrariety, transmutation of each into
another, corruption and death.

Having thus Sigilled the Elementa Elementata, and Principia Principiata, they
concentred and fermented them in the sight of Eve; whereby she saw the forms of
all things, in a Globous Figure: with the which aspect, her Fancy being
fassinated, she was attracted. Her Fancy being thus attracted, with the Species
of the object represented, communicated the Species thereof to the Soul, and to
the Animal, Vital, and Natural Spirits, and consequenly to the whole Body. The
Union thereof was multiplied by the Efflux and Reflux of the Celestial Body: by
the Efflux to matter Sigilled, with the Signature of Envy, and emulation
against God, and against his Image.

By the Reflux from Matter, thereby the Spirit of Man is more and more
transmuted according to the Fermentation and Exaltation of the Fancy from Light
into Darkness; from Union and Communion with God, into Union and Communion with
the Spirit of the Universe.

Eve being thus fassinated, did fassinate Adam by Union of her Animal, Vital,
and Natural Spirits, (transpiring and exhaling through the pores of the body)
being Sigilled with Adams Spirit: The Spirits being thus United, Sigilled the
Spirits of Adam; the Spirits, the Fancy; the Fancy, the Soul: hence Diseases,
Death, Damnation.

2. Proposition.
THe Primitive Origin of Diseases, is the Union of the Spirit of Man with the
Spirit of the World.

The second Cause is the Signature of Emulation, Sigilled in Humane Nature. As
the Cause is twofold, so the Cure.

First Cure is by Dissolution of the Union; The second is by Transmutation of
the Signature.

5. Demonstration.
THe Union of the Spirit of God, is the Dissolution or Disunion of the Spirit
of the Universe: As the Degree of Union, so is the Degree of Dissolution; a
total Union of the Spirit of Man with the Spirit of God, is a total Dissolution
or Liberation from the Spirit of the Universe. A total Union is Glory and
Heaven. The Multiplication of the Union is by the continual reflection of the
Spirit of Man upon God in Christ.

The means are the Holy Scriptures, Faith, Love, Patience, Repentance,
Contrition of Spirit, Humility, Self-denial, Prayer in Spirit and Truth,
Continence, Temperance.

The 2d. part of the Demonstration.
TRansmutation of the Signature is effected immediately by Prayer in Faith,
working by Love.

Transmutation of the Signature is mediately by Signature, Sigils of
Constellations, characters of Planets, and of Angels, Numbers, Words, etc.
Concerning which I have written in a Book, called Luxe Tenebris, which I intend
shortly to put to the Press; therefore I shall be Brief in this Treatise.

The Signatures are in Animals, Vegitables, Mettallick Bodies, and Metals.
Amongst Animals Man has the chiefest Signature in his Blood: Amongst
Vegetables the Quintessence of Saffron; of the Berries of Juniper, of the Seeds
of Rue, (Juniper and Rue having the signature of the Cross) of the Quintessence
of Cedar of Wine, etc.

Amongst Mettalick Bodies and Metals preparations made out of the Minera of
Mercury and Antimony, Venus, Luna, Sol, have the principallest signature.

Numbers have Efficacy and Energy.
INstance he that has the Number seven, in his Nativity; can by the signature
thereof, cure diseases universally, if it be fortified and multiplied by a
continual reflection upon God: with the which Signature I was dignified in my
Nativity; and thereby have transmuted with admirable success, the Signature of
the Kings Evil, Epilepsy, Podagra, etc. and have removed the occasional matter
with Elixar and Balsam: with Elixars out of Mettallick bodies, Metals, and out
of the Universal spirit incorporated and fixed in Corals, Pearls, Saltpeter,
Vitriol, etc.

With Balsam made out of the mineral Sulphur, and out of vegetable Sulphur;
viz. by the coagulation of the Oil with the Volatile Salt: out of Animal
Sulphur by putrefaction, separation of the principles, and conjunction and
union of them again.

Demonstrations and Preparations of Mettallick bodies and Metals, and of the
Spirit of the Universe incorporated.
TAke the King and the Queen and put them in the Wedlock bed; then after forty
days the Queen shall conceive with a Royal Child; (the conception being
initiated) the Embrion is to be nourished with Virgins Milk until the full
perfection thereof.

Take Gold, and distill it seven times over the retort, with the menstruum
mundi; the Gold being thus volatized by distillation, is to be sublimed with
three parts of Mercury to one of Gold, until all the Gold be sublimed.

The Gold being thus sublimed with Mercury, then should it be calcined with a
Philosophical calcination. The Mercury with the Gold, being thus calcined, then
the bodies of both are pre-disposed for the Extraction of the tincture with the
menstruum mundi. Hence ye shall have the medicine, whose Virtues and Properties
will celebrate it self.

Take Mettallick Bodies, Metals and Spirit of the Universe incorporated, and
elevate them unto their Heaven; then circulate them until they have traced the
seven spears of the Planets, then reduce them into their Virgin Earth: whence
you have a Medicine and Elixar (of each of the premised) curing all diseases
Corolary, Mercury and Antimony being prepared according to their ordinary
manner of preparation, are at the best exalted Poison, until they be perfectly
fixed, which can be done by no means but by separating the impure from the
pure; and by joining and congealing the central Mercury with that which is of a
homogeneons nature; according to these Axioms, Natura natura letatur unitur,
transmutat and multiplicat.

Demonstrations of the preparation of Balsums out of Sulphur of Minerals
Vegetables and Animals.
TAke Mineral Sulphur, and elevate it to its Heaven by the Separation of the
mpure from the Pure, with a fit medium: the superfluous Sulphur being thus
separated, ye may extract the tincture thereof with the Spirit of Wine.

Take Saffron, Juniper Berries, Seeds of Rue, Aloes, Cedar, and digest them in
the menstruum of Alcalice volatalized with essential Oils according to the
ordinary way; But if ye shall prepare them according to the Method that I have
prescribed in the foresaid Book, you may do much better.

Demonstration of the Universal Panacaea, or of the Spirit of the Universe
Incorporated in the second matter of Generation; by Axioms and Conclusions.
Axiom 1. The Image of God is in Light as in its Vehicle.

Ax. 2. Light is the Secret matter of Generation.

Ax. 3. Virgin Earth is the second matter of Generation.

Ax. 1. The Image of God by the Vehicle's Light, is united and concentred in
the Virgin Earth.

Ax. 5. Light the first matter is concentred and fixed in Virgin Earth, the
second matter.

Ax. 6. The Image of God, in the first matter of Generation, uniting univocally
and homogenically with the spirit of man, ( being liberated from the bondage of
Elementa Elementata, of the Principia Principiata) does increase and multiply
it according to the degree of union.

Con. Virgin Earth is the subject matter; in which Light and Life is
terminated and concentrated.

Con. The Light and Life in Virgin Earth, causes Vegitation, Generation and
Motion in all the products thereof.

Con. Virgin Earth being purified by exaltation and sublimation, from the
circumferental and superficial impurity, is the universal Panacaea that
conserveth and multiplieth Light and Life in all its products.

Having demonstrated briefly the method and process of Creation, Generation, of
Origin of Causes, and of their Cure, I shall conclude with praise and glory to
the IMMENSE LIGHT, in whom we live, move, and have our being.

FINIS.

