A Testimony of the appearance of God, in the spirit of Power, and the true
Light, making manifest the deceipts of the Serpent: with some Reasons why
Margaret Hambleton does deny the Presbyterians of Scotland, they being found in
the steps of the False Prophets.
THe living God, who is the searcher of all hearts, Jer. 17.10.
who dwells in Light, who is pure for ever, and loves truth and equity, and
cannot behold, but hates iniquity; Dent. 32.6. Psalm. 11.7. Romans 14.17. Malicah
3.6. Heb. 1.1, 2.
whose Kingdom stands in Righteousness, who is the same to day, and does not
alter, nor change: He the same living and true God, who at sundry times, and in
diverse manners in times past, speak to the Fathers by his servants the
Prophets; and afterward did speak by his Son, is now appearing, according to
his Promise, Joel 2.28, 29.
in the power of his Spirit, manifesting his power in destroying sin, and
wickedness; 1 John 3.8. Tir. 2.14.
and gathering unto himself a Holy, and a peculiar people, in whom, and by whom
he will be glorified: Lay 54.13. Ezekiel. 34.10, etc.
and he will teach his people himself freely by his Spirit, and they shall no
more be made a prey upon by the false Shepherds; nor spend their money for that
which is not bread; Isay. 55.1, 2.
neither their labor for that which does not satisfy: But freely shall they
drink at the living Fountain, where true refreshment and satisfaction is, to
the hungry thirsting souls. The same truth, 1 John 1.1.
the same power and word of Life as ever was, is manifested, and made known in
the hearts of the Lords Children and Servants, which has separated them from
ungodliness, John 4.23, 24. Tit. 2.11, 12.
and worldly lusts, and redeemed them from the bondage and servitude of sin, no
more to serve and follow wicked lusts, Luke 1.74, 75.
and worldly delights, and vain sports and pleasures: but in truth and
uprightness of heart and mind to serve the living God in the new life of
Righteousness, Heb. 4.12. 1 Cor. 3.16, 17
and to worship him in spirit, and in truth in his holy Temple, not made with
men's hands: Acts 13.24.
And this work and power of God is strange to the world, and wonderful, (as
ever the working of God were) and many mouths are opened wide to speak evil of
the way of God, and of his truth, and of his faithful servants, who live in the
life of truth, and the enemy of man's Soul, John 8.44.
the old serpent who was a liar, and a deceiver even from the beginning. He is
full of wrath, and is stirring up his instruments in whom he rules, to make war
against the lamb, and his followers, that he may uphold his kingdom of sin and
unrighteousness, and keep people under his dominion and power of darkness, to
act sin, and serve him by obeying wickedness, and ungodly lusts, and therefore
he uses all means to keep them in his work; and speaks evil of the work of
God, and his faith full servants, crying out of error, heresy, and delusion,
and casting out their names as evil; but this is no new, nor strange thing, to
those who are acquainted with the workings of God, and who know the wiles, and
subtilty of the serpent, who in all ages has opposed the appearance of God,
Gal. 4.29.
and persecuted his life and power, manifested in his righteous Servants, as
the Scriptures make mention.

The Prophets of God, in the day of their Prophesy, were hated and persecuted
(by these professing people, Mat. 23.29, 30. etc.
who had the form of Moses words) and many of them were killed. Christ Jesus
the Son of God (whom Moses wrote of, and the Prophets prophesied of) in his
days were hated and persecuted, John 10.31, 33. John 7.48, 49. John 19.49.
under the name of a blasphemer; and this by a strict professing people, and
chief priests and rulers; these, and such as made a fair show in words, were
found in rage and enmity, and persecuted and crucified Christ the life.
Likewise the Apostles, Acts 7.57.
and true Ministers of the Gospel in the days of their Ministration they were
hated, and persecuted, under the name of deceivers, Acts 8.3. Acts 24.5.
pestilent fellows, and movers of Sedition, and such like.

And all along, even to this day and age, the true witnesses of God have
suffered persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12.
yea and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution; for
says Christ, if ye were of the world, John 15.19, 20.
the world would love his own, but because ye are not of this world, but I have
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. The servant is not
greater then the Lord: if they have persecuted me, they will also persecute
you, John 16.2.
and they shall put you out of the Synagogue, ye the time comes, that
whosoever kills you will think that he does God service: And ye shall be
hated of all men for my names sake. Mat. 24.9.
These Scriptures are fulfilled in these days, by this sinful generation of
Teachers, and people who have long bin professors of truth in words, Tit. 1.16.
but have denied truth by their wicked lives, and deceitful works, and now are
made manifest by the true Light, even by their fruits, Mat. 7.20.
and wicked rage and envy against the innocent, casting out their names as
evil, and incensing the people against the Lords Lambs; as it was of late
manifestted by two parish Masters in the west of Scotland, to wit, one called
Jews Simorell, and one Hugh Archbull, who excomumnicated (as they say) one
whose eyes the Lord has opened to see their deceits, Acts 20.13.
and has turned her face toward Sion to walk in the light, whose name
according to the flesh is Margaret Hambleton. Whom the said two parish Masters
did so incense their hearers against, (as that generation of murdering Priest
did formerly against the Lord Jesus and his disciples) as though she was not
fit to live amongst them, but nothing of fact or evil done, was proved against
her. But their reasons are, as I understand. 1. Because she denied the power of
the Presbytery. Secondly, Because she denied their Ordinances. And Thirdly,
Because she would not forsake the company of Seducers and Heretics as they
call them. Now to all ye people within the Parish of Monkland, these things I
write unto you, to give you an understanding of what we own, and what we deny,
that you may not be led away with blind guides, and envious men, Jude 10.
to speak evil of those things you know not, and so bring your selves under
the curse, with those who persecute the Lords innocent Servants. Your Teachers
do cry much against false prophets and seducers, but do they ever show you the
marks of the false Teachers. Some Scriptures I shall set before you, whereby
you may try your Teachers, and compare them with their fruits, and see whether
or no if they be not found in the steps of those, whom the true Prophets,
Christ and his true Ministers declared against Isaiah was a true Prophet of the
Lord, and he by the Spirit of the Lord, cried against the blind watchmen in his
days, calling them greedy dumb dogs, Isay 56.10, 11.
which could never have enough, every one looking to his own way, seeking for
the gain from his quarter: and he makes a Proclamation, Isay 55.1, 2.
saying, Ho, every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, yea, come ye and
eat, buy wine and milk without money, and without price. Now come to the
touchstone, and try your Teachers, compare them, and see whether or no they be
found in the steps of Isaiah, who spoke freely, without a price; or whether or
no they be not found in the steps and ways of those whom Isaiah cries against,
who sought gain from their Quarter; are not your Teachers greedy of gain? do
they not strive for great benefits, and great sums of money by the year? will
they not leave their own parishoners for a greater Benefice? and will any of
them preach without a price? is it not plain, no hire no Priest? be not
deceived with a vain hope, for such as you sow, such must you reap.

Jeremiah was a true Prophet of God, and he cried against that horrible filthy
thing committed in the Land: Jer. 5.30, 31.
The Prophets prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and
the people love to have it so: try if it be not so now, do not your Teachers
bear rule over you poor people? and he that has most means is highest exalted
by the blind world. Mica 3.5, 11.
Again, Micah the Lords prophet cried against the hireling Priests in his
days, and the prophets that made the people to err, that bite with their
teeth, and cry peace, and he that puts not into their mouths, they even
prepare war against him: See if it be not so with your Teachers, whilst
Margaret Hambleton and others put into their months, and gave them money, then
they spoke peace to her, Isay 48.22.
though she was in a condition of sin, where no peace is. And now the Lord
having opened her eyes, to see their deceits, who for conscience sake cannot
uphold them, nor put into their mouths: and so now they manifest themselves by
their envy against her, casting out her name as evil: read the marks of the
false prophets, and then read your Teachers, and do not wilfully close your
eyes against plain and pure truth. Ezekiel likewise one of the Lords Prophets,
declares against the false shepherds in his days, that fed upon the fat, and
clothed themselves with the wool, but feed not the flock, but scattered the
sheep of the Lords pasture: Ezekiel 34. read all the Chapter.
See if your Teachers be not found in the steps of those false shepherds: do
they not live at ease, and feed upon poor men's labors, taking care for
themselves, but scatter the sheep of the Lords pasture, and begets the people
into another Image? for if a lamb come amongst them they are ready to devour,
and tear the innocent ones; uphold not such, for if ye uphold them, Rev. 18.4.
Hosea 6.9.
and partake of their sins, you must partake of their plagues. And as troops of
robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests murder in the way by consent,
Hos. 6.9. Try your teachers, and see if they be not guilty of envy, and so of
murder; 1 John 3.15.
for he that hates his brother is a murderer, and no murderer has eternal
life abiding in him.

These and many other examples I might bring out of the Prophets writings, who
gave their testimony against the hirelings, and false prophets, and Priests, in
the time of the Law. Mat. 23.27, 28.
So likewise Jesus Christ declares against those deceitful hypocrites, who had
gotten Moses and the Prophets words, but were out of the life; and he shows
their marks. They were exalted, and went in long robes, having the chiefest
seats in the Assemblies, and the uppermost rooms at Feasts, and loved greetings
in the markets, and to be called of men, Master, Mat. 23.
to whom Christ pronounces many woes, and said unto his followers, Be not ye
called of men Master, for ye have but one Master, even Christ, and ye are
Brethren. Now try your Teachers, and with the light that Christ has
enlightened you withal; behold, if these marks be not written upon them: are
not they exalted above others, and stand praying in their stone houses, (as the
proud Pharisees did in their Synagogues) and love greetings in markets, and
have the uppermost rooms at Feasts, and are called of men, Master? Heb. 13.8.
Is not Christ the same today? and do you believe that he justifies those
things now, which he cried woe against then? He says expressly to his disciples,
Mat. 23.8, 10.
Be not ye called of men Master: But your Teachers are called of men Master,
contrary to the command of Christ, so no Ministers of Christ. A Master, and a
Minister are different one to the other; the one a ruler over, 2 John 9.
the other a servant under, but the followers of Christ were not called of men
masters. We do not read of Master Peter, Phil. 1.1. ^am. 1.1.
and Master Paul, nor any other of Christ's Ministers, that were called by those
Tytles, but servants for Jesus sake: And yet your Parish Masters have got the
name of Ministers, but are not in the nature, and so to be denied, and turned
away from: likewise Peter and Jude cried against such as preached for filthy
lucre, 2 Pet. 2. Jude 1.
and loved gifts and rewards; saying, woe unto them, they have gone in the way
of Cain, and runn greedily after the error of Balaam, for gifts and rewards.
Jude 11 verse. Acts 20.29. 1 Timothy 6.8, 9, 10, 11.
And Paul speaks of such devouring wolves that should not spare the flock, and
writes to Timothy to beware, and fly such things as filthy lucre, and the love
of money, for it is the root of all evil. So consider of these things, and try
your Teachers by these Scriptures, and see if they be not in a high measure
guilty of these things: do not they love money, which is the root of all evil?
and from this wicked root agreat deal of cursed branches do spring, and arise,
as envy, and wrath, pride, and vain glory, and so as Christ has said, Mat.
7.20.
By their fruits ye shall know them: though they be decked with the sheeps
clothing, the good words of the holy men of God, yet by their fruits they are
known, for no mait can gather grapes of thorns, nor figgs of thistles:
wheresoever envy is, it is a mark of Cain; and where wrath and malice is, they
are the wolves marks: though they may have smooth words, yet by their wicked
works they are known; 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc.
likewise Paul in his Epistle to Timothy marks out the deceivers so plain, that
even he that runs may read, They shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, proud
boasters, incontinent, fierce despisers of those that are good, lovers of
pleasures, more then lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying
the power, from such turn a way. And we in the light of the Lord seeing these
things amongst your Presbytery, (and called Ministers) we owning the true
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles testimony; do deny, Their casting out of
Margaret Hambleton is needless; For she has (in the Power of God) denied
them, and turned away from them, according to the doctrine of the Apostle.
and turn from such, as they the true Messengers of God, denied and testified
against.

And as for the Ordinances, We declare, that all the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ, which are durable, pure, spiritual, and substantial, which tends to
purity, and edification of the body, we own, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. Acts 2.4. Romans
4.15.
and practice: as preaching, and praying, as the Holy Spirit does move and give
utterance: and singing with the Spirit, and with understanding, according to
Scripture, we own: But those fading elementary shadows, which Christ has put
an end to, we do not practice, Col. 2.14, 20, 21, 22. But as for those things
which your Teachers calls Ordinances, (for which they have no example in the
Scriptures) we do deny: as their great stone houses, which are built with men's
hands, which you ignorantly do call Churches; for God that made the world, Acts
17.24, 25. 1 These. 1.1 John 4.21, 22, 23.
and all things therein, dwells not in Temples made with hands. Christ Jesus
put an end of Temple worship outwardly, and now is worshipped in Spirit, and
the bodies of his Saints are his Temple, as the Scripture declares, 2 Cor.
3.16.17. So likewise the things and practices in those Idol Temples we deny,
as their pulpit, their standing praying (pharesy like) before and after their
called Sermons; their singing of David's experiences in meeter; As O Lord I am
not puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye, etc. When people are so high and
scornful, they can scarce look one upon another, and so causes the people to
sing lies, and call God to witness; such singing without understanding we do
deny; likewise their sprinkling of insants, for which these have no example in
the Scriptures, we do deny; Their taking a part of Scripture and adding to it
their humane inventions, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
calling it the word of the Lord, which is but a divinaton of their own brain;
likewise their hourglass, as the Papist use to say mass by, and limiting
themselves to a time, which none of the Holy men of God ever did, and therefore
these their called Ordinances, we do in the power of God deny: as likewise
their carnal and man-made-ministry, Gal. 1.1.1, 12. Mat. 10.8.
their preaching for hire and filthy lucre: their Tithes, yearly set stipends,
and forced maintenance, Augmentations, gleab lands; and all such Popish stuff,
and Jewish rites we do deny; and against such things do testify; and all proud,
covetous, and envious men, we deny, and turn away from such, being out of Gods
Council, and so do not, nor cannot prophet the people at all, but leads them
captive in an empty and dead form, laden with sin, and led away with diverse
lusts, ever learning, 2 Timothy 3.
but never able to come to the true knowledge of God, as the fruits of the
Ministry of Scotland sadly make manifest; who are all excommunicated from it
(the life) from the true Church, and true Ministry.

And whereas your Parish Masters, John 16.2.
out of their envy and malice have cast out Marg. Hamb. yet not being found
guilty of any evil done but for Truth and its Testimony she shall not be left
desolate, 1 Pet. 4.13, 14, 15. Ezekiel. 34. Mar. ^.5. Heb. 6.8.
but Jesus the true Shepherd will take care for her, and feed her upon the tops
of the mountains; and it were well for you and your Teachers to begin at home
and pull the beam out of your own eyes, let them pluck up the briars and
thorns, and those g^os weeds, that are sprung so high above the pa^e seed; and
as for the tares (that are so like the wheat) let both grow together until
(...) harvest; Mar. 13.25, 31.
let them cast out all love^s of money, all covetous (...) and all proud, and
lofty ones, and all drunkards, and sweare^s, whoremongers, and adulterers, and
all sco^ers and sco^n^^s, and light vain wanton ones, Romans 1.28, 29, 30, 31, 32.
and liars, and all cozeners, and cheaters, and stoners, and strikers, and
persecutors, and all envious wra^h^^ and malicious ones, and such like workers
of iniquity, and then judge ye, how many they will leave behind, to make up
the^ Church, and assure your selves, all such as above mentioned, (...) live in
the lusts of the flesh, must be cast out from the pure God and his Holy City,
for the unrighteous cannot enter into the kingdom of God, as you may read, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.10, 20, 21. Rev. 21.8. Thus much for the denial of your
Presbytery, and their power who be found in those ways and practices above
mentioned, and their imitated and invented Ordinances: and as for their th^^
charge that she will not forsake the company of Seducers and Heretics, Acts
28.22.
I say your calling them Seducers and Heretics, does not make, nor prove them
so, no more then (their Brethren in envy and persecution) the chief Priests
formerly their calling Christ a blasphemer, and the Apostles deceivers, did
make or prove them so to be: But this has bin the subtilty of the serpent, and
of the false prophets, and deceivers (in whom he rules) the better to cloak and
and cover their deceit, Ephesians. 6.16.
they cry out against deceivers; but their lies and slanders does not touch the
innocent, for those whom your teachers do call Seducers, we the servants of the
most high God and in that way you which call Heresy, Acts 24.14.
so worship we the God of our Fathers, owning and believing all things declared
by the holy Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, 1 John 2.26.
waiting for the redemption of the promised Seed; Those be the deceivers and
seducers, which draws people from the anointing and light within, 1 John 2.20,
27. Romans 8.
for the pure, the Sons of God who are led and guided by the spirit of God: and
to this must all come to be led by, if ever you be led in the way of God; for
nothing can guide and lead in Gods way, 1 Cor. 2.11. 1 Cor. 10.7
but that which comes from God, and the manifestation of the spirit is given to
every man to profit withal. Therefore all people cease from the hirelings, who
preach for the price, Isa. 2.20. Isa. 54.15. Mat. 11.28, 29.
and turn to the Lord, who teaches his people freely: mind his call, who
says, Come unto me, take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, I am meek and
lowly in spirit, and you shall find rest to your Souls.

A. P.

THE END.

