PROTESTANCY DESTITUTE OF Scripture-Proofs.
A Request was, some time ago, made to Protestants to produce, for sixteen of
their positive Tenets, plain Scriptures: Scriptures, but so plain to Us, for
their Doctrines, as they require to be yielded them by the Catholic Church for
Here Is.

An Answer was returned disclaiming some (how consistently with their imposed
Doctrines will be examined in due place), and evading other of the
Propositions; alleging also Scriptures so perversely for such as are owned;
that the Requester concluded the Pamphlet unworthy a public or special notice,
and expected, if not more pertinent, yet at least more plausible Replies to
follow; except Protestants (who have hitherto boasted that Scripture is the
Rule of their Faith) meant their Profession should be exposed by silence or a
silly Defense, and, for the future, esteemed destitute of any Divine Evidence.

But, since the Requester hears no better of the Matter, and to prevent an
Imagination that he acquiesces in the Answer as satisfactory, He thinks it
expedient to draw up a brief Remark upon it.

Those of the Thirty nine Articles, which are opposed to Catholic Religion,
contain Affirmative Propositions, or may be resolved into equivalent
Affirmatives; whereupon, the Pretense of Negative Articles is a Subterfuge to
escap^ proving their Tenets: But, if it were true, that their Faith
(contradictory to ours) were concerning Negatives only; yet this Plea seems
insufficient to exempt Protestants from that Duty; because, tho for a Negative,
or every Non-Assent, or Suspense of Assent, a Reason may not be given or
required; yet, for Belief (a deliberate Act of the Mind), for a solemn
Profession, Subscription, and Swearing of that Belief (whether it be of
Negatives or Affirmatives) a Reason may be assigned and required: Unless Belief
may be without ground and motive; unless Subscriptions and Oaths may be exacted
of such as have neither Why nor Wherefore (besides Authority) for their
compliance (which Protestants explode as blind Obedience); or, unless that no
Man be obliged to render a Reason of the Faith that is in him, if he can
convert his Opinions into equivalent Negatives: As what Doctrine may not? But
does the Artifice of Negative Articles affect the Request proposing
Affirmatives only? If Protestants could prove their Doctrines, this fencing and
tergiversation about Negative Articles would not be employed, nor could They be
kept from divulging their Plea.

As trifling and defective is the Answerer's Definition of the Protestants
Belief of Negatives: for they believe (if their Faith may be Collected from the
Thirty nine Articles) not only that the opposite Affirmatives are not in
Scripture (for they may not be there and yet be true), but also that they are
Article 14.22.24.28.
rather, and plainly, repugnant to Scripture, and the Teachers of them
arrogant, impious, etc. (which if they be, they are false and Antichristian).
Now to characterize Doctrines so ignominiously, and, when importuned to prove
the slander by Scripture, to shift off the Charge by saying Their belief of
Negatives is only believing such a Doctrine is not in Scripture, will not serve
our turn, that expect satisfaction by their, either proving themselves no
Calumniators, or retracting their Calumnies.

Having said this to show Protestants obliged to give Scripture Reasons, for
their Belief of Negatives, had the Requester demanded them: We pass to examine
the Answers to the Propositions, where we shall find no Scriptures produced for
some of them; and for the Rest, none that conclude and prove that for which
they are quoted.

The Propositions, that Protestants should prove by Scriture, are

I. Scripture is clear, in all Necessaries, to every sober Enquirer.
Ps. 119.105. and 1. (it should be 2.) Tim. 3.15. are brought to justify this
Tenet; but had these Texts been truly quoted, they do not reach the Proposition
to be proved: for, if the Word of God were a Light to the Prophet David 's
feet: If all Scripture be given that the Man of God may be perfect; yet a
perspicuity of Scripture, in all necessaries, to every sober Enquirer, cannot
be deduced thence; except every sober Enquirer be a Prophet, or a Man of God,
or, at least, subject to such: But this Notion of sober Enquiry involves the
Catholic Doctrine of Submission of Judgment to Church Guides, which would have
prevented, and quite overthrows all Protestancy. And sure this Author intends
not by sober Enquiry what spoils his Profession.

II. The Secular Prince has all Spiritual Jurisdiction and Authority
immediately from and under God.
The Answerer behaves himself as if He were in apprehensions, and durst neither
own nor reject this Tenet. The Reasons are obvious: Yet, at length, He inclines
toward it, and thinks, Romans 13.1. proves it. Indeed, that Scripture either
sounds too much, or signifies nothing at all, to his purpose. If it proves what
He thinks, it proves more than He grants. It proves ministering the Word and
Sacraments to belong to the higher Powers. It leaves this Author's Church no
Rights independent, no Jurisdiction inherent, no Power inalienable, unless
ministering the Word and Sacraments be not a Soul-affair, be no act of Power;
Page 18.
in short, it will invest every Prince with Spiritual Jurisdiction properly so
called; tho this Author says, the Head of his Church has it not.

III. Justification by Faith alone ( viz. a Persuasion that we are justified)
is a wholesome Doctrine.
The Answerer says, his Church does not teach this Tenet, and we know some of
his Communion have condemned it. What then? Are we any more bound to conclude
thence, his Church does not teach it, than Protestants are, from the Decrees of
our General Councils, and our constant Profession, against a Doctrine, they
impute to us and to the Catholic Church, that we and the Catholic Church hold
not as they accuse us, and Her to do? Besides, we must suppose His Church to
teach now as She was taught, and did teach, in Edward the Sixths time, when the
Articles were devised by Cranmer: But that Worthy and his Accomplices were
constant Disciples of Luther, in Creed fortiter, etc. Tho in Consubstantiation
they deserted Him. Again, not only the Antinomians plead the Doctrine of the
Eleventh Article as the Parent of their Irreligion, but the strictest Adherers
to the Primitive Reformers in Doctrine (the Puritans) assert this Solifidian
Parenthesis as the genuine and literal Sense of Justification by Faith alone,
and of the Eleventh Article. The very same Doctrine was the first new Light
bestowed on the Apostle of the Reformation by the Prince of Darkness. But this
Author might have given us a Text asserting what He confesses his Church to
teach; viz. that Justification by Faith only is a most wholesome Doctrine and
very full of comfort; which intimates no necessity of Repentance to
Justification, none of the Sacraments, etc.

IV. The Substance of Bread and Wine remains after, what it was before,
Sacerdotal Consecration.
This is my Body, is an express proof (or the Answerer brings no Scripture
proof), That the Substance of Bread and Wine remains after, etc. But, literally
understood, this Text is express that the Substance of Bread, etc. does not
remain at all after Consecration: For the Eucharist is Christ's Body and Blood;
which, if substantially Bread and Wine, it cannot really be. A change, less
than that of the substance of the Elements, is insufficient to render them
really and truly, what the Text says they are, after Consecration.

V. Our Lord's Presence in the Eucharist is merely gracious and influential,
and, if more, only to the Faithful.
If He learned from his Church what he Writes, then this Tenet is Here Is: For,
does not this Answerer assert our Lord's Eucharistical Presence not to be
substantial; therefore (unless entirely absent) our Lord must be present in the
Eucharist by Grace and Influence only? What is there, besides Substance and
Efficacy, belonging to our Savior's Body and Blood? No Color of Scripture is
produced for this Zuinglian Proposition.

VI. Adoration of the Eucharist ( i. e. of our Savior under the Species of
Bread and Wine) is Idolatry.
This blasphemous Tenet is taught by the Answerer's Church; for, did not the
Majority of it is pretended Bishops vote for the Test? Do not all of them take
it? Is not that Test a Canon of their General Council, The Parliament? But this
Test declares our Adoration of the Eucharist (which is the Adoration of nothing
but Jesus Christ) to be Idolatry. Not one jot of Scripture does this Author
produce in defense of this their Test and Doctrine.

VII. All Christians, whenever they Communicate, are obliged to receive in both
Kinds.
Nor for this point can a Scripture Command be discovered in the Answer; tho
the Thirtieth Article affirms, that both parts of the Lord's Sacrament, by
Christ's Ordinance and Commandment, ought to be ministered to all Christian Men
alike.

VIII. Chastity, deliberately vowed, may be inoffensively violated.
This Proposition is a Doctrine of the Answerer's Church, except His be not the
same Church with Edward the Sixths, or the thirty Second Article have now
another sense than when composed by Cranmer: For all Bishops and Priests then
in the Western Church had deliberately vowed Chastity, and the Article says
it is lawful for them to Marry, which certainly violates their Vow. No Scripture
is alleged justifying a Tenet so impure, so perfidious.

IX, All Christian Excellencies are Commanded.
Phil. 4.8. Is quoted as comprehending all Christian Excellencies: If it do so;
yet, unless, besides comprehending, it command them, that Scripture will not
prove the Tenet. Nor can the Answerer conclude from the Mode of it is
expression, that It does command them; because it is common to an Exhortation as
well as Precept, as Protestants must confess, who affirm Pasce Oves to be One:
The same Answer will serve for Be ye perfect: And, for to whom much is given,
of them, much shall be required This imports, that proportion (not equality)
must be in our Accounts to our Abilities. But how does this Scripture accord
with this Author's Doctrine, that we must always reckon the Heights and
perfections of Virtues are commanded? The Account corresponds to our Abilities
(so sure does the Command) but all Abilities are not the same in all; how then
can God's Commands be so to all, as they are, if He always injoyns the Heights
and perfections of Virtues; unless perfections and Heights may have degrees,
which also makes little for this Author. If, to supererogate did signify (with
Catholics) to profit God; then the Fourteenth Article (condemning the Teachers
of Works of Supererogation, of Arrogance and Impiety) had been solidly founded
on when you have done all that are commanded to you, say, we are unprofitable
Servants. But we meaning no such thing, the Article perverts Scripture.

X. Every Soul, as soon as expired, is conveyed to Heaven or Hell.
The Parable of Dives and Lazarus, and St. Paul's desire to be dissolved, etc.
Our Author says, look fairly toward this Tenet: So they do, if three Souls be
All; or All Souls expire in either Dive's fitness for Hell, or Lazarus's and
St. Paul's for Heaven.

XI. Desiring the Intercessions of the Blessed, is more Superstitious, and
Derogatory to our Lord's Mediator ship, than entreating the Prayers of Holy Men
Militant.
It is not at all in Scripture that our Savior is our only Mediator of
Intercession; therefore this Proposition is not plain there. If such an only
Mediatorship of Intercession be plain in Scripture, it had been easy and kind
to have named such a plain Scripture. Yet none is brought, unless the Answerer
meant, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, etc. for such a one. Truly, I see
not, how he can deduce from it any thing to his purpose, till it appear that
all Prayer is divine Worship, Or, that we pray to Saints just as we do to God.

XII. Honoring the Cross, the Relics and Representations of our Lord and his
Saints, with that degree of Reverence as we do the Gospels (commonly kissed and
sworn by), Altar, and other Utensils, is Idolatry.
Our General Councils tell Protestants we pay no other Honor to any Creature;
their Test and Homily call the Honor, we pay to sacred Persons and Things,
Idolatry. We must then either challenge Protestants to prove this Proposition,
or conclude them Calumniators. We know what we profess and practice to be as
the Catholic Church teaches: We hear our Doctrine and Practice confidently
said, and solemnly subscribed, to be Idolatry: Sure then we may conclude that
Protestants believe the Proposition, and decent it is they give a Reason of a
Faith so injurious to the Catholic Church, or henceforward renounce it.

XIII. The Pope is Antichrist.
Do only some Protestants and no Homily (subscribed as containing a Godly and
Wholesome Doctrine, necessary for these times, Article the Fifty Fifth) affirm
the Pope to be Antichrist? Yet we meet with no Scripture brought to prove this
Godly, Necessary Doctrine.

XIV. Every Prayer, used in Divine Offices, must be in a Language Vulgar, and
intelligible to every Auditor.
1 Cor. 14. Is pretended to prove this Tenet; when as the Apostle's mind is;
that whosoever had the Gift of a Tongue, strange to all the Auditory, should
forbear to dictate therein Extempore Sermons, Prayers, etc. containing Matter,
as well as the Tongue, inspired into the Speaker. I say, this Gift (of no use,
but used for ostentation, in such a Case) was to be reserved till either the
Speaker or some Auditor could and did interpret, that the rest might edify.
Now will it follow from hence, that all the settled Forms of Divine Offices (to
many of which there is no necessity that all specially join and intend) be in
the vulgar or intelligible to every Auditor? It is enough (to comply with the
Apostles Doctrine), that all new, Extempore Prayers, and instructive or
exhortatory Discourses (by actions, ceremonies or circumstances, or other way
not interpretable) be, as they are, in the vulgar: But for the fixed Forms of
Divine Offices, that they be in a Language the most certain and the most
intelligible, not only in Christendom but in every Auditory. Intelligible, I
say, where needful, to every one by either Actions, Ceremonies, and
Circumstances, or by Custom, affinity with the Vulgar, or Books interpreting,
and containing Prayers correspondent to every part wherein the Auditory is
concerned.

XV. A Company of Christians, voluntarily separating from all other Christian
Societies, condemning their Doctrines and Rites, destitute also of any visible
Correspondence with them in the Eucharist, in any Religious Assemblies or
solemn Devotions, can, notwithstanding this perverse, entire, and manifest
separation be a Mystical Member of Christ, in Catholic Unity, and a Charitable
part of the Catholic Church.
This Proposition relates to Matter of Fact of the highest Moment, which we
affirm Protestants to have done; and desire them to make out by Scripture the
lawfulness of it, and it is consistency with Catholic Unity and Charity. If 2
Cor. 6.17. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, be intended for a proof of
it; then it must import that it is the Duty of one Christian, or a Party
pretending to be a National Church, to come out of the Catholic Church, and be
separate from Her, as from an Unclean Thing, that God may receive them. Less
than this will not reach the Protestant Case, and so much as this, will by no
means agree with One, Holy Church, wherein alone the Communion of Saints,
Remission of Sins and Life Everlasting are to be found. Yet a properer Text
this Author does not allege to Patronize his Schism.

XVI. The whole Clergy of the Catholic Church may Apostatize from fundamental
Truth and Holiness; whilst part of a National Laity may preserve both, discover
the Clergie's Defection, and depriving them, heap to Themselves Teachers of
their own Sending and Instruction.
This Apostasy (at the least) is taught in the Nineteenth and Twenty First
Articles and Homily against the Peril of Idolatry. And, Lay-supremacy
(recognized to be in Queen Elizabeth by the Laity only) gave Prelatic Ministers
all the Mission and Instructions they have. Now we desire to see proved by
Scripture, that such Apostasy should ever befall God's Church and Clergy, and
that the Laity have such Authority to deprive and create Clergymen, to teach
and send them. The Answerer is mute as to Proofs, and manifests himself, either
meanly versed in the Story of his Party, or no Friend to Ingenuity and Truth:
For, He confidently says, all the World knows it to be false, That only a Major
Vote of a Parliament of Laymen in England condemned and rejected the Doctrines
of the Church of Rome. Yet this is certainly true and attested by Protestant
Historians and Records, which assure us that all the Bishops and the whole
Convocation declared against Lay-supremacy and other Protestant Points and for
Noncompliance therewith, were almost all deprived: The Queen and Her
Lay-Parliament enacting Supremacy, whereby she imposed new Doctrines, displaced
the Catholic Clergy and created Prelatic Ministers: This then is the true State
of Prelatic Protestancy, and one would think being a change concerning Religion
should have some Scripture, or because extraordinary should have Miracles, to
countenance it: But just so much of the One as of the Other appears in it is
behalf. And this is enough to manifest how destitute of Scripture-Warrant
Protestant Opinions and Practices are, and that the Request is not answered.

FINIS.
London, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
For his Household and Chapel, 1687.


