Proposals relating to LITTLE YARMOUTH.
The manner of the Situation of Great Yarmouth, and of its Trade and Buildings.
WIthin a mile, on the East of the Town, is the Main Ocean: on the North-West,
the River Brayden; where three Rivers ( Wavenee, which parts the Counties of
Norfolk, and Suffolk; Yare, which runs through the City of Norwich; the Bure,
which comes from the North-parts of Norfolk) meet: from whence this River falls
East and by South; and before it runs into the Sea, continues its course on the
Key of Yarmouth. By these Rivers, to the Land-ward, all the Country-Growths and
Manufactures are with little charge brought to Yarmouth: and up these streams,
these Countries are furnished with Foreign and Domestic Commodities at
reasonable Rates, by reason the Flux of the Sea does make the current into the
Country almost equal with the current out of the Country.

As the Town is naturally situated with these advantages for the Trade of
these Countries, above any of the Eastern Coast: so it lies in the same
Latitude as Amsterdam; and by consequence, more convenient then any other Town
on the Eastern Coast of England for the Trade of the United Netherlands and
Flanders, and almost equal with Hull and Newcastle for the Trade of Hamborough,
the Hance-Towns, the Baltic and Norway. It is moreover enriched above any Town
in England, or perhaps in the World, with a yearly Revenue of the
Fishing-trade; which if it were managed and improved to the best advantage,
might far exceed the Dutch Fishing trade. But this for many years, by reason of
this Towns appropriating the Trade to a few hands, has both rendered this Trade
useless to the rest of this Nation, besides the Freemen of Yarmouth, who have
not Vessels enough to maintain the same; and have by this means given the Dutch
an opportunity of being the greatest gainers by it, who have for many years
last past brought over their Busses, and other Fishing Vessels, and have taken
the Herrings on this Coast, and brought the same into Yarmouth, and sold the
same to them for ready money; which money might as well have been got by our
selves, and kept at home.

This place, although so naturally and advantagiously seated for Trade, yet it
is no way conveniently built for it: the back-part thereof being so narrowly
built in Lanes and Rows, as that there can be no access made to it, but by
Barrows, used no where in England but in this place, and for this reason only.
Besides, the houses are built so low, as also being straightned for
Warehouse-room, they cannot receive such quantities of Merchandise as their
Trade is capable of. And although the houses to the Key are fair and well
built, yet they are not of sufficient capacity to entertain the fourth part of
such Merchants as might trade upon the account of this Harbor; neither have
they the conveniences of fresh water. Notwithstanding which, by reason of the
advantages aforesaid, they have and do flourish in Trade above any Town in
England, but London and Bristol; which they are able to do upon their own
account, without any dependency on any other place.

The Situation of Little Yarmouth, and Privileges granted by his Majesty, the
King of England, to his own Subjects, and the Subjects of Holland.
THe Town of Little Yarmouth, heretofore called South-Town, was an Incorporate
Town before Great Yarmouth, and did enjoy several privileges, as the lading
and unlading Merchandise, and of exporting and importing all kind of
Merchandise; which made the said Town in a very flourishing condition. But the
Town of Great Yarmouth, by their much greater power, procured several Grants
and Letters Patents, upon some plausible and specious pretenses, whereby they
appropriated to the Freemen of Great Yarmouth, the Monopoly of Lading and
Unlading all sorts of Merchandise within s(...) miles of Great Yarmouth; which
occasioned the said Town in a short time to decay, and to be forsaken by her
Inhabitants. But so it is, that it has pleased the King, by an Act of
Parliament, made in the sixteenth and seventeenth year of his Reign, entitled,
An Act for settling of differences between the said Towns, touching the Lading
and Vnlading of Herrings, and other Merchandise as also his Majesty, by his
Letters Patents dated th^^tenth of February in the twentieth year of his
Re(...) By both which is granted and confirmed to those, which are or shall be
Inhabitants of Little Yarmouth, their Ancient Privileges; and that any
persons, by inhabiting there, are to enjoy all the Ancient Privileges of this
place, and to be equal partakers of all the Privileges granted to the Freemen
of Great Yarmouth; and are, by their inhabiting there, Freemen of both Towns:
which Freedom is rated by the Freemen of Great Yarmouth, at 30 l. 40 l. or 50
l.

His Majesty has by his Gracious Declaration, bearing date the twelfth day of
June, 1672. granted to the Subjects of the United Provinces of the
Low Countries, as follows:

First, That all such Subjects, of what Profession, Rank or Condition soever,
shall have leave to transport themselves to what part of England they please,
in what Ships they will, without any seizure or molestation.

Secondly, That all such persons arrived in England, shall be free in their
Estates and Persons, with liberty to settle themselves and Families where they
please, and have Liberty of Conscience, as to matters in Religion; and to enjoy
all Privileges of his own Subjects, and to pay no more Duties or Customs then
his Majesty's Subjects.

Thirdly, That his Majesty at next Sessions of Parliament will Naturalize them,
their Children, and Servants; and are immediately made Denizens of England,
without charge or trouble.

Fourthly, All their Ships, Boats, Busses, and other Vessels, shall be
accounted as English-built, and enjoy the same Privileges in Trade and Customs.

Fifthly, All Dutch Seamen, Mariners, Fishermen, Shipwrights, Carpenters, and
other Artificers relating to Shipping, or Sea-Affairs, shall be and remain free
and exempt from any Press.

Sixthly, That his Majesty will grant free Passes and Convoys to all Persons,
Families, and their Goods, as shall transport themselves.

This place, as it is Staked out to be Built, is far more convenient for Trade
then Great Yarmouth, in respect of its Uniformity, and lying upon the Haven,
and for the conveniences of wide Streets and Lanes for Carriages; and for that
there is such a depth allowed to every house, and fresh water.

The Proprietors in the said ground do propose to all such of the English and
Dutch Nation as are willing to build upon the said Ground so Staked out, that
they shall have and enjoy the same upon these Conditions following:
For each foot in front for that ground which fronts the Key, 2 s. 6 d. per
annum.

For each foot in front which fronts the New street, with the Backside toward
the Key, 2 s. per an.

For each foot in front on the other side the New street, 1 s. 8 d. per an.

Note, Every foot in front, has 100 foot in depth allowed to the same; and
that any Undertaker may have what front may best suit with his occasions.

The Proprietors of the Ground are contented to Lease out the same for 40
years, or five Lives; and if allowance be made, for any longer term, or larger
estate therein. The first year they are to enjoy the same Rent-free.

The advantage of laying out money in Building in this place, is very great;
houses, after the rate as they yield in Great Yarmouth, yiedling 12 per cent.

Materials in this place are very reasonable; as Bricks at 10 s. a thousand
made upon the place: Lyme is also ^ade there: Oaken Timber is brought down the
three Rivers very reasonable: Fir-timber and Deal ^^ught in very reasonable,
being opposite to Denmark; ships going daily from this Harbor thither.

This place is convenient for all sorts of Merchants, Tradesmen, Fishermen,
Ship-Carpenters, etc. and for all other Trades and Employments belonging to
Maritime Affairs.

The Proprietors do further propose, to set out a convenient piece of Ground
for the Building a Dutch Church; as also convenient Marketplaces.

Any person may receive further satisfaction, as to these Proposals, if he
repair to Mr. Baldrow. Stationer in Miter-Court in the passage to the Temple;
or at Jo. Painters Coffee-house in Cornhill, or of Mr. Watts in Yarmouth.


