THE PROPOSITIONS OF THE ROMAN CATHOLICS OF IRELAND, Presented by their
Commissioners to His Sacred Majesty, in April, M. DC. XLIV.

As also the Answer of the Agents for the Protestants of Ireland, made to the
said Propositions; and their Petition and Propositions to His Majesty; with His
Majesty's answer to the Propositions of the said Roman Catholics: And the
answe^ of JAMES Marquess of Ormond His Majesty's Commissioner for the treaty
and concluding of a Peace in the Kingdom of Ireland, to the said Propositions.

(...) Waterford by Thomas Bourke, Printer to the Confederate (...) Catholics
of Ireland, M. DC. XLIV.

TO THE READER.
WHereas the Supreme Council of the Confederate Catholics of Ireland,
employed several persons of quality into England, authorized by Commission to
supplicate his Majesty, for redress of the grievances of the said Catholics,
and to settle a firm peace in Church, and Commonwealth, who having then for
some time attended His Majesty to that purpose, His Majesty's good intentions
to the peace of this Kingdom, was for that present diverted, by the false
Informations of persons ill affected to this Nation, whose suggestions happened
to be then listened unto, and answers accordingly given: So as the said
Commissioners returned into this Kingdom, with hopes only, that His Majesty
might in time be better possessed of the power, and affections of His
Catholic subjects here, and of the use to be made thereof, His Majesty being
pleased notwithstanding the said informations to give Commission to the Lord
Marquis of Ormond, Lieutenant General of Ireland, for the continuance, and
concluding of the treatre, begun before His Majesty; In pursuance of which
Commission, the said Catholics presented their propositions, the same in
substance they first presented to His Majesty in Oxford, unto which some
answers were made, which being no way satisfactorie, were replied unto, and so
the matter proceeded to a long dispute, and debate, wherein many difficulties
occurring, the treaty was adjourned, and so continues till the tenth of
January next, by which time His Majesty's resolution upon the whole matter
represented unto him is expressed, and a firm, and lasting peace hoped for.
This being the state the treaty is in at this time, it may be conceived
improper to give an account of the particular passages which are but overtures,
and alterable, as it is well hoped, and little to be doubted, but that in this
they will be, yet some to breed distraction and mistrusts among the said
Confederates, or blinded with private and ambitious ends, and impatient of any
delay, have been so malicious, or mistaken, as to traduce the said Confederate
Catholics, and their Commissioners affirming they might have obtained
Conditions satisfactorie to any reasonable people, but that they rejected the
same. To satisfy therefore all indifferent Judgments that may enter into the
consideration of the said proceedings, and to make it manifest, that the whole
scope of the said Catholics was, and is for the freedom of the Nation in
their Religion, Estates, and Liberties, with out trenching upon His Majesty's
rights, or other end, and that it may appear how far the proceedings
hitherto come short of that: It was thought necessary to expose those
proceedings to public view, by putting them to the press, so to cast off
those aspersions, that ignorant, or malicious persons endeavor to cast upon
them, having yet nevertheless assured hopes that His Majesty will in time
afford remedies to these Complaints, and with a gracious eye look upon the
sufferings of this afflicted nation.

The propositions of the Roman Catholics of Ireland humbly presented unto His
Sacred Majesty, in pursueance of their Remonstrance of grievances, and to be
annexed to the said Remonstrance.
1. THat all Acts made against the professors of the Roman Catholic Faith
whereby any restrainte, penalty, mulct, or incapacitie may be laid upon any
Roman Catholic within the Kingdom of Ireland, may be repealed, and the said
Catholics to be allowed the freedom of the Roman Catholic Religion.

2. That your Majesty will be pleased to call a free Parliament in the said
Kingdom, to be held, and continued as in the said Remonstrance is expressed
and the statute of the tenth year of King Henry the seventh, called Poynings
act, and all acts explayning, or enlarging the same be suspended, during that
parliament for the speedy settlement of the present affairs, and the repeal
thereof to be there further considered of.

3. That all acts, and ordinances made and passed in the now pretended
parliament in that Kingdom since the seventh day of August 1641. be clearly
annulled, and declared void, and taken of the file.

4. That all Indictments, Attainders, Outlawries, in the Kings Bench, or
elsewhere since the said seventh day of August 1641. And all letters pattents.
grants, leases, custodiums, bonds, recognizances, and all other records, act,
or acts depending thereupon, or in prejudice of the said Catholics, or any of
them be taken off the files, annulled and declared void: first by your
Majesty's public Proclamation, and after by act to be passed in the said free
Parliament.

5. That inasmuch as under color of such outlawries, and attainders, debts
due unto the said Catholics have been granted, levied, or disposed of, and of
the other side, that debts due upon the said Catholics to those of the adverse
party have been levied, and disposed to public use, that therefore all debts
be by act of Parliament mutually released, or, all to stand in statu Quo.
notwithstanding any grant, or disposition.

6. That the late offices taken, or found upon feigned, or old titles since the
year 1634. to entitle Your Majesty to several Countries in Connaght,
Thomond, and in the Counties of Tipperarie, Lymmericke, Kilkenny, and VVickloe,
be vacated, and taken off the file, and the possessors settled, and secured in
their ancient estates by act of Parliament. And that the like act of
limittation, of your Majesty's titles for the security of the estates of your
subjects of that Kingdom be passed in the said parliament, as was enacted in
the one and twenty year of his late Majesty's reign in this Kingdom.

7. That all Marckes of incapacitie imposed upon the natives of that Kingdom
to purchase, or acquire lands, leases, offices, or hereditaments be taken away
by act of parliament, and the same to extend to the securing of purchases,
leases, or grants already made. And that for the education of youth an act be
passed in the next parliament, for the erecting of one, or more Inns of Court,
Universities free, and common schools.

8. That the offices, and places of command honor, profit, and trust within
that Kingdom be conferred upon Roman Catholics natives in equality, and
indifferency with your Majesty's other subjects.

9. That the insupportable oppression of your subjects by reason of the Court
of Wards, and respit of homage, be taken away, and a certain revenue in lieu
thereof settled upon your Majesty without diminution of your Majesty's profit.

10. That no Lord not estated in that Kingdom, or estated, and not resident
shall have vote in the said parliament by proxy, or otherwise, and none
admitted to the house of Commons, but such as shall be estated, and resident
within the Kingdom.

11. That an act be passed in the next parliament declaratorie that the
parliament of Ireland is a free parliament of it self, independent of, and not
subordinate, to the parliament of England: And that the subjects of Ireland are
immediately subject to your Majesty as in right of your Crown: and that the
members of the said parliament of Ireland, and all other the subjects of
Ireland are independent, and no way to be ordered, or concluded by the
parliament of England, and are only to be ordered, and governed within that
Kingdom by your Majesty and such Governors as are, or shall be there
appointed, and by the parliament of that Kingdom according to the laws of the
land.

12. That the assumed power, or Jurisdiction in the Councell-boord of
determining all manner of causes, be limited to matters of state, and all
pattents, estates, and grants illegally, and extrajudicially avoided there, or
elsewhere be left in state as before, and the parties grieved, their heirs, or
assigns, till legal eviction.

13. That the statutes of the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth year of Queen
Elizabeth concerning stapple-commodities be repealed, reserving unto your
Majesty lawful, and just pondage, and a book of rates to be settled by an
indifferent Committee of both houses, for all commodities.

14. That in as much as the long continuance of the chief governor, or
governors of that Kingdom in that place of so great eminency, and power, has
been a principal occasion that much tyranny, and oppression has been
exercised upon the subjects of that Kingdom. That your Majesty will be
pleased to continue such governors hereafter but for three years. And that
none once employed therein be appointed for the same again, until the
expiration of six years next after the end of the said three years: And that
an act pass to disinable such governor, or governors during their government,
directly, or indirectly, in use, trust, or otherwise to make any manner of
purchase, or acquisition of any manors, lands, tenements or hereditaments
within that Kingdom, other then from your Majesty, your heirs or successors.

15. That an act may be passed in the next parliament for the raising and
settling of trained bands within the several Counties of that Kingdom, as well
to prevent foreign invasions, as to render them the more serviceable and
ready for your Majesty's occasions, as cause shall require.

16. That an act of oblivion be passed in the next free parliament to extend to
all your Majesty's said Catholic subjects, and their adherents for all manner
of offenses, capital; criminal, and personal: And the said act to extend to
all goods, and chattells, customs, maine-profits, prizes, arreares of rents
taken, received, or incurred since these troubles.

17. For as much as your Majesty's said Catholic subjects have been taxed
with many inhuman cruelties which they never committed, your Majesty's said
suppliants therefore, for their vindication, and to manifest to all the world
their desire to have such heinous offenses punished, and the offenders brought
to Justice, do desire, that in the next Parliament, all notorious murders,
breaches of quarter, and inhuman cruelties, committed of either side, may be
questioned in the said Parliament, if your Majesty so think fit, and such as
shall appear to be guilty to be excepted out of the said act of oblivion, and
punished according their deserts.

For as much DREAD SOVEREIGN, as the ways of our addresses unto your Majesty
for apt remedies unto our grievances were hitherto debarred us, but now at
length through your benign grace and favor laid open, We do humbly present
these in pursuance of the said Remonstrance, which granted your said subjects
are ready to contribute the ten thousand men as in their remonstrance is
specified toward the suppressing of the unnatural rebellion now in this
Kingdom: And will further expose their lives, and fortunes to serve your
Majesty, as occasions shall require.

The Answers of the Agents for the Protestants of Ireland, to the Propositions
of the Roman Catholics of Ireland, made in pursuance of his Sacred Majesty's
directions of the ninth of May 1644. requiring the same.
1, TO the first we say that this has been the pretense of almost all those
who have entered into Rebellion in the Kingdom of Ireland at any time since the
Reformation of Religion there which was settled by act of Parliament above
eighty years since, and has wrought good effect ever since, for the peace and
welfare both of the Church and Kingdom there, and of the Church and Kingdom
of England and Protestant party throughout all Christendom, and so has been
found wholesome and necessary by long experience, and the repealing of those
Laws will set Popery again both in jurisdiction, profession, and practice, as
it was before the said Reformation, and introduce amongst other inconveniences,
the Supremacy of Rome, and take away, or much endanger your Majesty's Supreme
and just authority in causes Ecclesiastical, a diminution of honor and power
not to be endured. The said acts extending as well to seditious sectaries, as to
popish Recusants. So as by the repeal thereof, every man may seem to be left
to choose his own Religion in that Kingdom which must needs beget great
confusion, and the abounding of the Roman Clergy there, has been one of the
greatest occasions of this late Rebellion, Besides it is humbly desired that
your Majesty will be pleased to take into your gracious Consideration a clause
in the act of Parliament past by your Majesty's Royal assent in England in the
seventeenth year of your reign touching punishment to be inflicted upon those
that shall introduce the authority of the Sea of Rome in any case whatsoever.

2. Whereas they desire to have a free Parliament called, reflecteth by secret
and cunning implication upon your Majesty's present Parliament in Ireland as if
it were not a free Parliament. We humbly beseech your Majesty to resent how
dangerous it is to make such insinuation or intimation to your people of that
kingdom touching that Parliament, wherein several acts of Parliament have
already passed, the validity where of may be endangered if the Parliament
should not be approved as a free Parliament, and it is a point of so high
nature as we humbly conceive is not properly to be discussed but in Parliament.
And your Majesty's said Parliament now sitting is a free Parliament in Law,
holden before a person of honor and fortune in that Kingdom composed of good
loyal, and well affected subjects to your Majesty, who doubtless will be
ready to comply in all things that shall appear to be pious and just for the
good of the true Protestant Religion, and for your Majesty's service, and the
good of the Church, and State, That if this present Parliament should be
dissolved, it would be a great terror, and discontent to all your Majesty's
protestant subjects of that kingdom, and may be also a means to force many of
your Majesty's subjects to quite that Kingdom, or peradventure to adhere to
some other party there in opposition of the Romish Irish confederates, rather
then be liable to their power, which effects may prove of most dangerous
consequence, and we humbly offer to your Majesty's consideration your own
gracious expressions mentioned in the grounds and motives inducing your
Majesty to agree to a Cessation of Arms for one whole year with the Roman
Catholics of Ireland Printed at Oxford the ninth of October 1642. viz. And
let all our good subjects be assured that as we have for these reasons, and
with this caution, and deliberation consented to this preparative to peace. And
to that purpose do continue our Parliament there, so we shall proceed in the
accomplishment thereof with that care, and circumspection, that we shall not
admit even peace it self other wise then as it may be agreeable to
conscience, honor and justice. We also humbly desire that such Laws as your
Majesty shall think fit to pass may be transmitted according to Poynings
Law, and other laws of explanation thereof, or of addition thereunto now in
force with great contentment and security to your Majesty's protestant
subjects. But if the present Parliament be dissolved we humbly represent unto
your Majesty that so many of your ablest, and best protestant subjects have
been murdered, or banished by this Rebellion, that few or no protestant
Freeholders will be found in the Counties, Cities, and Buroughs to elect, and
choose Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, which will be most dangerous to your
Majesty's rights and prerogatives and good subjects, and may beget great
disputes in after times for the repealing of Poynings Act, notwithstanding
their feigned expressions of their loyalty. Yet it plainly appears they do
not repose sucht rust inyour Majesty's Justice as it becomes lo yall subjects
to do, and such they pretend themselves to be, for that they seek thereby to
prevent your Majesty and your Council of England, and Ireland of so full a
view, and time of mature consideration to be had of acts of Parliament of
Ireland before they pass as in prudence is requisite, and has been found
necessary by the experience of well near two hundred years, And if their
intentions were so clear as they profess we know not why they should avoyde
the strictest view, and trial of your Majesty's, and your Councels of both
Kingdoms. This they desire intending to introduce a great diminution of your
Royal and necessary power for the conservation of your Regal State, and
protection of your good protestant subjects there and elsewhere. And what
special use they aim at in seeking such repeal your protestant subjects as
they know not the particular so can they conjecture of none unless the said
Confederates have some design by way of surprise to obtrude upon your Majesty
in their new desired Parliament some acts in Justification of their ill done
actions, and for condemning such of your protestant subjects as have in their
several degrees most faithfully served your Majesty there, which we the
rather believe seeing they have proved by their oath of Association, and the
Bull lately published in Ireland since the Cessation, the destruction of the
Protestants there, when they have their swords in their hands to put the same
in execution.

3. We humbly desire that they may particularize those orders or ordinances
which may prejudice your Majesty's service. For we are well assured that the
Parliament now sitting in Ireland on signification of your Majesty's pleasure
therein, either will give your Majesty full satisfaction, or repeal any unjust
orders, or ordinances whatsoever, which may be prejudicial to your Majesty.
And there may be some orders, or ordinances which may concern particular
persons in their lives, liberties, or fortunes, that may suffer unheard by the
admitting of so general a proposition, which is merely proposed, as we
humbly conceive to put a scorn on your Majesty's parliament now sitting there,
and to discourage your protestant subjects who have faithfully served your
Majesty in that parliament.

4. This we conceive to be a very bold proposition not warranted as we also
conceive by any example, and tending to introduce an ill president in after
times, for it was never seen that Records were taken of the file but where
there was some corruption, or fraud, or some illegal, or unjust carriage used
in, and concerning the procuring, or making up of such Records, and the same
first well proved upon due examination, And it may not only conceal, but in
some fort seem to justify their abominable Treasons, Murders, Cruelties,
Massacres, and plunders acted against your Majesty's person Crown and
dignity, upon the persons of your Majesty's most loyal protestant subjects in
that Kingdom, and encourage the Papists there to do the like again, besides
the discouragement it may beget in your Majesty's officers, and subjects to
their duties in the like insurrections which may happen hereafter, which also
may prove very prejudicial to your Majesty's rights and revenues, if the
Records to support the forfeytures wherein many of them are or may be grounded,
should be taken of the file, and Cancelled.

5. We humbly conceive that in times of peace, and most settled government. When
the Court of Law and Justice is most open, and best observed, that the debts
due to the Crown and actually levied and paid in to your Majesty's use, ought
not to be restored though the Records of the forfeytures should legally be
reversed, which is far from the present case, And this proposition tends to
cross the just right of your Majesty, and to make the disposition by the
Confederate popish Rebels of debts due to protestants, and by the said rebels
by fraud and force levied, and disposed in maintenance of their rebellion,
which commonly they call by the name of public uses, to be in equal degree
with the debts owing by the rebels and by them all forfeyted, and many of them
by law duly levied, which is a most unequal and unjust thing. And the said
propositions cannot, nor does make offer to have the popish Confederats cut off
from the debts due to them which they have justly forfeyted, but only for a
color of consideration, to have the protestants loose such debts justly due to
them, as have been unjustly taken from them, who have done no act at all to
forfeyte them.

6. We know not of any offices found on feigned Titles, nor what the Confederats
may demand in respect of any graces promised by your Majesty, which we intend
not, nor have any occasion to dispute, but do humbly conceive that all those
who have committed treason in the late rebellion subsequent to your Majesty's
promise of those graces, have thereby forfeyted the benefit thereof together
with the Lands which the said graces, might else have related, and so their
whole estates are now justly fallen to your Majesty by their rebellion, which
we conceive is of great importance for your Majesty's service to be taken into
consideration, as first with regard of the statutes made in the present
Parliament of England. Secondly the necessary increase of your revenue decayed
by the present rebellion. Thirdly the abolishing of the evil custom of the
Irish, and preservation of Religion, Laws and government there. Fourthly the
satisfaction of your protestants subjects losses in some measure. Fifthly the
arrears of your Majesty's Army, and other debts contracted for that war, and
for preservation of that Kingdom to your Majesty. Sixthly the bringing in of
more British on the plantations. Seventhly the building of some walled Towns
in remote, and desolate places for the security of that kingdom, and your
good subjects there. Eighthly the taking of the Natives from their former
dependencie on their chiefetaynes who usurped an absolute power on them to the
diminution of your Regal power, and to the oppression of the inferior.

7. This we conceive concerns some of the late plantations and no other part
of that Kingdom, and that the restitution herein mentioned is found to be of
great use especially for the indifferency of trials strength of the
government, and for trade and traffic, and we humbly conceive that if other
plantations shall not proceed for the settling, and securing of that Kingdom,
and that no restraint be made of papists purchasing, or buying of the
protestants out of their former platations where they were prudently planted,
though now cast out of their estates by the late rebellion, and unable to plant
the same again for want of means, and therefore probably upon easy terms
will part with their estates to the Confederates. That those plantations will
be destroyed to the great prejudice of your Majesty's service, and endangering
of the safety of that Kingdom. Touching bearing of offices we humbly conceive
that their non-conformitie to the laws and statutes of that Realm is the
only mark of incapacity imposed upon them. And we humbly conceive that they
ought not to expect to be more capable there then the English Natives are here
in England in like case. For Schools in Ireland there are diverse settled in all
parts of that Kingdom already by the Laws and statutes of that Realm. And if
any person well affected shall erect, and endow any more schools there, at
their own charges, So that the Schoolmasters and scholars may be governed
according to the laws, custom, and orders of England, and the best of free
schools here. We cannot apprehend any just exceptions thereunto, but touching
Universities, and Innes-of-Court. We humbly conceive that this part of the
proposition savoureth of some desire to become independent upon England, or to
make a separation in the Religion and laws of the kingdom, which can never be
truly happy but in the good unity of both in the true protestant religion, and
in the laws of England. For as for matter of charge such of the Natives as are
desirous to breed their sons for learning in divinity can be well content
to send them to the Universities of Lovain, Doway, and other places in forayne
Kingdoms, and for Civil law or Physic to Padua, and other places which
draws a great treasure yearly out of your Majesty's Dominions, but will send
few, or none of them to Oxford or Cambridge, where they might as cheaply be
brought up and become as learned, Which course we conceive is holden out of
their pride and disaffection toward this Kingdom, and the true Religion here
professed. And for the laws of the land which are for the Common-lawes
agreeable to England, so for the greatest part of the statutes, the Innes of
Courts in England are sufficient and the protestants come thither without
grudging, And it is a means to civilize them after the English customs to
make them familiar, and in love with the language, and Nation to preserve law
in the purity when the professors of it shall draw of one original fountain,
and see the manner of the practice of it in the same great Channel where his
Majesty's Courts of Justice of England do flow clearly. Whereas by
separations of the Kingdoms in the place of their principal instruction where
their foundations in being are to be laid, a degenerate corruption, in Religion
and Justice may happily be introduced, and spread with much more difficulty to
be corrected and restrained afterward by any discipline to be used in Ireland,
or punishments there to be inflicted for departing from the true grounds of
things that are best preserved in unity when they grow out of the same root,
then if such Universities and Innes of Court as are proposed should be granted.
All which we humbly submit to your Majesty's most pious and prudent
Consideration and Judgment.

8. We humbly conceive that the Roman Catholics Natives in Ireland may have
the like offices, and places as the Roman Catholics Natives of England here
have, and not otherwise. Howbeit we conceive that in the generallity they have
not deserved so much by their late rebellion. Therefore we see not why they
should be endowed with any new or further capacity or privileges then they
have by the Laws, and statutes now in force in that Kingdom.

9. We know no oppression by reason of the Court of Wards, and we humbly
conceive that the Court of wards is of great use for the raising of your
Majesty's revenues, the preservation of your Majesty's Tennures, and chiefly
the education of the Gentry in the protestant Religion, and civilitie of
learning, and good manners who otherwise would be brought up in ignorance, and
barbarism, their estats be ruyned by their kindred, and friends, and continue
their dependence on the chief Lords to the great prejudice of your Majesty's
service and protestant subjects, and there being no color of exception to your
Majesty's just Title to wardships, we know not why the taking away of Court
concerning the same should be so pressed, unless it be to prevent the
education of the Lords and Gentry that fall-wards in the protestant religion,
For that part of this proposition which concerns respit of homage, we humbly
conceive it reasonable that some way may be settled for this, if it stands with
your Majesty's good pleasure, without prejudice to your Majesty, or your
protestant subjects.

10. We humbly conceive that in the year 1641. by the graces which your
Majesty then granted to your subjects of Ireland, the matter of this
proposition was in a fair way regulated by your utter abolishing of blancke
proxies, and limitting Lords present, and attending in the Parliament of
Ireland that no one of them should be capable of more proxies then two, and
prescribing the Peers of that Kingdom not there resident to purchase fitting
proportions of land in Ireland within five years from the last of July 1641.
or else to loose votes till they should make such purchase: which purchase by
reason of the troubles happening in that Kingdom, and which have continued for
two years, and a half, have not peradventure yet been made. And therefore
your Majesty may now be pleased, and may take just occasion to enlarge the
time, when that Kingdom may again be settled in a happy and firm peace: And
as to members of the house of Commons the same is most fit as we humbly
conceive to be regulated by the Laws, and statutes of that Kingdom.

11. This proposition concerns your Majesty's high Court of Parliament both of
England and Ireland, and is beyond our abilities who are not acquainted with
the Records, and presidents of this nature to give an answer unto, and
therefore We humbly desire your Majesty's pardon for not answering unto the
same.

12. The Councell-Table has always exercised Jurisdiction in some cases ever
since the English government was settled in that Kingdom, and is of so long
continuance in cases of some natures, as the beginning thereof appears not,
which seems to be by prescription and has always been armed with power to
examen upon oath as a Court of Justice, or in nature of a Court of Justice in
cases of some natures, and may be very necessary still in many Cases,
especially for the present, till your Majesty's Laws may more generally be
received in that Kingdom: And we conceive that Board is so well limited by
printed Instructions in your Majesty's Royal fathers, and by your Majesty's
Grace in the seventeenth year of your Reign, that it needs for the present
little, or no further regulating at all: Howbeit they humbly refer unto your
Majesty's great wisdom, and goodness to do therein, as to Law and Justice
shall appertain.

13. The matter of this proposition is settled in a fitting and good way by your
Majesty already, as we conceive amongst the Graces granted by your Majesty
to your people of Ireland in the seventeenth year of your Reign, to which we
humbly refer our selves.

14. We humbly conceive that this proposition tends to lay a false and
scandalous aspersion upon your Majesty's gracious government over Ireland: And
that it trencheth very high upon your Wisdom, Justice and Power, and under
color of supposed corruptions pretended to be in the greatest Officer that
commands under your Majesty there, if he continue so long in his
government as may well enable him to find out and discover the true state of
that Kingdom, and the dangerous dispositions and designs of the Popish party
there, to prevent him therein; and to turn him out from doing service before,
or as soon, as he is thoroughly informed, and experienced how to do the same,
and then to hold him excluded so long that in all likelihood he shall not live
to come to that place the second time, which we humbly conceive will be a
great discouragement to any person of honor and fortune to serve your Majesty
in that high trust: And for the purchasing lands in that Kingdom, your
Majesty may be pleased to leave them to the Laws, and punish them severely
if they commit any offense, or exercise any oppositions under color of
purchasing of any lands or estates whatsoever.

15. The having of trained bands in Ireland for the present cannot under favor
be for your Majesty's service or the safety of that Kingdom: For that the
Protestants by the sad effects of the late Rebellion are so much destroyed that
the said bands must consist in effect altogether of the Confederate Catholics,
and to continue them in arms stored with ammunition, and made ready for
service by mustering, and often training, will prove under color of advancing
your Majesty's service against foreign invasion, a mere guard and power over
popish forces always in readiness to protect the Popish Confederates, and by
force, and Arms according to their late oath and protestations to execute all
their cruel designs for extirpation of the Protestant Religion and English
Government both which they mortally hate; Howsoever in cunning they dissemble
it, and to prevent the settling an army of good Protestants, without which your
Majesty's good subjects cannot live securely there.

16. We humbly pray, that the Laws of force be taken into consideration, And
do humbly conceive that your Majesty in honor and Justice may forbear to
discharge, or release any actions, suites, debts, or interests whereby your
Majesty's protestant subjects who have committed no offense against your
Majesty or your Laws should be barred or deprived of any of their legal
remedies or just demands which by any of your Majesty's Laws and statutes they
may have against the popish Confederates (who are the only delinquents) or any
of their party for or in respect of any wrongs done unto them, or any their
ancestors, or predecessors, in or concerning their Lands, goods, or estates
since the contryving or breaking forth of the rebellion, The said Confederates
having without provocation shed so much innocent blood, and acted so many
cruelties as cannot be parralleled in any story, And we conceive it to be high
presumption in them upon so weak grounds to propound an act of oblivion in
such general terms, some of the Confederates having been contryvers or
actors of such cruel murders and other acts of in humanity as cry to God, and
your Sacred Majesty for Justice, And they having of your Majesty's Revenues,
customs, subsides and other rights of your Crown in their hands or destroyed
by them to the value of twenty hundred thousand pounds and more.

17. We conceive this proposition is made but for a flourish, and if the
Confederates be so desirous to try their innocence as they pretend they need
not stay for another Parliament in Ireland, but submit to that which is now in
being, which is an equal and just Parliament, as in some of your reasons
touching that point is expressed, and they offering to draw it to a new
Parliament, is in effect to desire that they may be their own Judges, for as
that Kingdom is now imbroyled and wasted, the chief delinquents, or
Confederates will be so prevalent a faction in the next Parliament, that they
will be able, and doubtless will clear all the popish party how guilty
soever, and condemn all the protestants how innocent soever.

These answers to the high, and unexpected demands of the Confederates, we have
framed in humble obedience, to your Majesty's directions, but being very
sensible as of the weight and great importance of the business so also of our
own weakness and want of time, and well knowing that some of your Privy
Counselors, Judges, and Officers of that Kingdom are now in Town sent for
over, and here attending by your Majesty's command, who by their long
observation and experience of the affairs and state of Ireland, are better
able to give your Majesty more full and satisfactory answers touching the
premises then we can, And conceiving that the Collections in Answer to the
said Confederates Remonstrance, which we humbly presented to your Majesty the
27. of the last month of April, may in many things give your Majesty more
light then these our answers do or can. We humbly beseech your Majesty that
the said privy Counselors, ludges, and Officers as occasion shall require may
be called upon and heard to give your Majesty the better satisfaction in these
particulars, and that to the same purpose the Book of the said Collections may
be perused, and considered of, as your Majesty shall find most requisite.

The humble petition of diverse of your Majesty's Protestant subjects in your
Kingdom of Ireland, as well Commanders of your Majesty's Army here, as others
whose names are subscribed in the behalf of themselves, and other your
Protestant subjects in this your Kingdom.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
Shows, that this your Highness Kingdom, reduced with a vast expense of
treasure, and much effusion of British blood, to the obedience of the
Imperial Crown of England, has been by the Princely care of your
progenitors, especially of Queen Elizabeth, and of your Royal Father of ever
blessed memory, and your sacred Majesty in many parts happily planted, great
sums of moneys disbursed in building and improvements, Churches edified, and
endowed, and frequented with multitudes of Protestants, and your Custom, and
revenues raised to great yearly sums, by the industry of your Protestant
subjects especially, and great sums of moneis by way of subsidies, and
contributions cheerfully paid unto your Majesty by your said subjects, in
which happiness this your Kingdom has flourished in a long continued peace,
and under your highness most glorious, and happy government, until that by
the present general rebellion and conspiracy, raised out of detestation of
your blessed Government, and for the rooting out of the Protestant Religion,
and so for the dispossessing of your Majesty of this your said Kingdom,
without the least occasion offered by your Majesty* or the Protestant subjects;
And notwithstanding that your Majesty immediately before had enlarged beyond
president your Royal favor and bounty to them in granting all that their and
our joint Agents did desire of your Majesty, and we continuing amongst them in
all love and amity without distrust your petitioners and others who labored to
oppose those damnable designs and practices have been driven from their
dwelling, estates, and fortunes, their houses, and Churches, burnt, and
demolished, all monuments of civillity utterly defaced your Majesty's Forts and
places of defense thrown down, and the Common, and statute laws of this your
Kingdom utterly confounded, by taking on themselves the exercise of all manner
of authorities, and Jurisdictions Ecclesiastical and Civil, both by land and
sea, proper and particular to your sacred Majesty being your just prerogatives,
and the Royal flowers of your Imperial Diadem, to the disherison of your
Crown, and your royal revenues brought to nothing; And the Protestant Clergy
with their Revenues, and support for the present destroyed This your Kingdom
in all parts formerly inhabited by British Protestants now depopulated of
them, and many thousands of your Protestant most barbarously used, stripped
naked, tortured, famished, hanged, buried alive, drowned, and otherwise (by all
barbarous cruel sorts of death) muthered, and such as yet remain alive of
them are reduced to that extremity, that very few of them have wherewithal to
maintain a being; And all of them so terrified and afflicted, with those
barbarous and inhuman cruelties, the true reports whereof being now spread
abroad into the Christian world, your suppliants conceives fears, your
Majesty's British subjects will be discouraged from coming again to inhabit
this Kingdom: And the remnant of the British left here will be forced to
depart; All this being done by the Conspiracy of the Papists who did publickely
declare the utter extirpation of the Protestant Religion and all the British
professors thereof out of this your Majesty's Kingdom, and to the end this may
the better in some measure appear, your suppliants have made choice of
Captain M. William Ridgeway, Sir Francis Hamilton Knight and Barronet,
Captain Michael Jones, and M. Fenton Parsons whom they have employed and
authorized as their Agents, to manifest the truth thereof, in such particulars
as for the present they are furnished withal, referring the more ample
manifestation thereof to the said Captain M. William Ridgeway, Sir Francis
Hamilton, Captain Jones, and Fenton Parsons, or any three or more of them, and
such other Agents as shall with all convenient speed be sent as occasion shall
require to attend your Majesty from the Protestant subjects of the several
Provinces of this your Kingdom.

We therefore your Majesty's most humble, loyal and obedient Protestant
subjects casting down our selves at your Royal feet, and flying to you for
succor and redress in our great calamity as our most gracious Sovereign Lord
and King, and next and immediately under Almighty God our protector and
defender, most humbly beseeching your Sacred Majesty to admit into your Royal
presence from time to time our said Agents, and in your great wisdom to take
into your Princely care, and consideration the distressed estates and humble
desires of your said subjects, for that the glory of God your Majesty's honor,
and the happiness of your good subjects the Protestant Religion may be
restored through the whole Kingdom to its luster, and the losses of your
Protestant subjects may be repaired in such manner, and measure as your
Majesty in your Princely wisdom shall think fit, and that this your
Kingdom may be so settled as that your said Protestant subjects may hereafter
live therein under the happy government of your Majesty and your Royal
posterity, with comfort and security* whereby your Majesty will render your
self throughout the whole world a most just and glorious defender of the
Protestant Religion, and draw down a blessing on all other your Royal
undertakings for which your Petitioners will ever pray, etc.

A list of the names of those who have underwritten their names to this
petition.
GEorge Kildare. Montgomerye. H. Blany. VV. Ridgeway. Ia. Montgomery. Cha.
Coote. Fra. Hamilton. Arthur Forbis. Robert Han'y. Fra. Slinsby. William
Colley. Arthur Blundell. Ia. Dunbar. Ed Powey. Tho. Meredith. Arthur Loftus.
William Usher. Geo. Monk. Francis Willoughby. Robert Sterling. Io. Morris.
Henry Jones. Io. Piggot. Robert Bailey. Fra. Moore. Ed Philpot. VV. Parsons
Junior. Arthur Culme. Erasmus Burrowes. Io. Edgeworth. William Dodwell. Io.
Newman. William Plunket. Io Ferrar. Io. Cliffe. Peter VVybrants. Theod. Scout.
Brean Stapleton. Da. Dunbar. Tho Nill. Geo. Lawnder. Hen. Tillier. Hugh
Cogh^an, William Gilbert. William Montgomery. Ia. Calvill. William Johnson.
Geo. Montgomery. Robert VVh^^field. Io. Lo^bell. Hugh Montgomery. Io Rayvan.
Iosaa Wheeler. Arch Hamilton. William White. William Piggot. Tho. Tully.
Roger Atkinson, Nich* Simpson, Oli Wheeler. William Alsry. Adam Meredith.
Tho. Coote. Edw Piggot. Ia. Deroaile. Geo Boothe. William Knight. Robert
Sanderson. Ia. Starling. An. Dopping. Radeliffe Du^kinfield. William Lu^^^.
Tho. Leigh. Dan. Hester. Robert ^er^ivall. Ia. Crawford. Stephen Allen.
William Anberry. John Doyle. Edw. Spring. Io. Johnson. Tho. Almer. Io. Hoy.
Robert ^ennedy. Cooley (...). Robert Co^^. Robert Stewar^. Tho. White. Pat.
Connemag. Dudley Colley. Nic. Pinnar. Sa Mull^nax. Ia. Kennedy. Hen. Kenney.
William Hamilton. William Billing. William Vmphry. Hugh Ionne. Io. Leight.
Andr Brereton. Io Clerk. Roger Holland. Io. S^erring. Mar. Higginson. Io.
Waller. Iohauth Holt. Edw. Fisher Capt. Tho. Lewton. Tho. M^nley. Ios. Holt.
Io. C^mberlege. And. Cumble. Geo. Chibaldist* Io. Ro^. Fra Barser. Nath.
Stoug^^^^. Will. Boding^on. And. ^^^^g. Edw. Barten. Io. Pinrose. Will
Richardson. Robert Masson. William Heward. Ia. VVoodcocke. And. Watson.
Robert Jones. William Tedder. And. Jones. Robert Boyer. William Medcalfe.
Iona. Costie. William Sands. Natha. Poster. Io. Field. Walter Fraster.
His Majesty's answer, to the propositions of the Roman Catholics of Ireland.
COncerning any thing in Religion, his Majesty's answer is, That as the Laws
against those of the Romish Religion, within that his Kingdom of Ireland have
never been executed with any rigor or severity: So if such his subjects shall
by returning to their duty and loyalty, merit his Majesty's favor and
protection, they shall not for the future have cause to complain, that lesle
moderation is used toward them, then has been in the most favorable of Queen
Elizabeth and King James his times: Provided that under pretense of Conscience,
they do not stir up sedition but live quietly and peaceably according to
their Allegiance.

2. Touching the calling a free Parliament (by which his Majesty supposes the
proposers intend a new Parliament) his Majesty says he could wish, that all
the particulars might be fully agreed on, and ratified this Parliament; his
Majesty well understanding that his Protestant subjects may be in far
greater danger in a new Parliament then the proposers and their Party can be
in this, his Majesty being willing to give them any security that can be
desired against their apprehensions; however since some objections and doubts
are raised of the legal continuance of this Parliament since the death of the
Lord Deputy VVansford, and by the late arrival of his Majesty's Commission,
after the day of meeting upon the prorogation (though those doubts may be
easily solved) his Majesty is content to call a new Parliament, upon
condition, that all particulars be first agreed on, and the Acts to be passed
be first transmitted, according to custom (for his Majesty will by no means
consent the suspension of Poynings Act) and the proposers giving his Majesty
security, that there shall be no attempt in that Parliament to pass any other
Act, then what is agreed on, and first transmitted; or to bring any other
prejudice to any of his Majesty's Protestant subjects there.

3. His Majesty neither can nor will declare Acts in themselves lawful to be
void, but is content that neither the Proposers, nor their party shall suffer
any pejudice by any Acts or Ordinances passed, since the time in that
proposition mentioned, by reason of this commotion: And for that end shall give
his full concurrence.

4. The matters of the four, five and sixteenth Propositions are to be
digested into an Act of Oblivion, in which his Majesty will admit any Clauses
to enlarge his mercy: but will not by declaring Indictments legally taken and
regularly prosecuted to be void, give any countenance to, or make any excuse
for the present Rebellion: which would be a great prejudice to truth, and to
the future security of that Kingdom. And therefore His Majesty is content to
grant a full and general Pardon to all persons whatsoever within that his
Kingdom (except for all Treasons, Rebellion, or other crimes whatsoever,
growing or arising from or by reason of the said Rebellion) and will likewise
give his consent to such an Act of Oblivion as shall be prepared and
transmitted to him by the advice of his Lord Lieutenant and Council of
Ireland, who are fittest to consider in what state debts are to be left: and
particular actions and remedies to be waved: in which His Majesty for the
peace of the Kingdom will be content to release what concerns himself.

6. When all particulars shall be agreed on, and faithfully executed on the
parts of the Proposers, his Majesty (expecting a just acknowledgement of his
bounty, as well knowing that he parts with very much, to which he has a
legal and undoubted title) is content to release and quit his right to all
such lands in the Counties mentioned (except within the Countyes of Kilkenny
and Wickloe) upon the terms formerly assented by his Majesty in his Answer
to the grievanees in the seventeenth year of his Reign, and will consent to
such an Act of limitations as is desired.

7. When all other things shall be concluded, his Majesty will consent to an
Act for the taking away any incapacity, as Natives, either to lands or offices,
if any such there be: And will willingly consent to the erecting an Innes of
Court, University, or free-schooles, provided that they be governed by such
Statutes, and Orders, as His Majesty shall approve, and agreeable to the
Custom of this Kingdom.

8. Such of His Majesty's subjects of the Romish Religion within that Kingdom,
as shall manifest their duty and Affection to His Majesty, shall receive such
marks of His Majesty's favor in offices and places of trust, as shall manifest
His Majesty's good acceptance and regard of them.

9. His Majesty will take care, that his good subjects of that Kingdom shall
not be oppressed by his Court of Wards, and if oppressions of that kind have
been, upon good and due information, His Majesty will cause Justice to be done
for the time past; and for the future will prevent the like by Instructions.
But for the taking away of that Court, His Majesty can make no answer, till
the particulars for his satisfaction be set down, and presented to him.

10. His Majesty consented as far as is fit for him in this Point, in his
answer to the five and twentieth grievance, in the seventeenth year of his
Reign; the which he is still willing shall be enacted, looking forward still
to five years, to begin after the peace concluded.

11. His Majesty conceives the substance of this Proposition (which concerns
the fundamental Rights of both Kingdoms) fit to be referred to the free
debate and expostulation of the two parliaments, when it shall please God that
they may freely and safely sit, His Majesty being so equally concerned in the
privileges of either, that he will take care to the utmost of his power, that
they shall both contain themselves within their proper limitts: his Majesty
being the Head, and equally interessed in the Rights of both parliaments.

12. This is sufficiently provided for in his Majesty's Answer to the tenth
grievance, which he is content shall pass.

13. Since it appears by long experience that these Laws have not produced
that good effect for which they were made, his Majesty was graciously pleased
by his late Graces, that those Statutes should be repealed, save only for
woolls and woollfells: and will observe the same resolution: And a Book of
rates shall be settled by an indifferent Committee.

14. His Majesty does not admit that the long continuance of the Chief
Governor of that Kingdom in that place, has been an occasion of much tyranny
and oppression, or that any tyranny, or oppression has been exercised upon his
subjects in that Kingdom: However his Majesty will take care, that such
Governors, shall not continue longer in chose places, then he shall find for
the good of his people there: and is content that they shall be inhibited to
make any purchase (other then by lease, for the provision of their Houses)
during the space of their Government, in such manner as is desired.

15. This proposition is to be explayned, and some particular ways to be
proposed to his Majesty for the doing thereof: And then his Majesty upon due
consideration of the safety and security of his Protestant Subjects, will
return his Answer.

16. Answered in the fourth and fifth.

17. Such persons who shall be excepted out of the Act of Oblivion, shall be
tried by the known Laws of the Land.

The Answer of JAMES Marquis of Ormond His Majesty's Commissioner, for the
treaty, and concluding of a Peace in this Kingdom, for and in the name and
behalf of His Majesty to the Propositions of His Roman Catholic subjects of
Ireland.
When all the particular demands made on the behalf of his Majesty, the
Church, and his Majesty's Protestant subjects, and their party shall be
concluded, his Majesty will be graciously pleased on his part, to agree to
the particulars hereafter expressed viz.

1. To the first proposition, his Majesty will be graciously pleased, if his
said Roman Catholic subjects shall by their obedience, and loyalty merit his
Majesty's favor and protection, that they shall not for the future have cause
to complain, that less moderation is used toward them then has been in the
most favorable of Queen Elizabeth, and King James his times; But his Majesty
for diverse weighty considerations will further advise, before he consent to
the repeal of any the Acts, intended by the said Proposition.

2. To the second, his Majesty will be graciously pleased to call a new
Parliament upon condition, that all particulars therein to be passed by act of
Parliament, be first agreed on, between us his Majesty's Commissioner, and
Donogh Lord Viscount Muskery, Alexandermac Donell, and Nicholas Plunket
Esquiers, Sir Robert Talbot Baronet, Dermot O Brien, Patricke Darcy, Geffrey
Brown, and John Dillon Esquiers, or any five or more of them, who are deputed
by his said Roman Catholic subjects, to treat with Us about the same: And
the said Acts so agreed upon be transmitted according to several acts of
parliament in that behalf provided, And that there shall be no attempt by his
Majesty's Roman Catholic subjects in that parliament to pass any other act,
then what is agreed upon as aforesaid and first transmitted, or to bring any
other prejudice to any of his Majesty's protestant subjects in this kingdom:
And if any thing shall be attempted in the said parliament to the contrary,
that then his Majesty's Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor, or Governors,
before whom the said parliament shall be holden, shall forthwith after such
attempt, dissolve the said Parliament without expecting any further direction
from his Majesty for the same; But his Majesty for diverse weighty
considerations, will be further advised, before that he do consent to the
suspension of Poynings Act.

3. To the third, his Majesty will be graciously pleased that none of his said
Roman Catholic subjects, shall suffer any prejudice by any Acts or Ordinances
passed in this present Parliament since the time in the Proposition mentioned,
by reason of the present commotion, but his Majesty cannot legally declare
Acts or Ordinances made in Parliament which are in themselves lawful; to be
void, nor give warrant to take them off the file.

4. To the fourth his Majesty cannot in course of Justice, by his Proclamation
declare indictments, attaintures, out-lawries, Letters Patent, Grants, Leases,
Bonds, Recognizances, or any other legal record to be void, or taken off the
file, But his Majesty will be graciously pleased to grant a full and General
pardon, to all persons whatsoever, excepting such as hereafter upon this
treaty, shall be thought fit to be left thereout, for all Treasons, rebellions
and other crimes whatsoever, growing and arising for or by reason of the same,
And will likewise give his consent, that an act be passed to that purpose, in
which his Majesty will admit any clauses to enlarge his mercy, And his
Majesty will be further graciously pleased to determine all custodiums which
have been granted since the 22. of October 1641.

5. To the fifth proposition his Majesty cannot in Justice consent to the taking
away of any debts due to his subjects, who have committed no offense which
might occasion the forfeyture thereof, But for such debts as have accrued unto
his Majesty by the attaynture or fugacie of any of his Majesty's Roman
Catholic subjects since the 23. of October 1641. His Majesty will be
graciously pleased to remit so many of them, as have not beeen paid into his
Majesty's Exchequer or received otherwise to his Majesty's use, or by his
appointment.

6. To the sixth proposition his Majesty will be graciously pleased to release
and quite his right to all such lands in the said proposition mentioned, except
within the Counties of Kilkenny and Wickloe, upon the Terms formerly assented
unto by his Majesty in his answer to the grievances in the 17. year of his
reign, and will consent to such an act of limitation, as is desired.

7. To the seventh his Majesty will be graciously pleased to consent to an act,
for the taking away any incapacitie as Natives, either to lands or offices, if
any such there be, and will willingly consent to the erecting of an Innes of
Court, Vniversitity or free-schooles, Provided that they be governed by such
statutes, rules, and orders, as his Majesty shall approve, and be agreeable to
the Customs of England.

8. To the eight his Majesty will be graciously pleased that such of his
Majesty's said subjects within this kingdom as shall manifest their duty and
affection to his Majesty shall receive such marks of his Majesty's favor in
offices and places of trust, as shall manifest his Majesty's good acceptance,
and regard of them.

9. To the ninth proposition, his Majesty will take care, that his good
subjects of this kingdom shall not be oppressed by his Court of Wards, And if
oppressions of that kind have been upon good and due information, his Majesty
will cause Justice to be done for the time past, and for the future will
prevent the like by instructions. But for the taking away of that Court, his
Majesty can make no answer, till the particulars for his satisfaction be set
down and presented unto him.

10. To the tenth Proposition, his Majesty consented as far as is fit for
him in this point, in his answer to the 25 grievance, in the seventeenth year
of his reign the which he is still willing shall be enacted, looking forwards
still to five years, to begin after the peace concluded.

11. To the eleventh Proposition his Majesty conceives the substance of this
Proposition (which concerns the fundamental rights of both kingdoms) fit to
be referred to the free debate, and expostulation of the two Parliaments, when
it shall please God, that they may freely and safely sit his Majesty being so
equally concerned in the privileges of either, that he will take care to the
uttermost of his power, that they shall both contain themselves within their
proper limits, his Majesty being the head and equally concerned in the rights
of both.

12. To the twelfth his Majesty has sufficiently provided for this, in his
answer to the tenth grievanee, which his Majesty is content shall pass by act
of parliament.

13. To the thirteenth proposition his Majesty has been pleased by his late
Graces that those statutes should be repealed, save only for Wools and
wool-fels, And is well pleased, that the same be done by act of parliament, and
that a Book of Rates be settled, by indifferent Commissioners.

14. To the foureteenth proposition his Majesty does not admit or believe,
that the long continuance of the chief Covernors of this kingdom in their
places of government, has been an occasion of any tyrany or oppression, or
that any tyrany or oppression has been exercised upon his subjects of this
his kingdom, howsoever his Majesty will be graciously pleased to take care,
that such Governors shall not continue longer in those places, then he shall
find for the good of his people here, And his Majesty is content, that they
shall be inhibited to make any purchase, other then by Lease for the provision
of their houses during the time of their government.

15. To the fifteenth Proposition, this proposition is to be explaned, and some
particular way to be proposed for the doing thereof, And then consideration
being had of the safety and security of his Majesty's protestant subjects, an
answer will be made thereunto.

16. To the sixteenth proposition, his Majesty cannot in Justice to the
foreclosing of the subject of his legal remedy, for the recoverie of any
goods, chattels, or rents, unlawfully taken or detayned from him. But for
such-meane profits, Customs, prizes, and Rents, which have accrued unto his
Majesty since the 23 of October. 1641. except the Customs received at Waterford
and Rosse since the 15. of September 1643. His majesty is content to remit the
same, the rest of the proposition is answered in the answer to the fourth
proposition.

17. To the seventeenth, his Majesty will be pleased, that such persons as
shall be excepted out of the general pardon shall be tried by the known Laws
of this Land.

The Lord marquis of Ormond now declares that albeit these answers are thus
given by him in present to the said propositions, yet that he intends not to
be thereby concluded, from altering the same, or adding thereunto in any parts
there of, In such sort as he shall find cause upon further debate.

Some of the reasons which moved His Majesty's most humble and loyal Subjects
the Confederate Roman Catholics of Ireland to present certain Propositions to
His Excellency the Lord Marquis of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, His
Majesty's Commissioner.
THe first Proposition that concerns the freedom of the Catholic Religion,
and the repeal of all Laws made against the professors of that Religion, is a
demand, not in favor of any innovation, but for that Religion which the
Inhabitants of this Kingdom anciently, and like wise the English Colonies come
at first into this Land, and their heirs for many descents have professed, and
do profess at the present, and which before the reign of King Henry the
VIII. was professed by the Kings of England, and their subjects generally. And
it may be further added, and confidently affirmed, that there are no subjects
in the world of what other belief or profession soever in Religion, that held
themselves so inviolably tied to the preservation of that monarchy, to whom
they owe subjection, and allegiance, as the professors of the said Roman
Catholic Religion.

This proposition consists of two branches, the first for the repeal of
certain acts, the second that the freedom of their Religion may be allowed
to the said Catholics. For the clearing of the first branch, the said
Catholics do not press the total repeal of the said statutes, their
humble request being, that the great penalties, pressures, incapacities, and
other unavoidable inconveniences by the said statutes imposed on them alone,
may be removed as to them by act of Parliament. By one statute found among the
Records of Parliament of this kingdom in the second year of the reign of the
late Queen Elizabeth cap. 1. and 2. the said Catholics are made subject to
the arbitrary power of an high Commission Court, or other Commissioners to be
appointed by his Majesty, or the Lord Deputy for the time being, and may be
questioned, and punished for all offenses touching Religion. Irish statutes
fol. 261. likewise fol. 270. and 271. the Archbishops, Bishops, and Ordinaries
of another Religion have heavily punished, and may still punish the said
Catholics for Marriages, Christenings done according to the Catholic
Religion, and every Catholic was driven to pay nine pence every Sunday for
not repayring to Church, to the great impoverishment and destruction of the
said Catholics, and no profit at all to his Majesty.

By the said statute, fol. 261. and 262. not only the Catholic Clergy, are
excluded from all dignities and benefices Ecclesiastical, but likewise the
Catholic Laytie of all degrees and qualities, are rendered incapable of all
Civil offices, from the highest judge to the petty Constable, and likewise
from Marriall offices or employments, even to be a common Soldier in his
Majesty's army, where any fee or wages are due, without first taking the oath
of supremacy; and upon refusal of the said oath all dignities, offices, or
wages are forfeyted.

No Catholic can sue Livery or Ouster le maine for his estate or any part
thereof out of his Majesty's hands without taking the said oath by the same
statute of 2 Elizab. cap. 1 fol. 265. a. If any Catholic of what estate,
degree, or quality soever within this kingdom do by writing, printing,
teaching, preaching, express words, deed or act, affirm, hold, stand with,
set forth, and maintain any other authority, pre-eminence, power, or
jurisdiction in matters Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, then the person so
offending his abbettors, ayders, promovers, and counselors, shall for the
first offense, forfeyte their goods and Leases, and suffer imprisonment for one
year, for the second offense incur the pains and forfeytures set down by
the statutes of Provision and Praemunire whereby the offender is put out of the
Kings protection, imprisoned during his life, and his goods and lands
forfeyted: For the third offense the offender is punishable as in case of high
Treason.

Then by consequence if any of the Catholic Laytie take or procure a
dispensation for marriage within the eight degree, or any other license or
dispe^sation from any authorized by the Sea of Rome, is a principal offender,
and if he hears the Mass or Sermon of any deriving power from thence, and
keep him in his house, he is punishable as an ayder and abbettor within the
words of the statute, he knowing that whereof he cannot be ignorant by the
rules of his profession.

As for the second branch of the said proposition let any man judge, whether it
be reason sufficient of it self, that the professors of the Roman Catholic
Religion both spiritual and temporal, being to a few the Natives and
residents of this kingdom should desire a freedom of their Religion, and to
be freed and exempted from the penalties, and pressures aforesaid, whereby his
Majesty never received any advantage, and have been the occasion of many
inconveniences in the kingdom.

And it is evident that by this freedom all his Majesty's good subjects as well
Protestants as Catholics will be united more then ever before, when their
condition is equal, and neither party have occasion to envy or oppress the
other.

It will not be unworthy of consideration, that in reason of state (the
constitution of his Majesty's three kingdoms as now they stand being duly
weighed) that this freedom, and exemption is most necessary for his Majesty's
service and safety.

2. It is of the essence of Parliaments to be free, the contrary was practiced
here; The composition of this Parliament is desired to be of men estated and
interested in the kingdom, of genuyne and right members, and to be returned
from proper places, and by right ministers.

The suspension of the act for this free Parliament cannot prejudice his
Majesty, for that nothing is to pass as an act before transmission, other then
what shall be agreed upon and expressly mentioned in the Articles of peace.

3. It is conceived this pretended Parliament was determined by the death of
the Lord Deputy VVandesford, most of the estated and right members thereof did
not appear in it since the 7. of August 1641. those who now appear as members
thereof viz. of the Commons-house, are for a great part not much interessed and
other wholly uninteressed therein, and one order therein made to exclude the
said Catholics from the house, other orders to their disadvantage were and or
might have been made in the said Commons-house. Therefore it is desired that
all the proceedings of the said pretended Parliament may be declared void and
taken of the file.

4. When those indictments were found and outlawries promulged, the said
Catholics are informed, and hope to justify that those who governed in this
kingdom, or some of them, did plot and practice the total extirpation of the
said Catholics, and as much as in them lay did increase the troubles to that
end, and shute up the gates of his Majesty's mercy against the said
catholics, even against those who were undeniably innocent, as may appear by
many instances; the manner of appointing of Sheriffs, who returned the Jurors,
and the persons appointed, the Jurors condition and affection, the infinite
numbers of the persons indicted and outlawed, being never called to answer, and
other circumstances touching or depending of the said Records, being so
generally destructive to the said Catholics they cannot otherwise choose then
to insist on the taking them of from the file, that no such marks of infamy
may remain of Record, against them whose ancestors for the space of four
hundred years and upwards, faithfully served the Crown.

5. This proposition is so just and equal in it self, that there needs not
any reason or proof to be urged for it.

6. This proposition being yielded into by the answer, except the late
Plantations in the County of VVicklow and Iduogh in the county of Kilkenny, and
excepting the increase of Rents is referred to what shall be urged upon the
fixed answer.

7. In all or most Letters Patent granted of Plantation Lands, and some other
lands in this kingdom since the making of the said statutes, certain clauses
and conditions were inserted in them, that no land should be sold or past to
any of the mere Irish or of the Irish Nation, as the condition is in some
Patents, these clauses do and did nourish division and distinction between his
Majesty's subjects, the like was never used in England, nor in any other
kingdom. They extend not only to the old Irish, but likewise by construction
to the old English, for he that is borne in Ireland, though his parents and all
his ancestors were Aliens, nay if his parents were Indians or Turks if
converted to Christianity is an Irishman as fully, as if his ancestors were
here borne for thousands of years, and by the Laws of England as capable of
the liberties of a subject, Such marks of distinction being the insteps to
trouble and war are incompatible with peace and quiet.

8. The said Roman Catholics being rendered incapable of any command or trust
by the statutes aforesaid, may be relieved herein upon removal of the
impediments mentioned in the reasons for the first proposition, and particular
instances showed for the present, yet such were the Character, laid upon them
here, and the representations made of them from hence heretofore into England,
that they apprehend they suffer thereby in his Majesty's opinion of them, which
they conceive an impediment and stop to many graces and favors they expect and
hope to merit from his Majesty.

In all ages past before the said statutes their ancestors were preferred to
places of eminence and trust within their Native countries, and since very
seldom, three presidents since can hardly be instanced.

The condition of Roman Catholics in Ireland, where there are an hundred
Catholics to one of any other Religion differs much from that of England or
Scotland, where there is scarce one Catholic to a thousand of the protestant
religion.

In all the Nations of Christendom the Natives of the place are advanced
before others.

9. The Court of Wards was begun here a bout the foureteenth year of King
James, and never before: It has not the warrant of any Law or statute; In
England it was erected by act of Parliament.

The subject is extremely oppressed thereby by the multitude of informations
against all freeholders from the highest to the lowest without any limitation
of time, the frequent Courts of Escheaters and Feodaries, the destruction of
the Tenures of mesnes Lords by making many Tenures to be In Capite against Law;
by the sale of the wards from hand to hand, as of Horses in a Market, by the
want of Provision for portions of younger children, whereby they perish or take
ill courses; debts remain unsatisfied, and though by the statute of Merton
cap. 5. Usury does not run upon Infants, yet the Collateral security either
of men or Land mortgaged are not relieved by that statute.

The King never received one shilling advantage by this Court ultra reprisas,
for twenty shillings damage done thereby to his people, the vast fortunes of
the officers and ministers of the said Court, how suddenly raised on the
ruynes of many others his Majesty's subjects. And let all the wards since the
erection of the Court be numbered, for one that gained civilitie or breeding
during their minority, many will be found to have departed the said Court with
ignorance, loss or impayring of their estates and other great inconveniences.

No diminution of his Majesty's profit is desired, the personal service upon
all occasions shall be performed. The extinction of this Court and of the
Tenures in capite or by Knights service is humbly desired to be taken away, and
a course for his Majesty's profit and service and preservation of Heirs and
Orphans, and satisfaction of Creditors shall be then humbly proposed.

The respit and issues of homage being of no considerable advantage to the
Crown, and an intolerable yoke to the subject, is likewise desired to be taken
off, and a way of equal benefit to his Majesty shall be proposed.

10. The great number of these Lords uninteressed in the kingdom, their ends
in seeking for those honors, and the late introduction of the example being
considered; it may be easily judged how unequal or unjust it is that the votes
of men of no estate and never resident in the kingdom if not for design,
should impose a charge wherein they contribute nothing, or put Laws, by which
they are not bound themselves.

11. The independencie of the Parliament of Ireland of the Parliament of
England is so clear and manifest by Law, Justice, usage, and necessity, that
they humbly desire it may not be driven into dispute, yet in as much as the
Royal assent wrested from his Majesty to the acts of subscription may draw a
prejudice or discountenance upon our Parliament, a declaration herein and act
of Parliament is desired.

12. This proposition is in it self so reasonable, and the restraint laid on
the Councell-Table from taking cognizance of matters determinable in the Kings
ordinary courts of Justice by the Common Law* the great Charter thirty times
confirmed by Parliament, and sundry other acts of Parliament of force in this
Kingdom, is so manifest and clear, that there is no need of further reasoning
or proof for the same; therefore it is consonant to Law and Justice, that the
parties aggreeved, should be restored to what they lost, and left in statu
quo, etc. as is desired, and that no matter determinable in the ordinary
Courts may be determined at the Councell-table.

13. This proposition being for free trade and commerce so necessary for
advancement of his Majesty's service and profit and so indifferently inducing
to the weal of his people, it is conceived, that all who are interessed in the
Kingdom, ought to contribute their endeavors for the attaining of what is
thereby humbly desired.

14. The place of chief governor of this Kingdom being of so great honor
and high trust, and therefore to be conferred upon such as study his Majesty's
service, and the prosperity of the Kingdom without regard to particular
interest; this limitation will keep the chief governor wary from offending
any subject, or descending so low as to give occasion, even of speech, that his
actions are unwarrantable, or his purchases acquired by oppression, men are to
be chosen for this place, that have no need to purchase.

15. The malice and power of the malignant party in England and Scotland, and
of their adherents abroad, and threatened danger of in vasion to be made by
them, and the invitation thereunto of many in this Kingdom, who are known to
have studied and plotted the ruin of this Kingdom, are motives sufficient for
the granting of the contents of this proposition, and that the Kingdom be
always in posture of defense of it self, and all the well affected subjects
thereof.

16. The passing of an act of oblivion to quiet and secure the minds of all
his Majesty's subjects in a case so general, wherein the most of his Majesty's
subjects one way or other are involved, is so necessary, and so pursuing the
presidents, and examples, not only of England and Ireland, but also of other
States and Kingdoms, that without the passing thereof some Imbers of mischief
may still remain, which may (though God forbid) turn unto great flammes,
witness the Barons wars, the wars of York and Lancaster, these present
troubles of England, and Scotland, and other examples, even in this Kingdom.
And it there be any possibility to relieve all particulars, when the general
concernment is in question.

17. Honor, Justice, equity, and reason of State do plead for this
proposition.

We desire notwithstanding those reasons to be admitted to show such further
and other reasons, and add hereunto what we shall think fit touching the
matters, wherein the answers are short, or not satisfactorie.

As the Lord Lieutenant in his answer gave the Proposers no occasion to use any
unfitting expressions, so he may not but declare the Comparison, and some
other expressions in their preamble, to be very unnecessary, and unseasonable,
and such as he may not admit however he now offers.

An Explanation of some of the answers given by JAMES Marquis of Ormond His
Majesty's Commissioner, for the concluding of a Peace in this Kingdom to the
Propositions of His Majesty's Roman Catholic subjects of Ireland with some
further Concessions.
1. Answ. FOr the exception taken to the answer to the first Proposition,
although neither the statute of 2. Eliz. c. 1. nor any other statute of force
in this kingdom do impose any mulct or penalty for saying, singing, or
hearing Mass, or keeping a Roman Catholic priest in their houses, yet his
Majesty for the further satisfaction of his said Roman Catholic subjects, in
any doubt or scruple, that may arise upon the construction of any of the said
statutes which may disquiet their minds, is graciously pleased that a
declaration of the law as unto that point be prepared and published. And his
Majesty is likewise graciously pleased to suspend the high Commission Court:
And that as the oath of supremacy has not been imposed upon any of them of
late times upon the suing of Liveries, so they shall for the time to come be
admitted to sue their Liveries upon taking the oath by his Majesty's directions
in that case provided, which being added to the answers to the eight
proposition (by which his Majesty has declared that they shall receive such
marks of his favor in offices and places of trust as shall manifest his
Majesty's good acceptance and regard of them) may for the present abundantly
satisfy his said subjects, And for the repeal of any of the acts intended by
the said proposition his Majesty will further advise.

2. Answ. For the exception taken to the word new Parliament in the answer to
the second proposition, Whereas a free Parliament was propounded, The said Lord
Marquess declares that the said new Parliament is to be as free, as by the
laws and statutes of this kingdom any parliament to be held in this kingdom
ought to be, yet so as no interpretation be from thence made, that there should
be any proceeding in the said parliament in any particular contrary to the
agreement on this Treaty. As to the exception taken to the clause in the
answer, viz. that the parliament shall be dissolved upon an attempt only of
propounding any other matter then shall be agreed upon by the articles of
peace, albeit the clause is not so as it is recited, Yet the Lord Marquess for
their further satisfaction is pleased that the word attempt be left out of the
clause wherein it is, and it be expressed in manner following viz. And that
nothing be concluded by both or either of the said houses of parliament, which
may bring prejudice to any of his Majesty's protestant party or their
adherents.

And for their desire to have Poynings act suspended, forasmuch as it is
assented unto, that no act of parliament is to pass upon the suspension of
Poynings act without transmission, according to the usual manner, but what
shall be provided for in the Articles of peace, And that it is enacted by act
of parliament of force in this kingdom, that Poynings act cannot be
suspended, but by Bill to be first agreed upon by both houses of parliament in
this kingdom, which is likewise to be transmitted according to the usual
manner, which will take up as much time as the transmitting of the Bills which
are to be agreed on this Treaty, And seeing the benefits which shall be held
fit to be derived to the proposers may be as effectually, and with more speed
done without suspending of Poynings act, as by suspending thereof; His Majesty
does not see cause why the same should be desired, But he is very apprehensive
of the prejudice the suspension thereof may bring upon himself, and the
public service by disquieting the minds of his protestant subjects in both
kingdoms, if that he should admit such innovation at this time, there being no
necessity thereof, and therefore his Majesty as well for that as other weighty
considerations, may not vary as unto that particular from his former answer.

3. Answ. If both or either of the houses of parliament have made any orders
wherein his Majesty's concurrence has not been, It does rest only in the
power of the house or houses and not in his Majesty to vacate such orders,
except they do appear in themselves to be illegal, And in such cases his
Majesty will declare such to be void, and give directions for the vacating of
them as in the particular whereof instance is made, for excluding members duly
elected and returned according to the established laws of this kingdom out of
the house of Commons, who should refuse to take the oath of supremacy, which
without an act of parliament to warrant it cannot be in such case imposed, but
his Majesty may not admit the present parliament to be void, nor declare all
that has been done therein since the seventh of August 1641. to be void for
that many orders much tending to his Majesty's honor and the safety of this
kingdom, wherein both houses did join have been made since that time, as the
prohibiting the taking of the Covenant so destructive to Monarchy, and the
Church, which has been condemned by both the said houses, Their joint
approbation of the late Cessation, The petition wherein both houses joined to
his Majesty, and others of that kind.

4. Touching the exception taken to that part of the answer to the fourth
proposition concerning the General pardon, The Lord Marquess declares that it
is meant thereby that the said general pardon shall extend to restore them,
excepting such as shall be on this Treaty agreed to be excepted, to their blood
and estate by act of parliament, whereby all Grantes, Letters Patent, Acts,
Letters, Promises shall be avoided. But his Majesty cannot in justice publish
any such Proclamation, or give any such direction to the parliament as is
desired, before the persons intended to be charged be heard, and the matters
suggested proved, which if they shall, his Majesty will then do therein what
shall be just. And in the mean time cannot think ill of his ministers of
state employed in this kingdom, nor of the proceedings of any of his Majesty's
Courts of Justice, And for their desire that there should be no exception in
the pardon, his Majesty may not assent thereunto.

5. His Majesty will be pleased that debts do stand in statu quo, having as
unto such who shall be agreed in this treaty to be excepted out of the general
pardon, and excepting one particular sum which has been paid into his
Majesty's Exchequer.

6. His Majesty may not agree to the avoiding of the Plantations in the county
of VVicklow, and Territory of Idough in the county of Kilkenny, part of the
Lands in the county of VVicklow, viz. the Ranelagh being confirmed by act of
parliament, and so much of the rest of the lands in the said county as fell to
his Majesty upon the division, and the Territory of Idough being passed by
Letters Patent under the great Seal upon the Commission of Grace for remedy
of defective Titles, strengthened likewise by act of Parliament, which his
Majesty may not in honor avoyde, And his Majesty does conceive it were
unsafe for diverse of his Majesty's subjects, who have purchased, estates
grounded upon his Majesty's title, that the statute of Limitations should have
such a retrospect as is desired, which in time would overthrow the estates of
many of his Majesty's subjects, who acquired estates for valuable
considerations, And therefore his Majesty may not assent thereunto, but for
taking off or abating of Rents contracted or agreed for, his Majesty is
pleased that the course prescribed in his answer to the twelfth additionall
proposition be observed.

7. His Majesty may not admit that the governing of the Innes of Court,
University, and free-schooles by such statutes rules and orders, as his
Majesty shall approve of, and be agreeable to the customs of England will
debar Roman Catholics so long as they are of that Religion from attayning
to the laws of the Land, or any other learning within the kingdom, for those
of that Religion in England, and who go from hence do attain the knowledge
of both in the Universities and Innes of Court there in an eminent manner, and
may do the like here.

8. There being no offices or place excepted in the former answer, the
Proposers may rest satisfied therewith, it being in his Majesty's power to
dispose of such places and offices by his Letters Patent as occasion shall be
offered, and thereby to remove all impediments mentioned by the Proposers.

9. His Majesty does not admit such abuses to have been in his Court of wards
and the ministers thereof, as are set forth in the reasons for the ninth
proposition, until proof be made thereof, And his Majesty does believe that
exceeding great benefit may redound to the kingdom, by the continuance and
right ordering thereof, And therefore conceives his former answer to be
reasonable, And it seems not equal which is propounded that there should be
first an extinguishing of the Court, and the Tenures in capite taken away, and
that then a course for his Majesty's profit and service should be proposed,
that being to be offered in the first place before his Majesty part with the
other, And the like is to be done for respit of homage.

10. His Majesty may not receade from the former answer with which the
Proposers may rest satisfied.

11. As his Majesty may not vary from his former answer, so he may not
foreclose the houses of parliament from making any declaration agreeable to the
laws of the land.

12. The Proposers may rest satisfied with the former answer, considering that
all parties grieved may have the benefit of the laws of the land, and that by
consent of the parties interested many matters determined at Councell-board are
confirmed by act of parliament.

13. His Majesty will be pleased that indifferent persons be agreed on this
treaty who shall be authorized by Commission to moderate and settle the Book
of Rates in such sorre as they shall think fit.

14. His Majesty may not assent any further to this proposition then he has
already done without apparent prejudice to his service.

15. His Majesty may not receade from his former answer.

16. His Majesty thinks not fit to give any further answer to this
Proposition then he has done already, until the Proposers make answer to the
propositions made and delivered unto them in the behalf of his Majesty's
protestant subjects and their adherents. And then upon further debate his
Majesty will give such answer as shall be thought fit.

17. It may not be admitted that trials by the known laws of the land
assented unto by the former answer should not be indifferent, And therefore his
Majesty may not receade from his former answer:

The said Lord Marquess of Ormond now declares, that albeit these answers are
thus given by him in present to the said propositions, yet that he intends not
to be thereby concluded from altering the same or adding thereunto in any parts
thereof in such sort as he shall find cause upon further debate.

Additionall Propositions of His Majesty's most humble and loyal subjects the
Confederate Roman Catholics of Ireland, presented to His Excellency the Lord
Marquis of Ormond; Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, His Majesty's Commissioner.
1. THat an act be passed this next Parliament, prohibiting that neither the
Lord Deputy, Lord Chancellor, Lord High Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor,
or any of the Barrons of the Erchequer, privy council, or Judges of the four
Courts be Farmers of his Majesty's Customs.

2. That an act of Parliament may pass in this Kingdom against all
Monopolies, such as was enacted in England, 21. Iacobi, with a further clause
for repealing of all grants of monopolies in this Kingdom.

3. That the Court of Castle-chamber in this Kingdom, having been an
oppression to the subject, and there being other remedies for the offenses
questioned in that Court by the Common Law and Statutes of the Realm, be taken
away, or otherwise limited, as both houses of Parliament shall think fit.

4. That two acts lately past in this Kingdom, one prohibiting the plowing
with horses by the tail, and the other prohibiting the burning of oats in
straw may be repealed.

5. That upon presenting the names of three persons of quality in each County
by Us to your Lordship, patents be passed to such of those so to be presented
respectively to be Sheriffs in each County, as to your Lordship shall seem
meet to make choice of for that purpose.

6. That one, or more Agents from this Kingdom, may be admitted still to
attend his Majesty for his better information of the affairs of this
Kingdom; And that as a testimony of his Majesty's favor, some of the nobles
and others of quality of this Kingdom may be employed about his Majesty's
person.

7. For as much as diverse of the Scottish Nation, and others in this Kingdom
do not obey the present cessation, and many of them having of late taken the
Covenant proposed by the members of Parliament at Westminster now in arms
against his Majesty. It is therefore humbly desired that such as disobey the
said Cessation, or have taken the said Covenant, be proclaimed traitors, and
prosecuted accordingly by his Majesty's authority, and that such Counties or
Corporations as have not submitted to the now Cessation of arms in this
Kingdom, according his Majesty's Commission, be not admitted to make any
return to the Parliament.

8. For as much as sundry persons estated in this Kingdom, have either actually
raised arms in England, against his Majesty, or have otherwise adhered to the
malignant party now in arms against his Majesty, that therefore it may
please his Majesty to give way to the impeachment and attainders of those, and
such others whose names we shall here represent to your Lordship by way of bill
in Parliament, whereby they may receive condign punishment for their offenses,
and his Majesty take advantage of the forfeiture of their estates, and in the
interim the possessions to remain in the hands wherein they are at present.

9. For as much as upon application of the Agents from this Kingdom to his
Majesty, in the fourth year of his reign, and lately upon humble suite made
to his Majesty, by a Committee of both houses of the Parliament of this
Kingdom, order was given by his Majesty for redress of several greevances;
It is therefore humbly desired, that for so many of those as are not expressed
in the now propositions presented to your Lordship, whereof both houses in the
next ensuing Parliament, shall desire the benefit of his Majesty's said former
directions for redresses that the same be afforded them.

10. That the office of (...) in this Kingdom be settled ^^dependant of none
but his Majesty, whereby maritime causes may be determined here without
driving merchants or others, to appeal or seek Justice elsewhere in those
causes.

11. That a Course may be taken for all such as owe debts in this Kingdom for
that by reason of the general devastation of the Kingdom, the land is not
like in some years to come to be of any considerable value, being the only
means that many of the Nobility, Gentry, and others of this Kingdom had to
satisfy their debts, and therefore a competent time be given by act to be
past in the next Parliament for payment thereof and the interest or use of
moneys to be moderated.

12. That the subjects of this Kingdom may be eased of the increase of rent
lately raised and imposed on them upon the late Commission of defective titles
in the Earl of Straffords time.

13. That if any of your Lordships party during these troubles, have by fines,
recoveries or otherwise disinherited those who were next to succeed them of our
party as heirs, or in reversion, or remainder without real and full
consideration, but for being of our party, that all acts so done be avoided in
Parliament.

14. That such of our party whose estates are in the hands of the Scottish and
Parliament party, either in this Kingdom or in England, be recompensed out
of the estates of those malignant in this Kingdom.

The Answer of JAMES Marquis of Ormond, his Majesty's Commissioner, for the
treaty and concluding of a Peace in this Kingdom, for and in the Name, and
behalf, of his Majesty, to the additionall Propositions of his Roman
Catholic subjects of Ireland, etc.
When all the particular demands made on the behalf of his Majesty, the
Church, and his Majesty's Protestant subjects, and their party, shall be
concluded his Majesty will be graciously pleased on his part, to agree to the
particulars hereafter expressed, viz.

1. TO the first proposition, his Majesty has declared his pleasure in this
point (excepting in that part which concerns privy Counselors) in his answer
to the eight grievance in the seventeenth year of his Majesty's reign, which
his Majesty will be graciously pleased may stand as a rule in this case, And
as to that part which concerns privy Counselors, the same shall be humbly
represented to his Majesty and his Royal pleasure therein expected.

2. To the second proposition, his Majesty will be graciously pleased to
assent to this proposition yet so as first there be care taken to secure his
Majesty in the particulars proposed in the sixth, and seventh Articles of the
demands in the behalf of his Majesty delivered by the Lord Lieutenant on this
treaty to the Lord Muskery, etc.

3. To the third proposition, The particulars wherein it is desired, that the
Court of Castle-chamber may be limited, are to be proposed, and then such
consideration shall be had of this proposition as shall be fit.

4. To the fourth proposition, his Majesty will be graciously pleased, that the
two acts in this proposition mentioned be suspended for such time, as on this
treaty shall be agreed on.

5. To the fifth proposition, The laws have already provided for the manner of
appointing Sheriffs, from which course his Majesty thinks not fit to vary.

6. To the sixth proposition, After a peace shall be fully settled, application
may be had herein to his Majesty, who in his high wisdom best knows how to
extend his Royal favor in this particular.

7. To the seventh proposition, For the first part of this proposition, the
Lord Lieutenant declares that his Majesty's Commission to him warranting this
treaty, gives him authority to conclude a Peace, but gives him no authority
for pub^lshing such a Proclamation, or for such a prosecution, as in this
proposition is proposed, and for the later part of this proposition the
granting thereof is inconsistent with the condition of a free parliament.

8. To the eight proposition, when the Proposers shall present to the Lord
Lieutenant the names of the persons in this proposition intended to be
impeached and attaynted, such consideration shall be had of this proposition as
shall be fit.

9. To the ninth proposition, the proposers setting down the particulars of
the things contained in this proposition, such consideration shall be had
thereof as shall be fit*

10. To the tenth proposition, his Majesty will be pleased to advise concerning
this proposition.

11. To the eleventh proposition, this is left to further consideration on
debate.

12. To the twelfth proposition, this is not held fit for his Majesty to be
assented to on this treaty, yet the case of remittals or abatements we intend
humbly to represent to his Majesty, who will be graciously pleased in fit time
to set down such a course herein by Commission or otherwise, as may still
further magnify his goodness and indulgence to all his subjects.

13 To the thirteenth proposition, his Majesty may not assent to this, it being
against the liberty of the subject, and the laws of the Land.

14. To the fourteenth proposition, Such of the estates in this proposition
mentioned, as shall a crew to his Majesty is to be left to his Majesty to be
disposed of as in his high wisdom he shall think fit.

Demands in the behalf of His Majesty,
1. THat present restitution be made by the Confederate Roman Catholic
Party. of the Command, Rule and Government of the Cities of Limmericke,
Waterford, Kilkenny and Cashell, the Towns of Galway, Clonmell, VVeixford,
and Rosse, and of all other Cities, Towns, Counties, and Territories of right
belonging to his Majesty, and now in the possession, or under the command of
the said Confederate Roman Catholic party, and that restitution be like wise
made by them of all his Majesty's Castles, Fortes, Lands, Tenements, and
hereditaments, and of all his Majesty's Ordnance, Artillery, Arms, and
Ammunition, which have been seized on, or taken by the said Confederate Roman
Catholic party, since the 21. of October 1641. in the Cities of Limmericke,
Waterford, Galway, the Castle and Town of Newry, Charlemount, and other
places within the kingdom, And that all such power, Jurisdiction or Government
as has been assumed by the said Confederate Roman Catholic party over their
party, since the 22. of October 1641. be from hence forth abrogated deserted
and deemed void, And that all his Majesty's subjects as well the Roman
Catholics as others within the kingdom shall be from henceforth ameaneable
to the Laws of force in this kingdom, and obedient to his Majesty's
government and Courts of Justice.

2. That all the Armies raised by the said Confederate Roman Catholic party,
with their Arms and munition, and such Fortes, Garrisons and Wards, as are
now kept by them, shall from henceforth be under the command of his Majesty,
and his Majesty's Lieutenant, or other his Majesty's chief governor or
governors of this kingdom for the time being, and such others, as his Majesty
from time to time shall appoint.

3. Thirdly, that his Majesty may be answered such certain Rents, Compositions
and Casual profits and Subsidies, and all Customs, and Subsidies for
Merchandise as were accrued and grown due before and on the 23. of October
1641 and which shall from henceforth grow due.

4. That all the remain of the thirty thousand eight hundred pound appearing
to be payable to his Majesty by the Instrument signed by the Lord Muskery and
others, dated 16. of September 1643. which has not yet been paid in money or
Cattle, in manner as in an Instrument signed by the said Lord Muskery and
others, dated the xvj. of September one thousand six hundred forty and three,
is expresled, be paid to his Majesty's Vice-treasurer and Treasurer at Wars,
or to his deputy, or to such other person or persons as the Lord Lieutetenant,
or other chief governor or governors of this kingdom for the time being shall
appoint, to his Majesty's use, by the said Confederate Roman Catholic party,
at by or before the day of next

5. That the said Confederate Roman Catholic party do make a true account
and present payment of his Majesty's Customs and Impositions of Waterford and
Rosse, according to the Book of Rates, for all such Commodities as have been
exported out of, or imported into the said Harbors since the xv. of September
1643.

6. That the grant of the Licencing of retayling Wine and Aquavitae, and of
transportation of Linnen-yarne at per pack in Ireland toward the support of
the charge of this kingdom, may be settled by act of Parliament upon the Crown,
according to the resolution in his Majesty's late graces in the year 1641.
with some apt Proviso, that they may be kept and continued as a Revenue to the
Crown.

7. That on the pound of Tobacco be settled by act of parliament unto his
Majesty's use, as a Custom upon that Commodity, whereupon the emption of
Tobacco to be free, and the Monopoly wholly taken away.

Demands in the behalf of the Protestant Clergy.
1. THat the Archbishops, Bishops, and all other Ecclesiastical persons be
presently restored to their respective Churches, Jurisdictions and possessions,
both spiritual and Temporal, and to the free exercise of their several and
respective functions, and that they enjoy the same without any interruption to
be given thereunto by the said Confederate Roman Catholic party, in such
manner as they have enjoyed the same, before and on the 23. of October 1641.

2. That all Cathedral and parish Churches, and all Archbishops, and Bishops,
Mansion-houses, which have been any way demolished or defaced, by any of the
said Confederate Roman Catholic party, shall be withal convenient speed by
the Confederate Roman Catholic party repayted, and put in as good condition
as they were on the 23. of October. 1641.

3. That for the present subsistence of the protestant Clergy, they may be
allowed the one half of all the Tithe Corn belonging to their benefices
respectively arysing out of this present Harvest 1644. within the quarters
allotted by the articles of Cessation to the said Confederate Roman Catholic
party, or the value thereof.

Demands in the behalf of all His Majesty's Protestant subjects, and their
Party.
1. THat present restitution be made unto them of all their Castles, Lordships,
Manors, and all other Hereditaments, and Chattles real, of what kind soever,
whereof they were seized or possessed by themselves or their Tenants on the 22.
of October 1641. and which remain within the quarters allotted by the Articles
of Cessation to the said Confederate Roman Catholic party.

2. That where any of the goods, Evidences, or writings of the protestant
subjects, and such as adhere unto them, have been delivered in trust to any
that are or have been, of the said Confederate Roman Catholic party, to be
kept by any of them, That such goods, Evidences, and writings be restored to
those that so delivered them in trust as aforesaid, or to their heirs,
executors, administrators or assigns.

3. That all goods which have been pillaged and taken away by any of the said
Confederate Roman Catholic party, which may be had in specie, and the
property whereof was not altered by sale in market before the 24. day of June
1644. (being the day of the date of his Majesty's Commission warranting this
Treaty) be restored, or otherwise the Proprietor may be left to his remedy at
Common Law for the recoverie thereof, and that any sale in market since the
said 24. of June, shall be no hinderance or bar thereunto.

4. That where any of that party have pillaged or taken away any goods from any
of his Majesty's protestant subjects, or any adhering to them, between the 21.
of October 1641. and the 21. of January 1641. that the party so pillaged may be
left to take his remedy at law for recovery of his goods or damages for the
same against such who did so pillage them.

5. That all Castles and houses which were surrendered upon quarter, upon
Articles under hands, wherein it was undertaken, that the said Castles or
houses should be preserved from being destroyed or demolished, That the said
Confederates who have so articled may rebuild the said Castles or houses, in as
good state as they were at the surrendering up of the same, upon Articles as
aforesaid.

6. That where any Lands belonging to his Majesty's protestant subjects or
their tenants or adherents have been possessed by any of the said Confederate
Roman catholic party, and corn sown therein by any of that party since the
15. of September 1643. that the said protestant subjects or their adherents who
by themselves or their tenants were possessed of the said Lands on the 22. of
October 1641. or their Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns may
respectively receive the fourth sheafe of all the said corn this present
Harvest 1644. or the value thereof.

These propositions thus made in present are not in exclusion of any other
propositions which we shall adjudge necessary to be propounded or insisted on
for the glory of God, the honor of his Majesty, the interests of his good
subjects, and the safety of the kingdom, nor in exclusion of sundry other
particulars which may be necessary for us to insist on, as conducing to the
formerly mentioned ends, and which may arise upon the present Treaty.

Answers to the demands made by the Lord Lieutenant in the behalf of His
Majesty.
1. TO the first Demand his Majesty's faithful subjects the Confederate
Catholics of his kingdom of Ireland do answer, that the Cities, and Towns
in the said demand mentioned, are, and always have been ruled, and governed,
according to his Majesty's Laws, and the Charters unto them respectively
granted by his Majesty, and his Royal progenitors and predecessors Kings, and
Queens of England and Ireland, and are preserved and kept by the said
Confederate Catholics for his use, and service against the malignant party,
and their adherents. And as for his Majesty's Fortes, Castles, Territories,
Hereditaments, Ordnance and Artillery, in the same demand mentioned, the same
are likewise kept, and maintained for his Majesty's use and service, and the
safety of the kingdom and his Majesty's interests therein against such as are
joined in a rebellious covenant, and are actually in arms against his Royal
person. And they know of no considerable ammunition taken by the said
Catholics, and such as was so taken, and much more was by them employed in
his Majesty's service, And as to the power and jurisdiction mentioned to be
assumed by the said Confederate catholics, they say they were necessitated to
rule and govern their party to avoyde the extirpation of their Religion and
Nation plotted, and contrived by the said malignant party, and to preserve his
Majesty's rights. And their proceedings were, and are as near and consonant to
the laws of the kingdom, as the state and condition of the times did, or can
permit. And they will be ready to relinquish the said rule, and government
upon a full setlement of the affairs of the kingdom.

2. To the second they answer that the armies raised by the said Confederate
Catholics were raised, and the said armies Fortes, Garrisons and Wards in
the demand mentioned are maintained for the safety of the kingdom, and to
preserve his Majesty's interests, and the said armies always were and are in
actual service accordingly, and that upon a full setlement, the same are to be
disposed of as his Majesty will direct.

3. To the third they say that so much of the profits therein mentioned as grew
dew since the seventh day of August 1641. (on which day happened that enforced
and fatal adjournement of the parliament from whence all the distractions of
this kingdom did spring) as was received by the said Confederate Catholics,
and many an hundred times more was by them employed and expended in his
Majesty's service for the defense of the kingdom, And the said profits for the
time to come after a full setlement are to be disposed by such hands, as his
Majesty shall think fit.

4. To the fourth they say that the free gift granted to his Majesty by the
said Confederate Catholics is already overpayed, as shall be made appear
upon account by the supreme Counsel of the said Confederate Catholics, to
whom that affair is entrusted.

5. To the fifth they say that the Ports of Waterford and Rosse, being within
the quarters of the said Confederate Catholics by the Articles of Cessation,
they have according the said articles received the profits accruing out of the
customs of those ports, and employed the same in his Majesty's service and
defense of the kingdom.

6. 7. The matters contained in the sixth and seventh Demands are properly to be
determined in such manner as shall be agreed upon in the conclusion of this
treaty. And what further concerns the said demands, or the matters in them,
or any of them contained we conceive proper for a debate and to be determined
upon conclusion of the treaty.

The said Confederate Catholics do refer their answers to the demands made
on the behalf of the protestant Clergy to the first of the propositions
presented by them, And to the debate and determination thereof.

Answers to the Demands made on the behalf of His Majesty's Protestant
subjects:
1. TO the first the said Confederate Catholics do answer, that after a full
setlement of affairs, reciprocal restitution is to be made as well to the said
Confederate Catholics, and every of them, as also to his Majesty's said
protestant subjects, and to every of them, other then such of the said
protestants as are or shall be joined in a rebellious covenant against his
Majesty, or adhere to the malignant party of their respective Castles,
Lordships, Manors, hereditaments, and Chattels real, whereof they were
respectively seized or possessed on the 22. of October. 1641. within the
quarters allotted to either party by the articles of Cessation, And other then
the Castles, Lordships, Manors, and hereditaments in the county of VVicklow,
and in the Territory of Idough, out of which the Natives thereof were by an
high and injurious hand, or extrajudiciall and arbitrary proceedings expulsed
since the year of our Lord God 1633.

2. 3. 4. To the second, third, and fourth, they say that the said Confederate
Catholics are much more ^^mnified therein then the said protestants. And yet
in regard the same may beget many endless suites and troubles, they conceive
they are fit to be seriously debated, and finally ended upon the setlement.

5. To the fifth they answer that they know of no Forte, or Castle that was
demolished contrary to articles, And when the particulars shall appear, they
will give particular answers.

6. To the sixth they say that the Confederate Catholics do receive no profit
of their estates detayned from them; wherefore they conceive it not equal that
the protestants should receive the profits of their estates, until after
setlement, and then the profits of both estates, are to be reciprocally
received by all parties respectively in such manner as shall be agreed upon.

Reasons why His Majesty's said Roman Catholic subjects are not satisfied
with the answers delivered them by his Excellency the Lord Marquis of Ormond,
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, his Majesty's Commissioner, to certain
Propositions by them presented to his Lordship, on the fourth of September in
the twentieth year of his Majesty's reign.
IN as much as most of the reasons declaring how the said answers are not
satisfactory, do appear either in the said propositions themselves, or in the
reasons afterward in the month aforesaid presented to your Lordship, setting
forth the necessity of the said propositions, to avoid reiteration, what is in
the said propositions or reasons expressed, is herein omitted. It is therefore
humbly desired that your Lordship in your consideration of the reasons now
presented will distinctly and apart reflect upon the said former propositions
and reasons.

The said Catholics upon exact scrutiny, and search by them Reasons against
the first Answer.
made of their consciences and actions, finding nothing more desired by the
one, nor aimed at by the other (next to the homage which they owe to the King
of kings) then the advancement of his Majesty's service, and the settling of a
full peace and quiet in this his kingdom of Ireland, they do therefore with
heaviness of heart apprehend some expressions in the first answer (viz. If the
said Roman Catholic subjects shall by their obedience and loyalty merit his
Majesty's favor and protection) whereas the said Roman Catholics are as
obedient and loyal subjects to his Majesty as any other his subjects without
exception, and whereas their thoughts or actions have never deserved to put
them out of his Majesty's protection, yet the occasion of their said
apprehenhensions they may not ascribe to your Excellency, who is entrusted by
his Majesty with the acting and directing part in this great affair now in
Treaty, but unto some isntrumental cause or other mistake.

And as to the rest of the said first answer (viz. That when all demands made
by your Lordship unto the said Catholics in his Majesty's behalf, or on the
behalf of the protestant Clergte, and on the behalf of his Majesty's
protestant subjects, are concluded and upon such merit, as is before expressed,
the said Catholics shall not have cause to complain that less moderation is
used then in the most favorable of Queen Elizabeth, or King James his times,
and his Majesty will be further advised upon the repeal of the statutes made
against the said Catholics.) Although the said Roman Catholics are most
confident of his Majesty's grace and goodness, yet so great is the penalty
imposed by statutes of force in this kingdom extending to the goods estates,
liberties, lives, and corruption of blood of the said Catholics that they must
live in restless fears so long as those extreme punishments hang over them,
and in case his Majesty by Letters Patent under his great seal, or otherwise
will declare his Royal pleasure against the execution of those statutes upon
the said Catholics, yet those fears will hardly be removed thereby, such is
the malice of the malignant party, who have vowed the total destruction of the
said Catholics, that their adherents here, though not known to be such, will
never want will, and cannot want opportunity sufficient to indict the said
Catholics upon the said statutes; and the Judges before whom the said
indictments are found, by their oath declared by the statute of 18. Elizab.
will not stop or suspend the proceedings of the Court for the great Seal,
privy seal, or his Majesty's letters writs or commandments. And your Lordship
may please to observe that by long experience it is manifest that since the
making of those Laws, being foure-score and odd years, the penalties or
forfeytures in them expressed, have not been so prevalent as to draw them the
said Catholics from the Religion professed by them and their Ancestors, and
no advantage did in so long a tract of time accrue to the Crown by those
statutes. And seeing his Majesty is content that moderation should be used
toward the said Catholics, to what purpose should the said penal laws be
continued in force, whereas the continuation thereof can produce no other
effect, then jealousies and fears in the minds of the people.

A free Parliament is propounded and a new Parliament is meaned Reasons against
the 2. Answer.
in this answer to be granted. It is true that Parliaments in their Essence
ought to be free, yet some examples showing the contrary in this kingdom, and
a clause in the answer, viz. That the Parliament shall be dissolved upon an
attempt only of propounding any other matter, then shall be agreed upon by the
Articles of Peace, which attempt may be purposely done by some averse to peace
to dissolve a Parliament, and the taking away of the said clause, attempt, does
induce the said Catholics to supplicate the inserting of a free Parliament,
And that all the acts to be concluded on by the treaty may not be transmitted
into England, in regard the substance of that which will be passed as acts,
without transmission are to be inserted in the articles of peace, which and
none other act of Parliament is to pass upon the suspension of Poynings act
without transmission according to the usual manner, wherefore the said
suspension can bring no manner of prejudice upon his Majesty, or the public
service, and that by the granting thereof the peoples minds will be much
quieted The said Catholics do therefore humbly desire, that the said act be
suspended as is by them propounded.

If the now pretended Parliament, or either of the houses of Parliament made
any Orders or Ordinances to the prejudice of the said Reasons against the 3.
Answer
Catholics, the same Parliament may vacate them and take them off the file;
And it is not to be presumed that any member of Parliament is so little affected
to the peace or quiet of the kingdom that he will give opposition to the third
proposition, or to his Majesty's direction, or to your Lordships request in
that behalf. And the said Catholics conceive it necessary in point of honor
and reputation that no Order or Ordinance to their prejudice may remain of
Record in Parliament. And if no such Order or Ordinance be, the proposition
can hardly be denied, wherefore it is humbly desired, that the answer may
Reasons against the 4. Answer
be more full and satisfactory.

Upon consideration of the fourth proposition and of the reasons for the same,
it is humbly desired this answer be enlarged to the greater advantage of the
said Catholics, then is expressed; and although his Majesty cannot avoyde
Records of this nature by Proclamation, yet when his Majesty is informed that
those indictments and outlawries were done of design to extirpate a Nation,
and that in the proceedings it will appear, and here was practiced, his
Majesty's proclamation in a case of this general concernment declaring his
dislike of such proceedings will be of great consequence and his direction to
the Parliament, to that effect will no doubt, accomplish the desire of the said
Catholics contained in this Proposition, and his Royal directions to have the
Procurers, Actors, and Plotters of and in the said indictments, and outlawries,
and the whole proceedings questioned, and the design and practice being
discovered and proved, then the said records and all matters depending
hereupon, ought in law and justice to be vacated and taken off the file, and
the pardon in the answer mentioned restores neither blood nor estate, as it is
there set down, and admitting the pardon were by Parliament, it will be of
absolute necessity to avoid all grants, letter-patents, leases, and other
acts, letters, or promises made to the prejudice of the persons attainted, and
to restore them to their blood and estate, in which act a clause condemning the
manner of the procuring of the said indictements and outlawries is thought
necessary to be inserted; and the exception mentioned in the said answer, is
humbly desired by the said Catholics to be taken off; and the clause viz.
(His Majesty will enlarge his mercy.) to be made more particular.

This answer is humby desired to be made equal to all parties one Reasons
against the 5. Answer
way or other, as it is propounded, and that Catholics should pay debts due
upon them, and loose the debts due unto them, is conceived not to be equal.

By his Majesty's graces of the fourth year of his reign, all the Reasons
against the 6. Answer
estates in the Province of Conaght, and County of Clare, in pursuance of the
Indentures of composition made by the late Queen Elizabeth, for great and
valuable considerations, with the Lords and Gentry of the said Province and
County, and of the grants and promises of the late King James of happy
memory, were to be confirmed and made good by act of Parliament, the statute
of limitation was then to be passed, which extended to all estates in the
Kingdom, therefore no greater rent ought to be reserved upon the lands in the
said Province or County, nor upon the lands in the Counties of Tiperarie and
Lyndak, then was answered to his Majesty in the said fourth year of his
Majesty's reign.

And the great offices intituling his Majesty unto the before mentioned lands,
and to many men's estates in the County of Wickloe, and to the territory of
Idough in the County of Kilkenny, were enforced by an high hand; the
freeholders thereof being in possession of their repective estates then and
for many ages before, without interruption or question. It is therefore humbly
desired, that those offices be vacated and taken off the file, by his
Majesty's gracious directions, his highness or his patentees being therein only
concerned as to the title found by those offices; And that the statute and
limitation may be here enacted with a retrospect to the fourth year of his
Majesty's reign, at which time it was promised by his Majesty, to have been
passed as an act in this Kingdom, and if it had been so done, the said
offices had not been found. And that the case of the County of Wickloe, and
the County of kilkenny meriting equal justice and favor with the rest, ought
not to be distinguished from them.

The clause in the said answer, concerning Innes of Court, and free-schooles,
as it is expressed in the answer, will debar Roman Catholics Reasons against
part of the 7 Answer
so long as they are of that Religion, from attaining to the knowledge of the
laws of the land, or any other learning within this Kingdom.

This answer is conceived not to be satisfactorie and to general; and
particular instances of the marks of his Majesty's favor toward Reasons
against the 8 Answer
the said Catholics is humbly desired.

The reasons against this answer in all the parts thereof are the same, that
are urged for the ninth Proposition, and upon consideration of To the 9. Answer
those reasons, the answer is humbly desired to be enlarged.

His Majesty's answer made to the 25. grievance, in the 17. year of To the 10.
Answer
his Majesty's reign, gives five years time to the unestated Lords, to
acquire estates in this Kingdom; It is therefore humbly desired, that the
answer may be more satisfactory on consideration of the reasons for the tenth
proposition, and the state of affairs is so altered since that time, that upon
the now intended general settlement more circumspection and warines is to be
used then at any time before.

The said Catholics do conceive and affirm in all cleerenes, that the
Parliament of Ireland is independent of the Parliament of England, To the 11.
Answer
without which independency, this realm could be no Kingdom, nor any
Parliaments here necessary, nor any subject of this Kingdom, sure of his
estate, life or liberty, other then at the will and pleasure of a Parliament,
wherein neither Lords, Knights nor Burgesses of this Kingdom, have place or
vote, and which vowed the destruction of all or most of this nation, and
unwarrantably assumed the power to dispose of their estates, by the Statutes of
subscription to malignants, and Hollanders. To draw this into any debate or
question might prove of most dangerous consequence to this nation And yet a
declaration of the Parliament here, and an act as in the proposition is set
down, is humbly desired, in regard his Majesty was drawn to give the Royal
assent to the acts of subscription.

This answer is humbly desired to be enlarged according to the reasons The 12.
Answer
for the twelfth proposition.

The rates of staple commodities are humbly desired to be moderated by
Commissioners to be appointed by both houses of Parliament The 13. Answer


The reasons for the not continuance of the chief governor above three years
are the same urged for the fourteenth proposition. The 14. Answer


The reasons for the erecting and continuance of trained Bands are the same
that are urged for the fifteenth proposition. The 15. Answer


This answer is humbly desired to be enlarged, and the act of oblivion to
extend to goods taken of either side, although the Roman Catholics suffered
much more then all others in this war, and The 16. Answer
your Lordship will consider the reasons for this proposition.

It is of necessity the trial of the persons to be excepted be by parliament,
The 17. Answer
otherwise the trial cannot be indifferent in this case.

We desire notwithstanding those reasons to be admitted to show such further
and other reasons, and to add hereunto what we shall think fit touching the
matter wherein the answers are short, or not satisfactory*

FINIS.

