The Protestant PETITION and ADDRESS.
London, April 30. 1681.
Upon Thursday last there was Presented to the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen, (no Common Council at that Time Sitting) This Following Address.

To the Right Honorable Sir Patient Ward, Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of
London; And to the Right Worshipful, the Aldermen his Brethren. The Humble
Petition of Us whose Names are here Subscribed, and of many Thousands of the
most Eminent Citizens and Inhabitants of the City of London; his Majesty's
Loyal Subjects.
THat your Petitioners being deeply sensible of the many Instances which they
have had the Honor to receive, of his Majesty's Princely Goodness and Bounty;
and more particularly, in His Royal Assurances of a full Resolution to have
Frequent Parliaments; and both In, and Out of Parliament to use his utmost
Endeavors to extirpate Popery; to redress all the Grievances of his Good
Subjects; and in all things to Govern according to the Laws of the Kingdom:
Which his Sacred Majesty has been Graciously pleased, with a most Express
Solemnity, to promise, and to publish unto the World in his Late Princely
Declaration.

In the Contemplation of a Goodness so ample, and so effectual, that there is
nothing further wanting toward the Composing of Men's Minds; the creating of a
Right Understanding betwixt his Majesty and his Liege-People; and (under Gods
Providence) toward the Establishment of a Distracted Nation, in Agreement,
Peace, and Plenty; saving only the Dutiful Return of Veneration and Obedience,
from the Subject, in acknowledgement of the Fatherly Tenderness of so Indulgent
a Sovereign.

Your Humble Petitioners cannot but in Reverence, and Gratitude, Declare, that
We are Unanimously Resolved to lay our Lives and Fortunes at His Majesty's
Feet, in Defense of his Sacred Person, against all Opposition whatsoever; and
in the Maintenance of the Established Religion, and the Government both of
Church and State, as it is settled by Law; pursuant to the Tenor of his
Majesty's Royal Declaration, and the Duty of all Loyal Subjects.

May it Therefore please your Lordship, and this Honorable Court, to present
This our Humble Address, Declaration, and Resolution, to his most Gracious
Majesty, in such manner as unto You shall seem meet;

And Your Petitioners (as in Duty bound) shall ever Pray.

NOw forasmuch as the Petition above-Recited has been Invidiously Represented
to the World, as a Popish Contrivance; a Jesuitical Design; a Petition for
Slavery; and, at the best, but a Superfluous Acknowledgment to his Majesty for
Doing his Duty: (to the great Reproach, and Scandal of the Loyal Petitioners:)
We the Subscribers have deemed it Necessary, and Reasonable, for our Own
Vindication; the Satisfaction of all Honest men; and as a matter of good
Example unto Others, to publish the Petition it self: Appealing for the Truth
of the Copy, and the Quality of the Petitioners, to the Original Papers
remaining in the Court where they were presented; and Declaring withal, that
as it was but the work of a Day and Half, to gather the Hands; (without any
Preparatory toward it;) So the Subscribers are, every man of them, Regular
Protestants of the Church of England, and live in Obedience, and Conformity to
the Law.

The Reader will observe, upon the View of this our Petition; First, that it is
Peaceable, and Modest; being only a Dutiful Discharge of our Affections and
Consciences, in Thankfulness to his most Gracious Majesty, without
intermedling in any Nice and Political Matters; or reflecting, in any sort
whatsoever, upon the Doings, or Opinions of Other People, Secondly, that it is
a Gratitude to his Majesty, for the most Generous, and Consummated Obligations
that it is possible for a Prince to lay upon his People: That is to say, for
his Royal Assurance of Frequent Parliaments; of Extirpating Popery: Supporting
the Protestant Religion; Governing by the Laws; and Protecting his good
Subjects against all Violence whatsoever.

We shall leave the Reader here to think his Pleasure of those men that reckon
it a Scandal for a Subject to acknowledge the Bounty of his Sovereign; And
comfort our selves in the Integrity of our Own Souls: And in This further
Assurance, that we have as many Hearts, and may have as many Hands, in
approbation of This our Proceeding, there are True Protestants; Loyal Subjects;
and Right Englishmen, in his Majesty's Dominions. And so we shall Conclude,
without making any Descant, upon the Passions, Interests, or Designs of those
that Oppose us.

Printed for the Subscribers, April 30. 1681.


