False Fictions AND ROMANCES REBUKED: In Answer to Pretended Matter Charged
against the QUAKER, in a Book, Entitled, The Progress of Sin, etc. Written by
B. K. His Lies and Slanders therein returned back upon him, and the Speakers of
YEA and NAY in Truth Vindicated.

By JAMES PARK.

Psalm. 7. 14. Behold he Travelleth with Iniquity, he has conceived Mischief,
and brought forth Falsehood.

Ibid. v. 16. His Mischief shall return upon his own Head, etc.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1684.

False FICTIONS and ROMANCES Rebuked, etc.
I Have lately met with a Book entitled, The Progress of Sin, etc. it appears
to be written by the Author of War with the Devil; in the Title Page, for his
Name is only set B. K. toward the latter end of his Progress of Sin, he seems
concerned in his Majestical Attempts to Try, Condemn and Execute Tyrant Sin,
(as he calls it) but could not plainly tell how to demonstrate its Nature in
any sort of People, especially the Quaker, whom he Exposes and Derideth for
his speaking Yea and Nay, beginning with him by a Misrepresentation of his Zeal
and Sanctity, then making him speak, what (I dare say) he never said, nor can
he prove it: But however Tried, and Condemned to reproach must the Quaker be by
this Baptist Teacher, really for what it remains for him to make appear in his
next Progress of Sin, if he knew how; for in his last he has come so far short
thereof, that I think every sollid Christian Reader may apprehend him so
baffled in his War with the Devil and Progress of Sin, as now set at variance,
and fighting with his own shadow: and his War with the Quaker is, as if he had
no skill to make one fair blow at him, although his Wicked Fists are lifted up
high enough to knock him on the Head at once, were not the Angel of Gods
Presence with him, to keep him in safety from the power of his Fists of
Wickedness. Sober Men may judge that he might have forborne his barking and
biting also at the Quaker at his ravenous rate, at such a day of suffering as
this is, upon all Dissenters from the public Worship of the Nation; what in
his Progress of Sin I found by way of Charge against the Quaker, I return him
this following Answer, being as much as I judged Expedient it might deserve,
Truth or Reallity not appearing in his Proceedings against the Quaker by his
Imaginary Court, or what he has printed in his Progress of Sin against him: he
imagined ('it is like) it might be some pleasing Food to such of his Brethren*
that are most in Enmity and Prejudice against the Quaker, if none else would
bite at it or taste it; however certain I am, it can do good to none, plainly
proceeding from an Evil Fountain, the Father of Falsehood, Deceit and Lies.

B. K. in page 241. of thy Progress of Sin, etc.

Thou have taken upon thee in thy dark Imaginary Mind and Spirit, to search for
and find out Mr. Erroneous's House (as thou call'st it) of the Town of Heresy,
where, thou say, Sin was found hid under the plain Cloak of Yea and Nay,
with pretended Zeal and seeming Sanctity: What! Could thou not find out thy
Mr. Erroneous's House of the Town of Heresy no where, but under the plain
Cloak of Yea and Nay, as in (...) Unrighteous Smite it appears? the Quaker thou
aim'st thy blow at, with thy Fist of Wickedness, Error and Heresy, if thou
had searched for it with the Light of Christ, and the Spirit of the Lord,
thou need not to have gone so far as the plain Cloak of Yea and Nay to have
found it; for thou might have found it near thee, under thy fashionable
painted false Cover with thy Multitude of Words, that want not Sin, nor shall
profit the People at all, however thou may flatter thy self in thy vain
Imagination; the true Zeal and Sanctity of the People that have been directed
by the Lord and the Rule of Scriptures to Yea and Nay in all our Communication,
thou can not make void; and if thou Swear, or thy Communication be not Yea
and Nay, then it comes of Evil, Mat. 5. 37.

Thou art so hasty and furious for the Trial of thy pretended Sin of Error and
Heresy, which thou unwarrantably say was found under the plain Cloak of Yea
and Nay; that with thy Fictions and Lies, (like thy Brother Hicks) thou
resolvest to dispatch his Trial, to Try and Sentence him that speaks Yea and
Nay, contrary to his Knowledge of thy intent, he having no summons before thy
Narrative of the pretended Trial of him was Printed, and thou wast afraid, Thou
should not have Room, the Press calling upon thee to Abreviate, etc.

But if thou had had true Christian Charity toward the Despised Speakers of
Yea and Nay, thou would have been more Cautious and Deliberate in thy
Proceedings, then to Judge and Sentence him, and not really to tell him thy
Unchristian Design against him. Room to Range in, I see not how thou could
want, and if thou had kept this thy Evil Work from the Press, till any Press
in London called for it, I question its coming at any of them. God be thanked,
the truly Zealous and Sanctified Quaker is not in thy hold, as thou imaginest;
if he were really so, no good or comfort have thou given him cause to expect
from thee; but what Chief Constables Hand is he in? away with thy Fictions and
Imaginations; be plain, if false Forgery and Deceit have not so blinded thee
and hardened thy heart, that thou know not how and what Officers were they
thou darkly mentions. Do thou not know, that thy Trumpet has given an
un^ertain sound, and there is none that are come to that which is certain will
hasten to or matter thy unjust and unrighteous Trumpet, and Trial with thy
foolish Imagining a Bench.

Page 242. thou pretends Sacred Scripture to be Judge of thy Bench, attended
with so many of thy Imagined Sirs, framed up in thy Sensual Mind, that seldom
if ever has been known the like to try Tyrant Sin* but if all thy Sirs except
Antichristian Opposition, might really have heard the Quakers Just Plea for
himself, without thy taking upon thee to make up a Judge and Jury of thy own
devising, most of thy Sirs might have seen just cause to adhere thereunto, and
not according to thy Evil desire have brought the Quaker in Guilty with Tyrant
Sin: I know not what or whom thou meanest, let them concerned look to that: for
some other People besides the Quaker thou must also aim at, which thou was not
so willing plainly to name. The Sacred Scripture, the Quaker owns the Authority
of, to discover and condemn Sin and Error, contrary to what thou (like thy
Brother Hicks in his Dialogues) have forged that upon the Quaker, as said by
him, which he nor thou cannot prove against the Quaker, or that it was ever
said by him, whom thus grossly thou have belied and abused.

The Scriptures of Truth, which thou pretends to be thy Judge, will never
justify thee in this thy Unscriptural work of making the Quaker speak in page
245. as Denying the Authority of the Scriptures, etc. without any mention of
who it was, when it was, or where any such Expressions were really uttered by
the Quaker: And the God of Heaven and Earth to whose Righteous Judgment the
Quaker can boldly appeal for Judgment against thee in this matter, knows how
innocent the Quaker is of this thy Hellish Charge; and I doubt not but will
quit the Quaker shortly from thee and it, by wiping away that reproach thou and
such like have from time to time endeavored to cast upon the Quaker, by your
Fictions and Lies, which in your Malicious Minds you have Forged and Printed
against him; thy fictious Conviction by thy pretended Jury, which thou falsely
calls Worthy Gentlemen, will prove Rotten Judgment, Corrupt Reason, Darkened
Understanding, Slavish Fear, Wicked Revenge, Carnal Indignation, Wicked Desire,
Hellish Zeal in the Town of Ignorance, Dead Faith, Feigned Love, Hypocrysie and
Partiallity, which thou appears full of and acted by in thy late undertakings,
which will be thy Burden too hard for thee long to bear: So, thy Charge,
Indictment, with thy Jury, so many Masters made up in the dark Chamber of
Imaginations of thy Vain and Deceitful Heart, reaches not the Quaker, but more
reaches such as thy self, whose Wickedness will be searched out by him that
sees it altogether, and will bring it upon thy own Head, sly whether thou will
with thy Vain Dark Shifts, the Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth will find
thee out, and reward thee according to thy Works of Darkness.

Where does the Sacred Scripture, thy pretended Judge of thine Imagined Court
bid any there to take off the Quakers Hatt? answer me plainly: surely, if thou
were not ignorant of the Scripture, that Equal Judge, and the profitableness
thereof to make the Man of God perfect, through Faith in Christ Jesus, thou
would not have given Sacred Scripture, thy pretended Judge and Rule, as thou
have done, the Lie: Its no marvel that thou have the Art to forge so many
false things against the Quaker, when thou can do so by thy Judge, as thou
pretends Sacred Scripture, as if that should say in thy falsely framed Court to
some there, Take off the Quakers Hatt; and say further, Friend, what is the
Reason that you go about to hinder the Orderly Proceedings of this Court
against this Criminal? (page 244 of thy Progress of Sin) this is so unlike
Sacred Scripture, and so far contrary to the Language thereof, as if this
Baptist Teacher had forged new Scripture, as well as framed a new Form of
Judicature now in England, that himself should have the sway of, and thereby to
Save and Condemn whom he pleased by his newly Erected Court of Justice, the
Form and Manner of it much Unheard of and Unknown in England. What would this
vain Man be at? Who seems so Ambitious after Superiority, that by his Trumpet
he seems to have so many Sirs, Attorney General, and Solicitor General, with so
many Masters at his command, as a formed Court; his Mr. Christianity, and
Primitive Purity are so far from being really that, that they are by me scarce
worth mentioning, with which he makes such a confused noise now in City and
Country* that Real Christianity and Primitive Purity indeed he will more make
People deaf to, then any ways be Instrumental to open their Ears to it.

What Quaker has said to thy Imagined Mr. Christian, My Name Friend, thou its
like cannot understand if I should tell thee? Where and when was this? show if
thou can, or else cease thy thus smiting the Quaker, whom so unrighteously
thou opposes to thy Mr. Christian, manifesting the Gall of Bitterness that is
in thy hard Heart, who seem as if thou well knew not how to vent it enough
against the Despised Suffering Christian-Quaker; surely God, nor any that are
really of him, neither the Holy Scriptures, does Judge or Condemn the Quaker
for going about to Obstruct or hinder the Disorderly proceedings of thy Corrupt
Court, hatched through the vain Imaginations of thy Evil Heart against the
Innocent Quaker.

Thou Minister of Sin, when and where did the Quaker say to thee or thy
Question (page 245 of thy Progress of Sin) to wit, Who is the proper Judge?
etc. What Quaker answered, The Light within all Men or divine Revelation? And
that said, He disowned Sr. Sacred Scripture to be the Judge? etc. Or that
People have in an Idolatrous manner so long adored him? bring forth the Quaker
that uttered these sayings, or else confess thy self to be a forger of Lies,
and so cease thy Scribbling.

And where was it, and what Quaker said, I do not believe what Sr. Sacred
Scripture testifies; or what is it but a lifeless Fellow, a pitiful Paper
Judge, a dead Letter: If thou could as readily Prove all that against him, as
thou art Impudent in Accusing of him, it were something to thy Evil purpose and
design against him, which the Eternal God will certainly confound and blast;
and till then thou do but still further manifest thy own Folly and great
Ignorance of the Word of God.

In thy Enmity and Wickedness, in page 246. thou go about more plainly to
show thy mischievous desire against the Quaker, by making him Brother in
Iniquity with the Jesuit, and as if the Jesuit should say to the Quaker, Well
said Brother, etc. when thou falsely charge him, Not to believe what Sacred
Scripture testifies; and that he should say, What is it but a lifeless Fellow,
a pitiful Paper Judge, etc. which words I dare affirm no Quaker ever spoke:
Thy War with the Devil thou think thou art so good at, it will certainly be
ineffectual, as long as thou art thus led by the Spirit of the Father of Lies,
using thy Tongue to speak, and thy Pen to publish thus Lies and Falsehood, for
which with thy other Wickedness the Lord I know will rebuke thee, and (may be)
stir up some of thy own Persuasion to manifest a dislike of this thy confused
and hideous abusing of the Quaker.

And if thou Judge it so Criminal for the Jesuit and the Quaker to agree in
some things; may be thou and others of thy Brethren will be proved more highly
guilty thereof then the Quaker: who knows not yet, but the Jesuits may retain
something, that in it self may be good: Shall I utterly renounce what is good,
because a Jesuit holds the same? I know no reason for that, whatsoever the
unreasonable Baptist Teacher says of the Quaker, one while agreeing with the
Papist, and another while in the same Page they differ: the pure Light of
Christ Jesus, or Immediate Revelation from God, being really experienced to
give Light and understanding to the Saints, does no ways lessen or make void
the Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures, but rather thereby the Children of
Light and of the Day, are more and more confirmed in the belief of the Holy and
Divine Authority of Sacred Scripture. O Man! thou will one day be tormented to
thy great grief and sorrow of thy Heart, in that thou have been so sensual, not
only to join the Quaker and Jesuit together as Brethren in Iniquity, but also
have Blasphemonsly excluded the Light of Christ within Man and Woman (that the
Quaker loves, and the Scriptures Extol highly, and also Revelation) from being
Judge of Faith and Practice, putting not that difference that deservedly thou
might by distinguishing the Light of Christ from the Pope or his Church: What!
Is thy Darkness so great, that Revelation from God is of no better esteem with
thee then Pope or Church of Rome? which thou seem to hate also, that its
manifest, that thou do not love but hate the Light within, and Revelation,
equally as thou hate the Pope, if not more; wishing doubtless as bad to him
and his Church, as thou do the Quaker which in time justly may be
recompensed upon thee, for thou not only thinks but speaks Evil, and it will
deservedly pursue thee

Surely, all that will may see, how this Baptist Teacher (if he had power in
his hands) has a mind, and how his Fingers itcheth to be fingering or roughly
handling the Quakers, by his pretended Trumpet, sounding for to prepare his
Imagined Bench of Justice, to Try, Judge, and find Guilty the Quaker of Error
and Heresy: Sins indeed, if he could as readily prove against him, as
feignedly he has charged him; but I am sure the Reader may read long enough in
his Progress of Sin, before really he can find any thing of plain prooff of
this against the Quaker, how fallaciously and blackly soever in his Wicked Mind
he has charged him with the great Sin of Error and Heresy: and I think
scarce any People of any other Profession, save only Papists, that his Charge
runs so directly against. The Reader must take for granted if he will that
Anabaptists, Independants and Presbyterians, etc. are quite clear of these his
Charges; and the Quaker, whose Yea is Yea, and whose Nay is Nay, need not fear
the uncertain sound of this Baptist Teachers Trumpet, nor his Bench, Jury, or
Witnesses, that he has pretended to Convict them by, who might have saved that
labor to call Sr. Sublime Matter with his thirteen Imagined Sirs more, as
phantastically he takes upon him to make Knights and Gentlemen at his pleasure,
none of them worth mentioning, save to manifest the Folly and Ridiculousness of
their Maker. Surely, the way he takes may bring distress upon Sion, but will
not help her nor comfort her when distressed.

I have heard that this Author of The Progress of Sin, writ another Book,
called, War with the Devil; but if that be written from that Spirit wherein he
writ this, he will be foiled and sadly worsted by the Devil in his encounter;
and B. K. thou will know that the Quaker does quite slight thy Romantic
Conceit of thy Created Sirs and Gentlemen, as thou calls them, and all that
which thou feignest they have to say against him thou audaciously condemnest,
and would have destroyed, else what do thou mean by thy thus not only holding
up thy Wicked Fists against, but striking and smiting, as if thou had a mind to
Blood; and if thou delight therein, it will pursue thee: if thou had had any
real Charity, thou doubtless would have considered the several Laws of Men, and
Courts of Justice, by which the Quakers are frequently exposed to Sufferings
and Spoils already; but it seems, thou judgedst all of that kind too little
Punishment for the Quaker, although may be thou thinks it a great deal too much
for you Baptists: If thou had had any real matter thou could have proved
against the Quaker, with absolute power to have Tried and Punished this thy
supposed* Criminal; few and Evil it is like would thou have made the Days of
his Pilgrimage; thou bast given the Quaker little cause to expect better from
thee then the Gallows, which the Quaker met with from that Spirit that thy
Court of Justice is managed by in thy Presbyterian Brethren in New England:
They were going the way to quit that Country by the Gallows of the Quakers
there, had not the King in time stopped them, and put a Bridle to their Murderous
Proceedings in their Bloody Courts: It may be easily seen, what this Baptist
Teacher would be doing (had he power in his hands) with the Quaker.

How far the Papists are guilty of his Charge, they know best; I wish all Men
well, desiring they might as well quit themselves of Error and Heresy, as the
Quaker can; which is his great Comfort and Happiness at this day, which this
envious Baptist Teacher cannot take from him, nor all his Brethren in Iniquity
with him; and God I hope will send a good deliverance to the Quaker, and
deliver him from the Power of Hell acting its self in this Baptist Teachers
Court.

He says in his Preface to his Progress of Sin; That he has endeavored to
avoid all occasion of Offense, not reflecting on any Man's person, etc. though
all kinds of Sins be justly exposed, and Sinners reprehended.

It Is true, that thou have not named any Persons, but people as the Quaker and
Jesuits, so reflecting on them in thy Book, that I find there is no Baptist,
Independent or Presbyterian, etc. by the Name they are distinguished in their
Profession of Religion, but if Sinners, as thou makes them, be the persons of
the Quakers and Jesuits, thou have plainly pointed at, nay, singled out them by
the Name they go under, not so (by thy usurped power of a Court) proceeding
with any of the other Criminals; for peradventure they are the best of the
Flock in thy Eye, thou would spare, as did Amaleck; and however thou have
reprehended Persons or Sinners through thy Book, thou will be found a Forger of
Lies and false Fictions against the Quaker, whom in page 241. thou exposest
under the plain Cloak of Yea and Nay, with pretended Zeal, and seeming
Sanctity; might thou not almost as well have exposed by their proper Names most
that are called Quakers, whose Zeal for God in this day I doubt not but will
prove right, and their Sanctity really of the Lord Jesus Christ,
notwithstanding the vain Taints, Scorn and Derision, wherewith in thy Progress
of Sin thou have appeared against speaking of Yea and Nay, and the Quakers Zeal
and Sanctity, I hope that will abide right and sincere toward God and his
Work, when the Zeal and Sanctity of this Baptist Teacher will stand him in
little stead, his Zeal being Fury, and his Sanctity, Enmity; coming sorth in a
confused heap of Imaginations and Divinations of his own Brain, which if it had
not been crasie, might have foreseen, he gave some just occasion to the Quaker
and Papist to be offended at him for joining them together in a Brotherhood in
Iniquity, and guilty of Imposture, Heresy and Error: But he must make another
Statute Book then the New or Old Testament, for this Court of his Erecting to
Proceed upon, before he can make good his Charge against the Quaker, for the
Old and New Testament sufficiently witnesses for the Quaker, against this
unjust Accuser and his Whimsies.

B. K. I Charge thee in the Truth of God (which is over all thy deceit) to
bring forth thy High-Constable mentioned by thee to prove the Quaker such a
Criminal, as thou have rendered him page 245. that his Name is Imposture,
alias, Erroneous, and what Heresy thou took the Quaker Prisoner in? Or that he
endeavored to hide under the Cloak of Light, Life and Power? Though that is a
better Covering to hide under, then Darkness, Death and its Power: Will not Woe
from God come upon thee and all People that cover themselves with a another
Covering then that of God's Holy Spirit? which is one with the Light, Life and
Power of God forever: Divide or separate them if thou can; what is thy Cloak
thou have over thee, that is contrary to the Light, Life and Power of God?
surely, it is but Darkness and Death, or Figg-leaves, that hide not thy
Nakedness from them, that are in this Light, Life and Power of the Lord; such
see sufficiently the shame of thy Nakedness, although People not come
thereunto, may look upon thee as well gifted, and thy Confused Work of Eminent
Worth.

Thou Forger of Lies and Enemy of the Truth and Righteousness, what Quaker was
it, that yet ever denied the Scripture Authority? Or said to it, Art thou the
Judge of Sin and Error? away with thee; show where this was said, and the time
when, or else thou gives the Quaker ground to proclaim thee a very great and
grand Son to the Father of Lies, and to cry, Away with this Son of Pordition;
and the Quaker may well believe thou art not the Just Man that sins not, who
have proved so unjust to him; and that if ever thou had any goodness, like the
early dew, it is passing away, and that thou art so drunk with, and needlessly
cumbers thy Mind about many things, to no purpose, in thy late troublesome
Work, is very apparent to him that has an eye to see with; thou one day wilt
be made to know (besure) that that thou have written against the Quaker, is
black, false and offensive enough; making him in thy sensual Mind to call
Sacred Scripture, A Dumb Idol; whereas the living God knows that the Quaker
never had such a thought, much less spoke it at any time.

And thou have not at all proved thy Charge against the Quakers in the margin
of thy aforementioned page; that they deny The Sacred Scripture to be the judge
of Sin and Controversy about Religion and Worship; but I doubt that thou do
busy thy self so in Controversy about Religion and Worship of God, that thou will scarce in all thy Travels come to that Pure Religion that is undefiled
before God, or his Worship in Spirit and Truth. So till thou have fairly and
fully proved the Crimes against the Quaker, which thou have published as his,
Sin enough will lie at thy door, where I leave it, till thou find a place for
Repentance; and then thou will find thy Travails to be those of Ungodliness,
(at least, so far as they relate to the Quaker) even a traveling with
Iniquity, and the bringing forth Falsehood, with the poison of Asps under thy
Tongue; for the great Mystery of Godliness in thy Imaginary Travails can thou
never find out nor give a right Description of; but art a great Stranger
thereunto; and as if the Profession of Godliness were a sufficient Cloak for
thee: If thou have any thing of the Form of Godliness, yet the power thereof
thou seems very ignorant of, so that the Quaker has still reason sufficient to
turn away from thee and all such Formalists and deceitful Works of Iniquity.

Written in the Fear and Dread of the Lord God, (for the honor of his Name,
and to clear his Truth and People that walk in it, from the reproach and
scandal this Opposer has endeavored to cast upon the same, with his Fictions
and Romances) by a true lover of Godliness in Life and Power, highly esteeming
the Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures.

Something further, partly by way of Query.
WHat Quaker was that which in page 248. is said to say, I am sure, I should
have known as much of Christ as now I do, if I had never heard of the
Scriptures?

And what Quaker was it, that ('it is said in that page) was quite silent upon
thy doting unnecessary Question pretended to be put to him, to wit, What
things Jesus did that were not written? and answer it thy self, if thou can.

And what marvel is it, that many of thy Evil-devised Court were ready to
smile, and cried out, How are these People Deluded? Who and how many in thy
Court were they that were ready to smile, and cried out, How are these People
Deluded, before the things charged against them were at all proved? Art thou
not ashamed to pretend, that thou have confuted the Quaker; whilst it is
nothing but that which thou in thy Evil Heart have Imagined and forged against
him, that thou smitest at? That there is wholesome and sound Judgment against Sin
and Evil throughout the Scriptures, was always plainly owned by the Quaker; yet
we know not where it calls it self Sr. Sacred Scripture, or that thou have
plainly proved it to be the only Judge of Sin, and Rule of Faith and Practice:
Might thou not as well have placed this Authority properly more immediately
upon Christ Jesus, as he is the Word of God, who was in the Beginning with God,
and before the World was, and the Scriptures were written? But ought the Light
of Christ Jesus and Revelation of God so to be slighted and rejected by thee,
as to be no rule of Faith and Practice, or that it may not be concerned in
Judging Sin? And may it not be affirmed a certain and undeniable means to
discover Deceivers and Impostors where ever they are, or whatsoever they may
pretend to? and no other Light or Revelation does the Quaker exhort People to
come to or believe in, but the Light of Christ, and Revelation from God of his
Son Christ Jesus; by which none are left to an uncertainty, as thou blindly
imaginest.

What Quaker was it, that asked for Mediums, and that to make out what we say
and affirm? produce him if thou can; or that said to thee, Thou looked for a
sign; though probably he had not been mistaken, if he had told thee so? Have
thou convinced the Pagan thou speak of, that what thou say is true? the
Quaker cannot believe Fictions; bring thy Pagan forth, that the Quaker may
discourse him upon this subject.

Is the agreement betwixt the Papist and Quaker that thou storms at, any thing,
but what thou have made the Quaker to be, that he never was, and to say, what
he never said; to say, What is Sr. Sacred Scripture, but a Lifeless Fellow, a
pitiful Paper-Judge, a Dead Letter: which words the Quaker denis utterly,
putting thee upon the prooff thereof? Also when any Jesuit said to any Quaker
thereupon, Well said Brother, or A Nose of Wax? certainly, That which was
before time I do believe will in due time make fully manifest, whether the
Papist and Quaker, or Papist and the Anabaptists do most agree, and whether
this Anabaptist-Teacher may not prove too much like a Nose of Wax, when his
Faith and Practice comes to be further tried?

How dares thou say in the Margin of thy Book, page 247. That there came in
(pretending to thy Court) an Outlandish Man, of a tauney Complexion, that
called the Scriptures of Truth, thy pretended Judge, Lord, and said, He was a
Pagan Born, an Indian dwelling in the furthest parts of America, that
manifested any Contradiction to the Quaker about the Light of Christ within, or
its sufficiency, as the Quakers do really affirm and bear Testimony of it? But
how then can any of you Baptist-Teachers any more render us as Pagans to the
World, seeing the Pagan and you so well agree? But how came the uncertain sound
of thy Trumpet to be heard as far as America? How many Indians or Pagans have
thou by thy pretended Judge convinced of the Evil of their ways and doings,
without the Light of Christ Jesus, which thou so hates, and endeavors to
exclude from being any Judge of Sin, Being (as thou darkly say) wholly
Ignorant, or know nothing of one great Statute-Book, wherein many positive good
Laws are written, which the Prisoner at the Bar has abominably violated, page
247. I think of so little as thou have writ against the Quaker, never more
Malice, Deceit and Falsehood appeared: Can there be any Statute-Book or Good
Laws in it, and the light of Christ within people be wholly Ignorant or know
nothing of one great Statute Book, etc? I would thou saw thy own Confusion and
Ignorance of the Light of Christ and the way thereof. How can the Light of the
glorious Gospel, that shines in Peoples Hearts, be ignorant or know nothing of
the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, or any Precept or Ordinance thereof, which
the Prisoner (as thou calls him) at thy pretended Bar has Abominably violated,
without any prooff against thy supposed Prisoner at thy Imagined Bar? And prove
what are those good Laws, as thou calls them, he has so violated: as for the
Good Laws of the Old and New Testament the Quaker has not violated, but is a
doer thereof, which is more justifiable in the eye of the great Law giver, then
to profess and talk of the Laws of God, and be a daily breaker and not doer of
the same.

J. P.

THE END.

