THE Protestant Joyners Ghost TO Hone the Protestant Carpenter IN NEWGATE.
With his CONFESSION.
Col. HOne! Oh! Hone! Oh! Hone! Oh!


Hone. What dismal Voice is this, nay, now I find I must be Hanged. This is as
the Sound of the last Trump, shril and terrible as Death.


Col. Do you not know me yet, That and that for your Confession.

(Pinches him)
Hone. Oh my Ribs! Oh my Side!


Col. The Trial being so near at the Old Baily, I am sent to Torment thee, my
Ghost shall haunt thee to the Gallows if thou Confess a Syllable.


Hone. My Journeyman Stephen! the Protestant Joyner! Chip of the Old Block of
Rebellion! do thou not know thy old Master?


Col. Yes, yes my old Master the Protestant Carpenter that Wainscoted the Room
at the Devil for the Green Ribbon Club, and Carved Rebellion and the Sacred
Slaughter of Kings about the Frames and Chimny Pieces. Yes, Hone the Carpenter
that hewed out the way to Destruction, that swore the Death of Kings and
Princes, and now swears as hard for em and against himself, Hone the betrayer
of the Cause, and Impeacher of the Brethren, Hone the Apostat, Hone the
Backslider, Hone the Turncoat, Hone the Changling.


Hone. Now let me die for a Traitor, if thou be not thy self this very Apostat,
this Turncoat, this Changling. Now thou art Changed since I see thee? thou
look as if thou had been hanged alive upon one of thy own Gibbets, and fed
all this while upon Shavings and Saw dust.


Col. Yes, I was foreman of the Plot, and carved it and plained it, till I made
it as smooth as a Deal Board. Any fool that kenw how to manage it might nap
upon a King. But you with your hacking, and hewing, your splitting and sawing,
have sawed it all to pieces. Your selves dropped into the Saw-Pit, and lie Buried
in your own Dust.


Hone. Indeed we have wanted thy helping hand, the Cause has gone much down the
Wind since so hopeful a Branch was lopt off from the Root of Rebellion. Where
have thou been all this while.


Col. In Hell, In a deeper Vault then Deerhams Dungeon, 16 Fathom beneath the
Lowermost Abyss where this Plot was first brewed, and where such Plotters will
be Rewarded.


Hone. Indeed this was a Reach beyond the Devils Ela. But what have thou been
doing all this while?


Col. Building of Gibbets for Traitors and King-Killers, and now they come so
fast, that I want a Journeyman.


Hone. Can thou not Remove Tyburn, it will save a world of Carpenters Work.


Col. That Is kept for Whigs and Plotters in this Life; How Shad -- l and the
fat Turnspit would make a Gallows swag, there are others have outrun the
Constable; But hang it, Rebellion is nothing till they be caught.


Hone. Prithee Stephen, who was caught at Oxford.


Col. If I was caught, I made no pitiful howling Lamentation, or whining
Confession, to the betraying of the Cause or the Brethren; I brazend it out to
the last.


Hone. With more then the Doctors Impudence till the Rope choked thee, for a
Lie never would. But prithee tell me, for thy excellent Skill in Joining
Dissenters, and Turning Monarchy into a Commonwealth, how has thy Master the
Devil Employed thee ever since thou dropped from the Tree at Oxford, like a solon
Goose into the Lake.


Col. The first two Years I was Employed in making Protestant Flayls.


Hone. Protestant Flayls! I can tell thee where there are Five Thousand at this
time in one place.


Col. You had best tell the King and Council.


Hone. I have done it already.


Col. Now 5000 Legions of Devils with 5000 Flayls, be dashing out thy Brains
for 5000 years together, was there ever such an Ass trusted with so great a
Secret?


Hone. Was there ever such an Owl in Pursuit of the Eagle, when thou ought
to have been mouseing amongst thy own Vermin at home. Well, thou art an Angel
of Light, and the Ass cannot choose but open his Mouth. What had thou to do at
Oxford with thy Arms, and Armor Cap a Pe, and Protestant Flayls to dash out
the Brains of Monarchy, and overturn the whole structure of Church and
Government. Thou designedst a plaguey turn in the State, but that thou had thy
last turn at the Gibbet, and lest as thy Journey-men to do thy work at
New Market, where our whole Plot was overturned, and now it is come to our turn
to follow.


Col. Indeed your Plot at New Market, your Cart cross the way, your twenty
Blunderbuses, six Inches Diamiter; your Horse-Races and Hunting Matches, your
Arms and Insurrections, were in a fair way to take effect. But Fires and
Dissolutions are fatal to our Conspiracies.


Hone. And a Rope will put an end to 'em.


Col. With your Cowardly Confessions, and Treacherous Impeaching of one another.


Hone. Would thou have me to brazen it out like thy self, and go to the Devil
with a Lie in my Mouth? Will a Vote of the Factious Rump save us from the Curse
of King-Killing hereafter? Will our putting it upon the Papists (as Oats did on
Pickerin) pass upon the Devil. Will M -- pass for a Headpiece? West for a wise
Councellor, or the Solamanca Bloud-sucker for a Savior in the other World? For
my part, before I have to do with such a pack of Rebels, I Will turn Loyal,
Confess, and Repent though I hang for it.

The Ghost had no sooner-heard him talk of Repentance, but with much
Indignation incensed, he Vanished in a Flash of Fire, throwing the Bed-Staves
about the Room, and the Doors often the Hing's, with that Terrible Noise, that it
shook the Foundation of the uppermost Hell. With a terrible rattling of Links
and Chains; The Noise was given out that a Prisoner had escaped, which Alarmed
the Captain, and his Janizarys to pursue, but they could not catch him.


LONDON, Printed for J. Smith. 1683.


