A PROPOSAL FOR AN Equal Land Tax: Humbly submitted to CONSIDERATION.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1691.

A PROPOSAL FOR AN Equal Land Tax, etc.
THere is a great and urgent necessity at present of raising great Sums of
Money. To which the Common People of England, we may safely presume, would
willingly contribute their utmost: and matters might be so ordered, that their
Assistance would be very considerable. But some would have the Gentry take the
whole Burden, upon themselves and a few others; and would have this Money
raised by a Land Tax. which way will very probably be followed. Here it is
confess't, that though this Tax prove heavy, yet upon this great Occasion it
would be born with Cheerfulness, if it were made equal. But the monstrous
inequality of it, as the Rates are now, is more grievous then the Tax it self.
What can be a greater heartbreaking, then to pay double and treble, in
proportion to other people? And many a poor Gentleman must be ruined, if these
Rates continue.

A Remedy for this Evil has been nobly attempted already, in Parliament, by
bringing the Payments to a Pound Rate. And surely it cannot be denied, but that
the Taxes of two Shillings in the Pound, and three Shillings in the Pound, were
the fairest that ever were granted. Nor has there been any thing done in
England more becoming a Parliament. But that which was well designed, was so
villanously executed, (I mean in the Assessing); that even those Taxes proved
shamefully unequal. So that, notwithstanding all the Care that was taken, some
Men paid double and treble to others. Not that much Land was Assess't above the
true value, (for That is not complained of); but while some were Assess't to
the full, others were Assess't at the half, or third part. by which means they
that were Assess'd to the full, paid double or Treble. For Example: If there be
three Farms of equal value, that is, each of them worth threescore pound a
year; and one of these is duly Rated at threescore Pound, the second unduely
at thirty, and the third at twenty; in this case the first pays double to the
second, and treble to the third.

You will say, that to rectify this matter, we must raise all those that are
under-rated, and thereby have all Lands Assessed at their just and full value.
In answer whereunto, I confess that if this thing were done, we might easily
have equal Taxes: whether they were laid by the Pound Rate, or by a Sum
certain upon each County. But all the Skill, and all the difficulty is, to get
this thing done. The ordinary Assessors will never do it. for Experience has
taught us, that Men will strangely swear and forswear, to save themselves and
their Neighbors from being screwed up. And it has been proposed already, to
take a more effectual course by rewarding Informers. but that way does not
please. Some would have a Tax by the Pound Rate, and the King to name the
Commissioners. but I doubt it will not be convenient, for his Majesty or Men
deputed by him, to have any hand in screwing up people. Others would have such
a Tax farmed out, and the Farmers to try their Skill. but a Tax fit to be
farmed out should be of some continuance: whereas this must be paid at once, or
within a short time. beside, these Farmers and these Commissioners must do
their work by the help of Informers: who, as I have said before, are not
pleasing. Moreover, go which way you will, this raising and Screwing of people
is a harsh and odious business, and goes against the hair: so that it will be
found extremely difficult.

But the design of the Proposal here offered, is not to raise any body: but
only to ease those that are overcharged, and that pay above their proportion.
Which is a thing so equitable and so favorable, that there is good reason to
hope that no Man will be so inhumane to oppose it. Considering withal, that
none are to have this Easement, unless they make their case so plain that no
doubt can be made of it.

The Proposal has been briefly mentioned already, in the Project of a Descent
upon France. and more at large it is this.

1. That a Land Tax be granted, the same with that which was granted this last
year. (the Amount whereof is (we know) about seventeen hundred thousand
pounds.) And that the same proportions be laid upon the several Counties, and
upon each particular Man. 2. Provided nevertheless that no Man be obliged to
pay above two Shillings in the Pound, of the true and full yearly value of his
Land. 3. That, in order hereunto, all persons aggrieved, that is, all that are
to pay above that proportion, may complain to such Commissioners as the
Parliament shall please to nominate for each County. 4. That these
Commissioners, upon clear proofs in writing of the true value of the Land,
shall make just Abatements, and shall settle the Complainants Tax at the said
proportion of two Shillings in the Pound. 5. That the Commissioners cause all
these Depositions, and their Orders upon them, to be fairly transcribed into a
Book; and so transmit them to the Committee, which the Parliament shall please
to appoint for this Service. 6. That this Committee of Parliament shall inspect
the said Depositions and Orders; and shall disallow the Orders if the Evidence
seem not clear, or alter them as they see Cause. 7. All Orders and Abatements
made by the Commissioners to stand good, unless, and until, they are
disallowed by the Committee of Parliament. 8. No proof to be admitted, but by
written Depositions. Even the Quality and Credit of the Witnesses, if there be
occasion for it, to be proved in writing.
Thus I have laid open the whole design: which aims at nothing but to relieve
the Oppressed. Here will be good store of Informers: but of all that ever were,
they will be the most innocent; for every Man must Inform for himself. And he
may easily do it with effect. For there is nothing more easy, then for any Man
to show plainly the true value of his Land.

If the Land be Let, or have been lately, at a Rack Rent; it is easy to show
what that Rent is or was. And the Tenants own Oath will be good Evidence, if he
can also swear, that the whole Tax must be allowed by the Landlord. which the
Law directs, if there be no Covenants to the contrary. Also the same thing may
be proved by the Landlords Steward or Bailiff, or any Servant that knows.

If the Land be Let for Lives or Years, and at an under Rent; it may be showed
what the Rent is, and likewise what Fine was paid, and for what term.

But if the Land be a Man's own, and was never Let, there must be more ado.
though even then the thing will not be greatly difficult. It will give a great
light, if a Surveyour swear to the Quantity. Showing also how much of it is
Common Field, and how much Enclosure: likewise, how much is Meadow, Arable,
Pasture, and Wood. Then others must prove the common rate of those sorts of
Land, in that place and Neighborhood. And substantial Neighbors may make
Oath, what they believe and judge, to be the true value of the particular Land
in question. Also the Party may show, at what rate he bought the Land, if he
has lately bought it; or at what rate he has offered it to be Let or Sold.
In short, there are many ways to make out a thing of this nature, if it be
true. But to palliate a false value is very difficult, so as to give clear and
full Satisfaction: without winch, there must no relief be expected by the
Complainants.

I must now answer a Question concerning this Matter: and likewise two
Objections.

The Question that may be asked is this; What is the meaning of this Committee
of Parliament, which (according to these Proposalls) must control the
Commissioners of the Counties? And I answer, that the meaning is; that the
Commissioners may take greater Care to do equal and righteous things, when
they find that their Proceedings must be seen and examined by others. Whereas
they would be apt to take too much Liberty, if it should be only known to
themselves, what Methods they follow, and upon what Grounds they go. But yet in
all likelihood the Committee will not much alter what the Comissioners have
done.

The first of the Objections is, That the thing here proposed is exceeding
laborious. I answer; That the bringing Taxes to an equality is so glorious an
Achievement, that we ought to spare for no pains to Compass it. Nor is it only
noble and beneficial, but also of absolute necessity. If the equal dividing
the common Booty be necessary to Pirates and Buccaneers, the equal
distribution of the Public Burdens is much more to a State. Says a late
Author. But moreover, as this Work is great, so there will be many Hands to do
it. The Country Commissioners will divide themselves, as they use to do in the
case of Assessments. And the Committee of Parliament (which will be numerous)
will name several Sub-Committees out of their own number, and share the Work to
them. who (amongst them) must peruse the Books sent from the Counties; and
report to the whole Committee, what they disallow and what they doubt of. The
transcribing the Depositions into these Books may seem a tedious business, and
of too much time. But even here so many hands may be employed, as will make
quick work. For several Men may be at the same time transcribing upon loose
Sheets, and then those Sheets be made up in a Book. Indeed there should be two
Books: one to be sent to the Parliament, the other to be kept in the County.
All this Writing to be paid for, by those for whose benefit it is done,
according to the length of the Depositions that concern them. And it is much if
it cost any Man five Shillings.

The second Objection is, That by these Abatements, according to the Proposals
here offered, the Tax will fall short. In answer to which I must acknowledge,
that the Tax will fall short at least half a Million. But if the Public
Occasions require it, this may and must be made good by a farther Tax: which by
this time will be pretty equal. And surely it is much fitter, that the whole
Nation should bear this further Burden by an equal Tax; then that part of the
Nation should bear it, by having the Inequality continued upon them, and by
paying above their proportion.

It is confess't, that when all is done that has been here proposed, there
will still remain some Inequality. For as the Rates are now, there are many
that, to the last great Tax, pay under two Shillings in the Pound: And there is
nothing here offered to raise them. We must therefore be content (at least at
present) to let them enjoy this advantage. Let them pay twenty pence, or
eighteen pence, or less, while others pay two Shillings. But that some should
pay but twenty pence or eighteen pence, while others pay four, five, or six
Shillings, or more; so that some are at ease, while others are destroyed; is
too unreasonable, and ought to be endured no longer.

You will ask, What Injury is it to me, if my Neighbor be eased? I answer,
the Injury is, that I am not eased too. And if He pay below his proportion, I
must pay above mine. And by the undue Easing of Him and others, the Tax falls
short of what it would otherwise be; so that the Public Occasions call for
further Taxes, of which I shall bear part, and still above my proportion. If
some Part-Owners should pay less in proportion then Others toward the Ships
Charge, it would be a plain Wrong to those Others. And so it would be, if some
Lands in a Marsh should (for maintaining the Sea Walls) pay but six pence an
Acre, when other Lands pay twelve pence.

It has been said, that though a Tax were laid as has been here proposed, yet
there would be still some Inequality. But the next Tax after might bring things
more even. For it might be granted for the same gross Sum, with this Proviso
that none pay above one Shilling in the Pound: with the same Methods for giving
ease. And this Tax would make good what the other falls short. For both these
Taxes will amount to three Shillings in the Pound: which is very near the true
proportion, that all Lands should pay to the Tax now on foot.

Thus by the way that has been here proposed, there must be two Steps to
arrive at the Reformation intended. But I conceive, upon further consideration,
that the thing may be done at once: and that the first new Tax may be at the
former Rates, Provided that none pay above one Shilling in the Pound. Which
will be the same thing in effect, as a Tax of twelve pence in the Pound, with a
new and sure Method to have it equally Assessed. This Tax may, by the good old
word, be called a Subsidy. And the Parliament, now and at other times, may
please to grant, either one Subsidy, or part of one, or a Subsidy and a half,
or two or three Subsidies or more, according as the Public Occasions require.

But still after all has been done, the Taxes will not yet be exactly equal.
For there are diverse, as I am well informed, that do not pay six pence a Pound
to the great Tax now upon us. I leave these to be further considered. And in
the mean time, though they do not pay to the full, yet they will pay three
times as much in proportion, as they did formerly.

I have all this while been driving at Equality. But there is an Equality so
unequal, that I cannot but declare my sense against it. and That is; that
Houses should bear equal proportion with Lands. for which there is no reason,
as every Man's reason will tell him. They ought therefore to be abated a fourth
or a fifth part.

If the Parliament shall not think fit, to enter upon this great Work at
present, (though it is every Man's Work, and would be soon done); they may
however, by a shorter way, give some relief (if they please) to those that are
oppress't in the Land Tax: that is, to those that pay plainly above their
proportion. And this may be done; By making the Sum of the Tax next granted,
to be something less than the last, and then distributing this Abatement among
the Counties, that are now notoriously overcharged: the other Counties
continuing as they are. Thus, whereas the last Tax was for about seventeen
hundred thousand Pounds, the next may be for fifteen or fourteen hundred
thousand: which is two or three hundred thousand pound less. And then the
Oppressed Counties, (which Counties are well known), may have their Monthly
Payments abated, in such proportions as the Parliament shall find meet. The
raising either of Men or Counties is such a Noli me tangere, that there is no
meddling with it: but there is great reason to hope, that the giving just Ease
to those that want it, will meet with no Opposition. For my own part, I have no
particular Concern in this Matter. I am in a County that is not like to be
eased. And I pay about three Shillings in the Pound; which is near the true
proportion. But I wonder the Counties that are concerned, have not petitioned
all this while. In such a case as this, even clamorous Petitions would be
excusable.

There is another Consideration about Taxes, which I recommend to those worthy
Persons who have a hand in granting them. And that is, That the Payments be not
made too quick. We know that the present great Tax (to say nothing of those
precedent) is paid with exceeding difficulty. And such another Tax in the neck
of it, to be paid likewise forthwith, it is doubt would occasion extreme
Distresses. When a Man has bled much, if you go to take a further great
Quantity from him, at once and presently; it may prove fatal, his Body cannot
bear it. But after a while, his Blood being recruited and supplied you may
take more without hurt or danger; especially if you do it by degrees. And it is
just so with our Nation in point of Taxes. We could pay a moderate T^x for many
years, and be little the worse. And people would have room and time to supply
all by Industry and Parsimony, the two great Promoters both of private and
public Riches. But our Money of late has been swept away so fast from us,
little of it returning; that it has not only shear'd from the Landlord a good
part of his Rent, but also disabled the Tenant from paying the rest: the Market
being dead, and no Money stirring. And then the Cities and Towns must needs, as
they do, find a grievous deadness of Trade. So that a general Poverty has
suddenly overwhelmed us.

We could better pay two Millions in four years, then a Million and a half in
one year. In which first way, the War might be maintained by Taxes, that
probably will be paid in time of Peace: when we shall be better able to do it.
Also his Majesty's present Occasions will be as well provided for this way, if
there be a Credit given upon those future Payments. You will say, This will
draw on Interest. But I answer, that the Interest will not do us so much harm,
as the Respite will do us good.

In this Affair we must consider, not only what is best to be done, but also
(and more especially) what We are able to do. Perhaps it were best to pay ready
down. But if we cannot do it, we must be glad to take time and allow Interest.
And it is better to have upon us, for some years a burden we can bear; than
to be crush't at once by a burden we cannot bear.

If it be an advantage, to Lend Money to the Public above the common Interest;
it is among Our selves, and any one that will may have it. There is also this
Convenience, that all those Lenders will be firmly engaged to wish well to the
Government.

I would not have us follow the Example of Holland: where their whole standing
Revenue is Anticipated for a great many years, by vast Sums of Money taken up
at Interest. And there are many Families, that live upon the constant Interest
of Moneys lent to the Sta^e. But I hope we shall never be brought to such
Necessities. And I would have our Dealings in this kind, to be for moderate
Sums, and a moderate number of years.

We may remember, that in King Charles his first Dutch War, the Parliament
gave at once two Millions and a half: but to be paid in some years. So that
what is here offered in this Matter, is even in England no new thing.

But what if this War continue next year, and we must raise more Money? How
and upon what shall the Tax be laid? My Answer is, that if there be Necessity
for it, it may be a concurrent Land Tax. Or the Tax may be pushed further on,
upon some years to come: that is, after the End of the four years before
mentioned.

It cannot be denied, but that the Ways now mentioned, and especially the
last, will draw on more Interest. But to make this Interest easy, it is further
humbly proposed;

1. That a Land Tax be granted, suppose for a Million of Pounds, payable at the
end of five years. 2. That upon the Credit of it, the King be enabled to give
Tallies or Tickets, of one hundred Pound each, amounting in the whole to ten
thousand. 3. That these Tickets be made Current according to their value, by
Act of Parliament. 4. That these Tickets be Pieces, or Plates, or Medalls of
Silver, coined or stamped in the best manner to avoid counterfeiting. and each
having its Number fairly stamped upon it. 5. That each of them be affixed or
appended, under a S^ale, to a Pockett Book. 6. In this Book shall be written,
To whom and by whom the Ticket was first delivered, with all the Assignments
afterward. 7. That no Man shall be obliged to take them at first from the King,
but with the Allowance of five per Cent. Nor shall the Kings Receivers be
obliged to take them back at their full value, till after a year from their
first delivery. 8. That when these Tickets are brought in, at the end of the
five years; they that bring them in, shall likewise have the Allowance of five
per Cent. So that they are first taken at ninety five pound, and paid back at
last at a hundred and five. 9. If any of these Tickets be lost, yet he that had
it, to have the benefit of it at the five years end. he proving that it was
delivered or assigned to him, and there being no proof that it was further
assigned. 10. The form of the Pocket Book may be this.
Number One.
March 1. 1691. Delivered to A. B. of the City of London Merchant By Me C. D.
the Officers name. April 17. 1692. Assigned to Sir E. F. of S. in the County of
Kent, Knight By Me A. B. June 24. 1692. Assigned to G. H. of the City of
London, Goldsmith By Me J. K. Executor of Sir E. F.
Here now is Money taken up for the public Service at ten per Cent. for five
years: which is two per Cent. yearly.

The first five per Cent. will take the Tickets cleverly out of the Kings
hands, without any appearance of hardship to the Subject: and it will set them
fairly aflote. The five per Cent. at last will secure those that take them
from being left in the lurch. It will make them not afraid but desirous to
have them at the five years End. And it will keep up their value and
reputation during the whole time.

These Tickets will be a Treasure that can be neither stolen nor lost. For
they will be of no value (more then the Medall) save only to Those have the
Right to them.

They will be a good supply for the Money we have lately lost: and Money will
then be less needful. Great Sums will be paid with Tickets, and lesser Sums
with Money.

Perhaps hereafter, when we have seen the way of it, We may in the same manner
take up greater Sums, at easier Interest, and for more years.

But I doubt it will not be convenient, that the Amount of these Tickets should
ever exceed the half of our Running Cash, though we could have them without
Interest. A moderate Quantity of them will impe out our Money: but too great a
Quantity would drive it quite away.

I must add one thing more to the foregoing part of this Discourse: and that
is, That when a Land Tax is granted, there should a Poll-Tax go along with it.
That so, the whole Kingdom being concerned, every Man in it may contribute
something. The Land Tax draws hard from those that have Estates: and the
Poll-Tax will draw something (though a general Excise would insensibly draw
more) from those that have them not. And surely when the Men of Estates bear
the main of the Burden, and put their Shoulders to it; it is but reasonable,
that the Common people also should each of them lend a Finger. They ought not
therefore to complain, if for every Shilling in the Pound which the Land Tax
rises to, there be twelve pence a Head laid upon Men; and upon the Women, six
pence. Thus a great difference is here made, as it ought, between Women and
Men. For there is no reason that Women should pay equal, when they do not get
half so much. And I have the rather designed them some little Ease in this
matter; because I think our Nation has been too valiant, in making hard Laws
against Women.

When I speak of so much a Head, my meaning is that it should be upon all
alike, both high and low. Or if any difference be made, it should be only some
such difference as this; That Gentlemen, and all so reputed, should pay double
or treble to common Men.

It seems a great Mistake, that a Poll-Tax, should run high upon Degrees and
Titles and Dignities: especially if a Land-T^x likewise be then on Foot. For
generally they that have Titles, have also Estates, which pay to the Land Tax.
If a Land Tax come to two Shillings in the Pound, and there be a Poll-Tax
proportionable; a common person pays two Shillings for his Head, and a Knight
of a thousand a year pays a hundred Pound for his Estate: and it seems very
hard, that he should pay ten Pound more for his Title. Why should we lay more
upon those, that have their load already?

And though there were no Land Tax on foot, yet a Poll-Tax that runs upon
Titles and Dignities, is of all others the most unjust, because it is most
unequal. It is very unequal and unjust, that a Squire not worth a hundred
Pound, should pay as much as one worth five thousand a year.

FINIS.
London Printed for Randall Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1691.


