A PROPER NEW BALLAD OF THF Devils Arse a Peake, Or SATAN'S Beastly place, Or,
In plain Terms OF the POSTERIORS and FAG-END of A Long PARLIAMENT.
To be said or Sung very Comfortably To the Tune of Cook Laurel.
O Foolish Brittanicks, where are your hearts fled?
What fiend does the Nation bewitch;
That since you like Rogues Cut off your own Head,
Your Noses Close in with the Britch?
The Britch! such a bit, Nolls paunch could never brook,
For it put him still to his dumps;
And though full meals of Hell-broth he often took,
Yet always he spewed out the Rumps.
Till Lambert the Knave and Fleetwood the fool
(Though Di^k persuaded them from it)
Did overturn the Devils Close-stool,
And like Dogs return to their Vomit.
No sooner the Council Table was spread
With many a vomited gull;
But the Army grew sqeezee and turned their Head,
For they soon had their belly full.
The Red-coats could never this Rumpling digest,
Till advised by Old Nick and his train,
(Who good unwittingly often may suggest)
They spewed up their vomit again.
Their Surreverence was for a while out of sight
Till Whettam began to deplore 'um,
And Arthur the Knight of the Spur a bold wight,
The Rump of a Rump did restore 'um.
Then a pox light on the pitiful Rump
That a third time above board vapers
Which Old Nick blew out; but now turns up Trump
As Jone farted in and out tapers.
The House by this Legion was long time Possessed,
But at last they were Cast out of door;
Yet finding it swept, returned a new guest
Seven-times more a fiend then before.
Away then ye pitiful Citizen slaves
Who let such enormities pass,
Were you but true men or not errant knaves,
Fools durst not you ride like an Ass.
Then dare to be Honest, and beat up your Drum,
For when the Rogues here of your power,
Youl'e smell what a sent proceeds from the Bum,
From Whitehall, at least to the Tower.
S' foot! what if these Arse-worms with gifts of our gold
Great George to defend them should move,
Our goods and our Liberties, then would be sold,
And the Devil a Monk would he prove.
Then pluck up your Spirits, and draw out your Swords
It Is force that must only prevail,
We have long enough stood out in bare Words,
Let Us now make a Rod for their Tail.
Then Vive le Roy let us merrily Sing,
Can any Man well in his Wits,
Think worser of Charles our Noble good KING,
Then those who do Govern by Fits?
Search round the great City what ill you can see,
Which the Rascally Rump has not done,
And then you will wish with the Nation and me,
That CHARLES had his Heritage won.
For Swearing, Sacrilege, Murder, and Lies,
KING-Killing, Hyprocrisy, Cheats,
They make no more of these Sins, then of Flies,
HELL is almost outdam'd by their Feats.
Then fight ye like Men for the good of the Nation,
As ye hope to be Civilly Drunk,
On free cost at blessed CHARLES Coronation,
Pray hard for the trueness of Monk.
Heaven bless our good Sovereign, the best of all Men,
Let the KING of our Hearts be Trump,
That Peace and Prosperity may come again,
Squire Dun and Old Nick take the Rump.
Then let the Knaves Shuffle 3 Kingdoms a while
Till each Curr at his fellow snarls,
Ere long they will Cut, and after the broyl
The dealing must fall to KING Charles,
This Flap with a Fox-taile shall have the same Lot,
That unhorst his Tumble down Highness,
For since the rest of the Members are not,
The Rump must shortly have FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas James.


