The Good Old Cause rightly stated, and the False un-cased.
By William Prynne Esquire a Bencher of Lincolns-Inne.
WHen the Josh. 9.3, etc.
wilely Gibeonites attempted to circumvent Iosuah and the Israelites, and draw
them into a League with them, against Exodus 23.31, 32. c. 34.12. Deuteronomy. 7.2, 3.
Gods express inhibition, they accomplished their design with this Stratageme,
Peter Mouhis Nouveaute du Papisme oppose a antiquite de Uray Christianisme.
Sed^n 1627. Bishop Ushers answer to the Jesuits challenge.
by carrying along with them, old Sacks, old rent Wine-bottles, old Shoes and
Garments, and old dry moldy bread and provisions to the Israelites Camp at
Gilgal; which they alleged were all new on the day they came forth from their
Country, but were all become old by reason of their very far journey, which they
believing, without examination, were ensnared by them.

This policy has for many years past been pursued by Jesuits and other
Gibeonites of Rome, to circumvent over credulous Protestants to enter into a
holy League with them to the shipwreck of their Faith and Souls, by crying up
their The Author of the Protestant Religion. London. 1621. Kellisons survey of
the New Religion. Doway 1603.
new Superstitions, Relic, Errors, for the only old Religion, and decrying
the ancient Protestant Religion as a late Novelty first broached by Luther and
Calvin. Whether this be not the present stratageme of some of their
Instruments, or Fraternity, to engage the Soldiers to join in a new
confederacy with them, to bring our old Religion, Government, Parliaments,
Laws, Liberties, to speedy desolation, and irrecoverable destruction, under the
disguise of maintaining the good If they mean by this Good Old Cause, their
New-Commonwealth, it was begotten but in March, 1648. had presently unknown
Guardians and Governors set over it till 1653 then a new Protector, under whose
wardship it still continues as an Infant, but of ten years birth, and if he be
removed, it must be in ward to the Army Officers till its full age. How then
can they call it Old, or the Good Old Man or Cause, without a contradiction and
absurdity?
old Cause, is not unworthy their strictest inquisition, and most serious
consideration, which will be evidently demonstrated to them by discovering the
only true original Good Old Cause, Grounds, Ends, drawing the Houses of
Parliament to raise and continue the Armies under their successive Generals;
most clearly, fully, and truly expressed in their own Votes, Orders,
Ordinances, Declarations year after year, printed at large in two distinct
Volums for Edward Husbands 1643. and 1646. by order of the Commons assembled in
Parliament; which being almost quite forgotten, it will be both seasonable, and
necessary to refresh the memories, and awaken the stupid, if not seared
Consciences of the Nation, with a recital of the chiefest of them, to
countermine the new plots of all seducing Gibeonites.

The first Original of the unhappy breach between the late King and our long
Parliament, was Exact Collect. p. 34, 35, 36, etc. 59, 60, 61, 66, 67, etc.
his coming personally into the Commons House to demand the five Members, 4
January 1641. whom the day before he had impeached of High Treason, and sent a
Sergeant at Arms to apprehend: This breach of Privilege induced the Houses to
require the power of the Militia to be at their disposal, for the safeguard of
their Persons and Privileges: which being denied by the King, who condescended
to it very far, but not in that latitude as demanded; soon after the King
departing from the Parliament, and setting on foot the Commission of Array for
his defense against the Parliament, and the Parliament raising the Militia for
their safeguard against the King, this first engaged them by degrees into a
civil bloody war against each other, ending in their mutual destruction by the
very new Militia they contested for, as their only security against each other.

The sole Cause, Grounds, Ends of the Parliaments raising the Militia, and
after that an Army, are thus fully declared by the Lords and Commons, in their
Prepositions for bringing in Plate and Money, Horse, Horsemen, and Arms for the
defense of the King and both Houses of Parliament, printed and published by
order of the Lords and Commons, 10 Junii 1642. Whereas it appears the King
(seduced by wicked Counsel) intends to make war against his Parl. and in
pursuance thereof, Exact Collection; p. 339, 340, 342.
under pretense of raising a Guard for his person, has actually begun to levy
forces both horse and foot, etc. so as the orders of Parliament, which is the
highest Court of Justice in this Realm, are not obeyed, and the authority
thereof is altogether scorned and vilified, and such persons as stand
well-affected to it, and declare themselves sensible of these public
calamities, and of the violations of the privileges of Parliament, and common
liberty of the Subjects, are baffled and injured by several sorts of malignant
men who are about the King; some whereof, under the name of The true
description of a Cavalier: which some who most condemned them, have now
actually drawn upon themselves in overthrowing the parliament by force.
Cavaliers, without having respect to the Laws of the Land, or any fear either
of God, or man, are ready to commit all manner of outrage and violence, which
must needs tend to the dissolution of this Government, the destroying of our
Religion, Laws, Liberty, and property; all which must be exposed to the malice
and violence of such desperate persons as must be employed in so horrid and
unnatural an act, as the overthrowing of a Parliament by force, which is the
support and preservation of them. All which being duly considered by the Lords
and Commons, and how great an obligation lies upon them, in honor, conscience,
and duty, according to the high trust reposed in them, to use all possible
means in such case, for the timely prevention of so great and irrecoverable
evils; they have thought fit to publish their sense and apprehension of this
imminent danger, thereby to excite all well-affected persons to distribute
their best assistance, according to their Solemn Vow and Protestation, to the
preparations necessary for the opposing and suppressing of the traiterous
Attempts of those wicked and malignant Counselors who seek to engage the King
in so wicked and destructive an Enterprise, and to destroy the Privileges and
Being of Parliaments.

1. They the said Lords and Commons do declare, That whosoever shall bring in
any proportion of Money or Plate, or shall underwrite to furnish or maintain
any number of Horse, Horsemen, or Arms, for the preservation of the public
peace, and for the defense of the King, and both Houses of Parliament from
force and Uiolence, and to uphold the Power and Privileges of Parliament,
according to his Protestation: it shall be held a good and acceptable Service
to the Commonwealth, and Testimony of his good affection to the Protestant
Religion, the Laws, Liberties and Peace of this kingdom, and to the Parliament
and privileges thereof.

And lastly it is declared, That whatsoever is brought in shall not at all be
employed upon any other occasion, than to the purposes aforesaid, which are; To
maintain the Protestan^ Religion, the Kings authority, and his person in his
Royal Dignity, the free course of Justice, the Laws of the Land, the Peace of
the Kingdom, and the Privileges of Parliament, against any force that shall
oppose them: And this by direction of Both Houses of Parliament.

Here you have the Good Old Cause truly, clearly and fully stated by both
Houses of Parliament in every particular branch thereof, when they first
engaged themselves, all the well-affected people of the Kingdom, and Army in
it, as they published to all the world in these their Propositions. Which how
diametrically contrary it is in every branch to the misstaken Good Old Cause,
now cried up and prosecuted with an high hand, and to the late practices,
proceedings, counsels, papers, designs of those, who were first raised,
commissioned by the Parliament for its just defense, yet are at last
degenerated into the greatest Apostates from, and violentest enemies against
it; their own consciences can best resolve, and the blindest eyes most clearly
discern,

These Propositions were seconded with a Exact Collection, p. 456, 457.
Declar^tion of the Lords and Commons to the same effect, printed and published
by their Order, 5 Iulii 164^. in pursuance whereof July 12. the Commons House
pass^d and published these Votes: And by an Ordinance of both Houses, 14 Martii
1642. A Collection of Ordinances, p. 8.
Resolved upon the Question, That an Army shall be forthwith raised, for the
safety of the Kings Person, the Defense of Both Houses of Parliament, and of
those who have obeyed their Orders and commands, and preserving of the true
Religion, the Laws, Liberty and Peace of the Kingdom: That the Earl of Essex
shall be the General: That in this Cause, for the Safety of the Kings person,
defense of both Houses of Parliament, and of those who have obeyed their Orders
and commands, and preserving of true Religion, the Laws, Liberty and Peace of
the Kingdom, they will live and die with the Earl of Essex, whom they have
nominated General in this Cause. That a Petition should be framed, to move his
Majesty to a good accord with his Parliament, to prevent a civil War. Which
Petition and Votes were presented to the Lords; who returned Answer; They did
concur with the House of Commons, in omnibus.

After this the Lords and Commons in their Exact Col. p. 932. An Appendix, p. 4.
Ordinances of 14 Martii 1642. and 3 August 1643. for the speedy raising and
levying money for the maintenance of the Army raised by the Parliament, and
sundry other Ordinances, whiles the Earl of Essex was General, did declare;
That the only Causes for which they have raised and do continue an Army and
forces, are the necessary defense of the true Protestant Religion, of
themselves and the Parliament from violence and destruction, of this Kingdom
from foreign Invasion, and bringing notorious offenders to condign punishment,
the preservation of the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, and the Kings
person. And the A Collect. p. 43, 44.
Earl of Essex himself, in his Proclamation to prevent plundering, the 24. of
April 1643. as he styles himself, Captain General of the Army, raised and
employed for the defense of the Protestant Religion, King, Parliament and
Kingdom; So he declares, That this Army is raised for the defense of the King,
Parliament, and Kingdom, the preservation of Gods true Religion, and the just
rights and liberties of the Subjects from violence and oppression.

The year next following, when the Scottish forces were called and brought in
for our assistance to join with the English Army and Forces; the self same Good
Old Cause in every branch thereof was avowed and espoused by them, and no
other, as both Houses of Parliament and the Scots themselves declared to all
the world in A Collect of Ordinances p. 305, 308, 313, 327, 363, 371, 416, 418,
420, etc. 424, 425 etc.
several printed Ordinances, Declarations, Remonstrances, and in the Solemn
league and Covenant, which the Officers and Soldiers of both Armies, as well
as Members of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, and all well-affected persons
in England, Scotland, and Ireland, generally subcribed in a most cheerful,
public, and sacred manner: yea A Collection. p. 426.
Oliver Cromwell himself (both as a Member and Lieutenant General) being the
40th. Member who subscribed it.

The command of the Parliaments forces and Army, being afterward translated
from the Earl of Ess^x to Sir Thomas Fairfax, by an Collection p. 598.606.
Ordinance of the Lords and ^ommons in Parliament, 15 Febr. 1644. for raising
and maintaining the sorces under his command: both Houses ordained, That there
be forthwith raised and armed for the d^fence of the King and Parliament, the
true Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, an Army
consisting of 6600 Horse, 4000 Dragooners, and 14400 Foot, under the immediate
command of Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, who is hereby constituted Commander in
chief of all the forces raised by this Ordinance, and shall from time to time
be subject to such Orders and Directions as be shall receive from time to time
from both Houses of Parliament, or from the Committee of both Kingdoms. And it
is fu^ther provided by this Ordinance, that all Commanders and Officers that
shall be employed in this Army, and to be approved by both Houses of
Parliament, and all the common Soldiers of this A^my shall ^ake the National
League and Covenant of both Kingdoms, within 20 days after they be listed in
the said Army; and that all such who shall refuse the said Solemn League and
Covenant, shall upon such their refusal be displaced, and shall not be admitted
into any Office or command in the said Army, until they shall have taken the
said Solemn League and Covenant, in such form as is there prescribed, and such
their conformity approved of by both Houses of Parliament. In the A Collection
p. 623.
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for the speedy
raising and impressing of men for the recruiting the forces under the command
of Sir Thomas Fairfax, 27 Febr. 1644. They declared, Forasmuch as the true
Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the Subject were in danger to be
subverted Idolatry, and tyranny, like to be introdu^ed by the force and power
of several armies raised by pretense of the Kings authority, etc. Be it
therefore ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the
Committees of the Militia for the City of London, the Deputy Lieutenants and
Committees of Parliament in every County, City, or place within the Realm,
shall from time to time, raise, leavy, and impressed such number of Soldiers,
Gunners, and Chyrurgions, for the defense of the King, Parliament, and Kingdom
as shall be appointed by both Houses of Parliament, the Committee of both
Kingdoms, or by Sir Thomas Fairfax. The like recitals of this Good Old Cause,
and ends for which this Army under him and others was raised, are used in A
Collection, p. 666, 667, 668, 669.
other Ordinances. If this be not sufficient evidence, that Sir Thomas Fai^fax,
and the General Counsel of the Officers and Army under him took up Arms, and
engaged only for this Good Old Cause and ends, and none else, thus declared by
both Houses of Parliament, the very title of their several Remonstrances, and
Declarations penned by themselves, printed by their own order in one
Collection, London 1647. will resolve the world, themselves, and all other
Soldiers since incorporated into the A^my past all contradiction, being thus
entitled, A Declara^ion of the Engagements, Remonstrances, Representations,
Proposals, Desires, and Resolutions from his Excellency Sir Tho. Fai^fax and
the General Council of the Army for settling his Majesty in his ^ust Rights, the
Parliament in their just Privileges, and the Subjects in their liberties and
freedoms Also Representations of the Grievances of the Kingdom, and remedies
propounded for removing the present pressures (by Taxes and Excises): And the
resolution of the Army, for the establishing of a firm and lasting peace, in
Church and Kingdom. This being the Title, sum of all their Engagements,
Remonstrances, Representations, Proposals, R^solutions, it is superfluous to
recite all the particular passages in them tending to these ends: only it will
not be unseasonable to remind them of this one passage in their Declaration of
September 9. 1647. concerning the fundamental authority and government of the
Kingdom, p. 250. Whereas a Member of the General Council of this Army has
publicly declared and expressed himself, That there is no visible authority in
the Kingdom but the power and force of the Sword, (the only Good Old Cause now
cried up by some in deeds if not in words) we therefore the said General
Counsel, Nota.
to testify how far our hearts and minds are from any design of setting up the
power of the sword above or against the authority and government of the
Kingdom, and our readiness to maintain and uphold the said Authority, have by a
free Vote in the said Counsel ((...) man contradicting) judged the said Member
to be expelled the said Council which we hereby thought fit to publish as a
clear manifestation of our dislike and disavowing such Principles or practices
(yet now revived, practiced.)

This being the right State of the true Good Old Cause and only ends for which
all the Forces, Armies, under the forenamed or any other Generals since, were
first raised, Commissioned, and hitherto maintained, continued, at the peoples
vast expense, as both Houses of Parliament; the Kingdoms, Parliaments of
England, Scotland, the Generals, Officers, and General Councils of the Army
themselves, have thus from time to time remonstrated in print to all the world,
yea ratified by the Protestation, A Collection p 203, 204, 205, 425, 426, 427.
the sacred Vow and covenant, the National League and Covenant, with other
sacred Oaths and Obligations, obliging them faithfully, constantly, and
sincerely to defend, maintain and persevere therein all the days of their
lives; and to promote the same to their power against all Oppositions, Lets and
Impediments whatsoever according to their power, without suffering themselves
directly or indirectly by whatsoever combination, persuasion or terror, to be
divided, withdrawn or make defecti^n from the same. Which Covenants, Vows,
Protestations, they professed they all made in the presence of Almighty God,
the Searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to perform the same.

If there be any other Cause now or lately espoused by any Members of
Parliament, Officers, Soldiers, English, Scots, Irish, of what ever condition,
sect, or party, inconsistent with, or repugnant, destructive to this good old
Cause, or any branch thereof; it cannot without an apparent contraction,
absurdity, and falsehood, be styled; either A Good or Old, much less, The Good
Old Cause, for which the Parliament, Army, Soldiers kingdom, or any others
adhering to them first took up arms, and so long engaged in; but rather a Bad,
a New unrighteous Cause, or Gunpowder-plot, originally contrived and secretly
fomented by Popish Emissaries, I^suits, and their seduced Disciples: or a good
cause only as War is styled good, Cicero, Calepine, Holioke, Tit. Bellum.
Bellum quasi Belluinum, or minime Ponum: And Old only in these respects, (if
conscientiously examined by any who shall either promote or engage in it)
Because it proceeds orig^nally from the Rev. 12.9. c. 20. 2. John 8.44.
Old Serpent, and Dragon, the Devil, (a seducer, liar, murderer from the
beginning; the spirit who Ephesians 2 1, 2, 3.
now rules in the Children of Disobedience, to engage them in this cause:)
Because it suits with, and proceeds, issues from the Ephesians. 4.22.22. Romans 6.6.
Col. 3.9.
Old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, which they have
not yet crucified, nor put off with his deeds, after all their Fastings,
Humiliations, Prayers; Because it strongly relisheth of the 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
Old seven of malice and wickedness, which they have not yet purged out, that
they might be anew sump, and is carried on with a despitefull and revengefull
heart, ( to destroy, whatever they formerly engaged to preserve as the true
good old cause) because of the Ezekiel. 25.15.
Old Hatred: Because they perceive, that this new pretended good Cause they had
set up and pursued, now decays and waxes Heb. 8, 13.
Old, and is ready to vanish away; unless they put all their might, and the
strength of the whole Army to support it Because, it is the Job 22.15, 16.
old Way which wicked men, (the old Gunpowder Traitors) have formerly trudden;
which were cut down out of time; whose foundation was overflown with a flood.
Or finally, because it was first set on foot and promoted, Jude 4.
by certain men crept in unawares (into the Army and Nation from Jesuitical
Seminaries and I. Leydons) who were before of Old ordained to this
condemnation; ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness,
and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ at lestwise in their
works, (as Jude and Paul inform us by an unerring divine Spirit) Titus 1.16.
being abominable, Disobedient (to all their lawful Superiors and Parliaments
themselves) and to every good work reprobate; Yea, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
lovers of their own selves, covetous, proud, boasters, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection,
Truce Breakers, fa^se accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that
are good, Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of
God: Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, who have made
these last days of ours perilous times, as St. Paul of old predicted. If then
the false good OLD CAUSE lately and now cried up and prosecuted, upon serious
Inquisition of any already engaged, or solicited to engage therein, shall upon
De Consideratione, lib. 1.
St. Bernards threefold inquiry, An liceat, an deceat, an expediat (which every
Christian ought to make into every Action, before he undertake it) clearly
appear to be the old, and The good Old Cause, only in these respects; which
render it most desperately Wicked, Ill, and New, ^otally inconsistent with,
p^ofessedly repugnant to, subversive of that real good Old Cause, wherein they
first ingag^d; here truly stated: Let all Officers, Soldiers of the Army, and
others who have any remainders of Conscience, Ingenuity, Honesty, or indeared
affections lest in them to the Peace, Welfa^e, Safety, Settlement, fundamental
Laws, Government, Parliaments, Liberties, Weal, Prosperity of our endangered,
shaken subverted Church, State Parliaments; eternally renounce this Spurious
Imposture, and Gibeonitish stratagem inevitably to destroy them all: And
remember the genuine, true, Good Old Cause here ^ightly stated, Rev. 2.5.
from whence they have fallen; and repent, and do their first works lest Christ
come upon them quickly, and remove both them, their and our Candlestick out of
its place, except they and we repent. And let all such Commanders, Officers of
the Ar^y, and their Confederates, who against their Commissions, Trusts,
Duties, Covenants, Declarations, and Solemn Engagements, first mutinied the
Army against the Houses, and Members of Parliament, for the defense of whose
Persons, Privileges, and Session they were principally raised; and secluded,
secured the Members, dissolved both Houses, and the Parliament it self, one
after another: and have since bin kept and thrust out of the Parliament House,
secured, dissolved themselves by their Fellow. Officers, and Soldiers directly
or indirectly, several times; now seriously consider, How God has scourged
them with their own black rod, and president of Disobedience, and taken them in
their own snare: That ( Judges 1.6.7.
Adonibezeck like) as they have done to others, so God has required them, and
Ps. 137.8.
recompensed unto them the deed they did to us. That Luke 6.38.
with the same measure they meeted to others, it has been, and shall be
measured to them again. If any of them, or their Confederates, have an ear to
hear, let them hear this further irreversible Decree of the immutable God, and
Sovereign Judge of all the Earth Rev. 13 10. He that leads into Captivity,
shall go into Captivity. He that kills with the sword shall be killed with
the sword. He^e is the patience and faith of the Saints. And if any engaged in
the new fictitious, against the real true good old Cause, believe and tremble
not at the consideration thereof, he has neither the faith nor patience of the
Saints, though he usurp and engross the name of a Saint to himself: and shall
find it experimentally verified in conclusion; as many others have already
done, who now like Fools repent too late, of what is past their skill and power
to redress.

FINIS,

