Diotrephes Catechized: OR Sixteen IMPORTANT QUESTIONS Touching the
ECCLESIASTICAL Jurisdiction and Censures (contradistinct to Civil) now eagerly
pretended to and challenged by a DIVINE Right, by some Over-rigid
Presbyterians, and Independents. Propounded to both these Dissenting Parties,
for the further Discovery of Truth; the Preservation of the Civil Christian
Magistrates Interest, and speedier comprimising of our present unhappy
Controversies touching Church Government: On which many now so over-dote, as to
place the Whole Kingdom of Christ and substance of Religion therein; to repute
all our former Reformation, a mere Nothing; the Church of Christ undone, and
the exercise of their Ministry, not only fruitless but unlawful, so as they
cannot with good Conscience continue, but threaten to relinquish it, in case
they cannot obtain their demands of such an Exorbitant power, by Divine
Institution, which Christ and his Apostles never claimed, exercised, nor
themselves, nor Predecessors, ever formerly enjoyed, petitioned for, or
pretended to in any age, but this.

Proposed; published by W. Prynne a Well-wisher to Verity and Unity. The Second
Edition with some Enlargements.

Lu. 22 24. 25. 26. Math. 20. 25. 26. 27. And there was a strife among them,
which of them should be accounted the Greatest. But Jesus called them unto him
and said; ye know, that the Princes of the Gentiles Exercise Lordship (or
Dominion) over them, and they that are great exercise Authority upon them; But
it shall not be so among you; But whosoever will be Great among you, let him be
your Servant; Even as the Son of man came, not to be Ministered unto, but to
Minister. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3, 5. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking
the oversight, (or care) thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for
filthy luchre, but of a ready mind, Neither as overruling, (or being Lords
over) Gods Heritage, but being ensamples to the flock: Yea all of you, be ye
subject one to another, and be clothed with humility; for God resists the
Proud, and gives Grace to the humble. LONDON Printed For Michael Sparks. Anno
Dom. 1646.

Sixteen Important Questions touching the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and
Censures, Contradistinct to Civil, now challenged by a Divine Right.
THe serious consideration of the importunate Claims of a new kind of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, by a pretended Divine Right, by those very men
who of late so eagerly declaymed against the Old, as Antichristian and Papal,
when challenged by our Prelates upon the selfsame grounds and Title, has
induced me to propound these few Important Questions to the over-^asger
prosecutors of this supposed Divine Authority, at leastwise to moderate, if not
extomgio^ those unseasonable deplorable late kindled flames of Contention,
which if not timely prevented may prove more fatal to our Churches Kingdoms,
then all the former Dissentions, and break forth into a new Civil War,
between our selves, when we have totally vanquished the Common Enemy. The
Prelates deserting of their undoubted Jus hum inum, and unadvised challenge of
a Ius Divinum to advance, perpetuate their Jurisdictions, and sweating men to
this their Title by a new, etc. Oath, was the immediate forerunner, yea
principal means of the utter subversion both of their Hierarchy and
Authority. And we have cause to fear that some over-ridged Presbyterians in
considerate zeal, in waving the Presbyteriall Authority vested in them by an
unquestionable Ordinance of Parliament (to their full contents as most men
deemed;) and resorting to a more dubious disputable (pretended) Ius Divinum
(formerly laid aside by both houses of Parliament and the Assembly, though now
resumed, revived,) the more highly to advance and firmly settle it in ou^
Churches, may produce the like contrary unexpected effects: and either revive
the old exploded Luciferian Episcopacy, or introduce that more feared
Anarchicall Hydra or Babble of Independenc y, which they most endeavor to
suppress; or at leastwise revolve the censorius or corrective power of all
scandalous sins and sinners into the Civil Majestrates hands, the far
safest of the three: on whose be^e, I shall with the spirit of Peace and
Meekness propose these following Queries, both to my Presbyterian and
Independent Brethren; desiring their acquiescens in or serious answers to them
after sound deliberation, laying aside all private Interests and designs,
whatsoever, which may misguide their Judgments) for the sifting out of that
one Golden medium of sacred Truth, which can only reconcile and ^ordially
reunite us in the Bonds of Love.

1. Whether all scandalous Sins and Offenses now pretended by Presbyteri^s or
(...) to be of Eccle^sticall cognizance, be not by Gods own Institution and
Command [as well before, as undet the Law, and through out the Old Testament,]
inquirable, examinable, and to be determined, In ged only by the temporal
Majestrates, or Civil powers, and punished only with temporal or corporal
punishments, not by any Ecclesiastical Persons, Officers, or Church Censures
only, distinct from civil; since, we read, that the several scandalous sins
of Levit. 20. (...) to 8. D^ut. 13. 4. to 18. c. 17. 2. to 8. Io^ 22. 10. to 34
2 chronicles. 23. 17 15. 13. Judge. 6. 30. 31. 1 King 18. 40. 2. King 10. 20. to 29.
c. 11. 18.
Idolatry, Exodus 21. 17. Levit. 20. 9. c. 24. 10. to 17. 1 Kings 24. 10 to 16.
Dan. 3. 29. Mat. 26. 65.
Cursing, Blaspheming, Exodus 21. 14. Numb. 15. 32, to 37
Sabbath-breaking, Exodus 21. 15, 17. Levit. 20. 9. D^r. 22 18. 19, 20. Josh 1.
18. 1. Sa. 11, 12. Ezr. 7. 25. 26.
Disobedience to Parents natural or civil, Genesis 26. 11 c. 38, 24, 25, Levit.
20. 10, 15, 17, 18. Deutt. 22. 22 to 25 Levit. 18. 6. to 30. c. 21. 9 John 8,
4, 5,
Whoredom, Adultery Levit. 18. 22, to 30. c. 20, 11, to 22. Exodus 22. 19.
Indg. 20, 1. to 15
Incest, Rape, Sodomy, Buggery, ^en. 9. 5. 6 Exodus 21. 12, 13, 14. Levit. 24,
17. Number. 35. 15, to 34. 1 King. 2. 32 to 35
Murder, Levit. 20 27. Deutr. 18. 11. 1 Samuel 28. 9.
Witchcraft, Sorcery, with sundry other sins, were by Gods own precept, to
be inquired after, censured, punished by the Temporal Majestra'e, civil
Congregation, powers People and only, with civil punishments alone, as putting
or stoning to death, burning,[ Deu. 31 22
] hanging Deuteronomy. 22. 28 19. 29, c. 25 2, 3 2 Cor. 11, 23. 24. c. 6. 5.
fines, stripes and the like, but never enjoined to be examined, censured by
Ecclesiastical Persons, Officers or to be punished by them with
Church Censures, as Excommunication, Suspention from the Passover,
Circumcision, Sacrifices, Festivalls, or any public Ordinances then in use, or
exclusion from the Temple or Synagogues, as the marginall texts demonstrat. And
more especially Ezra. 7. 25. 26. where King Artaxerxes sending Ezra the Priest
(descended linially from the Highpriests before him, as is evident by v. 1. to
6) up to Jerusalem, with a special Commission to repair the City, Temple,
restore the service of God therein, and settle the Government of that place
according to the Law of God, gives him this command: And thou Ezra, after the
wisdom of thy God, that is in thine hand, set Majestrates and Judges that may
judge ALL THE PEOPLE that are beyond the River, all such as know the LA^ OF THY
GOD, and teach ye them that know them not: AND WHOSOEVER WILL NOT DO THE LAW
OF THY GOD, and the Law of the King; let Judgment be executed speedily against
him, (not by Ezra the Priest, or any Ecclesiastical Consistory or Presbytery
of Priests, with mere Ecclesiastical Censures of Excommunication or
suspention from the Temple, or public Ordinances of God, no such
Church Officers punishments being then known, or instituted by Gods Law; but by
the Majestrates and Judges appointed, who were to punish them only with
temporal Censures as the following words thus resolve) Whether it be unto
DEATH, or to BANISHMENT, or to CONFISCATION OF GOODS or to IMPRISONMENT: the
only punishments, censures then inflicted on Delinquents against Gods Law, as
well as against the Kings: Yea had there bin any other Censures Ecclefiasticall
distinct from these temporal, which ought by any Divine Right or institution
to have bin then inflicted upon notorious scandalous offenders against Gods
Law, by the high Priest, or any other Church Officers or Iudicatory, no doubt
this devcut King upon this occasion would have expressly commanded Ezra the
Priest himself, or those Church Officers or Judicatories to have duly executed
the same, when he gave him this large Commission, and extended so much
extraordinary favor to him, that he cries out in the very next ensuing words.
v. 27. Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, who has put such a thing as
this into the Kings heart, etc. Which as it expressly determines, that Deu. 12.
47, 48 Acts 16. 22. 23
this Commission, and forecited direction was inspired into the Kings heart by
God himself, and so most consonant to his written word and Law: so it
insinuates, that by the Law of God in those days, all scandalous Offenders
against Gods Law were to be punished only by the civil Majestrates and Judges
with civil punishments, not by any Ecclesiastical Officers, or Iudicatory,
with any Church Censures whatsoever. This may be further evidenced by the
Priests, Prophets, Peoples, and Princes proceedings against Jeremiah, and
Vriah, who for preaching and prophesying falsely, (as was supposed) were
punished by the King, and Princes, upon the Priests, Prophets, and peoples
malicious accusation only by Jer. 16 throughout c. 29, 26, c. 31. 33, c. 37,
18, 19. c: 38, and 39
Imprisonment and Death alone, not by Church-cen^res, Church Iudicatories: Yea
Deuter. 13. 5. False Prophets are expressly enjoined to be put to death by the
Civil Majest^^^s, not punished by the Ecclesiastical powers with
excommunications or suspentions. And it is most clear and undeniable by the 1
King 22. 26. 27. 2 Chronicles. 16. 10. c: 18. 25. 26. Math. 14. 3. 4. 5. Luke 22.
23. Acts 5. 18. 19. c. 8. 3. c. 12. 2. 3. 4. c. 16. 23. 24. c. 22 19. 20 to 30.
c. 24 and 25, and 26 2 Cor. 6, 5, Hebr. 11, 36, 37. That both in the old and
new Testament False Prophets, Teachers and broachers of Erroneous Doctrins; (or
such who were so reputed though true) yea the Apostls and Saints of Christ, for
preaching, professing the Gospel and truth of God, amongst the Jews and
others who reputed it Acts 14, 14. c. 28. 22
Heresy, Scisme, or false Doctrine, contrary to what they had formerly
received, were usually convented before the civil Majestrates, and punished
with imprisonment, stripes, putting or stoning to death, and the like, but not
with Excommunication, or any Ecclesiastical Censures of divine institution
though now made matters of mere Ecclesiastical Cognizance. And if so; whether
the Temporal Christian Majestrates and civil Powers, as such, have not now
the selfsame divine Authority to punish such sins and sinners under the
Gospel, only with temporal punishments, without the interposition,
Examination or Censures of any Church Officers or Presbyteries, as the Godly
temporal Majestrates and Civil powers had then under the Law? If not, how the
contrary can be evidenced by clear Scriptures, and by what texts in particular?

2. Whether the texts of Deuteronomy. 17. 8. to 14. and 2. Chron. 19. 8. to the end,
do warrant any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Congregationall or Classical in
Causes merely Ecclesiastical, or any mere Church censures, distinct from the
Civil Majestracy, and temporal Censures, as some now pretend? Whether the
genuine scope and sense of these texts, hold forth any more or other
jurisdiction and power in the Priests, Levites, or High Priest himself, then
this: That they jointly with the temporal Judges, and chief of the Fathers of
Israel [not alone by themselves] should resolve (not ordinary plain, or
undisputable, but only] all such doubtful, civil cases, or controversies
which the ordinary Judges or Majestrats in their Cities held dubious, or too
hard for them to determine aright, between [not scandal and scandal, ^or who
should be excommunicated, suspended from the Ordinances as scandalous, ignorant
or unfit, and who not] but, between blood and blood, plea and plea, stroke and
stroke, ( being matters of civil controversy) in their gates; and between Law
and Commandment, Statutes and Judgments, [to wit the Judicial written Law of
God] upon whose exposition any civil doubts, or controversies should arise
which the people themselves could not resolve,] whose superior resolutions they
should submit to, and proceed accordingly to execution; and he that would
presumptuously disobey and not submit to their sentence, was not to be
excommunicated or suspended, Deutr: 17, 12 13
but put to death; (a mere civil censure) to terrify others. And if this only
be the full sense and meaning of these texts, whether any episcopal,
Presbyteriall, classical or congregational Jurisdiction to correct scandalls
with mere Ecclesiastical censures can be deduced from them? Whether that
speech of Iehoshaphat 2. Chron. 19. 11. And behold Amariah the Chief Priest is
over you in all matters of the Lord (not scandalous sins and Ecclesiastical
Offenses committed by the Priests or people, no matters of the Lord, but sins
of men, detested by the Lord;] imply or necessarily enforce, that he had any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in point of judicature, to censure, punish all or
any sort of scandalous sinners with Church censures [of which there is not one
syllable in the text] vested in him by any divine Authority? And if so, whether
it makes not more for Papal and Archiepiscopall, then Presbyteriall,
Classical, or Congregationall Authority? this power or superintendent
Jurisdiction over all matters of the Lord, being vested in this High Priest
alone, and no other. Or rather, whether it be not clearly meant, that as King
Josiah himself did by his own Regal Authority appoint Judges in the Land and
in Jerusalem, in the preceding 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. and 10. verses, to determine all
controversies and punish all Offenses whatsoever, according to the Laws of God
and that Kingdom; so he did by the selfsame regal Authority appoint Amariah,
then chief Priest, over the Priests and Levites only, [implyed in the word You,
not over the people of the Land] in all matters of the Lord, that is to Order,
direct the Priests and Levites under him in their several courses, and all
matters what soever concerning the worship, service Oblations, and sacrifices
of the Lord, to be performed by them in the Temple at Jerusalem: in the
selfsame manner, as he set Zebadiah the Ruler of the House of Judah, over all
the Kings matters; in the very next ensuing words? That is, (as all consent,)
not over the people and Kingdom for to judge and govern them for that the
Judges forementioned were to do: but over his househould, Lands, Revenews as
his Lord Treasurer, or Lord High Steward of the Revenewes of the Crown, as the
comparing of it with ^^ Chron. 26. 30. 33. ( And of the Hibronises, Hashabiah
and his Brethren, men of valor a thousand and seven hundred were Officers
among them of Israel on this side Jordan westward IN ALL BVSINESSES OF THE
LORD, and in the service of the King, etc. And his Brethren, men of Valor
were two thousand seven hundred chief Fathers, whom King David Made Rulers
over the Rubenites, Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasseth, for EVERY MATTER
PERTAINING UNTO GOD and Officers of the King; jointly: (therefore Church
Officers made only by the King, and alterable at his pleasure, not by any
Divine institution of God himself;) and the paralelling it with these
explanatory texts, 1 Chronicles. 9. 10. to 35. c. 23. and 24. and 25. and 26. 2 Chronicles. 5. 7. to 14. c. 8. 14. 15. c. 13. 9. 10. 11. 12. c. 26. 16. to 21. c.
29. 3. to 35. c. 30. 16. c. 31. 2. 3. 11. to 20. c. 35. 2. 12. Ezra. 6. 17. 18.
Neh. 12. 40. to 47. compared with Heb. 5. 1. 2. For every high Priest taken
from among men, is ordained for men IN THINGS PERTAINING To GOD, that he may
offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins, etc. insallibly demonstrate? And if
so, then what Divine warrant is there from hence for any such Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction distinct from the Temporal as many now contend for, from these
two noted Texts? or for any Priests, Ministers of the Gospel, or Church
Officers distinct from the temporal Majestracy, to examine, correct any
scandalous Ostences by a mere Ecclesiastical power, or to punish them with
Church Censures, disterent from civil punishments?

3. Whether the Priests Jurisdiction to judge of Lev. c. 13. and 14.
all causes of Leprosy (no scandalous sin nor offense, but a mere natural
infirmity,) and that only among the Jews, yea as well in Houses, Garments,
Vessels, [no subjects of Ecclesiastical censures] as Persons: or their
proceedings in the case of Numb. 5. 12. to 31.
Jelousie, by virtue of express special Leviticall or Judicial Laws (the
only cases wherein the Priests were appointed to be as Judges in the old
Testament, whose proper Office was, Exodus 30. 10. Leu. 4. and 5. c. 6. 7. c. 7.
7. 8.. Number. 8. 19 21. c. 15. 25, and c Hebr. 5. 1, 2. 3.
to offer sacrifices and make atonement for sins, not to censure or punish
them;] be any infallible proof of the Aaronicall Priests or Presbyteries
Ecclesiastical Judicature or Jurisdiction to censure all spiritual Leprosies
of the soul with Church censures? Or of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of
Presbyteries or Independent Congregations to judge or censure all causes of
spiritual Leprosy, or scandalous offenses under the Gospel? And whither we
may not as soundly argue from the Writ, Regist. f. 267. F^t. Not. Bre. f. 234.
De Leproso amovendo; and the Statute of 1 Iac. chap. 31. as they from these
Texts; Majors, Bayliffes of Towns, Justices of Peace, Constables and other
Officers may lawfully remove Lepers, and shut up persons infected with the
Plague of Pestilence, Ergo, they may excommunicate and suspend from the
Sacrament all such as are scandalously or notoriously infected with the
Leprosy and plague of sin?

4. Whither, Deuteronomy. 13. 12, 13, 14, Josh. 22. 10. to 34. Judge. 20. 1. to 18. 2 Chronicles. 19. 9. to 11. Ezra 10. 16, 17. [where we read of temporal Officers,
Princes sent and employed Commissioners, as well as Priests, to inquire after
Idolaters, Idolatry, rapes, marriages with heathenish Wives, and other
Ecclesiastical crimes] compared together, he not a stronger Scripture
evidence for proof of the Parliaments, and Lay. Commissioners Authority, to
enquire after, yea punish Idolaters and scandalous sinners; then any texts that
can be produced by the Presbyterians or Independents out of the Old Testament
for probat of a divine right, either in their Classes, Presbyteries or
Independent Congregations to censure scandalous sins and sinners with
Ecclesiastical censures? And whither the Statutes of 26. Hen. 8. cap. 1. 31.
Hen. 8. c. 10. [appointing a Lay Vicegerent in all Ecclesiastical matters] 37
H. 8. c. 17. 1 E. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1. do not justify such Commissioners to
be legal as well as these texts, warrant them to be in some sort divine?

5ly. Whether there be any precept or president in all the Old Testament
directly or punctually determining, that there was by divine institution an
unquestionable Ecclesiastical jurisdiction vested by God Himself in Priests,
Levites, or any Jewish Officers, to examine witnesses upon Oath, convent or
censure any scandalous sinners by excommunication, or suspention of them from
the Tabernacle, Temple, public Assemblies, Synagougs, Sacrifices, solemn
public Festivalls, or other sacred Ordinances for any scandalous fin
whatsoever? If so, then what are these precepts, presidents, and scandalous
sins in particular? And whether it be probable they had any direct authority
given them by God ^imselfe, to suspend or put back any from the Sacraments of
Circumcision, or the Passover (which Baptism and the Lords Supper now
succeed) since both of them originally were ordered to be performed in private,
by the Genesis 17. 10. to 28. c. 21 4. c. 24. 22. 23 24 Exodus 12. 48. e. 4. 24.
25. 26. Luke 2. 2^. John. 7. 22. Josh. 10. 2. 3. 7. Acts 7. 8.
Parents or Masters of the Family, not Priests or Levites; and executed or
eaten by them in their Exodus 12. (...). 4, 15. 21, 40. ^0 46. Mat. 26 17. to.
26. M^r. 14. 12. to 19.
several private houses, where the Priests and Levites had no Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction that we read of, and were not present at these sacred actions
unless only at some few solemn general Passeovers at Jerusalem, where they
were but Ministerial, to 2 Chro. 30 13. to 21. c. 35 1. to 20, Ezra. 6. 18. to
22. 1. Cor. 10. 1. to 8. compared together.
help kill the Passover, and sprinkle the blood, not Magisteriall, to keep
any back from eating thereof, by any pretext of Ecclesiastical Authority?

6ly. Whether Ministers or Presbyteries under the Gospel, have any other or
greater Ecclesiastical jurisdiction then the Jewish High Priest, Priests, and
Levites had under the Law? And whither Christian Kings, Magistrates have not as
large an Ecclesiastical power and Authority under the Gospel, as any godly
Kings or Magistrates exercised under the Law? If you answer Negatively to the
first, and affirmatively to the latter of these demands; then how can that
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of Presbyteries or Congregations, and their power
of Church Censures, distinct from the civil Magistracy, be any way justified
or maintained by the Scripture? If affirmatively in the first, and Negatively
in the latter, then show us direct Scripture Authorities to convince our
judgments of what you thus assert, or else give over your pretense of Ius
divinum? It is confessed both by the Presbyterians, or Independents, and clear
by sundry See Question 1. in the Margin.
express texts, that Christian Majestrates are Jure divine, and have an
undoubted divine Authority, yea command to punish and cut off all scandalous
sinners, Psalm. 100 5, 7, 8. Romans 13. 1. to 8. Pro. 20. 26. Whether
Presbyteries, or Independent Congregations, have any divine Ecclesiastical
right to punish them with Church censures, is very disputable and denied by
many. Therefore it is the safest, readiest way to Unity and Reformation, to
remit the punishment of all scandalous offenses to the civil Magistrate,
rather than to the pretended disputable questioned a^hority of Presbyteries,
Classes, or Indedependent Congregations.

7ly, whether there be any express texts in all the New Testament, and what in
particular, which infallibly evince an Ecclesiastical jurisdiction by divine
right to be settled by Christ in all Christian Ministers. Presbyteries, or
Congregations, and in which of them in particular, to continue unalterably in
all Churches of Christ to the end of the world, for the excommunication or
suspention of all kinds of scandalous persons from the Sacrament, though they
externally pretend and profess their sincere repentance in general? Or any
certain rules prescribed them in the Gospel, and in what particular Texts for
the due execution of this jurisdiction in I am (...) hu^dreds of cases in Summa
(...), (...), (...), (...) Co^se us, The. Ze^la; and other Canonists Tit, Ex
com (...): and others, ^ch (...), (...) in ou^ Presbyteries concerning
excommunications and suspentions, for the deciding whereof, there is no one
rule nor Text in Scripture: Then how can their proceedings (...) be Jure divine?
all cases or scandalls that may happen? If not, whether it can probably be
imagined that Christ in his wisdom would erect, institute and vest an
Ecclesiastical Government in Church officers, without prescribing them any
certain rules whereby to manage it in all particulars, and leave them to proceed
in an arbitrary way, according to their mee^ pleasur^ con rary to Mat. 28 19.
20. If yea, then produce these texts to us for our satisfaction.

8ly. What rules or presidents are there in Scripture to re ieve parties
grieved by unjust. Ecclesiastical censures either by appeals or other ways
and to what superior Tribunals? If no such rules or presidents appea^e therein;
(admitting Presbyteries, or Congregations Ecclesiastical jurisdictions,
censures to be Jure divino] then (...) by Go^s own Law which pro^ides them no
re^iefe, the parties injured must not remain remediles when most injuriously
sentenced by any private Presbitery, Classis, congregation without any help or
benefit of Appeal to Provincial, National Synods, Parliaments, or the Civil
Magistrate? And if so: whether this will not introduce as many absolute
tyrannies, and arbitrary Tribunals, (against which we have so much contested of
late) as there are Presbyteries, or Congregations: especially if we grant them
a general power of all things they themselves shall judge to be scandals,
without confining them to particulars, or establish their jurisdictions by a
divine right, which no mere humane power or i^stitution can control?

Ninthly, whither if Christ has instituted or left any exact Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, discipline or power of censures to his Church distinct from the
civil Magistracy and censures, this pretended jurisdiction, discipline or
power be so absolute and sufficient of it self alone, as to be fully able to
correct, redress, reform all abuses, scandalls, corruptions, and suppress
all Heresies, Schisms, Errors, Vices, arising in every Church? If ^ot, then we
may justly suspect, it is no real jurisdiction nor discipline instituted by
Christ, who would Deuteronomy. 22 (...) 2 Samuel 22. 31. Psalm. 19. 7. 2 Timothy 3. 1^
institute and bequeath no incompleate, nor imperfect jurisdiction, judicatory,
or discipline to his best-Beloved Spouse the Church: If yea, whither is that
jurisdiction now contended for by Presoyterians or Independents, such? If so,
then it is complete, and every way selfesufficient without the concurrence or
assistance of the Christian Magistrate or any temporal authority to assist,
maintain it, or supply its defects: But this none can truly assert nor affirm.

For First, no Pres^ytery, Classis, or Independent Congregation has yet
challenged, nor can claim by divine right, any coercive power by way of
attachment, imprisonment, or fine, to bring any party or witness sommoned so
much as to appear before them, in case of wilful neglect or refusal to
appear, or be examined, to prepare any cause ^or sentence.

Secondly, In case any Ecclesiastical Censure of Excommunication or Suspention
be inflicted by them upon scandalous persons after full hearing, if they
absolutely contemn the same or refuse to conform themselves, or by open
violence intrude into the Congregation, Church or force the Minister to give
the Sacrament to them though excommunicated or suspended.

Thirdly, In case any Heretic, Schismaticke, or profane person shall
wilsu'ly separate from our Congregations, (as thousands now do) refufing to
communicate with us in any Ordinances, proclaming us to be no Churches, and
pass a schismatic sentence of Non-Communion with us, by reason of some
unjust exceptions or pretenses against our Orthodox Doctrine, di^cipline, or
form of Government; and thereupon refuse to appear before our Presbyteries,
Congregations, or to submit unto their jurisdictions or censures; in all these
and such like cases, the pretended divine Ecclesiastical power, censures of
Presbyteries, Classes, or Independent Congregations are at a Nonplus, and so
defective, invalid of themselves (...) enforce obedience to such contumatious,
or reduce, reclaim such here^icall, schismatic, or profane persons from
their obstinacy, Heresies, Schisms and neglect of public Ordinances, that
they are enforced to pray in aid from the Civil Magistrate by Capias
excommunicatums, imprisonments, fines, or other such civil compulsory means
(the only effectual course by way of censure used in all ages to suppress,
reform I am assured a special (much desired) active Committee to examine and
punish the broachers of new blasphemous, Heretical Anabaptisticall Errors, and
gatherers of Schismatic Conventicles, would more suppress them in one
month, then all Ecclesiastical Judicatories in an age. See Iusti^ian: Cod. l.
1. Tit. 4. 6. 8. and Codex. Theod: ^ib. 16. Where we find obstinate Heretics
and Schis^naticks, by temporal Laws thus punished and suppressed: 1. They
were disabled to inherit by descent, or to purchase any Lands; to buy, sell,
make any contract, Will, or take any Legacy: to sue, or to be witnesses in any
Court of Justice: to bear any Office, Civil, or Military; to be present at
any Councels or elections, or to List themselves Soldiers in the Army, whence
they were cashiered when detected to be such. 2ly. Their goods were all
confiscated, or went to their next heirs that were Orthodox: their persons
banished, and in some cases imprisoned and put to death. 3ly. Their heretical
^ooks were prohibited and burnt, the Houses where they kept their Diurnall or
Nocturnall Conventicles confiscated, if kept there, with the Owners privity or
consent: If by the tenants privity without the Landlords, if the Tenant were
poor; then he was publicly bastanadoed or whipped, if rich then fined; and their
Conventicles both ^n Churches and private places prohibited, suppressed, under
severe penalties By these means and censures alone Heretics, Heresies,
Scismaticks, have always bin suppressed, restrained in former ^ges; but never
by Church censures, which they both derided and contemned. See Frid:
Lindebrogus Codex Legum Antiqu: Leges wisigothor, lib. 13. Tit. 2. Lex. 2.
Neap. 1. Tit. 1. 2. Capital: Karoli and Lud. l. 5. tit. 183. Pauli Geschimij,
Constit: Carolinae, Rubr. 3. 4, 5. with our own Statutes against Recusants, and
Heretics; And these will be the only means to suppress them now.
Heresies, Schisms, and the only way to suppress, redress them now) without
which all their Ecclesiastical censures, are both contemptible, ineffectuall,
and altogether insufficient to reform abuses: So that if the Magistrates be
Infidels, Heretics, or Schismatics, who will not; or profane, negligent,
timorous or licentious persons, who care not or dare not to assist the
Presoyteries, Classes, or Congregations, in forcing submission to their Church
processes, censures, they are so defective and ineffectuall of themselves, that
none can justly call, or infallibly prove them to be the Kingdom, Scepter,
Government, descip^ine and censures of Christ, whereby his Church must only
be governed, purged, reformed, as some now pretend them to be.

10ly. Whither Matthew. 18. 15. 16, 17. (if meant of Christian Presbyteries or
Church Officers, as is pretended, not of the civil Magistracy or Jewish
Sanhedrim;) gives any authority to them to proceed ex officio against notorious
scandalous sins [as Idolatry, Blasphemy, swearing, drunkenness, etc.) since
it speaks not of any public scandalous offenses against God and the Church,
but only of private personal So this word Trespass is used here, and in, Mat.
6. 14, 15: Luke 17. 3, 4. Genesis 31. 36. cap. 50, 17. 1. Sam. 25, 28. Though some
falsely aver it is never used in Scripture but for a trespass or sin against
God.
trespasses between man and man, to be proceeded against only upon the
voluntary complaint of the party offended, after previous private admonitions,
and then reproves before witnesses, yea, of such offenses, which upon private
satisfaction we are to forgive 77. times, without any public complaint, or
censure, Luke 17. 3. 4. Therefore not meant of mere public scandalls, which no
private man can remit, nor no Church or Presbytery will grant that they ought
to be 77. times remitted one after another, without the least suspension or
excommunication, upon mere external shows of Repentance: And whether, thou
have gained thy brother, in this Text, be meant properly of gaining him to God
by true Repentance, or only unto him who gains him, by way of reconciliation,
and renewing friendship, as the phrase it self, compared with Prove. 18. 19.
intimates.

11ly. Whether, Acts 15. 1. to 36. where a Synod of Apostles, Elders, and
Brethren met together at Jerusalem, to debate and resolve a dubious point of
doctrine only about circumcision, without exercising any act of discipline or
Ecclesiastical censure on any seandalous per^son, be a sound divine Authority,
to evidence to any man's conscience, the Divine Right of Presbyteries, Classes,
or Independent Congregations, to inflict Ecclesiastical censures upon
scandalous Delinquents, or to examine witnesses upon Oath against them, of
which there is not one syllable in that Text?

12ly. Whether the precept of Paul, 1 Cor. 5. 13. for putting away from among
them the incestuous person, written to this particular Church in this one case
of Incest only, against which heinous scandalous sin, being then under
Heathen Magistrates, they could not safely complain to them of it without
great scandal, nor go to Law before them for ordinary just civil things
without great offense, as appears by the very next words, 1 Cor. 6. 1. to 9.
when as by the Law of God, had the Magistrates there been Jews or Christians,
this sin of Incest was to be punished by them, not with excommunication or
suspention from the Church, but death it self, Leviticus 18. 8. c. 20. 11. 12.
Be any satisfactory or infallible argument for the continuance and exercise of
Excommunication, or Suspention from the Sacrament in all Churches of Christ in
all succeeding ages in all other cases of sin or scandal, though the
Magistrates in them be christian, and may, yea ought to punish those sins
with death or other temporal censures, if complained of? Whether those that
press this text, may not as well conclude from the very next words 1 Cor. 6.
1. to 9. that it is unlawful for Christians to go to Law besore any Christian
Judges now, and that they must sue only before Presbiteries or Congregations
for mere temporal matters, because Paul then commanded the Corinthians, not to
go to Law before heathen Judges to prevent scandal, but only in the Church
before the Saints, or such Judges as the Church should appoint them? As
infer, that all Scandalous persons must be excommunicated and suspended from
the Sacrament by Classes Presbyteryes, and censured only by them now, not by
the Christian Majestrate, because the incestuous Corinthian was then Ordered to
be put away and pun^hed by the Church and Saints of Corinth, for want of a
Christian Majestrate to punish him with death, or corporal censures? Yea
whether they may not as Logically and Theologically argue from the very next
chapter. 1 Cor. 7. 27. where Paul writes thus: I suppose therefore that this is
good for the present distress ( or necessity) for a man not to touch a Woman,
or marry; Ergo, it is lawful, yea necessary for Christian men or Women in all
ages, Churches of Christ to vow perpetual Virginity, and not to mary at all,
as the Papists thence infer in defense of their Monks, Nons, and u^married
Clergy. As reason from this text, That Paul in regard of the Corinthians
present distress and necessity for want of Christian Majestrates to punish
this incestuous, person with death and civil Censures advises the Church of
Corinth, To put away from AMONG THEMSELVES that wicked person; [or thing as
some read it:] Ergo all Ministers Presbyteries, and particular congregations of
Christ have a divine inherent Ecclesiastical right and power in them to punish
not only incestuous persons, but all other scandalous sinners with
Excommunication, suspention from the Sacrament, and other Church Censures, even
when and where there is no such necessity nor defect of Christian Magistrates,
but sufficient s^ore of them both able and willing to punish such with civil
punishments answerable to their crimes and scandalls? This is all that can be
extracted from this text, whereon they most realy; Which must needs be a
gross inconsequent, because no Apostolical advice to any one particular
Church upon a private extraordinary occasion and necessity only, can or ought
to be a general binding Law or Institution of Christ to oblige all other.
Churches whatsoever in the like, or any other cases, where there is no such
extraordinary occasion or necessity; As is clear by one pregnant evidence in
the 16. chap. of this very Epistle, c. 1. 2. concerning the Collection then
advised to be made for the Saints, by the Corinthians every first day of the
week, or weekly; which being but a particular advice and direction to this
Church for tha^ one Collection; is See (...) ^riumphing over falshoo^ p. 155.
156.
no binding Law or Rule to all other Churches of Christ strictly to imitate in
all their ensuing Collections, as is evident by Acts 13. 28, 29, 30. 2 Cor. 8.
1. to 21. c. 9. 1. to 15. R^m. 13. 25 26. Phil. 4. 14. to 20. Else no Church
could since appoint any public monthly Collections on week days, but only
weekly Collections on the Lord's Day, under pain of transgressing the
institustitution of Christ and this Apostle; which none dare aver: However,
since the Apostle writes not here to any Classis, Presbytery, or Presbyt^r, but
to the whole Church at Corinth; TO PUT AWAY FROM AMONG THEMSELVES, that wicked
person: [that is, to seclude him wholly from their Congregation, Church,
company, and not so much as to eat with him at their Tables or keep any
company with him at all, as is evident by ver. 7. 9. 11.) not to suspend him
only from the Lords Supper of which there is not one syllable in this Chap.
nor of any such suspention in the 10. and 11 chap. where he purposely treates
of this Sacrament; we may very well question, whether it makes not more against
Presbyteries and Classes divine power of Excommunication, and a bare
suspention, of scandalous persons from the Lords Supper only, without secluding
them Al^xa. A ensis ^um. (...) 4. q^. 21. 22. ^otus in 4. (...). 23 Thomas,
(...), (...), Darandus, in 4. sent. did. 18. p. (...) enchired Th^oli pars 5.
c 1.
from all other Ordinances and Church Assemblies as well as it, then for them;
it being contrary to the very difinition and practice of excommunication
hitherto known and used in the Church, to Excommunicate a notorious scandalous
person from the Lord supper only once a Month, a quarter, a year, for fear
of infecting others, and yet to admit him daily or weekly to joy ne with the
Church in all other Ordinances but it alone: when all [ a] Schoolmen Gr^tian
Cause. 11. qu, 3. Summa Angelica, and Rosella. Tit. Excommunicati^ Hostiensis
Sum. I. 5: Tit. De Sentent. Excom. Ani^nius (...) Tit. Excom. Bochelius,
Decret. Eccles. Gal. l. 2. Tit. 14.
Canonists resolve, that excommunication [especially that they call Major
Excommunication] excludes men, not only from the Sacrament, but likewise from
entering into the Church, the society of men, prayers of the faithful; and
those who wittingly keep company, buy or sell with such, are to be ipso facto
excommunicated. Whereas many now pretend it should seclude men from the Lords
Supper only, but not from any other Ordinance, contrary to thi^, to [ 2 These.
3. 14. 2 John 10 11 2 Timothy 3. 1. Tit 3. 10. 11. 3 c. (...) John 10 Rom 16. 17
John 9. 22. 32. 33 cap. 12. 42. c. 16. 2. Numb. 5. 2. 3. 4. c.. 21 14. 15 Deuteronomy.
23. 1. 2. 3
] other Texts and all sound Antiquity.

13ly. Whether there be any ground or example at all in Scripture to enjoyne
the Civil Christian Majestrate, in cases of obstinacy, contumacy against
Church censures, inflicted by Presbyteries or Congregations to become a mere
servant and executioner to Pre, byteries, Congregations or Church Officers, (as
the Pope and Prelates anciently made them.) to enforce obedience to their
censures by imprisonment or other coercive means, without any particular
examination of the merits of the cause, or justice of the procedings? Whether
such Ministerial executions of their censures, if admitted, do not necessarily
subject the people to a double jurisdiction, vexation, for one and the
selfsame scandalous crime, which may prove more intollerably oppressive to
them then the most exo^bitant country Committees, or Prelates consistories, if
not exactly bounded and subordinat the Majestracy to the Ministry, Presbytery
and particular Congregations, in point of Authority? which if obliged by any
divine Law to see Church censures executed and enforce obedience to them then
certainly Christian Majestrates as such, must either be Church Offic^rs as well
as Ministers, or Lay Elders; the rather because all Precepts given to
Majestrates themselves in Scripture, are given only to such See Deutr. 17, 14,
to 21 2 Samuel 7, 8, c. 32. 1, 3, 1 Kings 17. 9. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8 c. 19. 5. to 11. i.
to 13. Isay 49. 23.
] Godly or Christian Majestrates who believe, embrace the Scriptures, and are
Members of a visible Church or Christian state, as such; not to any infidells
or Heathen Majestrates, as heathenish, or mere Majestrates out of the Church
(as some grossly mistake,) else they were not obliged by Gods Law to see Church
cen. sures executed, obeyed, submitted too, if no Church officers.

14ly. Whether it be not more agreeable to the word of God, the Rules of
Justice and more conducing to the Churches Peace for the Civil M^jestrate
juditially to examine, punish, all pretended scandalous persons with temporal
cen^ures and then if they still continue impenitent to certify the proofs
taken before him to the (...), (...) or Congregation, upon their request, ^or
their conviction t^ere to ground an ^xcommunication or suspention upon, if
there b^e cause: then to ^ive them immediatpower to examine all scandalls
themselves upon Oath, without first acquainting the Civil Majest^ate with it,
or desiring his (...) examination of the scandalls, of purpose to subject them
to Church censures? Since we read of no such Examinations upon Oath practiced
by Presbyteries, Church Officers, or particular Congregations among the Jews
or Christians in Scripture: which if taken in writing and recorded (as they
ought to be, that so they may be produced, scanned upon Appeals) there must
then be a particular examiner, or Register at least appointed in every
Presbytery, Classis, and Provincial Synod to record them; for which they will
expect a constant Fee from the Church or State, or an answerable recompense
from the parties accusing or accused; which cannot be settled without Act or
Ordinauce of Parliament (being new Fees and Offices) and so it will draw a very
great unnecessary charge (far greater then that of Bishops and their
Officialls) upon the people, which they will very unwillingly bear. In which
regard it is fitest the civil Majestrates or Justices of Peace should only
take the Examinations, of scandalls as they do in cases of Felony and other
crimes, and certify them to the Presbyteries, or Classis, as there shall be
need.

15ly. Whether it be not both unjust and unreasonable to press the Parliament
to settle any kind of Church Government as prescribed Iure divino, before it
be clearly demonstrated or manifested to their Judgments consciences to be
so, by perspicuous undeniable proofs from Scripture? Or to importune them to
grant any unlimited arbitrary power to Classes, Presbiteries, or Congregations,
to judge of unknown contingent scandals, (never yet thus censured from Adams
or Christ's days til now] before they can so much as conjecture what they are,
or where ever they will be perpetrated in our Churches? since offenses always
use to Levit. 24. 10 ^^ 27. Number. 15. 32. 37.
preceed Laws made to punish them; and, ex malis moribus optimae oriuntur
leges, as all Politicians have resolved? Whether the demanding of such an
unlimited power to be now established, be not as bad yea more unreasonable then
the late Prelates, etc. Oath (most justly damned declaimed against,) and savors
not more of wilfullnes then Conscience, of the spirit of 3 John 3. 9. 10. 11.
Diotrephes, then of Christ, of whose Kingdom some pretend it to be a most
necessary and inseparable Branch? And whether any Prophet, Apostle, Godly
Presbyter, private Congregation or Classis, in the primitive Church, ever
solicited their Princes or Parliaments for such an exorbitant unlimited power?

16. Whether Christian Princes and Majestrates See Institu Cod. l 1. Tit. 7. De
Episcopali Audientia Capit Caroli et Ludovic Jup. I. 6. cap. 301. 313. 314.
322. 323 326. 330. lib. 1 throughout. Leges Wisigoth I. 2. c. 29. 30.
indulging of overmuch power, Honor, and Ecclesiastical Authority in point
of Jurisdiction, Church Censures, and Excommunication in former ages to the
Clergy, under this apprehention, persuasion, that they were most pious,
conscientious, holy, moderat, just and humble persons who would exercise it for
Gods Glory only, and the Churches good; has not been the true Original cause
of all that Antichristian Tyranny, Persecution, exorbitances, of Popish
Prelates, and Clergymen, which have over-spred, corrupted, infested the Church
and people of God? And whether former examples of this kind may not justly
lesson us to beware of the like Error for the present; though our Ministers who
claim this Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction now contested for by a Divine Right be
never so Godly, upright, discreet, humble, conscientious, since we know not
what many of our Ministers, Elders, who must exercise it in the Country are for
the present; or what the best of them all or their successors at least may
prove for the Genesis 3. 5. 6. 3. John 9. 10.
future, Mat. 20. 20. to 29. Luke 22 24 to 31.
( ambition being a Acts 20. 29. 31.
man's first sin and most pleasing to our corrupt Natures; as we see by the 2
King 8. 12. Eccles. 2. 19..8.
example of See Philip de Morney his Mystery of iniquity, Carolus Molinaeus,
Commentar: in Edict: Henrici secundi, etc. contra parvas datas, etc. Abbas
Uspergensis Platina and Balaeus de vitis Pentificum Romanorum: Grimstosn
Imperial History.
Christ's own Apostles, and daily experiences every where) especially when they
have engrossed more Ecclesiastical power into their hands by pretext of a
Divine Right, then ever the express Law of God, or Christ Himself in his
Gospel has delegated to them. It is very observable, that while the ( o)
Popes claimed their Papacy and Superiority over other Churches by grants and
donations from the Christian Emperors of Rome, they were very humble, loyal,
and obsequious to them. But after the long enjoyment of their transcendent
jurisdiction by imperial donations had so far puffed them up with pride, as by
degrees to desert their true ancient claim, and challenge both their Papacy
and Supremacy by a divine Right from Christ Himself, by wresting diverse
Scriptures to their purpose, (and some of those among others which our Divines
now principally insist upon,) they presently cast off both their subjection and
Loyalty to the Emperors at once; and so prosecuted them with Excommunications,
Interdicts suspentions, rebellions, force of Arms, and parties raised against
them in their own Empires; that at last they quite trampled them under their
feet, disposing of their Crowns at pleasure, making them swear solemn
homage to them as their Vassalls, and to hold their Imperial Crowns from them
alone, who formetly did homage to, and held their Bishoprics, with all the
Papal Jurisdiction they enjoyed only from them: Yea if our Presbyteries,
Classes or Independent Congregations shall be admitted to hold and enjoy all
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction they now pretend to, by a Divine Right; and
the Parliament their power, authority, only by a meet humane Institution, and
not by as clear a Divine Right as theirs; the next consequence I fear will be
(and we see it already maintained in some Mr. Rutherford.
Presbyterians, and more Mr. John Goodwin. Master Henry Burton. Mr. Saltmarsh.
Mr. Robinson.
Independents printed Books;) That our Parliaments, Kings, and temporal
Majestrates must have nothing at all to do with Church Officers or Church
Government by way of direction, correction, or appeal, but merely as their
subordinate Ministers, to ratify their determinations, and enforce obedience
to their censures; which if they neglect or refuse to do, or stop their
proceedings by any Prohibitions, or legal course, for ought I know, when their
Divine pretended Authority is settled to their minds, the next thing they shall
hear of will be; that which our Kings, Judges, and Officers did heretofore
from our Clergy in Archbishop Lindwade, Provinc. l. 5. Tit. de Paenis f. 226.
etc. 10, de Aton Constable. f. 138. to 142.
Boniface his time, when they opposed their extravagances, even a serious
admonition to obey their Dictates, and after that an Interdiction of all their
Lands, Castles, Towns, with a suspention of them from the Sacrament, or
excommunication from or Non-communion with their Congregations for this
Contumacy: And then Lord have mercy upon us miserable sinners, we may sooner
bewail then remove that spiritual Yoke of bondage which we thus suffer
voluntarily to be imposed both on our own and others necks. It being a very
difficult task and work of many ages to moderate, abate, regulate or suppress
any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, though never so exorbitant, especially if once
legally settled, or but incroached by coulor of a Divine Right, as we see by the
Papacy, and our late exploded Prelacy.

I shall therefore close up all with the Apostles seasonable advice, Gal. 5. 1.
Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us f^ee and he not
again entangled with any Yoke of Bondage, which Christ Himself has not
imposed on us by a clear and evident institution in his word: Christ's Math 11.
30
Yoke is easy, and his burden light, to which all people must with
cheerfulness submit: if the Presbyterians yoke, in suspending men from the
Sacrament for all kind of supposed scandalls, though they profess unfeigned
penitence for all their sins, and earnestly desire to receive it; or the
Independents Yoke, in non-admitting or secluding those from their Congregations
whom they judge not real Saints, or will not subscribe to their private Church
Covenants, (without any express precept or president in Scripture, to warrant
these their practices, proceedings) be not such, we may justly suspect and
reject them too, as none of Christ's.

FINIS.

