THE DOOM OF COWARDISZE AND TREACHERY OR, A Looking-glass for Cowardly or
Corrupt Governors, and Soldiers, who through Pusillanimity or Bribery, betray
their Trusts, to the public Prejudice.

Containing certain Domestic Laws, heretofore, lately made, and judgments
given against such Timorous and Treacherous persons; fit to be known in these
unhappy Times of War.

By William Prynne, Utter Barrester of Lincolnes-Inne.

DEVT. 20.1.2.34. When thou go out to Battle against thine Enemies, and
see Horses and Chariots, and a people more then thou, be not afraid of them;
for the Lord thy God is with thee, which brought thee up out of the Land of
Egypt: And it shall be when ye are come nigh unto the Battle, that the Priest
shall approach and speak unto the people and shall say unto them: hear, O
Israel, you approach this day unto the battle against your Enemies; let not
your hearts faint; fear not, and do not tremble; neither be ye terrified
because of them; for the Lord your God is he that goes with you, to fight for
you against your Enemies, to save you.

PSALM. 3.6. PSALM 27.3. I will not be afraid often thousands of people who have
set themselves against me round about. The Lord is my light and my salvation,
whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be
afraid? Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not feare^
though War should rise against me, in this will I be confident.

LVKE. 17.33. MAT. 16.25. Whosoever shall seek to save his life (by cowardly
and unworthy practices) shall lose it; and whosoever shall lose his life (by
adventuring it valiantly) shall preserve it.

Imprimatur John White, October. 23. 1643.

LONDON, Printed for Michael Spark Senior, and are to be sold at the Blew-Bible
in Greene-Arbor, 1643.

TO THE READER.
REader, I presume the following pages need no Apology, for their seasonablenes
in times of War, or necessity in an Age of Timidity and Treachery. All men of
valor will protest and join forces with me against Cowards; all persons of
honor and sincerity, against Traitors, and Deceivers, (the only enemies here
encountered;) especially in a public War, undertaken, managed for no other
end, but the defense of Religion, Laws, Liberties, Justice, and bringing
Delinquents, Traitors to their native Country, unto condign punishments; In
such a sacred warfare as this;

Lncan. l. 10 de Bello Civili.
Nulla fides, pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur, is not only a Paradox, but
a Prodigy, yea an inexpiable impiety: which ought to admit no other Centurions,
or Soldiers, but such as Cornelius is recorded to be, Acts 10.1.2. A devout
man, and one who feared God with all his house; which gave much Alms to the
people (instead of plundring them) and prayed to God always; Or in one word,
such as that royal magnanimous General and Captain of Gods Host, King David,
was; P^al. 89.20. Act. 13 22.
A man after Gods own heart, who shall fulfill all his will. To such Martial
men as these (and I would to God all our Armies were wholly composed of no
other) I know these lines will be very acceptable; no ways displeasing. If any
grow offended at them, I fear their indignation arises only from, or will be
an evidence of their guilt in some particulars here arraigned, condemned by the
Law o^ Arms. If any complain of overmuch Brevity, let them know, that shor^
Discourses are ever most suitable for men, for times of action. Soldiers who
act much, can read but little. This induced me to present thee with a Manual
only, in such a subject, which I could have amplified into a Volume: Dictum
sapienti sat est. A few good presidents, are sufficient to inform, reform many
persons, and abuses: which if these, through Gods blessings, shall effect, I
have the accomplishment o^ my desire.

Farewell.
THE DOOM OF COWARDICE and TREACHERY.
IT was one part of that excellent Military Discipline which God himself
pr^scribed unto his own people when they went out to battle against their
Enemies, that the Officers, should speak thus unto the people, (in nature of a
public Proclamation:) Deuteronomy. 20.18. What man is there that is fearful and
faint hearted? let him go and return unto his house, le^t his brethrens hearts
faint (by his flight or Cowardice) as well as his heart. In pursuance whereof;
valiant Judge^ 7.1^ 2, 3^
Gideon having assembled an Army of thirty two thousand men, to fight against
the Midianites, God commanded him, to go and proclaim in the Ears of the
people, saying; whosoeever is fear^full and afraid, let him return and depart
early from Mount Gilead (where they were assembled:) whereupon there returned
of the people twenty two thousand, and there remained only ten thousand; more
then two parts of three, being pusillanimous Cowards; and therefore altogether
unfit for martial affairs, better dismissed then retained in such a service.
Mac. 3.56.
The like Proclamation, according to this Law, we find made by that heroic
General of the Jews, Judas Maccabaeus. Cowardly, and timorous persons are
Rev. 17.14. c. 21.7, 8. Esaias 51.12, 13. Hen. Ranzoui^^ de Bello. l. 1. c. 11,
12.
no fit Soldiers to be employed in any temporal or spiritual Militia; and
therefore by Gods own directions are ^o be cashiered out of both. It is
therefore the duty of every person, who takes upon him the profession of a
Soldier, but more especially, the Office of a Governor or Commander, Lu. 14 s
31.
seriously to examine his own heart and spirit, whither he has sufficient
c^urage, valor, resolution (as well as skill or prudence) to execute,
discharge, such a most generous calling, before he undertake it, that known
speech of Chabrias being an experimental verity, Plutarchi A^^ph 71.41^
Pelybius. Hist. l. 1. and Henricus R^nv^uius Commentarius. (...). l. 5. c. 1.
lib. 1. c. 12.
That an Army of hearts with a Lion for their Leader, is more terrible then an
Army of Lions with an heart for their Commander; the Cowardice of the General
being o^t times the overthrow of the most valorous Army, and the timorousness,
or covetousness of the Governor, the loss of the strongest City or Castle,
to the intolerable damage of those States or Princes who employ them in such
military services.

Hence in all ages, cowardly, mercenary treacherous Soldiers and Governors,
who through ^eare or covetousness be^ray their trusts, have undergone most
exemplary censures and punishments of an high strain^, as well for their
^^^illanimity as treachery, fit to be publicly known in these times of War,
for the terror of such Delinquents, and better encouragement of all men of
Arms, valorously and faithfully to discharge the trusts they have taken upon
them; even for fear of legal executions, where the advancement of their own
honor and reputation, and public safety will not engage them faithfully to
discharge their duties.

Not to trouble you with any See Petri Blesensis Epist. 60. The Soveragne power
of Parliaments part 4. p. 34.35. Henricus Bocerus l. 1. de Bello. c. 13. p.
49.50.
foreign Histories, Laws or Customs of this nature, I shall present you
only with some few domestic precedents; to which the industrious perusers of
our Records and Annalls, may accumulate many more.

By the Lambard: Arch. fol. 135. De Here^ochiis.
Laws of King Edward the Confessor, he who flies from his Lord or fellow
Soldier for fear of War, or death, in the conduct of the Horetock (or
Captain) in any expedition by Sea or Land; let him lose all that is his, and
his very life, and the Lord may lay hands on the land which he had formerly
given to him. And he who shall be slain in War before his Lord, be it in the
Land, or elsewhere, let his reliefes be pardoned, and his heirs enjoy his
Money and Land without any diminution, and divide it among themselves.

By the Statutes of 18. H. 6. c. 19.7. H. 7. c. 1.3. H. 8. c. 5.2. E. 6. c.
2.4. and 5. Phil. Mary c. 2.3.5. Eliz. c. 15. It is made no less then felony
and death for any Soldiers, to depart from their Captains, without their
license under hand; for which many Soldiers have been condemned and executed,
a^ you may read in Sir Edward Cooks, 6. Rep. f. 27. in the case of Soldiers.
And before these Statutes Thomas Earl of Lancaster was Walsingham Hist. p. 89.
Holinsh^d, Grafton. Stow^ Speed; Trussel. in 12. R. 2.
proclaimed a Traitor by the whole Army in the.12. Year of King Edward the
second, for departing in discontent from the Ar^ie, at the Siege of Berwick, by
means whereof it was not taken, and the Siege raised. If then deserter^ and
forsakers only of their Captains and Military Service are punishable with
death, then much more such Cowards and Fugitives, who Ps. 78.9.
like the Children of Ephraim, being armed and carrying bows, turn their
backs and fly in the day of battle; or refuse to E^e. 22.30.
stand in the gap, to make up the breach and repulse the Enemy.

For presidents of proceedings and judgments against Cowardly Soldiers, and
Governous of Forts, take these ensuing instead of many. Dan. p. 18. Speed. p.
502. Holin ^. and Stow. An. 2. H. ^.
Henry de Essex, standard bearer to the Kings of England by right of
inheritance, was accused of high Treason in the second year, of King Henry
the second by Robert de Montford his near kinsman, and vanquished by him in a
Duel^ at Reading, for his Cowardly abandoning and throwing down the Standard
Royal i^ Northwales in the Battle against Prince Owen amidst the mountains,
and flying when fiercely assaulted by the Welsh, whereby the Kings Army was
endangered to be Routed: whereupon though his life was pardoned, yet his lands
were seized into the Kings hand, and he shor^e and shut up a Monk in the Abbie
of Reading, where he died:

The Case of Gomeneys and Weston.
In the Parliament Rolls of 1. R. 2. Number. 38^ 39.40. I find this notable
record, which I shall transcribe at large. Item, whereas it was prayed by the
Comm^ns, that all those who have rendered or lost Castles or Towns through the
very default of the Captains, might be put to answer it to thi^ Parliament,
and severely punished according ^o their desert, by award of the Lords and
Barronage, to eschew the evil examples which they have given to other^, who
are Governors of Towns and Castles, it was commanded to Sir Alexander de
Buxhall Constable of the Tower of London, that he should cause to come before
the Lords in Parliament at Westminster on Friday the 27 day of November in the
year afor^said, Sir John de Gomineys, and William de Weston, apprehended and
detained in the said Tower by the command of our Lord the King, because they
had lost and rendered such Castles and Towns to the Enemies of our Lord the
King, to answer thereunto upon the Articles which shall be surmised against
them for the said cause, on the behalf of our Lord the King. Upon which day of
Friday, the said John and William, being brought by the said Constable before
the Lords aforesaid in full Parliament, sitting in the white Chamber, they were
severally arraigned, at the Commandment of the said Lords, by Sir Richard
Lescrop Knight, Steward of the house of our Lord the King, in manner as
ensues.

William de Weston, you took upon you from the most puissant Prince, whom God
assoyle, Sir Edward late King of England, Grandfather of our Lord the King
that now is, safely to keep to him and his heirs, Kings of England, the
Castle of Outhrewyck, without surrendering it to any one but to the said
Grandfather or to his said heirs, or by command from him or from his said
heirs; have you William who are a Liege-man of our Lord the King, in times of
the same our Lord the King who now is, true heir to the said Grandfather,
delivered and surrendered the same to the Enemies of our Lord the King, without
command from him, to the dishonor (or damage) of him and his Crown and of the
Estate of his Realm of England, against your allegiance and undertaking
aforesaid? What will you say hereunto?

Number. 39.
Whereupon the said William said, that he had put his answers in writing, and
produced before them a Cedule containing many things comprised within the same,
and came and read the said Cedule in full Parliament. Whereupon it was demanded
of him by the said Steward, if he presented before them this Cedule for a
final answer in this behalf, or not? And hereupon the said William prayed
that this Cedule might be redelivered to him, and that he might put in his
final answer; which Cedule for the cause aforesaid was redelivered to him; and
after the said William delivered the said Cedule, with an addition put
thereunto, in full Parliament, for his final answer in this behalf, the Tenor
of which Cedule is such as follows. To the most sage Council of our Lord the
King, and to the other Lords and Commons of the Parliament, supplicates and
shows William de Weston, that albeit he be accused of this, that he has
maliciously rendered the Castle of Outhrewyk, of which he had the custody by
delivery and assignment of our Lord the King; may it please your sage and just
discretion to have the said William excused thereof, for these causes ensuing.
First of all, may it please you to remember, how that the said William was
lately informed by a spy, that a great power of the Enemies would come upon
him to besiege the said Castle, with very great and very grievous Ordnances;
whereupon he the said William presently by his Attorney and by his Letters,
required of the said council, that it would please them to re-enforce the said
Castle with m^re men, for the defense and safeguard thereof, in regard that the
Garrison of the said Castle that then was, were not half sufficient in respect
of multitude to resist so great a force in so large a place; but in conclusion,
for all this, he could not have any succor from the said council. And so the
said William not at all through his default, was left without people sufficient
for to keep and defend the said Castle any long tim^ which he beseeches you
to take into your just and benign consideration. Also, please you to know^ how
upon a Monday about one of the Clock the enemy came to be^^eg^ the said
Castle, to the ^umber of about 2600 Men of Arms, and 700 Arblasters Genevoyes,
and with 5000 of the Commonalty of the Country, having nine great Cannons,
diverse Engines, and one Trebuchet.
Morter-piece, beyond all measure, greater then ever they had seen any before
in those Marches; and the same hour, presently a great number o^ the men of
Arms and Arblasters aforesaid came before the Gates for to assail the said
Castle, and at this time a Knight of theirs was slain, who was Cousin to the
Lord de Clisson as was reported, and many others were likewise then slain and
wrecked; and within a short time after, they began to discharge and shoot^ with
their Ordnances, and other Engines, and so continued their assault from one day
to another, that is to say, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursay; and then were the
Walls and houses of the Castle battered down and bruised in many places; and
they had likewise by force trenched the Ditches of the said Castle, in three
places, so as all the water was drained out; and that night came a great party
of them, and by fine force made an assault and abated the Baracadoes; and the
next day which was Friday, they came about day-breaking with all their Forces
to assault the said Castle, but with Gods assistance they were yet repulsed
with force from their assault, and of the one part and other there were some
slaine^ and wounded. And the same day the Marshall of Burgone, sent to the said
William and others of the said Castle, to render it. Whereupon having
consideration, that the said Castle could not be kept, as w^ll in regard of the
small number of the people, as by reason that the Walls in many pl^ces were
enfeebled by their mavelous Ordnances, there was a Treaty with the Lords to
this end, that the said William and his companions might advise themselv^s
against the n^xt morning. And so they departed each to their own. Also this
same night the Enemies caused all their Ordnances, Engines, Morter-piece, and
Cannons, and Fagots, with ^^aling-Ladders, Galleries, and all other nec^ssaries
to be drawn up near to the very Ditch of the aforesaid Castle; and the next
day which was Saturday, they made all things ready plainly for to assault the
place. And then first of all they sent an Harold to the said William to know,
if the said Castle should be rendered to them, or not? Whereupon the said
William by advice of the wisest of ^is companions, taking con^iderati^n how
that the said place was destroyed and enfeebled with their Ordnances, and also
that they were too few men for its defense, by reason that 12 of their
companions were in this time slain, wounded, and sick, so as there remained
of all the people of the Garrison in health, but only 38 men to defend the
same; hereupon by common assent the said Castl^, which could be kept no longer,
was by ^orce surrendered, for to save their lives granted to them and their
go^ds; and that all th^se things aforesaid are ^rue, the said William puts
himself upon his proof, according to your discr^ete Ordinances. Also it is to
be rem^mbred, that when the said C^stle was thus rendered as aforesaid,
certain French people bargained with the said William for his Victuals to buy
them, together with c^rtaine prisoners which the said William held imprisoned
within the said Castle, for which things he received of them for his payment
1500 Frankes: of which he paid to his Companions for part of their wages, which
was behind unto them for one quarter of a Year and an half 78 Frank^s;
likewise, after was paid at Caleys for the victuals of the said C^stle before
that time du^, 442 Frankes; Also for the passages of the said William and of
his companions unto England, and lik^wise for the expenses of the said William
being at Calleys 135. frankes. And therefore the said William prays, in this
regard, your justice and benignity, seeing by envious suggestion he has
against all reason been accused, whereby his estate and name, by the grievous
sin of misinformers, and he also are ruined: having likewise consideration that
out of his proper goods, he has for the greater part paid his companions,
their wages which were due unto them as aforesaid, and also for the great costs
he has been at before this time for to victual the said Castle, (for which
he has given his obligations in diverse places, and owes great sums, by
reason whereof he is on all sides undone^ if your just benignity do not
succor him;) that you would be pleased for Gods sake, and for pity, to ordain
likewise for him, that he may by your discreet nobleness recover his estate
and goods. Also the said William Weston shows, How the first day when the
enemies came before Arde, that he went in haste to Caleys unto the Captain,
and desired of him more succor and aid of men for the better guarding of his
Fort of Outhrewyk, and to defend it if the enemies should come thither. And the
Captain answered him briefly, That he would not deliver, nor give him aid nor
succor at the said time, because he doubted that the said enemies would come
before the Town of Caleyes. And the said Cedule being vi^wed and read in full
Parliament, immediately after was the said John brought thither by the said
Steward in the manner following.

John Lord of Gomineys, you took upon you to the most puissant Prince, whom
God assoile, Sir Edward late King of England^ Grandfather to our Lord the King
that now is, safely to keep to him and his heirs, Kings of England, the Town
and Castle of Arde, without surrendering the same to any person, except to the
said Grandfather and his Heirs, or by commandment of him or of his Heirs; these
have you Lord of Gomine^s in time of our Lord the King that now is, true Heir
to the said Grandfather, delivered and surrendered to the enemies of our Lord
the King without commandment from him, to the dishonor of him and of his
Crown, and of the estate of the Realm of England, against your undertaking
aforesaid: What will you say thereunto? Whereupon the said John answered, That
the said Town and Castle of Arde were so weak, that he could not well keep
them against so great a power of the enemies, which was then ready to affaile
the same Town and Castle; and therefore he caused to assemble all the Knights,
Esquires, and others being in the said Town, and informed them of the perils
of the said Town, and force of the said enemies, and by common counsel and
assent of the said Knights, Esquires, and others, he issued out to the enemies
to treat with them, for to save the Lieges of our Lord the King, being within
the said Town and Castle of Arde; without that, that he ever took any thing
for to surrender the said Town and Castle of Arde. Upon which one Geoffry of
Argenton Knight, said in full Parliament to the said John, That he the said
Geoffry was at that time in the said Town in company of the said John, and
that the Town and Castle of Arde were never delivered nor surrendered by his
counsel nor assent, but that he was always ready to die and live upon the
safeguard of the same; and the said Geoffry offered to prove it if any would
deny it. And further, it was demanded of the said John^ If he would say any
thing else? and he said, He would not. Whereupon the said Constable was charged
with the safe custody of the said John and William until the next day, the
Saturday next ensuing^ and to bring them again safe before the said Lords in
the said Parliament at the place and day aforesaid. At which day of Saturday,
that is to say, on the twentieth day of November in the year aforesaid, it was
showed unto them severally by the said Steward on the same day, by the
commandment of the Lords aforesaid, how upon the answers that the said John and
William had given in the said Parliament, as before is said; the Lords of the
said Parliament, that is to say, the King of Castile and of Leon, and Duke of
Lancaster, Edmund Earl of Cambridge, Edmund Earl of March, Richard Earl of
Arundel, Thomas Earl of Warwick, Hugh Earl of Stafford, William Earl of
Suffolk, William Earl of Salisbury, Henry Earl of Northumberland, John Lord
Nevill, Roger Lord Clifford, and many other Lords, Barons, and Bannerets being
in the said Parliament, who had assembled and advised together from the time
that the said Answers were given in Parliament the Friday, until this Saturday
at three of the clock, of things touching the Answers aforesaid, and came and
examined diligently the said Answers, and other Articles touching those
matters; and taking thereupon good and mature deliberation and due information,
of the most valiant and most discreet Knights and others ^eing in the said
Parliament, it was thus said. First of all in manner as follows to the said
William by the Steward, reciting the things aforesaid touching the said
William; It seems to the Lords aforesaid, That you William, who had taken
upon you safely to keep the Castle of Outhrewyk, as before is said, That you
William have without any duresse or d^fault of Victuals, evilly delivered and
surrendered the same to the enemies of our Lord the King by your own default,
against all apparent right and reason, and against your allegiance and
undertaking aforesaid: and having by due information read the case of the late
Baron of Graystock, who was a Lord, and (...) of the P^^^s of the Real^, who
had taken upon him safely to keep to the aforesaid Grandfather the (...) of
B^rwicke: The said Baron perceiving afterward, that the s^id Grandfather
addressed himself to ride into the Realm of France, the said Baron (without
command of the said Grandfather) committed the said Town of Berwicke to a
valiant Esquire Robert de Ogle, as Lieutenant to the said Baron, for to keep
safe the said Town of Berwicke to the said Grandfather, and the said Baron
went as (...) to the said parts of France to the said Grandfather^ and there
remained in his company. During which time, an assault of war was made upon
the said Town of Berwicke by the said Scots, and the said Robert, as
Lieutenant to the said Baron, valiantly defended the some; and at last by such
forcible assaults the said Town was taken upon the said Robert, and two of the
sons of the said Robert there slain in the def^nce of the same.
Notwithstanding, because that the said Baron himself had taken upon him the
safeguard of the said Town to the said Grandfather, and depart^d himself from
thence without co^^^and of the said Grandfather, and the said Town of Berwick
was lost in the absence of the Baron, ^e being in the company of the said
Grandfather in the parts of France, as is aforesaid. It was adjudged, by advice
of the said Grandfather, the King of Castile who is present, the Nobles, Dukes,
and Counts whom God ass^ile, Henry late Duke of Lancaster, the late Earls of
Northampton and Stafford, and Sir Walter de Manny, That the said Town was lost
in default of the said Baron; and for this cause he had judgment of life and
member, and that he should forfeit all that he had: and to render this
judgment in these words, the said Sir Walter had a command from the said
Grandfather; Which things considered, ^^d this also, That you William
surrendered the said Castle of Outhr^wyk to the enemies of our Lord the King
aforesaid, without any duresse or want of victuals, against your allegiance and
undertaking aforesaid, the Lords above named sitting here in full Parliament,
adjudge you to death, and that you shall be drawn and hanged. But because that
our Lord the King is not yet informed of the manner of this judgment, the
execution thereof shall be respited until the King be informed thereof.
Whereupon it was commanded to the said Constable safely to keep the said
William, until he had other command from ou^ Lord the King. And as to the said
John Lord of Gomeneys, touching his answers aforesaid, it was showed unto him
by the said Steward, how the said Lords had assembled and considered of the
said answers as before is said; and moreover it was showed to him, how that in
the time that Sir Ralph de Ferrers Knight, had the custody of the said Town
and Castle of Arde, the said Town of Arde was not half so strong as it was at
the time the said John surrendered the same; and the said Ralph had a command
from the said Grandfather to surrender the same, for the feebleness thereof,
before that the said Ralph would put himself into very great peril for the
safeguard thereof; notwithstanding the said Ralph valiantly defended and
maintained the same against a ^ery great and strong assault of war. And
thereupon, and the things aforesaid, and other evidences touching the answers
of the said John in this behalf; it was said in manner as follows to the
said John being in Parliament, by the said Steward, reciting all things
aforesaid touching the foresaid John; and also ^he forecited judgment of the
said Baron, and the cause thereof in manner abovesaid, That it seemed to the
Lords aforena^ed sitting here in Parliament, considering your answers in this
behalf, and the examinations and informations had thereupon as before, and
having regard also to this, that there were lately sent unto you to the said
Town and Castle of Arde, above the number of men with which you had at another
time undertaken the safe guarding of the said Town and Castle, 20 men of
Arms, and 20 Arch^rs, to enforce the same, according to your reque^^ then made
to certain Lords late being upon a message at Calys on the behalf of the said
Grandfather; and this also, that at that time it was said unto you by the King
of Castile who is here present, ^h^t if you could not well keep them, you ought
in no manner to undertake to keep the same, and that another should have and
keep them, who would take upon him safely to keep the same to the said
Grandfather and his heirs aforesaid; and thereupon you undertook to keep
them safely without surrendering them to any, except in manner as aforesaid; and
now you John without duresse or default of Victuals or Artillery, or of either
things necessary for the defense of the said Town and Castle of Arde, without
command of our Lord the King, have evilly delivered and surrendered the same to
the enemies of our Lord the King, by your own default, against all appearanc^
of right or reason^ and against your undertaking aforesaid; wherefore the Lords
aforesaid, here in full Parliament adjudge you to death; and because that you
are ^ Ge^tleman and a Baronet, an^ have served the said Grandfather in his
wars, and are no lieg^man of our Lord the King, you shall be beheaded,
without having other judgment; And because also that our Lord the King is not
yet informed of the manner of this judgment, the execution thereof shall be
put in resp^^e, until our Lord the King be informed thereof. Whereupon the
foresaid Constable was commanded safely to keep the said John, until he had
other command from our Lord the King.

And it is to be remembered; that Geoffrey Martyn Clerk of the Crown made this
very Record, and delivered it thus written in this present roll, with his own
(...).

From this memorable Record, I shall only observe these few particulars.

First, that the surrender of Towns or Castles to the enemy, through cowardi^e
or treachery, is properly examinable, and tryable only in Parliament, it being
a detriment to the whole Kingdom, and so sit to be determined by the
represe^tative body of the Kingdom. Secondly, That the cowardly delivering up
of any Town or Castle by the Governor thereof to the enemy, is a capital
offense, deserving death; and likewise the loss of it through his neglig^nce
or default. Thirdly, That every Governor who takes upon him the custody of any
Fort o^ Town, is obliged in point of trust and duty, under pain of death, to
defend it to the utmost extremity. Fourthly, That the concurrent a^s^nt of a
Council of War or soldiers, to render up a Town to the enemy before utmost
extremity, for the saving of the house^, lives, and goods of the soldiers or
inhabitant^, is no excuse at all to justify or extenuate such a Governors
dishonorable surrender and offense. Fifthly, That those who are accused of such
an unworthy surrender of any Town or Castl^^ ought to be apprehended and kept
in saf^ c^stody till their trials be past; and not suffered to go at large.
Si^tly, That a Governors giving timely notice of the enemies approach, of the
weakness of the Garrison, his suing for timely aid, and repulsing of the
enemy for a season, will no ways excuse his surr^nder of a Town or Castle,
unless he hold it out to the uttermost extremity, or surr^nder it by the
consent of those who entrusted him with the custody thereof. Seventhly, That
the violent battery of the walls, or draining of the dikes of any Castle or
City, or any breaches made in them by the enemy (though extraordinary
powerful) are no sufficient ca^ses or excuses for any Governor to surrender
them upon composition to the enemy, whiles there is sufficient Victuals, Men,
or Amu^ition, to defend them; and that they must in no wise be surr^ndred
without consent of those who put in the Governor, till the greatest part of
the Soldiers be sl^ine, the Victuals or Ammunition quite spent, and all hopes
of relief dispaired of utterly, upon good grounds, Which is clear by the case
of Weston, who made a better defense of the Castle of Outhr^wicke with 38 men
only, against more th^^ 800^ enemies (who bes^^ged, ass^ulted, battered it for
six days together, with nine great Cannons, and other Engynes) and pleaded
far more in the d^fence of his surrender of it, then many now can do for
surrendering of Towns and Castles of far greater importance then this Castle
was, in a shorter time then he did; when furnished with ^arisons of many
h^ndr^ds, and sufficient Victuals and Ammunition, and that before any battery or
assault made against the walls thereof: and yet for all this was Weston in full
Parliament adjudged to death for it, though he sold the Vict^^ll and Prisoners
to the enemy, and paid his soldiers wages, and other debts of the Castle with
the money. When some of late have surrendered Victuals, Arms, Colors,
Cannons, Prisoners, and all Magezines whatsoever to the enemy before they were
nece^^^tated or enforced to it, to the Kingdome^ unspeakeable loss prejudice,
and the enemies infinite advantage.
^re^^^ngham and ^pil^sworth.
In the Parliament Rol^ of 7 R. 2. Number. 17. I find this case in Parliament in
these term. Item, upon the compla^nt which has been made to the King, of
Pierce de Cre^^ingham and John de Spykesworth Esquires, concerning this; that
whereas they were made in the said voyage (to wit of the Bishop of Norwich into
Flaunders with an Army) Captains and Guardians of the Castle of Drinkham in
Flaunders, which was gained from the enemies, and after that well and
sufficiently stored with victuals and other necessaries, and strong enough to
be held against the enemies, that they left and rendered the said Castle to the
said enemies, receiving of them for this delivery and surrender, by Treaties
made with the enemies, a sum of gold, and that by Covenant made with the Kings
enemies, without the will and command of our Lord the King himself or of his
Lieutenant: for which the said Esquires were arrested by command of the King,
and after put to their answer in Parliament. And the said John Spikesworth
excused himself before the King in Parliament, in this manner, That he had
never the custody of the said Castle, nor any thing to do therewith, ^^ve
only that as ^e was riding into the Country somewhat near the said Castle of
Drinkham, to make his best advantage upon the enemy, by force of the said
enemies he was there chased to the said Castle, then being in the custody of
the said Pierce de Cressing^am; and soon after he says, That upon an assault
made to the barbican there, by the enemies, he wa^ unhappily routed, and one of
his varlets slain in the Garrison very near him, where he remained
continually until the said Pierce rendered the same, and otherwise he had
never any thing there to do, neither as a soldier thereof, nor in any other
manner whatsoev^r; praying, that therefore it would please our Lord the King to
have him well excused. To whom it was answered on the behalf of the King, that
if any man knows not to say more against the said John, contrary to his said
answer now made, that the King will hold him well excused, and wills tha^ he
shall be disarrested, and suffered to go at large. And the said Piers of
Cressingham well knowing that he had the guard of the said Castle, said, That
as soon as the enemies were come before Burburgh, in which were the L.
Beamond, Sir William of Ellingham, Sir Thomas Tryves, Sr^ William Farrinden,
and many other English men, and the Town and Castle of Burburgh being rendered
to the enemy, of all the soldiers which he had with him at Drinkham, none
would there continu^ with him upon the safe guard of the said Castle but only
5 persons in all; by reason of which great necessity he was forced, in
safeguard of his own person and his people, to make a Treaty with the enemies,
for to deliver up the said Fort, and thereupon he did it, and not for any other
cause, nor in any other manner, but only by constraint of the power of the
said enemy as aforesaid. And further he says, that he never received any thing
from the said enemies by way of gift, or in any other manner; whereupon he
conceives that no man ought to impute any manner of blame, nor of reproach
unto his person. But if it shall be thought that he has done ill in any
manner, he puts himself most humbly into the grace of his Liegelord. And
because that this excuse seemed not at all to be sufficient^ ( though a better
then many now can make for themselves) he was committed to prison, there to
remain until the King our Lord had otherwise declared his pleasure concerning
him.

In the same Parliament of 7 R. ^. Number. 22. The Bishop of Norwich general of
the Forces sent over into Flaunders, The Bishop of Norwich his arraignment and
second answer.
having 4 Articles exhibited against him in this Parliament, touching that
expedition, and the surrendering of Graveling to the enemy; to which he had
given some former answer, (see Number. 15.17, 20, 21.) upon his second Arraignment
had this proceeding. At which day the said Bishop rehearsing the 4 Articles
surmised against him formerly in Parliament, and in presence of the King
himself, gave the^e his answers, such almost as before, concerning all the
things aforesaid; adjoining thereunto, that the time when he heard the news
that the vantguard of the host of France was entered the County of Flaunders
and that thereupon the said siege of Ipre was thereby removed, he took a
resolution to have encountered the vantguard for to have fought with them,
which purpose of his he could not perform by reason that the Captains of his
Host would not a^sent thereunto, but those Captains and others of his h^st
contraried him, in so much that of necessity and for doubt of the enemies they
ought to depart, and betake themselves to their Fortresses; and thereupon the
said^ Bishop returned to the Town of Graveling, and the same would he have held
out well enough against all men, and did hold out until the other Captains
had rendered their Forts to the French; and after that, until that some
English might com^ unto him incontinently, although there were well-nigh about
6 or 7 thousand English lying upon the sands near Calyce, who were made to
come out of the said Forts rendered, to their great mischief and prejudice,
because they had not wherewith to live, neither could they have entrance into
the Town of Galeys; And for as much as the Truce made before that time ought
to cease within two or three days then next ensuing, the French had a purpose
to run upon them and slay them all, as soon as ^he said truce was ended, which
slaughter if it had been made, would principally have turned, upon the said
Bishop, and after on the other Captains, to far greater villainy and
mischief then any other thing could bring; the Bishop was thereupon required
and charged on the behalf of the King himself, that he should render the
Town to the enemies, or else demolish it and go his way to succor the said
people, and after that toward England in salvation of himself and others of
his host, for they said, that if any thing else but good had happened to the said
people, lying on the sands, they would have truly called the said Bishop to an
account before the King himself: Whereupon it See the History of this Treaty
and aba^ement of the Town in Walsingham. Hist. Angl. p. 327, to 330. and in
Holinshed, Speed, Graf^on, in 6 R. 2.
behoved him the said Bishop to abate and void the said Town of Gravelynge, as
it was lawful for him to do at his pleasure, being gained by his proper
conqu^st from the enemy. And for this, and for the other reasons formerly
alleged by him, as also because that a Letter from our Lord the King came to
him before, commanding him, that if there were great want of victuals in the
said Town, as in verity there was, that then in salvation of himself, and of
the said people, he should void the Town and succor the said people, and
after return into England; it seems to him, that he ought to be well ex^used
of what ever is surmised against him. Number. 27.
To which the said Chancellor replied and said: Master Bishop, as to this your
last reason, it is true that you had sufficient victual when this Letter came
unto you; and besides this, the King sent your other victuals in great plenty;
and also with it other good Letters, containing, how he had appointed his uncle
of Spain to come speedily to you for your aid and succor; and all this
notwithstanding you departed thence, leaving the said Town to the enemies
against the form of your indenture, by the which the King has given and
granted you whatever you might conquer, not at all to render, sell or leave the
same to the enemy, but to hold and possess. And also to that which you have
said in your f^^st answer, that by your said voyage Truce^ had been agreed
between the Realms, and happy offers of peace made by the adversaries of
France, which you say shall be an introduction to a good and final peace,
which God grant, it contains no truth at all; For true it is, that the news
spread in the Army of France of the coming of our Lord the King, and of
Mounsieur of Lancaster, who was at the Sea side ready to pass for your
succor, was the principal cause of the Truce and profers aforesaid, and of
the T^eaty to be commenced; for it is no probable thing at all, nor in any wise
agreeable to reason, that you who were with your people chased by force of the
enemies out of the field, and afterward besieged by them within your
Fortresses, should be the cause of the said Treaty by any way. And so as to
this, nor yet as to any other of the reasons before alleged, nor for the
rebellion of your Captains or others of your retinue, nor any other defaults
which you have or may surmise unto them, (considering that you had them all of
your proper choosing and election, and not at all by the denomination of our
Lord the King or of his Council,) you neither can nor ought to be at all
excused of the damages, deceits, villainies, contempts, and the other losses
and misprisions surmised to you, nor in especial of the Treaty made with the
enemies upon the deliverance of the said Fortresses, of which there are
certain Indentures made and drawn between you and your Captains on the one
part, and the enemies of the King on the other part, sealed with their seals,
and the seals of the other Captains, without the authority or consent of the
said our Lord the King, as before is said. And moreover the said Chancellor
said in the behalf of the King, Sir Bishop, although the King our Lord might
clearly handle and judge you as a temporal person of his Realm, because you
have behaved and carried your self a^ a temporal person; for you expressly
obliged your self to the King our Lord by your Indentures, to be a Soldier
of the King, to govern the Christian people after the term of your Crossado
ended, and you used commonly to have your Sword carried before you; and you did
many other such like things every day publicly as a Lord temporal, against
the common custom of the estate of a Prelate of England: Notwithstanding, by
reason of your estate, the King our Lord, of his grace, will forbear for the
present to lay his hands upon your body. But for as much as he is informed,
that you your self have complained to many Lords of the Realm, that wrong
has been lately done you on the last day, affirming by your words, that that
which was done passed not at all by assent or knowledge of your Peers of the
Realm, this is greatly to be marvelled of you, and of these your words, seeing
the ill success touches nothing at all your Peralty, but only certain
misprisions which you have made and perpetrated as a Soldier of the King,
against the form of your Indentures and Covenants which you have made with the
King our Lord, to the great damage of the King, as before is said, whereof the
conisance and punishment of common right and ancient custom of the Realm of
England, only and totally appertains to ou^ Lord the King, and to no other.
And true it is, that you have not at all by this your last answer any whit
amended your matter in excuse of your self, upon the things surmised against
you, but as it seems have more greatly impaired the same. Wherefore by the
assent of the Earls, Barons, and other Lords temporal present in this
Parliament, it is assented and accorded, that you shall be in the mercy of the
King^ and put to a fine and ransom for your misdoing, according to the quality
and quantity thereof. And to do this yo^ shall be compelled and constrained by
the seizure of the temporalties of the Bishopric of Norwich. And the King
commands you, that from henceforth you shall not cause nor suffer any sword to
be carried before you, as it has been done, under the peril which shall
follow. And it is expressly accorded in this Parliament, that whatsoever has
be^^ expended on your use of the said Franks of gold, you shall make full
payment thereof in the Treasury of our Lord the King, without delay or
difficulty.

See Walsing. Hist. Ang. p. 3^7 to 330. Holins. Grafton, Fabian, Stow, Speed,
Martyn, Trussel, in 6 Rich. 2.
Upon this Judgment the Temporalties of this Bishop were immediately seized
into the Kings hands, and detained in them a long time for this his surrender
of Graveling, a^ Walsingham, Holinshed, Grafton, Speed, Trussel, in their
Histories, and Godwin (in the life of this Bishop) attest, who had lost his
life, had he been a Layman, only for the surrender of Burburgh and
Graveling, which were manfully defended against a great power of the French,
till aid was sent for into England, and Letters received from the King; but the
aid not coming so speedily as was expected to him, he compounded with the
French to raze Graveling to the ground, and to depart whether he would with his
bag, baggage, and men. And yet for all this he was thus censured in Parliament,
because he held not ou^ the Town to the uttermost, though the enemy gained it
not, and himself had formerly won it from them.

In this very Parliament of 7. R. 2. as I read in Hist. Ang. p. 337.
Walsingham, and in Holinshed, Speed, Grafton, Trussell, out of him, news came
from the Northern parts, that the Castle of Berwicke was taken by the Scots,
whose custody Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, then possessed by ancient
right: the Scots, for money, fraudulently getting entrance into the said Castle
by one who had the custody of it at the second hand, under the Earl. Hereupon
by Duke John's procurement (as was reported) the said Earl on the fourth of
December, for the loss of the said Royal Castle, by the Judgment of the
Lords and of the King then present in the said Parliament, had a sentence of
condemnation publicly pronounced against him, notwithstanding that the said
Earl had been summoned to the said Parliament by the Kings Writ, and would
rather have tarried at home for the defense of his Country. But the execution
of the said sentence was soon after released by the King, and the Earl by his
indulgence restored to his life and possessions, which he was adjudged to lose.
Whereupon he posted into the North, and calling his Forces and friends
together, strongly besieged the said Castle, and in few days took it by
composition, he giving the besieged their lives, movables, and two thousand
marks to surrender i^. And thus he was taught to keep his Forts more wisely
for the future, and to commit the custody of them to more trusty and valiant
persons.

The Lord Speeds His^. p. 1050. 1156. Grafton, Holi^shed, How, Cambden.
Wentworth Governor of Calleys, delivering up that Town to the French, (after
they had taken the Castle by force, made a breach in the Town walls, and
slain above fourscore of the Garrison at one assault when they took the
Castle, together with Sir Anthony Ager Marshall of the Town, and his son and
heir) and that upon dishonorable terms, not without some suspicion of
treachery, he was thereupon endicted in Queen Mary's days for his cowardly
and treacherous surrender of this Town, contrary to his trust; and after that
was arraigned at Westminster in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, the
Marquess of Northampton being his Judge, and Lord chief Steward of England
for that day. But that noble man so nobly defended himself, that he was
acquitted by his Peers, and wan a most honorable opinion for his many and
faithful former ^^rvices, otherwise he had lost his life.

Anno 27. H. 6. Caen being besieged by the French, Grafton p. 644, 645. Fabian,
Holinshed, Speed, Stow, Martin, Hall, 27 Hen. 6.
the Duke of Sommerset Governor of Normandy then in it, being more pitious
then hardy, moved with the dolor and love of his wife and children, called a
Council of war, and would have surrendered it to the enemy upon composition:
But Sir David Hall being Captain of the Town under the Duke of York, owner
of the Town by the Kings gift, would not consent thereto without the Duke of
Yorkes assent, (though the Duke alleged he was the Kings Deputy there,
representing his person, and might do what he pleased, according to his
discretion) it being committed to his immediately trust.

To give you some few Domesticke Examples of the punishment of treacherous
surrenders of Fo^ts, and penalties inflicted for the same.

Walsing. Hist. Ang. p. 88. Hect. Boethius lib. 14. Polyd. Vir. l. 18. Hard. c.
172. Sp^ed p. 674. Holinsh. Stow, Gra^ton, Daniel, Martyn, in 12 Edw. 2. Cambd^
Brit. p. 1817.
Anno 1312. being the twelfth year of Ed. the 2. his reign, Peter Spalding,
to whom this King had entrusted the Town of Berwicke, treacherously sold and
betrayed the same of the Scots for money. But Spalding, after the Treason done,
had the reward of a Traitor; Robert King of Scots, to whom he sold and betrayed
the Town, putting him to death, to save the King o^ England the labor of
hanging him for this Treason.

Sir Walsing. Hist. Ang. p. 245. to 248^ Fabian, Holinshed, Pol. Virg. Grafton,
Stow, Speed, Martyn, Trussel^ in 3 Rich. 2.
John Annesley Knight, in the Parliament of 50 E. 3. (commonly styled, The good
Parliament) had accused Thomas Katrington Esquire of Treason, for selling and
delivering up the Castle of S. Savior (built by the Lord John Chaundos within
the Isle of Constantine) to the French, for an instimable sum of money, when
as he wanted neither means of defense, nor victuals: which Castle, had it not
been thus traitorously alienated, had descended to the said Sir John in right
of his wife, being next heir to the Lord Chaundos, offering to make good this
accusation, and try it out by Duel; whereupon the said Thomas Katrington was
then apprehended and imprisoned, but soon after by means of the Duke of
Lancast^r and the Lord Latymer, (who then did what they pleased) released,
being formerly their instrument and creature in peace and war, in all just
and unjust, in true and false things; neither could the said Sir John obtain
the effect of his suit till the Parliament of 3. Rich. 2. Anno 1380. some men
affi^ming, That it was against the Laws of the Realm for any man of the
Realm to fight such a duel for such a cause; Many who Note.
feared the like tax and ^ccusation, did most of all hinder this trial: but at
last, in this Parliament, the ancientest and truth-speaking Knights of the
Realm being assembled, it was resolved, that for a foreign cause, such as
the present was, which arose not within the limits of the Kingdom, and for the
possession of transmarine things, it was lawful for any man to fight a duel,
if the cause were before certified to the Constable and Marshall of the Realm,
and the duel accepted by the parties in their presence. Where^pon a day of
battle, and Lists were appointed them in the Court at Westminster, where this
duel being solemnly fought on the seventh of June between these two Champions,
in the presence of the King, Nobles, and an infinite multitude of people; the
traitorous Esquire wa^ vanquished by the Knight, to the joy the of common
people, and to the grief of Traitors: the Esquire, who fainted in the place,
died the next morning, to save the hangman a labor, else he should have been
ex^cuted, as the Walsing. Hist. Ang. p. 337. see Holinshed, Grafton, Speed,
Tussel, in 7 R. 2
Navarrois was in 7. Rich^ 2. when vanquished in a like Duel before the King
and Lords in Parliament, by John Walsh Esquire, (whom he falsely accused of
Treason, done beyond the Seas, against the King and Kingdom, upon the like
occasion) though the Queen and many others interceded to save his life.

7. Rich. 2. The case of Sir William de Elmham and others.
In the Parliament Rolls of 7. Rich. 2. number. 24. I find this Record. Item, Sir
William de Elmham, Sir Thomas Tryvet, Sir Henry de Ferriers, and Sir William d^
Farndon, Knights, and Robert Fitz-Ralph Esquire, who by the said charge
formerly given in Parliament, had been with the Chancellor, and acknowledged
and confessed to him, How that they had received certain sums of Frankes of
gold of the French, in lawful and due manner, and not otherwise. To which they
said, First of all, that is to say, the said Sir William of Elmham, Thomas
Tryvet, William Farndon, in one parcel three thousand Frankes of gold. Item,
in another parcel, etc. Item, the said Sir William Elmham received another
parcel of the French for the Castle o^ Burburgh, whereof Master William de H^o
was then Captain, and for the victuals of the said Master William de Hoo,
being in the said Castle of Burburgh two thousand Frankes, whereof the said
William de Elmham presently paid, as he said, one thousand Frankes to the said
Master William de Hoo, and the other thousand Frankes he promised to pay at a
certain term to the same Master William de Hoo, etc. Item, there is another
great misprision that some Lieges of the King rendered and delivered to the
said enemies of the King, Castles, Fortres^es, Victual, Armor, and other
refreshment, without special comm^nd and authority of the King, or of his
Lieutenant; but yet it is far worse to sell or alien to the said enemies any
Fort; Victuals, Armor, or other refreshment, by receiving money or other goods
of the said enemies, without authority of the King, or of the same his
Lieutenant. And Sirs you know well and cannot deny, That by certain Covenants
made between the said French enemies, and you the said Sir William de Elmham,
Thomas Tryvet, Henry de Fertiers, and William de Farndon, and others, of which
there are certain Indentures made and sealed with your Seals; you lately made
a Treaty with the said Enemies, without the will or authority of the King or of
his Lieutenant, and by this Treaty, and your sale of the said Forts, Victuals,
and Arms, you received the said sums of gold; and by this, and by other your
affairs, and rebellions made to your General, the said host was spoiled and
destroyed, to the grievous damage, villainy, and contempt of the King our Lord,
and very great profit and comfort of the said enemies, for which you are worthy
to undergo reproach and grievous punishment. For you Sir William de Elmham,
received of the said enemies the said two thousand Frankes, for the sale and
surrender of the said Castle of Burburgh, and of the Victuals, Arms, and other
goods therein, then being to a great number and value, without the leave and
authority of the King our Lord and the consent of the said Master William de
Hoo Captain of the same, although that the said Castle was well able to have
held out for a long time against all men. And also you the said William de
Elmham, Thomas Tryvet, and William de Farndon, received to your proper use in
common the said three thousand Frankes of the gi^t of the said enemies, for
your consent and aid to the said Treaty made upon the voydance of the English
out of that Country, and the deliverance of the Town, of Graveling, and of the
other Fortresses then occupied in those parts, etc. And you the said Sir
William Farndon are in another very great default, because yo^ would not carry
back to the said Enemies the five thousand Frankes by you left at Graveling,
against the will and command of the said Bishop your Chieftaine, etc. And the
said Sir William de Elmham says, That although he has so recived the sums
a^oresaid, yet it was done for Victuals, Prisoners, and other goods which he
had within the Fortress of Burburgh, and elsewhere in those parts, and which
with the same Fortress he rendered by the said Treaty, as of fine force he
ought to do for the salvation of himself and his people: for otherwise the
Town of Burburgh, where the Lord Beaumount, Sir Thomas Tryvet, Sir William de
Elmham, and a great number of the people of their Army were besieged, and
assaulted by the enemies in very great number, and the Town within set on
fire, had been taken by them by force, and all those within it taken or
slain: and therefore he conceives, that in doing this, he has done nothing
amiss. But notwithstanding, if it appears to the King our Lord that he has
done any thing amiss, he puts himself upon his noble grace, etc. And the said
Chancellor in replying to the said Sir William de Farndon, Henry, and Robert,
says, etc. And certainly as to this which you Sir William de Farndon say, That
it had been better to cast the said gold into the Sea then to have sent it
back to the said enemies; This is not true, for it had been better that the
enemies had recived their own gold, then any Traitor of the King our Lord, and
he who shall hereafter sell the Fortresses of the King to the enemies, for gold
or other their goods, may excuse himself in such manner as you would now
excuse your self. And after these matters thus by the same persons alleged
for their excuse, being considered, and held and adjudged insufficient for
their excuse in this behalf, The said Chancellor in behalf of the King,
spoke thus, It is accorded in Parliament, that you Sir William de Elmham,
Thomas Tryvet, Henry Ferriers, William de Farndon, and Robert Fitz Rauf, shall
make agreement and full payment to our Lord the King of whatsoever you or any
of you have so received and taken of the enemies aforesaid; and further, that
all you the said Sir William de Elmham, Thomas, Henry, and Robert, be committed
to prison, and there ransomed at the will of the King, for your misdeeds
aforesaid, having due consideration of the quality and quantity of that deed
which every one of you has done. And that you Sir William de Farndon, because
that you have received of the said enemies diverse sums of gold, and have
given them horses to their great refreshmen^, for which you had no license of
the King nor of his Lieutenant, shall be in the mercy of the King, body and
goods, to do with them what he pleases.

In the Parliament of 28 Henry 6. Rot. 50, 51, 52. the Commons preferred diverse
Articles of high Treason to the King and Lords against the Sea Holins^ Grafto^,
Speed, Hall, Martyn, An. 28 H. 6.
Duke of Suffolk, a^ong others these ensuing; That he being Ambassador for
the King of England to Charles, Art. 4^
calling himself, French King, promised to Reynor King of Sicile, and to
Charles Dangers his brother, enemies to the King, the release of Angeou, with
the deliverance of the County of Maine, and the City of Malt or Mauns; which
promise after his return he caused to be performed, to the Kings
disinheritance and loss irrecoverable, and to the strengthening of his enemies,
and feeblishment of the Duchy of Normandy. To the which Article he answered,
That his Commission was, to conclude and do all things according to his
discretion for the obtaining of a Peace, and because without delivery of those
Countries, he perceived the Truce could not be obtained, he agreed to the
release and deliverance of them.

Item, the said Duke within this your Realm, has untruly counseled you to
grant fro you without due consideration the Castle of Mawlyon de Sooll, Artic^
32.
and full many diverse other great Lordships, Seigh^uries, Places, Offices,
Profits, Revenues, Casualties, and Commodities within your said Duchy of
Guyan, whereby your power there to support your Wars and Arms, and to pay
the wages of your great Counselors, Captains, and Soldiers has been so
enfeebled, that your people of the same Duchy, neither your land there, might
in no wise be defended.

Artic. 34.
Item, the said Duke of Suffolk without deliberation and advise of Your
Counsel, has caused Your Highness to grant to diverse persons, many Captains
Offices, Towns, Lordships, Places, Interesses, Profits and Revenues within
Your Realm of France and Duchy of Normandy, to such persons as were not to
You profitable, nor able, nor convenient to have or Govern any of the
premises, nor ever had deserved to obtain of Your Grace any such grant; which
has been done by him for his great avail and lucre, and has been one of the
greatest means of the loss of the said Realm of France, and Dutchey of
Normandy.

See Halls Chronicle 28. H 8. Gra^ton. p. 607. to 613. Fabian, Caxton,
Holinshead, Speed, Stow. Polidor Virgill Martin. An. 28. Hen. 6. and 28. H. 6.
in the Parliament Rols. number. 50.51.52.
The Duke upon these Articles was committed to the Tower for one months space,
to pacify the people, and then released by the Queens means, who entirely
loved him: whereupon the Commons were so far from being pacified, that they
were more enraged; openly denouncing, that it was a shame to all the whole
Realm to see such a person, guilty of so many misdeeds, either to rule about a
Prince, or to be had in honor, or suffered to go unpunished; Upon this the
Commons rising up in diverse places of the Realm in Companies under Captain
Blewbeard, the Commons in Parliament earnestly beseeched the King, that such a
person as assented to the release of Angeou, and deliverance of France, etc.
might be extremely punished and tormented; and to be privy to this Fact, they
accused as principal the said Duke of Suffolk, with John Bishop of Sal^bury,
Sir James Fines, Lord Say, and others. Whereupon, the King plainly seeing, that
neither glo^^ing would save, nor dissimulation appease the continual clam^r of
the importunate Commons against the Queens Darling and his accomplices; to begin
a shore pacification of so long a broile, first, he sequestered the Lord Say,
being Treasurer of England, from his Office, (who for the same offense was
after committed to the Tower, and after that beheaded by Jack Cade, and the
kentish mutineers at the standard in Cheape-side, who carried his Head about
the streets of London fixed on a p^le, etc.) And then by his own authority,
assembling all his Lords Spiritual and Temporal together, on the 17 day of
March, in a Chamber over the cloisters at Westminster, he arraigned and
banished the said Duke for five years, against the Lords and Commons consent,
who would have capitally proceeded against him; meaning by this exile, to
appease the present furious rage of the people, and that pacified, to recall
him to his old estate, as the Queens chief friend and counselor. But
fortune would not that he should so escape; for when he was shipped in
Suffolk, intending to be transported into France, he was encountered by a Sip of
War, appertaining to the Duke of Exceter, of which the Constable of the Tower
of London was Captain, who entering the D^kes Ship with small ^ight, brought
him to Dover rode, and there on the side of a Cock-boate cut off his head, as a
Traitor, and there left his body and head upon the Sands. S^^h was the end of
these two ill Counselors, only for advising this weak King himself thus
dishonorably and Cowardly to surrender up these Towns, Forts, and Territories
in France, to his Enemies, to purchase an unhappy peace, to the Kings and
Kindomes i^reparable great damage, dishonor, weakening, and the Enemies
extraordinary advantage, strengthening and encouragement.

To these I shall subjoyne one presi^ent more, of a different nature, necessary
to be known and considered of by all Captains and Commanders, who defraud
Soldiers of their wages, or the republiks, to enrich themselves.

Walsingham^ Fabian, Hole^shed, Grafton Stow. Speed. Daniel. Martin^ In 5^. E.
^.
In the fifty one year of King Edward the third, Sir John Minsterworth Knight
was arraigned of Treason at the Guild Hall in London, before the Lord Major and
other the Kings Justices, for that he had received great sums of Money of the
King to have paid his Soldiers withal, and did it not, but kept the said
sums of Money to his own use, and then fled to the French King, whereupon he
conspired against his natural Prince and Sovereigne Lord; of the which Treason
he was found guilty; and therefore had judgment, to be hanged, drawn, and
quartered, which was executed accordingly. Indeed the Statutes of 18. Henry 6.
c. 18.7. H. 7. c. 1.3. H. 8. c. 5: and. 2. E. 6. c. 2. Prescribe a milder
penalty, a^ Fining, Imprisonment, Cashiering, forfeiting of all Goods and
Chattels, to Captains and Commanders, who shall abate their Soldiers Wages,
or defraud them of their pay; or receive more pay for Soldiers then are
actually in service under their Commandes (the Case some say of too many
Captains now in these times,) but anciently this was, and in rigor of Law,
still is, no less then a capital offense; The Act for Soldiers.
which should make all Commanders honest, faithful in this kind; for fear of
capital Censures, if convicted of such an injurious fraudulent Crime.

I shall close up these ancient Laws and Presidents, with some others of very
late Edition.

Hi^ Excellency the Earl of Essex, Lord General of the Parliaments Forces, in
his Laws and Ordinances of War, established, for the better conduct of his
Army, Printed at London September, 1642. Has published ^his Law in Print
concerning the yeeld^ng up of any Town, etc.

WHOSOEVER yields up ANY TOWN, FORT, MAGAZINE VICTVALL, ARMS, AMVNITION,
or that MENTIONS, any such thing BUT UPON EXTREMITY, and that to the
Governor, or in Council SHALL BE EXECVTED AS A TRAITOR.

This Law is very punctual, and penal; yea so plaine^, that it neede^ no
explanation; only it may be doubted, what may be called extremity. For this I
shall refer you, to the forecited Cases of Weston, Gomeneys, Cressingh^m,
Elmham, and the Bishop of Norwich: and to that incompaable late Martial
Prince, the King of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus, his Military Laws, touching the
Surrender of Towns, where he reduces extremity to these three heads.

First, if the Garrison be reduced to an utter extremity of all eatable things
whatsoever (be it Skins or Hides;) so as they have no kind of Food whereby to
subsist, but must necessarily perish by Famine, if they yield not. Secondly, If
there be no hope at all left them in such a Case, of any succor and relief.
Thirdly, If without Parlying at that very instant, both the Forts, Men, and
Arms must of necessity fall forthwith into the hands and power of the
Besiegers.
If the Governor of a Town or Fort, can prove by pregnant Testimonies, that
he was really reduced to all these extremities, then he is to be acquitted
upon his trial; but if he fail in the real proof of any of these three,
then he is to be condemned and executed as a Traitor, by this Kings Martial
Laws. And whether all the Towns, Castles, Forts, late in the Parliaments
possession, and since by the Governors thereof surrendered to the enemies hands
by composition, without the Parliaments and his Excellencies previous consent^
or privities, have been first reduced to all, or any of these extremities
before they were yielded up, I refer to their most vigilant, just, and
honorable Examination, whom it most concerns dilig^ntly to inquire thereinto,
for their own and the whole Kingdoms future security: and severely to punish
all timorous and treacherous Governors, who out of Cowardice or Avarice, have
betrayed their Trusts, and in them the Parliament and whole Kingdom (as much
as in them lay) as well as the particular Towns and Forts committed to their
custody.

Upon this very Law and the Common Law of the Realm, See M^ster John Vicars,
his God in the mount. page 353. (...) 363.
Master Tomkins and Master Challenor were lately arraigned, condemned, and
executed by Martial Law in London (and some others their confederates,
arraigned and condemned, though not executed) in June and July last, for
endeavoring to seize upon the Lord Major and Committee of the Militia for
London, with some Members of the Parliament House, and to surprise the Tower of
London, the Cities Bulwarks, Forts, Magazines, Gates, and other places of
importan^e in the City, and to let in the Kings Forces to surprise the same:
though they brought not this plot to such maturity as to put, or endeavor
presently to put it into execution.

Yea, by color of the same Law, See the examinations taken, and letters
written by Colonel Fiennes touching this particular, ^ublished in print.
Colonel Thomas Essex, late Governor of Bristol, was suddenly apprehended and
sent up prisoner to London, by Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes, who succeeded him in
the Government of that City and the Castle thereof; (upon some jealousies and
presumptions only, That the said Colonel Essex would have surrendered the said
City and Castle into the Kings ^ands, had his Forces come th^re, and that
before they were fully fortified) though he never actually attempted any such
surrender. (The case of Sir John Hotham for Hull too.)

And not long after diverse Citizens of Bristol were apprehended, imprisoned,
and put to their several fines and ransomes, and two of them (namely Yeomans
and Butcher) arraigned, condemned, and executed by martial Law in the streets
of Bristol by Colonel Fiennes, only for conspiring to deliver up the said
City and Castle to Prince Rupert and the Kings Forces, when they came first
before it, though they effected not their design; and that before the City or
Castle were completely fortified.

And yet (I know not by what ill fate, or accident) that Noble City and Castle
(which even in William Rufus his reign was styled, Roger de Hoveden. Annal.
pars. prior p. 461,
Castrum Fortissimum, A MOST STRONG CASTLE) the Metropolis, Magazine, chief
Mart and Bulwark^ of the Wester^^ parts, of infinite importance to ^he
Parliament and kingdom, (as this Colonel himself attesteth in his printed
Page 3.13.14
Relation,) after it was strongly ^ortified, victualed for three months s^ege
or more, furnished with 55 piece of Cannon mounted in it, besides Murderers,
and smaller pieces; manned with near two thousand Foot soldiers, and 300
Horse, or more; stored with no less then 60 Barrels of Powder in the Castle
only when surrendered, (10 more then Gloucester had when it began to be
besieged) besides what was in the Forts and City, Match sufficient, 500 Cannon
shot or more, 50 great Grenades (never one of them used;) and furnished with
all manner of necessaries for a long brave defense and leaguer: was in less
then How soon had the whole Kingdom been conquered had all other Cities and
Forts, of less importance, been yielded up in so short a space, though worse
provided, less defensibl^?
^oure days siege, and the loss only of seven or eight Garrison soldiers,
with the death wel-nigh of one thousand of the enemies, before any out Forts
were taken, or the Town or Castle-walls battered or assaulted; (upon a breach
made only in the Line of Communication, and the entery of a small party of the
enemies, not 200, (which might at first have been all easily cut off, into the
out-skirts of one corner of the City,) were most unexpectedly surrendered up to
the enemy by the said Governor, with all the Cannon, Arms, Ammunition,
Victuals, Magazines, Colors, and Prisoners therein, (without the privity or
consent of the Parliament or his Excellency) to the great astonishment and
discouragement of the Parliaments party, the inestimable detriment, i^reparable
loss of the whole Kingdom; the extraordinary strengthening, enriching,
advantage of the enemies, and of the Irish and Welsh Rebels both by Land and
Sea: The Narration and Articles of which surrender, which I need not
particularly relate, with the consequences thereof, I shall here forbear to
mention, since already published in print by Colonel Fiennes himself, in his
Relation to the House of Commons, and L^tter to his Excellency: In Master
Clement Walker his Answer to that Relation, The Tragedy of the Kings Armies
fidelity since their entering into Bristol. The Relation of the siege of
Gloucester, and other printed Mercuries; the rather, because the more full
examination of that unhappy action is referred by the Commons, upon the said
Colonels motion, to a public trial before a general Council of war, in
such a public convenient place, (in London or Westminster, as is conceived,
where the Commons may be present) as his Excellency shall think fittest, for
such a general cause of importance, to the whole Kingdom.

For other particulars formerly touched, his Excellency has published these
ensuing Laws.

NO man shall abandon his Colors, or fly away in any Battle, upon pain of
death. If a Pike-man throw away his Pike, or a Musketeer his Musket, or
Bandalier, he or they shall be punished with death. Whosoever in skirmish shall
fling away his Powder out of his Bandaliers, that he may the sooner come off,
shall be put to death. A Regiment or Company of Horse or Foot, that charge
the enemy, and retreats before they come to hand-strokes, shall answer it
before a Council of War; and if the fault be found in the Officers, they
shall be banished the Camp: if in the Soldiers, then every tenth man shall be
punished at discr^tion, and the rest serve for Pioners and Scavengers, till a
worthy exploit take off that blot. No Captain of a Troop shall present at the
Master any but real Troopers, such as are bound by their pay to follow the
Troop upon pain of cashiering without mercy. And if any Victualler,
Feebooter, Enterloper or Soldier whatsoever, of any other Troop or Company
shall present himself or his Horse in the Muster, to misleade the
Muster-master, and to betray the service, the same shall be punished with
death, No Muster-master shall wittingly let any pass in the muster, but such
as are really of the Troop or Company presented, upon pain of death, etc. Any
Officers that shall presume to defraud the Soldiers of their pay, or any part
of it, shall be cashiered.
These few Presidents seriously considered, and Military Laws duly executed,
will be a ready way to make our Captains and Soldiers courageous, our
Officers incorrupt, our Governors trusty, our Towns and Forts secure against
our enemies fiercest assaults, and finest underhand devices. I read in
Historiarum, ^8. p. 390, 391.
Henry Huntingdon, that all the Soldiers of Prince Robert, upon the
magnanimous Oration of the Consul of Chester, holding up their hands, with a
terrible shout abjured flight, and setting presently on the enemy, routed them
utterly, and took King Stephen prisoner. I hope these Pages may produce the
like effect, and work this generous resolution in all our Commanders,
Governors, Soldiers; Hic igitur vel vincendum, vel occumbendum, spes fugae
nulla. I shall close all with the speech of this Consul. Necesse est ut ad
probitatem confugiat, cui non potest esse aliud diffugium.

FINIS.

