A PLEASANT PVRGE, FOR A ROMAN CATHOLIC, To evacuate his EVIL HVMOVRS.
Consisting of a Century of Polemicall Epigrams; wherein diverse gross Errors,
and Corruptions of the Church of Rome are discovered, censured, refuted, in a
facetious, yet serious manner.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE, an Vtter-Barrester of Lincolnes-Inne; who composed these
Poems, to solace himself, in his late tedious Imprisonments.

Horatius de Art Poetica. Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci. Jeremiah
51. 6. Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his Soul; be
not cut off in her iniquity; for this is the time of the Lords vengeance; he
will render unto her a recompense. 2 Thessalonians 2. 10, 11, 2. Because they
received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved; for this cause
God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie: that they
all might be damned who believed not the truth but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. Printed at London by R. C. for Michael Spark Senior,
dwelling at the blue Bible in Green Arbor, 1642.

TO The Most Illustrious CHARLES, PRINCE OF WALES, AND Heir Apparent to the
Crown of GREAT BRITAIN.
GReat Britains present Joy, her future Hope,
And Faiths Defender against Romes proud Pope;
Vouchsafe to cast Your Gracious Princely eye
On these unpolish't Poems; which descry,
Refute some foul, gross Errors, Practices
Of Romes false Church. By one short view of these,
Your Highness may conjecture of the rest,
And be stirred up for ever to detest
With greatest Zeal, Romes Errors, Blasphemies;
Which make good hearts with indignation rise
Against them. Great Jehovah Crown and bless
Your Highness with all kinds of Happiness;
And, through Your Favor, make this PVRGE of use,
Si^ke Roman Souls to true Health to reduce.
So prays, Your Highnesses most humble devoted Servant, WILLIAM PRYNNE.

To the Courteous Reader.
MEeting with sundry The Lord Ewer Lord Morley. Sir Maurice Drummond, with
others, in the Tower of London and elsewhere.
Papists whiles that I
Remained a Prisoner under Custody;
We often conferred in a friendly way,
Of diverse points of Doctrine, wherein they
Dissented from us; and some Practical
Corruptions, which they, Rome, Devotion call.
On this occasion, to help pass the time,
I some of our Discourses turned to Rhyme;
That so I might with greater Liberty,
And less Offense, their Errors lash, descry;
Both to convince, and cause them to despise,
Their fond false Tenants, Worships, Blasphemies.
Which Poems since, being licensed the Press,
As useful for these times; fit to repress
Romes spreading Errors ( Ave Maryes Bedes, Crucifixes, Bowing to Altars, etc.
some whereof I find
Not yet oppugn'd by any in that kind,
As here they are;) I them shall recommend
Unto thy use (kind Reader) to this end,
That thou may weigh their matter, not their dress;
Which is but rude, unworthy View, or Press.
Mind then their Substance, not lame Poetry;
And all Defects in friendly sort pass by.
If any Health thou by this PVRGE shall gain;
Bless God; and pray for him who shall remain,
Thine in the Truth, WILLIAM PRYNNE.

A Table of the Epigrams herein comprised.
1. ON, and against Popish Ave Mary's. Page 1 2. On, and against Popish Beads
and Pater-nosters often repetition on them. p. 19 3. On, and against Popish
Crucifixes, and Images of Christ. p. 23 4. On, and against Popish Crucifixes,
and Adoring them with Latria. p. 28 5. On, and against Popish Pictures of the
Virgin Mary, as a crowned Queen, sitting on a Throne with Christ a sucking
Infant held in her arms; And on the Relics o^ her milk, which they keep
and show. p. 31 6. On, and against Papists painting the Virgin Mary, and other
Saints in new fashions, with frizled hair, and rich dresses. p. 35 7. On Saint
Dominickes vision of Friars of his Order, hid in Heaven under the Virgin Mary's
Peticoate; and on the Relics of her Garments, which Papists keep and show in
sundry places. p. 37. 8. On, and against Papists reserving the Host, and
carrying it in Procession. p. 39. 9. On Popish Tapers. p. 42 10. On Saint
Michaels Buckler and Poynard kept for a Relic in the Chapel of Saint
Michaels mount, in base Normandy. p. 42 11. On the Relics of Joseph's Han, and
the Asses tail, whereon Christ rode. p. 43 12. On the Popish Sacrifice of the
Mass. p. 44 13. On Romes 7. Sacraments. p. 45 14. On Romes 7. deadly sins.
ib. 15. On Romes Latin Prayers. p. 46 16. On Popish Miracles ib. 17. On Popish
Whippings and Satisfactions. p. 47 18. On Papists abstaining from flesh on
Fasting days. ibid. 19. On Papists making Marriage a Sacrament; yet forbidding
their Priests to marry, and permitting them to keep Whores. p. 48 20. On Romes
extreme Unction, and its being a Sacrament. ib. 21. On Papists implicit Faith,
and Images. p. 49 22. On Popish blind obedience. ib. 23. On Popish
Pilgrimages, Offerings, Kneelings, Prayers to the Images of the Virgin, and
their worshipping of her and them. p. 50 24. On Romes worshipping the Cross,
nails, and what ever touched Christ's body, with Latria, or divine Worship. p.
52 25. On Romes Prayers to dead Saints, and for the dead. p. 53 26. On Romes
divine Adoration of her painted Crosses. p. 54 27. On Papists supposed
looking-glass of the Trinity, for their Saints to see prayers in. ib. 28. On
Prayers in an unknown Tongue. p. 56 29. On Romes Idol, and idle worship. ib.
30. On Transubstantiation. ib. 31. On Popish Transubstantiation, and
Annihilation. p. 57 32. On Transubstantiation, and the Popes Vicarships
repugnancy. p. 59 33. On the real presence, Pix and Crucifixes repugnancies.
ib. 34. On Transubstantiation, and Popes Leaden Bulls. p. 60 35. On Popish
Priests, taking away the cup from the people. ib. 36. On Popish Concomitancy,
and the sacred Cup. p. 61 37. On Popish Concomitancy; and half Communion. ib.
38. On Praying to, and representing of God and Saints by Pictures. p. 62 39. On
worshipping Images. ib. 40. On Popish Confessors and Pardons. p. 63 41. On
Popish Altars and Mass Priests. ib. 42. On Popish Purgatory and its fire. ib.
43. On Popish Indulgences. p. 64 44. On Popish Merits, and Prayers to Saints.
45. On Papists praying to Christ, to save them by Thomas Beckets blood. p. 65
46. On Romes Freewill. ib. 47. On Popish Priests shaven beards, and shorn
Nuns. ib. 48. On Popes Bulls, and doubting of Salvation, their contradict on.
p. 67 49. On Pop^sh Sa^nts (...) for partiticular Coun^^^^s, (...), and kinds
of (...) p. 68 50. (...) p. 69 5^. (...) ib. 5^. On Pop^sh Merits. ib. 53. On
Auricular Confession. p. 70 54. On Romes Prayers to Saints. ib. 55. On Popish
Monks, Players, Prayers, and Merits. p. 71 56. On Romes taking away the
Scripture, Cup, and second Commandment from the people. ib. 57. On the Romish
Mass. p. 72 58. On the Popes two swords. p. 73 59. On the Popes two keys. ib.
60. On kissing the Popes feet. ib. 61. On the Popes being Peter's successor. ib.
62. On the Popes not erring, whilst he sits in Peter's chair. p. 74 63. On the
Popes not erring. ib. 64. On Popes not sinning and erring as Popes but as men.
ib. 65. On the Popes not erring, and falling from Grace. 66. On the Popes
pardons, and mortal sins. p. 75 67. On the Popes being Christ's Vicar general
upon earth. 68. On Popes pardons of sins. p. 76 69. On the Popes being head
of the Church 70. On Romes sins, curses and pardons. 71. On the Pope and his
Cardinals. 72. On the Popes being Christ's Vicar p. 77 73. On the Popes
Vicarship, and Vicars. 74. On the Popes Porpherie chair, wherein they are
groped, and tried to be men. p. 78 75. On Christ's Crown of Thorns, and the
Popes triple crown of gold. 76 On Peter's poverty, and the Popes great wealth;
and being Peter's successors. 77. On Popes prohibiting Priests from marriage. p.
79 78. On Protestants damnation by Papists, and the reason of it. p. 82 79. On
Romes Saviors and Jesuits. 80. On no Salvation out of the Church of Rome. p.
83 81. On Papists making Apocrypha Canoninicall, and Canonical Scripture less
than Apocryphal; with their blasphemies against it, and Popes power over it.
p. 84 82. On the two Arch-Patriarches of Popish Friars, Saint Francis and Saint
Dominick and their blasphemies concerning them. p. 85 83. On the strange Popish
Miracles, attributed to, and forged of Saint Vincent Ferryer, and Saint Anthony
of Padua. p. 93 84. On the Popish blasphemous Legends of their Saint Katherine
of Sennes. p. 95 85. On a Popish Miracle of their deified Hostia. p. 98 86. On
Papists Prayers to those for Saints, who neither were Saints nor men. p. 99 87.
On Popish blind obedience. p. 100 88. On Romes making perpetual visibility a
note of the true Church. p. 101 89. On Romes making Multitude, and Roman,
another note thereof. p. 102 90. On Romes engrossing the name of the true
Church of Christ to her self alone. 91. On Romes Religion turned to policy. p.
103 92. On Popes Right, to interpret Scripture, and their strange Glosses on
sundry Texts to prove their supremacy, and the lawfulness of deposing and
killing Kings, who disobey them. p. 104 93. On the Popes Supremacy and
Sovereignty over Kings, Emperors, and Kingdoms. p. 109 94. On Popish Images.
p. 111 95. On Romes Doctrine and practice of Equivocation. 96. On Papists
blasphemous assertions touching the Virgin Mary, to the dishonor of God the
Father, and Christ his Son. p. 112 97. On Romes Novelties, notwithstanding
her pretense of Antiquity. p. 114 98. On, and against Romes halfe-Communion,
and Sacrilegious depriving of the people of the Sacramental Cup. p. 217 99.
On, and against Popish and superstitious bowing to Altars, and railing in the
Lords Table Altarwise. p. 140 100. On, and against Popish bowing to Altars, and
adoration of the Host. p. 181
Errata.
PAge 9. l. 3. for you, read your, l. 10 the, four. p. 13. l. 35. hers, his, p.
27. l. 5. it, is. p. 28. l. 1. Nazarene, p. 55. l. 25. ascend, p. 72. l. 16.
eternity; extremity, p. 88. l. 18. there tarry, p. 95 l. 18. the Baker, p. 99
l. 12 you Saint, p. 113. l. 16. advocate, p. 117 l. 17. Constans, p. 120. l.
11. for to, p. 121. l. 33 great feast, l. 34. guest, p. 124. l. 17. received,
l. 21. no; Nay, l. 27. whom when received, p. 126. l 25. makes, p. 129 l. 16.
that, as, p. 131. l. 8. Drank, l. 35. Sacraments of; Sacramental: p. 134 l.
4. yet, it. p. 135. l. 8. and some, l. 23. public, vulgar, p. 138. Nor, Not;
p. 139. l. 9 they, th^are.

In the Margin, p. 12. l. 40. dele and, p. 13. l. 17. Novae, l. 27. Capreolus,
p. 28. l. 34. Molanus, p. 66. l. 40. Rosella, p. 109. l. 24. Eutropius, p. 138.
l. 5. Eucharistia, l. 11. Carnotensis, l. 17. Spe^^^. p. 174 l. 39 Sam. Sacr.

A PLEASANT PVRGE FOR A ROMAN CATHOLIC, TO EVACVATE HIS EVIL HVMORS.
Consisting of sundry Epigrams; wherein diverse Errors, and gross Corruptions of
the Church of Rome are discovered, censured, refuted, in a Facetious, yet
serious Manner.
On, and against Popish Ave-Maries.
NO Ave-Marie now? No Salutation
Of the blessed Virgin since her Exaltation?
The Luke 1. 28.
Angel said it whilst she here did Live;
Must we not then this honor now her give,
In state of Glory, mounted up on High
To Gods Fleurs des vies des Sts. A Paris 1637. part. 2. p. 124. to 132.
right hand, above the Starrie sky?
No. Why? because it is A Luke 1. 29.
Salutation,

Friends, Neighbors use none to salute or greet
By speech, whilst absent, but when as they meet.
If Men in England should salute with Ave
Their friends in Spain, and cry to them, God save ye,
All Hail good sirs, and with them Complement
Whiles absent there, as if they were present;
Or should they Aves to their Pictures say,
And them Salute, as you do hers each day,
All would them deem mad, foolish; are not ye
Then Mad, Crazed, Sottish thus to cry Ave,
Hayle Mary full of Grace, to Mary here,
And to her Pictures, as if still she were
Here present with you; when you all grant, know,
She Is now in Fleurs, des vies des Sts p. 124. to 132. La Feste del Assumption
nostre Dame
heaven above, not here below,
See Burtons Melancholy p. 242. to 252.
Ten Millions more remote from you all, then*
Those now in Spain are from us English Men.
No doubt your wits are fled, you quite err, dote,
Thus to salute her from you so Remote,
Since Fools, yea little Children still deny
To ask their Parents blessing, if not by;
Go to Salute them with Cap, Congie, Knee,
Except they see them, and they present be.
till he Luc. 1. 28. And the Angel came in unto her and said, Hail. etc.
came
Into her Presence; pray do ye the same;
Stay, till you meet her Person, then salute;
The Angel else your folly will confute;
Who in her absence used no Complement,
Nor Ave, but when, where she was present.
Nor did he her Salute, nor Ave cry
Till he Luc. 1. 26. 27. 28. Fox. p. 1310.
was sent by God in Embassy
To Her from Heaven Above, and to her came
With special tidings: do you than the same.
Stay till God sends you to her, then salute:
The Angel, else, your Dotage will refute.
When you come to her with an Embassy
From God, then Her salute and Aue cry:
But not before, since it is Presumption
Her to salute without commission.
None but Luc. 1. 26. 28. Fox 1310.
An Angel, not one Mortal Man
Saluted her with Ave here: how can
You then (no Angels, but mere men) presume
The Angels Salutation to Assume?
And this great Flewrs des Sts Part. 2. p. 128. 129. Officium B. Mariae.
Parisiis 1635.
Queen of Heaven greet thus? I fear
You are too bold with Him and Mary here,
First, to Usurp his words, and then to cry
Ave to this grand Queen Familiarly,
Without their leave or God's, as if you were
Their equals; till you be so, pray forbear
Your Aves: Its not Manners, nor Decent
For you with this grand Queen to Complement:
It stands not with a Princess Royalty,
That all should her salute Familiarly.
The Angle said his Ave Luke 1. 18.
once, no more
Then ceast, and did not often repeat it over.
How then can you your Aves every Day
Repeat often times together, when you pray,
And never cease? the Angle certainly
Did never teach you such Battologie.
Ribadeniera Fleurs, des vies des Sts p. 222.
Your Legends write of great St Marguerite,
That she a thousand times used to recite
The Ave Mary, Prostrate on the Ground
On Each Feast, Vigil* which she sacred found
Unto the Virgin, and did cry Ave
When and where ere she did her Image see;
Yea, Popes and Rosarium B. Mariae. Sir Edwin Sandys Relation, p. 7. George
Dowly, Brief instruction: Edit. 4. p. 211. 212. Officinm B. Mariae f. 7. Joan.
Crispin L'estat, de Leglise p. 498. 512. Fox 1315 Tho. Beacons Relics of
Rome. vol. 3, f. ^34.
Masse-Bookes order you each day
By sound of Bell, nine Aves for to Say,
Morning, Noone, Evening, three Aves together
Without one Pater Noster them to sever;
So that you pray to Mary nine times more
Each day, than unto God, if not nine Score.
For, in your Ladies Beads or Rosary;
(Which all Dominican Monks, and sundry
Besides, are bound to use still) you each day
Rosarium B. Mariae George Dowley Priest, his brief instruction p. 211. 212.
213.
An hundred fifty Ave Mary's say.
Successively; ten Ave Mary's to
One Pater Noster; and so pray unto,
Her ten times more than to God the Father,
And so her ten times before him prefer,
At least, if not far more, Officium. B. Mariae nuper reformatum Pii 5^^
Pontificis iussu A Paris 1636. f. 16. 37. 40. 43. 46. 49. 51. 57. 74. 76. 78.
80. 82. 86. 89. 106. 108. 110. 112. 114. and p 17. 67. 72. 82. 60. 66. 76. 97.
58. 83. 90. Fox p. 1310. 1314. 1315.
beginning all
Your hours, with Aves to her, ere you call
On God, your lips to open, and to be
Your Aid; proceeding, ending with Ave
To her: with it you still begin and end
Your Sermons, Prayers; Her, more than God intend.
Fools, why do ye thus her prefer before
God, and than him invoke thus ten times more?
Why do you vex her with Battologies,
And Peales of often rehearst Ave Mary's
From day to day? for shame this clamor cease,
The Angel else will bid you hold your Peace,
Who said his Ave only once, no more
For ought we read; give then your Aves over;
You have repeated them so often Each day,
That now it is time to cast them quite Away,
The Angel his Ave to Mary said
Luke 1. 28 29.
Before his tidings to her were displayed;
To inform her of something she before
Knew not at all; which done, he spoke no more.
You not to inform her of ought that is new,
Or of a thing which she before not knew;
But out of fear least she forget what He
Informed her then through flux of time, Ave
By Sir Edwin Sandys his Relation p. 5. to 9. Rosarium. B. Mariae.
Millions to her still cry night and day
Unceasantly, and naught but Aves say;
No doubt she hears them not, for if she did,
She would as many times each day have chid
You for your folly, as you Ave cry,
Not to her honor, but great infamy;
Who think her deaf, dull, void of Memory,
Forgetful of her Grace, Felicity,
And of the Angels Message; at least wise
Delighted with your vain Tautologies,
That you such Peales of Aves to her Thunder;
If she hear ought for them it is a wonder.
Cease than to cloy, deaf, shame, vex her with Ave,
Else she will hear naught else, nor have time to save ye;
Took up, deaft, tired with Aves alone;
To her no pleasing, but distastefull Tone,
Which at the first Luke 1. 29.
perplexed; made her admire,
But now thus babled, her Provokes to Ire.
Learn Manners from the Angel, Ave cease
When uttered once, then after hold your peace.
Cease Aves now for shame; if you proceed
You are no Angels but the Cuckoo's breed.
He, as a Luke 1. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33.
preface to his Embassy
Used his Ave, whiles she was here only
Among Women, in State of Grace, not Glory;
Be you then guided by the Angels story.
You have no Embassy unto her Grace,
From God himself, to preface thus; her Case,
State, Place, are altered much from what they were
When as the Angel her saluted here:
She was then Luke 1. 28. Blessed art thou among women.
among Women; now on high,
She has no Women in her Company:
There are no women yet in heaven; its true
Good women's Souls are there in Bliss, but you
Cannot their Souls call women; since souls are
Not Male nor female, and naught does declare,
Make, differ Sexes but bodies alone;
And women's Bodies yet in heaven are none;
Therefore no women doubtless are now there:
But Grant they be, yet no Women are near
Where you place Her, Ribadineira les Fleurs des vies des Sts part. 2. p. 128.
to 132 ^afeste del Assumption.
at Gods Righth and on high,
On the throne of the Blessed Trinity,
Above all Angels, Saints, who come not nigh
The Virgin, whom you mount, advance so high.
You cannot then say truly, Blessed art thou
Among Women; Unto the Virgin now;
Since no Women are in her Company:
When you say Aves now, you still do Lie.
a Luk 1. 29. See Fox p. 1310. 1311.
Salutation, not a Prayer
His Ave Mary uttered first to her:
You as a prayer to her it say always;
This does your Error, sottishness display*
His Salutation was not, cannot be
A All the Prelates and Co^vocation of England and King Henry the 8. in their
Necessary Doctrine and Erudition; write; that although the Salutation be not a
prayer of Petition, supplication or request or suite; yet nevertheless the
Church has used to adjoyne it to the end of the Paret Noster, as a Hymme, of
praise, partly of our Lord and Savior and partly of the blessed Virgin, etc.
prayer to her, as you shall clearly (...).
Luk* 1. 26. 28*
Angel said it; Angels pray
Not unto men, whom they Ps. 34. 7. Ps. 91. 11. Hob. 1, 14
guard, save always;
God never sent an Angel to teach Men,
To pray to Him, much less to Mary; then
It is no Prayer; no Angels but Christ may
Presume once to prescribe what Men shall pray.
Luke 1. 28. 31. 32. 3^*
came her news to bring
Of Christ's conception, craving her nothing.
It was a Luke 1. 26. 28.
greet from God; to make it then
A Prayer to her, makes God to pray to Men.
There is no word in it which possibly
His greet a Prayer to her can once Imply.
Besides, the Luke 1. 29.
Text, All Offices and Romish Catechismes term it, the Angels or Angelical
Salutation.
you, it expressly call
A Salutation, and no prayer at all.
And that a mere salute a prayer should be
To her, seems strange, nay senseless unto me.
The Text adds further; Luke 1. 29. 30. So he said to Zachary, v. 13. Fea^e
not etc. yet none say thus to the Virgin or him though the Angel did it: why
then say they Ave and not this to?
she was troubled at
His saying, and did cast in her mind, what
Manner of Salutation this should be:
Which made the Angel say, (c) Fear not: Had she
Thought this a prayer made to her, certainly
She had not thus bin troubled, scared thereby.
Naught this a prayer, unto her can import,
To make it then a Prayer now is mad sport,
Unless be for her: if you this deny,
A Prayer for her the words it prove clearly.
First Luke 1. 28. (...), signifies properly Gaude, or rejoice.
Ave, which All Hail, or happiness
Attend you, signifies, is an express
Prayer for, not to her; and is just the same
With our salute, God save you blessed Dame;
Which all confess to be a Prayer not to
But for those we salute; than Ave's so.
Next, Dominus Tecum; The Lord be with thee,
Is a prayer for, not to her: this to be
So, is most clear by all your Liturgies,
Hours Masse-bookes, where the Priest thus prays and cries.
Officium B. Mariae and Missale Romanum passim.
Dominus Tecum often times; which all call
A prayer to God, for, not to men at all.
By this then see your Madness, folly, shame,
In saying Aves to the Blessed Dame.
You think thereby you only pray unto
Not for the Virgin, when you quite cross do,
Praying not to, but for her always when
You say your Aves: O mad, senseless Men!
If she thus need your Aves her to save,
Bless, bring to God, how can you then ought crave
Pray, gain from her? If she needs prayers from you
She can ill aid, save those who to her sue.
You Fleurs des vies des S^s part. 2. page 128. to 130. Bernardinus de Bustilis
Mariale, Pars. 3. Sermon. 3. Excellent. 4. 5. Pars. 5. Ser. 7. Pars 9. Ser. 2.
Pars 10. Sermon. 2. See Bishop Vshers answer to the Jesuits challenge p. 475. to
496
write, she is in height of Happiness;
That God, Christ, she, do now one throne possess.
It is mere folly then and surplusage
To Power out Aves for her in this Age:
At least wise Salves; which you make the same
With Aves in your Masse-bookes; where the Dame
Is often saluted, prayed for thus, Officium B. Mariae fol. 22. 29. 35. 36. 82.
94. 95.
Salve
Maria, or Regina, God save thee
Mary, or Queen of heaven; which does imply,
That she is not yet saved perfectly;
Because you pray God thus to save her still;
(A pray^ re not to, But for her Grace, as will
Appear by this prayer often Mentioned,
1 Samuel 10. 24. 2 Samuel 16. 16. 1 King. 1 25. 34. 2 King. 11. 12. 2 Chro. 23. 11.
God save the King; used when Kings were Crowned,
Not to, but for them, by their subjects:) or
If she be saved already, this prayer for
Her (made for none but those not saved yet,
And men on Earth, if I do not forget)
Must needs be Idle, Vain, Absurd; and she
With it no doubt, will much displeased be,
Since it her not yet saved does imply,
As it did when she was Luk 1 27. 28.
here, not on High.
Before she saved was you might well say,
Aves and Salves for her; but not pray
Thus for her now, when saved perfectly,
In Heaven (as you hold) Fleurs des vies des Sts part. 2. p. 128. to 132.
Both soul and Body.
The Angel had no Ave Mary Sir ^dwin Sandyes his Relation; p. 8.
Bell,
Sounding each morning, noone, night, him to tell
When he should say his Ave to Mary,
As you have, by whose sound your Aves Cry,
Thrice trebled daily which Bell, no Popes Ban
Or Interdicts from ringing silence Can,
As Tractar, de interdictis par. 1. nu. 79. Philip de Marnix Talbeau des
differens part. 4. c. ^. f. 178. a.
Calderin most sagely notes; though they.
All other Bells from ringing wholly stay.
The ringing these Bells is of such Moment,
That the Orders of Monks at Rome once Albericus de Rosatis in Dictionar,
verbum Campanella; Tablean des Differens: 4. part. c. 2. f. 178. a.
went
To Law about it, before the Popes Grace,
To know which of them four should in first place
It ring each morning: where after long suit,
Much cost, more wrangling, and no small dispute:
It was at last resolved finally,
By an unalterable Act, that they
Who did first rise, should ring it first of all
Each morning, men to Aves thus to call.
But since the Angel sounded no such Bell,
You should not ring it if you would do well.
The Angel had no Beads whereon to say
His Aves by set number every day;
He said it but once, without Beads, then you
Must Alanus de Rupe Miroure des Rosaries Sir Edwin Sandy Relation p. 7.
Beads and daily Aves bid Adue.
He said it not by way of Penance; ye
Sir Edwin Sandys Relation, p. 17.
Injoyne men for their Penance the Ave
To Mumble over by set Scores, and then
They are absolved and mere guiltless Men.
The Angel fell not on his knees when he
Unto the Virgin spoke his first Ave.
Why then do See Bellar-mine de Imaginibus, libi Li^wade Provinc. Constit. li.
5. de Haeret. c. Nullus. Bishop Vshers answer to Jesuits challenge. p. 497.
you before her Image fall,
And kneel when you with Aves on her call?
The Angel said his Ave only to
Her Luke 1. 28.
Person, not her Picture; you unto,
Before her Petr. de Cabreram 3. part Thoma qu. 25. artic. 3. disp. 2. number. 15.
32.
Image, not her Person say
Your Ave Mary's only, when you pray.
Is it that you her Pictures deem to be
Her self, that you them greet thus with Ave?
If not, belike it is because you fear
She is so 1 King. 18. 27.
far off now she cannot hear
Your voice, but yet her Images close by
May chance to hear you, when you Ave cry
Before them: but I doubt they both have lost
Their hearing quite, she, and the painted post:
And so your Babled Aves are lost, vain:
You may do well then from them to abstain.
Pater Noster as
A Prologue to his Ave; neither was
The Ave heretofore joined to the Pater
Ad its part or Apendix why of Later
Times than do ye in your Hours Officium: B. Mariae p. 1. 5 9. 56. 61 62. 73.
88. 92. 94. 121. 125. 193. 399. 352. 354. 362. 366. 367 376
Offices
Prayers, Masse-bookes use to preface your Aves
With Pater Nosters, yea make them a part
Of the Lords Prayer, or Codicell by Art?
Conjoyning them so near, that none may say
A Pater without Ave, when they pray:
As if they both were prayers alike, and all
Who pray Our Father, ought likewise to call
On Mary as their Mother, Queen, else they
Shall not be answered though they Paters say.
Had this been so, the Angel, or Christ would
Have them conjoined thus, or at least we should
Have found them coupled thus in sacred writ;
Which since it does disjoyne them as unfit
To Match, suit, run together; you both err
And sin no doubt to Yoke them thus together.
Belike the Pater is a Beggarly
Prayer, and Ave Fox: Acts and Monuments, p. 1^10 1^14.
is infinitely
Better than it, as some held heretofore,
That you conjoyne them, and say half a score
Aves for one sole Pater Noster; this
Angel near taught you thus to pray amiss.
His Ave did in time and Place preceede
The Pater: you, in both make it succeed.
His Ave Luke 1. 28. 30. 31. 32. c. 11 2.
was before Christ's birth, but the
Pater long after it; Luke, his Ave
Records in his first Chapter; the Pater
In his Eleaventh, in time, place later
Than it: you Ave after Pater say,
Place, and so from the Text run quite astray.
Nay you the Angles Ave far out-goe
Joining Luke 1. 42. Officium B. Mariae f. 1. 5. 9. etc.
Elizabeth's salute thereto
As if it were the Angels own; whereby
You Wrong the Text, and make the Angle Lie
And speak Nonsense, in saying, blessed be
The Fruit of thy Womb; when it is clear that she
Luke 1. 31. 32.
Had then no Fruit conceived in her womb:
Whence he tells her, The Holy Ghost shall come
Upon thee, and the Power of the Highest
Shall over-shadow thee, both these expressed
Not in the Present, but the Future Tense,
Her clause as his, makes him lie, speak nonsense,
It being true when she it spoke after
Mary's conception; false when he to her.
Said his Ave before it. This is bad,
But that is worse which you to his words add.
Officium B. Mariae p. 2. 5. 9.
Sancta Maria ora pro Nobis, etc.
Holy Mary pray for us, none of his
Nor of Elizabeth's Words, nor once found
In Neither in the ancientest Masse-books, witness Officium. B. Mariae
secundum usum Sarum Parisiis. 1538. where this clause is not found.
scripture why then do you join, confound
This cursed Prayer thus with the Angels speech
As if the Angels Mary did beseech
To Pray God for men, and this clause indite
Which you as part of his salute recite,
To make poor people to the Virgin pray,
Who think all Scripture, Angels words they say.
Since All Popish Hours, Missals, Catechismes and writers so term it
all it term the Angels Salutation,
When these words are Romes damned innovation,
Patcht to the Angels greet: which forgery
The silly People cannot possibly
Discover, since Rome takes Gods Word away
From them, which should this Juggling trick display
And leaves them none but such books where they find
This clause annexed, the better them to blind.
The Angle did not such forged Aves say:
You must them then discard and cast away.

Psalms, Lessons, Hymns, Hours, Sermons and Glories
No Aves said, Officium: B. Mariae nup. Reformatum Pii 5. jussu. Parisiis 16
36. p. 16. 17. 37. 40. 44. 46. 49. 51. 57. 58. 67 72. 76. 78. 80. 82. 65. 66.
83. 90. 86. 89. 97. 100. 108. 110. 112. 114. 118. 193. Sir Edwin Sandys Rela.
p. 7.
Like, you; much less did he
Into the 95. Psalm his Ave:
And Lord be with you, insert, as you do
Four times within this Psalm, annexing two
Aves more unto its close, Rosarium B. Mariae Officium: B. Mariae Pii 5. jussu
reformatum. Ave Maria. is 86. times repeated and at large, and above an 100.
times more in fractions. The Pater Nost. but 31. times.
placing one
Before it, though in the old Testment none
Can find one Ave: Nay, whereas in the
Whose Bible there is only one Ave
Used by the Angel, you do it record
Repeat at large, omitting not one word
An hundred and fifty times in one small
Rosary only; and in most of all
Your Offices, Hours, Missalls I it find,
Well nigh as often recited in this kind.
O Monstrous Babbling and Battologie! George Doul^y his brief Instruction Edit.
4. p. 84. Chachismus Tridentinus c. de Oratione Fon p. 1310. 1314.

The Angel taught you no such Cuckooes Cry.
The Angel said his Ave only to
Mary her self; you say, (Nay write that you
May say) these Aves, Paters to, before
Those other Saints whom you invoke, implore,
As you now use to say your Beads and Pater
To Mary and her Image, as your Father,
And then say Aves at your Paters end
To God the Father: this for shame amend,
Since it is the height of Madness, Blasphemy
To God, to Saints to say Ave Mary,
And to say Paters to Saints, and to her
As if they were God, your heavenly Father.
He never said an Ave too, before
The Cross, which you now pray to and adore
With Pontificale Romanum.
Ave Lignum Triumphale; nay
With See G. before.
Ave Mary's which you to it say
Or Pontificale Romanum cap de Bendictione none crucis. Fox p. 1311. a.
Ave Crux spes unica; All Hail
O Cross our only hope; do thou avail
In Godly men to Judgment Righteousness,
And pardon to the guilty to adresse,
He never said an Ave to the spear
That did Christ's blessed side both pierce and tear,
When you sing Ave Lignum triumphale,
Felix Hasta, All Hail, Pontificale Romanum.
or God save thee
Triumphant Iron, happy spear, these you,
Salute, adore with Aquinas 3. part. q. 5. Art 3. and 4. Cajetanus Ibid.
Bonaventure Marcellus, Almain, Carthusian Capicolus, n. 3. sint Distinct. 9.
Jacobus Naclantus in Rom 1. Alensis. part. 3. qu. 30.
Latry as their due;
And the Cross, Nails, Spear, Ceremoniale. Romanum.
worship, deifie,
Because they did Christ's Body Crucify, Officium B. Mariae, f. 381. 382.

As you salute, adore, Mary for that
She bore, Officium. B. Mariae, f. 314.
preserved, nursed Christ; and did flat
Contrary to them, these your Aves be
Quite Cross to hers, and cannot well agree
The Virgin cannot take it well that these
Should be adored with Latry and Aves
As well as she, and equaliz'd to her
For killing Christ, who did him Nurse and bear.
Yea, you say Ave Chrisma to that Oil
And Chrisme wherewith you children grease and soil:
And to S. Anne, Officium: B. Mariae, f. 314
Roch, others Aves say,
In all these you quite from the Angel stray.
Ave at no one day
By sound of bell, as you it use to say
John Crespin L^estat de L^glise: f. 498. Stella and others in vita Calixti.
By Pope Calixtus precept, to the end
That these Aves might those aid and defend
Who did against the Turks fight usually,
A goodly charm, no doubt, to make Turks fly.
Nor did he ever chaunt Ave Mary
Alanus de Rupe Mirror des Rosaires Officium: B. Mariae. f. 349. 352. 354.
362. 366. 376.
rescue searched sovles out of Purgatory,
Or rather Hell, as you do, when you say
Your Ave Mary prayers at Nooneday,
And in your Offices for the dead where
You Ave Mary's say, and pray God there
To Ion Crespin. f. 512.
free the dead from Satan's Power, Gods Ire
Endless Damnation, Ab ira tua libera eos Domine; A fiamma ignis libera eos
Domine: a potestate Diaboli libera eos Domine: ute Paenis Inferni ^ripere
digneris: and omnes fideles ab ae^erna damnatione liberare digneris: Officium
B. Mariae.
bells torments, and fire
Without one word at all of Purgatory
Whose name in Missals, Hours, appears rarely:
Good proof there is no Purgatory: you

The Angels Ave was but arbitrary,
Not said of duty but of Luke 1. 28. 39.
courtesy,
You deem your Aves, Mary's right and due,
Though neither God, Christ, She, them crave from you.
Mary with Ave
Only Luke 1. 26. 27. 28. 30. 31 to 37.
before Christ's birth; you since, when ye
Cannot produce one Text, proof, that any
Thus greeted her since Christ's Nativitie:
Whereas we read, the Mat. 2. 1. 2. 11.
Wise men from the East
Who came to worship Christ, and did not rest
Until they found him, when they came into
The house, and saw him with his Mother too,
Fell prostrate, worshipped him only, not her
And to him offered Gold, Incense, and Myrrh,
But offered naught, we read, to her at all;
Nor her saluted; you quite Cross See Rosari um and Officium Beatae Mariae.
down fall
Worship, Salute, Present, Invoke only
Her, and the Babe Christ, in her Arms, pass by
Uncourted, uninvoked, No Ave
Is said to him, knee bowed, thing offered; she
(A Crowned Queen) has all the Ceremony,
Prayers, Worship, Offerings, whiles he a Babie
In her Arms, is Neglected: O fools see
How opposite to the wise Men you be,
Who Mat. 2. 11.
did Salute, Adore, Present only
The sucking Babe, but past the Mother by.
No doubt the Heb. 1. 6. Rev. 19. 10.
Angel would have done likewise
Had he seen Christ with her, before his eyes:
Or in her arms: you must not Ave cry
Then, or her greet henceforth, if Christ be by,
As he is still, in Picture, when you say
Your Aves to her Image, as you pray.
He never did his Ave Mary say
To purge all Mortal, Venial sins away,
As Alanus de Rupe in his Mirror of Rosaries Table and es differens p. 4. p.
188. T. Becons Relics of Rome, vol. 3. f. 358.
you your Aves and your Rosary
Use for to say; a new found Purgatory
To Purge Men from all sins without Christ's blood,
Which the Apostles never Understood.
He did establish no Rosarium B. Mariae Tableau des differens, f. 188.
Fraternity
Of our Ladies Chapter or Rosary,
As you have done, to cry Ave each day
An hundred and fifty times without stay;
To all of which Order Pope Innocent
The Eight by his hand, voice and full consent
Tableau des differens 4. Part. c. 4. f. 188 189. Sir Edwin Sandys Relation. p.
17. 19.
Gave two plenary Indulgences; In
Life one, in death the to'ther of all sin;
And five years after gave an hundred years
And Quarantines of Pardons to each bears
The Chaplet but about him; and many
Popes since, to those who say the Rosary
And Ave, have granted them, seven, five, two
Years indulgence, with Quarantines thereto.
Nay Alexander the sixth gave Pardon
For thirty thousand years, to every one
Who before the Altar of our Lady
With Christ and her Mother, should say only
A special Ave, importing that she
Was without sin conceived; such Pardons he
Did neither give nor grant to any here
For saying his Ave, Sir Edwin Sandys Relation p. 19 21.
Popes may well forbear
Then for to grant them; till God, Christ, Mary,
This Angel give them such Authority.
Gideon,
Did use to him this Salutation;
Judge. 6. 11 12. c. 13. 3. 4. 5.
The Lord is with thee O thou Man of Might:
Yet none this greet to Gideon will recite:
An Angel unto Manoahs Wife, also
Brought down from God these happy tidings; Lo
Thou shall conceive and bear a Son; the same
In substance with those he to Mary came;
Yet none to her this greeting Message use:
You must then both repeat, or both refuse.
An Luke 1. 11. to 20. c. 2. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.
Angel to the Shepherds, Zachary
Brought tidings of John's, Christ's Nativity;
And said to them as unto Mary here,
Fear not, and so forth; yet it is most clear
That none to them these greets or Aves say;
You must your Ave Mary's cast away
Then by the selfsame reason, since that ye
Can show no Precept, Ground to say Ave
To Mary only, and to pretermit
The Angels words to all these, as unfit
To use each day alone, or joined to the
Lords prayer, as your Ave Mary's be.
The Angel never dreamp't that his Ave,
Could Reprobates and damned Souls set free
From hell it self, when as your Rosary
Of Ave Mary's, (If Quod Reprobi and praesciti per Devotionem Rosarii vitam
aeternam assequantur. In his Mirror of Rosaries, which passage is expunged in
the Review of his Rosarie set forth by Copinger, Printed at Mentz. 1624.
Alanus lie
Not,) but devoutly used will obtain
Eternal life for Reprobates, and gain
Damned tortured Souls out of hell fire, whence ye
Record, that Abbot Sigeberti Chron. Anno. 988. Petrus Dammian: in vita
Odilonis. Tom. 1. Surii Jan. 1. p. 251: 253. 453. in the first Editions.
Odilo did free
The souls of Reprobates and damned men by
His Prayers, and his Covents of Clary
From Hell, or Vuleans Pots, in whose flames they
By Devils were tormented night and day:
All which the Devils did often times Lament
In hearing of an Anchorite, who sent
This news to Odilo; who then ordaines
All-soules day hereupon, damned souls from pains
Of hell to free, and not from Purgatory,
As most now write against the sirst pend story.
If Ave Mary's, Rosaries can free
Damned Souls from hell, Few then shall damned be.
In fine, his Ave was esteemed no part
Of Mary's or Gods worship: by what art
Have you then See Officium and Rosarium B. Mariae, Missale Romanum. The
erudition of a Christian Man^ by King Henry the 8. and the Convocation: Chap.
1. of the Angelical Salutation.
made it both; who think that she,
And God too, by your Aves worshipped be:
Yet Mary more than God, since that you all
Your Offices, Hours, Psalters; Masse-bookes call
Not Gods, but Mary's, so that you adore,
Serve, her only now, at leastwise her more
By far than God, Christ, since your books thus bear
Her name and title, not theirs, as is clear
By your new Printed Masse-bookes, which styled be
In all their Titles, Fronts, as you may see,
Our Ladies Psalters, Primers, Offices,
Hours, Rosaries, and such like: This Aves
Use has in time produced, you to Make
Her See, Bernardinus de Busti his Mariale: and the Authors quoted by Bishop
Usher in his answer to the Jesuits challenge, p. 477. to 496.
Servants and Devoti; who forsake
God, Christ, the Holy Ghost, and Trinity
Adoring none for God, but her only:
She is Romes Goddess; God, Father, Son, Sp'rite,
Trinity, Mother; and none else of Right.
The Sir Edwin Sandyes Relation. p. 5. to 10 Fleurs des vies des S. part. 2.
page 129. 130. 131. part. 1. p. 63. 64.
Stateliest Churches, Altars, Images
Most Monks, Nuns, Orders; all Hours, Offices,
Books of Devotion are hers, bear her Name,
And all Grace, Pardon comes from this blessed Dame,
As Rome Avers now. This Aves have wrought
Beyond, contrary to the Angels thought,
And Mary's too; who by them has undone,
Ungodded both the Father, and the Son.
On, and against Popish Beads, and Pater-Nosters
I Wonder much why Papists on These Beads must be solemnly hallowed ere they
must be used to say our Ladies Psalter on: the form of which consecration you
may read in Tho. Beacons 3. Vol. f. 291. 292. 358. 359.
Bedes pray,
And all their Pater-Nosters by them say.
Is it because they set them out to sale,
And none will buy them by their weight but Tale?
As they do wodden Billets; and therefore
They must have Beads to keep true Count and score?
If so; it seems a just and Lawful Act;
Though to sell Prayers, be no Christian Fact.
Or is it, because they contract each day
With God, how many Paters they will say
To him? and so their Bedes serve to keep true
Account, that God from them may have his due;
So many Pater-Nosters just as they
By Contract, vow, or penance, ought to pay?
This seems an honest Practice, and most just,
To render God his due: yet then they must
First prove, that God takes all their prayers by Tale
Not weight; but this would mar their price and sale.
Their Paters are so light, that God must take
Them all by Tale, since they no weight will make.
For should he balance them, their endless tale
Of Paters, would not Poyse, nor turn the Scale.
Bedes then keep equal Scores, 'twixt God and them;
God would forget else what they pay to him:
He is oblivious, if not false; therefore
They dare not trust him, they must keep the score.
Or else they deem he minds no more than they
Their mumbled Paters; else they would not pray
By Count; I doubt they cheat God in the Score
Sometimes, to make him mind their Paters more.
Or do they use their Bedes alone to find
That tale of Paters which they seldom mind?
Their thoughts being elsewhere when their Pater's said,
The Bedes must tell them still how often they prayed:
Their Paters sure are said with great devotion;
They do not know their sum, but by Bedes Motion:
Should God them take by weight, than, not by Count,
So many feathers would their poyse surmount.
I doubt their Beads, though light, will overweigh
All Paters, Aves, which they on them say;
And are far more worth were they to be sold,
Than all the Paters, Aves, on them told.
But why must Paters thus be said by score?
Did Christ's Apostles, Prophets, Saints before
Time use it? No, read Scripture new or old
You find no Paters, Prayers on Beads told.
Some think our Bid, these Beads did first invent,
From whom they took their Name; if I consent
( Peter the Hermit was the first that invented Beads and Chappelets about
the year. 1263. John Crespin: Le^st. de L'eglis. p. 382. Others make them of
later date.
Though false,) yet for sev'n hundred years, or more
Next after Christ, none Paters by Beads score
Said; now the Case is alt'red; few can say
Their Paters, unless they on Beads them pray.
Pray on them? No: let him mark who this reads
They never use to pray, but say their Beads:
This is their Proper language, so as they
Confess, their Beads help make them not to pray;
To say indeed, nay use vain Repetition,
Against the Paters and Christ's Prohibition,
Who first ordained the Mat. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. Eccles. 5. 2.
Pater purposely
Vain Babbling, and your Bedes quite to put by,
Which Christ condemns as Heathnish, and defends
All his to use, because it God offends.
But Chaplets now this remedy has marred,
And made it the disease it should discard:
Some scores of Pater Nosters must be said
On Beads, ere God can hear, mind what they praide:
He Is grown now deaf belike, and cannot hear
Their first, next, third, fourth Pater; or they fear
He is asleep, or dreaming; so that he
With peales of Paters must awaked be,
Or with their Beads great rattling sound and noise,
Ere he can hear or listen to their voice.
If he hears the first dozen Paters, all
The next are Idle, Bootelesse, Prodigal,
Yea, a gross Exodus 20. 7. Matthew. 6. 5. 7. 8.
taking of Gods Name in vain;
Which if it merits ought, its naught but pain.
Such Idle Babble, and Battologie
God does condemn, reject, hate, and defy,
Especially when they kneel down before
Saints Images, and say their Paters over
To them, as if they God the Father were,
And did their Beads and babled Paters hear:
Which damned common practice Rome allow's
In her Cap. de Oratione.
Trent Catechism, not disavou's;
Yea, Hubberdin, with others long ago,
Maintained, Fox Acts and Monuments p. 1310. 1314. in the old Edition.
that they might Pater Nosters to
S. Peter say, and other Saints full well
Without offense; and A brief instruction, etc. By George Douley Priest: Edit.
4. 1638. Permissu superiorum. p. 84.
George Douly does tell
Us now of late, in his Instruction
Of the chief points of your Religion,
That doubtless men may say the Pater, or
The Ave Marie unto the honor,
Or Invocation of any other
Saint or Angel, with this intent, either
To pray to God that he would have mercy
Upon their souls, for this Saints, Angels Cry;
Or to craze of the Saints themselves, that they
Will offer to God for them what they pray.
A new point of faith and devotion,
Not known to Christ, but to Romes Priests alone:
Had Papists sense or Reason, they might see
How often repeated Pater Nosters be
Most irksome, loathsome to God, not pleasing.
For if men here should to a Judge, Lord, King,
Ten, twenty, thirty, Forty times, or more
Together the same words, requests, say over,
(As they to God say Paters) all would think
Them mad or foolish; yea their suites would stink
And be denide for this their Clamorous cry,
Thougst Just, since marred by such Battologie.
If it be folly, frenzy, babbling then
Often to repeat our suites and plaints to men,
Yea, the next way to make them us deny;
Is it not just the same to God to cry
Thus Pater, Pater, for an hour or more
Until your Beads be fully numbered ore?
Mat. 6. 5. to 10.
Doubtless it is, nay a mere mockery
Of God, who turns his ears from this vain cry.
All deem the Cuckoos, which do often times sing
Naught else but Cuckoo, Cuckoo, in the spring
For three Months space; most foolish birds because
They often repeat their Cuckoo, without pause;
And we think children, fools, the Cuckooes play,
In counting then how often they Cuckoo say.
Papists are worse than Cuckooes, which forbear
Their Cuckooes song for nine months space each year;
When they their Cuckoo-Paters night and day,
All the year long repeat, and never stay.
Yea, whereas Cuckooes never keep account
How often they Cuckoo cry; they them surmount
In this, that they cry Cuckoo and keep score
How often they do it, on Beads made therefore;
So that they are more sottish, foolish, vain
Than Cuckoos, Children, Fools, and so remain;
Whose several follies all conjoined be
In them, and linkt in one, as now we see.
If they on Beads to pray will still proceed,
They are Fools, Children, and the Cuckooes seed.
On, and against Popish Crucifixes, and Images of Christ.
NO Pictures can so lively represent
Christ's Death and Passion, as the 1 Cor. 11. 24. 25. 26. Gal. 3. 1.
Sacrament
And Word, the only Crucifixes he
Has left his Church, his death, to mind, and see.
What need of Pictures, Crucifixes then
To show Christ's death, or Person unto men?
Had they been useful, he had instituted
Them too, like these: since not, they are refuted.
If we Christ's Person, or humanity
At any time would set before our eye.
Let us behold our selves: No Image can
So lively set forth Christ to us, as Man,
Gods and Christ's perfect Genesis 1. 26. 27. c. 5. 1. c. 9. 6. 1 Cor. 11. 7. Ephesians
4. 24. Col. 3. 10.
Image; whose likeness
And Phil. 2. 7. 8. Heb. 2. 11. 14. 16. 17. c. 4 15. John 1. 14. 1. Cor. 15.
48. 49. 2 Cor. 3. 18.
Nature Christ assumed: if Man express
Not Christ sufficiently unto our view,
No pictures can; they false are, He the true,
And perfect living Image of Christ; why
Neglect they truth then, and behold Isay 44. 20. Hab. 2. 18. Jer. 10. 8.
a lie?
The Scripture no description of Christ's face
Form, feature, person makes, but of his Joh. 1. 14. 16.
grace
That none should dare presume to undertake
His Deuteronomy. 4. 15. 16. 17. 12. 23. 2 Cor. 5. 16.
unknown Image, Unseen shape to make,
Which cannot but be false, and a mere Hab. c. 18. Isay 44. 20. Ezech. 10. 2.
Romans 1. 25.
lie,
Because no ground, shape's left to draw them by.
And none now know Christ's true form, portraiture:
How can the Papists, others then be sure
Those Crucifixes they adore, keep, see
Are Christ's true Pictures, and not one of the
Two Mat. 27. 38 Man. 15. 27. Luke 23. 32. 33. Joh. 19. 18. 32.
Thieves that were with him then Crucified,
Since both alike upon their Crosses died?
And those who made them for ought they can tell
Intended to present by them as well
These Thieves as Christ; since nothing does appear
From the bare Picture, this great doubt to clear?
You must then know the Painters thoughts ere ye
Them for Christ's Pictures can once take to be.
Which naught can make them, but your fantasy,
And theirs that made them, but by guess only.
But grant them true, what fruits, good can accrue
To men by Christ's mere outward shape they view?
Since all our comfort rests in this, that He
Man's Joh. 1. 14. Phi. 2. 7 and Mar 1. 23. H^b. 2. 11. 14. 16. 17. c* 4. 15:
Nature took, not that shape which we see;
His Incarnation, not his Countenance
Was that which did our Natures, States advance;
Which men alone, not Pictures can express
Unto the Life, they then are vain, useless.
Christ was unlike to most, or all in face,
His Yet the Papists say, Salve fancta facies nostri redemptoris. Salve vultus
Domini Imago beata etc. Officium. B. Mariae. secundum usum Sarum. p. 67.
visage saves none, but his Nature, grace;
We must strive to be Phil. 2. 5. 1 Cor. 15. 49. 2 Cor. 3. 19. Ephesians. 5. 2. Mat.
11. 29.
like him inwardly
In Graces, but not paint him outwardly.
Gods Word Exodus 20. 4. 5. Levit. 26. 1 Deur. 4. 15. to 23. c. 5. 8. 9.
forbids such Images to make,
Or use at all: we must them then forsake.
The holy noynting Oil which Sanctified
The Arc, Priests, Tabernacle, all beside
Which did thereto belong, with that perfume
Which God prescribed of old, none might presume
On Exodus 30. 31. 32. 33. 36. 37. 38.
pain of death to make the like; since they
Were holy; and in type did Christ display,
Who does us Heb. 2. 11. c. 11 29. c. 13. 12. 1. Cor. 1. 2. c. 6. 11. Rev. 8.
3. 4.
sanctify, and quite consume
The stink of all our prayers, with his perfume.
If then it were so grand a crime for men
To make the like to these types of Christ, then
To make Christ's Image, likeness for a use
Civil, or Sacred, is a great abuse.
Its Civil use, walls, windows, Rooms to grace,
Does Christ, profane, abuse and much debase;
Christ, is an Luke 1. 36. Mar. 1. 24. Act. 2. 27. c. 3. 14. c. 13. 35. 1 John
2. 20. Dan. 9. 24.
holy and most sacred thing,
Ordaind for holy uses; the making
Then of him common, for a civil use
Is profanation, and more grand abuse
Than to turn Churches, Lords Bords, Chalices
To profane uses; damned by Popes Decrees
For profanation, gross impiety.
Its civil use you then must needs deny.
It Is sin, profaneness, by all men's consents,
For to translate the sacred Elements
Of bread and wine (which Christ's 1 Cor. 11. 25. 26. 27. 28. Gal. 3. 1.
death typifie
And paint his Body, bloodshed to our eye,)
Unto a vulgar use; then by the same
Reason it must deserve as great a blame,
To make Christ's Image for a civil end,
Since both alike to profanation tend.
Its Sacred use, to worship, or adore,
Makes it a sinful Psalm. 106. 19. 20. 21. Romans 1. 19 23. 25. 2 Cor. 6. 16.
Rev. 9. 20.
Idol; and therefore
Be it for Common, or for Sacred use,
To make Christ's Image is a gross abuse,
Nay Sacrilege, falsehood and blasphemy,
Since it presents Christ's bare humanity
Unto men's eyes, thoughts, fancies, separate
Quite from his Godhead and Divine estate,
Which hypostatically is joined to
His humane Nature, in such sort, that no
Man must behold, view his humanity
But as Mar. 1. 23. Joh. 1. 14. Acts 20. 28. Romans 9. 5. Tit. 2. 13.
conjoined still to his Deity,
Which Isa 40. 18. Act. 17. 29. Romans 1. 22. 23. 25. 1 Timothy 6. 16
no picture can possibly express
Unto the eye, since void of all likeness
And visibility. Christ as mere man
Unto us no Christ, Jesus, Savior can
Be, Therefore it is both falsehood, blasphemy
To picture Christ as a dead man only,
Hanging upon his Cross, quite severed
From what made him a Savior, his Godhead.
What comfort, profit can it be to eye
Christ hanging on his Cross as man only?
Ah, none at all. Thus you him always view
In Crucifixes. Therefore bid adieu
Unto them: and the rather because they
Mis-represent Christ to you day by day;
Not only as mere man, but as hanging
Yet actually upon his Cross: a thing
Both false and dangerous, which does quite 1 Cor. 15. 15. to 20. Romans 8. 34.
c. 10. 9. c. 14. 425.
confound
Our faith, hope, joy, and cast them to the ground;
Christ's hanging on the Cross was transient,
Past in Mar. 15. 25. 33. 34. Joh. 19
few hours, which done he Luke 24. Act. 1. 1. to 12. c. 3. 21. c. 7. 56.
rose and went
Up into Heaven, where he now reigns only,
And lives free from his Cross Romans 6. 8. 9. 10. 11. Rev. 1. 18.
no more to dye.
To paint him then still hanging on his Cross,
Or as a sucking infant, it most gross
Abuse, controuling sacred History,
And representing nothing but a lie.
O than with Isa 2 20. c. 30. 22. c. 31. 7. Hosea 14. 8.
indignation cast away
These Idol Pictures, and aside them lay;
Which at the best are Isa. 44. 20. Romans 1. 25.
Lies, and different
From Christ's form which the Scriptures represent.
The Sea Molanus. Historiae de Imaginibus, and Lentulus his forged description
and Picture of him, commonly printed and sold here of late years.
Papists paint Christ very lovely, fair,
And like a Nazarite, with long count hair,
And somewhat fleshy; when the Text says, he
Should Isa. 52. 14. c. 5^. c. 3. Phil. 2. 7. ps. 22. 6. 7.
like a root which springs in dry ground be;
And that he had no form nor comeliness
Of Person in him, (as they him express)
So that when men should see him, no beauty,
Him to desire, they should in him epsy;
Whence they should him reject, despise, despite,
And hide their faces from his ghastly sight.
He was no Nazarite, nor long hair wore
(As some yet dream, and many heretofore:)
For he Mat. 11. 19. c. 26. 29. Mar. 14. 25. c. 15. 23. Joh. 2. 8. 9. 10. Luke
2^. 12.
drank wine, often Mat. 9. 24. 25. Mar. 5. 35. 39. 41. 42.
touched, nay raised the dead
Which Number. 6. 3. to. 12 Am. ^. 12
Nazarites might not, nor shaved he his head
When he came near dead Corpse as Nazarites
Were bound to do, nor used ought of their rites,
He was not, could not be Heb. 4. 15. ^ Pet. 2. 22. See (l) before Joh. 14, 30.
defiled at all
Like Number. 6. 9. 10. 12.
them; no sin in him was, nor could fall.
Into him. He no sinne-peace-burnt-offring,
Or such like for Heb. 7. 26. 27. 28.
himself had need to bring,
As Nu. 6. 722
they: He was not then a Naz^rite
Nor yet could be, as some men vainly write:
Its true, he dwelt at Nazareth; whence he
A Mat. 2. 13. as our last Translation truly renders it: whence Christians
were called Nazarens Act. 24. 5.
Nazaret (not rite) is said to be,
And often styled Jesus of Mat. 21. 11. Luc. 2. 39. 51. c. 4. 16. Joh. 1. 45. 46.
Naz'reth, but not
A Nazarite by Order, as these dote,
Who paint him with long baire, to men a 1 Cor. 11. 14. 15. 16.
shame
Says Paul, yea Nature, and so him defame.
Nay, where the Psa. 22. 14. 15. 16. 17. applied to Christ. Matthew. 27. 35. Luke
23. 34. 35.
Scripture says, that his body
Was like a pot-sheard, so lean, withered, dry,
That men might all his bones tell; these mistake
In that they in their Images him make
Plumpe, fleshy, so that none can tell his bones;
His Pictures than are mere lies, and false ones,
Expressing not Christ's true shape, but only
The Painters fancy, and gross forgery:
Those than who these false Images adore,
Worship the Painters fancy, and no more,
Instead of Christ himself; which certainly
Is both false Exodus 20. 4. 5. Romans 1. 19. to 27. Psa. 106. 19. 20. 21.
worship and Idolatry:
It is no doubt a great sin to misdraw,
Mispicture Christ thus, Exodus 20. 4. 5. 6. Deuteronomy. 4. 12. to 24. Lev. 26. 1.
against his word and Law,
Which Popes have Index Librorum prohib. reg. 4. The Rhemists Preface to the
new Testament.
taken from the Laity
Whom these false Molanu Historia de Imaginibus and Picturis Tho. Waldensis.
Tom. 3. Tit. 19. c. 53. p. 274. etc.
Pictures must now edify
And teach in stead of them: In this deal they
Like men with Children from whom they away
Take gold or silver, and then them content
With Babies, Counters, their cries to prevent.
Papists are children, or the Children play,
To set up Pictures, cast Gods Word away.
On, and against Popish Crucifixes, and adoring them with Latria.
What, Christ still hanging on the Cross? not yet
Quite dead? or does he his pains so forget
As to take pleasure thus to hang, not dye
For sundry ages? or are none there by
To take him down, if dead; that he thus stays.
So long upon his Cross, both nights and days?
Is he not yet interred, Raised again,
Ascended into heaven there to remain
At Gods right hand? and so 1 Cor. 15. 15. to. 20. Rom 4. 24. 25. c. 8. 34.
our Faith, Hope, gone;
Salvation lost, and our poor Souls undone?
Is not the Mat. 27. 57. 58. Mar. 15. 42. 43. Luc. 23. 50. 51. Joh. 19. 31. 38.
to 42.
Evening come him down to take?
No Sabbath nigh? has Joseph yet not spoke
To Pilate for to take him down? Shall He
Thus on his Gibbet always hanging be?
Not among Jews in Jury, but in Rome,
His Spouse, some say; O where is her love become?
Has Peter now for ever and a day
Mat. 26. 56. 58. 69. to 75.
Renounced his Master, and fled quite away?
I fear he has, else Christ had long ere this
Been taken off the Cross by him, or his.
But once took down; Popes hang him up again
Upon it, there not Mark. 15. 25. 33. 34.
few hours to remain
As at the first; but from age unto age.
This is small show of love, no doubt it is rage;
Yea, greater malice far than ought we find
In Pilate, Jews, Highpriests, who were so kind
As not to suffer Christ to hang Mat. 27. 57. to the end. Joh. 19. 31. to the
end.
one day
Upon his cross, when first they did him slay.
Rome's turned Jew, Judas, Highpriests, worse than all;
Their malice joined, of hers far short does fall:
They nayl'd him only to one Cross; no more;
She to ten hundred thousands, past all score
And number; taking pleasure and delight
To see Christ ever hanging in her sight.
They on a cross of Act. 10. 39. c. 13. 29. Gal. 3. 13. 1 Pet, 2. 24.
wood hanged Christ alone,
Rome upon Crosses of gold, silver, stone,
Tin, Lead, Brass, Copper, Glass, Wood, Tapestrie,
Wax, Brick, Past, Leather, Paper, Christ hang, tie;
And least she should not him sufficiently,
On all these Crosses, kill and Crucify;
She does it in as many See Bellarmine De sacrificio Missae, and others.
Masses more
Each day. O blessed Jesus what great store
Of Crosses, Tortures, deaths does Rome provide
To pierce thy hands, feet and thy blessed side?
And kill thee every day often times afresh;
Nay eat thy body, Corpus Christi posse in Sacramento sensualiter frangi, and
fidelium dentibus atteri, Gratian: Decret: pars 3. De Consecratione; Dest. 2.
cap. Ego Berengarius.
tear and gnaw thy flesh?
Is this thy Vicars, Spouses Love to thee,
Thus worse than Pilate, Jews, Highpriests to be?
But this their malice makes notorious,
That they deem all this Bellarmine, and others De Sacrificio Missae: Tho.
Beacons Relics of Rome. ^ ol. 3 f. 366. 367.
meritorious;
No doubt it is so if they gloss it well;
It does deserve the deepest place in Hell.
But why do they thus fix thee to the Cross?
Because Romes Pope else should sustain^ great loss;
He could not else possess thy throne, and reign,
Not as thy Vicar but thy Sovereign;
Thy Laws else must be kept, thy word obeyed,
Thy will by him fulfilled, and not gaine-sayd:
All which Popes do against, beside thy word
Should then be void, and by all men abhorred;
They must be Peter then in Truth, not name,
Else thou would thrust them from his chair with shame.
Good reason have they then to nail and tie
Christ to these Crosses for Eternity.
In this they show their peerless faith, and love,
To bind Christ fast that he should never move
From off these Crosses, to oppose their-will,
They do so love his precepts to fulfill.
If this be love, I may then truly say,
The Jews in love did Crucify and slay
Christ at the first; were Popes but loved so,
They would all Crucifixes damn, forgo,
And never more the Cross, nails, spear adore
For Saints, which killed Christ, and his body tore:
But whilst they thus adore these, they imply
That to kill Christ, deserves a Deity:
The Soldiers than and Jews who Crucified
Him more than these, must now be deifide,
And worshipped with Aquinas Summae: pars. 3. qu. 25. Art. 3. Azorius Instit.
Moralium. Tom. 1. l. 9. c. 6. Thomas Waldensis. Tom. 3. Tit. 20. c. 159.
Latrie; like nails, spear, Cross,
By which Hell, Devils, shall receive great loss;
Since none to Hell can damned be, if they
Demerrit Heaven, and Latry, who Christ slay.
On, and against, Popish Pictures of the Virgin Mary as a Queen, sitting on a
Throne with a Triple Crown on her head, and holding Christ, painted like a
sucking Infant, in her Arms; and on the Relics of her milk, which they
keep and show.
FIe, Mary, fie; what give suck to a Baby?
It is not decent, fit for Queen, nor Lady:
With them it is out of fashion; thou will shame
Thy self with these, they will thee tax and blame:
Were thou no Lady, Queen, as heretofore,
Thou migh'st do this; but now not do it more
Since Queen and Lady too: Thy child grows great
Or old enough to be weaned from the Teat.
He has sucked sixeteene hundred years and more,
Thirty men's ages, shall he never give over?
Shall he be still a suckling, or a fool
To suck so long? it is time he were at School.
Others give suck but for one year, or two;
Thou, sixteen hundred years, what do thou do
Thus to turmoyle thy self? and all in vain,
He does a little Infant yet remain,
Where some not half so old as he, have known
Ten Generations unto old men grown.
Sure thy milk, I doubt, is very bad,
Thy Babe ere this might else have been a Lad;
Out of his coats, at least; No age has known
One suck so long, and yet so little grown.
No doubt, if noted, it is a Miracle
Whose strangeness does all Wonders else excel.
But (blessed Virgin) can thy milk be ill,
Since naught but Luke 1. 28.
Goodness all thy members fill?
This cannot be the reason, milk is scant
More likely, with thee; and thy Babe does want
Milk, that he thrives not; and he will suck no other
Nurse thou would put him to, but thee his Mother.
Yet, since I find, thou have much Milk to spare,
As Hogges-heads of its Relics now declare
See Tho. Beacons Relics of Rome, Vol. 3. fol. 181. b. 184. a. 186. a 193. a.
Declaration du Pere Basil. p. 85. There is a Chapple named S. Laict in Reimes
where the Ladies Milk is kept.
Kept fresh and sweet, by sundry Priests and Friars
(And it is thine own true milk, else they are liars;)
The want of milk is not the cause why he
Grows not, there must some other reason be:
How these thy milk have got it is not known,
Belike they stole it, and thy Babe's not grown,
Because these cheates each day commit High Treason
In stealing of his milk: Lo here is the reason:
No milk they show, but i'ts fresh, sweet, not sour;
No doubt they steal thy milk from thee each hour
Else it would wast, If the consecrated Bread and wine, which Rome holds, to be
the very glorified Body and Blood of Christ, will putrify, mould and corrupt
if overlong reserved, as experience witnesses, and all Romish D^^ grant: then
much more the Virgins milk: unless they make it better than Christ's very body
and blood.
grow stale, sour, putrify
As other milk; such Thieves deserve to dye
At least, for stealing thy Babes milk so long,
Else he ere this had grown more great and strong;
Why Rome has so much Virgins milk to show,
And Christ is yet a Babe in part you know.
But can such theft be without her consent?
No sure; I fear his Mother is content
To keep him still an Infant, that she may
The better rule, and make him her obey:
Were he but grown once unto man's estate,
Her Regency would be quite out of date:
Men would no longer to her pray, and say,
Impera Filio tuo Monstra Te esse Matrem. Yet remaining in all their Hours of
our Lady and Masse-bookes and sundry Manuals of their Devotion, intimating
Christ now in state of Glory to be still under his Mothers Command. See B. Vsh.
Ans. to the Jesuits Chal. p. 478. to 496.
Command thy Son, make him thee to obey,
Now show thy self a Mother, would no more
Be heard, few would her aid, or grace implore,
But his alone, whom Papists now pass by
Because a Babe, and worship, honor, Eye
His Mother more than him; when as the Wise
Men from the East, the Mat. 2 ^. 2. 9. 11.
Babe did only prise;
They ran in Pilgrimage to him; they fall
Down and odore him, not her; present all
Their gifts to him alone, but never once bent
Their knees her to salute in Complement,
Much less her to adore, for ought we read:
Rome will not here the Wisemens footesteps tread.
Nor suffer Christ to man's estate to grow,
Since this her Church, Monks, faith would overthrow.
Romes Ladies Prayers, her Primers, Offices,
Hours, Masse-bookes, Psalters, and such Blasphemies,
Must be casheer'd then, and her New faith too;
Most Monks, Nuns, Friars it would quite undo;
To hinder Christ from doing all this ill
He must be kept a little sucking still.
Mean time his mother rules al, wears the Crown,
And he (poove Infant) is deposed, kept down;
Least this should be forgot, or men it doubt
Rome though it fit to Paint, Print, set it out,
In all her Churches, Psalters, Books we find^
By Statues, Pictures, all of this to mind;
Where Mary sits as Lady, yea, as Thus is She pictured not only among Papist;
abroad, but at home to, and such a Statue of her has been lately set up over
the Porch of S. Mary's Church in Oxford to the great scandal of Protestants,
and obduration of Papists.
Queen
Of Heaven upon a Royal Throne, between
Two Angels, wearing a great Triple Crown,
Upon her head, to add to her renown;
With Christ a little Babe, held in her Arms
Or Lap, which she so overrules and charms
With threats, or flatt'ries, that he there still lies.
For sundry ages, and yet never cries,
Though thus abused, kept from his Crown and right
So long; perchance his Mother does affright
Him with the Rod, and should he but once cry
For justice, she would whip him instantly.
But Mary thou art full of innocence,
Not guilty of these crimes; its Romes offense
Thus to abuse thee, and thy Son, and make
Him still a Babe; thou from him thus to take
His rule, Crown, Kingdom: O Sweet Jesus thou
Art very patient, and to anger slow;
Else thou could never suffer Rome so long,
Thee and thy blessed Mother thus to wong
With these Blasphemous Pictures, Images,
False Relics, Legends, and Idolatries:
No doubt thou will avenge these in due time;
Mean while let me her censure, in this Rhyme.
Its not thy person, nor thy Mothers, I
Here lash, tax, censure, but Romes Blasphemy;
I only jeare, discover to her Eyes
Her damned follies, and Idolatries
In these her Pictures, Relics, that she may
Discern, renounce, and cast them clean away.
Lord clear her eyes by this, that she may see
Her cursed follies, and them henceforth flee.
Beholding thee, not as a small suckling,
But as her only crowned Lord and King:
Not as thou once waste, but as thou art now;
Then all their knees to thee alone shall bow,
Not unto Mary, who is grieved sore,
To see Rome thee neglect, and her adore.
On, and against Papists painting the Virgin Mary, and other Saints in new
fashions, with frizled, poudred hair, and rich dresses.
What? Lady Mary frizled, spotted, painted?
I fear the blessed Virgin is Un-Sainted;
Or has quite lost her old Virginity,
She now appeeres so wanton to the Eye;
So rich, and stately, in such Dresses she
Never here used, and abhorred to see.
I fear some Ladies who curle, powder, paint,
To warrant these, have made her such a Saint:
Stripped her of all her modest, course array,
Put her in fashion, made her rich, count, gay,
Curled and spotted; yea, as wanton, vain
As those lewd Females who in Stews remain.
She was a modest Virgin heretofore,
Now she may be a Lady, or a Whore.
Fie Ladies, fie! you may your selves defame
And Antique thus, but not this blessed Dame,
Who spits at all such Dresses, and defies
Her self and you, whiles clad in such disguise.
No wonder if lewd Rome the Whore now play;
She makes the Virgin one by such Array,
To Grace her Trade, and keep her Company:
How dare Her Nuns then save their Chastity?
Alas Nicolaus de Clemangis, de corrupto Ecclesiae statu c. 15. 23. Agrippa De.
Va. Scie^t. c. 63.
they do it not; but seemingly;
They were Romes Bastards else, not Progeny.
I Will never think Romes Church chaste any more,
Who paints the blessed Virgin like a Whore;
Nor wonder why the Female Sex curles, paints,
They learn to do it from the Roman Saints.
These are now lawful by Canonisation;
Not ill, but holy by Romes Consecration;
No doubt most Madams will now curle, spot, paint,
Since to do these things is to be a Saint,
At least in show; and that may well suffice;
No matter for the Heart, these please the Eyes.
If by naught else, by this at least we know
Romes Saints are void of substance, naught but show;
Nay, Romes great vaunting Church to be a Whore,
Since far more painted, gaudie than before,
More stored with Baudes and Panders to entice
Men to her lusts, and to uphold her vice.
Setting her Saints out to men's public viewes
In such Attire as suites best with her stews.
Join but her Agrip. De Vanitat. Scien. c. 63. Espenceus de Continentia l. 3.
c. 4.
public Stews to this her Paint;
She Is than a true Whore, but a varnisht Saint.
On Saint Dominicks vision of Friars of his Order hid in heaven under the
Virgin Mary's Peticote; and on the Relics of her Garments which Papists keep
and show in sundry places.
SAint Sum. part. 3. tit. 23. c. 3. f. 159. 160.
Antonine of Dominicke does write,
That he to heaven was rapt up in his sprite,
Where he Monks of all Orders did epsy,
But of his own, not one could there descry:
Whereat amazed, the Lord Christ bids him be
Of good Cheer, for of his own company.
There were great troops in heaven bid, (where I wot?)
Under the Virgin Mary's Peticoate;
Whom he there showed him; none being so nigh
Or dear to her as his fraternity:
This storie's Canonized, we must give faith
To what this Saint saw, and another says.
Belike this chaste pure Virgin, who Luke 1. 34.
here fled
Man's carnal knowledge, and the Marriage bed,
Mounted to heaven, and in state of joy
Is grown more wanton, common, not so coy
As here she was; or has forgot, cast by
Her Virgins state, and Pristine chastity,
Since swarms of Leacherous Friars thus reside
Under her coats, too near her skin, thighs, side.
It Was well this Order had no being when
She was on earth; Sh'ad scarce been Virgin then.
These Jacobines who now so near her lie,
I doubt had robbed her, of her chastity.
But is the Virgin in her Robes there clad?
This news perchance may make some Monks look sad.
The Sea Tho Beacons Relics of Rome. Hospinian De Origin Templorum: cap.
Reliquiis.
Relikes of her Garments they show here
Will prove all false, has she her Wardrobe there;
Unless they say, she left her clothes behind:
How do they then her Coats in heaven thus find?
Perhaps she has new suites made there, her old
She them be queath'd to be kept, showed, bought, sold.
If so, then Tailors shall be saved, and skip
To heaven, to make Coats for her Lady-ship:
Have they no merits, faith, grace, yet their trade
Will save them; else her clothes could not be made.
And to make robes for Her deserves doubtless
A place in heaven, she cannot give them less.
But how came Friars by those clothes which she
Here wore on earth? or how can they or we
For certain know them to be hers? since they
So rich, fresh, gaudy, not like her array,
(Not heard off in the world nine hundred years
Or more from her decease,) may breed just fears
They are See Cassandri Consultatio, cap. De Veneratiene Reliquiarum, p. 973.
974. Where he freely confeseth, that most of the Relics Papists now show, are
great and detestable Impostures, and therefore wishes that all showing of
Relics should be utterly abolished.
not hers? nor can they show us by
What trusty hands they were kept anciently,
And thence transmitted to them, for to make
Blind sots adore them for the Virgins sake.
Besides, her clothes were old when first off cast;
Full sixteen hundred years since that are past,
They then were rotted, perished long agone,
And so the fresh, rich Rags, they show are none
Of hers, no doubt; unless they chance to say
New shreds of Relics drop from heaven each day
From her into their Wardrobes; whence their See Tho Beacons Relics of Rome.
store
Of Relics now is more than heretofore;
Sagreat, that they ten thousand times or more
Ex^eede all Garments which on Earth shewore:
Their store of new, sine, gaudy Relics now
Must needs then fall from heaven to them below:
She Is now a Queen, a Lady, has each day
Or week at least, rich suites of new array,
Which once put on, the old drop to them here,
Because none will adore such Relics there,
As See Tho. Waldensis, Tom 3. Tit. 23. c. 164. 165. and Tit. 21. c. 161.
some do here, and trot from place to place
In pilgrimage them to see, kiss, embrace.
Again, her Robes are now of Eratque hoc tantae capacitatis and immensitatis
vestimen^um, quod totam caelestem patriam amplexando dulciter continebat.
Antoninus: Hist. pars. 3. Tit. 23. c. 3. f. 159. b.
larger size,
Since under them an Host of Friars lies:
I wondered much how Papists got such store
Of Maryes rags, but I wonder more,
They have so few, since her Coat is so wide
And long, that it whole tooopes of Monks can hide.
O Mary! now thou have a monstrous train,
Me thinks its weight, length, breadth, should thee lade, pain,
And sink to earth, unless supported by
Those strong fat Monks who under it hid lie.
On, and against Papists reserving the Host and carryning it in Procession.
Why does Rome keep Christ's Body See Tho. Becons. Relics of Rome. Vol. 3.
^ol. 328. b.
prisoner still
Within her pixes, quite against his will?
Naught of the Paschall Lamb (which Cor. 5. 7. 8.
typified
Christ and his Supper) might Exodus 12. 10. c. 29. 34.
remain, abide
Until the morning, if ought did they then
Must burn it in the fire forthwith: yea when
Christ did his Supper institute, he said,
Mat. 26. 26 Mar. 14. 22. Luc. 22. 11. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 24.
Take Eat forthwith, and nothing then up laid,
Reserved within a pix: Christ's guess must eat
Not keep nor Closet up their sacred meat.
The Exodus 12. 46.
Paschall Lambs flesh none were to carry
Abroad out of the house; to Typifie,
That none must carry Christ's body abroad
Out of the Church, the place of its abode.
Yet Rome in her Council. Coloniense sub Adolpho. An. 1549. c. 17. 22. Surius
Tom. 4. Council. p. 853. 854.
Processions carries it
Abroad about the streets, and deemes it fit.
Christ rode but once, and then upon an Mat. 20. 5. to 11. Mar. 11. 7. 8. 9.
Luke 19. 35. 36. 37.
Ass;
But now he does often in state, triumph pass
On great Men's shoulders in Procession,
As if he could not stand, walk, go alone:
By which they turn Christ's Supper to Qua: (k) before.
a play;
When they Processions go, they ever stray.
Besides, Rome does her Hosts still See Missale Romanum: and the Cannon of the
Mass Acts and Monuments. in the old Edition: p. 891. to 897. Tho. Beacons
Relics of Rome. p. 385. a.
elevate
And them adore; these customs are but late.
Christ, the Apostles, neither used nor taught
Them; doubtless, than they are not good, but naught.
Rome may ill boast of her Antiquity,
Her pactise in all this is Novelty.
But here George Douley Priest, his brief Instruction. p. 175.
Rome pleads, that Aaron did reserve
A Exodus 16. 32. 33. 34.
pot of Manna, and the same preserve.
Within the Arc, by Gods Command: therefore
She may and does her Hosts reserve in store,
Thus in her pixes: But this will not serve
Her turn, for he the Manna did reserve
By Gods Exodus 16. 32.
express Command: But she has no
Command from God her Hosts to pix up so,
But only them Mat. 26. 26.
to Eat without delay,
As Exodus 16. 19 20. 22. 23.
Manna eaten was the selfsame day:
By Gods procept, and might not be kept till
The morrow, as her Sacred Hosts are still.
Besides, this Manna was not kept to eat,
As are her Hosts: nor did they often repeat,
Renew the same; when Rome her Hosts ea^h day
Or week does change; nor did Manna decay,
Or putrify, as Summa Angelica: Eucharistia. 1. Sect. 38. 39. 40.
Romes hosts often times do,
Wanting Christ's warrant to reserve them so;
Nor was it kept, but for a Exodus 16. 32. 33. 34.
memory,
To show unto the Jews posterity
In future ages, when all Manna ceast,
With what bread God did their forefathers feast
In wilderness, when he from Egypt Land
Them brought, and rescude with a potent hand:
So is the Text express: Now Hosts remain
And shall not cease till Christ shall 1 Cor. 11. 25. 26.
come again.
You then no ground from Manna have to store,
Reserve your Hosts in Pixes any more,
But rather not to do it; since none might
Exodus 16. 19. 20.
Reserve their Manna till the next days light:
And Manna was a Joh. 6. 31. to 52.
type of sacred bread,
Of Christ, wherewith our souls are nourished.
Nor is the Arkes removing, any ground
Whereon Rome can her Hosts Processions found,
For that removed not but by Gods Exodus 17. 1 c. 40. 36. 37. 38. Number. 9. 15.
16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23.
Command
Whilst Israel journeyed toward Cana's land;
Wherein when they were seated, it did 2 Chronicles. 6. 41. Psalm. 132. 5. 8. 2 Samuel
6. 10. 11. 12. 17. 1 Samuel 7. 2.
rest
Still in one place, which by it was much blessed.
Nor did the Arc once in Procession ride
About the streets, as your Hosts do: beside
When it removed none did fall down before
And worship it, as you your Hosts adore
In your Processions, on set days kept still:
Whereas the Arc Number. 9. 15. to 23.
removed still at Gods will:
But you have no command your Hosts to bear
Thus in Procession, and you seated are
In peace within your Countries; therefore you
To these Processions must quite bid adue
Till God command them, and you journey to
The Land of Canaan, as the Jews did tho.

TApers at noone day burning? why? to light
A blind Religion to which day seems Night.
Papists think all else blind: How blind are they
Who thus need burning Torches at Noonday?
But it is to Fox Acts and Monuments. p. 685. in the old Edition, Tho. Waldensis.
Tom. 3. Tit. 24. c. 166.
show, that Christ is this worlds light:
Does not the shining Sun show this more bright
Than any Tapers? which gives Genesis 1. 16. Psalm. 136. 7. 8. Psalm. 19. 1. 2.
Light to all
The world alone, and is the Radical
Fountain of all light; whereas Tapers give
Light but to few, who cannot well perceive
Their Light at Noonday: None then need such light
But Romish Owls who hate the Sun, love Night;
And are so senseless, that they cannot see
Feel, taste, their Sacred Host still Bread to be.
Number igitur mentis suae compos putandus est, qui auctori and datori luminis can
delatum aut cerarum lumen offer^ pro munere? De vero Cultu. l. 6. c. 2.
Lactamius deemed this Madness heretofore
In Pagans; then in Papists it is much more.
On S. Michaels Buckler and Poynard, S. Michaels Mount in Normandy.
IN Tho. Beacons Relics of Rome: Vol. 3. f. 90. a. Declation du Pere Basil. a
S^dan. 1637. p. 84.
Michaels Chapel in S. Michaels Mount
Is kept a Relic of no small account,
Archangel Michaels double Buckler, made
Of fine red velvet, which does never fade;
And his steel Poynard, with which Arms he fought
Against the Rev. 12. 7. to 14.
Dragon, when he cast him out
Of Heaven, with all his Angels: certainly
These famous Relics are a forgery,
Since Angels Psalm. 104. 4. Heb. 1. 7.
Spirits) in a Spiritual
War, as this was, could use no corporal
Arms, instruments of war; nor do I find
By Scripture, they had weapons of this kind:
I doubt these Arms were forged by Romes Clergy,
Who use such See Platina, Balaeus, Benno Cardinalis, Crespin and others in the
life of Pope Hildebrand, and other his successors.
Arms, and lay devotion by
In all their wars, since Michael as they say
Clad with these Arms, not Prayers got the day
Of the red Dragon, Satan, and his Host;
Who else perchance the day and field had lost.
How Spirits can repel'd, or conquered be
With swords and Bucklers, I cannot yet see.
Those who this Dragon will repulse or slay
Must use no Arms, but only Mat. 17. 21. Ephesians. 6. 11. to 19. 1. Pet. 5. 8. 9.
Jam. 4. 7.
fast and pray,
And need no other Buckler, shield, or sword,
But Prayer, Faith, and Gods most Sacred Word
Saint Michaels Buckler, Poinyard, and such Arms
Cannot defend men from the Devils charms.
On the Relics of Joseph's Han, and the
IN France, at Declaration du Pere Basil. p. 85.
Courchiverni near to Blois
Within a Bottle they keep, show the Noise,
Or H^n which Joseph, (Christ's reputed father)
Used when he cleft wood, or when squared it rather.
A famous Relic: 'twas, a skillful man
Who could both catch and bottle up his Han
In such good pickle, that it keeps fresh still
For sixeteene hundred years and more: what ill
Fortune had Joseph's Body to decay,
When as his breath and Han last to this day,
And are preserved with such special care,
When as his body, bones, flesh perished are.
His Han at first was not seen, only heard;
Now only seen, not heard; it is false, or marred:
The At Genes: See Tho. Beacons Relics of Rome. Vol. 3. f. 90 a.
Asses tail whereon Christ rod, which they
Have yet to show, to this Han join they may,
Nay wear the Asses tail, ears, skin and head,
Since they such Lies for Truths have credited;
Which Fools and Children would deride and jeare:
They are more sottish than the Ass, I fear.

What, Mass no Sacrifice? this mine heart cooles
Yet courage; it is the Eccles. 5. 1.
Sacrifice of Fools.
Why so? they think Priests offer Christ again,
Yet do not, cannot do it: the Heb. 9. 12. 25. 26. 27. 28. c. 10. 10. 11. 12.
13. 14. 17. 18.
Text is plain.
They say, See Beller. de Sacrificio Missae. Declaration du. Pere Basil c. 1.
Tho. Beacons Relics of Rome, Vol. 3. f. 366. 367.
it is for use, worth, better, more
Than that which Christ made on the Cross before.
As if that Pictures were more excellent
Than any Persons which they represent.
It strangles, murders, Christ a fresh each day;
And yet it is unbloody, as they say:
Yea meritorious; then the Highpriests, Jews
For killing Christ, Heaven merit, its strange news.
It does avail (they hold) both quick and dead:
True; Priests who live, by it are nourished;
Yea much inricht, and buried sumptuously
When dead; thus quick and dead Priests gain thereby;
When as Laymen by it are often undone;
The dead man's Mass, quite breaks his living Son.
On Romes seven Sacraments.
TWo Sacraments? No more? too few by five,
Had Popes no more to sell they could not thrive:
See Bella^. De Sacramentis: Contr. 6. de Numera Sacramentorum. And Amesii.
Bellarminus Eu^ruatus. Tom. 3. c. 6. f. 52. 53.
Seven's a complete number; they may sell
One Sacrament each day, and so gain well;
Its fit each day should have its Sacrament
To vent, else Popes would hardly be content,
Now they may Market keep all week, year; this
Popes well remembering, thought it not amiss
To add five Sacraments to Christ's own two,
The sale of which if lost, would them undo.
On Romes seven deadly Sins.
BUt Officium beatae Mariae: Ledesma. c. 14. Canisius. sum. Doct. Christianae
p. 237. 238.
Seven deadly Sins Rome? if thou sell
All sins but these, thou may thrive pretty well:
But thou to raise thy Holy Fathers rents
Make venial all thy seven Sacraments:
The sale of each which is a mortal sin:
Thou must thy tale of deadly sins begin
To double, since they seven Sacraments
Thus sold, prove deadly sins in their events
But are these deadly, since thou selst them all?
Not so: at Rome all sins are Venial.
On Romes Latin prayers.
ROme will have none but See Missale Romanum, Officium B. Mariae. Fox Acts and
Monuments. p. 1717. to 1721. in the old Edition.
Latin prayers to God;
Twere just to whip her with the self same rod;
Give her but Latin, henceforth, and no Coin,
She will to Latin any Language join:
Nay damn the Tongue, and to gain Gold good store,
Swear she will never receive the Latin more.

MIracles still? after so many done?
Is such a wonder as the world might stonne.
Does Romes faith stagger? is she yet in doubt
That she for Tho. Waldensis de Sacramentalibus. Tom. 3. Tit. 14. c. 124. 125.
p. 239. to 233.
Miracles thus still cries out?
Either the old were false, Mar. 16. 17 20. Heb. 2. 4. Joh. 4. 48.
the Faith untrue
They did confirm, else there is no need of new.
The old Faith's lost in Rome, she has a new one,
She needs new wonders, it to make a true one:
See Surius, Ribadeneira; Antoninus and others in the lives of the Saints:
Maffaeus his History of India, and the Jesuits letters thereto annexed from
thence.
Such she has store of too, and yet she cries
For more: I doubt she knows they are but lies,
And false impostures, else she would not call
For fresh, her new false faith to keep from fall.
Hold then thy peace Rome, else I must thee tell
Thy faith is false, and thou an Infidel;
On Popish whippings and Satisfactions.
IF whipping might sins purge and satisfy;
Each Bridewell should then be a Purgatory;
And Rogues there daily whipped, should merit more
Than all the members of the Roman whore;
Who now to satisfy and merit well
Should still be kept, whipped, tortured in Bridewell.
On Papists abstaining from flesh on fasting
PApists in Surius Council. Tom. 2. p. 1048. Summa Angelica Tit. Jejunium.
Lent, on fasting days will Eat
No roast, boyld, backed flesh: its unlawful meat,
Yea, mortal sin to taste it, yet they will
On all these days of raw flesh take their fill
Rome against dressed flesh, on these days has Law;
She might do well to make some Acts against raw:
Against flesh in Chambers, not in Halls only;
For her their Fasts, prove Feasts of Venery.
How ever its no See Summa Angelica Tit. Jejunium. Ambrose se Elia and Jejunio.
Fast no flesh to eat,
And yet to feast on fish or better meat;
As Papists do, who on their Fast days feed
On choycest fish, and in their Cates exceed.
Which do their flesh more pamper, more inflame
Their lusts, than flesh, which they for this cause blame.

ROme Concilium Senonense An. 1528. Decreta fidei. c. 10. 8. Surius Tom. 4.
Council. p. 627. 729.
Marriage makes one of her Sacraments,
Yet that her Priests should marry disassents:
They are too Holy, wives to have; yet they
Keep Agrippa de Vanitate Scient. c. 63. Espenca us de continentia. l. 3 c. 4.
Grauamina Geimaniae.
Whores good store; Rome will not say them nay,
But force them to it by an annual rent:
She should make whoredom then a Sacrament
Not marriage, since to her Sacred Clergy
She does the last, not first, as ill, deny:
It is no Sacrament, but thing unclean*
Which does Surius. Council. Tom. 3. p. 158. Fox Acts and Monuments p. 924. John
Bales Acts of English Votaries. Gratian. Diss. 26, to 46.
unpriest, unhallow Sacred men:
This marriage does, not whoredom now in Rome,
Naught is her Sacrament then but whoredom.
On Romes extreme unction, and its being
APostles Mark. 6. 13. Jam. 5. 14
noynted sick men to restore
Them to their health again, only, wherefore
Does Rome then anoint them soly at the last,
To dye, when all hopes of health, Life are past?
Well may she this her Unction term, Extreme;
It Is extreme madness, folly or a dream:
She says a Concilium Senonc^se An. ^527. c. 10 Surius Tom. 4. p. (...) ^.
Summa (...). Tit. (...) 6.
Sacrament too; this I doubt
Since never done in the Church, but always out.
It is a Chamber, not Church Sacrament;
In this it does from all the rest dissent.
On Papists implicit Faith, and Images.
PApists have no faith: for they Rhemists annot. in Lu. 12. 11.
all believe
As does their Church; they hang all on her sleeve;
Their says is in their Church, not As all true faith is in the person
believing. 1 Pet. 3. 15. 2 Timothy 1. 5.
them; they then
Are Infidels, at least wise Faithless men:
There is no See D. Rainolds Theses; and M. Burtons Babble no Bethel.
true faith in their Church now left,
They then of all faith must needs be bereft:
We may then call each Papist Infidel,
Who has no faith, or what he cannot tell.
No wonder than if Papists so delight
In Images, they only walk by sight,
Not 2 Cor. 5. 7. c 4. 18.
Faith; and so must have before their eye
The Sea Tho. Waldensis Tom. 3. Tit. 19. c. 155. and Tit. 20. c. 158.
Pictures of Christ and the Deity;
Which cannot stand with Faith, the Heb. 11. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 7.
evidence
Of things not seen, not subject unto sense.
On Popish blind obedience.
PApists must Tollet. de Instruct. Sacerdotis. l. 4. c. 3. Cusanus. Exist. l:
2. and 6. See Sir Humfry Lynde his By-way-Sect. 22.
never once doubt what Priests have told:
Why tell they then Priests money, weigh their gold?
Belike their Doctrine's current, not their scale:
Their Cayne not Doctrine, needs both Weights and Tale.
If they may err, cheat, prove false in their coin;
Why may they not then in faith err, purloine?
[Which they than money less mind, and esteem;]
Its safe to try their faith by weight and Beam.
The Act. 17. 11 12.
Noble wise Bereans heretofore
By Scripture tried Paul's Doctrine, you much more
Then ought to 1 These. 5. 20. 1 John 4. 1 John 5. 39. 2 Cor. 13. 5.
prove your Priests by Scriptures test,
Since they are sinful, erring men at best.
On Popish Pilgrimages, Offerings, Kneelings Mary; and their Worshipping of her
and them.
What, See Tho. Waldensis: Tom. 3. Tit. 15. c. 134. to 138.
Pilgrimages still? Cross too and fro?
They err no doubt, who thus a wandering go;
Their way, light, guide are lost, yea faith, I doubt;
Perhaps they Straggle thus to find them out.
The Mat. 2. 12. 8.
wise Men which came to Jerusalem
Out of the East, when Christ at Bethlehem
Was newly borne, led by a wondrous Star,
Took all this Pains and Pilgrimage so far
To worship Christ alone; whom when they found,
Saw with his Mother Mary, to the ground
They Mat. 2. 11.
fall and worship Him, not her; present
Their gifts, Gold, Incense, Myrrh, with joint consent
To him alone, though then a Babe; but to
His Mother they no gifts give; nor yet do
Her any Worship that we read off: Why
Do foolish Papists then quite contrary
To these wise men, Tho. Waldensis. Tom 3. Tit. 15. c. 134. 135. 136. 137.
trotting in Pilgrimages
From place to place? to sundry Images
(Not Persons) of the Virgin; and before
Them fall down on their knees and See Tho. Beacon. Vol. 3. f. 232. 233. and
Tho. Waldensis. Tom. 3. Tit. 19. c. 150. 151. 152. 153. 154. to 159. Petr. de
Cabrera, in 3. part. Thom. quest. 25. Art. 3. Disp. 2. number. 15. 32. Lyndewood
Constit: prouinc. lib. 5. de Haeret. cap. Nullus.
them adore,
Present with gifts, pray, supplicate for Grace;
Whilst Christ in all this Worship has no place,
Or very little; no nor yet his Mother,
Whose Images adored are, and not her.
But they them for her Tho. Waldensis qua. 1. Catechismus. Romans part. 3. c. 2.
Sect. 14.
sake alone adore,
And Honor thus: What then? these heretofore
Did not her Person Worship, when they came
Into her Presence, nor fall to the same,
But Worshipped Christ alone; Why then give you
More to her Picture than was ever due,
Or done unto her Person anciently?
No doubt it is most gross Idolatry,
Point blanke against Gods Law: which does defend
Men Exodus 20. 4. 5. Den. 4. 15. to 21. c. 5. 8. 9. c. 16. 22. Levit. 26. 1
Psalm. 97. 7. Exodus 23. 24. Josh. 23. 7. Judge. 2. 12. 13. 14. 15. 1 King. 18. 19.
2 King. 17. 35. 36. 37. c. 19. 18. 2 Chr. 25. 24. Isa. 2. 8. 9. 20. c. 30. 22.
c. 31. 7. c. 44. 15 17. 18. 19. 20.
to; before an Image once to bend
Bow, fall, or Worship; though the Imagry
Be of no Creature, but the Deity.
If then none must Gods, Christ's Statues adore,
Nor make; much less may they bow, kneel before
The Virgins; or as Pilgrims to them go
To offer gifts; the Wisemen did not so;
And those who these Wise Men's steps will not trace,
No doubt are errant Fools, Sots, Void of grace;
We find a Mat. 8. 2. c. 9. 18. c. 28. 9. 17. Mar. 1. 40. c. 5. 6. 22. Luke 5.
12. c. 24. 52. Joh. 9. 38. Mat. 15. 25. c. 20. 20.
Leaper, Jairus, one borne blind,
A Man possessed, two of the female kind,
Both Mary's, the Disciples, worshipping
Christ, and to him falling, kneeling, praying;
But read not in the whole New Testament
Of any that in Pilgrimage once went
Unto the Who went in person to visit her cosen Elizabeth, Lu. 1. 39. to 45.
not Elizabeth to visit her.
Virgins Person, or that prayed,
Or made suite to her for grace, help, or Aid,
Or once adored, or worshipped her: What ground,
What show have Papists then whereon to found
Their worship of, their Offerings, Pilgrimages
And prayers too, before her Images;
Their Ladies-Masses, Psalters, Hours? truly
None that I know, but their Priests knavery;
Who to enrich themselves make fools by flocks
To Run, pray, Offer, to their Ladies Stocks:
Substract these offerings, then your Priests will say
You need not to her Statues run, kneel, pray,
As now you do without all warrant, ground;
Take heed lest God your Souls for this confound.

ROme holds for truth, that what Tho. Waldensis Tom. 3. Tit. 13. c. 120. 121.
f. 223. 224
touched Christ's Body
Must be adored with Divine Latry.
Hence, she adores the Cross, Nails, Spear with it
And makes them Saints (at least the Whom they style S. Longinus the soldier
that pierced Christ's side and S. Eloi, which was but the Nails. See Surius and
Ribadeneira in their lives of the Saints.
Spear) it is fit
They should add Judas to this Number, who
Has Mat. 26. 48. 49. Mar. 14. 43. 44. 45. Luk 22. 47. 48.
kissed his Lips, betrayed and killed him too,
And touched him oftener, hurt him more than Cross
Or Nails; his Saint-ship must not suffer loss;
Rome must adore him too; with all the train
That Mat. 26. 67. c. 27. 26. to 37. Joh. 19. 16. 18.
led Christ to the Cross when he was slain;
Each thorn that Crowned him, all his vestments; yea,
The Mat. 25. 2. to 10. Joh. 12. 14. 15.
Ass he Rode on, Earth he trod on, Sea
He Mat. 14. 25. Mar. 6. 48.
walked on, Mat. 8. 23. 24. c. 13. 2. c. 14. 13.
Ships wherein he sat, or Sailed,
All those his very Mar. 6. 56.
touch to cure prevailed.
If these be not Enough, Rome, to adore,
I will yet show thee something else in store,
Thou must adore his very Excrement;
It Was in him, from him, has a pleasant sent:
All other relics, had thou store of these,
Would lose their Honor, worship, dignities,
There is one yet left, thou do most adore,
The Devil, will you know the cause wherefore?
He Mar. 4. 1. to 12. Luke 41. to 10.
touched Christ's body too often times, when be
First tempted him, as we in Scripture see,
Proffring him all Earths Kingdoms, Glory, store
If he would fall down, and but him adore;
Christ then resus'd his bribe, and worship too
His Vicar takes it, will the Homage do
Not for the bribe; no, he does Rev. 9. 20.
him adore
Because he touched Christ's Body heretofore;
And that not with Dulia, but Latrie;
Yet Rome is guiltless of Idolatry.
On Romes Prayers to dead Saints, and
ALL Men believe Psalm. 65. 2.
God hears them when they Cry:
Where Saints do so, Peter Lombard sentent. l. 4. art. 25. see Scotus and
others on that place: and Gabr. Biel. in Can. Missae c. 31.
most doubt; some quite deny.
Its madness then to leave a certain way
And choose a doubtful, when we go to pray:
Saints cannot ^eare, Biel Ibidem Scotus. in 4. Sent. Did. 45. qu. 4.
unless God first reveal:
Why do they then from him to them appeal?
This done; they must rebound prayers back again,
Why do they trouble God and Saints in vain?
In fine; not they, but God alone must grant:
Why run they then to Saints for what they want?
Fly then to God alone who hears, grants all:
Its See Eccles. 9. 5. 6. Joh. 14. 20. 21. Isa. 8. 19. c. 38. 10. 11. c. 63.
16. Heb. 7. 23. 24. 25.
bootelesse, senseless, on dead Saints to call.
Rome Prays to, and for dead men; well she may;
Her prayers dead are, fit for none else but they.
The One hears them not; the other no good thereby
Reap; they that make them less; such Prayers then fly.
Prayers to, and for dead men, well agree;
They both dead, faithless, bootelesse, sinful be.

ROme thy Crosse-worship now is at a loss,
Not one of all thy Relics of Christ's Cross,
Or pieces of his vestments did once See (x) before. See T. Beacons Relics of
Rome.
touch
His body; for his Garments were no such.
But grant these did, yet sure not one of thy
Carved, painted Crosses had this dignity,
Unless thou say his Body's Nailed to all
Those Crosses before which thou now do fall:
Thou must then make as many Christ's or more,
As thou have Crosses, or not one adore.

STrange news! Romes God is now a See Scotus, Durandus, and others Schoolmen
in. 4. Sent. did. 25.
Looking-glass
(A brittle God) to which her Prayers pass
That Saints may there behold them; She does fear
Her Saints are deaf, and cannot prayers hear;
Nor see at all unless God turn a glass,
God is no God; Saints deaf, or Rome an Ass:
Glasses Dense bodies are, not spirits, Frail;
God is no God, but Glass, if Rome prevail.
She has no Glass, if God; if Glass, no God:
Thy Glass I doubt is now become thy rod.
No Glass, no prayer to Saints, their sight is gone;
A Glass, no God, but thy deaf Saints alone.
Prayers, were only 1 King. 8. 30. 34. 36. 39. 43. 45. Psalm. 4. 1. 3. Psa 17.
1. 6. Ps. 20. 1. 6. 7. Dan 9. 27. 18.
heard, not seen of old,
Now seen, not heard by Saints, as we are told,
Saints can do more than God; Psalm. 65. 2. Psalm. 84. 8. Joh. 11. 42.
he does but hear,
They see Romes Prayers, they sure have lost their ear,
Or else their Ears are all turned into Eye,
That they no Prayers now hear, but all epsy.
Nothing is seen but what is colored,
Corporal, painted, guilt or varnished:
Romes Orisons are such of late, therefore
Her Saints must only see, not hear them more:
But if they barely see them, and not bear,
They will not grant, nor answer them I fear;
Since God, men never answer nor reply
But when they hear, as well as see Men cry;
Yet say they did, I doubt Romes painted prayre
Which must be seen, will vanish in the Air,
Before it can ascended above the sky
Into this new Glass of the Trinity:
See then they frenzy, pray no more to Saints,
They cannot hear, grant, nor yet see thy Plaints:
Sounds are the proper Objects of the ear,
You cannot see, smell, taste, feel them, but hear
Them only; you may colors hear, as well
As see men's prayers; it is impossible
As all men know well by experience
For eyes to see the Objects of ears sense.
Romes Looking-glass then is a mere fancy,
And Saints sight of prayers in it, a gross Lie.

PRay in See 1 Cor. 14.
a tongue unknown, to God? to Saints?
Neither, I doubt, will hear or know your plaints.
Its fit that those who know not what they prayed,
Should not be understood, or else gaine-sayd.

ROme thou have in thee Idol and Latrie,
Conjoyne them, then, thou have Idolatry:
Deny me Idols; Idle, and Latrie
Thou must yield; join them, here is Idel-Latrie:
Idol, or Idle Worship, choose thee whether,
If neither like thee, take them both together.

PArdon great Rome, I hope it is no Treason,
To call thy Transpanation void of Reason:
Its Nonsense to the Eye, Hand, mouth which find
The substance of the Bread still left behind:
It is Non-reason, yea, 1 John 1. 2. 3. Joh. 20. 19. to 30. Luke 21. 35 to 45.
c. 1. 2. 1 Cor. 15. 1. to 10.
Non-scripture then,
Because Nonsense to all the Sense in Men;
Since naught is Reason, but what first is sense,
Its void of Reason than, because Nonsense.
If ought be lost in Transubstantiation,
It is Romes Senses only; and her Reason:
She cannot find what all else feel, taste, see,
And finds that there which is not cannot be.
If Sense may err, then (sweet Rome) tell me why
Thy Vicars, Priests, all else by sense do ^^y?
They know the Bread, Wine, which before them are
Then to be hallowed, such, and so declare
For Summa Angelica. Tit. Eucharistia. 1.
certain by their sense; yet presently
When sacred, against sense they it bread deny.
If sense were certain, at the first, to know
Them Bread and Wine; how does it senseless grow
Within a Moment? sure thy sense is fled,
Else thou must judge them still but Wine and Bread:
Thy meat thou tryest by sense; thy silver, gold
By sense are always felt, weighed, tried and told.
Thou ever sel'st, but never takes back Lead
For Gold: thy Sense here erres not, nor is dead.
If then Rome tries all else so sure by sense,
She must, her Host judge naught but bread from hence,
Since Christ himself has made the Joh. 20. 18. 20. 25. to 30. c. 1. 14. 15.
31. 32. 33. c. 19. 35. Luc. 1. 1. 24. 35. to 45. Act. 1. 3. 4. 10. 11. c. 10.
40. 41. 1 Cor. 15. 1. to 9. 2 Pet. 1. 16. 17. 18. 1 John 1. 1. 2.
sense only
The Proper judge of his humanity,
Birth, Miracles, Death, Resurrection,
The truth whereof are proved by sense alone.
On Popish Transubstantiation and Annihilation.
THis Mat. 26. 26.
is my Body, words of So the Papists generally now hold.
Consecration;
How can they change, or work Annihilation?
It is a Isa. 65. 8. Deuteronomy. 28. 2. Heb. 6. 8. Mal. 2. 1. 2. 2 Kings 22. 19. c.
2. 24. 25.
Curse, not Blessing, to destroy
That Bread which Christ would have us to enjoy;
Which if quite vanished in the Consecration,
These words must cause, or need breads Re-creation.
Or else be Idle: for if bread begone
Naught can be sacred, but the words alone.
Rome says, the Sea Summa Angelica. Tit. Eucharistia. And Bellarmin de
Eucharistia.
species are: I doubt the shade
Cannot be hallowed, if the Substances fade;
Else by this Doctrine, a mere Hypocrite
For show were sacred though his heart's not right;
And Priests who lose their substance by Sacration,
Must by their shadows work out their Salvation.
Yea, all Romes See Pontificale and Ceremoniale Romanum: and Tho. Beacons Vol.
3. f. 201. to 236.
Churches, Bells, Saints, shades must be
When hallowed they from substance were made free.
If Consecration make the Substance fade,
Romes, Popes, Priests, Churches, Altars, Saints are shade,
For they are Hallowed too, as well as Bread,
Their substance then as well as its is fled.
O Rome, recant this error, thou have made;
Else all thou have is nothing but a shade.
In all Romes Hallowings of Priests, Churches, days,
And other things their substances always
Remain without change or destruction:
Why then must Breads, Wines substances alone
In hallowing be destroyed or changed? ye
Can give no Reason why. In fine, tell me,
What Priests do Hallow? if you say Wine, Bread:
They then remain such, though thus hallowed:
If you say ought else, it is an Error, Lie,
Since you Confess, you Gratian de Consecrat. Did. 2 Summa Angelica Tit.
Eucharistia.
Hallow them only;
Now what you Hallow, that you take, eat, drink,
Its Bread, Wine, then; not true Christ, as you think
On Transubstantiation and the Popes Vicarship.
IS not the Pope Christ's Vicar here? Yes: why?
Christ's See Bellarmin de Romano Pontifice; and all others, who make this the
sole Reason and ground of the Papacy, and yet confess a real and Corporal
presence of Christ in the Sacrament.
absence upon earth still to supply:
Is not Christ present in the Sacrament,
In real manner? we have Romes consent.
Thy Pope his Vicar then cannot here be,
Since Christ's here present by Romes own decree.
Not in one Place or Country, as of old;
But in so many as cannot be told.
If his mere presence in one place; whilst here,
Banished all Vicars; thou have cause to fear
His omni-presence in each Church, Pix, Host,
Will quite exclud Popes from the wide earths Cost,
To be his Vicar no where but in Hell;
Since he in Heaven and Earth does always d well.
Pope Choose thy fate, to be his Vicar there,
Or else deny his Real presence here;
Else can thou be no Vicar General
On earth for him, no Vicar, Pope at all.
But if to save thy place, thou will deal fair,
Confess thou erdst; then See Sir Humfry Lyndes, By-way. Sect. 18. 21. 22.
Popes may err in chair:
And if in this, why not in more? in all?
Turn where thou will, Pope; here thou have a fall.
On the Real Presence, Pix and Crucifixe.
IS Real Presence true? Christ in the Pix?
What need his Pictures than, or Crucifix?
Pictures are useless when the person's by,
Either your Pictures or your Pixes lie:
Both cannot stand together, one must part:
You Lie but are unskilful in the Art.
Lies must keep quarter; if they chance to Jarre,
Or meet too near, they will the tale quite mar.
Ye must disclaim Christ's presence in the Pix,
Or else break down your lying Crucifix.
You were unwise to place these two so nigh,
That now they fight, and give each over the Lie.

THose who can each day change Lead into Gold,
Bread to Christ's Body changed, may safely hold.
The first, wants Scripture, but has reason store;
The last, a Mat. 26. 26.
show of Scripture and no more.
Gain proves the first, I think the latter too,
Should both prove falls, it would Popes quite undo.
Mean while they take the last by Scriptures show;
The first by sense, not text they will still know.

I Wonder not that See D. Featlies Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome.
Priests alone ingrosse
The Sacred Cup; they love the Pot to toss.
Should Laymen drink, Vines would not them suffice
With Wine, at least, the price thereof would rise.
By this device they have engrossed all
The Wine to them, and made the price to fall.
Men wondered much before, why Priests were drowned
So often in drink; the reason now is found.
On Popish Concomitancy and the Sacred
Bellarmin, Vasquez, Gretser, and others. Consil. Constant. Sess. 13. Surin^
Tom. 3. p. 821.
PRiests say, that Laickes Christ's Cup and Blood drink
In eating of dry Bread, and so they think.
Could they persuade them thus to drink at Table,
Drunkenness then would soon become a Fable
With them; and None but Joviall Priests be found
In wine or other liquors henceforth drowned:
And so they only of right should possess,
Both Pot, Cup, Barrel, Wine, and drunkenness.
But since they cannot make Fools, Children think
(Much less men, drunkards) that they wine, bear drink
In eating of bread, or meat at their Table,
They should disclaim this whimsie, as a Fable.
On Popish Concomitancy and half Communion.
THe Bellarmin, Cotton, Douly, and others.
Priests say Laymen When they the bread eat,
Do therein drink Christ's Blood; Bread's drink and Meat.
If Laickes, then Priest likewise: pray then, why
Do Priests not to themselves the Cup deny?
Belike they need the Wine their Hearts to cheer,
And wash their throats to chaunt their Massemore clear:
If so; they say, that they in Firmissime credendum est, and nullatesand nus du
bitandum, integrum Christi Corpus and Sanguinem, tam sub specie panis, quam sub
specie Vini, veraciter contineri. Council. Constant Sess. 13. (...). Tom. 3. p.
821.
drinking take
And eat Christ's body; let them then part stake.
Priests drink the Wine, Laickes eat all the bread,
Else Priests will twice, Laickes but once be fed.
On Praying to, and representing of God
What? go by Pictures both to God and Saint?
You deem both shadows then, or else but Paint.
If God or Saints be like to what you see,
They then no substance but mere shadows be.
And dare Rome Shadows for her Gods adore?
She Is then more sot than Pagans heretofore.
Are they not like, nor what their picture^^re,
Then are thy Pictures Jer. 10 8. 9. Isa. 41. 29. Hab 2. 18. Zec. 10. 2.
Lies, (Rome) and Popes err
More than the Painte^ for he only Paints
These lies and errors, but they make them Saints,
By consecrating them for sacred use;
For shame now see, detest this great abuse.

What? must we have no Images nor Stocks
To Worship? Council. Trident. Sess. 25. Surius. Tom. 4. p. 983.
Yes, you are not men, but blocks;
The Psalm. 115. 4. to 9. Psalm. 135. 15. to 19.
Idols, Makers, Worshippers are one;
All, at the best but Mettle, Blocks or stone:
Your whole Religion's blockish, or a Play;
You just like it; your Puppits this display.
On Popish Confessers and Pardons.
IF Men 1 John 1. 9. Psalm. 32. 5. Pro. 28. 13.
Confess to God, absolved they are;
What need they then their sins to Priests declare?
If to their Priests, not God, they may them Pain,
But not absolve: Confession then is Vain.
If Men repent, God Mich. 7. 28. 19. Psalm. 32. 1. 2. Act. 3. 19. Ps. 103. 8. to
14
Pardons instantly
Without a fee; why will they Pardons buy?
If they Luc. 13. 3. 5. Jer. 15. 1. 2. Ezech. 14. 13. 14. Numb. 23. 8. 20. 26.
repent not, Popes cannot forgive;
Their Pardon's void; why will they Money give?
On Popish Altars and Mass Priests.
NO Altars now? Priests then are quite undone
There were no Mass Priests till Altars begun;
Take them away, Mass, Massing-Priests must cease,
And Christ's rent Church shall live in greater peace:
No sweeter Sacrifice can men devise,
Than Priests and Altars both to Sacrifice.
On Popish Purgatory, and its fire.
ALL Papists hold a fiery Council. Trident. Sess. 25. Decretum de Purgatorio:
Conc. Tom. 4. p. 982. 983. and Bellarmin de Purgatorio.
Purgatory;
The Wise, to gain; the Fools to spend their Money:
The first, to fill; the last, to Purge the Purse:
The ones great blessing; but the others Curse.
If it has any fire, it is fed with Gold;
Substract but it, this fire will soon grow cold.

What need men pray to God, Angels or Saints
If Popes can pardon sinners, grant their Plaints? See Bellarmin de
Indulgentiis Summa Angelica, Tit. Indulgent^a.

They that can loose from Hell, and Men Heaven grant,
No doubt will give, if asked, all things they want.
Give did I say, if asked? No, they sell all,
Else none to God, Angels, or Saints would call
To give what Popes can grant; their sales to high,
Force most from them, to these to run and cry.
If Popes would give, as free as sell; they might
In gross all suites from these, be God's out right.

PApists have See Bellarmin. De Indulgentiis.
Merits store, themselves to save
And others too; yet not enough to crave
Pardon, or Alms from God, unless some See, Officium B. Mariae the several
Collects therein for Saints days, and Bellarmin De cultu Sanctorum.
Saints
(Not Christ) put up their undeserving plaints:
They who can find no Merit once to cry
For Alms, or Pardon; sure have none to buy
Heaven for themselves, or others: they must now
Their Prayers to Saints, or Merits disavow.
On Papists praying to Christ to save them
PApists to Christ Tu per Thoma sanguinem quem pro te impendit, fac nos Christ
scandere quo Thomas ascendit. In Officio heata Mariae secundum Vsum Sarum. Used
Anciently in most Churches as their Common Mass Book.
himself pray, them to save
By Beckets blood shed for him; an Arch-knave,
And ingrate See Antiquitates Ecclesiae Brit. and Godiwin in his life.
Traitor to his Sovereign:
Yet his blood's saving, Christ's, but shed in Vain;
Else they would pray to Christ to save them by
His own, not Beckets blood, yet it is only
To make them to ascend where Thomas went:
If to the Gallows, be their sole intent
Which he deserved, and some of them, its well;
Else they shall doubtless but ascend to hell
As Becket did; a place almost too good
For those who will be saved by his blood.
Its sign Rome Traitors loves, else would not she
By theirs, not Christ's blood, pray thus saved to be.
On Romes Freewill.
ROme says, See Bellarmin: deliber. Arbitrio.
she has Free Will to Good, as well
As unto Ill: why does she then excel
In naught but Ill, and no good thing pursue?
Her Practice proves this her Doctrine untrue.
Either do good, Rome, if thou have Free Will;
Else confess thou art Free to naught but Ill.
On Popish Priests shaven beards, and
ROmes Priests their See John Valerian de sacerdotum Barbis. Polydor. Virgil.
De Invenr. rerum, l. 4. c. 8. Gratian. Distinct. 33.
Beards shave, least Christ's blood should stay
Thereon: twere better quite to take away
The cup from them, which they from Laymen, take
For fear their Beards should of Christ's blood partake.
Let them his blood drink only in the bread,
No drop thereof can on their beards be shed.
They Durandus, Rationale Divinorum. l. 2. c. 1.
shave their Crowns like Baruch 6. 31. forbidden to Gods Priests Lev. 21. 5:
and 19. 27. Ezekiel. 44. 20.
Pagan Priests of old,
That so their heads may some proportion hold
With spheres above, and earth below, both round
Bald, hairelesse, yet is neither shaven Crowned:
When Spheres and Earth shave their Crounes, then Priests may
Shave theirs; till then, let them their shaving stay.
Rome Baronius and Spondanus An 57. Sect. 27. Paulus Windeck, de Theolog.
Juriscons. Locus. 38. p. 107. 108. 109. Summa Angelica. Tit. Faemina.
shaves her Nuns Crounes, heads too, though S. Paul
A shaven Crown, a woman's 1 Cor. 11. 5. 6. 14. 15. Isa. 3. 24. 1 Cor. 11. 14.
15. Ezech. 16. 7. Rev. 9. 8. Luc. 7. 28. 44.
shame does call,
Whose long Hair is her * Glory, Covering,
By Gods and Natures dictate; yea a thing
Which for them thus to shave and sheare away
Is shameful, sinful, both to disobey.
Whence some who used it, damned, accursed were
By two old Council. Gangrens. Can. 13. 17. Surius. Tom. 1. p. 373. Sosemeni
Hist. l. 3. c. 13. Nicetas. Thesaur: Orthodox. l. 5. c. 14. Bib. Pa^. Tom. 12.
part 1. p. 587. b. Summa Angelica and Resela. Tit. Faemina.
Councils, others to deter.
This shaving of their Nuns did thus begin;
Some Germans Wives Convicted of the Sin
Of Whoredom and adultery, were by
The Ancient custom of old Tacitus de Motibus Germanorum. c. 6. Justinian God.
l. 9. Tit. 9. Le^. 30. Ambros. ad Vitginem lapsam. c. 8. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 3.
f. 141. 155. 165. Niceph. Eccl. Hist. l. 17. c. 5. Surius. Council. Tom. 3. p.
40.
Germany
Shaved by their Husbands, to their Infamy,
And then shut Prisoners in a Nunnery;
Some Empresses, and Ladies of great Name
Thus used, for to abate and cloak this shame
Of shaving, turning Nuns and Abbesses,
Brought in Nuns shaving with them by degrees.
So long till none at last Nuns made be might
Till they were See Cornelius a Lapide in 1 Cor. 11, v. 5. 6.
shaven first in open sight.
No wonder then if Nuns prove See Onus Ecclesiae, c. 22. Sect. 12. Nicholaus
De Clemangis de Corrupto Eccl. statu. c. 23. Agrippa de Vanitate Scient. c. 63.
whores, they bear
This badge of whores, and by it hallowed are.
Did they respect their fame or chastity,
Shorn Crounes, the badge of Whores, they would defy,
And rather follow Gods, Paul's, Natures Lores
Than this invention of Notorious Whores:
The Pattern does the Practice so disgrace,
That honesty forbids it to take place
In any Females, in Nuns specially,
Who vow, profess naught else but Chastity.
On Popes Bulls and doubting of Salvation.
POpes Heaven to Men by such firm See Officium B. Mariae secundum usum Sarum.
Tho. Beacon. Vol 3. f. 200. 201.
Bulls intaile,
That none must doubt but that they will avail,
And yet they deem Salvations Certainty
A Council. Trident: Sess. 6. c. 9. 12. 13. 14. 15. Surius. Tom. 4. p. 911. 912.
914.
grand presumption, if not Heresy.
See how they damn themselves; if to believe
Be such a Crime, what is it then to give
Assurance of Salvation? Give? I Lie,
Alas they sell it, and this See Summa Angelica; Tit. Simonia.
Symony
Makes void their Sales; they then to doubt have cause,
Since these Sales void are by all kind of Laws;
Rome now must hold, and give Heavens certainety
Hence forth; else none but fools her Bulls will buy.

PApists have several Saints for each S. George for England, S. Denis for
France, S. Patricke for Ireland. S Andrew for Scotland, S. Iago for Spain, S.
Gregory for students, S. Luke for Painters, Cosmus and Damian for Philosophers,
S. Katherine for Spinners, S. Crispin for Shoomakers, S. Sebastian for the
Plague, S. Valentine for the falling sickness, Pe tronella for Agues, S.
Apollonia for the rooth-ach, S. Anthony for Pigges, Saint Gallows for Geese,
S. Wencelaus for Sheep, S. Pelagius for Oxen, etc. See Surius R^badeneira and
others in the lives of the Saints.
Country,
Profession, sickness, and Infirmity
In Man or Beasts; to whom for help they call,
God is no God, but these who guard, help all;
To whose bands, guidance, care, and Custody,
They still commit their whole Soul, Sprite, Body,
Wits, Senses, Members, Thoughts, Words, Actions, Ways
For Ever; so Romes Church in Officium bearae Mariae with other Hours and
Manuals and M^^alls.
Masse-bookes prays.
If they say, these are but Gods Substitutes;
They must them Prove, that God these Saints deputes
To these distinct Climes, trades, beasts, maladies
Which they assign them: this their great Rabbis,
Popes, Doctors, Monks, and Jesuits cannot do;
These Patrons then are false; they fools, sots, to
Rely upon, pray to them; God alone
Make then your Patron, since these Saints are none.
Rome has See Tho. Beacons Relique^ of Romans
false Relics store, but this surely
Is a true Relic of Idolatry,
And sottish Pagans, who had 1 King 20. 23. 2^. 2 King 1^. 29. 30. 3^ c. 18.
33. 34. 35.
Gods for all
Climes, Trades, Diseases which Men, beasts, befall.
Rome Plays the Sea Ornerod his Pagano-papismus: and Francis de Croy his
threefold Conformity.
Pagan in most things, but here
That she turns Pagan, is to all most clear.
On Works of Supererogation.
SOme Popish Monks, Summa Angelica Tit. Indulgentia Sect. 9.
Priests do more than they need,
And think this is a Meritorious deed:
True, they do all besides, against Gods will,
Not it; I fear the Merit then is Ill.
Heaven, say they; Hell, I; else there is no hell
If men may merit Heaven by not doing well.
On Papists good Works to Merit Salvation.
PApists dream to be saved by See Bellarmin De Justificatione; and Council.
Trident. Sess. 6 c. De Justificatione.
works alone:
They must do so, for true faith they have none.
But since their good works from no good says flow
No doubt at last they will no good works grow.
On Popish Merits.
GOd, men's good works of Psalm. 62. 12. Neh. 13. 22. 2 Timothy 1. 15. 18. Tit. 3.
5. Jude 21. Romans 11. 35. 36. Psalm. 66. 12. Rev. 20. 13.
Mercy, not of debt
Or right rewards: This Papists quite forget
2 Cor. 5. 20.
According to, not for their works; of Grace
And promise only; debt has here no place.
Hence Saints in Scripture, still for Neh. 13. 22. Exodus 33. 19. c. 34. 7. 2 Chronicles 1. 8. Ps. 18. 50. Ps. 23. 6. Ps. 32. 10. 10 Ps. 33. 18. 22. Ps. 33. 18.
22. Ps. 52. 8. Ps 57. 3. 1^. Ps. 61. 7.
mercy call
Not wages, Merits they knew not at all.
If Rome has Merits, works, Ps. 66. 20. Psalm. 85. 7. 10. Ps. 89 2 14. Psa.
98. 3. Psalm. 102. 13. Psalm. 103. 8. 11. 17. Psa 130. 3. 4. 7. Psalm. 31. 16.
Isa. 54. 7. 8. 10. Lam. 3. 22. 23. 32. Dan. 9 18. 19. Rom 9. 15. 16. 23. c. 11.
30. 31. 32. Luc. 1. 50. 54. 72. 78. Ga. 6. 16
and trust thereto,
I doubt at last they will her quite undo.
Rome by her faith will not be justified:
Good reason, its not true, but false if tried;
Her works, or naught, must then her justify;
But these prove ill, not good, if God them try:
Since then her Faith, works, both prove Ill, when tried,
Rome must be damned by them, not justified.

IF men confess to God, will that suffice?
No: tell me why? Priests should not then be wise:
Laymen should then have Secrets, and lose pains
Imposed for sins confessed, Priests chiefest gains.
Priests now know all men's secrets, none Priests know;
And by enjoined Penance, wealthy grow.
Confess and so be hanged said once of old;
By Confess and Absolved, seems now controlled.
Not so, both stand well, since Priests absolution,
Makes men neglect Gods, to their just confusion.
At leastwise hangs them in Priests halters, pains;
Who torture, rack them, to improve their gains.
When Priests their own faults See Jam. 5. 16.
first confess, and mend,
They to confession may all others send.

Why has Rome See Officium B. Mariae, and the Popish Letanies of the Saints.
store of Saints her prayers to hear?
Is God deaf to them? or else does she fear,
So faithless, heartlesse, dead, ill, are here plaints,
They are not fit for God, but for her Saints?
Or does she try her patience thus to pray
To Saints that cannot hear or else delay
To hear or grant! hence often her cause is marred
Before her prayers by her dead Saints are heard;
And we who go to God immediately,
Are heard and answered ere Saints hear her cry.
On Popish Monks, Players, Prayers, and
OUr Church has some who work not, but still play:
Romes more, who work not, but yet always pray:
Prayer's no work with Rome to merit by
Unless with Witness the Prayers and Masses of Priests and Monks to free
Souls out of Purgatory, which are daily bought and sold.
gold you will her prayers still buy:
Her Prayers therefore are Players, and do play
Not work, but when men wage them for to pray.
How can they merit then by works, who play
Still, and no work do for which God can pay?
Men over-pay them for their prayers still here,
God than cannot owe, pay them any arreare:
They should be double paid if God and men
Should both reward them; where is their merit then?
On Romes taking away the Scripture,
LAickes read Scripture? fie, it is not fit;
Rich Rome might soon lose all her wealth by it:
Her Popes and Canons then must both dismount;
Her Faith, Works, Pardons, be of no account,
Her Monks, Nuns, Friars, Abbots, Prelates then
Would soon be banished and cast out by men.
Better the people lose their soul, heaven, all,
Than Romes Popes, Prelates, Monks, catch such a fall.
Christ Joh. 5. 39. Act. 17. 11. Ps. 1. 2. 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16. 17. Col. 3. 16. 2
Pet. 1. 19. 20 Deuteronomy. 6. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. c. 11 18. 19. 20. 21. c. 17 18. 19. 20.
often commands all, Scripture day and night
To search, read, meditate, that so they might
Obtain Eternal Life: The Sea Index Librorum Prohibitorum and the Rhemists on
1 Cor 14.
Pope says nay,
And from Laymen the Scripture takes away:
He is not here true vicar unto Christ,
But Antichristian, and true Antichrist.
The Sea al their M^^all^* Catechismes, Hours and Manuals wherein it is omitted
and council. Constant. S^^s. 13. Surius Tom. 3. p. ^21.
Second Commandment, Cup, and Scripture
Popes steal from people too: Thieves are they sure
Of highest rank: in that they stolen have
What Father, Some, and holy Ghost men gave;
For robbing Men and the whole Trinity:
They then deserve Laws, deaths eternity
I wonder Papists dare their souls once trust
With these Arch-theeves, to God, men so unjust:
They will not trust thieves with their coin, I fear
Their Souls than Money are to them less dear.

Mass is a wonder; its a See Bellarmin de Sacrificio Missae. ^ Yea S. Maclou a
Popish Same raised a beast from death whom the Servant of a covetous Master had
slain, at the Servants request. Ribadeneira, fleurs des vies des Saints part
2 p 413.
Sacrifice
For quick and dead; and for all maladies
In Man or Beast, a rare receipt and cure;
A sick Man, Beast, Ass, Ox, Cow, Hog, is sure
To be releast from any Malady,
If you a Mass for them, of Priests will buy:
Physicians, Farriers will be now undone,
All sickemen, beasts to Priests for cure will run,
They need no other Physic but a Mass,
Which you may Pier de Moulin Bouclier de Foy, a Geneve 1635. p. 612.
buy for Ox, Cow, Horse, Hog, Ass,
Or any Creature else, all which must pay
Priests well, for Gratis they will no Mass say.
On the Popes two Swords.
POpes have See Abbas Vspergensis p. 3. 3. 344. and Platina and Balaeus in
Boniface the 8. his life.
two swords, to smite, one hook to keep,
No wonder they more slay than feed Christ's sheep.
On the Popes two Keys.
POpes, See Bellarmin de Romano Pontifice.
hold, they keep the Keys of Heaven and Hell;
Some do oppose: I like it very well,
Since they lock Heavens strait gate fast up to all
Their flock, but open Hells wide, wherein they fall.
On kissing the Popes feet.
OTher folks Lips are kissed, only Jean Crespin, L'estat de ^eglise, p. 80.
Popes feet:
Their breath is Poison, but their Shoe is sweet;
Psa. 140. 3. Rom 3. 1^.
Under their lips does Addars poison lie,
They therefore will have none their lips come nigh.
On the Pope being Peter's Successor.
SOme say See Platina and Onuphrius de vitis Pontificum: and Bellarmin de
Romano Pontifice.
that Popes succeed to Peter, I
Confess it, both their Master Christ deny.
Peter but Mat. 26. 34. 64. to 75.
thrice: They often, and so preceed
In sin; Him, they in Place, not Grace Succeed.
But are they Peter's Successors alone?
They Are See O^u^ Ecclesiae and Nich. de Clemangis, de corrupto Ecclstatu.
Judas, Simons too, its ten to one.

POpes See Bellarmin de Pontifi. Romano.
cannot Err, in Peter's chair whilst set;
It Is true, for sure, They nere once sat there yet:
No wonder then if they naught else but Err,
Since they in his un-erring chair sat never.

ALL Romans 4. 15
Error is from Rule; Popes will have none,
To judge, do, live by, but See Morney his Mystery of Iniquity. p. 454. 455.
themselves alone:
They cannot then once err, because not stray
Quite from themselves, unto Gods Rules and way.

THe Bellarmin de Pontif. Romano.
Pope as man, not Pope, may sin and Err:
Why does not then the Pope the Man deter
From sin and Error? Can he not this do?
The Man the Pope may make sin, and err too:
And if the Man for sin and Error go
To Hell, I fear the Pope too must do so.

POpes cannot err; yet they may Council. Trident. Sess. ^. can. 16. 23.
totally
Away from Grace fall, yea and finally,
By Romes own Doctrine; which they often times do,
To prove her Doctrine by their practice true.
It is no error thus to fall from grace,
Since Popes herein Romes doctrines footsteps trace.
I wonder not at Romes Apostasy,
Her practice else her Doctrine would belie:
Now both accord, and she falls quite away
From faith, grace, truth, that none once question may,
Or doubt her Doctrine, which was questionable;
But thus confirmed, it must be true and stable.
On the Popes Pardons, and mortal sins.
MAy men See Ta^a Camera.
buy Pardons, and for mortal sins?
Pardons are truly venial then, not sins:
But yet at Rome alone, for God, Kings, all
But Popes, hold Pardons Romans 3. 24. c. 8. 32. Mich. 7. 18.
free, not venial.
On the Popes being Christ's Vicar General upon Earth.
THe Pope on Earth's Christ's Vicar General,
He Is nothing then; Christ, Joh. 18. 36.
here had naught at all:
But be he something, it is in Earth, or Hell,
Not Heaven: Christ lets no Vicar never him dwell:
Who being still Mat. 28. 20. Act. 3. 21.
present both in Heaven and here,
Popes are his Vicars but in Hell I fear.

THe Popes do Pardon sins; I think so too;
All, which men for them; None, they against them do.
All against God; against themselves, not one.
What can, is not, what cannot they, is done.

POpes are Bellarmin, de Romans Pontifice.
Supreme heads of the Church by due,
But of the false Church only, not the True.
The true Church has but one head, Ephesians. 1. 22. c. 4. 15. c. 5. 23. Col. 1.
18. c. 2. 10. 19. 1 Pet. 2. 7. 1 Cor. 11. 3.
Jesus Christ:
The false but one, the Pope, true Antichrist.

AT Rome all is Venial, some say; I say no;
Her Sins, and Curses doubtless are not so:
The first are mortal; last not sold, but free
Bestowed, all is not venial Rome in thee.

Cardinals Council. Constantiense. Sess. 23. Surius
hinges are; the Church the door
Which hanges on them: Tom. 4. p. 67. Cardinales sicut nomine, ita re ipsa
Cardines sunt, super quos ostia, universal^^ versentur and sustententur
Ecclesiae.
O Pope thy fate deplore;
If the Church on them, only hanged be,
Naught but an Halter's left by them for thee;
Thou may go bang thy self therewith; for they,
Not thou, the Church uphold, support, and stay.
On the Popes being Christ's Vicar.
IF Popes Christ's Vicars be, his flock to teach,
Why do they not like him, than feed and Mat. 4. 17. c. 11. 1. Mar. 1. 14. 38.
59. c. 2. 1. Luke 8. 1. c. 21. 37. 38. Joh. 8. 2. Luc. 22. 53.
preach?
They are his Vicars, but to sheare his sheep;
When they should feed them, they are fast asleep.
Christ but one Vicar can have here; He many,
To do his Office; he then is not any.
Either the Pope must do his work alone,
Or if by Vicar, he must make but one:
Else Christ may chance to make more Vicars too
By his example, and so him undo,
Unless he tie Christ's hands from making any,
Because himself before had made too many.
On the Popes Vicarship and Vicars.
A Vicar by the Summa Angelica. Vicarius Sect. 8.
Law can never make
Another Vicar: see how Popes mistake,
Who make so many Vicars of each kind,
In every Country were they profit find,
Either this Law is Error, or these be
No Vicars, but mere Factors for Romes See.
True, for they only his rents help get in;
He, not they keep them, else it were a sin:
They are Christ's rents, tithes, Peter's patrimony;
Popes must be still sole Vicars of the money:
Twere Sacrilege, at least, for to assign
Another Vicar to keep Peter's Coin.

POpes need no Platina de vitis Pontif. in Joan, 8. See Cook his Pope Ioane,
and Morney his Mystery of Iniquity. p. 166. 169. 170.
Porphry chair now for to try
If they be males or not; they it descry
To all the world beforehand by the store
Of Balaeus and others in vita Sixti, 41. Morney his Mystery of Iniqu. p. 603.
to 608. 591.
Bastards they beget. It then were more
Fit now, their Testicles to cut, than grope,
For fear a Leacher, not a Whore, turn Pope.

CHrist wore one Mat. 27. 29. Joh. 19. 2. 3.
Crown of Thorns, Popes three of gold;
No wonder then that Christ's by them controlled.
Christ Mat. 21. 2. to 12. Joh. 12. 14. 15. 16.
rode but once, and that upon an Ass;
Popes ever ride and often on See Caere moniale and Pontificale Romanum.
Kings backs pass
The streets: No wonder, they make Christ their Page
He never rode in such state, Equipage.
Popes now no Vicars, but Lords Paramount
Are, since they Kings, and Christ so far surmount.
Peter's poverty and the Popes great wealth and on the Popes being Peter's
Successors.
PEter Act. 3. 6: Mat. 17. 27.
no Gold nor Silver had, or wore:
His Successors both Bernard. De Consid. ad Eugenium, and ad Gulielmum Abbatem
Apologia.
have, and wear great store.
The Church, poor then, had Peter a poor head;
She Is now grown rich, great, since that Peter's dead.
Her head must then grow rich, great, like her body;
Else 'twere unseemely, and he were a Noddy:
Peter had no such Court, State, Table, train
As Popes; who need much gold them to maintain:
Peter was but a fisher, not a Pope,
They Popes, nay See Bellarmin de Romano Pontif and D. Crakanthorp, of the
Popes temporal Monarchy. c. 1 and 2.
Monarchs of the world: I hope
They must have gold store to support their State,
They cannot now live at S. Peter's rate.
It were no less in Popes than Platina in the life of Paul the 2. writes that
in a Village not far from Rome diverse men and women were apprehended and
condemned for heretics by this Pope, for holding, that of all those who
succeeded S. Peter none was any true Vicar of Christ but those who imitated his
poverty.
Heresy.
To succeed Peter in his poverty;
Whose very name they scorn, since none of all
The Popes [who See Platina Onuphrius, Bale, and Crespin, in vitis Pontificium.
change their names] did ever call
Himself by this name Peter, but still by
Some other name, as John, Paul, Gregory,
And such like, which in all great doubt may breed,
That Popes, who Peter never will succeed
In name, do less in Office, Grace, Chair, State
Succeed him: then succession's out of date:
Till Popes resemble Peter more: say I,
That they succeed him, is an arrant lie.
On Popes Prohibiting Priests from marriage.
PRiests are the seed of Adam, Noah; why
Should they not then have wives to multiply
And store the earth; as well as other men,
As Genesis 1. 28. c. 9. 1. c. 8. 17.
God commands? From See D. Halls Honor of the married Clergy: John Bales Acts
of English Votaries.
Adams days till ten
Hundred years after Christ, or more, Priests were
Still free to Marry, and did not forbear
But use the marriage bed: why do Popes now
Priests marriage Gratian. Distinct 81. Summa Angelica Matrimonium, Sect 4.
quite condemn, and disallow?
Which ^oth before, under the Levit 21. 7. 9 13. 14 15. Ezra 10. 18. to 44.
Law, Gospel,
Was used by, allowed to Priests as well
As any others; yea God did prescribe
Wives, with their qualities, to Levies Tribe.
S. Paul writes, Heb. 13. 4.
Marriage is honorable
In all men; Popes say it is Gratian. Distinct 27 to 35. 81.
detestable
In Priests; belike Romes Priests are beasts, not men
For if they were, by Paul's rule marriage then
To them were lawful, honorable, all
Priests under his all men, if men, must fall.
We read that Mat 8. 14. Mar. 1. 30. 32. 1 Cor 9. 5. Phi. 4. 3. Act. 21. 8. 9.
Peter, Philip, James, Paul, were
Al married; why should Priests then wives forbear,
When these Apostles; yea, See Bishop Halls honor of the married Clergy, and
M. Fox Acts and Monuments Vol. 2 p. 399. and 463. etc. Edit Ult. Gratian.
Distinct. 38. 35. 32. 33. 34.
some Popes of old
And godly Bishops did wives wed and hold?
Which they no doubt would not have done, if it
Had been unlawful, or for Priests unfit.
To put this out of doubt, we find that Paul
Himself among the qualities which all
Bishops and Deacons, ought to have, says 1 Timothy 3. 2 3. 4. 5. 11. 12. Tit. 1 6.
they
The husbands of one wife must be; none may
This text control, found in Popes Gratian Distinct. 26.
Canon Laws,
Which to this day retain this very clause;
Priests, Bishops, Deacons then may lawfully
Keep wives; this clause else were a nullity,
Vain, Idle, nay repugnant, and S. Paul
Mistaken in prescribing it to all
Bishops, and Deacons, midst those qualities
Which simply needful are. If Rome denies
This meant of Wives enjoyed actually
By Bishops, Deacons, whilst such; certainly
S. Paul confutes her by prescribing there
1 Timothy 11. Tit. 1. 6.
What Wives they ought to abuse, how they must bear
Themselves, and rule their Children well; else they
Gods Church unfitting were to rule and sway:
All which were needless, vain; if meant of those
Not yet in Orders as Rome does it gloss.
Besides, Paul speaks of such as A Bishop must be blameless, the husband of
one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior; and 1 Timothy 3. 2. 3. 4. Tit. 1. 6.
7. 8. 9. All in the present, nor preter perfect tense or future.
actually
Are Priests or Deacons, and not futurely
To be so; and this quality, to be
The Husband of one wife, is in degree
And tence the same with the A Bishop must be blameless, the husband of one
wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior; and 1 Timothy 3. 2. 3. 4. Tit. 1. 6. 7.
8. 9. All in the present, nor preter perfect tense or future.
rest specified
There, which to Priests in act must be applied
In the present not Preterperfect Tense:
Priests marriage then must needs be lawful hence.
In fine, S. Paul avers, that 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2. 3.
marriage
And meats, men to forbid in this last age,
[Both which Romes Popes doe] is Apostasy
From faith, mere devils doctrine, and a Lie.
Whence I conclude, that Popes have fallen away
From faith, and that Lies, devils doctrines sway
And rule them now, since they Priests marriage,
Free use of meats forbid, in this last age;
Gratian. Distinct. 34.
Permitting Priests whores, Gratian. Did. 26. to 35.
not wives; which do make
Them quite unfit Orders to keep or take,
Whereas gross whoredom and Adultery
From Orders none thrust out, nor yet put by;
Which sins of Priests, should See Cassandri Consultatio. Artic. 23. p. 987.
etc.
cause the Roman whore
The Lawful use of marriage to restore.
We read, the Mat. Westminster, Mat. Paris, Holinshed, Speed, and others in
the life of H. the 1. An. 1125. Henry Huntingdon, l. 7. p. 32. Hovenden. Annal.
pars 1. p. 478. Grafton, p. 40. Polychron. l. 7. c. 16.
selfsame day the marriage bed
Was first to English Priests prohibited,
In Council, by John Crema, Legate to
The Pope, by whose Command he this did do,
That he himself at night in bed was took
By Priests, lying with a whore, and so forsook
And fled the Realm with public shame, whereby
The Priests their wives retained quietly
Long after: Were Romes Popes, Priests narrowly
Watch't, men them with whores might too often epsy;
Yea, its a Common trade now, and no news
At Rome, for Agrippa de vanitate Scient. c. 64. Wesselus, Tract de Indulgentis
Papalibus Gravanina Germaniae.
Priests to baunt the public stews,
Which Popes maintain, and have in Italy
Dispensed with Priests to commit Sodomie
In the hot months, with boys and Ganymedes;
That is not good, but ill which such fruits breeds;
Which I forbear at large to specify,
Since Nic. de Clemangis de Corrupto Ecclesiaestatu Espencaeus de Continentia
and in Titum. c. 1. 2. Alvares Pela gius de planctu Ecclesiae, Onus Ecclesiae.
Bernardi concio in Concilio Rhemensi. Cassand^ Consultatio. Artic. 2^ p. 987.
988 etc.
Romish writers, fully them descry,
Wishing that Popes, Priests marriage would restore,
The want whereof has made their Church a whore.
There is no Pia-Mater in Popes brain
Who Priests from marriage, against Gods Word restrain,
And them quite bar from this their Sacrament,
Yet give them free leave, whores, stews to frequent.

PRotestants damned are, say See the Book called Charity Mistaken.
Papists; Why?
Because they to one Savior, Christ, all fly.
Few or none damned are in Romes Church if any,
Since she besides Christ, Saviors has full many.
If Mat. 7. 14. c. 20. 16. c. 22. 14. Luc. 13. 23. 24.
few be saved, as the Scriptures say,
One Savior is enough to whom to pray;
Who seldom used in Romes Church, which him wants
Not, may find leisure to save Protestants.
Lest this prove true, Romes Church may now do well,
All Saviors, but Christ only, to expel.

NO wonder if all Romes flock saved be,
They have ten thousand Saviors more than we;
So many that to keep them from disorder,
She marshalls some into a distinct Order,
Graced with the saving name of Jesuits,
They are such active good, sweet, saving Sprits,
Saviors no doubt to Romes Church, Popes, and Crown,
Which their plots, wits, pens keep from tumbling down.
It Is not their goodness, virtue, grace or merits
That make them Saviors, but their treasons, wits;
Saviors to Popes; could Kings and States say so,
They Jesuits were in Name and Nature too.
But whilst their Treasons, plots, against these them shame,
They are not such in truth, deed, but in name:
Nay mere Antipodes to this name, they
It into Judasites now alter may,
Or Jebusites, since they disturb, annoy
Al States, Kings, Churches, and would them destroy.
On no Salvation out of the Church of
ROme says See Bellarin, de ecclesia: and Charity Mistaken.
Out of her Church none saved be,
And that no Church is Catholic but she.
It Is pride and gain that make her thus to boast,
Since she faith and Salvation both has lost.
The Patriarchs, Prophets, holy Jews of old,
Christ, his Apostles, were not of Romes fold;
Yet were all saved: Greeks, with sundry more
Since them were, and are saved without the whore
Of Romes precincts; whose whoredoms, vices are
Now Catholic, her faith, grace none, or rare.
She then had need prevent her own damnation,
Not others; doubt her own, not our Salvation.
Apocrypha Canonical, and Canonical Scripture less than Apocryphal, and
their blasphemies against it, and Popes power over it.
PApists (against the Sea Sir Humfrey Lyndes By-way, Sect. 5. 6. and Jean
Mestrezat Traicte de (...) escriture Sancte, a Geneve, 1633.
joint consent of all
Fathers) Apocrypha, Canonical
Make, and all Protestants revile, condemn,
For not consenting in this point with them.
Mean time [o wonder] that which both confess
To be true Scripture Canon, they far less
Esteem, than what is mere Apocryphal,
And deem no Scripture Text Canonical;
Stiling Gods sacred book, ^indanus l 2. Strom c. 2. Bellarmin de verbo Dei.
l. 3. c. 8. 9. Costeri Enchir. c. 1. Salmeron Prolegom. 1. Stapleton l. 2. De
Author. S. Scrip. Vasquez Tom. 3. part. 3. Disp^^. 216. Andrad^^s Defens. Conc.
l. Tridon. l. 2. Declaration du Per^ Basil. p. 77. 78. 79. P^gghius Hierar. l.
1 c. 1.
a leaden sword,
A nose of wax, a dead letter or word,
A leaden Parchment Rule; no Judge, rule, guide
Of faith, by which all doctrines must be tried.
They write, it has its force, authority,
Sense, exposition from the Pope only,
Who can, may, does it change, control, annual,
Repeal, dispense against it, by his Bull.
If this be true, Rome no Canonical
Text grants; but makes all mere Apocryphal:
And so unchurcheth, yea quite overturnes
Her self, whilst she against Gods Word thus spurns
On Ephesians. 2. 20. 21. Mat. 16. 18
which all Christian Churches built, must fall,
If Scripture cease to be Canonical.
O Rome recant thy fearful blasphemy
Against Gods Word, which does for vengeance cry
Against thee; and shall Joh. 21. 48. Romans 2. 16. Rev. 22. 18. 19.
judge thee at the last,
And into Hell, without repentance cast.
On the two Arch-Patriarchs of Popish Francis and S. Dominicke.
I Hope I may without offense, recite
What Papists of their great S. Francis write,
The father of their Friars Minorites,
In Printed Bartholmeus de Pisa Conformitatum lib. approved at Assise by a
General Chapter of the Franciscans, Aug. 2. 1389. as containing nothing in it
worthy correction, and approved by three Popes fol. 3. 4. 5. 13. 14. 17. 24.
39. 66. 78. 144. 149. 294 250. 254. 247. Antonini Chron. Tit. 24. c. 1. 2.
Vincentius Beluacensis Speculum Historiae l 3. c. 97. Ribadencira Fleurs des
vies des Saints part. 2. p 281 etc See Philip Mornay his Mystery of Iniquity
London 1612 page 34^ 348
Books, made by his favorites.
They write, that he John Baptist did surpass
In four respects: For first, John Baptist was
But Christ's forerunner, Francis [as they say]
Both his forerunner to prepare his way,
And standard bearer too: John received
The Word of Penance, but from Christ our head;
Francis, from Christ and the Pope, which is more:
John, but the Bridegroomes friend was, heretofore,
Francis was like the Bridegroom: John, on high,
Is but exalted to the Company
Of Seraphins, where Francis on the throne
Whence Lucifer was cast down, sits alone.
They write, that Francis in worth far excels
All the Apostles, and that now he dwells
In Heaven in Christ's own bosom, More: That he
Was here a Jesus typically: yea
A figurative Savior: who upon
His body received in a Vision
The selfsame wounds that Christ did, yea suffered
The selfsame pains: and thereby renewed
Christ's passion in him, for to save mankind:
Of which the Prophet David does men mind
Who says. Psalm. 3. 5. Heb 2. 7. 9.
Thou have with glory and honor
Him Crowned, and thou have him also set over
The works of thine own hands; of whom did write
The Prophet thus, Isa. 42. 6. c. 49. 6. Luc. 2. 32. Act. 13. 47.
Thou gave him a light
Unto the Gentiles Joh. 8. 56.
whose day Abraham
Saw, and rejoiced for to see the same.
[All meant of Christ alone.] Besides they write,
That what the Gospel says of Christ, of right
May be sung of him, Joh. 3. 35. Mat. 11. 27.
All things unto me
Are given of my Father; whence we see
The Scripture of him faith: Heb. 1. 5.
A Father I
Will be to him; and he again shall my
Son be; [both meant of Christ.] They add, that all
The virtues of the Saints, both great and small,
In the Old and New Testament, do rest
United and conjoined in his breast.
That by his merits he deserved to be
The Son of God, and that Leo did see
A roll descend from heaven, which rested on
His head, containing this Inscription:
This man, is the grace of God, conformable
Wholly to Christ in all things, the Example
Of all perfection; deified in
The Glory of God the Father, and now in
The glory of the Saints united, to
God, whereby he precedes and does out-goe
All living Creatures, is made one and the
Same spirit with God: Nay, they aver, that he
Deserves with God to be the Advocate
Of the who^e Militant Church on earth: that
Christ's Passion is in him renu'd, for the
Salvation of all Mankind: So as he
By one Mass only has God pacified
For all the world: This must not be denied.
They add; that all are saved certainly
Who in S. Francis Order, Rule shall dye.
For Francis prayed and obtained likewise
From God, that none who in his Order dies
Should dye an evil death [which is far Mat. 7. 21. 22. 23. c. 22. 14.
more
Than Christ obtained from God heretofore
For all who him profess:] That the same grace
Descends on him, who shall but embrace
His Order of Religion, as does fall
On him that is baptized. Is this all?
No: they say further, the mere putting on
Of Francis hood gives full remission
Of sins, and frees from their guilt, punishment:
That the bare resolution and intent
To take his Order, though not put inure,
Is a new Baptism, does pardon procure.
They teach; that Christ has but prayed, but Francis
Has impetrated or obtained. All this
(With sundry such like fearful Blasphemies)
Appears in the Book of Conformities
Presented to the Chapter General
Of Cordiliers, and there approved by all
With this express clause; We have carefully
Searched, perused, examined thoroughly
This book, and we have nothing in it found
Worthy Correction; all there is so sound
That they it term, a Golden book [So prise
They their S. Francis, and these Blasphemies]
Which Gregory the ninth, Pope Alexander
The fifth, Nichlas the third [a whoremaster]
Sent unto all the faithful; charging all
S. Francis wounds to credit, and not call
Them into doubt, on pain of Heresy:
And Benedict the twelfth, lest this gross lie
Should be forgotten, did enjoyne all men
Yearly to keep that day as Holy, when
S. Francis these forged wounds received. After,
The Hill Averna by Pope Alexander
The fourth his Bull, was took into the Sea
Of Romes protection, because these scar's he
Thereon received; which sundry deem a ly,
And damn for a notorious Blasphemy.
Not to relate, how Ribadeniera Fleurs des vies des Saints part. 2. p. 290.
Bonaventure in his Chronicle.
Francis often times preached
Unto the very Birds, who their necks reached
Out to receive his Blessing, and did stay
Their singing whiles that he his Mass did say:
Or, how his hair did suddenly cement
A great new house from top to bottom rent
And like to fall, so that they could not get
The hair out thence: Or, how his Cord but wet
In water, and that drunk, did instantly
Cure diverse sick men of their malady:
I shall but one thing more of him relate,
Recorded as a truth past all debate;
To wit, that at Rosatium Be^nardi Antonini Chron. Tit 24. c. 7. Sect 4. Peter
Moulin Accroisement des Eaux de Siloe etc. p. 31. 32.
Assize in Italy
About the year twelve hundred thirty three
An Angel to S. Francis did appear,
And told him that in Mary's great Church there,
Called Angels, Jesus Christ, the Virgin Mary
With sundry Angels did for him tarry;
Where being come, Christ Jesus to him spoke
Thus: Francis, for saving Souls one suite make,
For thou are sent to be a light unto
The Gentiles; Francis answered thereunto,
I crave that thou the Pardon of all sin
Wilt grant to every one who enters in
To this Church, and I likewise supplicate
The Virgin Mary, mankindes Advocate,
To aid me in this suite: then Jesus said
Freer Francis, that which thou of me has^pray'd
Is a great matter, but thou art worthy
Of greater things: I do accord to thy
Request, and grant it: but yet go to Rome
Unto the Pope my Vicar, unto whom
I have given power to bind and to unty
In Earth and Heaven, and of him ask in my
Behalf this indulgence: On which he goes
To Pope Honorius, and does this disclose.
Demanding of him for these plenary
Indulgence, without offerings or money.
The Pope replied, that this could not be done,
Because he that would gain such full pardon
Must Note here the Policy and avarice of Popes.
merit it, by putting helping hands
To Peter's Treasure, and this suite withstands.
By this we see, Popes can, do, will deny
Those suites which Christ has granted formerly.
The Pope demanded next, for how many
Years he desired pardon: His reply
Was, I not for years, but for souls did crave
Pardon, and will no Bulls for this grace have;
Adding, the Virgin should unto him be
Instead of paper, Christ his Scribe, and the
Angels his witnesses. The Pope at last,
This indulgence at his entreaty past,
That whosoever this Church visited
Each first of August, and therein entered
During that whole days and nights space, should gain
Perfect remission from the guilt and pain
Of all his sins, from baptism till that day:
An easy rate to purge all sins away.
Now least S. Francis merits, wounds, and fame
Should quite eclipse S. Dominickes great Name,
I shall from Antonine, one of his Sect
[A Romish Saint] him clear from disrespect;
Who writes as much of Dominicke well nigh
As others do of Francis dignity,
Comparing him with Christ, in such a sort
Which makes Christ of him often times to fall short.
For Christ [writes Antouini Chron. Tit. 23. c. 1. 2. 3. See Morney his Mystery
of Iniquity. p. 348. 349. 350. Ribadeniera Fleurs des vies des Saints par. 2.
p. 94.
he] but three dead men in all
Raised up, when Dominick^ within Romes wall
Did raise up three; and forty that were dead
And drowned near Tolouse, he restored
To Life: Christ when immortal, the Joh. 20.
doors shut
Entered in to his sad Disciples: but
S. Dominicke [which is far more] whiles yet
A mortal man into the Church did get
At night, the Gates fast shut, least he should wake
His Brethren: Christ, after his death thus spoke
Mat. 28. 18.
All power in Heaven and Earth is given to me;
And this power to S. Dominicke [writes he]
Was not communicated sparingly
Whiles here, 'ore all things in the Heavens high
On Earth, and underneath the Earth: For he
Had the blessed Angels at his Service; the
Four Elements did unto him obey,
The Devils trembled at his sight, and they
Unable were to dis-obey him; as
He does by Legends prove: That ere he was
Borne or brought forth into the world, there were
In Venice two Statues: In Marks Church there,
The one of Paul as they use him to paint,
Over the which was this Inscription, Saint
Paul, but under the Image feet was writ,
By this man we come unto Christ; Near it
The other of S. Dominicke was placed
In a poor preaching Friars habit, graced
With this Motto, S. Dominicke, above,
But underfoote with; By this man we move
And go more easy unto Christ; For why
The doctrine of St Paul [writes Anthony]
And other Apostles, did but only lead
To Faith, and keeping of Gods Laws we read;
But Dominickes did teach men to obey
Counsels, which is the shorter, easier way
To go to Christ: Oh horrid blasphemy
S. Dominicke thus to advance so high
Above S. Paul, all the Apostles; and
To make his Doctrines take the upper hand
Of the Apostles, as the shortest, best,
Way unto Christ! He adds yet to the rest,
That he was aptly named Dominike,
Because he was to Christ himself most like:
For Dominicke was that principally,
And by possession, what absolutely,
And by authority Christ was [marke ye
His proofe] For the Lord says thus, Joh. 8. 12.
I am the
Light of the world, and the Church does thus sing
Of Dominick, Thou art the Light, Dayspring
Of the world: yea, as the Prophets of old
Of the Lord Christ bore witness, and foretold
In diverse ways: So Prophet Zachary
Of Dominicke and his Order says Zech. 11. 7.
I
Have taken unto me two staves, ^ne I
Did call Beauty, the other Cords: Beauty
Is the Sect of Saint Dominicke, for the
Beautiful habits of their Prelates we
Behold: the Cords, are naught but Minor Friars
Girt with a Cord, and thence called Cordeliers
[A worthy Gloss on this Text;] thus they play
With Sacred Scripture: Furthermore they say,
Christ was borne on the bare earth, but Mary
For fear of cold, did him Luke 2. 7.
swath presently,
And put into a Manger. Dominicke,
Whiles yet an Infant, often times off did kick
His clothes, and getting from his cratch, was found
By his Nurse lying naked on hare ground,
Detesting, as it were, all the delights
Of the flesh: Anthony yet farther writes;
That at our Lords birth there appeared a Mat. 2. 1. to 20.
star,
Which guided the wise men who came from far
Unto him: which did intimate that the
Whole world by him should then enlightened be.
So in the forehead of Dominicke, when
He was Baptized his God-mother did (...)
A shining star; which signified, that he
A new light come into the world should be.
He adds: The prayer of Christ was heard always
When ere he would: but yet when he did pray
Within the Garden, Mat. 26. 36.
that the cup might pass
From him, this suite of his denied was;
Because he praying thus but sensually,
He would in reason have God him deny.
But Dominicke did never ought require
Of God, but he obtained his full desire,
Because he naught requested according
Unto the flesh; They harp more on this string:
The Revel. 1. 5.
Lord has loved us, and washed away
Our sins in his blood: Dominicke, say they,
Out of perfection of his Charity,
Spending the whole night with God fervently
In prayer, did with his own hands every day
A threefold whipping undergo [I pray
By what command from God?] not with whipcord
But with an Iron chain, wherewith be goard
And lasht himself to bloodshed; One was done
For his own sins, which were but small or none;
Another for those Souls in Purgatory;
The third for those who in this world yet lie:
In fine, (to pass by and not name the rest
Of their blasphemous Parallels, at best;)
When our Lord Christ would leave this world, be to
His grieved Disciples [loth him to fore-goe]
Promised to send a Joh. 4. 16.
Comforter, that is
The holy Ghost: Saint Domincke to his
Disciples, near his death, said; Do not ye
My dear Friends mourn, nor vex at all for me,
Nor let my now departure hence you move,
For in the place to which I go, above
The Clouds, I shall be far more profitable
To you than I, whiles here, to be am able:
For after my decease you shall me have
A better Advocate by much, to crave
Ought for you then I now am; by which speech
He does Romans 8. 34. 1 John 22. 3.
Christ's Office usurp, and impeech.
Who that has any conscience, says, grace, fear
Or love of God, can once with patience hear
Such gross blasphemous speeches? or not hate
Those shameless Friars who dare them to relate?
Yet Romes Church, Popes approve, and See Surius and Ribadeniera in the Lives
of S. Francis, Dominicke and Antonine.
Canonize
For Saints, those who spoke, writ these blasphemies.
With what face than can any man aver,
That See Bellarmine, de Ecclesia, and Romano Pontif.
Romes Popes, Church, can never stray nor err?
No doubt in this they err so shamefully,
That all who love God, truth, their souls, will fly
From their Communion, since they Canonize
Such men for Saints, approve such blasphemies.
On the strange Popish Miracles, attributed Vincent Ferrier, and S. Anthony of
Padua.
SOme Popish Saints in Miracles out-reach
Christ's own Apostles; who sent out to Act. 2. 1. to 12. c. 10. 46. c. 19. 6.
preach
To sundry Nations, were most wondrously
Endowed with all tongues knowledge, from an high,
That so they might to all men preach in their
Own Language: But Ribadeniera Fleurs des vies des Saints part. p. 384.
Saint Vincent Ferrier,
Preaching in Spanish to strangers who knew
Not this his Language [if the tale be true]
Was understood by all as perfectly,
As if he had preached to them severally
In their own tongues; Nay, some who earnestly*
Desired to hear him Preach, not possibly
Able to come unto the Church, did hear
Him more than one whole league off, very clear;
He had a louder voice belike than all
Christ's twelve Apostles, joined with S. Paul,
Since none could hear them preaching half that space
As these this Saint heard. Nor was this his case
Alone; Ribadeniera Ibid. page 563.
for I read that S. Anthony
Of Padua, who Preached in one only
Language, to those of sundry Nations, who
Were unacquainted with his Tongue, was so
Well understood of them, as if that he
Had Preached in their own Dialect: yea the
Good wife who would have come to his Sermon
But hindered by her husband, got upon
Her Barn to hear it, heard him perfectly
Half a league off the place he preached in; she
Had very good ears doubtless, or else he
A thundering voice. They make him yet do more
Than Christ, or his Apostles heretofore.
For Preaching at Ariminum unto
The Heretics, who stopped their Ears that so
They might not hear his voice; he presently
Went to the Seaside, to that Town then nigh,
And there with great affiance in Gods aid,
Called unto the fishes, and them prayed
To bearken to him, whom the Sectaries
And Heretics to hear did then despise.
This said: an infinite scooll of great, small
And middle sort of fishes, ranged all
In their set Order, lift their heads above
The water, him to hear; who out of love,
Calls them his Brethren, then did to them make
A Sermon of the blessings they partake,
And still receive from God, instructing them
What thanks and Service they should yield to him:
Which Sermon ended, all the Fishes bowed
Their heads his blessing to receive; The crowd
Of people seeing this strange sight, were all
Astonished, and the Heretics did fall
Down at his feet, desiring him to preach
To them, and Gods truth among them to teach:
I wish he had it taught to those who write
These lies of him, and them for truths recite.
Then had we never further Ribadeneira Ibid.
read, that he
To Bouivil his Ass or Mule, brought the
Host with great reverence, when she had been
Kept three days fasting, and no meat had seen,
Commanding the beast in the Lords name, he
Then held in his hands, to come how the knee
Forthwith to his Creator, and adore
Him, that Christ's presence therein might no more
Be henceforth doubted, Heretics thereby
Confounded; which spoke, the Ass instantly
Her Master, and her Provender forsakes,
Though hungry, and upon her knees there makes
Prostration to the Host, as to her maker
And Lord [though made by the Priest or Baker.]
Which miracle so evident, greatly
The Catholics did comfort, edify:
But did encourage Heretics much more,
Who the Host as their Lord would not adore
For all this miracle: Rome might let pass
This piece of worship, proved thus by this Ass,
Since they at least are Asses, if not more,
Who from an Ass learn how God to adore.
On the Popish Blasphemous Legends of Catherine of Sennes.
It Is strange what Romish Antonini Chron. pars 3. Lugdun. 1543. Tit. 23. c. 14.
Sect. 4. to 19. f. 180. to 188. Ribadeniera Fleurs des vies des Saints part. 1.
p. 435. to 44^.
Legends write of their
Saint Catherine of Sennes, who cut her hair
To shun her Marriage, having formerly
Espoused her self to Christ most solemnly,
And ^ow'd to be his spouse alone. They say
That she did whip her self three times each day
For three hours space, with a sharp Iron chain,
So that her blood did issue forth amain
Out of all parts of her body; willing
To repay Christ by this her bloodshedding,
The blood which he for her sins shed on the
Cross, that she might no debtor to him be.
To pass by all her strict Fasts, Disciplines,
Strange Visions, as requiring many lines,
They write, that Christ did so familiarly
Converse with her, appear so frequently
To her, when she did pray, or meditate,
Walk or repose her self, early and late,
That he seemed always present with her, yea
And talk with her saying, Think thou of me
And I shall think and take of thee the care,
With sundry such discourses which I spare:
That Jesus Christ enamored with her,
Appeared to her with his own mother
And other Saints, and her most solemnly
Espoused in their presence visibly,
The Virgin Mary leading her unto
Her Son Christ Jesus, as a person who
Was worthy to be wedded specially
To him; who condescending, presently
To this her motion, put a Ring of Gold
With four rich stones on her finger, then told
Her: I betroth thee to me thy maker
And Savior: After which act he did her
Continually visit familiarly,
Bringing with him often times Virgin Mary,
And sometimes other Saints, yet usually
Coming alone, keeping her company,
Walking, reciting Psalms with her, which She
Unlearned knew not how to read, till he
At her request, did teach her instantly
By Miracle to read them perfectly.
They write, that Christ himself the Sacrament
Gave unto her, that the Host it self went
Unto her mouth without help, and that she
The Child Jesus in the Host often did see:
That Christ his wound in his left side opened
For her, who thence Christ's own warm blood sucked:
That he stamped on her his five wounds, that she
In suffering torments might like to Christ be.
In fine; they write, that Christ did really
Change hearts with her, took out of her body
[Opened on the left side] her heart; which he
Took with him for some space: that mean time She
Lived without an heart: that soon after
Christ in his glory did appear to her
With a red beautiful heart in his hand,
And coming near to her, where she did stand
He thrust it in to her on the left side,
Saying to her, My daughter and my Bride,
I here deliver my heart unto thee
In leiw of thine: which uttered then be
Her side closed up: and that this really
Was done, not in a vision, show only,
The scarre remaining in her side descried,
Which her Companions often times viewed and eyed.
These most Blasphemous, gross, notorious lies
Which every Christian Soul abhors, defies,
Romes Church proclaims for truths conformable
Unto her faith: and them approves full well.
Witness the Nous etc. we under signing Doctors in the faculty of Theology at
Paris certify, that we have diligently read this book, etc. In which we have
found nothing but what is conformable to the faith of the Catholic Apostolic
and Roman Church, and therefore we judge it very useful and necessary to be
published. November ult 1608 Gesselni, Blazi.
Sorbon Doctors approbation
Prefixed in Print before their late relation
Of Rabadeneira the Jesuit
His Flours of Saints lives, [Saints lies a more fit
Title were for it] Reprinted lately
With approbation in French. Certainly
Romes Church must needs be false; which justifies
Such monstrous Lies, such horrid Blasphemies,
And deemes them very useful, necessary,
For all to know; true; them, her to defy.
On a Popish Miracle of their Deifide Hostia.
OUr Tho. Walsingham ypodigma Neustriae, Anno. 1215. p. 55.
Walsingham relates this Miracle,
That Otho, when deposed, not being well,
At point of death did earnestly desire
His extreme Viand, ere he should expire:
Which he [unable to retain ought, he
Then tooke] desired only but to see,
Not eat Christ's Body; which when the Priest nigh
Him brought, he it with great humility
Adored, then drawing near to it stretching
His arms out, as if he were most willing
It to embrace, his body quite naked,
The Host out of the Priests hands then leaped,
And through an hole which opened instantly
In his flesh, just whereas his heart did lie
Entered into his Body: which done, the
Hole forthwith closed up so that none could see
The Print of any scarre: When he the Host
Had thus received, he rendered up the Ghost.
This nimble skipping Host was certainly
Ill tutored, to leap so wondrously
Into the heart of one deposed by
The Pope himself, as the Church enemy;
And to break Christ's own institution
Not being Mat. 26. 26.
eaten, nor once fed upon.
Which makes me fear this Monstrous Miracle
Is but a Fable, coined in some Monks Cell.
On Papists prayers to those for Saints who
I Much admire, deplore the sottishness,
Of Romes deluded flock, who often address
Their prayers unto Pere Bosile, his Declaration c. 7. p. 34. 35.
S. Martial, Christopher,
George, Margarite, and Saints who never were;
Nay, to the Sea Officium S. Crucis Bren. Roman. Sab. in Heb. 4.
wodden-Crosse which Crucifide
Our Savior; to the Officium B. Mariae secundum usum Sarum, and John Bridges
of the Princes Supremacy p. 481. to 490.
spear, which pierced his side;
Which they have made a Saint, and him now Name
Saint Ribadeneira Fleues des vies des Saints part. 1. p. 332. 333. 2.
Longis, writing Legends of the same.
They pray unto the Nails, which nayl'd his feet
And hands; Saint them too (it is very meet)
And then Saint Eloy nominate. I fear
These wooden, Iron Saints will hardly hear
Their prayers: Ibid. part. page 473. etc.
If they do not, yet verily
The three chief graces, Faith, Hope, Charity,
(Which they have made three Saints of later days,
And in their solemn Liturgies always
Invoke thus; Heures de Nostre Dame a l'usage de Romera Rov. And Heures Nostre
Dame secundum usum Roven. in the Letanie of the Saints, Sancta fides, Ora pro
nobis, Sancta Spes, Ora, Sancta Charitas Ora, etc. Not found in the Ancient
Offices secundum usum Sarum.
O S. Faith, pray for us, Saint
Hope pray for us, S. Charity our plaint
Hear and pray for us) will undoubtedly
Both hear and give an answer to their cry,
Else they would not them invocate: I fear
These Saints are deaf too, and cannot them hear,
Since they are sacred 1 Cor. 13. 13.
Graces, not Saints, and
Extreme remote from those, not near at hand,
Who them for Saints invoke, who certainly
Have in them no true Faith, Hope, Charity;
Since they yet know not what they are, or where;
And cry to them as Saints in heaven, not here.

CHrist writes expressly, Mat. 15. 14. Lu. 6. 39.
if Blind lead the Blind
They both shall fall into the pit, nay find
Destruction, as the Isa. 3. 12. c. 9. 16. Jer. 23. 13. ^2.
Prophet punctually
Determines: it is then false Divinity
Which Si rusticus circa articulos credit suo Episcopo proponenti aliquod Dogma
hae^eticum, MERETUR INCREDENDO, LICET SIT ERROR, quia tenetur credere donec ei
constet esse contra Ecclesiam. Tollet. De Instruct. Sacerd l. 4. c. 3.
Tollet and Cusanus teach of late;
That he who does believe his own Prelate,
When as he shall propound an Heresy
Against the faith, shall merit much thereby,
Although it be an error, because he
Is bound for to believe him, till it be
Apparent to him that it is contrary
To what the Church believes; whence they thus cry;
Quam firma est aedificatio Ecclesiae, quia nemo decipi potest per malum
praesidentem. Si dixerit Domine obedi ut tibi in praeposito hoc tibi sufficient
ad salutem tu enim per obedientiam quam facis praeposito quem Eeclesia tolerat
dicipi nequis, etiamsi praeceperit alia quam debuit^ praesumit enim ecclesia de
illa sententia, cui si tu obedieris MAGNA ERIT MERCES TUA; Obedientia igitur
IRRATIONALIS, e^ consummata obedientia and perfectissima, scil. quando obeditur
sine inquisitione rationis, sicut JUMENTUM obedit Domino suo. Cusanu^ Exist. c.
1. l. 6.
O how strong is the Churches building? Why?
For no man can be deceived, no not by
An evil Bishop. If thou to God say,
O Lord I did thee in my Priest obey;
This shall suffice thee to Salvation,
For thou by the willing submission
That thou yeeldst to thy Bishop can not be
Deceived, although he shall command thee
Other things than he ought to do; for the
Church does presume his sentence good to be;
Which sentence, though false, if thou shall obey
Thy reward shall be great. Therefore [say they]
Obedience without reason is a most
Full and complete obedience, when thou do
Obey without inquiring reason why,
As beasts obey their masters: a beastly
Contrary to 1 John 4. 1. 2. 2 John 10. 11. Rev. 2. 2. 1 These. 5. 20. 21. Joh.
5. 39. Act. 17. 11. Col. 2. 8. 18. 19. Phil 3 2.
Unreasonable doctrine, which should make
All men suspect Romes Priests; and them forsake;
Who make them worse than beasts, cause the^ deny
Their reason, senses, lest they should descry
Their gross erroneous Doctrines, which if tried
By Scripture, reason, sense, would be denied
Of all, received of none; Romes faith would fall,
Did not her blind obedience most inthrall.
On Romes making perpetual visibility a
ROme says See Bellarmin de Ecclesia Contr. 2.
the true Church is still visible;
If Popes (her Bellarmin, De Council. Author. l. 2 c. 17. 19. Gretzer, def. c.
10. l. 31, de verbo. Dei See sir Humfrey Lynde his Byway. Sect. 19.
Church and Head) were so, 'twere well:
But they dye, and then See Platina On^phrius, Luitprandius, Stella, and
Balaeus de vitis Pontificum, Francis Mariu^, and Zabarella, de Schismate,
Theodoricus a Niem de Schism. etc.
often for sundry years
Months, weeks at least, no Church, nor head appears
At all in Rome, which sometimes two or three
Popes has at once, so as no man can see
Which is the true Church, Head, Pope, since each one
Does then pretend he is true Church, Pope alone,
Rome then must bid this mark of hers adieu,
Else it will prove her a false Church, not true;
Since Popes [her Church] are not still seen, and she
Has often no Pope, head; sometimes two or three.

SOme Panegirolla, with others.
Romanists aver, that Multitude
A Churches truth and goodness does conclude,
If so, the damned in Hell a truer Church are
Than Saints in heaven, since they Mat. 7. 13. 14 Luc. 13. 23. 24.
are more by far.
Then world, flesh, Devil, whom most serve, adore,
And Mahomet, whose worshippers are more
Than Christ's or Gods, shall truer, better be
Than Christ, God, Christians. Rome thine error see
In this, which thou must needs retract, recall,
Because Christ says, his true Flock is but Luc. 12. 32.
small.
Thou add'st; that Bellarmin, Sanders, and others de Ecclesia.
Roman, is a mark; then all
Those famous Churches to whom John, James, Paul,
Writ their Epistles, and that Church from whom
All other Churches are derived, (Yea Rome
Her self) I mean Isa. 2. 1. 2. 3. Act. 2. 1. to 16. c. 1. 4. c. 8. 1. to 15.
c. 11. 27. to 30. c. 15. 1. to 40. c. 16. 4.
Jerusalem, were no
True Churches, since not Roman. And if so,
The Scriptures err, who them true Act. 19. 31. c. 15. 41. c. 16. 5. 1. Cor.
7. 17. c. 11. 16. c. 14. 33. 34. 2 Cor. 8. 1. 18. 19 23. 24. c. 11. 28 Gal. 1.
2. 2 These. 1. 2. Rev. 1. 11. 20. c. 2. 7.
Churches term
Of God and Christ; this Rome dares not affirm.
But if these were true, though not Roman, then
Roman's no Note of the true Church to men;
At least in this age, when Romes Church of due,
Is either no Church, or corrupt, untrue.
On Romes engrossing the name of the true
ROme boasts, that She is Christ's true Church only
When as in Scripture none can her descry
So much as once a Unless it be the Church that was in Priscilla and Aquila's
house. Romans 16. 5. which diminutive Church is far from Catholic and
Universal.
Church stild, unless she
The Church of 1 Pet. 5. 13. applied by Bellarmin himself to Rome.
Babylon there called be,
And that by Peter, when as sacred writ
Does other 1 Cor. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 1. c. 8. 1. Gal. 1. 2. 1 These. 1. 1. 2 These.
3. 1. Rev. 1. 11. 20. c. 2. and 3.
Churches often so style, not it.
Why so? I doubt not but to signify
Her future errors and Apostacy,
By which she should so far from true faith fall
That none should her a true Church deem or call,
But that she should become a Rev. 14. 8. c. 16. 19. c. 17. 5. c. 18. 2. 10.
Babylon
Of Errors, lewdness and confusion.
On Romes Religion turned to Policy.
What Romes Religion now decayed? pray why?
It Is changed to State, wealth, worldly policy:
But what is Exchanged for gain, is not decayed
But much improved, it cannot be gaine-sayd;
Profit, and worldly honor comprise all
Those points which Rome does now religion call:
Substract these two, and all Romes faith is gone;
Its Policy then, not Religion
Which Rome professes: if these will her save
Her Machiavill chief place in heaven shall have.
And her Diaboli inventum esse ut populus Biblia legere permitteretur De Tract.
Part. 1. assent. 3.
Peresius, who in policy
Durst write and Print, this fearful blasphemy;
It is the Devils invention to permit
The people to read Scripture (no way fit
For them to know) may by mere policy
Escape hell flames, and mount above the sky.

MUst not the Pope interpret Scripture? yea
Good reason, else a Pope he could not be.
No Text him makes Christ's vicar, Peter, Pope;
His Gloss must help here, else he had no hope
Of being either, that makes him these, more:
No reason then he should this right give over.
Popes Bellar. de verbo Dei. l. 3. c. 10. Gretzer. De^. c. 1. l. 1. De verbo
Dei. p. 16.
claim it as their proper right and due
To expound the Scriptures, which none do so true,
So well as they, in all points, specially
In defense of their own Supremacy,
And right to judge, depose, kill Kings, here they
Such comments make on Texts, as will display
Their learning, wisdom, and unerring power;
For instance, they say, that our Savior
Said unto, Peter, Joh 21. 15 16. 17.
Feed my sheep: therefore
The Popes Supreme head of Christ's Church: nay more
They hence infer, that they may judge, depose,
Kill Christian Kings, and of their Crowns dispose:
Feeding is killing now with Popes, and they
Good shepherds are, when they their flocks spoil, slay.
Christ said to Peter, Luc. 5 4
lanch out from the shore
Into the deep, and loose your Nets; therefore
The Pope is supreme head, may Kings put down
And loose his Net, to catch their Kingdoms Crown:
I doubt S. Peter never had one thought
Of catching such Fish when he lanch't his boat.
Christ said to Peter Mat. 16. 19.
whatsoever thou
Shall bind, or loose here upon Earth below,
Shall be bound, loosed in heaven, therefore Popes may
Kings Excomunicate, depose, judge, slay;
Nay loose those Subjects from their oaths, which tie
Them to obedience, truth, and Loyalty;
And bind Kings so, that they shall vassals be
To Popes, and never once strive against Romes See*
I fear this kind of binding, loosing fall
Besides this text, which meant them not at all.
Once the Disciples said to Christ, Luke 22. 38. Pope Boniface interpreted it.
De Major. and Obedientia. Unam Sanctam, etc.
Behold
Here are two swords, upon which Christ them told,
That is enough; therefore both swords, with all
Sovereign power, as well temporal
As spiritual does appertain of right
Unto the Pope; he may with both swords smite,
I think S. Peter did not then descry
That these two swords did so great power imply
As his successors have since in them found;
Who on the sword, not word their Empire ground.
No wonder if they slay, not Preach the Word;
They stick not to the Text, but to the Sword.
Christ says Mat. 28. 18. Applied to Pope Leo the 10. in the Council of
Lataran by Stephen Archbishop of Patracla.
All things in heaven and earth to me
Are given of my Father; therefore the
Pope has all power, Crowns, Kingdoms of mere right
Belonging to him, and by his own might
May dispossess all Kings who them enjoy,
When he thinks meet, if they him disobey,
Yea hence they plead, See Officium B. Mariae secundum usum Sarum the
Rubrickes; there Pere Basile his Declaration. c. 12. p. 61. etc.
that the Keys of heaven, hell
And Purgatory [wherein they Christ excell]
Belong to Popes, who can redeem, release
Men from hell, Purgatory when they please,
Or send or keep them there, or let in men
Or shut them out of Heaven: They gods are then
I deem this Text belongs to Christ only,
Its error then it to Popes to apply.
Christ said to Peter, Act. 10. 11. 12. 13.
Arise, kill and eat;
[That is, such beasts, fowls only made for meat
Which he saw in a trance, from heaven let down
In a great sheet:] Therefore Popes may uncrowne,
Depose, kill Kings, and Princes at their will,
If they refuse their mandates to fulfill:
Nay send them soul and body unto h^ll.
I fear the Pope expounds this text not well,
Since there was no King, man within the sheet,
Bu^ creeping things, fowls and beasts with four fe^^e.
If Popes from hence will kill Kings, they must eat
Their flesh likewise. O'tis a royal meat.
Christ Mat. 21. 1. 2. 3. Man. 11. 1. 2. 3.
two Disciples sent, and bad them loose
An Asses colt, and bring him [can you choose
But laugh at this rare gloss?] the Pope therefore
Has right to all men's goods, both rich and poor:
Yea, to Kings Crowns, and may them bind, unty;
Depose; free subjects from their Loyalty,
Oaths of Allegiance, fealty, even as
Christ's two Disciples did untie the Ass:
Popes are hard driven when they must repair
Unto this Ass, to prop up Peter's chair.
Christ said, Joh. 12. 32.
if I be lift up from earth, I
Will draw all things unto me: Popes hereby
All Kingdoms, Crowns, things of right to them draw
And claim them as their due, by Christ's own law.
But since Christ draws al things to him, on high,
Not to the Pope, on Earth, I must deny
This Roman gloss, till Popes can make it clear
That Christ speaks of them, of Crowns not Souls
Ce^. 1. 1.
In the beginning [not beginnings] God
Created Heaven and earth [note here Popes odd here.
Gloss and deduction;] Therefore there is but one
Beginning, Monarch; who? the Pope alone,
Whence all Kings, Princes, Prelates, Priests power springs;
And Popes may make, judge, sway, depose, kill Kings.
In this beginning Popes were not at all;
This text then to their aid they cannot call.
Genesis 1. 16.
God two great Lights created, the great'st Light
To rule the day, the less to rule the night:
Hence D^cretalium l. 1. de Majoritate and obedientia Tit. 33. c. Solitae.
Innocent the third, writes, the greater
Light is the Pope, the less the Emperor;
And then concludes most learnedly from hence,
That there is as great and vaste a difference
Between the Pope and Emperor, as is
Twixt Sun and Moon: which his Glossa Ibidem.
Glosser in this
Sort manifests; That as the Suns greatness
And magnitude exceeds the Moons, no less
Than forty seven [nay fifty sixe] times; so,
The Pope in greatness, might, power, does out-goe
Him, no less than forty seven times; and as
The moon no luster, nor light in it has
But what the Sun derives to it: so Kings
And Emperors power, luster from Popes springs;
Whereas in truth, the Popes authority,
And greatness was Matthew Westminster. An. 609. p. 209. Jean C^^spin Lesta^, d^
L^^glise. p. 1^^. 184. Platina, Balaeus, and others in the life of Boniface the
3.
derived from them only.
But since the Sun, not Pope, was this great light
Here meant, I doubt the Gloss is false, not right.
Christ said that John 1. 42.
Peter should be called Cephas;
That is, an head says Sermo in Fest Greg. Papae, and senno. ^. in festo S.
Petri.
Innocent, whereas
Christ there interprets it to be, a Stone
Whence he inferres, that none but Popes alone
Are heads of Christ's Church and Lords Paramount
To Kings, and may them censure, kill, dismount.
This Gloss was made but by an Innocent,
Who understood not what this Cephas meant,
Nor what is the duty of an head, to Ephesians. 4. 15. 16. c. 5. 22. 23. 24. 29.
guide
Not kill the members, or them rule with pride.
Christ said to Peter, Mat. 26. 52.
Put thou up thy sword
Into the seabbard; from which very word
Pope De Major. and Obed. unam Sanctam, etc.
Boniface the eight most learnedly
Resolves, the temporal sword does rightly
Belong to Popes; and that the Temporal
Sword subject is to the Hierarchicall.
But since Christ said, put up, not use this sword,
This Text no such conclusion will afford.
God said to Jeremie the Prophet, See
I Jer. 1. 10.
over Nations, Kingdoms have set thee
To root out, pull down and destroy [namely
By threatening judgments for their sins only:]
Therefore say Sermon. in festo Greg. Papae. Extran. de Ma^oritate and
Obedientia. ^. unam Sanctam.
Innocent and Boniface
[Two learned Popes] the Pope has power, right, place,
Over all Monarch's and their Kingdoms, Crowns
All subject to him, and within the bounds
Of his Grand Empire; and he may at will
Destroy all Kingdoms, Kings dethrone, judge, kill.
This, not to Peter spoke, but Jeremy
Makes little for the Popes Supremacy:
And if De Consid. ad Eugenium. l. 2. c. 6. Rusticani magis sudoris schemate
quodam labor spiritualis, expressus est, etc.
S. Bernard rightly gloss the place,
Confounds, not proves the Popes, state, power and grace.
Its writ of Christ, Psalm. 91. 13
that he should tread upon
The Lion, Adder, yea the young Lion
And eke the Dragon trample under feet:
Jean* Crespin, L'estat. de L'esglis. p. 357 Balaeus and Platina in Alexandro.
3. Grimstons imperial History. in Fred. 1.
Pope Alexander the third, thought it meet
And lawful for him, from this text, his foot
On Frederick the first his throat to put,
And tr^mple on him, uttering this clause,
Whiles he (...) on him with his Papal Paws.
The Rev. 12. 4. to the end. 1. Pet. 5. 8.
Devil and his power is meant only
By Adder, Lion, Dragon, certainly
In this Text, not the Emperor, therefore
This Pope mis-glost, abused it heretofore.
1 Cor. 9. 4.
Have we not power to eat and drink? says Paul:
Popes hence have right to all things temporal,
And may dispose of Kings Crowns, as some write,
Then all men sure may claim the selfsame right
Since they have power to eat and drink; but yet
Not Kings, Crowns, Kingdoms, but their drink and meat.
Store of such learned glosses every where
In Popes Extran. De Major and Obedientia. In Council. Lateran. sub. L^o. 10. p.
671. Anton. Sum. part. 3 Tit. 22. c. 5. Pope Innocentius the 3. his works. In
Popes Epistles in Aventine. and in Papists who defend the Popes supremacy.
decrees, Epistles, works appear;
Which I omit, since these do well descry
That Popes all else excel, in glossery,
And can from any text, high Treason draw.
Good cause then they alone should gloss Gods Law
On the Popes Supremacy, and Soveraignety Over Kings, Emperors, and Kingdoms.
THe Emperors, See Platina, Crespin. Balaeus and Volateran de vitis Pontificum
Romanorum Eutorpius: Grimstons Imperial History, Morney his Mystery of
Iniquity, Abbas Uspergensis Volateranus, the Century writers, Carolus,
Moluiaeus, with others.
nine hundred years, and more
Romes Popes confirmed, chose, judged, ruld heretofore;
Who swore them homage and fidelity
As their Supreme Lords, who did summon, try,
Censure, depose them often for crimes, as we
By Histories of former times may see.
By what right then do Romes Popes now of late
Themselves, 'bove See Aventic. Annal. Boyorum.
Emperors, Kings elevate,
And them elect, confirm, crown, judge, depose,
Kill, excommunicate, their Crowns dispose,
Their Kingdoms interdict, absolve, untye
Their subjects from their Oaths, faith, loyalty,
And stir them up to fight, revolt, rebel
Against their lawful Princes, them to quell,
Exempt all Clergy men's goods, persons, lands
From public taxes, and Lay-Judges hands?
Mat. 17. 24 26 27
Christ, Peter, tribute did to Caesar pay,
And charged all to Mat. 22. 21
give Caesar always
The things that are Caesar's; yea blessed Paul
Writing unto the Romans, says, Romans 13. 1. to 9.
Let all,
Or every Soul be subject to obey,
The higher powers, and to them tribute pay,
Not out of fear but conscience, since they be
Ordained of God. The like precept read we
Saint Peter gives to all; 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. 15.
Your selves submit
To the King, as supreme, why so? for it
Is the will of God, and for the Lords sake
You must this do; Here Popes Peter forsake,
And quite abandon: his Divinity
They now at Rome condemn for See Balaeus and Benno in vita Greg. 7. with
Abbas Uspergensis, and Grimston in the life of Frederick Barberossa and Henry
the third.
Heresy.
The Jewish Highpriests to their Kings of old
Did still submit, and were 1 King. 2. 26. 27.
judged, ruled, controld
By them; nay Mat. 26. and 27.
Christ himself, Act. c. 25. and 26. and 27. and 28. 2 Timothy 4. 16. 17.
Paul, Peter, all
The Apostles unto See Doctor Crakenthorpe of the Popes Temporal Monarchy.
Caesar's tribunal
Appealed, submitted; if Popes Vicars be
To Christ, or Peter's Successors, their See,
Goods, persons, Lands, they must to Emperors
And Kings subject, as did their Ancestors;
They must no longer them judge, kill, depose,
Accurse, command, nor of their Crowns dispose;
Else they will prove the Devils Vicars, who
All earthly Kingdoms claimed, [as Popes now do
In sundry See Doctor Crakenthorpe of the Popes Temporal Monarchy.
Printed bookes] and said Mat. 7. 8. 9. Luke 4 5. 6.
all these
Are mine to give unto whom I shall please;
But neither Devil, Pope have right to one
Kings Crown or Kingdom, but Prove. 8. 15. Psalm. 22. 28. Dan 4. 25. c. 2. 21.
c. 5. 21. 22. Job. 9. 5. to 13. 2 Chronicles. 2^. 6. 7. c. 9, 8. 1 Timothy 6. 15. Rev.
17. 24 c. 19. 16.
Christ, God alone;
And Kings from under them immediately.
If Popes lay claim to any, certainly
They from the Devil must their right derive,
And such bad Title, doubtless will not thrive;
Which if they look not well unto, I fear
The Devil will at last them to hell bear
For their encroachments on his royalties.
Popes than forbear this claim, if ye be wise;
Christ, Peter did no Joh. 18. 36.
earthly Crowns possess,
Therefore Popes claims to them are vain, groundless.
On Popish ^mages.
PApists in Lent (a time of most devotion)
Their Images Declaration du Pere Basil. p. 72.
still hide of their free motion
In all their Churches; So that none can eye
Them when they pray. This practice certainly
Is an undoubted sign that Images
And pictures placed, used in Rome Churches
Do hinder men's devotion, since they hid^
Them thus in Lent: than lay them quite aside
At all times else, since no Saints heretofore
Had Images in Churches, or before
Them used to pray, bow, kneel, or worshipped
Them as Romes Creatures of late have learned
To do; who Pagan like stocks Cassandri Consul^atio. Artic. 21. Hieron. Lamas
Sum. Pars. 3. 2. Adeo Gens affecta est truncis corrosis and deformibus
Imaginibus, ut me test, quoties episcopi decentiores po^ere jubent, veteres
suas p^tant plorantes, etc.
deisie,
And after them when lost like Pagans cry,
As some of late have done in Spain; 'twere well
Therefore if Images were damned to Hell,
Wherewith Romes flock as gross Idolatry
Commits, as Pagans with theirs anciently.
On Romes Doctrine and Practice of Equivocation.
ALL Rome for a false Church should damn, fly, hate,
Because she teaches to See Mos^^ of Equivocation.
equivocate;
The worst of all (...).
Lies, cheates, that is; no truth
Can be in Rome, who this defends, pursu'th.
How can men pin their faith on Romes Church sleeve,
Whose doubling faith, words, oaths none can believe.
They may more faith, truth find in Devils, then
In most of Romes Popes, Jesuits, Clergymen;
Whose strange Equivocations, Lies, should make,
All them, and their false Church quite to forsake.
Virgin Mary, to the dishonor of God the Father, and Christ his Son.
Marial. part 3* Sermon. 3. Excellent 4. Gabriel Biel in Cen. Missae. Lect. 80.
Joan. Gerson. Tract. 4. super Magnificat.
BErnard de Busti, and some Romanists
Since him, record, that Gods Kingdom consists
Chiefly in these two, Justice and Mercy:
That God this last has resign^d to Mary
As his Kingdoms best half; whence all who by
Gods Justice grieved are, may appeal and fly,
From God to her, as men here commonly
From Courts of Law, appe^le to Chancery:
Who by her Mercy, will them aid, releeve
Against Gods Justice when ere it them grieve.
So that if God in justice men condemn
Her Mercy, mauger God, will absolve them,
And free from condemnation; if this be
True, God's but half a God; no God but she:
God has naught left but Justice, which damnes all;
Not one for Justice, all for Mercy call:
Mary has all Gods Mercy; is all grace
Nay Mercies Fons Misericordiae, matter Misericordiae, etc. So is Mary styled in
most Offices, Primers, Hours and Popish Masse-bookes: as if all Gods mercy
were derived from her.
Fountain: all then will embrace
Her for their only Goddess; all will fly,
Sue, pray to her, not one to God will cry;
Nor yet to Christ, who being just as well
As merciful, does often delay, repel
Poor sinners suites (writes De excellentia. B. Virginis.
Anselme,) when Mary
Composed of naught but mercy, clemency,
Hears and grants all men's suites without delay,
As soon as they unto her seek or pray.
So as all those who their suites would obtain
With speed, must unto her resort, complain.
Which (if true Doctrine) all to her will run,
And Christ, as Mediator, be undone,
Since all will sue to her, who does first grant,
And never demand of God one thing they want
For Christ his Intercession, but seek all
From her, whom they their Eia ^rgo ADVOCATA NOSTRA. Officium. B. Mariae
secundum Usum Sarum; and in all other Offices Ancient and Modern.
ADVGCATE often
If these write truth, the Virgin has undone
Un-Godded both the Father and Son:
Ingrost their Mercy, Office, Di^ty,
And made herself Romes only god: Truly
Then well might Bonaventure, in his Psalter
Our Lord unto our Lady See Bishop Vshers Answer to the Jesuits challenge, p.
490. 491.
change and alter
Throughout the Psalms: and the Psa. 110. 1
Lord said to my
Lord, sit thou at my right hand until I
Thine enemies make thy footestoole; translate;
The Lord said to our Psalm. 71. 1. 2. 3.
Lady, sit thou at
My right hand, until I thine enemies
Thy footestoole make: And in like sort disguise,
Psalm. 71. 1. 2. 3.
O Lord in thee have I put my trust, let
Me never be confounded, and to set
It thus: O Lady I my trust in thee
Have put, O never suffer me to be
Put to confusion: in thy righteousness
Deliver me, for thou art my fortress:
With sundry such like: This gross Blasphemy
Which Romes Popes Church approve, use, justify,
To Gods and Christ's dishonor, should now make
All them quite to abandon and forsake.

ROme is still vaunting of Antiquity,
Though all, or most in her be Novelty.
Her Popes, Arch-prelates, Prelates, Cardinals,
Archdeacons, Prebends, Deanes, Officialls,
Subdeacons, Readers, Clerks, Acolythists,
Abbots, Abbesses, Priors, Massing-Priests,
Monke^, Friars, Nuns of all sorts, Anchorites,
Con^essors, ^egats, Pard'ners, Jesuits,
Chancellours, Vicars, Proctors, Commissaries,
Dataries, Chaplains, are all See Wicklisse. Dialog. l. 4. c. 15. 26. 33. to
39.
Novelties
Not found in Scripture, men's late forgery.
Now since Rome these her See Bellarmin de Ecclesia l. 3. c. 2. Marsilius
Patav. Defens. Pacis. part. 2. c. 2.
Church calls, deemes only,
Her Chuch is but a Novelty built on
Men's fancies, not on Ephesians. 2. 20. Mat. 16. 18. 1 Pet. 2. 5. 6. 7.
Christ the Corne^ stone:
Her blotting out the second Commandment,
And doubling of the tenth, to give content.
Her monstrous Transubstan^^^tion,
Mass, Ladies Psalters, h^lfe Communion;
Her drinking of Christ's blood within the bread
She eats, and that (...) in the veins not shed;
Making, ado^^^g gods, Saints Images,
(...) Crosses, Pixes, Crucifixes*
Pray^^s to God in unknown Tongues: to Saints
Departed, who cannot hear their complaints;
Auricular confession, exempting
Delinquent clerks from justice of their King;
Election for men's foreseen works; freewill,
Falling from Grace, new Miracles wrought still;
Her marks of a true Church, the Priests intent
Essential to make a true Sacrament,
Adoring of the host conditionally,
If it in truth be turned to Christ's body;
Saints seeing Prayers in the Looking-glass
Of The Trinity, to which men's prayers still pass;
Her worshipping of all things with Latry
(As Cross, spear, Nails, Thorns) which touched Christ's body;
Her Pictures of our Lady on a throne
Crowned Queen of Heaven, with Christ a little one
Held in her Arms: Her praying unto her,
Jure matris impera tuo delectis^imo filio Domino nostro Jesu Christo. Corona
B. Mariae Virginis, Bonavent. Opera. Tom. 6. Romae. 1588. Inclina vultum Dei
and Filii rui super nos: COGE peccatoribus misereri. Ibidem; Monstra ^e esse
matrem; Jurematris IMPERA: Offic. B. Mariae.
Command thy Son, show thy self a Mother;
See Tho. Beacons Relics of Rome.
Relics of her milk, hair, combs, Gowns, smocks (all
Still fresh, sweet) sins in nature venial;
Prayer to Angels, Limbus, Purgatory,
Popes Indulgences, Pardons sold for money,
For any sin; five new coined Sacraments,
Her public stews allowed to raise Popes rents,
Her Merits, works of supererogation;
Doubt, no certain assurance of Salvation;
Popes right to both swords, their supremacy
Over all Persons, Clergy, Laity:
Their excommunicating, deposing,
Judging, nay killing Kings, interdicting
Whole Kingdoms; absolving from loyalty
And solemn oaths of that fidelity
Which subjects make unto their kings; arming,
Exciting subjects against their lawful King;
Processions, Pilgrimages, reservations
Of Hosts in Pixes, with their elevations,
And Adorations: Lay men not to read
Gods Word: that it must be interpreted,
Confirmed by Popes: that Romes Popes may dispense
Against Gods word; control the text, and sense;
That Popes are above Councels general,
And must confirm, nay overruled, and call
Them of due right: that Councels cannot err,
Nor Popes in Peter's chair, where they sit never:
Saints canonizing; Romes rich Treasaury
Of Merit, whereof Popes must keep the key;
Cases reserved to his Sanctity,
Bulls, Masses to free Souls from Purgatory,
Justification not by faith alone
But works, more Mediators besides one;
That Mary is the Churches Advocate,
Damning Priests marriage, vowing Celibate,
Saints Legends, Holi-dayes, strict abstinence
From meats at set days out of conscience;
Bowing at Altars, shaving Priests, Nuns Crowns,
Great difference in habits, Coules, Frocks, Gowns,
Beads, Pater Nosters, Aves, said by score,
Yea Ave Mary Bells, not known before
Time; Holy Water, Holy-bred, Candels
Burning at Noonday; See Tho. Beacon of Exorcismes and Conjurations. vol. 3.
f. 101. to 133.
Christning, hallowing Bells,
Palms, Churches, Churchyards, Altars, Chalices,
Salt, Spittle, Chrisme, Swords, Pals, Ro^bets, Abbees,
Copes, Altar-Cloathes; Organs, strange Duckes, Bowings,
Nods, Gestures, Ceremonies, and Crossings;
Chaunting of Masses, praying toward the East,
Choosing of some Saints more than all the rest
For certain Kingdoms, Countries, diseases;
Cities, Professions like the Pagans; these
With sundry other things, are Novelties,
Not found in Scripture, but men's Forgeries*
Cease then thy Bragges Rome, thy Religion's new,
Vain, false; ours only is old, saving, true.
On, and against Romes half Communion, and Sacrilegious depriving the people
of the Sacramental Cup.
TEll me lewd Rome, with what sense, reason, grace
Can thou fly in our blessed Saviors face?
And cross his precept, Mat. 26. 27.
Drink ye ALL of this;
As if it were superfluous, or amiss?
Yea, bid a Non-obstante unto it,
To Christ, Apostles, Fathers, as unfit
Here to be followed, in a full Quia in nonnullis partibus mundi perversus mos
pullulate incipit, ut sacerdotes Laicos sub utraque specie, panis viz. and
vini, commanicare non cessont, contra Romanae and universalis Ecclesiae
consuetudinem approba^am, unde scandala and haereses verisimiliter oriti
saspicantur Petimus; nos, etc. per vestras re verendissimas paternitates
provideri salubriter Ecclesiae Dei. etc. hinc est quod praesens Concilium sacum
generale ^onstantiense, in spiritu Sancto legitime congregatum, adversus hunc
ERROREM provideri satagens, matura plurium Doctorum tam divini, quam humani
Juris deliberatione praehabita, declarat, decernit and diffinit: Quod licet
Christus post c^^nam instituerit, and suis Discipulis administraverit, sub
utraque specie panis and vini hoc venerabile Sacramentum: tamen hoc NON
OBSTANTE: etc. Sessio. 13. Surius. Tom 3. p. 821. 822.
Council,
And curse damn all those to the pit of Hell
Who dare tread in their Footesteps, or say, Lay
Men ought to drink Christ's Cup, and him obey
Herein; stiling receiving in both kind,
A perverse custom, error, as we find
In the Council of Constan insolent,
Blasphemous Act, against Christ's Sacrament.
Had Rome not lost her wits, sense, grace, all shame,
She would not thus Christ's Laws annull, Acts blame
And those as P^rtinaciter asserentes oppositum praemissorum, tanquam haeretici
arcendi, per Dioce sanos locorum, aut inquisitores haereticae pravitaris
Council. Constant. Ibid.
Heritiques damn, and pursue,
Who hold the Cup to be to Laymen due.
To salve this sore: Rome first says, she being
Christ's Spouse, has power, right to decree this thing.
This I deny: No wives have power, right to.
Annull, Object. 1.
or change those acts their husbands do.
The Laws of God and Men, bid Ephesians. 5. 22. 23. 24. Col. 3. 18. 1 Timothy 2. 11.
12. ^ Pe^. 3. 1.
wives obey
Their husbands Mandates, Answ. 1.
not them cross, gainesay;
She is no true spouse, but whore, who dares rent,
Divide or change her Husbands Testament.
He is no good child, servant, or subject,
But Rebel, Traitor, who dares change, dissect
His Fathers, Masters, Princes Testament,
Or their Edicts oppose, control or rent:
Rome is no true Spouse, servant, child, subject
Of Christ then, as she boasts, who dares neglect,
Change, disannull his will and Testament,
And thus divide his blessed Sacrament,
Against his precept: Nor can she of right
It do. For what Authority, Law, might
Has any wife, child, Servant or subject
(Commanded to Ephesians. 5. 22. 23. 24. c. 6. 1. 2. Col 3. 20. to 26. 1 Timothy 6. 1.
2. Rom 13. 1. to 7. 1 Pet. 2. 13 14 18. c. 3. 1 Tit. 3. 1.
obey, nor cross, correct,
Their Husbands, Parents, Masters, Princes will,
And their Acts, Edicts, Pleasures to fulfill)
To alter, nullify, halve, disobey
Their Testaments, Acts, Edicts, or to stray
From, run cross to them? Romes Church cannot be
More than Christ's Spouse, child, servant, subject; she
Then being no more, if this, cannot cancel
Christ's ordinances, nor his Laws repeal,
Much less deprave, pervert his Testament,
His Cup restrain, divide his Sacrament.
Christ threatens Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Josh. 1. 7. Pro. 30. 6. Rev. 22. 18. 19.
death to those who dare detract
Ought from his Word, much more from his last act,
The Sacrament, by his death ratifi'de,
And 1 Cor. 1^. 25. 26. Luc. 22. 19.
do this as often as ye drink: Beside,
Christ does forbid to Exodus* 20. 15. Mat. 19. 18. Romans 2. 21. c. 13. 9. Ephesians.
4. 28.
stea^e or take away
What is another right: None can gainesay
Christ's Cup and blood to be the Peoples right
As well as Priests; since Christ in the same night
He did ordain the Sacrament; bids Mat. 26. 27 1 Cor. 10. 4. 16. 17.
All
To drink of his blessed Cup in General;
And 2 Cor 5. 14 15. 1 John 1. 7. c. 2. 1 2. Rev. 1. 5. c. 7. 14. Act. 20. 28.
Romans 5. 9. Ephesians. 1. 5. c. 2. 13. Heb. 13. 11. 12. c. 9. 11. to 26. 1 Pet. 1.
2. 19.
shed his blood alike for all; as much
As well for Laymen, as for Priests, and such
As be in Orders. Since then Laymen by
Christ's own gift, Charter, as great property
And right have to Christ's Cup, as Romes Clergy
Or any Pope or Prelate; certainly
It cannot but be Sacrilege and theft
Them to deprive of what Christ to them left;
And that at his death, by his Testament,
To which the Church must yield, not disassent.
Christ's own Apostles here had no right, power
To change his Acts, Laws; Hence our Savior
Tells them Joh. 14. 15. 21. 23. 24.
If ye love me, my Commandments
Keep: adding, For he who loves me, assents
To, and keeps my Commandments. Romes Church then
Who keeps not Christ's Commandments, and does when
She please, annull, control his Acts and will,
Loves not Christ, but rebels against him still.
All the Apostles, and S. Peter say
Act 4. 19. c. 5. 29.
We ought rather God than men to obey,
Therefore we rather must obey Christ here
Who bids us drink, than Popes who say forbear.
The Sacred Cup, Blood in the Sacrament
Is the Mat. 26. 28 Mat. 14. 24. Luke 22. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 25. Heb. 9. 20. c. 1^.
29. c. 13. 11. Exodus 24. 8. Zech. 9. 11. Romans 4. 11.
seal of Christ Covenant, Testament:
Whence Christ not of the Bread, but Cup says, This
Cup the New Testament in my Blood is:
Now Christ's Covenant, will, as Jer. 33. 20 21. c. 31. 35. 36. 37. Isa. 54. 9.
10. Psalm. 111. 7. 8. 9.
unchangeable
Are as the day and night, impossible
Once to be canceled, and stand fast for ever;
Therefore none can the Cups seal from them sover,
Containing Christ's blood of the Covenant;
Which will be void, if it this great seal want.

And grand Commission, he expressly there
Thus bounds their power, saying Mat. 28. 19. 20.
Go ye and Preach
The Gospel to all Nations, and them teach
ALL THINGS FOR TO OBSERVE WHATSOEVER I
HAVE YOU COMMANDED: adding, and lo, I
Am with you always unto the worlds end.
Since Christ then did his own Apostles send
Forth, but to teach all men to observe
Whatever he commanded, and not swerve
From it unto the left hand or the right:
How Romes Popes, Church have now more power, might, right
Than Peter, the Apostles had to change,
Repeal Christ's will, Acts, Edicts, seems most strange
To me, and she must show me some express
Commission from Christ, which does theirs suppress,
And give Popes power to rob the Laity
Quite of Christ's Chalice, given formerly
Unto them by his will, and that Popes be
Exempt from Christ's Injunctions now, though He
Be always present in his Church as King
And Supreme Lord, directing every thing;
Or else I must deny that Popes justly
May take Christ's Cup thus from the Laity.
When Paul the abuses in the Sacrament
Corinth would reform, he that Church sent
1 Cor. 11. 17. to 30.
Unto Christ's own prime Institution,
Blaming them first for its transgression,
And then informs them very punctually;
I have received of the Lord that which I
Also delivered unto you; that the
Lord Jesus in the selfsame night that he
Was betrayed took bread; and so forth: After
Supper he took the Cup in like manner
Adding this clause to both; As often as ye
Do this, do it in memory of me.
For as often as ye eat this bread; AND this
Cup drink, ye show the Lords death until his
Coming again: By which words it is plain,
All must drink Christ's Cup till he come again.
Since Paul then does them check for varying
From Christ's first Institution, injoyning
All to conform thereto; I hence clearly
Conclude Romes Church has no Authority
Or right at all from Christ's first form to stray;
Much less his Cup, Blood, thus to take away
From Laickes, who must it drink and retain
By this Texts warrant, till Christ come again.
The scripture calls the blessed Sacrament
The Lords 1 Cor. 10. 21. c. 11. 20.
Supper and Table; with intent
To signify, that as all constantly
Do Genesis 24. 54. c. 25. 34. c. 27. 25. c. 43. 34. Exodus 24. 11. c. 32. 6.
Judge. 19. 4. 6. 21. 2 Samuel 11. 13. 1 King. 1. 25. c. 4. 20. c. 18. 41. 1 Chronicles.
29. 22. Est. 1. 7. 8. Job 1. 13. Isa. 22. 13. Mat. 11. 19. Luke 10. 7.
drink as well as eat when called by
Men to Sup with them at their Tables: so
Christ would have all the Guests invited to
His Sacred Table Supper, as well drink
His wine, as eat his bread, else they might think
His feast defective, and himself to be
A niggard, not a bountiful, good, free
Housekeeper. This was it which makes him cry*
Cant. 5. 1:
Come drink O Friends, yea drink abundantly
O my beloved: Rev. 22. 17.
Drink ye all of this
And drink it freely. Mat. 26. 27.
Christ has prepared his
Prove. 9. 2. 5. Genesis 14. 28.
Wine as well as Bread, Meat for his feast,
As Scripture often recites, that so no guests
Might depart thirsty. This his bounteousnesse
Rome now controules, and deemes it an excess,
And therefore sends all from his Supper dry
Except Mass Priests, who drink the wine only;
To Christ's dishonor, his guests discontents,
Who neither love dry feasts, nor Sacraments.
When Lords Esth. 1. 7. 8. Dan. 5. 3. 4.
allow wine for all guests to drink,
All will those lewd, presumptuous Servants think
Who dare eclipse their liberality,
And send their guests away from Supper dry.
Thus Rome deals with her Lord Christ's guests: I fear
She will one day for this affront pay dear. Reply.

If any urge, That Mat. 19. 7. 8.
Moses anciently
In cases of Divorce did really
Dispense with Gods own Law; Therefore Popes may
The Sacred Cup from Laymen take away.
I rejoyne; Rejoinder.
Moses did not this thing by

But by express Deuteronomy. 24. 1. 2. 3. 4. c. 16. 17. c. 12. 1. Mar. 7. 8. 10. c.
3. to 10. compared together.
Command from God, which we
In sundry Texts upon record yet see.
But Popes have no command from Christ to take
Away the Cup: see then their gross mistake
And absurd argument: Moses, say they,
By Gods Command, did let men put away
Their wives in certain cases, contrary
To the first law of Marriage; formerly
Enacted: therefore Popes without command
From Christ, by their own might may countermand
Christ's Institutions; and quite take away
His Cup from people who are merely Lay.

Grant, Moses by his own (authority
Did this, which is not true; yet Popes must next
Prove their power as great as his from some Text,
And that this cause of divorce, arbitrary
At men's free choice, and practiced only
By few,) is just the same, with Popes taking
The Cup by force from all Laymen: which thing
Since they can no ways prove, they must confess
Their wicked error, theft, and it redress.
But Romes Popes here object, this precept was
Given to Priests alone, Object. 2.
who in the Mass
Still drink the Cup; not unto Laymen. I
To this evasion shall first thus reply: Answer. 1.

That if, Drink ye ALL of it, were spoke to
The Apostles only as Priests, not Lay; so
Likewise must, Take, eat, this is my body;
Be spoken to, and meant of Priests only,
Since both were spoke to the same men, at the
Same time, and this word, All, we clearly see
Omitted in the Breads delivery,
And expressed in this of the Cup only,
Will this enforce; which if true, then you may
As well the Bread as Cup now take away
From all Laymen; and so deprive them quite
Of the Lords Supper, Bread, Wine, Priests sole right.
Laymen have right to both kinds, else to nether;
Rome must then keep back or give both together.
But was it spoke to Priests only? why then
Does Rome deny, (as well as to Laymen)
The Cup to Council. Trident, Sessio. 21. c. 1. 2. Suriu^. Tom. 4. p. 957.
Priests who do not consecrate,
And by Trents Acts, leave them in Laymens state?
Christ only hallowed by consent of all,
The bread and wine at first; and did not call
Any of his Disciples to assist
Him in the consecration: yet then Christ
Said to them; Mat. 26. 27.
Drink ye all of this; and they
Mar. 14 23.
All drank thereof, as in Mark read you may.
Its then against Christ's precept, practice, to
Deny the Cup to such Priests, as you do;
Or unto any who communicate,
Since Christ words to all such alike relate.
But how knows Rome, that at this Sacrament
When first ordained, none but Priests were present?
The Twelve were present; but than they only
Were there, no Text does prove infallibly.
But grant it true; they did not receive then
As Priests, Apostles, but as Christian men
And members of Christ's body, Church, which they
There represented; else no Priests nor Lay
Men any ground had to receive the bread
Or wine at all, ^^th Christ's words related
Only to the Apostles then present,
To whom he spoke and gave the Sacrament.
Since therefore they first received bread and wine
In this sense only, as all grant, define:
Then all Lay men have as good Title right
Unto the Cup, as any Jesuit,
Pope, Priest, or Prelate. Nor can Rome, say they,
Receive them as they were Priests, but as Lay.
For Rome resolved has in Sessio. 22. Can. 2. De Sacrificio Missae Surius.
Tom. 4. p. 962.
Trents Council
That the Apostles were not made Priests till
After the consecration, and the bread
No sacred Cup to them delivered;
And that by virtue of these words; Do this
In remembrance of me; which they say is,
The ground, and form of her new Sacrament
Of Orders, Priesthood. Then by Romes assent
Not being Priests till these words uttered,
They were Laymen whom they first received.
The Bread, Wine; since Paul adds, Christ said, 1 Cor. 11. 25.
This do
In my remembrance, after the Cup too.
Which clause if it makes Mass Priests all shall be
Created such Priests, who receive; which she
Cannot gain say, since all men equally
Must take the bread and wine in memory
Of Christ, and DO THIS, in as ample wise
As any Mass Priests: whence this will arise,
That all receivers are Rev. 1. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
Priests; and therefore
None must be kept from the cup any more.
Add, Paul C^rists words applies equally
To all Receivers, Priests or Laity;
And makes the Cup as common unto all
As is the bread. Hence he is general
Of the faithful Jews writes 1 Cor. 10. 2. 3. 4.
that they did eat
ALL (as we do) the same spiritual meat,
And did ALL DRINK, the SAME spiritual drink;
For they drank of the Rock Christ: If you think
This proof not full enough, he writes to all
The 1 Cor. 1. 1. 2.
Church of Corinth, Saints in general,
1 Cor. 10. 21.
Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and
The Cup of Divils, which can never stand
Together) ye cannot partakers be
Of the Lords Table, and partake of the
Table of Devils: In which notable
Text the Cup is twice 1 Cor. 10. 16. 21.
placed before the Table
And sacred bread; and eke appropriated
To all the faithful, as well as the bread.
He adds, 1 Cor. 11. 26. 27. 28. 29.
for as often as ye this bread eat
And drink this Cup, ye the Lords death repeat
And show forth till be come: wherefore (O think
Of this) who ere shall eat this bread and DRINK
THIS CVP of the Lord but unworthily
Shall be guilty of the blood and body
Of Christ. But let a man well examine
Himself, and so eat of that bread divine
AND DRINK of that Cup: for he that eats
AND DRINKS unworthily, eats, AND DRINKS
Da^^ation to himself. Christ by S. Paul
Declares the Cup as common unto all
As is the bread. That Laymen must it drink
As well as Priests, whence he the bread does link
Five times together with the Cup. Cup, Bread
Eat, Drink are still conjoined not severed:
All must them both receive, or both forbear,
What Mat. 196.
Christ conjoynes, none must asunder tear.
All Lay men must eat, drink, as well as Priests,
Else they prove Rebles and mere Antichrists;
Yea, bar themselves both from the life of grace
And glory too; witness that noted place
In John. Joh. 6. 53. 54. 55. 56.
Except ye eat the flesh, AND DRINK
The blood of the Son of Man, (which Priests think
Meant only of the Sacrament, though then
Not instituted, nor made known to men:)
You have no life in you. Whosoever eats
My flesh, AND my blood (by true faith) DRINKS,
Has life eternal, and at the last day
I will raise him up: for my flesh (I say)
Is Christ says not here; the bread is my flesh indeed, as Popelings dream,
but quite contrary: My flesh is meat (to wit bread) indeed. and my blood is
drink (to wit wine) indeed: therefore if there be any transubstantiation here
employed, it must be of Christ's body and blood into bread and wine indeed: not
of bread and wine into Christ's body and blood.
meat indeed, and my blood drink indeed;
(Which cross conversion stands Rome in no steed
But damnes that Transubstantiation
Which she endeavors to erect hereon:)
He that eats my flesh, AND DRINKS my
Blood, dwells in me, and I in him, (only
Spiritually, not corporally.) Here
Christ's flesh and blood; eating, drinking, appear
Four several times combined: and drinking
Christ's blood is thrice made a most needful thing
To gain eternal life: Nor can Rome cry,
That this was spoken unto Priests only;
For 'twas spoke to the people, as is clear
By express words, and Christ's whole discourse here.
Besides, it differs 10. 6. 24. 26. 23. 29. 31. 32. 34. 35. 41. 42. 43. 49. 5^.
^3.
eating from drinking
Often times, as a distinct and diverse thing;
And make both equally needful. Therefore
Rome to Laymen the Cup must now restore;
Else she will rob them of life eternal,
Of Christ's blood, Object. 3.
and to Hell fire damn them all.
To shun this Rock, Rome says, Council. Constantiense. Sessio. 13. Surius.
Tom. 3. p. 821. Council. Trident. Sessio. 21. cap. 3.
that Laymen Drink
Christ's blood in eating the dry Host: I think
None but mere sots devoyd of reason, sense,
Will be deluded with this gross nonsense.
Is any man so simple once to think
That he Wine, Cider, Beer, does truly drink
In eating dry Grapes, Answ.
Apples, Barley, Meat;
Or that he drinks swines blood when he does eat
Black puddings; and so needs not for drink call
Because he drinks Wine, Cider, Beer in all
Reasons, Bread, Apples, meats he eats? Truly
I never yet heard, nor read in History
Of any so besotted as to think,
That in bare eating, he did truly drink
Wine, Bear, included in dry bread only,
And eat, drink, both in one, for company.
Should Priests tell Children, fools, (than how much more
Wisemen) when they eat bread, dry meats good store
And then call for wine, bear, that they need none
Because they truly drink Wine, Beer alone,
In eating bread or dry meats; they would cry
Forthwith, they did but them mock, cheat, belie,
And give no credit to their words at all
But them mere Liars and impostors call.
Should Priests in this sort only drink at Table
They would this shift damn as a senseless Fable;
Why are lay Papists then such blocks to think
Their Priests speak truth, in saying that they drink
Christ's Cup, blood truly, in eating dry bread?
No doubt their wits are lost; their senses fled.
Should they tell Priests, or Priests tell them when as
They feast at home in private, not at Mass,
That they drink wine in eating of their bread,
Neither by either would be credited:
How then can they believe they drink truly
Christ's Cup, Blood, when they eat the bread only?
All know that eating is not drinking; they
In See (z) before. Job 1. 18. Mat 11. 18. 19. Luke 10. 7.
Scripture, Authors, speech, use are always
Distinct things, and still put as opposite,
One to another. How then dares Rome write
Or Pope decree such Nonsense, that eating
Is drinking, drinking eating, both, one thing?
When each man, child, fool knows the contrary,
And may here justly say they err and lie.
Are they the same? why then did Christ say, Mat. 26. 26. 27. Joh. 6. 52. to
59. 1 Cor. 11. 25. to 3^.
Eat
And drink? yea, both of them so often repeat,
As different things? why do Priests both eat, drink
And as to them eating no drinking think?
If Laymen drink in eating, not Priests, then
They can do more than Popes, Priests, Clergymen:
If Priests in eating drink as well as they,
The Cup must then from Priests be took away,
Lest they drink twice for once; nay eat twice too
In drinking; wherein See (^) before.
Rome holds her Priests do
Eat Christ's body, conjoined unseprably
Unto his blood; and by concomitancy
Is eat in drinking. But if neither drink
In truth in eating bread, why does Rome think
She does it, against Scripture, reason, sense,
Christ's express verdict, and experience?
Men always chew the things they eat; and they
Hard, solid, dense (not liquid) things always,
(The Objects of eating) are said to eat;
They swallow when they drink; not chew; not meat,
Bread, solid things, but liquors, drinks only,
The objects which men still drink properly.
Men take what they eat with hand, knife, spone: sup,
Quaffe what they drink out of some, pot, glass, Cup.
It is a contradiction then to think,
Say, he that eats the bread, does truly drink
The Cup thereby. O Papists now epsy,
Renounce Romes monstrous Nonsense, Foolery.
Christ bids all eat and drink still distinctly,
Not both in one; and that successively:
Mat. 26. 26 27. 28. 1 Cor. 11. 24. 25. etc.
First eat the bread, next drink the Cup, that he
At first ordained, and them gave, thus the
Apostles still took them successively
In former times; but those who drink only
In eating of the bread, do both together
In one act, moment, and do not them sever.
Christ bids men Matthew. 29. 27.
drink; not eat his blood; but they
Who take it in the Host, it eat always,
Not drink at all; as men do only eat
Blood in black puddings, fowls, or strangled meat,
Wherein blood is contained: Nay he bids all
Here not drink of his blood in general, Mat. 26. 27. 18. 1 Cor. 10. 16. 21.
c. 11. 25 to 30.

But specially to drink it in the Cup
And wine. Now those who only drink it up
Within the bread; and neither Cup, wine take,
Transgress Christ's precept, and his form forsake;
The Bread is not the Cup, wine: Christ's body
Is not his blood; these differ really
One from another; then those who only
The Body, Bread eat, cannot possibly
Be said to drink the Cup, Object. 4.
Wine, blood thereby.
This to evade, Romes See (r) before.
Doctors will reply,
That Christ's body under the form of bread
Contains his blood, and is accompaned
Still with it; Therefore those who eat the one
Do drink the other in it, not alone.
But Christ himself thought not so, Answ. 1.
when he the
Lords Supper first ordained, since that he
Commanded all to Mat. 26. 26. 27. 1 Cor. 11. 23. to 30.
eat his body in
The bread alone, his blood to drink within
The Cup and wine only, not in the bread,
Which he from Cup and wine distinguished.
Those then who eat the body, bread only,
Can not the Cup, Wine, Blood thus drink thereby
As Christ enjoynes them: Nay, the Sacrament
Ordained by Christ to this end and intent
His 1 Cor. 11. 25. 26. Mat. 26. 27. 28.
bloodshedding and death to signify,
Is quite subverted by this Novelty:
For blood within Christ's Body and the Bread,
Unshed, cannot Christ's Passion and Bloodshed
In any lively manner represent;
And so cannot be a true Sacrament
Of Christ's death, bloodshed: who says expressly
Mat. 26. 27. 28. Mat. 19. 24. Luke 22. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 25. 26.
This Cup is the new Testament in my
Blood which IS SHED for many, for pardon
Of sins; of which there is Heb. 9. 22.
no remission
Without the shedding of Christ's blood; Rev. 1. 5. Heb. 9. 14. 1 John 1. 7.
wherein,
Whereby we are washed, cleansed from all sin.
You must then in the Sacrament, drink up
Christ's blood not in his body, veins, but Cup,
As shed and severed from his body on
The Cross; else you his bloods effusion,
And sins remission cannot represent,
By an unbloody Host or Sacrament:
Which can no comfort to men's souls convey
Since it Christ's bloodshed, death does not display.
Add, that Christ's body in the sacred bread
Is eaten, not as living, but as Luke 22. 19. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 24. 25. 26. Mat.
26. 26. Mat. 14. 24.
dead,
Nailed, broken on the Cross; quite void of blood,
All shed out of his body for our good;
As three Evangelists, Saint Paul, and he
Expressly witness. His blood cannot then be
Drink, taken in his body, which is dead,
And out of which his blood is wholly shed?
Besides, admit his blood enclosed to lie*
Within the Host, and Veins of his body;
Yet since none drink, but eat the Host always,
And eating is not drinking; none can say
That those who only eat the Host, body,
Do drink the blood in truth, or properly.
More; Rome takes that for granted which she can
Not prove; nor all the learning, wit of man
Make good; that Christ's true Body, Blood combinde
Are in each Host received in their kind,
And proper substance: A gross forgery:
For grant Christ's blood be there substantially,
(Which I deny) it is still there as shed
Within the Cup, Wine only, not the Bread.
This Christ himself resolves. Its then most clear
That those who eat the bread only don't there
In Christ's blood eat, or drink in any kind;
But grant they do it: did Christ himself mind,
Know, understand this Crochet when as he
Ordained the Sacrament, or not? if ye
Say no: then how come you now to know more,
And understand that Christ knew not before?
And that in point of his presence, being
In the Sacraments of Bread, Wine; the thing
Which he himself ordained, and so should know
Far better then; than Rome, you can do now;
Unless you make Christ ignorant, and so
No God at all. But if he knew it tho,
That those who eat the bread do really
Therein his blood drink, and receive; than why
Did he ordain the Cup, and command Mat. 26. 27. 28.
ALL
To drink of it, in such a special
Strict manner? which had been superfluous,
Had all within the bread his blood drunk thus.
Since then Christ did ordain the Sacrament
In both kinds, and gave express Commandment
That all should drink his sacred blood, as shed,
Within the Cup, wine only, not the bread,
I may conclude, (since Christ did naught in vain)
That the dry Host does not Christ's blood contain;
And that those who the body, bread only
Eat, cannot therein drink Christ's blood truly.
Rome then Christ's Cup to Laymen must restore,
And with these nonsense lies, them cheat no more.
To say, Object. 5.
the Scripture speaks of Luke 24. 85 Act. 2. 46. c. 20. 7. See Doctor Featly
his Grand Sacrilege, c. 12. p. 148.
breaking bread
Only, in some Texts, the Cup not named;
Therefore they did receive the bread only
Without the Cup: Is an absurdity,
Since eating, breaking bread does there imply
A full repast, with meat, drink, wine, not dry
Bread only without drink: Answ.
hence when we pray
Mat. 6. 11.
Give us this day our daily bread; all say,
Profess we therein pray for wine, drink, and
All things of which our Bodies in need stand.
But say these texts be meant of bread only,
And of the Sacrament, (which I deny:)
Without the Cup or Wine, yet they imply
Not as Rome dreams, that eating properly
Is drinking, and that those who eat the bread
Do therewith drink Christ's blood in veins, or shed;
The thing in question; or that Priests only
Must drink the Cup; but proves the contrary;
That both Priests, people, must the Cup forbear,
Because in these Texts no Cup, Wine, appear
At all: and that Priests may well consecrate
Bread without Wine, since these Texts nominate
No Cup nor wine them used; Rome must take
The Cup away quite, Object. 6.
or these Texts forsake.
The(v) (f) See Joan. Gerson, defensio De creti Council. Constant.
Inconveniences she does pretend
To justify her theft, are to no end.
Since Christ, no doubt, did them foresee, as well
As Rome, Answ.
yet none did from the Cup repel;
Rome then must be more careful, wise, than he,
Or else disclaim these shifts, Incon. 1.
which idle be.
The danger, lest some drops of it should shed;
Is common to the crumbs of Sacred bread,
As well as to the Cup; which Priests shed may
As soon as Laics, and as(x) (c) Gratian de Consecr. distinct 2. c. Si quis
per libr. Sunima Angelica Eucharistia. 3. Sect. 43.
Casuists say,
In drunken sits may chance to vomit up
Christ's blood they drank out of the Sacred Cup.
Whence Rome has made Decrees for to redress
This mischief, in the case of Priests excess;
So that Rome must both of the Cup deprive,
Or it alike to Priests and People give.
The next pretext, Inconv. 2.
of the wines waxing sour,
Is vain, since no wine in one day or hour
Will putrify, much less Christ's blood: and bread
As well as wine will mould, be corrupted:
Yet you reserve it in a Pix, not wine, Inconv. 3.

Till it grow stale: you must this shift decline.
The danger of its sticking on the beard
Of those that drink, was never thought of, heard
In former times by any; and you may
With better color shave men's beards away
(As you do See Cyprian Valerian de Sacerdotum ba^bis.
Priests for this cause) then deny
The Cup to them, l^st their beards it come nigh.
However, since youths, women, beardlesse men
Have no Beards to steal Christ's blood; you must then
To all these give the Cup and yet deny
To none but men with beards; on which truly
Since crummes of bread may chance to stick, as well
As drops of wine: Incom. 4.
Rome now must them repel
Alike from both: That some want wine, therefore
Rome may the Cup take from those who have store;
Is most absurd: and she may likewise say
The bread must be from all sorts took away
That have bread; because some Countries have, eat
No bread at all, but live on roots, fish, meat.
But where no wine is, there Priests, Laity,
Are both alike; none drink, both are still dry.
That some loath and can taste no wine, Incom. 5.
therefore
Those who can drink it, must not drink it more,
Is most ridiculous: some love not bread,
Must none then with the sacred bread be fed?
If so, then neither Priests nor Laity
Must henceforth to Christ's Supper once draw nigh.
The danger of infection some pretend, Incom. 6.

Romes Transubstantiation does quite end,
For if the bread and wine be really
Christ's body, blood, they cannot certainly
Receive, nor yet convey infection
To any; nor read I that any one
Took any sickness (Pox, Plague, Leprosy)
By drinking Christ's Cup in sincerity
As he commands: Nay, Christ who cures all
Kinds of diseases, will not let them fall
On such who thus obey his Sacred will,
But will preserve them from Contagion still.
Add, that the bread may be infectious
Through Priests, Clerks, Bakers, hands, nay poisonous
As well as the Cup, Wine, blood, for Jean. Crespin and Grimston, in Henry the
7. Platina and Bal^us in Victor. 3.
Henry
The seventh (Emperor) was poisoned by
Bernard, and Victor the third in the bread,
As Mat. Paris, An. 115. p. ^8.
Henry of York, King See Speedes History. p. 587.
John were poisoned
With the Cup, by Monks and Clergy men:
Neither of both are Christ's body, blood then,
But bread and wine for substance: and if you
This inconvenience further will pursue,
You must the bread as well as wine remove,
Since both (through Priests means) may infectious prove. Incom. 7.

Paul says, he 1 Cor. 11. 27. 29.
that eats, drinks unworthily
Eats, drinks, damnation to himself thereby;
If then this greater danger must not drive
Men from Christ's Supper; nor good men deprive
Thereof, though certain: this less danger you
Pretend, but casual, not like to ensue,
Must not debar the people from drinking
The Cup: Much less the plea of differing
The Clergy from the public Laity:
For since Christ for Rev. 1. 5. 1 John 2. 2. 3. Mat. 26. 27. 28.
both equally did dye
And shed his blood; yea, the 1 Cor. 10. 16. 21. c. 11.
Cup to both give
A^ike; none must them of this right deprive.
It Is more than devilish pride for to deny
Laickes the Cup, to raise Priests dignity,
And to subvert Christ's very Sacrament,
(Which bread alone cannot well represent)
Yea hurt men's souls, to Mount Mass Priests on high
And them advance above the Laity.
To close up all: Romes Comperimus autem quod quidam sumpta tantummodo corporis
sacri portione, a Calice Sacrati cruoris abstineant, qui proculdubio^ quoniam
nescio qua superstitione docentur astringi) aut integra Sacramenta percipiant,
aut ab integris arceantur; quia divisio unius ejusdemque mysterit SINE GRANDI
SACRILEGIO esse non potest. Apud Gratianum. De Consecrat* Did. 2.
Pope Gelasius
In his unerring chair determined thus;
In this same case, long since, (when some only
Would take the Sacred bread, and then deny
The sacred Cup to drink, because they were
Persuaded wine was ill, and did forbear
It only from this superstition:)
That Priests such people with great caution,
Should cause to take both Elements entire,
Or drive them from both: If you now desire
His reason, mark it well: Because that one
And the same very Sacrament alone
Can no way possibly divided be
Without GREAT SACRILEGE. In which Decree,
Rome these particulars, well worthy note,
May see defined against her Sessio 13. Surius. Tom. 4. p. 821. 822.
Constans vote.

Must drink the Cup still, as well as the Priest.
Manichees did first invent
The half Communion, and half Sacrament.
Because they thought wine in it self to be

Men's false persuasion in their conscience
That wine is simply ill, must not dispense
With, nor exempt them from the sacred Cup
But they must drink it here, or else not Sup
With Christ at all, nor taste his bread and body:
Whence I against Romes Church shall plead strongly;
That if those who thought wine in conscience
Unlawful, must yet drink it in plain sense
Within the Cup, not bread, at Sacrament,
Or else be from the bread, and Church out-pent,
And quite secluded: Then much more must they
Who deem Wine lawful, not be kept away
From the Lords Cup; but drink it punctually;
Nay be for'st to receive it constantly
If they refuse it: and by this decree
Eating to be no drinking, all may see.
Next that Popes, Prelates, Mass Priests, must compel
All to drink of Christ's Cup, or else repel,
Them from the Sacred bread. But Romes Clergy,
Popes, Prelates, Priests d^e now quite contrary:
Compelling Laymen to eat bread alone,
Usually suffering not so much as one
Of them to drink the Sacred Cup: nay the
Counsels of Ipsa sancta Synodus decernit Patriarchis, Primatibus,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, etc. processus esse. dirigendos ut effectualiter
puniant eos. qui communicando populum sub utraque specie panis and vini
exhortati fuerint, and sic faciendum esse docuerint, and si ad paenitentiam
redierint, ad gremium Ecclesiae suscipiantur, injuncta eis pro modo culpae
poenitentia salutari. Qui vero ex illis ad poenitentiam redire non curaverint
animo indurato, per censuras Ecclesiasticas per eos ut HAERETICI sunt
coercendi, invocato etiam ad hoc (si opus fuerit) auxilio br^chii secularis.
Council. Constantiense, Sessio 13. Surius. Tom. 3. p. 822.
Constans, and Trent, Thus decree:
That if any Priest shall exhort Laymen
To take the Sacrament in both kinds, then
For this offense, or if he admit any
Thus to receive, he shall be presently
Excommunicated; and if that he
Perssist herein, he shall condemned be
And censured as an Heretic: yea Qua propter dicere quod hanc consuetudinem
aut legem observare, sit SACRILEGIVM, aut illicitum, censeri debe^ erroneum;
and per tinaciter asserentes oppositum praemissorum, tanquam HAERETICI, arcendi
sunt and graviter puntendi, etc. Ibidem.
Lay
Men, who shall be so bold as once to say
As this Pope does, that it is SACRILEGE,
Unlawful, or erroneous to abridge
Them of the Cup, shall for this cause only
Be persecuted, punished grievously
As Heretics. O strange, prodigious
Decrees; quite cross to Pope Gelasius!
Fifthly, that those who eat the Host only
Drink not Christ's blood enclosed in his body;
Nor take they the whole Sacrament, but it
Divide in half, and into pieces split:
Which Sessio. 13. Suri^s Tom. 3. p. 821. 822.
Constans and Sessio. 13. De Eucharisticae Sacr. Can. 3. Surius. Tom 4. 935.
936.
Trent Councels both deny,
Belike they love truth, Popes to contrary.
Sixthly, that not one element alone,

Christ's bloody death compleately represent;
And make up one entire sweet Sacrament.
In fine, that none can sever or divide
The bread and Wine, or put the Cup aside
Taking the bread alone, or give it to
(as Priests now do)
Without GREAT SACRILEGE: And if that they
Who think wine ill in point of conscience, may
Nor here the Sacred wine refuse to drink
Without great Sacrilege; then all must think
Those Sacrilegious in the top degree
Who deem wine lawful, and will drink it free
In Tavernes, and all places else, but here
In Christ's own Supper it forbid, forbear.
These seven conclusions, Pope Gelasius
Has in his chair decreed of old for us,
In his Decrees, which Rome cannot gainesay,
Since part of her own G^atian De ^ons. Dist^nct. 2. (...). Decret pa^s. 2.
Canon Law this day.
Now tell me Rome, did this Pope err? if so;
Then Popes may err in chair like him. If no;
Then thou and thy late Popes, Mass Priests, Council
Of Constans, Trent erred grossly, and err still;
Yea they commit great Sacrilege each day
In taking, See Geor^^ Ca^s^ander, Consulta^^^ de Sacra Commu. sul u^ raque
sperisi ^perum, p. 1019. etc.
keeping, Christ's Cup, blood away
From Laymen, contrary to Christ's command
And this Decree, which they do much withstand.
O Rome, now see thy great impiety,
Grand Sacrilege, theft, gross iniquity
In robbing Laickes of Christ Cup, Wine, Blood,
Which be bequeathed them for their endless good.
And making them think Matthew. 26. 26.
This is my Body,
Pronounced by the Priest, does really
The bread into Christ's body; change when they
Recited in the Mass but to display
What Christ once did and said of old, when he
Ordained the Sacrament, at most can be
But a The words in the Canon of the Mass run thus: Who in the same night he
was betrayed took bread into his holy and venerable hand, and lifting up his
eyes to heaven to thee O God his Almighty Father* he blessed, brake, and gave
it to his Disciples, saying, Take and eat ye all of this, for this is my body.
In like manner after supper taking also the Cup into his Sacred hands, giving
also thanks to thee, he blessed and gave to his Disciples, saying, Drink ye
all of this, etc. All which words are merely narratively and historically
recited, relating only what Christ spoke.
recital of an History,
And of no more force to make Christ's body
When uttered in the Mass, than when they read
In the Gospels themselves, since it is granted
By, and known unto all that the reading
Of any story does change, make nothing
Anew at all. The reading the story
Of the Creation, Christ's Nativity,
Death, resurrection, Miracles, effects
No new Creation of the world; reflects
The old, not makes a new Nativity,
Death, Resurrection of Christ really:
Therefore this is my body spoken by
The Priest, not Christ himself, rehearsively
Can work no real change of bread into
Christ's body. And if bread be changed it is to
The Priests own body, who says, this is my
Body, not Christ's; who being Christ only
In represent when he does consecrate
And use these words, which now to him relate
The bread can be Christ's body only as
The Priest is Christ himself, when he says Mass,
And that is not in truth but represent,
Rome cannot from this clear truth dis-assent.
On, and against, Popish and Superstitious Bowing to Altars, and railing in the
Lord Tables Altarwise.
NO Patriarchs, Prophets, Saints for ought we find
In Sacred writ, once bowed or Inclined
To, or before their Altars: though Genesis 35. 1. 3. 7. Exodus 20. 14. 25. 26. c.
27 1. c. 40. 5. 10.
built by
Command from God, and did Christ typifie.
Altars of old, and Sacrifices too
Did Heb. 7. 12. to 28. c. 6. 1. to 13. c. 9. 2. to 18 c. 10. 1. to 23. c. 13.
11. 12 13.
represent Christ, as Bread, Lords Boords do:
Yea, they on Altars 1 Cor. 10. 2. 3. 4. 18. Heb. 13. 10. 11. 12.
ate the selfsame meat
[Christ] in their Sacrifice, as we now eat.
Yet none did then to, toward Altars bow,
Why then must we bow, congie to them now,
Or Tables, or the Sacred Element,
Which Christ, no more, than theirs did, represent?
They had the self-same ground, to bow as you,
Yet did it not, nor ever thought it due,
As you do now: Either you Err, or they:
Judge whether is more like to go astray.
Why do ye then, since Heb. 7. 11. 12. 13. 14. 24. 25. c. 8. 7. 8. 9. c. 9 9,
10, 11. 25, 26, 27, 28 c. 10 1, 2, to 22 c. 13 10 to 19. Col. 2. 14. to 23. 1
Cor. 9. 13. 14. c. 10. 16. to 22. c. 11. 20. to 34.
Altars Overthrow
By Christ's death, to, before them cringe or bow?
Are they now grown more Sacred then before,
By men's Erections, that you them adore?
If they had no such honor done them when
Set up by God, why now, when made by men?
If not against, at least besides Gods word:
Perchance because men's own, they are adored.
If you say you bow to them as a Table,
Not Altar; sure I think it is a Fable;
Your language does betray you, you it call
See the Coal from the Altar* Doctor ^ocklingtons Sunday no Sabbath, and
Altar Christianum. D. Heylins Antido^^^ L^n^olniense. M. Meede, of Altars, and
Edmond Re^ve, Exposition of the Catechism in the Common Prayer Book.
An Altar; Altarwise against a wall
You fix and ^aile it in, and still you say,
You to the Altar how; before it pray.
But be it so, where do you read that now
Men to Lords Tables ought to stoop, or bow?
Did Christ, or his Apostles do it? No,
Much less Command it; why must we do so?
We read, when Christ ordained this Sacrament
They all Mat. ^6. 20. 26. Mar. 14. 3. 18. 22. Luc. 22. 14. 19. John 13 4. 12.
23. 25. 26 28. compared with 1 Samuel 16. 11. Psalm 128. 3 Cant. 1. 12 Ioh. 11* 2.
1 King. 12. 20. Mat. 9. 11. c. 26, 7. Lu. 7. 36 37. 49. c. 11. 37 Mark. 2. 15.
sat round, not to the Table bent.
Had they so done, or wil'd us so to do
The text had said they sat, yet bowed too.
What are ye now more holy, or more wise
Than Christ or his Apostles, to devise
An inclination, which not one of them
Did ever use, command, or of it dream?
Belike they were mere Rustickes, never knew
Fit Table Congies, they must learn from you.
All worship, honor, bowing, are Rev. 4. 9^. 10. 11. c. 5. 13 c. 7. 11, 12. c.
19 10 c. 22. 8, 9. 1 Chronicles. 16. 26. to 33. Heb. 1. 6. c. 5. 4. 2 Pet. 1. 17.
Gods Fee,
Right, due alone, and must not given be
To any Creature but by his express
Command or License; you then much transgress
In yielding honor, worship, reverence
To Altars, Tables, without Gods License
And warrant; which you never can produce
Out of his Word: For shame leave this abuse.
But you have Reasons for it: did they them know?
If you say yea, why did they not then bow?
Belike they were too weak to bend them: why
Are they so strong than you to bow awry?
If no, they were then ignorants to you,
And must learn from you now, what they never knew.
Christ, his Apostles must be put to School
To learn of you to cringe, Object. 1.
bow, play the fool.
But may we know your ponderous Reasons why
You bow, stoop, ducke thus? you shall instantly.
First, Archbishop Lauds speech in Starchamber, June 14. 1637. p. 44.
Gods house is a place of Reverence;
Therefore when we go in, (i) Genesis 28. 17. etc
or out from thence,
We must to, and before the Altar ^end:
I do deny the consequence, Answ.
good friend,
Till you can prove this holy Reverence,
An Altar-cringe, going in, or out from thence,
And that good Jacob did bow and adore
To, Object. 2.
and before the Altar heretofore.
Well, that is done; Number. 20 6. Arch-Bp. Lauds Speech in Star Chamber, June 14.
1637. p. 43. 44. Translated and reprinted in French and Dutch, and so well
approved at Rome, that it is there translated and Printed in Latin.
Moses and Aaron fell
Upon their Face at door of Tabernacle.
True, but what then? they fell flat on their face,
Not bowed, like you, to supplicate for Grace,
Not Cringe and so away, as you adore;
Not at, to Altars: If you say no more,
All that your wits can rack from thence will be,
You must at, to the Church door, bow your knee,
Fall prostrate on your face; but once, not still,
Not to an Altar, if you will fulfill
This Text: nay at the Church-doore make a stay,
Fall down, rise up, not enter, then away,
Like them: and since it says not, they did fall
To, before the Altar [not named there] twill mall
Your cause to pieces: they then did not bow
To, before Altars, you than must not now.
The Altar of burnt offering Exodus 40. 6. 7. 29. 30.
stood before,
And quite without the Tabernacle door;
The Laver standing twixt the door and it
By Gods express Command. See then how sit
This text is for your purpose: Moses fell
On his face at the door oth' Tabernacle
With his back to, face from the Altar [then
Behind him unsaluted,] Therefore men
Must toward, to, before the Altar bow;
And turn their face, not backs still to it now.
A strange Non-sequell, Men must do quite Cross
To Moses, and this Text, as you it gloss.
He fell down once, no more, and that behind
The Altar, not before it: if you mind
His steps to trace, you must fall once no more,
And that behind your Altars, not before.
Which now you may not, cannot do at all,
Unless you quite remove them from the wall,
Into the middle of the Church or Quire,
Their place of old, where men yet still desire
Lords Tables should now placed be. This Text
You see makes nothing for you: Object. 3.
What Is the next?
But, 2 Chronicles. 29. 29. 30. Arch-Bp Lauds speech Ibid. p. 44.
Hezekiah when the offering ended,
With all the people bowed, worshipped.
True, but not toward, to, before the Altar
Like you, this Text then is become your halter.
We read of many who Genesis 24. 26. 27. 48. 5. 2. Exodus 4. 31. c. 12. 27. c. 34.
8. 1 Chronicles 29. 20. Neh. 8 1. 2. 6.
bowed down the head
Toward the Earth, Answ.
and God so worshipped,
In places where no Altars were, therefore
They did not toward them, but Earth adore.
We find not in Gods text, one named who to
Or toward Altars did his worship do.
Which had they done, and it were exemplary
It had not been omitted in the Story:
Which saying still; they Genesis 24. 52 Exodus 34. 8. J^sh 5. 14. c. 7. 6. N^h. 8.
6. Esa. 49. 23. 2 Chronicles. 7. 3. This they did to testify both their reverence,
humility, and that they were but vile dust and ashes, Genesis ^8. 27. Job 42. 6.
c. 4. 19. Josh 7. 6. Psalm. 119 25. Lam. 3. 29. Isay 29. 4.
bowed to, toward the ground
Or Earth, your Altar worship does confound:
Had they bowed to the Altar, then you had
Urged something; now your case proves very bad.
They did not then unto the Altar bow;
Therefore you must and ought to do it now;
Is but mere nonsense, and a running Cross
To them: your cause, and you are at a loss;
This King and people jointly bowed their head
Together; and God jointly worshipped;
You, one by one: they when they Sacrificed
Upon the Altar, and new hallowed
The Temple; you when as no Sacrifice
Is offered, or upon your Altar lies:
They bowed once, when the Sacrifice was ended;
You often, ere it begins; O well defended!
But yet, Object. 4.
the psalm 95. 6, Archbishop (...) p 44.
Psalmist and the Liturgy
Bids us, Come Worship, fall down, bow the knee
Before the Lord our Maker: Very true;
Therefore this bowing's to the Altar due:
A learned Sequel: Men must kneel, adore,
And bow before their Maker, Lord; therefore
To, and before the Altar: I think then
Not God, but Altars made you Priests, or men.
If Altars be your Makers, you wood, stone,
It Is fit you should bow, kneel, to them alone:
But if God only, you must then bow, fall,
Kneel before him alone, and on him call,
By this Texts precept, which whiles you apply
To Altar worship, you confess thereby,
You bow to God and Altars both alike,
Take heed his 1 Chronicles. 13 to, 11.
venging hand do not you stricke.
If that you say, you bow to God thereby;
It Is false, it is to Christ's humanity
And Archbishops speech, p. 47
body at the most, which you say there
Is present on it: grant this, yet you err
From this your Text, since Christ's humanity
Is not your Maker, but the Deity:
And to adore Christ's body and no more
Without his divine nature, heretofore
Was always judged gross Idolatry,
Since but a creature, and no Deity.
This Text then does your practice quite confound,
Yea casts your cause and it down to the ground.
As for the Liturgy, it says no more
But what the Text, it helps you not therefore;
Nay it strikes dead, and quite confounds your cause,
Because it Ever reads this Psalm and clause,
Not when you down before the Altar bend
At the Communion, Entrance, Service end,
Or Second Service; but This Psalm and Text is read, not at the beginning of
prayers, but after the confession, absolution, and Lords prayer just before the
Psalms are read, and that only at Morning Prayer, not Evening* besides, this
clause is not in the beginning, but in the midst of this Psalm, so that if you
bow by virtue of it, it must not be at your entering in, or going out of the
Church, or at your approaches to, or ^ecesses from, or your passings by the
Altar, nor yet at Evening Prayer, but just when this clause is read
before the Psalms
At morning prayer only, which thing quite calmes
Your new devotions: for by this you must
Kneel, fall, bow down, before the Altar just
When this Psalm's read; all jointly, not before,
After, or single, as you now adore:
But since you bow not to the Altar when
This Psalm is read, nor kneel, fall down, but then
Do always stand, or sit, by this you show
Both Text and Church-booke your cause overthrow,
And either you against them both offend
In not adoring when they bid you bend,
Or else you make both Church-booke and this Text
No warrant of your cause, Object. 5.
but a pretext. Answ.

Yet we, Ibid. Archbishop. p. 43.
when we thus bow and fall before
The Altar, God, not it do still adore.
First, show where God commands you thus to bow
To him before the Altar; this I know
You cannot do: in all the Texts you name,
There is no Scripture warrant for the same.
It is Col. 2. 22. 1 Chronicles. 13. 10. c. 15. 12. 3. 15.
will worship then at best, not true;
Naught but commanded worship is Gods due.
Isai. 1. 12.
Who has required these things at your hand?
Should make you and this worship at a stand.
We must not to our parents, Kings, Men, bow
But that God does Genesis 27. 29 c. 43. 6. 26. Exodus 20. 12. Ephesians. 6. 2. 1 Samuel
20. 21. 2 Samuel 14. 22. 23. See Edmund Gurney his Vindication of the 2
Commandment
command, and us allow
To do it; much less may we bow before
An Altar, Table, or them once adore;
Which are more base and vile by much than we,
And Isai 44 10. to 21.
therefore by us must not worshipped be
With Cap or knee, since God forbids us to
Exodus ^0 5 Levit. 26. 2. Number. 25 2. Deuteronomy. 5. 9. Josh. 23 7. 16. Judge. 2. 19.
12. 17. 1 Kings. 19. 18. 2 King; 17. 35.
Bow down to them, or to them worship do.
But you bow unto God alone, Not so,
You say you do it Archbishop speech. p. 49 D^o et Altari. etc.
to the Altar to;
There is an holy Reverence due to it;
Which you unto it give, as just and fit,
Both jointly, in one bowing and prostration
To God and it: the selfsame adoration
You give then unto both; Is God's divine?
Then Altars too, you cannot it decline.
Both have the same for time, act, motion, place,
Therefore the selfsame worship, honor, grace;
And so you act most gross Idolatry
In joining Altars thus with God most high.
If that you give to both like Reverence,
Not worship; God no doubt will take offense
That you give like and equal veneration
To him and Altars; it is no Christian fashion;
Nor courtly neither, for if any one
Should equal worship give to King and Throne,
And both at once in selfsame sort adore
He would be trust up, or thrust out of door.
You should do well then to distinguish that
Worship, you say, you give to God, from what
You yield the Altar, in time, gesture, show,
That they, you, others might their difference know
But do you give to both like honor? I
Presume the Altar has precedencie.
Were not the Altar there, you would not bend;
From it your bowings spring, to it they tend.
If Altars then this worship cause, and share
Therein with God, they most adored are;
God for the Altars sake, First: they for his:
The Altar has more share than God in this;
He is beholding only to the Altar
For this his worship, which else would quite falter;
Remove but it, Gods worship's at an end;
It does then from, to it, not God move, tend:
You then commit the same Idolatry
As Pagans, Papists, in their Imag'rie:
Image and Altar worship are the same
In substance, differ but in object, name;
They say See Gregory de Valentia Apologia de Idololatria, and Vasquez, l. 2.
de Adoratione.
they do God worship and adore
When as they bow, kneel, fall down, to, before
Their Idols; not the stocks or Images
Themselves: if then their worship God displease,
Your Altar worship cannot but do so;
They are the same, you cannot say me no.
Your Reasons, grounds, excuses both agree,
They are but one in substance then we see.
You say Archbishops speech. p. 43.
you bow not to the Altar, Table,
But God alone. No doubt it is a Fable,
Your words betray you, and in terms you do
Confess you bow to God and Altars too;
Archbishop Ibid. p. 49.
Deo and Altari, you in Print confess,
To both conjoyntly; see your guiltiness,
You all acknowledge that you bow before
The Altar [which you eye] to God; therefore
You worship it, before it, and thereby
Make it an Idol, act Idolatry.
To worship God, and before God, are Psalm. 72. 9. 22. 27 86. 9. 95 6. Deuteronomy. 26.
10. Isay. 66. 23. Mich. 6. 6. Rev 3 9. c. 15. 4. 1 Samuel 2. 18. c. 3 1. 1 Chronicles.
16. 1. 2 Chronicles. 2. 6. c. 6. 19.
one
In Scripture phrase, and due to God alone.
The Psalm 95. 6.
Psalm you urge, with other Texts, therefore
Injoynes all to fall, worship, kneel before
Their Lord and Maker only; how then dare
You swerve from it, and openly declare,
That you before the Altar bow, adore,
As well as before God, if not far more?
Are you then guiltless of Idolatry?
Not so in Scriptures judgment, for thereby
Bowing 2 Chronicles. 25. 14. Ezekiel. 44. 12. c 8. 16. Rev. 22. 8. 9. Isay. 44. 12.
14. Edit. Iunij.
before an Idol, is the same
With bowing to it, and has equal blame;
Both are alike Idolatrous: this you
May from the Devil learn to be most true,
Who tempted Christ, to fall down and adore
Luk 4. 7, 8 (...); adoraveris coramme, as the vulgar Latin, and others render
it
Before him only, not desiring more:
Christ this refused; mark his reason why,
Its written, thou shall worship God only;
If then to worship, bow down, kneel before
An Idol, Devil, be them to adore
As Scripture, Christ, resolve, and we must all
Before God only worship, bow, and fall
Religiously; your worshipping before
The Altar, is it, not God to adore;
And to give that to Altars which only
Is due to God; which is Idolatry.
See then you vain distinctions, whose conclusion
Will be naught else but your shame and 1 Chronicles. 15. 13.
confusion,
But yet we read, Object. 6.
the Psalm. 28. 2. Exodus 25. 21. Number. 7 8. 9. Psalm. 5. 7. Josh. 7. 6.
Jews did heretofore
Toward Gods mercy-seate, look, pray, adore,
And lift their hands; Reeve. p. 132. Shelfords Answer. Sermon of Gods house.
Cole from the Altar. p. 52. Archbishops speech. p. 47. 48.
Good reason then that we
Should to the Altar look, pray, bow the knee,
It being now Gods only Mercy-seate,
Yea the most holy place, where we Christ eat.
Well argued gentle Sir, you here descry
Your learned Logic, and Divinity;
The Jews did never toward their Altars bow,
Pray look of old, therefore you must do it now:
They looked, prayed toward the Mercy-Seate,
Not Altar; this your cause does clean defeat.
But when, and why looked they sometimes that way?
(In special cases only, not always:)
Because Exodus 25. 17. to 23. Number 7 8. 9. Josh. 7. 6 to 17. Psalm. 99. 1. 5. 9.
Psalm 28. 2. Psalm. 80. 1. 2. Exodus 30. 6. 1 Chronicles. 13. 3. 6. Levit. 16. 2. 1 Samuel
4. 4. 6. 7. 1 Chronicles. 21. 30.
from thence God promised to grant
An answer to them, when they should it want,
And there to meet them, to declare his will
And commune with them, which he did fulfill:
This made them look that way, because from thence
God did his answers unto them dispense
As men still turn their face toward those to whom
They speak, to places, Courts whence answers come.
But God no answers from their Altars gave;
Hence they looked, prayed not so toward them; you have
No reason, ground, then hence to worship, bow
Or pray toward Altars, or Lords Tables now,
Since they did not: and God does not from thence
His Sacred Will See A Quench coal p. 37. to 44.
, Word now to men dispense,
But from the Pulpit, and the reading Pue,
Your bowing then to them [if ought] is due.
These, not your Altars, are Gods mercy-seat,
If ought now, Neh. 8. 4. to 9. Luke. 4. 16. 20. 21. 22. Acts 13. 15. 16.
whence he does his will repeat,
Reveal afresh, by those who 1 Cor 4. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 20. Matthew. 28. 19. ^0 Gal.
4. 24.
represent
His Person, and from him to us are sent:
But that your Altars Merci-seates should be
More than the Jews of old, is See A Quench coal p. 3. 7 to 44.
senseless; ye
Have neither Scripture, reason, ground at all
To warrant it, and so your cause must fall:
The Exodus 25. 17 to 22 Levit 16. 13. 14. 15. Number. 7 8. 9.
Mercy-seate was made of purest gold
With Cherubs at each end, and stood of old
Above God's Ark, on high, like Pulpits Exodus 25. 17. to 23 Number 7. 8. 9 Heb. 9.
5 Levit. 16. 2.
whence
God did his will and answers still dispense.
On it no Show bread, Incense, Sacrifice,
Stood, or were offered; therefore in no wise
Can you make Altars, Tables now to be
Gods Mercy-seate: Hence then your dotage see.
And, if you will bow, cringe to Mercy-Seates,
You must henceforth to Pulpits do these feats,
As Neh. 8. 1. 4 6. 7.
once the Jews did bow down and adore
Before the Pulpit [if ought] heretofore. Object. 7.

But you say Heylin Antid. Lincolniense Sect. 2. c. 7. p. 79. and others.
Our Altars and Tables are
Sanctum Sanct^rums: Here you more declare
Your brain-sicke Nonsense, dotage* then before.
There was Exodus 26. 33 34. Levit. 16. 2 3. etc.
but one most holy place, Answ.
no more,
In former times, there must be millions now
If you speak truth, toward which to worship, bow.
We must have now a new High Priest to go
Into these Holiest places, Yet no more
Than Levit. 16. 34. Exodus 30. 10. Heb. 6. 7.
once each year, and none but he must come
Within your Chancels or your Altar-roome:
No Priest, nor Laicke must once enter, see
Your Chancells, Altars: what becomes of ye,
And this your worship then? you can no more
Before your Altars bow, kneel or adore;
Nor yet approach them there to celebrate,
Read Second Service, offer, early, late,
To light your Tapers: all your Altar-play,
And court-ship now must vanish clean away.
Fools, then recant, and see how God confounds
And overthrowes you quite with your own grounds;
Learn now at last, that this most Holy place,
Where to each year with blood the Highpriests grace
Once entered, and no more, did Heb 9. 6. to 28.
typifie
Our High Priest Christ's Ascension, once only,
Into the highest Heavens; with his own blood,
There to redeem us, for our endless good.
Thus says the Text: then all Sanctorums gone
And vanished are, none left but heaven alone:
Toward it, Object. 8.
naught else, you must still look, turn* pray
And worship; Acts. 3 21. c 9. 56. Heb. 9 24 Romans 7. 34.
where Christ sits and Reigns always.
See then the badnesse of your cause, when all
Your proofs on it, and you so heavy fall,
What have you more to say? The 1 Kings. 8. 29. 30. 35. 38 42. 44. 48. 2 Chronicles
6. 21. 26 29. 34. 38. Psalm. 5 7. Psalm. 138. 2.
Jews when they
Of old did worship God, or to him pray,
Turned their faces to the Temple-ward.
What then? this puts you to it very hard;
If they thus toward the Temple prayed; See this object on fully answered in
the Quench coal. p. 240. to 245.
then we
Must toward the Altar pray, bow, bend the knee.
Had you said toward the Church, Answ.
it had bin better
No Altar is once named within the letter;
They looked toward the Temple, not the Altar
When as they prayed: In this you err and faltar,
That you not toward the Church, but Altar bow
Pray, look, herein you cross the Text, I trow.
But when did they thus pray? in 1 Kings. 3. 37. 38. 44. 45. 4^. 48. 2 Chro. 6
24 25. 29. 34. 36. 37. 38. 39. Daniel. 6. 10.
times of war,
Of Exile, or when as removed far
Both from the Temple, and its view; but ye
In times of peace, not war, when you are free,
Not Exiles, nor when out of Churches view,
But in the Church alone, will have it due:
None can look toward the Church, place where they be,
You turn the Text to Nonsense, falsitie,
Unless without the Church you pray, as they;
For in it, toward it, you can never pray.
See then how you pervert the Text, and make
It senseless, vain, and false by your mistake.
They in Dan. 6. 10. 2 Chronicles. 6. 29. 30.
their private prayers thus turned their face
Toward the Temple, when they sought for grace;
You not in private, but in public bend
Toward the Altar, yea, when as you send
No prayers up unto God: you bow, and so
Pass in, out of the Church, or by it go.
See now your learned arguments, from hence,
Yea Contradiction, folly, and nonsense.
The Jews of old 1 Chronicles. 6 24. 25. 28. 29. 34. 36. 37. 38. Dan. 6. 10.
when remote from, and out
Of the Temples bounds, sight, did turn about
Their face, not bow toward it when as they prayed,
[Not toward the Altar; or ought on it laid;]
Therefore must ye, if you their steps will trace,
Not in the Church, but in each private place
You pray, now turn your face toward some Church [to
What Church I wot not] which you never do,
Not toward the Table, Altar, nor when ye
Within the Churches Precincts praying be:
And only turn your face that way, not bow
Toward your Altars, as you practice now.
This is the only sum and Consequence
That you for Altar-worship can draw hence.
Which quite confounds it; as shall yet more clear
By that which follows, unto all appear.
The Jews did toward the Temple look and pray
Because God Deuteronomy. 12. 11 1 Kings 8. 29 10. 11. 12. 13. 2 Chronicles. 5. 13. 14. c.
6. 1. 2. 20. 41. c. 7. 1 2 3. 12. 15. 16.
promised there to fix always
His special presence; and there to reside
More than in any place on Earth beside,
Filling the Temple with his glory, and
His presence so, that the Priests could not stand
Nor stay therein to do their Ministry:
But God by promise never yet did tie
His special presence in such sort to any
Church, Altar, Table [much less unto many]
Now Extant; nor from them immediately
With his own Mouth, give answers to their cry.
We have no reason than to turn our face
To any Altar, Table, Church or Place
On Earth, when as we pray; but still to move
And lift our hearts, hands, eyes, to heaven above,
Where God and Christ Psalm. 103. 19. Psalm. 11. 4. Ezra 5. 11. 12 ^am. 3. 41.
Ma^th 6 9.
reside most, and whence they
Hear, answer, grant us all for which we pray.
Hence John 17. 1. c. 1^. 41.
Christ and godly men most usually
Did ^am. 3. 11. Psalm. (...) Psalm. 123. 1. ^. Psalm. 25. 15. Isai 51. 6. 1 Kings
8 2^.
still lift up their Hearts, hands, Eyes on high
Toward Heaven alone, when as they prayed, as all
Or most do now, who on God truly call.
Besides, they had 1 Kings 8. 23. 30. 35 38 42. 41. 48. 2 Chronicles 6 21. 26 29 34.
38. c. 7. 12. to 17.
a promise in Gods book;
That if they should but toward the Temple look
And pray, in wars, or their Captivity,
(When they to God in it could not draw nigh)
That he would hear their prayers; and hence did they
In times of War and Dan 6. 10.
Exile often thus pray.
This promise was made to the 2 Chronicles. 6. 24. 26. 29. 32.
Temple, not
The Altar, Arc, or The pot of Manna was not in the Arc, when it was brought
into the Temple, but only the two Tables of the Law, 2 Chronicles. 5. 10. 1 King 8.
9 Therefore its a Fable which some say, that they prayed and looked toward the
Temple, because the Ark stood there, and to the Ark, because the Manna was in
it, which typified Christ, and the Sacramental bread. Joh. 6. 33, 34.
Manna, as some dote:
But you have no such promise in Gods book,
That if you toward the Altar pray, bow, look,
That he will hear you: therefore you must stay
Till God shall warrant you thus to bow, pray.
This promise was made to the Jews, and ye
Can scarce apply it, till you Jews shall be:
It was made only to their Temple, (not
Their Synagogues:) which ruined and forgot
Long since, this promise is quite gone with it:
You cannot it unto your Altars fit,
Nor to our Churches, which succeed unto
Their Psalm. 74. 8. Man. 6. 2. Mark. 1. 21. 39. Luke 4. 15, 16. John 16. 2.
Act. 9. 20 c. 19. 8.
Synagogues, not Temple: all that you
Can then extract from hence will be, that all
Must toward this ruined Temple, pray, bow, fall,
Not toward the Altar; strange Divinity
At this day, though by Jews used anciently.
Add, that this promise runs promiscuously,
If they should toward their own 1 King. 8. 44. 48. 2 Chro. 6. 34. 38.
Land, and City
[First nam'd] as well as toward the Temple pray,
That God would hear. Hence Daniel thrice each day,
Toward Dan. 6. 10.
Jerusalem [not Temple] prayed
In Babylon, whilst he there exiled, staid;
Which City, Temple, being there out of view
And kenning, gives at least a check to you
Who bow not toward the Altar but in sight
Thereof, and out of its view stand upright;
Whereas the Jews did toward these Land, City, Temple, but not Altar.
three adore,
Though out of sight, and kenning, heretofore.
Gods promise then, not their view, did excite
Them thus to pray; naught makes you bow but sight
Since then the text names praying toward al three
Alike, and that where men could not them see;
You may more fitly thence in far that all
When they in public, private, on God call,
Ought toward their Countries, Cities turn their face
Or toward Jury, or the ruined place,
Where then Gods Temple stood, than that they now
Must toward the Altar, Church, or Temple bow.
This toward runs conjunctively to 1 Kings 8. 48. 2 Chronicles 6 38.
Land,
City and House, as they in order stand;
Not to the Altar: whence conclude I may,
That they did never toward the Altar pray,
Bow, look: for then no doubt the Text had knit
The Altar to these three, not past by it.
Which not once naming, and prescribing how
They should toward these three only pray; all now
May see that bowing toward the Altar then
Was not once thought on, nor in use with men.
Nay more, this And he stood before the Altar of the Lord etc. 1 Kings. 8. 22.
2 Chronicles 6. 12. 13. So the Priest. stood [not bowed] at the East end of the
Altar. 2 Chronicles 5. 12.
Chapter notes it to my hand.
That Solomon did not bow to, but STAND
Before the Altar, on a Scaffold; where
His ^ands he spread forth toward heaven, and there
Kneeled down upon his knees, before all
The Before the Congregation [not the Altar] says the Text.
Congregation present; whence I shall
Infer; that had he bowed toward, or unto
The Altar, doubtless the Text had said so;
But since it only says, he stood before
The Altar; not, that he did bow, adore
Toward it, it is most clear from hence that he
To, toward it did not bow, nor bend the knee.
Nor did they then toward Altars turn their eyes,
But when on them they offered Sacrifice,
Or took some solemn Oath before them; (yet
They then to bow to them did quite forget;
Gen 18. 22. c. 19. 27. 2 Chronicles. 6. 12. 22. c. 7 1 See Number. 23. 1. 2. 3 6. 14.
15. 17. Rev. 8. 3. 1 Kings 13. 1. 2 Chronicles 5 12. 1 Kings 8. 22.
Standing before their Altars, or close by
Them, but not bowing, nere used anciently:)
If you thus toward the Table look when ye
Thereat receive, the Elements, to see
Whilst they are consecrating, I consent
Thereto, but not when there is no Sacrament.
In fine, we read, 2 Chronicles 7. 1. 2. 3.
When Solomon had ended
His Prayer, and the fire which from God descended
Consumed the Sacrifice, and Gods glory,
Quite filled the house; that all who then stood by
And saw this fight, bowed themselves with their face
Unto the ground, (not Altar) in that place;
And worshipped, and praised God, saying, For he
Is good, for his Mercies e're-lasting be.
Had they toward Temple, Altar, worshipped,
Or bowed themselves, we should no doubt have read
It in the Text; whose silence in this kind
Proves, that they to, toward neither thus inclined,
But simply bowed to, before God alone:
By this Text then, Object 9.
your cause is lost and gone.
Exodus 3 5. Josh. 5. 5. Isai. 20. 2. Acts. 7. 53
Put off thy shoes from off thy feet; for why,
The ground whereon thou stand is holy,
Spoken to Moses, Joshua of old;
Urged Dr. Laurence his Sermon on this Text and others.
next for Altar-bowing, will not hold;
No Altar, Bowing, is here named: if you
These special Texts mean strictly to pursue,
You must your shoes put off; Answ.
and barefoot go
Into the Church, Churchyard; no shoes wear, so
As See Burtons Melancholy. p. 673. Augustinus de haeresibus Gratian. Causa. 24
qu. 3. Isiodor. Hispal. Orig. l. 8. c. 5.
some fond Persons did of old, led by
These very Texts; which you more misapply
And wrest then they; Who got the brand and name
Of Heretics, for practicing the same,
In going barefoot: If you these Texts strain
To prove your Altar-worship, sure your brain
Is far more crazy, and your practice more
Cross to these Texts, than their was heretofore.
For what sense, reason, can in this be found?
Tw^, their shoes We read they were but once commanded to do it, not always,
and they only and no other.
once put off in holy ground,
By Gods express command; therefore all men
Must bow down toward, or to the Altar when
They it approach; and when they come or go
Into or from the Church, though they have no
Command or pattern so to do? Surely
This is pure nonsense, if not Heresy.
Your Altars, Tables, are stone, wood, not ground:
No worship then of these, can here be found,
But of the Churchyard, Churches soil, which you
Style Bishop Lauds and W^ers ^^tation Articles.
Holy ground; if worship hence be due
To ought, it is to the Church-ground only,
Not Table, Altar; See now your folly,
In quoting Texts to prove, which overthrow
Your cause, and your nonsense to all men show.
Add, that the shoes are here enjoined to be
Put off the feet, the lowest part; not the
Hat ^^lled off, head bowed down; no art
Can from the lowest to the highest part,
Conclude ought that is solid: here your feet
And heads without sense, reason, strangely meet:
You may do well then these Texts to put off,
Which will expose you and your cause to scoff. Object. 10.

That other Text some urge; Eccles. 5. 1. Mr. Yates and others.
Keep thy foot when
Thou go unto the House of God; is clean^
Besides the purpose: To press bowing thence
To Altars, Tables, is to speak nonsense;
When men go to Gods house, they must their feet
Keep with all care; therefore they must there greet
And bow down to the Altar, is a bad,
A senseless sequel; fit for none but mad
Or crazy pates: No Altar, bowing are
Named in this Text; whose scope is to declare,
That men when they approach Gods house to pray,
Must watch their feet (affections) and that they
Must shun vain thoughts, rash, fond loquacity.
Their senses then are lost, who now apply
This Text, their Altar-worship to maintain,
From whence they can naught to this purpose strain.
The cause is bad which such extravagant
And far-fetcht proofs, it to defend does want.
Which none but those who are past grace or shame
Or void of wit, would for this purpose name.
But yet we read, Object. 11
the Rev. 4. 10. 11. c. 5. 8. 14. c. 19 4. Mr. Yates.
Elders fell before
Him who sat on the Throne, and did adore,
Casting their Crowns before the Throne; thus we
Before the Altar must fall, bow the knee.
Well argued learned Sir, Answ.
have you a Crown?
Are you an Elder? then you may fall down,
If not, forbear; since there you read of none
That prostrate fell, but twenty four alone,
Elders by Office; when as thousands Rev. 5 11. compared with c. 7. 9. 10. 11.
stood
Round by them, yet fell not; your proofe's not good.
But yet not here on Earth, but Heaven they fell;
This then concerns not those who on earth dwell.
But did they bow like you? no, their prostration
Was far unlike your newfound adoration,
They when they fell down, Rev. 4. 9. 10. 11. c 5 8. 9. 13 14.
sang a song of praise
Unto the Lamb; you never then sing such Lays:
They when they fell had Rev. 5. 8.
Harpes, Viols, made of Gold,
All full of Odours: you bowing, none such hold;
They prostrate fell, not going in, or out
Of any Church, or passing to, about.
Or from the Altar, as you now; their fact
Is then no warrant for what you now act.
They fell Rev. 4. 10. c. 5. 8. 14. c. 19. 4.
before him who sat on the Throne,
Within their view. Do you so? no not one;
You see not Christ, nor to him bow and fall,
But to the Altar, not Christ's Throne at all;
There is no Altar, Table in the Text.
You may go whistle then: what say you next?
Though Scripture fail, yet we have reasons left:
I fear you will be at last of both bereft;
He who Isai. 8. 20. 1 Cor. 3. 19.
wants Scripture hardly will find reason
For Sacred things, as you shall see in season.
Altars, and Tables are Christ's royal Archbishops speech, p 47, 48. Shelford
Reeve, Widows Heylin, Dr. Laurence, and others.
Throne
Whereon he sits within the Church: Object. 12.
each one
Must therefore bow before, and to them. I
Your ground and sequel both at once deny. Answ.

Christ's Psalm. 103. 19. Psalm. 11. 4. Acts 7. 49. Esaias 66. 1. Mat. 5. 34 35.
Throne is in Heaven, not on earth: it is plain
By Creed and Scripture: Act. 1 9 11 c. 3. 2^. Luke 24. 51. Act 2. 34. Romans 8.
34 He. 4. 14 c. 8. 14. c. 9. 24 26. c. 10. 12, 13. c. 12. 2. Rev. 3. 21.
there he does remain.
Sitting at Gods right hand; His Thrones I fear
On earth are now cast down. But yet to clear
This further, if they be Christ's Throne, its either
Of his divine or humane nature; neither
Of these they be. Of his humanity
Say you: its false; that only is on high.
Christ's humane body is in Heaven Acts 3. 21. Mat. 28. 6. Joh. 10 28. c. 17. 11
Lu. 24. 51. He. 8. 1 4.
alone,
Fixed in one place, cannot be but in one.
But if each Altar, Table be his Chair,
Wherein he sits, it must be every where
Upon these Thrones, and he must have as many
Bodies as Thrones: he is not then in any
Of all your Thrones; he never yet once sat there,
They are not his, but your Thrones then, I fear.
But yet Christ's present in the Sacrament. Reply

By grace; Answ.
in person I cannot assent:
So is he Mat. 28. 20. c 18 20. 1 Cor. 14, 25.
present in each Ordinance;
This will not then your cause one hair advance;
But he is The Altar is the greatest place of Gods Residence upon earth: I say,
the greatest, yea, greater then the Pulpit. For there it is, Hoc est Corpus meum,
this is my Body: But in the Pulpit it is at most, but Hoc est Verbum meum, this
is my word. And a greater reverence (no doubt) is due to the Body, than to the
Word of our Lord. And so in Relation, answerably to the Throne, where his Body
is usually present, then to the Seat where his Word uses to be proclaimed,
etc. Archbishops Speech in Star Chamber, p. 47. A rotten absurd passage, of
false Romish Divinity.
most present in these Elements,
More then in other Rites: Reply.
Some men's consents
You have in this, Answ.
not mine; until you say
And prove it too, I shall it still gainsay:
That is soon done, Reply.
Matthew. 26. 26. Archbishops speech. p. 47 48.
This is my Body, is
A proof which cannot be gainsaid in this;
More grace is present with, more reverence due
Unto Christ's body then word: What say you?
A learned proof. Answ.
What Body of Christ I pray,
Is sacred Bread? 1 Cor. 10. 16. Gal. 3. 1.
this will the truth display.
If Natural, that is in Heaven, bread's not it,
Its but Christ's Body figurative, or it
Does rather only show and typifie
The breaking of Christ's body to the eye.
True: what then makes bread Christ's Body? I say,
The Matthew. 26. 26. 1 Cor. 11. 23. 24.
words of Consecration: mark I pray.
If then Christ's word does make the bread his body,
Agreed by all, Reply.
confirmed by Sacred story,
Then its more worthy than the bread or wine; Answ.

You must to it then, not to them incline.
That which gives being, honor to another;
Is greater, Nobler [if ought] than the the other.
The 1 Cor. 11. 23. 24. 25. 1 Timothy 4. 5.
word gives being to the Sacrament,
Its greater, Nobler, then; can you dissent?
But bread is called Christ's Body: So 1 Cor. 12. 12. 27. Ephesians. 1. 22. 23.
each Saint
And Church is styled: your reason then is faint,
And quite casheer'd: each Saint is better then
Christ's breaden-Body, made by, and 1 Cor. 3. 21. 22. Prove. 9. 2. 5 Rev. 22. 7.
for men
And for their Service; therefore they are better:
For this, there is Text store, for you not one letter.
Besides, Phil. 2* 7. 8. Heb. 2. 14. 16 17.
Christ's humane Nature is the same
With ours; Bread is his Body but in name,
Not truth. Gal. 2. 20. 1 Cor. 14. 25. Ephesians. 3. 17. John 17. 21. 23 2 Cor. 6.
16. John 6. 51. 1 John 3. 24. 2 Cor. 13 5.
Christ lives and dwells continually
Within his Saints by Grace, and Spiritually.
He dwells not so within the bread; if then
You bow to ought, it must be godly men;
These 1 Cor. 12. 12. 27. Ephesians. 23. Col. 1 18. 24 1 Cor. 6. 15. Ephesians. 2. 21.
22. 1 Per. 2. 5. John 1. (...) to 26
are Christ's Body, Members, Temples, Bone,
Flesh, and with Christ himself by Grace made one.
If he have any Throne on earth, its they,
[Not Altars] where he Ephesians. 3 16 Gal. 2. 20. Rom 5 17. 21. 1 Cor 14 25.
dwells, lives, Reigns always.
If then you will bow to, before Christ's Throne,
It must be to, before his Saints alone:
But to the Word again, Christ's Deity
Is called the John 1. 1. 2. 14. 1 John. 5 7.
Word, and is expressed thereby;
The Bread, is but his Matthew. 26. 26. 28. 1 Cor. 11. 23. 24
Body termed; that is best
Of both, whereby his Godhead is expressed.
Besides, the Word John. 5. 25 1 Pet. 1. 23. 1 Cor. 4. 15.
begets, the Sacrament
Does but confirm Faith, Grace; Now all consent,
That what gives Life, excels what serves only
But to confirm; (one's John. 2. 25. 1 Pet. 1. 23. Romans 10. 13. 14 15.
simply necessary
To save, convert; the other's but supply.
Our grace to strengthen, seal, and ratify,
Men may be Iam. 1. 21. 25. Mark. 16. 15. 16. Romans 1. 16. 1 Cor. 1. 18. Ephesians.
1. 13 1 Timothy 4. 16.
saved by the Word alone,
Without Christ's breaden Body; but not one
By it, without the Word; which Accedat ve (...) ad Elementum ut fiat
Sacramentum Augustine.
makes it be
A Sacrament; as you before may see.
Now what is able to save men alone,
Excels that which alone serves to save none.
Yet more, Gods Word is Christians 1 Pet. 2. 2. 3. Deuteronomy 6. 6. 7. 8. 9
daily food
In public, private: tother's not so good,
Because more rare, less common, not for all;
The B^^um quo communius eo melius Aristotle
Common'st good the best, men always call.
The Word then is, of both, most excellent
In these respects; you cannot dis-assent.
But Christ's Archbishops speech. p. 47.
more present in the Sacred bread
Than in the word, by which on souls are fed.
Some hold so I confess, in this sense true,
It 1 Cor. 10. 16.
more presents Christ's Passion to our view,
Than the mere Word without it: Reply.
but to say
His grace and presence are more there, I may
Deny with safety; they cooperate
As much in all (nay more in most men's state,
With his blessed word, Answ.
than with the Eucharist,
Since it requires a greater power from Christ,
A greater presence of him, and far more
Strength to raise up dead men and them restore
From death to life, then to corroborate
A living Christian in a gracious state.
Now it is the Joh. 5. 25. Ephe. 1. 18, 19. 20. Romans 1. 16. Ephe. 2 1, 2. 1 Cor.
1. 18. Acts 19. 19, 20. Heb. 4. 12.
Word alone, not Sacrament
Which quickens dead men, as Divines consent.
Whence it is styled Act. 13. 26. c. 14. 3. c. 20. 32. Phil. 2. 16. Acts 19. 20.
the word of Life, Faith, Grace,
Salvation, Matthew 6 11. Hebr. 5. 12, 13, 14. 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2 3. 1 Timothy 4. 6.
bread, milk, food, in every place
Of Sacred writ. Christ promises to be
Still Mat. 28. 19 20. Act. 19. 9, 20. c 16. 14, 15. Rom 1, 16. Joh 16. 63.
Act. 2. 4. 17. 2 Cor 3. 8. 18. Gal. 3 2. Ephesians. 6. 17. 2 These 2 8. Heb. 1. 4.
12. Rev 2. 7
present with it to the end; nay he
His Spirit joins therewith, makes it the maine,
Chief business of himself, Apostles, train,
To preach the Word, this is their special charge
Most pressed, Acted; as we read at large
In Scripture, where we find but thin and rare
Speech of Christ's Supper; Whose most special care
Was for the Isaih 61. 1. Mat. 4. 17. Mat 1. 4 7. 14. 38, 39. c. 2. 2. Luke 3.
18. Ioh. 8, 2. Act. 5. 42. Rom 1. 16. 1 Cor. 1. 17. 2 Timothy 4. 11.
frequent Prea^hing, day and night
Of his sweet word, often termed, his power, and might
Unto Salvation: All which will declare
That Christ's grace, spirit, presence always are
As much concurring with his Word, Reply
yea more
Than with his Supper. Have you ought in store
Yet? yea, Christ's more present in the Sacrament
Under the Bread, Answ.
Wine, outward Element
Then in the Word: It Is held so without ground,
But if discust, will prove an empty sound:
Mark what I say, Christ's body, spirit, grace,
Have no inherent real presence, place
Within the bread, or Wine themselves: for then
Both wicked, faithless, good, and faithful men
Should them receive alike inclusively
Within the Sacred signs: Reply
which 1 Cor. 11. 27, 28, 29.
we deny.
But is not Christ within them? Answ.
yes, in sign
And Sacramental wise, not grace divine.
Its See the Practice of Piety, in the Preparative to the Sacrament* where all
this is at large deba^ed and proved, with Mr. Philpots Examine. Fox Act. and
Mon. Vol. 3.
not the signs, nor Ministers that give
The true bread Christ to men, whereby they live.
But Christ does give himself there, unto all
Worthy Receivers, in a spiritual,
Yet real manner; not by descending
From Heaven above, but by the secret sending
Down of his Spirit, which does comprehend
Them, and their Faith; Hearts, souls, cause to ascend
To heaven to him, and there on him to feed
By faith, as their mouths feed here on the bread.
It is men's John. 6. 40. 47. 48. 49. Ephesians. 3. 17. Gal. 2. 20.
Faith then, not the Element
That makes Christ present in the Sacrament:
As that is greater, less, so they more feed
Or less on Christ in Heaven, not in the bread,
Which ill men take; but not Christ, or his grace
Therein, for want of Faith, this quels your case.
For if Christ's presence, spirit, grace, be not
Included in the signs, as now you wot,
And he be present only in the heart,
Not mouth, of each believer; then no part
Of his grace, body, presence, placed are
Upon your Altars, Tables, as their chair,
Or throne; where if he were, its not in State,
As Lord and King, but only as our John. 6. 22. to 64. 1 Cor. 11. 20. to 34.
c. 10. 16. 17. 21.
meat:
Not in a state of glory, but as bread,
[In basest state] wherewith our ^^iles are fed.
How can Lords-Tables the^^ be styled his Throne;
When as he sits, not, but (...), stands thereon,
As food alone? who (...), yet heard, or read
Of Thrones, or cha^^s prepared for meat, drink, bread?
It is mere nonsense thus to call Lords-Tables,
Or Altars Christ's Thrones, here your words prove fables;
The Faith, Arc, Table, are but his 1 Chronicles. 28 2. Psalm. 39. 5. Psalm. 132. 7.
Isay 66. 1. Matthew. 9. 35.
footstooles;
To all these Christ's Thrones, is to play the fools.
Therefore the reasons why you thus adore;
And bow to Altars, are quite out of door.
Christ sits not on your Altars, Tables; he
Is Matthew. 28. 6. Acts 3. 21. Luke 6. 51.
risen, gone hence up to Heaven, there ye
Must Heb. 9. 24. 28. 1 These. 1. 10.
look to, for him, Matthew. 24. 23. Mar. 13. 21 Luke 17. 23.
not on earth below:
You must to Heaven then only look, and bow.
Hence does the Church-booke, at the Sacrament
Exhort all, to Heb. 9. 24. 28. ^am. 3. 41.
lift up their hearts whole bent
Unto the Lord on high, without one word
Of looking, bowing, to the Altar, Board:
Christ's is not there, he sits in 1 Pet. 3. 22. Ephesians. 6. 9. Lam. 3. 41.
Heaven above
There must your eyes, thoughts, hearts be, there your love.
If you presume he sits upon the Table,
You make the Scripture, Church-book but a fable
Besides, you do not take the Sacrament,
From off Lords-Tables, whence men now are pent
And bard with railes, for fear they should draw near
Unto them, there to eat Christ's sacred cheer:
What they receive, is from the Priests hands, at
The railes; why should they then bow, cringe to that,
From whence they naught receive? they must adore
The Priests hands, railes, not Tables, Altars more:
From them, not these they take the Elements,
They then do best deserve these Complements.
But grant you what you would, that Christ's body
[As Papists hold] does on your Altars lie,
And that this is the cause, why you adore
To, toward Altars: I desire no more
But this your plain confession, to descry
Your folly, falsehood, and Idolatry.
You say you bow to God alone, but lie;
This reason proves, it is to Christ's body
There present [as you hold,] which is not God,
But man; your reason is become your rod:
For to adore Christ's body, or the bread,
Which shows his Manhood only, not Godhead;
Or to adore God, or Christ's Deity,
Merely because of his humanity,
As you do here at best, is See Bishop Mortons Institution of the Sacrament.
b. 7. p. 504. to 541. where this is largely manifested.
certainly
Will Worship, Error, and Idolatry;
Since Christ's body a creature is; and none
Ought to be Luke. 4. 8. Rev. 19. 10 c. 22 9.
worshipped but God alone,
And that still for himself; where you adore
God for Christ's Manhood, or it, and no more.
This all Bishop Mortons Institution of the sacrament. b. 7. throughout: for
what other thing do they (popish priests when they are bowing and bleating
before their Images, burning incense and fall down flat before their Altars,
but that which in times past the Prophets of Baal did when as they transported
the worship of God unto an Idol^ Sir John Borthwicke Martyr: Answer to this 7.
Article. Fox Acts and Mon. Edit. ult. vol. 2. p. 610. a.
condemn as gross Idolatry
In Papists, who adore Christ's bread-body,
As God Almighty, and bow down before
Their Altars, only it for to adore
(Not them) there present in the pix always;
You are their Apes, say, do the same as they;
Nay worse, in that you to the Altar bend
Bishop Mortons Institution of the Sacrament. Edit. ult. p 463.
When Christ is not there: this for shame amend.
If Christ his presence be the cause wherefore
You to, before the Altar thus adore,
You ought to do it only when, and where
He present is thereon; not when not there.
But you to your Altars bow commonly,
When as no sacred Elements there lie,
And Christ's not on them, so that you adore
The Altars, Tables only, and no more.
Yea; Reply
but though Christ be not there present then,
Yet he is sometimes there; therefore as Widows, Shelford, and others make this
objection, use this similitude. See my Quench-coale, p. 55, 56, 57. 38. to 44.
277. to 284
most men
At Court, do use to bow to chaires of state,
Because that Kings in them sometimes have sat,
Though absent when they bow; so we likewise
Bow when there are no signs before our eyes.
Well said, Answ.
I now see whence your conges came;
It was from Court, from whence you learnt the same,
But not from Gods Court, but the Kings; so then
It is a worship not from God, but men;
Yea, its no more but a Court complement:
To court, not serve God then, is your intent.
I doubt you mean to turn mere Courtiers now,
And therefore practice, thus to Congie, bow
Unto the Altar, Table, that thereby
You may be perfect in Court ceremony,
Against you resort thither, for to find
Or seek preferment: now I know your mind:
Those who would rise high, must first stoop, and bow;
I feel your pulses, and your tempers know:
But pray you show me, where God ever sent
Men to the Court, to learn to complement
With him in his own Temple? or that he
With Courtly complements will served be,
Which all deem fained, gross hypocrisy;
Take heed you prove not hypocrites thereby;
But say that some to chaires of State thus bow,
When Kings are absent; wisemen doubtless know
That this is nothing but Court adulation;
Such then must be your Courtly adoration.
It is a custom; true, yet void of reason;
Which I^gens autem est vesania eorum qui talia dicunt. Nam rex purpuram
indutus, ab omnibus adoratur; nunquid ergo purpura adoratur, aut Rex?
manifestum est quod Rex: Vbi vero Rex hanc exu^t, and in locum reposuit, non
amplius vestis purpura adoratur. Sedet etiam in templo sape Rex in proprio
Thron^, and adoran^es adorant regem in templo ac throno proprio; Vbi vero
surrexit Rex, nemo neque Templum neq, thronum adorat. Nemo autem adeo insanus
est, ut adorare volens Regem in Throno, dicerad Regem, Surgeex Throno ut te
adorem; sed adorat Regem cum Throno. Epiphanius, lib. Anchoratus, Col. 970. 971.
some omit, and yet commit no treason.
Should men adore each place where Kings have set,
They must their senses, or themselves forget;
Yea, thus to congie when the Kings are gone,
Is but to mock the Kings, and grace their Throne.
It is mere folly, frenzy too, I fear,
To now to chaires, because Kings once sat there.
But be this as it may, no chair of State
Is bowed to, but that wherein Kings once sat
In person, not in picture only; True,
Hence see your sottish folly; then must you
Bow to no Altars, Tables henceforth; Why?
Because Christ nere sat on them really
In person, but in figure, picture; ye
By this your instance quite confounded be:
Its just with God men's reason to confound,
When they make Reason, not his Word, their ground.
But grant you further, that Christ's present in
The sacred bread and wine; yet still you spin
A greater thread of solly, and ensnare
Your selves more fast, as I shall next declare.
For first, no Tables, Altars touch, contain,
Immediately, the sacred bread and wine;
But only hold the vessels, Paten, Cup,
(As Tables do our dishes when we sup)
Which the bread, wine, contain in them alone;
They therefore (if ought) are Christ's chair, and Throne,
Wherein he sits; Altars but their See 1 Chronicles. 28 2. Psalm. 99. 5 Psalm. 132. ^.
^am 2. 1. where the Arc and Temple, are styled Gods Footstool, not his Throne
or chair of state.
footestooles,
Or Christ's at least: why play you then the fools
To bow to Altars, Tables, as Christ's Throne,
Not Cup, or Paten, where he sits alone?
All Altars, Tables, are but stone, or wood;
These vessels silver, gold, not near so good
As these for matter, substance; and in end,
They, Tables, Altars, in worth far transcend,
Made purposely these vessels to sustain,
Which the blessed bread and wine in them contain;
Therefore more worthy Congies and respect.
Why bow you then to those, yet these neglect?
If there be any reason to incline
To ought, its to these vessels; the bread, wine:
Yet see more folly, you bow to the Table,
When these are in your hands, count these a fable,
And Christ within them [as you hold.] And here
You are most gross Idolaters, I fear;
For when you hold these and Christ in your hand,
You bow to Altars, whereon neither stand:
Did you thus bow to Christ, as you pretend,
You would not to your naked Altars bend,
When he is in your hands, contained in
These vessels: here you faulter, err, and sin;
As you do likewise, when you bow, adore
Toward the Altar, Tables, just before
You go to consecrate the Sacrament,
Ere Christ's there present in the Element:
You should (me thinks) not bow, but stay till he
By consecration should there present be.
Yet one bout more; the bread and wine you say,
Are, or contain Christ's body, blood; and they
Are better, greater than Gods sacred word:
Why do you then bow to the Altar, Board,
Not to the Bread, Wine, Christ, nay them neglect,
When in your hands, to turn, bow with respect
Unto mere naked Tables, Altars? sure
Your wits are lost, and Christ will not endure
To see a stone, or planke adored, whilst he,
Then in your hands, must not thus worshipped be.
By this all know it is a truth, no fable,
That you adore not Christ thus, but the Table,
Or Altar, else you would not to them bow,
Whilst you hold Christ within your hands. Then now
At last discern your folly, and pretend
No more, you worship Christ; you him offend:
And since naught in the Sacrament presents
Christ to us, but the Sacred Elements,
You must your Altar-worship quite give over,
And naught but them (if ought) henceforth adore.
And yet the signs, are not so venerable,
As is each Saints heart, wherein Ephesians. 3. 17 2 Cor. 13. 5. Psalm. 2. 20. 2
Cor. 6. 15.
Christ does dwell
In far more lively, real manner, then
In bread, wine, Altars, made for holy men.
Christ's real presence is in these alone,
2 Cor. 12. 12. 37 1 Cor. 6 15. 19. Ephesians. 5. 30. Col. 1. 29.
They are his members, body, flesh, bone, one
In, and with him, called 1 Cor. 10. 12 Ephesians. 4. 12 13.
Christ; if you adore
Christ where he dwells most, you must bow before,
To, toward these his 1 Cor. 6. 15 19. 1. Pet. 25. 1 Cor. 3. 10. 17 2 Cor. 6.
16. Ephesians. 2. 2.
living Temples, where
He still resides; this you will not do, I fear,
But rather bow to senseless Altars, stones
Then to the dearest of Christ's holy ones,
The common objects of your disrespect;
Take heed you be not one day for it checked.
If this displease, to give you some content,
Me thinks your Priests, by office reverent,
Who hallow, hold, take, give the sacred bread
And wine to all, should be more worshipped
Then your bare Altars, since they 1 Cor. 10. 16. 2 Cor. 5. 20 Gal. 4. 14.
represent
Christ's person, who blessed, gave this Sacrament
At first: are Altars (senseless wood or stone)
More sacred, worthy then Priests? who alone
Neglected are, not bowed to then by you;
Doubtless, if bowing be to either due,
It is to Priests [your name] or if you will,
To Col. 1. 23. 24. 1 These. 3. 1. 1 Timothy 4. 6. 1 Cor. 4. 1. 2 Cor 3. 6. Heb. 1.
7. Ephesians. 4. 12. 1 Timothy 1. 12. 2 Timothy 4 5. Romans 12. 7.
Ministers; who there act and fulfill
Christ's Office, who more present then resides
In their hands, persons, then in ought besides,
More than in Paten, Chalice, Altar: yet
These worthy persons, now too often forget
Their honor, office, Christ, whom they present,
And whilst they Paten, Cup, blessed Element,
Hold in their hands, like Isay. 44. 9. to 21. Psalm. 115. 8. Baruch 6.
senseless stocks, or stones
They unto Altars turn, and bow their bones,
Whereas, if Altars, Tables, had but sense,
Life, they would bow and do them reverence.
For shame then be not stocks, or fools henceforth
But know your selves, your office, place, state, worth
And no more crack your brains to justify
Gestures, that strip you of your dignity,
And senses both at once, as you must see,
And now confess, unless you senseless be:
Where Christ's more truly present on the Altar
Then in the Priests; the Priests deserve an halter;
And I shall deem that man a stock or stone,
Who bows to Altars, lets the Priests alone.
O Priests consider well of what I say,
And then in this you will not say me nay:
But if you do, and Altars still adore,
I Will not spend breath to plead a Priests cause more.
But ere we part, once more to Church we will tend;
Why do you not to Font, Pue, Pulpit bend,
As well as Altars, Tables? since in these
Christ is more present in his Ordinances,
Then on these, in most Churches, places where
Baptism, Lords Supper, Sermons frequent are:
In these each week, day, Christ is constantly
Present; on Altars, Tables, quarterly,
Or monthly at the most; he then resides
More in the Pulpit, Font, than ought besides.
You hold, that Matthew. 28. 15. 16. John 3. 3. 5 Romans 10. 13 14. 15.
Baptism, yea, and Gods word too,
Are simply needful men to save; but so
Is not the Eucharist, as all agree;
They then more useful, worthy, needs must be.
These two save men alone, but the other not,
The greatest reverence then you should allot
To Pulpits, Fonts, whence these dispensed are,
Than to the Altars, where Christ is more rare.
But let these pass; you cannot this deny,
That Bibles far surpass in dignity,
Fonts, Altars, Tables, Churches, Pulpits, all;
Which without Gods word, to the ground will fall;
This is their Ephesians. 2. 20, 21.
sole foundation, if it fade,
All else without it, is naught but mere shade;
Both Table, Pulpit, Church, Font, Sacrament:
Of all these then Gods word's most excellent;
In it Gods Spirit, Christ, grace, more reside
Then in all places of the Church beside;
If then you will adore, bow, cringe at all,
You must unto, before Church-Bibles fall:
Your Altar-bowings, while you these neglect,
With God and good men will find no respect.
In fine, Christ's promise is, where two or three
In his name meet together, he will be
Mat. 18. 20 Luke 24. 3. Re. 5 6 Joh. 20. 13. 26. c 19. 26.
In midst of them: yea, Scripture says always,
That God amidst his Church, house, folk does stay:
As he dwells, lives, most in men's middle part
And center; Numb. 5. 3 Psa. 46. 5. Ps. 48 Ier. 14. 9. Hos. 11. 9. Ioe. 2. 27
Zeph. 3. 5. 15. 17 Zech. 2. 5. 10, 11. cap. 8. 3. Rev. 1. 13. c. 2. 3. c. 5. 6
Heb. 2 12. 1 Chro. 16. 1. Exodus 8. 22. Ezech. 43. 7. 9.
not head, foot, but in their Ephe. 3. 17 Gal. 4 6. 2 Cor. 1. 22.
heart,
Whence Altars in the midst of Church did stand
As hearts in midst of men do, writes Per Altar c^r nostrum intelligitur,
quod est in medio corporis, sicut Altar in medio Ecclesiae, Rat. Divin. lib. 1.
Durand.
To say then that Christ sits upon the Table
As you now place it, is no doubt a Fable:
For it stands not in midst of Church, Quire, but
Against the Chancels East-wall, there up shut
Close prisoner, with a new rail, remote from
The Congregation, which now must not come
Nor have seats near it: it is a Laici juxta Altar non sedeant, nec inter
clericos sta^e vel sedere praesumant, sed pars illa quae cancellis ab Altari
dividitur, tantum psallentibus p^teat cle^icis. Iuo Ca^notensis, Decret. pars.
2. c. 1 37. Sed and hoc secundum auth^ri atem canonum modis emnibus
prohibendum, ut nulla foemina ad Altar p^aesi^^at accedere, aut infra
Cancellos stare aut sedere. Conc. Nan. apud Sur. tom. 3. p. 569.
place too high
And sacred for Lay people to come nigh.
If then God, Christ, midst Church and people be,
As by forequoted Scriptures you may see,
Your Tables, Altars, which now stand alone
Far from the Churches midst, are not their Throne:
If you will have them graced with their presence
You must remove them to the midst from thence,
Where they are present; else they will still set,
Besides these Thrones, Object.
whose due place you forget.
But ancient Christians prayed, looked toward the East,
Because the Altar was so placed, at least,
In most old Churches; this is Antid. Lincoln. Sect. 2. c. 7. page 86.
Heylins Fable,
To justify the placing of the Table
Against the East end of the Chancell wall, Answ.

Though he no Altars, Tables, finds in all
Antiquity so seated; when as they
In midst of Church, or Quire were placed always;
Hence Quires were so styled, because men did stand
About the Altar round, like a Crown; and
Did there sing praises; as writes Ideo dictus Chorus, quia in sacris Collectis
in modum Coronae circa Aras starent, and ita psallerent. Isiod. hisp. Orig. l.
6. c. 19.
Isidore,
De Vniverso. l. 5. c. 9.
Rabanus Maurus, Durandus Rat. divinorum l. 1. c. 1. nu. 18 Durantus de ritibus
Ecclesiae, l 1. c. 17. n. 1. Barthol. Gavanus; commen. in rubt. Miss. pars. 1
Tit. 15. sect. 2. Cassan. Litur. c. 22.
others heretofore,
Though some fond Novellists the contrary
Aver, against truth, and antiquity.
Hence in old times, the people round about
The Priest and Table stood [not thence barred out
With rayles as now] when as the Sacrament
Was celebrated, as is evident,
By O miraculum quicum Patre seorsum sed^t, in illo ipso temporis articulo
omnium manibus pertractatur, etc. Fit autem id nullis praestigiis, sed apertis
and circumspicientibus Circumsistent ium omnium oculis. De Sacerdotio. l. 3.
Edit. Fronto-ducaei. Tom. 4. p. 28. See l. 6. p. 83. Multitudinem conspexisse
Altar ipsum Circumdantium.
Chrysostomes words, in the Margin, and
By the Priests prayer at Pro omnibus hic circumstantibus. Canon Missa: And,
omnium Circumstantium qui tibi hoc sacrificium laudis Offerunt. Ib. Honorius in
Genima l. 1. c. 66. Durandus Rationale diu. l. 4. c. 53. Fox Act. and Monum.
Edit. ult. vol. 3. p. 3. 11. Cassandri Liturg. p. 22. 25. 61, 62, 65, 66. 72.
94. Neque Canon debet nimium tacit legi, sed expressa voce, ut a
Circumstantium, posset a^diri and percipi, cum Circumstantes debeant ad
Orationes singulas respondere, Amen. Gerardus. Lerithicus de Missa puel.
prorogand.
Mass, for all that stand
There Altar Domini multorum multi^udine Circund^tum. Athanasius in vita
Antonii, in Bishop Mortors Institution of the Sacrament, l. 6. c. 5. p. 462.
Circunstant autem eum soli eum Sacerdotibus ministri selecti. Dionysius Areop.
Eccles. Hierarch. c. 3.
Round about him, And by old Sacerdos solus Missam nequaquam celebret, etc.
Esse enim debent qui ei Circunstent, quos ille salutet, a quibus ^i
respondeatur, and ad memoriam illi reducendus est ille dominicus sermo.
Vbicunque fuerint duo vel tres in nomine meo congregat^, ibi sum and ego IN
MEDIO eo^^m: Spelmanni Concilia. p. 589. Cassand^i Liturgica, c. 33. p. 8.
Which was taken out of Gregory, lib. Capitulari. c. 7. Regino de Eccles.
Officiis, c. 19.
Saxon
Canons at home, forbidding Priests alone
To celebrate Mass. [marke the reason why]
Because there ought some people to stand by
There round about him, whom he may salute,
And who may answer him, and in pursuit
Hereof, he must remember Christ's words, where
Two or three in my name together are
Met, there am I in midst of them; hence we
In the Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. p. 787. c. ^.
Musarabicke Office find the
Priest kneeling at the Altar, praying thus;
Be present, be present, O good Jesus
In midst of us, an high Priest, as thou wast
In midst of thy Disciples in times past;
And sanctify this our Oblation:
Hence Ser^o ad Clerum in Council. Rhem. Col. 1726. Jesus autem in Medio est,
non in angulo: unde ipse in (...) angelio, Vbi duo, inquit, vel tres congregati
fuerint in nomine meo, in Medio eoru^ sum. Et iterum, Jesus autem transiens per
Medium illorum ibat. Et in libro Sapientiae, In Medio, inquit, Ecclesiae
aperuios meum. Et rursus in Evangelio dicitur, Stetit Jesus in medio
discipulorum subrum. Vae mihi Domine Jesu, si tecum ero in domo tuae, and non
in medio domus tuae. At isti non sic, sunt quidem cum Jesu, sed non in medio
domus ejus, etc.
Bernard sweetly descanting upon
That of the Psalmist, He shall not dwell in
The midst of my house who works pride and sin;
Says, Jesus in the midst of the Church is
Not in a corner; which he proves by this
His speech, Where two or three are met together
In my name, I in midst of them am ever.
And by some other texts. Hence De ecclesiasticis Officiis, l. 2. c. 8 Council.
Aquisoran: sub Ludov: Surius tom. 3. p. 298. Circa aram Christi, quasi Columnae
Altaris sisterent.
Isiodor
With others write, that Deacons heretofore
Stood round about the Altar, as if they
Its pillars were, it to support and stay.
Yea, hence in ancient Liturgia sancti Petri bib. Patrum tom. 1. p. 210. and
Liturgia sancti Iacobi, ib. p. 18, 19. Missa Aethiopica, et missa Mozarab. and
Muzarab: ibid tom. 15. p 746. 748. 763. c. 78. Missa Christianorum apud Indos,
ibid. p. 790. a. 791. a. and Liturgia Basilii, and Chrysostomi.
Massebooke, writers, I
Find Priests still singing, thus I will wash my
Hands in innocence, and so I will
Compass thine Altar round; and Bishops still
When they did hallow Altars anciently,
Did Rational. div. l. 1. cap. de Consecrat. Altaris, and l. 4. c. de
thurificatione Pontif. Roman. p. 144, 145, etc.
cense and Circuit them round frequently,
Which they could not do, unless they stood so
That they might round about them freely go.
Yea, in the ancient Tunc Acolyti vadunt dextralaevaque post Episcopos Circa
Altar. Subdiaconi finito offertorio, vadunt Retro Altar, aspicientes
Pontificem, stantes erecti. Ordo Romanus de Officio Missae, apud Georg.
Cassandri Opera, p. 101, 102. 107. 112. 118, 119.
Roman order, I
This passage find, that Bishops anciently
Did round about the Altar go, when they
Did consecrate; that subdeacons always
Behind the Altar went, and stood upright
After the Offerture, with their eyesight
Fixed on the Pope, which could not be at all,
If Altars stood not distant from the wall.
Besides, it is clear out of Eccles. hist. l. 10. c. 4.
Eusebius,
Hom. 1. in Isai, c. 6. Vidi Dom. de Sacerdotio, l. 3. and 6. and in his
Liturgy.
Chrysostom, De Verbis Domini, Sermon. 46.
Austin, Eccles. Hierar. l. 3.
Dionysius,
Oration. 21.
Nazianzen, Eccles. hist. l 5. c. 22.
Socrates Scholasticus,
Eccles. hist. l. 12. c. 34.
Nicephorus, Eccles. hist. l. 2. c 3.
Bid, De Rebus Eccles. l. 4. c. 19.
Walafrid Strabus,
Rationale Divinorum, l. 1. c. 2. n. 15. c. 1. n. 18. c. 7. n. 15. See
Cassandri Liturgica, c. 3^. p. 84. and my Quench-coale. p. 11. to 30. 235. to
239. 290, etc.
Durand, that Altars, Tables, anciently
Stood in the midst of Churches, Quires, not by
The Eastwall, Altarwise, as now they place
Them in our Churches, with a brazen face.
Affirming that they so stood of old, when
De Origin Altarium c. 6. p. 135.
Hospinian De Missa l. 2. c. 1. p. 177.
Mourney, Tablean, des differens, part. 5. c. 6. p. 307.
Marnix, Nouvaute du Papisme Contr. 11. c. 17, 18. p. 1022.
Moulin, men
Of note] with Cathol. Orthodox. tom. 1. qu. 29 p. 514.
Rivet, and some more learned
Men, in Reformed foreign Churches bred,
With Scripta Anglicana p. 475.
Bucer, In his works p. 476, 477.
Tyndall, Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 1211, 1212.
Ridley, Notes on Exodus c. 20. and 27. p. 279 307
Babington,
Old Fox Acts and Monuments, p 1404 1406.
Ferrer, Answer to Hardings Preface. Reply to Harding, Artic. 3. Divis. 26.
Arti. 13. Divis. 6. p. 362.
Jewel, Answer of a true Christian to a counterfeit Catholic, artic. 15. p.
55, 56 Confuta. of the Rhemish Testament notes, on 1 Cor. 5. 11. sect. 18. 9.
Hebr. 13. sect. 6. Defense against Gregory Martin c. 17. sect. 15.
Fulke, Answer to the Rhemish Testament notes on 1 Cor. 11. sect. 18.
Cartwright Institution of the Sacrament, l. 6. c. 5. p. 462.
Morton,
Synopsis Papismi contr. 9. qu. 6. Error. 53.
Willet, with others prove, that anciently
Altars stood not against the wall, close by
The East end of the Quire, as in these days,
But in the midst, that people might always
Go or stand round about them; Thus stood the
Altar of old in the Roma sater, l. 3. c. 13. l. 2. c. 4. p. 31.
Catacombe
At Rome, and in Saint Peter's Church lately,
[Romes prime Cathedral;] and in history
I read, that Crantzius me trop. l. 1. c. 9. Hospinian de Orig. Alt. c. 6.
histor. Sam. l. 3. c. 1. p. 184.
Witikindonce saw the face
Of Charles the great, decked with a cheerful grace,
After his approach to the Lords Table
In the midst of the Church: And I am able
By See my Quench. coal p. 157, to 160. 3. to 37 and 269. 237, 238. 290. Beda,
Eccl. hist. l. 5. c. 11. 17. 18. 21.
sundry instances to manifest
That Altars stood not anciently at The East
End of the Quire, against the wall, but I
Will only name two more for brevity:
And those at home. In Beda eccl. hist. l. 2. c. 3. Antiq eccle. Brit. p. 7.
habet hoc in medio pene sui Altar, etc.
Austins Church, built by
Austin, first Archbishop of Canterbury:
In that great Church, in Bedes time, the Altar
Stood almost in the midst of the Church, far
From the East-wall, in the North-Isle: [If I Chemnitius examen council.
Trident. pars 4. Platina in Nich. 3. Anastasius de Vitis Pontif. p. 68, 69.
Thomas Becons works, vol. 3. p. 281, 282. Hospiman de Orig. Altar. p. 35.

Conceive him right.] And the Caenbdens Brit. p 460.
Monks of Bury
Abbey in Suffolk in King Edwards days,
[The first of that name] whiles they went to raise
Them a new Chapel, as they dug, found
The walls of an old Church, that was built round,
So as the Altar stood, as it were nigh
Or in the midst; and we think verily,
[Writes Everden a Monk of that place, yea
And Cambden out of him] that this was the
First Church there built unto Saint Edmonds name
And service: In these two Churches of Fame,
Of special note, and great antiquity,
The Altar stood in, near the midst only:
And in the Church where Beda eccl. hist. l. 3. c. 19. Sed p^st annos quatuor.
constructa domuncula cultio^i recep^ui corporis ejusdem, ad Orientem altaris
adhuc sine macula corruptionis invention, etc.
Saint Furse was inshrinde,
Above the Altars East end; as I find,
Saint Godwins Catalogue of Bishops, p 295 296. 315. 352.
Hugh of Lincoln, and John Elmer were
Interred above the Altar, even here
At home: therefore it stood not anciently
Against the East wall of the Quire. Lastly,
Epist. lectori, p. 115. before his translation of the Greek Liturgy.
Hervetus, De Graeco^^n Ritibus, Bibl. Patrum, tom. 15. p. 771. (...).
Genebrard, and Claudius Saints in his Edition of the Greek Liturgy: Parisiis.
1560.
others write,
That in Greek Churches, the high Altars site,
Or place, is in the midst of the Quire, where
De Antiquis Missae Ritibus l. 2. c. 28.
Josephus Vicecomes proves most clear,
That Altars seated were of old, both by
Eusebius, and Martyrs Tombs, anciently
The Beda Eccles. hist. l. 2. c. 1. Fecit inter alia papa Gregorius, ut in
ecclesiis petri et pauli, super corpora eorum missae celebrarentur.
only Altars, which stood East and West,
Not North and South. We must then needs detest
Their shameless impudence, and forgery
Who contradict so clear a verity,
And dare affirm, that Altars heretofore
Were placed against the East wall evermore,
And there rayl'd in; and that men did receive
The Sacrament kneeling, as most believe,
When as its clear, they did receive only
Standing or Hence the Waldenses says was, That the Sacrament ought to be
received at the Table, according to the anci^nt use of the Primitive Church,
where they used to communicate sitting. Fox Acts and Monuments, old Edition, p.
43. a. and Edit ult, vol. 1. p. 300 a. And Mr. Fox himself, Edition old. p 89.
(...). Christordained his Supper a Table matter; we turn it to an Altar
matter be for a memory, we for a Sacrifice. He sa^e, our men stand, and make it
a matter of kneeling. See my Quench-coale, p. 106, to 108. 95.
sitting round the Table, nigh
Them: and where Heylin writes, that men did pray
Eastward, because their Altars stood that way.
There is no ancient Writer, Council, Book,
Attests, that Christians to the East did look,
Because their Altars were so placed: belly
Not thus for shame [then] grave Antidotum Lincolniense, c. 5 p 86, 87.
Antiquity,
To bolster out your errors, Novelties;
That cause is naught which needs the help of lies.
They Gen 2. 8. Basil de Spirim sancto, c 27. Tertullian Apolog. c. 16.
Eastward looked, prayed, because Paradise
Stood there of old, and there the Sun did rise;
Poor reasons if well scanned; yet not the truth,
They learnt Ezekiel 8. 16 Vitruvius de Architectura. l. 4. c. 58 Hospin^an de
Origin Altarium, Philip de Marnix, Tableau des differens, part 5. f 307. See
my Quench coal, p 303. to 307. Dr. Reinolds de Idolo. Romans Eccl. p. 432.
it from the Pagans in their Youth
As might be proved by grave authority,
And Fathers verdicts, which I here pass by.
There is small reason then to symbolize
With them in this their heathenish Rite and guise.
Yet Christians bowed to Altars anciently.
It is a falsehood, one passage only
There is to prove it, it is De Poenitentia. vid. Notae Ibidem.
Tertullians,
And that corrupted by some evil hands,
Written anciently Haris, and so this mistake and corruption might easily
happen, by omitting Cor ^h which added to Haris, or Aris, makes Charis.
Aris Dei adgeniculari,
Whereas it is Charis in the true Copy,
As notes Lacerda, and Junus, Ibid.
Pamelius, though a Papist, and
Some Albaspinaeus. Observe. l. 2. Obs. 22. Heraldus Observat. l. 2. Obs. 22.
Mornay, li. 2. de Missa, c. 1. Salmacius ad Aram Dosiadi.
others, which to cite I will not stand.
The best and oldest Manuscripts so read
That place; yea, sense, and reason for it plead:
For he speaks there, of none but Rhenanus, and la Cerda thidem Tripartita
hist. l 7. c. 35.
penitents,
Excluded both from Church and Sacraments.
For some great crimes; which since they might not come
Within the Church, much less the Altar room,
As See Pamelius ibid. and my Quench-coale, p. 250. to 253.
all confess, they could not bow the knee
Unto the Altar, which they might not see,
But to Gods dear Saints, out of Church, whom they
Kneeld down to, at their houses, both to pray
Them to forgive them, and to supplicate
God for them, whilst thus Excommunicate:
This is the only sense, scope of that place:
This Aris then for Charis, does disgrace,
Not help your cause. Besides this, there is not any
Clear proof or passage in Antiquity,
For Altar-bowing, till Oration de Imaginibus, 1 and 2. p. 449. b. 762
John Damascen,
To prove that Images of holy men
And Christ might be adored, writ, men may bow
To Images, and Altars, (as Rome now
And some it seems did then:) Vt Laici secus Altar quo sancta mysteria
celebrantur, inter Clericos tam advigilias, quam ad missam, stare^ vel sedere
penitus non praesumant; sed pars illa quae cancellis, ab Altari dividitur^,
tantum psallentibus pateat Clericis. Ad adorandum vero and communicandum Laicis
and foeminis; sicut ^os est pareant Sancta Sanctorum: Juo Carna^ensis
Decretalium pars, 2. c. 137. Ex Concilio Moguntino, c. 13. See Council.
Nannetense, cap. 3. apud Surium, Tom. 3. p. 569. a accordingly.
If you rely
On him, you must commit Idolatry,
And Which is Idolatry, Exodus 20. 5 Judge. 2. 12 17. 19. Numb. 25. 2. 1 Kings 19
18. Josh. 23 7. Isa. 2. 8. 9.
how to Altars, Images alike,
As well as toward them, which you mislike,
In words at least, and say, Archbishops speech in Starchamber, p. 48. 51.
You bow not to
But toward them; these Authors both say, To:
This last, seven hundred twenty years and more
From Christ lived; till then none did thus adore
Altars, nor since, till Transubstantiation
Brought in the breads, then Altars adoration.
The Christians for eight hundred years, or more
After Christ, did not bow, kneel, or adore
In Prayer on the Lords days, nor yet between
Easter and Pentecost, as may be seen
In Council. Constant. 6.
Councels, Tertullian de Co^ona Millitis. Basil. de Spiritu Sancto. c. 27.
Fathers, but stood; whence we know
That they to Tables, Altars, did not bow;
Nor to the sacred Elements, since they
These always standing took on the Lords day,
Wherein their knees to pray they never once bent,
Much less to Altars, or the Sacrament.
Whence grave Nonne solennior erit Statio tua si ad Aram Dei stetteris? De
Orat. c. 14. So did Pagans and others anciently in Scripture stand, not kneel
at Altars. Number. 23. 2. 3. 6. 14. 15. 17. 2 Chronicles 5. 10. c. 6. 12. 23. Rev. 8.
3. Chrysostom. de Sacerdotio. l. 3. and the prayers at the Mass forecited.
Tertullian writes, that they stood by
[Not bowed, kneeled to] the Altar anciently,
In all their stations when they celebrated
Christ's supper; Altars then were not railed, grated
About as now, to Dum datur communio aut aliud quippiam officij fit, omnes
stant erecti. Georgij Cassandri Liturgica. c. 11. p. 29 See p 65. 70. 73. 82.
94. 95.
keep the Laity
From coming near them, since they them stood by,
As do the Dum datur communio aut aliud quippian officij fit, omnes stant
erecti. Georgij Cassandri Liturgica. c. 11. p. 29 See p 65. 70. 73. 82. 94. 95.
Aethiopians at this day,
Who stand upright when they receive always.
But Archbishops speech in Starchamber. p 47. to 52.
Knights o'th Garter bowed to, and before
The Altar, and both God and it adore.
What then? I hope this new found argument,
Proves it no worship, but a Complement;
Used by those Knights alone, [not other men]
Not commonly in each place, but where, when
They offer in their grand solemnity;
Their practice then, to others is no tie;
Nor do they deem these congies then, divine,
But merely civil, since they then incline,
As much, or more to the Kings Person, Throne,
As to the Altar, or ought placed thereon:
Nor did these Knights, Archbishops speech. p. 49. 50.
thus bow at first, as ye
In him who this objects, may read; where he
[Admit the Libro Nigro Windorien. p. 65
Black Books Legend true, though not
Once named in English Annals, but forgot]
Confesses, that King Henry of that name
The fifth, by Charter first ordained the same,
When as these Knights first bowed to him alone,
And to his seat; but of them all not one
To God, or to the Altar; whereat he
Offended, thereupon made this decree,
That they thenceforth in their solemnity
Should not to him, and his seat bow only,
But Domino D^o and Altari ejus in modum viroruus Ecclesiasticorum, Ib.
unto God, and to his Altar too,
As Priests and Monks then used for to do:
The King and Lords, who made this Act, were all
Blind Papists, and the times quite blind withal;
The pattern which they then took, was unsound,
Blind Priests and Monks: what shadow then or ground
Can thence be raised, true Christians to induce
Unto this Courtly, or mere Popish use?
Which since it orders them, alike to bow
To God and Altars in one act, I know
Not how they can escape Idolatry;
This then is no rule to follow, but to fly.
And though these Knights, these congies still retain
As civil, they this act and them disdain,
As Popish, as an apish imitation,
Of Priests and Monks gross Altar-adoration.
Who in their Masses, used for to bow
To (before) Altars, as our Priests do now:
Witness their ancient Pontifex inclinans se paulu lum A D Altar: Altari
inclinans: Adorato Altar: pertransit Pontifex in caput Scholae and in gradu
superiore inclinato capite ad Altar. Et salutar Altar, Sacerdos quando dicit
Supplices te to gamus; humiliato capite inclinat se ante Altar, Sub^llaconi ad
Al^are progredientes simul se inclinant coram ^o: Ordo Romanus de Offic. Missae
a pud Greg. Cassandri opera, p. 108. to 130.
Offices and the
Missale parvum pro Sacerdotibus in Anglia itinerantibus. Printed Anno 1623
Ordo Missae p. 19. Sacerdos paratus cum ingreditur ad Altar, facta illi Debita
Reverentia, p. 29. Profunde inclinatus ante Altar.
Small Missall, made for Priests that traveling be
In England (lately Printed,) which enjoyne
Their Priests at Mass to bow down and incline
Unto their Altars, and due reverence
To make to them: which Ribadeniera Fleurs des vies des Saints part 1. p. 104
After Compline and Mattins he visited all the Altar; o^ the Church, making a
prostration and reverence to every of them.
Raymond used, whence
He prescribes Tunc te Curv^bis ad a^am, (...) est, in^linabis Alta^^ Su^^ula
Ray^undi fo. 133.
Priests beginning Mass to bow
Unto the Altar, as our Priests do now.
Should I to this Kings Act, annex the story
Of Card'nall Poole, Popes Legate to Queen Mary,
Whose Fox Acts and Monuments Edit. 1610: p. 1781.
Visitons in Cambridge, did enjoyne
Scholars [in her dayes] to bow, and incline
To, and before the Altar, [the only
Injunction of this kind, our Church story
Affords for Altar-worship] all would cry
Forthwith, it is a brat of Popery;
Begot at first by Transubstantiation,
The Sea Fox Acts and Monuments old Edition. p. 359 a. 623. b. 1528. 1541.
1^30. and my Quenchcoale p. 295. 296. 277. to 284.
ground and cause of Altars veneration:
But since my Muse may not expatiate,
I leave this point for others to dilate;
And how 2 Kings 18 22. 2 Chronicles. 32 12. Ier. 36. 7. Acts 17 23.
some Pagans did bow and adore
Before their Idoll-Altars heretofore.
But will you not have men for to adore
God with their bodies? Yes, fall, kneel before
Him with all humble reverence, when you pray:
This is a worship, which none will gainesay:
It is Psalm. 95. 6. Psalm. 86. 9. Dan. 6. 10. Acts. 21. 5 Ephesians. 3. 14. Psalm.
72. 9. 11.
commanded in Gods Word; Object.
adore
God thus devoutly, Answ.
he expects no more
Worship but this, and will be pleased with it,
Though all these Altar-bowings should omit;
As you by this one Text may understand;
Isay 1. 12. Col. 2. 20. 22. 23.
Who has required these things at your hand?
I have now See my Quenchcoale where this is more fully debated.
answered every Text, proof, ground,
Whereon you this new Altar-worship found;
And made you see, how they all severally
Confute, confound it by Gods destiny;
Your Scriptures, Reasons now are all quite spent;
Had God, or Christ, wil'd that you should have bent,
Or bowed thus, they no doubt would have expressed
It in the Scripture, where is not the least
Touch, show, or color of it: and if these
Texts, grounds and reasons which some men now please,
To urge, had been sufficient to inclined
Men thus to bow, those holy men we find
In sacred writ, would doubtless constantly
Have practiced it; be not more wise then they.
You have no more, I know, left to produce;
Consider all here said, and make good use.
On, and against Popish bowing to Altars,
RIbadeniera Fleures des vies des Saints part. 1 p. 104.
, a late Jesuit,
Of Romes Saint Raimond of Rochfort, does write,
That in the nights he used it discipline
Himself, after the Mattins, and compline,
He all the Altars in the Church, duly
Would visit, and unto them severally
Prostrate himself, and make low reverence.
Belike our Priests and Prelates learnt from hence
To bow to their new Altars; since I find
This Saint the He dyed Anno 1275.
first, who Altars in this kind
Adored; yet not constantly, but when
He whipped himself; in nights, not days. If then
Our Novellers will imitate him, they
Must whip themselves, ere they bow; and in day
Time quite forbear this Complement; and use
It but at night: Both these they will refuse.
I read, Saint Surius Tom. 5. vita Francisci ex Bonaventura. c. 8. et Duralt
Jesuit Flores Exemp c. 5. tit. 6.
Francis the Friar, exhorted
A Cade-Lambe (for he to Beasts, Birds, Preached
Oft-times;) to be attentive to Gods praise;
And hereupon, this holy Lamb always
After, the Church frequented every day,
And without any Tutor (as they say)
Kneeled before the Altar of our Lady,
At the Hosts elevation; (mark you why)
In honor of her Maker; O discant haeretici vel a pecude venerari matrem
Christi, et Eucharistiam adorare. Ibidem.
Surius
Who does relate this history to us,
Writes; O let heretics learn to adore
The blessed Sacrament, and bow before
It, by this Lambs example: happily
Our Altar Worshippers were lesson'd by
This silly Lambs example, to kneel, bow,
Adore before their Altars, Tables now;
And worship them, and Christ, who sits on
Them (as Shelfold, Widows, Heylin, Archbishop Laud; and Dr. Pocklington, in
their places forcited.
they write) as in his Chair or Throne:
But then they should, like this Lamb, kneel only,
And bow thus, when they lift the Host on high;
And that not to the Altar, but the Host:
Should they this do yet, their design were lost,
Wherefore, I doubt, these Wolves in Matthew 7. 15.
sheepes-clothing,
Have rather from two Asses learned this thing,
Famous in Popish Legends, who before
The Host, and Altar kneeled, to adore
Them. The first was, the Rihadeniera Fleures des v^es des Saints. p. 1. page
563.
Ass of Bouivil,
Kept three days fasting, who of her Free Will
Forsook her provender for to adore
The Host her Maker, brought and held before
Her by Saint Anthony; which miracle
P. 95.
Already touched more largely) wrought so well,
That it her own did Convert, nay, more,
Teach Catholics the host for to adore.
I wonder why the Matthew. 21. 2. to 10. Mar. 11. 1. to 11.
Ass which Christ rode on
Into Jerusalem, fell not upon
Her knees, her Makers person to adore,
When as this Ass fell on her knees before
This Host, which did but only represent
His body. Sure some lewd Friar did invent
This Legend; or this Ass was tutored
Like Banks his horse, to kneel thus to the bread,
To cheat the vulgar, and make them adore
The Host, like this Ass, for their Creator;
Else that Ass whereon Christ rode, would as well
As this, have to him on her knees down fell.
In memory whereof Saint Anthony
Holding the Host, and this Ass kneeling by
Thereto, are graven on the high Altar
At Padua, where this happened, or not far
From thence. But this devout Ass did adore
The Host, not Altar; but once, and no more.
Those then who bow to Altars frequently,
Transcend this Ass in devout foolery;
And the next Ass, or Mule; which, as I read,
From Ribadeniera Fleures, etc. part 1. p. 151.
Andelousa in Spain carried
The relics of Saint Bernard, Accurse, and
Three Martyrs more, slain by the cruel hand
Of Pagan Moore in Morrocco, unto
(If you believe the Legend which writes so)
Conimbri, by Gods conduct directly;
And went to the Gate of the Monast'ry
Of Saint Cross, where the Canons Regular
Of Saint Austin reside; and staying there
Vntill' the gates were opened to her, she
Went in first, King Alphonsus, ^is Queen, the
Whole Court, and multitudes then following her
In great procession, to the high Altar;
Before which she kneeled down, and would not stir
Thence, until they had quite discharged her
Of these Saints relics she thus carried;
Which, for a miracle is registered.
This devout Ass, who kneeled thus before
This Altar, taught our Asse-priests to adore
And bow before their Altars constantly:
Yet the but once, and that prodigiously
Thus kneeled; they, in this her far transcend,
In that they to their Altars daily bend,
Without a miracle, and them adore;
Whereas she did, not kneel to, but before
The Altar; not in to reverence, or pray
To God; but there her burden down to lay.
Those then who bow to Altars, far surpass
Saint Francis Lamb, Bonivils, and this Ass
In fond devotion; Beasts, Sheep, Asses, Mules
Acts, in Gods worship, must not be men's rules;
As Rome now makes them, but Psalm. 119. 9 John 5. 39. Gal. 6. 16. Isay. 1. 12
3. c. 8. 20. Luk 16. 29. 2 Pet 1 19. Matthew. 15. 1 to 10. Col. 2. 8. 16. to 23.
Gods word only,
Which Altar-worship does not justify;
Nor yet the adoration of the Host,
Which is not God, but sacred 1 Cor. 10. 16. 17. c. 11 23 24. 26. 27. 28. Luke
24 30 35. Acts 2 46. c. 20 11. John 6. 32. 33. 34. 35 41. 48. 50. 51. 55. 58
compared together.
bread at most.
FINIS.

