HISTORIARCHOS, OR The Exact Recorder: Being The most faithful Remembrancer,
of the most Remarkable transactions of Estate, and of all the English Laws,
and the just Motives of them; for the Proprieties, Rights, and Liberties of the
English Subjects. As most elabourately they are Collected for the benefit of
them, out of the Antiquities of the Saxon and Danish Kings, unto the Coronation
of WILLIAM the Conqueror; and continued unto the present Government Of RICHARD
now Lord Protector.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE Esquire, and Bencher of Lincoln Inn.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Coals, dwelling at the Sign of the halfe-Bowle in
the Old Baily, 1659.

To the Ingenuous Unprejudiced READER.
I Here present thee with The Third part of a seasonable, Legal, and Historical
Vindication of the good old Fundamental Liberties, Franchises, Rights,
Properties, Laws, Government of all English Freemen; with A Chronological
Collection of their Strenuous Defenses by Wars, and otherwise; of all the Great
Parliamentary Councils, Synods, chief Laws, Charters, and other Proceedings, in
them; the great fatal Public Revolutions, Invasions, Wars, National Sins,
occasioning them; and the exemplary Judgments of God upon Tyrants, Oppressors,
Perjured persons, Rebels, Traitors, Regicides, Usurpers, under our Saxon and
Danish Kings, since the year of Christ 600. till the Coronation of King William
the Norman, anno 1066. with some Short Observations of mine own here and there
subjoined, for the Readers benefit, and instruction. A work neither
unseasonable for, nor unsuitable, unserviceable to our present times, worthy the
serious perusal of all who profess themselves trons of the Public Fundamental,
Rights, Liber-Paties, Laws, Properties, Government of the English Nation: or
studious of our old Parliamentary Councils Acts, Laws, Charters Proceedings or
of our English History. From which intelligent wise Christian Readers, by
observing the Providence, Judgments, Proceedings of God toward our
ancestors, and others, for their national, personal crying bloody sins in
former ages, may probably conjecture what Tragical Judgments, Events, our
whole Nation in general, many transcendent Delinquents in particular, have now
just cause to fear and expect, for their exorbitant iniquities, (equalling or
exceeding any in those former ages) unless their speedy, real, sincere
repentance, reformation, and Gods infinite mercy, ward them off.

True it is, that the infallible certainty of future contingent judgments, and
events, national or personal, are Isay. 41.22, 23, 26. Acts 1.7. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Dan. 2.18, 19, 22.
known only to God himself, Dan. 2.21, c. 4.32, 35. Psalm. 7^.6.7. Psalm. 135.6.
I^r. 1.10. Is. 40.23, 24.
who changes the times, seasons, removes Kings, and sets up Kings; pulls
down one and sets up another: roots up, pulls down, destroys, builds,
plants Nations, Kingdoms, Cities, Families, Persons, at his pleasure; doing
whatsoever pleases him, both in heaven, earth, the Sea, all deep places, and
amongst all the Inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hands, nor say
unto him, What do thou? Yet notwithstanding wise intelligent Christians by a
serious t^utination, and comparing of the Judgments of God, expressly threatened
against, and usually inflicted upon Nations or Persons, for such and such
transgressions, in precedent generations; Prove. 22.3. c. 27.12. Isay. 26.20,
21. Amos 3.6, 7. Rev. 18.4. See the the life Dr. James Usher p. 39, 86. to
92.166.
may probably conjecture and predict, what severe exemplary punishments our
late present transcendent wickednesses, and outrageous crimes, are like to draw
down upon our impenitent, secure perjured sinful Nation, and the hairy scalps
of all those Grand Offenders, who go on still in their exorbitant trespasses,
though they deem themselves Isay. 14.10. to 15. Obad. 3.4. Ier. 49, 16.
advanced above the reach of any Powers or Tribunalls which may pull them down,
and execute justice on them, answerable to their bloody crimes, and violences,
there Eccles. 5.8. Deuteronomy. 32.35, Psalm 94.8^ 9.
being an higher than the highest, who is both able and resolved, to execute
vengeance on them in his due season, as well as on all Notorious grand
Offenders in former ages, though never so many, if their repentance prevent it
not.

It was David's profession to God (though a victorious King, General, and Man of
War) Psalm. 119, 120^
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. O that
this were the present temper of our secure Nation, and all the sinners,
warriors, and Grandees in it, in this fearless stupid age; wherein though
Mich. 7, 3^
we commit wickedness with both hands, Isay. 3, 8, 9.
our tongues and doings are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory:
and we all proclaim our sins like Sodom, and hide them not, Psai. 10.5, 11.13.
yet Gods judgments are far above out of our sight, and we all say in our
hearts (like those secure Atheists mentioned in the Psalmist) we shall never be
moved, we shall never be in adversity: God has forgotten, he hides his face,
he will never see nor require it: Yea, notwithstanding all Gods threats, curses
against, his late severe punishments of our National, personal sins: Deuteronomy.
29.19, 20.
We bless our selves, and say in our hearts, we shall have peace, though we
walk in the imaginations of own hearts, to add drunkenness to thirst: quite
forgetting what follows thereupon, The Lord will not spare such men, but the
anger of the Lord, and his jealously shall smoke against them, and all the
curses that are written in his book shall lie upon them, and the Lord shall
blot out their names from under heaven.

Let therefore the contemplation of the National, Personal judgments of God
upon our Ancestors here recorded, for those crimes of which we are now as deeply
guilty as they were then, awaken us from our present Lethargy, lest we be Prove.
2^.1. c. 24.21, 22.
suddenly destroyed, and that without remedy; and teach us all this Gospel
l^sson, Romans 11.20, 21. Be not high minded but fear: for if God spared not the
natural branches (heretofore, or of late) take heed lest he also spare not
thee.

Mat Paris Hist. Angl. p. 968.
Rumor de Veteri faciet futura timeri.
The fourth Section of the third chapter (which begins this third part) should
have been printed with the Second part, as a branch thereof, above two years
since, but that the Stationer then kept it back for fear it should swell that
Part overbigg for his present Sale; whereby the bulk of this Third Part, is now
augmented beyond its first intended proportion; which all Readers may do well
to bind up with the two former parts, to which it has special relation, more
particularly to the ten Propositions in the First Part, to which the
Proposition figures in the margin refer.

The most of that large tract (of 450. years space) I have here Chronologically
run through, was spent either in bloody intestine wars between our Saxon Kings
themselves, or the Welsh Britons, warring upon and against each other: or else
in defensive Wars both by Land and Sea, against the invading, bloody,
plundering Danes, Norwegians, Scots, Normans, and other Foreign Nations. During
which M^litary seasons Religion, Devotion, Piety, Law, Justice, Parliamentary
Councills, Synods, and just Government, are usually cast aside, and quite
trampled under foot; yet it is very observable (for the perpetual honor of our
Kingdom^ and Kings) that^ as during the reign of our ancient B^itish Kings, (
before the Saxon race here seated, our Kingdom of Britain produced See part
2. p. 21.24. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. Spelmanni Concilia, Fox, Speed^ Holinshed in
their lives, usserius, De Ecclesrit. Primordiis, c. 3, 5. Godwins Conve^sion of
Britain,
Lucius the first Christian King, Helena the first Christian Queen, and
Constantine the great, her son, the first Christian Emperor in the world, who
publicly embraced, professed, countenanced, propagated the faith and Gospel of
Jesus Christ, and abolished Pagan Idolatry in their Dominions: And of later
times as our English Realm brought forth Fox Acts and M^num^nts, Hall, Hayward,
Spend, Holinshed, and others in their lives. Rastal, Rome, Crown, Monasteries,
Fi^st-fruits, Mass, S^rvice, and Sacramen^s.
King Henry the 8th, the first Christian King in the world, who by Acts of
Parliament, abolished the Popes usurped power and jurisdiction out of his
Dominions; King Edward the sixth his son, the first Christian King, and Queen
Elizabeth the first Christian Queen we read of in the world; who totally
abolished, suppressed Popery, banished it their kingdoms, and established the
public Profession of the Protestant Religion, by public Statutes made in
their Parliaments: So during the reigns of our Saxon Kings, after they turned
Christians, this Realm of England procreated Capgrave in his Chronic. Sir Henry
Sp^lman in his Epistle Dedicato^y before his Councils.
more devout, holy, pious, just and righteous Kings, eminent for their piety,
justice, excellent Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws, transcendent bounty to the
Church, Clergy, and Martyrdom for the defense of Religion, and their Country
against Pagan Invaders, than any one Kingdom throughout the World. There being
See Mat, ^estm. Capgraves Chronicle, Sir Henry Sp^lman his Epistle to his
Councils.
no less then 15 or 16 of our Saxon Kings, and 13 Queens within 200 years
space, who out of piety, devotion, and contempt of the world (according to the
piety of that age, out of date in this) voluntarily renounced their earthly
Crowns, and Kingdom^, and became professed Monks, Nuns, to obtain an
incorruptible Crown and Kingdom in Heaven; and 12 Kings crowned with Martyrdom,
being slain by Pagan invaders, 10 of them being canonized for transcendent
Saints, and enrolled for such in all Martyrologies, Liturgies of the Church;
which I doubt few of our new Republican Saints will be: Yea the piety of our
Kings in that age was generally so surpassing, Ut mirum tunc fuerat Regem non
Sanctum videre, as Preface to his Chroicle.
John Capgrave informs us. Whence Wernerus (a foreign Chronologer) in his
Fasciculus temporum, records; Plures se invenisse sanctos Reges in Anglia, quam
in alia mundi Provincia quan^umcunque populosa. And De Vita and Miraculis
Edwardi Confessoris, col. 369, 371.
Abbot Ailred long before him, gives this memorable testimony of the Sanctity,
Martyrdom, Justice and study of the peoples public we al before the private,
shining forth in our Saxon Kings, more than in any other kings throughout the
world. Verum prae cunctis civitatibus Regnisve terrarum, de sanctitate Regum
suorum Anglia gloriatur: quorum alii coronati martyrio, de terreno ad caeleste
Regnum migraverunt: alii exilium patriae praeferentes, mori pro Christo peregre
deligerunt; nonnulli posito diademate, disciplicinis se monasticis subdederunt:
quidam in justitia et sanctitate regnantes, prodesse subditis quam praeesse
maluerunt (whose footsteps, with the pretending self-denying antimonarchical
domine^ring Saints over us would now imitate) inter quos istud Sydus eximium,
gloriosus Rex Edwardus, emicuit, quem cernimus and in divitiis egenum, and in
deliciis sobrium, in purpura humilem, and sub corona aurea seculi contemptorem:
So as the Prophesies of Psalm. 72, 2, 6. Isay. 42, 4, 10, 12. c. 49.1, 23. c.
51, 5. c. 60, 9, 10, 11. c. 66.19. seem to be principally intended and verified
of our Kings and Isle above al^others in the world. No wonder then that these
ages of theirs afford us (notwithstanding all the wars, tumults, combustions
therein) sundry memorable Presidents of great Parliamentary Councils, Synods,
Civil and Ecclesiastical excelleut Laws and Canons made in, and royal Charters
confirmed by them, with diverse memorable Mouuments both of our Parliamentary
Councils, Kings, Princes, Nobles, Peoples constant care, diligence, prudence,
fortitude, in defending, preserving, vindicating, and perpetuating to posterity
the good old Laws, Liberties, Franchises, Rights, Customs, Government, public
justice and Propriety of the Nation; to suppress, abolish all ill Law,
tyrannical, unjust Proceedings, Oppressions, Exactions, Imposts, Grievances,
Taxes, repugnant thereunto; and to advance Religion, Piety, Learning, the free
course of Justice, and the peoples welfare. Which I have here in a
Chronological method (for the most part) faithfully collected out of our
antientest best Historians and Antiquaries of all sorts; where they ly
confused, scattered, and many of them being almost quite buried in oblivion,
and so far forgotten, that they were never so much as once remembered, or
in^isted on, either in our late Parliaments and Great Courts of Justice, in any
late public Arguments or Debates, touching the violation or preservation of
the fundamental Laws, Liberties, Properties, Rights, Franchises of the Nation,
now almost quite forgotten, and trampled under foot, after all our late
contests for their defense.

I have throughout these Collections strictly confined my self to the very
words and expressions of those Historians I cite, coupling their relations
together where they accord in one, citing them severally where they vary, and
could not aptly be conjoined, transcribing their most pertinent passages in the
language they penned them (omitted by our vulgar English Chronologers) and
annexing some brief observations to them for Explanation or Information, where
there is occasion.

The whole undertaking I here humbly submit to the favorable acceptance and
censure of every judicious Reader; who if upon his perusal thereof, shall
esteem it worthy of such an Encomium, as His^o^^^ Anglicana. scriptores, (...)
1757.
William Thorn ( a Monk of Canterbury) has by way of Prologue praefixed to
his own Chronicle; Valens labor and laud dignus, per quem ignota noscuntur,
occulta ad noticiam patescunt; praeterita in lucem, praesentia in experientiam,
and futura temporibus non omittantur; and quia labilis est humana memoria,
necesse constat scriptis inseri memoranda, ne humanae fragilitatis contingens
oblivio, fieret posteris inopinata confusio. It will somewhat encourage me to
proceed from these remote, obscure times, to ages next ensuing, in the like, or
some other Chronological method, But if any out of disaffection to the work, or
diversity from me in opinion, shall deem these Collections useless or
superfluous, I hope they will give me leave to make the selfsame Apology for my
self and them, as our most judidious Historian De Gestis R^g. Angl. l. 5. p.
173, 174.
William of Malmesbury long since made for himself and his Historical
collections. Et quidem erunt multi fortassis in diversis Regionibus Angl^ae,
qui quaedam aliter ac ego dixi, se dicant audisse vel legisse. Veruntamen si
recto aguntur judicio, non ideo me censorio expungent stilo. Ego enim veram
Legem secutus Historiae, nihil unquam posui, nisi quod a sidelibus relatoribus,
vel scriptoribus addidici. Porro, quoquo modo haec se habeant, privatim ipse
mihi sub open Christi gratulor, quod continuam Anglorum Historiam ordinaveram,
vel solus, vel primus. (at least wise in this kind) Si quis igitur post me
scribendi de talibus munus attentaverit, mihi debeat collectionis gratiam, sibi
habeat electionis materiam. Quod superest, munus meum dignanter suscipite, ut
gaudeam grato ^ognitoris arbitrio, qui non erravi eligendi judicio.

Thus craving the Benefit of thy Prayers for Gods Bles^sing on these my
publications, for the common liberty, weal and Benefit of the Nation, I
commend both them and thee to Gods tuition and benediction.

WILLIAM PRYNNE.
Lincolns Inn December 6. 1656.
A Seasonable, Legal and Historical Vindication of the good old Fundamental
Liberties, Rights and Laws of England.
Chapter 3. Section 4. Comprehending a brief Collection of all the most
observable Parliamentary Councils, Synods, Conventions, Public Contests,
Debates, Wars, Historical Proceedings, Passages, Records, relating to the
fundamental Liberties, Franchises, Rights, Customs, and Government of the
People under our English Saxon Kings, from the year of our Lord 600, till the
death of King Edmund Ironside, and reign of Cnute the Danish King, Anno Dom.
1017. with some brief Observations on and from the same.
IN the former Section I have presented you with a general brief Account of our
first English Saxon Christian Kings limited Power and Prerogative, being
obliged to govern their English-Saxon Subjects, not arbitrarily, but justly,
according to their known Laws, and totally disabled, to alter, repeal any old,
or enact any new Laws; to impose any public Taxes, Tallages, Imposts, Customs
whatsoever, on their people, upon any real or pretended necessity; to m^ke any
War, Peace; or to alienate the Lands or ancient Revenues of their Crowns, to
any pious, public or private uses whatsoever, without the common consent of
their Nobles and Wisemen in general Parliamentary Councils; together with a
Summary of the Laws of Ethelbert, the first Christian Saxon King, wholly
pretermitting the Names, Acts, Kingdoms, of our first Pagan Saxon Usurpers,
rather than lawful Kings: who, though many and great in their generations,
were very speedily brought to nothing their See Mat. Westminst. An. ^86, etc.
Malmesbury, de Gest. Regum Anglo^um. l. 1. Hen. Huntindon Hist. lib. 2.
Ethelwerdi Hist. lib. 1.2. Fox Acts and Monum. Vol. 1. p. 148. Speeds Hist. of
Great Britain, p. 209, etc.
Kingdoms begun, erected by blood, conquest, and mere power of the Sword,
standing not long unshaken by civil wars among themselves, each King envying
his equals greatness, and seeking to enlarge his own Dominions upon the next.
In which Combustions few or none of them came to the Grave in due time, but
were either slain in war, or treacherously murdered in Peace, or expelled their
Realms by, or forced to resign their Crowns to others, after all their former
prosperous successes and reigns wholly spent in Wars, Troubles, Seditions,
Rebellions, Rapines, affording nothing worthy memory for their peoples good,
the Kingdoms settlement, or imitation of Posterity. Whence Henry Huntindon in
the close of the 2 Book of his Histories, p. 320, has this Observation
concerning them, very seasonable for our present times; Vide igitur Lector, and
perpende, quanta Nomina quam cito ad nihilum devenerint; Attend quaeso and
stude, cum nihil hic du^et, ut adjuiras tibi regnum, and substantiam illam,
quae non deficiet, Nomen illud and honorem qui non pertransibit, monimentum
illud and claritatem quae nullis saeculis veterascet. Hoc praemeditare, summae
prudentiae est, acquirere summae, caliditatis, adipisci summae faelicita^is.

I shall now in this Section proceed in my intended Chonological Method, to
their next succeeding Christian Saxon Kings reigns in England, till the reign
of King Cnute the Dane, Anno Domini, 1017.

It is recorded of Aethelbert Ch^onic. Will. Thorn: col. 1760, 1761 1762, 2123.
Spelman Con^il. p. 118. to 129. ^h^onicon Ioh^n. Brom^on, col. 733.
the first Christian An. Dom. 605
Saxon King of Kent, that keeping the Fea^t of our Saviors Nativity at
Canterbury, with his Queen, Ead bald his Son, Archbishop Augustine, and the
Nobles of the Land; he there held a Parliam^ntary Council with them, on the 5.
of January, in the year of our Lord 605. Which Thomas Sprot thus expresses (in
the Language of his age rather than of that) Convocato ibidem communi Concilio
tam Cleri quam Populi, die quinto ^anuarii, Proposition 5^ 6^ 10.
he did then and there, Omnium and singulorum approbatione, and consensu, as he
relates; or cum consensu Venerab^lis Archie ^iscopi Augustini Ac Principum
meorum, and cum Aedbaldi filii mei, aliorumque Nobilium optimatum meorum
Consilio, as his Charters reci^e, give, grant and confirm to the Church of St.
Peter and Paul in Canterbury for ever, sundry Lands, precious Utensils,
Privileges and Immunities by his Charters, made and ratified in this Council.
In which (it is most probable) he likewise made those Judicial Decrees and
Laws, with the advice of his Wise men, for the bene^it of his people in his own
Country Saxon Language, Which our venerable Ecclesiast. Hist. lib^ 2. c. 5.
Beda, De G^stis Reg. Angl. l. 1. c. 1.
William of Malmesbury, Hist. l. 3. p. 226.
Huntandon, Chron. col. 738.
Bromton, and Mr. Seldens Ti^les of Honor, part. 2. c. 5. p. 602.
others mention only in the general, and Bishop Spelman. Council. p. 127.
Enulph has registered to posterity in his famous manuscript, entitled Textus
Rosfensis, of which I have given you some account before. Section 3. p. 50, 51,
52. on which you may reflect.

In the year of Christ 627 Beda Eccles. Hist. Gentis Anglorum l. 2. c. 12, 13,
14. See Mat. Westminster. An. 626, 627. Malmesb. de gest. reg. l. 1. c. 3. Hen.
Huntindon, hist. l. 3. p. 327, 328. Chron. Iohannis Bromton, col. 781, 782.
Simeon Dunelmensis Epist. de Archiepiscopis Eborum, p. 77. Radulphus de Diceto,
Abbreviationes Chron. col. 438. G^rvasius Acta Pon^ificum Cantuar. col. 1634.
Godwin in the life of Paulinus, Polychronicon, Fabian, Graf^on, Holinshed^
Speed, Fox in the life of Edwin. Seldens Titles of Honor, part. 2. c. 5. S^^t.
6. p. 632.
Paulinus persuading Edwin King of Northumberland to b^come a Christian, to
avod eternal torments, and to be made a partaker of the Kongdom of Heaven; The
King answered, That he was both willing, and ^ught to receive the faith which
he taught, but he ought first to confer with his Friends, Princes, and
Counselors concerning it, th^^ so, if they concurred in ju^gement with ^im,
^^ey might all be bap^ized together. Assembling therefore his Wisemen, and
advising with them, he ^emanded severally of them all, What that Doctrine,
which they never heard of till then, and that new worship of God which was
preached by Paulinus, seemed to t^em? Proposition 5, 6.
To whom Coyfi the chief of the Priests presently answered: Do thou consider, O
King, what that Religion is which is now preached to us; I profess unto thee,
that which I have most certainly learned, that the Religion we have hitherto
embraced, has no virtue at all in it; whereupon it remains, that if those new
things which are now preached unto us, shall appear to thee upon examination,
to be better and stronger than our Religion, let us hasten to embrace them
without any delay. To whose wise persuasions and words, Another of the Kings
Nobles giving his Assent, spoke something concerning the brevity and
incertainty of this life, and of their ignorance and incertainty of that life
which is to come, concluding, That if this new Doctrine brought any thing to
them more certain, than that they formerly embraced, it ought to be deservedly
followed: The rest of the Elders and Kings Counselors, prosecuting the like
things, by Divine admonition, Coyfi added; that he desired to hear Paulinus
preaching concerning God, more diligently than before; which when he had done,
by the Kings command; he cried out (having heard his preaching) I heretofore
understood, that what we worshipped was nothing, because by how much the more
diligently I sought the truth in that worship, the less I found it. But now I
openly profess, that in this preaching, the truth shines forth, which is able
to give unto us the gifts of eternal life, salvation, and happiness; Whereupon,
O King, I advise thee, that the Temples, and Altars we have consecrated without
any fruit or benefit, we should now presen^ly execrate and burn. Upon ^his,
without more debate, the King openly gave his assent to the preaching of
Paulinus, and renouncing Idolatry, confessed that he did embrace the faith of
Christ. And when the King demanded of Coys^ his Priest, who ought first to
profane and destroy the Altars and Temples of the Idols, with the rails and
and bounds wherewith they were enclosed? He answered, I, who have worshipped
them through foolishness. And presently renouncing his Superstition, he
demanded Arms and an Horse of the King, ( Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 156.
which by their old Law Priests might not use:) which being granted him, he
mounted the Horse, with a Sword and Lance in his Hand, and riding to the Idols
thus armed (the people deeming him to be mad) profaned the Temple, and
commanded his Companions to destroy and burn it, with the Idols, and all the
Hedges about it, which they did. Whereupon the King, with his Nobles, and very
many of the people, embraced the Christian Religion, and were baptized by
Paulinus, in the Church of St. Peter at York; (which the King there speedily
commanded to be built of Wood, and afterward enlarged) ordaining Paulinus
Bishop of that place, who converted, baptized him and his people; as Beda and
others more largely record the History. From which memorable president we may
observe these particulars.

1. That the King himself could not then alter the established Laws or received
Religion of this Realm, though false; nor introduce new Laws, or set up the
true Religion, without the concurrent Assent of his Nobles and Wisemen in a
general Parliamentary Council 2. That the Princes, Chief Priests, Nobles, an^
Ae^dermen of the Realm, were the Parliament Members in that Age. 3. That every
one of them in these Councils had freedom of Vote and Debate; and gave their
voices severally, for the bringing in of Christianity, and de^truction of
Idolatry.
De Gestis Regum Anglor. l. 3. c. 2. p. ^8. See Fox Acts and Mon. vol. 1. p.
157.
William of Malmesbury gives this Character of this Kings Government, after he
became a Christian, and of the vicissitude of humane affairs, worthy our
present observation, he being suddenly slain in battle, together with his Son,
after all his former conquests and felicity.

Nullus tunc Praedo Publicus, nullus latro domesticus, insidiator conjugalis
pudoris procul; Exp^lator alienae Haereditatis exul: Proposition 4.
Magnum id in ejus ^audibus, and no^tra aetate ^plendidum. Itaque Imperii sui,
ad eos limits incrementa perducta sunt, ut Iustitia and Pax liben^er in mu^uos
amplexus concurrerent osculorum, gratiam grata vicissitudine libantes; and
faeliciter tunc Anglorum Respublica procedere potuisset, nisi mors immatura,
^emporalis beatitudinis Noverca, turpi fortunae ludo, virum abstulislet
Patriae. Aetatis enim 48. Regni 17. Rebellantibus Regulis, quos ^ub jug^m
miserat, Ceadwalla Britonum, and Penda Merciorum, cum Filio interemptus,
mi^erabile varietatis humanae fuit exemplum: nulli prudentia inferior, qui ne
Christianam fidem, nisi diligentissime inspecta^a ra^ione, voluit suscipere,
susceptaeque nihil existimare comparabile,

Anno 673.
Anno 673 Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 5. Mal. Westminst. and Florentius
Wigorniensis An. 673. Gervasius Doroberniensis. Actus Pontif. Cantuar. col.
1639. Matthew Pa^ker Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 15. Spelmani Council. p. 152, 153.
Fox Acts and Mon. vol. 1. p. 161. Proposit. 5, 6.
Theodor Archbishop of Canterbury, held a great Council at Hertford;
presentibus Episcopis Angliae, ac Regibus, and Magnatibus universis; the
Bishops of England, and Kings (to wit, King Lotharius and Easwine) and all the
Nobles being present at it. In this Council, they made ten Canons or Laws,
which they all subscribed and ra^ified with their hands; the 7th. whereof was,
That a Synod (or Parliamentary Assembly) should be assembled twice, or (because
diverse causes hindered) Placuit omnibus in commune, they all agreed in common,
that in the Calends of August, in a place called Clov^sho^n, a Synod should be
congregated, at least once every year. The rest of them you may peruse in the
marginal Authors at leisure, being mee^ly Ecclesiastical, and not so pertinent
to my Discourse.

Evidentiae Ecclesiae Christi. Cantuar. col. 2207.
Ceadwalla King of the West Saxons, Anno 680.
In the year of our Lord 680. granted to Bishop Wilfrid certain Lands, with
their appurtenances, called Pagaliam; cum consensu and devota con^irmatione
omnium Optimatum meorum; with the consent and devout confirmation of all his
Nobles (assembled in a Parliamentary Council) the grant of his Crown Lands to
him, Propos. 10.
being not valid to bind his Successors without his Nobles concurrent
confirmation.

De Gestis regum Angl. l. 1. c. 2. p. 14. Mr. Seldens ^istory of Tithes, c. 10.
sect. 1. p. 269.
William ^f Malmesbury writes of him; That though before his conversion unto
Christianity, he addicted himself to wars, and to plunder and spoil his
neighboring Kings; yet he conscientiously dedicated the tenth of all his
spoils to God. Inter haec arduum memoratu est, quantum etiam ante Baptismum
inservierit pietati, ut omnes manubias quas jure praedatorio, in suos usus
transcripserat, Deo Decimaret. In quo, et si approbamus, affectum, improbamus
exemplum; juxta illud; Qui o^fert sacrificium de substantia Pauperis, quasi qui
immolat ^ilium in conspectu patris.

If all the Plundering, warring Saints of this Age would imitate his example,
in giving the Tenths of all their spoils and plunders to God and his Ministers,
instead of spoiling them of their Tithes and ancient Church-Revenues, men would
deem them as good Saints as this plundering conquering Saxon King; of whom it
is likewise storied, that Beda Eccles. Historiae l. 4. c. 16. Camdens
Britannia^ p. 275. Thomas Stubs Actus Pontif. Eboracensium col. 1691. and
Malmesbury de Gestis Pontificum Angliae. l. 3. in Wilfrido. Chron. Johan.
Bromton, col. 742.757. Spelman. Council. p. 181. Speeds Hist. p. 227.
before he turned Christian, intending to invade the Isle of Wight, and unite
it to his Kingdom; he vowed to give the 4 th. part of the Island, and Prey, to
Christ, if he should vanquish it: Whereupon he conquering the Isle, slew the
Natives in it, being Pagans, with a Tragical slaughter; and in performance of
his vow, gave to Bishop Wilfrid and his Clerks (for their maintenance and
encouragement) the possession of 300 ^-Hides of Land, being the fourth part
thereof. When our new Conquerours shall be so bountiful in bestowing the
fourth (or but the ^enth) part of all the pretended conquered Lands they have
gotten on Christ's Church and Ministers, instead of invading and purchasing the
Churches ancient Lands, Gl^bes, Tithes and Inheri^ance, they may demerit the
Name and praise of Saints, as well as Ceadwalla; who, before he came to the
Crown, as he was unjustly banished from his Country, through the envy of
others, only for his virtues and worthiness, which first caused him to take up
arms and invade the South Saxons, two of whose Kings he slew successively in
the field, after which he twice invaded, and afflicted Kent with grievous wars
(taking advantage of their civil discords) wherein he shed abundance of
Christian blood: So when he had reigned but two years space, after all his
victories, out of mere devotion, he voluntarily left his Crown, Kingdom,
Conquests, and went in Pilgrimage to Rome (where he was baptized) to bewail and
expiate the guilt of all his former wars, bloodshed, plunders, rapines,
perplexing his Conscience, and there died.

An. Dom. 616.
The first Charter and grant I find extant of any Lands given to the Church,
after those of Ethelbert King of Kent, forecited, is that of Evidentiae
Ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. col. 2207.
King Eadbaldus his Son and successor, Anno Dom. 616, who being by Gods mercy,
through the admonition of Archbishop Lawrence converted from the pravity of his
life, for the Salvation of his soul, Propos. 1.10.
and hope of a future reward, gave to Christ-Church in Canterbury, and to the
family serving God in that Church, his Lands called Edesham, with the Fields,
Woods, Pastures, and all things thereunto of right appertaining, free from all
secular services, and Fiscal tributes; except these three; Expedition, Building
of Castle and Bridge.

The next in time, An. 679.
is the Sea Chronica VVil. Thorn, and Evidentiae Ecclesiae Christi Cantuar.
col. 2207.2225. where all these Grants and Charters are recorded: and
Monasticon Anglicanum, published by Mr. Doddeswel, etc. since this was penned.
^rant of Lotharius King of Kent, Anno 679. of certain Lands in the Isle of
Thannet, to the Monastery of Raculph, free from all secular services, except
these three, Expedition, Building of Bridge and Castle: To which I might annex
these ensuing Grants and Charters, which I shall only name; The Grant of King
Egfrid, and his Queen Etheldrida, of Hestodesham to Bishop Wilfrid, Anno 674.

The Charter and Grant of Ceadwalla aforesaid, and Kendritha his wife (of 4
plough-Lands to Archbishop Theodor, and the Family of Christ-Church in
Canterbury, free from all secular services, but those 3 forementioned) An. 687.
of Withrid King of Kent, Anno. 694, of King Offa, An. 774. of King Edmund, An.
784. of King Kenewlfe, An. 791, 814, 815, 822. of King Wilof, An. 829. of King
Athulfus, An. 832, 833, 834. of King Ethelstan, An. 927, 940. of King Edred,
An. 941, 948, 949. of King Egered, An. 979, 980. and of King Cnute, An. Dom.
1016. To pretermit others of this kind.

All which Grants being for the most part, only of their own private Lands
gotten by Purchase, Proposit 1.10^
or Conquest, not of the Lands, or Demesnes of their Crowns, passed by their
own Charters alone, without any confirmation or assent of their Nobles in a
Parliamentary Council, not mentioned at all in them. But no grants of any
Lands, Rents or Revenues o^ their Crowns, to pious or other uses, were then
either valid in Law, or obligatory to their successors, without common consent
and rati^ications of their Nobles in Parliamentary Councils, which for this
reason is still mentioned in all their Charters and donations of such Lands and
Rents to pious uses. Neither could they exempt those Lands from any of these
three forenamed public charges (for the common defense and bene^it of their
Realms) by their own royal Char^ers alone, unless ratified by the Nobles in
their great Councils. Whereupon in all these forecited Charters, and other
grants of Lands by particular persons, ratified by these Kings, they exempted
them only from all secular services, exceptis Expeditione, Pontis and Arcis
constructione, which they could not discharge them from, but by special Grants
in General Parliamentary Assemblies, as subsequent Presidents will more ful^y
demonstrate.

Anno 685.
Simeon Dun^lmensis Historia Dun^l. Eccl^siae, l. 4. col. 57, 58. Ge^vasius
Doroberniensis, Actus Pontif. Cant. col. 1639. Florentius Wigo^n. An. 684. p.
254. Godwins Catalogue of Bishops in the life of Cu^bert.
Theodor Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno 685. held a Council at Twyford, in the
presence of Egfrid King or Northumberland, who going in person to St. Cutbert
(when as he neither by Le^ters nor Messengers could be drawn out of his Island
Lindesfarne to the Synod) brought him to it much against his will: where; by
the command of all the Synod, he was constrained to take upon him the Office of
a Bishop: Whereupon King Egfrid by the advice of Archbishop Theodor, Bishop
Trumwin, and totius Concilii, and of the whole Council, for the salvation of
his and his successors souls, by his Charter gave to St. Cutbert and all his
successors, the Village called Creic, and 3 mile in circuit round about it,
together with the City called Lugabadia, and 15 miles circuit round about it,
Proposit. 10.
to have to him and his successors, for the service of God for ever, as freely
and quietly as he himself enjoyed them, and to dispose thereof at his pleasure;
which Charter the Archbishop and Bishops present in the Conncil, confirmed
with their Subscriptions. What other Councils and Synods were held under this
Archbishop Theodor at Hartford, Clovesho, Ethelwerdus Hist. l. 2. c. 8. calls
it Lethlege.
Heathfield, (or Hatfeild) and what Canons were made in them, for the
confirmation of the Christian faith, the 5 first General Councils, etc. you may
read at leisure in Gervasius^ Doroberniensis, Matthew Parker, and Godwin in his
life, where they are recorded; and in Matthew Westminster, An. 880. Chronicon
Iohannis Bromton, Col. 741, 756, 799, 780. Radul. de Diceto Abbreviationes
Chronic. Col. 441. Chronica Will. Thorn, col. 1770, Henry Huntindon,
Historiarum lib. 3. p. 335, Spelmanni Concilia, p. 152. Beda Ecclesiasticae
Historiae, l. 4. c. 5, 17, 18. Mr. Fox Acts and Monuments vol. 1. p. 160, 161.
To which I shall re^er you.

About the year of Christ 692. Anno 692.
Ch^o^. Iohannis Bromton col. 759. to 767. Lambardi Archaion. Spelmanni Council.
Tom. 1. p. 122. to 136. Mr. Seldens Titles of Ho- p. 632. Fox Acts and
Monuments, vol. 1. p. 164.
Ina King of the West Saxons, who succeeded Ceadwalla, by the exhortation and
advice of Cenred his Father, Hedda and Erkenwald his Bishops, and of all his
Aldermen (or Senators) and of all the Elders and Wisemen of his Realm, in a
great Assembly of the Servants of God, for the salvation of his peoples so^ls,
and the common conservation of his Realm, Enacted sundry Ecclesiastical and
civil wholesome Laws, that by them just judgments might be founded and
es^ablished, throughout his Dominions, and that from thence^orth it might be
lawful for no Alderman, Senator, or other person living within his Realm, to
abolish these his Laws; Proposit. 1, 2, 4, 5.
tending all to advance Piety, Justice, Peace, and preserve his people from
violence, rapine, oppression, and all Punishments, Taxes, Fines, but such only
as were imposed, ascertained by his Laws and Parliamentary Councils, as you may
read at large in the Laws themselves, especially Lex 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 16,
17, 51, 73, 74.

In the year 694 Anno 694.
William Thorn Evidentiae Ecclesi^e Christi Cantuar. col. 2208. Spelm.
Council. p. 189. to 199.
Withred King of Kent summoned Brithwald Archbishop of Canterbury, Toby Bishop
of Rochester, with the other Abbots, Abbesses, Priests, Deacons, Dukes and
Earls to a great Council at Beccanceld (or Baccanceld, as others write it:)
where consulting all together concerning the State of the Churches of God,
within that Realm, how they might establish and perpetuate to them to the end
of the World, those Lands and Revenues which their pious Kings and Ancestors
had granted and appropriated to God and his Church, Proposit. 4, 6, 10.
as their perpetual inheritance, without substraction or diminution, They
thereupon enacted, decreed, and in the name of God Almighty commanded, that all
their successors, both Kings and Princes, with all other Laymen whatsoever,
should not invade the Righ^s, Lands or Dominions of the Churches, which they
then confirmed; nor presume to viol^te the Privileges granted to them, and
specially by king Withreds Charter, which they ratified in this Council with
all their subscrip^ions; wherein he and they exempted Churches from all s^cular
services and Tribu^es, but such as they should voluntarily and freely render
without compulsion, which should not be drawn into custom to their prejudice;
wi^ne^^e this Clause of the Charter, and exemption then confirmed; and ab omni
debito vel pulsatione Regalium Tributorum, ^isi sua spontanea volu^tate, ex
la^gitate beneficiorum quid facere velint; tamen hoc imposterum non servetur,
nec habeatur in malam consuetudinem.

Anno 697.
The same Spelm. Council. p. 194.
King Withred, in the Parliamentary Council of Berghamsteed, Anno 697. by the
advice and common consent of his Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Orders, cum
viris qui^usdam militaribus; Proposit. 5.
enacted sundry Ecclesiastical and civil Laws, to be added to the former Laws
and customs of Kent: the first whereof is this, That the Church shall be free,
and enjoy her Judgments, Rents, and Pensions.

Anno 700.
And Spelm. Council. p. 198. Evidentiae Eccles. Christi, Cant. col. 2208, 2209.
Antiqu. Eccles. Bu^. p. 34, 35.
Anno Dom. 700. this king Withred, una cum consensu Principum meorum, together
with the consent of his Nobles and Bishops (who subscribed their names to his
Charter) granted to the Churches of God in Kent^ that they should be
perpetually freed ab omni exactione publica tributi, atque dispendio vel
laesione, a praesenti die and tempore, etc. From all public exaction of
Tribute, and from all damage and harm: rendering to him and his posterity,
Proposit. 1.10.
such honor and obedience as they had yielded to the Kings h^s antecessors;
under whom Justice and Liberty was kept toward them. Anno 678. to 706.


About the year of our Lord 678. Will. Malmes. de Gest. Pontif. Angl. l. 3. p.
264. to 269. Chron. Ioh. Brompt. col. 791, 792, 793, 794. Sim. Dunelm. de
Archiepis. Ebor. col. 78. Spelman. Council. p. 200. to 206. Man. Parker, Tho.
Stubs, Godwin in the lives of Archbishop Theodor, VVilfrid^ and Bri^^wald. Mat.
Westminster. Anno 692, 711. Hist. Anglicanae Scriptores antiq. An. 1652, col. 78,
294, 295, 296, 440, 441, 1691, 1741. Fox Acts and Monunments, vol. 1. p. 160,
161^ Propos. 2, 4, 5, 7^
Wilfrid Archbishop of ^ork ^eing in a Council unjustly depri^ed of his
Bishopric by Theodor Archbishop of Can^erbury, who envied the greatness of his
Wealth, Power, and Diocese, which he would and did against Wilfrids will, in
that Council divide i^to ^ more Bishoprics, was after that time exiled the
Realm, through the malice of Egfrid king of Nort^umberland, and Emburga his
Queen, (whom he would have perswad^d ^o become a Nun, and desert her Husband,
as some Authors write, and others deny in his favor) without any just and
lawful cause; and after that about the year 692. being again deprived of his
Bishopric and right by the Judgment and sentence of another Council held
under Aldrid king of Northumberland, and Bertuald Archbishop of Canterbury; he
thereupon ma^e two successive appeals to Rome against their two unjust
sentences, as he conceived them: The first to Pope Agatho, and a Council of 150
Bishops, held under him; who decreed, he should be restored to his Bishopric
and make such Bishops under him (by advice of a Council to be held `by him) as
he should deem meet; with which decree against his first s^ntence, he returning
from Rome to king Egfrid, to whom he delivered it, sealed with the Popes Seal;
the king upon ^ight and reading thereof, in the presence of some of his
Bishops, tantum a reverentia Romanae sedis abfuit, was so far from obeying this
Decree of the Roman See, that he spoiled Wilfrid of all his Goods and
possessions, and committed him prisoner to a barbarous and cruel Governor; who
thrust him into a dark dungeon for many days^ and after that committed him to
another more cruel Jailer than he, called Tumber, who endeavored to put him
into Fetters by the Kings command; which he could no ways fasten upon his Legs,
but they presently fell off again, through a Miracle. Whereupon wickedness
giving place to Religion, he was loosed from his Bonds, detained in free
custody, and afterward released, but not restored. After which, about the year
693. he appealed again to Pope John, against the proceedings of the second
Council, which refused to re-admit him to his Archbishopric, unless he would
submit to the decrees of Archbishop Theodore, and Brithwald his successor;
which he refused to do, unless they were such as were consonant to the decrees
of the holy Canons, which he conceived theirs not to be, because they would
order him to condemn himself without any Crime objected to him. Upon which
appeal, this Pope, wi^h his Bishops, pronounced Wilfrid, free from all Crime,
and ordered him to return to his A^chbishoprick; writing Letters to Ethelred
King of Mercians, and Alfrid King of Northumberland to restore him thereunto.
Alfrid receiving the Popes Letters by Wilfrids Messengers, altogether refused
to obey the Popes commands in this Case; Proposit. 7.
saying, Quod esset contra rationem, homini jam bis a toto Anglorum Concilio
damnato, propter quaelibet Apostolica scripta communicare: That it was against
reason, to communicate with a man already twice condemned by the whole Council
of the English Nation for any writings of the Pope (so little were the Popes
authority and decrees then regarded in England, contradicting the kings and
English Councils proceedings) neither would he restore him all his life. After
his death Edulfe usurping the Crown by Tyranny, Wilfrid repaired to him to
restore him to his Archbishopric, upon this account of the Popes Letters;
Whereupon he was so enraged with him for it, though formerly his great friend,
that he presently commanded him to depart the Realm forthwith, unless he would
be sp^^led of all his goods, and cast out of it with disgrace. But this Usuper
being deprived both of his Realm, Crown, and Life, in little more than 3 Months
space, and Osred son of king Alfrid, being restored to the Crown by the Nobles,
as right heir thereunto; at last Wilfrid was re-invested in Anno 705.
his Bishopric by the decree of a Council held under him in Northumberland, at
a place called Nidden, An. 705. not so much in obedience to the Popes command,
as king Alfrids, attested by Elfleda his Sister, then Abbess of Streneshash;
witness these words of Berfride, Ego jussionibus Papae obediendum censeo,
prae^er^im cum eorum ro^ori, accedat Regis nostri Iussio^ and nostrae necessit
atis sponsio, etc. Puer in Regem levat^s, hostis abactus, Tyrannus extinctus;
est igitur Regiae voluntatis ut Episcopus Wilfridus revestiatur. Upon which he
was accor^ingly restored: whereupon all the Bishops embraced him, and
reconciled themselves to him.

This Bishop Wilfrid procured to the Church of Hagustald, which he founded, and
was Bishop thereof, many privileges, and that ^or one miles circuit round
about, Proposit. 10.
none should be arrested going or coming, bu^ enjoy inviolable peace. Quod
in^titutum authoritate and privilegiis Romanae sedi^ Apostolicorum, and
Archiepiscoporum, and Episcoporum, and Regum and Principum tam Scotiae quam
Angliae confirmatum est. Quod si aliquis De Stat. and Episcopis Hagus^alaensis
Ecclesie, l. 1. c. 5. col. 29^.
temerarius insringere audebit, and magnae pecuniae damno obnoxious erit, and
perpet no Anathematis gladio ab ecclesi^ seperabitur; as Richa^d Prior of
Hagustald records. An. 708, 709, 712.


Anno Domini 708 Antiqu. Ecclesiae Brit. p. 20. Balaeus script. Brit. Centur.
1. c. 91, 94, 99. Centur. Magdeb. 8. c. 9. Spelm. Council. p. 209. to 217.
Egwin Bishop of Worcester, procured king Kenred and Offa by their Charters, to
grant and confirm many Lands and Privileges ^o the Abbey of Evesham; which Pope
Constantine likewise ratified by his subscription at Rome, as well as ^hese
kings, in the presence of many Archbishops, Bishops, Princes and Nobles of
diverse Provinces, who commended and approved their Charters and Liberality. In
purs^ance whereof, Pope Constantine writ a Letter to Brithwald Archbishop of
Canterbury, to summon Concilium totius Angliae, Proposit. 5, 6, 10.
a Council of all England, to wit, of the Kings, Bishops, Religious persons of
Holy Orders, Optimatesque Regni cum proceribus suis, with the Nobles and great
men of the Realm; who being all assembled together in the name of the Lord; The
Archbishop should in their presence, read the Charters of these Kings and the
Popes confirmation of them, that they might be confirmed by the favor and
assent of the Clergy and the people, and consecra^ed with their Benediction.
Whereupon king Kenred and Offa, after their return from Rome, assembled a
General Council in a place called Alne, where both the Archbishops Brithwald
and Wilfrid, with the rest of the Bishops, Nobles, and these two Kings were
present: wherein, Donationes omnes confirmatae sunt, all these their Donations
and Charters were confirmed; and likewise in another Synod at London, An. 712.
A most pr^gnant e^idence, that these kings Charters and Donations, though
ratified by the Pope himself, were not valid nor obligatory to their successors
or people, without their common consent to, and confirmation of them in a
general Parliamentary Council of the Prelates, Nobles, Clergy and Laity, even
by the Popes and these kings own confessions and practice in that age.

An. 716.
In the year of our Lord 716. Ingulph. Hist. p. 851, 852.
Ethelbald king of M^rcians, by his Charter gave to God, the blessed Virgin,
Saint Bartholomew and Kenulphus, the whole Isle of Croyland, to build a
Monastery; and confirmed it to them for ever, free from all Rent and secular
services; and inde Char^am suam in praesen^ia Episcoporum, Proposit. 10.
Procerumque Regni sui securam statuit; all his Bishops and Nobles of his Realm
assenting to, and ratifying this Charter of his, both with the subscriptions of
their nam^s, and sign of the Cross, as well as the King; that so it might be
firm and irrevocable, being his demes^e Lands, which Charter is at large
recorded in the History of Ingulphus.

An. 720.
About the year of Christ 720. L^g^s Ed. Confessoris c. 25. Spelmanni Council. p.
219. See Polychronicon, l. 5. c. 28. Mat. VVestminst. An. 586.
some (fabulously) write, that king Ina took Guala daughter of Cadwallade^,
last king of the Britons to wife, with whom he received Wales and Cornwall, and
the blessed Crown of Britain. Whereupon, all the English that then were, took
them wives of the Britons race, and all the Britons took them wives of the
illustrious blood of the English and Saxons, Proposit. 5, 6^
which was done, Per commune Concilium et assensum omnium Episcoporum ac
Principuru^, Procerum, Comit^m, et omnium Sapientum, Seniorum, et populorum
totius Regni, (a^^emb^ed ^o^^^her in a General Parliamentary Council) Et per
praeceptum Regis Inae; whereby they became one Nation and People: After which;
they all called that, the Realm of England, which before was called, the Realm
of Britain, and they all ever after stood together, united in one, for common
profit of the Crown of the Realm, and with a unanimous consent most fiercely
fought against the Danes and Norwegians, and waged most cruel wars with them,
for the preservation of their Country, Lands and Liberties.

An. 705. King Spelman. Council. p, 227, 228, 229. etc. Chron. Johan. Brom^on.
col. 758. and Monasticon Angl^
Ina by his Royal Charter, Anno 725.
granted and confirmed many Lands to the Abbey of Glastonbury, endowing that
Abbey and the Lands thereto belonging, with many large and great Privileges,
exempting them from all Episc^pal Jurisdiction, and from all regal exactions
and services, which are accustomed to be excepted and reserved; to wit, from
Expedition and building and repairing of Castles or Bridges; from which they
should inviolably remain free and exempted, Proposition 6, 10.
and from all the promulgations and per^urbations of Archbishops and Bishops:
which privileges were formerly granted and confirmed by the ancient Charters of
his Predecessors Kenewalcus, Kentwin, Ceadwalla and Baldred. This Charter of
his was made and ratified by the consent and subscription, not only of king Ina
himself; but also of Queen Edel^ur^^^ king Baldr^d Adelard, the Queens B^o^her^
consentientibus etiam omnibus Britanni^^ Regibus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis,
Ducibus, atque Abbatibus, all the Kings, Archbisho^s, Bishops, Dukes, and
Abbots of Britain, consenting likewise thereunto^ many of which subscribed
their names unto it, being assembled in a Parliamentary Council for that end.

An. 727.
King Matthew Westminst. An. 727. p. 765.
Ina, In the year 727. traveling to Rome, built th^re a school, for the
English to be in^tructed in the faith; gran^ing toward the maintenance of the
English Schol^rs there, a penny out of every house within h^s Realm, Proposi^.
1, 5, 6.
called Romescot, or Peterpence; to be paid toward it every year. All which
Things and Tax; That they might continue firm for perpetui^y, Statutum e^t
genera^^ ^ecre^o, etc. were confirmed by a general decree of a Parliamentary
Council of ^is Realm; then held for that purpose; of which Part. 2. p. 71.
before more largely.

In the year of our Lord 742. There was Evid^ntiae Eccles. Christi Cantu. col.
2209. Spelmanni Council. p. 230, 231. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 21.
a Great An. 742.
Parliamentary Council held at Clovesho (or Clyffe) where Ethelbald King of
Mercia sat President, with Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury; the rest of the
Bishops sitting together with them, diligently examined things necessary
concerning Religion, and studiously searched out of the an^ient Creeds and
institutions of the holy Fathers, how things were ordered according to the rule
of equity in the begin^ing of the Churches birth in England; whiles they were
inquiring after these things, and the ancient privileges of the Church, at last
there came to their hands, the Liberty and Privileges which King Withred had
granted to the Churches in Kent: Proposit. 5.10
which being read before all, by King Ethelbalds command; they were all very
well pleased therewith, and said unanimously, That there could not be found any
so noble and so prudent a Decree as this, formerly made, touching
Ecclesiastical Discipline; and therefore, Hoc ab omnibus firmari sanxerunt,
decreed that it should be confirmed by them all. Whereupon King Ethelbald for
the salvation of his soul and stability of his kingdom, confirmed and
subscribed with his own munificent hand, That the Liberty, Honor, Authority,
and security of Christ's Church in all things, should be denied by no person,
but that it should be free from all secular services, with all the lands
pertaining thereunto, except Expedition and building of Bridge and Castle. And
like as the said King Withred himself ordained, those privileges should be
observed by him and his, so he and this Council commanded, they shall continue
irrefragably and immutably in all things. And if any of our Successors, Kings,
Bishops, or Princes shall attempt to infringe this wholesome Decree, let him
render an account to Almighty God in that terrible day; But if any Earl,
Priests, Clerk, Deacon or Monk shall resist this Decree, let him be deprived of
his degree, and sequestered from the participation of the body and blood of the
Lord and alienated from the kingdom of God, unless he shall amend with due
satisfaction, what he has unjustly done, through the evil of Pride.

Ingulph. Histor. p. 853. Will. Malmsb. de gest^ Reg. l. 1. c. 4. p. 29.
Antiqu. Eccl. Bri. p. 22. Spel. Conc. p. 242. to 258. Mat. Westminster. An. 748.
Malmesb. de gestis Pont. l. 1. in Cuth. p. 197.
Anno 747. An. 747.
There was another Parliamentary Council held at Clovesho, or Cly^fe, under
king Ethelbald, where the king himself, with Cuthbe^t, Archbishop of
Canterbury, eleven other Bishops, cum Principibus et Ducibus, with the Princes
and Dukes, were present.

In this Council were some Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons made, the last
whereof was, for Prayers to be publicly made for Kings and Princes
incessantly; that the People might live a Godly and peaceable life under their
pious protection. In this Council king Ethelbald renewed and enlarged his
former Grant of Privileges to the Churches, recited at large in the Marginal
Authors, the sum whereof is this, Proposit. 1, 5, 12.


Plerumque contingere solet, pro incerta futurotum temporum vicissitudine, ut
ea quae prius multorum fidelium personarum testimonio consilioque roborata
fuissent, ut fraudulenter per contumaciam plurimorum and machinamentis
simulationis, sine ulla consideratione rationis, periculos^ dissipata essent,
nisi auctoritate Literarum, and testimonio Cyrographorum aeternae memoriae
inserta sint. Quapropter Ego Ethelbaldus Rex Merciorum, pro amore caelestis
patriae, han^ donationem me vivente concedo; Ut omnia Monasteria and Ecclesiae
Regni mei, A publicis vectigalibus, and ab omnibus operibus, oneribusque
absolvantur, nisi in instructionibus Arcium vel Pon^ium, quae nulli unquam
possint laxari, (as Ingulph. renders it, or as other Copies; nisi sola quae
communiter fruenda sint, omnique populo edicto R^gis, facienda jubentur, id
est, instructionibus Pontium, vel necessariis defensionibus Arcium contra
^ostes, non sunt renuenda:) Sed nec hoc praetermittendum est, cum necessarium
constat Ecclesiis Dei. Praeterea habeant famuli Dei propriam Libertatem in
proficuis Sylvarum, in fructu Agrorum, in captura piscium; nec munuscula
praebeant Regi, vel Principibus, nisi voluntaria, sed liberi Domino serviant,
in contemplatione pacifica per totum regnum meum usque in aevum. Sed cunctas
rribulationes quae nocere vel impedire possint in Domo Dei, omnibus Principibus
sub mea potestate degentibus, demittere and auferre praecipio; Quatenus
sublimitas Regni mei prosperis successibus polleat in ^erris, and meritorum
manipuli multipliciter maturescant in coelis. Qui vero haec benigna mentis
intention at que in-laesa cogitatione custodierit, aeterna claritate
coronetur, ornetur, glorificetur; Si quis hoc, quod absit, cujuslibet personae
tyrannica cupiditate instinctus, contra hanc donationis char^ulam saeculari
potentia fretus venire nititur, sit sub Anathemate Iudae Proditoris Domini
nostri Jesu Christi. Ad confirmandum vero hoc nostrae beneficentiae munus, Hi
Te^^es adfuerunt, and Nostri Magistrarus, Optimates, et Duces, fidelissimique
amici concesserunt et scripseruut: Then follow the subscriptions of the King,
Bishops and Nobles, with, Ego his statutis consentiens subscripsi,
confirmandoque signum crucis aravi.

In this Chron. W. Thorn, c. 3. sect. 7. col. ^77^.
Council, amongst other Synodal Decrees subscribed by the Bishops, It was
decreed, That the Feasts of St. Gregory the Pope, and St. Augustine the English
Apostle, should be perpetually observed with greatest solemnity, Proposition 5^
King Ethelbald, with his Nobles, being there present, and approving it.

In the year of Grace 752. Anno 752.
Cuthred king of the West Saxons being unable to endure the proud Exactions and
insolences of king Ethelbald, for vindica^^on of his own and his peoples
Liberty from his oppressions, raised an Army, and fought a bloody Batt^l wi^h
him at Beorford; where through Gods assi^^ance (who gives grace to the Humble,
and resists the Proud) he routed him and his whole Army, and after, An. 755.
slew him in a second battle (he disdaining to fly) by the Treachery of Bernred,
his Captain, the chief Author of his death.

King Matthew Westminster. p. 273. Chron. Iohannis Brom^on, col. 769, Huntindon.
Hist. l. 4. p. 341. See Holinshed, Speed, Grafton in their lives, VVil.
Malmesbury de gest. reg. l. 1. c. 4. p. 28.
Cuthred deceasing, Sigibert his kinsman who succeeded him, growing insolent
and proud by his Pre^ecessors great successes, Proposit. 1, 2, 4.
became intolerable to his Subjects, treating them very ill in every kind,
Depraving or altering the Laws of his Ancestors, Anno 756.
for his own private Luere, Matthew Westminst. An. 756. p. 274. Chron. Johan.
Brom^on, col. 770, 796. Will. Malmesb. de Gest. Reg. l. 1. c. 2. p. 15. Hen.
Hun^indon, Hist^ l. 4. p. 34^, 342, Floren^. Wigorn. An. 755. p. 274.
Polychr^n, l. 5. c. 25. Capgrave, F^bian Holinsh^d, Speed, Grafton in his life,
and the life of Kenulphus, Hoveden, Annal. pars prior. p. 408.

Propos. 1, 2, 4.


and exercising exactions and cruelties upon his Subjects, setting aside all
Laws. Whereupon his ^aithfull Counselor Earl Cumbra, ovingly admonishing him
to govern his people more mildly and justly, that so he might become amiable to
God and men; he was so incensed with him, that he commanded him most wickedly
to be slain, and became more cruel and Tyrannical to his people than before.
The Pe^r^ and Commons hereupon seeing their Laws and Liberties thus violated,
and their Estates and Lives every day in danger, being incensed into fury,
assemb^^ng themselves together, did all unamimously rise up in Arms against him
and upon mature prudent deliberation, by the unanimous consent of all, expelled
him the Kingdom for his Tyranny and mis-governmenr. Upon which Sigebert flying
into the woods for shelter, like a forlorn person, was there slain by Cumbra
his Swine-herd, in revenge of his Masters murder. Florentius Wigorniensis
relates, that after his expulsion from the Realm by the Nobles, for the
multitude of his unjust deeds; Kenulphus, allotted him the County of Hampshire
for his maintenance, until he slew Earl Cumbra (such was the Charity and
Humanity of those times, even to an expelled, deposed Tyrannical King, now
quite out of date) with whom Ethelwerdus, Hist. l. 2. c. 17. and Polychronicon,
l. 5. c. 24. accord. Some of our Historians (especially E^helwerdus and
Wigorniensis) relate; that Kenulphus usurped the Crown by mere force of Arms,
first drawing the Nobles and People to rise up against, and expel Sigebert for
his exorbitant actions, and the multitude of his unjust deeds, and then
usurping the Throne, being not of the blood Royal (as Malmesbury relates)
though of a Noble family: But they all Malmesb. de Ges^is Reg. l. 1. c. 2. p.
16. Ethelwerdus Hist. l. 2. c. 17, 18. Hen. Huntindon, Hist. l. 4. p. 343. Mat.
Westminster. An. 786. Sim. Dunelm. Hist. col. 110. Chron. Johan. Bromt. col. 770.
Hoveden Annal. pars prior, p. 409, 410. Polychron. l. 5. c. 17. Fabian,
Capgrave, Grafton, Holinshed, and Speed in his life. Florentius Wigorn. p.
278.279.
unanimously record, that he came to a miserable end upon this occasion. When
he had reigned 31 years with honor and good success, being puffed up
therewith, and fearing lest Kinear^us (Sigiberts Brother) who began to be
potent, should revenge his Brothers death upon him, and dispossess him or his
posterity of the Crown, he banished and compelled him to depart his Kingdom.
Who thereupon giving way to the time, voluntarily sled out of his Dominions.
But soon after secretly drawing together (through private Conventicles) a band
of desperate men, he found an opportunity to fall upon Kenulphus, when he went
with a few followers to visit his Paramore at Merton, where he besetting the
House round, slew the King, with all his followers. The fame of which Act
coming to his Nobles and Soldiers not far from the place, They upon
Exhortation of Esric, the chiefest of them, not to let pass the death of their
Lord unrevenged, to their notorious and perpetual infamy, furiously ^ncountred
Keneardus and his Accomplices, and notwithstanding all their fair promises of
Money, and preferments to them, and all entreaties, after a sharp bloody
encounter, put them all to the sword, with the loss of some of their own lives.
Ecce quomodo Dei Iustitia, non solum futuro saeculo, Proposition 2.
verum etiam in isto, digna meritis manifesto judicio recompensat, Proposit. 8.
etc. Add Henry Huntindon, Roger Hoveden, John Bromton, Malmesbury, and others,
as a Corollary to this History of Sigibert; and Kenulphus. Which all Traitors,
Tyrants and Usurpers treading in their exorbitant foots^eps, may do well
advisedly to consider.

In the year of our Lord 758. An. 758.
Mat. West. An. 758. p. 274. VVil. Malmesb. de gest. reg. l. 1. c. 4. p. 28.
Sim. Du^elm. Hist. col. 105. chron. Io. Bromt. col. 770, 776, Hen. Huntind.
Hist. l. 4. p. 3^2, 346. Hovedon. Annal. pars 1. p. 408. Speeds Chron. p. 254,
368. See Polyc. Fabian, Graft. Holinshed in his and Offa his life, Wigorniensis. An.
755, p. 274.
The people of the Realm of M^rcia rising up against their King Bernred because
he governed them not by just Laws, but by Tyranny: a^^embled all together in
one, as well Noble as Ignoble; and Offa being their Captain, they expelled him
out of the Kingdom, and then^ by the unanimous consent of all, as well Clergy
as people, they crowned Offa King. This Bernred, (as Malmesbu^y, Spee^, and
Simeon Dunelmensis write) treacherously mur^hered King Ethelbald his Sovereign,
whose General he was, and thereupon usurping his Throne, and turning a Tyrant,
(as most Usurpers do) was in the very first year of his usurped reign, expelled
the Realm, and soon after slain by Offa; and so dignum sinem insidiarum tulit,
being Author necis of his Sovereign, King Ethelbald, a suis tutoribus
fraudulenter interfectus, as our His^orians observe. A good Memento for other
Traitors and Usurpers treading in his footsteps; Qui Regnum Tyrannus invasit,
and per modicum tempus in parva laetiti^ and jocunditate tenens, Regnum cum
vita perdidit, as Wigorniensis writes of him. Prop. 1, 2, 4, 5.


The Man. West. p. 278, 279, 290. VVil. Malmesb. de gest. reg. l. 1. c. 4. p.
32. Spel. Council. p. 315.
English complaining to King Offa, An. 775.
in the year 775. of the great exactions in foreign parts under Charles the
Emperor, they being then at variance, so as their trading and merchandise was
every where prohibited in both their Realms, thereupon King Offa, by gifts sent
to the Emperor, obtained this Grant and Privilege from him for his Subjects.
That all Pilgrims passing through his Dominions to Rome for piety and devotion
sake alone, Proposit. 1, 4^
should have free and peaceable passage without any molestation or Tribute.
That all Merchants and others in the company of Pilgrims passing only for gain,
not devotion, should pay only a certain established Tribute in sitting places.
That all English Merchants and Traders should have lawful protection, by his
command, within his Realm, and if in any place they were vexed with unjust
oppression, that upon complaint to him or his Judges, they should have full
justice done unto them.

An^ 780, 781
In the year 780. Aethelred, or Adelred, king of Northumberland, Mat. West. p.
280. Hen. Huntind. Hist. l. 4. p. 346, 347. Malmes^. de gest. reg. l. 1. c. 3.
Hov^d^n Annal. pars prior, p. 409. Polychr. l. 5. c. 17.
was deposed by his Subjects after he had reigned 3 years, and quite driven out
of his Realm by his Nobles; who the next year after assaulted and burnt a
certain Consul (or Earl) being their justice in his ^wn house, plus aequo
saevientem, for tyrannizing beyond the Bounds of Law and Right. I shall not
insist upon the manifold Insurrections of these Northumberlanders against their
kings, nor their disloyal depositions, expulsions, Murders of most of them,
upon pretended oppressions and Exorbitancies in Government, rather than ^eal:
Propos. 1, 2, 4.
nor on the strange, general, bloody, frequent depredations, wars,
devastations, Plagues, Judgments, Invasions by Danes, Normans, Scots, and
others, inflicted justly on them for the same by Divine Justice, more than on
all other parts of this Island, since I have touched some of them Part. 2. p. 56
to 64.
before, and shall glance at more of them hereafter; all which the studious may
read at leisure, in Maslmesbury, Huntindon, Hoveden, Aethelwerdus, Matthew
Westminster, Bromton, Florentius Wigorniensis, Simeon Dunelmensis, Radulphus de
Diceto, Polychronicon, Holinshed, Speed, and others: Only I shall give you the
sum of them about this age in the words of Sim^on Dunelmensis, and Richardus
Hagulstaldensis In Historia de exordio Christianitatis and Religionis totius
Northumbriae, and Richardus Hagustald^nsis, de Stat. and Episcopis
Haegustaldensis Ecclesiae, col. 300. See Antiqu. Ecclesiae Brit. p. 32, 33, 34.
Sim. Dunelmensis Hist. de Gestis Regum Angli^, co^. 199. Chron. Ioh. Bromton,
col. 966. Tho. Stubs Acta Pontif. Eboracensium, col. 1708. Hen. de Knyghton de
Event. Angl. l. 2. c. 3. VVil. Malmesb. de Gest. (...) l. 3. p. 103. Hen.
Huntind. Hist. l. 7. p. 306^ Rog. Hoveden, Annal. pars pri^r, p. 451,
Crudelis exinde Barbarorum manus innumeris navibus in Angli^m transvecta,
omnia quaqua versum depopulans, Northunhymbrorum autem provincias atrocius
devastans, omnes Ecclesias, omnia Monasteria ferro, and incendio delevit, adeo
ut nullum pene Christianitatis signum post se discedens reliquerit. Monachi qui
loci reverentia confidentes remanserunt de Ecclesia extracti, alii in mare sub
hostibus submersi, alii Captivi abducti, alii detruncati, alii aliis tormentis
miserabiliter affecti, omnes simul interierunt. Et inde prosiliens slamma et
ferro, in exterminium omnia duxit, etc. After which sad successive devastations
for sundry years by the Danes, they were so totally depopulated, and extirpated
by Famine, Sword, and Pestilence by the Normans, An. 1069. that the whole
Country was reduced into a desolate Wilderness, without an inhabitant, and lay
untilled for nine years space; bestiarum tan^um and latronum latibula; being
only Dens of Beasts and Thieves. And how many times it has been wasted, de
populated with fire and sword since this, by the Scots, and what barbarous
cruelties they have exercised therein, you may read in the Continuation of
Simeon Dunelmensis by the Prior of Hagustald, col. 264. in Historia Ricardi
Prioris Hagustaldensis de Gestis Regis Stephani and bello Standardi, col. 315,
316. and other Chronicles since that time. The Lord in Mercy divert the like
judgments from that Northern part, and the whole kingdom now, for the like
transgressions of a later date.

In the year of Christ 787. Anno 787.
(as most account) Hen. Huntindon Hist^ (...). 4. p. 343. (...) Matthew
Westminster An. 789. p. 281. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 26. Cent. M^^^^deburg.
Cent. 8. c. 9. Hoveden Annal. pars prior, p. 410. Florentius VVigorn^^^^sis,
An. 785. Spelmanni Council. p. 292, to 395. Malmesbury de gestis regum^ (...) c.
4. and de gestis Pontif. l. 1. p. 198, 199. Matthew Parker, and Godwin in life
of Iambert. Chre^ica VVil. Thorn, col. 1774. Gervasius Dorobern. Actus P^^tif.
Cant. col. 1641. Radulphus de Diceto Abbrevi. Chron. col. 445. Polychron. l. ^.
c. 17.
Pope Adrian sent Legates into England, Proposit. 5.6.
to confirm the faith which Augustine had preached: who being honorably
received both by the Kings, Clergy, and People: thereupon held a great
Parliamentary Council at Calchut, Chalchuthe, or Cealtide (as Henry Huntindon
styles it.) In this Council Offa king of Mercians, and Kenulphus king of
West-Saxons^ with all their ^cclesiastical and secula^ Princes, Nobles, Elders,
Bishops, Abbots^ Proposit. 5, 6.
were pr^sent; who all subscri^e^ and consented to the Ecclesiaestical and
Temporal Laws and Canons therein made and published, being 20 in Number; The
principle whereof rela^ing to my Theme, I have formerly recited. In this
Parliamentary Council King Offa caused Egfrid his eldest son, to be solemnly
crowned King, who from thenceforth reigned with him, And in it Iambertus (or
Lambert) Archbishop of Canterbury, much against his will, resigned part of his
Archbishopric to the Archbishop of Litchfield, by the command and power of
King Offa; who envying the ^ower and Pride of the Archbishop of Canterb.
deprived him in this Council (notwithstanding all Iamberts appeals to Pope
Adrian) of all Lands and Jurisdiction within his Realm of Mercia, erecting a
new Archbishopric at Litchfield, to which he subjected all the Bishops of
Mercia, (being then six in number) ^ill by another Council they were reunited
to Canterbury, after the decease of Offa.

Anno 788.
Hen Huntindon, Hist. l. 4. p. 349. Hoveden Annalium, pars prior, p. 409.410.
Florentius VVigorniensis, Anno 781, 787, 788, 789. Spelman. Council. p. 303,
304. Simeon Dunelm. Hist. 110. Mat Westminster. Anno 789, 791. Richardus Prior.
Hag^stald. de Stat. and Episc. Hagust. Eccl. l. 1. c. 17. col. 297.
About the year 788. (there being some difference amongst Historians in the
year) there was a great Council held at Ade, and after that another Council
kept at Wincenhale or Pincanhale in Northumberland, now called Finkely. Sir
Henry Spelman conceives, that these Councils were principally summoned to
prevent the incursions of the Danes, who in the year 787^ came in^o Britain
with 3 ships; to discover the Coasts and prey upon it, slew King Bricticus his
Provost, and after that many thousand thousands of the English at sundry times.
Proposit. 6, 9.
After this there was another Parliamentary Council or Synod held at Aclea, or
Aclith^; at which time Duke Sigga by wicked Treason slew his Sovereign Alfwold,
king of Northumberland, and was, not long afterward, slain himself by the
Danes, (who miserably wasted and destroyed that rebellious kingdom of
Northumberland with fire and sword) as a condigu pu^ishment for their treasons,
Rebellions and Regicides of their Kings.

Matthew West. p. 282. Mamesbury de gest. reg. l. 1. c. 3. Huntind. Hist. l.
4. p. 343, 344. Hoveden Annal. pars prior, p. 410. Florent. Wigorniensis. An. 792.
Ethelredi Hist. l. 3.
Anno 792. Anno 792.
there was a Council held at a place called Fincale, where the Archbishop with
his Suffragan Bishops, and many others were present: What the occasion of it
was, appears not: only our Historians relate, That Osred king of
Northumberland, was this year chased out of his Kingdom by his rebellious
subjects, when he had reigned but one year, and Ethelred, son of Mollo
substituted King in his place. Whereupon Osred gathering forces together to
expel Ethelred, which had expulsed him out of his Realm, was in his march into
it again taken prisoner and slain by this Usurper at Tymmouth. Upon occasion of
which Insurrections and Wars, I conceive this Council was most probably
summoned. Soon after this usurping Regicide Ethelred, was slain himself, even
by those seditious Subjects who expelled and slew Osred, Proposit. 5, 9.
to advance him to the Throne. The common fate of bloody Usurpers, especially
in this kingdom of Northumberland, as our Historians observe.

Matthew Westminster. An. 794. p. 287, 288, 289. Spel. Conc^l. p. 300. to 316.
Chron. Ioh. Bromt. col. 754, to 757. Polychron. l. 5. c. 17.
King Offa, in the year 793. Anno 793.
called a Provincial Parliamentary Council, Proposit. 5.10.
where Archbishop Humbert, and his Suffragans, with all the Primates and Nobles
were present; wherein he treated with them about founding the Monastery of St.
Albane, the first Martyr, in the place where his Corpse was found: endowing it
with lands and Privileges. Placuit omnibus Regis propositum. Whereupon they
concluded, the King should go to Rome in person, and procure from the Pope the
Canonization of St. Albane, and a Confirmation of Privileges to the Abbey he
intended to build. He repairing to Rome accordingly, the Pope commending his
Devotion, gave him his full a^^ent, both to found a Monastery, and endow it
with all such Privileges as he desired: enjoining him, that returning to his
Country, ex Consilio Episcoporum, and Optimatum suorum, Proposit. 6, 10.
by advice of his Bi^hops and (...) to the Monastery of St. Albane, what
Possessions or Privileges he would: which he (...) grant or confirm to it by
his special Charter first, and afterward he would confirm his original with
his Privilege and Bull. The king hereupon receiving the Popes Benediction,
returned home, and held two great Councils for the setliug of the Lands,
Privileges and Liberties of St. Albanes: The one at Cel^yth, where were
present, 9 Kings, 15 Bishops, and 20 Dukes (as John Stow relates in his
Chronicle) who all subscribed and ratified his Charter of Lands and Privileges
granted to St. Albane. The other Council was held at Verolam, which Matthew
Westminster thus expresses. Congregato apud Verolamium Episcoporum and
Optimatum Concilio, unanimi omnium consensu and voluntate, beato, Albano Amplas
contulit terras, and possessiones innumeras, Quas multiplici Libertatum
privilegio insignivit. Monachorum vero conventum ex Domibus been Religiosis ad
Tumbam Martyris congregavit, and Abbatem eis Nomine Willegodum praefecit, cui
cum ipso Monasterio, Iura R^galia concessit. This king then reigning over 20
Shires, at the same time (by the unanimous assent of the Bishops and Nobles)
See Radol. de Diceto Abbrev. Chron. col. 446, and Spelm. Council. p. 310. to 314.
gave out of all those Counties to the English School at Rome, Peter Pence, in
English called Romescot. Yet he privileged the Church of St. Albane with so
great Liberty, that this Church alone should be quit of the Apostolical Custom
and Tribute called Romescot, when as neither the King nor Archbishop, nor any
Bishop, Abbot, Proposit. 1.6.
or Prior, or any other in the Realm was exempted frow this payment. And
likewise granted, that the Church of St. Albane should faithfully collect the
said Romescot, from all the County of Her^ford, wherein the said Church is
situated, and receive the money collected to that Churches own use. And that
the Abbot thereof, or a Monk constituted his Archdeacon under him, should
exercise Episcopal Authority over all the Priests and Laymen within the
possessions belonging to the Abbey, and that he should make subjection to no
Archbishop, Bishop, or Legate, but only to the Pope himself. So as that Church
has omnia jura Regalia; and the Abbot thereof for the time being, Pontificalia
ornamenta. And that by the great Charter of this king then made, with the
unanimous consent of all his Bishops and Nobles in this great Council. What
Lands he gave to the Monastery of St. Augustines and Christ-church in
Canterbury, and the Archbishops there, you may read at large in the Chronicles
of William Thorn, col. 1775. and Evidentiae Ecclesiae Christi Cantuariensis,
col. 2203, 2219.

Mat. West. Anno 797, p. 290, 291. Alcuini Epist. Osbert. Speeds History p.
371. Chron. Iohan-Brom. col. 752, 754, 776.
King Offa deceasing An. 797. his Son Egfrid, Anno 797.
so soon as he was settled in his Fathers kingdom, imitating the pious
footsteps of his Father, devoutly conferred many Lands and possessions on the
Church of St. Albanes, and confirmed them by his Charter an^ Privilege; with
all those other Lands, Privileges and Royal Liberties which his Father had
conferred on the said Church, to enjoy them in the freest manner. Of ejus
Donatio, ut perpetuae firmitatis Robur obtineret, juxta morem Romanae
Ecclesiae, omnium Episcoporum Comitum et Baronum totius imperii sui (assembled
in a general Council of ^he Realm) Subscriptionem, Proposit. 10.
and signum crucis apposuit, Causing all his Bishops, Earls, and Barons of his
whole Realm to subscribe and ratify his Charter and Donation with the sign of
the Cross, after the manner of the Roman Church, That it might be of perpetual
force and validity. Moreover declining his Fathers covetousness in all things,
whatever he for the exaltation of his Kingdom, had diminished out of the
possessions of diverse Monasteries, he, out of a pious devotion, restored and
confirmed with his Privilege (or Charter) to all who desired it.

This pious King Egfrid, (as our Historians observe) and let others note it who
gain their Kingdoms, Powers, Possessions by Bloodshed and Treason ( was taken
away by sudden death on the 141 day after his Fathers decease (which gave great
cause of grief to all the people of his Realm) not for his own sins, which is
not to be supposed; but because his Father (pro Regni sui confirma^ione
sanguine^ (...) effudit) for the confirmation of his Ringdom shed much blood.
For he See Mat. Westminster. Malmesbury, Huntindon, Hoved. Radulph. Cas^^ensis,
Ethelwerdus, Wigorniensis. Speed, Graston, Holinshed, Fab^ in his li^e. Chapter Io.
Brom. col. 750.751, 752. Radulph. de Diceto Abbreviat. Chron. col. 445, 446.
Polichron. col. l. 5. c. 16, 17.
came to the Cro^n by the sla^ghter of King Bernred, forementioned; deposed and
slain by him for his usurpation, Tyranny, and Mis-government, then he invaded
and slew with his own hand Alrick King of Kent, routed his forces, and reduced
that kingdom under his own: After this, marching from South to North, even
beyond Humber, he made Havoc of all that stood in his way: Whence returning in
Triumph, he set upon the West Saxons, and vanquished them, forced their king
Kenwolf to fly into Wales to the Britons for aid; then en^red into Wales,
routed their King Marmodius, for breaking his Truce; made a great slaughter of
the Britons and after ten years prosperous wars to conquer others, returned
victoriously into his own territories. After his return thither, to complete
his bloody Tragedies, Ethelbert King of East Angles coming upon solemn
invitation to his Court in great state, to marry his Daughter, was there
treacherously murdered by his Wife Quendreda's solicitation and practice, with
his privity and consent, who caused a deep pit to be dug in his Bedchamber,
under his Chair of State, or Bed, into which he falling was there treacherously
murdered, and his head ^ut off by Gaymbertus, who presented it all bloody to
King Offa; who (to color the business) seeming to be sorrowful ^or this
murder, shut himself up in his Chamber, and there fasted 8 days space, but
then, sending a great Army into the Kingdom of this murtherea Prince, seized on
and united it to his own Empire. But Gods exemplary vengeance pursued this
heinous bloody Treachery (notwithstanding all his seigned magnified Saintship,
and works of Charity and Piety) for, within one year after this bloody fact
committed, both Queendreda, Offa, and their Son Egfrid (the only joy and pride
of his Parents) all died, and his very kingdom it self was translated from the
Mercians to the West Saxons, whom he had conquered and oppressed, O that all
men of blood, and unjust invaders of others Crowns, Realms, Possessions by war,
bloodshed and Treachery, would seriously consider this President, with all
others of this nature both at home and abroad, collected to their hands by Sir
Walter Raughly, in his excellent Preface, before his famous History of the
World.

About the year of Christ 797. An. 797.
Bonif. Mogunt. Ep. 112. Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, part 2. c. 5. p. 632.
Cynwolfe (or Kenulph) King of West Saxons held a Council, wherein he with his
Bishops, una cum caterva Satraparum, and likewise with a great company of his
Nobles, there assembled, writ a Letter to Lullus Bishop of Mentz touching some
matters of Religion then in Deb^^e. Proposit. 5, 6.


In the Tho. Stubs, Actus Pontif. Ebo. col. 1697.1698. Simeon Dumelm. Hist.
^ol. 114, 115. Rog. de Hoveden, Annal. pars prior. p. 406.
year 798. Anno. 798.
(the third of King Kenulph his reign) there was a great Parliamentary Synod
assemat Pinchamhalch, wherein Eanbaldus, or Embaldus, Archbishop of York sat
President, with very many wise and great Men; by whose Wisdom and Justice the
Kingdom of Northumberland was then much advanced and renowned: Who after they
had debated many things concerning the benefit of holy Church, and profit of
all the Provinces of the People of Northumberland; the observation of Easter,
and of Divine and secular Laws, the increase of Good service, Proposit. 5, 6,
and the honors and necessities of the servants of God, rehearsed and ratified
the faith o^ the 5 first General Councils, concerning the Trinity, in brief and
pithy expressions, sit now to be revived in these times of Heresy and
Blasphemy.

The Evidenti^ Eccl. Christi Cantuar. col. 2211, 2212. Sp^lm. Council. p. 317.
Mat. West. Anno 798.
same year, there was another Great Council held at ^acanc^ld, wherein Kenulph
King of Mercians sat President, Athelardus Archbishop of Canterbury, 17 other
Bishops, sundry Abbots, Archdeacons, and other fit persons being there
likewise present; Wherein, by the command of Pop^ Leo, it was decreed; That
from thenceforth no Laymen should exercise Dominion over the Lords Inheritance
and Churches; but that they should be governed by Holy Canons, and the Rules of
their first founders and possessors, under pain of Excommunication: and that
Christ-church in Canterbury, Propos. 5, 8, 9.10.
should be restored to its ancient Metropolitan Jurisdiction. Which all the
Prelates and Abbots confirmed with their Subscriptions. And this year this King
consecrated the Church of Winchelcumbe, endowing it with great gifts and
possessions, in a kind of Parliamentary Assembly of 13 Bishops, and 10 Dukes,
where he manumitted and set free at the high Altar, Edbert King of Kent,
surnamed Pren, whom he had taken prisoner in Battle. Moreover Eanbaldus
Archbishop of York, this year assembled a Synod at Finchale; most likely for
the assistance of Eardulfus King of Northumberland against Duke Wadus, and
other Conspirators, who rose up against him, whom he vanquished and utterly
routed, after a long and bloody battle at Bilingeho, where many were slain on
both sides; which History Matthew Westminster couples with this Synod, An. 798.

An. 799.
Evid. Eccles. Christi Cant. col. 2212.
King Kenulph in the year 799. By the consent of his Bishops and Princes, at
the request of Athelardus Archbi^hop of Canterbury, restored to Christ-Church
in Canterbury, four parcels of Land which king Offa had formerly taken from it,
Proposit. 4, 10.
and gave to his Servants, free from all secular service and Regal Tribute:
ratifying this restitution by his Charter, signed with the Cross, that it might
remain inviolable by their concurrent assent.

There was a Provi^cia^ Council held at Cloves^o (or An. 800.
Clyffe) In the year of our Lord 800. by Kenulf king of Mercians, Spelmanni
Council. p. 318, 319, 320. Evident. Eccl. Christi Cant. col. 2212, 2213
Gervasius Dorob^rn. Actus Pontif. Cantu^ col. 1642. and Godwin in the life o^
At^elardus.
Athelwerdus Archbishop of Canterbury, and all the Bishops, Dukes, Abbots and
^^juscunque dignitatis vi^os, and men of all sorts of ^ignity; where after some
inquity, how the Catholic Faith was kept, and Christian Religion practiced
amongst them? The Lands which king Of^a and ^ing Kenulph had forcibly taken
away from Christ-Church, with the Nunnery of Cotham, and the Hides of Land
called Burnam, were Synodali Iudicio, by the Iudg^me^t of the Council, restored
to Christ-Church. Et omnium voce Decretum est, and, It was decreed by the voice
of all the Council, upon sight of the Books and Deeds there produced before
them by the Archbishop, that it was just Cotham should be restored to
Christ-Church (being given to it by King Aethelbald, Propos. 4, 5, 6^
by his Charter) of which it had, for a long time unjustly been spoiled,
notwithstanding the frequent complaints made by Archbishop Bregwin and Iambert
in every of their Synods. In hoc Concilio annuente ipso Rege, Athelardus
recuperavit dignitates and possessio^es quas Offa R^x Merciorum abstulerat
Iamberto: writes Gervasius. After which the Archbishop in this Council made
this Exchange with Cynedritha, then Abbess of Cotham; that she and her
successors should enjoy all the Lands, and Nunnery of Cotham, in lieu whereof
she should give to him one hundred and ten Hydes of Land in Kent, lying in
Fleot, Tenaham, and Creges, together with all the writings thereto belonging,
which exchange was made before, confirmed and attested by this Noble Synod;
that so no Controversy might arise betwe^n them, their Heirs and Successors,
or King Offa 's, in future times concerning the same, but that they might
peaceably in^oy them without interruption, for ever. And moreover the
Archbishop gave unto Cynedrytha the Monastery called Pretanege, which king
Egf^id gave to him and his heirs. Which proves the Great Councils and Synods in
that age to be Parliaments; and that they judicially restored Lands u^jus^ly
taken away by Kings, upon complaint, exami^a^ion an^ due proof made ther^of, as
well as inquired o^ errors and abuses in Religion,

In ^his Council ^ conceive i^ was, that (...). Malmsbury de gest. Reg. l. ^.
c. 4. Sp^l. Conc. p. 320. to 324. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 27, 28, 29, 30. Mat.
West. An. 797.
Kenulph, with his Bishops, Dukes, et omni sub nostra Ditione Dignatis gradu,
comp^ed and (...) Letter to Pope Leo the third; promising obedience to his
commands; re^uesting^ that the ancien^ Canons might be observed, and the
Jurisdiction and Power of the Sea of Canterbury ( which King Of^a and Pope
Adrian had diminished and divided ^^to two Provinces or Archbish^pricks) might
be restored and united again thereto, to avoid Scisms: and craving the Popes
answer to these their request: which he returned in a special Letter to the
King, restoring to Athelardus and his successors the Bishoprics subtracted
from his Province, with the Metropolitan Jurisdiction over them, as amply as
before.

An. 802.
Spelman. Council. p. 324, 325, 326. See Mat. Westminster. An. 797, to 805.
Hereupon, in the year 802. or thereabouts, there was another Parliamentary
Council assembled at Clovesho; wherein the Archbishopric of Litchfield was
dissolv^d, the Sea of Canterbury restored to its former plenary Metropolitical
Jurisdiction (according to Pope Leo his Decree) By the advice and Decree of the
whole Council: which commanded in the name of God; That no Kings, nor Bishops,
Proposit. 5, 6.
nor Princes, neque ullius Tyrannicae potestatis Homines, should diminish the
honor of the Metropolitical See, or presume to divide it in any particle
whatsoever, under pain of an Anathema Maranatha; which Decree the Archbishop,
with 12 other Bishops, subscribed and ratified with the sign of the Cross (as
they formerly did in the Council of Bechanceld, An. 798.) And in this Council
diverse controversies concerning the Lands, Limits and Jurisdictions of other
Bishops and Bishoprics were likewise decided and settled; as you may therein
read at large.

Matthew West. An. 802, 854. Asserius Mean. de gest. Alfredi Regis, Will.
Malmesb. de Gestis Reg. l. 2. c. 3. p. 46. Florentius Wigorn. An. 855.
Polychron. l. 5. c. 27. Speeds Hist. p. 230. Mr. Seldens Titles o^ Honor, part
1. c. 6. p. 166. Sim^ Dun^lm. Hist. de Gest. Reg. Angl. col. 118. Fox Ac^s and
Monuments, vol. 1. p. 170, 171.
Eadburga Daughter to King Offa married Brithrie King of the West Saxons: Anno
802.
proud of her parentage and ma^ch, she grew so ambitious, ^^sole^t, and
Tyrannical that she becam^ od^ous, not only to all the Prelates, Nobles, and
Courtiers, but to the people l^kewise. For being incited with malice and
tyranny, she usually accused and execrated to the King all the Nobles of the
Realm, Ordinaries, Bishops, and Religious persons, and so overcame him by her
flatteries, that those whom she began to accuse, aut vit^ aut Regno privaret,
she would either deprive of Life, or banish them the Realm; and if she ^ould
not obtain this from the King against them, she accustomed to destroy them
priv^ly wit^ poison. At last, An. 802. She preparing poi^on, to destroy a rich
and noble Favorite of the Kings, whom he extraordinarily loved; so as she
could not banish or destroy him by her false accusatio^s; the King casually
drinking of ^he Poison (contrary to her intention) as well as his Favorite,
they were both therewith suddenly poisoned and d^stroyed. Wherewith this wicked
woman being tetrified, sled with all her invaluable Treasures b^yond the Seas
to Charles the Great: who for her Lasciviousness, in making choice of his Son
for her Husband before himself, (though much inamoured with her transcendent
beauty) thrust her into a Monastery, Proposit. 2, 4.
where soon after, she abusing her body by uncleaness, in lying with a lewd
man, was expelled thence, forced to beg her bread, and ended her days in
extreme misery. A just judgment of God, both upon a Tyrannical Queen, and
unrighteous King, seduced to banish and condemn his Nobles and Subjects
unjustly by her solicitations. For this her most heinous crime the West Saxons
ordained a Law, to the Grand prejudice o^ all their succeeding Queens: That
none of them should have ei^^^r Title, Majesty, or place of Royalty or Queen:
No^ (...) West-Saxones Reginam, vel juxta Regem (...) ^^ginae appellatione
insigniri patiuntur, (...) Eadburg^e, quae virum s^um Brithicum v^neno
perdidit, and juxta Regem ^edens, omnes Regni Nobiles accusare solebat, and
quos accusare non po^uit, potu eos venenifero necare consue^it. Itaque pro
Reginae maleficio omnes conjuraverunt, quod nunquam se regnare permitterent,
qui in praedictis culpabilis inveniretur: as William o^ Malm^sbury, Asserius
Menevensis, Matthew Westminster, Florentius Wigorniensis, and others out of
them rel^te,

Spelman. Council. p. 327, 328, 329.
There was a Parliamentary Synod, or Council, held at Celiohi^h, in the year
816. Anno 816^
at which, not only Wulfred Archbishop of Canterbury, with all his Suffragan
Bishops, but likewise Kenulf king of Mercians, with his Princes, Dukes, and
Nobles, and sundry Abbots, Pri^sts, Proposit. 4, 5, 6.
Deacons, and other sacred Orders were present, wherein they enacted 11
Constitutions, the 6th. whereof was this in substance. That the Judgments and
Decrees of Bishops made in Synods should not be infringed, but remain firm and
irrefragable, being ratified with the sign of the holy Cross (by the Kings and
Nobles Subscriptions) unless perchance the King or Princes deemed the
subscriptions of their Antecessors of no force, and feared not to re^^rm, or
cease from this error, which shall rest and bring a Curse on them and their
heirs. The 7th. That no Bishops, Abbots or Abbesses shall alienate or part with
the Lands, writings and evidences of their Churches and Monasteries, w^i^h they
are entrusted to keep, nisi rationabilis causa poposcit adjuvari, contra
invasionem famis, and Depraedationem Exercitus, and ad Libertatem obtinendam:
which causes they reputed reasonable.

Anno 822.
In ^he year of our Lord 822. there was a Parliamentary Council assembled at
Clovesho, Evident. Eccles. Christi Cont. col. 2213, 2214. Spelm. Council. p.
332, 333, 334. Florentius Wigorn. Anno 822. p. 287. Ethelwerdi Hist. l. 9. c. 2.
wherein Beornulph King of Mercians sat President, at which Wu^fred Archbishop
of Canterbury, with the rest of the Bishops, Abbots, omniumque dignitatum
Optimatibus, Ecclesiasticarum scilicet and saecularium personarum, were
present, debating things both coneerning the benefit and regulation of the
Church, and defense and safety of the Realm (the proper subjects of our present
English Parliaments) a^ these words import, Utilitatem and necessitatem
Ecclesiarum, Monasterialisque vitae Regulam et observantiam, stabilitatem
quoque Regni pertractante^. In this Parliamentary Council, the Proceedings in 3
precedent Councils, Proposit. 5, 6^
touching the Complain^s of the Archbishops of Canterbury, of the Injuries done
unto them, in taking away the Lands of the Church by their Kings and Officers,
with the proceedings thereupon are at large recited, which I shall here
transcribe, because generally unknown to most, and best di^covering the
proceedings of our ancient Parliamentary Councils in Cases of this nature; of
any Council I have met with in that Age, and those which next proceeded, or
succeeded it.

All the said persons in the said Council sitting down quietly together, it was
inquired by them; quomodo quis cum Iustitia sit tractatus, seu quis injuste sit
spoliatus? In what manner any one had been handled with justice? or if any one
had been unjustly spoiled? Whereupon, amids other things there acted and
spoken, it was showed, That Archbishop Wulfred by the misinformation, and
enmity, and violence and avarice of king Kenulph, had suffered many injuries,
and was most unjustly deprived of his just dominations, as well by those things
which were done unto him amongst us here in England, as by those things which
were brought against him to the Sea Apo^tolick, by the procurement of the
foresaid King Kenulph: by which accusations and discords, not only the
forenamed Archbishop, but also the whole English Nation, for almost six years
space, was deprived of its primordial authority, and of the Ministry of sacred
Baptism. Above all these things, the said king Kenulph at a certain time with
his Council, coming to the City of London, appointed a day (with great
indignation) Proposit. ^.4.
wherein the Archbishop should come unto him: whither when he came, the King
commanded, that relinquishing all his goods, h^ should speedily depart out of
England, without hopes of returning any more, neither by the command of our
Lord the Pope, neither by the i^treaties of the Emperor, nor of any other
person, unless he would consent to his will, in demising to him a farm of 300
Hides of Land, called Leogene^ham, and moreover would give to the said King one
hundred and ^we^ty pounds in money; This reconciliation the said Wul^red
refusing, long contradicted; and when the ^ri^nds of the man of God, and Nobles
of the King, who loved him very much, perceived the rapacity and violence of
the King, they importuned the Archbishop, that he would consent to the Kings
will, upon this condition; that the King should relinquish the difference which
he had raised between the Pope and Archbishop, by his Messengers, and should
restore to the said Father all the power and dignity which belonged to the said
Primates See, according to the authority which his Predecessors most amply
enjoyed in former time. But if the King could not do this, that he should then
restore the money and Land, which he exacted of the Archbishop to him again.
Upon this condition therefore, the said reverend Father gave his assent: But
nothing of the aforesaid condition was performed: For three whole years after
the said agreement, he remained deprived of the power which his predecessors
and himself had before that difference over Suthmenstre, as well in pasture,
money, vestments, as obedience, which belonged to the Metrapolitical See.

But after the death of King Kenulf, when Beornulf reigned; the said Archbishop
Wulfred invited Abbess Kenedrytha, Heir and Daughter of King Kenulf, to the
foresaid Council; whither ^hen she came, the Archbishop complained in the
audience of all the Council, of the injuries and troubles offered and done to
him, and to Christ's Church, by her Father; and required reparation from her, if
it were Just: Then all the Council found it to be Justice,, et hoc unanimi
consen^u Decrevi^, and Decreed it by a unanimous consent, Nota.
That all those things which ^er Father had taken away from the Archbishop, she
ought justly to restore unto him, and to give him so much ^g^in for reparation.
And moreover should restore all the use (or profit) the foresaid Father had
lost in so long a space: which she humbly promised to do.

It seemed good therefore to king Beornulf, with his Wisemen, for friendship
sake, most diligently to make a reconciliation and amends for the said Lands,
between the heirs of King Kenulf and the Archbishop; and beca^se this pleased
the king, and he humbly entreated it; out of Love and Friendship to the King
the Archbishop con^ented thereto; ^or ^he heirs of the said king Kenulf often
desired to have the said Father to be their Patron and intercessor; And they
entreated him with humble devotion, that for a full reconciliation, he would
receive in four places one hundred Hides of Land; to wit Herges, and Herfording
Land, Wamdeloa, and Gedding. Then the Archbishop for the love of God, and the
amiable friendship of Beornulf, consenred to this accord, upon this condition;
that the foresaid Abbess should deliver to the said Archbishop, the foresaid
Lands of one hundred Hides, with the Books which the English call Land^o^, and
with the same liberty which he had before, for a perpetual inheri^nace:
Whereupon king Beornulf, with the testimony of the whole Council, proclaimed it
to be altogether free.

But this Agreement was not all this time ratified, because after these things,
the promise remained unfulfilled for 12 Months: for three Hides (or tenements)
of the foresaid Lands, were detained; and the Books of 47 tenements; to wit,
the Book of Bockland, the Book of Wambelea, and also the Book of Herfocding
land, But in the year following she the said Ahbess desired a Conference with
the foresaid Archbishop, who at that time was in the Country of the Wicii, at a
place called Ostaveshlen, where he held a Council: where, when she had found
the man of God, she confessed her folly in delaying her former agreement: upon
which the Archbishop with great sweetness showed; that he was altogether free
from the foresaid agreement, and that of her part there were many things
wanting which she ought to have restored; but she being brought before the
Council^, greatly blushing, humbly promised, that she would restore all those
things that were wanting, and with a willing mind restored to the Archbishop
the Books of certain Lands, which before she had not promised, with the Lands (
adjudged to him, as Sir Henry Spelmans Margent supplies the defect) in the same
Council. She likewise added thereto a farm of 4 tenements in Hevgam for his
favor; likewise She gave to the Archbishop 30 Hide land (or tenements) in
Cumbe, with a Book of the said Lands, that a firm and stable friendship and
accord might remain between all the heirs of King Kenulf and the Archbishop.

To all which things the Archbishop gave his consent, upon this Condition, that
the names of the before said Lands should be rased quite out of the Ancient
Privileges which belong to Wincelcumbe, lest in after times some controversy
should be raised, De hoc quod Synodall authoritate decretum est, et signo
crucis firmatum: concerning this which was ended by authority of the Council,
and confirmed with the sign of the C^oss. By this, and the precedent Councils
of Clovesho, it is apdarent; first, That the Injustice, Rapine, and oppression
of our Saxon Kings themselves, was then examined and redressed in and by our
Parliamentary Councils: 2ly. That Tittles to Lands, Jurisdictions, Privileges
unjustly taken from the Church and other men, by our kings, or other great
persons and complaints touching the same, were usually heard, determined and
redressed in the great Parliamentary Councils of that Age, upon complaints made
thereof, and that to and before the whole Council, not to any private
Committees, not then in use. 3ly. That restitution, reparations and damages in
such Cases, were usually awarded in such Parliamentary Councils, not only
against the Kings and Parties that did the wrong, Nota.
but likewise against their heirs; as here against Abbess Cenedritha, Daugher
and heir to king Kenulph, After the decease of her father the Tort Feasor. 4ly.
That the same cause and complaint was revived, continued, ended in succeeding,
that rested undecided, and unrecompensed in former Councils. 5ly. That
Agreements, Exchanges, and Judgments given upon Complaints in Parliamentary
Councils, were conclusive and final to the Parties and their Heirs. 6ly. That
Injuries done by the power of our Kings or great Men in one Parliamentary
Council (as in dividing the Archbishopric of Canterbury, etc.) were examined
and redressed by another subsequent Council. 7ly. That Parliamentary Councils
in that Age, were very frequently held, at least once or twice a year (if not
interrupted by wars) and that usually at Clovesho, according to the Actus
Pontif. Cantu. col. 1639. Spelm. Council. p. 334.
Decree of the Council of Heartford under Archbishop Theodor, That the Bishops
once a year should assemble together in a Council at Clovesho; as Gervasius
Doroberniensis records; there being 4 Councils there, and elsewhere, held in
King Beornulfs 4 years reign.

I find Anno. 824. Spelm. Council. p. 334, 335.
another Council held at Clovesho, in the year 824 the 3. of the Calends of
November, under Beornulf King of Mercians and Wulfred Archbishop of Canterbury,
where this King, which all his Bishops and Abbots, and all the Princes,
Proposit. 5, 6.
Nobles, and many most wise men were assembled together. Amongst other
businesses debated therein, there was a suit between Heabere Bishop of
Worcester, and the Nuns of Berclea concerning the inheritance of Aethelfrick
Son of Aethelmund, to wit the Monastery called West-Burgh, the Lands whereof,
with the Books, the Bishop then had, as Aethelfrick had before commanded, that
they should be restored to the Church of Worcester. This Bishop, with 50 Mass
Priests, and 160 other Priests, Deacons, Monks and Abbots (whose names are
recorded in the Manuscript) swore, that this Land and Monastery were
impropriated to his possession and Church; which Oath with all these fellow
swearers, he was ordered to take at Westminster, and did it accordingly, after
30 nights respite. Whereupon, It was ordained and decreed by the Archbishop,
and all the Council consenting with him; that the Bishop should enjoy the
Monastery, Lands, and Books to him and his Church; and so that suit was ended,
and this Decree pronounced thereupon.

Qua propter, si quis hunc agrum ab illa Ecclesia in Ceastre nititur evellere,
contra Decreta sanctorum Canonum sciat se facere; quia sancti Canones
decernunt, Quicqu^^ Sancta Synodus universalis cum Catholico Archiepiscopo suo
adjudicaverit, nullo modo fractum vel irritum esse faciendum. Haec au^em gesta
sunt. Hi sunt Testes and Confirmatores, hujus rei, quorum nomina hic infr^
notantur, ^ die tertio Calend. Novembrium.

Ego Beornulf Rex Merciorum hanc chartulam Synodalis decreti signo sanctae
Christi Crucis confirmavi.

Then follows the Archbishops Subscription and confirmation in like words; with
the subscriptions of sundry Bishops, Abbots, D^kes and Nobles, being 32 in
number, all ratifying this D^cree.

An. Dom. ^33.
An. 833. Ingulphi Hist. p. 855, 857. See Mat. Westminster. Anno 833, 834, 835.
Spelm. Council. p. 337, 338, 339.
Egbert, King of West Saxons, Athelwulfe his Son, Witlasius king of Mercians,
both the Archbishops, Abbots, cum Proceribus majoribus totius Angliae, with the
greatest Nobles of all England, were all assembled together at London (in a
National Parliamentary Council) pro consilio c^piendo contra Proposit. 5, 9, 10.
Danicos Pir^tas Littora Angliae assidne infestantes: to take Counsel what to
do against the Danish Pirates, daily infesting the Seacoasts of England.

In this Council the Charter of Witlasius king of Mercians, to the Abbey of
Croyland (where he was hid and secured from his enemies) was made and ratified;
wherein he granted them many rich gi^ts of Plate, Gold, Silver, Land, and the
Privilege of a Sanctuary, for all offenders flying to it for shelter; which
grant could not be valid without a Parliamentary confirmation; for he being
elected King, omnium consensu, after the slaughters of Bernulf and Ludican (two
invading Tyrants cut off in a short time; qui contra fa^ purpuram induerent,
and regno vehementet oppresso, totam militiam ejus, quae quondam plurima
extiterat, and victoriosissima, sua imprudentia perdiderant, as Ingulphus
writes) was enforced to hold his kingdom from Egbert king of West Saxons under
a Tribute. And thereupon conferring diverse Lands by his Charter to this Abbey
for ever, to be held of him, his heirs and Successors, Kings of Mercia, in
perpetual and pure Frankalmoigne, quietae and solutae ab omnibus oneribus
secularibus, exactionibus, and vectigalibus universis quocunque nomine
censeantur. That his grant might be sound and valid, he was necessitated to
have it con^irmed in ^^is Parliamentary Council, by the consent of King Egbert
and his Son, and of all the Bishops, Abbots^ et Proceribus Majoribus Angliae,
and the greater Nobles of England the^e present; most of them subscribing and
ratifying this Charter with the sign of the Cross, and their names.

About the year of Grace 838. Anno. 838.
there was a Parliamentary Counc^^ held at Evident. Eccl. Christi Cantuar. col.
2217, 2218. Spelm. Council. p. ^40.
Kingston, in which Egbert king of the West-Sa^ons, and his Son Aethelwulfe,
Ceolnoth Archbishop of Canterbury, with the rest of the Bishops and Nobles of
England were present. Amongst many things there acted and spoken, Archbishop
Ceolnoth showed before the whole Council, That the foresaid Kings Egbert and
Ae^helwulfe had given to Christchurch the Manor called Malinges in Su^^ex,
free from all secular service and Regal Tributes, Proposit. 5, 6, 10.
excepting only these three, Expedi^ion, building of Bridge and Castle: which
foresaid Manor and Lands King Baldred g^ve to Christchurch; Sed quia ille Rex
cunctis Principibus non placuit, noluerunt donum ejus permanere ratum; But
because this King pleased not all his Nobles, they would not that this his gift
should continue firm: (To which Sir Henry Spelman adds this Marginal Note, Rex
non potuit distrahere patrimonium Regni, sine assensu Procerum) Wherefore the
foresaid Kings (in this Parliamentary Council, with their Nobles assent) at the
request of the said Archbishop, regranted and confirmed it to Christchurch;
with this Anathema annexed against the infringers of this grant, If any shall
presume to violate it, on the behalf of God, and of us Kings, Bishops, Abbots,
and all Christians, let him be separated from God, and let his portion be with
the Devil and his Angols.

Anno ^47.
Hist. Angl. l. 5. Spelman. Council. p. 343.
Polydor Virgil, records, that King Athelwulfe, in the year 847. going in
pilgrimage to Rome, repaired the English School (there lately burned down) and
in imitation of King Ina, made that part of his Kingdom which Egbert his Father
had added, Tributary toward it; Legeque sancivit, Proposit. 1.
and enacted by a Law (made in a Parliamentary Council) that those who received
30 pence rent every year out of their possessions, or had more houses, should
pay for those houses they inhabited, every of them a penn^ a piece to the Pop^
(for the maintenance of this School) at the Feast of Peter and Paul, or at
least of St. Peter's bonds; which Law some (writes he) though falsely, ascribr
to his Son Alfred; which act others refer to the years 855, or 857, and that
more truly.

Anno 850.
Ingulf. Hist. p. 858, ^59. Spelm. Council. p. 344. Mat. Westminster. An. 849, 85^.
Abbot Ingulphus in his Hist. of the Abbey of Croyland, records; that Bertulf
usurping the Crown, by the treacherous murder of his Cosen St. Westan (tanta
ferebatur ad regnandum ambitione) passing by the Abbey of ^royland, most
wickedly and violently took away all the Jewels, Plate and ornaments of the
Church, Prop. 2, 4, 5, 9.10.
which his B^other Withlasius and other Kings had given to it; together with
all ^he money he could find in the Monastery; and hiring Soldiers therewith
against the Danes, then wasting the Country about London, he was vanquished and
put to flight by the Pagans; Whereupon this King soon after, holding a great
Council at Benningdon, An. 850. with the Prelates and Nobles of his whole Realm
of Mercia there assembled (about the Danes invasions, how to rai^e forces and
moneys to resist them, as is most probable by our Historians.) Abbot Siward,
and the Monks of Croyland therein complained before them all, by Askillus their
fellow Monk, of certain injuries maliciously do^e unto them by their
Adversaries, who lying in want in the uttermost banks of their Rivers, did
seize upon their servants (being such as fled thither for Sanctuary) in case at
any time they went out of their precincts never so little way (either to fish,
or bring back their straggling Sheep, Oxen, or other Cattle) as infringers of
their Sanctuary, and subjected them to the public Laws, to their cond^mnation
and destruction; to the great damage of the Abbey, by the loss of their
service; Of which complaint, the King and all the Council being very sensible,
and desirous to provide for the peace and quiet of the Abbey, and to declare
and enlarge their Privileges; The King thereupon commanded Radbott Sheriff of
Lincoln, and the rest of his O^ficers in those parts, to go round about,
describe and set forth the bounds of their Isle of Croyland, and of the
Marshes thereunto belonging, and ^aithfully and clearly to demonstrate them to
him and his Council, wh^rever they should be, the last day of Easter next
ensuing; Who fulfilling his command, openly presented an exact description of
their Boundaries to the King and his Council, (which bounds are recited at
large in Ingulphus,) keeping their Easter at Kingsbury.

Anno 851.
Anno 851. Whereupon the king in this Parliamentary Council at Kingsbury,
Ingulphi Histor. p. 858. to 863. Spelm. Council. p. 344, etc.
in H^bdomada Paschae, pro Regni negotiis congregati; In Recompensationem tamen
aliquam pecuniae direptae; to make some kind of Recompense of the Money he had
formerly taken from the Abbey, by the Common Council of his whole Realm, by his
Charter made and ratified in this Council (wherein he makes this recital
touching this money, as if they had freely lent it to him in his necessities;
though the Historian relates, Proposit. 1, 4.
he took it away by fo^c^: Gratias Debitas vobis omnibus dignissime reddo pro
pecunia qua me per vos dudum praetere untem, in me a maxima indigentia contra
Paganorum violentiam gratissimo and liberalissimo animo defovistis) granted
unto them, That the bounds of their Sanctuary and liberties should extend 20
foot in breadth beyond the farthest banks of their grounds compassing their
Island; And 20 foot from the water it self; where ever their fugitive servants
should ascend, to draw their nets, or do their other necessary businesses; and
that this Sanctuary for fugitives should extend to all the Marshes where they
had Common for their Cattle; and that if their Cattle through tempest, theft,
or other misfor^une, strayed beyond these limits into the fields adjoining,
their fugitive servants might pursue and fetch them back thence, without any
seizure or danger; sub multilatione membri magis dilecti, si quis istud
privilegium meum in aliquo temere violaret. After which, he confirmed all the
Lands and privileges formerly granted to this Abbey, by Kings, Earls, or other
persons, particularly recited in this Charter; which was made and granted by
the common consent, sent and advice of this whole Parl. Council, and of the
Bishops and Nobles of the Realm, as these Clauses in the Charter abundantly
attest. Cum communi concilio totius Regni mei concedo. Nota.
Consentientibus omnibus Praelatis and Proceribus meis concedo; cum communi
Concilio, Prop. 5, 6, 10.
gratuitoque consensu omnium Magnatum Regni mei co^cedo; complacuit unanimiter
mihi, ac universo Concilio vestra omnia loca mei authoritate Regii Chirograpi
confirmare. Unanimo con^ensu ^otius presentis Concilii, hic apud Kingsbury,
Anno incarnationis Christi Dom. 855. feria sexta in hebdomada Paschae, pro
Regni negotiis congregati, istud meum Regium Chirographum sanctae crucis signo
stabiliter and immutabiliter confirmavi. After which the Archbishop of
Canterbury, with other Bishops, 3 Abbots, 2 Dukes, 3 Earls, with O^lat
Ambassador of King Ethelwulf and his Sons, in their Names, and the Name of the
West Saxons, subscribed and ratified this Charter, affixing the sign of the
Cross, and their names thereto, as you may read at large in Ingulphus.

That this Parliamentary Council, and the former at Beningdon were principally
summoned for the defense of the Realm against the invading Danes, who See
Ingulf. p. 858, 862, 863, 864, 865, Mat. Westminster. Florent. Wigorn. Ethelwe^dus,
Radulf. de Dice^n, Huntingdon, Hoveden. Brom. An. 851.
then incessantly molested it; and that this was the chief of those Regni
negotiis for which they were assembled, is evident by this public prayer of
the Kings, then subscribed under this Charter.

Ego Bertulphus Rex Merciorum palam omnibus Praelatis and Proceribus Regni mei,
divinam deprecor Majestatem, quatenus per intercessionem sanctissimi
Confessoris sui sancti Guthlaci, omniumque sanctorum suorum, dimittat mihi, and
omni populo meo, peccata nostra, Propesit. 9.
and sicut per aperta miracula sua dignatus est misericordiam suam; sic super
Paganos hosts suos dare nobis dignetur omni certamine victoriam and post
praesentis vitae fragilem cursum in consortio sanctorum suorum gloriam
sempiternam, Amen.

After which Hist. p^ 861, 862.
Ingulphus subjoyns this Monkish miracle, relating the order of the proceedings
in this Council, the sole end for which I cite it.

God wrought in this Council to the honor of his most holy Confessor Gut^lac,
a most famous miracle, whereby the devotion of the whole Land, now more
lukewarm than ordinary, to go in pilgrimage to Croyland, might thenceforth
become more frequent, and by all ways, through all Counti^s might daily be
revived; for whereas a certain disease like to a Palsy, this year afflicted
all England; the Nerves of Men, Women, and Children, being smitten with a
sudden and excessive cold (their veins swelling and growing harder, the which
no remedy of clothes could prevent) and especially the Arms and hands of men
being made useless, and altogether withred; in which disease, like a
fore-running most certain Messenger thereof, an intolerable pain pre-occupated
the Member so growing ill. It happened in this Council, that many, as well of the
greater as lesser rank, were sick of this Malady, and cum regni negotia
proponerentur, and when as the busine^^es of ^he Realm were to be proposed,
Lord Celnoth Archbishop of Cant^rbury, who was vexed with this disease, openly
counseled; Nota.
Divina negotia deberi primitus proponi, and sic humana negotia Christi
suffragante gratia, finem prosperum posse ^ortiri; Prop. 5, 6.
Assentientibus universis, etc. That Divine businesses ought first of all to be
proposed, and so humane business, through the suffrage of Christ's grace, might
obtain a prosperous end. All assenting thereunto, when Lord Siward, then Abbot
of Croyland was inquired for; because in Councils and Synods for his great
eloquence and holy Religion, he had been, as it were, a divine interpreter for
many years, and the most gracious Expositor and Promotor of innumerable
businesses of the whole Clergy; who by reason of his great old age, was not
present; but by Friar Askillus, his fellow Monk, he excused his absence with a
most humble Letter, by the burden of his long old age; King Bertulph himself
remembering the former complaint of the Church of Croyland, open^y related
before the Council, the Injuries frequently done to the Lord Abbot Siward, and
to his Monastery of Croyland, by the foolish fury of their Adversaries; and
commanded, that Remedy should be provided and Decreed by common advice. When as
therefore this business was in agitation amongst them, and Petitio Domini
Siwardi, (the first Petition I meet with of this Nature to and in our
Par^iamentary Councils) and the Petition of the Lord Abbot Siward concern^ng
the same, delivered by the foresaid Friar Askillus, had run from hand to hand
of the Prelates and Nobles of the whole Council, and one advised one thing,
another another: Lord Ceolnoth Archbishop of Canterbury cried out with a loud
voice, that he was healed of his disease, and perfectly recovered by the merits
of the most holy Confessor of Christ, most blessed Guthlac, whose businesses
were then handling in their hands: likewise many other most potent men in the
said Council cried out, as well Prelates as Nobles, that they had been sick of
that disease, but now by Gods Grace, and the merits of most holy Guthlac, they
felt no pain in any of their Members, through the said malady: And all of them
presently bound their Consciences with a most strict vow, to visit the most
sacred Tomb of most holy Guthlac at Croyland with devout pilgrimage, so soon as
they could. Wherefore our Lord King Bertulf, commanded the Bishop of London
(who was then accounted the best Notary, and most eloquent speaker, who being
moreover touched with the same disease, now predicated, with greatest joy, that
he was healed) to t^ke the Privileges of Croyland into his hands, and that he
should insist to honor his Physicitian S. Guthlac with his hand writing, prout
consilium statueret, as the Council should ordain; which also was done;
Therefore in the Subscriptions of the Kings Charter (aforementioned) the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Ceolnoth, confesses himself whole and sound: Propos.
6.
St. Swithin Bishop of Winchester, rejoices concerning the Lords Miracles.
Alstan Bishop of Sherburn, and Orkenwald of Lichenfeld, give thanks for the
successes of the Church; and Rethunus Bishop of Leicester, professes himself a
Servant to St. Guthlac so long as he lived: Uuniversique Concilii Optimates,
And all the Nobles of the Council, with a most ardent affection, yielded
obedience to the Kings benevolent affection toward St. Guthlac In all things.

From all which precedent passages in these two Councils, it is apparent.

First, That the Parliamentary Councils of that Age, consisted only of the
King, spiritual and temporal Lords and Peers, without any Knights of Shires, or
Burgesses, of which we find no mention in this, or any other former or
succeeding Councils, in the Saxons times; though sometimes Wisemen of inferior
quality, both of the Clergy and Laity, were particularly summoned to them,
without any popular election, by the Kings special direction, for their advice.

2ly. That all Divine and Ecclesiastical matters, touching God, Religion, and
the Church, and all affairs of the Realm of public concernment, relating to
war or peace, were debated, consulted of, and settled in Parliamentary Councils.
3ly. That the businesses of God and the Church, were therein usually first
debated and settled, before the affairs of the kingdom, of which they ought to
have precedence. 4ly. That all private grievances, injuries and oppressions
done by the King, his Officers, or other private persons, to the Church, or
other men, were usually complained of, and redressed in Parliamentary Councils,
by the advice and judgment of the King and Peers; and that either upon the
parties Petition, setting forth his grievances, or a relation made thereof by
the King, or some other Prelate or Nobleman, before the whole Council. 5ly.
That what could not be redressed in one great Council, was in the next
succeeding Council revived and redressed, according to the merits of the cause.
6ly. That no Peer nor Member of the great Council might absent himself in those
times, but upon just and lawful excuse, which he ought humbly to signify to
the King and Council by a special Messenger, and Letter, as Abbot Siward did
here. 7ly. That all Members of the Council had free liberty of Debate and Vote,
in all businesses complained of, or proposed ^o them; and a negative, as well
as an affirmative voice. 8ly. That all businesses then were propounded and
debated before all the Council, and resolved by them all, not in private
Committees. 9ly. That our Kings in those days, in Cases of necessity, could not
lawfully ^eise their subjects moneys and plate against their wills, to raise
Soldiers to resist invading foreign Enemies, but only borrow them by their free
consents, and held themselves bound to restore or recompense the moneys lent or
taken by them in such exigencies, with thankful acknowledgment. 10. That our
Kings in that age, could not grant away their Crown lands, create or enlarge
Sanctuarie^, or exempt any Abbeys from Taxes and public payments, or impose
any public Taxes on their Subjects, but by Charters, or grants made and
ratified in and by their great Councils.

Anno 854. An. 854.
Mat West. An. 854, 878. Mr. Seldens Hist. of Tithe^ chapter 8. p. 208, 209.
Malmsbury de Gest. Reg. Angl. l. 2. c. 2. Florentius Wigorniensis Anno 855.
Ingulphi Hist. p. 862. Polychronicon, l. 5. c. 30. H^n. Huntindon, Hist. l. 5.
p. 348, Ethelwerdi Hist. l. 3. c. 3, p. 841, Roger Hoveden Annal. pars prior,
p. 413. Chronicon Iohannis Bromton, col. 802. Ethelredus Abbas, de genealogia
Regum Angliae, col. 351. Simeon Dunelm. de Gest. Reg. Angl. col. 121. Radul^us
de Diceto Abbrev. Chron. col. 450. Speeds Hist. p. 377. Spelmanni Council. p.
348. to 353.
King Aethelulf gave the tenth part of his Realm to God and his Saints, free
from all secular services, exactions and Tributes, by this Charter, made and
confirmed, by the advice and free assent of all the Bishops and Nobles
throughout the Realm then assembled in a Great Council, to oppose the invading
plundering Danes.

Regnante in perpetuum domino nostro Jesu Christo, in nostris temporibus
bellorum incendia, and direptiones opum nostrarum, and vastantium crudelissimas
hostium barbarorum paganorumque gentium multiplices tribulationes, a^^ligentium
usque ad internecionem cernimus, tempo^a incumbere periculosa; Quamobrem ego
Aethelulfus, Rex Occidentalium Saxonum, cum Consilio Episcoporum, ac Principum
meorum, Consilium salubre arque uniforme reme i un a^^irmavi, ut aliquam
portione^ Terrae meae Deo and beatae Mariae and omnibus sanctis^ Iure perpetuo
possidendam concedam, Proposit. 1, 5, 6, 9.10.
Decimam scilicet par^em terrae meae, u^ sit tuta mu^eribus, et libera ab
omnibus servitiis secularibus, nec non Regalibus Tributis Majoribus et
Monoribus, seu Taxationibus, q^ae nos Wi^teredden appe^lamus, Or Winterden as
Ingulsus has it.
Sitque omnium rerum libera, pro remissione animarum and peccatorum meo^um; ad
^erviendum soli Deo, sine expeditione, et pontis constructione, arcis
munitione, u^ eo diligenti^s ^ro nobis preces ad Deum ^^ne cessatione fundant,
quo eorum servitutem in aliquo le vigamus.

The Copies in our Historians vary in some expressions, and in the date of this
Charter; some placing it in Anno 855. others Anno 865. This Charter, as
Ingulphus records, was made at Winchester, November. 3. Anno. 855. praesentibus
and subscribentibus Archiepiscopis Angliae universis, nec non Burredo, Merciae,
and Edmundi East-Anglorum rege, Abbatum, and Abbatissarum Ducum, Comitum,
Procerumque totius terrae, aliorumque fidelium infinita multitudine. Dignitates
vero sua nomina subscripserunt. After which, for a greater Confirmation the
King offered the Written Charter up to God upon the Altar of St. Peter, where
the Bishops received it, and after sent it into all their Diocesses to be
published: and hereupon the Bishops of Sherburne and Winchester, with the
Abbots and religious persons, on whom the said benefits were bestowed, decreed,
That on every Wednesday, in every Church, all the Friars and Nuns should sing
50 Psalms, and every Priest 2 Masses; one for the King, and an other for his
Captains, It is observable, first, That the Parliamentary Council wherein this
Charter was made and ratified by common consent, and this exemption and tenth
granted, was principally called to resist the invading plundering Danes. 2ly.
That this King and Council, in those times of Invasion and necessity, were so
far from taking away the Lands and Tithes of the Church, for defense of the
Realm, or from imposing new unn^ual Taxes and Contributions on the Clergy for
that end, that they granted them more Lands and Tithes than formerly, and
exempted them from all former ordinary Taxes and Contributions, that they might
more cheerfully and frequently pour ^or^h prayers to God for them, as the best
means of defense and security, against these foreign invading enemies.

History of Tithes. chapter 8. p. 208, 209.
Mr. Seldom recites another Charter of this King of the same year (different
from it in month and place) out of the Chartularies of Abbington Abbey, to the
same effect, made by Parliamentary consent of that time, and per consilium
sa^ubre cum Episcopis, Comi^ibus, ac cunct^s Optimatibus meis, which Char^er is
s^bscribed by this King and his two Sons, with some Bishops and Abbots;
ratified with their signs of the Cross, and this annexed curse, Si quis vero
minuere velmutare nostram donationem praesumpserit, noscat se ante tribunal
Christi redditurum rationem, nisi prius satisfactione emendaverit, usual in
such Charters.

After See Malmesbury, Huntindon, Hoveden, Matthew Westminster. Ethelwerdus, Simeon
Dunelmensis, Wigorniensis, Speed, Polychron^ Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton, and
others in his life.
which, this King going to Rome, carried Alfred his youngest Son thither with
him (whom he most loved) to be educated by Pope Leo; where continuing a year,
he caused him to be crowned King by the Pope, and returning into his Country
married Judith, the King of France his Daughter, bringing Alfred and her with
him into England. In the Kings absence in foreign parts, Alstan Bishop of
Sherburne, Eandulfe Earl of Somerset, and certain other Nobles making a
Conspiracy with Ethelbald the Kings eldest Son, concluded, he should never be
received into the Kingdom, upon his return from Rome, for two Causes: One, for
that he had caused his youngest son Alfred, to be crowned King at Rome,
excluding thereby, as it were, his eldest Son, and others from the Right of the
Kingdom. Another, for that contemning all the w^men of England, he had married
the Da^gh^er of the King of Fra^ce^ an alien et contra morem et Statuta Regum
West-Saxonum, and against the use and Statu^es of the Kings of the West Saxons,
called Ju^ith, ( the King of France his Daughter, w^om he lately esp^used)
Queen, and caused her to sit by his side at the Table, as he ^easted; For the
West Saxons permit^ed not the Kings Wife to sit by the King at the Table, nor
yet ^o be cal^ed Queen, but the Kings Wife: Man. W^st. An. 802, 854. Huntindon,
Hoveden, Bromton, Speed, Holinsh^d, Asser. Flor. Wigorn. Radulf. de Dice^o.
Sim^on Dunelm. Polyc^ronicon, Fabian, Mr. S^ldeas Titles of Honor, pa^ l. 1.
c. 6. p. 116, 117, 118. See here p. 35.
Which Infamy arose (...) Eadburga, Daughter of King O^fa, Queen of the some
Nat^on, who destroyed her Husband King Brithr^^ic with poison, and sitting by
the King, was wont to accuse all ^he Nobles of the Realm to him, who thereupon
dep^ived them of l^fe or banished them the Realm^ and whom she c^uld not
accus^, she used to kill with poison: Therefore^ for this mis-doing of the
Q^^en: they all conjured and swore, that they would never permit a King to
reign over them who should be guilty in the premises: W^e^eupon King Aethelulfe
returning peaceably from Rome, his Son Aethelbald, with his Accomplices,
attempted to bring their conceived wickedness to effect, in excluding him from
his own Realm and Crown. But Almighty God would not permit it; for lest
peradventure a more than civil war should arise betw^^n the Father and the Son,
the Conspiracy of all the Bishops and Nobles ceased, though the King Clemency,
who divided the Kingdom of the West Saxons ( formerly undivided) with his Son,
Proposit. 2, 4, 7, 8, 10.
so that the East part of the Realm should go to his Son Ethelbald, and the
West-part remain to the Father. And when tota Regni Nobiliras, all the Nobility
of the Realm, and the whole Na^ion of the West Saxons, would have fought for
the King, thrust his Son (Ethelbald) from the right of the Kingdom, and (...)
him and his Accomplices out of the Realm, qui tantum facinus perpe^rare ausi
sunt, and Regem a regno ^rop^io re^ellerent (which Wigorniensis, Anno 855.
^^le^ Facinus, et inauditum omnibus saeculis ante infortunium) if the Father
would have permitted them to do it. He out of the nobleness of his mind,
satisfi^d his Sons desire; so that where the Father ought to have reigned by
the just judgment of God, there the obstin^te and wicked Son reigned. The King
Matthew Westminster. An. 857. Speeds Hist p. 376, 377. Chron. ^o. Bromton, c^l. 820.
and the rest ^o^ecited.
Aethelulfe before the death of Egbert his father, was ordained Bishop of
Winchester, but his Father dying, he was made King by the Prelates^ Nobles, and
People, much against his will, cum non esset alius de Regio genere qui regnare
debuisset, because there was none other of the Royal Race who ought to reign:
Haeredibus aliis deficientibus, po^^modum necessitate compulsus, gubernacula
Regni in se suscepit, as Bromton and others express it.

At his death (Anno 857.) Anno 857.
he did by his will (lest his Sons should fall out between themselves after his
decease) give the kingdom of Kent, with Sussex and Ess^x, to Ethelbert his
second son, and left the kingdom of the West Saxons to his eldest son
Aethelbald; then he devised certain sums of Money to his Daughter, Kindred,
Nobles, and a constant annuity for ever, for meat, d^ink, and cloths to one
poor man or pilgrim, out of every 10 Hides of his Land, and 300 marks of money
to be sent yearly to Rome, to be spent there in Oil for Lamps, and Alms: which
sums I never find paid by his Successors, as he prescribed by his Will and
Charter too, because not confirmed by his great Parliamentary Councils, of
Prelates and Nobles, as his forcited Charter, and Radulph, de Diceto
Abbreviationes Chron. col. 450. Chron. Johan, B^om. col. 802, 806. Polychron.
l. 5^ c. 30.
Peter Pence (likewise granted by him) were; upon this occasion (as some
record) that he being in Rome, and seeing there outlawed men doing penance in
bonds of Iron, purchased of the Pope, tha^ Englishmen after that time should
never out of their Country, do penance in Bonds.

About the year of our Lord 867. Chron. Io. Bromton, col. 803. Speeds History.
Osbrith King of Northumberland (as Bromton records) residing at York, Anno 867.
as he returned from hunting, went into the house of one of his Nobles called
Bruern Bocard; to eat; who was then gone to the Seacoasts, to defend it and
the Ports against Thieves and Pirates, as he was accustomed; His Lady being
extraordinarily beautiful, entertained him very honorably at dinner; The K.
enamored with her beauty, after dinner taking her by the hand, leads her into
her Chamber, saying he would speak with her in private; and there violently
ravished her against her will: which done he presently returned to York, but
the Lady abode at her house, weeping and lamenting the deeds of the King;
whereby she lost her former color and beauty. Her Husband returning, and
finding her in this sad condition, inquired the cause thereof; wherewi^h she
fully ac^uainting him; he thereupon cheered her up with comfortable words,
saying, that he would not love her the less for it, since her weakness was
unable to resist the Kings power; and vowed by Gods assistance, speedily to
avenge himself and her of the King, for this indignity. Whereupon, being a
Noble and very potent man, of great Parentage, he called all his kinsmen, and
the chief Nobles of his Family to him, with all speed, and acquainted them
with this dishonor done to him by the king, saying, he would by all means be
avenged thereof; and by their Counsel and Consent, they went all together to
York, to the king, who when he saw Bruern called him courteously to him; But
he, guarded with his kindred and friends, presently defying the King, resigned
up to him his Homage, Fealty, Lands, and what ever he held of him, saying, that
he would never hold any thing of him hereafter as of his Lord: And so without
more words, or greater stay, instantly departed, and taking leave of his
friends, went speedily into Denmark, and complained to Codrinus king thereof,
of the Indignity done by King Osbrith to him and his Lady, imploring his aid
and assistance, speedily to revenge it, he being extracted out of his Royal
blood. The king and Danes hereupon, being exceeding glad that they had this
induc^ng cause to invade England, presently gathered together a great Army to
revenge this Injury done to Bruern, being of his Blood, appointing his two
Brothers, Inguar and Hubba, most valiant Soldiers, to be their Generals; who
providing Ships and other Necessaries, transported an innumerable Army into
England, and landed them in the Nothern parts; This being the true Cause why
the Danes at this time invaded England in this manner. In the mean time, the
Parents, Kindred, and Friends of Bruern, expelled and rejected King Osbrith,
for this ^njury done to him and his Lady, Proposition 8,
r^fusing to hold their Lands of, or to obey him any longer as their Sovereign,
and advanced one Ella to be King, though none of the Royal blood. Our other
Florent. Wigorn. Mat. Westminster. Anno 867 Sim. Dunelm. Hist. de Dunelm. Eccl. c. 6.
Huntingd. Hist. l. 5. p. 349. Roger, Hovenden, An. pars prior, p. 415.
Ethelwerdi Hist. l. 4. c. 2. p. 842. Polychron. l. 5. c. 32. Hist. de Sancto
Cuthberto col. 70. Sim. Dune^m. de gest. Reg. Ang. col. 123, 142. Tho. S^ubs.
Actus Pon^if. Ebor. col. 1608 Speeds Hist. p^ 24^8. See Ho^linshed, Fabian
(...) Grafton.
Historians, who mention not this fact of Osbrith, and occasion of these Danes
arival to revenge it, write, that the Danes upon their Landing marched to the
City of York, wasting all the Country before them with fire and Sword unto
Tinmouth. At that time (they write) by the Devils instinct, there was a very
great discord raised between the Northumberlanders, Sicut ^emper populo qui
odium incurrerit evenire solet: For the Northumberlanders at that time had
expelled their lawful King Osbrith out of the Realm, and advanced one Ella, a
Tyrant, not of the Royal blood, to the Regal Sovereignty of the Kingdom^ By
reason of which division, the Danes taking York, ran up and down the Country
filling all places with blood and Grief, wasting and burning all the Churches
and Monasteries far and near, leaving nothing standing but the Walls and ruins
of thom; pillaging, depopulating, and laying waste the whole Country. In which
great necessity and distress the Northumberlanders reconciling their two Kings,
Osbrith and Ella, one to another, gathered a great Army together against the
Danes; which their two Kings and ^ight Earls marched with to York; where (...)
long fight, with various success, both the said Kings with most of the
Northumberlanders were all slain^ A^ril 11. Anno 867. The City of York consumed
with fire, and the whole Kingdom made tributarie to the Danes: Hist. de Dunelm.
Eccles. c. 6. col. 14. and Hist. de Sancto Cuthberto col. 70.
Simeon Dunelmensis relates, that both these kings had violently and
sacrilegiously taken away certain Lands from S. Cuthberts Church in Durham,
Proposit. 3, 4.
for Osbrit had by a sacrilegious attempt taken away Wircewood and Tillemouth;
and Ella, Billingham, Heclif and Wigeclif and Creca from S. Cuthbert: tandem
cum maxima part suorum ambo praefati Reges occubuerunt, and Injurias quas
Ecclesiae sancti Cuthberti aliquando irrogaverant, vita privati, and regno
persolverunt; Which the Author of the History of St. Cuthbert, observes and
records more largely, as a punishment of their sacrilegious Rapine: The Danes
hereupon made Egbert king of Northumberland, as a Tributary and Viceroy under
them: Sic Northumbria bellico jure obtenta barbarorum dominium multo post
tempore pro conscientia libertatis Ingemuit, writes Malmesbury de Gestis Regum
Angliae, l. 2. c. 3. p. 42.

These rebellious Northumberlanders about 7 years after, Proposit. 8.
uno conspirantes consilio, expelled Egbert the Realm by unanimous consent,
together with Archbishop Wilfer, making one Richius King in his Place; the
Danes both then and long after possessing and wasting their Country, and
slaughtering them with fire and sword (as the Sea [c] before p. 57.
Marginal Historians record) more than any other parts of the Island, by a just
divine punishment for their manifold Treasons, Seditions, Factions, Rebellions
against, and Murders of their Sovereigns.

Anno 868.
In the year Sim^ Dun^l. Hist. de Gest. Reg. Ang. col. 123, 124, 146. Mat.
Westminster. and ^lorentius Wigorniensis. An. 868, ^69. Ethelwerdi Hist. l. 4. c. 2.
Huntingd. Hist. l. 5. p. 349. Hoveden Annal. pars 1. p. 416. Ingulph. Hist. p.
863, 864. Chron. Ioh. Bromtom, col. ^07. Polych. l. 5. c. 32. Fabian,
Holinshed, Grafton, Speed in the life of (...) and ^thelred.
868. a great Army of these victorious plundering Danes, marched out of the
Kingdom of Northumberland to Nottingham, which they took, and there wintered;
Whereupon Beorred (or Br^thred) King of Mercians, omnesque ejusdem gentis
Optimates, and all the Nobles of that Nation assembled together, Where the
King, Consilium habuit cum suis Comitibus, and comilitonibus, and omni populo
^i^i subjecto, Qualiter inimicos bellica virtute exuperaret^ sive de Regno
expelleret; held a Council with his Earls and fellow Soldiers, and all the
people subject to him, Proposit. 5, 6, 9,
how he might vanquish these Enemies with military power, or drive them out of
the Realm: By whose advice, he sent Messengers to Ethel^ed King of the
West Saxons, and to his Brother Elfrid, humbly requesting them, that they would
assist and join with him against the Danish Army; which they easily
condescening to, gathered a very great Army together out of all parts, and
joining all together with Beorred and his forces, marched to Nottingham,
unanimously, with a a resolution to give the Danes battle; who sheltering
themselves under the works of the Castle and Town, refused to fight with them;
whereupon they besieged them in the Town, but being unable to break the Walls,
they concluded a Peace at last with the Danes, upon condition, that they should
relinquish the Town, and march back again in^o Northumberland, which they did;
where their Army continued the whole year following, in and about York,
debaccha^s and insaniens, occidens and perdens perolurimos viros and muli^res.

Hist. p. 863^ 864.
Abbot Ingulphus records; that during the siege of Nottingham, King Beorred,
(as he styles him) at the request of Earl Algar the younger (who was very
gracious with him and the other Kings^ causa suae nobilis militiae) granted a
Charter of Confirmation, not only of all the Lands, Advowsons, Possessions,
Proposit. 10.1.
which this Earl, with other particular persons and Kings had given to the Abbey
of Croyland, but likewise of all their former Privileges, confirming all their
Islands, Marshes, Churches, Chapels, Manors, Mansions, Cottages, Woods, Lands,
Meadows, (therein specified) to God and Saint Guthlac for ever, Libera and
Soluta, and emancipata ab omni onere ^erreno, and servitio seculari, in
Eleem^synam aeternam perpetuo possidendam. Which Charter has ^^is memorable
exordium, expressing the motives inducing this King to grant it.

Beorredus la^giente Dei gratia Rex Merciorum, omnibus provinciis, and populis
earum universam Merciam inhabitantibus, and fidem Catholicam conservantibus
salutem sempiternam, in Domino nostro Jesu Christo. Quoniam peccatis nostris
exigentibus, manum Domini super nos extensum, quotidie cum virga ferrea
cernimus cervicibus nostris imminere, Necessarium nobis and salubre arbitror,
piis sanctae matris ecclesiae precibus Eleemosynarumque liberis largitionibus
iratum Dominum placatum reddere, et dignis devotionibus ejus gratiam in nostris
necessita^ibus auxiliariam implora^e, Ideoque et ad petitionem stren^i Comitis,
mihi meritoque dilectissimi, concessi regio Chirographo meo Theodoro Abbati
Croyland, Tam donum dicti Comitis Algari, quam dona aliorum fidelium praeterit
orum ac praesentium, etc. And it concludes thus. Istud Regium Chirographum
meum, Anno Incarnationis Domini nostri Jesu Christi, 868. Calendis Augusti apud
Snothingham coram fratribus, and amicis, and omni populo meo in obsidione
Paganorum congregatis, sanctae crucis munimine confirmavi^ Then follow the
subscriptions and confirmations of Ceolnoth Archbishop of Canterbury, 5
Bishops, 3 Abbots, Ethelred king of West Saxons, and Alfred his Brother, Edmund
king of East-Angle, 2 Dukes, and twelve Earls, who all ratified this Charter.

After which Charter confirmed, this king Beorred renders special thanks to all
his Army, for their assistance against the Danes, especially to the Bishops,
Abbots, and other inferior Ecclesiastical Persons, for their voluntary
assistance of him in those wars against these Enemies, norwithstanding his
Fathers exemption of them by his Charter from all military expeditions and
secular services: thus recorded by Hist. p. 864, 865.
Ingulphus, and most worthy observation.

Ego Beorredus Rex Merciorum, Intimo animi affectu, totisque praecordiis
gratias exolvo speciales, omni exercitui meo; maxim tamen Viris
Ecclesiasticis, Episcopis and Abbatibus, aliis etiam inferioribus status and
dignitatis. Proposit. 1, 3, 8.
Qui licet piissimae memoriae, Rex quondam E^helwulfus pater meus, per
sacratis^imam Chartam suam, ab omni expeditione militari vos liberos
reddiderit, and ab omni servitio saeculari penitus absolutos; dignis^^ma tamen
miseratione super oppressiones Christianae plebis Ecclesiarumque, and
Monasteriorum destructiones luctuosas, benignissime compassi, contra
nefandissimos Paganos in exercitum domini prompti and spontanei convenistis, ut
tanquam Martyrs, Christi cultus sanguine vestro augeatur, and barbarorum
superstitiosa crudelitas effugetur.

From these last Passages, it is apparent: first, That in those days our Saxon
Kings made War and Peace by the advice and consent of their Nobles and
Parliamentary great Councils. 2ly. That in cases of common invasion and danger
by foreign Enemies, all the forces raised, and ways and means to resist them,
were concluded on by advice and consent of these great Councils, and not by the
kings absolute power. 3ly. That all, or most Churchmen and their Church Lands,
in those days, were absolutely freed and discharged from all military
expeditions, Contributions, Aids and Assistance against Enemies, by express
Charters, but only such as themselves voluntarily an^ ^reely contributed in
cases of incumbent great Danger and Necessity, without compulsion; for which
their kings rendered them special and hearty thanks; acknowledging and
confirming these their Immunities, not violating them upon such Necessities, as
this Notable passage of Ingulphus attests, together with that of Page 312. and
Malmesb. de Gestis Regum. l. 2. c^ 2. p. 37.
Mat. West. An. 867. Concerning Alstan Bishop of Sherborne, a man of very great
Power and Counsel in the Realm: Contra Danos quoque qui tunc primo insulam
infestabant, Regis Aethelulfi saevitiam exacuit; Ipse ex fisco pecuniam
accipiens, P^opos^t. 1.3.
ipse excercitum componens, Martiis felix eventibus contra hosts bella plurima
constanter peregit: receiving Money out of the Kings Exchequer (not the Peoples
Purses or Contributions) to manage these Wars and not warring on his own
expenses. 4ly. That the Nobles, Gentry, and People of the Realm, were the only
standing Milit^^ in that Age, to defend it against foreign Enemies in times of
danger or actual invasion; when they marched out of their own Counties against
them, voluntarily and freely adventuring their lives for defense of their King,
Country, Religion, Liberties, Properties; as they did at this siege of
Nottingham, and during all the long-lasting Danish Wars, Invasions, and
Depredations both by Land and Sea. 5ly. That our Christian Kings, Nobles, and
great Councils of those days, in times of greatest danger, Invasion and Wars,
held it most seasonable and necessary to confirm and enlarge the Churches
Patrimony, Liberties, and Privileges, thereby to stir up their Clergymen more
earnestly to assist them with their Prayers; An. 870.
not to diminish, invade or infringe them, under pretext of Real inevitable
necessity and danger (the practice of late and present times) Whereupon they
granted and, confirmed this forecited Charter in the very Army during the
siege of Notingham, before all the Kings, Princes, Prelates, Dukes, Earls, and
people there present.

Ingulphi Hist. p. 865 to 869, Mat. Wes^m. Wigorn. Huntingd. Hoveden, Brom.
Radulf. de Diceto. Sim. Dunel. Polychron. Fabian, Grafton, Holinshed, Speed,
Ethelwerdus in the life of Ethelred and An. 870.
In the year 870. Inguar and Hubba, with the rest of the Danes coming into
Kesteven in Lincolnshire, wasting and slaying all the Country with fire and
sword, thereupon Earl Algarus, Osgot Sheriff of Lincoln, and all the Gentry and
People in those parts, with the Band of the Abbey of Croyland (under the Command
of To^^us a Monk, formerly a Soldier) consisting of 200 stout men, (most of
them Fugitives thither for Sanctuary) uniting all their forces together in
Kesteven, on the Feast of St. Maurice, fought with the Danes, and slew 3 of
their Kings, with a great multitude of their forces. That night the other
Danish Kings (dispersed abroad to pillage the Country) with a great booty and
many captains, coming to the tents of their routed Companions, with a numerous
Army, were enraged with the slaughter of their Confederates, in their absence:
Whereupon most of the English secretly fled away from the Earl and their
Captains in the night through fear: who early in the morning having heard
divine Offices, and receiving the Sacrament, resolved not to retreat, but
manfully to fight with the Danes (though not above 700 to their many thousands)
being most ready to die for the defense of the faith of Christ and of their
Country: Whereupon the Danes assailing them with great multitudes and fury,
they all standing and fighting close together, valiantly sustained their
assaults from morning till evening, without giving ground. Upon which the Danes
to sever them, purposely feigned a Flight, and began to leave the Field^
Hereupon the English, contrary to the commands of their Captains, dissolving
their Ranks, and dispersing themselves to pursue the Danes, they suddenl^
returned and slew most of the English, who fought gallantly with them to the
last gasp, some few of them only escaping; After which the Danes marching to
the Abbey of Croyland, put the Abbot with all the Monks and Persons they there
found (one Child excepted) to the Sword, after they had extremely tortured them
to discover where their Treasures were; broke up all the Tombs, pillaged and
burnt the Abbey, with all the Edifices thereof, leaving it a mere ruinous heap;
then marching on, laying all the Country waste before them with fire and Sword,
sparing neither person, age, nor sex, they cast down, burnt, destroyed, and
levelled to the Ground the goodly Monasteries of Bradney, Peterborough,
Huntingdon, Ely, with sundry others, murdering as well all the Monks as Nuns
therein, which their merciless Swords, after they had first polluted them. To
avoid whose barbarous rape, Mat. VVestm^ An. 8^0. p. 313. Speeds Hist. p. 383.
Ebba Abbess of Coldingham and her Nuns (by her example and persuasion) cut off
their upper Lips, and Noses, to deform themselves to their lascivious eyes;
which bloody Spectacle preserved their Chastity from their Lust; but not their
Monastery or bodies from their Cruelty, they burning them and their Nunnery to
Ashes. Anno 870.


Mat. VV^s^m. Anno 855.870. VVil. Malm, de gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 3. v. 13. Hunt.
Hist. l. 5. p. 349. Hov. Annal. pars 1. p. 416. Eth^l. Hist. l. 3. c. 1. Chron.
Io. Bromton. col. 745, 754.804, 805, 806. Sim. Dunelm. Hist. de Eccl. Dunelm.
l. 2. c. 6. et de gest. Reg. Ang. col. 124, 143. Polychron. l. 5. c. 42. Fab.
Grant. Hollinshed, Caxton, Speed in the life of St. Edmund. Fox Acts and
Monuments vol. 1. p. 140, Proposit. 2.4,
After which, the same year Inguar and Hubba marched against St. Edmund, who in
the year 855. was chosen King of the East Saxons Ab omnibus Regionis illius
magnatibus et populis, by all the Nobles^ and People of that Realm (being
sprung from the ancient Royal blood of the Saxons) and compelled to take the
Government on him much against his will, being then but 13 years old, and
consecrated King by Bishop Humbert in the Royal Town called Bury. The reason of
their malice to this King, (as some of our Historians write) was this, that he
was maliciously accused to have murdered their Father Lothbroc, driven by a
sudden storm in a small boat into England as he was hawking at Fowl, by this
Kings Faulkoner: who having murdered himself out of mere malice, was by
judgment of the Knights and Lawyers banished the Realm, and put alone into
Lothbrocs Boat, without O^re or Sails for murdering him, and so sent to Sea;
being driven in it into Denmark, to excuse himself, he maliciously accused the
King of this Murder, to these his Sons; Who thereupon invaded England with an
Army to revenge their Fathers death. And the Reason why they at this time so
extraordinarily prevailed, and overrun the Land, was the Civil Discords; Wars,
and Emulations amongst the Saxon kings; who either out of Malice or Ambition to
advance their own Dominion, or base unworthy fears, would rather induce these
common Enemies to overrun them, than assist one another against them; which De
gest. Reg. l. 2. ^^ ^. p. 42.
William of Malmesburie thus expresses. Meminerit interea lector, quod interim
Reges Merciorum et Northanimbrorum, captata occasion ^dventus Danorum, quorum
bellis Ethelredus i^sudabat, a servitio West-Saxonum respirantes, domina^ionem
suam pene asseruerant. Ardebant ergo cunctae saevis popularibus provinciae,
unusquisque Regum inimicos magis in suis sedibus sustinere, quam compatrio^is
Laborantibus opem porrigere curabat: Ita dum maluit vindicare, quam praevenire
injuriam, socordia sua exanguem reddiderunt Patriam. Dani sine obstaculo
succressere; dum et provincialibus timor incresceret, et proxima quaeq,
victoria per additamentum Capti^orum, instrumentum sequentis fieret, etc.
Northanimbri jamdud^m civilibus dissentionibus ^luctuantes, adventante host
correxerunt discordiam. Itaque Osbirthum Regem quem expulerant, in solium
reforma^tes, magnosque moliti paratus, obviam proc^dunt; sed facile pulsi,
infra Urbem Eboracum se includunt: qua mox a victoribus succensa, cum laxos
crines effusior flamma produceret, tota depascens maenia, ipsi quoque
conflagrati, patriam ossibus texere suis, Mercii non semel obtriti, obsidatu
miserias suas levaverunt. At vero Ethelredus multis laboribus infractus obiit:
Orientalium Anglorum pagi, cum urbibus et vicis a praedonibus possessi; Rex
eorum sanctus Edmundus, ab eisdem interemptust Anno Dominicae Incarnationis
870. 12 Calendas Decembris, temporaneae mortis compendio regnum emit aeternum.

The manner of King Edmunds Martyrdom See those forecited at (m) and Capgrave,
Surius, and Ribadeniera, Antonius in the life of St. Edmund, Malm. De Gestis
Reg. l. 2. c. 3.
Historians thus relate. An. 870. Hinguar King of the Danes invading King
Edmunds Realm with a great Power sent a Messenger to King Edmund to demand the
half of his Treasure and Wealth, and that he should hold his Realm under him;
threatening otherwise to waste his Kingdom and extirpa^e him and his People. Sed
nimis fraudulenter Hinguar thesauros exigebat, qui Clementissimi Regis caput
potius quam pecuntas sitiebat, writes An. 870. p. 370.
Matthew Westminster. Where upon Bishop Humbe^t advising him to fly from the
Danes (who approached with their forces toward him) to save his life, The King
wishe^; Would to God that I might preserve the lives of my Subjects, for whom I
desire to lay down my life; for this is my chi^fest wish, that I may not
survive my faithful Subjects, and most dear friends, which this Cru^l Pirate
has th^evishly slain; neither will I stain my glory by sl^ght, who never yet
sustained the reproaches of Wa^re. The Heavenly King also is my Witness, that
no fear of the Barbarians shall separate me from the Love of Christ, whether
living or dead. Then turning to the Messenger of Hinguar, he said, Thou art
worthy to suffer the punishment of death, being w^t with the blood of my
people; But imitating the example of my Christ, If it should so happen, I am
not afraid willingly to die for them; Return therefore speedily to thy Master,
and carry my answers to him: Although thou take away my Treasures and riches
which the Divine Clemency has given me, by thy power; yet thou shall never
subject me to thy infidelity: for it is an honest thing to defend perpetual
liberty, together with purity of Religion for which also, if there be need, we
think it not unprofitable to die: Therefore, as thy proud cru^l^y has begun,
after the servants slaughter cut thou the Kings throat^ because the King of
Kings seeing these things, Proposit. 8.
will translate me into Heaven, there to reign eternally. The Messenger
departing, the King commanded his Soldiers to run to their Arms, a^firming^
that it was a worthy thing to fight both for their Faith and Country, Nota.
le^t they should prove de^er^ers of their Realm, and betrayers of the people.
And being encouraged by Bishop Humbert, his Nobles, and fellow Soldiers, he
marched against the Enemy, and near Thedford fought a bloody battle with the
Danes, from morning to night, the place being all dyed red with the blood of
the slain. A^ which grievo^^ ^ight King Edmund was much grieved, not only for
the great slaughter of his own So^ldiors ^ight^ing for their Country and native
liberty, and the faith of Jesus Christ, and so alre^dy ^rouned with M^rtyrdome:
But likewise for the death of the Barbarous Infidels, sent down to Hell in
great numbers; which he overmuch lamented. After which battle, retiring to
Hegelsdun with his forces that were left, he immutably resolved in his mind,
never to fight battle with the Enemies more. saying only this; that it was
necessary that he alone should die for the People, and not the whole Nation
perish. Soon after Hinguars Army being recruted by the access of Hubba to him,
with ten thousand men, he marched to Hegelsdun, and surrounded it, that none
might escape thence; Whereupon King Edmund flying to the Church, and casting
down his temporal Arms, humbly prayed the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to give
him constancy in his passion: Then the Danish Soldiers seizing on him, brought
him from the Church before Hinguar, by whose command he was tied to a tree hard
by, cruelly whipped a long time, then shot through with Darts, wherewith his
Body was stuck full; after which, being taken from the tree, his Head was cut
off from his Body, with a bloody sword by the Barbarous Executioner appointed
for that purpose; and so he died a most glorious Martyr for his Kingdom,
Country, Subjects, and Religion: to whose memory a famous Monastery was after
built; Of which William of Malmesbury de Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 13. p. 89.
gives this Relation; Quibus Artibus Edmundus ita sibi omnis Britanniae de
vinxit incolas, ut beatum se in primis astruat, qui Coenobium illius, vel nummo
vel valenti illustraret. Ipsi quoque Reges aliorum Domini, servos se illius
gloriantu^, and coronam ei regiam mis^itant, magno si uti volunt redimentes
commercio. Exactores vectigalium qui alibi Bacchantur fas nefasque juxta
metientes ibi supplices, Proposit. 1.
cira (...) sancti (...) ^^ondi^ litigationes sistunt, experti multorum paenam,
qui perseverandum putarunt; which I wi^h our Tax-Exactors, and Exci^ers wou^d
now remember.

Anno 870.
Whiles the Danes were thus wasting the Kingdoms of Northumberland and the
East Saxons with Fire and Sword, and martyring King Edmund Ingulphi Hi^t. p.
868, 869, 911.
Beorred king of Mercians was bu^^ed in warring against the Britains, who
infested the Western parts of his Realm: But hearing the Danes had invaded the
Eastern part of his Kingdom, he came to London, and gathering a great Army
together, marching wi^h i^ through the Eastern quarters of his Realm, he
applied the whole Isle of Ely to his Exchequor, taking into his hands all the
lands formerly b^longing to the Monastery o^ Medehamsted, Proposit. 1, 4.
lying between Stamford, Huntindon and Wisebeck, assigning the Lands more
remote, lying scattered through the Country, to his Souldiers^ The like he did
with the Lands of the Monastery of St. Pega of Rikirk; retaining certain of
them to himself, and giving some of them to his Soldiers. And the like did he
with the Lands of all other Monasteries, destroyed totally by the Danes: whose
Lands by Law 7 E. 4.11, 12. Brook Escheat 19.
esch^ated to the Crown, and those Lords, whose predece^^ors founde^ and
endowed them, by the slaughter and chasing away of all the Monks and Nuns and
burning of the Monasteries; whose Lands thereupon were re^umed and confi^cated
to the Kings Exchequer: Et cum caetera Monasteria per Danorum fe^ocitatem
funditus destructa, Regali fisco fuerant ascripta, denuo et assumpta, omnibus
Monachis eoru^ necatis, perditis, seu penitus fugatis, as Ingulphus informs us
of the Reason; yet many of the Monks of Croyland escaping the Danes fury, and
returning soon after thither again, electing a new Abbot, and repairing their
Monastery by degrees, as well as that exigency would permit, thereupon they
enjoyed the sight of the whole Abbey, and the Isle of Croylan^, with the self
same Liberties and Privileges they had from the b^ginning, dischardged from all
secular services, during all the time of this their desolation, and the Danish
wars, till the time of its restoration; and after that till Ingulphus time, as
he records. Nothwithstanding, because many of the Monks were slain, and the
Abbey burnt down and demolished by the Danes, King ^eorred thereupon seized some
of their lands into his own hands, and gave other of their Lands more remote
from the Abbey to his stipendiary Soldiers.

And although venerable Abbot Godric, took very much pains, frequently
demanding restitution of them both from King Beorred and his Soldiers, and
very often showed the Charters of the Donors, and the confirmations of fo^mer
Kings, together with, his own proper Charter, to this Kings, yet he received
always nothing but empty words, from and him them: whereupon he at last utterly
despaired of their restitution. Perceiving therefore the overmuch malice of the
times, et Militiam Are not the Soldiers now sick of the same disease.
Regis Terrarum cupidissimam, and the Kings Militia, and Soldiers most covetous
of Lands, he resolved with himself in conclusion to pass by these Royal
Donations Surdo Tempore^ in a deaf time; being over-glad and rejoicing, that
the Kings grace had granted the whole Island lying round about the Monastery
unto it, free and discharged from all Regal exactions, much more specially to
him then at that time, which had not happened to many other Monasteries. There
departed therefore at that time from the Monastery of Croyland these
possessions which never returned to this present day: The Manor of Spalding
given to Earl Adelwu^fe, with all its appurtinances: The Manor of Deeping
given to Lang^er a Knight, Propos. 4.
(or Soldier) and the Kings Baker, with all its appurtenances; The Manor of
Croxton given to Fernod a Knight (or Soldier) the Kings Ensign-bearer, with
all its appurtenances; The Manors of Kerketon and Kimerby in Lindesy, with all
their appurtenances, given to Earl Turgot; but Bukenhale and Halington, then
appropriated to the Exchequer, were afterward restored to the said Monastery
by the Industry of Turketulus Abbot of Croyland; and the gift of most pious
King Edred, the Restorer of them with 12 other Manors (named by Ingulf.)
belonging to Croyland; quas Rex Beorredus Fisco suo a^sumserat, Which King
Beorred had then assumed in his Exchequor. After which K. Beorred passing with
his Army into Lindesey, Latissimas Terras Mon^sterio Bardney ( totally ruined
by the Danes) Dudum Pertinentes ^isco suo accepit, remotas vero in diversis
patri^s divisas ^acentes, Militibus suis dedit. But mark the issue. At last
Mattew Westminster. Floren. Wigorniensis. An. 874. p. 313. Chron. ^oh. Brom^. col. 779,
810. Sim. Dun^lm. Hist. de Gest. R^g. Ang. col. 127. VVil. Malm. de Gest. Reg.
l. 1. c. 4. p. 33. Huntin. Hist. l. 5. p. 349. Hoveden Annal. pars prior, p.
417. Speeds Hist. p. 256.
the Danes returning into Mercia Anno 874. wasting and spoiling all the Country
with fire and sword, and destroying all Churches and Monasteries, King Beorred,
when he beheld all the Land of England, in every corner thereof, wasted with
the slaughters and rapines of these Barbarians, vel de victoria desperans, vel
^ot laborum Labyrinthum fastidiens, either despairing of victory, or loathing
the labyrinth of so many troubles, left the Kingdom, and went to Rome, where he
died few days after, and was there buried in the English School, and his Wife
following after him, died in her way to Rome; Some write, Anno 874.
he was driven out of his kingdom by the Danes.

Hereupon the Ingulphi Hist. p. 869, 870. ^^o^ent. Wigorniensis. An. 874. p. 313.
Chron. Ioh. Bromt. col. 810. Simeon Dun^lm. de Gest. R^g. Ang. col. 127. VVil.
Malmesbury de Gest. Reg. l. 1. c. 4. p. 33. Huntind. Hist. l. 5. p. 349.
Hoveden Annal. pars prior p. 417.
Danes, Anno 874. substituted in his place in the Realm of Mercia, one
Ceolwulfus, a servant of King Beorreds, an Englishman by Nation, sed Barbarus
impietate; but a Barbarian in impiety. For he swore fealty, and gave pledges to
the Danes, Quod tributa imposita eis ^ideliter persolveret, that he would
faithfully pay unto them the Tributes they imposed, and that whenever they
would redemand the Kingdom committed to him, He would resign it without any
Resistance, under pain of losing his Head. Whereupon he (as Ingulphus records)
going round about the Land, paucos Rusticos relictos excoriavit, Mercatores
absorbuit, Viduas and Orphanos oppressit, religiosos omnes tanquam conscios
thesaurorum innumeris tormentis afflixit; plucked o^f the Skins of the few
Countrymen that were left; swallowed up the Merchants, oppressed the Widows and
Orphans, and afflicted all Religious Persons, P^oposit. 1.4^
as conscious of hid^en Treasures, with innumerable torments: whence amongst
very many evils he did, Impoposing a Tribute of a thousand pounds upon Godric,
the venerable Abbot of Croyland, and his miserable Freers, he almost undid the
Monastery of Croyland. For no man after that, by reason of the overmuch Poverty
of the place, would come to conversion; Yea Abbot Godric being unable to
sustain his professed Monks, dispersed many of the Monks amongst their Parents
and other Friends of the Monastery through all the Country, very few remaining
with him in the Monastery, and protracting their life in greatest want. Then
all the Chalices of the said Monastery except 3. an^ all the silver Vessels,
besides the Crucible of King Withlasius, and other Jewels very precious, being
changed into Money, or sold for Money, were scarce able to satisfy the
unsatiable covetousness of Ceolwulfe, the Viceroy: who at last, by his Lords
the Danes, most just in this, ( after all his Rapines and Oppressions of the
People by unjust Taxes and imposts) was deposed and stripped naked of all his
ill-gotten Treasure, even to his very Privities, and so ended his life most
miserably. And the Kingdom also of the Mercians at this very time, (King Alfred
prevailing against the Danes) was united to the Kingdom o^ the West Saxons, and
remained so united ever after, when it had continued a Kingdom from the first
year of Penda (the first King thereof) to the last times of this miserable
Viceroy Ceolwulph, about 230 years: Of which Kingdom De Gest^ Reg. l. 1. c. 4^^
William of Malmesbury thus concludes; Ita Principatus Merciorum, qui per
tumidam gentilis viri insaniam subito efsloruit, tunc per miseram semiviri
ignaviam omnino emarcuit, Anno Dom. 875. though Speed post-dates its period in
the year 886. Whence it is observable, that unjust Rapines, Taxes, Oppressions
speedily and suddenly destroy both Kings and Kingdoms.

The next year following Anno 876. An. 876. Mat. Westminster. and Wigorniensis. An. 876.
Huntingd. Hist. l. 5. p. 329. Hoveden, Annal. pars prior p. 417. Eth^l. Hist.
l. 4. c. 3. p. 844. Sim. Dunel. Hist. de Dunel. Eccles. col. 14, 17, 21. Hist.
de Sancto Cuthherto col. 70. and de Gest. Reg. col. 155.
Halden king of the Danes, seizing upon the seditions kingdom of
Northumberland, sibi eam, suisque Ministris distr^buit, illamque ab exercitu
suo coli fecit auobus Annis; totally dispossessing the seditious, murtherous
Northumberlanders thereof; who but a little before had expelled both their King
and Archbishop out of their Realm. This Halden and his Soldiers miserably
wasted and destroyed the Churches of God in those parts, for which the wrath of
God suddenly f^ll upon Halden; who was not only struck with madness of mind,
but with such a most loathsome disease in his body, which much tormented him,
that the intolerable stink t^ereof made him so odious and loathsome to ^is
whole Army, that being contemned and cast out by them all, he fled away from
Tine, only with three Ships, and soon after perished with all his Plundering,
Proposition 4.
Sacrilegious Followers; The Danes elected Guthred king in his stead,
possessing this seditions Realm of Northumberland till di^posse^^ed of it by
king Edmund An. 944. who then annexed it to his kingdom.

Our Noble Saxon King Florentius Wigorn. and Mat. We^^m. An. 871 to 900. See
Malmes. Huntingd. Asser. Fab, Holinshed, Speed, and others in his life. Lamb.
Arch. Spelman council. p. 360, 362. Ingulph. Histor. p. 870, 871. Chron. Io.
Brom. col. 809 to 832.

Proposit. 3, 5, 6, 7, 9.


Alfred the first anointed king of England, Anno 877.
(as glorious for his most excellent Laws, transcendent Justice and civil
Government, as for his Martial Exploits, Victories; and for his incomparable
Piety and extraordinary bounty to the Clergy and Learned men) coming to the
Crown Anno Dom. 87^, in the years 873, 874, and sundry years following, by
common consent of his Wise men, commanded long Ships and Galleys to be built,
throughout the Realm, and furnished with Mariners, to guard the Seas and
eucounter the Danish Ships and Pirates, which then infested and wasted the
Realm, from time to time: whose forces he often encountered, as well by Sea as
by Land, with various success. At last having obtained the Monarchy of all
England, and received their Homages and Oaths of Fealty to him, he appointed
special Guardians to guard the Seas and Sea-costs in all places; Whereby he
very much freed the Land from the Danes devast^tions. About the year 887. Anno
887.
(even in the midst of his wars, when Laws use to be silent) he compiled a body
of Ecclesiastical and Canon Laws out of the sacred Scriptures, and the Laws
which his pious predecessors, Ina, Of^a, and Ethelbert had religiously made and
observed; antiquating some of them, retaining, reforming others of them, and
adding some new Laws of his own, by the advice and counsel of his wisemen, and
of the most prudent of his Subjects; the observation of which Laws was enjoined
by the consent of them Propos. 5, 6.
all. Wherein certain fines and penalties were prescribed for most particular
offenses, which might not be al^ered or exce^ded: Amongst other Laws, (as
Mirror of Justices, c. 1. s^ct. 3. p. 10. c. 5. sect. 1. Cooks Preface to his
9 Repo^^s 1 Institutes, ^. 110. See Spel. Council. p. 347.
Andrew Horn, and others record) this King and his Wisemen ordained: That a
Parliament twice every year, and oftener in time of Peace, should be called
together at London, that therein they might make Laws and Ordinances to keep
the People of God from sin, that they might live in peac^, and receive right
and Justice by certain customs and Holy Judgments; and not be ruled in an
arbitrary manner, but by stable known Laws. Proposit. 5.6^


And it was then agreed^ that the King should have the Sovereignty of all the
Land unto the midst of the Sea invironing the Land, as belonging of Right to
the Sovereign Jurisdiction of the Crown. This King, See Mat^ Westminster: An. 892
Ingulphi Hist. p. 870.871. Chron. Johan. Brompton col. 818 819 Chron. Will.
Thorn cap. 5. Sect. 4 Col. 1777.
by appointing Hundreds and Tithings throughout the Realm, with Constables and
Tithing men, who were to take sureties, or pledges for the good behavior of
all within their Jurisdictions, or else the hundred to answer all offenses and
injuries therein committed, both to the party and king, caused such a general
peace throughout the Realm; and such security from Robbers and plunderers even
in those times of war, That he would hang up golden bracelets in the Highways,
and none durst touch them, and a Gir^ might have traveled safely, laden with
Gold, from one end of the Realm to the other, without any violence, Mat.
VVestmn. An. 888 Florent. Wigorniensis. An. 887 p. 326.327.
Matthew Westminster, and Florence of Worcester record, That he spent a great
part of his time in Compo^^tione le^um, Quibus Milvorum Rapacitatem
Reprimeretur, and ^^mplex (...); And amongst many other m^morable acts of his
Ju^^ice, as he frequently examined the Judgments and Proceedings of his Judges
and Justices, severely checking them when they gave any illegal Judgment
against Law and Right, merely out of Ignorance, of which they were to purge
themselves by Oath, that they could judge no better: so he severely punished
them when they thus offended out of Corruption, Partiality and Malice. Mirror
of Just. cap. 5. Sect. 3. p. 296. to 301.
Andrew Hor^ in his Mirror of Justices records, That he hanged up no less than
44 of his Judges and Justices in one year, as Murderers and Capital Offenders,
princicipally, for their false Judgments, in condemning and executing sundry
of his people against Law, without any lawful trial by their Peers, Proposit.
2.
or Uerdict and Judgment by a sworn Jury; or upon in sufficient evidence, or
for Crimes not Capital by the Laws. The names of these Judges with their
several offenses, you may read at large in Horn. Had those pretended Judges of
a ne^ edition, who of late arraigned, condemned, executed the King, Nobles,
Gentlemen and Freemen of England in strange new arbitrary Courts of high
Justice, without any legal Indictment and Trial by a sworn Jury of their peers;
and many of them, for offenses not Capital by any known Laws or Statutes of
the Realm, and upon very slender evidence, lived in this Just Kings reign, they
might justly fear he would have hanged them all up, as Murderers and Capital
Malefactors, as well as these 44 Judges, not altogether so peccant in this kind
as they: this form of trial by sworn Juries of their Peers then in use, being
since confirmed by the Great Charters of King John and King Henry the 3, some
hundreds of subs^quent Statutes, and the Pe^i^ion of Right not known in Alfreds
days.

I find in the Pr^face to King Alfreds Laws (of which Laws Abbot Ethelred gives
this ^rue encomium, De Genesis Reg. A^g. col. 355.
Leges Christianissimas and scripsit, and promulgavit, in quibus fides ejus et
devotio in deum, sollici^udo in subdito^, ^ambardi Archaion^ Spel^manni Conc^l
p. 362.
misericordia in pauperes, Iusticia ci^ca om^es cunctis legentibus pate^) this
observable passage: That the Apostles and elders assembled in a Synod at
Jerusalem, Acts 15. in their Epistle to the Churches of the Gentiles, to
abstain from things offered unto Idols; added this Summary of all Laws: And
what ye would not to be done to your selves, that do ye not to others: from
which one precept it sufficiently appears, unicuique ex aequo jus esse
reddendum; that right or Law is of Justice to be rendered to every one; neither
will there be need of any other Law or Law-book whatsoever, i^ he who sits
Judge upon others, shall only remember this, that he would not himself should
pronounce any other sentence against others than what he would should be pas^ed
against himself in their Case. But when the Gospel was propagated, many
Nations, and amongst them the English, embraced the faith of Gods word,
Proposit. 5. ^^ 7.
there were then held some Assemblies and Councils of Bishops, and other most
illustrious Wise men, throughout the World, and likewise in E^gland: and these
being thoroughly instructed by Gods mercy, d^d now first of all, Impose a
pecuniary Mulct upon Offenders; and without any Divine Offense, delegated the
Office of exacting it to Magistrates, leave being first granted: Only on a
Traitor and Deser^er of his Lord (or King) they decreed, that this Milder
punishment (by pecuniary Mulcts) was not to be in^licted: because they thought
just, that such a man was not at all to be spared; both because God would have
Contemners of him unworthy of all mercy, and likewise because Christ did not at
all compassionate them who put him to death, but appointed the King to be
honored above all others: These therefore in many Councils singulorum scelerum
paenas constituerun^ ordained the punishments of every kind of offenses, and
commit^^^ them to writing.

From whence it is apparent, First, That all capital, coporal, and pecuniary
Mulcts and penalties for any civil or Ecclesiastical offenses whatsoever,
inflicted on the Subjects of this Realm, in that and all former ages since they
embraced the Gospel, were only such as were particularly defined and prescribed
by their Parliamentary Councils, and the Laws therein enacted, and not left
arbitrary to the King, Judges, or Magistrates, as it appears by ^he forecited
passages of Beda, Malmesbury, Huntindon and Bromton concerning King Ethelberts
Laws, part 2. p. 50. by the Laws of King Ina, Lex 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 21, 22, 25, 26, 27, 30, 31, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 46,
47, 48, 49, 54, 57, 58, 64, 73, 75, 76, 80. and more specially by the Laws of
King Alfred himself, Lex 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 20, 21,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30^ 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 46,
48, 51. with the Laws of our other Saxon kings, prescribing par^icular fines,
pecuniary, corporal and capital punishments for all sorts of offenses and
injuries, to avoid all arbitrary proceedings and censures in such Cases, 2ly.
That no imprisonment Corporal, Capital, or pecuniary Mulcts, or punishments
whatsoever, justly might, or legally ought to be then inflicted upon any
Malefactors or Trespassers whatsoever, but when, where, and for such offenses
only, as the known Parliamentary and common Laws then in force, particularly
warranted and prescribed: which penalties and Laws could not be altered nor
abrogated, but by Parliamentary Councils only. 3ly. That Common right and
Justice, were then to be equally dispensed to all men, by our Kings, Judges,
and other Magist^ates, according to the Laws then established, in such sort as
they would have them administered to themselves in the like Ca^es. 4ly. That
^ilfull Traitors and Deserters of their lawful Lords and Sovereigns, were not
to be spared or pardoned by ^he Laws of God or Men, nor yet punished only with
fines, but put to death without Mercy: W^e^ce ^his Law was then enacted by king
Alfred and his Wisemen. Chron. Johan Brom^on, col. 822, and L^mb^rd. ^rcha^on.
Lex 4. Si ^uis vel ^er ^e ve^ suscep^am vel suspectam ^e^sonam De morte Regis
tractet, vitae suae reus sit, et omnium quae habebit, and ^f any fought or drew
any weapon in the Kings house, and was apprehended, sit in arbitrio Regis, sit
vita, sit mors, sicu^ ei condonare voluerit, Lex 8. because it might endanger
the kings person.

This king Alfred made two special Laws for securing even Leets, and Inferior
Courts of Justice from armed violence and distu^bances by fighting, which I
shall recite.

Chron. Ioh Bromt. col. 825, and Lambardi Archai. Sp^lmanni Council. p. 369.
which some^hat deprives the s^nse of it in the translation, and make it Lex 51.
Lex 41. Si quis coram Aldermanno Regis pugnet. In publico, emendet Weram and
Witam sicut rectum sit, and supra hoc CXX ^. ad Witam.

Lex 42. Si quis Folemot id est populi placitum. Armorum exercitione turbabit,
emendet Aldermanno CXX s. Witae, id est foris factu^ae.

What Fines and punishments then do they deserve, who not only fight before,
and disturb Aldermen and Leets with their Arms, but even disturb, fight, and
use their Arms against our Aldermen themselves, yea, all the Aldermen, Peers^
and Great men of the Realm, assembled in the highest, greatest Parliamentary
Councils, and overawe, impri^on, secure, seclude, and forcibly dissolve them
at their pleasures? as some of late times have done, beyond all former
Presidents.

During the reign of this Noble king Alfred, Gythro the Dane, Anno 878.
(sometimes styled Godrin, or Guthurn) See Mat. Westminster. Florent. Wigorniensis. Simeon
Dunelm. Bromt. Huntindon, Hoveden, Polychronicon, Fabian, Holinshed, Speed,
Asser. Ethelwerd, Fox an^ others, An. 878, 879.
Anno 878. with an invincible Army running over all the Coa^^s of England,
wa^^ing the Country, and depopulating all sac^ed places wheresoe^er he came,
quicquid in auro et argento rapere potest, Militib^s erogavit, and ^e^^^ng upon
loca quaeque m^nita, ^or^ed ^ing Alfred (being so dis^ress^d that he knew not
what to do, nor w^ither to turn himself) to r^tire and save himself in the Isle
Aethelingie, for a sea^on; ^ill recollecting his scattered Subjects and Forces
together, he vanquished Gi^hro and his Army in a set battle at Et^end^^e, and
then besieging him and his remaining forces ^5 days in a Castle, to which they
sled, com^elled them by Famine and the Sword, to make peace with ^im upon this
Condition; ut Regni et Regis infestationem perpetuo abjurarent; That they
should perp^tually abjure the infesting of the King and Realm, and that they
should ^u^n Christians: which they accordingly performed, Githro, with 30 of
the choicest men in his A^my being baptized at Alve, 15 days after, king Alfred
being their Godfather, and giving him the name of Aethelstane. After which
Alfred feasting him an^ his Captains 12 days in his Court, gave Githro
Eastengland to inhabit, wherein king Edmund reigned, to be held of and under
him: Whereupon Githro and his Danes An. 879. leaving Cirencenster marched into
the East parts of England, which he divided amongst his Soldiers, who then
began to inhabit it by Alfreds donation.

Upon this accord, or some time after, King Alfre and Gythro, by the Common
consent of their Great Councils and wise men, made and enacted certain civil
and Ecclesiastical Laws, for the government of their People and Realms,
recorded in Bromton, Lambert^ and Spelman, where those who please may pernse
them: the Prologue and 2 first Laws whereof, I shall only recite, as both
pertinent to my purpose, Proposit. 5.
and seasonable for our times, much opposing the Magistrates coercive power in
matters relating to God and Religion.

Chron. Io, Brom. col. 829. Spelman. conc. p. 375^ 376, 390, 391.

Pro^osition 6.


H^c est consili^m quod Alred^s Rex et Godrinus Rex eligerunt, et condixerunt,
quando Angli e^ Da^ ad pacem et concordiam plene convenerunt, e^ Sapientes, et
qui ^ostea successerunt, saepius Hoc e^^ assi ^^e renovantes, in bonum semper
adduxerunt.

Cap. 1. Inp^imis est, ut unum Deum diligere velint, et omni Paganismo sedulo
renunciare: et instituerunt secularem Iustitiam, pro eo quod sciebant, quod non
poterant multos ali^er castigare: plures ve^o Nolebant ad Dei cultum sicut
deberent ali^e^ Inclinari^ et secularem emendationem instituerunt, communem
Christo, et Regi, ubicunque Recusabitur Lex Dei just servari secundum
dictionem Epis^opi. Et hoc est primum edictum Ecclesiae, Pax intra parietes
suos, ut Regis Handgri^h, semper inconvulsa permaneat.

Cap. 2. Siquis Christanitatem suam male mutat, vel Paganismum veneretur verbis
vel operibus, reddat sic Weram, sic Witam, sic Lashlyte, secundum quod factum
sit: that is, Let him be fined, and ransomed according to the quality of his
off^nce.

This Noble King Alfred (who fought no less than 46 bloody Battles with the
Danes by Land and Sea for his Countries Liberties) Although he was involved in
perpetual Wars and Troubles wi^h the Danish Invaders all his days, as our
Hi^^orians and this his Huntingd. Hist. l. 5. p. 352 Asser. Aelercedi R^g.
Gest. Ch^on. Io. Br. col. 819. Camb. Britan. p. 224.
Epitaph Demonstrates, Nobilitas innata tibi, probitatis Honorem
Armipotens Alurede dedit, Probitasque laborem;
Perpetuumque Labor nomen; cui mixta dolori
Gandia semper erant, spes semper mixta timori;
Si modo victus erat, ad crastina bella parabat:
Si modo victor erat, ad crastina bella pavebat.
Cui vestes sudore jugi, cui sica cruore
Tincta jugi, quantum sit onus regnare probarunt.
Non fuit immensi quisquam per climata mundi
Cui tot in adversis vel respirare liceret.
Nec tamen aut ferro contritus ponere Ferrum
Aut Gladio potuit vitae finisse Labores.
Iam post transactos Regni vitaeque Labores
Christus ei sit vera quies sceptrumque perenne.


Yet Mat West. Wig. As. Men. An. 888, 898. Ae hell. Abbas de Genesis Reg. Ang. col.
355. Chron. Io. Brom col. 814, 818. Sim. Dunel^^. Hist. de Gest. R^g. col. 132,
133. Will. Mal. de Gest. Reg. l. 25. c. 4. Ingulph. Hist. p. 870, 171. Hov.
Annal. pars 1. p. 420, 421. Ethelwerdi Hist. l. 4. c 3. Polychron. Fab. Caxton,
Hollinshed, Graston, Speed in the li^e Alfred. o^ Camd. Brit. p. 378, 379.
Spelman council. p. 354 to 380^ Antiq. Eccl. B^t. p. 43.
these things are remarkable in him. 1. That he most exactly and justly
governed his people by and according to his and his Predecessors kn^wn Laws, in
the midst of all ^is Wars; not by the harsh Laws of Conquest and the largest
Sword. 2. That he advanced Learning and all sorts of Learned Men, erecting
Schools of Learning, and the famous University of Oxford; which he founded, or
at least refounded when decayed, in the heat of all his Wars and Troubles. 3.
That he was so far from spoiling the Church and Churchmen, or any other his
Subjects of their Lan^s, Tithes or Revenues to maintain his perpetual Wars
against the impious Pagan Danes, who destroyed all Churches, and Religious, as
well as other Houses, where ever they came; that he not only repared, adorned,
endowed many old de^ayed Churches and Monasteries, but likewise in the year
^88, he built two new Monasteries of his own, at Ethelingei and Shafftesbury,
and endowed them with ample riches and possessions; and by sundry Charters gave
several Lands to the Churches of Durham, Worcester, and Canterbury. Moreover he
not only duly paid Tithes and other Duties to the Church himself, but also by
his Laws, enjoined all his Subjects under sundry mulcts, justly to pay Tithes
and Churchels to their Priests and Ministers, with all other Duites and
Oblations belonging to the Church for the maintenance of the Ministers and Gods
worship: together with Peterpence for the maintenance of the English School at
Rome; prohibiting all men to invade the Churches Rights and Possessions under
severe penalties. 4. That he equally divided all his annual Revenues into two
equal parts: The first moity was for Pious uses, which he subdivided into three
parts. The first parcel he bestowed in Alms, ^o relieve the poor both at home
and in foreign parts; The second, he bestowed on Religious Houses and Persons;
The third, he gave toward the maintenance of Schools, Scholars, Doctors, and
learned Men of all sorts, resorting to and liberally rewarded by him according
to their merits. The other moity was for civil uses, which he likewise divided
into 3 equal portions. The first he gave unto his Soldiers; whom he divided
into 3 Squadrons: The first Squadron, which were Horse, waited one month on him
at his Court, ( as his Lifeguard) whiles the other two were employed in
military expeditious in the Field: And when their month expired, they all
returned from the wars, and then another new Company succeeded them; And when
their Month was ended, they returning to their Houses, the other Company
succeeded them. And so they successively kept their monthly courses during all
his Reign, being one month in actual service, and two months at home about
their own affairs. The second part he gave to his Workmen and Artificers of all
sorts, skillful in all Worldly affairs. The third part he gave to Strangers in
Royal Gifts and Presents, and that as well to the Rich as Poor. Besides, he had
a very great Care Ne a Vicecomitibus et Ministris pauperes opprimere^tur, et
indebitis exactionibos gravarentur; That the poor people should not be
oppressed by Sheriffs and other Officers, nor bur^hened with unjust Exactions
or Contributions; Yea by his large A^mes and Gi^^s he ^ent to Rome^ Propos. 1.
he procured the English School to be freed from all Taxes and Tributes by the
Popes special Bull. And we never read he imposed the least public Tax upon his
Subjects during all his wars and Exigences, by his own Regal Power, upon any
pretext of public Necessity, Danger, Defense or Safety of the Realm against
the Numerous Invading, plundering Danish forces both by Sea and Land; Which our
late and present Egyptian Tax-masters may do well to consider. Anno 894.


Sim. Dunelm. Hist. de Dunel. Eccl. c. 13, 14. col. 22, 23.
In the year of our Lord 894. this King Alfred and Guthurn the Dane, gave to the
Church of St. Cutbert in Durham, all the Lands between Weor and Tyne, for a
perpetual Succession, free from all Custom and secular Services, Propos. 10.
with all Customs, Saca, and Socua, and infaugtheof thereunto belonging, with
sundry other Privileges, which they ordained to be perpetually observed, Non
solum Anglorum sed et Danorum consentiente et collaudante exercitu; by the
consent and approbation of the ARMY, not only of the English but Danes also:
Has Leges and haec Statuta (which proves that it was done by a Parliamentary
Counsel then held in both their Armies,) Quicunque quolibet nisu Infringere
praesumpserint, eos in perpetuum, nisi emendaverint, Gehennae Ignibus
puniendos, anathematizando, Sententia omnium contradidit.

I pretermit the Spelman council. p. 381 to 387.
Welsh Synods held under the Bishops of Landaff during King Alfreds Reign (as
Sir Henry Spelman conjecture^, in whom the Reader may peruse them) wherein the
Bishop of Landaff and his Clergy excommunicated some of their petty Welsh Kings
for Murder, Perjury, violating the Churches Patrimony; and Injuring the Bishops
family; who upon their Repentance and Reconciliation gave all of them some
parcels of Land to the Church of Landaff. The rather because I conceive them
fabulous, there being no such form of Excommunication used in those days, as
Spelman. Council. p. 353, 379, 3^0.
Sir Henry Spelman proves, nor any such Episcopal Synods held in England under
King Alfred himself. The barbarous Danes having throughout all England with
fire and sword utterly wasted and destroyed all Cities, Towns, Castles,
Monasteries, Churches, put most of the Bishops, Abbots, Clergy to the Sword,
and almost quite deleted the knowledge of Learning and Religion out of the
whole Nation; insomuch that there were very few spiritual persons on this side
Humber, who could either understand the Common prayers in the English tongue,
or translate any writing out of latin into English; yea so few, that there was
not so much as one man on the South Side of the Thames that could do it, till
King Alfred ( after his Conquest of the Danes in the latter part of his Reign)
restored Learning and Religion ^gain by Degrees; as this King himself records
in express terms, in his Epistle to Bishop Wulsug, by way of Preface to his
own Translation of Gregory's Pastorals into the English Saxons Language.

King Alfred deceasing, his Son Edward surnamed the Elder, Anno 901.
Ethel. Hist. l. 49. c. 4. Mal. de Gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 5. Matthew. Westminster.
Florent. Wigorn. Sim. Dunelm. Huntingd. Hov. Ethel. Bromt. Polychon. Ethelr.
Abbas. Fab. Holinshed, Grafton, Speed in the life of Ed. the Elder and An. 901
to 925.
succeeding his Father in the year of Christ 901, thereupon Prince Aethelwald
his Uncles Son, aspiring to the Crown without the consent of the King and
Nobles of the Realm, seized upon Oxlie and Winburne: whereupon King Edward
marching with his Army against him to Bath, he fled from Winburne to the Danes
in Northumberland for assistance: who being glad thereof, they all make him
King and Prince over all their Kings and Captains: Whereupon they invading
Essex and Mercia, King Ed. raised a great Army, chased them into
Northumberland, and harrowed the whole Country to the Lakes of Northumberland;
where the Kentishmen remaining (contrary to the Kings Command, and Messengers
sent to them) after the retreat of the rest of the Army; The Danish Army upon
this advantage setting upon them, they gallantly defending themselves, slew
their new King Aethelwald, with King Eorit, and sundry of their chief
Commanders, and many of their Soldiers, though they lost the field. This King
and Edelfled his Sister, Queen of Mercians, to prevent the frequent eruptions,
plunders the Danes, repaired many old ruinated Towns, and built many new ones
in convenient places, which they replenished with Soldiers, to protect the
Inhabitants and repel the Enemies, whereby the Common people we^e so
encouraged, and became such good Soldiers, that if they heard of the Enemies
approach, they would fight and rout them, Rege etiam and Ducibus inconsultis in
certamen ruerent, Proposit. 3.
eisque semper numero and scientia praeliandi prae^^arent, it a hosts
contemp^ni militibus, Regi risui erant, as Malmesbury writes. The Country
people themselves sighting with the Danes at Ligetune, put them to flight,
recovered all the prey they had taken^ and likewise the Danes Horses, as they
likewise did in some other parts. Amongst other places, this King repaired the
walls of Colchester, put warlike men in it, and certum eis stipendium
assignavit; and assigned them a certain stipend, as Mat^ Westminster. records,
neither he, nor other our Historians making mention of assigned wages, to any
other Garrisons or Soldiers in that age; At last the Danes in most places
throughout England, perceiving King Edwards power and wisdom, submitted
themselves unto him, elected him for their King and Pat^on, and swore homage
and fealty to him; as likewise did the Kings of Scotland, Northumberland, and
Wales.

An. 905.
In the year of Grace 905. This VVil. Malmesb. de Gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 5. p. 47,
and 48. Mat. Westminster. An. 905. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 45. Gervasius Dorobern.
Act. Pont. Cant. col. 1644. Godwin in the life of Plegmund, Spelm. Council. p.
387, 388. Ingulphi Hist. p. 877.

(...) 5.


King Edward assembled a Synod of the Senators of the English Nation, as
Malmesbury, or a great Council of Bishops, Abbots, and faithful people (as
Matthew Westminster, and others s^ile it) in the Province of the Gewisii; which
by reason of the Enemies incursions had been destitute of a Bishop for 7 years
space. Whereupon the King and Bishops in this Council, taking good advice, made
this wholesome constitution; That instead of 2 Bishops, whereof one had his Sea
at Winchester, the other at Schireburn, 5 Bishops should be created; ne Grex
Domini, absque cura Pastorali, luporum incursionibus quateretur: Whereupon they
in this Council elected 5 Bishops; to wit Frithstan, for Winchester; Athelin
for Schireburn; Aedul^e for Wells; Werstan for Crideton, and Herstan for
Cornwall; assigning them their several Sees and Diocese; and two other ^ishops
^or Dorchester and Cirencester, all consecrated by Archbishop Plegmond at
C^nterbury in one day. Will. of Malmesb. and some others write, that this
Council was summoned upon the Letter of Pope Formosus, Propos. 5, 6.
who excommunicated king Edward with all his Subjects, for suffering the
Bishoprics of Winton and Scireburn to be void for 7 years space together: But
this must needs be a great mistake, since Pope Formosus was dead ten years
before this Council, and before these Bishoprics became void, and his
pretended Epistle to the Bishops of England makes no mention at all of the
king, as Sir Henry Spelman well observes.

In the year 906. An. 906, 921.
Lamba^di Archaion. Spel. Council. p. 390, to 400. Mat. Westminster, Wigorn.
Hunt. Hoveden, Sim. Dunelm. Brom. and others. An. Dom. 906, 910, 918, 921.
king Edward made a Peace and firm agreement with the Danes of Northumberland,
and East-England, at Intingford, when (as some think) he and Guthurn the Dane
reconfirmed the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws formerly made and ratified by his
Father King Alfred and Guthurn. But Guthurn dying in the year 890, full eleven
years before this Edward was king, could not possibly ratify these Laws at the
time of this Accord, being 16 years after his decease, as the Title and
Prologue to those Laws in Mr. Lambard and Spelman erroneously affirm;
wherefore, I conceive, that this confirmation of these Laws was rather made in
Propos. 5.
the year 921. when all our Historians record; that after king Edward (Anno
910. had sent an army into Northumberland, against the perfidious and
rebellious Danes, slain and taken many of them Prisoners, and miserably wasted
their Country for 4 days space, for breaking their former Agreement with him:
after his Sister Aegelfled, An. 919. had forced the Danes at York to agree, and
swear, that they would submit to her and her Brothers pleasure in all things;
and after Edward had vanquished the other Danes, Scotch and Welsh in many
Battles; thereupon, in the year 921. the king of Scots, with al^ his Nation,
Stredded king of Wales, with all his people, et Regnaldus (or Reginaldus)
Reginald King of the Danes, with all the English and Danes inhabiting
Northumberland (of which Reginald then was King) coming to King Edward, An.
921. submitted themselves unto him, elected him for their Father and Lord, and
made a firm Covenant with him^ And therefore I conjecture that Guthurnus in the
Title and Preface of these Laws, is either mistaken, or else mis-written for
Reginaldus, then King of these Northern Danes, who had no King in the year 906,
that I can read of in our Historians.

De Genealogia Reg. Ang. col. 358.
Abbot Ethelred, gives this Encomium of this Kings transcendent modesty and
justice, Rex Edwardus, vir mansuetus et pius, omnibus amabilis et affabilis,
adeo omnium in se provocabat affectum, ut Scotti, Cumbri, Walenses, Northumbri,
et qui remanserant Daci, eum non tam in Dominum ac Regem, quam in Patrem eum
omni devotione eligerent. Tanta dehinc Modestia regebat Subditos, tanta
Justitia inter proximum et proximum iudicabat, ut contra veritatem non dico
nihil velle, sed nec posse videretur; unde fertur quibusdam iratus dixisse;
dico vobis, si possem vicem vobis redidissem, Quid non posset Rex iu Subditos,
Dominus in Servos, Potens in infirmos, Dux in milites? Sed quicquid non
dictabat aequitas, quicquid veritati repugnabat, quicquid non permittebat
Justitia, quicquid Regiam mansuetudinem non decebat, Sibi credebat impossible.

I wish all our modern domineering Grandees would imitate his presidential
Royal Example. Yet I read of one injurious Act done by him, Huntingd. Hist. l.
5. p. 354 Hov. An. pars posterior. p, 422. Mat. Westminster. Wigorniensis. Sim. Dunel.
Anno 920. Chron. Io. Bromton col. 835.
After the decease of his renowned Sister Elfleda, Queen of Mercia, Anno 920.
he dis-inherited her only Daughter Alfwen (or Elwyn, his own Niece) of the
Dominion of all Mercia, who held that Kingdom after her Mother, seizing and
Garrisoning Tamesworth, and Nottingham first, and then disseising her of all
Mercia, uniting it to his own Realms, and removing her thence into West-Sex.
Magis ^eurans an utilit^r vel inutiliter, Quan an just vel injust^; Propos. 4.
Writes Henry Hunting^o^. which in^rious action, Si violanda sit fides regni
ca^sa violandae, will not excuse.

The Chronicle of Bromton records, that King Edward as he enlarged the bounds
of his Kingdom more than his Father; Col. 831, 835, 836, 837.
So Leges condidit, he likewise made Laws to gove^n it: which are there
registered to Posterity in two parcels, as made at several times, but in what
year of his Reign this was, it informs us not, The first of these Laws,
declaring his zeal to public Justice, according to the Laws then in Force, is
this.

Edwardus Rex mandat et praecipit omnibus Praefectis et Amicis suis, ut Justa
^udicia judicent, quam rectiora possint, Et in judicial^ Libro stant^ nec
parcant nec dissimulent ^pro aliqua Re Populi Rectum et jus publicum recita^e;
et unumquodque placitum terminum habeat quando peragatur, quod tunc recitabitur.

The first Chapter of the second part of his Laws intimates, that they were
made by his W^se men assembled in a Parliamentary Council at Exeter; witness
the contents thereof.

Edwardus Rex admonuit Omnes Sapientes quando fuerunt Exoniae, Proposit. 5.
ut investigarent simul et quaererent; quomodo pax eorum melior esse possit
quam antea fuit; quia visumest ei, quod hoc impletum sit aliter quam deceret,
et quam ante ^praecepisset, Inquisivit itaque qui ad emendationem velint
redire, et in societate permanero qua ipse sit, et amare quod amat, et nolle
quod nolit, in Mari and in Terra. Hoc est tunc, Ne Quisquam rectum difforceat
alicui. Siquis hoc faciat, emendet sicut supra dictum est (In his first Laws
then either made or rehearsed) prima vice 30 s. secunda fimiliter, ad tertiam
vicem 120 s. Regi.

The last Chapter, being the VIII in Bromtons translation, (but the XI. in the
Saxon Copy) is this. Volo ut omnis Praepositus habeat Gemotum (an Hundred
Court) semper ad quatuor hebdomadas; et efficiat ut omnis homo rectum habeat,
et omne placitum capiat terminum quando perveniat ad finem; Siquis hoc
excipiat, emendet, sicut ante dictum est.

Anno 924.
King Edward deceasing, Will. Mal. de Gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 6. Mat. Westminster. VVig.
An. 925 to 940, Hunting. Hist. l. 5. p. 334. Hov. Annal. pars prior, p. 422.
Ing. Hist. p. 877, 878. Chron. Johan. Brom. col. 8^8. Sim. Dunelm. Hist. Reg.
Ang. col. 134. to 154. Ethelw. Hist. l. 4. c. 5. Aelr^ Abbas de Geneologia Reg.
Ang. Pol. l. 6. c. 6. Henry de Knighton, de En. Ang. l. 1. c. 5. Speeds Hist.
p. 393, 396^ Fab. Holinshed, Gra^ton, Caxton in his life.
Aethelstan his eldest Son ( designed by his Fathers Will to succeed him) was
elected King at Winchester in the year 924. Magno Optimatum consensu et omnium
favore; and so^emnly Crowned at Kingston, only one Alfred, and some factious
ones opposed his election, pretending he was illegitimate and born of a
Concubine, whereupon they would have set up his Brothe^ Edwin being legitimate
and next heir as they pretended; whom the Generality of the Nobles rejected,
nondum ad regnandum propter teneros Annos Idon^o. Aethelstan after his
Coronation knowing his Brother to be born in lawful Matrimony, and fearing Ne
per ipsum quandoque Regni solio privaretur, lest he should be some time or
other deprived of his kingdom by him, hated him extremely; and at the
solicitation of some Parasites, whereof his Cup Bearer was the chief, to be
rid of him and this his fear, he caused young Edwin, attended only with one
Page, to be put into an old broken Boat in the midst of the Sea, without Sail,
Oar, or Pilate, that so his death might be imputed to the waves; out off which
Boat the young Prince in discontent cast himself headlong into the Sea (or
rather the Page threw him headlong overboard,) and so was he drowned^ But the
Page recovering his body, by rowing with his hands and feet, brought it to Land
where it was in^erred. The King was hereat so ^roubed with a real (or feigned)
contrition for this barbarous bloody fact, Propos. 2.
that he did seven years voluntary penance for this his fratricide, and
adjudged his Cup Bearer to a cruel death, who gave him this ill advice; and to
pacify his Brothers ^host and his own Conscience, built two new Monasteries at
Middleton and Michelresse, and there was scarce any old Monastery in England
which he adorned not either with buildings or Ornaments, or Books or Land^, to
exp^ate this his bloody crime.

In this king Aethelstans reign In the year 927. There were fiery Beams and
Meteors seen throughout all the Northern parts of England; soon after which
Athelstan resolved utterly to extirpate the perfidious Nation of the Danes, and
treacherous Scots, which had violated their Agreement made with his Father,
whereupon he marched with a great Army by Land, and Navy by Sea into
Northumberland and Scotland, wasted and harrowed the Country without
resistance, forced Guithfrith King of Northumberland out of his kingdom,
uniting it to his own Realm, vanquished and overcame Howel king of Wales,
Constantine king of Scots, Anlafe the Dane, and others in a set battle, drove
them out of their Realms, and forced them to submit to him: Who upon their
submission, knowing the chance of war to be variable, and pitying the Cases of
these down-cast Princes, restored them presently to their former estates, with
this Princely Speech, That it was more honor to make a King, than to be a
King: yet these petty Kings, Princes rebelling afterward, and siding with
Anlafe against him, were all rou^ed by Athelstan^, King Constantine of
Scotland, with five more of these Kings, 12 Dukes, and most of their Army slain
in one battle, principally by the valor of Turketulus, and the Londoners, An.
837: Whereupon the petty Kings of Wales, contracted to pay him a yearly tribute
of 20 pound weight of Gold, and 300 of Silver, and 25000 head of Cattle, with a
certain number of Hawks and Hounds, which no King of England ever exacted or
received from them before.

De Gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 6, p. 49.
William of Malmes^ury (who exceeds in his praises) writes, that it was truly
reported of him amongst the English, Quod nemo Legalius vel literatius
rempublicam administraverit; That no king governed the Commo^we^l^h more
legally or learnedly than he, being as Ingulphi Hist. p. 817.
Ingulphus records, guided and directed by Turketulus, his Chancellor, a man
of great integrity, honesty, and piety, of prof^und judgment, whose decrees
upon debate were irrefrag^ble. This king Athelstan, for the better
administration of Jus^ice, enacted sundry excellent, civil, and ecclesias^ical
Laws, recorded in Bromt. Lamb. and Spelm.

Anno 928.
The first of these his Laws, were made and enacted in the famous Chron. Io.
Bromt. col. 840, to 856. Spelman. Con. cil. p. 396, 397, 405, 406. L^mbardi
Archaton.
^oun^il of Grately, about the year 928, in which the king himself, Wulfehelm
Archbishop of Cante^bury, and the rest of the Bishops, and all the Nobles and
Wisemen which King Ethelstan could assemble, were present, who all ordained and
confirmed these Laws in this great Council, as the last Chapter (...) in^orms
us in ^hese words.

Proposit. 5.6.
Totum hoc institutum est et confirmatum, In magno Synodo apud Grateleyam, cui
Archiepi^cop^^ (...) et omnes Optimates, et Sapientes, quos Adelstanus Rex
potuit Congregare: Or, Cum^^ Optimates et Sapientes ab Aethe^^tano evoca^^
frequentissimi, as another Copy renders it^ which proves, that all the Members
of this Council were summoned to it by this kings writ, and not elected by the
peoples suf^rages. And although the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Clergy men
were the chief advisers of the Ecclesiastical L^ws, made in this Council, as
this Prologue to them attests: Ego Aethelstanus Rex ex prudenti ^l^^elmae
Archiepiscopi, aliorumque Episcoporum et Servorum Dei consilio mando; yet they
were all enacted and confirmed by all the Nobles and Wisemen in the Council, as
the premises evidence. In this Council, the king commanded^ by his Laws, all
his Officers, that they should demand and exact from his Subjects such things
and duties only as they might justly and lawfully receive, Proposit. 1.
adding this memorable reason for it; Nunquam enim erit populo been consultum,
nec digne Deo conser^abitur, ubi Lucrum impium et magis falsum diligitur, Ideo
^e^ent omnes amici Dei quo^ miquum en, enervare, quod ^ustum est elevare; non
pa^i ut prop^er falsum, et pecuniae quaestum, se forisfaciant homines, er^^
^ere ^apientem Deum cui displicet omnis injustitia: Which I wish all our
unrighteous covetous ^^x-ma^^ers, Excisers and Exacters would now seriously
consider: After which it follows, Chris^ianis autem omnibus neces^arium est, ut
rectum diligant, ut iniqua condemnent, et saltem sacris Ordinibus erecti justum
semper erigant et prava deponant: Hinc debent Episcopi cum saeculi Judicibus
interesse Judiciis, ne permittant, si possint, ut illinc aliqua pravitatum
germina pullulaverint. And to avoid all arbitrary proceedings, oppressions, and
Injustice in all things, this Council by positive Laws ascertains all fines,
amerciaments, imprisonments, and corporal punishments for criminal offenses,
from which the Judges might not vary. And withal defines, what Arms every man
should ^ind in those times of war, against the Danes and other Enemies by his
positive Law, Lex 21. ( Sax. 16.) Omnis homo habebit duos homines cum bonis
equis de omni Caruca. Proposit. ^, 3.


King Ethelstane after this Council at Grately (what years is not expressed)
assembled several other Parliamentary Proposit. 5.
Councils at Exeter, Fevresham, and Thunderfeld; wherein he and his Wisemen, by
common consent, confirmed the Laws made at Grately, altering some of them in
certain particulars, and adding some new Laws unto them, as you may read at
large in Brom^on, and as the first Chap^er, and this Prologue to those Laws
assure us.

Chron. ^oh. Brom^. col. 850.
`Haec sunt Judicia quae Sapientes Exon^ae consilio Adelstani Regis
instituerunt, and iterum (...) Fevresham^ et tertia vice apud Thundresfeldiam
ubi hoc definitum simul et confi^matum est; et hoc imprimis est, Proposit. 5, 6.
ut observentur om^ia Judicia quae apud Gratel^yam imposita fuerint, praeter
mercatum Civitatis, et Diei Dominicae.

The Cause of making these new Laws, and confirming the old, was, a Complaint
to the King in the Council at Exeter, that the Peace and Laws made at Grateley,
were not so well kept as they should be; and that The^ves and Malefactors
abounded; as this Prologue manifests, Chron. Ioh. Brom. col. 850.
Ego Adelstanus Rex notifico vobis, sicut dictum est Michi, quod pax nostra
pejus observata est quam Michi placet, vel apud Grateleyam fuerit institutum:
Proposit. 5, 6.
Et Sapientes Michi dicunt, quod hocdiutius pertuli quam debueram; Nunc inveni
cum illis Sapientibus, qui apud Exoniam fuerint mecum in sancto Natali Domini,
quod parati sunt omnino quando velim, cum seipsis and uxoribus, and pecunia,
and omni re sua ire quo tunc voluero, nisi malefactores requiescant eo tenore
quo nunquam deinceps in patriam istam redeant, etc.

In the Council of Fevresham in Kent, the King by some of his Wise-Counsellors
sent thither to it, propounded some things for the weal and peace of the
Country, together with his pardon for fore-past offenses; which they upon
debate assenting to, and drawing up into sundry heads, returned to the King for
his Royal assent, with this memorable Gratulatory Prologue; which most truly
representing unto us the proceedings in the great Councils of that Age, I
thought meet entirely to transcribe.

Chronicon Ioh. Bromt. ^ol. 850, 851.
Karissime, Episcopi tui de Kent, and omnis Kentescire, Thayni, Comites, and
Villani, tibi Domino dilectissimo suo gratias agunt, quod nobis de pace nostra
praecipere voluisti, and de commodo nostro perquirere and consulere, quia
magnum opus est inde nobis divitibus and Egenis. Et hoc incepimus quanta
diligentia potuimus, consilio horum Sapientum quos ad nos misisti, unde
Karissime Domine, primum est, de nostrae decim^, ad quam valde cupidi sumus and
voluntarii, and tibi supplices gra^ias agimus admonitionis tuae. Secundum est,
de pace nos^r^ quam omnis popul^s teneri desiderat, sicut apud Grateleyam
Sapientes tui posuerunt, et sicut etiam nunc dictum est in Concilio apud
Fefresham. Tertium est, quod gratian^ omnes misericorditur Hermerum dominum
suum, ^e dono quod forisfactis hominibus concessi^^i; hoc est, quod pardonatur
omnibus forisfactura de quoc^nque furto quod ante Concilium de Fefresh^m factum
fuit, eo tenore quo semper deinceps ab omni malo quiescant, et omne latrocinium
confiteantur, et emendent hinc ad Augustum. Quartum, Ne aliquis recipiat
hominem alterius sine licentia ipsius, cui prius folgavit, nec intra marcam,
nec extra, et etiam ne Dominus libero homini hlasocnam interdicat, si recte
custodierit eum Quintum, Qui ex hoc discedat sit dignus eorum quae in scripto
pacis habentur, quod apud Grateleyam institutum est. Sextum, si aliquis homo
sit adeo dives, vel tantae parentelae quod castigari non possit, vel illud
cessare nolit, ut efficias qualiter abstrahatur in aliam partem regni tui,
sicut dictum est in occiduis partibus, sit alterutrum quod sit, sit Comitum,
sit Villanorum. Septimum est, ut omnis homo teneat homines suos in fide
jussione sua, contra omne furtum. Si tunc sit aliquis qui tot homines habeat
quod non sufficiat omnes custodire, praepositum talem praeponat sibi singulis
villis qui credibilis ei sit, and qui concredat hominibus. Et si praepositis
alicui eorum hominum concredere non audeat, inveniat XII plegios cognationis
suae qui ei stent in fide jussione, Et si Dominus vel praepositus, vel aliquis
hoc ins^ringat, vel abhinc exeat, sit dignus eorum, quae apud Grateleyam dicta
sunt, nisi Regi magis placeat alia justitia. Octavum, Quod omnibus placuit de
scutorum opere, sicut dixisti. Precamur Domine misericordiam tuam, sit in hoc,
sit in alterutrum, vel nimis, vel minus, ut hoc emendare Iubeas juxta velle
tuum. Et nos devote parati sumus ad omnia quae nobis praecipere velis, quae
unquam aliquatenus implere valeamus.

After this there was another kind of Parliamentary Council held at London, and
not long after that, another at Thithamberig, wherein many consultations were
had, and propositions made for suppression and punishment of Thieves and
keeping of the peace, which the Justices, Commissioners, and others appointed
to keep the peace, and to take sureties of all men to the keeping thereof,
concluded upon at London, and after submitted to the Kings Council, to enlarge
or alter, as he should see cause; Who thereupon made some alteration and
mitigation at Thithamberig, of what the King thought over-severe, in putting to
death those who were above 12 years of Age, for 12 d. value, as these passages
attest, declaring the proceedings of that Parliamentary Council.

Chron. Ioh Bromt. col. 852, 855, 856.
Hoc consultum est, quod Episcopi et praepositi qui Londoniensi Curiae
pertinent, edixerunt, and jurejurando confirmaverunt in suo Fridgildo; Comites
and villani in adjectione judiciorum, quae apud Grateleyam and Exoniam
instituta sunt, and iterum apud Thundresfeldam.

Cap. 1. Et est imprimis haec, non parcatur alicui latroni supra 12 Annos et
supra 12 d. de quo vere fuerit inquisitum quod reus sit, quin occidatur, and
capiatur omne quod habet, etc.

Cap, 14. Nec tacendum est vel praetereundum, si dominus noster vel
praepositorum nostrorum aliquis ullum Augmentum excogitare possit, ad nostrum
Fridgildum; ut hoc gratanter excipiamus, sicut nobis omnibus convenit, and
nostrum necesse sit, and in Deo confidimus, et regni nostri Domino.

Cap. 15. Si totum hoc ita complere volumus, res totius populi meliorabitur
contra fures quam an^e^ fuit, and si remissius egerimus de pace and vadiis quae
simul dedimus, and quam Rex nobis praecipit, timere possumus, vel magis scire
quod fures isti regnabunt, plus quam ante fecerunt, si fidem teneamus, et pacem
sicut domino nostro placeat, quia magnum opus est ut insistamus et peragamus
quo^ ipse velit, et si amplius praecipiat cum omni jocunditate et devotione
parati sumus.

Cap. 17. Item quod Sapientes omnes dederunt vadium suum, insimul Archiepiscopo
apud Thundresfeldam quando Ealpheagus, Scyb, et Brithnodus Odonis ^ilius
veneruut ad Concilium ex ore Regis, ut omnis praepositus vadium capiat in suo
comitatu de pace servanda sicut Adelstanus Rex apud Fefresham, et quarta vice
apud Thundresfeldam coram Archiepiscopo, et Episcopis, et Sapientibus, quas
ipse Rex nominavit qui interfuerunt et judicia conservaverunt Quae in hoc
Concilio fuerunt instituta, etc.

Cap. 18. Item quod Adelstanus Rex praecepit Episcopis suis et praepositis
omnibus in toto Regno suo, ut pacem ita custodiant sicut recitavit, et
Sapientes sui.

Cap. 19. Item Rex dixit nunc iterum apud Thitlan^birig Sapientibus suis, et
praecepit ostendi Atchiepiscopo et caeteris Episcopis, quod ei miserabile
videtur, quod aliquis tam juvenis occidatur, vel pro tam parva re sicut
innotuit ei quod ubique fiebat; dixit itaque, Quod ei videbatur et eis cum
quibus hoc egerat, ne aliquis occidatur junior quam quindecim Annorum, nisi se
defendere velit, vel aufugere, et in manus ire velit, ut tunc deducatur, sir
major sit minor, qualiscunque sit, si se dederit ponatur in Carcere, sicut apud
Greateleyam dictum est, et per idem redimatur etc. Praecepit Rex ne aliquis
occidatur pro minori precio quam 12 d. nisi fugiat vel repugnet, ne dubitetur
tunc licet minus. Si haec ita conservemus, in Domino Deo confidimus quod pax
nostra melior erit quam antea fuit.

As these passages demonstrate the proceedings of the Parliamenrary Councils in
that Age, (unknown to most, for which end I have transcribed them at large) so
they clearly prove, that Thieves or Felons (much less other English Freemen)
could not be imprisoned, killed, put to death, fined or ransommed, but by
special Acts, Propos. 2, 4, 5, 6.
and Laws made in General Parliamentary Councils, nor any Laws made, enacted,
or altered in such Co^ncils, but by the Kings Royal Assent thereto, who then
frequently summoned them, and all the Members of them, by writ and nomination,
without the Peoples Election.

Henry de Knyghton, de Eventibus Angliae l. 1. c. 5. an^ See the History of Guy
o^ Warwick.
some other fabulous Authors relate, Anno 932.
that in the eighth year of King Aethelstans reign, Olaus King of Denmark,
Golanus King of Norwey, and the Duke of Normandy, with 8 Dukes and 5 hundred
thousand Soldiers, arived in England, Propos. 5, 6, 9, 10.
bringing with them out of Africa, A Giant called Colybrand, the strongest and
most famous at that time throughout the World; Whereupon King Aethelstan
hearing of their coming, Congregavit Magnates, assembled his Noblemen at
Winchester, to advice with them, how they might resist the Enemies and fight
with them in Battle; Tha^ whiles king Aethelstan vacaret tali Coneilio et
congregatione po^uli sui in Wintonia, the foresaid kings came upon him with
their Army, and besieged him Cum Baronia sua with his Batons, in that City for
two years space. Neither durst the English fight with them by reason of their
multitude and Power. In the mean time they made this Agreement, that king
Aethelstan, should find out one Champion to fight a single Duel with Colybrand;
that in all future times the Realm of England should be held of the King of
Denmark under a Tribute, and if Colybrand were conquered by Aethelstans
Champion, rhen Olaus should forfeit and disclaim the Realm of England for him
and his Heirs for ever, and no King of Denmark should afterward lay claim to
the Realm of England, nor yet molest it. That the king in near one whole years
space, could not find out a Champion to encounter Colybrand; whereupon he and
his Nobles were very much troubled. At las^, God by an Angel from Heaven,
directed the King to find out Guy of Warwick, coming thither as a Pilgrim, who
undertook to encounter Colybrand; and after a sharp battle with him in the view
of both kings and their Armies, cut off one of his hands, and after that his
head. By which Victory the whole Land of England enjoyed the unviolated
privilege of rest and Liberty from the Danish king, until Cnute king of
Denmark gained the Realm of England from Edmund Ironside. But this Relation
being contrary to the truth of History, and the Stream of all our
Historiographers, I shall repute it merely fabulous; though I could not well
omit it, for that Relation it has to this my Theme an^ precedent Propositions.

De Gest. Reg. Ang. l. 2. c. 6. p. 52. Spelman. conc. p. 407, 408. Speeds Hist.
p. 396. See Ingulph. Hist. p. 378.
William of Malmesbury and others out of him record, that Elfrid (a Noble man)
who opposed Aethelstans Title to the Crown, though in vain, intended to have
seized on him at Winchester, and put out his eyes; but his Treason being
discovered before it came to the Accomplishment, he was taken and sent to Rome
to purge himself by Oath; where before the Altar of St. Peter and Pope John the
10 th, he abjured the fact, and thereupon fell suddenly down dead to the
Earth, and being carried from before the Altar by his Servants to the English
School, he there died within three days after. Proposit. 2, 4, 5, 6, 10.
Upon this the Po^e ^ent to ^he king, to advise what he should do with him, and
^hether he should allow him burial with other Christian C^rps. The king
hereupon assembling a Council of his Nobles, to advise about it; Optimates
Regionis^ the Nobles of the Realm with a great Company of Elfrids kindred,
earnestly requested of the King with great humility, that his body might be
committed to Christian Burial. The King consenting to their Request, acquainted
the Pope therewith; who granted him Christian Burial, though unworthy. Hereupon
the Nobles adjudged all his Lands and Possessions great and small, to the King;
who by their consent, ^ropos. 2, 4, ^, 6.10.
granted and confirmed them all to the Abbey of Malmesbury by his Charter,
wherein he recites; Sciant Sapientes regionis Nostrae, non has praefatas terras
me injuste Rapuisse, Rapinamque Deo Dedicasse, sed sic eas accepi Quemadmodum
judicaverunt omnes Optimates Regni Anglorum. Insuper et Apostolicus Papa
Romanae Ecclesiae Johannes; After which, reciting the Treachery, perjury and
death of Elfred, with his Condescension to his Nobles and friends request
aforesaid, he concludes thus. Et sic Adjudicata est mihi tota possessio ejus in
magnis et modicis. Sed et haec Apicibus praenotamus literarum, ne quamdin
Christianitas regnat, aboleatur; unde mihi praefata possessio, quam Deo et
Sancto Peiro dedi, donatur; nec Justius novi quam Deo et sancto Peiro hanc
possessionem dare, q^i aemulum meum in conspectu omnium cadere fecerunt, et
mihi prosperitatem Regni largiti sunt.

To which Malmesbury subjoyns. In his Verbis Regis sapientiam, et pietatem ejus
in Dei rebus suspicere par est: Sapientiam, eo quod animadverterat, juvenis
presertim, non esse Dei Gratiosum de Rapina Holocaustum. Pietatem, eo quod
Munus ultione divine collatum, Deo potissimum non ingratus rependeret.

From whence I shall only observe, that Elsrid being a P^er of the Realm, dying
perjured as a^oresaid, was ad^udged to forfei^ all his Lands for Treason after
his death only by his Peers in a Parliamentary Council, and that i^ the king
had seized on them without their judg^ment, it had been an unjust Rapine, by
his own Confession; but being legally confiscated to him by their Judgment, it
was no Rapine, but Justice for him to seize^ and Piety to dispose of them at
his pleasure to this Church. What Churches and Monasteries he built and
repaired throughout the Realm; What Lands he restored to St. Augustines Church
at Canterbury on the day of his Coronation (by the Assent of his Bishops and
Nobles) though long detained from it; and how he gave the Lands of Folcastan,
in Kent, e^cheated by the Danes destruction of the Nunnery there, to
Christ-church in Canterbury, you may read in the Ingulph^ Historia. p. 878.
Chronic^ Will. Thorn, Col. 1778. Evidentiae Eclesiae Christi, Cant. Col. 2220.
etc.
Marginal Authors.

de Gest: R. Ang. l. 2. c. 6. p. 51. See Ingulp. ^ist. p. 877, 878.
William of Malmesbury informs us, that Baldwin Earl of Flanders, sent
Embas^adour by Hugh King of France, to King Ethelstan, to demand his Sister for
his Wife, brought over with him diverse rich presents, and Relics (Amongst
others, the Sword of Constantine the Great, the Lance of Charles the Great, and
one of the 4 Nails that pierced our Saviors body, set in plates of Gold; A
piece of our Saviors Cross enclosed in a Crystal Case etc. all which he
presented to the King and Lady) cum in Conventu Procerum, apud Abindonium proci
postulata exhibuisset: Which intimates, that this King consulted with an
assembly of his Nobles aabout his Sisters Marriage to the King of France, as a
matter of Parliamentary consideration.

Ingulphus Hist. p. 876, 877, 878. records, that Turketulus was his Chancellor
and chief Counselor, who affected not Honors and Riches, refu^ed many
Bishoprics offered him by the King, Tanquam ^endiculas Satanae ad animas
evertendas; and would never accept of any Bishishoprick all his life, being
Content only with his own Lands and Wages: That all his Decrees were so just
and legal, that they remained irrevocable, when once made: That he was a great
Soldier, and fought most valiantly against the Danes, and often gloried and
said, He was most happy in this, that he had never murdered nor maimed any one,
Cum pugnare ^ro patria, and maxim contra Paganos licite quisque possit; He
esteeming the slaughter of such Pagan Enemies in defense ^f his Country,
lawful, and no murder nor maim.

Anno 940.
King Aethelstan, deceasing without i^^ue, his Brother Edmund succeeded him An.
940. who upon the false suggestions of some of his Soldiers and Courtiers,
Malmesb. de G^st. R^g. Angl. l. 2. c. 7. Hoveden Annal. pars prior, p. 422.
Ingulp. Hist. p. 878. Huntindon Hist. l. 5. p. 355. Ethelwerdi Hist. l. 4. c.
6. Chron. Johan. Bromton, Col. 856, 857, 858. Mat. Westminster. et Wigorn. ^n. 940.
to 946.
dedeprived Dunstan (whom he had made his Chancellor, and one of his privy
Con^cil, year ranked amongst the Royal Palatines and Princes of his Realm) of
all his dignities and Offices. The very next day after, being like to break his
Neck as he rod a hunting over a steep Rock, had not his horse miraculously
stopped at the Rocks brink in his full carier, he immediately sent for Dunstan;
and to repair the injury done him, rod presently ^o Glastonbury, and made him
Abbot thereof. Presently after, Anla^fe King of Norwey, whom Aethelstan had
driven out of the Kingdom of Northumberland, came with a great Navy and Army to
York, being called in by the persidious and rebellious Northumberlanders, who
instantly revolted to him, and elected him for the^r King. Whereupon he
marching Southward wi^h a puissant Army, purposing to subjugate the Realm of
England to himself, King Edmund gathering his forces together, encountered him,
and after a bloody battle fought a whole day between them at Leicester, with
great loss on both sides, Proposit. 4.
Odo Archbishop of Canterbury and Welstan Archbishop of York perceiving the
danger on both parts, and the Destruction of the Realm, made this Agreement
between them; that Anlaffe should quietly enjoy the whole Northeast part of
England, lying North of Watlingstreet; and Edmund all the Sou^hern part
thereof, during their joint Lives, and the Survivor of them enjoy the whole
Realm after the others decease: B^t Anlaffe soon after wasting the Church of
St. Balter, and burning Tivinagham with fire, was presently seized on by Gods
avenging Judgment, and miserably ended his life.

About the year 940. Spelman. Council. p. 408, 411. etc.
Hoel Dha, Prince of all Wales, Anno. 940.
sent for six Laymen, eminent for authority and knowledge, out of every Kemut,
or hundred of his Realm, and all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and Priors
of his Realm, digni^ied with a Pastoral staff; who continuing all together, in
prayer, fasting and consultation all the Lent, did in this Welsh Pa^liament,
make and enact many Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, which they divided into 3
parts and books, Propos. 5.2^
^or the better Government of the Realm and Church; which you may read in
Spelman. In the 22 Law whereof they thus determine: Tres autem sunt hom^nes
quorum nullus potest per Legem impignora^e contra aliquod Iudicium: Primus est
Rex, ubi non poterit secundum Legem in Lite stare coram judice ^uo agendo vel
respondendo, per dignitatem naturalem, vel per dignitatem terrae, ut Optimas,
vel alius. So that by the Laws of those times, nor only the Kings of England,
but even the petty Kings of Wales were by their very Natural and Royal
Dignities, exempted from all personal Trials and Judgments against them in
any Courts of Justice, seeing they had no Peers to be tried by.

In the year 940 Simeon Dunelm. Hist. de Dunel. Eccl. c. 16. col. 23. c. 24.
Reingwald [or Reginald) the Dane coming with a great Navy into
Northumberland, slew most of the best Inhabitants of that Realm, or drove them
out of it. He likewise seized upon all the Lands of St. Cutbert, and gave his
Lands to two of ^is Soldiers; one of them called Scula, who afflicted the
miserable Inhabitants with Grievous and intolerable Tributes; whence even unto
this day, the Yorkshire-men as often at they are compelled to pay Tributum
Regale, Propos. 1, 4.
A Royal Tribute, endeavor to impose a pecuniary Mulct on the Land which this
Scula possessed, for the easing of themselves. Scilicet Legem deputant, quod
Paganus per Tyrannidem fecerat, qui non legitimo Regi Anglorum, sed barbaro et
aliegenae Regis Anglorum hosti militabat, Nec tamen quamvis multum in hoc
Laboraverint Pravam Consuetudinem huc usque Sancto Cuthberto resistente
Introducere potuerunt; writes Simeon Dunelmensis. The other part of those Lands
one Onlasbald seized upon; who was much more cruel and oppressive to all men
than Scula; extraordinarily vexing the Bishop, Congregation, and People of
Saint Cutbert, and particularly seizing upon the Land belonging to the
Bishopric; Whereupon the Bishop often endeavoring by persuasion to draw him to
God, and entreating him to lay aside the obstinate rigor of his mind, and
refrain himself from the unlawful Invasion of the Churches Lands, else if he
con^temned his admonitions, God and St. Cutbert would severely avenge the
Injuries done by him to them, and others. He with a diabolical mind contemning
his admonitions and Threats, swore by his Heathen Gods, that he would from
thenceforth be a more bitter Enemy toward St. Cuthbert and them all, than
ever he was before; Whereupon the Bishop with all his Monks falling prostrare
on the earth, earnestly prayed to God and his holy Confessor, to annul those
proud Tyrants Threats; who was then coming into the place where they were
praying, having one foot within the Door, and the other without; in which
posture he stood there immovably fixed, as if both his feet had been nailed,
being able neither to go out nor come in, but standing immovable, till being
long thus tortured, he there gave up his mi^erable soul in the place: with
which example all others being terrified, would no further presume by any means
to invade the Land, nor any thing else belonging of right to the Church.,

Anno 941.
Mat. West. e^ Wigorn. An. 941. to 946. Hu^t^ngd. Hist. l. 5. p. 355, Hov.
Annal. pars prior p. 421. Ethelw. Hist. l. 4. c. 6. William Malmesbury, De
Gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 7. Simeon Dunelm. Hist. de Dunelm. Eccl. c. 18. col. 26. et
de Gest. Reg. Angl. col. 134, 155, 156. Ethelr. Ahbas de Genesis Reg. Ang. col.
358. Pol. l. ^ c. 7. Fab. Caxt. Grast. Holinsh. Speed in the life of king Edm.
Anno 941. the Rebellious o Northumberlanders preferring disloyalty before the
Fealty which they owed unto Magnificent Edmund King of England, elected Anlaff
(King of the Nor^eyans) for their King, Son to the former Anlaff; who perishing
suddenly for his Sacrilege (as aforesaid) he and Reginald, the Son of
Garthfrith, after their Baptism, breaking their faith and Agreement with King
Edmu^d, by invading his Dominions. Edmund thereupon by force of Arms expelled
them both out of the Realm of Northumberland, and united it to his own kingdom;
and wrested Lincoln, Nottingham, Derby, Leicester, and Stamford out of the
hands o^ the Usurping, insolent, oppressing Danes, with all Mercia; subduing
and reducing the Monarchy of all England unto himself; extirpating all the
Pagan Danes with their infidelity; restoring Christianity to its Luster, and
the English to their Possessions and Liberties. The year following he wasted
and subdued all Cumberland, and pillaged the people of all their goods: And
because the people of that Country were perfidam and legibus insolitam,
perfidious and unaccustomed to Laws, so that he could not totally subdue and
civilize them, having harrowed it with his Army, and put out the eyes of the
two sons of Dummail, Propos^t. 3, 7.
King thereof, he gave the Country to Malcolm King of Scots, to be held of
himself, upon this Condition, that he should assist him, and defend the
Northern parts of England by Land and Sea from the Incursions of invading
Enemies.

This King Edmund after the Conquest and Expulsion of his Enemies, An. 944.
by the advice of Dunston and his Chancellor Turketulus, Chron. Ioh. Bromt.
col. 858. to 862. Spelm. Council. p. 415. to 428^ Lambardi Archaion, Polychron.
l. 6. c. 7. Malmesb. de Gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 7. Ingulphi Hist. p. 878.
made good Laws, and ordinances, Ecclesiastical and Civil, for the Government
of his Realm; for which purpose, about the year of our Lord 944, he as^embled a
Parliamentary Council of the Clergy and Laity at London, to consult and advise
with them in the making of his Laws. Which the Proems to them, thus express.
Edmundus Rex ipso solenni Pascatis festo Frequentem Londini tam
Ecclesiasticorum quam Laicorum Caetum celebravit, as one version out of the
Saxon; Or^ Congregavit magnam Synodum Dei ordinis et saeculi; as another
^^anslation renders it, cui interfuit, Odo, et VVulstanus Archiepiscopi, et
alii plures Episcopi^ ut animorum suorum, Proposit. 5^
et, ^orum omnium, qui eis curae sunt consuleretur saluti; And this Proem of
King Edmund, himself thus seconds, Bromt. Spel. Lamb. ^uo supra.
Ego Edmundus Rex omnibus qui in d^tion^ ac potestate mea sunt, senibus and
juvenibus, clare significo, Me a scientissimis Regni mei in celebri
Ec^le^sticorum quam Laicorum frequentia, studiose requisivisse, quo tandem
pacto Christiana proveheretur fides, etc. Or, Mando, and praecipio omni populo
Seniorum and Iuniorum qui in Regione mea sunt, Ea quae Investigans Investigavi
cum Sapi^ntibus Clericis and Laicis: In this Council there were three parcels
of Laws made; the one, merely Ecclesiastical; the other, merely Civil; the
third, mixed of bo^h^ And in this Council, I conceive, the Constitutions of
A^chbishop Odo were read and ratified. The greatest part of the Civil Laws
there made, were against Murder, bloodshed, fighting, breach of Peace, Theft
and Perjury: In the last parcel of these Laws, cap. 5. The King gives God and
them thanks, for assisting him in making these Laws, in these words; Maximas
antem and Deo and vobis omnibus ago gratias, Qui me auxilio vestro in hac pacis
quam nunc ad prostigandos fures sancivimus, P^oposit. 5.
Lege adjuvistis; ac vehementer con^ido, eo vos propensius Nobis in posterum
opitulaturos, quo hujus Decreti observatio magis vi^ebitur neces^aria.

About the same year, 944. Chron. Johan. Bromt. col. 859.
this King assembled another Parliamentary Council of his Bishops and Wisemen
at Culinton, where they enacted 7 other Laws, Principally against Thieves,
together with an Oath of Allegiance to king Edmund, Proposit. 5, 4, 7.
thus prefaced. Haec est Institutio quam Edmunds Rex, and Episcopi sui, cum
Sapientibus suis instituerunt apud Culintoniam de pace and Iuramento faciendo.
The two first of these Laws I shall transcribe as pertinent to my Theme.

Cap. 1. Imprimis, ut omnes jurent in nomine Domini, pro quo sanctum illud
sanctum est, fide^i^atem Edmuudo Regi, Sicut Homo debet esse fidelis Domino
suo, Proposit. 7.
sine omni controversia and seditione, in manifesto, in occulto, in amando quod
amabit, Nolendo quod, noluit; et antequam Iuramentum hoc dabitur, ut nemo
concelet hoc in fratre vel proximo suo plus quam in extraneo.

Cap. 2. Vult etiam, ut ubi fur pro certo cognoscetur Twe^fhindi et Twifhindi
(that is me^ of 600 or 200 s. Land by the year) consocientur et exuperent eum
vivum, vel mortuum, alterutrum quod poterunt; ^t qui aliquem eorum infaidiabit,
qui in ea quaestione fuerint, sit inimicus Regis et omnium Amicorum ipsius. Et
si quis adire negaverit, et coadjuvare nolit, emendat Regi cxx s. vel secundum
hoc pernegat quod nescivit, et hundredo xxx s.

From whence it is apparent, That all Oaths of Allegance; and Laws against
Thieves and other Malefactors, were then made and enacted in Parliamentary
Councils assembled for that purpose, and all fines, for offenses imposed, and
reduced to a certainty only by Parliament. And by the last parcel of King
Edmunds Laws in Bromton, it seems, the manner of contracting Marriage was then
prescribed and settled by a Parliamentary Council.

This King Chron. VVil. Thorn. col. 21. c. 25. Evid. Eccles. Christ. Cant. col.
2221. Sim. Dunelm. Hist. de Eccles. Dun^lm. l. 2^.19. col. 25.
Edmund, as he gave and restored by his Charters to Christ-Church and St.
Augustines in Canterbury several Lands unjustly taken away from them by his
Predecessors, free from all secular services, except expedition and building of
Bridge and Castle; and ratified the Laws and Privileges of St. Cutberts Church
at Durham, by consent of his Bishops and Nobles; So likewise, Malm. de Gest.
Reg. l. 2. c. 7. Sp^lman council. p. 4.27.
Anno 944. he granted by his Charter, (written in golden Characters) sundry
large Liberties, together with the Manor of Glastonbury to the Abbey of
Glustonbury, Consilio et consensu Optimatum meorum (then assembled in a
Paliamentary Council at London) ratifying the Privileges granted to the
Monastery by King Edmund his Father, Propos. 4.10.
E^frid, Centwine, Ina and Cu^hred, et ne quisquam mortalium, scu Episcopus,
vel Dux aut Princeps, aut quilibet ministrorum eorum audeat eam omnino intrare
caus^ placitandi, vel c^piendi, vel quidquam faciendi, quod contrarium fore
possit imbi Deo Servientibus, Dei indictone prohibuit.

An. 945.
Mat. W^st. An. 945. p. 366. Chron. Ioh^n. Brom. col. 8^8.
In the year 945. this King Edmund gave many Lands and Privileges to the
Monastery of St. Edmundsbury, by his Charters; quam subscriptione Episcorum,
Comitum et Baronum pia devotione roboravit, (most probably in the Parliamentary
Council, of London, Proposition 10.
at Culington where they were all assembled.)

Anno 946.
Mat. West. Wig. Malm. Hunt. Hov. Ingulph. Sim. Dunelm. Brom. Will. Thorn.
Polch. Aelredus, Fab. Grant. Caxton, Holinsh. Speed, An. 946. and in the life
of Edmund.
King Edmund, in the year 946. celebrating with great Solemnity ^he Feast of
St. Augustine (which the English accustomed to celebrate every year) at
Canterbury, as some, or at Pulcherkirke (now at Puckel-Church in Glostershire)
as others, or Michelesberith, as M^tthew Wes^minster styles it) as he was
fitting at Dinner in the Hall amidst his Nobles and Courtiers e^pyed a notable
Thief c^lled Leoff (whom he formerly bani^hed for his theft) stand in the Hall:
Whereupon he not enduring his sight, commanded his Butler to thrust that Thief
presently out of the Palace: who refusing to depart upon the Kings Command and
resisting the Butler, Proposit, 2, 8.
the King thereupon in a rage rising suddenly from the Table, took the Thief by
the Hair, and threw him to the Ground: whereupon the Traitor feeling himself
hurt, and the King lying upon him, presently drew out his Knife; which he
carried secretly about him, ripped up the Kings bowels and slew him with it;
which the Knights and Soldiers perceiving, rushed all upon the Thief, and with
their Swords and Knives chopped all his flesh and bones into small pieces. Some
^istorians write, that he slew some of the Kings followers likewise, and
wounded more of them, and so escaped in the midst of the Tumult, Sicque clarum
regalis Convivii principium, nebulosus rerum Gestarum exitus terminavit.
Communi ergo decretum Concilio: It was thereupon decreed by a Common Council,
that his Body should be interred in Glastonbury Abbey. Abbot Ethelred gives this
Encomium of him. De Genesis Reg. Ang. col. 358.
Erat autem pat^is Edwardi in omnibus imitabitor, homo simplex and rectus, et
timens Deum, et usque ad sinem vitae suae permanens in innocentia sua.

Mat. West. VVig. Sim. Dunelm. Hunt. Hov. Malm. Brom. Aelred. Polyc. Fab. Ho^
Speed An. 946. and in the li^e Edred, E^helw. Hist. l. 4. c. 8.
Edred his Brother, Anno 946. etc.
succeeded him the same year in the Throne, and was crowned King at Kingston by
Odo Archbishop of Canterbury; Edwin and Edgar King Edmunds Sons, being put by,
because of their Infancy; quia tepugnante legi^i^a ^tate pa^ri succedere non
valebant, as Matthew Westminster renders the reason.

No sooner was he crowned, but entering into Northumberland, with a great army,
he subdued the rebellious Northumberlanders, who refused to bear the yoke of
his government, reducing them all under his obedience. Whereupon Wulstan
Arc^bishop of York, and all the Nobles of the Northumberlanders swore fealty to
King Edred, which they did not long observe. After which King Edred en^red with
Banners displayed into Sco^land, P^opos. 8.
whereupon the Scots, stricken with a fear, without any resistance, or war,
swore homage and fealty to him as to their true Lord, as well as the
Northumberlanders; which Oath they soon violated: For no sooner was Edred
returned with his Army into the Southern parts, but Anlaff who was chas^d out
of Northumberland, returning thither again with a great Fleet, was joyfully
received by the Nor^humberlan^^r^, and restored by them to the Throne of the
Kingdom, which he kept by force near four years. But in the fourth year the
Northumberlanders using their accustomed treachery and disloyalty, chased away
their King Anlaff, and received Hirc or E^icus s^n of Harald, ^or their king,
who held the kingdom but a short time; for the People of the Country, not long
enduring any king as they ha^ lightly received Hirc for their king^ so in the
third ^ear of hi^ Reign, they as lightly rejected him^ and calling king E^red
to them of their own accord, recei^ed him again for their Sovereign, and s^t
him in (...) others relate; That king Edred Anno 948 was so incensed with the
Northumberlanders for their treachery toward him, in choosing Hirc for their
king, against their Oath of Allegiance sworn to him; that he wasted all
Norshumberland with fire and sword and famine, et pene ex hominibus delevit;
But some of the Northumberlanders in his return from thence, sallying out of
York with their forces, cut off some of the Rear of his Army ar Cesterford;
wherewith king Edred was so enraged, that he resolved presently to return, et
totam illam terram penitus desere, and ututterly to destroy all that Country.
Which the Northumberlanders hearing, they were so terrified, that they rejected
their new King Hirc, and received Edred for their Sovereign, satisfying the
King with Honors, and the Damages and Wrongs they had done unto him, with
Gifts, and no small Sums of Money. These treacherous Rebellious
Northumberlanders after Edred and Hirc, had no particular King at all to rule
over them, but only Dukes, whose names and successions Anno 951.
(with their Treachery toward and Rebellions against them) you may read at
leisure in Roger Hoveden, who subjoyns the History of them immediately to this
relation.

This King Edred (about the year 951. Mat. West. An. 951. p. 357. Malm. de Gest.

Reg. l. 2. c. 7. Sim. Dunelm. Hist. col. 356. Flor. VVig. An. 952, 954 Roger
Hov^ Annal pars prior, p. 42^, Thomas Stubs, Acta Pontif. Ebor. c. 1669. Godw.
Catalogue of Bishops, p. 443, Antiq, Eccles. Brit. p. 49.

Propos. 2, 3.


close imprisoned Wulstan Archbishop of York in Withaubrig, and suspended him
from his Archbishopric, near a whole year, for certain causes of which he had
been frequently accused to him; but especially for countenancing and harboring
the rebellious perjured Northumberlanders and the Danes, a Heathen people, who
not only sought to destroy his Native Country, but also to root out Christian
Religion, for which he deserved a thousand deaths: and exciting them both
against his Sovereign King Edred, contrary to their Oath; and for killing the
Citizens of Thetford in a tumultuous manner, in revenge of the death of Abbot
Adelm, whom they had causelessly murdered. Norwithstanding all which, about a
year after he was enlarged and restored to his Bishopric; Malmesbury and Abbot
Eth^lred, record of king Edred, that he made his Palace altogether a School of
Virtues, obeying Dunstans Counsels in all things, et Justissimis Legibus
subdi^os Regens, and governed his Subjects by most just Laws.

I read only of one Great Parliamentary Council held under King Edred, Anno 948.
and that was at Ingulphi Hist. p. 874, 875, 876. Hoveden Annal. pars prior. p.
423. Mat. Westminster. An. 948 Spelm. Council. p. 428. Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor,
part 2. chapter 5. p. 633.
London, in the year 948. in the Feast of the Virgin Mary's Nativity; Cui
Universi Magnates Regni, per Regium edictum Summoniti, tam Archiepiscopi, and
Episcopi, and Abbates, quam Caeteri totius Regni Proceres and Optimates,
Londini convenissent, ad tractandum de negotiis publicis totius Regni; as
Ingulphus and others record.

In which Parliamentary Council, when all the public affairs were finished
(which as it seems concerned the making and carrying on of that war against the
Rebellious, Treacherous Northumberlanders, who brake their faith with King
Edred, Propos. 5, 8, 9.
and set up a King of the Danish race, as aforesaid,) the King in the presence,
and by the consent of them all, restored, granted and re-confirmed by his
Charter (dictated by Abbot Turketulus heretofore his Chancellor) all the Lands
and Liberties formerly granted by Kings and others to the Abbey of Croyland,
with sundry Manors then given to it by Turketulus himself: wherein (amongst
other Liberties) he granted to the Monks; quod sint qui^ti and soluti ab omni
Scotto, Geldo, auxiliis Vicecomitum, Hydagio, and ab Secta in Schiris,
Wapuntakis, Hundredis, Thrichingis and omnibus omnibus aliis curis and saeculi
oneribus universis. Proposit. 1.
This Charter was subscribed and ratified with the sign of the Cross, by all
the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and Nobles, who gave both their Counsels and
Assents thereto, as their subscripti^ns testify, that ^o it might be firm and
perpetual. In the beginning of which Charter, this King, to show, that he held
his Crown only from and under God, thus styles himself. Ego Edredus Rex
terrenus sub imperiali potentia Regis saeculorum aeternique Principis, Magnae
Britanniae gerens Imperium, etc.

About the year of Christ 950, Spelman. Council. p. 429, 430, 502, 530.
Nogui a Welsh King, An. 950, 955.
being overmuch incensed with one Arcoit, wasted his Lands, and with too much
fury, violated the Sanctuary, to which he sled. Whereupon Pater Bishop of
Landa^fe assembled all the Clerks of his Diocese in a Synod, Proposit. 2, 4, 6,
10.
to punish this Sacrilege and breach of Sanctuary: Which the King hearing of,
desired pardon of the Bishop and whole Synod, for these offenses in the Church
of Mainnon, restoring all the things of the Church he had taken away, with
satisfaction, and effusion of Tears. Whereupon, to obtain pardon and absolution
for the penance they enjoined him, he gave the parish of Guidcon, with all the
Lands, Liberties and Commons apper^aining thereun^o, to God, and the Bishops of
Landaffe for ever, to be held in Frankalmoighne. Some five years after (Anno
955.) Ily a Deacon slaying one Merduter, and slying into a Church for
Sanctuary; thereupon his kins^olk, and some of king Nogui his family, forcibly
entering into the Church, flew Ili before the Altar, sprinkling his blood both
upon the Altar and Walls of the Church; Whereupon Pater Bishop of Landaffe,
assembled a Synod of all the Priests, Deacons, and Ecclesiastical persons
within his Diocese, to excommunicate the Delinquents; which King Nogui and his
Nobles hearing of, fearing the Malediction of the Church, the weight whereof
they du^st not undergo, sent for the Bishop, and upon con^ultation, by advice
of the Doctors of both sides, delivered up the Murderers into the Bishops
hands, who sent them to the Monastery of St. Teliavi, where they were kept 6
Months in Iron Chains. Aft^r which they were excommuuicated. Synodo quoque
Judican^e defini^um est, unusquisque eorum suum agrum, suamque totam
substantiam, insuper and pretium animae suae (id est) septem Libras Argenti,
redderet Ecclesiae quam maculaverat, determinantibus omnibus Divino Judicio,
etc.

The Bishop rising up in the mid^^ of them, holding the Gospel in his hand,
said to Nogui, lay thy hand upon this Gospel: Whereupon Nogui laying his hand
upon it, said; Sit haec terra cum incolis suis, in sempiterna consecra^ione
Deo, etc. and Patri Episcopo, and omnibus Episcopis Landaviae, Libera ab omni
Laicali servitio, nisi tantum in oratione quo^idiana in perpetuo. It seems the
petty Welsh Kings, and their Courtiers, were all subject in those days to the
Censures and excommunications of their Synods, for their Sacrilege, and other
unrighteous Actions infringing the Churches Liberties. That their Synods had a
Judiciary Power, and that they could not convey Lands to the Church, but by the
Consent and Judgment of their Synods, which attested and ratified the same, as
you may read in Spelman. Who likewise informs us, of another Welsh Synod held
at Landaff^, about the year 988. wherein Arithmail Son of Nogui, King of
Guenti, slaying his Brother Elised, was for this execrable Fratricide
excommunicated by Gucan, Bishop of Landa^fe, and all the Synod, who thereupon
submitting to the penance therein enjoined him, gave certain Lands for ever in
Frankalmoighne to God and all the Bishops of Landaffe, to purchase his
absolution.

King Will. Malmesbury de Gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 8. de Gestie Ponti^icum, l. 1. p.
20. Mat. Westminster and Wigorniensis. An. 955, 957, 958, etc. Hoveden Annal. pars
prior, p. 427. Ethel^re^us Abbas de Genealogia Reg. Angl. col. 358, 359.
Chronicon Iohannis Bromton, col. 862, 863. Simeon Dnelmensis de Gestis Regum
Angli^, col. 156, 157. Hygden Po^ychron. l. 6. c. 8. Fabian, Caxton, Holinshed,
Grafton, Speed in the life of Edwin, Osburn, Gervasius Dorobern. Capgrave, Mat.
Parker, and Godwin in the Lives of Odo and Dunstan. Fox Acts and Mon. vol. 1.
p. 196. Antonini Chron, pa^ c ^^ Tit. 16. c. 6.
Edred deceasing to the great grief of all hi^ Anno 957.
Sub^ects, his Nephew Edwin (formerly put by the Crown for his Nonage) was
thereupon (though young) crowned King at Kingston by Archbishop Odo, An. 955.
but in the second year of his reign 957. the Mercians an^ Northumberians wholly
cast off their obedience to him, and conspiring altogether by unanimous
consent, rejecting him from being their King, elected his Brother Edgar for
their Sovereign Lord, Deo dictante and annuente populo: VVhereupon the kingdom
was divided between them by the bounds of the River of Thames.

What was the true Cause of this deposition and rejection of Edwin is very
do^btfull: William of Malmesbury, Hovedeu, Matthew Westminster, Dunelmensis,
Bromton, Henry de Knighton, Abbot Ethelred, Hygden, Florence of Worcester, and
most of our old Historians being Monks, and overmuch devoted to their
Arch-Patron Dunstan, record: That the true Causes thereof were, First, His ill
lascivious Life and Incontinency with Alfgiva his Concubine (as they write) and
near kinswoman, from whom Archbishop Odo divorced him; and likewise with sundry
other Concubines which he entertained in his Court, whom Odo excommunicated and
banished thence. 2. His Indiscret and Tyrannical Gvernment contrary to his
Laws. Proposit. 2, 4.
1. In slighting, depressing and destroying the Nobles and Wisemen of the
Realm, who disgusted his lascivious Courses, and in favoring ignorant, unjust,
vicious persons, and following their most wicked Counsels. 2. In banishing
Abbot Dunstan, and seizing upon all his Goods, only for Justice sake, because
he reprehended him for his exorbitant vicious Courses (being then the chief
swaying Grandee, and head of the Monkish faction.)

3. In forcibly thrusting out by Armed Soldiers all the Regular Monks
throughout England, and casting them forth of the Monasteries, (there being
then no Regular Monks in any Monasteries, but only in Glastonbury and
Malmesbury as the Chronicles of Winchester, and others record:) then seizing
upon all their wealth, and bestowing their Lands and Monasteries on secular and
married Priests, and afflicting these Monks in sundry other kinds.

But Histor. l. 5^ p. 356.
Henry Archdeacon of Huntington, an ancient, judicious, impartial old
Historian, flourishing in the year 1148^ mentions none of these particulars, in
his life, but gives this honorable Testimony of his Government, tha^ it was
both prosperous, ^lourishing and laudable. Rex Edwi non illaudabiliter Regni
infulam tenuit; Anno R^gni sui Quiuto, cum in principio Regnum ejus
decentissime ^loreret, prospera et laetabunda exordia mors immatura perrupit.
And therefore Archbibishop Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 47^ to 54.
Parker, Catologue of Bishops in the lives of Odo and Dunst. p. 19, 20, 21, 22.
Bishop Godwin, History of Great Britain. p. 403, 404.
Speed, and Spelm. council. p. 429, 430.
others conceive, that the true cause why the Mercians and No^thumbrians, (and
those only, not the rest of his subjects and kingdom) rejected him, and s^t up
his Brother Edgar (whose lasciviousness was more excessive, and vices more
extorbitant in some degrees than Edwins, which yet our former Monkish
Historians blanch or excuse) was the Malice of Dunstan, and Odo (the Pillars
and Oracles of the Monkish Clergy;) who stirred up the Merciaus and seditious
rebellious Northumbrians, against him, to set up Edgar in his stead, who was
totally devoted to them and Dunstan, by whose Coun^els he was afterward wholly
guided, and built no less than 47 new Monasteries for the Monks, besides all
those he repaired, in^ending to build three more had he lived, to make them 50
complete; and likewise cast out the secular and married Priests out of all
Monasteries and Churches unless they would become Monks, re^lenishing all
Monasteries and Churches with Monks alone. They likewise inform us, that the
true causes of kings Edwins banishing Dunstan, ejecting the Monks, and seizing
their Lands and Treasures was, That Dunst^n had so bewitched Edmund, Edward,
Athelstan, and Aedred his Predecessors, with the love of Monkery, as that they
no^ only took vio^ently from married Priests their livings to erect monasteries,
but also lavishly wasted much o^ their own Royal Treasures, Lands and Revenues
upon them, which they should have rather employed in resisting the common
Enemies of God and their Country, the Danes: whereupon Edwin percei^ing that
all the wealth of the Land was crept into Monasteries, not only refrained to
bestow more on them, but recalled diverse of those prodigal Gifts his
Predecessors had granted them, which the Monks refusing to ren^er upon demand,
he seize^ upon them by armed Officers, as having indeed cheated his
Predecessors and defrauded the Kingdom of them. They add hereunto, that King
Edrid had committed all his chief Household Stuff, Plate, Records, and the
Treasures of all the Realm, with all the Magazines he had gotten, to Dunstans
custody, and laid them up in ^he Monastery at Glastonbury; yea, he committed
his Kingdom, body and Soul unto him, So as all was wholly in Dunstans power,
who alone managed all the public affairs of the Realm, and exercised Regal
Authority. And when King Edred in his sickness demanded all his Housholdstuff,
Jewels, Moneys and Treasures from him, Dunstan pretending to fetch them, before
he returned with them, Dustan heard a voice ( as our Monkish Writers fable)
that Edred was dead in the Lord; and thereupon detained them in his and his
Monks custody, being unwilling to part with them to young King Edwin his
Successor, whereupon he seized on them by force, as of righ^ belonging to him,
and expelled Dunstan with his Monks. And so much the rather, because Dunstan
presumed most impudently and violently, to rush into his Bedchamber, and pull
him out forcibly thence on the very day of his Coronation (contrary to all
Christian and Princely ^odesty) from the embraces of his beautiful and beloved
Alfgina, which some Monks and these Historians report, to be his lawful wife
^not his Concubine, and not content therewith, he excited Odo Archbishop of
Canterbury, publicly to divorce her from him; some say, for consanguinity
only, and others for other Reasons. Whereupon the king betaking himself to his
Concubines, Odo suspended him from the Church, excommunicated all his
Concubines, caused one of them whom the king best affected, to be violently
fetched out of the Court with armed Men, branded her in the forehead with an
hot Iron, and then banished her into Ireland.

After which she returning into England, Odo apprehended her the second time,
and cut off her Sinews at the Hock-bone. All which intolerable Affronts so
incensed Edwin, that he banished and spoiled Dunstan with his Monks as
aforesaid, and threatened Odo with severe punishments; none others in the Realm
but these daring then to oppose him: hereupon they formerly and then bearing
the greatest sway, by way of revenge, and to preveut Edwins further fury
against them, stirred up the Mercians and Northumbrians to reject him, and that
in a tumultuous manner, by force of Arm, in which Uproar Edgar gained
possession of half his Kingdom. Antiq^ Eccl. Brit^ p. 4, p. 153. Spelm. council,
p. 431. n^onius in his life.
Matthew Parker and Sir Henry Spelman out of him, subjoyns, that by these civil
dissentions raised between King Edwin and his Brother Edgar, they much weakened
the forces of the Realm in many set Battles fought between them; till at last
Edgar getting the better; Convocato ad Branfordiam Regni concilio, Fratris
Edwini acta et decreta rescendit. Assemblong a Council at Brandford, he
repealed all the Acts and Decrees of his Brother King Edwin, restored to the
Churches and Monasteries the Treasures he had taken from them, Propos. 5.
recalled Dunstan from his former banishment, and made him first Bishop of
Worcester, then of London, and last of all of Canterbury.

De Eventibus Angliae, l. 1. c. 5. col. 2312, 2313.
Henry de Knyghton, a Canon of the Abbey of Leicester, relates, out of the
History of Leicester Abbey; That Edwin being expulsed and shamefully thrust out
of his kingdom, for his evil life, and exorbitant actions done against the
Church, the Monarchy of England continued void above a year. Whereupon, many
murders and wickednesses were committed, and infinite mischiefs happened amonst
the people for want of Government, until holy men, both of the Clergy and
People deeply affected therewith, humbled themselves, and uncessantly repented
of their sins, and prayed day and night to God, that he would hear them, and
mercifully relieve them in so great necessity, giving them such a King who
might govern the Realm of England in such sort, as might redound to the honor
of God, and profit of the Realm. That God beholding their prayers from on high,
in the night silence, this voice was heard from God; That they should crown
Edgar King, though but then a youth; who rejoiced with this Divine Oracle,
(most likely by the Monks and Dunstans Legerdemain, the Divine Oracle that
uttered it) speedily advanced Edgar to be King, being but 16 years old; and so
he was elected and crowned King by a divine Oracle, which never happened to any
King of England in former times.

Anno 959.
Upon Edgars Coronation Man. ^estminst. Wigorn. Et Sim. Duuelm. Anno 859. VVil.
Malmesb. de Gest. Regum Angl. l. 2. c. 8. Ethelredus Abbas d^ Genealogi^ Regnum
Angl. col. 359^ 360. Graft. Chron. p. 154^
and Dunstans restitution, An. 959. K. Edwin reigning in a decayed Estate,
living in little Esteem, and without being desired, for very grie^ thereof (as
some write) he died, after he had for 4 years space, Libidinosie simul and
Tyrannice, lustfully, and also Tyrannically depressed the Realm of England:
Others a^firm, that he was deprived both of his Life and Kingdom, by the
Rebellion of his Subjects: But his Monkish O^posi^es record, that he was taken
away by an untimely Death by Gods Just Judgment, in the year of our Lord 959.
Whereupon his Brother Edgar, ab omni populo electus, being elected king by all
the people, united the kingdom into one, and obtained the entire Monarchy of
the Realm, the kings of Cumberland, Scotland, and Wales^ voluntarily
submitting, and doing homage to him, without any effusion of blood, or war.

King Edgar Chron^ Johan. Bromton, col. 867. Malmesb. de G^st. Reg. Angl. l. 2.
c. 8 O^burn. Capgrave, Mat. Parker, and Godwin in the life of Archbishop
Dunstan, Fox Acts and Mon. vol. 1. p. 200, 201. Speeds History, p. 407, 408.
About the year of our Lord 963. Anno 963.
contrived the death of Earl Ethelwald, who (as some Authors aver) against his
trust, had cheated him of Elfrida, only Daughter of Ordgarus, Duke of
Devonshire, the Paragon of her Sex, by disparaging her beauty to the king, and
marrying her to himself. After which the king being extraordinarily ravished
with the true reporr and sight of her transcendent beauty, thereupon (as
Bromtons Chronicle relates) statim post octo dies, Rex Parliamentum suum apud
Sarisberiam convocavit, Ubi cunctis suis Proceribus congregatis, de custodia
terrae Northumbriae qualiter contra ingressum Danorum melius posset custodiri,
tractaverunt; inter quos Ethelwolfus ad Custodiam Eboraci and patriae
adjacentis, in illo erat Concilio deputatus. A clear Evidence, That Matters of
defense against Common Enemies, and Guardians of the Seacoasts against the
Danes Invasions, Proposit. 5, 9, 4.
were then debated and settled by the King and his Nobles in Parl. then usually
summoned by our Kings for that end. Hereupon Earl Ethelwolfe traveling through
the Forest of Werewell toward his new Wardship, was there cruelly assaul^ed
and murdered by some unknown armed persons, there placed in ambuscado by the
king, as was commonly reported, and as some relate by king Edgar himself, who
shot him through with an Arrow, as they were there hunting together. The slain
Earls Bastard-Son being ^here present, beholding his dead Corpse, the king
demanded of him, how such a hunting pleased him? who answered, very well my
Lord and King; for that which please^h you ought not to displease me: which
answer ^o pacified this kings swelling mind, that he loved no person more
entirely all his life than this Young man. Tyrannici facti offensam in Patrem
sedulitate Regia in filium allevans, writes Malmesbury. This being done, the
king with great joy bringing Alfrida to London, there espoused her, and the
same day both of them wore a golden Crown, adorned with precious pearls, on
their heads. Hereupon Archbishop Dunstan, the next morning, boldly rushing into
the kings Bedchamber, whiles they were both in Bed together, demanded of the
king; what Woman he had lying in bed with him? who answered, that it was his
Queen; Dunstan by way of rebuke replied; That he could not marry or retain her
as his wife, without offending God, and the Laws of the Church, because he had
been Godfather to her Son, often admonishing the king, that he would put her
away, and be divorced from her: Which he by reason of his ardent love toward
her, and unsatiable lust with her, would by no means hearken to.

Anno 964.
Anno 964. King Edgar heating of a Nun of incomparable beauty in the Monastery
of Wilton, Malmesb. de Gest. Reg. l. c. 8. Osburn, Capgrave, Surius, Matthew
Parker, and Godwin in the life of Dunstan, Fox Acts and Mon. vol. 1. p. 201,
202. Speeds Chron. p. 407, 408. Spelm. Council. p. 481.482.
named Wilfrida, a Dukes Daughter, took her out of the Nunnery, and frequently
admitted her to his Bed: Which being commonly blazed abroad, Archbishop
Dunstan understanding of it, with great passion, and i^dignation of mind came
to the king; who seeing the Archbishop, arose from the Royal Throne to take him
by the hand, and give him place. But Dunstan refused to take him by the hand,
and with a stern countenance, bending his Brows, spoke thus unto him. Thou
that have not feared to corrupt a Virgin, espoused to Christ, presumest thou to
touch the consecrated hands of a Bishop? Thou have defiled the Spouse of thy
Maker, and think thou by flattering service to pacify the Friend of the
Bridegroom? No Sir, his Friend will not I be, who has Christ for his Enemy,
etc. The king terrified with these and other thundering words of Dunstan, and
compuncted with inward repentance for his perpetrated sin, fell down at
Dunstans ^ee^ weeping: who raising him up again from the ground, began to
relate unto him the hainousness of the fact: And finding the king ready to
undergo what ever satisfaction he should lay upon him, enjoined him this
following Penance for 7 years space. That during these seven years he should
wear no C^own; That he should fast twice every Week; That he should liberally
distribute the Treasures left him by his Ancestors, to the poor; That he should
build a Monastery of Nuns at Shastesbury; That as he had robbed God of one
Virgin, through his transgression, so should he again restore many to him in
time to come. Moreover, That he should expel Clerks of evil lives, (meaning
secular Priests who had Wives and Children) out of Churches, and place Covents
o^ Mon^s in their room; That he should enact just Laws, and such as were
acceptable to God: and command the people to observe them through all parts of
the Realm. Which the king promising effectually to perform, was thereupon
absolved, and vigorously set himself to execute what he had promised. Anno 966.


Hereupon, in the year 966. Spelmanni Council. p. 435, to 444. Mat. Westminster. and
Wigorniensis. An. 963, 964, and Monasticon. Anglic.
King Edgar founded the Monastery of Hyde near Winchester, filled it with
Monks, endowed them wi^h large privileges and possessions, exempting them from
all secular services whatsoever, but these; rata expeditione, Pontis Arcisve
constructione; praescribed several Laws and Canons for the Monks thereof to
observe, made by advice and consent of his Bishops and Nobles, and ratified by
his Royal Charter, ^ub^cribed by himself, his two sons Prince Edmund and
Edward, his Queen, Grandmother, both the Archbishops, Proposit. 1, 10.
9 Bishops, 5 Abbots, 3 Dukes, and sundry others, with the sign of the Cross
annexed to their names. In which Charter there is this solemn curse donounced
against all the infringers and perverters thereof. Si quis autem hanc nostram
Donationem in aliud quam constituimus transfer voluerit, privatus consor^io
sanctae Dei Ecclesiae, aeternis Barathri incendiis lugubris jugiter cum Juda
Christi proditore, ejusque complicibus puniatur, si non satisfactione
emendaverit congrua, quod contra nostrum deliquit decretum.

The same year King Edgar by his regal Charter (recorded at large by Histor. p.
880, 881, 882.
Abbot Ingulphus) confirmed all the Lands and Privileges of the Abbey of
Croyland, Proposit. 6, 10.
formerly granted and confirmed to them by King Edred and his Nobles, in the
presence of both the Archbishops (...) Bishops, and Nobles assembled in a
Council at London: who re^^ned it with their fub^criptions, the ^ign of the
Cross, and a solemn excommunication (denounced by the two Archbishops and three
Bishops more in Paul's Church London, in the presence of King Edgar his Prelates
and Nobles, in Octavis Pentecostes] against al^ Infringers ^f this Charter and
of their Liberties.

Anno 967.
Abo^t the year 967 as some, or 969. as others compute, King Edgar in a Great
Senate or Council, Chron. Io. Brom. col. 870, 871. Lambardi A^chaion Spelman
council. p. ^ 443 to 476.
by advise of his Wisemen, enacted diverse civil and Ecclesiastical Laws and
Canons, for the Government of the State and Church, thus pre^aced. Leges quas
(or, hoc est Institutum quod) Edgarus Rex, freqenti Senatu, Consilio Sapientum
snorum, Proposit. 5.
a^ D^^ gloriam^ Regiae (...) ornam^^tum, et Reipublicae utilitatem sancivit,
or constituit. Propos. 2, 3, 4.
The 7 and 8 of his secular Laws in the Latin, but 1, 2, 3. in the Saxon Copy,
I shall only transcribe.

Hoc est institutio secularis quam volo per omnia ^eneri. Volo ut omnis homo
sit dignus juris publici, a^per e^ dives quicunque sit; et eis justa judicia
judicentur. Et sit in emendationibus remuno venialis apud Deum. Et apud seculum
tolerabilis. Et nemo requiret Regem pro aliqua causa, nisi domi negatur ei omne
dignum recti, vel rectum impetrare non possit. Et de nulla emendabili re foris
faciat homo plusquam Weram suam (agreeable to our Kings Coronation oath, and
Magna Charta) Et judex qui injustum judicium judica^it ^licui, det Regi Cxx s.
nisi ju^a^e a^deat, quod rectius judicare nescivit. Et qui aliquem injuste
superdicere praesumat, Unde vita vel commodo pejor sit, linguae s^ae reus erit,
etc.

Anno 969. Anno 966.
there was Ethelredus Abbas de Genesis Reg. Ang. col. 360, 361. Sim. Dun^lm. De
Gest. Reg. Ang. col. 158. Chron. Io. Brom. col. 768. Mat. Westminster. VVig. Hov.
An. 963, 969. Polych. l. 6. c. 10. Osh. Ger. Surius. Mat. Parker, Godwin in the
life of Dunstan, Oswald, and Ethelwald. Fox Acts and Mon. vol. 1. p. 197 to
203. Spelm. conc. p. 476. etc. Baron. Anno 969.
a general Council assembled at London by king Edgar, at the in^^iga^^on of
Pope John, and Archbishop Dunstan; wherein (as I conceive) the King made that
elegant Oration, against the vicious lives of the Clergy; thus expressing his
own duty and supremacy over all Persons and causes both Civil and
Ecclesiastical. Justum proinde est, ut qui omnia subjecit ^ub pedibus nostri^,
^ub^iciamus illi et Nos et animas nostra^; et ut hi, quos nobis subdidit ejus
^ubdantur Legibus, non ^e^niter el^^oremus E^ meae quidem in^eres^ Laicos cum
aequitatis jure tractare; inter virum et proximu^ suum justum judicium facere,
punire sacrilegos, rebel^es ^upprimere, eripere ^^opem de manufortiorum ejus,
egenum et pauperem a deripientibus eum. Sed e^ meae ^ollicitudinis est,
Ecclesiarum Ministris, etc. et necessaria procurare et paci eorum et quieti
consulere. De quorum omnium moribus ad Nos spectat examen: si vivunt
continenter, si honest se habent ad eos qui foris sunt; s^ in divinis officiis
solliciti, si in Docendo populo assidui, si victu sobrii si moderati habitu, si
in judiciis sunt discreti, etc. Ego Constantini, vos Petri gladium habetis in
manibus; jungamus dextras, gladium gladio copu^emus ut ejiciantur ^extra castra
leprosi, ut purgetur sanctuarium Domini, et ministrent in Templo filii Levi,
etc. After which directing his speech to Dunstan, Aethelwald, and Oswald, he
concludes thus^ Vo^i^istud committo negotium, ut Episcopali censura et
authoritate Regia ^urpiter viventes de Ecclesiis ejiciantur, and ordinate
viventes introducantur. Herupon there was a Decree made in this General
Council, That all Canons, Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons should live chastely
(that is, Proposit. 4.
put away their lawful Wives, vow chastity, and become Monks) or relinquish
the Churches they then held: The execution whereof was committed to Oswald and
Ethelwald; Who thereupon compelled the Clergy in Worcester, Winchester, and
other Churche^ to become Monks, renuentes vero ab omni beneficio spoliarunt,
depriving those who refused of all their Benefices, and putting Monks into
them, qui novo quidem splendore vniversam Insulam illustrarunt, as our Monkish
Writers record: or rather novo foetore contaminarunt, as others write Chron.
col. 868.
John Bromton informs us, that after the slaughter of the Nuns of Ely by Inguar
and Hubba, the secular Priests enjoyed that Monastery one hundred years space;
Propos. 4.
whom King Edgar de Concilio beati Dunstani Archiepiscopi, and dicti
E^he^waldi, ac m^gnatum Regni (in the forementioned General Council) expulit
and fugavit for their dishonest conversation.

Bishop Oswald having ejected the married secular Priests out of his Church at
Worcester, and introduced Monks in their places, did this year 969. as I
conjecture from the premises (not 964. as Sir Henry Spelman computes it)
Spelman. Council. p. 432 to 435. See Mat. Westminster. Wigorniensis. and Hoveden, Anno 966.
Sim. Dunelm. Hist. De Gestis Reg. Angl. col. 158.
p^ocure King Edga^ by the Counsel and assent of his Princes, Nobles and
Bishops (most probably in the forementioned General Council, or that of London
next ensuing) to ratify this their ejection, and confirm the Church of
Worcester, with all the lands, Proposit. 4, 6,
goods, ecclesiastical and secular things thereto belonging to the Monks of
that Church for ever, free from all secular servi^es and exactions, hard or
easy, and from all siscal duties great and small, known or unknown, as well of
the King or Prince, as of their Officers^ exceptis Arcis, and Pontis
extructione, et expeditione c^ntra hoestem. And that by the special Charter,
called Oswald Law, subscribed by the King, Queen, both the Archbishops, and 3
Dukes.

Mol^esb. de Gestis Reg. Angl. l. 2. c. 8. p. 57, 58. Spelman. Council. p. 483,
to to 488. Monast. Anglic.
King Edgar, Anno 970.
Anno 970. or 971. in the 12 year of his reign held another Parliamentary
Council at London, where himself, his Mother Alfgina, Prince Edward his Son,
Kined King of Scots, Mascusius his Admiral, both the Ahchbishops, with the rest
of the Bishops, and all the Nobles and great men of the Realm were present, By
his Charters made in and ra^ified by this Council, this King granted and
confirmed many and very magnificent Privileges to the Monastery of Glastonbury
communi Episcoporum, Abbatum, Principumque concilio, et generali, assensu,
Pontificum, Abbatum, Optimatumque suorum, exempting the Monastery and Monks
thereof, not only from all Episcopal Jurisdiction, but likewise all their Lands
from all Tributes and Exchequer businesses for ever, Granting them Socam and
Sacam. etc. Toll and Te^me^ Ita libere et quiet, sicut ego habeo in regno meo:
Ean^^m quoque Libertatem and Po^estatem quam ego in Curia mea habeo, tam in
demittendo, quam in punien^o, and in quibuslibet omnino negotiis Abbas and
Monachi praefati Monasterii in Curia sua habeant. And which is a Privilege
beyond all president, Si autem Abbas, vel quilibet Monachus loci illius
latronem, qui ad suspendium vel quodlibet mortis periculum ducit^^ in itinere
obvium habuerit, potestatem habeat eripiendi eum ab imminen^i periculo in toto
Regno meo. The old Charter begins thus.

In nomine Domini nostri Jesu Christi. Quamvis Decreta Pontificum, and verba
Sacerdotum inconvulsis ligaminibus, velut fundamenta montium sixa sunt, tamen
plerumque tempestatibus and turbinibus saecularium rerum Religio sanctae
Ecclesiae maculis reproborum dissipatur ac ^u^pitur. Iccirco prosutu u^
succeden^^bus posteris esse decrevimus ut ea quae salubri Consilio et communi
assensu definiuntur, nostris literis roborata ^irmentur, etc. Hoc i^aque
Dunstano Doroberniensi, atque Oswaldo Eboracensi Episcopo adhortantibus,
Proposit. 6, 10.
consentiente e^iam e^ annuente Brithelmo Fontanensi E^iscopo, c^terisque
Episcopis, Abbatibus et Primatibus: Ego Edga^ divina di^po^^^ione Rex Anglorum,
etc. And it concludes thus, Acta est haec Privilegii ^a^ina, and confirma^a
apud Londonium Communi Concilio omnium Primatum meorum: Then fol^ow ^he
su^^criptions of King Egar, A^fgina his Mother, Prince Edward, Kindred King of
Scots, Mascusius the chief Admiral, both the Archbishops, 6 Bishops, 8 Abbots,
3 Dukes, and other Officers: Which Charter and Privileges at the Kings request
were ratified by Pope John the 13 in a general Council at Rome, Anno Dom. 971.
by a special Bull, that they might remain inviolable: yet both the Abbey it
self, Lands, Privileges are long since demolished, dissipated, annihilated,
such is the mu^abiliunity of all sublunary things.

The self same year (Anno 970.) Ingulphi Historia. p. 883, 883.
King Edgar by his Charter granted and confirmed sundry Lands and Privileges to
the Monastery of Medeshamsted formerly demolished by the Danes, which Bishop
Aethelwold had repaired, and named Burgh, perpetually exempting it from all
Episcopal jurisdiction, yoke, and exaction; Quatenus nec Rex, nec Comes, nec
Episcopus, praeter Christianitatem attinentium Parochiarum, nec Vicecomes, nec
ulla alia major minorve persona, ulla dominatione occupare praesumat, excepta
moderata expeditione, and Pontis Arcisve constructione. Which Charter was
ratified by the kings own subscription, both the Archbishops, sundry Bishops,
Abbots, Dukes, and other chief Officers, and the sign of the Cross after each
of their Names.

Anno 973.
In the year 973. Matt^h^w Westminster. Wigorniensis. Sim. Dunelm, Hoveden, Bromt. and
others, An. 973. M^lmesb. de Gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 8, p. 10. Hen. Huntind. Hist.
c. 5. l. 356. Hoved. annal. pars prior, p. 426, Malm. de gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 8.
p. 56. Huntingd. Hist. l. 5. p. 356. Hov. Annal pars prior, p. 426. Mat. Westminster.
Flor. Wigorn. Simeon Dunel. An. 973, 974. Chron. Io^ ^r^m. col. 869.
Ethel^edus. Geneal. R^g. Ang. col. 362. Polychron l. 6. c. 10. s. 238. He^. de
Knyghton, De Eventi^us Ang. l. 1. c. 1. VValsing. Hist. Ang. p. 51. Fox Acts
and Mon. vol. 1. p. 200. Caxton, Gra^ton, Fab. Holinsh. Speed, Baker, and
others in the life of Edgar. Mr. Seldens Mare Clausum. l. 2. c. 11, 12
King Edgar after his seven years penance expired, on the Feast of Pen^ecost in
the 30^h year of his age, was solemnly Crowned, and consecrated King ^ and wore
his Crown with great glory at Akemancester, alias Bath, both the Archbishops
Dunstan and Oswald, with all the rest of the Bishops of England, ac Magnatibus
universis, and all the Nobles being there pre^ent at his Coronation, and
received the accustomed Gifts usually given to the Nobles being at such
inaugurations. Soon after the same year this King with a very great Fleet and
Army sailing round about the Northern parts of England came to Westchester,
where his eight tributary Kings or Vice-royes, (namely Kyneth king of Scots,
Malcome King of Cumberland, Marcus king of Man, and many other Islands, and the
other 5 kings of Wales, Dufn^ll, Siferth, Howel, James, and Iuchill) met him as
he had commanded them, and swo^e (...) him in ^he^e words: That they would be
faithful and assisting to him both by Land and Sea. Which done, he on a
certain day en^red wi^h them into a Barge, and placing them at the Oars,
himself took the Helm, and steered the Barge very skilfully whiles they rowed
it down the River of Dee from his Palace to the Monastery of St. John Bapist,
on the other side, all his Dukes and Nobles fol^owing and accompanying him in
other Barges: where having made his Prayers, they all rowed him thence back
again in like pomp to his Royal Palace; which when he had en^red he said to
his Nobles: Anno 974.
Tha^ any of his Successors might then say he was King of England, when wi^h so
many Kings following and subject to him, he should enjoy the Prerogative of the
like pomp and power. Bu^ Mr. Fox subjoyns; In my mind this king had said much
b^tter: God ^orbid that I should glory in any t^ing but in the Cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Mat^ West. An. 974.374, 375. Hen^ Hun^ingd. Hist. l. 5. p. 356. Chron. Io.
Brom. col. 867. De Gest. Ang. l. c. 8. p. 58. I^gulphus, Histor. p. 884.
The year following An. 974. Certain Merchants coming from York, arived in the
Islle of Thanet in Kent, where they were presently taken by the Ilanders and
spoiled of all their goods; which king Edgar being informed of, was so far
incensed against these Plunderers, Prop^s. 2, 4.
that he spoiled them of all their Goods, and deprived some of them of their
lives; Which Huntingdon and Bromton thus record. Rex Edgarus undecimo Anno
Regni sui jussit praedari Insulam Tenet, Quia jure Regalia spreverant: non ut
hostis insani^ns, s^^ ut Rex malo mala puntens. The same year as De Gest. Reg.
l. 5. c. 8. p. 28.
Ma^mesbu^y, Histor. p. 883. etc.
Ingu^p^us and Spelman. council. p. 488, 489.
others write, king Edgar, by his regal Charter, caused the secular Priests to
be removed out of the Monastery of Malmesbury and introducing Monks in their
places, restored to them the Lands and Possessions of the monas^ery, which the
secular Priests formerly enjoyed and had leased o^; ^ that upon a ful^ hearing
before the Wisemen, Propos. 4, 6,
Bishops and others in his presence, most likely in a Par^iamentary Counci^, as
^his c^au^e in his Charter intimates. Haec a praedictis accommodata Cl^ricis, a
con^ensioso possessa est Ed^^^no^^: s^d superstitiosa, sub^il que ejus
discept^tione a Sapientib^s meis audita, ^t conflictatione illius mendosa ab
eisdem me praesente convicta, Monasteriali a me reddita est usui. If the
Council of Winchester (hereafter cited Anno 975.) was held in King Edgars life
time, as Chron. of Winton Spelman council. p. 491.
some affirm, most probably this debate here mentioned touching these Lands,
was held in and before that Counci^, and this Charter therein made and ratified
with the subscriptions of the Kings, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and Dukes
thereto annexed, according, ^o the custom of that age.

Although King Malm. de Gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 8. Athelredus. de Genealog. Reg.
Ang. col. 359, etc. Polychron. l. 6. c. 9, 10, 11. Henry Knyghton de Eventibus
Ang. l. 1. c. 2. Mat. Westminster. Wigorniensis. Ingulphus, Huntingdon, Hoveden, Brom.
Sim. Dunelm. Will. Thorn, Fah. Caxt. Holinsh. Graft. Speed, Baker in his life.
Osburn, Capgrave, Surius in the life of Dunstan, Spelman. council. Mr. Seldens
Mare Clausum. l. 2. c. 11, 12. and others.
Edgar in his younger days was subject to many Vices, and committed some
injurious Ty^^^^ic^^ A^^s, recorded by Malmesbury, Fox, Speed, and others; yet
repenting of these his youthful, lustful Vices, he proved such a just and
prudent King, that Malmesb. de Gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 8. Ethelredus de Genealogia
Reg. Angl. col. 359. etc. Polichron. l. 1. c. 9, 1, 11. Hen. Knighton de
Eventibus Angliae, l. 3. c. c. 2. Mat. Westminster. Wigorn. Ingulphus, Huntindon,
Hoveden, Bromton, Simeon Dunelm. Will. Thorn, Fabian, Caxton, Holinshed,
Graston, Speed, Baker in his life, Osburn, Capgrave. Surius in the life of
Dunstan. Spelmanni Council. Mr. S^lden. Mart. Clausum, l. 2, c. 11.12. Antonini
Chron. p. 2. and others.
our Historians of elder and later ages give these large Encomiums of his
Justice, Prudence, Piety, Virtues, and poli^ique Government: wor^hy perpetual
memory and immitation. So excellent was he in Justice, So sharp was he in
correction of Vices, as well in his Magistrates, Officers, and other Subjects;
that never before his days was less felony by Robbers, nor less extortion or
Bribery by false Officers; such as were wicked he kept under, them that were
Rebels he repulsed, the godly he maintain^d, and the just and modest he loved;
the learned and vi^tuous he encouraged: He would suffer no man of wh^t de^ree
or quali^y soever he were to elude or violate his Laws without condign
punishment. In his time there was neither any private Pilferer, nor publ^ke
Thief, but he that in stealing other men's Goods, would venture and suffer (as
he was sure) the loss of his own Goods, and Life. He was no respecter of
persons in judgment; but judged every man according to the quantity of his
Offense, and quality of his person. He united all the Nations under him, which
were diverse, by the Covenan^ and Obli^^tion of one Law: Governing them all with
such Justice, Equity, Integrity and Peace, that he was stile^ Rex, (...)
Edgarus Pacificus, the p^aceable King Edgar. In his days, not ^orments, not
Gibbe^s, not Ex^le, not banishment were so much feared, as the offending of so
good and gracious a King. He built and endowed no less than 48 Monasteries,
and restored many more, endowing them with large possessions, privileges, (out
of Piety and Devotion, ^s these times reputed it) and was a great honourer,
lover, promoter of the virtuous and learned Clergy, and suppressor of the
vicious and scandalous. There was scarce one year throughout all his reign
wherein he did not some great and memorable necessary thing for the good of his
Country and people, the honor of God, and advancement of Religion. All which
made him so honored and beloved by his Subjects at home, so far d^eaded by his
Enemies abroad; that Nullas Domesticorum insidias, nullum exterminium alienorum
sensit: He never felt any homebred treachery, or foreign invasion, but reigned
peaceably all his days^ without war or bloodshed, which none of his
Predecessors ever did. He was so far from tollerating any violence or rapine in
men toward each other, that he commanded all the Wolves and ravenous Beasts,
greedy of blood, to be destroyed throughout his Dominions: And such an Enemy
was he to Drunkenness (the Mother of Vices, Murders Quarrels, Thefts,)
wherewith the Danes had much infected the English, that to prevent and redress
it, he caused Pins to be set in every Cup, prohibiting by severe Laws and
Penalties, that none should force others to drink, nor yet d^ink below those
Pins, in that moderate proportion which he prescribed them. Among other his
Politic deeds, for the peace and safeguard of his Realm against pillaging
Pirates, and Foreign Invaders, he had always in readiness 3600 (as most) or 4800
strong ships of War (as others record) to secure the Seas in the Summer season,
Proposit. 3, 9.
which he divided into three Squadrons or Fleets: whereof he placed 1200 in the
East Seas to guard them; 1200 in the South Seas; 1200 in the West Seas, ( and
1200 in the North Seas, as some write) to prevent Piracies, and repulse the
invasion of Foreign Enemies. These Ships immediately after Easter met together
every year at their several places of Rendezvous, wherewith the King sailed
round about the Island and Seacoasts, with a great force, to the terror of
Foreiners, and exercising of his own subjects, sailing with the Eastern Navy to
the Western parts of the Island, and then sending them back with the Western
Fleet to the Northern Coasts, and then sailing with the Northern Fleet to the
South; pius scilicet explorator, ne quid Piratae turbarent. After his return
from the Sea, in the Winter and Spring, he used to ride in Progress through all
the Counties of the Realm, diligently to search and inquire how his Laws,
Statutes, Ordinances were kept and observed by his Princes, Great Men, and
O^ficers, lest the Poorer sort of people should suffer prejudice, or be
oppressed by the Greater and Richer: And whether his Judges or Justices judged
uprightly, according to the Laws, or injured any through Bribery Malice, or
Partiality, Violati Iuris severus Ul^or, being a severe Revenger of his
violated Laws, sparing nei^^er Rich nor Poor, but judgi^g him justly according
to the quality of his transg^ession. In hoc Justitiae in il^o fortit^dinis, in
utr^que Reipublicae and Regni utilitatibus consulens, as Wiliam of Malmesbury,
and Flor. of Worcester repor^ of him. Et ideo tempore suo latrones nulli
fuerunt, nec aliquis qui Guerram vel turbationem in Regno movere a^debat.
Merito ergo non infirma inter Anglos fama est; nullum nec ejus, nec superioris
aetatis Regem in Anglia recto and aequabili judicio Edgaro comparandum: He
being Flos et Decus an^ecessor^m Regum, non minus memorabils Anglis, quam
Romulus Romany, Cyrus Persis, Alex. Macedoniis Arsaces Parthis, Carolus Magnus
Francis^ as Malmesbury, Abbot Ethelred, Florentius VVigorniensis, Simeon
Dunelmensis, Henry Huntindon, Matthew Westminster, and Polychron. l. 6. c. 11.
others record of him, who are much more copious in his praises. Acts and Mon.
vol. 1. p. 200.
Mr. Fox closes up his Encomiums of him with this Speech: As I see many things
in this worthy Prince to be commended; so this one thing in him I cannot but
lament, to see him like a Phoenix to fly alone, that of all his Posterity so
few there be that se^k to keep him company.

Toward the end of his Reign the Polych. l. 6. c. 11. f. 239. Chron. Ioh.
Bromt. col. 870. Speeds History, p. 406.
Welchmen moving some rebellion, ^e thereupon assembled a mighty Army to
suppress and prevent it; wherewith he entering into the Country of Glamorgan,
sharply punished the Ringleaders thereof: But his Soldiers doing great harm in
plundering the Country, lading themselves with spoils; the King out of his
bounty, commanded them to restore to the People all the spoils they had gotten;
and more especially St. Ellutus Bell, that was hanged about an Horses neck;
whereby he purchased singular love and honor from the Inhabitants. At length
after he had reigned thus, 16 years and two months in great tranquillity and
honor totum regnum sanctis legibus strenue gubernantem, as Histor. Novo^um. l.
1. p. 1.
Endmerus rela^es of him, he died happ^^y o^ Tuesday the 8 of July, Anno 975.
Nec potuit male mori qui been vixerat, qui tot Ecclesias Deo fundaverat, qui
tot bona perennia brevi tempore statuerat, as Histor. l. 5. p. 356.
Henry Archdeacon of Huntingdon observes, who bestowed this honorable Epitaph
on him, remembered also by Io. Brom. Chron. col. 870. Fox Acts and Momuments
vol. 1. p. 202.
others.

Auctor opum, vindex scelerum, largitor honorum,
Sceptifer Edgarus Re^na supe^na petit.
Hic alter Solom^^, legum Pater Or^ita Pacis;
Quod caruit bellis, claruit inde magis.
Temp^a (...) dedit ^gros;
Nequitiae lapsum, justiciaeque locum.
Novit enim Regno ve^um p^rquirere ^a^^o,
Immensum modico, perpetuumque brevi.
Immediately after his death, Res et spes Anglorum retro s^blapsae sunt, totins
Regni status e^t perturbatus; et post ^empus laetitiae quod i^^ius ^empore
vigebat pacifice, caepit tribulatio un^ique advenire, as Malmesbury,
Wigorniensis, Hoveden, Simeon Dunelmensis, and Bromton observe: such an
incomparab^e lo^s was the death of so just, pious, and prudent a King to the
whole Nation, qui ju^entutis vitia, po^^ea m^gnis virtutib^s delevit, when most
others do quite contrary.

Ingulphi Historia, p. 889. Will: Malmsb. De Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 9. Mat.
Westminster. VVigorniens^s, Simeon Dunelmensis, Huntindon, Hoveden, Anno 975, 976.
Chron Johan: Bromton, col. 871, 872. Henry de Knyghton de Ev^ntibus Angliae, l.
1. c. 1. Col. 23^3. Eadmerus Hist. Novorum, l. 1. p. 1. Polychronicon, l. 6. c.
12. Fabian, Caxton, Grafton, Holinshed, Speed, in the Lives of Edgar and
Edward. Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 203.204. Mat. Parker, in Archbishop
Dunstans life. Antonini Chron. pars 2. Tit. 16.
King Edgar at the time of his decease leaving Anno. 975.
behind him two Sons by two venters, Edward his eldest Son by Queen Ethelfleda
his first Wife, then but 12. years old, and Ethelred his second Son by his
second Queen Elfreda, then not much above 7. years of age; (...) arose ^ ^re^t
contention amongst the Nobles of the Realm about choosing of a new King. ^or
Queen (...) wi^h A^fe^us Duke of Mercia and many other Nobles, siding with the
married Secular Priests against the M^nkish Clergy, combined to advance ^oung
Ethelred^ electing him unanimously for their King, disavowing Edwar^ as
illegitima^e, and begot^en of an harl^^ before marriage; as Malmesbury de Gestis
Regum, l. 2. c. 8. Osburn in the life of Dunstan, Nicholas Trivet, Iohannis
Parisi^nsis, Vincentius, Antoninus, Matthew P^rker in the Life of Archbishop
Dunstan, Mr. Fox and others repute him: though Ingulphus, Huntindon, Hoveden,
Mat: Westminste^, Florentius Wigornensis, Bromton, Abbot Ethelred, Simeon
Dunelmensis, Radulphus Cistrensis, and the generality of our modern Historians,
repute him Edgars lawful Son, and right heir to the Crown: Whereupon the most
of the Nobles elected him to succeed unto his Father: The two Archbishops,
Dunstan, and Oswald, with all the Bishops, Abbots, and Clergy of the Monkish
faction, holding their new-gotten States dangerous, and their footing unsure,
if in the nonage of the King, their Opposites should rule all under him, as
they imagined they would, if Ethlred were elected by them thereupon abetted
the Title of Edward, as altogether wrought to their mould and treading in his
Fathers footsteps, lawfully begotten in the nuptial bed of Queen Ethelfleda,
right heir to his Father, and by him d^signed to succeed him. Their claims
thus banded amongst the Nobles, Duustan and Oswald foreseeing the danger,
Proposit. 5, 6, 8.
prudently assembled all the Bishops, Abbots, and Nobles together in a Great
Council, to debate their rights and settle the title; Where Archbishop Dunst^n
(as ^ome write) coming in with his Cross and Banner, dum consecr^tionis ejus
^empore nonnulli Patriae Optimates resistere voluissent; no^ ^taying ^or
further debating de Iure, presen^ed Prince Edward in the mid^t of them de
Facto, for their Lawful King, as his Father had declared him at his death.
Upon which, the Major part of the Council, being Clergymen, elected^ anointed
and consecra^ed Edward for their King Quibusdam Optimatum murmurantibus, some
of the No^les of ^he contrary party murmuring at it, especially Queen Elfrida,
who thought to advance her young Son to the Throne, that so she might rule all
things, and reign under the color of his name, as Dunstan and the Monkish
Clergy did under the color of King Edwards, whose Counsels and admonitions he
diligently followed in all things, and judgments acted by him.

During the Interregnum, and banding of these two parties about the right of
the Crown, and immediately after Edwards coronation, Malmsbur. De Gestis Regum.
l. 2. c. 9. p. 61. Mat. Westmin. Wigorniensis, Ingulphus, Simeon Dunelm^nsis,
Huntindon, Hoveden, Bromton, Ann. 975. Osburne, Capgrav^, Mat. Parker, Godwin
in the Life of Dunstan, Baronius and Spondanus, Annal. Eccl. An. 975. n. 12.
Surius Council. Tom. 2. Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 202, 203, 204, 205.
there arose great controversies, tumults and civil Wars between the Monkish
Clergy, and married Secular Pr^ests, and the Nobles siding with both parties.
The marie^ Priests presently upon Edgars death, complained to Queen Elfrida,
Elfere, and the Nobles, That they were unjustly expelled out of their Churches
by the Monks and their prevailing party; alleging, that it would be a very
great and miserable dishonor to the Nation, and shame to them; ut novus advena
veteres colonos migrare compelleret: hoc nec Deo gratum ^utari, qui veterum
habitationem concessi^set nec alicui probo homini, qui sibi idem timere poss^t
quod aliis praejudicio accedisse cerneret. Hereupon many clamours and tumults
arising among the people, they went to Archbishop Dunstan; Praecipue
Proceribus, ut Laicorum est, succlamantibus praejudicium, etc. but especially
to the Nobles, as the manner of Laymen is, crying out unto them; that the
S^cul^r Clergy were prejudged, and suffered unjustly, being expelled their
a^tient posessions without cause: Proposit. 2.4.
that they ought to be more mildly dealt with, and restored to their Rights.
Dunstan giving a deaf ear to these their just complaints, many of the Princes
and Nobles thereupon, in a tumultuous manner, expulsed the Abbots and Monks out
of the Monasteries wher^in King Edgar had placed them, and brought in the
married Clerks with their wives in their places, as at first. Among others,
Alfere Earl of Mercia, gathering great forces, and using much insolence,
overturned almo^t all the Monasteries King Edgar and Bishop Ethelwold had b^ilt
in the Province of Mercia; quorundam Potentum assensu et factione, placing
married Priests in them. This they did magnis occaecati muneribus by the married
Clergy, as Hoveden, Simeon Dunelmensis, Florentius Wigorniensis, and our
Monkish Historians as^ert. To which Historia, p. p. 889. See Fox Acts and Mon.
Vol. 1. p. 203, 204.
Abbot Ingulphus subjoyns. Cujus (Regis Edwar^i) sancta simplicitate et
innocentia tam abusa est factio Tyrannorum, pe^ Reginae favorem et potentiam
praecipue roborata, quod per Merciam Monachis de quibusd^m Monasteriis ejectis,
Clerici s^nt inducti: Qui statim Monasteriorum maneria Ducibus terrae
distribuebant, ut sic in suas parts obligati eos contra Monachos defensarent.
^unc de Monasterio Eveshamensi Mon^chis expulsis^ Clerici fue^unt introducti;
Terraeque Tyranni de terris Ecclesiae praemiati sunt: quibus Regina cum
novercali ne^uitia stans cum Clericis^ in Regis opprobrium favebat. Cum
Mona^his Rex et sancti Episcopi persistebant: Sed Tyranni fulti Reginae favore
et potentia super Monachos triumphabant. The Monks on the contrary to secure
their intere^t (by like Bribes and means as is most probable, though our
Monkish Historians conceal it) sti^red up Ethelwin Duke of the East-English,
and Brithnorth Earl of Essex, (men of great dread and power) to a^^ear in their
quarrel and resist ^he opposite party. Qui in Synodo constituti; Proposit. 6.
who assembled together in a Synod or Council for that end, protested, That
they would never endure the Monks should be cast out of the Realm, who held up
all Religion in the Kingdom. After which, they raised a mighty Army, defending
with great valor the Monasteries of the Eastern English, keeping the Monks in
possession of them. This fire between the Monks and married Priests thus blown
from a spark to a flame, was feared to mount higher, if not timely quenched.
Wherefore by mediation of Wise men, arms being laid aside, the caus^ was
referred to be heard and decided between them in a Great Council of the whole
Kingdom. For which end there was a famous Council summoned and held at
Winchester; (which some Historians antedate in Edgars life, others place in the
Interregnum, after his death; but the series of Story, and most judicious
Antiquaries, evince it to be after Edwards Coronation, Anno 975.) In this Great
Council, the King and Archbishop Dunstan sitting in their Thrones, as chief
Judges of the Controversy, in the East End of the Hall of the Refectory of
Winchester Abbey near the wall, (wherein there was a Crucifix immured just
behind them) Duces cum torius Regni Magnatibus; the Dukes with al^ the Nob^es
of the Realm, and the expulsed married Clerks standing on the left side of the
Refectory, and pleading for themselves, that they might be restored; and Oswald
Archbishop of York, Athelwold Bishop of Winchester, with the Monks standing all
together on the right side of the Hall, pleading for their continuance in their
Churches (as they Author of the old Manuscript Chronicle of Winchester Abbey
relates, though he misdates the time of this Council, as h^l^ Anno 968.) After
much debate, the Nobles of the Realm fearing they should be overcome by d^spute
((...) Monks) promising reformation of life on the Clergies behalf, most humbly
entreated the King and Archbishop, That they might be readmitted into
Monasteries, out of which they had been ejected. With whose prayers, tears and
sig^s the mo^^ me^ci^u^ King being much moved, was in a great straight,
ruminating in his min^, what he should do in this business. At last purposing,
and being about to grant pardon to the Clerks, upon hope of their amendment,
and to give them leave to return to the Monasteries and Churches whence they
had been expelled; When he was ready to pronounce this his definitive Sentence;
there was this divine Voice uttered, by the Cr^^ifix i^ ^he W^ll. Cum plurium
jam Suffragiis de Presbyteris restituendis decernebatur, as M^^^hew Parker
relates it; Absi^ ut hoc (...), etc. God forbid that this should be done; God
forbid it should be done; You have judged well once, you would change ^gain not
well. Which articulate voice only the King and Archbishop who were the Judges
of ^he cause, heard, if the Chronicle of Winchester may be credited, when as
another Monk relates, it was heard by all present; At which voice they being
both astonished, fell to the ground on their faces; but all the rest hearing only
the ^ound of the Voice as of a great Thunder, fell down flat to the Earth very
much affrighted. Some write, that both sides by Dunstans policy appealed to the
resolution of the Crucifix in this case, in which Dunstan had placed a man with
a Trunk in the wall behind the Image, who uttered this voice in and by the
mouth of the Rood: which is most probable. Soon after, he King and Dunstan
heard this second voice from the Crucifix, Arise, be not afraid, because this
day Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other in the Monks. In memory of
this cheating Oracle and Monkish fable, (of which Huntindon, Hoveden,
Wigorniensis, Ranul^us Cistrensis, Fabian, and other old Monas^ical ^^storians
make no mention, and Malmsbu^y slightly relates it as An hearsay) the Monks of
Winchester ingraved these Verses over the head of this Crucifix in their
Refectory. Humano more Crux praesens edidit-ore;
Coelitus effa^a quae prospicis hic subarata.
writing the words forcited under this Distick, as then uttered by the
Crucifix, which asserted before all, That Dunstans way was true. Wherewith the
Clerks and their Abettors were quite confounded, and put to silence. Sed adhuc
non sedatis animis, etc. But the Nobles and Clerks minds being not as yet
quieted by this Oracle (a clear evidence they suspected it as counterfeit) our
Historians inform us, there were Proposit. 5, 6.
three more great Councils soon after held to settle this Con^roversie between
the married Priests and Monks. The first at Kerling, Kerding, or Cerding, or
Kirking, as it is variously styled, Anno 977. which Wigorn. An. 977. p. 360.
Roger Hoveden Annal. pars prior, p. 425. Ioh. Bromt. Chron. col. 870. Sim.
Duuelm. Hist. de Gest. Reg. col. 160. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 56. Spelm.
Council. p. 497.
Wigorn. and Hoveden style Magna Synodus, Anno 977.
without recording what was done therein. Sir Henry Spelman out of an old Saxon
Note, calls it A great Council, affirms it was held after East^r, and that
Sideman Bishop of Devonshire died in it. That King Edward and the Archbishop
therein ordained; That every man should go in pilgrimage to the Church of St.
Mary at Abendune out of Devotion. And Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury,
in the life of Dunstan, superaddes: Dunstanus ibi cum Monachorum labenti
conditioni succurrete voluit, nihil profecit, Itaque hoc dissoluto Concilio,
aliud in Regia Villa Wilteria quae Calne vulgo appellatur coegit.

This Great Council held at Malmesb. de Gest. Reg. Angl. l. 2. c. 9. Mat.
Westmin. An. 975. VVigorniensis, Simeon Dunelmensis, Hntindon, Hoveden, Bromt.
Anno 975. Gervasins, Osburn, Capgrave, Matthew Parker, Godwin in the life of
Dunstan, Polychronicon, l. 6. c. 12. Fabian, Caxton, Holinshed, Gra^ton, Baker
in the life of King Edward, Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 204, 205. Speeds
History, p. 411, 412. Baronius, and Spondanus An. 977. n. 2. Spelm. Council. p.
494, 495. Camdens Britannia. p. 243.
Calne (some style it Cleve) was purposely called the same year. 977. to end
the long continued Controversy between the Monks and married Priests, which
the feigned Oracle of the Crucifix at Winchester, and the Council of Kerding
could not determine. Proposit. 6.
All the Senators and Nobles of England sitting together at this Council in an
Upper room (the King being absent by reason of his tender age or sickness) the
business being debated with great conflict and controversy; and the strongest
wall of the Monkish Church, Archbishop Dunstan, being assaulted with the Darts
of many revilings, remained unshaken. The Disputants of both parties and orders
defending their sides with greatest industry, in the midst of the dispute, the
whole Floor, with the Rafters and Beams of the Room wherein they disputed
suddenly brake in pieces, and fell to the ground, with all the people in it,
except Dunstan, who escaped without any harm, standing firm on a beam that
remained, of which he took hold-fast; the rest being either slain outright, or
very much hurt and bruised with the fall, so as they languished ever after,
hardly escaping present death. This miracle (as our Monkish Authors style it)
gave peace to Archbishop Dunstan from the assaults of the English Clerks, and
others, who thereupon from thence^orth submitted to his sentence and judgment,
if William of Malmesbury, and Mat. Westminster may be credited; Whereas
Florentius Wigorniensis, John Bromton, and others out of them, assure us; that
there was not long after another Parliamentary Synod or Assembly held at
Ambresbery, upon the same occasion, without recording the Proceedings or Event
thereof. Some conjecture that this fall was only a fiction of the Monkish
VVriters, to add reputation to their languishing cause, as well as that of the
Crucifix Speech forecited. Others conceive, it was wrought by Duustans sorcery,
or Policy. Others, that it was casual, by reason of the weight of the People.
But Henry Huntindon Hist. l. 2. p. 357. Bromton, col. 876. and Sir Henry
Spelman out of them, p. 496. record, That this fall of the Nobles at Calne, was
(not a Divine Judgment on them for their Opposition against, and injury to the
Monks, as some interpre^ed it, but) signum videlicet Dei excelsi fuit quod
Proditione et Interfectione Regis sui, Proposit. 8.
ab amore Dei Casuri essent, et diversis gentibus digna contritione conterendi;
as they were soon after broke in pieces by the invading conquering Danes and
Normans: And whether the late violent falls and ruptures of our Parliaments and
Nobles portend not the like fate to England, by some other foreign Invasions for
the like Treachery, Apostasy, Regicide, or far worse, let those who are
guiltiest of it, and others determine at their leisures.

Anno 978.
King Matt. Westminster. Wigorniensis. Simeon Dunelm. Huntind. Hoved^n, Radul. de Dice.
Ethelr. Bromt. An. 977, 978. Malmesbury de Gest. Reg. l. 8. c. 2. Polych. l. 6.
c. 13. Antonius Chron. pars 2. Fabian, Caxton, Holiushed, Grafton, Speed, Fox
and others in the life of King Edward.
Edward imitating the footsteps of his Fathers Religion and Piety, was so
circumvented by the flattering speeches of his Mother-in-law Queen Elfrida,
that although she opposed his Title, Election, Coronation, all she could, to
advance her own Son to the Crown: yet retaining only the name of a king to
himself, he soon after permitted her and his Brother Ethelred, his Competitor,
to order all affairs of the Realm as they pleased. VVhereupon (as the Chronicle
of Bromton relates) she began to plot how to dethrone this Man of God King
Edward, and advance her own Son Ethelred to the Throne; Which when she had a
long time meditated upon, she opened the Secrets of her heart to some of her
chief Counselors, advising with them concerning it, and earnestly entreating,
yea conjuring them to assent to her therein, and to find out some means to
effect it; Cui protenus in necem illius omnes conseuserunt, who all forthwith
consented to his Murder, and contrived how they might most speedily accomplish
it by some fraudulent device, which they soon after executed in this manner.

King Edward hunting for his disport in the Forest near Warham, hearing that
his Brother Ethelred whom he entirely loved) was near that place, residing then
with his Morher at Corph-Castle,) some style it Cornesgate) rode thither to
visit him with very few attendants, who either casually, or of set purpose
lingering behind him, sporting in the way, he came alone to the Castle gate.
Queen Elfrida who had a long time waited for such an opportunity, being
informed thereof, went presently to meet him with her bloody Assassinate,s and
welcoming him with flattering Speeches, and a pleasant countenance, importuned
him to lodge there that night, which offer he with thanks refused, saying he
desired only to see and speak with his brother, but would not alight from his
horse: Whereupon she commanded a Cup of Wine to be speedily brought him to
drink, appointing one of her boldest Soldiers to kill him whiles he was
drinking: Who kissing the king, like another Judas, under a pretext of love,
to take away all suspicion, so soon as the Cup was at his mouth, stabbed him
presently into the Bowels with a knife. King Edward feeling himself wounded,
set spurs to his Horse, thinking to escape to his own faithful followers; but
the wound being mortal, he fell from his Horse dead, and one o^ his feet
hanging in the Stirrup, he was dragged up and down through the Mire and Fields,
and at last left there dead near Cerf Gate. VVh^ch his wicked Stepmother
hearing of, commanded her most wicked Servant to drag him by the Heels like a
beast, and throw him into a little Cottage hard by, that the fact might not be
discovered. After which she commanded his Corpse to be privily taken from
thence, lest this her most execrable work of darkuess should be discovered, and
buried in an obscure bushy morish place, where it should no more be found by
any. Most of our Historians write, that he was obscurely buried at VVearham,
without any Royal State; Ac si cum Corpor^ pariter and Memoriam sepellissent,
invidentes ei sespidem, cui vivo inviderunt decus Regium; So Malmsbury; or as
Ma^thew Westminster delcants on it^ Invidebant enim mortuo Ecclesiasticam
concedere Sepulturam Cni videnti decus Regium auferebant. And not content
herewith, they made an ^dict^ than which nothing could be more cruel; That no
Man should lament or speak of his death, thinking thereby utterly to delete his
memory. But contrary to their expectation, God by a supernatural light from
heaven shining on the place, and sundry Miracles there wrought (if our Monkish
Historians may be credited) frustrated this design. For though the Queen and
her Accomplices out of their transcendent malice (which O that some of late times
had not overmuch imitated,) Inimicitias quas viventi ingesserunt in mortuum
protelantes, sepelierunt ^um fine Regio honor apud Warham^ ut sicut vitam ejus
extinxerant ita et nomen ejus extinguerent: Proposit. 8.
hic vero compertum est contra divinam providentiam non sufficere pravum cor
hominis et inscrutabile: Quem enim perfidi terris abjicerant, Deus coelo
gloriose suscepit, et memoriae aeternae insignivit eum Dominus. cujus mentionem
Proditores obnubulare studuerant. But mark the sad sequel of this prodigious
Regicide, Proditione Gentis suae perfidae, thus registered by Histor. l. 5^ p.
357.
Henry Huntindon, an impartial Historian. Inde Dominus iterum ad iram
provocatus est, et plus solito irritatus, Genti pessimae malum inextricabile
confer cogitavit, et quod facere paraverat non distulit. Veneruntque Dani, et
operuerunt Angliam quasinubes coeli. To which De G^stis Regum Ang. l. 2. c. 9.
p. 61.
William of Malmsbury subjoyns. Creditumque et celebriter vulgatum^ quod
propter Elfridae in Edwardum insolentiam multo post tempore tota patria
servitutem infremuisset Barbaricam. Take the sum of his Reign, Murder,
Saintship in these words of De Genealog. Reg, Anglor. p. 362.
Abbot Ethelred. Translato ad coelestia Regna Rege Eadgaro^ in re^no terreno
filius ejus Edwardus successit: Qui injuste ab imp^^s interfectus, tum (...),
tum ob mortis (...) tatem Sancti Nomen et Meritum Deo donante promeruit: being
afterward translated to Shaftsbury, and there honorably enshrined.

King Edward being thus treacherously murdered on the 17th day of April, Anno
979.
Anno 978. when he had reigned only 3. years and 8. months by hereditary
Succession, thereupon on the 8. of May 979. his half-brother Ingulphi Historia
p. 889, 890. Mat. Westminster. VVig. and Sim. Dun^l. An 978, 979, etc. 1016. Chron.
Inhannis Bromton, col. 877, 878. Will: Malmsbur. de Gestis Regum. l. 2 c 18.
Eadmerus Hist. Novorum, l. 1. p. 1. Hoveden Annal. pars prior. p. 427. etc.
Hen. de Knyghton de Eventibus Angliae, l. 1. c. 2. Polychron. l. 6. c. 12, 13.
Caxton. Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton, Speed, Stow and others in the life of K.
Ethelred. Radulphus de ^^ce^o Abbrev. Chron. col. 46^
Ethelred was crowned King at Kingston, by both the Archbishops, Dunstan and
Oswald, and ten Bishops more, in the presence of the Nobles, much against
Dunstans will. And although Ethelred so much lamented his Brothers murder,
being then but a child of ten years old, not active to promote this Treacherous
plot, and so detesting it, that his Mother Elfrida in a rage whipped him for it
with candles for want of a rod, which made him abhor candles all his life; yet
Dunstan full of a prophetical Spirit, at the very time of his Coronation told
him, that he and his Posterity, together with the whole kingdom, should suffer
grievous tribulation all his reign, using these words then unto him; Because
thou have aspired to the Kingdom by the death of thy Brother, whom thy Mother
murdered; therefore hear the word of the Lord; Thus says the Lord: The Sword
and Blood shall not depart from thy House, nor from the Nation, but shall rage
against thee all the days of thy Life, slaying thy seed, until thy Kingdom
shall be translated to another Realm and Nation, whose Customs and Language
that Nation over which thou reignest knows not; qu^ eos in ul^im^m red^gat
servitutem who sha^^ reduce them into the extremest Bondage, for conspiring
with thy ignominious Mother against the Blood of thy Brother. Neither sha^^ thy
fin, nor the sin of thy Mother, Nor the sin of those who were privy to her
wicked Counsel, that they might stretch out an hand against the Lords anointed
to slay him, Proposit. 8.
be expiated, but by a long Revenge, and much effusion of blood. Which
accordingly came to pass; and let all others whom it concerns most nearly, with
our whole English Nation now seriously reminde it. This Prophecy was presently
after seconded, with a prodigious Cloud, spread and seen over all England
sundry nights, which appeared sometimes bloody, other times fiery, and then
changing it self into diverse sort of flashings and colors, vanished about the
morning. The very next year following the barbarous Danes invaded England,
burnt Southampton, killing and carrying away Prisoners almost all the
Inhabitants thereof; after which they infested and wasted the Isle of Teneth,
and City of West-Chester, invading England every year with new forces, til they
had laid the whole kingdom desolate, expelled King Ethelred, with his Queen and
Children, into foreign patts, and possessed themselves both of the Crown and
Realm, as absolute Sovereigns.

And here, before I proceed further, I cannot but take special Notice of Gods
admirable retaliating Justice inflicted upon some of our Saxon usurping
Regicides and their Posterities, worthy our saddest contemplation.

See Mat. Westminster. Malmsb. Huntindon, Hoveden, Ethelwerdus, Ingulphus,
Wigorniensis, Simeon Dunelmensis, Bromton, Polychronicon, Hen. de Knyghton,
Fabian, Speed, Holinshed, Grafton, Daniel in their lives.
King Edgar (as I touched before) injuriously usurped upon his elder Brother
King Edwyn; and by force of arms deprived him of half his Crown and kingdom at
first, and of his whole Realm, if not life too, at last. But within few years
after by Gods avenging hand, his best beloved eldest Son and heir, King Edward,
to whom he bequeathed the Crown at his death, was first opposed in his
Succession, and soon after most treache^ously butchered by his own Queen and
younger Son, who invaded the Crown by his slaughter. King Edgar treacherously
slew Earl Ethelwold, (as you have read) to espouse his wife Elfreda, and Crown
her for his best beloved Queen; who (no doubt) was consenting to, if not the
contriver of his murder, as he was hunting in Worel Forest. And she to requite
this murder, kills his own Son and heir King Edward, as he came from hunting in
a Forest, not very far distant from the same place. Elfere Earl of Mercia, the
Queens chief Counselor and Instrument to murder and dethrone King Edward,
(whom he stabbed to death with his own hands, as Malmesbury records,) though to
expiate this crime, he soon after honorably translated his Corpse from Warham
to Shaftsbury-Minster; yet by Gods avenging wrath, about a year after his whole
body was eaten up of Lice and Worms, so that he died most miserably. Queen
Alfrida the chief Plotter of this murder, soon after the fact, was struck with
such horror of conscience for this bloody Regicide, that to pacify the pangs
thereof, and expiate the guilt of his crying blood, she built two Monasteries
at Almesbury and Warwel, and casting off her royal robes and State, entered into
the later of them, where she afflicted her self with sackcloth, fasting,
weeping, and severe penance unto the day of her death, bewailing this bloody
crime all the remainder of her life. The whole English Nation, who were either
consenters to, or overgreat connivers at their Sovereigns Murder (which they
never publicly questioned nor revenged) were not only stricken, consumed with
all sorts of Plagues and strange diseases, but uncessantly invaded, oppressed,
spoiled, captivated, conquered, murderated, and almost quite extirpated by the
barbarous Danes, who usurped the Sovereignty over them for three Generations,
being made a spectacle of divine Justice both to Angels and Man. As for King
Ethelred himself, though then an infant, he purchased nothing else by his
Brothers blood, but a Crown of Thorns and Cares, living in perpetual wars,
cares, fears, wants, distresses, being crossed in all his designs, wars by
Land and Sea, contemned, deserted, and frequently betrayed by his own
Counselors, Nobles, Commanders, Soldiers, Subjects; forced out of the Realm
with his Queen, children, by the conquering Danes, all living like exiles in
foreign parts; dying at last neither lamented nor desired; Some of his Sons
after his death were treacherously murdered, (as Edmund Ironside by his own
Brother-in-law, and Eth^lred his Son-in-law, Duke Edert) all his posterity
renounced by the English, and the Danes preferred before them, banished,
betrayed, devoted to ruin by the usurping Danes, and his own temporizing
English Prelates and Nobles. Of which more fully hereafter. Take bu^ this brief
Character of his unhappy reign out of De Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 10.
William of Malmsbury, and De Eventibus Angliae, l. 1. c. 2.
Henry de Knyghton; Ethelredus post occisionem frat^is sui Edwardi in Regem
levatus 38. annis reguum potius obsidit, quam rexit. Nam vitae suae cursus
saevus et infa^stus fuit; in principio, miser; in medio et fine, turpis et
reprobus^ Iste tenuit Regnum in magna angustia^ Nec mirum, quia sic felonice et
injuste intrusus est in Regnum, Rex suorum perfidia Ducum avito ex terris
solio, et opis egens alienae, in cujus manu aliorum solebat salus pendere. E
Normannia accercitus Londoniae agebat propter proditores, nunquam procedens,
ubi animam laboribus et miseriis natam efflavit. Post cujus mortem Proceres
Regni, cum Clero stirpem ejus abhorrentes, Canutum recognoverunt Regem suum
fore. All which calamities fell upon these Regicides, Traitors, and the whole
English Nation, as our Historians observe, for the murder of their lawful
Sovereign. And have we not all now just cause to fear the very like, or some
sorer Judgments for the selfsame crying Sin, and other transcendent, bloody,
traitorous violences, oppressions of all kinds, far exceeding this, and all
others in former ages? But to proceed from these Generals, to the most
observable particulars during his reign.

Anno 980.
Anno Dom. 980. being the second year of King Ethelreds reign, the Mat. West.
Malmsbury, Ingulphus, Huntindon, Hoveden, Simeon Dunelm. Bromton, Wigorn.
Radulphus de Diceto, Polychron. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. Fox, Holinshed, Grafton,
Speed.
Danes began their invasion and persecution of the English, wasting,
depopulating with fire and sword Southampton, Chester, the Isle of Te^eth,
Cornwall, Devonshire, and other places, continuing their depredations sundry
years after, till they became Lords and Masters both of the Crown and Realm.
All our Historians record, that the sins of the English Nation, (especially
their Treason and Treachery against their innocent murdered Sovereign) were the
original cause of this Danish invasion, and most fatal Judgment: to which
Bishop Mat. Parker, Antiqu. Eccl. Brit. p. 63, 64.
Lupus in his Oration, subjoyns these other sins, pertinent to my Theme, of
which I fear our Nation is now far more guilty than their Ancestors in that
age: Ecelesiae vastantur, ordo Clericalis ludibrio habetur et contemptui; ima
plebs proditorie e regno sumpto protio venundatur, Proposit. 1.4.8.
infantes ab ipsis incunabilis ad miseram servitutem sumpti et redacti sunt,
omnisque benignitas et eleemosyna perit. Ipsi denique liberi avita liberate
frui, et in servili condition constituti, bonis magnis partis laboribus aut
aliu^de concessi^, uti prohibentur. Et quia haec gens perjuriis, Mendaciis
Iuramenti, Fidei, Faederum atque Pignorum fractionibus crebris, ^omicidio,
turto, et quae ad Rempublicam l^befactandam summa sunt Proditione, falso atque
Technis vaferrimis in ipsos Domi^os atque Heroes multifariam deliquit, cujus
fuit indicium, Edwardi regis ipsis hostibus traditio, etc. The external causes
principally inviting, encouraging the Danes to this invasion, as Antiqu. Eccl^
Brit. p. 62.
Matth^w Parker, and Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 207. Speeds Histo^y.
Mr. Fox conjecture, were these: Quod a segnibus et torpentibus Monachis Regni
facultates essent absorptae; auctaque indies Dacorum vis ab Anglorum sub
Monachis redactorum ignaviam, et civilia orta multa discrimina; quae Dacos
e^ferarunt victores. And that the Danes perceiving the discords that were then
in the Realm, and the hearts of the Subject to be withdrawn from, and set
against their Sovereign, they thought it a sufficient occasion and advantage to
forward their intendments, and omitting no time, arived on the Coasts of Kent,
and spoiled the Country as aforesaid^

Anno 982.
About the year of our Lord 982. One Lefsi bought lands in the Isle of Ily of
Adelwold Bishop of Winchester, and not only denied to pay for them, but
likewise forcibly disseised the Bishop of 3. Manors, Burch, Undeles, and
Kateringes, which the Bishop recovered by Judgment of the Earldermen, and
Thames in the WITENAGEMOTE (Wittagemiot) or Parliamentary Assembly of that age,
thus reported by the ancient Ms. de Operibus B. Edelwoldi, Episcopi.
Book of Ely, and by Titles of Hono^, second part. c. 5. sect. 6. p. 693.
Mr. Seldom, out of it. Edicitur placitum apud Londoniam, qu^ cum Duces,
Principes, Satrapae, Rethores et Causidici ex omni part confluxerant, beatus
Aedelwoldus praefatum Lefsium in jus protraxit, et coram cunctis suam causam et
injuriam, ac rapinam quam ipse Leofsius intulerat sanctae Ecclesiae ex ordine
patefecit. Qua re been ac aperte ab omnibus discussa, omnes Deo et beato
Aethelwaldo per judicium reddiderunt Burch, et Undeles, et Kateringes.
Judicaverunt etiam ut Leofsius Episcopo totum damnum suum su^pleret, et Munda,
Saxonice Pax dicitur: sed et Satisda^io, ut ^ic, ni ^allor, inte^pretatur.
Mundam suam redderet, de rapina vero Regis forisfacturam emendaret, dato
pretio genealogiae suae. Post haec infra octavum diem convenerunt iterum ad
Northamtune, et congregata ibi tota Provincia, sive Vicecomitatu, Proposit. 4,
6,
coram cunctis iterum causam supradictam patefecerunt. Qua pa^efacta ac
declarata, ut praejudicata erat apud Londoniam, judicaverunt et isti apud
Northamtune. Quo facto omnis populus cum jurejurando in Christi Cr^ce
reddiderunt Episcopo quae sua erant, scilicet, Burch, et Undeles, et
Kateringes. By which President it is apparent, 1. That Parliamentary Councils
in that age held Pleas, and gave judgments of Disseisins and Titles of Lands.
2. That they had Lawyers to assist them, and plead such cases before them. 3.
That the Judgment given in the Great Council at London, was confirmed,
recited, and executed in the County Court held at Northampton, and possession
of the Lands accordingly restored to the Bishop.

King Matthew Westminst. An. 983, 986. Wigorniensis. and Sim^ Dunelm. An. 986^
Ingulphi Hist. p. 890. Will. M^lmesb. de G^stis Reg. l. 2. c. 10. Hoveden,
Annal. pars prior, p. 427. Huntindon Hist. l. 5. p. 357. Ch^on. ^o. Bromton,
col. 818. Henry de Knyghton de Eventibus Ang. l. 1. c. 2. col. 2515. Fox Acts
and Monuments vol. 1. p. 20^. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 61. Godwins Catalogue of
Bishops p. 394. Speed p. 144.
Ethelred being incensed against the Bishop Anno 986.
of Rochester, Anno 983. as some, or 986. as others compute it, besieged the
City of Rochester for a long space; VVhereupon Archbishop Dunstan commanded him
to give over the siege, lest he should provoke St. Andrew, Patron of that City,
against him. The King notwithstanding continued his siege till he extorted one
hundred pounds from the Bishop. VVhereupon Dunstan admiring at his
covetousness, sent him this Message. Because thou have preferred silver before
God, Money before an Apostle, covetousness before me, the evils which the Lord
has denounced shall violently come upon thee. Upon which Matthew Westminster
makes this observation. Anno 986. Rex Anglorum Aethelredus qui prohibente beato
Dunstano Centum libras ab Episcopo Roffe^si extorserat, pro pace brevissima
pensionem 16 millium librarum persolvere compulsus est. Which fell not out
till the year 994. as himself and others record: Malmesbury referrs it to the
Tax of 10 thousand pounds, paid by him to the Danes. Anno 991. In this year
986. Alfric Duke of Mercians, son of Duke Alfere was banished England
crudeliter, cruelly, without just cause, as Bromton recites, which made him
afterward prove treacherous to the King, he being one of those English, quos
nullis causis extantib^s exhaeredabat Rex, et affecto crimine, opibus
emungebat; which Malmesbury taxes him for. Propos. 2, 4.
His oppression and inj^stice, being the chief causes of his miscarriage and
expulsion by the Danes.

Anno 988. An. 988, 991.
The Danes invading VVecedport, thereupon Goda Earl of Devonshire, Mat. Westminster.
Wigorniensis. Hun^indon, Hoveden^ Bromt. Speed, Holinsh. Fox, Grafton.
Strenwild, a most valian^ Knight, and many others in defense of their Native
Country and Liberties, fought with them, and were slain by them. And Anno 891.
Brithnoth the most valiant Duke of the East English, and his forces, fought a
set battle with the invading Danes, who wasted Ipswich and the parts adjoining:
In which battle an innumerable multitude were slain on both sides, and this
valiant Duke with many thousands of the English, in defense of their Country
against these Invaders. After which, by the Counsel of Gervasius Antiq. Eccle^.
Brit. and Godwin in the life of Spricius.
Syricius Archbishop of Canterbury, Duke Aethelward, Alfric, and other Nobles
(assembled no doubt in a Parliamentary Proposit. 1.
(...) as Malmesbur^ his Duces et Proceres si quando in Concilium venissent,
pars hic, (...) illud (...) and Henry de Kayghton his Proceres Regni, si quando
ad Concilium congregati, etc. im^ort) A Tribute of ten thousand pounds was
given to ^he Danes, that they might desist from their frequent rapines, and
slaughters of men, which they frequently exercised about the Seacoasts,
pacemque firmam cum iis tenerent, and might hold a firm peace with them. Some
of our Historians style this Huntind. Hist. l. 5. p. 357. Chron. Johan.
Bromton, col. 879.
Infaustum Concilium, an unlucky Council. Eadmerus Hist. Novorum l. 1. p. 1.
gives this verdict of it.

Regis desidia circum circa innotuit, Et ideo extevorum cupiditas opes Anglorum
quam mortes affectans, hac and illac, per mare, terram invadere: and primo
propinquas mari villas and urbes, deinde remotiores, ae demum totam Provinciam
miserabili depopulatione devastare. Quibus cum ille nimio pavore perculsus, non
armis occurrere, sed data pecunia pacem ab eis petere non erubuisset, Propos.
1, 5, 6, 9.
ipsi suscepto pretio in sua revertebantur, ut, numero suorum adaucto fortiores
redirent, ac praemia iteratae irruptionis multiplicata reciperent; Unde modo
december millia, modo sedecim millia, modo viginti quatuor millia, modo triginta
millia librarum argenti consecuti sunt: omnia illis largiente praefato Rege
Edel^edo. et gravi exactione totum Regnum opprimente. De Gestis Reg. Angl. l.
2. c. 10. p. 62.
William of Malmesbury passes this censure on it, and the unhappy consequence
of it. Danis omnes portus infestantibus, and levitate piratica ubique
infestan^ibus, dum nesciretur, ubi eis occurrere debent decretum a Syriaco
Archiepie piscopo. etc. ut repelleren^ur argento qui non po^erunt ferro. Ita
december millia libra^um soluta cupiditatem Danorum exp^^^ere. Exemplum Infamiae
et Uiris indignnm, libertatem pecunia redimere, quam ab invicto animo nulla
violentia possit excutere. Et tunc quidem pa^isper ab incur^bus ce^^arunt, mox
ubi vires o^io resumpserunt, ad superiora re^i^um. Tantus timor Anglos
invaserat, ut nihil de resistendo cogitarent. Si qui antiquae glor^ae memores
obviare, and ^^gna colligere tentassent, hostium multitudine, and sociorum
defectione desti^^ebantur whereby they became Vassals and Tributaries to the De
Gestis Pontif. l. 1. p 203.
in^ulting Danes. Cujus Siricii consilio in gestis Regum dixi Ethelredum Regem
animi libertatem Danis pretio ^endicasse. Ut eo^u^ pacem argento redimerent,
quod ferro repellere posset^ nisi cord car^ret. Unde Importabilis Tributi
pensio imposita Angliae, fortunas provincialium ad solum usque destruxit.
Histor. l. 5. p 357.
Henry Huntindon, and the col. 879.
Chronicle of Bromton pass this verdict against, and deduce this memorable
observation from this Tribute. Edelredi Regis, Anno 13. Proposit. 1, 6, 9.
Primo statuerunt Angli (which intimates it to be (...) a Parliamentary
Council) Concilio infausto Siricii Archiepiscopi, quod ipsi censum Dacis
persolverent, quatenus a rapinis and caede (...) ^ederum eis december mill
libras. Hoc autem malum usque in hodiernum diem duravit, et diu, nisi Dei
Pietas subveniat, durabit: Regibus namque nostris modo persolvimus, ex
consuetudine quod Dacis persolvebatnr ex ineffabili terrore. To which Bromton,
Polychr. l. 6. c. 13.
Ranulphus Censtrensis, and De^ Ev^ntibus Angliae, l. 1. c. 2.
H^nry de Knyghton immediately subjoyn. Dacis Tributum annuum solvunt. Primo
anno 10 milia librarum, Secundo anno 16 millia librarum, Tertio anno 20 millia
librarum, Quarto anno 24 millia, Quin^o anno 40. millia librarum, donec tandem
pecunia deficiente iterum tenderent ad Rapinas. Et tunc Nor^^^^briam
depraedantes^ et Londoniam obsidente, Coegerunt regem tributum dare. Antiqu.
Eccles. Brit. p. 64.
Mat. Parker Arc^^ishop of Canterbury, thus censures this ill advice of his
Predecessor; Siricius pacem Christianis ab in^idelibus Dacis 10. librarum
millibus redemit, Ad ignominiam sane, peneque perniciem totius Regni. Acts and
Mon. Vol. 1^ 207.
Mr. John Fox informs us, That King Ethelred being glad to grant the Danes
great sums of money for peac^, gave himself to polling of his Subjects, and
disinheriting them of their possessions; and caused them to redeem the same
ag^i^ with great sums of money; For that he paid great Tributes to the Danes
yearly, which ^as calle^ Danegelt. Proposit. 1. 4.
Which Tribute so increased, that from the first Tr^bute of 10000 l. it was
brought at last in p^ocesse of 5. or 6. years to 40000 l. The which yearly
Tribute (until the coming of St. Edward and after) was levied of the people of
the Land: Moreover, for lack of Justice, many Thieves, Rioters, and Bribers,
were in the land, with much misery and mischief. To which sorrow moreover was
joyued hunger and penury (besides a bloody flux, fevers, mortality, murrain
amongst cat^el, etc.) amongst the Commons, insomuch that every one of them was
constrained to pick and steal from others. So that what for the pillage of the
Danes, and what by inward Thieves and Bribers, this Land was brought into great
affliction: Albeit the greatest cause of this affliction (as it seems to me)
is not so much to be imputed to the King, as to the dissension among the Lords
themselves, who did not agree one with another; but when they assembled in
Consultation together, either they did draw diverse ways, or if any thing were
agreed upon any matter of peace between the parties, soon it was broken again;
or else if any good thing were devised for the prejudice of the Enemy, even the
Danes were warned thereof by some of the same Council. Page 415, 416.
John Speed, in his Hist: of Great Britain relates, That King Ethelred could
not redress the ev^ls occasioned by the prosperous Danes successes, who lay in
the land like unto Grasshoppers, his strengths being small, and his Subjects
affections l^ss. Proposit. 1, 6, 9.
Therefore calling to counsel the Statesmen and Peers, demanded their Advic^,
what was best to be done? Some few of these profe^ed the King their assistance,
but more of them persuaded to a composition, whereof Siricius Archbishop of
Canterbury was chief; and in fine, ten thousand pounds paid to the Danes for
their departure. This golden mine once entered, was more eagerly dug into by
those still-thirsting Danes, who finding the branch so beneficial at first,
hoped the vein in following would prove far more beneficial; and therefore,
regardless of promise, the next year prepared themselves again for England, and
with a great Fleet disp^tched to Sea. The News whereof struck such terror into
the English hearts^ that despairing of hope^ they accounted themselves the
Bondslaves of Misery, and were enforced to compound a peace with them, with the
payment of 16000 pounds, which they at last mounted to 40000 ( or 48000)
^ounds^ till it emptied the Land of all her coin, the Kingdom of her Glory, the
Nobility of their Courage, the Commons of their Content, and the Sovereign of
his wonted Respect and Observation. (A pattern of our age and ^imes.) A
Collection of the History of England. London 1634. p. 16.
^amuel Daniel gives us this Censure of this first unworthy hea^y Tax: Ethelred
in the end was fain, seeing he could not prevail with the sword, to assail them
with money, and bought a peace for 10000 pounds, which God wot, proved after a
very dear pennyworth to the Commonwealth: Showing the seller t^e^eof, how much
was in his power, and the buyer, at how bad a rate, his necessity was to be
served, and yet not sure of his bargain, longer than the Contractor would. Who
having found the benefit of this market, raised the price thereof almost every
year. And yet had not Ethelred what he paid for, the land in one part or other
being never free from spoil and invasion, but rather, were more oppressed both
by the Dane, and by this Taxation, which was the first we find in our Annals
laid upon the Kingdom, and with heavy grievance raised in a poor distressed
State, continuing many Ages after the occasion was extinct; And in the end
(...) became the usual Supplement in the Dangers of the Kingdom, and the
Occasions of Princes. And hereby Et^elred enla^ged the means and de^ires^ of
the Enemy, so that at length came Swain King of Denmark, and Anlafe King of
Norwey in person, as if likewise to receive him for committing outrage, and
were both returned with great sums. And many years it was not ere Swain
returned again to raise new sums by new afflictions, and tormenting here this
poor turmoiled people more than ever, receives a fee for bloodshed,
Propoposition 1, 6, 9.
to the sum of 48000 l. Granted in the General Assembly of the States at
London; and a Peace, or rather paction of servitude concluded.

From these passages of our Historians it is most evident. 1. That this Tax of
ten thousand pounds to the Danes, was the very first we find imposed on the
English Nation, An. Domini 991, being never subject to any public Civil Tax
til then, for ought appears by History. 2. That this Tax was then imposed, and
after reimposed, augmented on the Nation, only by common advice, grant, and
consent of the King, Prelates, and Nobles assembled in a public and
Parliamentary Council. 3. That the original ground of granting it was base
degenerous cowardice, or unmanly fear, and sluggishness, both in the King,
Nobles, and People, and that by the very unlucky, imprudent, ill Council and
advice, of an Archprelate, Siricius Archbishop of Canterbury being the
p^inciple adviser of it. 4ly. That it was originally paid, not to a lawful
Native Sovereign king, for defense of the Nation, but to a foreign invading
prevailing, victorious Danish Enemy, to purchase peace, and be quit of future
troubles and Invasions. 5ly, That when this was first imposed, it was with a
belief and resolution never to reiterate or draw it again into custom or
president in succeeding ages: and that only to satisfy a covetous invading
Enemy for the present, without any thoughts that ^t would but streng^hen or
encourage their Enemies to new inva^ions and Tributes of this Nature, doubled
and trebled on the Nation afterward. Yet lo the contrary sad effects of this
ill president and advice. 1. It is within few years after, several times drawn
into Use and Custom again. 2. It is every time increased, augmented more than
other, till it amounted to 4 times as much as it was at first. 3. It did but
impoverish, weaken the English themselves, and much strengthen, encourage their
Danish Enemies, and keep them still under their Vassalage. Whereas so much money
or less raised and spent for their own defense against ^he Danes, would
probably have expulsed and beaten them home to their own Country with loss,
and so have prevented their future invasion. 4ly After the Danes were quite
expelled, and the occasion of this tax quite extinct, yet it then became a
usual constant suppliment to our Kings for sundry ages after, upon all
occasions, and was the only groundwork, pattern, of all the heavy public
Shipmony, Taxes, Aids, Impositions, Payments, under which the people have
suffered in all succeeding ages, till this present. It is very dangerous
therefore for Parliaments, or Statesmen, upon any extraordinary pressing
Necessity, to lay any new Taxes, Tributes, or Imposts on the people, and most
perilous for the people voluntarily to submit unto their payment; for being
but once or twice granted, imposed, paid, and made a President, they are hardly
ever abolished or conjured down again, but kept still on ^oot upon some pretext
or other; yea often doubled, trebled, and quadrupled by degrees, to the peoples
grand oppression and undoing, as we may see by this old President of D^negelt;
and the late sad Presidents of our new imposed Exci^es, Imposts, Monthly
Contributio^s, ra^^ed from 20 to 30, 40, 50, 60, 100, and 120 thousand pounds,
amonth, and the Excise from thousands to Millions; and so continued for sundry
years, without hope of end, or ea^e: the only blessed lib^rty which we have
hitherto purchased with all our Prayers, Tears, Fasts, Counsels, Treasures,
wars and whole Oceans of Christian blood. I shall therefore desire our late and
present Tax-Masters, Excise^s, if they be not now past all shame, sadly to
consider, how much more burdensome and in^urious they have been and are now to
their native Christ^an English Brethren, than the Barbarous Pagan, foreign
invading Danes were then to their predecessors; in that they by their own
authority, without any lawful grant, or Act by a free Parliament, impose on
their Brethrens exhausted purses and estates, no less than 60 or 120 thousand
pounds every Month, besides Excis^s, Imposts, Customs, amounting to much
more; when as the barbarous, foreign Danes exacted of them, only by their own
common consent in free Parliamentary Councils, only ten thousand pounds in one
year at first, and then 16000, 24000, 30000, 40000, or 48000 l. at the utmost
for several whole years Tribute, without any Excise, Imposts, or other Customs.
Which meditation me thinks should now induce them to mitigate, release, cease,
our long continued uncessant Taxes, Excises, Imposts, or at least to reduce
them to the Danes highest annual proportion, of 48000 thousand pounds, lest the
whole Nation and Posterity repute them more oppressive, barbarous, tyrannical
to their Christian Countrymen now; than the worst of the foreign Pagan Danish
Invaders were heretofore, and greater present Enemies to their Native Country,
than the Danes then were to our Progenitors.

Anno 991.
The self same year William Malmsbur. De Gestis Regum. l^ 2^ c^ 10. p. 64.
Spelman. Council. p^ 503.
there being some difference between King Ethel^ed and Richard Marquess of
Normandy, he thereupon slew and pillaged all the English passing through his
Country, and affronted King Ethelred with frequent injuries. Pope John the 15.
hereupon sent Leo his Legate, with exhortatory Letters to make peace between
them: who coming with them to King Ethelred on Christmas day, Proposit^ 6.9.
Anno 9^1. the King, upon r^ceit of the Popes Letters Accersitis cunctis sui
Regni fidelibus, utriusque ordinis Sapientioribus, Assembling all the Wisest
men of his Realm of both Orders, for the love and fear of Almighty God, and St.
Peter the Prince of the Apostles, granted and estabished a most firm peace with
all his Sons and Daughters, present, and to come, and with all his Lieges,
without guile. In pursuance whereof, the King sent Edelfinus Bishop of
Sherburn, with two other persons of quality into Normandy to the Marquess: Who,
upon receipt of the Popes Admonitions, and hearing of the kings Decree, with a
willing mind, confirwed the said Peace with his Sons and Daughters present and
to come, and with all his Subjects, upon this reasonable condition, That if any
of them, or they themselves should perpetrate any unjust thing against the
other, it should be exp^ated with eondign reparation. Which Peace that it might
remain perpetually firm, was ratified by the Oaths of the Commissioners of both
parts, at Rhoan, in March following. Here we have a Peace advised, ratified by
the direction of a Parliamentary Great Council: recorded at large by Malmsbury:
The last clause whereof was this, Et de hominibus Regis, vel de inimicis suis,
nullum Richardus recipiat, nec Rex de suis, sine Sigillo eorum.

King Florentius Wigorniensis, Mat. Westminster. Simeon Dunelmensis, Hoveden,
Huntindon, Hist. l. 5. p. 357. Chron. Johan. Bromton. col. 879.880. Speed,
Holinshed, Graf^on, Fox.
Ethelred in the year 992. Anno 992.
hearing that the Danes intended a new invasion of England, and that they had
sent a great Fleet to Sea, contrary to their former Agreement the year before,
assembled a Council of his Nobles to consult how to resist them. What the
result of their consultation was, Florence of Worcester thus record Consilio
jussuque Regis Anglorum Ethe^redi, Procerumque suorum, Proposit. 6, 9.
de tota Anglia robustrores, Londoniae congregatae sunt Naves. By the Counsel
and command of Ethelbert king of England, and of his Nobles, all the strongest
Ships were assembled together at London, out of all England; which the king
furnishing with choice Soldiers, made Duke Alfric, Duke Thorold; Alstan and
Aes^win (two Bishops) Admirals over them; commanding them, if by any means they
could, to take the Danish Army and Fle^t by invi^oning them in some part. But
Duke Alfric (formerly banished, forgiven, and now made chief Admiral) turning
Traitor, both to his king and Country, first sends a secret Messenger to the
Danes, to acquaint them with the designs against them, entreating them to
prevent the ambushes prepared to surprise them, whereby they escaped the hands
of the English. After which, when the English and Danes were ready to encounter
each other in a Sea Fight, Alfric fled secretly to the Danish Fleet the night
before, and by reason of the instant danger, fled away shamefully with them.
The kings Navy pursuing them, took and pillaged one of the Danish Ships,
flaying all the men therein. But the London ships meeting with the other Danish
Pirates, as they were flying, fought with them, slew many thousands of the
Danes; and took Duke Alfric his Ship, with the Soldiers and Arms, himself
hardly escaping, as Wigorniensis and Matthew Westminster relate. But Huntind.
and Bromton, write, that the Danes recruiting their Navy, met and fought with
the kings Navy, slew many of the Londoners, triumphantly took whole armed
Ships, and Duke Alfric who was in them; whom the king should not have trusted,
according to the ancient saying: Quem semel graviter laeseris, non facile tibi
fidelem credideris. For this Treason of Alfric, the king cau^ed the Eyes of his
Son Algar to be put out, Un^e odium and infamia e^us ^rudelitatis adaucta est,
as Hunti^don and others observe.

The next year 993. Anno 993.
the VVi^o^mensis, Bromt. Huntindou, Hoved^n, Mat. VVestminst. Malmesbury
Simeon Dunelm. Radulphus Cestr^nsis, Fabian, Holinshed, Speed,
Danish Fleet entering Humber, wasted the Country of Northumberland and
Lindesey, burning the Villages, slaying the people, and pillaging their goods.
Whereupon great multitudes of the people of tha^ Country, assembling together,
resolved and hastened to sight with them: but when they were ready to gi^e them
battle, Frena, F^ithgist and Godwin their Captains, being of Danish Progeny^
proving treacherous to their followers, persuaded them to fly, and fled first
themselves. Notwithstanding the Country (as Malmesbury, Speed, and others
write) being unable to digest their intolerable insolence and plunders, fell
upon the Danes, slew many of them, and chased away the rest to defend their
Lives, Liberties, and Estates.

Anno 994. Anno 994.
Swane king of Denmark^ and Anlafe king of Norwey with 94 Ships sailed up to
London, Florent. VVigo^n. S^m. Dunelm. Mat. Westminster. Anno 994. William Malmes, de
G^st. R^g. l. 2. c. 10. Hun^indon Hist. l. 5. p. 358. Hov^den, Annal. pars
prior, p. 428. Chron. Ioh. Bromt. col. 880, Polych. l. ^. c^ 13. Henry de
Knyghton de Even^. Angl. l. 1. c. 2. Fabian, Graston, Holinshed, S^ow, Speed,
Spelm, Glossarium, Tit. Danegelt, Radulph. de Diceto Abbrevi. Chron. 461,
besieged and ^iercely assaulted the City, thinking to take it; but the
Citizens so manfully defended it, that they repulsed the Danes thence with
great loss. Who thereupon turning their fury upon the Coun^ies of Essex, Kent,
Sussex, and Southampton, so greivously wasted them with fire and sword, burning
the Villa^es, and slaying the Inhabitants, that King Ethelred, Concilio
Procerum suorum, by the Council of his Nobles (a^^embled together for that end,
as Wigorniensis Matthew Westminster, Hoveden, Simeon Dunelmensis and others
write) sent Ambassadors to them, promising to give them Tribute and Wages, and
Money, upon this condition, that they should desist from their cruelty. Who
thereupon condescending to the kings request, returned to their Ships, and
drawing all their Army together unto Southampton, wintered there: To whom a
Tribute of fixteen thousand pounds, Proposit. 1, 6, 9.
was given and paid out of all England, that they should cease from their
rapines and slaug^ters of innocent persons. After t^is agreement King Anlaf
^epaired to Andover, to King Et^elred, where he received bapti^m, Ethelred
being his Godfather: and bestowing great gifts upon him; Hereupon Anlaf entered
into a League with him, promising, to return into his own Country, and never
after to r^turn into England with an Army; Which promise he faithfully
observed. The Articles of the Agreement between King Ethelred and him, are at
large recorded in the Chronicle of Bromton, Col. 899^ 900. being made by advice
of all his Wisemen as^embled in a Parliamentary Council, as this Title to them
intimates. Haec sum verba Pacis et Prolocutionis, quas Ethelredus Rex et omnes
Sapientes ejus cum exercitu sirmaverunt, qui cum A^a^an^, ^t Justino, et
Gudermundo Stegiari filion venit. The Articles of the Peace between them are X.
in the Saxon, but XI. in the Latin Copy.

An. 997, 998, 999.
The perfidious Wigorniensis, Mat. VVes^. Huntindon, Rad. de Decito, Simeon
Dunelmensis, Polychron. Bromton, Hen. Knyghton, Malmsbury, Hoveden, Fabion,
Holinshed, Speed, Grafton, and others.
Danes violating their former agreement, Anno 997. came with a great Fleet and
Army into the mouth of Severn, wasted and laid waste and desolate Northwales,
and most of the West and South parts of England, no man resisting them, gaining
an extraordinary great booty and Wintring about Tavestock. The next year 998.
They entering the river of From, wasted and spoiled Dorsetshire, the Isle of
Wight, and Sussex over and over, living upon their spoils: whereupon the
English many times assembled an Army to resist and expel them; but so often as
they were about to give them battle, Angli aut insidiis, aut aliquo infortunio
impediti, terga verterunt, et hostibus victoriam dederunt; most of the Nobles
of England secretly favoring the Danes, and not loving Ethelred, quia Alfrida
matter sua pro ipso liberius in regno substituendo, sanctum Edwardum fratrem
suum dolose ^xtixxerat, as Bromton and others atte^. Anno 999. The Danish ^leet
entering the river of Medway, besieged Rochester, and wasted Kent. The Kentish
men uniting their forces fought a sharp battle with them, wherein many were
slain on both sides, but ^he Danes winning the field, horsed their foot on the
horses they gained, and miserably wasted all the West part of Kent. Which King
Ethelred being informe^ of, Proposit. 1, 6, 9.
suorum Primatum Consilio et classem et pedestrem congregavit exercitum; by the
advice of his Nobles, ^e assembled a Navy and foot Army to encounter them. But
whiles the ships were preparing, the Captains of the Army delaying from day to
day their begun le^yes and undertakings, Grievously vexed the People. In
conclusion, neither the Navy nor Army ^id any thing at all for the peoples
benefit or defense, prae^er populi laborem, pecuniae pe^ditionem, hostium
incitationem, as Florentius Wigorniensis, Roger Hoveden, and others observe.

Hereupon Hen. Huntindon. Histor. l. 6. p. 359. Ch^o. Johan. Bromton Col. 883,
884, Polychronicon, l. 5. c. 60.
King Ethelred, Anno 1000. Anno 1000.
for the better defense of his Realm, resolved to take to wife Emma daughter of
Richard Earl of Normandy, who was then most valiant, and formidable to the
whole Realm of France: For he saw himself and his Subjects very much weakened,
and did not a little fear their future overthrow. Hoc autem Dei nutu factum
esse constat, ut veniret contra improbos malum. Genti enim Anglorum quam
sceleribus suis exigentibus disterminare proposuerat, sicut et ipsi Brittones
peccatis accusantibus humiliaverant, Dominus omnipotens duplicem contritionem
proposuit, et quasi militares insidias adhibuit. Scilicet, ut hinc Dacorum
persecutione saeviente, illinc Normannorum conjunctione accrescente, si ab
Dacorum manifesta fulminatione evaderent, Normannorum improvisam cum
fortitudine cautelam non evaderent. Quod in sequentibus apparuit, cum ex hac
conjuntione Regis Anglorum, et filiae Ducis Normannorum, Angliam, JUST,
secundum jus Gentium Normanni et calumniati sunt, et adep^i sunt. Praedixit
etiam eis quidam vir Dei, quod ex scelerum suorum immanitate, non solum quia
semper caedi et proditioni studuebant, verum etiam quia semper ebrietati et
negligentiae domus Domini dediti erant, eis insperatum a Francia adventurum
Dominium; quod et eorum excellentiam in aeternum deprimeret, et honorem sine
termino restitutionis eventilaret. Praedixit etiam, quod non ea gens solum,
verum et Scottorum, quos vilissimos habebant eis ad emeritam confusionem
dominaretur. Praedixit nihilominus varium adeo seculum creandum, ut varietas
quae in mentibus hominum latebat, et in actibus patebat, multimoda variatione
vestium et indumentorum designaretur. Hac igitur providentia cum Legatoriis ad
Ducem Normannorum missis, Rex Anglorum suae petitionis concessionem
obtinuisset, Statuto tempore tanto digno ministerio ad Dominam suam recipiendam
et adducendam Proceres Anglorum mittuntur in Normanniam, quae longo et digno
regibus apparatu dirigentur in Angliam. Thus Henry Archdeacon of Humindon,
Radulphus Cistrensis, Bromton, and others out of them, ^rite of this Norman
match, as the groundwork of translating the Government in succeeding times from
the Saxons to the Normans, for the Saxons sins forenamed.

Mat. Westminster. Hoveden, Wigorniensis, Sim. Dunelmensis, Holinshed, Speed, and
others. Anno 1000.
This same year, the Danish Fleet sailing into Normandy and pillaging it, King
Ethelred hearing o^ it, marched with a great Army into Cumberland and the
Northern parrs, which had revolted to the Danes, and where their greatest
Colony was; where he vanquished the Danes in a great battle, and wasted,
pillaged most of all the Country. Which done, he command^d his Navy to sail
round about the North parts of Wales, and to meet him at an appointed place,
which by reason of cross winds they could not do: yet they wasted and took the
Isle of Man; which success somewhat raised and encouraged the dejected spirits
of the English, and increased the Kings reputation with them.

In the years 1001. Anno. 1001.1002.
Wigorniens. Huntindon, Hoved. Ethelwerdus. Ingulphus, Malmsb. Radulphus de
Diceto, Radulphus Cistrensis, Simeon Dunelm. Bromton, Mat. VVestmin. Hen: de
Knyghton, Mat. Parker, Fox, Fabian, Holinshed, Graf^on, Speed, Daniel.
The Danish Fleet returning from Normandy, entered the river of Ex, and besieged
Exceter: which the Citizens manfully defending, repulsed them with great loss
from their walls. Wherewith they being extremely enraged, marched through all
Devonshire, burning the villages, was^ing the fields^ and slaying the people,
without distinction of age or sex, after their usual manner. Whereupon the
inhabitants of Devon, Somerset, and Dorsetshires, uniting their forces in a
Body in a Place called Pe^ho, gave them battle: but being overpowred by the
multitude of the Danes, who far exceeded them both in number and military
skill, they were forced to ^lie, and many of them slain. The Danes thereupon
getting their horses, harrowed Devonshire ^arr worse than before, and returned
with a great booty to their ships: Whence steering their co^rse to the Isle of
Wight, they preyed sometimes upon it, sometimes upon Hampshire, other times
upon Dorsetshire, no man resisting them. Destroying the men with the sword, and
the Villages and Towns with fire, in such sort, ut cum illis nec classica manus
navali, nec pedestris exercitus certare audeat praello terrestri: for which
cause the King and People were overwhelmed with unspeakable grief and sadne^s.
In this sad perplexity, King Ethelred, Anno 1002. Habito consilio cum regni sui
Primatibus (as Florentius Wigorniensis, Simeon Dunelmensis, Radulphus de
Dicet^, Roger Hoveden, and others express it; Proposit. 1, 6, 8, 9.
or Consilio Primatum suorum, as Mat. Westminster and his follow^rs relate i^:
^ By the Counsel of the Nobles of his realm, (assembled together for this
purpose at London) reputed it beneficial for him and his people to make an
Agreement with the Danes, and to give them a Stipend, and Pacifying Tribute,
that so they might cease from their mischiefs. For which end Duke Leofsi was
sent to the Danes, ^ho coming to them, importuned them, that they would accept
of a Stipend and Tribute. They gladly embracing his Embassy, condescended to
his request, and determined how much Tribute should be paid them for to keep
the peace. Whereupon ^oon after A Tribute of 24000 pounds was paid them, pro
bono Pacis, for the good of Peace.

In this Assembly and Council, (as I conjecture) Chron. VVil. Thorn, col. 1780
Spelmanni Council. p. 504. to 510.
King Ethelred informed his COUNSELORS, who instructed him both in divine and
humane things, with the sloathfulness, negligence, and vicious lives of the
Secular Priests throughout England, and by their advice thought meet to thrust
them out, and put Monks in their places, to pour forth prayers and praises to
God for him and his people in a due manner. Whereupon he confirmed by his
Charter, the ejection of the Secular Priests out of Christs-Church in
Canterbury, Proposit. 6, 10.
and the introduction of Monks in their places; and ratified all the lands and
privileges formerly granted them; exempting the Monastery and Lands thereof
from all Secular services, except Expeditione, Pontium operatione, et Arcium
reparatione. Beseeching and conjuring all his lawful Successors, Kings,
Bishops, Earls, and people, that they should not be, Ecclesiae Christi
Praedones, sed sitis Patrimonii Christi defensores seduli, ut vita et gaudio
aeternis cum omnibus Dei sanctis in aeternum fru^mini. Which Charter was
ratified by the Subscriptions of the King, Proposition 2.
Archbishop, Bishops, Abbots, and of several Aeldermen, Nobles, and Officers,
and the sign of the Cross. This year Wigorni^nsis. and others.
Duke Leofsi slaying Esric a Nobleman, the Kings chief Provost, was judicially
banished the Realm by the King for this offense.

After this Peace made with the Danes, Anno 1002. Emma ariving in England, Anno
1002.
received both the Diadem and name of a Queen; Huntindon, Hov^den, Malmsb. Mat.
Westminster. Radulphus de Dice^^^ Si^eon D^n^lm. Wigorniensis. Bromton, Hen. de Knyghton,
Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 207. Polychron. ^abiar, Holinshed, Grafton^
Speed, Daniel.
whereupon King Ethelred puffed up with pride, seeing he could not drive out
the Danes by force of arms, contrived how to murder and destroy them all in one
day by Treachery at unawares, either by the sword or by fire; because they
endeavored to deprive him and his Nobles both of their Lives and the Realm,
and to subject all England to their own Dominion: The occasion, time, and
manner of whose sudden universal Massacre is thus related by Mat. Westminster,
An. 1012. (though acted An. 1002. as all accord) and by Mr. Fox and others.
Huna General of King Ethelreds Militia, a valiant warlike man, who had taken
upon him the managing of the affairs of the Realm under the King, observing the
insolency of the Danes, who now after the peace made with them, did so proudly
Lord it through all England, that they presumed to ravish the wives and
daughters of Noblemen, and every where to expose them to scorn; by strength
caused the English husbandmen to soil and sow their land, and do all vile
labor belonging to the House, whiles they would sit idely at home, holding
their wives, daughters, and servants at their pleasure; and when the husbandmen
came home, they should scarcely have of their own, as his servants had: So that
the Dane had all at his will and fill, faring of the best, when the owner
scarcely had his fill of the worst. Thus the common people being of them
oppressed, were in such fear and dread, that not only they were constrained to
suffer them in their Doings, but also glad to please them, and called every one
of them in the House where they had rule, LORD DANE, etc. Hereupon Huna goes
to the King much perplexed, and makes a lamentable complaint to him concerning
these things. Upon which the King being not a little moved, by the Counsel of
the same Huna, sent Letters (or Commissions) unto all the coasts of the Realm,
commanding all and every of the Nation, that on one day after, to wit, on the
Feast of St. Brice the Bishop, all the Danes throughout England should be put
to death by a secret Massacre, that so the whole Nation of the English might
all jointly and at one tim^ be freed from the Danish Oppression. And so the
Danes, who by a firm covenant, sworn unto by both sides a little before, ought
to have dwelt peaceably with the English, Proposit. 2.
were too opprobriously slain, and the women with their children being dashed
against the posts of the houses, miserably powered out their souls. When
therefore the sentence of this decree was executed at the City of London
without mercy, many of the Danes fled to a certain Church in the City, where
all of them were slain without pity, standing by the very Altars themselves.
Moreover, that which aggravated the rage of this persecution, was the death of
Guimild, Sister of King Swain, slain in this manner in England: she was
lawfully married to Count Palingers, a Noble man of great power, who going into
England with her husband, they both there received the faith of Christ and
Sacrament of baptism: this most prudent Virago being the mediatrix of the peace
between the English and Danes, gave her self with her husband and only son, as
Hostages to King Ethelred for the security of the peace, she being delivered by
the King to that most wicked Duke Edric to keep, that Traitor within few days
after commanded her husband, with her son, to be slain before her face with
four spears, and last of all commanded her to be beheaded. She underwent death
with a magnanimous mind, without fear or change of countenance; but yet
confidently pronounced as she was dying, That the shedding of her blood would
bring great detriment to England.

Historiarum, l. 6. p. 360.
Henry Huntindon thus relates the story of this Massacre. In the year 1002.
Emma the Jewel of the Normans came into England, and received both the Diadem
and name of a Queen; with which match King Ethelred being puffed up with pride,
bringing forth perfidiousness, caused all the Danes who were with peace in
England, to be slain by clandestine Treason on one and the same day, to wit on
the feast of St. Brice, concerning which wickedness we have heard, in our
infancy some honest old men say; that the said King sent secret Letters into
every City, Proposit. 2.
according to which the English on the same day and hour destroye^ all the
Danes, either cutting off their heads, without giving them warning, with
swords, or taking an^ burning them suddenly together with fire. Vbi fuit videre
miseriam, dum quisque charissimos hospites, quos etiam arctissima necessitudo
dulciores effecerat, cogeretur prodere, et amplexus gladio deturbare, writes De
Gest. Regum, l. 2. c. 10. p. 64.
Malmsbury.

The News of this bloody Massacre of the Danes, being brought into Denmark to
King Swain by some Youths of the Dan^sh Nation who e^caped and fle^ out of
England in a ship, moved him to tears, Mat Westmin. An. 1012, p. 391, 392.
Uocatisque cunctis Regni Principibus, W^o calling all the Princes of his Realm
together, and relating the whole series of what was acted to them; he
diligently enquired of them, what they would advise him to do? Who all crying
out together, as with one mouth, DECREED, That the blood of their Neighbors
and Friends was to be revenged. Where upon Swain, a cruel man, prone to shed
blood, animated to revenge, by his Messengers and Letters commanded all the
Warriers of his Kingdom, and charged all the souldier^ in ^orein Regions,
greedy of gain, to assist him in this expedition against the English, which
they cheerfully did, he having now a fairer show to do foully than ever, wrong
having now made him a right of invasion, who had none before.

Anno 1003. Anno 1003.
King Swain ariving with a great Navy and Army in England, Malmsbury,
Huntindon, Hoveden, VVigorniensis, Simeon Dunelmensis, Radulphus de Diceto,
Bromton, Henry de Knyghton, Polychronicon, Ingulphus, Mat. Westminster. Fabian, Fox,
Holinshed, Grafton, Speed, Daniel
by the negligence and treachery of one Hugh a Norman, whom Queen Emma had made
Earl of Devonshire, took and spoiled the City of Exeter, rased the wall thereof
to the ground, and burnt the City to ashes, returning with a great prey to his
ships, leaving nothing behind them but the ashes. After which wasting the
Province of Wiltshire: a strong Army congregated out of Hamshire and Wiltshire,
went wi^h a resolution manfully and constantly to fight with the Enemy; but
when both Armies were in view of each other, ready to join battle, Earl Edric
their General (a constant Traitor to his Country, and secret friend to the
Danes) feigned himself to be very sick, and began to vomit, so that he could
not possibly fight. Wh^re upon the Army seeing his slothfulness and
fearfullness, departed most sorro^full from their Enemies, without ^ighting,
being disheartened by the Cowardice of their Captain: Which Swane perceiving, he
marched to Wilton and Sarisbery, which he took, pillaged, and burnt to the
ground, returning with the spoil to his Ships in triumph.

The next year Swane (to whom God had designed the kingdom of England, Anno
1004.
as some old Wigorniensis. Hoveden, Huntind. Hist. l. 6. Speed, and others.
Historians write) sailing with his Fleet to Norwich, pillaged and burnt it to
the ground. Whereupon Ulfketel, Duke of East-England, ^ man of great valor,
seeing himself surprised, and wanting time to raise an Army to resist the
Danes, cum Majoribus East-Angliae habito Consilio, Proposit. 6, 9.
taking Coun^el ^ith the Great men of East- England, made peace with Swane;
which he treacherou^ly breaking within three weeks after, suddenly issuing out
of his ships, surprised, pillaged, and burnt Thetford to the ground; and
covering the C^untry like Locusts, spoiled all things, and slaughtered the
Countrymen without resistance. Which Duke Ulfketel being informed of,
commanded some of his Countrymen to break his ships in pieces, in his absence
from them; which they not dared, or neglected to do, and he in the mean time
raising an Army with as much speed as he could, boldly marched against the
Enemy, retu^ning with great booties to their Ships; where after a long and
sharp encounter on both sides, the English being overpowered by the multitude
of the Danes, were totally ro^ted, and all the Nobles of East-England there
slain in their Countries defense, who fought so valiantly, that the Danes
confessed they had never an harder or sharper battle in E^gland than this. The
great loss the Danes sustained in it, though they got the ^ield, and an
extraordinary ^amine in England the year following, greater than any in the
memory of man, caused Swane to return into Denmark to refresh and recruit his
Army.

King Ethelred quit of these Enemies, Anno 1006, Anno 1006.
deprived Wulfgate the Son of Leonne, Flor^n^ius Wigorni^nsis, Mat. Westminster.
whom he had loved more than all men, of his ^ossessions and all his honors,
propter injusta judicia, for his unjust judgments and proud works; P^opos. 2,
6.
and likewise commanded the eyes of the two Sons of that Arch-Trait or Edric
Streona to be put out at Cocham, where he kept his Cour^, because Edric had
treacherously enticed a bloody Butcher, Godwin Porthound (whom he corrupted
with great gifts) to murder the Noble Duke Althelin at Scoborbyrig, as he was
hunting, whom Edric purp^s^ly invited to a Feast, that he might thus
treacherously murder him. While these things were acting, in the month of July,
the Danes returning with an innumerable Navy into England, landing at Huntind.
Hoveden, Malmesbury, Sim. Dnnelmensis, Wigorniensis. Mat. Westminster. Ingulphus,
Bromton, Radulph. de Diceto, Knyghton, Polych. Fabian, Holinshed, Graston, Fox,
Speed, Daniel.
Sandwich, consumed all things with fire and sword, taking great booties,
sometimes in Sussex, sometimes in Kent: Whereupon King Ethelred gathered a
great Army out of Mercia and the West-parts of England, resolving valiantly to
fight with the Da^es; who declining any open fight, and returning to their
Ships, landed sometimes in one place, sometimes in another, and so pillaging
the Country, returned with the booty to the Ships before the English Army could
encounter them, which they vexed all the Autumn in marching after them from
place to place to no purpose: The English Army returning home when Win^et began
to approach, the Danes with an extraordinary booty sailed to the Isle of Wight,
where they continued till the Feast of Chri^ts Nativity, which Feast they
turned into sorrow. For then they marching into Hampshire and Berkeshire,
pillaged, and burnt down Reading, Wallingford, Colesey, Essington, and very
many Villages, Quocunque enim perag^bant, quae parata erant hilariter
comedentes, cum discederent in retribu^ionem procurationis reddebant hospiti
caedem, hospitio flammam, as Huntindon, Bromton, and others story. As they were
returning another way to their ships with their booty, they found the
Inhabitants ready to give them battle at Kenet; whom the Danes presently
fighting with, and routing, returned wi^h triumph to their ships, enriched with
the new s^oils of the routed English.

Anno 1007.
King Ethelred lying all this time in Shropshire, unable to resist the Danes,
Anno 1007. cum Consilio Primatum suorum (as Florentius Wigorniensis, Simeon
Dunelmensis, Polyc^ronicon, and others express it) by the Counsel of his
Nobles, sent Messengers to the Danes^ Proposit. 1, 6, 9.
commanding them to tell them, quod sumptus et Tributum illis dare vellent,
that they wou^d give them Co^ts and Tribute, upon this Condition; That they
should desist from rapines, and hold a firm peace with them; to which request
they consented^ and from that time Costs were given them, and a Tribute paid
them of thirty six thousand pounds out of a^l England, Historia^um l. 6. p. 360^
Henry Hun^i^don, and Br^mton, thus rela^e the business. Rex et Senatus
Anglorum, dubii quid agerent, quid omitterent, communi deliberatione, gravem
conventione^ cum exercitu fecerunt, and ad pacis observatione^ 36000 mil.
librar. ei dederunt. A clear evidence that this Agreement and Peace was made,
and money granted and raised in England, by common advice and consent in
Parliament (or Council) In^renduit Anglia to^a velut arundinem Zephiro vibrante
collisum. Unde Rex Ethelredus confusione magna consternatus, pecunia pacem ad
tempus, quam armis non potuit, adquisivit, writes Anno 1007. p. 387.
Matthew Westminster. Anno 1007^ 387.
Rex Anglorum Ethelredus, pro bono pacis Tributum 36 mil. librarum pers^lvit
Dacis, as Abbrev. Chron. col. 462
Radulphus de Diceto words it. After which the King this year made Edric,
(aforementioned) Duke of Mercia; and that by the Providence of God, to the
destruction of the English, a man of base parentage, but extraordinary crafty,
eloquent, witty, and unconstant, surpassing all of that age in envy,
perfidiousness, pride, cruelty and Treason, who soon after married the Kings
daughter Edith: whereby he had the better opportunity to betray the King and
kingdom, with less suspicion.

Spelmann^ Council. p. 510. to 531. Malmsb. l. 2. c. 10.
King Ethelred, Anno 1007.
though often vexed with the wars and invasions of these foreign Enemies, yet he
had a care to make good Laws for the benefit, peace and safety of his people;
whereupon, having thus made Peace with the Danes, An. 1007. he summoned and
held a Great Parliamentary Council at Aenham, on the Feast of Easter, at the
exhortation of Aelfeag Archbishop of Canterbury, and Wulstan Archbishop of
York, who together with the rest of the Bishops, Proposit. 5, ^.
and all the Nobles of England were present at it. Regis Aethelredi Edicto
concrepante acci^i sunt convenire. Where they all (...) de catholicae cultu
Religionis reparando deque etiam rei statu publicae reparando vel consulendo,
plura et non pauca, utpote divinitus ^inspirati, ratiocinando sermocinabantur.
In this Council they debated, resolved on diverse things, and enacted many
wholesome Laws and Edicts for the reformation and settling of Religion, and
Churchmen, the advancement of Gods worship; the Government of the Church and
State, the advancement of civil Justice and honesty, and defense of the Realm
by Land and Sea, beginning with the things of God and the Church in the first
place; which you may read at large in Sir Henry Spelman. Some Laws whereof I
shall here transcribe, being very pertinent to my subject.

Cap. 5. Sapientes decernunt, Ut Leges quique coram Deo e^ hominibus aequas
^^atuant et tueantur: Proposit. 1, 2, 4, 5.
iniquas autem omnino deleant: justitiam pauperi atque diviti, pari exhibentes
lance: et pacem insuper et concordiam pie in hoc seculo coram Deo et hominibus
retinentes.

Cap. 6. Sapientes etiam decernunt, Ut nemo Christianum et in^ontem pretio
tradat extra patriam, praesertim in Pagani alicujus servitium.

Cap. 7. Sapientes etiam decernunt, Ut pro delicto modico nemo Christianum
morti adjudicet, sed in misericordia potius Leges administret ad utilitatem
populi; et non pro modico eum perdat, qui est opus manuum Dei, et mercimonium
ejus magno comparatum pretio. De quolibet autem Crimine acuratius decernito,
sententiam praebens juxta factum, mercedem juxta meritum, ita scilicet, ut
secundum divinam clementiam levis sit poena, et secundum humanam fragilitatem
tolerabilis.

Cap. 9. Nemo dehinc in posterum Ecclesiae servitium imponat, nec clientelam
Ecclesiae injuriis afficiat, nec Ministrum Ecclesiae ejiciat inconsulto
Episcopo.

Cap. 21. Ve^ba et op^ra recte quisque disponat, er Jusjurandum pactamque fidem
caute teneat. Omnem etiam Injustitiam e patriae finibus qua poterit industria
quisque ejiciat, et perjuria formidanda.

Cap. 22. Urbium, Oppidorum, Arcium atque Pontium instauratio sedulo fiat,
prout opus fuerit, restaurentur, renoventur: vallis et fossis muniantur, et
circumvallentur; Militaris etiam et Navalis Profectio, uti imperatum est,
Proposit. 1, 3, ^, 9.
ob universalem utique necessitatem.

Cap. 23. De Navali Expeditione sub Paschate. Cavendum etiam est, ut celerius
post Paschatis festum Navalis expeditio Annuo sit parata. Si quis Navem in
Reipublicae expeditionem designatum vitiaverit, damnum integre restituito, et
pacem Regis violatam compensato. Si vero eam ita prorsus corruperit, ut
deinceps nihili habeatur, plenam luito injuriam et laesam praeterea Majestatem.
So one translation out of the Saxon Copy reads it: but another thus. Naves per
singulo^ annos ob patriae defensionem et munitionem praeparentur: po^ique
sacrosanctum Pa^cha cum cunctis utensilibus competentibus fimul congregentur.
Qua etiam poena digni sunt qui Navium detrimentum in aliquibus perficiunt,
notum cunctis esse cupimus. Quicunque aliquam ex Navibus per quampiam inetriam,
vel per incuriam, vel negligentiam corruperit, et tamen recuperabilis sit, Is,
navis corruptelam vel fracturam ejusdem, per solidam prius recuperet, Regique
deinde, ea quae pro eju^dem munitionis fractura, sibimet pertinet, rite
persolvat.

Cap. 24. De Militiam de^ractante. Si quis de Profectione militari cui Rex
intererit, sine licentia se substraxerit, in detrimentum currat omnium
fortunarum.

These three last Laws most clearly demonstrate, that the Militia and Military
affairs of this age, with all their Provisions of Arms, Ships for defense of
the Realm by Land and Sea, against the invading Danes, and other Enemies, with
their Military Laws, and all other apurtenances thereto belonging, were ordered
and settled in their General Councils by common consent.

Cap. 26. Si quis vitae Regis insidiabitur, Proposit. 8.
sui ipsius vitae dispendio, et quas habet, rebus omnibus poenas luito: Sin
negaverit, et purgatione qua licuerit, expetierit, solemniori eam faciat
juramento, vel Ordalio triplici, juxta legem Anglorum, et in Danorum lege,
prout ipsa statuit.

Cap. 27. Si quis Christi legibus, sive Regis se nefarie opposuerit, capitis
plectitor aestimatione, vel mulcta alia, pro delicti qualitate. Et si is
contrarius rebellare armis nititur, et sic occiditur, inultus jaceat.

Proposit. 1, 2, 4, 5.
Cap. 29. Scrutari oportet diligentius unumquemque modis omnibus, quonam pacto
illud ante omnia efferatur Consilium, quod populo habeat utilissimum, et, ut
recta Christi religio ^xime provehatur, injustumque quodlibet funditus
extirpetur. Haec enim in rem ^uerin^ totius patriae, ut injustitia conculcetur,
et Institia coram Deo et hominibus diligatur.

Cap. 32. Ut quisquis fuerit potentior in hoc seculo, vel per scelera evectus
in altiorem gradum, ita gravius emendabit peccata sua, et pro singulis
malefactis poenas luet graviores.

Haec itaque Legalia Statuta vel Decreta in Nostro Conventu Synodali, ^ Rege
nostro magnopere edicta, cuncti tunc temporis Optimates, se observaturos
fideliter spondebant.

The Invasions and Oppressions of the Danes, excited both the King, his
Prelates and Nobles, in this Great General Council, not only to provide for
their necessary defense against them by Land and Sea, but likewise to enact
good Laws for the advancement of Gods worship and service, the good Government
of the Republic, the advancement of Justice, and Righteousness, the
suppression of all Oppressions, Injustice, wickedness, and preservation of the
Just Rights and Liberties both of the Church and People; as the most effectual
means to unite and preserve them against the Common Enemy, and to remove Gods
wrath and judgments from them, as the other Statutes and Decrees of this
Council more fully resolve, which you may peruse at leisure.

About the same year, (as I conjecture) or not long after Chron. (...) Bromt.
col. 893. to 903. Lambardi Archaion, Spelm. Council. p. 530, 531, 532, 533.
King Ethelred having some brea^hing time from wars by his Peace concluded with
the perfidious Danes, h^ld three other great Parliamentary Councils, the first
at Woodstock, the second at Venetyngum, the third at Haba, wherein He and his
Wisemen made and published many excellent Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, for
the Good Government, Peace, VVelfare and happiness of his People, Proposit. 5,
6.
recorded at large in Bromton, Lambard, and Spelman, where you may read them. I
shall insert only 3 of them at Venetingum (VVantige, as some take it.)

Cap. 4. Habeantur placita in singulis VVapentakis, ut exeant seniores 12
Thayni and Praepositus cum e^s, and jurent super sanctuarium quod eis dabitur
in manus, Quod neminem innocentem velint accusare, vel noxium concelare.

Cap. 23. A^ Bilynggesgate si advenisset una navicula, unus obolus Thelonii
dabatur: si major and habet siglas, 1 d. si adveniat Ceol, vel ulcus, and ibi
jaceat 4 d. ad Thelonium dentur. Proposit. ^, 9.
De navi plena lignorum, unum lignum ad Theloneum detur. In ebdomada panum
Theloneum detur 3 diebus, die Dominica, die Martis, and die Iovis. Qui ad
Pontem veniat cum Bato ubi piscis inest, unus ob: dabatur in Theloueum, and de
majori Nave 1. d. Homines de Rothomago qui veniebant cum vino vel craspisce,
Flandrenses and Pontrienses, and Normannia and Francia monstrabant res suas,
and extolneabant. Hog, and Leodium, and Nivella, qui per terras ibant,
osten^ionem dabant et Theoloneum. Et homines Imperatoris qui veniebant cum
navibus suis bonarum legum digni tenebantur, sicut and nos emere in suas naves:
Et non lic^bat eis aliquod Forcheapum facere burhmannis, and dare Theoloneum
suum. Et in sancto natali Domini duos Grisingos pan^os, and unum Brunum, and 10
libras Piperis, and cirotecas 5 hominum, et duos cabillinos, colennos aceto
pl^nos, and totidem in Pasca: de Dosseris cum Gallinis, ^na Gallina Thelon. and
de uno Dosseto cum Ovis, 5 Ova Theolon. Si veniat ad Mercatum, mongestre,
Sinere qui mangonant in Caseo and Butiro 14 diebus ante Natale Domini, 1. d.
and 7 diebus post Natale Domini, Unam alium denarium ad Theloneum.

Cap. 24. Si Portireu vel Tungravia, vel alius Praepositus compellat aliqu^m
quod Theolon. supertenuerit, and ^omo respondeat^ quod nullum Theloneum
concelaverit quod just debuit, juret hoc se sexto, and sit quietus. Si
app^llet quo a Theolonium dederit, inveniat cui dedit, and qu etus ^^t. S^ ^unc
hom^nem invenire non posset cui dedit, reddat ipsum Theloneum, et persolvat 5
l. Regi. Si Cacepollum advoce^, quod ^i Theoloneum dedit, and ille neget,
perneget ad dei ^ud^cium, et in nulla alia lada.

These are the first Laws^ (to my remembrance) wherein there is any mention of
Toll, Tribute, or Custom, paid by any Natives or Foreiners for goods or
merchandise imported or sold; Proposit. 1.
or any forfeitures or pen^lty imposed for concealing or non-payment thereof,
which it seems were imposed about this time by common consent in a
Parliamentary Council, for the better maintenance of the Navy, and defense of
the Realm against the Danes, the end for which I cite them.

The King having thus in the Great Councils of Aenham and Wantige, Anno 1008,
1009.
by consent of his Nobles and Wisemen, provided a Navy to be annually set out
for the defense of the Realm, in pursuance thereof the selfsame year (as our
Florentius Wigorn. Sim. Dunelm. Mat. Westminster. Huntin. Hoved. Malmesb. Ingulph.
Radulph. de Diceto, Bromt. Polychron. Fab. Grafton, Fox, Holinsh. Speed,
Daniel, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. Knyghton.
Historians jointly attest) commanded one ship to be built, and furnished out
of every 310 Hides, or Ploughlands, and a Buckler and Helmet out of every 9
Ploughlands, throughout his Realm. The ships being accordingly provided, the
King victualled and placed chosen Soldiers in them, and assembled them all
together to the port of Sandwich, that they might defend the Coasts of the
kingdom from the irruptions of Foreiners. An. 1009. Puppes praedictae
congregatae sunt apud Sandwic, and viri optime armati, Nec fuit tantus numerus
Navium tempore alicujus in Britannia, Proposit. 2, 3, 6, 9.
writes Henry Huntindon. But yet God ^rus^rated and blasted all their designs,
beyond expectation: For about, or a little before this time, Brithiricus a
slippery ambitious proud man, brother to perfidious Duke Edric, injuriously
accused Wulnoth, a Noble young man of Southsex to the King, whose servant he
was; who thereupon banished him. Wulnoth upon this fled away, lest he should be
apprehended, and having gotten 20 Ships, exercised frequent Piracies upon the
Sea Coasts. The Kings Navy being thereof informed, and that any man who would
might easily take him, Brithtric hereupon, to get praise to himself, took 80 of
the Kings Ships with him, and promised to bring Wulnoth alive or dead to the
King. When he had prosperously sailed a long time in pursuit of him, a most
violent tempest suddenly arising, shattered and bruised all the ships, driving
them one against another, and forced them to run ashore upon the dry land, with
great loss, where Wulnoth presently coming upon them, fired and burnt them all.
The rest of the Navy discontented with this sad news, returned to London: The
Army likewise then raised was dispersed, Et sic omnis labor Anglorum cassatus
est, writes Huntindon: or, as Wigorniensis and others express it, Sicque totius
populi maximus labor per^t, to their great grief and disappointment. Upon this
disaster, in the time of Harvest, Earl Turkel a Dan^ arived with a great new
Fleet of Danes, and ^n innumerable Army at Sandwich, whom another great Navy of
Danes under the command of Hemmingus, Erglaf^, and Tenetland followed in the
Month of August. These all joining together marched to Canterbury, assaulted,
made a breach therein, and were likely to take it. Whereupon the Citizens and
Inhabitants of East-Kent were enforced to purchase a firm peace wi^h them, ar
the sum of 3000 pounds; which being paid, they returning to their ships
pillaged the Isle of Wight; with the Counties of Sussex and Southampton, near
the Seacoasts, burning the Villages, and carrying away great booties thence.
King Ethelred upon this, raised and collected a great Army out of all England,
placing forces in all Counties near the Sea, to hinder the Danes landing and
plundring. Notwithstanding they desisted not, but exercised rapines in all
places where they could conveniently land. At last, when they had straggled
further off from their Ships than they accustomed, and thought to have returned
laden with spoils, the King with many thousands of Soldiers intercepting their
passage, resolved to die, or to conquer them. But perfidious Duke Edric, by his
treacherous and perplexed orations, endeavored to persuade the King and
Soldiers, not then to give the Enemies battle, but to suffer them to escape at
that time. Suasit and persuasit. And thus, (like a Traitor to his Country, as
he ever had been) he then delivered the Danes out of the Englishmens hands, and
suffered them to depart with their booty, without resistance. The Danes after
this taking up their VVinter quarters in the River of Thames, maintained
themselves with the spoils they took out of Essex, Kent, and other places on
both sides of the River, and often times assaulting the City of London, attempted
to take it by assault, but were still valiantly repulsed by the Citizens with
great loss.

In Ian. 1010. the Malmesb. Ingulph. Flor. Wigorn. Sim. Dunelm. Huntind.
Hoveden, Mat. Westmin. Bromt. Radulphus de Diceto. Polychronicon, Knighton,
Fab. Holinsh. Speed, Fox, Grafton, Daniel, Antiq. Eccles. Brit.
Danes ^allying out of their Ships, Anno 1010, 1011, 1012.
marched through Chiltern Forest to Oxford, which they pillaged and burnt,
wasting the Country on both sides the Thames in their return. Being then
informed that there was a great Army raised and assembled against them in
London, ready to give them battle; thereupon that part of the Danish Army on
the Northside of the Thames, passed the River at Stanes, and there joining with
those on the South Side, marched in one body to their Ships through Surrey,
laden with spoils, refreshing themselves in Kent all the Lent. After Easter
they went into the East parts of England, marching to Ringmere near Ipswich,
where Duke Ulfketel resided. On the first of May they fought a set battle with
him, where, in the heat of the battle the East-English turned their backs on
Turketel a Dane, beginning the fight: but the Cambridgeshire men fighting
manfully for their Country and Liberty, resisted the Danes a long time, but at
last being overpowred with multitudes, they likewise sle^; Many Nobles and
Officers of the King, and an innumerable multitude of people were slain in the
fight. The Danes gaining the victory, and thereby East-England, turned all
Horsemen, and running through the Country for three Months space, burnt
Cambridge, Thetford, with all the Towns and Villages in those parts, slew all
the people they met with, as well Women and Children, as Men; tossing their
very Infants on the tops of their Pikes, wasted, pillaged all places, killing
the Cattle they could not eat, and with an infinite rich booty their Footmen
returned to their ships. But their Horsemen marching to the River of Thames,
went first into Oxfordshire^, and from thence into Buckingham, Hertford and
Bedford Shires, burning Villages, and killing both Men and beasts, and wholly
depopulated the Country; then they retired laden with very great booties to
their ships. After this, about the Feast of St. Andrew they rambled through
Northamptonshire, burning and wasting all the Country, together with
Northampton it self; then marching Westward into Wiltshire, they burnt,
pillaged, depopulated the Country, leaving all those Counties like a desolate
Wilderness, there being none to resist or encounter them after their great
victory at Ringmere.

The Danes having thus wasted and depopulated East. England, Essex, Middlesex,
Hertford, Buckhingham, Oxford, Cambridge Shires, half Huntindonshire, most of
Northamptonshire, Kent, Surrey, Sussex, Southampton, Wiltshire, and Barkshire,
with Fire and Sword. King Ethelred, et Regni sui Magnates, and the Nobles of
his Realm, Propos. 1, 6, 9.
thereupon sent Amba^^adors to the Danes, desiring peace from them, and
promising them Wages and Tribute, so as they would desist from depopulating the
Realm. Which they upon hearing the Ambassadors consented to, yet not without
fraud and dissimulation, as the Event proved. For although provi^ions and
expenses were plentifully provided for them, and Tribute paid them by the
English according to their desires, ye^ they desisted not from their rapines,
but marched in Troops through the Provinces, wasting the Villages every where,
spoiling most of the miserable people of their goods, and some of their lives.
At last, not satisfied with rapine and bloodshed, between the Feasts o^ St.
Mary and St. Michael, they besieged Canterbury, (contrary to their dear bought
peace) and by the treachery of Archdeacon Almear took the City, which they
pillaged and burnt to the ground, together with the Churches therein, burning
some of the Citizens in the fire, slaying others of them, casting many of them
headlong over the Walls, dragging the Women by the hair about the streets, and
ravishing, and murdering them. After which they decimated the Men, Women,
Monks, and little Children that remained, leaving only the tenth of them alive,
and murdering the rest, slaying no less than 900 Religious persons, and above
8000 o^^ers in this manner, as some of our Historians relate. Mr. See Speeds
Hist^ry, p. 419.
Lambard in his Perambulation of Kent, computeth, that there were massacred 43.
thousand and two hundred persons in this Decimation, there being only 4 Monks,
and 4800 Lay People saved alive. The Archbishop See Antiq. Eccles. Brit.
Gervasius, Malmesb. and Godwin in his life. Huntind. Hist. l. 6. p. 361. Mat.
Westminster. Hoveden, Bromt. Wigorn. Sim. Dunelm. Polychron. Grafton, Holinsh. Fab.
Speed, Daniel, VVil. Thorn, col. 1782. Radulph. de Diceto Abbrev. Chron^ col.
464, 465.
Alfege they took prisoner, bound in chains, buffeted, grievously wounded, and
then carried to their Fleet, where they kept him prisoner 7 Months. At last
they propounded to him, that if he would enjoy his life and liberty, he should
pay them 3000 pounds for his ransom: which he refusing to do Week after Week;
prohibiting any others to give them any thing for his ransom, they were so
enraged with him, that bringing him forth publicly to their Council at
Greenwich, they struck him down to the ground with their battle Axes, Stones,
and the Bones and Heads of Oxen, and at last one Thrum, (whom he had confi^med
but the day before) moved with an impious piety, cleft his head with an Axe,
and so martyred him. The Londoners hearing of it, purchased his dead corpse with
a great sum of money, and honou^ably interred it: But above 2000 of these
bloody Villains were in short time after destroyed wi^h grievous diseases.
VVhiles these things were acted by the Danes in Kent. Anno 1012. Anno 1012.
perfidious Duke Edric Simeon Dunelm. Hist. col. 169. Hoveden Annal. pars 1. p.
432. Florent. Wigorn. p. 378. Mat Westminster. An. 1012. Polychron. Graft. Fabian,
Speed, Daniel.
et omnes cujuscunque Ordinis et Dignitatis Primates Congregati, and all the
Nobles of every Order and Dignity a^^embled together at the City of London
continuing there til they had levied and said to the Dane^ a Tibute of forty
(as some) or forty eight thousand pounds (as others write) upon this condition;
That all the Danes within the Realm should have everywhere a peaceable
habitation with the English, and that there should be, as it were, one Heart,
and one Soul of both people (as Matthew Westminster, Daniel, and some others
record the Agreement.) Which Accord being ratified on both sides with Pledges
and Oaths (as Matthew Propos. 1, 6, 9.
Westminster and others relate,) King Swain (as some Historians write, though
others mention not his being here in person, but only by his Commanders)
returned into his own Land, and so ^he rage of the Danish persecution ceased
for a short space. Upon this agreement 45 of the Danish ships under the command
of Turkill the Danish General, submitted themselves to King Ethelred,
promising, That they would defend England against strangers and foreign
invasions, upon this con^dition, that the English should find them victuals and
clothes. Henry Huntindon censures this accord, Historiarum l. 6. p. 261. Chron.
Johan. Bromton. col. 891.
with the Danes, as made overlate. Tun^ vero Rex nimis sero pacem feci^ cum
Dacorum exercitu, dans eis 8000 (misprinted for 48000) librarum; nunquam enim
tempore oportuno pax fiebat, donec nimia contritione terra langueret.

To what extremities King Ethelred was put to raise this and the other
forementioned Tributes to the D^nes, and to pay his own Captains besides; and
how much the Monasteries were taxed, oppressed, exhausted of all their moneys,
pla^e, wealth by the King, his Officers and the Danes, during these wars, by
force and menaces, this memorable passage of Abbot Ingulphus will best inform
us, not mentioned by any other Historians, which I purposely reserved, as
properest for this place.

Ingulphi Histor. p. 890, 891, 892.
In tempore i^aque Domini Osk^tuli Abbatis Croylandiae, cum sic Dani totam
terram inquietarent, indigenae ^e Villis and Vicis ad Civitates and Castella,
and pl^^imi ad paludes, et lacum, loca invia refugientes, Danorum transitum et
discursum pro anima praecavebant. Coeperunt tunc omnia terrae Monasteria a Rege
Ethelredo, Proposit. 1, 9.
et Ducibus ejus ac Ministris Gravissimis exactionibus subjici, et ad
satisfaciendum Danicis Tributis pro immensis pecuniarum summis sibi impositis,
supra modum affligi: Et direptis thesauris, ac monasteriorum tam sacris
calicibus, quam aliis jocalibus, etiam sanctorum Scrinia jubent ab exactoribus
spoliari. Venerabilis ergo pater dominus Osketulus Abbas Croilandiae 400.
marcas pro talibus Tributis variis vicibus exolverat: et tandem 12. annis in
officio pastorali sancte ac strenue consummatis, mortis sacrae compendio Regias
exactiones, universosque seculi timo^es cum carnis depositione finaliter
exnebat. 12. Call. November. Anno scil. Domini 1005. Cui successit ad Abbatis
officium Venerabilis Pater Abbas Godricus, electus et effectus Abbas in diebus
angustiae, tribulationis et miseriae; laboriosissimeque rexit Monasterium 14.
annis, sub praedicto rege Ethel^edo: Hujus Abbatis tempore cum Dani totius
terrae fere obtinerent dominium, et ^am per Ethelredum regem et ejus Duces
Edricum, Alf^icum, Godwinum et alios ^lures importabiles Impositiones pro
Danorum tributis persolvendis, ac aliae Exactiones gravissimae ad eorundem
Ducum expensas plurimas restaurandas, quam per Analafum et Swanum, ac eorum
exerci^us depraedationes, despo^iation^s et destructiones assi^ ne fierent
saepe multa Monasteria de omni Denario emuncta sunt. Non tamen exact r^s
ultimam quadrantem se extorsisse credere voluerent. Ita hinc religiosi, quo
magis premebantur magis^ putabantur habentes, magis putabantur abundantes. Hinc
venerabilis Pater Abbas God^icus solvit primo Anno Regi Ethelredo, 200 marcas:
Ducesque sui pro suis expensis similiter ducentas marcas extorquebant, praeter
minores sumptus, qui quotidie Regis ministris irruentibus con^inue fiebant.
Secundo, tertio ac quarto anno similiter actum est. Tertio enim ann^ pro
Triremibus per omnes portus Fabricandis, et Navali Militia cum victualibus, et
aliis necessariis exhibenda, Ducentae Librae exactae sunt. Quarto etiam anno
cum ^urketulus, Danicus Comes cum fortissima class appllcuisset. Pro centum
Libris missum et ad solutionem per exactores crudelissimos commissum est.
Di^current^que Dani tunc per provin^ias, omnia mobilia diripientes, immobilia
cremantes, Draiton, Kotenham, et Hoke^on maneria Croylandiae, cum toto Comitatu
Cantabrigiae direpta, ignibus tradiderunt. Sed haec nuntia sunt malorum. Quippe
cum quolibet anno sequente quater ^^ntum Marcae Regiis exactionibus et Ducum
suornm sumptibus communiter solverent, rex Swanus veniens cum class recenti
exercitu ferocissimo tunc omnia depopulatur. Irruens enim de Lindesia, vicos
cremat, rusticos eviscerat, religiosos omnes variis tormentis necat: tunc
Baston et Langtoft flammis donat. Is erat annus Domini 1008. Tunc monasterium
Sanctae Pegae omniaque sua contigua maneria, scilicet Slinton, Northumburtham,
Makesey, Etton, Badington, and Bernake, omnia una vice combusta, tota familia
caesa, vel in captivitatem ducta. Abbas cum toto comitatu nocte fugiens et
navigio in Croylandiam veniens, salvatus est. Similiter Monasterium Burgi,
villaeque vicinae ac maneria sua, Ege, Thorp, Walton, Witherington, Paston,
Dodifthorp, et Castre, prius omnia direpta, postea flammis tradita sunt. Abbas
cum majore part conventus sui assumptis secum sacris reliquiis sanctarum
Virginum, Kineburgae, Kineswithae ac Tibbae Thorniam adiit. Prior autem cum
nonnullis fratribus, assumpto secum brachio sancti Oswaldi regis, ad insulam de
Hely aufugit. Subprior vero cum 10. fratribus ad Croylandiam venit faeliciter.
Illo anno ex frequentibus fluviis inundationes excreverunt, et vicinas paludes,
circumque jacentes mariscos immeabiles reddebant. Ideo totus mundus advenit,
populus infinitus affluxit, Chorus et claustrum replebantur Monachis, caetera
Ecclesia sacerdotibus et clericis, Abbatia tota laicis, caemeteriumque nocte ac
die sub tentoriis mulieribus et pueris: fortiores quicunque inter eos ac
juvenes in ulnis et alnetis ora fluminum observabant: erantque tunc quotidie
(ut caetera onera taceantur) 100 Monachi in mensa. Super haec omnia, per
nuncium Rex Swanus Monasterio Croylandiae mill Marcas imposuit, et ^ub poena
combustionis totius Monasterii solutionem dictae pecuniae certo die apud
Lincoln assignavit; infraque tertium mensem post solutionem hujus pecuniae,
iterum pro victualibus suo exercitui providendis exactores nequissimi mill
Marc^s minis maximis extorquebant. Ventilatum est tunc et ubique vulgatum
crudele martyrium S. Elphegi Archiepiscopi Doroberniae, qui quia summ^m
pecuniae excessivam sibi impositam pro sua redemptione solvere detrectavit,
belluina Dacorum ferocitas eum acerbissimo tormento crudeliter interemit. Omnes
fera tempora flebant, foelices qui quocunque modo in fata processerant. Abbas
Godricus maxim, cui cura tanti populi incumbebat et quem Rex Ethelredus
cumulos argenti habere existimabat. Danicus vero Swanus, snusque totus
exercitus ei, tanquam Domino de manibus eorum refugientium, juges insidias et
minas semper maximas ingerebat. Demum expensis interni^ et exactionibus
externis totus thesaurus Domini Turketuli Abbatis distractus est, horre^
^riborum Egelri^orum ^^m^lita ^un^, cum adhuc Regii exactores pro pecuniis
quotidie irruerent Et eum tanquam patriae proditorem, et Danorum provisorem
regi in proximo cum dignis compedibus deducendum, et supplicus tradendum pro
suis demeritis affirmarent. Perculsus ergo venerabilis Pater Abbas Godricus
dolor cordis intrinsecus pro tot minis terribilibus, convocat totum suum
conventum; et nuncians nummos Monasterio deficere, orat et exorat, quatenus
doceant et decernant in medio, quid contra nequam seculum magis expediat
faciendum? Tandem longo tractatu placet haec sententia cunctis, aliquem
Ministrorum seu satellitum Edrici Ducis Merciorum conducere, et cum pecuniae
deficeren^, terris et tenementis ad terminum vitae concedendis, in suum
defensorem contra imminentia pericula obligare. Erat enim ille Edricus
potentissimus post regem in terra, et cum rege Ethelredo, et cum Swano rege
Danorum familiarissimus, et postea cum Cnuto filio suo. Conductus est ergo
quidam maximus satellitum dicti Ducis Edrici nomine Normannus, sanguine sum
clarus, filius, videlicet Comitis Lefwini, et Frater Leofrici nobilis Comitis
Leicestriae, dato sibi (prout postulabat) manerio de Badby, ad terminum 100.
annorum. Ille dictum manerium acceptans, tenere de Sancto Guthlaco per firmam
in grano piperis per annum in festo S. Bartholomaei singulis annis persolvendo,
fideliter promittebat, et se futurum procuratorem ac protectorem Monasterii
contra omnes adversarios confecto inde chirographo obligabat. Valuit illud
Monasterio aliquanto tempore, scilicet omnibus diebus vitae suae.

By which passages it is apparent, what Taxes, exaction^, ^re^sures the
Monasteries and others suffered both from King Ethelred his Captains and
Officers on the one side, and from the Danes on the other side; and how they
were enforced to hire and b^ibe great Soldiers and Courtiers, by leases and
moneys, to protect them from utter ruin.

History of Great Britain, p. 416.
John Speed affirms, That the Clergy as backward as any, denied to King
Ethelred their assistance, pleading their exemp^ions from war, and privileges
of the Church, when the land lay bleeding and deploring for help, and
scandalized all his other proceedings for dema^ding their aids. But this
passage of Abbot Ingulphus so near that age, out of the Register Books of
Croyland (whereof he was Abbot not long after) proves they paid great annual
contributions to the King and his Officers, which consumed all their money,
plate, Jewels, Chalices, and the very shrines of their Saints, notwithstanding
all Charters and exemptions. And as for the Laity, De Gestis Reg. l. 2. c. 10.
William of Malmsbury, Radulphus Cistrensis, Mr. Fox, and others write. That
King Ethelred had such a condition, that he would lightly dis-inherit
Englishm^n of their lands and possessions, Proposit. 1, 4.
and caused them to redeem the same with great sums of money, and that he gave
himself to polling of his Subjects, and framed Trespasses for to gain their
money and goods, for that he paid great Tribute to the Danes yearly. Whereby he
lost the affections of the people, who at last deserted him, and submitted
themselves to the Danish Invaders, who usurped the Sovereign power, and forced
him out of England with his Queen and Children. These Unrighteous Oppressions,
Dis-inherisons, and Exactions of his were specially provided against by his
Nobles, Prelates, and Wise Men in the Spelm. Council. p. 530.531. Chron. Ioh.
Bromt. col. 901, 902, 903.
Councils of Aenham and Habam forecited, by special Laws, and special excellent
Prayers and Humiliations prescribed to be made to God to protect them from his
judgments, and the invading, oppressing, bloody Danes, worthy perusal; yet
pretended necessities and War, laid all those Laws asleep.

In the year of Christ 1013. Anno 1013.
(the very next after the Englishmens dearest purchased Peace, which the
perfidious gold-thirsty Danes never really intended to observe) King Swain, by
the sec^et instigation of Turkel the Dane (whom King Ethelred unadvisedly hired
to guard him with his Danish shi^s from foreign Invasions) who sent him this
Message, Malmesb. de Gestis Reg. l. 2, c. 10. p. 69.
Angliam praeclaram esse patriam and opimam, sed Regem stertere illum Ven^re
Vinoque studentem, nihil minus quam bellum cogitare: Quapropter odiosum suis,
ridiculum alienis, Duces invidos, Provinciales infirmos, primo stridore
Lituorum proel^o cessuros, Malmesb. Wigorn. Mat. Westminster. Sim. Dunelm. Radulphus
de Diceto. ^untind. Hoveden, Ingulphus, Polych^on. Fabian, G^^^^on, Holinshed,
Speed, Daniel, Fox.
arrived at Sandwich with a great Fleet and Army of Danes, in the Mone^h of
July; where resting themselves a few days, he sailed round the East part of
England, to the mouth of Humber, and from thence into the River of Trent, to
Gainsborough, where he quitted his ships, intending to waste the Country.
Hereupon, first of all Earl Uhtred and the Northumbria^s, with those of
Lindesey, presently without delay, and after them the Freelingers with all the
people in the Northern parts of Watlingstreet, having no man to de^fend them,
yielded themselves up to Swain without striking one stroke: and establishing a
peace with him, ^hey gave him Hostages for their loyalty, and swore Fealty to
him as their Sovereign. Whereupon he commanded them to provide horses and
victuals for his Army, which they did. William Malmesbury observes, that the
Northumbrians thus unworthily submitted to Swan^ his Government; Non quod in
eorum mentibus genuinus ille calor, and Dominorum impa^iens refrigueri^, s^d
quod Princeps eorum Uthredus primus exemplum defectionis dederit. Whose example
drew on all other parts. Illis sub jugum missis coeteri quoque omnes ^opuli qui
Angliam ab Aquilone inhabitant vectigal et obsides dederunt. A very strange and
sudden change, conq^est, without a blow. Swain committing his Navy and Hostages
to his son Cnute, raised chosen Auxiliaries out of the English, who submitted
to him, and then marched against the Southern Mercians. Having passed
Watlingstreet, he by a public Proclamation commanded his Soldiers, to wast the
Fields, burn the Villages, cut down the Woods and Orchards, spoil the Churches,
kill all the Males that should come into their hands, Old and Young, without
showing them any mercy, reserving only the Females to satisfy their lusts, and
to do all the mischiefs that possibly they could act. Which they accordingly
executed, raging with beastly cruelty. Marching to Oxford, he gained it sooner
than he imagined by surrender: taking Hostages of them, He posted thence to
Winchester: Where the Citizens extraordinarily terrified with the excessiveness
of his cruelty, immediately yielded, and made their peace with him; they and
the whole Country giving him such and so many hostages as he desired, for his
security, and likewise swearing allegiance to him. Only the Londoners defending
their lawful King within their walls, shut the Gates against him. From
Winchester Swain marched with great glory and triumph to London, endeavoring
by all means, either to take it by force, or surprise it by fraud. At his first
arrival he lost many of his Soldiers, who were drowned in the River of Thames
through overmuch rashness, because they would neither seek for Bridge nor ford
to pass over it. King Ethelred being then within the City, and having no other
refuge, the Citizens closing their Gates manfully defended their lawful King
and City against the assailants. Who encouraged with the hope of glory, and
great booty, fiercely assaulted the City on all sides, but were all most
valiantly repulsed by the Citizens, through the assistance of valiant Earl
Turkel, then within it; the Danes sustaining great loss of men, who were partly
slain, and partly drowned, the Citizens not only repulsing them from the Walls;
but likewise ^allying forth, and slaying them by heaps, so that Swain himself
was in danger to be slain, had he not desperately ran through the midst of his
Enemies, and by flight escaped their swords. De gestis Regum l. 2. c^ 10. p. 69.
Malmesbury thus writes of the Citizens, Oppidani in mortem pro Liberate
ruebant, nullam sibi veniam futuram arbi^rantes^ si Regem desererent, quibus
ipse vitam suam commiserat. I^aque cum ^trinque ac^^ter ce^taretur, Proposit. 8.
Iustior causa victoriam habuit, Civibus magna open conantibus, dum unusq^^sque
sud^^es suos, Principi ostentare, et pro eo pulchrum putaret emori: Hostium
pars prostrata, pars in flumine Thamesi necuta. Hereupon Swain despairing to
take the City, marched with his torn shattered Army, first to Wallingford,
plundering and demolishing all things they met with in their way^ after their
wonted manner, and at last they came to Bath; where Ethelmere Earl of the West
Country, with all his people came and submitted to him, giving him hostages for
their loyalty. Having thus finished all things according to his desire, he
returned with his Hostages to his Navy, being both called and reputed King by
all the People of England ( London excepted si Rex jure queat vocari, qui fere
cuncta Tyrannice faciebat, ^ite Florence o^ Worceste, and Simeon D^nelmensis
ver^ ca^e^o^sly. Nec adhuc flecterentur Londinenses tota jam Anglia in
clientelam ejus inclinata, nisi Ethelredus praesentia eos destitueret sua: as
Malmesbury observes.

King Ethelred being a man given to sloathfullness, and through consciousness
of his own demerits, very fearful (deeming no man faithful to him, Matthew
Westmin^t. An. 1013. p. 393. Malmesbury, l. 2. c. 10. Huntind. p. 432. Sim.
Dunelm. p. 169.
by reason of the tragical death of his Brother Edwaod, for which he felt this
Divine revenge, not daring to raise an Army, not fight the Enemy wi^h it when
raised, Ne Nobiles Regni quos injuste exhaeredaverat, lest the Nobles of the
Rea^m, whom he had unju^^ly dis-inherited, should desert and deliver him up to
the Enemy;) declining the necessity of war, and of a new siege, most un^orthily
deserted the Londoners (his faithful valiant Subjects and Pro^ectors in the
midst of their dangers and Enemies, ^lying away secretly f^o^ them to Hamshire,
by secret journies, from w^ence he sailed to the Isle of Wight. Hereupon the
Londoners, Malmesb. de Gestis Reg. l. 1. c. 10.
Laudandi prorsus vi^i and quos Mars ipse collata non sperneret hasta, si Ducem
habuissent, Cu^us dum vel sola umbra protegerentur totius pugnae, aleam, ipsam
obsidionem etiam non paucis mensibus luserunt) Seeing themselves thus
unworthily deserted by their Sovereign in their extremities, moved by the
example of the rest of their Countrymen, submitted themselves likewise to King
Swain, sending Hostages to, and making their peace wi^h him; the rather, for
that they feared Swains fury was so much incensed against them, for his former
shameful repulses by them, that if they submitted not to ^^m of their own
accords, he would not only spoil them of all their goods, but likewise command
either all their eyes to be pulled out, or their hands and feet to be cut off,
i^ he subdued them by force. History of Great Britain, p. 4^0, 421. and Edu.
1611. p. 378, 379.
John Speed (against the current of other Historians) informs us, That Swain
after his repulse from London, having received a certain sum of money, went
back into Denmark, for want of victuals, and to recruit his shattered Army,
whence returning soon after, he was immediately met by the English, where
betwixt them was struck a sore battle, which had been with good success, had
not the Treason of some hindered it, in turning to the Danes. King Ethelred
therefore seeing himself and the Land betrayed on this manner, to those few
true English that were left, used this Speech as follows.

If there wanted in me a fatherly care, either for the defense of the Kingdom,
or ad^inis^ration of Justice in the Commonwealth, or in you, the carriage of
Soldiers for defense of your Native Country, then truly silent would I be for
ever, and bear those calamities with a more dejected mind: but as the case
stands (be it as it is) I for my part am resolved, to rush into the midst of
the Enemy, and to lose my life for my kingdom and Crown. And you (I am sure)
hold it a worthy death, that is purchased for the Liberties of your selves and
kindred; and therein I pray you, let us all die; for I see both God and destiny
against us, and the name of the English Nation brought almost to the last
period: for we are overcome, not by weapons and hostile war, but by Treason
and dom^stick falsehood: our Navy betrayed into the Danes hands, our battle
weakened by the revolt of our Captains, our designs betrayed to them by our own
Counselors, and they also enforcing composition of dishonorable Peace: I my
self disesteemed, and in scorn termed, Ethelred the unready: Your valor and
loyalty betrayed by your own Leaders, and all our poverty yearly augmented by
the payment of their Danegelt; Proposit. 1.
which how to re^ress God only knows, and we are to seek. For if we pay money
for peace, and that confirmed by Oath, these Enemies soon break it, as a people
that neither regard God nor man, contrary to equity and the Laws of War^ and of
Nations; and so f^r off is all hope of better success, as we have cause to fear
the loss of our kingdom, and you the extinction of the English Nations
revenue. Therefore seeing our enemies are at hand, and their hands at our
throats, let us by foresight and counsel save our own lives, or else by
courage sheath our swords in their bowels, either of which I am willing to
enter into, to secure our Estate and Nation from an irrecoverable Ruin. After
which Speech he and his Army retreated, and gave way to the prevailing Enemy.

Swain herepon settling all things according to his own will, when as he knew,
that no man durst resist him, commanded himself to be called King of England,
Dum non fuit alius qui pro jure regni decertare, vel se regem confiteri a^sus
fuisset, as Ann. 1013. p. 393. Huntindon, p. 452.
Matt. Westminster, and others write. Such a strange fear and stupidity was
then fallen upon Ethelred and the whole English Nation. After this Ethelred
privily departed from London to Hampton, and from thence to the Isle of Weight
as aforesaid, where advising with the Abbots, and Bishops there assembled in
Council, what course was best to steer, he spoke thus unto them, the History
whereof I shall fully relate in De Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 10. p. 69, 70.
William of Malmesbury his words. Ibi Abbates et Episcopos^ Qui nec in tali
necessitate Dominum suum deserendum putarent, in hanc convenit sententiam.
Vide^ent quam in angusto res essent suae, Proposit. 8.
et suorum se perfidia Ducum avito extorrem solio, et opis egentem a^i^nae, in
cujus manu al^orum ^olebat salus pendere: quondam Monarcham et Potentem, modo
miserum et exulem: dolendum sibi hanc commutationem, quia facilius toleres o^es
non habuisse, quam habitas amisisse. Pudendam Anglis eo magis, quod deserti
Ducis exemplu^ processurum sit in orbem terrarum. I^^os amore sui sine
sumptibus voluntariam sube untes fugam, domos et facultates suas praedonibus
exposuisse, in arcto esse victum omnibus, vestitum deesse pluribus: probare se
fidem illorum^ sed non reperire salutem, adeo jam subjugata terra, observari
littora, ut nusquam sine periculo sit exitus. Quapropter considerent in m^dium,
quid censerent faciendum. Si maneant, plus a Civibus cavendum quam ab Hostibus;
forsitan enim crucibus suis novi domini gratiam mercarentur; e^ cer^e occidi ab
ho^te ^i^u^atur fortunae, prodi a Cive addicetur Ignaviae. Si ad exteras gentes
^^giunt gloriae fore dispendium; si ad notas, metuendum ne cum fortuna colerent
animum. Plaerosque enim probos et illustres viros hac occasion caesos,
experiendum tamen sortem et tentandum pectus Richardi Ducis Normannorum, qui si
Sororem et Nepotes non ingrato animo susceperit, se quoque non aspernanter
protecturum. Vadabitur enim mihi meam salutem conjugi et liberis impensus
favor. Quod si ille adversum pedem contulerit, non deerit mihi animus, pla^e
non deerit, hic gloriose occumbere, quam illic ignominiose vivere.

Hereupon he sends Emma his Queen and her children in the month of August into
Normandy, accompanied with the Bishop of Durham, and Abbot of Burgh, where they
are joyfully received by Duke Richard, who invites Ethelred himself to honor
his Court with his presence; who thereupon in January following passes over
into Normandy and there solaceth his miseries with the courteous entertainment
he there found. Wigorn. Sim. Dunelm. Huntindon, Hoveden, Radul. de Diceto,
Polychronicon, Malmesb. l. 2. c. 10. p. 70. Mat. W^stm. p. 394. Bromton,
Knyghton, Fa^bian, Graston, Holinshed, Speed, Daniel.
King Swane in the mean time provokes invaded England with ruins and
slaughters, plays the absolute Tyrant, commands Provisions to be abundantly
provided for his Army and Navy, et Tributum fere importabile solvi praecepit,
and likewi^e commanded an insupportable Tribute to be paid: And the like in all
things Earl Turkell the Dane, commanded to be paid to his Navy lying at
Greenwich, hired by King Ethelred to defend the English from Foreiners; yet
both of them as often as they pleased preyed upon and pillaged the Country
besides, first polling the inhabitants of their goods, and then banishing them.
Provincialium substantiae prius abreptae, mox proscriptiones factae. Propos. 1,
4.
In this sad oppressed condition under their New Sovereign, to whom they had
submitted themselves, both Nobles and people knew not what to do. Haesitabatur
totis urbibus quid fieret: si pararetur rebellio, assertorem non haberent; si
eligeretur subjectio, placido rectore careren^. Ita privatae et publicae opes
ad naves cum obsidibus deportabantur. Quo evidenter apparet Swanum naturalem et
legitimum non esse Dominum, sed atrocissimum Tyrannum, ^s Malmesbury, Matthew
Westminster, and others record. But God who is propitious to people in their
greatest extremities, suffered not England to lie long fluctuating in so many
calamities. For this barbarous Tyrant Swane, after innumerable evils and
cruelties perpetrated in England and elsewhere, added this to the heap of his
further damnation, that he Exacted a great Tribute out of the Town of St.
Edmondsbury, Anno 1014. which none ever before presumed to do, since it was
given to the Church wherein the body of the precious Martyr St. Edmond lies
intombed, all the lands thereof being exempted from Tributes. Beginning to vex
the possessions of the Church, and Proposit. 1.
threatening to burn the Town and destroy all the Monks unless they speedily paid
him the Tribute he exacted, and using reproachful speeches against St. Edmond,
as having no holiness in him, he was suddenly struck dead and ended his life on
the Feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin, Anno 1014. Our Monkish
Historians record; That on the Evening of the day whereon he held a general
Court at Ge^gnesburgh, ^ei^erating his menaces against the Town, and ready to
put them in execution, for not paying the Tribute demanded, he saw St. Edmond
coming alone armed against him, whiles he was environed in the midst of his
Danish Troops; whereupon he presently cried out with great affright and a loud
voice; Help O fellow Soldiers, help, behold St. Edmond comes to slay me: and
whiles he was thus speaking, being grievously wounded with a spear by the
Saint, he fell off from his horse, and continued in great torment till night,
and so ended his life, with a miserable death.

Malmesb. Hu^^ind. Hoveden, Wigorn. Sim. Dunelm. Radul^hus de Diceto, Mat.
Westmin. Polychron. Bro^ton, Fabian, Grafton, Speed, Daniel, Knighton,
Swane being dead, Anno 1014.
the whole Navy and Nation of the Danes, Elected and made Cnute his son their
King and Lord: Majores Natu totius Angliae; The Nobles and Senators of all
England ^iking nothing ^e^s than bondage, especially under such new tyrannizing
foreign Intruders, thinking it now or never the time to shake of^ their new
yoke, pronounced their Natural Lord, to be dearer to them than any Foreiner, Si
(...) se quam consueverat ageret. Whereupon with unanimous consent, and great
joy and speed they sent m^ssengers into Normandy to Ethelred to inform him;
Nullum eo libentius se in Regem recepturos, si ipse vel rectius gubernare, vel
mitius eos tractare vellet quam prius tractaverat: Proposit. 1, 5, 6, 8.
and to hasten his return unto them. Who thereupon presently sent over his son
Edward, qui fidem Principum, favor^mque vulgi praesens specularetur: who
together with his Ambassadors, assured both the Nobles and Commons of the
English Nation; That he would for time to come be their mild and devout Lord,
consent to their wills in all things, acquiesce in their Counsels, and if he
had offended in any kind, he would reform it according as they should think
^it, and with a ready mind pardon whatsoever had beed contemptuously or
disgrace^ully spoken or acted by them, against him or his, if they would all
unanimously receive him again as their King into the Kingdom. To which they all
gave a favorable and satisfactory answer: Whereupon a plenary reconciliation
was ratified between them on both sides, both b^ words and com^act. Moreover Ad
haec Principes, se non amplius Danicum Regem admissuros in Angliam unanimi^er
sposponderunt. Florentius Wigorniensis, p. 385. Henry Huntindon, p. 433. Simeon
Dunelmensis, Hist. col. 171.
The Nobles unanimously and freely agreed and voted, That they would never more
admit a Danish King into England to reign over them. The^e things conc^uded,
King Ethelred speedily returns into England, where he was honorably and
joyfully received by the English. And that he might seem to ca^t off his former
sloathfulness, he hastened to raise an Army against Cnute, who remaining with
hi^ Navy in Lindesey, made an agreement with the inhabitants, exacting men and
horses from them, that he might surprise Ethelred at unawares, and threatening
grievously to punish all such as revolted from him. But Cnute being taken in
his own craft, ( Ethelred marching thither with a strong army before he was
pro^ided to receive him) fled from thence with his Hostages, Army and Navy to
Sandwich; whereupon Ethelred depopulated all Lindesey, wasting the Country wi^h
fire and sword, slaying all the Inhabitants (as Traitors to him and their
Na^ive Country;) Cnute^ by way of revenge, humano et divino Iure contempto in
insontes grassatus, cuts o^f the hands and ears, and ^^its the Noses of all the
most Noble and beautiful Hostages throughout England, given to his father, and
so dismissing them, sailed into Denmark to settle his affairs and augment his
forces, resolving to return the year following. After his departure, Sim.
Dunelmensis, Florent. Wigorn. p. 382.
King Ethelred this very year^ Super haec omnia mala Classi quae apud Greenwic
^acui^ Tributum quod erat 30. millia librarum, pendi mandavit; to wit, to the
Fleet under Turkell the Dane, Proposit. 1.
who instead of defending, did but help to pillage and oppress the English:
Huntindon wri^es, it was but 21 thousand pounds; and Bromton avers^ that it was
Cnute, not Ethelred, who commanded it to be paid to his Navy. Soon after which,
the Sea rising higher than it was accustomed, drowned an innumerable Company of
Villages, people, and cattle.

Anno 1015.
After Cnutes departure, Malmsbury l. 2. c. 10. p. 71. Wigorn. p. 382. Mat.
Westminster, p. 395. Hoveden, p. 433. Polychronicon, Fabian, Grafton,
Holinshed, Speed.
King Ethelred summoned a Parliamentaty Council at Oxford, Anno 1015. both of
the Danes and English. Malmsbury expressly styles it, MAGNUM CONCILIUM;
Wigorniensis, Hoved^n, Sim. Dunelmensis, MAGNUM PLACITUM: Matthew Westminster
and others, MAGNVM COLLOQUIUM; our later English Historians, a Great Council
and Parliament. The King by the ill advise of that Arch Traitor Duke Edric at
this Great Council, commanded some Noble^ of the Danes to be suddenly and
secretly slain, quasi de Regia proditione notatos ac perfidiae apud se
insimulatos, the chiefest of them were Sygeforth and Morcar, whom Edric,
treacherously invited to his chamber, and there making them drunk, caused his
armed guards there placed secretly to murder them, which they did. Hereupon
their Servants endeavoring to revenge their Lords deaths (being digniores et
potentiores ex Scovengensibus) they were repul^ed wi^h arms, and forced to slye
into the Tower of St. Frideswides Church for safety; whence when they could not
be forcibly expelled, they were all there burnt together. The King presently
seized upon their lands and goods (the chief cause of their murder, as some
conceived) and sent the relict of Sygeforth (a very Noble, beautiful and
virtuous Lady) prisoner to Malmsbury: whither Edmond (the Kings base Son, as
some affirm,) pos^ed without his fathers privity, and being enamored with her
beauty, first carnally abused, then afterward married her; and by her advice
forcibly invaded and seized upon the Lands of her husband and Morcar, which
were very great, and the Earldom of Northumberland, which his father denied him
upon his request: Whereupon all the Inhabitants of that County readily
submitted to him. Whiles these things were acting, Malmsbury, Wigorn. Sim.
Dunelm. Radulphus de Diceto, Huntindon, Hoveden, Bromton, Polychronicon,
Fabian, Holinshed, Gra^ton, Speed, Daniel.
Cnute having settled his affairs in Denmark, and made a League with his
neighbor Kings, recrui^ed his Army and Navy, and returned into England, with a
resolution, either to win it, or to lose his life in the attempt. Ariving first
at Sandwich, and sailing thence to the West, he pillaged Dorsetshire,
Somersetshire, and Wiltshire, filling all places with slaughters and plunders.
King Ethelred lying then sick at Cosham, his son Edmond Ironside, and Duke
Edric, raised an Army against Cnute; but when both their forces were united to
fight him, the old perfidious Traitor Edric endeavored by all means to betray
Edmond to the Danes, or treacherously to slay him; which being discovered to
Edmond, thereupon they severed their forces from each other, and gave place to
the Enemies without giving them battle. Not long after Edric enticing to him 40
of the Kings ships furnished with Danish Mariners and Soldiers, openly
revolted, and went with them to Cnute, subjecting himself to his dominion as
his Sovereign: by whose example all West-Sex submitted to him as their Kihg,
delivering him hostages for their fidelity, resigning up all their arms to him,
and providing both horse and arms for his Danish Army. The Mercians offered
themselves alone to resist the Danes, but through the Kings sloathfulness, the
business of war received delay, and the enemies proceeded in their rapines
without opposition.

Anno 1016.
In the year 1016. King Cnute, and treacherous Duke Edric, came with 200 sail of
ships into the river of Thames, whence they marched by land with a great Army
of horse and foot, and invaded Mercia in an hostile manner, burning all the
Towns and Villages, and slaying all the men they met with in Warwickshire and
other places; whereupon King Ethelred, (as Huntindon, Wigorniensis, and others
record) made an Edict, Proposit. 3, 8.
Ut quicunque Anglorum sanus esset, secum in bello procederet, That every
Englishman who was in health, should go with him in battle against the Danes.
An innumerable multitude of people upon this assembled together to assist him:
But when his and his son Edmonds forces were conjoined in one body, the King
was informed, that some of his auxiliaries were ready to betray and deliver him
up to the enemies, unless he took care to prevent it and save himself: and as
some write, the Mercians refused to ^ight with the West Saxons and Danes;
whereupon the expedition was given over, and every man returned to his own
home. After this Edmund Ironside raised a greater Army than before against
Cnute, and sent Messengers to King Ethelred to London, to raise as many men as
possible he could, and speedily to come and join with him against the Danes;
but he, for fear of being betrayed to the Enemy, presently dismissed the Army
without fighting, and returned to London. Hereupon Ed^ Ironside went into
Northumberland, where some imagined he would raise a greater Army against Cnute
the Dane; but he and Vh^red Earl of Northumberland, instead of incountring
Cnute, wasted the Counties of Stafford, Shrewsbury and Leicester, because they
would not go forth to fight against the Danes Army, Proposit. 8.
in defense of their Country and King. Cnute, on the other side wasting with
fire and sword the Counties of Buckingham, Bedford, Huntindon, Northampton,
Lincoln, Nottingham, and after that Northumberland: Which Edmond being informed
of, returned to London to his Father, and Earl Uhtred returning home, being
compelled by necessity, repaired to Cnute, and submitted himself to him, with
all the Northumbrians, making a Peace with him, and giving him hostages for
performance thereof, and for his and their fidelity. Not long after Uhtred and
Turketel, Earls of Northumberland, were both treacherously slain by Turebrand a
Dane, by Cnutes command or Commission. Which done, Cnute made one Hirc (some
style him Egric) Earl of Northumberland in his place; and then returned with
all his army to his Ships in triumph, a little before the feast of Easter, with
a very great booty. Not long after, King Ethelred (born to troubles and
mischief,) after manifold labors, vexations, treacheries, and incessant
tribulations, ended his wretched life in London, where he died May 9th. Anno
1016. being there buried in St- Paul's Church, finding rest in his Grave by
death, which he could never find in hi^ Throne all his life, having attaine^ it
by Treachery, and his Brothers, Sovereigns murder Exagitabant illum umbrae
^ratern^, diras exigentes inferi^s, and^. Malmesbu^y De Ges^is ^eg. l. 2. c. 10.
whose Ghost (as Malmesbury and others written did perpetually vex and haunt him
all his r^ign, and made him so subject to, and fearful of plots and
treacheries, that he knew not whom to trust, nor ever deemed himself secure,
even in the midst of his often raised Armies, Nobles, People, though ready to
adventure their Lives for his defense.

I have related these Passages of the Danish wars^ and invasions during
Ethelreds reign, more largely than I intended. 1. Because on the Englishmens
parts, they were merely defensive of their Native Country, King, Laws,
Liberties, Properties, Estates, Lives against foreign Invaders and ^^urpers.
2ly. Because they more or less relate to my forementioned Propositions,
touch-the fundamental Rights, Liberties, Properties, of the English Nation.
3ly. Because they show forth unto us the true original grounds, causes,
motives, necessities, and manner of granting the very first Civil Tax and
Tribute mentioned in our Histories, by the King and his Nobles, in their
General Councils, to the Danish invaders, to purchase peace, and the true
nature, use of our ancient Danegelt, and rectify some mistakes in our common
late E^glish Historians.

Anno 1016.
Immediately after King Ethelreds decease Florentius Wigorn. p. 384. Huntind.
pars 1. p. 434. Sim. Dunelm. Hist. col. 173. Radulph. de Diceto Abbrev. Chron.
col. 446. Chron. Io. Brom^on, col. 903. H^nry de Knyghton de (...) Angl. l. 1.
c. 2. Polychron. Malmsb. Mat. Westminster. Fabian, Speed, Spelm.
Episcopi, Abbates, Duces, et quique Nobiliores Angliae in unum congregati (as
W^gornien^^s, Hoveden, S^meon Dunelme^^is, Radulphus de Diceto, Bromton^ Or,
Maxima pars Regni, tam Clericorum quam Laicorum in unum congregati (as Matthew
VVestminster^ Or, Proceres Regni cum Clero, (as Kn^^hton expresses i^) Pari
consensu in Dominum et Regem Canntum eligere: All the Bishops, Abbots, Dukes
and Nobles of England, and the greatest part of the chief Clergy and Laity,
assembled together (in a kind of Parliamentary Counci^^ (...) unanimous consent
elected Cnute for their Lord a^^ King (notwithstanding their solemn Vow and
Engagement but the year before, never to suffer a Danish King to reign over
them) Whereupon ^he^ all repaired to Cnute to Southampton Wigorn. c. 304.
Hoved. Annal. pars 1. p. 434. Sim. Dunelm. col. 173. Bromt. col. 903. Henry de
Knight. de Ev^ntib. Augl. l. 2. c. 2. col. 2315. Ailredus de vita and mirac.
Edward. col. 374. Se^ Po^yc. Fab. Holinshed. Grast. Speed.
omnemque Progeniem Regis Ethelredi, coram illo abhorrentes, et abnegando
repudiantes (a^ Wigorniensis, Huntindon, Knyghton, and others record) and there
in his presence abhorring and utterly renouncing and abjuring all the Progeny
of King Ethelred, they submitted themselves, and swore fealty to him, as to
their only King and Sovereign, he reciprocally then swearing unto them, That he
would be a faithful Lord unto them both in things appertaining to God and the
World, which our Historians thus express. Quibus ille juravit, quod and
secundum Deum, and secundum seculum fidelis illis foret Dominus. Only the City
of London, an^ part of the Nobles then in it, unanimously chose and cried up
Ed. Ironside, Proposit. 8.
King Ethelreds 3. son, by Elgina his first Wife, Daughter to Duke Thored, as
Speed and others relate, though Matthew Westminst^r, and others register his
bir^h, Non ex Emma Regina, sed ex quadam ignobili foemina generatus, qui utique
matris suae ignobilitatem generis mentis ingenuitate and corporis streuuit te
redintegrando redemit. After Edmonds election, he was crowned King by Living
Archbishop of Canterbury, at Kingston upon Thames (where our Kiugs in that age
were usually crowned.) No sooner was he thus advanced to the Regal dignity, but
he presently marched undauntedly into VVest-Sex, and being there recei^ed by
all the People, with great gratulation and joy, he most speedily subj^cted it
to his Dominion. Which being divulged in other parts, many Counties of England,
deserting Cnute, voluntarily submitted themselves unto him, such is the
fickleness of ^he People, and unconstancy of worldly power and affairs.
Malmesb. Huntind. VV^gorn. Sim. Dunelm. Mat. Westminster. Radulph. de Diceto. Bromt.
Polychron. Fab. Caxton, Gr^fton, Holinsh. Speed, Daniel, and others in the life
of Edmond Ironside and Cnute.
Cnute in ^he mean time to be revenged of the Londoners for making Edmond King,
marched to London with his whole Army and Fleet, besieged and blocked up the
City with his Ships, drawn up the Thames on the West Side of the Bridge, and
then drew a large and deep trench round about the City, from the Southside of
the River, whereby he intercepted all ingress and egress to the Citizens and
others, whom he shut up so close, that none could go in or out of the City, and
endeavored by many strong assaults to force it: but being still repulsed by
the Citizen^, who valiantly defended the walls, he left off the siege with
great confusion and loss, as well as dishonor. Thence he marched with his Army
into Dorsetshire, to subdue it: Where King Edmond meeting him with such forces
as he could suddenly raise, gave him battle at Penham near Gillingham; where
after a bl^udy and cruel encounter, he put Cnute and his Army to flight, and
slew many of them. Not long after, they recruiting their forces, both Armies
meeting at Steorstan, King Edmond resolving there to give Cnute battle, placed
the most expert and valiantest of his Soldiers in the front; and the rest of
the English who came flocking in to him, he kept for a reserve in the rear.
Then calling upon every of them by name, he exhorted and inform^d them, That
they now fought for their Country, for their Children, for their Wives, for
their Houses and Liberties, in^laming the minds of his Soldiers with his
excellent Speeches; in this battle with the Enemy, he exercised the O^fices of
a valiant Soldier, and good General, charging very courageously; But because
that most per^idious Duke Edric, Almar, and Algar, and others of the great men,
who ought to have assisted him with the Inhabitants of Southampton, Wilsthire,
and innume^able other English, joined with the Danes, the battle continued all
day, from morning to night, with equal fortune, till both sides being ti^ed
out, and many of each party slain, the night constrained them to march one from
another. But their blood not being cold, the next day they buckled together
again, with no less courage than before; till at last, in the very heat of the
battle, the most perfidious Duke Edric perceiving the Danes like to be totally
routed, and the English in great forwardness of victory, cut off the head of a
Soldier named Osmeranus, very like to King Edmund both in hair and
countenance, and shaking his bloody sword, with the half gasping head in his
hand, which he lifted up on high, cried out to the English Army: O ye
Dorsetshire men, Devonshire men, and other English, flee and get away, for your
head is lost; be^old here is the head of your King Edmund, which I hold in my
hand, therefore hasten hence with all speed, and save your lives. Which when
the English heard and saw, they were more affrighted with the atrocity of the
thing, than with the belief of the Speaker: whereupon all the more unconstant
of the Army were ready to fly away. But Edmond having present notice of this
treacherous stratagem, and seeing his men ready to give over the fight, hasted
where he might be best seen, and posting from rank to rank, encouraged them to
fight like Englishmen: who thereupon resuming their courage, charged the Danes
more fiercely than before; and bending their force against the Traitor, had
shot him to death, but that he retreated presently to the Enemy, the English
reviving, and manfully continuing the battle again till the darkness of the
night caused both Armies voluntarily to retreat, from each other into their
Tents. When much of the night was spent, Cnute commanded his men in great
silence to break up their Camp, and marched to his Ships, and soon after,
whiles King Edmond was recruiting his Army in West-Sex, besieged London again^
whereupon Edmond marching to London with a select company of Soldiers, chased
Cnute and his Army to their ships, removed the siege, and entered the City in
manner of Triumph. Cnute and Edric perceiving the valor and good success of
Edmond, conspired together, to overcome him by Treason, whom they could not
vanquish by Arms; for which end, Edric, before King Edmonds march to London
(as some) or soon after, as others relate, feignedly revolted from Cnute, and
submitted himself again to Edmond, as his natural Lord: and renewing his peace
with him, fraudently swore that he would continue faithful to him, only that
he might betray him. Edmond, two days after he had chased the Danes from the
siege of London, pursuing his victory, passed over the Thames at Brentford,
where, though many of the English were drowned in passing over the River,
through their carelessness, yet he there fought with the Danes the fourth (or
^ather fifth) time, routed them, and won the field. After which, Edmond, by the
advice of Edric, marched again into West-Sex, to raise a more numerous Army, to
supply those who were drowned and slain in this last battle: Upon which
advantage, the Danes again returned to the siege at London, invironing, and
fiercely assaulting it on every side; but being valiantly repulsed by the
Citizens, they retired from thence to their ships, and sailed into the River of
Arewe; where leaping out of their ships, they^ went about pillaging in Mercia,
killing all they met, and burning the Villages, returning to their ships with a
great booty: Another company of their foot sailing up the River of Meadway,
pillaged Kent, their Horse marching thither by Land to meet them, doing the
like, wasting all places with fire and sword. King Edmond having in the mean
time raised a strong Army out of all England, passed over with them again at
Brentford, to fight the Danes, and giving them battle near Oteford, routed the
whole Danish Army, not able to endure his fierce charge, and pursued them as
far as Ilesford, slaying many thousands of them in the pursuit; and had he
followed the pursuit further, it was conceived that day had put an end to the
war and Danes for ever. But perfidious Duke Edric by his most wicked Counsel
(the worst ever given in England) caused him to give over the chase. Whereupon
the ^lying Danes escaped into the Isle of Shepy. Edmond returning into
VVest-Sex to observe Cnutes motion, he thereupon transported his forces into
Kent, who began to plunder and wast Mercia far worse than ever they had done
before: VVhereupon King Edmond marching with his Army against them, gave them
battle the sixth time, at Esesdune, (or Assendune) now Ashdune in Essex;
whereafter a long and bloody fight, with equal valor, and great loss on both
sides: King Edmond seeing the Danes to fight more valiantly than ever before,
leaving his place (which usually was between the Dragon and Standard) ran into
the very front of the battle, and breaking in like thunder upon the Enemy,
brake their ranks, pierced into the very midst of them, and made way for others
to follow him, forcing the Danes to give back; Which the ever traitero^s Edric
perceiving, ^led with the whole Squadron of Soldiers which he commanded, unto
Cnute, as was formerly agreed between them, whereupon the Danes becoming the
stronger, made an extraordinary slaughter of the E^glish; as Matthew
Westminster and his followers s^ory. Henry Huntindon relates, That Edric
seeing the Danes going to ruin, cried out to the English Army, Fly O
Englishmen, ^ly Englishmen, for Edmond is dead (being not seen in his wonted
place) and crying out thus, he and his Brigade first began the flight;
whereupon the whole Army of the English following them, fled likewise.
VVigorniensis informs us; that King Edmond before this battle, riding about to
every Company, admonished and commanded them, that being mindful of their
pristine valor and victory, they should defend themselves and the Realm from
the avarice of the Danes, being now to fight with those they had formerly
conquered. that perfidious Duke Edric seeing the Danish army inclining to
flight, and the English about to gain the victory, began to fly with the
VVagesetensians, and that part of the army which he commanded, as he formerly
promised to Cnute, that circumventing his Lord King Edmond and the English army
with deceits, he gave the victory to the Danes by his treachery; and by the
consent of all our VVriters, he here gave the greatest wound to the English
Nobility and Nation that ever they rece^^^d in any former battle, Duke Alfric,
Duke Godwin, D^^e Ulfketel, Duke Aethelward, Ailward son of Duke Alke, and all
the flower of the English Nobility, together with Eadnoth Bishop of Lincoln,
and Abbot VVulfius, (qui ad exorandum Deum pro milite bellum agente
convenerunt) with an infinite number of common Soldiers being there slain in
this fight and slight: qui nunquam ante in uno praelio tantam cladem ab
hostibus a^ceperunt. Ibi Cnuto Regnum expugnavit, ibi omne decus Anglorum
occubuit, ibi flos patriae totus emarcuit, Writes Malmesbury, Cnute likewise
on his side sustained an irreperable loss, both of his Dukes and Nobles.

After this lamentable loss, wherein so many Nobles fell, Cnute marching to
London in triumph, took the Royal Scepters; whence depar^ing into
Glocestershire, in pursuit of Edmond (who retreated almost alone to Gloucester,
and there recruited his broken forces) he wasted and pillaged the Country in
his march. King Edmond resolved to give him another battle in a place called
Dierhurst; where Edmond with his army being on the VVest-part of the River
Severn, and Cnute on the Eastside with his army, both set in battle array,
ready manfully to encounter each other, wicked Duke Edric, magnatibus
convocatis, calling the Nobles of both parties together, ^pake unto them as
follows, as Matthew Westminster, and others accord, before any encounter;
but Abbot Ethelred records, that both Armies then fought a most bloody bat^el
for one whole day from morning to night, an innumerable Company being slain on
both sides, without any Victory; the night only causing them to re^ire, ad
similem ludum eundemque exitum die craestina reversuri. Both Armies being
wearied with this bloody sport, when they saw King Edmonds forces daily
increasing, and Cnutes company likewise augmented out of foreign parts, by
constant recruits, which he caused to be sent from thence, Uterque Exercitus
Proceres ad colloquium cogunt, both armies compel^ed their Nobles to a
Conference; where one of them, being elder than the rest (which others affirm
to be Duke Edric) requiring silence, spoke thus unto them, as Ethel^edus Abbas,
De Geneal. Regum Angl. coll. 363, 364. Polychronicon, l. 6. c. 17.
Abbot Ethelred records his words.

I desire, O wise men, in these our dangers to give advice; who verily am
in^eriour to you in wisdom, but superior to you in age, as these gray hairs
testify^ and peradventure what wisdom has not, use has taught me, and what
science has denied, experience has conferred. Many things verily we have seen
and known, many things moreover our Fathers have to^d us, and not without cause
we require audience, that we may utter no doubtful senten^^ of things certain
and apparent. A perilous thing is acted; we suffer evil things, we discern
worser, we fear the worst of all. We fight daily, neither do we overcom, nor
yet are we vanquished; yea we are overcome, and yet no man vanquisheth. For how
are we not overcome, who are wounded, who are oppressed, who are wearied, who
are distressed by forces, who are spoiled by arms? Neither fly we, since there
is none who may assault us; neither do we assault, since courage fails on both
sides. How long shall it be, ere we see an end of these wonderful things? When
shall there be rest from this labor, tranquillity from this storm, security
from this fear? Certainly Edmond is invincible by reason of his wonderful
fortitude; an^ Cnute also is invincible by reason of fortunes favor. We are
broken in pieces, we are slain, we are dissipated, we lose our dearest pledges,
we expose our sweet friends and alliances to death. But of this labor what
frui^? what end? what price? what emolument? what I pray, but that the
soldiers being slain on both sides, the Captains at last compelled by
necessity, may compound? or verily fight alone, without a Soldier? Why then
not now? Truly while we live, while we breath, whiles the Army remains this
might be done more profitably, honestly, securely. I demand, what insolence yea
violence, yea madness is this? England heretofore when subjected to many Kings,
both flourished in glory, and abounded in riches. O ambition! how blind is it
always, which cove^ing the whole, loses the whole? Why I pray, does not that
now suffice two, which heretofore was sufficient for five Kings? But if there
be in them so great a lust of domineering, that Edmond disdains a Peer, Cnu^e a
Superior, PUGNENT, QUAESO, SOLI, QUI SOLI CUPIUNT DOMINARI: CERTENT PRO CORONA
SOLI, QUI SOLI CUPIUNT INSIGNIRI; let them fight, I beseech you, alone, who
desire to domineer alone; le^ them contend for the Crown alone, who desire to
be crowned alone. Let the Generals themselves enter into the hazard of a Duel,
that even by this means one of them may be vanquished; lest if the Army should
fight more often, all being slain, there should be no soldiers for them to
rule over, nor any who may defend the Realm against Foreiners.

Whiles he was about to speak more, ALL THE PEOPLE, shut up his Speech in the
midst of his Jaws, if I may so speak, crying out and saying, AUT PUGNENT IPSI
AUT COMPONENT, let them fight themselves, or let them compound. His Speech
recorded in Bromton, Hen^ de Knyghton, Speed^ and others, is much to the same
effect, though different in some expressions.

Anno 1016. p. 400.
Matthew Westmininster brings in Edric speaking only, thus to the Nobles. O
insensati Nobiles, et armis pot^ntes! cur ^oties morimur in bello pro Regibus,
cum ipsi nobis mor^entibus, nec regnum ob^ineant, nec avaritiae suae finem
imponant. Pugnent consulto, singulariter, qui singulariter regnare contend^^t,
Quae est ista regnandi libido, Quod Anglia modo duobus non sufficit, quae ^lim
octo regibus satisfuit? Itaque vel soli componant, vel soli pro regno
decertent. PLACUIT AUTEM HAEC SENTENTIA OMNIBUS, ET AD REGES PROCERUM DELATUM
ARBITRIUM, ILLI CONSENTIENDO APPROBANT. Hereupon all the Nobles concurring in
this opinion, both Kings approving their Determination, fought a royal single
duel, first on horseback, then on foot, in the Isle of Olerenge, or Olney,
(near Gloucester) in the midst of Severn, in the view of both their Armies, with
extraordinary courage, and equal success, till they were both quite tired, but
neither of them vanquished: At last upon Cnutes motion they began to parley in a
friendly manner; Cnute speaking thus to Edmond. Hitherto I have been covetous
of thy Realm, now most valiant of men, I am verily more desirous of thy self,
whom I see, art to be preferred, I say, not before the Realm of England, but
the whole world it self. Denmark has yielded to me, Norwey has subjected it
self to me, the King of Swedes has given me his hand, and thy admirable Valor
has more than once fructrated the force of my assaults, which I believed no
mortal man could have been able to sustain. Wherefore although fortune has
promised that I should be every where a Conqueror, yet thy admirable valor
has so allured me to favor, that I above measure desire thee both for a
friend and consort of my kingdom: would to God that thou also may be as
desirous of me, that I may reign with thee in England, and thou may reign
with me in Denmark. Truly, if thy valor shall be united to my fortune, Norway
will fear, and Sweden will quake: France it self, accustomed to wars, will
tremble. In brief, Edmond and Cnute both consent to divide the Kingdom: Edmond
yielding to words, who had not yielded to swords, being overcome with this
Oration, who could not be overcome with arms; whereupon, laying aside their
arms, they run and mutually embrace and kiss each other, both Armies rejoicing,
and the Clergy singing Te Deum laudamus, with a loud voice. Afterward in
testimony of Agreement, they change clothes and Arms with each other, and
returning to their Armies, prescribed the manner of the Agreement and Peace.
Wigorniensis, Simeon Du^elmensis, and Annal. pars prior, p. 436.
Roger Hoveden add, that they ratified the agreement with Oaths, TRIBUTOQUE
QUOD CLASSICAE MANVI PENDERETUR STATUTO; and appointed a Tribute which should
be paid to the Sea forces, Proposit. 1, 9.
and then departed from each other. The Danes returned with the great booty
they had gotten to their ships, with whom the Citizens of London having made a
peace, DATO PRECIO, which they paid a pr^ce for, they permitted them there to
winter. The Realm was divided between them both, but the Crown remained to
Edmond, with the City of London, Essex, East-England, and all the Land on the
Southside the River of Thames, and Cnute enjoyed the North parts of England, by
mutual consent and agreement of all the Nobles; and so this bloody war between
them ^after 7. or 8. battles, within so many months space) ceased.

Soon after this fatal Agreement and partition of the Realm, which made Edmond
but half a King^ and England half Denmark, that ever traiterous Duke Edric, to
ingratiate himself the more with Cnute, treacherously mur^er^d King Edmond at
Oxford, of which there are 3. different relations in our Historians. William
Malmsbury, de Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 10, 11. ^ Hen. de Knyghton, de Eventibus
Angliae.
Some say that he corrupted the Kings Chamberlains wi^h gifts to murder him in
his bed: and that King Cnute, in the first year of his Coronation, caused all
of them who had conspired his death by Edric's exhortation to come before him,
where they declared to the King the Treason they had committed against King
Edmond, expecting a large reward for i^. Whereupon the King sent for the Great
Men and Nobles of the Realm, and made the Traitors to acknowledge their Treason
before them, and a great assembly of people; fearing lest otherwise it should
be believed that he had foreplotted the Treason aforesaid, and suborned them to
execute it. After their public confession thereof, he caused them all to be
first drawn, and then hanged for it. Hen. Huntindon, Hist. l. 6. p. 363.
Radulphus de Diceto, Ymagines Hist. and Mat. Westminster. Flores Histor. Anno 1016.
Polychron. l. 6^ c. 17, 18. Chronicon Johan. Bromton, col. 906, 907, 90^.
Others write, that Edric himself, or his Son by his command, murdered him at
Oxford on St. And^ews night as he was easing nature in an house of Office,
stabbing him into the bowels with a two-edged knife through the hole of the
privy, (in which one of them lay in wait to murder him) leaving the knife
sticking in his bowels, and him dead in the place: And some write, that he
placed an Image in his Chamber with a bow and arrow ready bent; which Edmond
admiring at, touching the spring which held the bow thus bent, the arrow
thereupon pierced and slew him in the place. That before his death was known,
Edric went to Edmonds wife, and taking away her two young Sons from her,
brought and delivered them to Cnute; and then saluted him, saying; GOD SAVE
THEE SOLE KING OF ENGLAND. Whereupon Cnute demanding, Why he saluted him in
this manner? He then informed him of King Edmo^ds death, and how he had
murdered him of purpose to make him sole King of England. Speed adds, That he
cut off his Sovereigns head^ presenting it to Cnute with these ^awning
salutations, All hail thou sole Monarch of England, for here behold the head of
thy Copartner, which for thy sake I have adventured to cut off: which no
ancient Historian mentions. Upon this, Cnute, though ambitious enough in
Sovereignty, yet out of a Princely disposition, sore grieved at such a disloyal
treacherous act, presently replied to him, I for reward of so great and
meritorious a service done for me, will^ this day advance thee above all the
Nobles of the Realm; After which he caused his head to be cut off, then fixed
on an hig^ poll, and placed on the highest Tower of London, for the birds to
prey upon. Ingulphi Hist. p. 892. Florent. Wigorn. Mat. Wes^min. Simeon Dunelm,
Hoveden, Anno 1016, 1017. Chron. Johan. Bromton col. 907, 908. Hen. de Knyghton
de Eventib. Angliae, l. 2. c. 2, 3. Radulphus de Diceto Abbreviationes
Chronicorum.
Others more agreeable to the truth, relate; That Cnute in the first year of
his reign depriving this Arch-Traitor Edric of the Dukedom of Mercia, which he
had many years enjoyed; thereupon Edric in the feast of Christ's Nativity,
repaired to Cnute at his Palace in London, to expostulate with him about it:
where checking the King over-harshly, he upbraided him with the many benefits
he had received from him, amongst which he mentioned two, wherewith he
specially provoked him to anger; saying, Most dear King, you ought not to speak
harshly to me, nor suffer any evil to be done unto me; for you had never
enjoyed the Realm of England, but by my means. For out of love to thee, I have
first betrayed King Ethelred; after that I deserted Edmond my proper and
natural Lord; and afterward I foreplotted his death, and murdered my just and
true liege Lord, Proposit. 8.
out of my fidelity toward thee, to bring the whole kingdom unto thee: and
do thou so lightly vilify so great love conferred on thee, for which I never
received any benefit or profit from thee? At which speeches, Cnute changing his
countenance, expressing his fury by its redness, presently pronounced this
sentence against him, saying: And thou shall deservedly die, thou most
perfidious Traitor, seeing by thy own confession thou art guilty of Treason
both against God and me, who have slain thine own Sovereign and natural King,
and my dear confederate Brother. His blood be upon thy head, because thou have
stretched out thy hand against the Lords anointed. And lest a tumult should be
raised among the people, he commanded him to be there presently strangled in
his palace, and his body to be cast through a window into the river of Thames,
to be devo^red of the fishes, as some, or hanged upon London walls unburied, to
be devoured by birds, as others story. At which time Ingulphi Historia, p. 891,
892.
Duke Norman, son of Duke Leofwin, (Captain of Edrics guard) Aethelward son of
Duke Agelmar, and Brihtricus son of Alphege Earl of Devonshire, with many
others of Edrics followers were likewise slain without offense, together with
Edric; because Cnute feared he should one time or other be circumvented by the
treacheries of this old perfidious Traitor, hearing his former natural Lords
Ethelred, and Edmond had frequently been betrayed by him, quorum diutina
proditione alterum vexavit, alterum interfecit; there being no trust to be
reposed in such a Traitor to his Sovereigns. Thus this inveterate Arch-Traitor
to his Natural Country, Kings, and bloody Regicide, by Gods divine Justice
received the just punishment of all his Treasons at the last, instead of
expected great rewards, from that hand he least suspected. Whence Anno 1017. p.
402.
Matthew Westminster relating both the Histories of the manner of Edrics death,
concludes thus, Sed sive sic, sive aliter vitam finierit Proditor Edricus, non
multum ad rem pertinet; quia hoc liquido constat, Quod ille qui multos
circumvenerat, tandem est justo De^ Iudicio circumventus, et proditionis suae
meruit subire talionem: And let all those who have or shall imitare him in his
Treasons against his native Country, Kings, and Regicide, seriously meditate on
his tragical end, and expect the self same retribution in conclusion, though
they escape as many years as he then did before final execution.

A third sort of Authors, as Marianus Scotus, Wigorniensis, Roger Hoveden, and
Simeon Dunelmensis, make no mention of King Edmonds murder by Edric his
subordination, but only that he died at London, (not Oxford) about the Feast of
St. Andrew; as if he had died of a natural death; but the generality of
Writers agree, he was murdered at Oxford, ambiguum quo casu extinctus, writes
De Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 10. p. 72. Chron. Johan. Bromton col. 906, 907.
Malmesbury; the common fame being he was murdered, by Edric as aforesaid. And
Bromton, who recites all three opinions, concludes thus, Sed primus modus,
videlice^, quod rex Edmundus, ad requiem naturae sedens, proditione dicti
Edrici occisus fuit, verior aliis et au^enticior habetur. The Author of the
Encomium of Emma, concurring with Marianus, subjoynes this Observa^ion touching
his short reign and speedy death: That God, etc. minding his own doctrine, That
a kingdom divided in it self caunot long stand, and pitying the English, took
away Edmond, lest if the Kings had continued long together, they should have
both lived in danger, and the Realm in continual trouble. His reign continued
only seven months, in which time he fought seven or eight battles in defense
of his Country, People, and their Liberties, besides his single Duel with
C^ute: and by his untimely death, the English- Saxon Monarchy was devolved to
the Danes, who by Treachery and the Sword for three descents, deprived the
English Saxons of the Crown and Kingdom, through divine retaliation, as they
had unjustly by treachery and the Sword dispossessed and disinherited the
Britons thereof, about 450 years before, as Histor. l. 6. p. 359.
Henry Huntindon, Chron. col. 883.
Bromton, Polychron. l. 1. c. 59 f. 56.
Radulphus Cistrensis, Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 222.
Mr. Fox^ History of Great Britain, p. 394. to 398^
Speed, and others observe. The Sins of the Saxons grown now to the full,
(writes Speed) and their dreggs as it were sunk to the bottom, they were
emptied by the Danes from their own vessels, and their bottles broken, that had
vented their red and bloody wines; in lieu whereof the Lord gave them the cup
of wrath, whose dreggs he had formerly (by their own hands) wrung out upon
other Nations. For the Saxons, that had enlarged their Kingdoms by the blood
of the Britons, and built their nests high upon the Cedars of others, (as the
Prophet speaks, Habbak. 2.) committed an evil cov^tousness to their own
habitations, and were stricken by the same measure that they had measured to
others, when as the Danes often attempting the Lands invasion, and the
subversion of the E^glish Estate, made way with their Swords through all the
Provinces of the Realm, and lastly, advanced the Crown upon their own helmets,
which they wore only for three Successions.

CHAP. IV. Comprising a Summary Collection of all the Parliamentary Great
Councils, Synods, Historical Passages, Proceedings, Laws, relating to the
Fundamental Liberties, Franchis^s, Rights, Government of the People, and other
remarkables, under our Danish Kings, Cnute, Harold, and Harde-Cnute; from the
year of our Lord 1017. till the first year of King Edward the Confessor, Anno
1042. With some brief Observations on the same.
IMmediately after the murder of King Edmond Ironside, King Cnute the Dane,
Anno 1017. taking possession of the whole Realm of England, was solemnly
Holinshed, Gr^fton, Speed, and others in his life, Radul. de Diceto, Abbrev.
Chron. col. 466. Chron. Io. Bromton, col. 906.
crowned King at London, Anno 1017.
by Living Archbishop of Canterbury, succeeding in the Realm of England, Non
successione haereditaria, sed Armorum violentia, as Chronica, col. 1782.
William Thorn observes: Injuste quidem Regnum ingressus, sed magna civilitate
et fortitudine v^tam componens, writes De Gestis Regum Angl. l. 2. c. 11. p. 73.
William of Malmsbury. Whereupon, the better to for^ifie his Military Title,
with a seeming public Election, by the Nobles and Nation in a Parliamentary
Council, and their open disclaimer and renunciation of any Right or Title
either in King Edmonds Sons or Brethren, to the English Crown, to settle it in
perpetuity on himself and his posterity; he Athel^edus Abbas, de Genealog.
Regum Angl. col. 965, 966. Florentius Wigorniensis, p. 389, 390. Sim.
Duuelmensis, col. 175, 176. Hoveden Annal. pars 1. p. 436. Radulph. de Diceto,
Abbrev. Chron. col. 466. Hen: de Knyghton, De Eventibus Angliae, l. 1. c. 3.
Polychronicon, l. 6. c. 18. See Fabian, Grafton, Holinshed, Speed, Daniel, in
the Life of Cnute.
commanded all the Bishops, Dukes, Princes and Nobles of the English Nation to
be assembled together at London in a Parliamentary Council: Where when they
were all met together in his presence, he most craftily demanded of them, as if
he were ignorant, Who were the Witnesses between him and Edmond Ironside when
they made their agreement, and division of the Kingdom between them? What
manner of conference there then was between him and Edmond, concerning his
Brethren and Sons? Whether it was agreed, that it should be lawful for Edmonds
Brethren or Children to reign in the kingdom of the West Saxons after his
death, by any special reservation or agreement between them, in case Edmond
should die in his lifetime? Whom he had designed to be his Heir? Whom he had
appointed to be guardians to his Sons during their infancy? And what he had
commanded concerning his Brothers Alfred and Edward? To which they all
answering both falsely and flatteringly, said, That they did most certainly
know, King Edmond neither living nor dying had commended or given no part of
his kingdom to his Brethren; and they did likewise know, that it was King
Edmonds will, that Cnute should be the Guardian and Protector of his Sons
Proposit. 5, 6, 8.
and of the Realm, until they were of age to reign, calling God himself to
witness the truth hereof. (O the strange temporizing falsity, treachery,
perjury of men in all ages!) But though they thus called God to witness, yet
they gave a false testimony, and fraudulently lied, preferring a lie before the
truth, being forgetful of justice, unmindfull of nature, unjust witnesses,
rising up against Innocence, and betrayers of their own blood and Country: when
as they all well knew, that Edmond had designed his Brethren to be his heirs,
and appointed them to be Guardians of his children; thinking by this their
false testimony to please King Cnute, to make him more mild and gracious to
them, and that they should receive great rewards from him for the same. After
their answers to those Interrogatories, to ingratiate themselves further with
Cnute, though they were sworn before to Edmond and his Heirs, and were Native
Englishmen, Proposit. 8, 1.
yet they there all took a solemn ^ath of Allegiance to Cnute, swearing to him^
That they would and did choose him for their King, and humbly obey him, et
Exercitui Uectigalia dare; and would give Trib^tes to his Army. And having
received a pledge from Cnutes naked hands, with Oaths from the Princes and
Nobles of the Danes, and Cnute reciprocal Oaths from them and all the people,
they ratified a mutual Covenant and League of Peace with reciprocal Oaths
between both Nations, reconciling and abandoning all public enmities between
them. They likewise swore, that they would cast off, banish, and wholly reject
King Edmonds Brothers, Sons, Nota.
and Family. In pursuance whereof they there presently, Fratres et filios
Edmondi Regis omnino despexerunt, ^osque Reges esse negaverun^; unum autem ex
ipsis praedictis Clitonibus, Edwinum, egregium et reverendissimum Edmundi Regis
germanum, Ibidem cum consilio pessimo, exulem esse debere coustituerunt, as
R^ger de Hoveden, Abbot Ethelred, Wigorni^nsis and others at large record the
Story. The discord, treacherous falsehood, disloyal proceedings of the English
Nation then toward one another, and the English royal line, is thus elegantly
set forth by De Vita and Miraculis Edwardi Confessoris, col. 374.
Abbot Ailred; (a lively Character of our age) Externisque malis accessit
civilis d^scordia, adeo ut quis cui creder^t, quis cui mentis suae secreta
commit^eret nesciretur. Plena erat proditoribus Insula, nusquam tuta fides,
nu^quam ^ine ^u^pi^^one ^mor, Sermo sine simulatione. Tandem eousque Proditio
Civilis, et astu^ia Processit hostilis, ut de (...) Rege Magna pars Ins^lae
legitimis abdicatis haeredibus, Cnutoni qui Regnum invaserat, manus darent;
peremptoque i^victissimo Reg^ Edmundo paterni honoris simul ^t l^boris haerede,
etiam Filios ejus, ad^uc in cunis agentes, barbaris mi^terent occidendos. King
Cnute, hearing this their palpable flattery, and con^emptuous rejection of
Edwin, and the Saxon regal Line, went joyfully into his Chamber, and calling
perfidious Duke Edric to him, demanded of him, how he might deceive Prince
Edwin, so as to have him murdered? Who thereupon informed him, how and by whom
his murder might be accomplished by promised rewards of money and preferments,
which was accordingly effected soon after by Cnutes procurement and command.
This Edric likewise persuaded Cnute, to slay Prince Edward and Edmond, King
Edmonds sons. Whereupon Statuit Cnuto mirabiliter in animo suo, omne genus
Gentis Regni Anglorum perdere, vel exilio perenni eliminare, ut regnum Angliae
filiis suis jure h^roditario r^servare curaret, writes Matthew Westminster, p.
402. But because it might seem a great disgrace to him, to murder these infant
Princes in England, he afterward sent them over Sea to King Swane to slay them
in Denmark; who abhorring the fact, instead thereof sent them to Solomon King
of Hungary to be preserved and educ^ted.

Cnute having thus through the flattery, perjury and treachery of the Euglish
Prelates and Nobles ^ained the entire Monarchy of England^ slew or banished all
those perfidious English Sycophants, temporizers who had the chiefest hand in
this false testimony, abjuration and treacherous bloody advice, against the
Saxon Royal Family: ^y whose Counsel he slew or banishe^ all the blood royal of
the Realm of England, that so he might Iure Haereditario, reserve and
perpetuate the kingdom to his own Posterity by an hereditary right. Duke Edric
the principal of them, for this and his other Treasons forementioned, was
deprived of his Dukedom of Mercia, and exemplarily executed as a most
perfidious Traitor by Cnutes command the first year of his reign, and many of
his Captains and followers were slain with him, (of which at large before.)
Mor^^m Proditori^ pro demeritis accepit laqueo suspensus, et in Tamesin fluvium
projectus. Cum quo plurimis sattellitum suorum similiter occisis, e^iam inter
eos praecipuus et primus Normannus occisus est, writes Abbot Historia, p. 892.
Ingulphus. Turkell Duke of East-England, and Hirc Duke of Northumberland, were
both banished the Realm; Duke Norman and Bridric slain, and a heavy Tax of 82
Thousand pounds Proposit. 1, 8
(besides 10000 pounds imposed on London alone) imposed and levied on the whole
Nation. Quoniam igitur proprii sanguinis proditores adulantes Regi menti^i sun^
in caput suum, gladiu^ eorum intravit in cor eorum, et a Cnutho quem
naturalibus Dominis praetulerunt, confractus e^t arcus eoru^. Cum (...)
Monarchiam Insulae faven^ibus illis ob^inui^^e^. Omnes qui primi in illo fuere
consilio exterminavit, et q^o^quo^ de regio Semine ^uperstites reperit, vel
regno repulit, vel occidit, as De Genealogia R^gum Anglorum, col. 365, 366.
Abbot Ethelred records to pos^e^ity. To which Histo^iar. l. 6. p. 363.
Henry Huntindon, and De Eventib. Angliae, l. 1. c. 3.
Henr^ de Knyghton subjo^n, Postea vero Rex justo Dei judicio dignam
retributionem nequitiae Anglis reddidit: Ipse namque Rex Cnu^e Edricum occidit,
( quia timebat ab insidi^s ab eo aliquando circumveniri, sicut Domini sui
priores Ethelredus and Edmondus frequenter sunt circumventi, quorum diutina
proditione alterum vexavit, alterum interfecit, add ^lorentius Wigorni^nsis,
Simeon Dunelmensis, Roger de Hoveden, and Radulphus de Diceto:) Turkellum
exulavit, Hirc fugere compulit. Praeterea summos Procerum aggressus, Normannum
Ducem interfecit. Edwi Adeling exterminavit, Adelwoldum detruncavit, Edwi
Churleging exulavit: Birdric ferro vita privavit. Florentius Wigorn. Anno 1017.
p. 391.
Aethelwardus filius Agelmari Ducis, et Brihtricus filius Alphegi Domnaniensis
Satrapae, sin^ culpa interfecti sunt. Fecit quoque per Angliam mirabilem Censum
reddi, scilicet 82. (some write 72.) mill librarum, praeter undecies mill
libri^ quas Londinensis reddiderunt. Dignum igitur exactorem Dominus Iustus
Anglis imposuit (for rejecting their own Hereditary Sovereign Line.) Polychron.
l. 6. c. 18. Fabian part. 6. c. 205.
Radulphus Cestrensis (englished by Trevisa,) Fabian and Chronicle^ p. 174.
Grafton, thus second them. Also they swore, that they would in all wise put
off Edmonds kinn. They trowed thereby to be great with the King afterward, but
it fared far otherwise. For many or the more part of them, specially such as
Canutus perceived were sworn before to Edmond and his heirs, he mistrusted and
disdain^d ever after. Nota.
Therefore some of them were slain by Gods rightful dome, and some banished,
and exiled and put out of the land, and some by Gods punishment died suddenly,
and came to a miserable end; which other of our Historians likewise register: I
shall desire all such who are guilty of the like Treachery, Flattery, Practice
or Advice against their lawful Sovereigns royal Posterity, advisedly to ponder
this sad domestic President in their most retired Meditations, for fear they
incur the like divine retaliation by Gods rightful doom, when and by whom they
least ^uspect or fear it.

King Cnute thus quit of all King Edmonds Sons, Anno 1018.
Brethren, kindred, and likewise of the greatest English Dukes and Nobles who
might endanger his Life, Crown, and new-acquired Monarchy, in the next place
contrived, how to secure his Empire against Prince Alfred and Edward, Edmonds
Bro^hers, then in Normandy with Queen Emma their Mother, and their Uncle
Richard Duke of Normandy, a person of great valor, power, and interest; the
only person likely to attempt their restitution to the kingdom and Crown of
England. For which end he by gifts, Ambassies, and fair promises Malmesb De
Ges^is Reg. l. 2. c. 10. Mat. Westminster. Hov^den, Huntindon Wigo^niensis, Simeon
Dunelm^nsis, Radul^ de Dic^to, Brom^on, Polychron. Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton,
Sp^ed, and others.
procures Earl Richards consent, to bestow his Sister Queen Emma upon him for
his wife, who ariving in England in July 1018. was presently married to this
Invader of her former Husbands kingdom, his sons royal throne, and murderer,
banisher, dishinheriter of his and her royal Posterity, whereby her Brother
Duke Richards thoughts were wholly diverted from ayding his Nephews to recover
their right in England. Ailredus Abbas, de Vita and Miraculis Edwa^di
Confesseris, col. 374.
Ex hinc cum C^utoni omnia pro voto cessissent, timens Ne Haeres legitimus
Regnum quod sibi de Iure debebatur, a^^quando Normanica fretus vir^u^^
Reposceret, ^t Ducis sibi arctius colligaret affectum, Emmam ^efuncti Regis
relictam duxit uxorem. Whereupon De illorum (Elfredi and Edwardi) restitutione
Richardu^ avunculum nihil egisse comperimus, quia et sororem suam Emmam hosti
et invasori nuptam collocav^t: Ignores majori illius dedecore qui dederit, a^
f^minae quae conse^ serat, ut thalamo illius c^leret, qui vi^um infestaverit,
filios effugaverit; is De Gestis Regum l. 2. c^ 10. p. 73.
Malmesbury his observation and censure thereupon. Only their Uncle Robert
attemp^ed their ^estitution, Congregatis navibus, et impositis militibus
profectionem paravit, subinde jactitans se pronepotes suos coronaturum: et
proculdudio fidem dictis explesset, nisi quia (ut a majoribus accepimus) semper
^i ventus adversabatur eontrarius, per occultum scilicet Dei judicium, in cujus
voluntate sunt potestates omnium regnorum. Reliquiae navium multo tempore
dissolutarum Rothomagi adhuc nostra aetate visebantur, writes Malmsbury. By
this match with Queen Emma, as Cnute took off Duke Richard from yielding any
assistance to his Nephews, in hopes his sister might have issue by him to
inherit the Crown of E^gland ( it being agreed between them on the marriage,
that the issue of Cnute begotten on her should inherit the Crown;) so it much
obliged the English to him, and made them more willing to submit to his
Government, Malmsb. de Gestis Reg. l. 2. c. 11. p. 73.
ut dum consuetae Dominae deferrent obsequium, minus Danorum suspirarent
Imperium: the rather, because they much honored and affected her for her
manifold virtues, of which they had long former experience: and likewise
because they hoped it might be a means to restore Ethelreds issue by her to
the Crown again, in case she had no issue by Cnute to inherit it; which in
truth it effected by Gods providence, contrary to Cnutes design. After this
marriage this politic Foreign Intruder, to establish his Monarchy over England,
endeavored to reconcile the English to him by all other public means he could
devise, and that by Emmaes advice.

1. By advancing some of the English Nobility to places of Honor and trust, as
Florentiu^ Wigorn. Sim^on Dunelm. Hoveden, Speed and others.
Leoffric; whom he made Duke, in the place of his Brother Norman whom he had
slain; with some others, and loving them very dearly.

2. Malmsb. de Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 11. Wigorniensis, Speed.
By granting to the English equal Rights, and Privileges with his Danes, in
Consessu, in Consilio, in Praelio; and favoring and advancing them both alike.

3. Malmsb. de Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 11. Mat. Westminster. Huntindon, Hoveden,
Wigorniensis, Sim. Dunelm. Radulphus de Diceto, Bromton, Polychron. Fabian,
Grafton, Holinshed, Speed.
By favoring and enriching the English Clergy and Churchmen, and manifesting
extraordina^y piety, devotion, bounty in repairing, building, endowing
Monasteries and Churches throughout the Realm, which had been partly decayed,
par^ly demolished and profaned by his and his Fathers former wars and
excursions: And by erecting new Churches in all places where he had fought any
battle, especially at As^hendune, and placing Priests in them, perpetually ^o
pray for the souls of those that were there slain. Ita omnia quae ipse, et
Antecessores sui deliquerunt, corrigere satagons, prioris Injustitiae naevum
apud Deum fortassis, apud Homines certe abstulit; as De Gestis Regum, l. 2. c.
11.
Malmsbury relates.

4. Mat. Westminster. Wigorniensis. Sim. Dunelm. Radul. de Diceto, Knyghton, Fabian,
Grafton, Holinshed, Speed, Huntindon, VVigorniensis.
By ^asing them of his Danish Forces, and constant heavy Taxes for their
maintenance: For by the advice of Emma, he sent back all his Danish stipendiary
Soldiers to their Native Country, and all his Ships but 40, which he retained
to transport him into Denmark the next year. To return, pay off, and disband
which foreign Forces, the English paid him a Tribute of 82. as some, or 72
thousand pounds as other Historians record, collected out of all England, and
the Londoners 11 thousand or 10500 marks more. Which Tribute I conceive was
granted him in the Council of London the year before; wherein all the Prelates
and Nobles took an Oath, Wigornien. Sim. Dunelm. Hoveden and others.
Suo exercitui vectigal dare; according to their former agreement at Gloucester,
upon the partition of the Kingdom between Edmond and Cnute; Wigorniensis. p. 389.
Sim. Dunelm. col. 175.
wherein King Edmond and all the English Nobles and Army ordained, that a
Tribute should be paid to the Danish Fleet, TRIBUTO QUOD CLASSICAE MANUI
PENDERETUR STATUTO. So that I conjecture, it was not imposed on the people by
Cnutes absolute power, but by common Grant and Consent of a Great Parliamentary
Co^ncil.

5. Wigornien. Bromton, Sim. Dunelm. Hoveden, Holinshed, Speed, Malmsb. and
others.
By ratifying all their former good old fundamental Laws, Righ^s, Liberties,
Privileges, which they used, enjoyed under their Saxon Kings, by enacting other
good wholesome Laws, repealing all unjust Laws, and redressing all exactions and
grievances.

By which means he so obliged the English to him, that they cordially assisted
him in his Danish wars, cheerfully obeyed him, and never raised any
Insurrection or Rebellion against him, though frequently absent out of the
Realm, all his reign, albeit he had no Army nor Garrisons to over-aw them.

Anno 1018.
In the second year of his reign, Florentius VVigorniensis, Sim. Dunelm.
Radulphus de Diceto, Roger Hoved. Chron. Ioh. Bromton, col. 908. Hen. de
Knyghton de Eventib. Angl. l. 1. c. 3. Grafton, p. 174. Speed, Holinshed,
Fabian, part. 6. cap. 205. f. 272.
Anno 1018. King Cnute assembled a Parliamentary Council both of the English
and Danes at Oxford, wherein they both accorded, That King Edgars Laws should
be observed. Angli et Daci apud Oxonefordiam, de lege Regis Edgari concordes
sunt effecti; as Florentius Wigorniensis, Sim. Dunelmensis, and others express
it: but the Chronicle of Bromton thus. Posthaec apud Oxoniam PARLIAMENTUM
tenuit, ubi Angli, simul and Dani, de Legibus Edgari Regis observandis
concordes facti sunt: Which Fabian, Grafton, Speed, and others thus express in
English. He called A PARLIAMENT at Oxford, where among other things it was
enacted, That Englishmen and Danes should hold and firmly keep the Laws of
Edgar, Proposit. 5, 6.
late King; Which Parliament they misplace some in the 3. others in the 15.
year of his reign, when it was in the second.

Mat. Westminster. p. 423. Wigorniensis. p. 392. Hoveden, p. 437. Sim. Dunelm. col. 177.
Radulph. de Diceto Abbrev. Chron. col. 467.
King Cnute sailing into Daenmark in the third year of his reign, Anno 1020.
having there settled his affairs, returned into England, Anno 1020. about the
feast of Easter. Apud Orencestriam CONCILIO CONGREGATO, as Matthew Westminster;
or, Apud Cirenceastram, MAGNUM CONCILIUM HABUIT, as Florentius Wigorniensis,
Hoveden, and Simeon Dunelmensis, record it. And then held a great Parliamentary
Council at O^encester (or Cirencester) wherein he banished Duke Ethelward. And
this year as Radulphus de Diceto informs us, Proposit. 2, 5, 6, 10.
Rex Canutus CONSILIO CLERI ET PROCERUM; by the Counsel of his Clergy and
Nobles (most likely assembled in this Council at Cirencester) and especially of
his Queen Emma, he placed Monks in the Monastery of Badricesworth, wherein the
body of King Edmond the Martyr rests, removing the Secular Priests from
thence. Matthew Westminster thus relates it. Consilio Emmae Reginae, et
EPISCOPORUM, SIMUL ET BARONUM ANGLIAE Monachos in eo constituit, etc. Caenobium
quoque beati Regis et Martyris Edmundi tot praediis et bonis aliis ampliavit,
ut omnibus fere Angliae Monasteriis, in rebus temporalibus meri^o praeferatur.

Sir Edward Cook in his Preface to his 9. Reports, Anno 1021.
out of an ancient Manuscript of the Abbey of St. Edmonds, which he said, was
in his custody, gives us this account of a Parliament held at Winchester, in
the 5. year of King Cnute his reign, (Anno 1021.)

Spelmanni Concilia, p. 534.
Haec sunt Statuta Canuti Regis Anglorum, Danorum, Norwegiarum, Venerando
Sapientum ejus consilio, ad laudem et gloriam Dei, et sui Regalitatem, et
commune commodum, habito in Sancto Natali Domini apud Winton, etc.

Rex Canutus anno regni sui 5. viz. per centum et triginta annos ante
compilationem Decretorum, quae Anno Dom. 1150. fuerunt compilata anno septimo
Pontificatus Papae Eugen^i ^ertii, et ante compilationem aliorum Canonum
quorumcunque, Cunctos Regni sui Praelatos, Proceresque ac Magnates ad suum
convocans Parliamentum, Proposit. 5, 6, 10.
in suo publico Parliamento, persisten^^bus personaliter in eodem Wu^^tano et
Adelnodo Archiepiscopis et Ailwino Episcopo Elmhamense, et aliis Episcopis,
ipsorum suffraganeis, septem Ducibus, cum totidem Comitibus, necnon diversorum
Monasteriorum nonnullis Abbatibus, cum quamplurimis gregariis Militibus, ac cum
populi multitudine copiosa, ac Omnibus tunc in eodem Parliamento personalitur
exisientibus, Votis Regiis unanimiter consentientibns, praeceptum et decretum
fuit, Quod Monasterium Sancti Edmondi, etc. sit ab omni Jurisdiction
Episcoporum Comitatus illius, ex tunc in perpetuum funditus liberum et
exemptum, etc. Illustris Rex Hardicanutus, praedicti Regis Canuti filius,
haeres et successor, ac sui Patris Vestigiorum devotus imitator, etc. cum laud
et favore Aegelnodi Doroberniensis, nunc Catuariensis, et Alfrici Eborac.
Episcoporum, aliorumque Episcoporum Suffraganeis, necnon Cunctorum Regni sui
mundanorum Principum, descriptum constituit, roboravi^que praeceptum.

That (which this Manuscript styles so often a Parliament, held at Winchester,
in the 5th year of King Cnute (of which there is not one Syllable in any of our
Historians) is as I conceive, that which Matthew Westminster, Wigorniensis,
Hoveden, and Simeon Dunelmensis style CONCILIUM, ET MAGNUM CONCILIUM, etc. held
at Cirencester or Orencester, not Winchester, the 4th year of his reign: wherein
by the Counsel of Queen Emma, and of his Bishops and Barons, he placed Monks in
the Monastery of Bederichesiorthe, where St. Edmund was interred; and endowed
the Monastery of St. Edmond with so many farms and other goods, as made it one
of the richest in all England, as those Historians witness; Whose Name and date
the ignorant com^iler o^ this Manuscript mistook; whose Antiquity and
reputation is very suspi^ious, as Concilia, p. 534.
Sir Henry Spelman informs us. First, because Sir Henry could never gain the
sight of it from Sir Edward Cook, though he oft-times promised to lend it him
to peruse for his satisfaction. And that which dares not abide the sight and
test of such a judicious learned Antiquary, when desired, may justly be deemed
an Imposture. 2ly. Sir Henry Spelman conceives the Author of this Manuscript,
writ not before the end of King Henry the 3d, if so soon, seeing he calls the
Great Council of the Realm, so frequently a Parliament, which Title was not
given it in Manuscripts or Historians, till the end of King Henry the 3d. or
after his reign; And Wigorniensis, Matthew Westminster, Hoveden, and Simeon
Dunelmensis, all style it only CONCILIUM, not Parliamentum. 3ly. Because he
certainly mistakes in his Chronology in making Aegelnoth Archbishop of
Canterbury in the reign of King Hardecnute, when as he died and Eadsi was made
Archbishop thereof two years before Hardicnu^es reign, which Eadsi crowned him
King, as Matt. Westminster, An. 1038. together with Matthew Parker and Godwin,
attest. And therefore he might as grossly mistake in other things. 4ly, It
appears by the recital it self, that it was writ above 130 years at least after
this Council under Cnute, because it recites, it preceeded the Decrees made so
long after, under Pope Eugenius, An. 1150. 5ly. The form of the Prologue, Haec
sunt Statuta, etc. coupled with, ad suum convocans Parliamentum in suo publico
Parliamento: and, aliis Episcopis ipsorum Suffraganeis, prove it not to be
written before King Edward the first his reign; when such phrases came first in
use: Sir Edward Cook himself informing us in his Epistle, that in Cnute his
reign, such State-Assemblies were styled Uenerandum Concilium Sapientum, and
sic enim apu^ majores Parliamentum illud Latin redditur. 6ly, Because it
^ubjoins, cum quamplurimis gregar^s militibus, ac cum populi multitudine
copiosa, as if ^hey had been personally present in this Parliamentary Council,
as well as the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Dukes and Nobles; of which there
is not one syllable in our four ancient Historians, which mention this Council
at Cirencester. Neither can these Gregarii milites be intended Knights of
shires; nor populi multitudine copiosa, Commoners or Burgesses elected to serve
in Parliament by and for the people, (as Sir Edward Cook and others fancy)
there being no m^ntion of any such chosen Kngih^s of Counties, Citizens,
Burgesses or Commons in that or succeeding ages, till about the reign of King
H^nry the 3d. but only, ordinary Soldiers, and the Vulgar sort of people,
admitted to be present in the Council at the reading and passing of the Charter
to St. Edmond, as they are now admitted into the Lords House, together with the
Knights and Burgesses at the beginnings and ending of our Parliaments, and upon
public Trials, Conferences and Occasions; at which times there are more common
people ten to one usually present to see and hear what is acted, who are no
members, then there are Members of the Commons House, which never sat together
with the Lords for ought appears, much less in this Parliament, as some
confidently infer from this Spurious A^tiquity; which Sir Edward Cook (little
versed in Antiquities, and often mistaken in them) so much magnifies and insists
on.

In the year of Christ 1021. Mat. West: Florent. Wigorn. Sim. Dunelm.
Huntindon, and Hoveden.
King Cnute, upon occasions and offenses taken by him, banished Duke An^o 1021.
Turkell (to whom he had formerly committed East- England) with Edgitha his
wife; and Hirc Duke of Northumberland, out of England. Turkell no sooner arived
in Denmark, but he was there slain by the Dukes of the Country, by divine
vengeance, he being a chief inciter of the death of St. Alphege. Proposit. 2.


Mat. Westminster. Flores Hist. p. 404.
The English and Danes, An. 1022. Anno 1022.
in Colloquio apud Oxoniam celebrato, de Legibus Regi Edwardi pr^mitenendis
coucor^es facti sunt. Unde ^isdem Legibus, jubente Rege Cnutone, ab Anglica
lingua in Latinam translatis: tam in Dania quam in Anglia^ propter earum
aequitatem Proposit. 5.
a Rege praefato observari jubentur, as Mat. Westminster relates, Anno 1022. So
as he imposed no New Laws on them, nor revived old, but only by common consent
in a Parliamentary Council both of English and Danes.

Mat. West, p. 404. Malmsbury, De Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 11
King Cnute in the year 1023. Anno 1023.
did so carefully endeavor to reform all things wherein himself or his
Ancestors had offended, as he seemed to wipe away Prioris Injustitiae Naevum,
the Blot of his former Injustice, as well with God as with men. And by the
exhortation of Queen Emma studying to reconcile all the Proposit. 5.
English to himself he bestowed many Gifts upon them, et insuper bonas Leges
omnibus et placentes promisit: and moreover promised good and pleasing Laws to
all. The best means to win and knit the peoples hearts.

Mat. West. p. 405. Huntindon, Hist. l. 6. p. 364. Malmsbury de G^stis Reg. l.
2. c. 11.
Anno 1024. Anno 1024.
Cnute leading an Army of English and Danes against the Swedes, whereof he lost
many in the first battle, the next day, when he appointed again to fight with
them, Earl Godwin, General of the Enlish Militia, without King Cnutes privity,
resolved with his English forces alone to invade the Swedish Enemies in the
night. Whereupon using this Speech to his Soldiers, ut pristinae gloriae
memores, robur suum oculis novi Domini assererent, etc. they al^ valiantly
assaulted the Enemies at unawares, put them all to flight, Proposit. 8.
slew an innumerable multitude of them, and compelled the Kings of that Nation,
Ulf and Eglaf, to yield to terms of Peace. Cnute preparing to fight very early
the next morning, thought the English had been either fled away, or revo^ted to
the Enemies; but marching to the Enemies tents, and finding nothing but the
blood and carcasses of those the English had slain; he thereupon ever after had
the English in great esteem; who by this their Victory Comitatum Duci, sibi
laudem paraverunt, writes Malmsbury; Cnute returning joyful of this Victory
into England, and bestowing an Earldom on Godwin for this Service.

Anno 1^27. to 1030.
In the year 1027. Cnute hearing that the Norwegians disesteemed Olaus their
King by reason of his simplicity, Florentius VVigorniensis, Simeon Dunelm,
Hoveden, Mat. Westmin. Anno 1027, 1028, 1029, 1030. Radulf. de Diceto, Bromton,
Huntindon, and others.
bribed his Nobles with great sums of gold and silver to reject Olaus, and
elect him for their King; which they promising to do, the next year he failed
into Norwey with 50 ships, thrust Olaus out of his kingdom, by consent of his
Nobles, and subdued his Realm to himself: whence returning into England, An.
1029. H^conem Danicum Comitem, quasi Legationis causa, in Exilium misit,
because he had married Gunilda a Noble ma^ron, daughter of the King of Vandals,
unde metuebat, ab illo vel a vita privari, vel a regno expelli: who was after
drowned in the Sea, or slain in the Orcades, Proposit. 2.5, 6.
Anno 1030. In which year Robert Duke of Normandy going to Jerusalem, Apud
Fis^hamium PROCERES AD COLLOQUIUM VOCAVIT; ibique Gulielmum filium suum,
haeredem sibi constituens, fecit omnes ei fidelitatem jurare. And the same year
the Norwegians cruelly murdered Olaus their King, Doctor, Preacher and Apostle
with an ax. Indignabatur enim Gens illa pagana et cruentissima, QUOD PRIMAS
LEGES et superstitiosas idem sanctus Rex Olaus praedicando, docendo,
evangelizando, statuendo evacuaret. But Cnutes gold was the prime cause
thereof, to get his Crown as he had done his Realm and Edmond Ironsides; for
whose soul he prayed, and offered a rich embroydered Pale on his Tomb at
Glastonbury, Anno 1026. Hoc autem fecisse creditur, ne in mortem ejus, cui in
certamine singulari confoederatus fuerat, consenssisse videretar, writes Flores
^ist. ^. ^05.
Mat. Westminster.

Ingulphi Hist. p. 893.894. Will. Malmsbury de Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 11. p.
74. Mat. Westminster. p. 407, 408. Hoveden, Annal. pars 1. p. 437. Flor. Wigorniensis, p.
394, 395. Radulph. de Diceto, Abbrev. Chron. col. 468. Bromton, col. 912.
Polych^on. l. 6. c. 20. Sim Dunelm. p. 178. Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton, Speed,
and others.
King Cnute, Anno 1031, Anno 1031.
(to palliate his Usurpations of other men's Crowns with the show of Devotion
traveled to Rome in very great pomp, where he offered very great gifts in
gold, silver, rich vestments, and precious stones; and obtained from Pope John,
That the English School should be free from Tribute. In his going and returning
he not only gave large a^ms to the poor^ but likewise removed and deleted many
unjust Tolls and Taxes, exacted from such who traveled to Rome, giving a Great
price to abolish them. He solemnly vowed to God before the Sepulcher of the
Apostle Peter, a reformation both of his life and manners. In pursuance
whereof, he writ a Letter from Rome to the Archhishops of Canterbury and York,
all the Bishops, Nobles, and Rulers, and to the whole English Nation, as well
Nobles as Plebeans; wherein he certified them, That he had procured from the
Emp. of Germany, King Radolphus, the Pope, and other Princes, a release of all
unjust Tolls and Taxes exacted of his people as they traveled out of devotion
toward Rome, and of the vast sums of money which the Archbishops paid to the
Pope for their Palls. Proposit. 1, 2, 4.
After which he in forms them, That he had vowed to justify his life to God
himself in all things; To govern the Kingdoms and Nations under his subjection
justly and piously; To observe just judgment in all things; and if through the
Intemperance or negligence of his youth he had hitherto done any Nota.
things besides that which was JUST, that he promised by Gods assistance to
reform it all. Therefore I obtest and command all my Counselors, to whom I
have committed the Co^nsels and Justice of my Realm, that by no means, either
for fear of me, or through favor to any potent person, they should from
henceforth do any Injustice, or cause it to sprout up in all my kingdom.
Likewise I command all the Sheriffs and Officers throughout my Realm, as they
desire to enjoy my favor or their own safety, that they do No unjust violence
to any Man, neither to rich nor poor; but it shall be lawful for all, as well
Noble as Ignoble to enjoy justice and right: from which they might not deviate
in any manner, neither for Regal favor, nor for the person of any potent man,
nec propter mihi congerendam pecuniam, quia nulla mihi necessitas est, ut
iniqua exactione pecunia mihi congeratur; nor yet for raising o^ heaping up
money to me: Because there is no necessity for me (and let those who now plead
Necessity both ^or their own illegal imposing, levying of unjust uncessant
heavy Taxes, Imposts, Excises on our Nations, without grant and common consent
in Parliam^n^^ consider it) that money should be raised and collected for my
use by an injust exaction. After this he en^oyns them by thi^ Letter; To pay
all Debts and Duties due by the ancient Law; as Tithes of their corn and
cattle, Peter Pence, and First fruits at the Feasts appointed, under pain of
the penalties inflicted by the Laws, which he would strictly exact without
pardon: Neither was he wor^e than his word^ writes De Ges^is Regum, l. 2. c. 11
Malmsbury) for he commanded all the Laws made by ancient Kings, and especially
by his predecessor King Ethelred, to be for ever observed, under pain of a
regal mulct. To the custody of all which ancient Laws, Even now (writes he) our
Kings are sworn, under the name of King Edwards Laws, non quod illa statuerit,
sed observaverit. And Flores Histor. p. 408.
Matthew Westminster records further; V^cecomitibus Regni Angliae et
Praepositis, districte mandav^^, ut nulli hominum vim inferant, nec propter
pecuniam fisco reponendam in aliquo a Iustitia deviant, dum non habeat
necessitatem de peccato pecuniam a^augere.

If this Foreign Danish Conqueror and Usurper of the Crown of England^ quod
Bellico Iure ob^inebat, e^ armorum violentia; as Chronica, col. 1782.
Willi^m Thorn records, was at last so just and equal to the English, as to
reform all his former extravagant acts of Injustice, Exactions, Oppressions, to
rel^ase all unjust Taxes, Exactions, Oppressions, and not to exact or raise any
moneys unjustly on the people, upon any real or pretended necessity, without
their common consent in Parliament, by any of his Officers, should not our own
English Conquerors, and domineering Grandees, now much more imitate this his
laudable Example, who pretend not only to equal but exceed him in Saintship,
Justice, Devotion, and no longer to oppress the grieved people with their
arbitrary Tyrannical Taxes, Excises, Imposts, extravagan^ violent poceedings in
new ways of highest Injustice, as hitherto they have done, against all their
Oaths, Covenants, Declarations, promises, and Engagements to the Nation.

King Cnute returning from Rome into England, Anno 1032.
Anno 1032. treated the English very justly and civilly, Ingulphi Historia, p.
892, 893.
confessed redressed his own former and his ancestors extortions, oppressions,
rapines, endowed many Monasteries with lands and privileges, and ratified them
with his Charters. Hereupon Brithmerus Abbot of Croyland. Cum Cnutonem Regem
super Angliam stabilitum cerneret, universos Anglios civiliter and satis
amicabiliter tractare, insuper sanctam Ecclesiam speciali devotione deligere,
ac filiali subjectione honorare, monasteriis multisque sanctorum locis been
facere, quaedam vero Monasteria ad summam gloriam promovere, thereupon resolved
to go to the King, and procure his Charter of confirmation of the Abbey, Lands
and liberties of Croyland, quorundam adversariorum, qui tempore guerrae multum
creverant, vim formidans. Which Charter he readily obtained in these memorable
words, wherein he acknowlegeth his rapines and bloodshed to posterity. Cnutus
Rex totius Angliae and Danmarchiae, and Norwagiae, and magnae partis Swavorum,
omnibus Provinciis, nationibus and populis meae potestati Subjectis, Proposit.
1, 2, 4.
tam minoribus quam majoribus salutem. Cum terram Angliae, progenitores mei and
parents DURIS EXTORTIONIBUS, and DIRIS DEPR AEDATIONIBUS SAEPIUS OPPRESSERUNT,
Et (fateor) INNOCENTEM SANGUINEM FREQUENTER IN EA EFFVDERVNT, studium meum a
principio regni mei fuit, and semper erit in futurum, tam penes caelum quam
penes seculum, PROPTER HAEC MEA PECCATA, ET PARENTVM MEORVM SATISFACERE, and
statum totius sanctae matris Ecclesiae, and uniuscujusque Monasterii sub
Imperio meo constituti, cum in aliquo meo patrocinio indiguerint, devotione
debita emendare, omnesque sanctos Dei per haec, and alia bona opera mihi in
meis necessitatibus reddere benignos, ac deprecationibus meis favorabiles and
placatos. Ideo in arras hujus meae satisfactionis, offero sancto Gu^hlaco de
Croyland, and caeteris sanctis ejusdem loci de substantia mea unum calicem;
confirmans Brithmero Abbati, and Monachis suis totum Monasterium suum
Croylandiae, cum insula cicumjacente, and duobus Mariscis adjacentibus,
scilicet, Arderlound, and Goggislound eisdem terminis and limitibus, quibus in
Chirographo inclyti, quondam Regis Edredi restauratoris sui dicta insula,
dictique duo Marisci satis aperte describuntur. Confirmo etiam omnes Ecclesias
and Capellas, terras and tenementa, libertates and privilegia in ejusdem Regis
Chirographo contenta, cum quibus omnibus dictus Rex Edredus dictum Monasterium
Croylandiae ad honorem Dei, and S. Guthlaci confessoris sui corporaliter in ea
requiescentis dotavit, donavit, ditavit, and suo Chirographo confirmavit.
Nullusque hominum meorum audeat a modo dictos Monachos inquietare, vel in
aliquo conturbare proprae dictis. Quod si quis facere praesumserit, vel
tentaverit usurpare, vel gladii mei sentiet aciem, vel gladii paenam sacrilegis
debitam subibitabsque omni remissione, and redemptione puniendus, juxta modum
et mensuram injuriae dictis Monachis irrogatae. Ego Cnutus Rex anno Dominicae
incarnationis: 1032. Londoniis istud meum Chirographum signo sanctae crucis
confirmavi. Then follow the subscriptions of both the Archbishops, sundry
Bishops, Abbots, Earls and others.

The same year 1012. King Cnute granted and confirmed to the Abbot of
Glastonbury, Malmes^. de Gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 11. Spelman. Council. p. 517.
the Conusance of all ecclesiastical and secular causes within the Island of
Glastonbury, by a special Charter, Cum Consilio and Decreto Archipraesulis
nostri Edelnothi, ^mulque cunctorum Dei Sacerdotum, Proposit. 10.
and Consensu Optimatum meorum; as the words of the Charter atte^^, to the end
it might be valid in Law. And the self same year King Cnute commanded Elstan,
Abbot of S^. Augustines in Canterbury to repair to him at the Feast of
Pentecost, concerning the translation of the Corpse of St. Mildretha to that
Monastery, ut translationem faciendam, ipse Rex, per concessionem Procerum, and
per literas suas firmius confirmaret, as Col. 1910, 2127.
William Thorn in his Chronicle relates.

King Cnute in the year 1033. Anno 1033.
on the Feast of Christ's Nativity, Chron. Ioh. Bromt. col. 914. to 932.
Lambardi Archaion, Spelm. Council. p. 538. to 570. Fox Acts and Mon, vol. 1. p.
211, 212.
held a Parliamentary Council at Winchester, where, Uenerando Sapientum ejus
Consilio, by the venerable Counsel of his Wisemen, he made and published sundry
excellent Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws for the good government of the Church
and Realm, to the praise of God, the honor of his Regality, and common good of
the People, being 103 in the Saxon and 110 in the Latin Copies. His 61
Ecclesiastical Law thus resolves, against the Anti-Magistratical opinion of
this licentious age, Proposit. 5, 6, 1, 2, 4.
Christiano Regi ^ure pertinet, ut injurias Deo factas vindicet, secundum quod
acciderit.

His Civil Laws begin thus. Haec est institutio Legum secularium, quam communi
Sapientum meorum Consilio, per totam Angl^^m^^n ri^ ^r^cipi^ Imp^im^s volo, u^
Iustae Leges erigantur, et injustae sub vertantur, et omnis Injustitia modis
omnibus saerculetur, and a modo omnis homo dignus publica rectitudine
reputetur, pa^per and dives quicunque ^it, and eis justa judicia judicentur. I
shall transcribe only ^ome few of his Laws per^inent to my Theme.

Lex 25. Prohibemus ne Christianus aliquis penitus pro parva re saltem ad
mortem deducatur. Sed justitia pacificans pro necessitate populi exquiratur, ne
pro levi re, opus manuum Dei, and sui ipsius pretium, quod profunde redemit
desperet Lex 26. Praecipimus ne Christiani passim in exil^o vendantur, vel in
Gentilitatem, ne forte pereant animae quas propria vita sua mercatus est
Dominus noster Ihesus Christus. Proposit. 9.
Lex 31. Omnis Injustitia deinceps opprimatur, Burgbotam and Brigbotam, and
Scipforthunga and Frothunga, qui Navigii vel expeditionis sonant appara^um,
sedulo procuremus^ cum necesse fuerit ad commune regni nostri commodum. Et
perquiramus simul modis omnibus quo modo praecipuum possit consilium ad
profectum populi obtineri, rectaque Christianitas propensius erigi, and
quicquid in^ustum est solertius enervari. Lex 34. Si quis deinceps V^^lage, i.
e. non legem erigat, vel injustum judicium judicet, pro laesione, vel aliqua
pecuniae susceptione, sit erga Regem, CXX s. reus in Anglorum laga, nisi cum
juramento audeat inveritare, quod rectius nescivit judicare^ and dignitatem
suae legalitatis semper amittat si non e^m redimat erga Regem, sicut ei
permitte^ur. In Denelaga Lathslithes, reus sit si non juxet quod melius
nescivit. Lex 36. Qui aliquem accusare praesumat, unde pecuniae vel commodo
pejor sit, and denique mendacium pernoscatur, linguam suam perdat, vel
Weregildo redimatur. Lex 37. Nemo Regem requiret de Iustitia facienda dum ei
rectum offertur in Hundredo suo, and requiratur Hundredum secundum Witam, sicut
justum est. Lex 38. Et habeatur in anno ter Burgimotus, and Scyremotus bis,
nisi saepius sit necesse. Et intersit Episcopus et Aldermannus; et doceant ibi
Dei rectum et seculi. Lex 59. Non est in aliquo tempore concessa INJUSTITIA, et
tamen Injustitia est festis diebus et sanctificatis locis propensius
interdicta. Semperque sicu^ homo potentior est, vel majoris ordinis, sic debet
solertius pro Deo et seculo quod justum est emenda^e. Et ideo gratam
emendationem sedulo per quiramus de Scripturis Sanctis, et secularem juxta
legem seculi. Lex 83. Si quis de morte Regis vel Domini sui quoquo Proposit. 8.
modo traectaverit, vitae suae reus sit, ^t omnium quae habebit, nisi triplici
judicio se purget. Lex 91. Si quis Burgbotam, vel Brigbotam 1. burgi vel pontis
refectionem, vel Firdfare, 1. in exercitum ire supersedeat, emendet hoc erga
Regem C.xx. s. in Anglorum laga; in Denelaga sicut Lex stepit antea, vel ita se
adlegiet, nominentur ei 14. et acquirat ex eis 11. Lex 96. Haec est allevi^tio
quam omni populo meo praevidere volo, in quibus nimis omnino fuerant aggravati.
Praec^pio Praepositis meis omnibus ut in proprio meo lucrentur, et inde mihi
serviant. Et nemo cogatur ad firmae adjutorium aliquid dare, nisi sponte sua
velit. Et si quis aliquem inde gravabit, Werae suae reus sit orga Regem. Lex
97. Si quis ex hac vita decedat sine distributione rerum suarum, vel per
incustodiam^ vel per mortem improvisam, non usurpet dominus ejus de pecunia (
nisi quantum ad justam Relevationem pertinet, quae Anglice vocatur Hereget) sed
sit secundnm dictionem ejus ipsa pecunia recte divisa, uxori, pueris et
propinquis, unicuique secundum modum qui ad eum pertinet. Et sint Relevationes
ita minutae sicut modus est. Comitis, sicut ad eum per^inet, hoc est, octo
equi, quatuor sellati, quatuor insellati, et galeae quatuor, et loricae
quatuor, cum octo lanceis et totidem scutis, et gladii quatuor^ et CC. marcae
auri. Postea Thayni regis qui ei proximus sit, quatuor equi, duo sellati, et
duo insellati; et duo gladii, et quatuor la^ceae, et totidem scuta, et galea
cum lorica sua, et 50. marcae auri. Et mediocris Thayni, equus cum apparatu
suo, et arma sua, vel suum Halsfang. in Westsaxia, in Mircenis ij l. in
Estanglia, ij. l. Et si notus sit Regi, equi duo, unus cum sella et alius sine
sella, et unus gladius, et duae lanceae, et totidem scuta, et 50 marcae auri.
Et qui minus potest, det duas libras. Proposit. 4, 9.
Lex 104. Et qui fugiat a Domino vel socio suo pro timiditate in Exped^tione
navali vel terrestri, per dat omne quod suum est, et suam ^psius vitam, et
manus mittat Dominus ad terram quam ei antea dederat. Et si terram
haereditariam habeat, ipsa in manum regis transeat. Lex 105. Et qui in bello
a^te Dominum suum ceciderit, s^t hoc in terra, sit alibi, sint relevatitones
condonatae: et ha^ be^nt haeredes ejus terram sicut et pecuniam suam, et recte
dividant inter se. Lex 107. Et volo ut omnis homo pacem habeat eundo ad
Gemo^um, v^l rediens de Gemoto, id est placito, nisi sit fur probatus. Lex 110.
Qui leges istas apostabit quas Rex modo nobis omnibus indulsit, sit Dacus, sit
Anglus, Werae suae reus sit erga reg^m. Et si secundo faciat, reddat bis Weram
suam. Si quis addat tertio, r^us sit omnium quae habebit.
In the rest of his Laws all corporal and pecuniary penalties and fines for
all sorts of Offenses and Crimes, are reduced to a certainty, and none left
arbitrary; and by Lex 104, 105. it is evident, that the Military Laws, as well
as the Civil and Ecclesiastical, were made in and by advice and direction of
the Great Councils.

The Col. 913.
Chronicle of Bromton informs us, that King Cnute, per Chartam suam a se et
haeredibus suis dedit, quam cito post in Parliamento suo apud Wintoniam
Proposit. 6, 10.
(when and where those Laws were made) coram omnibus Regni sui Magnatibus
confirmavit, gave and confirmed the Manors of Hornyng, Ludham and Netershede to
the Monastery of Cowholm in Northfolke: And that one Maynard riding toward
this Parliamentary Council, brake his neck, who had so incensed the King
against Wulfri^ and the Monks of this Monastery, that he threatened to put them
to death. What lands and privileges he gave by his Charters to St. Cuthberts
Church in Durham, Christs-Church in Canterbury, and other Monasteries, the
Malmesb De Ges^is Reg l. 2. c. 11. Sim Dunelmensis, Hist. de Eccl. Dunelm. l.
3. c. 8. Evidentiae Eccles. Christi Cantuar col. 2223.2225, etc. Chron. Will.
Thorn, col. 1782.1908, 1909, 1910.
Marginal Authors will inform us.

About the year 1034. Anno 1034.
Mat. Westminster. Anno 1035. p. 409. Hen. Huntindon, Hist. l. 6. p. 364. Radulphus
de Diceto, Abbrev. Chron. col. 468, 469. Chron. Iohann. Bromton, col. 911, 912.
Polych^on. l. 6. c. 20. Hen. de Knyghton de Eventib. Angl. l. 1. c. 5. Fox Acts
and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 211. Speeds History, p. 401. Mr. Seldens Mare Clausum, l.
2. c. c. 12. Fabian, part. 6. c. 206. Polydor Virgil, Holinshed, and others in
his life^
King Cnute having obtained the Sovereign Dominion of England, Scotland,
Norwey, a great part of Sweden, and of all Denmark principally by the Sword,
through the flattery of his followers, who styled him, a King of all Kings,
most mighty Sovereign, and the like, who had under his subjection and Dominion
not only the People and Land but the Sea likewise; and also by reason of his
Great Dominions, was so much elevated with pride of heart, that he once
commanded the royal Throne of his Empire to be placed on the Sea shore near the
water, as the Sea was flowing in upon it: and then stepping up into his Throne
and sitting in it, he spoke thus to the Sea in an imperious manner, as if he
were absolute Sovereign of it. Tu meae ditionis es, etc. Thou art under my
Dominion and part of my Empire, and the land on which I sit is mine, neither is
there any one in it who dares resist my command, without punishment. Therefore
I now command thee, that thou ascend and come not up upon my land, nor yet
presume to wet my royal robes, nor the feet or Members of thy Sovereign. But
the Sea, notwithstanding this Inhibition, ascending after its accustomed manner
and nature, and no ways obeying his commands, wet both his feet, legs and
royal Robes, without any revernce. Whereupon the King leaping hastily out of
his Throne, almost over-late, and retiring from the waves; used these words:
Let all the Inhabitants of the world know, that the power of Kings is but vain
and frivolous, and that no man is worthy the name of a King, but he alone, to
whose beck both Heaven, Earth and the Sea obey by everlasting Laws. Henry de
Knyghton superaddes thereto as part of his Speech, which most others omit. I am
a Wretch and a Captive able to do nothing, possessing nothing without his gift;
I commend; I recommend my self to him, and let him be the Guardian of debili^y,
Amen. After which King Cnute never wore his Crown upon his head, but put it
upon the head of the Crucifix at Winchester (as most accord) to the praise of
the great King, thereby giving a great example of humility to Kings and
Conquerors; who in the height of all their power, can not command the Sea or
least wave not to flow or wash them. Henry de Knyghton conceives this to be
before his pilgrimage to Rome; others expressly record it was after his return
from thence, whose computation I here follow, and therefore place it in this
year.

In the year of our Lord 1035. King Cnute, a little before his death, Anno 1035.
made this partition of his kingdoms amongst his Sons. Malmesb. Mat. Westminster.
Wigorniensis. Sim. Dunelmensis, Bromton, Huntindon, Hoveden, Knyg^ton,
Polychronicon, Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton, Speed, Radulphus de Diceto, Fox, and
others.
Swane his son by Q. Algiva (or as some affirm of a Priests wife suborned by
Algiva as her own) he made King of Norwey; his Son Harde-Cnute by Queen Emma,
he caused to be crowned King of Denmark; as Wigorniensis, Hoveden, and others
write, yet some gainsay it, that he made his Son Harold King of England, and
soon after died at Shaftesbury, November, 12. 1035. and was buried at
Winchester. Immediately after his decease the Nobles met at Oxford about the
election of a new King^ which our Historians thus express. Convenerunt apud
Oxoniam ad Colloquium (as Mat. Westminster.) or Placitum magnum (as Huntindon and
others style it) Proceres Regni, Proposit. 6.
Vt de novo Rege creando tractarent ibidem. All the Nobles of the Realm
assembled in a great Parliamentary Council or Court at Oxford, that they might
consult about the electiction of a New King (which they would not have done had
Harold been made King of England before by Cnute in his life time.^ Leofric,
Earl of Chester, and the rest of the Nobles on the Northside of the Thames,
with all the Danish Princes and Londoners (who by conversing with the Danes
amongst them, were corrupted wi^h their vices, and addicted to their party)
elected Harold Son of Cnute by his Concubine Algiva, (whom ^ome aver to be the
son of a Tailor) for their King; But Godwin Earl of Kent, with the Princes of
the Western part of England, contradicting them, would rather have elected
Harde-Cnute, son of Cnute by Queen Emma, or one of the Sons of King E^helred
and Emma, then in Normandy. After great strife and debate between the Nobles
about the Election, because Harold was there personally present; but
Harde-Cnute then in Denmark, and Alfred and Edward in Normandy, Harolds party
prevailed against Earl Godwins, qui tandem vi and numero minor, cessit
violentiae. Whereupon Harold was presently crowned King at Oxford by Elnothus
Archbishop of Canterbury, though at first he was very unwilling to perform that
service. For it is Holinshed, Hist. l. 7. c. 13. p. 182. Speed^ Hist. p. 404.
See Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. and Godwin in ^is life.
reported of him, that he having the regal Scepter and Crown in his custody,
refused with an Oath to consecrate any other for King, so long as Queen Emma
her children were living; for (said she) Cnute committed them to my trust and
assurance, and to them will I give my faith and allegiance. This Scepter and
Crown therefore I here lay down upon the Altar, neither do I deny nor deliver
them to you; but I require by the Apostolic Authority, all Bishops, that none
of them presume to take the same away, neither that they consecrate him King
therewith; as for your self, if you dare, you may usurp that which I have
committed to God on this Table. Notwithstanding this great thunderclap being
allayed with the showers of Golden promises of his just, good, and religious
government intended (though present experience manifested the contrary) he was
crowned by him Anno Anno. 1035. Henry Huntindon and others write, That they
elected him King, only to keep the kingdom for his Brother Harde-Cnute then in
Denmark: Harold and the Nobles of West-Sex, who opposed his election, upon
advice taken, resolved, that Qneen Emma wife of the deceased King, should keep
West-Sex and Winchester for the use of her Son Hard Cnute, and that Earl
Godwin should be their Captain in military affairs. Roger Hoveden, and others
record, That Harold being elected King by the consent of the major part of the
Nobles of England, obtained the royal dignity, and began to reign, quia justus
haeres, because he was a lawful heir; yet he reigned not so powerfully as
Cnute, quia justior haeres expectabatur Hard Cnutus, because a ju^ter heir
Hand Cnute was expected: By reason of this disagreement amongst the Nobles, to
please both parties; the kingdom of England was thereupon divided by Lot; Harold
enjoying the Northern part thereof, and Harde-Cnutes friends retaining the
Southern part of it for his use.

No sooner was Harold crowned King, but to secure himself the better in his
Throne, he presently posted to Winchester with his forces, where tyrannically
and forcibly taking away all the Treasures and goods which Cnute had left to
Queen Emma his Mother-in-law, Proposit. 2.
he banished her out of England into Flanders; (some write, she was thus
banished by the secret Counsel and treachery of Earl Godwin, whom she had made
General of her forces for her preservation, who proved unconstant, and a
Traitor to her and her children) where in this her distress she was honorably
entertained by Earl Baldwin.

In the year 1036. Alfred eldest Son of King Ethelred coming over to claim his
right in the Crown, was with his Norman associates, betrayed, and murdered by
the treachery of Earl Godwin, of which I find these several different
relations in our Historians.

An. 1036. p. 410.
Matthew Westminster, Ranulphus Cistrensis, and others out of them record; that
Alfred being in Normandy, and hearing of the death of Cnute, came into England
with 23. chosen ships full of Soldiers, ut paternum regnum de Iure sibi
debitum, vel pacifice, vel si necessitas cogeret, armatorum praesidio
obtineret; that he might obtain his fathers kingdom, of right due unto him,
either peaceably, or if necessity compelled, by force of arms. Who ariving with
his forces at Sandwich Port, came as far as Canterbury: When Godwin Earl of
Kent knew of his coming, he went to meet him, and receiving him in his
fidelity, the very next night following completed ^he part of the Traitor
Judas upon him and his Fellow Soldiers. For after kisses of peace given, and
joyful banquets, in the silence of the midnight, when as Alfred and his
companions had given their Members to sleep, they were all taken unarmed in
their beds, suspecting no harm, by a multitude of armed men rushing in upon
them, and their hands being tied behind their backs, they were compelled to sit
down in order one by another: Where sitting in this manner, nine of them were
always beheaded, but the tenth dismissed, and his life reserved for a ^ime:
These things were acted at Gildeford, a royal Town. But when it seemed to be
Traitor Godwin, that there were more yet remaining alive of them, than was
profitable, he commanded them to be tithed over again, as before, and so very
few of them remained alive. But young Alfred, every way worthy of royal honor,
he sent bound to the City of London, to King Harold, (that thereby he might find
greater favor with him) with those few of his followers who remained
undecimated. So soon as the King saw young Alfred, he caused him ^o be sent to
the Isle of Ely, and there to have his eyes pulled out; of the pain whereof he
soon after died; but he slew all his Soldiers too perniciously.

Florentius Wigorniensis, Roger de Hoveden, Simeou Dunelmensis, Radulphus de
Diceto, Mr. Fox, and others relate, That the innocent Princes Alfred and
Edward, sons of King Ethelred, came out of Normandy (where they had long
resided with their Uncle Richard) into England, accompanied with many Norman
Soldiers, transpor^ed in a few ships, to conferr with their Mother Emma, ^hen
residing at Winchester. Which some potent men, especially Earl Godwin (^s was
reported) took very unworthily and grievously, because ( licet injustum ^sset)
although it were unjust, they were more devoted to Harold than to Alfred.
Whereupou Harold persuaded King Harde-Cnute and the Lords, not to suffer those
Normans to be within the Realm for jeopardy, but rather to punish them for
example; by which means he got authority to order the matter himself; Wherefore
he met them on Guild-down, and there seized upon Prince Alfred, and retained
him in close Prison when he was hastening toward London to conferr with King
Harold, as he had commanded: And apprehending all his followers, he ransacked
some of them, others of them he put in chains, and afterward put out their
eyes; some of them he tormented and punished, by pulling off the skin from
their heads, and cutting off their hands and feet; many of them he likewise
commanded to be sold; and slew 600 men of them at Gildeford, with various and
cruel deaths; whose Souls are believed now to rejoice with the Saints in
Paradise, seeing their bodies were so cruelly slain in the fields without any
fault; which Queen Emma hearing of, sent back her son Edward, who remained with
her, with greatest haste into Normandy. After which, by the command of Earl
Godwin and some others, Prince Alfred being bound most straightly in chains, was
carried Prisoner to the Isle of Ely by ship; where he no sooner arived, but his
eyes were most cruelly pulled out, and so being led to the Monastery, was
delivered to the Monks to be kept; where he soon after died, and was there
interred. Will. Caxton, Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 210, 211.
Some add, that after Alfreds eyes were put out, his belly was opened, and one
end of his bowels drawn out and fastened to a stake, and his body pricked with
sharp needles or poyneyards forced about, till all his intrails were extracted:
in which most savage torture he ended his innocent life. Ranulphus Cistrensis
in his Polychronicon. l. 6. c. 21. relates, that Godwin used this strange
cruelty toward those Normans that came over with Alfred, whom he twice
decimate^ at Gildeford; that he ^ipped up their bellies, and fastened the ends
of their guts to stakes, that were reared and pyght in the ground, and laid the
bodies about the stakes till the last end of the guts came out.

The Author of the Book called Encomium Emmae, and Speeds History, p. 405.
Speed out of him, writes, That Harold was no sooner established King, but that
he sought means how to rid Queen Emma secretly out of the way; and maliciously
purposing took counsel, how he might train into his Hay the sons of Queen Emma,
that so all occasions of danger against him, might at once for all be cut off.
Many projects propounded, this lastly took effect; that a Letter should be
counterfeited in Queen Emma's name unto her sons Edward and Alfred, ^o
instigate them to attempt the Crown usurped by Harold against their right. The
Tenor of which Letter you may read in Speed. This Letter being cunningly
carried, and digested by Alfred as savo^ing of no falsehood, he returned answer,
he would come shortly over to attend his Mothers designs: which Harold being
informed of, forelayes the coasts to apprehand him. Upon his coming on shore
in England, Earl Godwin met him, and binding his assurance with his corporal
Oath, became his Leige-man and guide to Queen Emma; but being wrought firm for
Harold, treacherously led these Strangers a contrary way, and lodging them at
Guildford in several Companies, there tithed and murdered them as aforesaid.

Historiarum, l. 6. p. 365.
Henry Huntindon, the Col. 935, 936.
Chro^icle of Bromton, William Caxton in his Chronicle, and another Historian
mentioned by Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 210, 211. Graf^on, p. 178, 179.
Mr. Fox, record, that this murder was after the death of King Harde-Cnute.
When the Earls and Barons of England by common assent and counsel sent into
Normandy for these two Brethren Alfred and Edward, intending to crown Alfred
the elder Brother, and to make him King of England; and to this the Earls and
Barons made their Oath. But Earl Godwin of West-Sax sought to slay these two
brethren so soon as they came into England, to the intent he might make Harold
(his own son by Cnutes daughter, or sister married to him) King; as some of
these affirm; Others of them relate, that he intended only to destroy Alfred,
being an Englishman by the Father, but a Norman by the Mother, whom he foresaw
to be a person of such honor and courage, that he would disdain to mary his
daughter, or to be swayed by him; and then to mary his daughter Godith to
Edward the younger Brother, and to make him King, as being of a more mild and
simple disposition, apt to be ruled by him. Hereupon Godwin went to Southampton
to meet with the two Brothers at their landing. It fell out, that the
Messengers sent into Normandy, found only Alfred there, Edward being then gone
into Hungary to speak with his Cosen Edward the Outlaw, Ironsides son. When
Alfred heard these Messengers tidings, he thanked God, and in all have sped him
to England, ariving at Southampton with some of his Mothers kindred, and many of
his Fellow Soldiers of like age, who were Normans. Whereupon Godwin intimated
to the Nobles of England, That Alfred had brought over too great a company of
Normans with him, and had likewise promised the lands of the Englishmen to
them, and therefore it would not be safe to instirpate such a valiant and
crafty Nation amongst them. That these ought to undergo exemplary punishment,
lest others by reason of their alliance to the King, should presume to intrude
themselves amongst the English. And then posting to Southampton, welcomed and
received Alfred with much joy, pretending to conduct him ^afe to London, where
the Barons waited for to make him King, and expected his coming; and so they
passed forth together toward London. But when they came to Guild-down, Godwin
said to Alfred^ Lock round about thee on thy right hand and left, and behold
what a kingdom shall be subjugated to thy Dominion. Upon which Alfred giving
thanks to God, presently promi^ed, that if i^ happened he should be crowned
King, He would constitute such Laws as should be pleasing and acceptable both
to God and Man. Which words were no sooner uttered, but the Traitor Godwin
commanded all his men to apprehend Alfred, and to slay all the Normans that
came with him in his company: and after that to carry Alfred into the Isle of
Ely, and there to put out both his eyes, and to pull out his bowels; which they
accordingly executed as aforesaid. And so died this innocent Alf^ed, right heir
to the Crown, through the Treason of wicked Godwin. Chronico^ Johan. Bromton
Col. 935, 936. William Caxtons Chronicle, part. 6. Fox Acts and Monuments vol.
1. p. 211.
When the Lords of England heard thereof, and how Alfred that should have been
their King^ was put to death^ through the false Treason of Godwin, against
their wills, (...) were ^onder^ull sorrow^ull and wr^th, and swore before God
and Man, that he should die a worser Death than did Edric, which destroyed his
Lord Edmond Ironside: and would immediately have put him to death, Proposit. 8.
but that the Traitor fled, and escaped into Denmark, and there continued 4.
years and more, and lost all his Lands, Rents, Goods and Chattels in England,
confiscated in the mean time for this his Treason.

These Historians, though they somewhat vary in the time and occasion of Prince
Alfreds death, yet they all agree in the substance of his and of his Norman
Soldiers and Campanions treacherous, barbarous murders, by the joint or
separate treachery of Earl Godwin, and his son Harold: Which how fatal it
proved to them both, by Gods avenging Justice, you shall hear in its due place,
and what divine vengeance it drew at last on the whole English Nation,
religious and judicious Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1 p. 210.
Mr. John Fox informs us in these words. This cruel fact of Godwin, and his
men against the innocent Normans; whether it came of himself, or of the Kings
setting on, seems to me to be the cause Proposit. 8.
why the justice of God did shortly after avenge the quarrel of these Normans,
in conquering and subduing the English Nation, by William the Conqueror, and
the Normans which came with him. For so just and right it was, that as the
Normans coming with a natural English Prince, were murdered of English men; so
afterward the Englishmen should be slain and conquered by the Normans, coming
with a foreign King, being none of their natural Country.

After the b^nishment of Queen Emma out of, and murder of Prince Alfred in
England Florentius Wigorn. Sim. Dunelm. Radul. de Diceto, Hoved. Bromton,
Malmesb. Huntindon, Polychronicon, Fabian, Caxton, Holinshed, Grafton, Speed.
Harde-Cnute delaying the time in Denmark, Anno 1037.
and deferring his coming in^o England; thereupon Harold, (formerly King only
of ^he Mercians, and Northumbrians,) that he might r^ign over all England, in
the year 1037. A Principib^s et omni Populo Rex eligit^r^ was elected King by
all the Nobles and People. Harde-Cnutus vero, quia in Denmarchia mans^rat, et
ad Anglian, ut rogabatur, venire distulit, penitus abjicitur, as Florentius
Wigorniensis, Simeon Dunelmensis, Hoveden, Bromton, Radulphus de Diceto, and
others inform us. Proposit. 5.
After which King Harold degenerating from Cnute his Father in all things, took
no care at all either of military or civil affairs, nor of his own Courtly
honor, doing only his own will, and contrary to his royal estate, going more
willingly on foot, (of which he was so swift, that he was named Harefoot) than
riding on Horseback. In his days there were rendered and paid to 16 Ships from
every Port (not Inland Towns) 8. marks of Silver, as in the time of his
Father; as Hist. l. 6. p. 365.
Henry Huntindon records: to which History of Great Britain, p. 425.
John Speed subjoynes; This Dane seeing his hazards prevented, sought to secure
himself, and with 16 Ships of the Danish Fleet kept the Seas, which continued
ever in a readiness and wafted from port to port: to the maintenance whereof,
he charged the English with great payments, Proposit. 1.
to their no little grudge and reviling; whereby he lost the love of his
Subjects before it h^d taken root in their hearts. Neither held he long those
disloyal courses, for that his speedy death did cut off the infamy of a longer
life, he dying at Oxford, where he was elected King, without wife or children
to survive his person, or revive his name, when he had reigned only 4. years,
and as many months, Anno 1040.

Upon the death of Malmesb. De G^stis Reg. l. 2. c. 12. Ingulphus. Mat. Westminster.
Flor. Wigorniensis, Sim. Dunelm. Radulphus de Diceto, Bromton, Huntindon,
Hoveden, Knyghton, Polychron, Caxton, Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton, Speed.
Harold, Anno 1040.
Proceres tam Anglorum, quam Danorum in unum concordantes sententiam; the
Nob^es both of the English and Danes (assembling together in a Parliamentary
Council) and concording in one opinion, sent Ambassadors to Harde-Cnute, then
at Bruges in Flanders, visiting Queen Emma his Mother (where he had made great
preparation of ships and landforces, to recover the Crown of England, which
belonged to him both by birth and compact, from his brother Harold) beseeching
him, to make have into England, and to take possession of the Crown thereof.
Whereupon he immediately consenting to the Counsel of the Nobles, came speedily
into England with 60, as some, or 40 ships, as others write, furnished with
Danish Soldiers and Mariners; where he was rec^ived with great joy, elected
King both by the English and Danes, and solemnly crowned at London by Elnothus
Archbishop of Canterbury. Soon after he commanded Alfric Archbishop of York,
Earl Godwin, and others, to digg up the interred corpse of his brother King
Harold out of his grave in London, and his head to be cut off by the hangman,
and then both head and corpse to be thrown into the Common sink, and after that
into the Thames. And that partly in revenge of the injuries done by him to his
Mother Queen Emma, in banishing and spoiling her of her money and jewels,
against all right and justice: and partly for his unjust invasion of the Crown
of England; but in truth, as a just retaliation of his barbarous cruelty to
Prince Alfred and his Normans. For whose treacherous inhumane slaughter, King
Harde-Cnute deprived Alfred Bishop of Worcester of his Bishopric, whose hands
were said to have been in Alfreds blood. And for which murder he likewise
looked with an evil eye upon Earl Godwin, compelling him to an Oath of
Purgation touching the same. Whereupon Godwin by his own Oath, and the Oaths of
most of the Nobles of the Realm his compurgators swore^ (though most falsely)
That Prince Alfreds eyes were not put out, nor he murdered (as aforesaid) by
his Counsel or consent, but what was done therein, was only by the command of
King Harold, which he durst not resist. Notwithstanding which Oath, to purchase
his peace with Harde-Cnute, he presented him with a most rich and royal
present, to wit, with a Ship, whose stern was of gold, with 80 Soldiers placed
therein, all uniformly and richly suited, having on their heads gilt Burgonets,
on their arms bracelets of Gold, on their bodies, Habergeons, Swords,
Battel-axes, Targets, and other arms after the Danish fashion, all richly gilt,
with gilt bosses and darts in their hands. Which Present, though it pacified
the Kings indignation, yet it prevented not Gods avenging justice on him
afterward for Alfreds blood; thus partly avenged on Harolds carcass, which
was cast into the Thames, and mangled according to Hard-Cnutes command, and lay
floting on the water sundry days, till a Fisherman in compassion took up his
corpse, and buried it privately in St. Clements Danes.

Soon after Harde-Cnute in the second year of his Anno 1040. 1041.
reign, commanded 8. Marks to be paid to every Mariner; Some write 20. others
30. marks, to every Shipwright of his Danish Navy; Proposit. 1.
besides a vast sum of money to his Land-Army: Hujus anno secundo redditus est
Census Exercitui Dacorum, scilicet 21000 lib. and 89 lib. Et postea sunt
redditae 32. puppibus, 11000 lib. and 48. lib. writes Histor. l^ 6. p. 365.
Henry Huntindon: Tributum inexorabile et importabile Angliae imposuit, ut
Classiariis suis per singulas n^ves vigin^i ^ac triginti marcas ex pollicito
pensitaret. Quod dum importune per Angliam exigitur, duo infestius hoc munus
exequentes, a Wigorniae Civibus extincti sunt; as De Gest. R^g. l. 2. c. 12. p.
76.
Will: of Malmsbury expresses it. Hic etiam contra omnem spem octo Marcas
unicuique remigi Classis suae de importabili tributo Angliae solvi fecit, So
Chronicon^ col. 933.
Bromton; Which ^lorentius Wigorniensis, Hoveden, Simeon Dunelmensis, Matthew
Westminster, Polychronicon, Caxton, Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton and Speed, thus
more at large relate. Anno 1040. Octo Marcas unicuique suae classis Remigi, et
12. unicuique gubernatori de tota Anglia praecepit dependi, Tributum videlicet
tam grave, ut vix aliquis id possit persolvere. Quapropter omnibus qui prius
adventum ejus desiderabant magnopere, factus est exosus summopere. Anno 1041.
Harde-Cnute King of England, Huscarlas missit per omnes regni sui Provincias:
Or, Ministros suos per omnes fines regni destinavit; sent his Officers through
all the Counties and parts of the Realm, to exact and collect the Tribute which
he had imposed, without sparing any, and to furnish his Mariners with all
necessaries from thence. Two of which O^ficers Faeder and Turstin exacting this
Importable Tribute with great rigor and cruelty from the Inhabitants of the
County and City of Worcester, were thereupon tumultuously slain by them in a
Monastery, whither they fled for Sanctuary, on the 4 th day of May. The King
being very much incensed therewith, sent Godwin with all the rest of the Earls
of England, and almost all his Officers and whole army thither, ^o avenge their
deaths, commanding them to slay all the men if they could, and to pillage and
burn the whole City and County; who coming thither the 2. of November, wasted
the City and County for 4. days space, but took or slew few of the City or
County, because they having notice of their coming, fled all away to an Island
in the midst of Severn called Beverage, which ^hey fortified, and so long
manfully defended against their Enemies, til they had recovered their peace,
and obtained leave quietly to return to their homes. Whereupon on the fifth day
they burnt the City, every one returning with great booties; and thereupon the
Kings wrath was pacified, but his reputation much ecclipsed, and the affections
of the people lost by that cruelty and Tax; Proposit. 1.
Which it seems was imposed by his own arbitrary power, without any Grant or
common consent in a Parliamentary Council. Unde cunctis qui prius ejus adventum
optaverant in Angliam exosus effectus est, writes Flores Hist. p. 412.
Mat. Westminster: Contumeliam famae and amori suo detrimentum ingessit, adds
De Gestis Reg. l. 2. c. 12.
Malmsbury, This whole Tribute amounted but to 32137 l. which came not to the
moity of one Months Contribution, or Excise in our days. History of Great
Britain, p. 407.
John Speed and some others write, That Earl Godwin devising how the Crown
might be worn by him or his, to separate the hearts of the Subjects from the
Prince, (thaen which there can be no greater wound unto both) caused the King
to impose heavy Tributes upon the English, only to pay the Danes in his Fleet,
appointing every common Soldier and Mariner to receive 8. Marks in money, and
every Officer and Master 12. amounting to the sum of 32147 l. for the payment
whereof there was so great a grudge, that two of his Collectors were slain by
the Citizens of Worcester; which caused their City to be burnt, and part of the
County to be spoiled by the Kings command, and their Bishop Alfred expulsed the Sea, til with money he had purchased his peace. But observe Gods Justice on
this Exactor and Tax-imposing King, soon after his cruelty at Worcester, as he
was revelling and carrouzing amidst his cups at Lambheth at a solemn
Mariage-feast between a Danish Lord, and Gotha an English Lady, he suddenly
fell down dead to the ground without speech or breath, ^ot being lamented nor
desired, by reason of his unwonted Taxes, excess and riot. Yea, so far were
all ^orts from bewailing him, Speed, ibidem.
that in regard of their freedom from the Danish yoke which they attained, ever
since among the Common people, the 8. of June (the very day of his death) is
annually celebrated with open pastimes in the street (as the old Romans kept
their Fugalia for chasing out their King,) which time is now called Hoc-tide,
or Herextide, signifying a time of scorning or contempt, which fell upon the
Danes by his death, when he had voluptuously and oppressingly reigned over the
English not full two years, wanting ten days thereof.

Now here take special notice of Gods exemplary justice upon King Cnute, the
Danish Usurper and Invader of other men's Crowns and Kingdoms, by treachery,
blood, war, treason, the murders of Edmund Ironside, Pr. Edwin, and Alfred, and
exile of the Royal posterity. His base Son Harold dispossessed his Legitimate
Son Harde-Cnute of the Crown of England, contrary to his will and contract,
banished and spoiled his own Queen Emma of her Treasure and Jewels, oppressed
the people with Taxes, and was soon cut (...) by death, without any issue.
Harde-Cnute after his death digs up his Brother Harolds corpse, beheads, and
then throws it into the common sink and Thames, incurs Gods and his Peoples
hatred by his Oppressions, Taxes, Luxury; and is taken away suddenly in the
midst of his age, without issue, before he had reigned two years. His Son
Florentius Wigorniensis, Sim. Dunelm. Hoveden, Brompt. Radulph. de Diceto, and
Mat. Westminster. An. 1045, to 105^.
Swane to whom he bequeathed the Kingdom of Norwey (which he got by treachery,
bribery, force, and the expulsion, murder o^ their rightful pious King Olaus)
was expelled both out of Norwey and Denmark too by Magnus the Son of Olaus;
the English Army sent by Harde-Cnute, to reestablish him in the Kingdom of
Norwey, routed in the field, and so forced home thence with dishonor, leaving
Magnus in possession, not only of Norwey but Denmark, which he conquered, and
made Tributary to him. Thus were all his three Sons, within 8 years space after
Cnutes death, quite stripped of all their three Kingdoms, acquired by war, blood,
conquest, treachery, and the English and Norwegian royal lines restored to
their rights and Crowns again. What persons then in their right senses would
impiously spend much treasure levied on the oppressed people by violence,
rapin, uncessant Taxes, Excises, or shed much human Christian blood, to
purchase other men's Crowns, Kingdoms, which are not only full of cares and
troubles, but so unstable, short and momentary in their fruition, as is most
evident by the Danish Intruders?

CHAP. V. Containing a Brief Historical Collection of all the Parliamentary
Councils, State-Assemblies, Historical Passages, and Proceedings that concern
the Fundamental Liberties, Privileges, Rights, Properties, Laws, and
Government of the Nation, under the reign of King Edward the Confessor, from
the year of our Lord 1042. to 1066. wherein he died.
KING Harde-Cnute being suddenly taken out of this world without issue Anno
1042.
by divine Justice on the 6 day of June Anno 1042. thereupon the Earls and
Barons of England, immediately after his death, assembled together in a Great
Council, about the election of a New King: Wherein Chro. Ioh. Bromton col. 934.
Fox Acts and Monum. vol. 1. p. 200.212. Speeds Hist. p. 410. Wigorni^nsis. Sim.
Dunelmensis Rad. de Diceto. Mat. Westminster. Huntindon, Hovedon,
Polychronicon. Fabian, Caxton, Holinshed, Grafton.
OMNES ANGLORUM MAGNATES ad invic^m tractantes, DE COMMVNI CONCILIO ET
JURAMENTO STATUERUNT, QUOD NUNQUAM TEMPORIBUS FUTURIS ALIQUIS DACUS SUPER EOS
IN ANGLIA REGNARET; and hoc maxim^ pro contemptibus quos Angli a Danis saepiu^
acc^perunt, etc. as the Chronicle of Bromton and others inform us: All the
Nobles of the English treating together decreed by common advice, which they
ratified with an oath; THAT IN TIMES TO COME NEVER ANY DA^E (or person of the
Danish blood) SHOULD REIGN OR BE KING OVER THEM IN ENGLAND ANY MORE;
disclaiming all Danish subjection; and that especially for the cont^mpts which
the English had very often received from the Danes. For if a Dane had met an
Englishm^n upon any bridge, the Englishman must not be so hardy to move a ^oot,
but stand st^ll till the Dane was passed qui^e over it. And mor^over, if the
Englishmen had not bowed down their heads to do reverence to the D^n^s, they
should presently have undergo^e great punishments and stripes. Whereupon King
Harde-Cnute being dead, the English rising up against them, drove all the
Danes, being then without a King and Captain^, out of the Realm of England, who
speedily qu^tting the land, never returned into it afterward.

And here we may justly stand still a while, and contemplate the admirable
retaliating justice of God upon our Danish usurping Kings and their Posterity:
Page. 223.224.225.
King Cnute as you heard before, caused the temporizing English Bishops, Nobles
and Barons assembled in a Parliamentary Council, against their oaths of
allegiance to King Ethelred, Edmund Ironside and their heirs, no less then
twice one after another, to renounce, cast off, and abjure their regal
Posterity, to make them incapable of the Crown of England, and settle the
inheritanc^ of i^ upon him and his Danish blood. Anno 1016. and 1017. And now
in little more then twenty years after, all the English Prelates and Nobles
assembled in Council, of their own accords, by a solemn Decree and Oath,
abjure, renounce, and eternally disinherit all the Danish blood-royall of the
Crown of England, and restore the Saxon English royal line to that
sovereignty, which they had formerly disclaimed: such are the vicissitudes of
divine justice and providence, worthy our observation in these wheeling times
wherein we live, when no man knows what changes of like nature Prove. 27.1.
one day or year may bring forth.

The English putting their Decree for cashiering all the Danes in execution,
Bromton col. 934. Hoveden, Huntindon, Malmesb. Math. Westminster. Fox, Speed, Caxtons
Chro. pars. 6.
turned the mout of all the Castles, Forts, Garrisons, Cities, Villages
th^oughout England, as well those of the Royal and Noble blood^ as the vulgar
sort, and forced them to depart the Realm, as they had formerly banished the
English Princes and Nobles. Huntindon Hist. l. 6. p. 365 Brom^on col. 934. Fox
vol. 1. p. 210.212. Speed p. 410.
Proc^re^ igitur Anglorum jam DACORUM DOMINIO LIBERATI, The Nobles therefore of
Engl. being thus freed from the Danes dominion; for so much of God of his mercy
and providence (who is the maker of heirs) thought good after the wo^ull
captivity of the English Propos. 5.6.8.
Nation, to grant them some respite of deliverance in taking away the Danish
Kings without any issue left behind them, who reigning here in England kept
the English people in miserable subjection about the space of 28 years, and
from their first landing in the time of King Brictricus, wasted and vexed this
land for the space of 255 years: their Tyranny now coming to an end by the
death of Hard Cnute; they thereupon assembling together in a great Council,
with a general consent, elected Prince Edward (surnamed the Confessor, the
youngest and only surviving son of King Ethelred) for their King; who ANNUENTE
CLERO ET POPULO LONDONIIS IN REGEM ELIGITUR, as Flores Hist. p. 415.
Mat. Westminster relates; whereupon Edward being then in Normandy, where he
had long lived in exile, being a man of a gentle and soft spirit, more
appliable to other men's counsels then able to trust his own, and naturally so
averse from all war and bloodshed, that he wished rather to continue all his
life long in a private exiled estate, then by war or blood to aspire to the
Crown) the Lords sent messengers to him, to come over and take p^aceable
possession of the Kingdom of England, they having chosen him for their King,
advising him to bring with him as few Normans as he could, and they would most
faithfully establish him in the throne. Edward, though at first he much doubted
what course to stear, somewhat mistrusting the treachery and inconstancy of the
fickle headed English, yet at last upon the importunity of the messengers, who
informed him Malmsbur. de Gestis Reg. l. 2. c. 13.
melius esse ut vivat gloriosus in Imperio, quam ignominiosus moria^ur in
exili^. JURE EI COMPETERE REGNUM, aevo maturo laboribus defaecato, scie^ti
administrare principatum per aetaten^ severe, miserias Provinci^lium pro
pristina aequitate temperare, etc. and upon putting in sufficient pledges, and
an oath given for his security, he came into England with a small train of
Normans, where he was joyfully received by the Nobles and people. Nec mora,
Giling^am (or rather L^ndoniam^ CONGREGATO CONCILIO, rationibus suis explicitis
regem effecit, Dominio palam ab omnibus da^o, as Malmsbury; or electus ^st in
Regem ab omni populo, as Hist. l. 6. p. 365.
Huntindon and others express it. After which on Easter day, Apr 2. 1043. he
was solemnly crowned King at Winchester, with great pomp, by Eadsi Archbishop
of Canterbury, by the unanimou^ consent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Nobles,
Cle^gie and people of England, to their great joy and content, without the
least opposition, war or bloodshed, after 25 years seclusion from the Crown
by the Danish usurpers.

Our Malmesb. d^ Gestis Reg. l. 2. c. 13. de gest. Ponti^. Angl. l. 2. c. 13.
p. ^49. Mat. Westminster. An. 1055. p. 422. Hen. Huntind. Hist. l. 6. Sim.
Dunelmensis Hist. col. 136. Polychronicon l. 6. c. 18. Al^edus Ahbas de vita
and miraculis Edwardi Con^essoris col. 373. Chron. Joh. Bromton col. 909.955.
H. de Knyghton. de E^eribus Angl. l. 1. c. 3. Antiq ^^tates Eccl. Brit. p. 88,
89. Speeds Hist. p. 410. Ribadenira and Capgrave in the life of king Edward.
Historians generally record, that Bryghtwold a Monk of Glastenbury (afterward
first Bishop of Wilton) when King Cnute had banished, and almost extinguished
the whole royal issue of the English race, almost p^st any possibility or
probabi^ity of their restitution to the Crown, which he had forcibly invaded by
the sword; on a certain night fell into a s^d deep contemplation of the forlorn
condition of the royal Progeny of the English nation, then almo^t quite
deleted by the Danes, and of the miserable condition of England under these
foreign usurpers. After which falling into a deep sleep, he saw in a vision
the Apostle S. Peter himself, holding Prince Edward (then an exile in Normandy)
by the hand, and anointing him King in his sight: who declared to him at large
how holy this Edward should be, that his reign should be peaceable, and that it
should continue for 23 years. After which Bryghtwold being yet unsatisfied who
should succed him, and doubting of Edwards offspring, demanded of S. Pet^r,
who should succeed him? whereunto S. Peter returned him this answer, REGNUM
ANGLIAE EST REGNUM DEI, ET IPSE SIBI REGES (or REGEM as some render it)
PROVIDEBIT. The Realm of England is Gods Ki^gdome, and he himself shall provide
Kings, or a King for himself, according to his good pleasure. Yea the golden
legend of King Edwards life informs us, THAT HE WAS CHOSEN KING OF ENGLAND BY
CONSENT OF PARLIAMENT WHILES HE WAS YET IN HIS MOTHERS WOMB, as well as after
Hard^-Cnute's death. Take the relation of it in De vita and miraculis Edw:
Confe^soris. col. 372.373.
Abbot Ailreds words; and of Brig^twolds vision likewise. Cum igitur gloriosus
Rex Ethelredus ex filia praeclarissimi comitis Thoreti filium suscepisset
Eadmundum, cognomento Ferreumlatus, ex Regina autem Emma, Aluredum; beatus
Edvardus inter Viscera materna conclusus utrique praeferiur agente Propos.
5.6.8.
^o qui omnia operatur secundum concilium voluntatis suae, qui dominatur in
regno hominum, and cui voluerit dat illud. FIT MAGNUS CORAM REGE EPISCOPORUM
PROCERUMQUE CONVENTUS, magnus plebis vulgique concursus, and quia jam futurae
cladis indicia saeva praecesserant, AGITUR INTER EOS DE REGNI STATU TRACTATUS.
Deinde Rex successorem sibi designar^ desiderans, QUID SINGULIS, QUI DVE
OMNIBUS VIDERETUR EXPLORAT. Pro diversorum diversa senentia res pendebat in
dubio. Alii enim Eadmundum ob invictissimum robur corporis, cae^eris aestimant
praeferendum: alii ob virtutem Normannici gene^is Aluredum, promov^ndum tutius
arbitrantur. Sed futurorum omnium praescius, prioris brevissimam vitam,
al^erius mortem immaturam prospici^ns, in pueru^ nec dum natu^ UNIVERSORUM VOTA
CONVERTIT. Vtero adhuc clauditur, and in Regem eligitur, non natus natis
praefertur, and quem nec dum terra susceperat, terrae dominus designatur.
Praebet elect^oni REX CONSENSUM, laeti PRAEBENT PROCERES SACRAMENTUM, and
inusitato miraculo IN Ejus FIDELITATE JURARUNT, qui utrum nasceretur
ignorarunt. Tua haec sunt o^^ra, Christ Jesu, qui omnia operaris in omnibus,
qui electum and dilectum tibi an^e mundi constitutionem plebis tui recto^em
hiis indiciis declarasti; quem li^et per illos, non tamen illi, s^d tu potius
elegisti. Quis enim non videat ^ec aptum usui, nec conveniens tempo^i, nec
consonum rationi, nec humano ferendum fuisse sensui, us omissis fili^ l^gi^im^s
and adultis, hostili gladio imminente, parvulus, necdum natus ELIGERETUR IN
REGEM quem in tali n^cessitate n^c hosts m^tuerent, nec cives revererentur.
Sed omnipotens Deus Spiritum prophesiae v^ci simul and affectui plebis infudit,
praesentia mal^spe futurae consolationis temperans, ut sciant omnes in totius
regni consolat^onem regem futurum, quem ab ipso Deo, plebe nesciente quid
fecerit, nullus dabitaret electum. Saevibat interim gladius hostilis in Anglia;
caedibus and rapinis omnia replebantur, ubique luctus, ubique clamor, ubique
desolatio. Incenduntur ecclesiae, monasteria devastantur, and ut verbis
propheticis utar, effuderu^t sanguinem sanctorum in circuitu Jerusalem, and non
erat qui sepeliret. Sacerdotes suis fugati sedibus, sicubi pax and quies aliqua
in monasteriis vel locis desertis inv^niebatur, communem miseriam deplorantes
delitescebant. Inter quos vener abilis Bryghtwaldus Wintoniensis Episcopus,
caenobium Glastoniense maerens and tristis ingressus, orationibus vacabat and
psalmis. Qui cum aliquando pro Regis, plebisque liberatione preces lacrymasque
profunderet, quasi in haec verba prorumpens. Et tu, inquit, Domine usque quo?
usque quo avertis faciem tuam, obliviscens inopiae nostrae and tribulationis
nostrae? Sanctos tuos occiderunt, altaria tua suffoderunt, and non est qui
redimat, neque qui salvum faciat. Scio Domine, scio, quia omnia quae fecisti
nobis, in vero judicio fecisti: sed nunquid in aeternum projiciet Deus, and non
opponet and complacitus sit adhuc? erit ne Domine Deus meus, erit ne finis
horum mirabilium? aut in aeternum tuus in nos mucro desaeviet, and percutias
usque ad internecionem? Inter prices tandem and lachrimas ^atigatum soper
suavis excepit; viditque per somnium cael^stem chorum cum lumine,
bea^issimumque Petrum in ^min^nti loco constitutum, dignum tantae majestati
habi^um praeferentem. Videba^ur ante eum vir praeclari vultus in forma decen^i
regalibus amictus insigniis, qu^m cum p^opriis manibus Apostolus censecrasset
and uuxiss^t in regem^ monita salu^is adjicit, praecipu^qu^ caelib^m vitam
commendans, quot esset annos regnaturus ape^uit. O^stupefactus Praesul tanti
novitate mi^aculi, petit sibi a san^^o visionis hujus mysterium revelari: de
statu insuper regni and instantis ^ine periculi apostolicum exegit oraculum.
Tunc factus vul^u placido in tuins in^uentem. Domini, inquit, o Praesul, Domini
est regnum, ipse dominatur in filiis hominum. Ipse transfert regna, and
mutatimperia, and propter peccata populi regnare facit hypocritam. Peccatum
p^ccavit populus tuus Domino, and tradidit eos in manus Gentium, and dominati
sunt etiam qui oderunt eos. Sed non obliviscitur misereri Deus, nec continebit
in ira sua milericordias suas, Erit enim, cum dormis cum patribus tuis sepultus
in senectute bona, visitabit Dominus populu^ suu^, and faciet redemtionem
plebis suae Eliget enim sibi viru^ secundum cor suum qui faciet omnes
voluntates suas; qui me opitulante regnu^ adeptus, Anglorum Danico furori finem
imponet. Erit enim acceptus Deo and gratus hominibus, amabilis civibus,
terribilis hostibus, utilis ecclesiae. Qui cum praescriptum terminu^ regnandi
in justitia and pace compleverit, laudabilem vitam sancto fine concludet. Quae
omnia in beato Edwardo completa r^i ^xi^us comprobavit; Expergefactus Pontif^x
ru^sus ad preces lac^imasque convertitur, and licet faelicitat^m suae gentis
non esset ipse visurus, de malorum tamen fine c^rtus effectus, gratias agens
Deo plurimum gratulabatur^ Fa^tus igitur animaequior, populis poeni^entiam
praedicabat, quibus D^us misericordiam non defuturam constantissim^
pollicaba^ur.

From these passages whether real, as man^, as fictitious as some repute them,
I shall only observe these real Truths.

1. That in King E^helreds reign, great Parliamentary Councils were usually
assembled, to consult of the weighty affairs, state, if not succession of the
Realm of England. 2. That godly men in all ages have been deeply affected with
the misery, exile, disinheriting, and ex^irpation of the Royal Issue and
Posterity, by invading foreign usurpers, and with the oppressions of their
native country under their usu^ped power; and have poured forth frequent and
fervent prayers unto God in secre^, for their restitution and relief. 3. That
the Nobility, Clergy and people of England have ever had a propense natural
inclination and affection to the true royal Blood and Posterity of the Nation,
though forcibly constrained to abjure and renoun^e them for a season by
prevailing Intruders; electing them for their Kings, and preferring them before
all others upon the very next opportunity to vindicate their rights and
liberties, and rejecting the usurpers and their race. 4. That though the Kings
of England were usually reputed hereditary, yet in truth they were for the most
part actually elected by the Prelates and Nobles in parliamentary Councils, and
appointed by the generality of the Clergy and people, and had oaths of
allegiance given to them by their subjects. 5. That God does many times beyond
all probability and expectation, restore disinherited Princes to their Crowns,
of which they have been ^orcibly deprived after many years dispossession, and
without any wars or effusion of blood, even by the Nobles and peoples own
voluntary choice and act, without their seeking: as he did here restore Prince
Edward after 25 years interruption, and Aurelius Ambrosius long before to the
British Crown, to omit all others. 6. That Crowns invaded, ravished by force of
arms and bloodshed, are seldom long or peaceably enjoyed by the usurpers
themselves or their posterity, that of Curtius being an experimental truth,
Hist. l. 3. p. 396.
Non est diu^turna possessio in quam gladio inducimur.
All which we find experimentally verified in this History of King Edward his
election and restitution to the Crown of England, worthy our special
observation.

King Edw. coming to the Crown, was not only very charitable to the poor,
humble, merciful and just toward all men, but also PLURES L^GES BONAS IN
ANGLIA STATUIT, quae pro majore pa^te adhuc in regno tenerentur. Whereupon
about the year 1043. (as the Chron^cle of Brompton, Col. 937.938.
William Caxton, in his Chronicle, and Mr. Seldom inform us) Earl Godwin, a
fugitive in Denmark for the murder of prince Alfred, Chron. pars 6.
hearing of his piety and mercy, resolved to return into England, humbly to
implore his mercy and grace, Titles of Honor. part. 2. chapter 6. sect. 5.
that he might have his lands again that were confiscated: having provided all
things for his voyage, he put to sea and arrived in Englan^, and then posted to
London, UBI REX ET OMNES MAGNATES AD PARLIAMENTUM TUM FUERUNT, Where the King
and all the Nobles were then at a parliament: here he beseeched and entreated
his friends and kindred, who were the greatest Lords of the land after the
King, that they would study to procure to him the Kings Grace and friendship,
who having thereupon taken deliberate counsel among themselves, led him with
them before the King to seek his Grace: But so soon as the King saw him he
presently appealed him of TREASON, and of the death of Alfred his brother, and
using these words unto him, said; THOU TRAITOR GODVVIN, Prop. 2.4.5.6.
^ THEE APPEAL FOR THE DEATH OF ALFRED MY BROTHER WHOM THOU HAVE TRAIT^ROUSLY
SLAIN. To whom Godwin excusing himself, answered, My Lord and King,, saving
your Revere^c^, and Grace, Peace, and Lordship, I never betrayed, nor ye^ slew
your Brother: unde super hoc pono me IN CONSIDERATIONE CURIAE VESTRAE; whence I
put my self upon the consideration and judgment of your Cour^ concerning this
matter. Then said the King KARISSIMI DOMINI, COMITES ET BARONS TERRAE, etc.
Most dear Lords, Earls and Barons of the land, who are my Liege-men now here
assembled, you have heard both my appeal and Godwins answer, Volo quod inter
Nos in i^ta appellatione, RECTUM JUDICIUM DECERNATIS, ET DEBITAM JUSTITIAM
FACIATIS: I will that between us in this appeal you award right Judgment and
do due Iustic^. COMITIBUS VERO ET BARONIBUS SUPER HOC AD INVICEM TRACTANTIBUS.
Hereupon the Earls and Barons debating upon this business among themselves,
some among them were different in their opinions from others in doing just
judgem^nt herein. For some said, that Godwin was never obliged to the King, (so
Bromton, to Alfred writes Cax^on) by homage, service, or fealty; and therefore
HE WAS NOT HIS TRAITOR, and that he had not slain Alfred with his own hands.
But others said, Quod Comes, nec Baro, nec aliquis Regi subditus, BELLUM CONTRA
REGEM IN APPELLATIONE SUA DE LEGE POT^ST VADIARE: That neither the Earl nor any
Baron, nor any Subject to the King, could by the Law wage Battle against the
King in his Appeal, but ought wholly to put himself in his mercy, and to offer
him competent amends. Then Leofric Earl of Chester (or Coventry, as Caxton) a
good man toward God and the world, spoke and said: The Earl Godwin, after the
King, is a man of the best parentage of all England; and he cannot deny but
that BY HIS COUNCIL Alfred the Kings Brother was slain; wherefore I award as
touching my part, that himself and his son, and every of us, DUODECIM COMITES,
the twelve Earls who are his friends and kinsmen should go humbly before the
King laden with as much gold and silver as every of us can carry between his
arms, offering that to him for his trespass, and submissively depr^cating,
that he would pardon all his rancour and ill will to the Earl, and receiving
his homage and feal^y, he would restore and redeliver his lands entirely to
him^ Unto which award THEY ALL ACCORDING, they all laded themselves with
treasure in the manner aforesaid, and g^ing to the King, declared unto him the
order and mann^r of their JUDGMENT, or AVVARD. QUORUM CONSIDERATIONI REX
CONTRADICERE NOLENS, QUICQUID JUDICAVERANT PER OMNIA RATI^ICAVIT. The King not
willing to contradict them in any thing they had judged, ratified the same in
all things. An agreement therefore being made between them in this manner, the
Earl presently regained all his lands.

The generality of our Historians (as Brom^on confesses) deny that Godwin ever
fled into D^nmark, or left England for the murder of Alfred; Malmesb. De gest.
Regum. l. 2. c. 12. Mat. Westminster. Sim. Dunelmens. Wigorn. Huntind. Hoved.
Polichron. Fab. Speed, Holinsh. Graft.
they generally aff^rming, that he purged himself thereof (though falsely) CORAM
PROCERIBUS, before the Nobles in the reign of Harde-Cnute; swearing with his
compurgators that he never consented to his death NISI REGIA VI COACTUS, but
through compulsion by royal violence. Recording likewise, that after the death
of King Harde-Cnute, Prince Edward was called out of Normandy, and elected
King, principally by the help and counsel of Earl Godwin himself, who (as
Malmesbu^y and others write) persuaded him to accept the Crown, and
precontracted with him before h^ came into England: De gest. Regem l. 2. c. 13.
p. 80.
Paciscatur ergo sibi amicitiam solidam, filiis honores integros, filiae
matrimonium; brevi futurum ut se Regem videat, qui nunc vitae naufragus, exul
spei, alterius opem implorat. Utrinque fide data, quicquid petebatur sacramento
firmavit. If there were then any such Parliament as this then held at London,
and such proceedings in it concerning Godwin it was most probably in the year
1043^ as I here place it. And from these memorable proceedings in it, we may
observe, 1. That there is mention only of the King, Earls and Barons present
in this Parliament as members of it, not of any Knights of shires, Citizens or
Burgesses elected by the people, of which there is not one syllable. 2. That
the Earls and Barons in Parliament were the only judges in that age in
Parliament between the King and his Nobles, subjects, both in criminal and
other causes there decided. 3. That Peers in that age were only tried and
judged by their Peers, for treason and capital offenses. 4. That appeals of
Treason were then tried in Parliament, and the Earls and Barons the sole Judges
of them, and of what offenses were Treason and what not. 5. That the Bishops
and Clergy in that age had no votes in matters of Treason and capital
offenses. 6. That the Judgment of Parliament then re^ted properly in the Earls
and Barons, not the King: and that their judgment was not repealable by, but
obligatory to the King himself. 7. That no Subject could then by law wage
battle against the King in an Appeal. 8. That the murder of Prince Alfred,
then heir to the Crown, in the time of Harold an actual King by usurpation
without any good title, by his command, was reputed a treasonable offense in
Earl Godwin, for which he forfeited his lands, and was forced to purchase his
pardon and lands restitution with a great fine and sum to the King. 9. That
though the Author of the Chronicle of Bromton (and Caxton out of him) ^t^le
this Assembly PARLIAMENTUM, a Parliament, Anno 1043.
not a COUNCIL, yet it is only according to the style of the age wherein he
writ (being in the reign of King Edward the third) as In his Epistles to
His^ori^ Anglica. Scriptur. p. 41.
Mr. Seldom proves, not according to the dialect of the age wherein it was
held; to which the term Parliamentum was a mere stranger, and CONCILIUM MAGNUM,
etc. the usual name expressing such Assemblies.


Malmesbur. de gest. R^g. l. 2. c. 13. Flor. Wigorniens. Mat. Westminster. Sim.
Dunelmens. Ann. 1042. 1043. Bromton. col. 936.937. Hoved. Annal. pars 1^ p.
439. Polychronicon. l. 6. c. 33. Faban, Caxt. Holins^. Gra^ton, Speed.
King Edward, Anno 1643. immediately after his Coronation came suddenly from
Gloucester to Winchester, attended with Earl Godwin, Siward and Leofric, and by
their advice forcibly took from his Mother Queen Emma, all her gold, silver,
jewels, and precious stones, and whatever rich things else she possessed,
commanding only necessaries to be administered to her there. Propos. 2.4.
The cause of which unjust act, some affirm to be Godwins malice toward her;
others affirm it to be, her unnaturalness to King Ethelred her first husband,
and her own sons by him, Alfred and Edward; In loving and marrying Cnute their
enemy and supplanter, when living, and applauding him when dead, more then
Ethelred. In advancing Harde-Cnute her ^on by him to the Crown, and
endeavoring to deprive Alfred and Edward thereof. In refusing to give any
thing toward Prince Edw: his maintenance whiles in ex^le and distress,
although he often requested her to supply his necessities. In having some hand in
the murder of Prince Alfred, and endeavoring to poison King Edward himself,
as the Chronicle of Bromton relates. After which, by the instigation of Robert
Archbishop of Canterbury, a Norman born, he again spoiled her of all she had,
and shut her up prisoner in the Abbey of Werwel, upon suspicion of incontinency
with Alwin Bishop of Winchester, from which false imputation she purged her
self and the Bishop, by passing barefoot over nine red hot ploughshares without
any harm. Whereupon the King craved mercy and pardon from her for the infamy
and injury done unto her; for which he was disciplined and whipped by his
Mother, and all the Bishops there present.

Anno 1044. Anno 1044.
^lor. W^gogoriens. Sim. Dunelmens. Hovedon, Mat. Westminster. Malmsb. D^ gest. reg.
l. 2. c. 13. Holinsh, Gra^ton.
There was GENERALE CONCILIUM CELEBRATUN, a General Council held at London,
wherein Wolm^r was elected Abbot of Evesham. And this year King Edward DE
COMMUNI CONCIDIO PROCERUM SUORUM, as Bromton and others write (most likely when
assembled in the Council at London) married Edith daughter of Earl Godwin in
patrocinium regni sui, he being the most potent man in all the Realm; there
being in her breast a magazine of all liberal virtues. Propos. 5.2.
And this same year (most probable by this same Councils Edict) Gunilda, a
noble Matron, King C^ute's sisters daughter, with her two sons Hemming and
Thurkell, were banished out of England into Flanders, from whence after a
little stay they departed into Denmark: Flor. Wi^orniens. M. W^stm. Sim.
Dun^lm. Hu^tind. Bromt. Polychronic. Fabian, Sp^ed.
King Edward in the year 1045. Anno 1045.
assembled together to the port of Sandwich a very numerous and strong Navy,
against Magnus King of Norway, purposing to invade Engl. But Swane King of
Denmark then warring upon him, hindered his voyage for England. The next year
1046. Osgodus Clapa was banished out of England.

Propos. 3.9.
Wigorni^ns. Sim. D^n^lm. Hovedo^, Mat. Westmister, Malmesb. Bromton, and
others.
Swan^ King of Denmark Anno 1047. Anno 1047.
sent Ambassadors to King Edward, desiring him to send a Navy to him against
Magnus King of Norway. Hereupon Earl Godwin counseled the King, to send him at
least fifty ships furnished with soldiers: Sed quia Leofrico comiti, ET OMNI
POPULO id non vid^batur consilium, and CAETERI PROCERES DISSUASERUNT, Propos.
6.9.
nullum ei mittere voluit. But because that Council seemed not good to Earl
Leofric and all the people, and the rest of the Nobles dissuaded him from it,
he would send no ships to him. Magnus furnished with a great Navy fought with
Swane, and after a great slaughter on both sides, expelled him out of Denmark,
reigned in it, and compelled the Danes to pay him a great Tribute.

Anno 1048.
The Authors in ( x.) Proposit. 3.9.
Harold Harvager King of Norwey, Anno 1048. sent Ambassadors to King Edward,
offering peace and friendship to him, which he embraced. Also Swane King of
Denmark sent other Ambassadors to him this year, requesting a naval assi^tance
of ships from him. But although Earl Godwin was willing, that at least fifty
ships should be sent him, yet none were sent, because Earl Leofric, OMNISQUE
POPULUS UNO ORE CONTRADIXERUNT, and all the people contradicted it with one
voice. Historiae p. 295.296.
Abbot Ingulphus records, That Wulgat Abbot of S. P^ga, whose Abbey was quite
destroyed and burnt to the ground by the Danes, had a long suit in the Kings
Court with three Abbots of Burgh, concerning the seat of his Abbey, especially
with Abbot Leofric, with whom he most strongly contended: Sed Regis curia
nimium fav ^nte potentiori, and contra pauperem sententiante, tandem sedem
monasterii sui perdidit. Tanta fuit Abbatis Leofrici pecunia: Proposit. 4.5.
tanta Comitis Godwini potentia, which he thus repeats. Illo in tempore
venerabilis Pater Wulgatus Abbas Pegelandiae diutissimam calumniam passus ab
Abbatibus Burgi, Elfrico, Arwino and Leofrico, Abbatiae suae sedem amittens
tandem succubuit, and (pro^ nefas!) totum situm monasterii sui JUDICIO REGALIS
CURIAE PERDIDIT. Tantum tunc potuit super Iustitiam pecunia, contra veritatem
versutia, and in CURIA regis Hardecnuti Godwini potentia. After which he adds,
that in the year 1048. when the said Abbot Wulgat having lost the site of his
Monastery, had laid the foundation of a new Monastery in his Manor of
Northburt, next adjoining to the old, intending to translate his Abbey thither,
and diligently labored to reedifie a Church, Dormitory, with other claustral
offices there, being assisted with the alms of many believers, Ferno^us, a Knight.
Ld. of Bosworth, openly showed out of the Abbots own writings, that the said
Manor of Northburt was given by his progenitors to the Monastery of S. P^ga
and to the Monks there serving God, whence by consequence he al^edged, That
seeing Abbot Wulgat and his Monks did not serve God and S. Pega from that time
forwards in that place (where the old Monastery stood) that they ought not from
henceforth to enjoy the said Manor. Acceptatum est hoc A REGIS JUSTITIARIO, ET
CONFESTIM ADjUDICATUM EST dictum manerium de Northburt cum omnibus suis
pertinentiis praedicto militi Fernoto, and tanquam jus suum haereditariu^, de
monachis ecclesiae sanctae Pegae, alienatu^ perpetuo and sublatum. Quod tum per
universum Regnum citius ^uisset cognitum, scilicet Abbatum de Peikirk, prius
amisisse monast^rium suum, and consequenter man^rium ad monasterium quondam
pertinens; similiter Edmerus miles and dominus de Holbrok calumniam mov^t
contra eundem Abbatem and monachos suos de manerio suo de Maksey; and Horsingus
de Wathe calumniatus est, and pro Manerio suo de Bading^o^, and Siwardus Comes
de Manerio suo de Bernack, and Hugolonus Thesaurarius de Manerio de Helieston,
and alii plures de allis mane iis dicto Monasterio dudum pertinentibu: and
omnes eadem ratione in dicta causa contra Monachos obtinuerunt, and tam de
maneriis, quam de Monasterio suo dictus Abbas de Peibec ac Monachi sui nequiter
and crud^liter ejec^i sunt, ut nunquam alicui veniat damnum solum. Cum itaque
Abbas Wulgatus and conventus suus, Monachi scil^cet, etc sic de Monasterio
destituti, vagabundi and in proximo dispergendi in ^mnem ventum pro extr^ma
miseria flu^^uarent, misertus eorum piissimus R^x Edwardus, Omnes in suam
curiam suscepit, and u^quequo eis provideret, suam capellam, ac aulam quoti^ie
frequentare imperavit. The Abbot of Croyland dying soon after, and his
pastoral staff by which he was invested, being presented by the Prior and two
Monks to King Edward, the King thereupon immediately invested Wulgatus in the
Regiment of the Monastery of Croyland by the delivery of the Pastoral staff
unto him, seconded with his Charter of donation, without any election by the
Covent. Inter praecipua Monasteria tunc magno nomine praedicabatur Croilandia,
tot and tanta in tempore Danicae Tribulationis in Regis curiam semper manu
promptissima effuderat donaria ET TRIBUTA. A multis itaque annis retroactis,
NULLA ELECTIO PRAELATORUM ERAT MERE LIBERA ET CANONICA, SED OMNES DIGNITATES
TAM EPISCOPORUM QUAM ABBATUM PER ANNULUM ET BACULUM R^GIS CURIA PRO SUA
COMPLACENTIA CONFEREBAT. These proceedings and judgments against the Abbot and
Monks of S. Pega and Peikirk, De gest. reg. l. 2. c. 13. p. 79.80.
were the occasion (as I conceive) of this passage in William of Malmesb.
touching King Edwards reign. Fuerunt tam^n nonnulla quae gloriam tempo^um
deturbarent. Monasteria tunc monachis viduata; PRAVA JUDICIA A PRAVIS HOMINIBUS
COMMISSA, etc. Sed harum rerum invidiam amatores ipsum ita extenuare conantur:
Monasteriorum destruction, PERVERSITAS JUDICIORUM, non ejus scientia, sed per
Godwini filiorumque ejus sunt commissa viol^ntiam, qui regis indulgentiam
videban^; postea t^men ad eum delata, acriter eorum exilio vindicata. To which
may be referred that story of Walter Mapaeus, in Mr. Cambdens Britannia, p.
374.375. of Earl Godwins thrusting the Abbess of Berkley and her Nuns out of
the Monastery of Berkley (which he begged of King Edward) by this wile; He
caused a young Nephew of his feigning himself sick, to lie so long in the
Nunnery t^ll he left the Abbess and all her Nuns great with child: and then
complaining of, and proving this their incontinency before the King, ejected
the Abbess and Nuns, and gained the Nunner^ and Manor of Berkley to
himself, worth 500l. revenue. Together with this Camdens Britan. Suss. p. 307.
Godwins cheating the Archbishop of Canterbury of his Manor of Boseam in
Sussex, by a wily word-trap and equivocation, recorded by the same authors.

King Edward, Anno 1049.
Anno 1049. was so deeply affected and ravished with Gods extraordinary mercy
toward him, Mat. W^stm. An. 1049. p. 416.
in preserving him like another Ioash from the cruelty of the bloody Danes, and
restoring him beyond expectation to the Crown of England, without his seeking,
or the least effusion of blood, after sundry years dispossession by the Danish
Intruders, that thereupon, he vowed a solemn pilgrimage to Rome, there to
render humble thanks and gifts to God for this signal mercy. For diligently
having prepared great sums of money to defray his expenses, with many rich
presents, he assembled all the Nobles and Prelates of the Realm in a
Parliamentary Council, acquainting them with this his vow and intended
pilgrimage, and craving their advice, how the Realm might be justly governed,
preserved in peace, and defended in his absence, till his return from Rome.
Propos. 5.6.9.
Upon which the Nobles after serious consultation, considering the great
inconveniences and perils that might be^all the kingdom by his absence, being
but newly settled; and the manifold dangers that might happen to him in so long
a journey; and what new troubles and mishaps might befall the Realm, if he
should miscarry in the way, having no issue; would by no means permit him to
undertake this pilgrimage, but dissuaded him from it; and by common consent at
last agreed to send solemn Ambassadors from the King and them to the Pop^, to
r^present the inc^nveniences and perils that might befall the Realm by his
abs^nce from it, and thereupon to procure a dispensation from this his vow and
pilgrimage. Which the Ambassadors accordingly representing, the Pope thereupon
dispensed with the Kings vow, upon this condition and firm injunction, that
the King should dist^ibute to the poor all the expenses he had provided for
his journey, and should either build a new, or repair an old Monastery, in
honor of S. Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, and endow it with sufficient
revenues to maintain the Monks; confi^ming by his Apostolical Authority all
the lands or revenues which the King or any other should confer upon that
Monastery, and whatever privileges he would think fit to grant thereunto,
pertaining to the honor of God and denouncing an eternal malediction against
the infringers of them. The Ambassadors returning with this dispensation, St.
Peter revealed to one Vlsin a Monk and Anchorite, that his will was, that the
place called Westminster (then lying ruinous) should be restor^d: which vision
when he had related to the King and his Cou^cil, REX TOTIUS REGNI CONSILIO, The
King by the advice of the whole Realm^ (assembled in a parliamentary council)
rebuilt the foresaid place, and endowed and enlarged it with very ample
possessions, rents and liberties.

The passages of this story being very memorable, and pertinent to my
discourse, I shall present you with them at large in the words of Abbot Ailred,
who thus records them. De vita and Mucanilis Edwardi Confess. col. 379.380.381.
etc.


Succedentibus prosperis, Rex beatus nequ^quam sui sponsionis est oblitus, nec
in die bonorum, immemor ^uit malorum. Sed cogitans and recogitans quanta sibi
fecerit Dominus, Prop. 5.6.9.
qui ditavit egenum, sublimavit humilem, inglorium coronavit, parat reddere
vota quae distrinxerunt labia ejus. Parat sumptus, separat donaria, VOCATISQUE
TOTIUS REGNI PRIMATIBUS, habuit cum eis hujusmodi, vel DE STATU REGNI, vel DE
SUA PEREGRINATIONE SERMONEM:

Benedictus Dius qui magnificavit miseric^rdiam suam facere nobiscum, qui
visitavit in virga iniquitates nostras, and in verberibus peccata nostra,
pietatem suam non amovit a nobis. Ecce quomodo deposuit potentes, and exaltavit
humiles; quomodo esurien^es implevit bonis, and divites dimisit inanes. Per mo
Reges regnant, ait ipse, and principes justa discernunt. Non excidit a nobis
quomodo intrantibus in haereditatem nostram barbaris, facti sumus ^pprobrium
vicinis nostris, subsannatio and illusio hiis qui in circuitu nostro sunt.
Aliis namque interfectis, aliis fugatis, aliis jugo ignominiosae servitutis
oppressis, f^re nihil honoris, nihil gloriae generi nostro reliquerunt. Tandem
d^functo Patre meo, patribus peremptis, actis in exilium N^potibus cum hostibus
nostris in omnibus ^ortuna faveret, mihi perfecto nihil spei superesse
videbatur. Ego vero contra spem in spem credens, and Domini misericordiae me
totum dedens, peregrinationem meam ad sanctorum Apostolorum limina vovi, and
d^inceps divinae me protectioni dispositionique commisi. Ille autem resp^xit in
orationem mea, and non sprevit precem meam, and abstulit obprobrium m^um, and
restitui^ me in reg^u^ Patris ^ei: insuper cumu^avit divitiis, auxi^ gloria,
donis coelestibus illustravit^ SINE SANGUINE REBELS SUBEGIT, hosts subvertit
and omnia nostra amabili quadam composuit pace. Absit, absi^ ut tot and tantis
ejus ben^fi^iis inveniamur ingrati, quin potius de manu inimicorum nostrorum
liberati, serviamus illi in justitia and veritate. Faci amusque quod ait
Propheta; Vovete and reddite Domino Deo vestro. DECERNITE ERGO MECUM, QUOMODO
ME PEREGRINANTE REGNUM SUBSISTAT ANGLORUM, QUA LEGE, QUA PACE, QUO JUDICE OMNIA
DISPONANTUR: QUIS CUI PRAEFERATUR REGIONI, QUIS CASTRA, Propos. 5.6.9.
QUIS URBES, QUIS PRIVATA, QUIS PUBLICA NEGOTIA PROCURET. Erit enim unus
omnibus Custos and PROTECTOR DEUS, and pacem quam dedit, ipse servabi^,
nobiscum proficiscens, and vobiscum remanens, qui and vo^ custodiat, and me
reduca^.

Ad hanc vocem tota illa multitudo contremuit, and interiorem produnt lachrymis
suspiriisque dolorem. Iam j^mque manus Danica timebatur quam ejus meritis
evaserant, jamjamque deletum iri totam patriam formidabant. Erupit sermo in
populum, and ecce clamor, ecce tumultus, and quasi jam saevirent incendia,
plena lacrimis insula videbatur. Videres pauperes nunc manus extendere ad
coelum, nunc rursus in terram ruere, and quasi morituros fame si Rex
discederet, de sepultura tantum and tumulo cogitare. Tunc OMNES IN COMMUNE
VOCIFERANTES IN REGEM, se non deserendos, se non exponendos gladiis, patriam
hostibus non prodendam, nec demittendu^ paces obsiae^ quem Deo dante
receperant, nec pro uno, ut putab^tur, bo^o tot ADMITTENDA PERICULA ALLEGABANT.
IMPERANT PONTIFICES, ROGANT PROCERES, PLEBS EXTORQUET, ut si non omittendu^ it
er istud censuerit, CENSEAT VEL DIEFERENDUM^ Tunc ille tot lacrimis, tot
vocibus, tot precibus se urgeri sentiens, diu inter pietatem and desiderium
fluctuabat; quia and voto supersedere periculosum, and tantorum precibus
fletibusque non cedere, inhumanum arbitrabatur. Tandem quod aptius esset Deo
scire desiderans, peregrinationem non quidem dimittendam sed differendam
interim consultius aestimabat, donec Apostolicae auctoritatis consilio and
voluntate consulta, ex ejus sententia, aut votum redimeret aut impleret. His
auditis, tanta suit omnibus divitibus pauperibusque laetitia, ut Edwardum suum
rursus sibi redditum, ^ursus revocatum exilio aestimarent. Agit unusquisque pro
gradu suo, pro officio suo, pro facultate sua, ut regem dilationis non toedeat,
aliis orationes, elemosinas aliis, suam etiam pro eo peregrinationem nonnullis
promittentibus. Dirigendi mox ad sedem apostolicam ELIGUNTUR LEGATI,
Archi^piscopus E^oracensis A^lredus, Episcopus Wint^^iensis He^mannus, Abbates
praeterea duo spectatae religionis, cum pluribus aliis tam clericis quam
laicis. Parantur interim necessaria, sucseptoque a rege mandato ad urbe^
proficiscuntur. Credendum Dei actum providentia ut regii responsales
congregatam ibi SYNODUM MAXIMAM reperirent, in qua praesidente beatae
recordationis Papa Leone, de negotiis ecclesiasticis tractabatur. Gaudet in
eorum adventu illa sanctorum praeclara societas, and quasi sibi missum de caelo
solatium tantorum Patrum praesentiam susceperunt; magnum Dei munus judicantes,
quod a finibus terrae tales viri tali tempore tali conventui occurrissent.
Igitur patre beatissimo praecipiente nuncii causam pro qua venerant dicturi
procedu^t in medium, patribus qui assidebant praebentibus cum summa devotione
silentium. Exponunt desiderium regis, ET REGNI PERICULUM, dispendium pacis,
clamorem pauperum, lacrimas orphanorum; OBDUCTAM ETIAM NECDUM RECENTIS PLAGAE
CICATRICEM ASSEREBANT, QUAE DANICA RAB^E ANGLIS INFLICTA, SI REX DECEDERET,
ACRIOR TIMEBATUR. Silentibus nunciis sonuit in ore omnium gratiarum actio and
vox laudis. Praedicatur circa Deum Regis, circa Regem plebis devotio; Mirantur
mansuetudinem David, prudentiam Joseph, divitias Solomonis in tali principe
convenisse. Tandem summo Pontifice dictante sententiam, OMNES IN COMMUNE DE
CERNUNT, PRO PACE REGNI, PRO UTILITATE ECCLESIAE, pro necessitate pauperum, and
quiet monasteriorum, Regem auctoritate Dei and beati Petri, PRAESENTIS ETIAM
SACRATISSIMAE SYNODI, avoti hujus vinculo solempniter absolvendum, expensas
paratas itineri pauperibus erogandas; in voti recompensatione construendu^ in
Hono^e^ beati Petri regiis copiis monasterium, vel aliquod destructum a
barbaris reparandum. Exhinc legatarii oblatis muneribus quae sanctorum
Ecclesiis Rex sanctus direxerat, accepta benedictione Pontificis cum literis
apostolicis laeti repatriant: transvectique in insulam IN CONSPECTU CONCILII,
QUOD PROPTER HOC IPSUM REGIA POTESTAS COEGERAT, epistolam tradiderunt.

Leo Episcopus servus servorum D^i, dilecto filio Edwardo Anglorum R^gi salutem
and apostolicam benedictionem. Quoniam voluntatem tuam laudabilem and Deo
gratam agnovimus, grati^s agimus and ^i pe^ quem reges regnant, Prayers then by
this Popes (...) are as effectual and acceptable to God in any other place as
in Rome it self.
and principes justa odecernunt. Sed quia prope est Dominus in omni loco
omnibus invocantibus eum in veritate, and sancti Apostoli cum suo capite
conjuncti unus spiritus sunt, and pias preces aequaliter andiunt; E^ QUIA
CONSTAT PERICLITARI REGIONEM ANGLICANAM EX TUA DISCESSIONE QUI FRAENO JUSTITIAE
TUAE SEDITIOSOS Ejus MOTUS COHIBES. Ex auctoritate Dei and sanctorum
Apostolorum and SANCTAE SYNODI absolvimus te a peccato illius voti pro quo Dei
offensam times, Popes in that age determined no weighty matters, even in Rome
it self, but by the major part or unanimous vote of a Synod.
and ab omnibus negligentiis and iniquitatibus tuis; ^a n^mirum potestate ^si
quam Dominus in beato Petro concessit nobis, dicens, Quaecunque solveritis
super terram, s^luta erant in coeli^. Deinde praecipimus tibi sub nomine
sanctae obedientiae and poenitentiae, ut expensas quas ad iter istud paravaras,
pauperibus eroges and coenobium Monachoru^ in konore sancti Petri apostoloru^
principis aut novum construas, aut vetustum augeas and em^ndes, and
sufficientia^ victualium fratribus de tuis redditibus constituas, quatenus dum
illi assidus inibi Deum laudaverint, and sanctis angeatur gloria, and tibi
indulg^ntia: Cui loco quicquid contul^ris v^l collatum est, vel con^eretur, ut
ratum sit apostolica authoritate praecipimus, and ut semper habitatio
Monachorum sit, and nulli lai^ae perso^ae nisi regi subdatur. Et quaecunque
privilegia ibi constituere volueris ad honorem D^i pertinentia, concedimus, and
robustissima auctoritate confirmamus, and infractores eorum aeterna
maledictione dampnamus.

After which Abbot Ailred at large relates the vision of the Anchorite in
Worcestershire, and S. Peter's command to him therein, to eminent King Edward
in discharge of his vow, to repair and endow the Abbey of Westminster, which
he signified in a letter sent by him to the King, delivered and read in the
Council the very same day the Popes letter was read. Ea igitur die, loco co^e^,
^N EODEM CONCILIO quo legati redeuntes ab^urb^. apostolicum retulere mandatum,
epistola etiam viri Dei regi praesentata profertur in m^dium. Lectoque sancti
Papae Leonis rescripto, loco sequenti b^ati s^nis apices recitan^ur, etc. Tunc
rex laetus and alacer, Ailredus Abbas Rivallis, de vita^ and miraculis Edw.
Confess. col. 386.387.388.
ut ei suerat constitutum, pecuniam qu^m in peregrinationis suae solatium
procuraverat, disper sit and dedit p^uperibus, operique injuncto intendens
animum thesauros ^ffudit. When he had fully rebuilt and finished this
Monastery, he sent Aeld^ed Archb. of York, Guiso Bishop of Wells, and Walter
Bish. of Herefo^d again to Rome to Pope Nicholas, with a Letter and Peter
pence, and royal presents, desiring his absolution from his former vow, and
confirmation of the liberties and privileges of the Abbey of Westminster, and
the lands conferred on it; who thereupon granted to this Abbey. V^ amplius in
perpetuum r^giae constitutionis and consecrationis locus s^, atque r^posi^orium
reg^lium insignium, and habitatio pe^p^tua mon^chorum, qui nulli omnino
personae nisi regi subd^ntur, habeantqu pot^statem secundum regulam sa^cti
Benedicti per successores elig^re idoneos Abbates, etc. Absolving and exempting
the Abbey from all episcopal service, exaction, Dominion and Iurisdicti^,
ratifying all their lands and lib^rties, d^nouncing a perpetual Anath^ma
against the inv^ders, diminishers^ dispersers, or sellers of them, with Judas
the Traitor. Closing his Bull and letter thus; Vobis vero, and p^st^^i^ v^stris
regibus committimus ADVOCATIONEM and tuiti nem ejusdem loci, and OMNIUM TOTIUS
ANGLIAE ECCLESIARUM, ut vice nostra CUM CONCILIO EPISCOPORUM ET ABBATUM,
CONSTITUAS UBIQUE QUAE JUSTA SUNT. Scientes per hoc vos recepturos dignam
m^rced^m abeo, cujus regnum and imperium non d^sin^t nec minu^tur i^ seculum.
The Kings and Popes letters are at large recorded by Ai^^ed, who adds, Lectis
igitur A^ostolicae maj^statis apicibus, exultavit in gaudio Rex beatissimus,
omnique solicitu^ine quam ex voti obl^gatione contra^^rat exuitur, CUNCTAQUE
REGNI NEGOTIA DUCIBUS PROCERIBUSQ^E COMMITTENS, totum se div nis mancipabat
obs^ qui^s.

Sp^lm^n^ Council. p. 626. to 637.
K. Edw: after these two Embassies to Rom^, Propos. 5.10.
by three several Charters (wherein he recites these Embassies, the Popes
letters in answer to them, and the vision aforesaid) CUM TOTIUS REGNI
ELECTIONE: and CUM CONSILIO ET DECRETO ARCHIEPISCOPORUM, EPISCOPORUM, COMITUM,
ALIORUMQUE MEORUM OPTIMATUM PROSPICIENS (assembled in a great parliamentary
Council for that purpose) granted and confirmed sundry lands and privileges to
this Abbey of Westminster. which all the Pr^lates confirmed, not only with their
subscriptions and the sign of the cross, but likewise with a solemn
excommunication: In the first of which Charters there is this memorable recital
agreeing with Abbot Ailreds relation.

Spelm in. Con^il. p. 628.
Edwardus Dei gratia Anglorum Rex, etc. Scire vos volo, quoniam tempore avorum
meorum, patrisque mei, mu^ta and gravia bellorum pericu^a afflixerunt gentem
Anglorum, and ipsos tam a suis, quam ab extraneis concitata; adeo ut pene
periclitata sit HAEREDITARIA REGUM SUCCESSIO, magnum que interstitium inter
fratrem meum Edmundum, qui patri meo mortuo successit, meque habitum sit,
invadentibus regnum Swegeno and Cnutho filio ejus, Regibus Dano^um, ac filiis
ipsius Cnuthi, Haroldo and Harde-Cnutho; a quibus and alter meus frater
Alfredus crudeliter est occisus, solusque, sicut Joas occisionem Otholiae, sic
ego crudelitatem eorum evasi. Tandem respectu misericordiae DEI, POST PLURES
ANNOS EGO EDWARDUS AD PATERNUM SOLUM REACCESSI, ET EO POTITUS SINE ULLO
BELLORUM LABOR, sicut amabilis Deo Solomon, tanta pace and rerum opulentia
abundavi, ut nullus antecedentium regum similis mei fuerit in gloria and
divitiis. Sed gratia Dei, non me, ut assolet, ex opulentia and superbia
contemptus invasit; immo coepi cogitare cujus dono and auxilio ad regni culmen
evasi, quoniam dei est regnum^ and cui vult dare illud; and quia mundus transit
and concupiscentia ejus, qui autem totum se subdit Deo, feliciter regnat, and
perpetualiter dives est: itaque deliberavi me ire ad lumina subliminum
Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, and ibi gratias agere pro collatis beneficiis, and
exorare ut eam pacem firmaret Deus perpetuam mihi Prop. 3.8.9.
and posteris meis. Praeparavi ergo and denumeravi expensas necessarias
itineri; and honorabilia dona quae ferrem sanctis Apostolis. SED GRAVIUS SUPER
RE MAEROR HABEBAT OPTIMATES MEN'S, utpote memores maloru^ quae sub a^iis regibus
pertulerant, NE TANTO DOMINO, ET PRO PATRIAE REGE ABSENTE REGNU^ NOVITER
SEDATUM ALIQUA TURBARETUR HOSTILITATE, and metuentes id quod sanctus Ezechias,
ne si forte in via aut aegritudine^ aut alio incommodo deficerem, HAEREDITARIIS
RRGIBUS CARERENT, maxim quia nullum habebam filium. Itaque COMMUNI HABITO
CONCILIO, ROGABANT ME UT AB INTENTION DESISTEREM, pollicentes se satisfactur^s
Deo pro voto meo, tam in miss^rum and orationu^ oblatione, qua^ in l^rg^
ele^mosyneru^ distributione. Sed cum obnixe contradicerem, TANDEM UTRISQUE
PLACUIT, UT MITTERENTUR LEGATI DUO AB UTRAque PATRE, Eldredus and Hereman^us
Episcopi, and Abbates Wulfri^us and Elwynus, qui Apostolo mea^ voluntate^ and
votum, and ILLORUM PETITIONEM indicarent, and secundum ejus sententiam quam
mihi mandaret promisi me omnia facturum. Factum est ergo quod volumus, and
venientes Romam Legati nostri ex voluntate Dei, invenerunt COLLECTAM SYNODUM in
eadem urbe; cumque exposuissent meam voluntasem and suam petitionem coram
ducentis and quinquaginta Episcopis and alia multitudine sanctorum Patrum, tunc
Apostolicus EX CONSILIO SANCTAE SYNODI hanc Epistolam scripsit. Leo, etc. Haec
and alia Apostolica mandata cum referrent nobis Legati, interea revelavit
beatus Petrus^ etc, voluntatem suam esse, ut restituerem locum, qui d^itur
Westmona^terium, etc. Cumque mihi hanc visionem meisque retulisset, and
Apostolicae literae aequalia praecepta detul^ssent; contuli voluntatem meam cum
voluntate Dei and TOTIUS REGNI ELECTIONE, dedi me ad restructione^ ejusdem
loci. Itaque DECIMARI praecepi omnem substantiam meam, tam in au^o and argento
quam in p^cudibus and omni genere possessionum, and destruens veterem^ novam a
fundamento basilicam construxi.

From which passages and charters (which I have coupled all together for their
coherence in matter, though differing somewhat in time) I shall observe, 1.
That parliamentary great Councils in that age, were summoned by the King upon
all extraordinary occasions. 2. That the Prelates, Nobles, and Barons of the
Realm were the only members of the great parliamentary Councils (summoned
only by the Kings writs) without any Knights of Burgesses that we read of
elected by the people. 3. That the Kings of Engl. in that age could not depart
out of the Realm (no not to pay their solemn vows to God) nor appoint
Vice-royes, Guardians, Officers, Judges, Commanders, to govern or defend the
Realm in their absence, without the advice and consent of their Nobles, in
parliamentary Councils: nor yet endow Mona^teries with any Crown Lands, or
Royal privileges by their charters, unless by consent and conf^rmation of
their Nobles and themselves in Parliament. 4. That the Nobles and grand
Councils of Engl. had then a negative voice, not only to conclude against the
King in his resolutions and intentions, bu^ even in his sacred and religious
vows, when prejudicial, dangerous and mischievous to the Realm, the public
peace and safety. 5. That Kings ought to submit to the just petitions, advice
and desires of their Nobles, Councils and people, in all things which concern
their safety and tranquillity, though contrary not only to their private
resolutions, but vows. 6. That the Nobles and Subjects of that age were very
zealous both of the safety of their Kings persons, the kingdoms peace and
security, and the hereditary succession of the Crown. 7. That the Kings absence
out of the Realm, or death, without any hereditary issue or heir, is exceeding
perilous and mischievous to the Realm, yea the cause of many seditions,
tumults, perturbations and ruins. 8. That the sacred vows of Kings prejudicial
to the Realm may and ought to be violated and dispensed with; and that by the
resolution of two Popes, three Roman Synods, and two parliamentary Councils. 9.
That God does many times not only preserve the right heirs to the Crown from
the hands of bloody Tyrants and Usurpers who seek their life, but likewise
miraculously and unexpectedly restore them to the Crown again without war or
bloodshed, after many years seclusion from it by intruding armed usurpers, as
he did K. Edw. here after 25 years invasion of his right, Aurelius Ambro^ius
after 21 years long before. 10. That right heirs to the Crown, when so
miraculously restored and reinthroned in their Kingdoms, ought to be
extraordinarily affected with, and thankful, bountiful and devout to God for
it, and their subjects likewise, both in word^ and deeds; as King Edward his
Nobles and Subjects were.


Wigorniens. Huntind. Hove. Radul. de Diceto. Sim. Dunelm. Bromt. Speeds Hist.
p. 411. Holinsh. Graft. and others.

Propos. 3.9.


King Henry the Emperor, An. 1049. Anno 1049.
(when the forementioned parliamentary Council was held about the Kings
pilgrimage and Embassy to Rome) warring upon Baldwin Earl of Flanders, for
burning his palace, sent to King Edward, entreating him not to suffer Baldwin
to ^scape, in case he should fly to sea. Whereupon the King went with a great
fleet to Sandwich, which he there continued so long till the Emperor received
from Baldwin whatever he desired. Henry Huntindon and the Chronicle of Bromton
relate, that two Princes of the Danes, Lothin and Hirling the year before,
having there taken an inestimable booty, and great store of gold and silver,
they sailed by sea about the coast of Ess^x. pillaged it, and sailing thence
into Flanders, there sold their prizes, and returned from whence they came.
Which probably occasioned the kings drawing his fleet this year unto Sandwich,
for defense of the coast, as well as the Emperors Embassy. Whiles the Kings
fleet lay at Sandwich, Swane Earl Godwins son (who formerly fled into Denmark,
because he could not marry Abb^sse Elgina^ whom he had defloured) teturning
into England with eight ship^, gave out in speeches, that he would from
henceforth faithfully remain with the King. Whereupon Earl Beorn promised him
to procure from the King that his Earldome should be restored to him. The
Emperor and Earl Baldwin being agreed, Earl Godwin and Beorne by the Kings
license sailed to Pemeuse with 42 ships, the rest of the Navy the King
discharged and sent home, retaining only a few ships with him. But being soon
after informed, that Osgad Clapa (whom he had banished lay in Vlve with 29.
ships, he recalled as many of the dismissed ships as he could, to encounter
him. Osgad having received his wife, sailed with 6 of his ships in^o D^nmark,
the other 23 ships sailed toward Essex, having taken a great booty about the
promontory of Edelfe, they were all cast away in a great storm, but two, which
were taken in the parts beyond the sea, and all the men in them put to the
sword. In the mean time Swane dealt very deceit^ully with Earl Beorne,
entreating him to go with him to Sandwich to make his peace with the King; who
considering his consanguinity, went to him attended only with three men. Swane
treacherously sending him to Bos^nham where his ships rode at anchor, carried
him on shipboard, bound him in chains, and at last slew and cast him into a
pit. After which two of his ships being taken by those of Hastings and brought
to the King at Sandwich, and 4 more of his ships being dismissed, he sailed
with two ships only into Ireland, till Ailred Bish. of Worcest. reduced and
reconciled him unto the King. The same year in the month of Aug. the Irish
pirates with 36 ships arriving in the mouth of Severn by the help of Griffin
King of S^uthwales, burnt and pillaged many villages, and put the inhabitants
to the sword; against whom Ailred Bish. of Worcest. with few of the inhabitants
of Worcester and Hereford speedily marched; but the Welshmen amongst them, who
had promised fidelity to them, ^ending presently to their K. Griffin, and
entreating him with all possible speed to fall upon the English; thereupon he
and the Irish pirates assaulting the English unexpectedly early in the morning,
slew many of them, and routed the rest. King Edward in the year 1051. released
the English, Anno 1051.
From the heavy tribute or Danegeld, which Florentius Wigorniensis, and Simeon
Dunelmensis, thus express. Rex Edvardus Absolvit Anglos A gravi ve^^igali. 38.
Proposition 1.
anno, ex quo pater ejus Rex Athelredus Danicos solidarios solvi mandavit etc.
quod eis pater suus propter Danicos solidarios imposuerat, as ^hronicon. c^l
938.943.
Brompton renders it in another place; Roger de Hunedon Annalium pars 1. p.
441. Rodolphus de Diceto Abbreviatione Chronicorum. col. 145. ^^e the same
words. Ailredus Abbas Rievallis, de vita and miraculis Edwardi Confessori; Col.
383. thus relates it. Insuper and Tributum illud gravissimum, quod tempore
patris sui primo classi Danicae pendeb^tur Postmodum vero fisco regio Annis
singulis infer^batur, regia liberalitate remisit, et ab onere hoc importabili
in perpetuum Angliam absolvit. Vnde sancto huic regi non inconvenienter aptatur
quod scriptum est; B^^tus vir qui inventus sine macula, and qui post aurum non
abiit, nec speravit in pecuniae thesauris. Post aurum non abiit, quod potius
d^spersit, nec speravit in thesauris, quos in Dei opere non tam minuit quam
consumpsit.

Flores Hist. p. 418.
Matthew Westminster records it in these words, Anno gratiae 1051. Rex
Edwardus, A vectigali gravissimo Anglos absolvit, quod patre vivente, Danicis
stipend^ariis, Triginto octo millia librarum solvi consuevit. Henry de
Knighton, De eventibus Angliae. l. 1. c. 9. fol. 233.1^ and Higden in his
Polychronicon. lib. 6. c. 24. f. 254. thus relate it: Rex Edvardus absolvit
Anglos a Gravi Tributo quod pa^ur ejus Ethelredus Danicis solidariis solvi
fecerat, and jam per 40. annos duraverat; which Fabian in his Cronicle, part 8.
c. 210. p. 282. Gra^ton in his Cronicle. p. 170. Speed in his History. p. 410.
Holinsh^ad and others thus express. This King Enward discharged English men of
the great and most heavy Tribute called Danegeld, which his Father Ethelred had
made them pay to the Soldiers of Denmark, and had then dured 40. years, So
that after that day it was no more gathered. Abbot Iuguphus. Historiae page
897. thus records it more at large. Eodem etiam Anno 1051. cum terra non daret
solita fertilitate fructus suos, sed fames plurimos habitatores devoraret, in
tantum ut bladuum carentia, and panis inopia multa hominum millia morierentur,
miserecordia motus super populum pi^ssimus Rex Edwardus, Tributum gravisimum,
quod Danigelo dicebatur omni Angliae in perpetuum, relaxavit, Ferunt quidam,
regem sanctissimum, cum dictum DANIGELD cublcularii sui collectum in regis
cameram infudissent, and ad videndum tanti Thesauri cumulum ipsum adduxissent,
ad primum aspectum exhorruisse, protestantem, Se daemonem super acervum
pecuniae saltantem and nimio gaudio exultantem prospexisse; unde pristinis
possessoribus jussit statim reddere, and de tam fera exactione ne jota unum
voluit retinere, quin in perpetuum remisit, anno scilicet 38. ex quo tempore
Regis Ethelredi, patris sui Suanus, Rex Danorum suo exercitui illud solvi
singulis annis imperavit. This History of the Devils dancing upon this Money, is
thus more fully related by Roger de Honeden: Annali^m pars prior page 447. Item
de eodem Rege Edvardo quadam die contigit quod cum praedistus Rex Anglorum
Edwardus (Regnina and comite Haraldo deducentibus) aerarium suum intravit ut
pecuniam videret magnam, quam Regina and Comes Haraldus, Rege ipso nesciente,
colligissent ad opus Regis (scilicet per singulos comitatus totius Angliae: de
unaquaque hida terrae quatuor, denarios, ut Rex inde, contra natale Domini
pannos emeret ad opus militum and, servientium suorum) cumque Rex intrasset
aerarium suum, comitantibus Regnia, and Comite Haraldo, videt diabolum sedentem
inter Denarios illos: and ait illi Rex, quid hic facis? cui demon respondit:
Proposition. 1.
custodio hic pecuniam meam; and dixit Rex, conjuro te per Patrem and Filium
and Spiritum sanctum, ut indices mihi, Quamobrem pecunia ista tua est? and
respondens dixit ei demon, Quia injuste accquisita est de substantia pauperum.
Illi autem qui illum comitabantur stabant stupefacti, audientes quidem illos
loquentes, neminem autem videntes praeter solum Regem: and ait illis Rex,
Reddite denarios istos illis a quibus capti sunt, and fecerunt sicut praecepit
illis Rex: which is likewise remembered by Capgrave, Surius, Ribadeniera, and
others in the life of King Edward the Confessor.

From all which relations compared together, it is apparent.

First, That Dangeld was a great, most heavy, and intolerable Tribute, first
imposed in King Ethelreds reign, to pay the Danish Navy, and Soldiers then
invading England, to keep them from plundering, and spoiling the people. 2.
That King Swane the invading and usurping Dane, after he had gotten the power
of this Realm, imposed it annualy on the English, and made it any early Tribute
to pay his Army. 3. That the Danish succeding Kings continued, and made it a
kind of annual revenue to cloth, and pay their Soldiers and Mariners, for
sundry years together. 4. That it was yearly paid unto the Kings Exchequer, and
reduced to a certainty, to wit, four pence a year, out of every Hide, or plough
land, thorowout England, or else twelve pence or two shilings a year; as the
laws of Edward the Confessor: the black Book of the Exchequ^r; and Sir Henry
Spelman in his Glossary^ Title Danegold, affirms. 5. That King Edwards Officers
after the Danish Kings expired reigns, did collect it of the English Subjects,
without his privitie, to cloth, and pay his Soldiers and followers. 6. That
he out of mercy, piety, conscience and justice to his people; not only restored
it to them, when collected, and brought into his Exchequer, without retaining
one farthing of it, but likewise for ever released it to them, so that it was
no more collected, during his reign. 7. That Taxes unjustly leavied upon the
poor oppressed people, are very pleasing and acceptable to the devil himself,
who claims the money so collected for his own; and that the Collectors, and
exacters of such Taxes, (though for the payment of Armies and Soldiers) are
really, but the devils agents, and instruments, who will one day pay them their
deserved wages. 8. That heavy oppressions and taxes (though for pretended
public necessities) continued for many years together, ought not only to be
eternally remitted, but restored, when collected, by all conscientious, piou^,
righteous, merciful, Saintlike Kings, and Governors. 9. That illegal heavy
Taxe^ imposed by, or for invading Usurpers, if once submitted to, and not
strongly opposed by the generality of the people, will soon be claymed, and
l^avied as a customary, early legal revennue; both by the imposers, and their
successors, and hardly be laid down and discontinued again for the peoples
ease. 10. That this tax of Danegeld amounting but to thirty eight or forty
thousand po^nds in one whole year, was in truth, an heavy, and intolerable
burden, and grievous oppression to the whole N^tion, fit to be abolished, and
released especially in times of dearth and scarcity; Therefore certainly our
late illegal taxes, without authority of a free and legal Parliament,
amounting to 120.90. or 60.1000 li. mo^thly, when lowest; besides Excises,
Customs, Imposts, amounting to twice as much more, must certainly be far more
grievous and intolerable to the Nation, and so not only to be remitted,
abandoned, excluded, but accounted for, and restored to our exhausted,
oppressed Nation, by all those Governors, who pretend themselves saints of the
highest form, and men ruling in the fear of God; against whom this St. Edward
the Confessor, will rise up in judgment, i^ they imi^a^e not his just and
Saintlike president therein. All which con^iderations I recommend, to their
own, and their Collecters, Excisers sadest considerations to meditate seriously
upon for the peoples ease.
De gestis Regum l. 2. p. 13 p. 91.
William of Malmsburies records of this King Edward, that he was in
exactionibus vectigalium parcus, quippe qui and exactores execraretur. Till we
may b^ able really to record the like of our new Gov^rnour^, and Princes over
us, we shall never be either a free, a peaceable, or happy people, no^ they
worthy of the name of Saints or Confessors in any English Annals, or Kalenders.
See Ailredus Abbas de vita and miraculis Edwardi Confessoris c^l. 390.
He adds, That King Edward with the touch of his hand, d^d miraculously cure
sundry persons of the luxuriant humors and swellings about the neck, (commonly
called the Kings Evil) which cure in after ages some falsely ascribed, non ex
sanctitate, sed ex regalis prosapiae haereditate ^luxisse, not to have issued
from his sanctity, but from his hereditary royal blood. If his sanctity in
releasing^ and restoring the formentioned insupportable Tributes of Danegeld,
shall now cure the hereditary Kings, and our new Republiques long continued
evil, and malady of intolerable Tributes, Contributions, and Excises in this
Age, we shall register it to posterity for as great a miracle, as his first
care of the evil Kings only, by his touching of it with his royal sacred hand.

Malmsbury de Gestis Regum Angliae l. 2. c. 13. John Bromton Croni^on vol. 932.
Ingulphus Historia. p. 895.
King Edward about the year 1047. calling out of Normandy, certa^n Normans, qui
olim pauculis beneficiis inopiam Exulis suppleverant, who had there releived,
and supplied his want, during his exil^, to reward them for their benefits,
advanced them to places of extraordinary honor and trust about him; amongst
others, he promoted Robert Gemeticensis a monk to the Bishopric of London, and
then to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, William to be his Chaplain first, and
afterward Bishop of London, and another to the Bishopric of Dorchester, which
Iugulphus thus expresses. Rex autem Edwardus natus in Anglia, sed Nutritus in
Normania, and diutissime immoratus pene in Gallicum transierat; adducens and
attrahens de Norma^nia plurimos, quos variis dignitatibus promotos in immensum
exaltabat. Praecipuus inter eos erat, Robertus Monachus etc. Caepit ergo tota
terra sub rege and sub aliis Normannis introductis, Anglicos ritus diminui, and
Franceru^ mores in multis imitari: Gallicum idioma omnes Magnates in suis
curiis tanquam magnum gentilitium loqui; Char^as and Chyrographa sua more
Francium confici, and propriam consuetudinem in his, and in aliis multis
erubescere. Thereupon Earl Godwin and his Sons being men of high spirits, and
auctores, and tutores regni Edvardi, were very angry, and discontented, quod
novos homines and advenas sibi preferri viderent, because they saw these new
upstarts and strangers preferred before them; yet they never uttered a high
word against the King, whom they had once advanced. Upon this occasion, Anno
1051. there arose great discords between the English, and these Normans, quod
Angli aspernanter ferant superiorem, Normani nequeant pati parem. Histor. l. 6.
p. 366.
Henry Huntingdon records: That these Normnans accused Godwin, and Swain and
Harold his Sons to the King, that they went about to betray him; whereupon the
King calling them into question for it, they refused to appear without hostages
for their safety, upon which the King banished them. But William of Malmsbury,
Roger de Hoveden, Matthew Westminster, Florentius Wigorniensis, Simeon
Dunelmensis, Bromton, Hygden Henry de Knighton, Fabram, Graston, Holmshed,
Speed, and the Sea Fox Acts and Monuments. vol. 1. p. 212 213. Speed Histo^y p.
411. 412. Daniels History p. 2^.
General Stream of our Historians, relating the business more fully, make this
the original cause of the difference between them, and of the Exile of Godwin
and his Sons.

Eustace Earl of Boloyn, who had wedded King Edwards Sister ariving at Dover
in the month of September, 1051. one of his Knights seeking lodging, unjustly
slew one of the Townsmen, whereupon the Townsmen slew him. The Earl and his
followers being enraged thereat, slew diverse men and women of the Town, and
trod their children under their own, and horses feet. The Burgesses upon this
assembling together to resist them, after a fe^rce Encounter, put the Earl and
his followers to flight, slew eighteen or twenty of them in the pursuit, and
wounded many more; so that the Earl escaped only with one of his followers to
the King, then at Gloucester; where he grievously incensed the King against the
Englishmen, by reason of this tumult, which he and his followers occasioned.
Whereupon Earl Godwin being much incensed at the slaughter of his men, in the
Burrowgh of Dover, he and his sons assembled a great Army out of all the Towns
and Countries subject to them. The King sending for Godwin to the Court,
charged him with hi^ Host, to avenge the wrong done to Eustace, and to punish
the insolency of the men of Dover, which the King exceedingly aggravated. But
Godwin, a man of sharp wit, and well understanding, Proposition 2.5.6.9.
that sentence ought not to be pronounced upon the hearing of the allegations
of one part only without hearing the other, refused to march with his Army
against the Burgesses of Dover, although the King commanded him; both because
he envied, that all Aliens should find such extraordinary favor with the King,
and because he would show friendship to his own Countrymen. Whereupon he
answered, It were reasonable and just, that before any execution done, the the
Wardeins of Dover Castle, should be summoned into that Kings Court, in a fair
manner, to answer this tumult; and if they could excuse themselves, that then
they should be dismissed without harms; or if not, that then they should
satisfy the King, whose peace they had broken, and the Earl whom they had
offended, with money, or the forfeiture of their bodies and goods. Iniquum
videri, ut quos ^utari debeas, eos ipse po^issimum inauditos adjudices. And so
Godwin depa^ted at that time, little regarding the Kings f^ry, as being but
momentany. Quocirca, Totius regni Proceres jussi Glocestriam conveni^e ut i^i
magno conventu res ventilaretur. Therefore all the Lords of the land were
commanded to assemble together at Glocest^r, that this matter might be there
debated in a great Parliamentary assembly. Th^ther came the most famous Earl
Syward of Northumb^rland, and Leofric Earl of M^rcia, Omnibus Anglorum
No^iles, and all the English Nobility at that time; only Godwin and his Sons,
who knew themselves suspected, thought it not safe for them to come thither
without an armed Guard: whereupon they encamp^d at Br^verstone with a great
host, and there stayed; giving out a report among the people, Propisition 2.8^
6 9.
that they had therefore gathered an Army together out of Kent, Surry,
Yorkshire, Oxfordshire, Glocestershire, Somersetshire, Herfordshire, Ess^x,
Notinghamshire and other parts, that they might curb the Welshmen, who
meditating Tyranny, and Rebellion against the King, had fortified a Town in
Herefordshire, where Swane, one of the Earl Godwins Sons then pretended to
keep watch and ward against them. The King hearing that Godwin and his Sonn^s
had raised a great Army of men out of all these Counties upon this false
pretext, presently sent Messengers to Syward, Earl of Northumberland, and
Leofric, Earl of Mercia, to hasten to him, being in great danger, with all the
forces they could raise. Who repairing to him at the first with small forces,
so soon as they knew how the matter went, sending their Officers through their
Co^ntries, together with Earl Ralph in his Country, speedily assembled a
great Army, to assist the King, ready to encounter these enemies, if there were
a necessity. In the mean time Godwin marching with his Army into
Glocestershire, sent messengers to the King (as Matthew Westminster, and some
others story) commanding him to deliver up Earl Eustace, with his companions,
and the Normans and Bonomans, who then held the Castls of Dov^r, to him, else
he should denounce war against him. To whom the King, being sufficiently
furnished with military forces, sent this answer, That he would not deliver up
Earl Eustace, Proposition 2.
to him; commanding moreover; Ut qui exercitum contra ipsum collegerat, and
sine e^us licentia pacem regn^ perturbaverat, veniret ad eum die statuta, s^per
hac injuria sibi responsurus, and juri pariturus; Godwin and his Sons being
accused of A CONSPIRACY against the King, and made odious to the whole Court by
the Welshman and Normans; so that a rumor was spread abroad, that the Kings
Army would assault them in the same place, where they quartered, and were
unanimously resolved, and ready to fight with Godwins Army, (being much
incensed against him,) if the King would have permitted them. Quo accepto
Godwinus ad Conjuratos classicum cecinit, Ut ultro Domino regi non resisterent;
sed si conuenti suissent, quin se ulciscerentur loco non cederent, and profecto
facinus miserabile, and plus quam civil bellum fuisset, nisi maturiora
consilia interessent, writes Malmsbury; But because the best and greatest men
of all England, were engaged on the one side and other, it seemed a great
unadvisednesse to Earl Leofric and others, that they should fight a battle, and
wage war with their own Countrymen: and thereupon they advised, That hostages
being given on both sides, the King and Godwin should meet at London on a
certain day, to plead together; which Counsel being approved of, and mes^engers
running to and fro between them, hostages being given and received; and some
small agreement made between them at the present, thereupon the Earl returned
into VVest-Sax, and the King increasing his Army, both out of Mercia and
Northumberland, returned with them to London, by agreement between both
parties. Iterumque praeceptum ut Londini Concilium coageretur: and it was again
commanded by the King, that A COUNCEL or PARLIAMENT, Prop^si^ion 6.
as Trevisa, Speed and others render i^, should be assembled at London. Swane
the Son of Godwin was commanded to mitigate the Kings anger by his flight;
Godwin and Harold were ordered to come to this Council, with twelve men only in
their company; and that they should resign up to the King, the services of all
the Knights and Soldiers which they had thoroughout England. But Godwin and
his Sons, as they durst not wage war against the King: so, ad Curiam ejus
venire Iuri parituri negabant, They would not come to his Court, to put
themselves upon a legal trial; alleging, That they would not go to a
Conventicle of factious persons, without pledges and hostages; that they would
obey their Lord in the surrender of all their Knights services, and in all
things else, without the peril of their honor and safety. That if they came
thither unarmed, they might fear the loss of lif^; if with a few followers, it
would be a reproach to their honor. But the King being so resolute in his
mind, that he would not recede from what he had resolved by, their entreaties,
upon their refusal to come unto his Court to justify themselves, Rex in suo
Concilio communi Curiae suae judicio, by the common judgment of his Court,
Proposi^ion 2.6.
in this Parliamentary Council, Et omnis exercitus unanimi consensu, and by the
unanim^us consent of his whole Army (as Flo-rence of Worcester, and his
followers subjoyne) banished Godwin himself and his five Sons out of England:
whereupon prolatum Edictum est. A Decree and Proclamation was then published,
that within five days they should d^part out of England, Godwin perceving that
his soldiers deserted him some and some ^or fear of the Kings Army and
displeasure, thereupon he and his wife G^va, and his three sons, Swane, Gurth
and Tosti, with his wife Judith daughter to the Earl of Flanders, departed
presently out of England, by the Isle of Thanet, into Flanders to Earl
Baldwin, with much treasure; but his other two so^n^s, Harold and Leofric
sailed by Bristol into Ireland. Moreover the King put away his Queen Ed^tha for
her Father Godwins sake, thrust her into the Abbie of Warwel (or Redwel)
without worship, with one maid only to attend her, committing her to the
custody of the Abbess, his own sister, taking away all her substance, without
leaving her so much as one penny, Malmsburi. de Gestis Regnum. l. 2. c. 13. p.
82.
ne scilicet omnibus suis parentibus patriam suspirant^bus, sola sterteret in
pluma, Harolds Earldom, and County w^a bestowed on Algarus who ruled it nobly,
and he with good will resigned it up to Harold upon his return.

These things being done, William Duke of Normandy came to visit the King with
a great multitude of Normans and Soldiers, whom King Edward honorably
received, and magnificently entertained for a season, carrying him about to all
his royal Castles and Cities, and at last sent back into Normandy, with many
and great presents bestowed on him and his followers, De successione autem
Regni spes adhuc aut men^io nulla facta inter eos fuit writes, Histor. p. 898.
I^gulphus. Florent. Wigo niensis Sim Dunelmensis, ^olichronicon, Brompton
Hoveden, Huntindon, Rad. de Diceto, Malmsbu^y, Her. de Knighton Westminster,
Caxton Fabian, Graston, Holinshead, Speed, Daniel, Fox, Eadiner Hist. Nov. l.
1. p. 4.


King Edward ( In Parliamento Pleno, having in Plain or full Parliament, as
Radulphus Cestrensis Knighton de eventibus Angliae. l. 1. c. 10. Trevisa and
others relate, thus banished and outlawed Godwin and his sons in which in
condition (as some write) they continued two full years. Thereupon in the year
1052. Harold and Leofric by way of reveng, coming out of Ireland with such
ships and forces as they could there raise, p^llaged the western parts of
England^ infesting the shores with continual robberies, carrying away rich
booties, and slaying such as resisted them. Then marching from Severn into the
confines of Somersetshire and Dorsetshire, they plundered many Towns and
Villag^s in those parts: against whom a great multitude assembled out of these
two Counties making head, were incountred and routed by Harold, many of their
chief Officers and others being slain. After which they returning to their
ships with great booties, sailed round about by the shore to Plimo^th. Upon
this, King Edward speedily sent forth forty ships well victualed, and furnished
with choice Soldiers, commanding them to watch for, and resist the coming and
landing of Earl Godwin, who without their privity coming with a few ships
undescerned out of Flanders, practiced pyracy and pillaged the seacoasts of
Kent and Sussex, and at last came to the Isle of Weight, where his two sons,
Harold and Leofric, joining their ships and Forces with his, they studiously
plotted how they might aveng themselves upon King Edward by sea, Griffin King
of Wales in the mean time (by their instigation) depopulating Herefordshire by
land, and slaying many of the Country people, who resisted him. On the Kings
part there were about sixty ships assembled together to oppose Harold, riding
at anchor; the Admirals of which Navy were the Earls, Odo and Ralph, the Kings
kinsmen: neither was the King himself sloathfull in this necessity, lying all
night on shipboard, and diligently observing the excursions of these Pirates,
executing that by sage counsel, which by reason of age he could not act with
his hand. When both Navies were drawn near together, and ready to grapple with
and encounter each other, a thick fogge and cloud suddenly arising, blinded the
eyes of these furiou persons, and restrained the wretched audacity of these
mortals, so that they could not encounter each other, Godwin with his
companions being forced by the winds to return from whence they came. After
which Godwin and his sons by secret messengers, drew unto their party an
innumerable company of the inhabitants of Kent, Essex, Sussex, and Surry, and
all the Mariners of Hastings, with many Soldiers, and having drawn together a
very great Army out of those parts, who all promised with one voice, To live
and dye with Godwin: forbearing all plunder, and depopulation, after they met
together, taking only victuals for their Army when occasion and necessity
required, and alluring all they could to their party, they marched with their
forces first to Sandwich. Which the King hearing of, being then at London,
speedily sent messengers to all who had not revolted from him, Proposition 3 8
to come with all speed to his assistance; who delaying overlong, came not at
the time appointed. In the mean while Godwin comes up the Thames with his Navy
and Army toward London, and pitched his Tents in Sou^hwark, near the City. King
Edward, who was then at London, had assembled a great company of armed men
together, and no small Navy, to pursue Godwin and his sons, both by Sea and
Land. But because very few with the King or Godwin had courage to fight with
each other, and the English, whose sons, Nephews, Kinsmen and Friends were
with Godwin and Harold, refused to fight against their own parents and kindred
of the Kings party, thereupon some wise men on both parts, diligently
endeavored to make a firm peace and reconciliation between the King and
Godwin, and commanded the Armies and Navies to forbear fighting. Godwin being
aged, and potent both with his favor and tongue to bow the minds of his
auditors, very well purged himself from all the things objected against him.
The next morning Rex habens cum Primaribus suis Concilio, the King taking
Counsel with his Nobles, restored Godwin, and all his sons, (except Swane,
who went on Pilgrimage barefoot to Jerusalem, to expiate the murder of Beorne)
together with the Queen, his daughter to their former honors; Godwin giving
his Son VVolnoth, and Hake the Son of Swane, his hostages to the King, for
his keeping of the peace and future loyalty to him; whom the King immediately
sent into Normandy to be kept there. A concord and peace being thus made and
ratified, the King and Nobles omni populo bonas Leges and rectam justitiam
promiserunt, Proposition 5 2
promised good Laws, and r^ght Iustic^ to all the people; then they banished
Robert archbishop o Canterbury, Will^am Bishop of London, Vlfe Bishop of
Dorchester, and all the other Normans, who incens^d and gave the King evil
counsel against Earl Godwin, and the English, and had invented unjust laws,
and pronounced unjust judgments against them, permitting only some few Normans
(nominated in our Histo^ians) whom the King loved more than the rest, and who
had been faithful to him, and all the people, to remain in England. Not long
after, William Bishop of London was for his goodness recalled and restored to
his Bishopric, but Stigand was made Archbishop of Canterbury, in the place of
Robert, and Osburne, and Hugh two Normans by birth, leaving their Castles here,
went to the King of Scots, who entertained them, and so the land was freed from
these foreign incendiaries. Normannos omnes ignomina notatos prolata Sententia
in Robertum Archiepis^ ejusque accomplices quod statum regni conturbarant, animum
Regis in provinciales agitantes: Upon this sentence denounced, Robert and
others of them presently fled the Realm of their own accord, witho^t expecting
any actual violence to banish and expel them.

From all these memorable Historical passages, as we may observe the great
unconstancy, vicissitude and changes of earthly Princes favors, worldly
honors, preferments, and popular favor; with the great inconveniences of
admitting or advancing foreigners to any places of trust or power under the
King or Court; so we may likewise conclude that by the Law of that Age.

1. That no English man ought to be condem^ned, executed, imprisoned or put to
death upon any great man's bare suggestion, no not by the Kings ow^ special
command (which if given ought to be disobeyed in such cases) but only by, and
after a Legal hearing, trial and conviction of the offense. 2. That the Kings
of England were then sworn and obliged, to govern their people by good, just,
and wholesome Laws, and Customs, not by their arbitrary pleasures, powers, or
commands. 3. That the Parliamentary Councels and Nobles in that age, were very
careful to defend and maintain the Liberties, Rights, good Laws and Customs of
the people, and to prevent, and abolish all unjust Laws and Encroachments
repugnant to them. 4. That Parliamentary Conncels were then frequently summoned
by the King upon all public emergent occasions, and differences, and to make
war and peace, either at home, or in foreign parts. 5. That the Parliamentary
Councels of that time consisted of the Earls, Barons, Nobles and Praelates of
the Realm, duly summoned to them; without any mention of Knights or Burgesses,
elected and sent to them by the people, of which there are no presidents in
this Kings reign. Enough to prove Modus Tenendi Parliamentum (supposed to be
made and observed in this age) a mere cheating imposture of later days, as in
truth it is. 6. That all delinquents, of what quality soever, justly or
unjustly accused, ought to appear and justify themselves before the King and
his Nobles in their Parliamentary Councels, without armed Guards, forces,
Tergiversation, or resistance, upon due su^mons to appear before them, by the
Laws of that time. 7. That Kings and great men's coming to Parliamentary
Councels with Armies, strong armed Guards, and holding them with power, or
under Armies, is inconsistent with their Liberty and Privileges, and are an
occasion of civil wars, disturbances, much mischief to the Nation, as then
they proved. 8. That English Peers then were and ought to be tried, banished,
judged by their Peers, both in Parliamentary Councels and other Courts. 9. That
no English Peer or Freeman could then be lawfully, and judically banished the
Realm, but in and by sentence and judgment of a Parliamentary Council; for
some contempt or offense demeriting such a punishment. 10. That Peers and great
men obstinately refusing to submit themselves to the trial and judgment of
Parliamentary Councels, or to appear in them, or the Kings Courts to justify
themselves, without hostages fi^t given for their securiy; may justly be
sentenced and banished by our Parliaments, for such contempts, and affronts to
justice. 11. That the subjects were bound to aid and assist their Kings, as well
against Traitors, Rebels, Pirates, as against foreign enemies, under our Saxon
Kings. 12. That foreigners are usually the greatest occasioners, and fomenters
of civil wars. That such Incendiaries, deserve justly to be banished the
Nation: And that civil wars between King and subjects, English and English,
and their shedding of one another blood in such wars, was then deemed most
unnatural, odious, execrable; by all prudent means and councels to be timely
and carefully prevented: and not to be begun or undertaken, but by good advice
and common consent in great Parliamentary Councel^, upon weighty, urgent,
inevitable necessities. 13. That the abolishing of ill, and enacting of good
Laws, the removing of ill Counselors and Instruments about Kings, ordering
matters of war and defense by Land and Sea, and settling of peace, were the
ancient proper works, businesses, employments of our Saxon Parliaments. 14.
That the English Freemen have been always apt, forwards, cordially to join with
such Nobles and Great men, who are most cordial and active to defend their just
Liberties, Laws, Rights, against foreiners, and others who invade them.
Soon after the forementioned agreement between the King and Godwin Polychr. l^
1. c. 50. Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 244. Speeds History, p. 440, 441.
King Edward (according to his forementioned promises, to make good Laws for
all his people) out of all the former British and Saxon Laws, by Order of his
Wisemen, compiled an universal common Law, for all the people throughout the
whole Realm, which were called King Edwards Laws, being so just and equal, and
so securing the profit and wealth of all estates, that the people long after,
(as Mr: Fox and others record) did rebel against their Lords and Rulers, to
have the same Laws again, when suspended, or taken from them, or dis-used: and
prescribed this Oath to Florentius Wigornieusis, Sim. Dunelm. Hoveden, Dan.
Speed. p. 441.
William the Conqueror himself, and every of our Kings since, to be solemnly
taken at the time of his Coronation, for the further ratification^ and better
inviolable observation of these Laws, and perpetuating them to all posterity.

See Totles Magna Charta, 1556, p. 164.1 R. 2. ro^. Parl. number. 44. My Sovereign
Power of Parliaments, pars 1. p. 52, to 79. Exact. Collect. p. 290^ 7^2, 713,
714.
SIR, will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the people of
England, the Laws and Customs granted to them by ancient Kings of England,
rightful men, and devout toward God, and namely the Laws and Customs, and
Franchises granted to the Clergy, and to the Peopie by the glorious King
Edward^^ to your power? To which the King must answer, I will do it, before he
be anointed or crowned King.

Now because these Laws of King Edward (made by his Wisemens Counsel and
advice; as this Clause, Hoveden, p. 607.
Sapientes caeperunt super hos habere consilium, et constituerunt, in the
Chapter, De illis qui has Leges despexerent, implies) are so famous and
fundamental, most of our Common old Laws being founded on, or resulting from
them, I shall give you this brief account of them, out of our Historians, as
most pertinent to my subject matter, and useful for those of my profession to
be informed of (being generally not so well versed in Antiquity, History, and
Records, as were to be wished, for the honor and luster of their honorable
public calling,) pretermiting the gross Forgery and Imposture of Modus
tenendi Parliamentum, so much cried up by Epistle to his 9 th. Report. 1.
Institutes, p. p. 69, 110.2 Instit. p. 7, 8.4 Instit. p. 2.^2.340.
Sir Edward Cook for its Antiquity and Authority, as made and observed in
Edward the Confessors reign, when as it is a mere counterfeit Treatise, and
Spurious Antiquity, scarce antienter than King Richard the 2. as I have proved
in my Levellers levelled; and Mr. Seldom manifests in his Titles of honor pars
2. p. 713, 738, to 745; yea its own mentioning the Bishop of Carlisle (which
Bishopric was not erected til the Mat. W^stm. and Mat. Paris An. 1122. Hov^d^n
An, 113^ p. 400.
year 1132, or 1134.) the Mayors of London, (which had no Graf^ons Catalogue of
the Mayors of London.
Mayor til the year 1208) and of other Cities, with Knights and Burgesses usual
wages, all instituted long after the Conquerours reign; the not mentioning of
this Modus in any of our Records, Histories, or judicious Antiquaries, and its
difference from all the Modes and Forms of Parliaments, and Great Councils, of
that or later ages held in England or ^reland, with the many falsehoods and
absurdities in it, will sufficiently evidence it to every intelligent Peruser,
to be a late Bastard Treatise, and no such Ancient Record, as Sir Edward Cook
most confidently averrs it, upon groundless Reasons, and bold, false averments,
void of Truth. Which Modus, if really made and observed in his reign, and after
ages, no doubt our His^orians would have mentioned it, as well as his Laws, of
which they give us this following account.

De Event. Angl. l. 1. c. 15.
Henry de Knyghton records; That King Edward after his Coronation, Consilio
Baronum, et caeterorum Regni, Proposit^ 5, 6.
received, established, and confirmed the good Laws, which for 68 years lay as
it were asleep, among the sleepers, and buried in Oblivion These Laws are
called, the Laws of St. Edward, not because he had first invented them, but
because they being as it were put under a Bushel, and laid in oblivion from the
time of his Grandfather King Edgar, he put to his hand, first to find them out,
and then ^o establish them. De Gestis Reg. l. 1. c. 1^^ p. 75. S^e Spelm.
Council. p. 569^
W^l. of Malmesbury thus writes of these Laws: Omnes Leges ab antiquis Regibus,
and maxim^ ab antecessore suo Ethelred^, latas sub interminatione Regiae
mulctae perpetuis temporibus observari praecepit, in quarum custodia, etiam
nunc tempore bonorum sub nomine Regis Edwardi Iuratur, non quod ille statuerit,
sed observaverit. The Author of the ancient Manuscript Chronicle of Litchfield,
and Ad Fadm^rum and Notae, and Spicel^gium. p. 171.
Mr. Seldom, out of him, together with Annalium pars posterior, p. 608.
Roger Hoveden, and De Brit. E^clesiarum P^imord^is, p. 720.
Bishop Usher, inform us concerning these Laws. Ex illo die magna autoritate
veneratae, et per universum regnum corroboratae and consec^a^ae sunt prae
caeteris regni legibus Leges Regis Edwardi; quae quidem prius inventae and
constitutae ^uerunt tempore Regis Edgari, avi sui. Veruntatem post mortem
ipsius Regis Edgari, usque ad Coronationem S. Regis Edw. quod continet annos 67
predictae leges sopitae sunt, et penitus praetermissae. Sed postquam Rex
Edwardus in regno fuit sublimatus, Consilio Baronum Angliae, Legem 67 annis
^opitain excitavit, excitatam reparavit, reparatam decoravit, decoratam
confirmavit, and confirmata vocata est, Lex sancti Regis Edwardi, non quod
prius ipse invenisset eam, sed cum praetermissa fuisset, and oblivioni penitus
dedita ^ morte avi sui Regis Edgari, qui prius inventor ejus fuisse dicitur,
usque ad sua tempora, videlicet 67 annis The Chronicle of Bromton, col. 956,
957. gives us this large account of these and our other ancient Laws. This holy
King Edward the Confessor, Leges communes Anglorum genti tempore suo ordinavit,
ordained common Laws in his time for the English Nation, because the Laws
promulged in former times were over-partial: For Dunwallo Molmucius first of
all set forth Laws in Britain, whose Laws were called Molmucine; sufficiently
famous, until the times of King Edward; amongst which he ordained, That the
Cities and Temples of the Gods, and the ways leading to them, and the Ploughs
of Husbandmen, should enjoy the privilege of Sanctuary. After which Marcia
Queen of the Britons, Wife of Guithelin ( from whom the Provinces of the
Mercians is thought to be denonated) publish^d a Law full of discretion and
justice, which is called Mercian Law^ These two Laws the Historian Gildas
translated out of the British into the Latin tongue; and so it was afterward
commonly called Merchenelaga, that is, The Law of the Mercians, by which Law 8
Counties were formerly judged, namely Gloucestershire, Worcestershire,
Herefordshire, Shropshire, Chesshire, Staffordshire, Warwickshire, and
Oxfordshire. After these there was supe^added a Law, written in the Saxon or
English tongue, by Ina King of West Saxons, to which Alfred King of the
West Saxons afterwar^s superadded the Law, which was styled West-Saxenelega,
that is, the Law of the West Saxons. By which Law in ancient times, the 9
Southern Counties, divided by the River of Thames from the rest of England,
were judged; namely Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Berkeshire, Wiltshire, Southampton,
Somersetshire, Dorset and Devonshire. At length the Danes dominering in the
Land, a third Law sprang up, which was called Danelega, that is, the Law of the
Danes; by which Law heretofore the 15 Eastern and Northern Counties were
judged, to wit, Middlesex, Suthfolk, Northfolk, Herthfordshire, Cambridgeshire,
Huntingdonshire, Lincolnshire, Nott^nghamshire, Derbyshire, Northamptonshire,
Leicestershire, Buckinghamshire, Beddefordshire, and Yorkshire, which County of
York heretofore contained all Northumberland, from the water of Humber, to the
River of Twede, which is the beginning of Scotland, and is now divided into six
Shires. Now out of the foresaid three Laws, Merchenelega, West-Saxenelega, and
Danelega, this King Edward set forth one common Law, which even to this day is
called the Law of Edward. The like is recorded by Hygden in his Polychronicon,
l. 1. c. 50. Mr. John Fox in his Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 213, 214.
Samuel Daniel his Collection of the History of England, p. 22. John Speed his
History of Great Britain, p. 410. Fabian, H^linshed, Caxton, Grafton, and
others, almost in the selfsame words. These Laws are no where extant in any
Manuscripts, or printed Authors, as they were originally compiled and digested
into one body by him and his Barons, but as they were presented upon Oath to,
and confirmed by King William the Conqueror, in the 4th. year of his reign, of
which Historiae, p. 914.
Ingulphus Abbot of Croyland, in the close of his History (to which they are
^o. Seldeni ad Eadmerum Notae^ p. 171, 172.
annexed in some Manuscripts) gives us this account, flourishing in that age.
Attuli eadem vice mecum de London^is in meum Monasterium, Leges aequissimi
Regis Edwardi, quas Dominus meus inclytus Rex Willielmus autenticas esse, et
perpetuas per totum Regnum Angliae inviolabiliter tenendas sub paenis,
gravissimis proclamarat, et suis Insticiariis commendarat, eodem idiomate quo
editae runt; ne per ignorantiam contingat, nos vel nostros aliquando in nostrum
grave periculum, contraire and offendere ausu temerario, regiam majestatem, ne
in ejus censuras rigidissimas improvidum pedem far, contentas saepius in
eisdem, hoc modo.

These Laws are partly Ecclesiastical, partly Civil, recorded by Roger de
Hoveden Annalium pars posterior, p. 611. to 631, by Mr. Lambard in his
Archaion, Henry de Knyghton de Eventibus Angliae, l. 2. c. 4. Spelmanni Concili
p. 613. Mr. John Seldom, ad Eadm^rum and Notae, and Spicelegium, p. 172. to 195
Mr. John Fox his Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 214. wherein those who please
may peruse them.

^n these Laws it is observable: 1. That all capital, corporal, pecuniary
punishments, fines for criminal offenses, and all reliefs, services, and duties
to the King, are Lex 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 19, to 27,
30, 31, 35, 37^ 40, 41, 50, 53^ 62, 64, 67, 70. in Mr. Seld n.
reduced to a certainty, not lef^ arbitrary to the King, his Justices, or other
Officers, for the Subjects greater liberty, ease and security. 2. Lex 1, 2, 3,
6, 7. in Hoveden and Spelman.
That they protect, preserve the Possessions, Privileges, Persons of the Church
and Clergy from all Invasion, injury, violence, disturbance, and specially
enact, That not only all Clerks and Clergy men, but all other persons shall
enjoy the peace of God and the Church, free from all assaults, arrests, and
other disturbances whatsoever, both on Lords-days, Solemn Festivals, and other
times of public Church meetings, eundo, and subsistendo, and redeundo; both in
going to, continuing at, and returning from the Church, and public duties of
Gods worship; or to Synods, and Chapters, to which they are either summoned, or
where they have any business requiring their personal presence (wherewith the
Statute of 8 H. 6. c. 1. concurs, as to the later clause) Therefore all
Quakers, Anabaptists, and others, who disturb, affront and revile, assault, or
abuse our Ministers, or their people, (as many now do) in going to, or
returning from the Church, or whiles they continue in it, as well before or
after, as during Divine Service, Sermons, or Sacraments there administered, may
and ought by the Common Law of England, (confirmed both by Confessor and
Conqueror in their Parliamentary Councils) to be duly punished, as Breakers of
the Peace, by all our Kings, Justices, and Ministers of public Justice, being
ratified by Magna Charta, c. 1. and the Totles Mag. Chart. 1 R. 2. rot. claus.
m. 44. rot. Parl. 1 H. 4. n. 17. Exact. Collect. p. 712, 713, 714.
Coronation Oaths of all our Kings, (which all our Judges, and Justices are
bound to observe;) To keep to God and holy Church, to the Clergy, and to the
People Peace and Concord entirely, according to their power, (especially during
the public worship of God in the Church, and in going to, tarrying at, and
returning from the duties which they owe unto him, both as his Creatures and
Servants) And to grant, keep, and confirm the Laws, Customs, and Franchises
granted by the glorious King Edward. 3. That they Lex 8, 9. in Hoveden,
Lambard, and Knyghton.
prescribe the due payment of Tithes to God and his Ministers, as well personal
as praedial, under Ecclesiastical and temporal penalties, being granted and
consented unto a Rege, et Baronibus et Populo. 4. That the Lex 3. in Hoveden,
Lambard, Knyghton.
Causes and pleas of the Church ought first to be heard and ended in Courts and
Councils before any other, Lex 11. in Hoved. Lamb. Knyghton.
Iustitia enim est, ut Deus ubique prae caeteris honoretur. 5. That they thus
define Danegild: Proposit. 1, 9.
Danegaldi redditio propter Piratas primitus Statuta est. Patriam enim
infestantes vastationi ejus, pro posse suo insistebant. Ad eorum quidem
insolentiam reprimendam, Statutum est Danegaldum annuatim reddi, scilicet,
duodecim denarios de unaquaque Hida totius Patriae, ad conducendos eos qui
Piratarum eruptioni Resistendo obviarent. (To which Hoveden, Knyghton, Lambard,
and others subjoyn,) De hoc quoque Danegaldo, omnis ecclesia libera est and
quieta, and omnis terra quae in proprio dominico Ecclesiae erat, ubicunque
jacebat, nihil prorsus in tali redemptione persolvens, quia magis in Ecclesiae
confidebant orationibus, quam in armorum defensionibus, usque tempora Willielmi
junioris, qui Ruffus vocabatur, donec eodem a Baronibus Angliae auxilium
requirente ad Normanniam requirendam and retinendam, de Roberto suo fratre
cognomine Cortehose Jerusalem proficiscente, Concessum est et, non Lege
sancitum, neque confirmatum, sed hac necessitatis causa, ex unaquaque hida sibi
dari quatuor solidos Ecclesia non excepta. Dum vero collectio census fieret,
proclamabat Ecclesia, suam reposcens libertatem, sed nil profecit. By which it
is apparent, 1. That this grievous Tax of Danegeld, was first gran^ed and
appointed by a public Law in a Parliamentary Council, to hire men to resist
the eruption of the Pirates and Enemies. That it amounted but to 12 d. a year,
upon every Ploughland. That the Church and Demesne Lands of the Church, where
ever they lay, were exempted from it, till William Rufus his time, who first
exacted it from the Clergy upon a pretended necessity, and rai^ed it, from 12
d. to 4 s. a Ploughland, by grant of the Barons, without any Law to enact or
confirm it, for fear of drawing it into consequence.

6ly, That these Laws thus describe the Duty and Office of a King; Cap. 15, and
17. in Hoved^n, K^yghton, Lambard.
The King, because he is the Vicar of the highest King, is constituted for this
end, that he may rule the earthly kingdom and the Lords people, and above all
things, that he may reverence his holy Church, and defend it from injuries,
pluck away evil doers from it, and utterly to d^stroy and disperse them; Which
unless he shall do, the name of a King agrees not unto him, the Prophet
(Pope) John witnessing, Nomen Regis perdit, qui quod Regis est non faciat; he
loses the name of a King, who discharges not the duty of a King. Pepin and
Charles his Son, being not yet Kings, but Princes under the French King, hearing
this definitive Sentence, as well truly as prudently pronoun^ed concerning the
name of a King, by William the bastard King of England, foolishly writ to Pope
John, demanding this que^^ion of him; Whether the Kings of France ought so to
continue, being content only with the name of a King? Who answered; That it is
convenient to call them Kings, who do watch over, defend, and govern the Church
of God and his people, imitating King David the Psalmograph saying, He shall
not dwell in my House which works pride, etc. (After which it follows in
Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 214.
Mr. Fox, and some others, but not in Hoveden, and Knyghton^) Moreover, the
King by his right and by his Office, ought to defend and conserve fully and
wholly in all ampleness, without diminution, Proposit. 10.
all the Lands, Honors, Dignities, Rights and Liberties of the Crown of his
Kingdom. And further, to reduce into their pristine state, all such things as
have been dispersed, wasted and lost, which appertain to his kingdom. Also the
whole and universal Land, with all Islands about the same in Norwey and Denmark,
be appertaining to the Crown of his kingdom, and be of the appurtenances and
dignity of the King, making one Monarchy, and one Kingdom; which sometimes was
called the Kingdom of Britain, and now the Kingdom of England: such bounds and
limits as is abovesaid, be appointed and limited to the name of this kingdom. A
King, abov^ all things, ought to fear God, to love and observe his
commandments, and cause them to be observed through his whole kingdom. He
ought also to keep, cherish, maintain and govern the holy Church within his
kingdom with all integrity and Liberty, according to the constitution of his
ancestors and predecessors, and to defend the same against all Enemies, so that
God above all things be honored, and ever before his eyes. Proposit. 5, ^.
He ought also to set up Good Laws and Customs, such as be wholesome and
approved: Such as be otherwise, to repeal them, and thrust them out of his
kingdom.

Item, he ought to do Judgment and Justice in his kingdom, by the counsel of
his Realm. All these things ought a King in his own person to do, taking his
Oath upon the Evangelist, swearing in the presence of the whole State of the
Realm (as well of the Temporalty (...) of the Spiritualty) before he be crowned
of the Archbishops and Bishop^. Three Servants the King ought to have under his
feet as Vassals, Fleshly Lust, Avarice, and Gr^edy desire; whom if he keep
under as his Servants and Slaves, he shall reign well and honorably in his
Kingdom. All things are to be done with good advisement and premeditation: and
that properly belongs to a King. For hasty rashness brings all things to
ruin, according to the saying of the Gospel: Every kingdom divided in it self
shall be desolate, etc. (A clear evidence that our Saxon King^ had no arbitrary
nor tyrannical power to condemn, banish, imprison, oppress or Tax their
Subjects in any kind, against their Laws, Liberties, Properties.) And thus
much touching King Edwards Laws, Qui ob vitae integritatem, Regnandi Iustitiam
and clementiam, Legumque sive a se latarum, sive ex veteribus sumptarum, and
Equitatem, inter Sanctos relatus est, as Antiq^. Eccl^s. Bri^. p. 88.
Matthew Parker records of him.

In the year of Christ, 1053. as many, or 1054. as others compute it, that old
perjured Traitor Earl Godwin, came to a most soddein, shameful exemplary death
by divine justice, which the Ail^edus Abbas, de Vita and Mirac. Edwardi
Consessoris, col. 394^ 395. Malmsb. de Gestis R^g. Angl. l. 2. c. 13. p. 81.
Hen. Huntindon, Hist. l. 6. p. 366. Ingulphi Hist. p. 898. Mat. W^stm. An. 1054
p. 424. Radulphus de Dic^to A^b^^v. Chron. col. 476. ^hronic^n Io. B^omton,
col. 944. H^n. de Knygh^on, de Eventib. Angl. l. 1. c. 11. Hygden. Polychron.
l. 6. c. 25. Eadm^rus Hist. Novorum, l. 1. p. 4. Fox Acts and Monum^nts, Vol.
1. p. 213.
marginal Historians thus relate; Anno 1053.
and Abbot Ailred thus prefaceth. Inserendum arbitror qu^modo Godwinum
proditionum suarum donatum stipendiis, divini judicii ultrix ira consumpserit,
detestandique facinoris quod in Regem fratremque ejus co^miserat, populo
spectante, ipsam quam meruerat poenam exolverat. This Godwin being the Kings
Father-in-law, abusing his simplicity, multa in regno contra jus et fas pro
potestate faciebat, did many things in the Realm, against Law and right, by his
power; and often attempted to incline the Kings mind to his Injustice. At last
his subtilty proceeded so far, that by fraud, deceit and circumvention, he
banished out of the land almost all the Kings kindred and friends, whom he had
either brought with him, or called out of Normandy, as well Bishops as Clerks,
and Laymen of other dignities: believing that all things would succeed
according to his desires, if the King deprived of all his friends, should make
use only of his Counsels. But Edward dissembling all things, in regard of time,
place, and out of religion, addicted himself wholly to divine duties, sometimes
predicting, That divine Justice would at some time or other revenge so great
malice of the Earl, and telling Godwin himself so much. Whereupon on a certain
day when the King was celebrating the Feast of Easter at Winchester (as most,)
or at Windsor, (as some,) or Hodiam (as others) relate; Proposi^. 8.
which feast was famous among the people; the King sitting at his royal Table
at dinner, the Kings Cup Bearer ( Harold, Godwins own Son as some record)
bringing the Kings cup filled with Wine toward the Table, striking one of his
feet very hard against a stumbling block on the pavement, fell almost to the
ground, but his other foot going straight on recovered him again, and set him
upright, so that he had no harm, nor shed any of the wine. Upon which many
discoursing touching this event, and rejoicing that one foot helped the other,
Earl Godwin (who customarily sat next to the King at Table, being his
Father-in-law) laughing thereat, said by way of merriment; Here a brother
helped a brother, as some; or, So is a Brother helping to a Brother, and one
assisting another in necessity, as others report his words: To whom the King
upon this occasion ironically answering, said; Thus my Brother (Alfred) might
have assisted me, had it not been for Godwins Treachery, who would not permit
him. Which Speech of the Kings Godwin taking over-grievously, was sore afraid,
and with a very pale and sad countenance, replied; I know O King, I know, it
has been often reported to thee, that I have sought to betray thee; and that
thou O King do as yet accuse and suspect me concerning the death of thy
Brother Alfred; neither yet do thou think that those are to be discredited,
who call me either his or thy Traitor, or betrayer. But let thy God who is true
and just, and knows all secrets, judge between us; and let him never suffer
this piece of bread I now hold in my hand, to pass down my throat without
choking me, if I be guilty of any Treason at all against thee, or had ever so
much as a thought to betray thee; Or, if I be guilty of thy Brothers death; or
if ever thy brother by me, or my counsel, was nearer to death, or remoter from
life. And so may I safely swallow down this morsel of bread in my hand, as I am
guiltless of these facts. When he had thus spoken, the King blessed the piece
of bread; whereupon Godwin putting it into his mouth, swallowed it down to the
midst of his throat, where it stuck so fast, that he could neither get it down
nor cast it up by any means, till through the cooperation of divine vengeance,
he was so choked with it, that his breath was quite stopped, his eyes turned
upside down, his arms grew stiff, being conscious to himself of what he thus
abjured, and so he fell down dead under the Table: Deus autem justus et verax
audivit v^cem Proditoris, et mox eodem pane strangulatus, mortem praegustavit
aeternam; writes Abbrev. Chron. col. 476.
Radulphus de Diceto. The King seeing him pale and dead, and that divine
judgment and vengeance had thus passed upon him, said to those who stood by,
Dragg out of this dog, this Traitor, and bury him in the high way, for he is
unworthy of Christian burial. Whereupon his Sons there present beholding this
Spectacle, drew him from under the Table into a Bedchamber, ubi debitum
proditoris sortitus est finem; and immediately after they buried him privily in
the old Monastery at Winchester, without honor or solemnity. Abbot Historia,
p. 889.
Ingulphus thus briefly relates the story of this his death. Anno Domini 1053.
cum Godwinus Comes in mensa Regis de n^ce sui fratris impeteretur, ille post
multa Sacramenta tandem per buccellam d^glutiendam abjuravit, and buccella
gustata continuo suffocatus interiit.

As this judgment of God upon Earl Godwin for murdering Prince Alfred right
heir to the Crown, and the Normans who accompanied him, (17 years after the
fact) was most exemplary: so Gods justice upon his posterity is remarkable,
which (to omit their forementioned exiles troubles) are thus epitomized by De
Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 13 p. 82, 83. See Speeds History, p. 418.
Will. Malm^b. Godwin in his younger years had the Sister of Cnute for his
wife^ on whom he begat a Son; who having passed the first years of his
childhood, whiles he was riding on a horse given to him by his Grandfather, in
a proud childish bravado giving him the spurr and ^ains, the horse carried him
into the swift stream of the River of Thames, where he was drowned. His Mother
also was slain with the stroke of a thunderbolt, receiving the punishment of
her cruelty; who was reported to buy whole droves of slaves, especially
beautiful maids in England, and to send them into Denmark, that she might
heap up riches by their deformed sale. After her death he married another wife,
on whom he begot Harold, Swane, Wulnoth, Tosti, Girth, and Leofwin. Harold,
after Edward, was King for some Months, and being conquered by William at
Hastings, lost both his life and kingdom, with his two younger Brothers, (there
slain in battle:) Wulnoth sent into Normandy by King Edward, because his father
had given him for an hostage, was there detained a Prisoner without any
release, during all King Edwards life, and being sent back into England in
Williams reign, continued in bonds at Sarisbury till his old age. Swane of a
perverse wit, treacherous against his King, revolted oftentimes both from his
Father and his Brother Harold, and becoming a Pyrate, polluted the virtues of
his ancestors with his maritime Robberies and murder. At last going barefoot to
Jerusalem in pilgrimage, (out of conscience, to expiate the wilful murder of
his Cosen Breuno, and as some say his Brother) in his return thence, he was
circumvented and slain by the Saracens. Tosti being advanced by King Edward to
the Earldom of Northumberland after the death of Earl Syward, ruled the County
near two years, which being expired, he stirred up the Northumbrians to a
Rebellion with the asperity of his manners: for finding him solitary, they
chased him out of the Country, not thinking ^it to slay him, by reason of his
Dukedom; but they beheaded all his men both English and Danes, and spoiled him
of all his horses, arms and household stuff; whereupon being deprived of his
Earldom, he went with his wife and children into Flanders, and at last invading
Northumberland, and joining with the Danes against his own brother King Harold,
was there slain by him in battle, (with all his forces;) His daughter Queen
Egitha, (besides her forementioned repudiation by King Edward,) and the
imprisonment and disgraces put upon her by him for her Fathers sake, was never
carnally known by him as his wife, out of a detestation to her Father Godwin,
because he would not engender heirs to succeed him in the royal Throne, out of
the Race and seed of such a Traitor, as many Historians assert: ^ven so let all
other such like perfidious Traitors and their Posterities perish, who imitate
him, and them in their Treasons, Perjuries, Rebellions, and will not be warned
nor reclaimed by his, or their sad examples.

The same year Earl Godwin thus perished, Mat. Westm^nster, Wigo^n. Sim.
Dunelmen. Hoveden, Bromton, Anno 1053. Fabi^n, Holinshed, and others.
Rheese brother of Griffin King of Southwales, Anno 1053.
was slain by King Edwards command, and his head brought to Gloucester to the
King on the Vigil of Epiphany, for his manifold Treasons, rebellions, and
frequent depredations upon his English Subjects.

King Edward Anno 1054. commanded Marianus Sco^us, Wigo^n. Man. Westminst. Sim.
Dunelm. Huntindon, Hoved^n. Knyghton, Brom^on, ^^dulphus de Di^^^o, col. 478
Walsingham, Hist. Angl. p. 17.51.
Sywar^ the valiant Duke of Northumberland, to invade Scotland with an Army of
horse and a strong Navy, Anno 1054.
to remove Mackbeoth K. of Scots (to whom he had formerly given the Realm of
Scotland to hold it of him) and make Malcolm (the King of Cumberlands Son) King
in his place; Who thereupon entering Scotland with a puissant Army, fought a set
battle with Mackbeoth, slew many thousands of the Scots, and all the Normans
who went to him out of England, chased him out of Scotland (then totally wasted
and subdued by Syward) and deprived him both of his Life and Realm. Which being
effected, King Edward gave the Realm of Scotland to Malcolm, to be held from
and under himself. Not long after Duke Syward being likely to die of a flux,
when he saw death approaching, said; What a shame is it, that I who could not
die in so many battles and wars, should be reserved to die with disgrace, like
a Cow? Wherefore put upon me my impenetrable coat of male, gird me with my
sword, set my helmet upon my head, put my buckhandler in my left hand, and my
gilt battel-ax in my right hand, that being the strongest of all Soldiers, I
may die like a Soldier. Whereupon being thus armed as he commanded, he said;
Thus it becomes a Soldier to die, and not lying down in his bed like an Ox;
and so he most honorably gave up the Ghost. But because Walt^of his Son was
then but an in^ant, his Earldom was given by the King to To^ti, son of Earl
Godwin^ whose Earldom after Godwins sudden death, was bestowed on Harold, and
Harolds Earldom given to Algarus Earl of Chester: Earldoms in that age being
only for life, not hereditary.

In the year 1055. A^n^ 1055.
Huntindon, Hist. l. 6 p. 366. Marianus Scotus, Mat. Westminster,
VVigorni^nsis, Sim. D^n^lm^ and Bramton, Ann. 1055. H^n. de Knyghton, de Event.
Angl. l. 1. c. 11. Polychron. l. 6. c. 26. Will. Malmsb. De Gestis Reg. l. 2.
c. 13. Ingulphi Hist. p. 898, Holinshed, Spend, and others.
King Edward, Habito Londoniae Concilio, holding a Parliamentary Council at
London, banished Algarus, Son of Earl Leofric, quia de Proditione Regis in
Concilio convictus fuerat, because he had been convicted in the Council of
Treason against the King, as Henry Huntindon, Bromtons Chronicle, and Hygden
record: Yet Florentius Wigorniensis, Simeon Dunelmensis, Hoveden, Henry de
Knyghton, and others write, He was banished sine culpa, without any crime.
Whereupon passing over into Ireland, he soon after repaired with 18. piratical
Ships to Griffin King of Wales, requesting him to give him aid against King
Edward. Who thereupon forthwith assembling a very great Army out of all his
Realm, commanded Algarus, to meet him and his Army with all his forces at a
certain place; where uniting their forces together, they entered into
Herefordshire to spoil and depopulate it. Against whom timorous Earl Ralph,
King Edward^ Sisters Son, Proposit. 2, 4, 5, 6, 9.
raising an Army, and meeting them two miles from the City of Hereford,
commanded the English to fight on horseback contrary to their custom: But when
they were about to join battle, the Earl with his French and Normans, fled away
first of all; which the English perceiving, followed their Captain in flying;
whom the Enemies pursuing, slew four or five hundred of them, and wounded many
more; and having gained the Victory, took the City of Herford, slew some of the
Citizens, carried away many of them captives, annd having burnt and pillaged
the City, returned enriched with great booties. The King being info^med of it,
commanded an Army to be presently assembled out of all England, Proposi^. 3.
which meeting together at Glousester, he made valiant Earl Harold their
General; who devoutly obeying his commands, diligently pursued Griffin and
Algarus, and boldly entering into the coasts of Wales, encamped at Straddle. But
they knowing him to be a valiant man, not daring to fight with him, fled into
South Wales. Upon which, Harold leaving the greatest part of his Army there,
commanded them manfully to resist the Enemies if there were cause, and
returning with the rest of the multitude to Her^ford, he enviro^ed it with a
broad and deep trench, and fortified it with gates and bars. At last
Messengers passing between them and Harold, they made a firm Peace betwee^
them. Whereupon Earl Algarus his Navy returning to Chester, there exacted the
wages he had promised them; but he repairing to the King, received his Earldom
from him again. This same year Malmsbury de Gestis Reg. l. 2. c. 13. See Godwin
in the life of Bishop Herman.
Herman Bishop of Salisbury requested of the King, and almost obtained leave to
remove his See from Ramesberg to the Monastery of Malmsbury: sed Rege juxta
Consilium Procerum id nolente, he thereupon resigned his Bishopric, went
beyond the Se^s, and took upon him the habit of a Monk; but repenting of his
rashness, he returned into England, three years after, and held the Bishoprics
of Salisbury and Sherborne united together, till the 9th year of King William
the Conqueror. Anno 1057.


In the year 1057. Wigorniensis, Hoveden, Huntindon, Sim. Dunelm. Mat.
Westminster, Bromton, Hygden, Fabian, Holinshed, Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol.
1. p. 213. Cambdens Britannia, p. ^68.
Prince Edward, son of Edmond Ironside, came out of Hungary (where he had long
lived an Exile) into England, being sent for thence by his Uncle King Edward,
who had decreed to make him heir to the Crown after himself; but he died at
London soon after his return, leaving only Edgar Athelin his son, very young,
and two daughters Margaret, and Christiana, under the Kings custody and
tuition. This same year, Earl Leofric, at the request of his devout Noble
Countess Godina, Proposit. 1.
freed the City of Coventry from a most grievous dishonest servitude, and heavy
Tribute, wherewith he had formerly oppressed the Citizens, being very much
offended with them; which (though frequently importuned by her) he would remit
upon no other condition but this; That his Lady Godina should ride naked
through the street of the City, from the one end of the market to the other,
when the people were there assembled; Which she, to obtain their Liberties from
this Servitude and Tribute, performed, covering her self so with her long fair
hair, that she was seen and discerned by no body. Where^pon the Earl her
husband by his Charter, exempted the Citizens of Coventry for ever from many
payments, which he formerly imposed and exacted from them; the wisdom of which
Earl much benefited the King and people whiles he lived.

Wigorniensis, Hoveden, Sim. Dunelm. Anno 1058. Ingul. Historia p. 898. Speed,
and others.
Algarus his son succeeding him in the Earldom of Mercia in the year 1058. Anno
1058.
was banished the second time by King Edward; but by the assistance of Griffin
King of Wales, and help of the Norw^y fleet, which beyond expectation came to
assist him, he suddenly recovered his Earldom again by force, of which he
conceived himself unjustly deprived against Law. Gri^fin King of Wales having
(contrary to his former league and agreement) invaded, Proposit. 2.
infested England, slain the Bishop of Hereford, burnt the City, ^arrowed the
Country, and twice assisted Earl Algarus against King Edward; Anno 1063.
thereupon Anno 1063. Mat Westminster. Hoveden, Wigorn. Sim. Dunelm. Bromton, An.
1063, 1064. Malmsbur. de Gests Reg. l. 2. c. 13. Hen. de Knyghton, de Event.
Angl. l. 1. c. 14. Ingulphi Hist. p. 899. Holinshed, Fabian, Grafton, Speed.
Duke Harold by King Edwards command marched hostilely into Wales, with his
forces to infest Griffin: who having notice of his coming, took Ship, and
hardly escaped his hands. Hereupon Harold raised a greater Army, and likewise
provided Ships and furniture; after this his brother Tosti and he, joining
their forces together, by the Kings command, began to depopulate Wales, and
invaded it both by Sea and Land: whereupon the Welshmen compelled by necessity,
gave them Hostages, and promised, That they would thenceforth pay a Tribute to
K. Edward, as their Sovereign, and banish their King Griffin: whom they
expelled accordingly that year: and An. 1064. they cut off their King Griffins
head, and sent it unto Harold, who presently transmitted it to K. Edward:
whereupon the King made Griffi^s Brothers Blethagent and Redwallo, Kings over
the Welshmen, to whom he gave that land, who swear Fealty to King Edward and
Harold; et ad imperium illorum mari terraque se fore paratos, ac Proposit. 4, 8,
omnia quae prius de terra illa Regibus anterioribus fu^rant pensa obedien^er
se pensuros responderunt, as Wigorniensis, Hoveden, Simeon Dunelmensis, and
others record their Oath. Anno 1065.


The next year Ailredus Abbas, de Vita and Mirac. Edwardi Con^essoris, col.
394. Malmsbur. de Gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 13. Mat. West. Huntindon, Hoved^n,
Wigorniensis, Sim. Dunelm. Rad. de Diceto, Bromton, Polychron. l. 6. c. 27, 28.
Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 213. Speeds History, p. 418. Daniel, p. 24.
Fabian, Caxton, Holinshed, Grafton.
Tosti Earl of Northumberland, moved with envy against his Brother Harold, in
the Kings own presence at Winsore, took Harold by the hair as he was drinking
wine to the King, and violently struck the Cup out of his hand, using him most
dishonourably, all the Kings Household admiring at it. Upon which Harold
provoked to revenge, taking Tosti between his arms, and lifting him up on high,
threw and dashed him violently against the pavement. At which sight the
Soldiers round about ran in on all ^ides, and parting the began fray perforce
between these Brothers and stout Warriers, severed them one from the other. But
the King upon this predicted, that the destruction of these two Brothers was
now near at hand, and that their deadly feud was not long to be deferred. For
all the sons of the Traitor Earl Godwin were so ungracious, covetous,
oppressive, and so extremely unjust, that if they had seen any fair Manner or
Mansion Proposit. 2, 4.
place, they would procure the owner thereof to be slain in the night, withal
his posterity and kindred, that so they might get possession thereof for
themselves. Who notwithstanding which their soft and honied speeches, (although
they were but swords) did so circumvent the over-credulous simplicity of King
Edward, that after many enormous wickednesses committed by them, he made them
R^gni Iusticiarios, Regni Rectores and Dispositores; both Justices, Rulers and
Disposers of the kingdom; and likewise Generals and Admirals of his forces both
by Land and Sea. The many acts of Injustice committed by the sway of power and
passion by Earl Godwin and his sons proportionate greatness and the Kings
weakness, did much blacken that bright time of Peace, and made a good man (not
by acting, but enduring ill) held to be a bad King. Tosti after this contest
and quarrel with his brother Harold, departing in a rage from the Kings Court,
and coming to the City of Hereford, where his Brother Harold had provided a
great intertainment for the King, slew and cut all his Servants in pieces, and
put either a leg, arm, or some other member of their bodies thus mangled, into
every vessel of wine, meade, bear, and other sorts of liquors he there found,
wherein they lay steeping, stopping up the Vessels again: Which done, he sent
word to the King, that when he came to his Farm at Hereford, he should find his
flesh well powd^red, and that he would provide him sweetmeats. The King being
informed of this his barbarous villainy and scoff, commanded that he should be
banished for this detestable wickedness, which he abhorred. Soon after Tosti
departing into Northumberland, about the 5. of October, diverse Gentlemen and
others of that Country assembling together, came with about 200^ armed men to
York, where Tosti then resided, both to revenge the execrable murder of some
Noble Northumberlanders, servants to Go^patri^, whom Queen Egitha, in the cause
of her brother Tosti, had commanded treacherously to be slain on the 4th day of
the precedent Christmas, and of Gamel the son of Or^e, and Ulfe son of Delfin,
whom Tosti the year before had commanded to be treacherously murdered in his
chamber at York, under pretext of making a Peace with them; Proposit. 1, 2.
necnon pro immanitate Tributi quod de tota Northimbria injuste acceperat; as
also for the excessiveness of the Tribute which he had unjustly received out of
all Northumberland, without their common consent and grant. These chasing the
Earl himself out of the Country ( pro contuitu Ducatus occidendum non rati)
slew and cut off the heads of all his Servants, and Courtiers, as well English
as Danes, being above 200. on the North part of the river of Humber; then
breaking up his Treasury, they took away all his Treasures, Horses, Arms,
household stuff, and all things that were his. The rumor whereof being brought
to the King, and the Country in an uproar, almost all the Northumberlanders met
together, and elected, constituted Morchar, Earl Algarus, son for their Earl in
the place of Tosti; who marched with them into Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire,
and Derbyshire, wasted and pillaged those Counties, slew many of the
Inhabitants, and carried many thousands of them away captive, leaving those
Counties much impoverished many years after. Hereupon Harold was sent against
them to revenge those injuries, to prevent further mischiefs, and to mediate a
reconciliation between them and Tosti. Upon this the Northumberlanders met
Harold, first at Northampton, and afterward at Oxford, and although they were
more in number than he, yet being desirous of quietness and peace, they excused
the fact unto him, saying: Se homines libere natos, libere educatos, nullius
Ducis ferociam pati p^sse: A majoribus didicisse; aut Libertatem, aut Mortem,
etc. That they being men freely born, freely educated, could not suffer the
cruelty of any Duke. That they had learned of their ancestors, either to enjoy
Liberty, or death. Therefore if the King would have them his Subjects, he must
set another Earl over them; even Morchar, who had had experience how sweetly
they kn^w to obey, if they were sweetly handled. But all of them unanimously
refused any reconciliation at all with Tosti, Proposit. 1, 2,
whom they Outlawed, together with all those who had incited him to make an
unjust Law, and impose an illegal Tribute upon them. Harold hearing these
things, and minding more the Peace of the Country, than his brothers profit,
recalled his Army; and the Kiug having heard their answer, confirmed Morchar
for their Duke. Tosti hateful to all men, by the assistance of Earl Edwin, was
expelled out of England by the Northumberlanders, and driven with his wife and
children into Flanders, whence returning about two years after, and joining
with the Danes, he entered with the Danes into Northumberland, miserably
harrowed the whole Country, slaughtered the inhabitants, and at last was there
slain with most of his Soldiers by his own brother King Harold, Anno 1066.

King Edward, (as Abbot Historia, p. 899, 900, 911^
Ingulphus living in that age, records,) Anno 1065. being burdened with old
age, perceiving Prince Edgar Atheling (his Cosen Edwards son, lately dead) to
be unfit for the royal throne, tam cord, quam corpore, as well in respect of
mind as body, and that Earl Godwins many and wicked progeny did daily increase
upon the earth, set his mind upon his Cosen William Duke of Normandy, et eum
sibi succeder^ in Regnum Angliae voce stabili sancivit; and decreed, by a
stable vote, that he should succeed him in the Realm o^ England: For Duke
William was then superior in every battle, and a triumpher against the King of
France; and his fame was publicly blazed abroad amongst all the Earls of
Normandy who were next him, being invincible in the exercise of Arms, Iudex
justissimus in causarum judici^, a most just Judge in the judging of causes,
and most religious and most devout in the service of God. Hereupon King Edward
sent Robe^t Archbishop of Canterbury to him, as his Legate a L^tere, or special
Ambassador, illumque designatum sui regni Successorem tam debito cognationis,
quam merito virtutis suae Archipraesulis rela^u insinuavit; and intimated unto
him by the relation of his Archbishop, that he had designed him to be the
Successor of his Realm, as well by the debt of kindred, as by the merit of
Virtue. Moreover Harold, the Major of the Kings Court, coming into Normandy,
not only swore, that he would conserve the Kingdom of England for Duke William
after the Kings death; but likewise promised upon Oath, that he would take the
daughter of Duke William for his wife; and upon these promises returned home
magnificently rewarded: After which ^e subjoins, Edwardi p^issimi Regis, cujus
cognatione et consanguinitate inclytus Rex noster Willelmus fundat conscientiam
suam regn^m Angliae invadendi, caeteris Regibus de Danorum sanguine, quasi
nullius authoritatis ad allegandum, interim intermissis.

De Ges^is R^gum, l. 2. ^. 13 p. 93.
William of Malmsbury (who flourished in o^ near that very age) thus seconds
him. After the death of Edward, his son Edgar was, Neque promptus m^nu, neque
probus ingenio. Rex itaque defuncto cognato, quia spes prioris erat soluta
suffragii, Willielmo comiti Normanniae successionem Angliae dedit. Erat ille
hoc mun^re dignus, praes^ans animi juvenis, and qui in supremum fastigium
alacri labor excreverat. Praeterea proxime consanguineus, filius Roberti,
filius Richardi se^undi, quem fratrem fuisse Emmae matris Edwardi, non semel
est quod diximus. Ferunt quidam ipsum Haroldum a Rege in hoc Normanniam missum:
alii secretioris co^silii conscii invitum venti violentia illuc actum, quo se
tueretur invenisse commen^um; quod, quia propius vero videtur, exponam. Harold
coming to his farm at Boseam, going for his recreation into a fisher-boat, and
putting forth into the Sea in sport, was by a sudden contrary storm arising,
driven with his companions into the Village of Ponthieu in France, where he was
stripped and bound hand and foot by the rude Country people, and carried
Prisoner to Guido their Earl, who detained him in Prison to gain a ransom from
him. Whereupon Harold being of a subtle wit, studying how to relieve himself,
by large promises procured a Messenger to inform Duke William, that he was sent
by the King into Normandy, that what lesser Messengers had but mu^tered (
touching his Succession to the Crown of England) he might perform by his
presence; especially that he was detained in bonds by Earl Guido, whereby he was
hindered to deliver his message, notwithstanding his appeal to him, which was a
great diminution to his honor: and if his captivity were to be redeemed with
money, he would willingly give it to him and not to Guido; Upon which, he was
by Duke Williams command released, brought by Guid^ into Normandy; and there
nobly feasted by the Duke: where by his valor and policy he gained great
reputation with Duke William; and that he might more indear himself in his
favor, he there voluntarily of his own accord, confirmed to him the Castle of
Dover, which belonged to him of right, and the Kingdom of England after King
Edwards decease: whereupon the Duke espoused him to his daughter ( Adeliza)
then a child, and bestowed her whole ample portion upon Harold, and then
honorably dismissed him.

Flores His^^ p. 426.
Matthew Westminster Anno 1057. relating this Story of Harolds driving into
Ponthieu by storm against his will, as happening in that year; and that to
ingratiate himself with Duke William: Post mortem Regis Edwardi ei Regnum
Angliae Sacramento firmavit: subjoyns there^o: Tradunt autem aliter alii, quod
videlicet Haroldus a Rege Edwardo fuerat ad hoc in Normanniam missus, ut Ducem
Gulihelmum in Angliam conducer^t, qnem idem Rex Edwardus Haeredem sibi
constituere cogitavit.

Roger de Hoved. Annal. pars prior. p. 499. Radulph. de Diceto Abbr. Chron.
col. 480, 481. Eadmerus Hist. Novorum, l. 1. p. 4, 5. Sim. Dunel. Hist. col.
195. Io. Bromton in his Chronicle, col. 947. Hygden in his Polychron. l. 6. c.
27. with others, record the matter somewhat different from our other
Historians. That Harold after his Fathers death craving leave of King Edward to
go into Normandy, to free and bring into England his Brother Wulnoth, and
Nephew Hake, there detained Hostages; the King would not permit him to go as
sen^ by him, but yet left him free to do what he pleased of himself therein:
Adding, Praesentio tamen te ad nihil aliud tendere, nisi in detrimentum totius
Anglici regni, et opprobrium tui; nec enim ita novi Comitem mentis expertem ut
eos aliquatenus velit concedere tibi, si non praescierit in hoc magnum
proficuum sui. Harold notwithstanding taking ship to go into Normandy upon this
occasion, was driven by storm into Ponthieu, and there imprisoned as aforesaid,
and by Duke Williams means and threats, after two denials, released: who
honorably entertaining him for some days, to advance his own designs by him;
at last opened his mind thus to him. Dicebat itaque Regem Edwardum quando
secum invene olim juvenis in Normannia demoraretur, sibi interposita fide sua,
pollicitum fuisse, quod si Rex Angliae foret, Ius regni in illum Iure
Haereditario transferret; and subdens ait; tu quoque si mihi te in hoc ipso
adminiculaturum sposponderis, et insuper castellum Dofris, cum pute^ aquae, ad
opus meum te facturum, sororemque tuam, uni de Principibus meis dederis in
uxorem, te ad m^ t^mpore, quo nobis conveniet, destinaturum, nec non filiam
meam in c^njugem accepturum, promiseris; tunc et modo nepotem tuum: et cum in
Angliam venero regnaturus fratrem tuum incolumem recipies: in quo regno, si tuo
favore confirmatus fuero, spondeo, quod omne quod a me rationabiliter tibi
postulaveris obtinebis. Hereupon Harold perceiving danger on every side, and
not knowing how to escape, unless he condescended to Williams will in all
things, he thereupon consented to his requests. But he, that all things might
be ratified, bringing forth the relics of Saints, brought Harold to this,
That he should swear upon them, that he would actually perform all things which
they had agreed between them. These things thus done, Harold receiving his
Nephew, returned into his Country, where he related to the King, upon his
demand, what had happened, and what he had done; Who said, Did I not tell thee
I knew William, and that many mischiefs might happen to this kingdom in thy
journey; I foresee in this thy deed, that great calamities will come upon our
Nation, which I beseech God of his infinite mercy to grant, that they may not
happen in my days. Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 213.
Mr. Fox relating this story more briefly, concludes thus. Whereby it may be
^athered That King Edward was right willing that Duke William should reign
after him; and also it seems not unlike, but that he had given him his
promise thereunto before. The same Hoveden, Annalium pars posterior, p. 608,
609, 610. reciting the Laws of King Edward confirmed by King William after he
got the Crown; records these passages intermixed with them. That King Edward
retained his Cosen Edwards son, Edgar, with him, and nourished him for his Son,
and because he thought to make him his Heir, he named him Adeling, which we
call a Little Lord. But King Edward so soon as he knew the wickedness of his
Nation, and especially the pride of the Sons of Godwin, of Harold, (who after
invaded the Kingdom) Estigurt, Lefwin, and others of his Brothers; imagining
that what he had purposed concerning Edgar, could not possibly be stable;
Adoptavit Willielmum Ducem Normannorum in regnum: adopted William Duke of
Normandy to succeed him in the R^alm; William, I say, the bastard, the son of
Robert his Uncle, a valiant, warlike, and stout man: Who afte^ward^ by Gods
assistance, by vanquishing the foresaid Harold son of Godwin, victoriously
obtained the Re^lm o^ England. To which he subjoyns, That Edward wanting issue,
sent R^bert Archbishop of Canterbury to his Cosen William Duke of Normandy, and
de Regno eum constituit Haeredem; and made him heir of the Kingdom: yea after
him he sent Earl Harold; and He invaded the Realm; He further Records; That
when King William would have altered the Laws of England presented to him upon
Oath in the 4th year of his reign but in one point. Universi compatriotae, qui
leges edixerant tristes effecti, etc. tandem cum prosecuti sunt deprecantes,
quatenus pro anima Regis Edwardi qui ei post diem suum concesserat Coronam et
Regnum, et cujus erant Leges, that he would not alter the Laws herein,
whereupon he consented to their request.

Ypodigma N^ustria, p. 28.
Thomas of Walsingham thus registers the fact. Edwardus Rex Anglorum, prolis
successione carens, olim miserat Duci Robertum Archiepiscopum Cantuar. statuens
illum haeredem Regni a Deo sibi attributi. Sed et Haroldum ipse postmodum
destinavit, qui fuit maximus Comitum regni sui in honor, dominatione et
divitiis, ut ei de Corona sua fidelitatem faceret; ac Christiano more
Sacramentis confirmaret; Qui dum ob hoc negotii venire contenderet, velificato
freto, Porti Pontnium appulit, ubi in manus Widonis Abbatis villae S. Abvile
Comitis incidit, quem idem Comes captum, cum suis con^estim in custodiam
trusit. Quod ut Dux comperit missis Legatis violenter illum extorsit, quem
aliquandiu secum morat^ facto fidelitate de regno pluribus Sacramentis, cum
muneribus multis Regi remisit. Denique Rex Edwardus, completo termino foelicis
vitae, etc. migravit a saeculo. Cujus regnum Haroldus continuo invasit, ex
fidelitate pejuratus quam Duci Iuraverat. Ad quem Legatos direxit protinus,
hortans ut ab hac vesania resipisceret, fidem quam Iuramento sposponderat, cum
digna subjectione servare^. Sed ille hoc non solum audire contempsit, veru^
omnem ab illo Anglorum gentem infideliter avertit, etc.

Chronicon Iohannis Bromton, Col. 945. relates, That King Edward purposed to
make Edgar (whom he had nourished as his Son) heir of England: Sed ut quidam
aiunt, Rex gentis suae m^litiam, et praecipue superbiam Haroldi, filii Godwini,
^t aliorum divina demonstratione praevidens, percepit, quod proposi^um suum,
quoad ipsum Edgarum cognatum suum, de regno post eum obtinendo, minime potuit
adimplere, unde Willielmo cognato suo Normannorum Duci, Regnum post eum
optinendum per solennes nuncios assignavit. And Col. 957. he adds, Some say
that King Edward before his death had appointed William to succeed him,
according t^ the promise which the said King had made him when he was a young
man living in Normandy, that he should succeed him in the Kingdom; concerning
which, as some write, he had sent solemn Messengers to him into Normandy. The
like is affirmed almost in the sa^e words by Henry de Knyghton de Eventibus
Angliae, l. 1. c 15. col. 2238. and by Fabian, C^xton, Cambden, Holinshed,
Grafton, Speed, Daniel, Stow, Vestegan, and other modern Historians.

Hi^^. Ang. ^12.
Matthew Paris in the beginning of his History of England, p. 1. relates
Harolds driving into Pountois^ by storm, as he was taking his pleasure at Sea,
his presenting to Duke William, his espousals to his daughter under age, which
he ratified by Oath taken upon the relics of Saints; adding, Iuravit insuper,
se post m^^tem Regis Edwardi, qui jam senuit sine liberis, Regnum Angliae Duci,
qui in Regnum jus habuit, fideliter conservaturum. Consummatis igitur aliquot
diebus cum summa lae^itia, amplis muneribus ditatus, in Angliam reversus est
Haroldus. Sed cum in tuto constitueretur, jactabat se laqueos evasisse
Hostiles, Perjurii crimen eligendo. And Hip. Ang^. p. 912.
Anno 1257. Writing of the Lay Peers of France, whereof the Duke of Normandy is
first, he has this passage. Rex Angliae, Dux est de jure Normanniae, sanguinis
derivatione geneali: Rex ex conquestis: dicitur tamen quod beatus Edwardus, eo
quod haerede caruit, Proposit. 10.
Regnum legavit Willielim Bastardo Duci Normannorum. Sed hoc robore asseruitur
caruisse; qui^ hoc fecit in lecto Lethalf, et sine Baronagii sui commnni
consensu.

By all which Testimonies, as likewise by the express relations of Mr. Cambden
in his Britannia, p. 144, 145. Richard Verstegan his Restitution of decayed
Antiquities. Matthew Parker, his Antiquitates Ecclesiae Britanniae, p. 88. Mr.
Seldens Review of his History of Tithes^ p. 482, 483. it is apparent, that King
Edward whiles he was in Normandy, before he was King; upon Duke Williams
repairing into England to him after he was King, by several Messengers, and
Hostages sent to him in his old age, and in his very deathbed, appointed Duke
William to be both his successor and heir to the Crown of England, and that
Harold, either voluntarily, as purposely sent by King Edward, or craftily, upon
pretense he was sent by him, to work his own enlargement and his Nephews; or
upon Williams motion to him; voluntarily swore, that he would faithfully
preserve the Crown and Realm of England for him after King Edwards death, who
had appointed him to succeed him, as his heir and next kinsman by the mothers
side, and that he intended to dishinherit his Cosen Edgar Atheling of it,
though nex^ heir to it, by reason of his minority, unfitness, and indisposition
both of body and mind, to sway the Scepter of the Realm.

King Edward, having finished his Abbey of Westminster, Anno 1066.
and endowed it with ample lands and privileges by three several Charters, by
the advice and assent of all his Bishops and Nobles as Mat. West Florentius
Wigorn. Hoveden, A^lr^dus, Bromton, Polych^on, Fabian, Cax^on, Gra^ton,
Holinsh^d, Fox, Spelman, Speed.
aforesaid, Anno 1066, caused it to be solemnly consecrated on Innocents day,
with great solemnity; but falling sick in the midst of these festival
Solemnities of its dedication, he betoo^ himself to his bed; where continuing
speechless for two days space together, on the third day, giving a great
groan, and arising as it were from the dead, he related to those then about
him, a Vision he had seen touching the State of England; Namely, that two
religious Monks he had formerly known in Normandy, dead many years before, were
sent unto him with this message, declaring the Corruptions and Vices both of
the Clergy, Nobility, Gentry, and People of England, and the judgments ready
to fall upon them for the same: Which Flores H., p. 4^1.
Matthew Westminster thus relates. Quoniam Primores Angliae, Duces, Episcopi
and Abbates, non sunt Ministri Dei, sed Diaboli, tradidit Deus hoc regnum uno
anno, et die uno, in manu inimic^; Daemonesque terram hanc totam pervagabunt:
De Vita and M^raculis Edwardi Conse^^oris, col. 399, 400.
Abbot Ailred thus records it, Impletum dicunt Anglorum nequitiam, and
iniquita^ consummata iram provocat, accelerat vind^cta^. Sacerdotes
praevaricati sunt pactum Domini, polluto pector^ and manibus iniquitatis sancta
co^^rectant, and non Pastores, sed Mercenarii exponunt lupis oves, non
protegunt, lac and lanam quaerunt, non oves, ut detrusos ad inferos, mors and
pastores depascat et oves. Sed et Principes terrae infideles, Sociae surum
PRAEDONES PATRIAE, quibus nec Deus timori est, NEC LEX HONORI, quibus veritas
oneri, JUS CONTEMPTUI, CRUDELITAS DELECTATIONI. Itaque NEC SERVANT PRAELATI
JUSTITIAM, nec subditi disciplinam. Et ecce Dominus gladium suum vibravit,
aroum suum tetendit, et paravit illum; ostende^ deinc^ps populo hinc iram and
indignatione^, immissiones insuper per Angelos malos, quibus traditi sunt anno
uno and di^ uno, igne simul et gladio puniendi. The King groaning and sighing
for this calamity that was ready to fall upon his people, demanded of the
Monks: Whether if they repented of their sins upon his admonition to them, God
would not pardon them, and remove his judgments, as he did from the Ninivites?
They replied, That God would by no means receive them into his favor, because
the heart of this people was hardened, and their eyes blinded, and their ears
deafned, that they would not hear reproof, nor understand admonition, nor be
terrified with threatenings, nor provoked with his late benefits. The King
thereupon demanded, Whether God would be angry for ever? Whether he would be
any more entreated? and when they might hope for a release of so great
calamities? To which they replied; That if a green tree cut in the midst, and
carried a great space from the stock, could without any help reunite it self to
the root, and grow again, and bring ^orth fruit, then might the remission of
such evils be hoped for. The verity of which Prophecy (add our Historians) the
Englishmen experimentally felt, namely, That England should be an habitation of
strangers, and a Domination of Foreiners, because a little space after, scarce
any Englishman was either a King, a Duke, Bishop, or Abbot, neither was there
any hope also of the end of this mise^y. King Edward after his relation of this
V^sion to the Nobles and Prelates then about him, yielded up the Ghost and died
without issue on Epiphany Eve, An. 1066. and was solemnly interred the next day
in Westminster Abbey, the royal line of the Saxon Kings ending in him, which
had continued from Cerdic the first King of the West Saxons for 571. years,
without interru^tion, except by some Danish Usurpers, who for the Sins of the
English reigned for some years over them, with rigor, and were soon cut off by
death.

CHAPTER 6. Comprising the Historical Passages relating to the Parliamentary
Councils, Laws, Liberties, Properties, Rights, Government of England, Anno
1066. under the Short reign of the Usurper King Harold, till the Coronation of
King William the First, falsely surnamed, The Conqueror, though never claiming
the Crown by Conquest, but Title.
KIng Edward deceasing without any issue Anno 1066.
of his body to succeed him, refusing all carnal copulation with his Queen,
either out of a vowed virginity, as most Historians conclude; or, out of a
detestation of Earl Godwins Traiterous race, quod Rex Religiosus de genere
proditoris, haeredes qui sibi succederent, corrupto semine Regio nolue^rit
procreari, as Historia, p. 899, 900.
Ingulphus, Flo^^s Hist. p. 433. Malmsb^^y de Ges^is R^gum, l. 2. c. 13.
Matthew W^stminster, and others record; thereby exposed the kingdom for a prey
to the ambitious Pretenders aspiring after it. Upon which consideration,
praesentiebant plures in ejus morte, desolationem Patriae, Plebis exterminium,
totius Angliae Nobilitatis excidium, finem libertatis, honoris ruinam, (as De
Vita and Miraculis Edwardi Con^^ssoris, col. 399.
Abbot Ailred informs us.) The English Prelates and Nobles being then all
assembled at Westminster to the solemn consecration of the Abbey, were much
perplexed, and the generality of the people exceedingly grieved at his death.
For although he were, Malm^bu^^ de Ges^is E^g. l. 2. c. 13. p. 7^.
Vir propter morum simplicitatem parum Imperio idoneus, yet he was Deo devotus,
ideoque ab eo directus. Denique eo regnante; nullus tumultus domesticus, qui
non cito comprimeretur, nullum bellum forinsecus, omnia domi forisque quieta,
omnia tranquilla; quod eo magis stupendum, quia ita se mansuete ageret, ut nec
viles homunculos verbo laedere noscet. Nam dum qu^dam vice venatum isset, et
agrestis quidem stabulata illa, quibus in casses cervi urgentur, confudisset,
ille sua nobili percitus ira, per Deum inquit et Matrem ejus, tantundem tibi
nocebo, si potero. Egregius animus quise regem in talibus non meminisset, nec
abjectae conditionis homini se posse nocere putaret. Erat interea ejus apud
domesticos reverentia vehemens, apud exteros metus ingens: fovebat profecto
ejus simplicitatem Deus, ut posset timeri, qui nesciret irasci; No wonder then
if his death were much lamented by all his Subjects, Ailredus de V^t^, et
Mira^^lis Edwardi. Con^ess^ris, col. col. 402.
cum omnes et in Rege cernerent unde gauderent, et in se sentirent und^
dolerent. The English Nobility were much troubled and divided in their minds
and affections, which were wavering, touching the election of a ^it person to
succeed him; Mat. Westminst^r, Anno 1066. p. 433.
Fluctuabant Proceres Regni quem sibi Regem praeficerent et Rectorem. Many of
them favored William Duke of Normandy, as specially designed by King Edward to
succeed him, others of them inclined to Prince Edgar Atheling, as the next and
right heir to the Crown, Cui de Iure debebatur: Others of them favored Harold,
Earl Godwins son, as being a person then of greatest Power and Valor in the
Realm, Malmsb. de Gest. Re^um, l. 3. p. 99.
Anglia dubio fav^re nutabat cui se R^ctori committeret incerta, an Haraldo, an
Willielmo, an Edgaro. Nam and illum pro genere proximum regno, Proceribus Rex
commendaverat. Harold being a crafty subtle man, knowing that delays were
hurtful to those who were prepared, on the very day of Epiphany, whereon King
Edward was buried, having the command of all the Militia and forces of the
Realm, as General and Viceroy to the deceased Kiug, by the strength of himself
and his kindred and friends, invaded and seized upon the royal Crown, and then
presently set it upon his own head, crowning himself King without any Title,
Right, or due Election by the Nobles, or Coronation by the Bishops, (whereby he
incurred the hatred both of the English Prelates and Pope;) and then extorted
alleg^ance from the Nobles; as William of Malmsbury, Matthew Paris, Ingulphus,
Henry Huntindon, Matthew Westminster, the Chronicle of Bromton, Knyghton,
Caxton, Mr. Fox, Speed, and some others attest. But Marianus Scotus, Florent.
Wigorniensis, Roger de Hoveden, Sim. Dunelm. Radulfus de Diceto, Eadmerus,
Hygden, Fabian, Grafton, with others, write in favor of Harold, that King
Edward before his death, made him not only his General, but Viceroy; and
ordained, that he should be King after him. Whereupon, A totius Angliae
Primatibus ad regale culmen electus, he was elected to be King by all the
Nobles of England^ and solemnly consecrated and crowned King by Aldred
Archbishop of York. And so, Iuxta quod ante mortem (Edwardus) statuerat, in
Regnum ei successit Haroldus, writes Historia, Novorum, l. 1. p. 5.
Eadmerus. That King Edward designed him for his Successor in the Crown, seems
very improbable, because Harold himself never alleged nor pretended it in any
of his Answers to Duke Williams Ambassadors to him, who claimed the Crown by
his special bequest and designation in his lifetime; and because King Edwards
hatred to Godwin and his Posterity, seems inconsistent with it^

De Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 13. p. 93.
William of Malmsbury an impartial disingaged Author living in, or near that
time, gives us this determination of these diffrent relations. Recenti adhuc
regalis funeris luctu, Haroldus ipso Theophaniae die, extorta a Principibus
fide, arripuit Diadema, quamvis Angli dicant, a Rege concessum: quod tamen
magis benevolentia, quam judicio allegari existimo, ut illi haeredit^tem
tran^funderet suam, cujus semper suspectam habuerat potentiam. Quamvis, ut non
celetur veritas, pro persona quam gerebat, regnum prudentiae and fortitudine
gubernaret, si legitime suscepiscet. Abbot His^oria, p. 900.
Ingulphus living at that time, thus relates his intrusion into the Throne
against his Oath. In crastino Regii funeris Comes Haroldus, con^ra suum statum
and jusjurandum, cont^mpler praesti^ae ^idei, ac nequiter oblitus sui
Sacramen^i, Throno R^gio se intrusit: yet adds; per Archiepiscopum Eboracae
Aldredum solenniter coronatus: His^o^iarum l. 6. p. 367.
Henry Huntindon thus records it, Quidem Anglorum Edgar Adeling promovere
volebant in Regem: Haroldus vero, viribus et genere fretus Regni Diadema
invasit. The Col. 957.
Chronicle of Bromton, and D^ ^v^ntibus An^li^, l. 2. c. 15. col. ^339.
Knyghton, thus give us the story of it. Sancto Edwardo rege et Confessore
m^rtuo, quidam Anglorum Magnates Edgarum Adelynge, ^ilium Edwardi, filii Regis
Edmondi Ironside in Regem promovere moliebantur; sed quia puer erat, et tanto
oneri minus idoneu^, et in bursa minus refertus, Haroldus Comes viribus et
genere fretus, Cui erat Men's astutior, crumena f^c^ndior, et miles copiosior,
et pompis gloriosior, sinistro omine Regnum occupavit, et contra Sacramentum
quod Willielmo Duci Normanniae praesti^erat, Regni Diadema sinistro omine
illico invasit, et sic perjurus sancto Edwardo successi^ juxta quod idem
Edwardus, ut quidam aiunt, ante mortem suam statuerat promissione quam idem Rex
dum juvenis in Normannia extitit, dicto Willielmo de succedendo post ^um in
regnum fecerat, and sibi super hoc postea secundum quosdam solemnes nuncios, ut
praemittitur, destinaverat, non obstante. De Vita and Miraculis Edwardi
Confessoris, col. 404.
Abbot Ailred, thus registers Harolds usurpation, and the sad events thereof.
Int^rea Haroldus, Godwini filius, Regnum Angliae quod secundum fidem Sacramenti
debuerat servasse Willielmo Regis Edmundi consobrino, sibi nec Iure debitum,
nec Natura, irreverenter usurpans, malum quod Angliae secundum Sancti Regis
oraculum Dominus praeparaverat transgressione pacti et fidei acceleravit
laesione. Ut autem attenuati viribus, facilius ab hiis quos injuste
provocaverat hostibus vinceretur, suscitavit ei a part aquilonis inimicos,
Haroldum cognomento Harfar, Norwagenorum regem, et Tostium fratrem s^um, quem
de Anglia ipse exp^lerat etc. Ypodigma Neustria, p. 28.
Tho. Walsingham thus stories it. Cujus regnum Haroldus continuo invasit, ex
fidelitate pejura^us quam Duci juraverat. Ad quem Legatos direxit protinus,
hortans ut ab hac vesania resipisceret, et fidem quam juramento spospondera^,
cum digna subjectione servaret. Sed ille hoc non solum audire contempsit, verum
omnem ab illo Anglorum gentem infideliter avertit. Hygden in his Polychronicon,
l. 6. c. 28. Mr John Fox, Acts and Monuments Vol. 1. p. 214. Mr. Cambden in his
B^itannia, p. 145, 146. Holinshed, Sir John Hayward, Sir Richard Baker, affirm
the like, and incline to this opinion. That Harold, by his might, power, craft,
policy usurped, and invaded the Crown, without any right, against his Oath. I
shall sum up all their Opinions in the words of History of Great Britain, p.
416, 417.
John Speed. After King Edwards death, the Statesmen perplexed for choice of a
new, Edgar Athelings title was worthy more respect than it found, for him they
held too young for government: besides a stranger born, scarce speaking
English, and withal the prophecies of Edward, touching the alienation of the
Crown, the interest of the Danes, and the claim of Duke William, made, (both by
gift and consanguinity) bred great distractions of desires and opinions, but
nothing concluded for settling the State; no man assuming or possessing the
diadem, because none had the power or right to adorn therewith his own head. In
this calm conference a sudden gale arose, which blew all the sails spread for
that wind into one port. Harold, son to Earl Godwin, a man (duly prizing his
many worthy parts) not unmeet for a Kingdom, next Edward (his Bro^her-in-law,)
in the kingdom, courteous in speech and behavior, in martial prowess the only
man, ( qui vivente Edwardo quaecu^que contra eum bella incensa sunt, virtute
sua compressit, cupiens se Provincialibus ostentare, in regnum scilicet spe
prurienti anhelans, as De Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 13 p^ 93, 94.
Malmsbury writes of him) friended by as^inity of many of the Nobles, expected
to be both sided and assisted, if his cause came either to trial or voice,
seeing the time well sitted his entrance. Swane King of Denmark (most dreaded
by the English) being then entangled with the Sweden wars; William the Norman
(that made claim from King Edward) then absent, and at variance with Philip the
French King; the friends of Edgar in Hungary, and himself a Stranger, over
young for to rule: all which concurrent made Harold, without deliberation, or
order from the States, to set the Crown on his own head, regardlesse of all
ceremony, and solemn celebration: for which act, as a violater of holy rites,
he too too^much offended the Clergy, none either greatly applauding or
disapproving his presumption, except only for the omission of manner and form.

Harold having gotten actual possession of the Crown, Marianus Scotus,
Florentius Wigorniensis, Huntindon, Hoveden, Sim. Dunelmensis, Radulphus de
Diceto, Hygden, Fabian, Gra^ton, H^linshed, Cambden, and Speed, record; that to
ingratiate himself with the Clergy and people, He began to destroy evil Laws
and Customs before used: and stablished just and good Laws; especially such as
were for the defense of holy Church: He likewise became a Patron of Churches
and Monasteries, respected and reverenced Bishops, Abbots, Monks and Clergymen;
showed himself pious, humble, affable to all good men, and hateful to all
Malefactors; publicly commanding all his Dukes, Earls, Sheriffs, and other
Officers, to apprehend all Thieves, Robbers, and Disturbers of the Realm;
himself likewise taking extraordinary pains and care for the defense and
guarding of the Realm, both by Land and Sea Whereunto John Speed superadds, He
remitted or diminished the grievous customs Proposit. 1^ 2, 5^
and Tribute which his Predecessors had raised; a course ever powerful to win
the hearts of the Commons: to Churchmen he was very munificent, and careful of
their advancement; and to grow more deeply in their venerable esteem, he
repaired their Monasteries, especially that at Waltham, which he sumptuously
new built, and richly endowed. Moreover, to satisfy such Nobles as affected
young Edgar, he created him Earl of Oxford, and held him in special favor. In
brief, unto the poor his hand was ever open, unto the oppressed, he administered
Justice; and all to hold that Crown upright which he had set on his own head
with an unsure hand, and deprived him of unto whom he was Protector. But these
Encomiums of his Justice and Government, seem to me, to be rather forged than
real. For how could he r^form ill Laws and Customs, and enact good Laws, when
King Edward had so newly and exactly done it before him, that there was no need
of such a reformation; neither ^inde we the least mention of any Laws made by
Harold? Or how could he remit, or diminish those grievous c^stoms and Tributes,
which King Edward had totally remitted before him, unless himself first revived
them? Or how could he court the Prelates and Clergy, when as he refused to be
consecrated by them, for which he incurred their disfavour? I rather therefore
incline to the quite contrary Characters which other Historians give of him and
his Government, as most consonant to truth. De Even^ibus Angliae, l. 1. c. 16.
col. 2339.
Henry de Knyghton, though he recites what some forementioned write in his
favor, yet gives us this account of his proceedings himself: Iste devenit
nim^s e^latus et cupidus in collectione auri et argenti et thesaurorum, nec
aliquam uxorem ducere voluit, and vi oppressit filias Baronum and Procerum,
atque Militum de regno: quod ipsi aegre ferebant; Et de Forestis suis tantam
ferocitate^ and seviritatem erga adjacentes Nobiliores exercuit, quod
quamplures adni^tlavit, et multos depauperavit. Neo mirum quamvis ex hiis et
aliis nimis odiosus devenit populis suis. Et ideo pars Comitum et Baronum ad
invi^em conferebant, dicentes, ipsum non esse fortunae deditum, nec verum esse
Regem, sed per intrusionem erectum, et ideo infauste regere populum suum. Et
mandaverunt Willielmo Duci Normanniae, ut in Angliam veniret eorum Consilio et
Auxilio Ius Regni prosecuturus, feceruntque ei fidelem securitatem veniendi, et
consensit. Flores Hist. p. 434, 44^.
And Matthew Westminster gives us this character of him: Superbia elatus jam
factus de Rege Tyrannus, Rex Haroldus in multis patrisans temerarius suit, et
indiscretus, in praesumptione ancipiti nimis suae invictae confidens
fortitudini, laudis cupidus et Thesauri, promissorum immemor arridente
prosperitate. Unde ipsis Anglis quibus praeerat, etiam consanguineis se
praebuerat odiosum; victoriamque cum illi Dominus exercituum et Deus ultionum
concesserat, non Deo sed sibi, suaeque ascripsit strenuitati. Quod recenti
experientia fuerat comprobatum, cum a Noricis evi^tis Superbus spoliisque
omnium retentis, quae aliis promissa debebantur, ad Normannorum praelia
praecipitanter et inconsulte festinavit. Unde Ducis Gulihelmi, maguanimi in
negotiis bellicis peragendis, et circumspecti, fidelis in pollicitis, in pace
socialis and jucundi, in conviviis dapsilis et seren^, omnibus fere, tam Anglis
quam conterminis, maxim tamen Noricis acceptabatur. Recipientes eum benevole
dicebant; Benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini, Rex paci^icus, bellator
victoriosus, pater and protector desolatorum. Dominus autem Papa, simulque
fra^res Cardinales universi, cum tota Curia Romana, Regem Haroldum semper
exosum habentes, pro eo quod sibimet diadema Regni, sine eorum convenientia, et
ecclesiastica solemnitate, consensuque Pralatorum, praesumpserat, injuriam
dissimularunt. Et vid^ntes, quo fine ausa praesumptio terminaretur, cum fortuna
adversa sunt adversati, potentioriq, manu atque victrici, more cupidorum, vel
potius arundinis exagitatae ventorum turbine, quantocius inclinaverunt. Such
was the Popes and Clergies temper then.

Ingulp^us, Malms^. (...). Huntin^on, Hov^ den, Mat. V^^s, Mat. ^estm^nst.
Walsingham, ^pod^g^na Neu^r^^^, Sem. (...). Radulphus de Diceto, Bro^ton,
Hygden, K^yg^ton, F^bian, Caxton, Gras^on ^^linshed, Speed, (...), ^aker, S. ^.
Hayward, and others.
Duke William being certainly informed, that Harold contrary to his Oath and
promise to him, had without right or Title invaded the Crown, and being
secretly invited by some of the English Nobles to challenge his own right
thereunto by Kings Edwards designation; sent Messengers to Harold, who mildly
reprehending him for his breach of Covenant, added by way of menace, that he
would before the year expired exact his due from him by force of arms, in case
he refused voluntarily to yield up the kingdom to him. But Harold growing
secure, contemning his threats, (as never likely to be put in execution, both
because the Dukes daughter, to whom he was espoused, was dead, and himself
involved in wars with his Neighbor Princes) returned his Messengers to him
with this answer, (...) ^^stm. p. 434 435.
Harold King of England sends you this answer, That true it is, when he
espoused your daughter in Normandy, being compelled by necessity, He swear that
the Realm of England should belong to thee. But against this he asserts, That a
forced Oath is not to be kept: For if a vow or oath which a Virgin had
knowingly made concerning her body, in the house of her Father, without her
parents consent, was revocable and void: much more the Oath which he, being
under the Scepter of the King, had made without his knowledge, by compulsion,
ought to be n^lled and made void, as he asserted. Proposit. 5, 10.
Moreover he af^irmed, Nimis praesumptuosum ^uisse, quod absque generali
Consensu Regni Haereditatem vobis juraverat alienandam. Addidit etiam Injustum
esse petere, ut e regno discedat, quod tanto Principum favore, susceperat
gubernandum. That it was overmuch presumption in him, that without the general
consent of the Realm, he had sworn the inheritance thereof should be alienated
to him: That King Edward being then living, he c^uld neither give away the
Kingdoms succession to him, nor grant it to any other without his cons^nt; et
^ine populi consensu, Senatus Decreto, et nesciente omni Anglia, de toto Regno,
necessitate temporis coactus impegerit: and without the consent of the people,
and decree of the SENATE, (or Parliament) he could not promise to him the whole
Realm of England, without the knowledge of all England, being compelld thereto
only by the necessity of the time. Adding moreover, that it was unjust to
demand, that he should d^part from that kingdom, which he had undertaken to
govern with so great favor of the Nobles; Hist. No^o^um, l. 1. p. 5.
Eadmerus, ^bbreviat. Chron. col. 481.
Radulphus de Diceto, and some others, record this to be his Answer then
returned to Duke William. Soror mea, quam juxta condictum expetis, mortua e^.
Quod si corpus ejus quale nunc est vult Comes habere, mittam, ne judicer
Sacramentum violasse quod feci. Castellum Dofris, et in eo puteum aquae, licet
nesc^am cui, ut vobis convenit, Proposit. 10, ^.
explevi Regnum quod necdum fuit meum, quo Iure potui dare vel promittere? Si
de filia sua quam debui in uxorem, ut asserit, ducere agit; Super Regnum
Angliae mulierem extraneam, inconsultis Principi^us me nec debere, nec sine
grandi injuria posse adducere noverit.

Speeds Histo^y, p. 419. S^e Sir John H^ywa^d in Will. 1.
The Norman, who till then, thought England sure to be his, and had devoted his
hopes from a Duke to a King, stormed to see himself thus frustrated on a
sudden, and instead of a Crown to have such scorns heaped on his head;
therefore, nothing content with this ^light and scornful answer, returned his
Ambassadors again to Harold, by whom he said his claim more at large; As that
King Edward in the Court of France, had faithfully promised the Succession unto
him, and again ratified the same unto him, at his being in England; and that
not done without consent of the State, but confirmed by Stigand (it should be
Robert) Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earls Godwin and Siward, yea and by
Harold himself, and that so firmly assured, that his Brother and Nephew were
delivered for pledges, and for that end sent to him into Normandy: that he
being no way constrained to swear (as he pretended) he appealed to Harolds own
Conscience, who besides his voluntary offer to swear the succession of the
Crown unto him, contracted himself to Adeliza his daughter, then but young,
upon which foundation the Oath was willingly taken. But Harold who thought his
own head as fit for a Crown as any others, meant nothing less than to lay it
down upon par^y; and therefore told Williams Ambassadors plainly; That however
Edward and he had tampered for the Kingdom, yet Edward himself coming in by
election, and not by any Title of Inheritance, his promi^e was of no validity,
for how could he give that wherein he was not interested, nor in the Danes time
was likely to be? and tell you^ Duke, that our Kingdom is now brought to a
settled estate, and with such love and liking of the English, as that they will
never admit any more a stranger to rule over them. That the Duke himself well
knew, that the Oath he made him was only for fear of death or imprisonment, and
that an Oath so extorted in time of extremity, cannot bind the maker in
Conscience to perform it, for that were to join one sin with another. With
which and the like Speeches he shifted off the Dukes Ambassadors, without any
Princely entertainment, or courteous regard: who returned home without reply,
Malmesb. de Gest. Reg. l. 3. p. 99, 100.
vel veris vel veresimilibus argumentis perstricti.

Eadmerus Hist. Nov. l. 1. p. 5. Radulph. de Diceto Abbrev. Chron. col. 481.
Cambdens Brit. p. 147.
Some of our Historians record; That the Dukes Messengers upon their second
Embassy, admonishing him how religiously he had bound himself by Oath, and that
perjured persons should be sure to find perdition from Gods hands, and
reproachful shame with men, waived all other demands of the Crown, and
insisted only upon this; That Harold should marry his Daughter, which he had
espoused, according to his promise, else he should certainly know he would by
force of Arms challenge the succession of the Kingdom promised to him. But
this seems improbable, because our other Historians conclude, that his espoused
Daughter was dead before this Embassy; and Williams preparations and future
Messages claiming the Crown, resolve the contrary. Historia p. 900.
Abbot Ingulphus flourishing at that time, gives us this sum of their
Negotiation, and Harolds answer thereunto. Wi^lielmus au^em Comes Normanniae
Legatos mittit, foedera facta dicit, pacta patefecit, promissa petit, and
aliquod justum medium confici requirit. At Rex Haroldus Legatos vix auscultat,
foedera fracta negat, pacta recusat, promissa excusat, and omnia ^ustamedia
oblata sufflat, and subsannat; Cumque haec intermedia quotidie agerentur, ac
solum nunciorum cursus ac recursus tota aestate sine fructu consumerarentur;
The Ambassadors returned empty, bringing only Harolds unsatisfactory and
scornful Answers with them. Mat. Paris Mat. Westmin. Wigorniensis, Sim.
Dunelm. Rad. de Diceto, Bromton, Huntind. Hoveden, Hygden.

Malmsbur. de Gest. Reg. l. 3. p. 99, 100. Henry de Knyghton, de Eventib. Angl.
l. ^. c. 16. Ingulphi Hist. p. 900. Cambdens Brittan. p. 148. Speeds Hist. p.
420. Gra^ton, Fabian, Holinshed, Caxton, Daniel, Baker, Fox, Sir Io. Haywood.


Wherewith Duke William being much enraged, cast about how to recover that by
right of arms which he could not gain by Treaty; providing Ships, Soldiers,
Mariners, and all things necessary for an invasive war, making choice of the
tallest, skilfullest and goodliest Soldiers he could select, and of such
Captains and Commanders, as both in the Army and elsewhere, seemed all of them
to be rather Kings than Nobles. And to set the better color upon his pretended
enterprise, he sent to Pope Alexander, acquainting him with the justice of his
cause, and the war he had undertaken, his Ambassadors setting them forth with
all the strength of eloquence, which Harold neglected to do, either through
sloathfullness, or diffidence of his Title, or for fear William (who strictly
watched at Ports) should intercept his Messengers. The Pope having weighed the
Ti^le of both parties, Proposit. 6, 9
sent a consecrated Banner to William, as an Omen of his right to the kingdom,
and good success taken in the enterprise. Which having received, Conventum
magnum Procerum apud Lislibonam, fecit, super negotium singulorum sententias
scissitatus: Duke William called a Great Council of Nobles at Lill^bon,
demanding every one of their opinions concerning this business: Cumque omnes
ejus voluntatem plausibus excipientes, magnificis promissis animassent,
Commeatum Navium omnibus; pro qnantitate possesionum indixit. Henry Huntindon,
Hygden, Radulphus de Diceto, Speed, Daniel, and others relate, That the Lords
of Normandy in this great Parliamentary Assembly, taking Counsel amongst
themselves, what was best to be done in this expedition, William Fitz-Osbert
counseled, to leave and forsake the war, both for scarcity of ^ighting men,
and by reason of the strength, valor, fierceness and cruelty of the Enemies.
Whereof the other Lords being glad, put their answer into his mouth, resolving
they would all consent to what he should say: Who coming before the King said;
That he and all his men were ready and devoted to assist him in that
enterprise, and so were all the other Lords. Whereupon all the Nobles of
Normandy being thus unexpectedly surprised and bound by his words and promise,
provided themselves for the expedition. In this Assembly of the Norman States,
Cambdens Brit. p. 147. Speeds Hist. p. 421. Daniel Hist. p. 34, 35^
a subsidy being propounded, as the sinews to carry on this great undertaking:
it was answered, That a former war with the French had impoverished much of
their wealth; That if new wars were now raised, Proposit. 1, 9.
and therein their substance spent to gain other parts, it would be there so
missed, as it would hardly be sufficient to defend their own; That they thought
it more safe for him to hold what he had, than with hazard of their own to
invade the territories of others: That though the war intended were just, yet
it was not necessary, but exceeding dangerous. Besides, by their allegiance
they were not bound to mil^tary services in foreign parts^ and therefore no
payments could be assessed upon them. Whereupon the wealthiest of all the
people were sent for by the Duke, and severally, one by one conferred with;
showing them his right and hopes of England, where preferments lay even for the
meanest of them: only money was the want, which they might spare, neither
should that be given, but lent upon a plentiful increase. With which words he
drew them so on, that they strove who should give most, and by this means he
ga^hered such a mass of money as was sufficient to defray the war. Besides,
Fitz Osburne promi^ed to furnish 40 ships at his own charge, the Bishop of
Bayon 40. the Bishop of Mau^ 30. and so others accordingly, beyond their
abilities: And diverse neighbor Princes, upon promises of fair possessions in
England, assisted him both with Ships and Soldiers. On the other side Harold
to prevent his and the Danes invasions, who likewise laid Title to the Crown,
provided ships and forces, Proposit. 3.
to oppose them both by Sea and Land, and repairing to the Port of Sandwich,
appointed his Navy to meet him there; which being there assembled, he failed
with it to the Isle of VVight, and there watched the coming of William into
England with his Army all the Summer and Autumn, placing likewise his Lan^
forces of Foot in fitting places about the Sea coasts. But at last the victuals
of the Navy and land Army being spent, they both returned home about the Feast
of St. Mary.

Malmsb. Mat. Paris, Mat. Westminster. Huntindon, Hoveden, Sim. Dunelmen. Bromton,
Radulph. de Diceto, Hygden, Knyghton, Walsingham, Fabian, Caxt. Holinsh^d,
Graft. Speed, Daniel, Baker, A^l^edus Abba^ Sir John Haywood.
Soon after Divine Providence, to make the easier and speedier way for Harolds
overthrow, stirred up his own Brother Tosti, the banished Earl of
Northumberland, to recover his Earldom, and avenge himself of Harold (who
exiled him) some think by Duke Williams advice, they marrying two Sisters: Who
coming with 60 (some write 40) ships, out of Flanders, forced Taxes and Tribute
out of the Isle of VVight, took booties and Mariners to serve in his Navy on
the Sea coasts of Kent, whence, he hoising ^ail, fell ^oul on Lincolnshire,
where Morcar and Edwin, Earls of Chester and Yorkshire incountring him with
their forces by Land, and Harolds Navy by Sea, with some loss of their men,
routed, and drove him from thence into Scotland. Where after some stay Harold
Harfager, King of Denmark, after his conquest of the Orcades, by Tosti his
solicitation came into the River of Tine with 300. (others write 500) ships,
where they both united their forces, intending to subdue and conquer England:
then landing their Soldiers in Northumberland, they wasted and spoiled the
Country where ever they came. Whereupon Earl Morcar, and Earl Edwin, with the
inhabitants of the Country, raised all the forces they could against them, and
giving them battle in a tumultuous manner, were routed by them, many of them
being slain in the field, and the rest enforced to fly into York for shelter,
which the Enemies besieging, was presently surrendered up to them, and hostages
delivered them after the slaughter of many Citizens, Nobles, and Clergymen.
Upon this King Harold recollecting his disbanded Army and Navy, marched with
all speed toward York against the Danes, Norwegeans, and his brother Tosti,
but coming to Hamford Bridge, one valiant Dane, with his Battle Axe ^lew 40 of
his men, and made good the Bridge against the whole Army, for a long space,
till at last some going under the Bridge in a Boat, slew him with a spear. Both
Armies joining battle, after a long and bloody fight, Harfager and Tosti, with
may other of Note were slain, their whole Army routed, all their Ships taken,
with the loss of many of the bravest English Soldiers, and 20 of their Ships
only permitted to depart into Denmark with their wounded men, and O^aus
Harfagers Son, who to save his life, took an Oath, never from thence forth to
attempt any hostility or invasion against the English. De Vita and Miraculis
Edwardi Confessoris.
This victory Abbot Ailred ascribes to the merits of Edward the Confessor, who
promised to be the Captain and Protector of the English Nation, against those
Enemies who invaded the Realm contrary to right and Law, and promised them the
victory over them: But Harold, ascribing it to his own valor, instead of
rewarding his Soldiers with the spoils of the vanquished enemies, as the price
of their blood, out of a base unworthy avarice, converted all the spoils and
booty to his own private use, giving no part of them to any other: Wherewith
many of the Nobles and common Soldiers were so incensed, that detesting the
covetousness of their Prince, they unanimously depar^ed from his service, and
refused to march wi^h him against the Normans. This triumphant victory so
puffed up Harold, that he thought himself secure in the Throne, beyond the fear
or reach of any adversity, and instead of a King became a TYRANT.

Whilst Harold with all his Land and Sea forces were thus bu^ied in the North
of England, Duke William in August assembled all his Land Army and Navy,
consisting of 900 ships, at the Port of S. Valerie, to invade England in the
South, then wholly destitute of all Guards by Land, and Navy by Sea, to resist
his landing. And to satisfy his Soldiers, and all others of the justice of
his undertaking, Hen. Huntind in Hist. l. 6. p. 367. Polychron. l. 6. c. 29.
Chron. Io. Brompt. col. 958. Hen. de Knyghton, de Eventibus Angliae, l. 1. c.
16. Speeds History, p. 422, Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 215. Cambdens
Britanniae, p. 149, Sir John Haywood.
he alleged these three causes thereof, which Henry de Knyghton devides into
four.

The first was, to revenge the cruel murder of his Cousin Prince Alfred, King
Edmunds brother, and of the Normans who came with him to assist him to recover
the Crown of England, to which he was right heir, whom Godwin and his Sons had
shamefully dishonored, treacherously betrayed, and barbarously murdered; which
fact he ascribed principally to Harold.

The second was, because Godwin and his Sons by their cunning, had injuriously
banished Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, Earl Odo, and all the French and
Normans out of England, which wrong he would revenge on Harold, as done
principally by his means and labor.

The third and chief ground was; because Harold falling headlong into perjury,
had without any right usurped the Crown and Realm of England, which of due
belonged unto him, both by right of Kindred to, and gift by King Edward his
Nephew, and by Harolds own solemn Oath and promise, made to him in Normandy, to
preserve the Kingdom for his use after King Edwards death without children,
according to King Edwards command.

While Duke William with his ships and Army lay many days together at S.
Valerie, expecting a fair gale for England, the winds being cross Malmsbury de
Gestis Regum, l. 3. p. 100.
many of the common soldiers there lying in Tents, thus muttered one to
another: That the man was mad who would by force invade and make another man's
Country and Realm his own; That God did fight against them in withdrawing the
winds: That his Father attempted the same thing in the same manner, and was
hindered and inhibited therein. That it was fatal to his family, that aspiring
to things above their power, they should find God opposite to them. These
speeches bruted abroad, which might enfeeble the strength, and abate the
courage even of valiant men; The Duke thereupon taking Counsel with his
Senators, caused the Corpse of St. Valerie to be brought forth to procure a
wind; Mat. Westminst. p. 435. Mat. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 2. Henry de Knight. de
Event. Angl. l. 2. c. 1. Fabian part 6. c. 217. Gra^ton, Holinsh. Speed,
Caxton, Haywood, and others.
and presently a prosperous gale filling their sails, the Duke himself first
took ship, and launched forth, and all the rest after him, then casting Anchor
till the Fleet came round about him, they all sailing with a gentle course
landed at Hastings and Pevemsy. The Duke stepping forth of the ship upon the
shore, one of his feet slipped, so that he fell down into the mud, one of his
hands being filled with sand, whch he interpreted as an ill omen, and sinister
event. But one of his Soldiers who stood next him, lifting him up from his
fall, whiles he held the mud in his hand, changed this event into a better
interpretation, saying; Most happy Duke, thou already possessest England and
plowest it up; Behold the land is in thy hand, Lift up thy self with good hope,
thou shall be King of England ere long.

No sooner was the Army landed, Malmesb. de Gest. Reg. l. 3. p. 100. Fabian,
part 6. c. 217. and others.
but the King strictly charged them to forbear plu^dering, and take no booties,
seeing they ought to spare the things that should be his own, nor to wrong any
of their persons, who should ere long become his Subjects. Restitution of
decayed Antiquities, p, 137
Richard Vestegan records out of a French Historian, that Duke William the
same day he landed in England, caused diverse of his chief Officers and Friends
to dine with him, Proposit. 1, 2, 3
and chancing at dinner to talk of an Astrologer, who by the conjunction of the
Planets, had assured him at St. Valerie, That Harold should never withstand
him, but submit himself unto him, and yield him faith and homage; willed now
that the said Astrologer should be brought unto him, whom he had caused to be
imbarqued for that voyage: But it was told him, that the Ship wherein the said
Astrologer sailed, was cast away at Sea, an^ he drowned in it. Whereunto the
Duke replied; That man was not wise, who had more regard ^o the good or ill
fortune of another, than unto his own. I am now, thanks be to God, come over, I
know not how the rest will succeed. How false this Star-gazers prediction
proved, the sequel will manifest.

Malmsb. Mat. Paris, Wigorn. Hoveden, Bromton, Hygden, Fabian, Knyghton,
Walsingham, Holinsh. Speed, Daniel and others.
Duke William after his arrival, rested quietly 15. days without acting any
thing, as if he minded nothing less than war. After which to cut off all
occasion or hopes of return from his Souldie^s, he fired all his ships, or (as
some write) drew them all a shore and entrenched them, as others: erecting only
a Castle on the shore for a retiring place for his Soldiers, if need were.
From Pevensy he marched to Hastings, where he built another Fort. De Event.
Angl. l. 2. c. 1.
Henry de Knyghton records, that the first night he lodged in England in his
Pavillion, there came a voice unto him, saying: William, William, be thou a
good man, because thou shall obtain the Crown of the Realm, and shall be King
of England; and when thou shall vanquish the enemy, cause a Church to be built
in the same place in my name, so many hundred foot in length, as in number of
years the seed of thy blood shall possess the Government of the Realm of
England, and reign in England, an 150. years. But Flores Hist^ p. 439, 440.
Matthew Westminster writes, this voice was after the battle with Harold, not
before it, and the subsequent words in Knyghton, (touching his march to
London,) import as much.

Malmsbur. Huntindon, Hoveden, Wigorn. Sim. Dunelm. Mat. Paris, Mat. Westminst.
Walsingham, Radulphus de Dice^o, Knyghton, Polychron. Bromton, Fabian, Caxton,
Gra^^on, Holinshed, Speed, Daniel, Baker, Sir John Hayward.
Harold residing in the North after his great victory there, when he deemed all
his Enemies totally broken in pieces, received certain intelligence, that Duke
William was safely arived at Pevensey with his Fleet, and an inn^merable
company of valiant Horsemen, Slingers, Archers, and Footmen, whom he had hired
out of all France. Whereupon he presently marched with his army in great haste
toward London; and although he well knew, that most of the valiant men in all
England were slain in the two late Battles against Tosti and the Danes; that
many of the Nobility and Common Soldiers had quite deserted him, refusing to
march with him, in that necssity, because he permitted them not to share with
him in the great booties they had won with their blood; and that half his Army
were not come together^ yet he resolved forthwith to march into Sussex against
the Enemy and fight them, with those small forces tired he then had, being most
of them Mercenaries and Stipendiaries, except those English Noblemen, Gentl^men
and Freemen, who enflamed with the love and liberty of their Native Country,
voluntarily engaged themselves with him in the defense thereof, against the
common, dangerous, invading Enemy, rather than to support his usurped Diadem
and Royalty over them: of which number there were very few. Malmsb. De Gestis
Reg. l. 2. p. 94. l. 3. p. 100. See Mat. Westminster. p. 435. Fabian, part 6. c. 277.
Sir Io. H^yward in Will. 1.
Immo vero pauci, et manu promptissimi fuere, qui charitati corporum
renunciantes Pro patria animas posuerunt. Nam praeter Stipendiarios et
Mercinarios milites, paucos admodum ex comprovincialibus habuit. Praecipitabant
^um nimium fata, ut nec auxilia convocari vellet; nec si vellet, multos
parituros invenerat. Ita omnes ei erant infensi, quod solus manubiis Borealibus
incubuerat: Unde cum suis quos ductabat astutia Gulielmi ^ircumventus, fusus
est levi videlicet belli negotio, sed occulto et stupendo Dei consilio, quod
nunquam poste^ Angli Communi praelio in libertatem spiraverint, quasi cum
Haraldo omne robur deciderit Angliae, quae certe Potuit et debuit (etiam per
inertissimos) solvere paenas perfidiae. Yet Ypodigma N^ustria, p. 28.
Thomas of Walsingham and some others write, that Harold had gathered together
an innumerable company of Englishm^n against Duke William; and the multitudes
of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of England slain in the Battle, besides
those who fled from it, and could not come to fight; manifest his Army not to
be so small, as these Authors would make it, See Malms^ de Gestis R^g. Angl. l.
2. p. 94^
only to augment the Englishmens valor, and eclipse the Normans, as
overcomming them more by stratagem and multitude than true fortitude. Whiles
Harold was in his march toward William within 9 miles of his Fort in Sussex,
he sent out Scouts before him, to discover the forces and numbers of the Enemy,
who being intercepted and brought to William, he caused them to be led about
his tents, that they might well view his Army, and then being bounti^ully
feasted, he commanded them to be sent back to their Master without any harm.
Who returning to Harold, commending the Dukes magnificence, martial prowess and
clemency, seriously affirmed, that all his Soldiers seemed to be Priests,
because their faces and both their lips were shaven; which kind of shaving none
of the English then used, but their Priests only. Upon which Harold smiling at
the Scouts simplicity; replied, They were not effeminate Priests, but Soldiers
of great and valourous minds, invincible in arms. Whereupon Mat. West. p. 436.
Malms^^u^y de Gestis Reg. l. 3. p. 100. Mat. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 3. Holinsh^d,
Speed, Sir John Hayward and others.
Girth, Harolds younger Brother, a man of great knowledge and valor beyond his
years, taking the Speech out of his mouth, said; Seeing you commend the valor
of the Normans to be so great, I hold it unadvised rashness for you to fight
with them, to whom you may be reputed inferior, both in merit and valor.
Neither are you able to gainsay, b^t that you took an Oath to William (to
reserve the Crown to his use) voluntarily or unvoluntarily. Wherefore you shall
do more advisedly to withdraw your self out of the field in this instant
nec^ssity, ne si perjurus decertans, vel fugam vel mortem incurras, lest
fighting perjured, you incur either flight or death, and the whole Army
perish for your sin of Perjury, seeing there is no fighting against God.
Therefore expect the issue of the battle without danger: For we are altogether
free from any Oath, justum suscipimus bellum pro Patria pugnaturi, and have
undertaken a just war, to fight for our Country. Nota.
If we fight alone without thee, thy cause shall prosper better, and thou shall
be more safe, what^ver befalls us; For if we fly, thou may be able to succor
and restore us; and if we be slain, thou may revenge us. But such was Harolds
unbridled rashness, that he would not give a pleasing ear to this admonition,
esteeming it inglorious, and a great dishonor to his former life and valor,
to turn his back to any Enemy or danger.

Whiles these discourses passed between them: in comes a Monk sent by Duke
William, claiming the kingdom as his, Because King Edward had granted it to him
by advice of Archbishop Stigand, and of the Earls Godwin and Siward, and had
sent the Son and Nephew of Godwin hostages thereof into Normandy. But to avoid
effusion of Christian blood, the Monk brought him these three profers. Either
to depart with the Realm to William, a^cording to his Oath and agreement. Or,
t^ hold the Kingdom from, and reign under him. Or finally to determine the
controversy between them two by a single Du^l, in the vi^w of both their
Armies. But Harold out of a strange imprudence, impudence and pride of heart,
as one whom the heavens would depresse, accepting neither domestic counsel,
nor the N^rmans of^er, would neither vouchsafe to look upon the Messenger with
a good countenance, nor discourse with him in mild terms, but sending him away
with indignation, prayed only thus, That God would judge between him and his
Master William. To whom the Monk boldly replying; required, that if he would
deny the right of William, he should either referr it to the Judgment of the
Se^ Apostolic, or else to battle, if he had rather; by which he asserted, that
William was ready to tri^ his Title. But Harold answering nothing to those his
Proposals, but what he had done before, went within little of laying violent
hands upon the Ambassador, commanding William with violent terms and menaces to
depart his kingdom. By which he whetted the minds of the Normans to fight, and
gave them hopes of Victory by his Injustice. After which both Armies provided
to give battle the next morning, being Harolds birthday, 4. October 1066. his
Soldiers (as men whose Heads were sure to be crowned with lawress of Victory)
spent the whole night in licentious revels, riot, drunkenness, clamours,
shouts; but the Normans more Christianly and seriously demeaning themselves,
spent it in confessions of their sins, prayers, and Vows to God for victorious
success. No sooner did the morning appear, but the Norman Army was prepared
for battle. Then Hen. Huntindon Hist. l. 3. p. 368. Chron. Johan: Brom^on col.
959, 966^
Duke William making an elegant oration to them, minded them, of the
extraordinary valor, the manifold victories and conquests of their ancestors
and themselves, which he exhorted them now t^ second, concluding his Speech
with this exhortation, To avenge the injury of Harold, and the treachery of him
and the English in murdering Prince Alfred, and the Noble Normans who
accompanied him. Nonne pudet Regem Haroldam, contra me in praesentia vestri
perjuram faciem suam vobis ostendere ausum fuisse? Mihi tamen stupor est, Quod
eos qui parents vestros, cum Alfrido cognato meo proditione nefanda
excapitaverunt, oculis vestris vidistis; et eorum capita adhuc humeris eorum
super^int. Erigite vexilla viri, nec sit irae promeritae modus vel modestia. Ab
orient ad occidente videatur fulmen gloriae vestrae, audiatur tonitrum impetus
vestri, Uindicesque generosissimi sanguinis. At which words all the Normans
were so incensed against the English, that they left their Duke alone speaking
to himself, before he had ended his Speech; and presently charged the English
with unspeakable violence, before the third part of their army could be set in
battle array (as Wigorniensis, Sim. Dunelmensis, Radulphus de Diceto, Hoveden,
Bromtom, and others write.) One Taillefer, running before the rest, slew three
English Ensigns one after another, and then was slain himself, before the rest
of the Soldiers encountered. The English, by reason of the narrowness of the
place, were unable to bring up above one third part of their men to fight in an
orderly manner; For which cause, and out of hatred to Harold, many of them
deserted both the field and him, and very few continued with him with a
constant heart. Yet the battle was so manfully fought by Harold, and the
English remaining with him, with various success (sometimes one side
prevailing, sometimes the other) that in continued from the third hour of the
day, even till dark night. The English stood so thick and close together, and
fought so valiantly, that the Norman assailants could no ways break their
array, and were upon the point to recoyl: Which William perceiving, politickly
sounded a Retreat; the Normans retiring in good order, the English supposing
them to fly, and themselves to be Masters of the field, thereupon began
disorderly to pursue them, breaking their ranks and files; but on a sudden the
Normans having their wished opportunity charged them afresh, being scattered
and disordered, so as they were not able to recover their battle, and so were
beaten down and slain on every side; none of them by flight seeking to escape
the field, but to maintain their honor in arms, choosing rather manfully to dye
fighting in the cause and defense of their Country, than to fo^sak^ their Kings
Standard. Who performing the Office both of an expert Commander and valiant
Soldier all the day, after many wounds received, and fighting very manfully
was at last slain with an arrow, shot through his brain in at his left eye, and
falling dead from his horse to the ground, was slain under his own Standard,
(when he had reigned only 9. Months and S. days;) and his two Brothers, Girth
and Leofwin, with most of the English Nobility and Gentry there present were
slain together with him. Upon Harolds death, most of the common mercenary
Soldiers fled, being without that head for whom they fought, and were pursued
and slain by the Normans till night, Mat. W^st. p. 438, 439. Malmsbury, de
Gestis Regum, l. 3. p. 101.
Sed generosi malentes mori quam probrose fugere, videntes exhaeredationem suam
imminere et jugum intolerabile, donec nox certamen divideret, in certamine
immota pectora praebentes presti^erunt, pulchram mortem pro patria ultione
meruere. Speed, Heylyns Microcosm.
Some of our Historians write, that there were slain of the English in this
battle no less than sixty thousand nine hundred twenty four men; which could
not be, if Harolds Army were so small, as some report it; the Normans losing
not above six thousand in the fight. Hist. Novorum, l. 1. p. p. 5, 6.
Eadmerus, Roger de Hoveden, Simeon Dunelmensis, Radulphus de Dic^to, Bromton,
and others, ascribe this Victory only to a divine Miracle, and Gods Justice
upon Harold for his detestable perjury, from the Testimony of the French who
were present in it. De ho^ praelio testantur adhuc Franci qui interfuerunt,
quoniam licet varius casus hinc inde extiterit, tamen tanta strages et fuga
Normannorum fuit, ut victoria, qua potiti sunt, vero et absque dubio soli
miraculo Dei ascribenda sit, qui puniendo, per hanc iniquum perjurii scelus
Haroldi, ostendit, se non dominum esse volentem iniquitatem. Which De Genealog.
Reg. Angl. col. 367, 368. and De Vita and Mir^c^lis Edwardi Confessoris, col.
977.
Abbot Ailred thus seconds. Gulielmus Dei judicio (to which Harold appealed)
ipsum Haroldum Regno simul et vita privavit, for invading the Crown against
right and his Oath, belonging to William, jure consanguinitatis and antiquae
inter ipsum et Edwardum conventionis. The most of our Historians do the like.
Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 28.
Thomas of Walsingham, imputes the great slaughter of the English in this
battle by the Normans, as a just Judgment of God upon them for their
treacherous murder of Prince Alfred and the Normans that came with him.
Referuntur illo conflictu pugnae multa millia Anglorum corruisse, Christo illis
vicem reddente ob Aluredi fratris Edwardi R^gis necem, ab eis injuste
perpetratus: With whom Mr. Acts and Monnments, vol. 1. p. 215. here p. 254.
John Fox concurrs in his forecited passage; and Duke Williams Speech to his
Soldiers before the battle implies as much, he making it the chief ground of
his invading England.

This battle, writes De Vi^a and Miraculis Edwardi Confessor^s, col. 401.
Abbot Ailred, Anglicae Libertati finem dedit, initium Servituti: to which De
G^stis Reg. l. 3. p. 101.
Malmsbury subjoyns. Illa dies fuit fatalis Anglis, funestum excidium dulcis
patriae, pro novorum dominorum commutatione. Ingulphi Hist. p. 900. Mat.
W^stminst. Mat. Paris, p. 4. Wigo^n. p. 428. Hov^den, p. 447 448. Sim. Dun^^m
col. 193. Radulphus de Diceto Abb^^v. Chron. Col. 479. Knyghton De Event.
Angli^, l. 1. c. 15. Polychron. l. 6. c. 28. Walsingham Ypodigma, p. 28.
Fabian, Cax^on, Gra^ton, Holinshed, Speed, S^ow, Baker, Sir John Haywa^d.
Hanc autem regni subversionem, and sanguinis redundantis effusionem, cometa
ingens and sanguinea atque crinita, in exordio ill^us anni apparens, minace
fulgore prae^ignavit, unde quidam: Anno millesimo sexageno quoque seno
Anglorum metae flammas sensere Comet^.
Quod Regni mutationem magnam, populi Stragem, and multam terr^e miseriam
portendit. Ut enim Philosophi dicunt, quo dirigit crinem, illi^ diriget et
discrimen; as Abbot Ingulphus, Mat. Westminster, Matthew Paris, Huntindon,
Hoveden, Wigornienfis, Simeon Dunelmensis, Hygden, Knyghton and others observe.

In this Battle Duke William had three Horses slain under him, and often
acknowledged, that Gods divine hand did more protect him, than man's, seeing his
Enemy, amidst so many showers of darts and arrows which they shot against him,
could not draw so much as one drop of hi^ blood, though they frequently hit him
with them.

Malmsb. de Gest^s Regum, l. 3. p. 100, 101. Cambden, Speed, Daniel, Fabian,
part. 6. c. 217. Sir Io. Ha^ward in William the 1.
Morcar and Edwin Earls of Yorkshire and Cheshire, Harolds Brother-in-laws,
withdrawing themselves and their forces from their battle, (either for want of
room to fight, as was pretended, or rather for former discontents) retreated to
London: where consulting with Alfred Archbishop of York, and other Peers, and
with the Citizens and Mariners of London, they all resolved to crown and set up
Edgar Atheling the true heir, for their King: promising, to march under him
with all their forces against Duke William, and to try another field: for which
end they posted abroad Messengers to levy new forces, and raise up the hearts
of the dejected English from a despairing fear. But before Edgars Coronation,
whiles many were preparing themselves for a new battle, Morcar and Edwyn (whom
this fearful estate of their native Conntry would not dissuade or restrain from
disloyalty and ambition, to gain the Crown to themselves, (as some record)
secretly hindered that noble and prudent design, by withdrawing themselves from
Edgar, and marched home with all their forces and their Sister Algitha, or
Agatha, ( Harolds wife) into Northumberland; conjecturing out of their
simplicity, that Duke William would never come so far. Upon their departure,
though the rest of the Nobles would still have elected and crowned Edgar King,
if the Bishops would have assented thereunto; yet the Prelates, struck with the
fear of the Popes thunderbolt from abroad, and with the consideration of the
divisions, distractions of the Nobility and people, and the imminent danger at
home, would no ways concur with the Nobles, Londoners, Sea-Captains and
others, to crown Edgar, but resolved to go forth and submit themselves to the
victorious Duke, and elect and crown him for their Sovereign. Daniels Histo^y.
The Nobility discerning this wavering inconstancy of the Bishops; and
considering, that they were nobly born, and must have a King; that not to ^ake
him (who was of power to make himself King) would show more of passion than
discretion, distrusting each others faith, began to strive and runn headlong,
who should be the first to preoccupate the Grace of Servitude, and intrude them
into foreign subjection. The Commons (like a strong Vessel, that might have been
for good use) were hereby left without a stern, and could not move irregularly
without apparent shipwreck. So that all estates in general, either transported
with sordid fear, or corrupted with new hopes, forsook Edgar, themselves, and
their distressed Country, resolving all to become Williams sworn Vassals,
without any further contest. De Gestis R^g. l. 3. p. 102.
Ita Angli qui in unam coeuntes sententiam potuissent Patriae reformare ruinam,
dum nullum ^x suis volebant, indux^runt ali^num.

During this their Consultation at London, Marianus, VVigorniensis, Hoveden,
Sim. Dunelm. Speed, Holinshed, Daniel, Cambden, and others. Fabian, part. 6. c.
217. Sir John Hayward in Will. ^he 1.
Duke William after his victory marched with his army through Oxfordshire,
Buckinghamshire and Hartfordshire, toward London, so far as Berkhamsted,
without the least opposition; wasting the Country, burning the Villages, and
slaying the people (as Hoveden, Cambden, and others write) notwithstanding his
former inhibition of plunder, to force them more readily to submit unto him.
Hereupon Aldred Archbishop of York, Wulstane Bishop of Worcester, Walter Bishop
of Hereford, yea Prince Edgar himself, all the English Nobility, the chiefest
of the Londoners, and many others repaired to the victorious Duke at
B^rkhamsteed; where giving him hostages for their fidelity, they resigned
themselves up unto him as his subjects, and swore allegiance to him: with whom
he reciprocally made a Covenant of Peace; and nihilominus exercitui suo villas
cremare, and rapinas ag^re permi^it, adds Hoveden. When the feast of Christ's
Nativity approached, Duke William resolved to march to London, with all his
Army, and there to be crowned King; M^^. Paris in ^he life of A^b^t F^^d^^ick,
Speeds Histo^y, p. 4^6. Io^n Stow, S^r John ^a^wa^d. in ^ill^am the 1.
but being on his way, he found all the pass^ges blocked up with many great
trees, which Frederick Abbot of St. Albans (descended from the Saxons noble
blood) had caused to be cut down and cast in the ways, to secure his Monastery
from the destruction of the Normans; whereat the Duke both wondering and
fretting, sent for the Abbot, under assurance of his safe return; and demanding
the cause, Why his woods were thus felled, and the ways blocked up? he
returned him this stout answer: I have done (says he) both the duty of my
birth and profession; and if others of my rank had performed the like, (as they
w^ll might and ought to do) it had not been in thy power to have pierced the
land thus far. William hearing his bold answer, and knowing it was now a
fitter time to pacify, than exulcerate the English Spirits, gave way to the
present necessity, and marched to London with his Army; where he was joyfully
received, by the Prelates, Nobles, and Generality of the People, and by them
all elected and crowned King on the day of Christ's Nativity, Anno 1066. Matthew
^^stm. p. 44. Mat. Paris, p. 3, 4. Malmsb. de G^stis Reg. l. 3. p. 102.
Bromton, Knyghton, G^a^ton, Speed, D^ni^l and others.
In magna exultatione a Clero et Populo susceptus, et ab omnibus Rex
acclamatus. Ypodigma ^^ustriae, p. 28.
Thomas of Walsingham records, that Williams Vantguard marching into London
before him, found many Rebels against him in the streets of the City, with whom
they encountering forthwith, brought no small grief and lamentation to the City,
by reason of the many funerals of the Citizens and their Sons whom they slew.
^t last, the Citizens perceiving they could no longer resist them, put in
hostages, subjecting themselves with all theirs to their Conqueror and
Hereditary Lord. After which (writes he) the Duke on Christmas day was elected
King by all the Nobles, as well of the Normans as English, and anointed with
sacred oil, (...), l. 1. p. 6.

Malmsb. M^t. Pa^is, Mat. W^stm. W^go^n. Sim. Dun^lm. Radul. de Di^eto,
Hov^d^n, B^om^on, Knyghton, Hygd^n, Mat. Park^r, Godwin, and G^^vasius
Do^ob^rn. in the liv^s o^ S^igand, and Alfr^d, Ch^on. Will. Thorn^, ^ol. 1792.


and crowned with the royal Crown by the Bishops of the Realm at Westminster;
He receiving the Crown from the hands of Aldred Archbishop of York, refusing to
be crowned by Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, by reason of the many evils and
horrible crimes reported of him, and because he had unlawfully invaded that
See, during the life of Robert, for which he was suspended by the Pope: ne
maledictionem videretur induere pro benedictione, as most of our Historians
accord: though the Chr^n. Io. Bromton, ^ol. 962.
Chronicle of Bromton, and Man. Parke^, ^n^iq. ^ccl^s. Brit. p. 89, 90.
Mat. Parker assert, that Stigand peremptorily re^used to crown him, being a
man of blood, and an invader of another right. Cumque Willielmus Dux
Normanniae, Conqu^stor Angliae Tyranni nomen exhor resceret, et nomen Legitimi
Principis induere vellet, a Stigando Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo in regno petiit
consecrari. Ille vero, ut quidam dicunt, cruenti viro, et alieni Iuris
invasori, manus imponere formidans nullatenus adquievit. Unde licet ipse
Willielmus eundem Stigandum ut noverat multis modis blande honoravit, ip^um
tamen nunquam cordialiter amavit.

Chronica (...). Tho^ne, col. 1786.
Thomas Sprot, William Thorn, and out of them An^iq. Ecc^es. B^it. p. 89, 90.
Matthew Parker, Perambulation of Kent.
Mr. Lambard, Britannia, p. 325.
Mr. Cambden, Catalogue of ^ishops, p 28
Godwin, Stow, and History, p 437, 438. Sir (...) H^yw^^d in Will. the 1.
Speed record this Story, which none of our other ancient Historians mention,
That after Duke William had slain Harold, and the City of London with the
generality of England had submitted to his power, being struck with the ^ear
and terror of Harolds death, and the Englishmens great slaughter) except Kent
alone; William marched with his forces toward Dover Castle, (the lock and key
of the Realm) the better to command the Seas, and awe the Kentishmen, to
subject it, and the other parts of the County to his power. Archbishop Stigand
then lyiug close in that County, either to renew the war, or to obtain more
honorable and just conditions of subjection for his Kentishmen than any
others, effected for his Kentish people that which none in his Country did
besides. For persuading all his Kentish men to keep at home, and not stir out
of their confines, when he heard of Williams approach, advising with Eglesine
Abbot of St. Augustinet (they two being the chiefest Lords and Governors of
Kent) and the principal men of Kent; they considered, that the whole Realm was
in a very sad and ill condition; for whereas before the coming of the said
William, none of the English was a Servant, that now all indiffe^ently, as well
Noble as Ignoble, were subjected to the perpetual Servitude of the Normans. And
out of the dangers of their neighbors, assuming matter for their own and their
Counties preservation, they assembled all the Commons of Kent to Canterbury;
where they represented to them, the imminent dangers of the Country, the misery
of their neighbors, the insolency of the Normans, and the calamity of a
servile condition; all which now were too apparently seen. Proposit. 3, 5.
The English till then were freeborn, and the name of bondage never heard
among them, and they amongst the rest; but now nothing but servitude attended
them, in case they unworthily yielded (as others had done) to the insolency of
this griping Enemy. Whereupon by common advice, all the people decreed and
declared to mee^ Duke William, et cum eo pro Patr^is Legibus certare; and to
fight with him for the Laws of their Country; choosing rather to end an unhappy
life by fighting for them in the field, than to undergo the unaccustomed yoke
of bondage, or to be reduced from their accustomed liberty to an unknown and
unsure Slavery. The Archbishop and Abbot choosing rather to die in battle, than
to behold the miseries of their Nation, after the example of the holy
Maccabees, became the Captains of the Kentish Army, resolving to die in defense
of their Country and Laws, whereupon they all resolved to meet together at
Swanscomb, (two miles from Gravesend) at a set time. Where assembling
accordingly, they secretly kept together in the woods, watching the Dukes
approach, all jointly agreeing to block up his passage on all sides, and to
surround the Duke and his Army on a sudden, that they might not escape them,
every one of the Horse and Footmen carrying a green bough in his hand, that
they might not be discovered, and wherewith, if need were, they might impeach
and hedge up the Normans passage. The Duke marching the next day through the
fields near Swanscomb, the whole multitude of the Kentishmen, like a moveable
wood, surrounded him, approaching nearer and nearer to him with a lo^t pace.
Which stratagem so daunted the Duke, even with the very sight of their
approach, (who being, as he though^, free from all Enemies, was now suddenly
beset on all sides with these moving woods) that he knew not but all the other
vast woods he saw, might be of the like nature; neither had he time to avoid
the danger. The Kentishmen having thus enclosed him round about, casting down
their boughs, bended their bows, drew out their swords, shaked their pikes,
held forth their other arms, displayed their banners, and sounded their
trumpets in token of battle. The Duke and his Army being herewith astonished,
(though so puffed up with their former late victory, that they had even now, to
their seeming, the whole Realm of England in their hand) were so
extraordinarily terrified herewith, that they stood in danger not only of the
loss of the Victory and Army, but he even of his own life. Whereupon he
desired a parley with the Kentish before the battle was joined. Upon this
Stigand and Egelsine, their Generals, were sent Ambassadors to the Duke, on the
behalf of the rest, who spoke thus to him in their Kentishmens names.

Most Noble Duke, behold the people of Kent, are come forth to meet thee as thy
friends, and are ready to receive and obey thee as their Liege Lord, if ^hou
shall grant their most just requ^st^, demanding only such things as make for
peace, and such as only tend to retain the Liberty received from their
Ancestors, and preserve the Laws and Customs of their Country. Neither will
they be reduced under Bondage never yet felt by them, nor tolerate any new
Laws; For they can bear Royal Authority, but not Lordly Tyranny. Wherefore
receive the Kentishmen, not as thy Servants, but as thy loyal, loving and
affectionate Subjects. Yet upon this condition, That all the People of Kent may
for ever enjoy their ancient Liberty, without diminution, and use the Laws and
Liberties of their Country, But if thou endeavourest to take away their
Liberty, and the Immunity of their Laws, thou shall likewise take away their
Lives together with them: they being all ready at present to give thee and
thine battle, and to try the uncertain chance of War; Being fully resolved
rather to die in the field, than in any sort to depart with their Countries
Laws and Customs, or to live under strange Laws or servile Bondage; the name
and nature whereof is and ever shall be strange unto us. For although the rest
of the English can submit themselves to Slavery, yet Liberty is the proper
badge of Kentish men.

The Duke aston^shed with this Orat^on and his new troubles, with a perplexed
troubled mind, advised hereupon with his Counselors; and wisely considering,
that the event of the battle would be very doubtful, that if he should depart
without accomplishing his design, or if he should suffer any repulse or
inconvenience from this warlike people, that it would not only redound to his
great infamy, but that it would endanger the loss of his new-acquired kingdom;
undo what ever he had hitherto effected, and turn all his hopes and security
into danger, if he should not join Kent, the key of the whole Realm to the
rest of the Kingdom, and retain it more by friendship and compact, (thus
offered to him) than by force. And considering likewise that their demands were
not unreasonable; he thereupon, not so willingly as wisely, rather out of
necessity, than voluntarily, granted to the Kentish men, that they should live
freely according to their ancient Laws and Customs. Whereupon there being a
League made between William and the Kentishmen, and Hostages given on both
sides for performance of it, they thereupon laid down their arms, and the
joyful Ken^ish men conducted the joyous Normans to Rochester, where they
resigned up to Duke William both the County of Kent, and noble Castle of Dover.
And thus the ancient Liberty, Laws, Usage, and Custom of the English (called
Gavelkind in the municipal English Laws) which was frequently and equally used
throughout the whole Realm of England, before the coming of Duke William,
afterward taken from others, continued more inviolable even till these our
days in Kent alone, by the industry, courage, intercession and earnest
vehemence of Stigand and Egelsine. Which thing is sufficiently proved out of
ancient Writings concerning the customs of Kent, wherein it is thus recorded,
Dicit Comitatus, quod in Comitatu isto de jure deb^t de ejusmodi gravamine esse
liber; quia dicit, quod ^om^tat^s iste, ut residuum Angliae nunquam fuit
Conquestus, sed per pacem factam se reddidit Conquestioris dominationi Salvis
sibi omnibus Libertatibus suis, et liberis consu^tudibus primo habitis et
usitatis. And from this valor and prowess of the Kentishmen in standing thus
manfully for the Laws, Cnstoms and Liberties of their Country both against Duke
William, and the Danes before him, when as the other English basely submitted
their necks to their Vassalage, they Camb^^ns B^itanni^, p. 324. Io^^ S^lisbury
in his Polycr^^i^o^.
first obtained, and for many years after claimed, enjoyed this special
privilege, That in all Armies and Ba^taliaes of the English, they had the
honor of the Van, and foreward, and were worthily placed in the front, in all
conflicts with the Enemy; they above all other Englishmen, retaining still the
badges of their antieut worthiness and Liberty.

Duke William having thus rather reconciled, than subdued Kent to himself (of
which he was most careful, because therein were the most commodious Ports for
any so pass into or out of the Realm) hasted to London to his Coronation;
(which Matthew Parker, Godwin, and others, make subsequent to his Agreement
with the Kentish men, though Speed erroneously makes it precedent) where he
conceived so profound a displeasure against Archbishop Stigand, for his
forecited Speech and Stratagem to preserve the Liberties, Laws and Customs of
his Kentishmen, that he would not suffer him to Crown him, according to the
duty of his place, though he alleged other reasons for it, and never ceased his
rancor toward him, till he had revenged it; Mat. Paris, Mat. Westminster.
VVigorniensis, Huntindon, Hoveden, Malmsb. De Gestis Reg. and de Vitis
Pontisicum in Stigando, Sim. Dunelmensis, Bromton, Hygden, Chronicon Will,
Tho^ne, col. 1787. Hen. de Knygh^on, de Even^bus Angliae, l. 2. c. 8. Matthew
Parker, and Godwin in his life. Sir John Hayward in Will. 1.
first by carrying him over with him into Normandy soon after in the nature of
a prisoner at large, under a pretext of honor: Next, by depriving him of his
Archbishopric, upon his return from thence; And finally, by shutting him up
presently after a Prisoner in Winchester Castle, where he had scarce enough
allowed him to keep life and soul together, and soon after there died of grief
or famine.

When Duke William was crowned at Westminster by Archbishop Aldred, before he
set the Crown upon his head, he caused him before the altar of St. Peter in
Westminster, to promise upon Oath in the presence of the Clergy, Nobles and
people, Se velle Sanctas Dei Ecclesias, ac Rectores earum defendere; necnon and
cunctum populum sibi subjectum Just and regali Providentiae regere; Rectam
Legem statuere et tenere: Rapinas injustaque judicia penitus interdicere: as
Florentius Wigorniensis, Simeon Dunelmensis, Roger de Hoveden, and Radulphus de
Diceto, record his Oath: Which the Chronicle of Bromton, Proposit. 1, 2, 4, ^,
col. 962. thus expresses. Ipsum Regem Willielmum ad Iura Ecclesiae Anglicanae
iuendae et confirmanda, populumque suum recte regendum et leges rectas
statuendum Sacramento solemniter astrixit. Which John Speed thus renders in
English, At his Coronation he took a corporal Oath, before the High Altar,
according to the accustomed form. To defend the holy Church of God and the
Rectors of the same. To govern the universal people subject to him justly; to
establish equal Laws, and to see them duly executed as became a good King.
After which Oath taken, the Bishops and Barons of the Realm there publicly
made him homage, and took an Oath to him, to be his true and loyal Subjects.
Thus (writes Flores Hist. p. 440.
Matthew Westminster,) the Kingdom of the English was translated to the
Dominion of the Normans by the most orderly disposition of God, who disposes
and dissipateth Kingdoms, and disappointing the Councils of Princes, gives them
to whom he will, and so long as he pleases, neither is there any that can say,
why d^st thou thus?

What the chief Sins of the Englishmen then were, which brought them under the
Norman yoke, I have mentioned in part; take this addition to them, out of the
Chronicle of Bromton, col. 961, 962. Cur autem tanto furore Dei Iustil^a in
Anglos exarsit, causa, ut creditur haec est. In primitiva Angliae Ecclesia
Religio clarissime splenduit, etc. Processu vero temporis adeo omnis virtus in
eis emarcuit, ut gentem nullam in proditione et nequitia sibi parem esse
permitterent. Immisit ergo Dominus omnipotens, velu^ examina apum, Gentes
crudelissimas, quae ab initio Ethelwolfi Regis, usque adventum Normannorum per
CCXXX. annos Terram jugiter, protriverunt, et potissimum Normanni, quando omnes
fere Angli (ut inferius aliqualiter parebit) in servitutem sunt redacti, et
approbrium erat Anglicus appellari: To whom I shall subjoyn this passage of De
Gestis Regum, l. 3. p. 101, 102.
William of Malmsbury more fully setting out the Sins and Vices of the
generality of the English in that age, which brought Gods judgments on them,
and enslaved them to the Normans by one single battle. Illa fuit dies fatalis
Anglis funestum, excidium dulcis patriae, pro novorum dominorum commutatione.
Iam enim pridem moribus Ang^orum insueverat, qui varii admodum pro temporibus
fuere. Nam primis adven^us sui annis vultu and gestu barbarico, usu bellico,
ritu fanatico vivebant: Sed postmodum Christi fide suscepta, paulatim and per
incrementa temporis, pro ocio quod actitabant exercitium armorum in secundis
ponentes, omnem in religione operam insumpsere. Taceo de pauperibus quos
fortunae tenuitas plerumque continet, ne cancellos justi^iae transgrediantur:
pr^termitto graduum Ecclesiasticorum viros, quos nonnunquam professionis
contuitus, sed and infamiae metus a vero deviare non sinit. De Regibus dic^,
qui pro amplitudine suae potestatis licenter indulgere voluntatibus possent:
quorum quidam in patria, quidam Roma, mutato habitu coeleste luc rati sunt
regnum, beatum nacti commercium. Multispecie texus tota vita mundum amplexi, ut
thesauros egenis effunderent, Monasteriis dividerent. Quid dicam de tot
Episcopis, Hermitis, Abbatibus: nonne tota Insula indigenarum tantis reliquiis
fulgurat, ut vix aliquem vicum insignem praetereas, ubi novi Sancti nomen non
audias? quam multorum etiam periit memeria, proscriptorum inopia. Veruntamen
literarum et religionis studia aetate procedente absoleverunt, non paucis ante
adventum Normannorum annis. Clerici literatura tumultuaria contenti, vix
Sacramentorum verba balbuti^bant: stupori et miraculo er^t caeteris, qui
grammaticam noscet. Monachi subtilibus indumentis et indifferenti genere
ciborum regulam ludificabant. Optima^es gulae and venerii dediti Ecclesiam more
christiano ^an^ non adibant, sed in cubiculo, et inter uxorios amplex^s,
matutinorum solemnia et Missarum a festinante presbytero auribus tantum
libabant. Vulgus in medio expositum, praeda erat potentioribus, ut vel ^orum
substantiis exhaustis, vel etiam corporibus i^ longinqua^ terras distractis
acervos thesaurorum congererent, quamvis magis ingenitum sit illi genti
commessationibus, quam operibus inhiare. Illud erat a natura abhorrens, quod
multi ancillas suas ex se gravidas, ubi libidini satisfecissent, aut ad
publicum prostibulum, aut ad ^t^rnum obsequium vendicabant. Potabatur in
commune ab omnibus, in hoc studio noctes perinde ut dies perpetuantibus, parvis
and abjectis domibus totos sumptus absumebant: Francis and Normannis absimiles,
qui amplis and superbis aedificiis modicas expensas agunt. Sequebantur vitia
ebrietatis so^ia, quae virorum animos effaeminant. Hi^c factum est, ut magis
temeritate et furore praecipiti, quam scientia militari Willielmo congressi,
uno praelio, and ipso perfacili, s^rvituti se patriamque pessundederint. Ad
summam, tunc erant Angli vestibus ad medium genu expediti, crines tonsi, barbas
rasi, armillis aureis brachia on^rati, picturatis stigmatibus, cutem insigniti:
in cibis urgentes crapulum, in potibus irritantes vomic^. Et haec quide^
extrema victoribus suis participarunt, de caeter is in ^orum mores transeuntes.
Sed haec mala de omnibus generaliter Anglis dicta intelligi nolim. Scio
clericos multos tunc temporis simplici via semitam sanctitatis trivisse; Scio
multos Laicos omnis generis and conditionis in hae eadem gente Deo placuisse:
facessat ab hac relatione invidia, non cunctos pariter h^c involvat calumnia.
Verum sicut in tranquillitate malos cum bo^is fovet plaerumque Dei sereni^as,
ita in captivitate bon^s cum malis no^nunquam ejusdem constringit sev^ritas.

I have insisted more largely upon the Historical part of Harolds usurpation,
perjury, short and troublesome reign, tragical death, Duke W^lliams claims to,
and manner of acquiring the Crown of England, for this reason especially; To
refute the common received Error of some ignorant Historians, of many
illiterate Statists and Swordmen of this age, and of fundry temporizing
Ignoramusses of my own robe; who publicly averr in their Pamphlets, Speeches,
Charges, and Discourses; that Duke William claimed and obtained the Crown of
England only as a Conqueror; and thereupon altered the ancient Laws, Customs of
the Realm, and gave New Laws unto it by his own absolute power, as a Conqueror
thereof. Upon which false Ground they infer; That those in late and present
Power, coming in by the same Title of Conquest, may lawfully give new Laws to,
and impose what Taxes, Government they please upon the English (as well as
Scottish and Irish) as a mere conquered Nation, by their own inherent authority;
seeing by the Sea Grotius, De Iure Bell, l. 3. c. 4, 5, 6, 7, 15.
Laws of War, regularly all Rights and Laws of the place and Nation conquered
be wholly subject to the Conquerors will. And hereby they justify all their
late Impositions, Taxes, Excises, Sequestration, Seisures, Sales of all the
public revenues of the Nation, and many thousand private men's Estates, by
their Westminster, and White Hall Ordinances, Edicts, with the changes of our
Government, new-modellings of our Parliaments; and all other irregular
proceedings, destructive to our Fundamental Rights, Laws, Liberties,
Government, (which they formerly covenanted inviolably to maintain) without
grant or consent, by any free, full, lawful English Parliaments. Now to
demolish all these their superstructures, by subverting their ^alse Foundation
of D. Williams pretended Title to the Crown of England only by Conquest; It is
most apparent by the premised Historical Authorities.

1. That King William always claimed the Crown of England, both before at, and
after his Coronation, as of right belonging to him, by the promise, gift,
contract, gift and bequest of Edward the Confessor, and as his heir and next
kinsman by the Mothers side. 2. That he alleged, this gift and grant of the
Crown to him, to be made with the consent of the Archbishops of Canterbury,
Earls Godwin, Syward, and other Nobles of the Realm; ratified by special
Messengers sent unto, and Hostages delivered him for its performance, and by
Har^lds own solemn agreement and Oath, sent to him by King Edward for that
purpose, as himself at least suggested to him: which designation and grant of
King Edward to William, was no fiction; but a truth confessed by all our
Historians, and Harold himself, who by his answers never denied, but only
endeavored to evade it, and voluntarily acknowledged by all the Nobles of
England, both at his Coronation, and in Parliament it self in the 4. year of
his reign. 3. That after King Edwards decease, diverse of the Nobles would have
elected William King, in pursuance hereof, but that Harold perjuriously usurped
the Crown by mere force and power, without the least right unto it, or any
election by the Lords or people; setting the Crown on his own head the very day
King Edward was interred, and thereby prevented Williams election to it. 4.
That hereupon diverse of the Nobles, Prelates, and other English, sent private
Messengers to William into Normandy to come and demand his right to the Crown,
as due unto him; promising hostages and their assistance to recover it. 5. That
thereupon he sent Ambassadors twice or thrice to Harold, one after another,
before his landing, insisting on his mere right and Title to the Crown, to gain
it by parley without effusion of blood. 6. That upon Harolds obstinacy, he
appealed to the Pope, and to all his Nobles assembled in a Parliamentary
Council, for the justice of his Title and Right to the Crown, who declared his
Title Lawful and Just; and thereupon encouraged, assisted him all they could
to regain it by force of arms from the Usurper Harold, who would not otherwise
depart from it. 7. That immediately after his landing he made claim unto it
only by the foresaid Right, Title, and thereupon prohibited his Soldiers to
plunder the Country or hurt any of the Inhabitants, as being his by right. 8.
That very few of the English Nobility or Nation, would march or engage with
Harold, against William, and sundry withdrew themselves from the battle, as
conscious of Harolds usurpation, perjury, and Williams just cause against him,
(however other causes were then pretended) and amongst the rest, his own
Brother-in-laws, the greatest Peers of the Realm, Earl Morcar and Edwin,
deserted him in the fight. 9. That after the first battle won and Harold slain,
all the Prelates and Clergy generally (except Abbot Frederick) appeared for
him, and would not consent to set up Edgar, though right heir. 10. That after
good deliberation, all the Nobles, Prelates, Lo^doners, and others who first
appeared for Edgar, with the greatest p^rt of the Clergy, people of the English
Nation, without the least fight or resistance, or before any siege or summons
from him, together with Prince Edgar himself, voluntarily went out, and
submitted themselves, swear faith and allegiance to him as their Sovereign, at
Berkhamsted, and after that joyfully received him with highest acclamations as
their lawful King, at his entry into London. 11. That all the Prelates, Clergy
and Nobility soon after, without any coercion, upon his foresaid right and
Title, freely elected, and solemnly crowned him as their lawful King, in a due
and accustomed manner and then did Homage, and swore new Allegiance afresh unto
him, as their rightful Sovereign. 12. That he took the Ordinary Coronation Oath
of all lawful Kings; to ma^^^tan and defend the rights, persons of all his
people, to govern them justly, etc. as became a good King; which a King
claiming by mere conquest, would never do.
All these particulars are undeniable Evidences, that Duke William never made
the least pretense, claim, or title to the Crown and Realm of England, only as
an absolute Conqueror of the Nation, but merely by Title, as their true and
lawful King, by designation, adoption, and cognation, seconded with the
Nobles, Prelates, Clergy, and peoples unanimous election: And although it be
true, that this Duke ejected Harold and got actual possession of the Throne and
Kingdom from him by the sword, as did Aurelius Ambrosius and others before, and
King Henry the 4. Edward the 4. Henry the 7. with others since his reign; yet
that neither did, nor could make him, a King by conquest only, no more than
these other Princes, seeing the end of this war was not against the whole
English Nation, the greatest part whereof secretly abbetted his interest; but
only against the unjust Usurper and Intruder King Harold, and his adher^nts;
not to create a Title to the Realm, by his and their Conquest, but to remove a
U^surper, who invaded it without and against all right, and to gain the actual
possession thereof by arms^ from which he was unjustly withheld by force,
against those pretended lawful Titles which he made. So that he got not the
Right, Title, but only the actual possession of the Crown by his Sword, not as
a universal Conqueror of the Realm without right or Title, but as if he had
been immediate heir, and lawful Successor to the Confessor, who designed him
to succeed him. For ^uller confirmation whereof, I shall here subjoin these
ensuing proofs.

1. King William himself at his very Coronation in B^ittannia in English, p.
145.
London (as Mr Cambden informs us) said; That the kingdom was by Gods
providence appointed, and by virtue of a gift from his Lord and Cosen King
Edward the glorious, granted unto him; and that this most bounteous King Edward
had by adoption ordained him his h^ir in the kingdom of England.

2ly, In his In Insp^^. par. 7.1 E. 4. membr. 26. Mr. Seldens R^vi^w o^ his
Histo^y of Ti^hes, p. 483.
Charter to the Church of Westminst^r, he resolves as much in direct terms,
where he recites, In ore gladii Regnum adeptus sum Anglorum, devict^ Haroldo
rege Cum suis complicibus, qui mihi Regnum cum providentia Dei destinatum, and
b^neficio concessionis Domini and Cognati mei, gloriosi Edwardi CONCESSUM,
conati sunt auferre, etc. So that his Title was from Edward, though his
possession by the sword.

3ly. In the very Sp^lmanni Council. p. 619.
Title of his Laws, (published in the 4th year of his reign, (which he was so
far from altering, that he both by Oath and Act of Parliament, ratified,
^oveden, p. 601.
confirmed all the Laws and Customs of the Realm used in the Confessors time
and before, presented by a Grand Enquest unto him out of every County of
England upon Oath, without any alteration, praevarication, or diminution) he
styles himself, (or is styled by the Collector of these Laws) HEIR AND COSEN TO
Edward the Confessor, even in the ancient Manuscript which Sir Henry Spelman
has published Incipiunt Leges S. Edwardi Regis, quas in Anglia tenuit; and
quas WILLIELMUS HAERES and cognatus suus POSTEA CONFIRMAVIT. To which I shall
likewise subjoyn the words of the Charter of his Son 1. Seld^ni ad Eadmerum
N^t^, p. 211.
King Henry the 1. Anno 1108. translating the Abbey of Ely into a Bishopric,
wherein he gives his Father William the self-same Title. Ego Henricus
providente divina clementia Rex Anglorum and Normannorum Dux, Willielmi magni
Regis filius^ QUI EDWARDO REGI HAEREDITARIO JURE SUCCESCIT I^ REGNUM:
renouncing all Title by conquest, and claiming only as Heir to King Edward by
Hereditary right.

4ly. Earl William himself in none of his Charters, Writs, Speeches, Writings,
ever styled himself a Conqueror of England, nor laid claim to the Crown and
Realm of England by Conquest, after his inauguration; which Title of Conqueror
was afterward (out of the flattery or ignorance of the times) given unto him
by others. Therefore the words which the Cambdens Britannia, p. 145. Speeds
History, p. 448, 449.
History of St. Stephens in Caen in Normandy, reports he used at his last
breath: The Regal Diadem which none of my Predecessors ever wore, I got and
gained by the Grace of God only. I ordain no man heir of the Kingdom of
England, (which all our Historians unanimously contradict, affirming, that he
ordained William Rufus his second son particularly to succeed him in it, at
his death, upon which Title only he enjoyed it) but I commend the same to the
eternal Creator, whose I am, in whose hands are all things. For I became not
possessor of so great honor by any hereditary right, but by an humble
conflict, and with much effusion of blood I took it from the perjured King
Harold, and after I had either slain or put to flight his favorites and
Servants, I subdued the kingdom to my self, must either be reputed false and
fabulous, as most esteem them; or else have this construction, that he gained
the actual possession of it against Harold, and his adherents only by the
Sword, and that he had not an hereditary right thereto, as next heir by descent
to the Crown, but only by ado^tion from, and as heir by donation to King
Edward; as next of kin by the Mothers side; which he made his only Title.

5ly. Those ancient English Historians, who first gave him the name of
Conqueror, did it not in a strict proper sense, as if he were a mere universal
Conqueror of the Nation, disposing of all men's Estates, persons, and the Laws
of the Realm at his pleasure, for that he never did: but only as one who gained
the actual possession thereof from a perjured Usurper and his forces by
strength of arms, conquering them by open battle in the field; but still
claiming it by gift, con^ract, and designation from King Edward, as his
Kinsman; as an heir who forcibly outs a dis^eisor and intruder, comes in by
Ti^le and Inheritance only, though he gains the possession by force. This is
evident by the forecited words of Here p. 34.
Matthew Paris, and this passage of Henry de Knyghton (not extant in Hygden, De
Event. Angl, l. 2. c. 2. col. 2343.
out of whom he seems to transcribe it.) Et sic quia Normannus Iure
haereditatis tenuit Normanniae Ducatum, ideo Dux, Regnum vero Angliae mero
Conquestu^ (in respect of actual possession) et clameo subscripto, (in respect
of Title, and by claim by gift from King Edward) Ideo Rex: which claim and
Title being backed by the unanimous election of the Prelates, Clergy, Nobility^
People, and right heir to the Crown himself, (who all submitted and swear
homage, fealty, and allegiance to him as their lawful King^ infallibly
demonstrate him to be no Conqueror in respect of Title, in a strict, legal
military sense, even in the judgment of those ancient and modern Historians,
who give him that Title, but only in regard of Harold and his party, and the
actual possession which he got by conquest. And in this sense alone is that
Distick in the Col. 962.
Chronicle of Bromton to be understood. Dux Normannorum Willielmus vi validorum
Rex est Anglorum, Bello Conquestor eorum.


6ly. Our Great Antiquary Richard Vestegan in his Restitutions of d^cayed
A^tiquities, learned Mr. John Seldom in his Review of the Hist. of Tithes p.
482, 483. Sir John Hayward in the li^e of King VVilli^m the first Mr. Nathaniel
Bacon, in his first part of his Historical Discours^, of the uniformity of the
Government of England, chap. 44, 45, 46, 55, 56. (to omit others) most fully
prove and assert; That the entry of William the first into the royal Government
of England, neither was nor properly could be by Conquest, but by Title, and by
the free election of the Nobles, Clergy, and People. That although the several
Titles he Pretended were perhaps, if curiously examined, not sufficient to give
him a true, legal Title and Right to the Crown of England, a part ante,
because not agreed unto and confirmed by the general consent of the Nobles,
Kingdom, and Nation in a Parliamentary Great Council; but only by the King, and
some particular Prelates and Nobles out of Parliament (as Harold in his answers
alleged) yet being ratified, ex part post, both by the subs^quent consent,
agreement, submission, election, Oath, homage, and fealty of all the people,
Nobles, Clergy, by their legal free crowning of him a^ first, by Edgar Atheling
his own submission, fealty, and resignation of his royal right and Title
thereby un^o him, and ratified by succeeding Parliamentary Councils, it became
an in^uhitable Right and Title, both in Law and Justice, to him and his
Posterity, against all others, who could lay no legaller Title thereunto: he
continuing, confirming all the ancient fundamental Laws, Liberties, Customs,
and Government of the English Nation, without any alteration, both by Oaths and
Edicts. I shall therefore conclude this point with the words of In itinere
Temps. E. 3. s. 143. Mr. Seldens Revi^w p. 483.
Shard (a learned Lawyer in King Edward the third his reign;) who when the
Kings Counsel in a Quo Warranto against the Abbot of Peterborough, would have
made a Charter of king Edgar void, because they alleged^ all Franchises were
devolved to the Crown by the Conquest; replied there^o, The Conqueror came not
at all to ^ut any who had lawful possession out of their rights; but to
dispossess those who by their wrong had seized upon any land in dis-inherison
of the King and his Crown, And with the words of our judicious Hi^^orian Sa.
Daniel In the life o^ Willam the first, p. 36, 37.
concerning this king William. Neither did he ^ver claim any power by
conquest, but as a regular Prince submitted himself to the orders of the
Kingdom: desiring to have his Testamentary Title, (howsoever weak) to make good
his succession rather than his sword. And though the style of Conqueror, by the
flattery of the time was after given him, he showed by all the course of his
Government he assumed it not: introducing none of those Alterations (which
followed) by violence, but by a mild gathering upon the disposition of the
State, and the occasions offered; and that by way of reformation.

And although Reliqui^ Wo^^on^anae, p. 149, 150, 152, 153.
Sir Hen. Wotton gives this verdict of them. We do commonly and justly style
him the Conqueror: For he made a general conquest of the ^^ole Kingdom and
People, either by Composition or Arms, etc. Yet he adds, He was Crowned on
Christmas day, 1066. at which time he would fain have compounded a Civil Title
of, I know not what Alliance or Adoption, or rather Donation from Edward the
Confessor. As if hereditarie kingdoms did pass like Newyears gifts. The truth
is, he was the heir of his Sword. Yet from these pretenses howsoever, there
sprang this good, That he was thereby in a sorting aged to cast his Government
into a middle or mixed nature, as it were, between a lawful successor, and an
Invader: though generally (as all new Empires do savor much of their
beginning) it had more of the Violent than of the Legal.

If any domineering Soldiers, or others, upon this false surmise, of Duke
Williams right to the Crown and Realm of England by mere conquest^ shall
henceforth presume to claim and exercise a mere arbitrary, absolute, tyrannical
and despotical power over our English Nation, Laws, Liberties, Parliaments,
Estates, Persons, as over a mere conquered Nation, against all Commissions,
Trusts, Oaths, Engagements, Declarations, and the rules both of Law and War it
self, being rai^ed, waged, commissioned only to defend and preserve us from
conquest by the opposite party, Let them know, that they are far greater,
worser Enemies to their own Native Country, than this Norman Duke, or any of
our former British, Saxon, Danish, Norman or English Kings; who never claimed
the Crown by mere conquest in any age, but only by some real or pretended Title
of Inheritance; or at least by a free and general election both of the
Nobility, Clergy, and people, as this King William did.

From the former Historical Passages concerning Harold, Tosti, Duke William,
and the Kentishmen, I shall deduce these legal Observations.

1. That no Tax, Subsidy, or Imposition whatsoever Proposit. 1.
could in that age be imposed on the English or Norman Subjects by their Kings
or Dukes, but by their common consent^ in their Parliamentary Councils; where
they were denied, when inconvenient to the public; as well as granted, when
convenient. 2. That no English or Norman Subjects were then Proposit. 3.
obliged to aid and assist their Sovereigns, with their persons, arms, estates,
or subsidies granted, in any foreign invasive war, but only left free to
contribute what private assistance they thought fit in such cases. 3. That no
public wars in that age were ever undertaken, Proposit. 9.
but by common advice and consent in great Parliamentary Councils. 4. That the
Kings of England in that age, Proposit. 1, 2, 4^
however they came to the Crown, by right or wrong, held it both their bounden
duty, interest, safety, to defend and preserve the Laws, Rights, Liberties of
the Church and people; to enact and maintain good Laws, and abolish all evil
Laws, Rapines, Exactions, Tributes, and to govern them justly, according to
their Coronation Oaths, and not arbitrarily or tyrannically according to their
pleasures. 5. That no Freemen in that age, Proposit. 4.
could be justly imprisoned, banished, or put to death, but for some heinous
misdemeanors, and that by a legal trial and conviction. 6. That the Subjects of
England then held it their bounden duties, Proposit. 3, 8.
in times of foreign invasion, to defend the Realm, their Lives, Liberties,
Properties both by Land and Sea against foreign Enemies; yet they held
themselves dis-obliged, and were generally averse to defend the person or Title
of any Usurper of the Crown, against any foreign Prince, or other Person, who
had a better right and title to it. 7. That our English Ancestors in that age,
esteemed their hereditary Liberties, good ancient Laws and Customs, more dear
and precious to them than their very lives, and would rather die fighting for
their Laws and Liberties like freemen, than live under slavery or bondage to
any Sovereign whatsoever. 8. That the Kings of England in that age could
neither give away, Proposit. 10.
nor legally dispose of their Crowns, Kingdoms, or Crown Lands to others,
without the privity and free consent of their Nobles, and Kingdom in general
Parliamentary Council; as is evident by Harolds answers to Williams
Ambassadors; the recited passage of Here p. 340.
Matthew Paris upon that occasion, and this of Samuel Daniel, p. 34. So much
was done either by King Edward or Harold, (though neither act, if any such
were, was of power to prejudice the State, or alter the course of right
succession) as gave the Duke a color to claim the Crown by a donation made by
Testament: which being against the Law and Custom of the Kingdom, could be of
no validity at all. For the Crown of England, being held, not as patrimonial,
but in succession by remotion (which is a succeeding to another place) it was
not in the power of King Edward to collate the same by any dispositive and
Testamentary Will, the right descending to the next of blood only, by the Laws
and Custom of the Kingdom. For the successor is not sa^d to be the Heir of the
King, but of the Kingdom which makes him so, and See Rot. Parl. 39 H. 6. n. 10.
to 26.1 E. 4. n. 8. to 16.
cannot be put from it by any Act of his Predecessors. 9. That the Nobilities,
Clergies, and peoples free-Election, has been usually most endeavored and
sought after by our Kings ^especially See 1 R. 3. Rot. Parl. and Speed in his
life.
Intruders) as their best and surest Title.
To these Legal I shall only subjoyn some Political and Theological
Observations, naturally flowing from the premised Histories of King Edward,
Harold, and William, not unsuitable to, nor unseasonable for the most serious
thoughts, and saddest contemplations of the present age, considering the
revolutions and postures of our public affairs.

1. That it is very unsafe and perilous for Princes or States to entrust the
Military and Civil power of the Realm in the hands of any one potent,
ambitious, or covetous person: who will be apt to abuse them to the peoples
oppression, the kingdoms perturbation, and his Sovereigns affront or danger; as
is evident by Earl Godwin and his Sons.

2. That devout, pious, soft-natured Princes are aptest to be abused, and their
people to be oppressed by evil Officers.

3. That it is very dangerous and pernicious to heditary kingdoms, for their
King to die without any certain, known, and declared right Heirs or Successors
to their Crowns, yea an occasion of many wars and revolutions; as is evident by
King Edwards death without i^sue, or declared right heir.

4. That right heirs to Crowns, who are of tender years, weak judgment, or
impotent in Frien^s and Purse, are easily and frequently put by their rights,
by bold, active, and powerful Intruders, as Edgar Atheling was both by Haro^d
and William successively. Yet this is remarkable in both these Invaders of his
royal Right. 1. That Speeds History, Cambdens Britan. and others. Here p. 349.
Harold, who first dethroned him, to make him some kind of recompense, and
please the Nobles of his party, created Edgar Earl of Oxford, and held him in
special favor. 2 ly. That King Willam the first, (to whom VVigorn^ Sim.
Dunelm. Bromt. Hovden. An. 166.

Here p. 369.


he submitted himself, and did homage and fealty) used him very honorably and
entertained him in his Court, not only at first, bu^ even after he had twice
taken up arms against him Mat. Westminster, Mat. Paris, p. 6. VVigorniensis,
Huntindon, Hoveden, Simeon Dunelmensis. Bromton, Malmsbur, Holinsh, Speed,
Knyghton De Event. Angliae. l. 2. c. 3. col. 2350.
joining first with the English Nobility, then with the Danes and Scots
against his interest. For Edgar coming to him into Normandy, Anno 1066. out of
Scotland, where he lived some years, where nihil ad praesens commodi, nihil ad
futurum spei; praeter quotidianam stipem nactus esset: he not only pardoned his
fore-past offenses; but magno donativo donatus est, pluribusque annis in Curia
manens Libram Argenti quotidie in stipendio accipiebat, writes De Gestis Regum,
l. 3. p. 103.
Malmesb. receiving a great dona^i^e from him, and a pound of silver for a
stipend every day, and continuing many years in his Court. After which, Anno
1089. He went into Malmsb. Ib. p. 103. Sim. Dunelm. de Gestis Reg. Angl. col.
213. Chron. Ioh. Bromt. col. ^76.
Apulia to the Holy wars by King Williams license, with 200 Soldiers, and many
Ships; whence returning after the death of Robert son of Godwin, and the loss
of his best Soldiers, he received many benefits from the Emperors both of
Greece and Germany, who endeavored to retain him in their Courts for the
greatness of his birth: but he contemning all their proffers, out of a desire
to enjoy his Native Country, returned into England, and there lived all Kings
Williams reign. Florent. Wigorniensis, p. 456. Simeon Dunelm. De Gest. Reg.
Anglor. col. 216, 217.
In the year 1091. Will. Rufus going into Normandy to take it by force from his
brother Robert, deprived Edgar of the honor which his Brother (with whom he
sided) had conferred upon him, and banished him out of Normandy; whereupon he
went into Scotland; where by his means a peace being made between William
Rufus and Malcholm king of Scots, he was again reconciled to Edgar by Earl
Roberts means, and returned into England, being in so great favor with the
king, that in the Florent. Wigorniensis. p. 466. Sim. Dunelm. col. 223. Hoveden An.
pars 1. p. 466.
year 1097. He sent him into Scotland with an Army, Ut in ea consobrinum suum
Eadgarum Malcholmi Regis filium, (patruo suo Dufenoldo, qui regnum invaserat
expulso) Regem constitueret. Whence returning into England, he lived there till
after the reign of king Henry the first, betaking himself in his old age to a
retired life in the Country, as De Gest. Reg. l. 3. p. 103.
Malmesbury thus records; Angliam rediit, ubi diverso fortunae ludioro rotatus,
nunc remotus and tacitus, canos suo in agro consumit. Where most probably he
died in peace, since I find no mention of his death: No less than 4 successive
kings, permitting this right heir to their Crowns to live both in their Courts
and Kingdom of England in peace and security (such wa^ the Christian
Generosity, Charity, and Piety of that age) without reputing it High Treason
for any to relieve or converse with him, as the Charity of some Saints in this
Iron age would have adjudged it, had they lived in those times, who have quite
forgotten this Gospel Lesson of our Savior they then practiced: Mat. 5.4^ 44
45, R^m. 12, 14, 20, 21.
But I say unto you love your Enemies, do good to those that hate you, etc.
Wherefore if thine enemy hunger give him meat, if he thirst, give him drink,
etc. B^ not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with goodness.

5. That base carnal fears and cowardice, often cause both Prelates, Nobles and
People to desert their own best interest, and lawful Princes, and to act,
vote, and submit to mere unrighteous Usurpers, against their primitive
resolutions, judgments, Consciences; as here in the case of Edgar, and Rich.
3. since.

6. That Generals puffed up with victorious successes, and having the command
of the Land and Sea Forces in their power, are apt to aspire after the royal
Crown and Sovereignty, and forcibly to usurp it upon the next occasion^ even
with the disinheriting of the right heir, and hazard of the whole Realm; of
which Harold is a most pregnant example.

7. That ambitious aspirers after the royal Crown and Throne, will make no
conscience to violate all sacred and civil Oaths, Obligations, Contracts, and
find out any evasions to elude them, rather than go without them or part with
them when injuriously usurped ^y them; and will adventure to crown themselves
with their own hands, than not wear the Diadem: witness Harold

8. That Usurpers of Crowns without right, though they Court the people with
Coronation Oaths and fair promises of good Laws, Liberty, Immunity from all
Taxes and Grievances; yet usually prove the greatest Tyrants and Oppressors to
them of all others; as Harold, and William in some sort did.

That Invaders of Crowns and Sovereign power, without any right, title, or
color of Justice, being once in possession, will never part with them to those
who have better right, upon any verbal Treaties, but rather adventure their
lives, bodies, soul^, and their whole kingdoms utter ruin, than part with
their usurped Supremacy.

10. That the most unrighteous Usurpers of the royal Throne by apparent
perjury, fraud, force, treachery, will feign, forge, publish some specious
pretext or other of Title, or popular election, to palliate, or extenuate their
intrusions; to avoid the infamy of Tyrants and Usurpers; and take off the Odium
of their most unrighteous Intrusions; of which we see footsteps, both in
Harold, William then, and Rich. 3. of late.

11. That unjust Invaders of Crowns for the most part bring many miseries,
troubles, wars, and ruins, not only on themselves and their posterities, but
likewise on their Kingdoms and people; as Harold did.

12. That royal Usurpers when they are most successful, insolent and secure
(as Harold after his victory in the North) are nearest greatest dangers and
ruin.

13. That such Usurpers are commonly very vigilant and industrious to preserve
their own Interest and Power, under pretext of the common defense and safety of
the Nation: yet more rely on their Mercinary forces, than the unmercinary
Militia of the Nation.

14. That Usurpers, though they may have many Flatterers and seeming Friends,
to write, and act for them whiles in prosperity; yet are commonly generally
deserted both by Nobles, People, yea their own indeared Friends and kindred in
their greatest dangers, when they need them most; as Harold was.

15. That few English Nobles, Gentry or Commons, will readily adventure their
Lives in a Usurpers quarrel, when and where his Title stands in competition
with a better and clearer right; as most of them deserted Harold.

16. That the reign of perjured Invaders of others Thrones, is commonly Job
20.4, 5, 6. Psalm. 37.2.35, 36.
very short, full of War^, Troubles, Fears, Jealousies, and their ends, for the
most part, bloody, tragical; as was Harolds, and Rich. 3.

17. That the sordid Covetousness of Kings and Generals in oppressing their
people, and depriving their Subjects and Soldiers of their just and lawful
spoils after victory over the Enemies, is a ready means to alienate their
affections, and cause a defection from them to their Opposites.

18. That when God has designed a perjured Usurpers or Nations ruin for their
crying sins, he suddenly stirs up unexpected Enemies and Instruments to effect,
occasions to facilitate it; and so infatuates them, that they become altogether
incapable of any good advice, and reject all Propositions and Accommodations,
that might prevent the some; as Harold obstinately did.

19. That none are more forward publicly to appeal to God himself, for to
judge and decide the Justice of their cause and proceedings, than the most
perjurious and unrighteous Usurpers. That when such presumptuously and
atheistically dare openly appeal to God himself for justice against their
Opposites or Competitors, he usually cuts them off by exemplary deaths and
fatal Overthrows, as he did Harold; both to manifest his severe Justice and
Indignation against such Atheistical and hypocritical Apellants and Appeals;
and to deterr all others from such practices.

20. That all sacred Oaths and sworn Contracts solemnly made to others in
things lawful or indifferent, be it through fear, or voluntarily upon
premeditation, ought religiously and inviolably to be observed, and not
wilfully infringed, or eluded by shifts and pretenses, as here, by Harold.

21. That God sooner or later does usually avenge in an exemplary manner the
perjurious wilful breach of solemn Oaths, even in Kings themselves and the
greatest persons: whose detestable perjury often brings sudden destruction both
upon themselves, their kindred, Posterity, and whole Armies and Kingdoms too; as
in the case of Harold.

22 That perjured persons fighting in a cause directly against their corporal
Oaths, can expect no other success in battle, but either flight, or death. And
that one Battle may both lose and win a whole kingdom; so unstable are even
kingdoms themselves.

23. That the barbarous murders, the cruel oppressions of Innocent people, are
apt to stirrup a universal Insurrection against their Governors and
Instruments; and u^ually end in the dethroning, expulsion, death and
destruction of the Authors of them; of which Tosti yields us a notable
president: And that people when once justly enraged against such bloody
tyrannical Oppressors, become altogether implacable, and will never brook their
future Government over them.

24. That base carnal fears in times of imminent danger, usually dis-joynt,
those persons, councels, forces whom the Common danger should more unite, and
make them desert the probablest means of their public preservation, liberty,
peace, settlement, by setting up the Right heir of the Crown (as Edgar here)
against the Intrusions and Pretenses of all usurping Invaders of the Sovereign
power.

25. That a few timorous Counselors, Great Persons or Clergymen, in times of
danger, are apt to disappoint the magnanimous resolutions, and daunt the
heroical Spirits of such who are most cordially affected both to their Native
Countries Laws, Liberties, and right heir to the Crown; and to draw them to
unworthy compliances with them against both.

26. That stout resolute real Patrons of their Native Countries Laws and
Liberties, will then appear most cordially zealous to protect, own, and fight
for them, when they are in greatest danger to be lost, and most disowned,
deserted, betrayed by other timorou^ and time-serving persons: witness the
example of Abbot Fred^rick, Stigand, Eg^lsine and the Kentish men.

27. That true heroic English Freemen, prefer their old Native Liberties,
Laws, Customs before their Lives; and would rather die fighting for them in the
field, than depart with them upon any Terms to a victorious Sovereign; or
subject themselves to the le^st public Servitude, the name whereof has been
ever odious to them, much more the thing it self.

28. That the best means to preserve our public Laws, Liberties, Customs
against all Invaders of them, is manfully, resolutely, and unanimously to stand
up in their defense, both by words and deeds, when they are most endangered:
That such persons, Counties, places who have appeared most stout and resolute
in their defense, when others have generally de^erted, surrendered or betrayed
them; have thereby preserved, secured, perpetuated them to themselves and their
posterities, when all else have lost and been deprived of them; yea gained
immortal honor, and precedence of all others to boot: Witness the Ken^ish-men.

29. That the Stoutest Maintainers of their Countries Laws and Liberties are
commonly most odious to, most injured, oppressed by tyrannical Sovereigns,
though upon other pretenses; witness Archbishop Stigand, Abbot Frederick, and
Egelsine. Yet this must not deter^ them from their duties.

30. That no age or person ever yet reputed Conquest a just, safe, prudent
Title or Pretext to the Crown of England, but ever disclaimed it, as most
absurd and dangerous to their interests.

31. That the murdering, or disinheriting of the right heir to the Crown, has
been the Principal occasion and groundwork of all the great, sad revolutions
of Government in this Island; and of the translations of the Crown and Kingdom
from the Sea part. 2. p. 29, to 38.
Britons to the Saxons; from the Saxons to the Danes, and since from both of
them to the Normans, by the murder of Prince Alfred, and rejection of Prince
Edgar.

32. That when Treachery, Perjury, Oppression, Murder, Violence, and other sins
forementioned have generally overspread the Kingdom^, and infected all sorts
and degrees of men, then National Judgments, Foreign invasions, public
Revolutions of Governors and Government, yea all sorts of Calamities, Wars,
Troubles, may be justly feared, expected, inflicted, as the fruits, punishments
of these epidemical crying Transgressions.

33. That Prove. 27.24. Dan. 2.21. c^ 4.25.
Crowns and Kingdoms have their Periods and Revolutions, as well as private
possessions, Families, and that by the secret Justice, and wise disposing
Providence of God; who disposes, translateth, dissipateth, dissolveth Kingdoms
at his pleasure, and gives them to whomsoever he pleases.

34. From the whole, we may observe, with the Col. 883.
Chronicle of Bromton, and Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 148.
Mr. Fox, That as the English-Saxons had most unjustly, against their Oaths
and Trusts, formerly subdued and expelled the Britons by the just judgment of
God upon them for their sins, out of the possession of the Throne and Kingdom
of Britain, by the power of the sword: so God himself, by divine retaliation,
for the like Sins of the English-Saxons, after many years bloody intestine
wars between themselves, (wherein many of their Kings, multitudes of their
Nobles, and Millions of the Common Soldiers, and people were slain and lost
their lives) first plagued, infested them for many years, and at last totally
subdued, and dispossessed them of the Crown and Kingdom for some years space by
the bloody Danes, and after that subjected them to the Normans yoke, who
possessed themselves of the Crown and Realm of England instrumentally by the
Sword, and put by both the Saxon Invader Harold and his Posterity, with Edgar
the Saxon heir, in such sort as here you have read.

The Lord sanctify all these Collections and Observations to the greatest
public good and settlement of our unsettled distracted English Nation, and the
private benefit of all who shall peruse them, that they may aim only Heb.
12.28. 1 Pet. 1 4. c. 5, 4.
at that kingdom which cannot be shaken, and that Crown of glory which fades
not away: not at temporal Crowns, and kingdoms, which are so fading,
transitory^ full of Thorns, Crosses, Cares, Fears, Vexations, Tortures, Perils,
Deaths.

FINIS.
Omissions and Errataes. Kind Reader, I present thee with some Historical
Passages, casually omitted in their due places; and such Errors as have happened
at the P^ess, which I desire thee to correct.
PAge 10. line 8. Anno 654.
One Mat. W^stm. Anno 654. p. 229, 230.
Thunder maliciously accused Aethelbert, and Aethelred, two kinsmen of Egbert
King of Kent, educated and brought up in his Court, that they intended some
time or other to take away his kingdom from him; and thereupon advised the
King, either to banish them both into some far Country, or to deliver them
unto him to destroy and murder, Proposit. 2, 6.
without any legal Trial, or conviction of their guilt. Which Thunder often
instigating the King to do, and he but coldly prohibiting, or disliking;
thereupon Thunder, in the Kings absence rashly presumed ignominiously to murder
them in the Kings Palace, and then buried them under his Royal Chair, in a
Village called Estria. The King returning to his Court, in the dead of the
night there appeared a bright pillar sent from heaven, which filled his whole
royal Palace with an unspeakable brightness: which the Kings servants
beholding, were so terrified, that they fell down to the ground, and became
almost distracted. The King being awaked, with the tumult of his Guard, and
being ignorant of the cause thereof, arose, that he might go and hear Mattens
as he was accustomed: And going out of his house, he saw the City shining with
the beams of the new splendour. Upon which missing his Kinsmen, he sent for
Thunder, and demanded of him where they were? who answered him like Cain; Am I
thy Kinsmens keeper? To which the King replied, Thou have always sinisterly
accused them unto me, and therefore, most wicked wretch, thou ought to show
me where they are: Whereupon he informed him of their murder and burial;
whereat the King was very angry with him; But returning at last to himself, he
refunded the Crime and whole wickedness on himself, and being confounded
beyond measure, spent the residue of the night in tears. When the day appeared,
he sent for the Archbishop Adeo-datus, et Magnates quos habere potuit convocari
praecepit, and causing the Nobles to be called together, related the whole
business to them. The Archbishop gave counsel, that the bodies of these
Innocents should be removed to the Cathedral Church, and there interred in a
royal manner. Thereupon putting their bodies with Saints relics into Coffins
and Carts, they intended to carry them to Christ's Church, in Canterbury, but in
vain, because they could not stir their corpse, nor remove them out of the
place, although they attempted it with much endeavor and force. Upon this,
changing their counsel, they intended to remove them to St. Augustines Church,
neither yet could they effect it. At last they resolved they should be removed
to the most famous Monastery of Waermen, upon which the Carts presently removed
with eas^, as if they had no burden; and they were buried by the High Altar in
this Monastery.

Malm^^^^y, de G^s^is R^g. l. 1. c. ^. p. 1^. Mat. West. ^n. 671.
Kinewalchus King of the West Saxons, deceasing Anno 672. Anno 672.
Regni arbitrium Uxori Sexburgae delegandum putavit: nec deerat mulieri
spiritus ad obeunda regia munia: ipsa novos exercitus mo^iri, veteres tenere in
officio, ipsa subjectos clementer moderari, hostibus minaciter infremere,
prorsus omnia facere, ut nihil praeter s^xum di^cerneres: Veruntamen plus quam
animos foemineos anhelantem vita destituit, Proposit. 6, 8, 10.
vi^ annua potestate perfunctam. When she had reigned thus one year
Indignantibus Regni Magnatibus (assembled most likely in a Parliamentary
Council) ^xpulsa est a Regno, nolentes sub sexu Foemineo militare; The Nobles
thereupon made Eschwin King in her place, being Regali prosapia proximus, next
of the royal blood: quo d^cedente vel morte sua, vel vi aliena, vacantem aulam
successione legitima implevit Kentianus; He being the next right heir.

Page 24. l. 24. About the year 783, Anno 793.
^ill. Malms. de G^st. R^g. l. 1. c. 4 p. 3^, 31, 32. Mat. P^rker Antiqu. Eccl.
Bri^. p. 27.28, 29 Man. W^st. Anno 789, 797, 798. G^^v^sius Acta Pontif. Can^.
col. 1642.

Proposi^. 5, 6.


Kenulph King of Mercia, Cum Episcopis, Duc^bus, et omni sub nostra ditione
dignitatis gradu, with the Bishops, Dukes, and Nobles of every degree of Honor
under his Dominion, (assembled in a Parliamentary Council) writ a Letter to
Pope Leo the 3d. ^o reunite those Bishoprics to the Metropolitical See of
Canterbury, which King Offa, (out of his hatred to Archbishop Living) had
severed from it, and united to a new-erected Archbishopric at Liche^ield,
alleging in the Letter; Uisum est cunctis gentis nostrae Sapientibus, quatenus
in illa Civitate Metropolitanus honor hab^retur ubi corpus beatae recordationis
Augustini ( qui verbum Dei imperante beato Gregorio, Anglorum genti
remonstrabat, et gloriosissime Ecclesiae praefuit Saxoniae) pansat, qui his
partibus fidei veritatem inseruit. This Letter, with Pope Leo his answer
thereunto (worth the reading) are at large registered in Malmsbury and Matthew
Parker: Hereupon the new Archbishopric of Lichfield was dissolved, and the
ancient Metropolitical Jurisdiction of the Sea of S^e here, ^. 32.
Canterbury restored. Anno 798. by the Judgment and decree of the Council of
Bacanc^ld, and advice of Pope Leo; who being advanced to the Papacy, and saying
his first Mass, a certain woman to whom he formerly had access, as was
reported, coming up to offer, wringing him sweetly by the hand and kissing it,
thereby stirred up an incentive of lust in the Pope; Who after the Mass ended,
sitting in his Chamber and reprehending himself, suddenly cut off his hand,
according to that Gospel-saying: Mat. 5 29, 30.
If thy f^ot or hand shall offend, ^ut it off and cast it from thee, etc. After
which, concealing the fact, and retiring to a solitary place, he prayed to the
blessed Virgin to restore hi^ hand cut off from his arm; which she miraculously
did. And thereupon it was then decreed: Statutum est tunc quod nunquam ex tunc
manus Papae ab offer^ntibus deoscularetur, sed Pes; that never from thenceforth
the Popes hand should be kissed by such who offered (or resorted to him, but
his foot:) as Anno 799. p. 293. S^e Onuphrius, Ba^eus, and others in his Life.
Matthew Westminster, and others record: The original ground of kissing the
Popes foot instead of his hand ever since S^m. Dunelm. de Ge^t. R^g. Angl. Col.
116. R^dulph. de Dice^o, Col. 799. Se^ Platina, Onuph^ius, Baronius, H^rmannus
Schedel. Balaeus, Opmcerus, and others in his (...).
Some write, this Popes tongue and eyes were once or twice cut off, and pulled
out by the Citizens of Rome, and yet again miraculously restored to him, as
well as his hand: which the blind Papists may credit, though few else believe
to be a truth, but a ridiculous lying Romish Legend for the whetstone.

ERRATA.
PAge 35. line 37. r. malitiam, p. 37. l. 16. r. preceeded, p. 4^, l. 36.
Heabert, p. 46. l. 31. dele sent, p. 64. l. 26. r. him himse^f, p. 69. l. 16.
him and them, p. 80. l. 10. largest, r. longest, l. 30. Churche^s, p. 83. l.
35. of the, p. 91. l. 21. this, p. 206. l. 9. at, or, p. 107. l. 2. imitator,
p. 113. l. 34. King, p. 120. l. 30. hoc, haec^ p. 126. l. 8. jura, l. 21.
Edelna^o, p. 135. l. 14, again, p. 144. l. 5. r. Edric, p. 146. l. 3. Ely, p.
147. l. 29. affecto, p. 148. l^ 21. exterorum, p. 197. l. 8. carriage, r.
Courage, p. 235. l. 2. ^egis, p. 241. l. 4. r. 1032. p. 246^ l. 26. dele as, p.
250. l. Harold, Ha^d^-cnute. Godwin, Harold. p. 267. l. 6. of, as, p. 271. l,
1^. sactus, Sanctis, p. 279. l. 34. Abbatem, p. 286. l. 17. crunt, p. 288. l.
28. Solium, l. 36. limina p. 297. l. 8. Hoveden, l. 28. pater, l. 32^ Edward,
p. 298. l. 21. Hoveden, l. 29. regina, p. 300. l. 5.31. one hundred thousand,
p. 301. l. 28. cure of the Kings evil. p. 302. l. 12. gentilitium, l. 13.
Francor^m, l. 27. King, l. 33. Fabian, p. 303. l. 36. harm. p. 304. l. 17.
Beverston, p. 305. l. 5. Bononians, Castle, p. 307. l. 30. dele in, p. 310. l.
25, ignominia, p. 316. l. 9. denominated, p. 328. l. ^. Hereford, p. 331. l. 8.
which, with, p. 341. l. 20. impletam, l. 27. ^ocii, l. 35. huic, p. 355. l. 31.
King, Duke, p. 357. l. 30. may, many, p. 361. l. 28. tired forces, p. 365. l.
7. occidentem, p. 368^ l. 22. their, the. p. 387. l. 36. them, him. p. 291. l.
32.1069.

Margin. p. 6. l. 3. r. 1. p. 65. l. 9. and p. 115. r. Antoninus, p. 8. l. 31.
Brit. p. 104. l. 4. Propos. l. 9.7, r. 8. p. 275. l. 12. Regum, p. 276 l. 2.
Epistl^, l. 4^ Scriptor, p. ^82. l. 2. miraculis, p. 314. l. 12. and 1134.


