Jus Populi. OR, A DISCOURSE Wherein clear satisfaction is given, as well
concerning the Right of SUBJECTS, as the Right of PRINCES.

Showing how both are consistent, and where they border one upon the other.

AS ALSO, What there is Divine, and what there is Humane in both: and whether
is of more value and extent.

Claudianus ad Honorium.
Tu Civem, Patremque geras, tu consule cunctis:
Non tibi, nec tua, te moveant, sed publica damnae.
In private matters do a Brothers part,
In public be a Father; let thy heart
Be vast as is thy fortune, and extend
Beyond thy self, unto the Common end.
Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Bostock, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign
of the King Head. 1644.

Jus Populi. OR, A DISCOURSE Wherein clear satisfaction is given as well
concerning the right of Subjects, as the right of Princes. etc.
THe Observator (so he is styled at Oxford) writing against our parasiticall
Court-Doctors, who think they cannot be meritorious Patrons of Royalty, without
showing themselves Anti-patriots, or destroyers of public liberty, grounds
himself upon these three main Assertions. 1 Princes derive their power, and
prerogatives from the people. Secondly, Princes have their investitures merely
for the people benefit. Thirdly, In all well-formed States the Laws, by which
Princes claim, do declare themselves more in favor of liberty then Prerogative.

Much art, force, and industry has been used to destroy these fundamentals,
wherein though the Royalists have not been prevalent in the judgment of wise
men, yet something must further be replied, for the weaker sort of peoples
sake, lest multitudes of opponents should sway them, and effect that by number,
which cannot be done by weight.

Man (says the Apostle) was not made of the woman, but the woman of man: and
this is made an argument why the woman should pay a due subjection to man. And
again, Man (says the same Apostle) was not created for the woman, but the
woman for the man; this is made an other argument to enforce the same thing.
There cannot be therefore any to pick rules more properly pressed then these:
nay without offering some contradiction to the Spirit of God, we cannot reject
the same form of arguing in the case of a people, and their Prince: especially
when we do not insist only upon the virtue of the efficient or final cause,
but also upon the effect it self, and that form of Law, which was (as it were)
the product of both.

Let us now then re-examine these three grounds, and seek to give further
satisfaction to others, by enlarging our Discourse, where our adversaries have
given a just occasion. If we can make it good that Princes were created by the
people, for the peoples sake, and so limited by express Laws as that they
might not violate the peoples liberty, it will naturally follow; that though
they be singulis majores, yet they are universis minores; and this being once
made good, it will remain undeniable, that salus Populi is suprema Lex: and
that bonum Publicum is that which must give Law, and check to all pretenses, or
disputes of Princes whatsoever.

To make appear thus much, let us begin with the origo or first production of
Civil Authority.

1 The Royalists take a great deal of superfluous pains, and quote many texts
of Scripture to prove that all powers are from God: that Kings are anointed by
God: and that they are to be obeyed as the vicegerents of God. If we did oppose
or deny these clear Truths, no fraud were to be suspected in those that
allege them: but when we do express no kind of dissent from them herein, and
when they have too general a sense, as our dispute now runs, we must conclude
that there is some secret fraud wrapped up, and clouded under the very
generality of these asseverations. For it is not by us questioned whether powers
are from God or no; but whether they are so extraordinarily from God, as that
they have no dependence upon humane consent. Neither do we raise any doubt,
whether or no Kings are anointed by God; but whether that unction makes them
boundless, and their Subjects remediless or no, in all cases whatsoever.
Neither do we dispute whether Monarchs are Gods deputies, or no, and so to be
observed; but whether limited Monarchs, and other conditionate, mixed
Potentates may not challenge the same privilege. To show then more ingenuity
toward our Antagonists, we will be more clear in dividing, and distinguishing,
and we will decline general expressions, as often as just occasion shall
require.

In the first place therefore we desire to take notice that (...), or Potestas
is sometimes taken for order, sometimes for jurisdiction: and these terms
always are not to be confusedly used. If Adam had not sinned in Paradise,
order had been sufficient alone without any proper jurisdiction: it may well be
supposed, that government, truly so called, had been no more necessary amongst
men on earth, then it is now in Heaven amongst Angels. Government is in truth
that discipline or method which we exercise in promoting, inabling, rewarding
persons of good desert in the State, and whereby we prevent, suppress, punish
such as are contrarily affected. And as government has Laws to guide its
proceedings, so it is armed, with power and commission for putting those Laws
in execution. Its plain therefore where there is no supposition of sin, order
will be prevalent enough without formal jurisdiction: for as there needs no
additionall rules, besides those which creation imprinted, so there needs no
additionall power to attend those Rules. If we look up to Heaven, we see that
pre-eminence which one Angel has above another is far different from that
command which Princes obtain here on earth over their vassals: we apprehend it
as an excellence, that pertakes of more honor, then power, and that power
which it has appertaining is rather physical then political. If we descend
also to survey hell, we shall find some order observed there too, but no proper
government used; for as Law is useless where there is no sin, so it is also
improper or impossible where there is nothing but sin. Wherefore something of
primitive order is retained below amongst the damned legions for the
conservation of their infernal kingdom, but there is little resemblance of
our policy in that cursed combination. We may then acknowledge that order is of
a sublime and celestial extraction, such as nature in its greatest purity did
own; but subjection, or rather servile subjection, such as attends humane
policy amongst us, derives not it self from Nature, unless we mean corrupted
nature. Besides in order there is nothing defective, nothing excessive, it is
so universally necessary, and purely good that it has a being amongst
irrational creatures, and not only States, but even Towns, Villages, houses
depend upon it, and as it was existent before sin, so it must continue after
sin; but government, as it had no being without sin, nor has no being but
amongst sinful men, so even amongst men it is not without its defects and
inconveniences. We must not expect more then a mixture of good and evil in it,
and if we will refuse the burden of it, we must withal deny the benefit of it.
Nulla lex satis commodo est (says Cato) id modo quaeritur si majori parti and
in summa prodest. Wherefore it is now sufficiently apparent, that order does
more naturally refer to God as its Author then Jurisdiction does, and that it
also conveyes nothing in special to Kings, inasmuch as the benefit of it is
general, and extends to families, as well as States, and to popular States as
well as Monarchies. As to government also we must in the next place observe
three things therein very distinguishable. The constitution of power in
general must be severed from the limitation of it to this or that form; and
the form also must be severed from the designation of it to this or that
person. The constitution or ordinance of Jurisdiction we do acknowledge to
contain (...), but this excludes not (...), it may be both respectively, and
neither simply: and St. Peter seems to affirm as much of the humanity, as St.
Paul does of the divinity of the constitution.

In Matrimony there is something divine (the Papist makes it sacramental
beyond royal inauguration) but is this any ground to infer that there is no
humane consent or concurrence in it? does the divine institution of marriage
take away freedom of choice before, or conclude either party under an absolute
degree of subjection after the solemnization? is there not in conjugall
Jurisdiction (notwithstanding the divine establishment of it) a strange kind of
mixture, and coordination, and may not the Spouse plead that divine right as
much for a sweet equality, as the husband does for a rigorous inequality?

Inferior matrona suo sit blanda marito, Non aliter suerint foemina, virque
pares. There may be a parity even in the disparity of the matrimonial bond,
and these two contraries are so far from being made contrary by any plea of
divine institution, that nothing else could reconcile them; And if men, for
whose sakes women were created, shall not lay hold upon the divine right of
wedlock, to the disadvantage of women: much less shall Princes who were
created for the peoples sake, challenge any thing from the sanctity of their
offices, that may derogate from the people. Besides even government it self in
the very constitution of it is so far from being enjoined as divine upon any
persons (not before engaged by their own, or their Ancestors consent) or from
being necessitated by any precept, or president in Scripture, that we rather
see an instance of the contrary in the story of Lot and Abraham. Certainly
there was in nature some majority or precedence due either from Lot to Abraham,
or from Abraham to Lot, (for the rules of order are no ways failing) and yet
we see this is no sufficient inforcement to subject either of these Patriarks
to the others jurisdiction. When discords arose amongst their servants, they
might have been qualified and repressed by a friendly association, and either
one or both jointly or by course might have had the oyer, and terminer thereof.
Yet so it was, that they rather resolved upon a dissociation, and this could
not but have been a great sin against the divine right of Government, if any
such had been originally imprinted in Nature, or delivered by command from God,
as of more value then common liberty. It Is true it proved afterward fatal to
Lot, that he did disjoyne from Abraham, and it had been far more politic and
advantageous for both of them perhaps, if they had incorporated one with
another: but the question is not whether it was prejudicial, or no, to esteem
the privilege of an Independent liberty before the many other fruits and
advantages of a well framed principality: but whether it was sin against God,
or no, and a transgression against the constitution of power, to pursue that
which was most pleasing, before that which was likely to prove more commodious.
I conceive that freedom being in it self good, and acceptable to Nature, was
preferred before Government, which was also good, and more especially
commendable, but God had left the choice indifferent, and arbitrarie, and
therefore there was no scandal or trespass in the choice. I speak not this to
unsettle any form of Government already founded, and composed, nor against the
constitution it self, or intention of framing associations: it is sufficient for
my purpose, if it be proved, that before such foundation or composition every
man be left free, and not abridged of his own consent, or forced by any Law of
God to depart from his freedom, and I am sure this example of Abraham, and Lot
does evince thus much, unless we think good to charge them both as enemies to
the politic constitution of power, and will needs introduce a perpetual yoke
of authority upon all men whatsoever, whether pre-obliged by consent or not,
which seems to me very uncharitable. But enough of this, I pass now from the
constitution it self, to the determination of power to such a line, or such a
person, electively, or hereditarily: and this also is an act wherein we do not
deny Gods ordinary interposition, we only deny, that the peoples freedom of
choice, or consent is at all drowned thereby.

Gods choosing of Saul particularly, is no general denial of humane choice; we
may rather suppose that that coronation was an act of divine providence, then
of any special command. For as God remitted the matter to the decision of
Lots, so it is undoubted that he guided the event of those lots, as gently, as
he guides all other second causes, without violenting the nature of them. So
the Scepter of Judah though it was prophetically intayled upon David's
posterity, yet the individual person or line of that race was not always
specified by God.

The order of primogeniture was broken in Solomon, and there was no certain
rule left as often as that order was to be altered, or inverted, to whose choice
or discretion it should be left. After the Captivity there was also
interruption in the lineall course of dissent, and by whom the successive right
was then convayed, is uncertain, but in probability either the people, or some
other humane hand was the pipe of that conveyance.

We shall not need to prosecute this further, our Adversaries do grant us, that
the election of Princes is not now so extraordinary, and divine as it was
amongst the Jews, and the Scripture it self is clear, that even those Jewish
Princes which God pointed out by Lots, or anointed by his Prophets were yet
established, and invested by the people. And therefore in the first delivery of
the Law by Moses, before any king was resolved upon by the people, God
prescribed to them in this manner: Quando statues Regem super te, etc. when you
shall think fit to set or erect a King over you, you shall choose that man whom
I shall design. And the same word statuere is diverse times elsewhere used in
Scripture, so that though God did never interpose in any other Nation so
eminently about the making of Kings, as in Judea, yet even there he did commend
the person, the people did choose; or if he did choose, the people did statuere,
viz. give force and sanction to the same.

It remains now that we try what there is of God, and what of man in the
limitations, or mixtures of authority. It Is a true and old maxim in Law, Qui
jus suum alienat, potest id jus pactis imminuere. And hereupon Grotius takes a
good difference betwixt imperium and imperii habendi modum, and as for the
manner or qualification of rule, that he accounts so merely humane, that if the
King seek to alter it, he may be (as he acknowledges) opposed by the people:
nay he proceeds further, and cites Barclayes authority, who was the violentest
assertor of absolute Monarchy that ever wrote) to prove that Kings may have but
a part in the supremacy of power, and where they have but such a partial mixed
interest they may not only be resisted, but also deposed for forfeiture in
case they invade the other interest. The same Author also affirms, That States
may condition with Kings to have a power of resisting, and that the same is a
good condition, though the Royalty be limited by no other. If this be so,
surely the founding or new erecting of authorities at first, and the
circumscribing the same after by consent, is so far from being Gods sole
immediate act, that it is, as far as any act can be man's proper and entire act:
for except we allow that God has left it indifferent to man to form government
as he thinks most for his behoof, we must needs condemn all forms except one,
as unlawful: and if we grant indifference it is all one, as if we left it to
second causes. But soft to call Kings (says one loud Royalist) derivatives of
the people, it is to disgrace them, and to make them the basest extracts of the
basest of rational creatures, the Community. If we fix an underived Majesty
in the community as in it first seat, and receptacle (where there is not one of
a thousand an intelligent knowing man) this is (if not blasphemy) certainly
high treason against God and the King. This is Oxford Divinity. God reproves
Kings for his anointed peoples sake, these reproach the people for Kings sakes.
These are the miserable Heralds of this unnatural war, having mouths as
black as their hands are crimson: but let the man fall to his Arguments.

A world of reasons (says he) may be brought from Scripture to prove that
Kings are independent from all, and solely dependent from God. But for
brevities sake take these.

To whom can it be more proper to give the rule over men, then to him who is
the only King truly and properly of the whole world?

Answer. To none more proper: there shall be no quarrel in this; provided you
will no more except Kings then Subjects from this general subjection.

God is the immediate Author of all rule and power amongst all his creatures
above or below, why then should we seclude him from being the immediate Author
of government and empire amongst men?

Answer. We seclude him not. We only question whether he be so the immediate
Author of our constitutions, as he is of primitive order, or whether or no he
so extraordinarily intervene in the erecting of Governors, or limiting of
governments, as to strangle second causes, and invalidate humane acts.

Man in his innocence received dominion over the creatures immediately from
God; and shall we deny that the most noble, and excellent government over men
it from God, or say it is by humane constitution?

Answer. God did not create so vast a distance betwixt man and man, as betwixt
man and other irrational creatures: and therefore there was not at first the
same reason of subjection amongst the one as the other. Yet we except nothing
against order, or a mild subjection amongst men: we only say that such
servility as our Adversaries would now fain patronize in Gods name, was never
introduced by God, Nature, or any good men.

They who exercise the judgment of God must needs have their power to judge
from God; but Kings by themselves and their Deputies exercise their judgment
from God. Ergo.

Answer. The Prince of Orange, or the Duke of Venice may as well plead thus, as
the King of Spain, or the Emperor of Germany. Besides, according to this
rule, Quod quis per alium facit, facit per se: the State may as truly say, it
exercises judgment by the King, as the King may that he exercises judgment by
his inferior Courts. Lastly, if this be pressed upon supposition, that the King
is Judge next under God without any dependence from the State, it begs the
question: if it be pressed, only to prove, that the King ought to be so
independent, it is vain, and frivolous.

Kings are the Ministers of God, not only as to their Judiciary, but as to
their Executory power, ergo, their charge is immediately from God. They are
called Gods, Angels, etc. So in the Church, Preachers are the Ambassadors of
God, and this makes their function immediately divine.

Answ. The judiciary, and executory power flows from the same source, this
shall breed no dispute: and as for all the glorious attributes of Majesty, and
irradiations of sanctity, and divinity which the scripture frequently applies
to Kings.

First, We must know they are not only appropriated to Kings as they are
absolute, and solely supreme; but to all chief governors also though bounded
by laws, and restrained by coordinate partners.

Secondly, They are many times affixt to Kings, not quatenus Kings, but
quatenus religious and just Kings; these sacred expressions applied to Ahas or
Jeroboam, do not sound so tunably, as when they point at David or Josiah.

Thirdly, The people and flock of God sometimes communicate in terms of the
like nature, not only Priests and Prophets were anointed as well as Kings, but
the whole nation of the Jews was called holy, and dignified with that which
the ceremony of unction shadowed only. Priests were not Kings, nor Kings
Priests, but the children of God are both Kings and Priests: the scripture
expressly calls them a royal Priesthood.

Fourthly, That sanctity, that divine grandour which is thus shed from above
upon Princes for the peoples sake, in the judgment of wisemen does not so
properly terminate it self in the means as in the end.

If the grace inabling Kings for their employment be only from God, then
consequently the employment it self, ergo.

Answer, if God by inspiration did enable all Kings extraordinarily, and none
other but Kings, this were of some force: and yet this proves not that Kings
are more, or less inspired by God, as they are more or less limited by man.
Howsoever we know by woeful experience that the Major part of Kings are so
far from being the best Judges, the profoundest Statesmen, the most expert
soldiers, that when they so value themselves they prove commonly most wilful,
and fatal to themselves and others; and that they ever govern best, when they
most rely upon the abilities of other good Counselors and Ministers.

Where Sovereign power is, as in Kings there is authority and Majesty and a
ray of divine glory, but this cannot be found in the people, they cannot be the
subject of it either jointly, or severally considered; not singly, for all by
nature are equal: and if not singly: not jointly; for all have but the
contribution of so many individuals.

Answ. What ridiculous things are these? if Majesty and authority accompany
supremacy of power, then it is residing at Geneva as well, as at Constantinople;
or else we must take it for granted that there is no supremacy of power, but in
Monarchies. All men will explode this: but suppose the Crown escheated in a
Monarchy, will you say because all have but the contribution of so many
individuals, therefore there is no more virtue in the consent of all, then
there is in the vote of one? must the wheels of government never move again
except some miraculous ordinance from heaven come to turn, and actuate them?
must such a fond dream as this confound us in an eternal night of Anarchy,
and forbid us to wind up our weights again? how poor a fallacy is this? you
cannot subject me, nor I you, nor one hundred of us one hundred of other men
but by consent, it follows therefore that all of us jointly consenting cannot
subject ourselvs to such a law, such a Prince such a condition.

is only his who only gives life: ergo, Kings which only have this, can only
derive this from God.

Answ. This destroys all government but Monarchical, this denies all
Aristocraticall or Democraticall States to be capable of doing justice or
proceeding against delinquents, what can be more erroneous or pernicious? the
power of life and death in a legal sense is committed to man by God, and not
to Kings only. For if the Crown of England were escheated, the community even
before a new restoration of government, during the inter-regnum, might join
in putting to death murderers and capital offenders, and perhaps this it was
which Cain stood in fear of. Nay it may be thought ex officio humani generis,
they ought to prosecute all the common disturbers of mankind. And if this
without some orderly tribunal were not lawful, or possible to be done, yet
what right or power is there wanting in the people to erect such a Tribunal?
Grotius tells us, that as man is the general subject of the vis^ve facu'ty,
though the eye of man be its particular seat, so the whole body politic is the
general subject of authority, though it be more intimately contracted
sometimes into such a Chair, such a Bench, such an Assembly: and if it be so
after government settled, it is much more so before.

The actions of Kings as well of mercy, as justice, are owned by God, and
therefore when God blesses a people, he sends good Kings; when he scourges
them, he sends evil Kings.

Answer. If God be said to send evil Kings, and to harden them for our
punishment in the same manner, as he sends good Kings etc. we must acknowledge
the hand of God in these things, but not as overruling secondary causes: when
the lot is cast into the lap, the event is from the Lord, but it does not
always so fall out from the immediate sole causality of God, so as the second
cause is forced thereby, or interrupted in its ordinary operation. Wherefore if
the immediate hand of God does not violent such hidden contingent effects, sure
it is more gentle to more rational and free causes: and where the effect is
evil, we must not make it too causall.

God is styled a King and represented on a Throne, therefore let us not make
him a derivative of the people also.

Answer. Demand what security you please for this, and we will give it.

Kings, Priests, Prophets were anointed, but no fourth thing: and since Priests
and Prophets are sacred by immediate constitution, why not Kings?

Answer. We have instanced in a fourth thing, upon which the unction of God
has been powered, if not visibly yet spiritually, if not in the external
ceremony, yet in the internal efficacy. We do not deny also but Kings are
sacred by immediate constitution, as well as Priests: but we deny that Kings
only, or absolute Kings only excluding other conditionate Princes, and Rulers
are thus sacred; and as for Priests, they are not so properly a power as a
function: neither do I perfectly understand how far they disclaim all
humane dependence in their functions, nor is the dispute thereof any way
pertinent in this case.

12. Disobedience to Princes is taken as disobedience to God, and therefore God
says to Moses and Aaron, they murmr not against you, but me.

Answ. Cursed for ever be that doctrine that countenances disobedience to
Magistrates, much more such disobedience against such Magistrates in such
things, as that was which God so severely chastised in the Israelites: our
dispute at this present is not about obedience, but the measure of obedience;
for if the Kings will be the sole rule thereof, we cannot disobey God in
obeying the King, but this we know is false: and if any other rule be either in
the law of God or man, to that we will conform in our actions, and to that we
ought to be confined in our disputes.

The last result is, Priests and Kings have their offices if not personal
designations, immediately and solely from Gods donation, and both (as to their
persons and functions) being lawfully invested with sacred power, are
inviolable.

Answ. We need not doubt, but this great ostentatious undertaker, and this
wide, gaping promissor, was some Cathedralist within orders, he does so shuffle
Priests and Princes together. He will needs have Princes as inviolable as
Priests, but he could wish much rather, I believe, that Priests were as
unpunishable as Princes. He does admit Princes to have their offices as
immediately from God as Priests, but then his intent is that Priests shall
claim a power too as independent as Princes, Caecus fert Claudum, etc. If
Kings will be but as willing to carry Bishops as they are to guide Kings, it is
no great matter whether any body else have legs to walk, or eyes to see. But
what if we grant Ministers to have persons as inviolable as Magistrates, and
Magistrates offices as sacred as Ministers: what does this prove against
limited Monarchy, how does this divest the people of God of all right and
liberty?

Thus we see he that answers one argument, answers all: for we do not deny
Gods hand in the crowning of Princes, we know the scripture is express in it,
and we know there is a necessity of it, as there is in all other human things;
and yet this is al they can say for themselves. All that we wonder at is, that
since the scripture does every where as expressly also mention the hand of man
in making and choosing of Kings, and since there is no more ascribed to God for
inthroning them then is for dethroning: That our adversaries will take no
notice at all of the one, as well as of the other. It is plain in Job 12.18.
that God loses the bond of Kings, and girdeth their Ioynes with a girdle: and
many other proofs may be brought, that God gives and takes away Scepters.
Wherefore it Jeroboam an usurper and seducer of the people do as truly hold
his Crown from God, as Rehoboam, if Nebuchadnezar may as justly require
subjection from the Jews under the name of Gods Vicegerents, as Josiah; if
Cyrus be as truly invested from heaven as Judas Machabeus; if Rich. the third
have a person and office as sacred, and inviolable by divine right, as his
Nephew Edward the fifth whom he treacherously murdered: and if we cannot
affirm that God is a more active or efficacious cause, or more overaweth, and
wresteth inferior agents in the one, then the other, it behooves us to be as
cautious how we impute to God, that which is man's, as how we impute to man,
that which is Gods.

Kings reign by God, it is confessed: but (Kings) there is used indefinitely for
all supreme Commanders, as well limited as unlimited, as well those which have
a greater, as those which have a lower style then Kings, as well usurpers and
such as ascend by violent means and unjust titles, as lawful Princes that
enter by a fair descent and election: and so likewise the word (by) is taken
indistinctly, it may as well signify that efficacy of Gods hand which is
ordinary, and stands with the freedom of natural causes, as that which is
extraordinary, and excludes any humane concurrent causality: and we have given
reason, why it should intimate the first, but there is no reason given why it
should intend the second. But the Royalists will now object, that if power do
flow from a humane natural principle (rather then a divine and supernatural
one) yet still this proves not that public consent is that only principle.
Nimrod was a greater hunter of men, and doubtless that Empire which he
atcheeved, was rather by force then consent; and it is apparent that many other
Princes have effected that by their own toils, which they never could have
done by mere merit or moral inducements.

It Is not to be imagined that Nimrod or any other by mere personal puissance
without the adherence of some considerable party, could subject nations; or lay
the foundations of a spreading Empire: neither was any Conquest ever yet
accomplished without some subsequent consent in the party conquered, as well as
precedent combination in the party conquering, or concurring in the act of
Conquest.

Normandy and England were united by arms, but not merely by arms, for the
acquisition of England was compast at first by the voluntary aids of the
Normans, and upheld afterward by the voluntary compliance of the English.

The maintaining of dominion is altogether as difficult as the purchase, and
commonly is of the same nature: if nothing else but the sword had placed
William in the Chair, nothing else but the sword perpetually unsheathed could
have secured him and his posterity therein, but it was not Normandy that was
engaged against England, it was William that was engaged against Heralt, no
sooner therefore was that personal dispute ended, but William was as well
satisfied with the translation of Heralts right, as England was willing to
transfer the same upon him. Without some rightful claim William had been a
Robber, not a Victor, and without the consent of this nation either declaring
or making that claim rightful, the robbery would have lasted for ever, and
yet no title had ever accrued thereby. Wherefore if there must be a right of
necessity to make a difference betwixt robbery, and purchase; and if that right
can never be justly determined by force without consent either precedent,
subsequent, or both: nor no Prince was ever yet found so impious or foolish as
to decline the same: the plea of Conquest is but a weak absurd plea, for (as it
is well observed) by a learned Gentleman, Conquest may be a good mean, or it
may be a remote impulsive cause of royalty, but an immediate formal cause it
cannot be, neither can Gods ordinance be conveyed, or a people in conscience
engaged by any other means then consent of the people, either by themselves,
or their Ancestors. Our adversaries to involve us in a base thraldom boast of
three Conquests in this Island, and yet neither of them all was just, or total;
or merely forcible, without consent preceding, or following. It Is a law amongst
swordmen (and it has no other sanction) Arma tenenti, omnia dat, qui justa
negat. Try us by this law; and what could either the Saxon, Dane, or Norman
pretend against this whole nation? if the Crown was unduly withheld, that
could beget but a particular quarrel betwixt the usurper here and him that was
pretender, on the otherside. This was no National injury, and yet even no such
manifest desseisin can be proved against us.

Besides, if the whole Nation had transgressed, yet the whole Nation was never
wholly subdued, nor scarce any part of it altered by conquest, all our
conquerours themselves did rather loose themselves, and their customs, and
their Laws to us, then assimilate us to themselves. Anglia omnibus Regunt and
Nationum temporibus iisdem legibus, and consuetudinibus quibus nunc regitur
continuo regebatur: we know by what an authentical hand this was written.
Warlike incursions of foraine Armies prevail no more usually upon great
States, then the influxes of rivers do upon the ocean, so far they are from
making the Maine fresher, that they themselves become brackish in attempting
it. We see the Norman here being in the full pride of his great victory, was in
danger to have received a fatal check from the Inhabitants of Kent (one County
of this Realm) had he not prudently betaken himself to a mild way of treaty,
and composition. And if the conquered remain in such condition, what justice is
that, which ingulphs not only them but the conquering Nations also, and their
posterities in the same vassalage under one insulting Lord? The natives here
now are not distinguishable, nor ever were in point of freedom from those
which entered by force amongst them; and shall we think, that the same hand
which wrested away our liberty in favor of one man, would do it with expense
of its own also?

To use more words in this pretense of violent acquisition, were to attribute
too much to it, if you rely upon any agreement and condescension of this
Nation, produce the same, and the true form thereof, and that shall purchase
you a good title; if you rely upon mere force, the continuation thereof to
this day ought not to conclude us in a plea of this nature. It Is no reason we
should be now remedilessely oppressed, because our Ancestors could not defend
themselves against your oppression.

Let us come now to another objection: for the Royalists will still say, If the
people be the true efficient, primary cause of sovereignty, yet the party
constituting is not always better then the constituted. Still the rule is
deniable, Quicquid efficit tale est magis tale. For the better ventilation of
this truth, we shall distinguish betwixt natural and moral causes; for in
moral causes this rule does not so constantly hold, as in natural. You will
say, that in natural things, it does not always hold; for a spark may raise
far greater flames then it self; and wine may intoxicate or work that in
another, which it has not in it self.

I answer. The spark that inflames other combustible stuff, and so dilates it
self into a greater flame, works not as a cause only, but as an occasion also;
and we shall more truly imagine that it is multiplied, and that it gathers new
strength from other concauses, then that it spends it self, or effects
something more vigorous, and perfect then it self: So wine, it makes not drunk,
as it is it self drunk; because drunkenness proceeds not from wine
immediately, but from other nearer causes. Wine heats the veins, annoyes the
stomach with humors, and the brain with fumes, and these are the immediate
causes of drunkenness; the proper work of wine is heat, and so it ever has a
heat as intense in it self, as that which it self causes elsewhere, and without
the accession of other joint causes, it cannot produce a greater degree of
heat, in another thing then it reserves in it self. As to ethicall causes (if
they may be truly called efficients) it is confessed, forasmuch as they work
voluntarily and freely, they may in their influences depart with more, or less
vigor as they please.

Authority, land, honor, etc. may be passed either absolutely, or
conditionally, and the conditions may be more or less restraining as the
agreement provides, according to the intent of the grantor, expressed by
instrument, or otherwise. In our case then we are to inquire whether supreme
signiory, or command be to be reputed amongst natural or moral things, and I
conceive it is of a mixed nature, proceeding from principles partly ethicall,
and partly natural. The honor and splendour of Monarchs (two main ingredients
of dominion) are after a physical manner derived, the more glorious and noble
the people is, the more glorious and noble the chief of the people is; and this
honor and glory is such as flows from the people without wasting it self, in
the act of flowing. In the like manner puissance, and force, it has a natural
production from the people (and this is another principal ingredient of
Empire) the more strength there is in such or such a Nation, the more strong is
he who commands that Nation: and yet that puissance which by perpetual consent
passes into the supreme Commander, does not so pass from the people, but that
it retains its ancient site, and subject of inherence.

Wherefore Honor and Power though they be so great requisites in the
composition of Princes, yet we see they have a natural efflux; and as Honor is
in Honorante not in Honorato, so Potestas is in Potestante (as I may use the
word) not in Potestato. The woman is coruscant by the rays of her husband,
borrowing resplendence like the Moon from the Suns aspect, without loss or
diminution to the fountain and cause of that coruscance. In the same manner
also Princes derive honor and power from their Subjects, yet drain not at all
the scource which derives it: Tanti est rex, quanti est regnum: As the people
increases, or impairs, so does the Prince; and we must not expect the contrary.
If then a Prince be in value or excellence superior to that community from
whence all his power and honor deduces it self (which can find but hard
entertainment in our thoughts) yet it is not because the fountain has evacuated
it self in that deduction; for we see the effect (even after its production,
for I speak not of its former entity) is such here, that it has Aristotle's
condition in it; it does utrique inesse, it has a residence in both parties, it
invests the grantee without devesting the grantor. To do the office of a
Protector, is the most proper, and therefore the most excellent, and
incommunicable prerogative of a King, yet even that power by which he is made
capable of protecting, issues solely from the adherence, consent, and unity of
the people; and so issues, as that the people suffer no exhaustion in the
business. Nevertheless, it must be granted, there is something of royalty which
springs from a moral principle, but that is the Commission, or indeed that
form of qualification by which one Prince differs from another in extent of
Prerogative, and in respect of this principle the people does more or less
straiten it self in point of liberty.

This of all other rays of Majesty is most immediately streaming from the
consent of the people; but if a Nation by solemn oath, or otherwise has
engaged it self to submit to the will of a Prince absolutely, affirmatively
reserving no privileges, but tacitly renouncing all immunities except only at
discretion, I shall not seek to destroy such agreements. I only say such
agreements are not the effects of Nature, and it is not easy to imagine how
right reason should ever mingle with such a moral principle, as gave being to
such an agreement, especially when it renders the Prince, who for honor and
power has his perpetual dependence upon the people, yet more honorable and
powerful in reputation of others then the people, and that by the express
grant of the people.

Howsoever (not to make this any part of our quarrel) let such acts of
communities be demonstrable positive, and unquestionable, as particular
convayances of lands, etc. use to be, and it shall not be denied, but the
effect in these political affairs may be more such, then that impoverisht
cause, which emptied it self to make it such. Yet sure such acts are very rare,
prescription is the great plea of Princes, and they themselves must be Judges
of that plea, the Grand Signior himself has nothing but prescription to damn
his Subjects (if they be to be accounted Subjects) to the base villenage of
arbitrary rule.

But you will say to such causes, as remain more virtuous then their effects,
there is another condition also requisite, they must not only utrique inesse,
but they must admit of degrees also, that the effect may be less then the
cause, as the water heated is less hot then the fire. And you will say, if the
peoples power be not totally involved, then they remain still, as well superior
to the Parliament as to the King. And if it be, then why not inferior to the
King, as well as to the Parliament? As for degrees, there is nothing more known
and assented to by all: all men must take notice, that Prerogatives of Princes
differ almost in all Countries; and since this difference flows from different
commissions, which Princes do not rightly grant to themselves, it cannot but
issue from the people, and from an act of the people which is graduall in it
self.

For the other objection, we say it is not rightly supposed that the people and
the Parliament are several in this case: for the Parliament is indeed nothing
else, but the very people it self artificially congregated, or reduced by an
orderly election, and representation, into such a Senate, or proportionable
body. It Is true, in my understanding, the Parliament differs many ways from the
rude bulk of the universality, but in power, in honor, in majesty, in
commission, it ought not at all to be divided, or accounted different as to any
legal purpose. And thus it is not with the King, the King does not represent
the people, but only in such and such cases: viz. in pleas of a common nature
betwixt Subject and Subject. Wherein he can have no particular ends; and at
such or such times, viz. when there is not a more full and near representation
by the Parliament. And hereupon the supreme reason or Judicature of this State,
from whence no appeal lies, is placed in that representative convention, which
either can have no interests different from the people represented, or at least
very few, and those not considerable: but I shall have occasion to be more
large hereafter upon this, and therefore I now supersede.

2 I come now to the final cause of government. The Scripture is very
pregnant, and satisfying; that the proper end of government was the good of the
governed: and that the people was subjected to dominion for their happiness,
and tranquillity; and not that the Prince was elevated for his pomp, or
magnificence. As for the Prince, the Law of God is most express in that, he is
not to make his advancement any ground of lifting up his heart above his
brethren: he is enjoined to that comportment which suits with a brother, not a
Lord: and to be so far from lifting up his hand insultingly, as not to be
inflated in his thoughts vain gloriously. And for the people, they are called
Gods flock, and the sheep of his pasture; and therefore it is said in the 78.
Psalm, that God chose David to feed his people. Our adversaries therefore
though they seldom speak of the people but under the notion of the ruder
multitude, and seldom name the multitude, but with terms of derision, yet
they will not wholly disavow this, and therefore they would fain divide with
us, and have a co-ordination of ends in the business. They will acknowledge
that power was ordained, ut nobis been sit, according to Jeremy; and ut
tranquillam and quietam vitam degamus oum omni pietate, and sanctitate, atque
etiam extrema honestate; according to Timothy: and (...), according to St.
Paul: and pro bono publico, according to Aristotle, and all sound Philosophy:
But still they say, This end, is not the sole end, the power and honor of the
Governor is an end coordinate withal, or at least not merely subordinate.
This we can by no means admit, though by the word Governor be intended, the
best regulated Governor that can be; much less if an arbitrary governor, or
one that abuses his power be here understood.

For though government be a necessary medium for the preservation of man
considered in a lapsed condition, yet this or that form of government, is not
always so much as a medium: arbitrary jurisdiction is so far sometimes from
being a blessing, that it is a very pest to the people of God. And if it arrive
not at the efficacy of a true medium, how can we imagine it an end in any
respect whatsoever? Nevertheless if there were not fraud in Royalists, when
they speak of the power, and honor of Princes generally, if they did not under
those terms comprehend that arrogant tumor or grandour of mind which is
incompatible with brotherly demeanor, and so is precisely forbidden by God, we
should not so curiously distinguish at this present betwixt a mean, and a sole
or mere mean. But now it behooves us to be very strict, and therefore to use the
words of Cicero upon this, Eo referenda sunt omnia, iis qui praesunt aliis, ut
ei qui erunt eorum in imperio sint quam beatissimi. This seems a hard saying to
our Royalists, must Princes do nothing at all but in order to public good, and
are they bound to promote such as live under their command to all possible
good, ut sint quam beatissimi? This goes very far; this makes the power,
honor, of supreme Rulers so merely subservient, and subordinate to the public
good, that to compass that at any time, nay or to add any scruple of weight
unto the same, it is bound wholly to postpone or deny it self. Vt gubernatori
cursus secundus, medico salus, imperatori victoria: sic moderatori reipub.
beata civium vita proposita est: So in another place says the same Author, and
this we may suppose he learned not only out of the discourses of Aristotle,
and Plato, as he was a Philosopher, but out of his State practice, as he was a
noble Senator and Magistrate in Rome. We read of multitudes of heathens, both
Greeks and Romans who had great commands, yet lived and died very poor,
either by neg^^^^ting their own particular affairs, or by spending their own
means upon the public. And therefore as Salvian says of some of them to our
shame, Illi pauperes Magistratus opulentam rempub. habe^ant, nuuc autem dives
potestas pauperem facit esse rempub.

Adrian the Emperor did often say both to the people, and in the Senate of
Rome, Ita serempub. gesturum ut sciret populi rem esse, non suam. and for this
cause some Princes have deserted their thrones, others have bitterly complained
against the perpetual miseries of Sovereignty, as being sufficiently informed
that to execute the imperial office duly, was nothing else but to dye to
themselves, and to live only to other men. This does absolutely destroy that
opinion, which places the good of Kings in any rivalty with the good of States.
For if Antonius Pius could truly say, Postquam ad imperium transcivimus, etiam
quae prius habuimus perdidimus; how far distant are they from truth which
makes Kings gainers, and subjects loosers by their inthronization? M. Anton.
Phil. having by law, the sole, entire disposition of the public Treasure, yet
upon his expedition into Scythia, would not make use of the same without the
Senates consent, but professed openly, Eam pecuniam, caeteraque omnia esse
Senatus Populisque Romans nos enim usque adeo nihil habemus proprium, ut etiam
vestras habitemus aedes. How diametrically opposite is this to that which our
State-Theologues do now buzze into the Kings ears? They instead of giving the
subjects a just and complete propriety in the King, resign the subject and all
that he possesses to the mere discretion of the King, instead of restraining
Princes where the laws let them loose, they let loose Princes where the law
restraines them. But our Royalists will say, this is to make the condition of a
King miserable, and more abject then a private man's condition. For answer to
this I must a little anatomize the State of a Prince.

For a Prince is either wise, and truly understands the end of his promotion,
or not; if he be not wise, then he is like a sottish prisoner laden and bound
with golden fetters, and yet is not so much perplexed with the weight, as
inammor'd with the price of them. Then does he enter upon Empire, as if he went
only ad au^eam messem, as Stratocles, and Dramoclidas had use to make their
boasting in merriment; but these vain thoughts serve only to expose him to the
trains of Flatterers, and Court-Harpyes, till having impoverisht thousands to
enrich some few, and gained the disaffection of good men to be abused by
villains, he never reads his error till it comes presented to his eye in the
black characters of ruin. The same wholesome advertisement commonly which
first encounters him (as that handwriting did which appeared to Belshazzar in
his drunken revells) lets him understand withal, that all repentance will be
too late. If the Prince be wise, then does he sit amongst all his sumptuous
dishes like Damocles, owing his life perpetually to the strength of one horse
hair: and knowing that nothing else saves his head from the swords point: then
must his Diadem seem to him as contemptible, or combersome as Seleucus his did,
who confidently affirmed that no man would stoop to take it from the ground, to
whom it was so perfectly known as it was to him. And it was no wild, but a
very considerate interpellation of some other sad Prince, who being to put on
the Crown upon his own head amongst all the triumphant attendants of that
solemnity could not but break out into this passion. O thou deceitful
ornament, far more honorable then happy; what man would stretch forth his
hand to take thee out of the dust, if he did first look into the hollow of thy
circle, and seriously behold the throngs of dangers, and miseries that are
there lodged?

Secondly, A Prince is either good, and applies himself to compass the end of
his inauguration or not, if he be not good, then does he under the
Majesticall robes of a God, act the execrable part of a Devil, then does he
employ all those means and helps which were committed to him for saving
purposes to the destruction of Gods people, and to the heaping up of such
vengeance to himself, as scarce any private man has ability to merit. How
happy had it bin for Tiberius, for Nero, and for a hundred more, if they had
wanted the fatal baits of royalty to deprave them, or the great advantages of
power to satisfy them in deeds of lust, and cruelty? Neroes beginning, his
quinquenium shows us what his disposition was as a mere man; but the latter
part of his tragical reign shows us what the common frailty of man is being
overcharged with unbounded seigniory. Amongst other things which made Caius
appear a monster and not a man, Suetonius in the first place reckons up his
ayry titles of pious most great, and most good etc. his impiety made him so
audacious as to profane these sacred styles, and these, sacred styles made his
impiety the more black, and detestable. If the Prince be good, then as Sencca
says, Omnium domos unius Principis vigilia desendit, omnium otium illius
labor, omnium delitias illius industria, omnium vacationem illius occupatio.
And in the same Chapter he further adds, Ex quo se Caesar orbiterrarum
dedicavit, sibi eripuit, and siderum modo, quae irrequieta semper cursus suos
explicant, nunquam illi licet nec subsistere nec quicquam suum facere. It Is
true of private men (as Cicero rightly observes) ut quisque maxim ad suum
commodum refert quecunque agit, ita minime est vir bonus. But this is much more
true of public persons, whom God and man have by more special obligations,
confined to public affairs only, and for that purpose raised above their own
former narrow orb. O that our Courtiers at Oxford would admit of such
politics, and blush to publish any directly contrary? then would these raging
storms be soon allayed. But alas, amongst us, when the great Counsel desires
that the Kings children may not be disposed of in marriage without public
privity, and consent, all our peace and religion (being nearly concerned
therein) it is answered with confidence, that private men are more free then
so. So when the election, or nomination of Judges, Commanders, and Counselors
of State is requested, it is answered, that this is to mancipate the Crown, and
to subject the King to more exactness in high important affairs then common
persons are in their lower interests. Till Machiavells days, such answers
never durst approach the light, but now Princes have learnt a new lesson; now
they are not to look upon the people as Gods inheritance, or as the efficient,
and final causes of Empire, but as wretches created for servility, as mutinous
vassalls, whose safety, liberty, and prosperity is by all means to be opposed,
and abhorred, as that which of all things in the world is the most
irreconcileably adverse to Monarchy. Salust a heathen complains of his times,
that instead of the ancient Roman virtues, they did entertain luxury and
covetousness public egestatem, privatim opulentiam. That which he complained
of as the symptom of a declining State, we Christians cry up as a rare arcanum
imperii: to make the Court rich, and keep the country poor as in France, is
held the most subtle art of establishing a Prince. Trajan a Pagan was an enemy
to his own safety further then it could stand with the safety of the State, as
Pliny writes; and would not endure that any thing should be wished for to befall
him, but what might be expedient for the public. Nay he appealed to the Gods
to change their favor toward him if ever he changed his affection to the
Commonwealth. Yet Clergy men now in holy orders, advise Princes not only to
prefer themselves, before the people, but even to propose the peoples
poverty, as the best mean to their wealth, and the peoples imbroyling the
nearest passage to their safety. Cicero out of Plato gives Princes these
precepts, so to provide for the peoples commodity, as in all their actions to
have relation to the same, and utterly to forget their private advantage: and
in the next place to extend their care to the whole body of the Commonwealth,
and every part of it. Our Divines on the contrary think they cannot speak more
like themselves then by inverting this order: making the Kings profit the sole
scope of his aims and actions, and the peoples either secondary thereunto, or
which is worse inconsistent therewithal: and so far are they from taking any
consideration of the whole body, that if the major part be not condemned to
slavery, and poverty, they conceive the weal of the whole is exposed to great
hazard.

It is to be noted also, that we Christians are not only degenerated in our
politics and become more unnatural then Gentiles, but even we also amongst
Christians which have been born under regular governments, do more
preposterously let loose the raines of Sovereignty, then those Gentiles which
knew no such regulations. Seneca under the Roman Empire says, Non licet tibi
quicquam tu^ arbitrio facere. His reason is, magna fortuna, magna servitus. In
England this would now be treason, if not blasphemy against God and the King,
we must be so far from saying that our King (though he pretend not to an
absolute prerogative) is a servant, that we must not say he is universis minor:
we must be so far from denying him an arbitrary power in any thing, that we
must allow him an arbitrary dissent even in those things which the States of
Kingdoms after mature debate propose to him. Maximus the Emperor in his
oration to his soldiers uses this expression: Neque enim unius tantum hominis
possessi^ principatur est, sed communis totius To: populi siquidem in ill^ urbe
sita est imperij fortuna: nobis autem dispensatatio tantum atque administratio
principatus una vobiscum demandata est. Who dares now avow at Court that the
whole nation of England has a true interest and possession of this Crown, and
that there is nothing therein committed to the King, but the office and charge
to dispense, and manage the same together with the people, for the peoples best
advantage? That which was true at Rome when there was neither religion, nor
perfection of policy to bridle Tyranny is now false, dangerous, traiterous in
England, amongst the most civil, and knowing Christians that ever were; what
can be now spoken more odious in the Court of England, then this undeniable
truth, that the King is a servant to the State, and though far greater, and
superior then all particulars; yet to the whole collectively taken, a mere
officer or Minister? The objections of our adversaries against this truth are
especially these two. First, They say the end is not more honorable, and
valuable then the means: And, Secondly, it cannot be so in this case, because
(they say) it is contradictory in sense, and a thing impossible in nature to be
both a servant, and a Lord to the same State. As to the first objection,
whereas the example of our Savior is produced to prove, that some instruments
may be of more dignity then those ends for which they are ordained: we answer,
our Savior though he did by his blood purchase our redemption, yet was in the
nature of a free and voluntary agent, he was not designed to so great a work of
humiliation by any other cause then his own eternal choice: and therefore
since he receives no ordination or designation from those whom he came to
redeem, nor had no necessary impulsion from the work it self of redemption,
but was merely moved thereunto by his own entire (...), we say he was not our
mean or instrument, but his own; and whereas the example of the Angels is
next alleged: we answer also, that their Ministry performed unto men is
rather a thing expedient, then necessary; and it is not their sole or chief
Ministry, neither do they perform the same as necessarily drawn thereunto by
any motive from man, as being the immediate end of their Ministry, but their
service is enjoined immediately by God, and so God, not man is the true scope
of their attendance. Lastly, whereas it is pressed, that the Advocate is ordained
for the Client, the Physician for the Patient, etc. yet it is frequently seen
that the Advocate is better then his Client, the Physician then his Patient,
etc. We answer, every particular Advocate or Physician is not to be compared
with every particular Client or Patient, but it is true in general that the
skill and art of the Advocate and Physician is directed in nature not so much
for the benefit of him which possesses it, as of him which is served by it; and
therefore Aristotle in the 2. Phys. cap. 1. affirms truly that the Physician
cures himself by accident, as the Pilot wafts himself by event, it being
impossible that he should waft others, if he were absent. In all arts that
which is principally intended, is the common benefit of all, and because the
Artist himself is one part of the whole body, consequently some part of the
benefit redounds to him. So after the same manner he that sits at the helm of
a State amongst others, steers the same for his own ends, but according to
Plato, and and Cicero both, his maine aim, his supreme law, ought to be
salus populi; it is a fit title for Princes to be called (...), and we know in
a Philosophical understanding, the shepherd, though by kind far more
excellent then his charge, yet in quantum a shepherd, considered merely in
that notion with respect to his charge, is subordinate and bound to expose
himself for his sheep. It is our Saviors saying, and it was crowned with our
Saviors practice, Bonus Pastor ponit vitam pro ovibus. Besides, Advocates,
Physicians, etc. as they voluntarily choose their own professions, perhaps
intend their own private profit in the first place, the public in the second,
such is the perverseness of humane nature; but as the State designs, or
authorizes them, that intends public ends in the first place.

I pass now to the second objection which maintains Lord and Servant to be
incompatible; our Tenet is, that Kings may have supreme Majesty as to all
individual subjects, yet acknowledge themselves subject to the whole State,
and to that supreme Majesty which flows perpetually from that fountain. In
brief, according to the old received maxim, the greatest Monarchs in the eye
of Law, policy and nature, may be singulis majores, universis minores, they may
obtain a limited Empire, or sub regno graviore regnum. Our adversaries though
they cannot disprove, yet they much disrelish this doctrine, they cannot say it
is impossible; for all Democracies, Aristocracies, mixed and limited Monarchies
make it visibly true: nor can they say it is incommodious, for there are more
mixed and limited States then absolute; and those which are mixed, and limited,
are more civil, more religious, more happy then those which are not. These
things are beyond all doubt, and debate. The question then is only, whether
absolute Princes, that is, such as have no persons to share in power with them,
nor no laws to circumscribe their power for them, be not as mere servants to
the State, and as much obliged in point of duty to pursue its public interest,
as they are Lords over private persons, and predominant over particular
interests. Many of the authorities before cited make good the affirmative, and
many more may be alleged to the same purpose: and the rule of final causes,
makes it beyond all contradiction, that there is a certain service annexed to
the office of the most independent Potentate. Nefas est, (says Alexander
Severus) a publico dispensatore prodigi quae Provinciales dederant. He contents
himself with the name of a public Steward or Treasurer, and confesses that
he cannot mispend the common stock entrusted with him, without great sin and
injustice.

Maximus also (as was before recited) challenged no more in the Empire then a
kind of Commission to dispense, and administer (they are his own very words)
the affairs of the Empire with the State. And therefore Seneca gives this
admonition, that the Emperor should make his account, non suam esse Rempub.
sed se Reipub. And this was that service (the very word it self is servitus)
which Tiberius complained to be laid on his shoulders so miserable and
burthenous, as Sueton. writes in the life of Tiberius. It was recorded in
commendation also of Nasica, that he preferred his country before his own
family, and did account no private thing his own, or worthy of his thoughts in
comparison of those things, which were publicly advantageous; ut enim tutela,
sic procuratio Reipub. ad utilitatem eorum, quibus commissi sunt, non ad eorum
quibus commissa est, gerenda est: here the office of a Magistrate is a
procuration, he is taken as a Guardian in Socage, and the end of his office is
the utility of those which are committed to his trust, not his own. To
conclude the laws of the Empire were very full, and clear in this, and many
more histories might be brought forth to give more light and strength in the
case, but there is no need of any. If any honest Patriot nevertheless think
fitter to use the name of father then servant, I shall not wholly gainsay
therein. My wish is, that subjects may always understand their right, but not
too rigorously insist upon it; neither would I have them in private matters
look too much upon their public capacity: Princes also may without indignity
to themselves, at some times condescend to such acknowledgements of the peoples
due, as is not so fit to be heard from any mouth, but their own.

Happy is that King which anticipates his subjects in submitting his own
titles, and happy are those subjects which anticipate their King in submitting
their own rights, and happy are both, when both thus comply at the same time.

Nevertheless, if it may be ever seasonable to urge a verity with strictness,
Princes are not to be called Fathers of their Subjects, except taken divisim:
but are mere servants to the people taken collectim. How erroneous then are
they, and how opposite to the end of government, which are so far from making
Kings servants to the people, that they make the people servants to Kings;
whereas the Lord does not rule for the profit of his servant, but by the profit
of his servant compasses his own.

Servile power is tolerated, because it tends to the safety and good of him
that is subject to it; but as Aristotle holds, 3. Pol. c. 4. the master in
protecting his servant does not look upon his servants ends herein, but his
own, because the loss of his servant, would be a loss to his family.
Therefore this kind of Authority is not to be endured in a State, because it is
incompetent with liberty, provided only for slaves, and such as have no true
direct interest in the State: whereas finis justi imperii (as Ammianus writes)
and as has been confirmed by many other proofs: Vtilitas obedientium
aestimatur, and salus. But you will say, It is more reasonable that Subjects
should remain under the condition of servants, then he which has authority over
those Subjects, and is in place far above them.

I answer: That end to which Princes are destined, viz. the Common good, or
(...), as one calls, or (...), as another calls it, or cura salutis aliena, as
another calls it, is so excellent, and noble, that without the inconvenience of
servility, they may be servile to it. The truth is, all things that are in the
nature of means and instruments are then most perfect, and entire, when they
are most fit, and conducible to accomplish the end for which they are prepared.
So Aristot. delivers in the 5. Metaphys. and so Averroes, and Thomas thereupon.
It Is to quarrel against God, and Nature, to except against that true and proper
end which God and Nature has designed to any person or thing. The Greeks
called excellence (...) from (...); and the Romans called it perfectio,
because that is perfect, or consummate which approaches nearest to its end. It Is
not only therefore to be said, that that is a perfect, or entire State,
wherein the Governor executes all things in order to the Common good, but he
also is a perfect, and entire Governor, which bends all his actions to that
purpose. For if we look up to Almighty God, we must needs acknowledge that he
is most truly represented and personated by such a Deputy as refers all things
to public Good. For God is goodness it self, and there is nothing more
essential to goodness, then to be diffusive, and God has no end of addition or
profit to himself in making Heaven, or Earth, Angels or men.

Next if we look upon Nations, they ever retribute most honor, and repay most
duty, love, and gratitude to such Princes as are most free from particular
aims. That Reign which supports it self by terror is accompanied with hatred,
and danger: but that which found it self upon love, is truly majesticall, safe,
and durable. For in part the Princes happiness is involved in his Subjects,
and he does more partake in their flourishing condition, then they in his
private advantages. If Cicero can say, Nistrum dicamus esse, quicquid bono
principi nascatur: the Prince may say as truly, Principis est quicquid est
omnium. Therefore does Aristot. 8. Ethic. c. 10. maintain, that Kings do not
regard their own particulars, but the community of their Subjects; because
there is a self-sufficiencie, and perfection in good Kings whilst they cannot
be said to want that, which their Subjects have. Queen Elizab. by her public
actions doubted not to win her Subjects hearts, and being possessed of her
Subjects hearts, she doubted not but to command both their hands and purses,
and what else could she want to make her truly great and glorious?

Next, if we look upon Princes themselves, they have gallant, capacious, and
heavenly souls, which know no bounds in their affections but the Community it
self, over which God has placed them: but they are ever narrow of heart, poor
of spirit, and weak in judgment, that prefer themselves, and their own profit,
or rather a shadow of profit, before the whole flock of God, and that which is
indeed real, and substantial glory. Plato supposes that Nature in the
composition of common people used the courfest metal in the composition of
Soldiers, and the middle rank silver; but in the production of chief
Commanders, the purest sort of gold. His meaning is, she infused higher and
better principles, where the confined to greater and nobler ends.

Lastly, if we look upon the nature of the end it self, we shall see there is
not that servility in it as is supposed, it differs toto genere from that
preposterous end, which would make whole Nations servile. For if it be slavish,
and base, to have the true good or prosperity of millions postponed to the
false good and prosperity of one man, sure it is directly the contrary, for one
man to abdicate that which has but the show of his single benefit in comparison
of that which apparently is the true benefit of millions. Servility and
slaverie (if it be rightly defined) is that odious and unnatural condition,
which subjects and necessitates a man to a false end, or to such an end, as God
and Nature in his creation never did intend him for. Now this definition does
not agree with that condition of a Prince, which subjects, and necessitates him
to public ends. Let then all Princes from hence learn to renounce Machiavils
ignoble, fordid principles, and let them industriously aspire to the true
excellence and perfection of that public divine end, for which they were
ordained. Let them think it more glorious, and better beseeming imperial
dignity, to be accounted the love, and delights of Mankind, as Titus was; then
the seducers of Israel, as Jeroboam was. Let them zealously imitate Augustus,
who found Rome built of brick, but left it all beautified with marble; rather
then Nero who consumed both brick and marble with fire, and reduced all to
ashes.

Let them follow that Prince, who preferred the saving of one Subjects life,
before the slaughtering of a thousand enemies; rather then such Princes, as
usually value the life of one Traitor, before the peace and safety of diverse
Kingdoms.

To conclude, let the public good of their Subjects, (being the true end of
their Royalty assigned both by God and Man) be the measure of their actions,
the touchstone of their Politics, the perfection of their Laws, the
determination of their doubts, and the pacification of all their differences.

We have now seen who is the Architect, and what the true intent is of the
Architect. Let us in the third place take view of some frames and erections to
gain more light from the parts, and fashions thereof. And first let us take
notice of such Politics as Scripture affords from Adam to Moses; and next from
the introduction of the Law till the Incarnation of our Savior: then let us
inform our selves of that Empire under which Christianity began first to
spread; and lastly, let us draw down to our own times, and survey our own
fabric.

The first species of Power, which had a being in the world (for the word Power
is applied diversely) was Maritall: and this we conceive to be something more
then mere order, but not so much as Jurisdiction; for these reasons.

First, the Scripture says, the man, and the woman were made one flesh, or one
person; and they were so conjoined in their interests, that the love of son and
father was not so strong, as this conjugall tie.

This makes a coercive power improper, when man is to use it upon his own
members: for man is not said justly to have any jurisdiction over his own
parts, or members; it is a kind of solo^cisme in nature. Vbi tu Caius, ibi ego
Caia, so said the old Roman law, and God in the fifth Commandment allows the
same degree of honor to the mother as to the father.

Secondly, If the Husband have such a coercive power, it is so arbitrary that
he may proceed to what degree of rigor he pleases, even to death it self; for
as he has no law to bound him, so he has no equallito control him: nay, he
is not Judge only, but informer, witness, and executioner also: and nothing
can be more extreme, and rigid then this.

Thirdly, The wife (admitting such a Jurisdiction of the husband) if in all
cases remediless and destitute of appeal; though there be more bonds of
duty, and awe, to restrain her from being injurious, disobedient and
unnatural to her husband, then to withhold her husband from abasing his
authority, (and this ought rather to exempt her, then him) yet in this case,
for him there is no control, and for her there is no redress.

Fourthly, There is no mention precept or precedent in Scripture, to
countenance any coertion of this nature, unless we will call that of divorce
and repudiation so; and that also seems discountenanced by our Savior, except
in case of Adultery.

Fifthly, We see in all nations the power of Husbands is regulated by the
public civil power; which if it were from nature, before Civil power it
could not justly be repealed, nor merit to be altered. Contra jus natural,
non valet dispositio humana.

When Vashti the Emperesse would not submit to the command of him who was both
her Husband and Prince, a law was made to punish that contempt, and the like
offenses, and till that law was made, it was not thought fit that the
Jurisdiction either or husband or Prince should be exercised against her.

It Is sufficient therefore that Nature teaches wives to look upon their husbands
interests, as their own, and their persons as themselves; and to acknowledge
them their Lords, as God has endued them with more majesty, strength, and
noble parts: and to be submisse as they were created of and for men: and if
then Nature prevails not, recourse must be had to an impartial Judicature,
where either party may be indifferently heard: for there is no more justice
intended to the one, then to the other, nor can injustice be more feared from
the one, then the other. So much concerning Maritall power, and to show that
nothing can be rightly extracted out of it, for the licensing of arbitrary rule
in the State. Wherefore I pass to Paternall power.

The second species of Power which succeeded in the world, was that which
Parents have over their children: and this also we conceive to exceed mere
Order, but not to equal Jurisdiction, or at least absolute Jurisdiction; for
these reasons:

First, because it is apparent, that in the family the power of the Mother does
participate with the power of the Father, and by its mixture and co-ordination
cannot but be some qualification to its rigor.

Secondly, take children before they are of maturity, and there needs no other
Scepter, but a twig to awe them; and take them to be of full age, and then they
spread into families themselves, and rise to the same command in their own
houses, as they were subject to in their fathers.

It were unjust also that Parents should claim any Jurisdiction to hold their
children from marriage, or to usurp so over them after marriage, as they may
not command in the same manner, as they are, or were themselves commanded.

Thirdly, Nature with a very strong instinct breaks the force of Paternall
empire, by turning the current of affection rather from the father to the son,
than from the son to the father: it rather makes the father, which is the root,
convey sap to the son, which is the branch, than on the contrary: and therefore
the natural end of the father, is not his own good only, but his whole
families, (according to Aristotle) whereas, take him in the notion of a Master,
and so he regards his own good in the first place, and his servants in the
second, only as it conduces to his.

Fourthly, If Parents had an absolute jurisdiction over their Children, even to
life and death; then Children, which in the eye of Policy, are sometimes many
in number, and of more public value then their Parents, might be oppressed
without all means of remedy: and this may prove mischievous and unequal, and
not fit to be referred to Natures intention.

Fifthly, In all Civil Countries, where Government is established, there are
Laws to overruled Parents as well as Children, and to provide for the safety
of Children as well as Parents: And where no Government is yet established,
there is no president of such jurisdiction.

Upon the murder of Abel, if the right of a Father had entitled Adam to the
same power, as the right of a Prince uses to do, Adam ought to have arraigned
Cain at his Bar, and to have required blood for blood. But we do not find that
Adam did claim any such power, or sin, in not claiming it: We find rather that
the whole stock of Mankind then living, were the Judges that Cain feared: and
there is reason why they should be more competent for such a trial then the
Father himself. When there were no Kings, no Judges in Israel, the People by
common consent did rise up to vindicate common trespasses; and God so required
it at their hands. But if judgment should be left to Parents only, much
injustice might be expected from them, which is not so much to be feared from
the People not yet associated: For the offense of the Son is either against the
Father, or some other: If against the Father, then is he Judge in his own case;
and that is dangerous; the Father may be partial to himself: If against
another, then the Father is a stranger to the Plaintiff, not to the Defendant:
and that is more dangerous, in regard that partiality is more to be feared.
The Paternal right of Adam might better qualify him for rule, whilst he lived
only amongst his own descendents, than any other pretense could any other
particular person amongst his descendents: but it did only qualify, not
actually constitute: and since Adams death, none but Noah could pretend to the
same qualification.

The right of Fathers is now in all Fathers equal; and if we do not grant,
that it is now emerged or made subordinate in all great associated Bodies, by
that common authority which extends over all, we must make it incompatible
with Common Authority. It Is true, Bodin is very zealous for Paternall empire;
and he conceives, that the public Courts of Justice would not be so full of
suites, if this Domestical jurisdiction were not too far eclipsed thereby. But
it is well answered, That Bodin, in this, does not aim at the total cure of
Contention in the State: his only ambition is, to ease the public Courts, and
to fill private houses with more vexations and unnatural contestations.

The Roman Law was very rigid against Children; and Bodin supposes that Law
was grounded upon the Law of Nature: but we know it never was received in all
Nations, neither is it now in force almost in any Nation: And whereas Bodin
appeals to Gods law, Deuteronomy. 21. we desire no better determination; for the very
words of the Law there, give the definitive sentence to the Elders, and the
execution to the whole City: the Parent has no part, but that of the Witness,
left to him; neither indeed can any man be thought more unfit either to judge,
or to execute, nay, or to be a spectator of the rebellious executed Son, than
the Father himself. Civilitie has now so far prevailed even in the Imperial
Law it self, that Parents may not causelessly abdicate or dis-inherit Children;
nor is that held a good Testament, wherein the Sons name is totally omitted;
Nor if ingratitude, or disobedience, or any other cause be alleged against
the Son, is the Father left solely to his own judgment in that cause.

We do allow, that Parents are gods to their Children, and may challenge great
piety from them; and that, in nature, their offices of kindness are of grace,
and not of duty; whereas no office of the child is of grace, but of mere duty:
Yet this destroys not Law, or the interposition of Public Authority. The
Fathers right in the Son, is not so great as is the Countries. Cicero says
very well, Patria una omnium charitates complectitur. The Father therefore must
not use his inferior right to the prejudice of a higher. Nay, the Father is not
only restrained by Law from acts of injustice, the same being in him more to be
detested than in a stranger: but he is of duty to perform all such pious
offices also, as the infirm condition of Children stand in continual need of.

And this duty, though the Child cannot challenge as proportionable to any
merit in him, yet the State shall injoyne as necessary, and righteous, and
altogether indispensable. Nay, suppose our Crown escheated, or suppose any body
of men not yet associated; yet still we maintain, the Father (not as animal
sociatum, but only as animal sociale) owes a preservation of his Issue, for the
common good of Mankind; and cannot deny payment of the same, without great
injustice to humane nature. We may conclude then, that this Paternall rule
being so far divided and limited in point of loss of life, liberty, or other
properties, wherein there is a rivaltie or concurrence of a common interest:
and so far clogged with pious duties and tender respects, will be very unapt to
lend any testimony for rigorous, boisterous prerogatives in Princes.

The next kind of Power visible in the World, was Fraternall: for the Father
being dead, the eldest Son is supposed by some to have inherited his dominion,
or at least to have attained to some superiority over his younger brethren.
Much might be said to prove, that Fathers did not transmit all their power to
their eldest Sons; for so there had remained but one Monarch in the World: and
the story of Abraham and Lot sufficiently disproves this fond dream. But take
it for granted, and yet the same Answers which make conditionate the power of
the Father, must in the same manner be applied to the power of the Brother.
Philosophy tells, that the cement betwixt brother and brother, is in some
respects more knitting than any other whatsoever: for the cement of love
betwixt Husband and Wife, is equal, but not natural; the cement betwixt
Father and Son is natural, yet not equal; but the obliging power of amity
betwixt Brother and Brother, is both equal and natural: and this is no sure
preparation for superiority. Majestas and Amor non been ^onveniunt. And
therefore 'twill be superfluous to answer any farther to this point.

Our next transition then will be from Fraternall power to that of Masters or
Lords, which from the Greek we term Despoticall, from the Latin, Herile. This
power gives the Lord an absolute, arbitrarie interest in the slave; and it
cannot be called Jurisdiction, because it proposes no ends of Justice in it
self. A slave (according to Aristotle) is he, who is so wholly his Lords, as
that he has no property remaining in himself: he only lives, or has a being
to his Lord; but is as dead, nay nothing to himself. Whatsoever may be acquired
by him. Whatsoever may accrue any other way to him, it rests immediately in his
Lord: and his person, his life, all that Nature has endowed him withal, is so
his Lords, that at discretion he may be beaten, tortured, killed, or
libidinously used, etc. His very Lord is not called his, as he is called his
Lords: for he is his Lords absolute possession, as a horse, or any real or
personal chattell is: but his Lord is his, only secundum quid, as he bears
rule over him: in all other things the Lord retains his own state, person,
liberty and right; neither does he refer to the slave, but in a limited
respect.

Hereupon it is much controverted, whether Servitude be agreeable to Nature, or
no? And as Naturalists do generally hold it affirmative; so our Civilians are
strong for the Negative. Wherefore for the stating of this, we must know, that
Servitude is largely taken by Aristotle, and not distinguished from order in
Nature, or that power which Man has over sensitive and vegetable things, or
that Jurisdiction which intends Public good, and the distributing to every
man that which is his own. This caused that error. We must understand also,
that when Lawyers maintain all men to have been equal by Nature, and free;
their meaning is, that no violent, noxious, unvoluntarie inequality, or
restraint, had its introduction from Nature.

So the true Question is but this; Whether that power of a Lord, which is
unlimited, over his slave, be in any kind profitable for the Slave, good for
the State, or expedient for Mankind, or no? If it be, it may have a foundation
in Nature; If not, it is otherwise. And whereas Aristotle presupposes, that
there are some men so servile by nature, and so nearely approaching to bruit
beasts, that they cannot govern themselves, nor live but by the souls of
other men: we may not reject this, yet wholly reject Dominicall-power
notwithstanding.

For first, That Dominicall-power which we oppose, is unnatural; it is such,
as has no eye at all upon the good or conservation of the slave, or at least,
none but secundary; the very definition of it leaves the slave utterly
disinherited of himself, and subject to his masters sole ends: Now that which
tends not to the preservation, is not natural, but violent, and consequently,
to be abhorred.

Secondly, there can be no condition of man so servile or brutish, as to
require an Arbitrary subjection: Nature has not exposed infants to this rigor,
no nor beasts, and therefore much less any that have a larger use of reason:
This condition does make Government absolutely necessary; but absolute
Government it does not prove so much as expedient.

Thirdly, if this condition did justify Dominicall-Rule as to that respect,
yet this justifies it not generally, and as the world has ever hitherto used
it, and as it is commonly understood: No generous mind, no knowing man, no
Politician ought to be mancipated by this ground; and yet we know well, Slavery
hitherto has observed no such distinction in the world.

Fourthly, Servile Government does not only show it self injurious and violent
in devesting the propriety of those which are subjected to it, but also the
more public and sublime propriety; which the Commonwealth, the Society of
Mankind, nay God himself has in the parties enslaved. If the lord may destroy
his slave at pleasure, then he may destroy that, which in part is belonging to
another: then the condition of a slave is worse than of a beast, or any
inanimate Cattels; and this is most unnatural, and publicly detrimentall. Sic
utere tuo, ne noceas alieno: sic utere privato, ne noceas publico. These are
Maxims that restrain men from the abuse of any other things; nay, by these
Rules, no man may abuse himself: yet these restrain not from abusing slaves;
these deny not, but a lord may have a more confined power over his slave, than
he has over himself. Seneca would not admit, that the masters right in the
slave should derogate from the right of himself in himself, much less of
others; therefore does he most admirably expostulate, thus: Servi sunt? imo
homines. Servi sunt? imo contubernales. Servi sunt? imo humiles amici. Servi
sunt? imo conservi. His Conclusion is, Cum in servum omnia liceant, est aliquid
quod in hominem licere communius velit. Here is a difference observed between
the nature of the servant and the nature of the man: If thou may tyrannize
over him as he is thy servant, yet thou may not as he is man: If the misery
of one capacity have exposed him to thy cruelty, the privilege of the other
capacity ought to recommend him to thy favor: If the more base relation of
servant entitle thee to domineer, yet the more noble relation of man checks the
insolence of that title.

Fifthly, Arbitrary Government does not only rob slaves of that natural
interest which they have in themselves, and States of their public Interests
which they have both above lords and slaves; but it is often a very strong
Incentive to cause an abuse of that usurped Interest.

The Story of Vedius Pollio may make this good, and suffice instead of
thousands that might be produced. This Pollio had a Pond stored with Lampries;
and as he kept the Lampries for his own food, so his wicked use was to cast the
bodies of men into the Pond, to feed the Lampries. Augustus the Emperor came
by chance as a guest to his house; and, during the entertaiment, a
Crystal-Glasse was broken by one of his slaves that attended. The slave knowing
his lords cruelty, and fearing to be thrown into the Lamprie-pool, and so made
to die an unnatural prey to fishes, fell at the feet of Augustus, not
supplicating for life, but some other manner of death, less to be abominated.
The Emperor, moved with compassion, became an interceder for his pardon; and
not prevailing, in abhorrence of that bloody Monster, commanded the slave to be
dismissed, the Pond to be filled up with earth, and all the rest of Pollio's
Crystal-Glasses to be broken instantly, for prevention of the like disasters.

There was much grace in this; but there had been far more, if he had dismissed
all the slaves in Rome for the same reason, or so curbed the power of the
lords, that they might not have been any longer incited thereby to such
prodigious degrees of inhumanity. By the same reason also, as this unbridled
License make lords more insulting, it makes those that are insulted over the
more vindicatives, false, and dangerous. Many horrid Stories might be produced,
to prove, that the cruelty of lords has always been retalliated with
infidelity, hatred and desperate revenge of slaves.

But some will say, Slaves have been very useful to some States; and there are
experiments, that slavery itself has been beneficial to thousonds of slaves
themselves: and it is known to all, that in the first dilatation of
Christianity, when slaves were every where discharged for the honor of
Religion, the world became full of beggars: and though Hospitals and
Almshouses exceedingly increased, yet it was too little to keep many from
starving, and begging up and down. Hereupon, the Emperor Valens was compelled,
by his Edict, to recall into slavery again all such as had begged from door to
door, and for want of industry or ingenuity could not provide for their own
sustenance, and so declared themselves incapable of the benefit of liberty.

To this I make answer thus: First, Slaves in all Countries and in all Ages
have not been treated alike: and it is manifest, that in such Countries and
times, wherein they have been protected against extremity of rigor by
courteous Laws, they have been of some private use: But when they have been too
numerous, and when they have been governed with cruelty, they have been
publicly fatal, for the most part. Let Bodin speak to this Point.

Secondly, Where slaves are under the protection of other Laws than their lords
wills, and where they are truly parts and members of the State, and so
regarded; they cease to be slaves, according to our aforesaid Definition.

Thirdly, A confused enlarging of slaves at the same instant of time, and
dismission from all domestical rule, might be prejudicial in the infancy of
Religion; but the altering of domestic rule, or changing the same from
arbitrary to legal, from despoticall to paternall, and that for some certain
space of time, could have bred no inconvenience: For if the mere restoring of
men to a right in themselves, and a common and reciprocal right in the State,
could make them incapable of subsisting, this would extend to all Nations and
Times; whereas we know, we see, we daily try the contrary every where.

But it will be further said, If Nature it self has no ways recommended this
Arbitrary power over slaves; yet the Laws of Nations, or Municipall Laws do
justly permit the same. This, if it be granted, does nothing at all invalidate
any thing by me undertaken: Yet, for further satisfaction herein also, it is to
be observed,

First, That God, by his Law against murder, oppression, etc. excepts not
slaves more then freemen: That he equally hates sin in freemen, and rewards
virtue in slaves: That he has care of slaves equally as of freemen; and extends
the price of Christ's Blood equally to both: and in Levit. 25. his law is
peremptorily to the Jews, That none of that Nation shall be in Bondage, or
serve instar Mancipii; sed ut Mercenarius, aut hospes: Nay, even mercenary
servants were to be set free, and to return to their kindred, and liberty with
all their goods and family, vertente Jubelaeo: Nay, the Canaanites and
Heathens, whom God had designed to extirpation, yet might not remain in
slavery, after they did embrace the true Religion; then there was the same law
to the Jew and to the Proselyte: the Apostle is clear in this, Omnes unum sunt
in Christo. Whether they be Jews or Greeks, bond or free, etc. And if Saint
Paul does persuade servants, not to withdraw themselves from their masters
after conversion to Christianity; but remain under the yoke, and to honor and
obey their masters: Ne nomen Dei, and doctrina male propter ipsorum iniquam
pertinaciam audeat. This commends not at all the condition of slaves; it only
tolerates it so far, as that where it is established by public authority, it
may not be repealed by private persons. Yet we read of no slavery, till it was
denounced to Chams posterity, as a curse by God; neither may we impute the sin
of that slavery which ensued upon that curse, to God, as the proper and
immediate cause thereof.

Secondly, as there is no difference of slaves and freemen before God, so
neither is there in nature: Slaves are men as much as their lords; they have
the same endowments of mind, the same ability of body; they are born with the
same danger, and exposed to the same miseries.

Thirdly, In the State, if liberty be a benefit, and may be publicly more
useful then bondage, the liberty of the servant ought to be as precious, and
is of as much public importance as the Lords: nay, it often happens, that the
servant has more natural ingenuity then the master.

Fourthly, If we have respect to mere usage, and the custom of Nations, we
shall find, that the extreme rigor of arbitrary servitude was scarce ever
entertained by any, but barbarous people; nay amongst Barbarians, scarce any
would inslave natives, or such as they thought of the true Religion, or such as
had not some way merited death by the Law: Scarce any but had Asylum, or some
other means of refuge for slaves oppressed, and brought almost to desperation:
and where too much rigor was used, scarce any but found the desperation of
slaves pernicious.

Tacitus says of the Germans, that they were so indulgent to slaves, that they
were scarce to be called slaves there. And amongst the Russians, none but the
Prince could take away the life of his slave. The Athenians allowed by Law,
that the complaints and suites of slaves should be publicly heard: nay, they
provided for plowing Oxen, by Law, that they should not be abused. Cadmus at
Thebes, and Thesius at Athens, erected an Altar of Mercy, for protection of
Slaves. At Rome, the statue of Romulus; at Ephesus, the Temple of Diana served
for such merciful uses; And almost all Nations had the like places for
recourse of oppressed Captives.

The law Aquilia and Petronia were passed in favor of slaves, and to restrain
all cruelty beyond scourging. And Augustus, as also many Emperors after him,
when Civilitie began to be illightned by Christianity, began to break the
arbitrarie power of Lords, and to set bounds to it, as a thing fit to be
antiquated for many equitable reasons. As soon as Christianity was
established, by Law, provision was presently made to free all Christians from
slaverie And it is now 400 years, and more, since all slaverie amongst
Christians has been wholly expulsed, so that there is scarce any name or
memory thereof remaining. And this cannot but be attributed partly to piety,
partly to equity, and partly to natural respects.

Fifthly, If we have respect to Law, either we must acknowledge that the
Commonwealth has an interest in slaves, or not. If it has not, what a maime,
what a loss is this? If it has, how can such mis-improvement thereof be
answered to God, or justified in Policy? If it be said, that slaverie may be
inflicted as a due punishment not unsuitable to natural reason, or exchanged
for death. I answer: My scope is not to prove, that Arbitrarie servilitie is at
some times, and to some spirits, worse than death: Nor do I wholly bend my
self against it, as it is inflicted upon any that really deserved death, I
shall only thus argue: Either condemnation, and sentence of slavery passed upon
the guilty, does really put the Delinquent into a worse condition than death,
or not. If it does, then it is unjust and excessive. If not, then it reserves
something to the delinquent, wherein neither the right of the Delinquent, nor
the right of the State is wholly lost and relinquished; And if the Delinquent
be dead to himself, and yet not to others; then not to the State, more than to
the Lord; for how can the State, which has an interest in the Lord, choose but
have an interest in that, which is the interest of the Lord?

So much of this kind of Power. Now we orderly arrive at that Power, which is
the only intended subject of our discourse; and that we shall properly call
Jurisdiction. We have already searched the Schools for the causes of Power,
both final and efficient; We have also ransacked the bosom of Nature for all
other species of Power; and yet we can find no grounds for absolute Rule. We
shall now therefore make enquiry for precedents or patterns, such as all ages
may furnish us withal. And who now has any competent share of reason, can
suppose, that if God and Nature have been so careful to provide for liberty
in Families, and in particulars; that Man would introduce, or ought to endure
slaverie, when it is introduced upon whole States and Generalities. Every thing
intends its own good and preservation, and therefore when Communities fancied
to themselves the forms of Jurisdiction, we must believe that they did not
wholly depart from the originals of God and Nature, but rather copy out of
those forms whatsoever was best and most sovereign in each. Howsoever it is
granted on all sides, that Princes and supreme Commanders, in all Ages and
Countries, have differed in the latitude of Jurisdiction; some have been more
absolute, others less. Now since this did proceed from diverse reasons, and
has produced diverse effects; let this be the subject of our discussion.

The nature of Man-being depraved by the fall of Adam, miseries of all sorts
broke in upon us in throngs, together with sin; insomuch that no creature is
now so uncivil and untame, or so unfit either to live with, or without
society, as Man. Wolves and Bears can better live without Wolves and Bears,
then Man can without Man; yet neither are Wolves nor Bears so fell, so
hostile, and so destructive to their own kind, as Man is to his. In some
respects, Man is more estranged from Political union than Devils are: for by
reason of natural disparitie, the reprobate Angels continue without
dissolution of order, and shun that confusion amongst themselves, which they
endeavor to promote amongst Men. But amongst Men, nothing but cursed enmity
is to be seen. When Aristotle says, that Men do associate by instict of
Nature, for ends of honesty, as they are communicative creatures, as well as
necessity and safety: He rather intimates what we should be, than what we
are; and tells us what we were created, rather than what we are being now
lapsed.

We must insist upon Necessity therefore, as the main ground and end of
Policy; And besides Order, and the Laws of God and Nature, we must find out
some more particular constitutions, to cement us, and to hold us fast bound
together. Though the times of Adam were not uncouth, as ours now are, yet even
then the common consent of Mankind (that which we now call, Jus Gentium) was
too slack iand loose a bond, to keep the World from dissipation.

Whilst the Universe was but one entire House, united under one common Father,
in whom all tyrannous thoughts were contrary to the worst suggestions of
Nature; whilst the near relation of blood was fresh, and unobliterated; whilst
the spacious surface of the Earth (not yet thronged with plantations) afforded
few baits of avarice, or objects of ambition, or grounds of difference betwixt
brother and brother; whilst so many umpites of equal distance in blood, were
at hand to interpose, in case any difference did unhappily arise; The raines of
Government might hang more loose and easy upon the necks of Men. Yet even the
infancy of the World, we see, required something more than the rod to overawe
it, and some other severer hand than a Fathers, to shake that rod: Nay, if Abel
fall by the bloody hand of a Murderer, (who has no other provocation given
him, but the piety and devotion of his nearest allie) little expiation or
justice is to be expected from the common assembly of the whole body.

How long it was before Families did incorporate, and grow up into Cities, and
Cities into States; and how long it was before Cities and States did frame
Laws, and settle Magistrates to enforce those Laws, is dimly and obscurely set
forth, either in the Book of God, or other Authors: but we may very well
guess, by the many small petty Principalities that we read of in all ancient
Chronicles, either divine or profane. That Regiment in the first ages of the
world was rather too mild and finewlesse, than too violent and rigorous: Where
the Territories are narrower, the managery of affairs is the easier; and where
the Scepter is more easy to be swayed by the Prince, it is more gentle to be
born by the people. Were it not for fear of foreign infestations, smaller
Seigniories were best constituted and disposed, for peace and duration: And
because they require no large Prerogatives, but rest satisfied with little more
then Paternall power, the people are less jealous of their lord, and they,
consequently, have the less occasion to be harsh to the people.

Nimrod is registered with the title of a great Hunter; but whether he had that
addition given him for enlarging the confines of his Dominion, or for acquiring
a more unbounded Prerogative, or for exercising his power more insolently, is
not declared: Besides, it is left utterly uncertain, whether Nimrod laid his
foundation upon force, or consent; whether he did by his tongue or his sword
drive and hunt men out of Woods and wild Recesses into Towns and Cities: for
that force by which he did prevail, can hardly be supposed to be it self wholly
forced. It is left also as dubious to conjecture, how far consent was left by
Nature; for if order, and right of succession, did give the rule according to
primogeniture, then all mankind must have been subjected to one Crown;
whereas, if Primogeniture were wholly neglected, and every father or brother
left independent in his own family, to associate or not at his pleasure, then
Rule would have been crumbled into Atoms.

To avoid therefore surmises, and the dark Labyrinths of our primative-Records
before the Flood, and immediately following, let us fall lower, upon the Story
of Abraham, Moses, David, and such as succeeded them. The people of God, at
several times, were under either several forms, or several degrees of power
and jurisdiction: That Sovereignty which Abraham and the Patriarchs had, was
not the same as that which Moses and the Judges had; neither had Moses and the
Judges the same as Saul and the Kings; nor yet had Saul and the Kings the same
as Cyrus, and the Persian Emperors.

It is disputed much by some, Whether the Patriarchs and Judges before Saul's
days had Regal-power or no: Some say, Their power was Regal; others say, It was
but Aristocraticall: and others (more judiciously, in my opinion) say, It was
mixed of both. One says, That, after the Flood, till Nimrods usurpation, men
lived under the Empire of single Commanders, who nevertheless did not govern
as Kings, but as Fathers: Now since this is but the pattern which all Kings
ought to follow, therefore what other meaning can this bear, but that
Governors in those days, having small Territories, did claim but moderate
Prerogatives, though they were as solely supreme in the State, as Fathers are
in the Families? As for Moses, and the Judges also, it is truly said, They
were no other then Gods Viceroys, in regard they did go forth to Battle by
immediate Commission, and transact many other great affairs by direction from
Gods own mouth: Nevertheless, this alters the case little or nothing, as to
the latitude of their Prerogatives; this rather added than took honor,
grandour, or jurisdiction from them; this left them as sole a Sovereignty, and
as unbounded over the people, as other Princes have who are Gods ordinary
Vicegerents.

It must needs be, therefore, That that case and freedom which the people then
found under Gods immediate Substitutes, was not procured by any further Right
or law, or from any other indifferent composition of Government which they had
below, from other Monarchies; but from a Regulation above; because it was
impossible for their chief lord to oppress, or do injustice, or to direct his
thought to particular ends, contrary to theirs.

This shows how impious and stupid a Frenzy that was in the Israelites, which
made them weary of Gods Headship; for indeed, they did not so properly create
to themselves a new Government, as a new Governor. We cannot think that Saul,
being invested with Style and State of an ordinary King, and discharged of such
an immediate extraordinary dependence upon God, as Samuel acknowledged, had
thereby any new Right granted him, to do wrong, or be oppressive to his
Subjects: his Diadem did not absolve him from the true end of Diadems, nor did
his mere Instalment (so much against Gods will and advertisement) cancel the
Law of God, which forbids Kings to amasse treasure into their private Coffers,
or to increase their Cavalries, or to provide extraordinary Magazines of Arms
and Munition, or to lift up their hearts above their brethren; much more to
employ their Treasure, Horses or Arms against their Subjects.

Barclay, and our Royallists, offer apparent violence to Scripture, when they
will make God to call the usual rapine and insolence of Kings, Jus Regis;
whereas indeed, the word in the Original signifies nothing but Mos Regis, as
is plain to all that will look into the same.

Howsoever, let the Prerogative of the Jewish Kings be taken in its utmost
extent, and take the restraint of Gods Moral Law not to be of any Political
efficacy; yet we shall still perceive, that the very composition of that
Monarchy was not without qualifications of mixture, and other Limitations.

The Crown, it was settled upon Judah, and more particularly, upon the House of
David; yet the Peoples election was not thereby wholly drowned: for still,
before every Coronation, they might assemble to give their Votes, and were not
necessitated to choose any individual person in the House of David. It appears
also by the Story of Rehoboam, that the people might capitulate for just
Munities, and require some Obligation for assurance of the same: and in case
that was not granted, it was esteemed, and properly it might b^ said, That the
King did reject the people, and deny protection; not that the People did reject
the King, and deny subjection.

Next, there was a great College and Council of Elders, called, The
Sanhedrin, consisting of 71 Princes, who had the hearing and determining of all
weighty and intricate Suits, unto whom the last appeal lay from inferior
Courts; and the King, without tyranny, could not interrupt or impeach the
proceedings of this Sanhedrin. If Saul will charge David with Treason, and,
without all legal Process, take Arms against him, untried and uncondemned,
David may leavie Forces of Volunteers against the followers of Saul, and stand
upon his justification, cum moderamine inculpatae tutelae. Wicked Ahab stood in
so much awe of such kind of trialls, in the corrupted State of Israel, that
when he coveted Naboths Vineyard, he durst not attempt to wrest it away by
force, nor did he obtrude upon the Court what Sentence he pleased; he was
driven to hire perjured villains, and so by fraud to procure an erroneous
judgment. It is worthy of notice also, that these 71 Elders, or Princes of the
Tribes, who had the supremacy of judgment, were not eligible by the King, and
so the more obnoxious to his Commands; but did inherit this dignity; and for
that cause were extirpated by Herod, as the main obstacle to his Tyranny.

Besides, though the children of Israel had abandoned God for their chief
Ruler, yet God, out of his unspeakable grace, did not utterly cast them out of
his protection; but oftentimes did extraordinarily interpose by his Prophets,
as he had done by Princes before, for relief of his Inheritance. In behalf of
Vriah, Nathan was sent with a vindicative-Message, to bridle David's cruelty: In
behalf of the whole Nation, groaning under Solomon's ponderous hand, another
menacing Prophet was dispatched, to repress his impotent pride: And in the
behalf of the ten Tribes, recoyling from the same pressures under his son
Rehoboam, a third Prophet was sent, to put a hook into his nostrils.

Lastly, though the Jewish Kings, by having the Militia put into their hands
more arbitrarily then the Judges had before, obtained greater opportunity, and
not right of oppressing their subjects: Yet that Militia did not consist of
strangers or mercenaries, or such Soldiers as had no other profession or right
in the State; nor were there constant Armies and Garrisons kept in pay, like
those of the Roman Praetorians, or Turkish Janissaries.

And hence it is, that if Saul, in a brutish unnatural fury, will attempt
against the life of his son Jonathan, or seek to compass any other thing
subversive to the State, he cannot find instruments barbarous enough amongst
all his Swordmen for his black purposes, but he shall presently meet with
opposition, and forcible resistance.

Thus far then, we find in the world no prints or footsteps of Tyranny, or of
absolute Royalty, nay, nor of Royalty it self, till the peoples cursed
ingratitude and folly introduced it: We must go beyond God and Natures
Workmanship and impressions, before we can discover any thing but Parentall
Majesty, or gentle Aristocracie, or compounded or mixed Monarchy.

Since therefore it so fared with Gods people in point of liberty and safety,
out of Gods unspeakable favor, under Patriarks, Judges and Kings. Now let us
enquire how it fared with them under those foreign Emperors, by whom they
were subjugated, and made tributary. Judea being seated near the center of the
World, became obnoxious to all the great vi^ssitudes of change which happened
to the four vast overruling Monarchies. The Babylonian or Assyrian first, and
the Persian next, from the East, spread victorious arms almost over all Asia.
After, from the West successively, both the Grecian and Roman made irruptions;
and in all these general periods of Empire, the State of the Jews had its
sense and share of the calamity.

As for the two first Monarchies, there is little in particular recorded, and
left to posterity in Writing, concerning their true forms and compositions;
as there can no Laws be produced, by which the Subjects had resigned all right
of liberty and safety; so neither can there be any produced, by which they had
precisely compounded for the same. Some instances only we find mentioned, that
the laws of the Medes and Persians were unalterable by the Prince; and by this
it seems, that the prime ensign of Majesty, which consists in making and
abrogating of Laws, was not residing in the Emperor alone, without the great
Council of his Sages. For if the King could not alter Law at his own pleasure,
there was some other extrinsecall power circumscribed that pleasure; and that
power must be no other, then the same which made Law; for the true legislative
power it self can never put fetters or manicles upon it self; howsoever
Aristotle fancies to himself a kind of Monarchy which he calls Lordly; and
this he places betwixt Royalty and Tyranny, making it more unbounded than
that of Kings, but not so violent as that of Tyrants. And this Dominicall rule
he ascribes to the Barbarians rather than unto the Grecians; and amongst
Barbarians, rather to those of Asia, than to the Europeans. Asia (it seems)
being more rich and fertile, bred a people more esseminate and disposed to
luxury, and so by consequence more ignoble, and prone to servilitie.

Hereupon the Asiaticks were ever extremely despicable in the eyes of more
magnanimous Nations, especially the Greeks, for adoring and postrating
themselves with so much devotion before their Princes. Plutarch, speaking of
diverse unmanly slavish Customs amongst the Persians, refers that Empire to the
kind of such as are absolute, and equal to tyrannical. Plato calls it,
Despoticall; and Aristotle says, It was then very near approaching to
tyrannical Institution. We may well then imagine. That God, in bringing such a
yoke upon the necks of his chosen Inheritance, did it for their chastisement,
and out of his indignation; not for their advantage, and out of his wonted
loving kindness. As for the Grecian Empire, we know, Alexander becoming
instated with success, and tainted with the luxury of Persia, soon began to
degenerate from the moderation of his own native Country, and those Political
Rudiments which his Tutour Aristotle had seasoned him withal: and we read how
exceeding fatal it proved: he and his Empire both perhaps had been longer
lived, if he had not rendered himself odious, first to Callisthenes, by his
insolence; and to all other men afterward, for his cruelty to Callisthenes.
This justly administers here an occasion to us, to insist a little upon great
Monarchies, in that Notion only as they are great.

Alexander King of Persia, had no more right added to be insolent, than had
Alexander King of Macedonia; but greatness of Dominion did alter him for the
worse: and since it does so usually other Princes, we cannot but take notice
how this comes to pass; For either the largeness of Dominion does require a
proportionable Prerogative, and so enable Princes to do greater mischief, and
after by accident becomes a temptation and provocation to abuse that ability;
or else we must not confess that there is any difference, in this respect,
betwixt a large and narrow Dominion. Now that there is a great difference, is
so clear, that I will not undertake any proof of it. The Scripture ever,
speaking of the great Monarchies of the world, pensils them under the
lineaments of Lions, Bears, Eagles, etc. armed for rapine with Iron-teeth,
Brazen-talons, and sharp horns, etc. and the woeful experience of all Ages
seconds Scripture therein, testifying them to be monstrous excessives in
Nature, and the perpetual plagues of mankind. Yet let not me be taxed to
condemn all excessive Monarchies, as utterly unlawful: for, though I doubt
much, whether ever any one of them were at first justly purchased, or after by
any one man rightly administered, without Tyranny; yet I conceive neither of
these things totally impossible; and so I will pass no judgment thereupon.
Howsoever, Nature seems to have chalked out the just dimensions of a complete
Monarchy, by Mountains, Seas, or other lines: Spain, Italy, France, etc. seems
to be cut out as proportionable Paterns: and few Nations have ever prospered,
when their pride had transported them beyond their native Barricado's.
Hannibal, after seventeen years War waged with the Romans for the Mastery of
the world, at last sought a Composition, in humble terms, from Scipio; and
^lamed that dangerous fond competition, which had either engaged the
Carthaginians beyond the Coasts of Africa, or the Romans beyond the Coasts of
Italy: But alas, it is ill success that opens the eyes of Hannibal. Hanno was
before held his bitter enemy, and disaffected to his Countries prosperity, for
seeking an honorable Peace with the Romans, and preventing the mischiefs of
an over-swelling Empire: Yet by the way note, in the mean time Carthage is
lost, by an unpolitike and uncertain indifferency, whilst it will neither
wholly desist from attempting against foreign States, nor yet wholly concur
with such courageous Generals as it entrusted with those attempts: Either Hanno
ought to have been silenced, or Hannibal recalled: The Victories of Hannibal
are too glorious, to admit of a straightened Commission: things are now come to
that pass, that, if Hannibal be not enabled to scale the Walls of Rome, Scipio
is to be expected at the Gates of Carthage. Great Bodies cannot be moved, but
with great Engines; nor can extensive Monarchies be erected or conserved,
without extensive Prerogatives: Gravity and Policy both, do in this keep a
just correspondency. A moliminous vast Frame, can by no means rise into a
decent symmetricall Pile, except there be an orderly proportion kept between
the Basis, the Conus and the Pyramid: If the Basis be excessive, What is it but
a deformed heap? If the bottom be too narrow for the Spire, How unstable is the
Fabric likely to be. The Egyptian Pyramids had, perhaps, intention to express
Hieroglyphicall Politikes to us, and to let us know, that though small States
may be molded almost into any form; yet great Heights cannot be arrived at, but
by orderly graduall ascents. At Athens, Sparta, Thebes, Pella, where the
Precincts are narrow, the Government is easy; decency requires that it be as
lowly: But in the magnificent Court of Persia, where the Crown is more
glorious, the Scepter must be more ponderous: where the Spire is more lofty,
the proportion of the Conus and Basis must answer thereto: where Rule is more
difficult, the Ruler must be more majesticall. This lets us see how
inconsiderate that great Dispute is, amongst Politicians, about the comparisons
of this and that Form of Government, viz. Whether Monarchy, or Democracie, or
Aristocracie, be to be preferred amongst men: For, without doubt, the
difference is not so much to be seen in the Forms themselves, as in the States,
which make choice of those Forms.

But you will say, Mighty Sovereigns may be enabled, as to all that is good;
yet restrained by Law, from all that is evil: or, if the Law of man cannot,
externally; yet the Law of God, internally, may check them in matters wicked
and pernicious.

We answer; Bounds are set, by God and Nature, to the greatest and most
absolute Monarchs, as well as to the least, and most conditionate: but those
Bounds seem but as imaginary Lines, or as mere stones, not real Trenches, or
Fortifications: They serve only to discover to the Subject what his Right is,
but they have no strength at all to protect him from wrong Those slaves that
are sold, and forfeited to the worst of Bondages, as we have proved before,
have a Divine and Natural claim to safety, and freedom from abuses, as other
Subjects have; yet want of some Political remedy, exposes them to miseries
far worse then death, and detrudes them often into a condition below beasts.
The same slaves also are equally entitled to their lords courtesy, as the best
of Subjects are: there is no safety nor freedom from abuse which depends upon
mere will, as an Arbitrary power, but the poorest slave is as capable of it as
the freest Subject.

Nay, it has been often a glory to weak Princes, to attribute that to slaves,
which they would not to men ingenuously born: For, who had Offices of great
Command? who had chief Honors? who had the communication of secret
State Affairs? who had the prime sway in Court amongst the Roman Emperors,
but slaves infranchised? What Senator, what Officer in Rome had riches equal
to Narcissus, or Pallas* Who could more powerfully sway in the Palace, or
better patronize Cities and Nations, than Eunuchs, Grooms and Libertines? If
there be any difference then betwixt the most ingenuously-born subject and the
lowest-purchased caitiff, it is only in this, That the one has a stronger
circumvallation of humane Policy to secure him, than the other; and that he is
not left so merely to divine, natural and discretionary pretenses, as is the
other. But in wide expansive Seigniories, no Law, no Policy can sufficiently
entrench or immure it self: For, if the Prince be bad, he has the more
opportunity to do mischief; if he be good, he has yet the less power to
govern well.

It is almost a miracle, to see a great Monarch good: and if he be, it is more
miraculous, to see him upon the receipt of Appeals, and other Addresses (as
often as occasion shall require) from remote parts, to distinguish truth and
falsehood, or to sift the Bran from the Flour so nearly as it ought to be. Mark
how Solomon begs wisdom of God, that he may be able to go in and out before
the Nation of the Jews: Mark how great a Charge he makes that little
inconsiderable State to be. It was more than natural, that Augustus (though a
Pagan-Phoenix) should ever know what Peace was, over all his Dominions: That
little space of Halcyonian tranquillity which the world enjoyed during some part
of his Reign, is in verity more to be ascribed to the Cradle of Christ, than to
his Throne.

Change then the Scene, and see how the face of things varies: As Soon as
Tiberius enters, see how the Head of so many several Legions, of so many
several Nations, of so many several Parties in Religion and Opinion, of so
many several disagreeing Magistrates and Commanders, can be reduced to Order,
or forced to do reason, by any one Faction framed out of all these.

More need not be said: Where many States are subjugated to one Seignior, War
can never be absent; where War is, Military rule must needs predominate; where
Military rule is, Law must needs give place to Discretion; and what that bloody
fatal Train is, which ever attends War and a Military arbitrary Empire, is
sufficiently known to all. What gain then is it to our Adversaries, to
allege, That Alexander, or any of the Eastern Emperors did what they
pleased, and ruled always uncontrolled? This is no more but to allege, That
the Persians were first conquered by the Grecians, and that after the Grecians
were poised by the Persians, and that the division and enmity which remained
betwixt both, served the Prince as a sit means to enthrall both.

This is no just proof in Law, that the Macedonians were to undergo thraldom
and servitude, because they had overrun the East; or that the East was to
stoop to the like endurance, because it could not withstand Grecia: Nor if
Alexander did de facto tyrannize, cutting the Diamond (as it were) by the
powder of the Diamond, is this any stronger Argument for the legality of
tyrannizing, than dethroning or murdering of him had been for the justification
of the same in his subjects. A facto adjus non datur consequentia. When mere
force lays the foundation of Sovereignty, and where mere force raises up the
Structure, mere force may with the same equality and reason effect the
demolition of the same.

It is true, Zedekiah being bound by oath to the Babylonian Conqueror to
remain a true vassal, and being forbidden to make defection, by an express
from heaven; and undertaking the same at an unseasonable time, by improbable
means, commits the sin of Rebellion: But we see one of the Successors of
Alexander, acting the bloody part of a Tyrant in Judea, is not only resisted
by Judas Maccabeus, but quite expelled: And we see that right which the sword
of a stranger had acquired, was more honorably rescinded by the sword of a
native.

Neither does God not seem only to countenance that revolt in the Jews, but to
reward also the principal agent therein, by transferring the Diadem from the
Grecian Race, to him and his posterity.

The Story of Eglon also may serve for an instance of the same truth: And who
can now look upon all those goodly Provinces and Kingdoms which the grand
Seigniors Scepter has for so many Ages converted into Theaters of Slavery,
Beggary, Barbarism and Desolalation, and yet hold that they are no ways
redeemable from that Scepter? Who can say, that all those woeful Nations, or
rather, the starved Skeletons of Nations, if opportunity were offered, might
not by consent abjure their feral, sanguinary Oppressor, and choose to
themselves several Protectours out of their own native Territories? But the
strength of Custom and Prescription, is still by some magnified, and in the
worst of Empires made the Ordinance of God, and as valid as any other divine
Right or Title. I have seen a whole Volume, written to that purpose, yet the
answer thereof may lie (in my opinion) in a very narrow room; for if custom
may make that necessary which was indifferent, yet it cannot make that just
which was unjust, if it may change the Mode, or external form of some things,
it cannot change the Nature or internal form of all things. For example, if
the Grecian Line have reigned in Persia for so many generations, prescription
may have vigor enough to confirm that reign: but if the Macedonians have
reigned tyrannicaly; to the dis-inheriting and despoiling the Persians of their
due freedom, mere usage can give no ratification at all to this Tyrannical
reign. But soft of this enough: I descend now to the Roman story, and to the
times of Christ's Nativity, and such as are successive thereunto.

Hitherto our inquisition has met with no sufficient rule, precedent, or
authority, for arbitrary power; neither Nature nor History from the Creation to
the Redemption afford us any vestigia of it.

Wheresoever God had a Church whosoever were the Governors of it, whether
Patriarks, Judges, Kings, Emperors, we have made a strict survey, and as yet
discover no Empire so uncircumscribed, and absolved from Laws, as our
Adversaries contend for, and as for those Nations which were merely Pagan,
their Chronicles are very uncertain, and scarce worth turning over: I know our
Royalists will now challenge us to prove by what particular Laws, Liberty was
secured, and the hands of Princes bound up in all ages, but we must reply, that
this is more than reason or equity will require at our hands; if they will
maintain, That the part is better than the whole: if they will maintain, That
the effect is more potent then the efficient: if they will maintain, That the
means is more valuable than the end: their proofs ought to be Positive, and
full against us, we are on the Defensive part only, and do convince, if we are
not convinced.

It Is not sufficient for them to say, Such a Nation was slavishly treated de
facto, they must prove, that there was clear Law for that Treatance: nay they
must produce such a clear Law as extends to all Nations. It Is not sufficient for
them to say; Such a Nation submitted themselves to Monarchy, without any
precise conditions made for liberty, and much less without any such now
remaining extant upon record.

They must prove there was clear Law for abjuring liberty, and that the force
of the same is universal, and agreeable to that of God and Nature: but the
main shelf-Anchor of our Adversaries is that of the Apostle in his 13. Chap. to
the Romans, there all resistance to the higher power is forbidden, and
pronounced all damnable, And it is all one (they say) to be irresistible, and to
be absolute. Now I believe all that is in the book of God and Nature to be
expressed for the right of Princes, is there compendiously infolded. Since then
this was written in the infancy of the Gospel, and during the Reign of
Caesar, and was directed to the Romans, not without particular respect (as
Doctor Fern conceives) that the government, which was supereminent, or supreme
at Rome; We will take it into more special consideration.

The Primate of Ireland in his Sermon upon this Text, preached at Oxford, March
3. 1643. delivers it for a sure doctrine, (and there is scarce any other
divinity known now there) That no Subject may upon any occasion take Arms, or
use violence against the Supreme power, no not in defense of Religion: Now this
does much scandalize us for diverse Reasons. For first, when he speaks of the
supreme power, he does not define that which he means it to be; he takes no
notice, how supremacy of power may vest in one man, as to one purpose; in
another, as to another: how it may vest in the people, as to some affairs, in
the Prince as to others. The body is not so the Subject of the seeing faculty
as the eye is, yet it cannot be denied to be so in some sense.

The Prince of Orange is supreme in Military commands especially in reference
to all individual persons: but he is not so in all other expedients, nor in
matters of the Militia neither, if you compare him with the whole State.
Grotius affirms supreme power to be such: Cujus actus alterius juri non
subsunt, ita ut alterius voluntati humanae arbitrio irriti possent reddi; If
then Caesar was that supreme power at Rome, which the Primate intended, he
ought to have portrayed him according to this definition; he ought to have
Armed him with power beyond all the Laws and Rights of Rome; such as could
not, or ought not to be frustrated by any other right or power of the Senate
and people of Rome in any case whatsoever.

Secondly, when he speaks of the supreme Power, he does not at all
discriminate the person of the Sovereign Prince, from the persons of those
which are employed only as instruments under the Sovereign Prince. Now we
conceive, if there had been true candor and ingenuity in this learned Prelate,
he would have showed a little learning in this, which we hold to be exceedingly
necessary to be distinguished, and he knows we insist much upon.

Thirdly, when he speaks of Subjects he does not take notice of any difference
amongst them, neither in freedoms and immunities, he does not declare the
Roman Subjects and the English, or the English and the Venetian, to be a like
obnoxious to the will of an absolute Lord, neither does he declare the
contrary. Now since he thus Preaches at this time, we must needs condemn him,
either of great Hypocricy, or of great folly; for if he did intend that the
whole people and Senate of Rome, had no Title to assemble, nor right to defend
themselves, and therefore that the Parliament of England had no more Title then
the Romans, we say he did manifestly offer violence to his Text, if he did not
intend so: yet since he was no more careful at such a time, and before such an
assembly to interpret himself for the avoiding of dangerous misprisions, we say
he had not such circumspection as he ought.

Fourthly, when he speaks of the occasions of taking up Arms and using
resistance against powers, he seems to allow of no degrees at all: if Religion
be to be subverted, if the ruin of the Prince himself, or of his whole
kingdom be attempted, if the attemptors proceed ad infinitum, yet in all cases
(for ought he distinguishes) resistance is alike unlawful, and altogether as
damnable, as if the mischief were not publicly considerable. This tenet
seems to us horrid, unnatural, and against the light of all men's reason: for
hereby it is plainly averred, that either government was erected for
subversive ends, or else that general subversion may conduce to salutiferous
ends.

In cases of obedience a difference of command is to be observed: all commands
are not alike; binding and Potestative, but in case of resistance all acts of
the Prince are taken to be equally authoritative. If Saul command Doeg to kill
the Priests of the Lord; Doeg may receive that as a void command; but if Doeg
do wickedly draw his sword upon the Priests, this violence proceeds from so
unquestionable a warrant, that it may not be repulsed with violence.

Our adversaries sometimes when we dispute rationally, will acknowledge our
grounds to be very plausible, (this is very Dr. Fern himself) but say they;
Scripture is clearly against all limits of Monarchy, and scripture is to be
adhered to rather then reason.

Nevertheless when we submit our selves to the balance of the Sanctuary, and
when they see the letter and immediate sense thereof does not come home to our
particular differences, then they are feign to retreat to reason. But their
greatest subterfuge is to lurk between scripture and reason, and to remain in
a kind of transcient posture, as that they may be confined neither to the one,
nor to the other, nor yet to both. If our controversies were in credendis, or
about things that did exceed the compass of humane understanding, scripture
might justly be opposed to policy: but when we are treating of worldly
affairs, we ought to be very tender how we seek to reconcile that to Gods
law, which we cannot reconcile to man's equity: or how we make God the author of
that constitution which man reaps inconvenience from.

But for the present on both sides, we are agreed to adresse our selves to the
Roman story. Rome for the space of two hundred and forty years was subject to
Kings: and some say those Kings were absolute: others say with Halycarnasseus:
Populum Rom: principio formam Reipub: habuisse mixtam ex potestate Regia, and
optimatum dominatum fuisse constitutum: ultimo verum. Regum Tarquinio regnum in
Tirannidem vertere capiente, optimatum dominatum fuisse constitutum.

Questionless, written laws were wanting at first (as they are, and ever were
to all new foundations) and in this respect the Kings might be said to be more
loose from restraints: but this amounts to nothing; for as the Kings by defect
of laws were less obliged to the people, so the people by the same defect
were less obliged to Kings: and forasmuch as the people where they were more
contracted, and so might more easily correspond, hold intelligence, consult
together, (as in all infant small States they might) were better able to
oppress the King, then the King was to oppress them, the mere want of written
laws was no more prejudicial to the people, then to the King: great
moderation therefore was used toward the people by all the Kings, only Romulus
was too harsh to the Nobility, and so fell by their hands, and Tarquin grew
intollerably insolent toward all, and so occasioned the expulsion of himself,
together with the extirpation of Kingly government.

The word Tyrannus had been made odious all over Greece long before, and now
the word Rex is as much abominated, and abjured amongst the Romans: so
insufferable in all ages were the cruelties, and excesses of lawless Monarchy.
After Kings thus driven out, all the rights of Majesty were devolved in equity
to the whole people of Rome, distinguished then into Patritians and Plebeians:
but the Patritians affecting an Aristocraticall form, and seeking totally to
exclude the Plebeians from communion in government, they imbroyled the whole
State in continual wars, and contestations for many ages together: and not
being able to support their own weaker, and lesser side lost all by degrees,
and brought upon themselves the worst inconveniences of corrupted Democracie.
For the Plebeians having long remained contemptible under the indurance of many
indignities by force at first obtained the defense of Tribunes, and after so
increased the same power, that at last Censors, Consuls, Dictators, all the
chief Magistrates of Rome became subject to their check and sway. And whereas
those assemblies managed by the Senate which were called Curiata Comitia, or
Centuriata had the predominance hitherto, now the Tributa Comitia managed only
by the Plebeians draw all power of choosing Magistrates, and passing laws to
themselves. Quintius therefore blaming the Tribunes for not resting satisfied
with what they had already gained from the Senate, makes this sad complaint.
You desired Tribunes, (says he) we granted them; you would have a Decemvirate
created, we permitted it. You grew weary of those ten Commissioners, we deposed
them. Your anger was not so pacified against their persons, though most Noble,
and Honorable: we pursued them with death, or banishment. You would again
create new Tribunes, they were created. You would have the Consulship
communicated to your party, as a free gift; it was conferred upon you, though
we knew that gift was very unequal to our Order. You would have the Tribune
power enlarged, you would have an appeal lie from the Senate to you, you would
have your Plebeian acts binding to the Senate, under pretense of dividing power
with you, we have endured, and do yet endure that all our right and share be
usurped. It was alleged also, that even the Kings themselves had never
attempted to violate the Majesty of that supreme Order, and that the whole
Common wealth of Rome did consist of something else, besides the mere
Comminalty, but all will not prevail: that which was due being once denied,
more then is due must be now restored by way of expiation. Aristocracy standing
in competition with Democracy can say no more for it self (nor perhaps so
much) then Monarchy can: the Senate it self therefore having been accessory in
subverting Monarchy, had implicitly pronounced the same judgment against
Aristocracy. The truth is, both Monarchy, and Aristocracy, are derivative
forms, and owe a dependence upon Democracy, which though it be not the best,
and most exact form for all nations and Empires at all times, yet it is ever
the most natural, and primarily authentical; and forsome times, and places
the most beneficial. Howsoever the Romans never knew the benefit of Democracy,
so wisely and exactly regulated, as it ought to be; for their Tributa Comitia,
were too adverse to the Patritian Order, and very ill composed in themselves
for order and decency. The whole State had not any just influence of consent in
them by right of election or representation, nor was that body of Plebeians
themselves, which did therein concur to the nomination of Magistrates, and
sanction of Laws, any thing else commonly but a vast, rude, confused,
indigested heap of the vulgar.

This the Senators might at first have amended, and better disposed, had they
undertaken the same, whilst they had superiority, or equality of power in the
State: but in policy it is, as in Logic: Vno dato absurdo sequuntur mill:
Little neglects in fundamental Institutions may draw on great mischiefs in the
consequence. This time made evident amongst the Romans, for after many and
very bloody disputes betwixt the Optimacy, and populacy for sundry ages, at
length the bulk of the Empire growing too spacious for the rule of the
multitude (especially so tumultuously, and disorderly assembled) a contrary
change begins to be better relished. Sylla now observing such a conjuncture of
affairs, takes courage to reform this seditious, turbulent Ochlocraty
(notwithstanding that many gallant spirited men had perished before in the
enterprise) and though he pretend for Aristocracy, yet his thoughts tower as
high as Monarchy. Florus says true of him: Suscepta dictatura rebus novis
Reipub. statum confirmavit, Tribunorumque plebis potestatem minuit, and omne
jus legum ferendarum ademit. Nevertheless neither was Sylla, nor his Favorite
Pompey so certain and true to his own lordly principles, as he ought to have
been: for though they were both more daring then private men, yet they were not
so confident as the Lords of Rome should be: and therefore it is hard to say
whether they did oppress liberty, or not settle the Principality with the
greater expense of blood. Well might Caesar deride Sylla as a man not skild in
letters, nor able to dictate, when he would make no other use of the Dictature,
but only to inure Rome to the snaflle, and break the Senate to the musle, that
an other might the readilier mount into the sadle. The body of Rome was now
grown too gross for a popular form, and the populacy also of Rome had such
errors, and defects in the composition of it, that according to the judgment
of Tacitus, Non aliud discor dantis patriae remedium fuit, quam ut ab uno
regeretur. It Is strange, that Augustus should so solemnly take advise of
Maecenas, and Agrippa about the quitting of the Empire, after that he had
exposed himself to far more danger in the winning of it, then possibly could
attend the holding of it. For without the advertisement of Maecenas, his own
easy access to the Imperial Chair by the sword might have sufficiently
informed him, Quod multorum imperium magnitudo rerum far non poterat. It had
been far more seasonable (in my opinion) if Augustus had entered into debate
about the manner of government, and had proposed rather, whether a regal
prerogative, or something more, or some thing less had been fit for that
adjustment of time, and other circumstances.

The Romans had been sworn by Brutus upon the ejection of Tarquin never to
suffer any man to reign, or to admit of regal power at Rome, and perhaps a
vain superstition might so far prevail, as to make the word reign, and yet
not the thing detestable. What then is to be done? is all supremacy of one man
abjured, or only such a supremacy as Tarquin challenged? And if the intent of
Brutus be dubious, who shall determine that, but such as have the same
authority now, as Brutus then had? and may bind now, where he did loose; or
loose now, where he did then bind? But soft; three things especially touching
the Imperial Prerogative at Rome are now proper for our inquiry: First what
power did the Caesar's use, and assume de facto? Bodin gives just satisfaction
to this: For Augustus (says he) though he did craftily dissemble, and seem to
settle a color, and show of a Princely, and not Kingly regiment by pretending
only to be Captain General of the Military Forces, and Tribune for the
Comminalties safety; yet having disposed of forty Legions all over the
Provinces, and reserved three Legions about his own person for his own guard:
and having placed garrisons in all Forts, and places of importance, he did
exercise Kingly authority though without a Scepter, or Diadem. His successors
also addicted themselves to most cruel tyranny, every one transcending his
predecessor in acts of inhumanity, except only some few of them.

2 The next quaere, then is about the right of this absolute jurisdiction, and
upon what Law, or Commission it was grounded. The Lex Regia, or the Law of
Majesty (as Cremutius calls it) did absolve the Emperors ab omni legum
coactione, as Dion expresses it; the principal vigor of it did consist in
this, that it did transfer Dictatorian power without limits of time upon
them: and the Dictature, we know, was Legum nexu exoluta.

Now this is the occasion of some dispute amongst Civilians, for they all
grant, That no Law, or Commission could discharge the Caesar's from the bonds
which God, and Nature had imposed; nor from that main duty which Government it
self inforces them to. No privilege can free any Magistrate from the
obligation of rendering to every one that which is his due; nor can those
primitive rules be annulled which proportion to every one his due; especially
those which proportion to States more then to particulars, and attribute to
ends, more then to Means. It seems therefore to some Lawyers, That the force
of this Royal Law is to be restrained only to forms, and solemnities of such
humane constitutions, as might perhaps interpose, and impede the Caesar's in the
execution of their main charge. And though other Lawyers do not allow this
restriction, yet I conceive it very rational, for even the Dictators themselves
when they were acquitted of all Laws, yet had this Law affixed to that very
Commission which did therefore acquit them, that they should take more care,
and might be the better enabled to provide, Ne quid detrimenti capeat Respub.
All things which stood in direct order to that end, for which they had
Dictatorian power put into their hands, ( viz. the suppressing of such a
sedition at home, or the finishing of such a war abroad, or some other
design) might lawfully be done, any opposition of particular Laws, or
formalities notwithstanding. But if the Dictator himself did walk
excentrically, or contrary to this end, he was not exempted from resistance
during his term of command, nor from giving an account after the expiration of
the same.

The last thing inquirable into is the date, or commencement of this Royal
Law: and this also is not agreed upon of all sides. Arnissaeus will needs
refer the time of this Law to Augustus his reign: but his reason is
exceeding weak: Alias enim (says he) injusti possessores fuissent tam
Augustus, quam Tiberius, and caeteri regnatricis domus sucsessores, nec leges
far novas jure potuissent.

I shall not stand to answer this, I shall rather herein follow Bodin, for that
he was not only a grave Statesman, but a learned Lawyer also. Now in his
judgment, and if we may credit his reading, this royal Law was first passed
in Vespasians days, and he gives some proofs, and quotes Authorities for
confirmation of the same. Besides others, he cites Suetonius, censuring thus of
Caligula: Paerum abfuit quin diadema sumeret, aec speciem Prinoipatus in regnum
converteret. Also of Tiberius, he censures thus: Faedissima servitute Remp.
oppressit. He calls his reign mere tyranny, and oppression. Bodin therefore
having defined Princely government to be either a State of Optimacy, or
Populacy wherein some one has preeminence above all other particular persons,
and is called Princeps, that is, Primus: He concludes that the Commonwealth of
Rome from Augustus and his immediate successors, Vsque ad Flavium Vespasianum
Principatus dicebatur: and he closes all with this, that from the battle of
Actium, the State of Rome was neither popular, nor Aristocraticall, nor regal,
but mixed of all. By all this we see, that our great Irish Prelate, when he
sends us for St. Paul's meaning to the Roman Empire before Vespasians days,
there to find out what sovereign power is irresistible; He sends us not to
regal power, more then to Aristocraticall, or Democraticall. I will therefore
put the case stronger against my self: and make it my quaere, what
irresistibility is due to Domitian after his Fathers, and Brothers death. And
here first, I may except against the Royal Law it self passed in Vespasians
time, as not being the complete voluntary lawful act both of Patritians, and
Plebeians. For besides that the Senate had been now long overawed, and
corrupted many ways by the acts of the Court; we know the Tributa Comitia are
also totally depraved, and evirtuated by being called out of the field into the
palace, insomuch that all liberty of choice and suffrage is lost, to that great
convention, and it is now turned into a ridiculous solemnity.

Wherefore when Nero was to be deposed, and all his barbarous acts of
inhumanity to be accounted for, no plebiscitum could be obtained, an act of
the Senate only was past to declare him an enemy of mankind. But I shall not
insist upon this, I shall grant the royal law to be a good law, and enacted in
a full assembly of both the States, yet still I shall maintain, that the
lawmakers did not pass any thing to Vespatian, or his successors, but only in
order to the public good, and safety: nor did they grant away their own
original right, and power in themselves, by granting a fiduciary use and
administration of that right, and power to the Emperors. The whole body of the
law will furnish testimonies to this purpose, that the Emperor is not
proprietary of his subjects, or has any interest at all in them to his own use
merely.

Give me leave to frame a case upon supposition. Conceive that the major part
of the Patritiaens, and Plebeians all over the Roman Empire are converted to
the faith of Christ: conceive that Domitian (whose claim is by the law past to
his Father) hates Christianity, and being incited by his South-saying Priests,
his Concubines, and parasiticall Libertines to eradicate true Religion, and
enrich himself by the great spoil of the professors thereof, sets up such an
idol, and makes such an edict for the general adoration thereof, as the
Persian Monarch once did. Conceive that the Christians, both Senators and
Plebeians petition for their lives, but are rejected, and seeing a number of
Assasins armed ready to rush upon them, betake themselves to their defense, and
rely upon forcible resistance. Conceive further that they first acquaint
Domitian with their resolutions, and thus publish the justice thereof.

May it please your sacred imperial Majesty, the peaceable and gentle
principles of our pure Religion teach us rather to suffer moderate wrongs from
private hands, then to offer the least injurious violence to Princes.
Nevertheless since (after all our vain supplications) we see our selves
remorsely designed to a general massacre, for not obeying you against God: and
since you expect, that we should tamely surrender not only out estates, and
such other rights as are in our arbitrary disposition, but our lives also, and
the Gospel it self (of neither whereof we are masters, at discretion) for
as much also, as we being the major part of the State, and virtually that whole
Community from which you derive your Commission, and for whose behoefe alone
you are bound to pursue that Commission, and not to decline from the maine
intendment of it: and whereas further we have not so totally divested our
selves by intrusting you with power, but that we are to give some account to
God, and the law if we oppose not general subversion where. we may,
especially we being now farther entitled to defense by the extraordinary law
of general necessity (of the benefit of which iron law, particular men are not
wholly abridged) we are compelled hereby to protest, and remonstrate to all the
world, that we take now up these one just arms only for defense to secure our
Lives, Liberties, and Religion, against the bloody emissaries, which indeed
from your undue warrant can derive no authority; and not to bridle any just
authority of yours, or to attempt any thing against that idolatrous devotion
which has been hitherto established by law. And because we impute it to the
wretched falsities and artifices of calumniators that your Majesty is incensed
against us, and our Religion, and misinformed of our intentions: we crave
leave farther to declare, that we though we are freemen, and not slaves, and
have some share in Empire it self, and are not mere subjects, will yet
continue in the same obedience, as our Ancestors paid you for peace sake, if we
may not be driven to extreamities. And as for our Religion, it is no other then
a holy blessed law revealed from heaven, prescribed for the good of all
immortal, rational creatures, more beneficial to Princes then Paeganisme,
and such as without diminution of power you may submit to, and cast down your
Crown before. In the like manner also it will concern your imperial office
rather to protect us then those that seek our subversion, as being the greater,
and nobler part of the Empire, and better devoted to your person, and Crown
then they are. Neither is it distrust in our own numbers, forces, or
advantages that draws these lowly, loyal expressions from us, nor is it any
doubt in our cause: for Christianity dies as much lift up the heart in a just
war, as it dies weaken the hands in unjust enterprises; and the world shall see
it is as far from transforming us into ashes, as into woolves. Prefer your
sacred ears therefore, we pray you, from the sugges^ions of our enemies, and
the abusers, who may render us in your thoughts either absolutely disloyal, or
hestially servile, and do usually traduce our Religion as being utterly
inconsistent either with duty, or magnanimity. Let it be a confutation to them
at this present, that we do neither derogate in this case from your Majesty's
prerogative, nor utterly renounce our own interests: and yet that we do
rather fore-judge our selves, inasmuch as though we do not disclaim, yet we
forbear to claim a right of establishing true Religion, and abolishing
idolatry; as also of bringing your seducers to condign punishment. And thus
far we condescend in all humility for our blessed Religions sake, that that
may be liable to no aspersions, as if it had any causality in this war, and
that you may receive in the better apprehension, and relish of the profession
from the humble comportment of the professors. It is not in us to set an end to
these broils because we have no prevalence with you to gain just satisfaction
from you, but it is in you without all impediment to quiet our party, in regard
that we fight not now for a well being, but a mere being: not that Paganism
may be subverted, but that Christianity may subsist: all our conditions are
entirely in your own hands, and they speak no more but this, let us have
hopes to remain safe, and you shall have assurances to remain Caesar.

If his Grace of Armagh like not this Remonstrance, let him frame an answer to
it, and in so doing he shall appear a profounder Scholar, a more judicious
Statesman, a more peaceable Patriot, a more godly Preacher then his last Sermon
upon the 13. Romans did show him. I am sure there is no man that lives in these
days, can say I have fained an impossible case, especially when He sees two
Parliaments of two Protestant Kingdoms driven to petition for their lives to a
Prince that does acknowledge the truth of the Protestant Religion, and the
privileges of both Parliaments: and the liberties of both Kingdoms, and yet
brings a third Popish Kingdom against them; though traitorously besmeared in
the blood of thousands of Protestants, and proclaimed against by the King
himself, as the most execrable monsters of men. But perhaps our Primate will
say that the Roman law of royalty did extend farther, and that the people
thereby did confer to, and upon the Emperor, omne suum imperium and
potestatem, and thereupon it was said, Omnia poterat imperator, and Quicquid
Principi placebat Legis habebat vigorem. I take these to be no parts of the
royal Law, but only several glosses, and interpretations of Jurists
thereupon, yet all these extend no farther then to a perpetual dictature. For
the people could confer no more on the Emperor, then what it had in it
self; and no man will say, that the people had any power to destroy it self:
and what end could the people have (if that Law might be said to be the
peoples act) in inslaving themselves, or giving away the propriety of
themselves? where the Princes pleasure is entertained for Law, it is intended
that that pleasure of the Prince shall be natural, and prudentiall, and that
it shall be first regulated by Law if not in its formalities, yet in its
essentials. Grotius tells us of the Campanians how they did resign themselves,
and all that they possessed in ditionem Romanorum: and he conceives, that by
this resignation, they did make the Romans their proprietaries. By the favor
of Grotius, I think there is stronger reason, that no Nation yet ever did
voluntarily or compulsorily embrace servitude, or intend submission to it: it
is more agreeable to nature and sense to expound this word ditio in a mild
sense, and to suppose that the Campanians did intend to incorporate themselves
with the Romans, and to live under the same government or dition, and no other;
and not only reason, but the true story makes this good: and evidence of fact,
the strongest of proofs puts it out of doubt, that the Campanians were not at
all differenced in freedom from the Citizens of Rome themselves. In brief we
may rely upon these assertions.

First, there is no certainty of any Nations, that ever they so formally did
resign themselves in Terms, as the Romans, and Campanians did here: scarce any
story can parallel such particular grants of Sovereignty.

Secondly, if these be expounded mildly, and in favor of public liberty as
they ought, they can create no prejudice at all to those Nations which enacted
them, or any other.

Thirdly, if they be expounded in a tortious, unnatural sense, they are to be
damned, and rejected by all people, and they remain no way vigorous, or
obligatory in any country whatsoever. If the Primate have now recourse to the
practice of the Christians in the first ages, and urge, that because, they used
no arms but tears, and prayers when they were oppressed, we ought to do the
like: we answer,

First, The Christians till Constantines time in probability were not equal in
numbers, and forces, with the Pagans, whatsoever Tertullian might conceive.

Secondly, if they were, they wanted other advantages of arms, commands, and
other opportunities to free themselves. Aug. Caesar by forty Legions, and the
strength of Cittadels, and other places of strength yoked and inthralled forty
times as many in number as those Legions; and so did but purchase fear for
fear, making himself as formidable to the people, as the people was to him.

Thirdly, if they wanted no power, nor advantage, they might want policy to
infranchise Religion, perhaps they might be tainted with Tertullians opinion,
who thought it not only unlawful to resist tyranny, but also to fly from it.

Fourthly, History is clear, that in Constantines days, they did adhere to him
being a Christian, and fight against Licinius being a Pagan, and their Enemy.
And in the reign of Theodosius, such Christians as lived in Persia, and were
there tyrannically and cruelly treated, did incite the Roman Emperor to
undertake their defense against their own natural Lord.

Let this be sufficient for the Roman story, and for the phanning out of our
way such advantages, as the Primate, and his fellow Royalists may seem there to
lay hold of in expounding this text of the 13. of Romans to our prejudice: our
method now hands us to our own Laws, and Chronicles, let us follow our Preacher
thither. If St. Paul teach us that the supreme power is not to be resisted by
any persons merely inferior, and subordinate: but leaves us no certain rule,
whereby to discern what that supreme power is in all Countries: our Preacher
should do well to let us know what he utters out of his mere Text, and what he
utters out of his own imagination. Barclay, Grotius, Arnisseus, all our
Royalists besides are so ingenious, as to acknowledge, that a Prince in an
Aristocracy, or compounded Democracie is not so irresistible, as an absolute
Monarch: nay in Monarchy they do acknowledge degrees also. What shall we think
then of this Prelate, who without proving Caesar an absolute Monarch, or
reducing England to the pattern of Rome, or stepping at all out of his Text,
where neither Rome, nor England is mentioned, yet will out of his Text condemn
both Rome and England, and by consequence all other States to the remediless
servitude of non-resistance? The Emperor of Germany is now Caesar's successor,
and not denied to be the supreme Magistrate in that country, in diverse
respects: yet the Electors, and other Princes are in some respect supreme also
in their several territories, and may use resistance against the Emperor in
some cases. Now if our Preacher may except Germany out of his Text, why not
England, unless He will appeal to something beyond his Text? and if England,
why not others? and if he except, nor Germany, nor England, nor any: nor will
refer himself to any other authority but his Text, which mentions no
particulars: let Him enlarge his Sermon, and be a little more ingenious, and
vouchsafe us some account why He is induced thus to confound all forms of
government, and to recede from the judgment of all Politicians. But soft, what
have we to do with a mere Divine? let the Monarchy of England speak for it
self, let Divinity, and Law, and Policy be admitted into this Junto, for that
which is to be the subject of this consultation is to be reckoned inter agenda,
and not inter credenda.

FINIS.
Eerata.
Page 3. l. 4. r. desire them. p. 21. l. 30. r. Dramoctidas. p. 37. l. 7. dele
the. p. 38. l. 3. r. commune jus vetet. p. 42. l. 1. for death r. slavery.


