A Plea for the LORDS AND HOUSE of PEERS.

OR A full, necessary, seasonable enlarged Vindication, of the just, ancient
hereditary Right of the Earls, Lords, Peers, and Barons of this Realm to sit,
vote, judge, in all the PARLIAMENTS of ENGLAND.

Wherein their Right of Session, and Sole Power of Judicature without the
Commons House, in Criminal, Civil, Ecclesiastical causes as well of Commons as
Peers; Yea in cases of Elections, Breach of Privilege, misdemeanors of the
Commons themselves, are irrefragably evidenced by solid reasons, punctual
Authorities, memorable Presidents out of Histories and Records in all ages,
most of them not extant in any Writers of our Parliaments: Whose Errors are
here rectified; the Seditious Anti-Parliamentary Pamphlets, Libels of Lilbourn,
Overton, and other Levellers against the Lords House, and Right of judging
Commoners, fully refuted: and larger Discoveries made of the Proceedings,
Judgments of the Lords in Parliament, in Criminal, Civil causes, Elections,
Breaches of Privilege, of their Gallantry in gaining, maintaining, preserving
the Great Charters, Laws, Liberties, Properties of the Nation, and oppugning
all Regal, Papal Usurpations, Exactions, Oppressions, illegal Ayds, Taxes
required or imposed; and of the Commons first summons to, and just Power in
Parliaments, than in any former Publications whatsoever.

By William Prynne Esquire, a Bencher of Lincolnes Inn.

Prove. 22.28. Remove not the ancient Landmark which thy Fathers have set,

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the sign of the Gun in Ivy Lane and
Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1659.

To all the truly Honorable, Heroic Lords and Peers of the Realm of England,
who are real Patriots of Religion, their Countries Fundamental Liberties,
Properties, Great Charters, Laws, against all arbitrary Tyranny, Encroachments,
illegal, unnecessary Taxes and Oppressions.
Right Honorable,
THough true Nobility (always founded in Omnes pari sort nascimur, sola
virtute distinguimur. Minutius Felix Octau. p. 123. Nobilitas sola est ac unica
virtus. Iuvenal Satyr. 8.
virtue and real piety) needs no other tutelar Deity, or Apology, but it self,
amongst those Omnes boni semper Nobilitati savemus: and quia utile est reipub.
Nobiles Homines esse dignos Majoribus suis, and quia valet apud nos elarorum
Hominum and been de reipub. meritorum memoria, etiam mortuorum. Cicero Orat.
pro P. Sext.
ingenious Spirits, who are able to discern or estimate its worth; yet the
iniquity of our degenerated Age, and the frenzy of the intoxicated ignorant
vulgar is such, that it now requires the assistance of the ablest Advocates to
plead its cause, and vindicate the just Rights, Privileges of the House of
Peers, against the Lilburn, Overton, and others.
licentious Quills, Tongues of lawless sordid Sectaries, and Mechanic
Levellers; who having got the Sword and reins into their hands, plant all
their batteries and force against them; crying out like those Babylonian
Levellers of old against the House of Lords; Psalm. 137.7.
Raze it, Raze it, even to the foundation thereof, and lay it for ever ^ver
with the very dust; beholding all true Honor, worth, and Nobleness shining
forth in your Honors heroic Spirits, with a malignant aspect, because they
despair of ever enjoying the least spark thereof in themselves, and prosecuting
you with a deadly hatred, because better, greater than ever they have hopes to
be, unless they can through Those who usurp supreme Power by these illegal
means, and Come not in by the Door; but climb up some other way into the
sheepfold: are resolved by Christ himself to be THIEVES and ROBBERS; who come
but for to STEAL-KILL, and DESTROY the SHEEP; and no lawful Shepherds, Powers,
Magistrates, John 10.1.10. These Christ's true sheep will not follow, but flee
from, for they know not their voice. Ver. 5.
Treachery and violence make themselves the only Grandees, by debasing your
highest Dignity, to the lowest Peasantry, and making the meanest Commoners your
Compears.

This dangerous seditious Design has engaged me (the unablest of many) out of
my great affection to Royalty and real Nobility, and a deep sense of the
present kid tottering condition of our Kingdom, Parliament (the very pillars
and foundations whereof are now not only shaken, but almost quite subverted)
voluntarily, without any Fee at all, to become your Honors Advocate, to plead
your Cause, and vindicate your undoubted hereditary right of sitting, voting,
judging in our Parliaments; of which they strenuously endeavor to plunder both
your Lordships and your posterities; and to publish these subitane Collections
to the world, (now enlarged with many pertinent Additions) to still the Psalm.
65, 7.
madness of the seduced vulgar, whom Ignoramus Lilburn, Overton, Walwin, and
their Confederates have labored to mutiny against your Parliamentary
Jurisdiction, Isa. 41.25.
treading upon Princes as upon mortar, and as the Potter treads the clay, in
their illiterate seditious Pamphlets, whose Arguments, Pretenses, Presidents,
Objections, Allegations I have here refuted by Scripture, Histories,
Antiquities, and Parliament-Rolls; the ignorance whereof, joined with their
malice, is the principal occasion of their error in this kind.

And truly were all our Parliament Rolls, Pleas, Iournals, faithfully
transcribed, As they are now in part, In an Exact abridgement of the Records of
the Tower of London, 1657. published by me.
and published in print to the eyes of the world, as most of our Statutes are,
by authority of both Houses of Parliament (a work as worthy their undertaking,
and as beneficial for the public, as any I can recommend unto their care) it
would not only preserve them from imbezelling, and the hazards of fire and
war, to which they are now subject, but likewise eternally silence, refute the
Sectaries, Levellers ignorant false Allegations against your Honors
Parliamentary Jurisdiction and Judicatur* resolve, clear all or most doubts
that can arise concerning the tower, jurisdiction, privileges of both, or
either Houses, keep both of them within their due bounds, (the exceeding
whereof is dangerous, grievous to the people, except in cases of absolute,
real, present, urgent, not pretended necessity, for the saving of a Kingdom*
whiles that necessity continues, and no longer; chalk o^^ the ^mi^ent regular
way of proceeding in all kinds of Parliamentary affairs whatsoever, whether of
war, or peace, Trade or Government, Privileges or Taxes, and in all civil or
criminal causes, and all matters whatsoever concerning King or Subject, Natives
or Foreiners; overrule, reconcile most of the present differences between the
King and Parliament, House and House, Members and Members; clear many doubts,
rectify some gross mistakes in our printed Statutes, Law Books, and ordinary
Historians; add much light, luster, ornament to our English Annals, the Common
and Statute Laws; and make all Lawyers, all Members of both Houses far more
able than now they are, to manage and carry on all businesses in Parliament,
when they shall upon every occasion almost have former presidents ready at hand
to direct them; there being now very few Members, in either House, Lords,
Lawyers, or others, well read, or versed in ancient Parliament Roll^, Pleas,
Iournals, or Histories relating to them, the ignorance whereof is a great
Remora to their proceedings, yea often times, a cause of dangerous encroachments
of new Jurisdictions over the Subjects persons, estates, not usual in former
Parliaments; of some great mistakes and deviations from the ancient methodical
Rules and Tracts of parliament (now almost quite forgotten, and laid aside by
new unexperienced, ignorant Parliament Members, who think they may do what they
please) to the public prejudice, injury of posterity, and subversion of our
Fundamental Laws, Rights, Liberties, in the highest degree, by new erected
arbitrary Committees, exercising an absolute tyrannical power over the Persons,
Liberties, Estates, Freeholds both of Lords themselves, and all English Freemen.

Your Lordships helping hand to the speedy furthering of such a necessary
public work, and your industrious, magnanimous, unanimous imitation of the
memorable heroic presidents of your Noble progenitors, in gaining, regaining,
enlarging, confirming, perpetuating to posterity the successive Grand Charters
of our Liberties, when ever violated, in oppugning all arbitrary tyrannical
Proceedings, Taxes, Oppressions, Encroachments, ill Counselors, and bad
Instruments both of Kings and Popes themselves; in inflicting exemplary
punishments upon all Traitors, Enemies to the public, both in our Parliaments,
and the Field too, when there was occasion, the principal whereof, I have Page
56. to 140. 188. to 194. 210. 242. to 258. 263. to 267.
here presented to your view, in a Chronical method, will be a great accession
to your Honor, the best vindication of your ancient undoubted Parliamentary
Jurisdiction, Right, Power, Judicature, against all Opposites; till the
accomplishment whereof, I shall humbly recommend this enlarged Plea in your
Honors defense, to your Noble Patronage; who can pitch upon no better, nor
readier means to support your declining Honor and Authority, or to re-indear
your selves in the Peoples affections, than in these distracted, dangerous,
stormy times, to engage all your interest, power, activity, speedily to settle,
secure Gods Glory, Truth, Worship, the public Laws, Peace, Liberty, Safety of
the Kingdom, against all open Opposers, and secret Underminers of them; to
unburthen the people of their long-continued, heavy Taxes, the Soldiers
insolences, free-quarters; to redress all pressing grievances, all oppressing
arbitrary Committees, proceedings, contrary to the rules of Law and Justice; to
right all grieved Petitioners (especially such who have waited at least seven
years space at your doors for reparations) to relieve poor starved Ireland;
raise up the almost lost honor, power, freedom, reputation of Parliaments, by
acting honorably, heroically like your selves, without any fear, favor,
hatred or self ends, by confining your selves, with the Commons House, to the
ancient bounds, rules of Parliamentary Jurisdiction, proceedings, and by
endeavoring to excel all others as far in Justice, Goodness and public
resolutions, as you do in Greatness and Authority. Which that you may
effectually perform, as it is the principal scope of this Plea for your
Lordships; (which whether you stand, fall, or by way of Remitter, recover your
ancient rights again, after a violent discontinuance of them for a season, will
remain as a lasting Monument to all Posterity of your undubitable just Right to
sit and judge in all English Parliaments) So it shall be the constant prayer of,

Your Lordships devoted Servant, WILLIAM PRYNNE.
From my Study in Lincolns Inn, 7. Junii 1647.
To the Ingenuous READER.
THis Plea for the LORDS and House of PEERS, was first suddenly compiled and
published by me in the year 1647, when His Protestation against the Lords,
Regal Tyranny discovered, with others here quoted, p. 2, 3, 4.
Lilburn, Overton, with their Iesuitical and Anabaptistical levelling
Confederates endeavored by sundry seditious Pamphlets, libels, Petitions, then
printed, dispersed in the City, Army, Country, to extirpate the Lords and House
of Peers, together with the King and Monarchy, by engaging the vulgar Rabble,
Soldiers, and Commons to suppress, pull down, or cast off their superior,
just, ancient, legal authority over them; not only against the Prove. 24.21.
Romans 13.1, 2, 3. Tit. 3.1. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.13.14, 15.
express Laws of God and 1 Eliz. c, 1.3. 8 Eliz. c. 1. 1 Jac. 1* 3 Jac. c. 1,
4, 5. 1 H. 7. c. 1.
the Realm, their own Oaths, of Supremacy, Allegiance, Protestation, Covenant,;
but the very Law of Nature it self, universally received amongst all Nations
whatsoever: Dionysius Halicarnas. Antiqu. Romans l. 1. p. 7.
Haec enim lex Naturae* apud omnes Gentes recepta est, quam nullum tempus
delebit, UT SUPERIORES* INFERIORIBUS* IMPERENT: Which Law these unnatural
Bedlams would now quite obliterate, endeavoring to set up that A^axy and
disorder in Government, which Solomon, and God himself by him so much complain
of; Eccles. 10.5, 6, 7. There is AN EVIL, I have seen under the Sun* as AN
ERROR that proceeds from the Ruler, Folly (or persons of mean fortune, parts,
birth) is set in high dignity, and the rich set in low place: I have seen
Servants upon Horses; and Princes walking as Servants upon the earth: Which
disorder he thus censures, Prove. 19.10. Delight is not seeml^ for a fool, much
less for a Servant to have rule over Princes: The sad effects whereof he thus
relates; Prove. 30.21, 22. For three things the Earth is disquieted, and for a
fourth, which it cannot bear, (the (...) and chief whereof is this) For a
Servant when he reigns. To which David subjoyns another ill consequence;
Psalm. 12.8. The ungodly walk on every side, when the vilest of the Sons of men
are exalted: which the Chald^ paraphrase thus glosseth; In circuitu improbi
ambulant tanquam sanguisugae, 31 H. 6. c. 1. 39 H. 6. c. 1.
qui sugunt* sanguinem filiorum hominum; the peasantry, when exalted above the
ancient Nobility and Gentry, being usually both intollerably proud, insolent,
cruel, blo^dy, according to the old observation of In Eutropium l. 1 p. 67.
Claudians, and others; Asperius humili nihil est cum surgit in altum,
Cuncta ferit, dum cuncta timet; desaevit in omnes
Vt se posse putent, nec bellua tetrior ulla
Quam servi rabies in libera coll^ furentis;
Agnoscit gemitus et paenae parcere nescit.


This was experimentally verified, not only in Nubtigensis l. 4. c. 14.
Will. Langhamp heretofore, and other particular persons advanced from low
degree to places of greatest honor; but in the popular insurrections of See
Walsingham, Holinshed, Speed* Stowes Survey of London, Trussel, Grafton.
John Cade, Jack Straw, Wat Tyler, and others, who intended to murder the
King, destroy the Nobles, Judges, Prelates, Lawyers, and chief Gent. they could
meet with, than to seize upon their lands, estates, and make themselves Kings,
Lords in their steads, and share the Kingdom, Government between them* and by
the Sleidens Comment, l. 7.11. Munsteri Cosmogr. l. 3. c. 142. David Chyrraeus,
Chron. Saxoniae, l. 12, 13, 14.
Anabaptists proceedings of like Nature at Munster and other places in Germany;
whom the present See the Animadversions on the Welsh Remonstrance, and answer
to Killing no Murder.
Levellers of this sect would doubtless imitate, could they get but sufficient
power into their hands.

My absence in the Country whiles this Plea was printing, caused many material
mistakes of words, and one gross mutilated transposition in Cheddars case, in
its first Edition, p. 48, 52. which I could not correct, most of the Books
being dispersed before I could get an Errata printed; and the small time I had
to compile it, necessitated me to omit many material Records, Presidents
Histories pertinent to this Argument: Whereupon to right my self, with the
Lords whose cause I pleaded, and the Readers, I soon after resolved to publish
a corrected much enlarged Impression thereof; but other public Employments and
publications retarding it, and the whole House of Lords some few Months after
being forcibly suppressed, my self, with sundry other Members of the Comunions
House secured, secluded, and after that dispersed and sent close prisoners by
Mr. Bradshaws illegal Warrants unto several remote Castles, without any hearing
or cause expressed, or recompense for the Injuries, damages thereby sustained;
this much augmented Plea has lain dormant ever since, and had never been
awaked to walk abroad in public, had not the late loud unexpected Votes at
Westminster. of, a As at first propounded voted, and urged at several conferences.

See their Declarations and Papers of Feb. and March 17 and 19, 1648.


NEW KING AND HOUSE OF LORDS under the Name* Notion of ANOTHER HOUSE, passed by
some who had lately (c) suppressed, decryed, engaged against them both as
useless, dangerous, oppressive, burthensom, tyrannical, etc. revived, and
raised it out of the Grave of Oblivion.

The Subject matters principally debated and vindicated in it are only two.
First, That all the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Barons, Lords of
England have an undoubted ancient, just Right, Privilege to sit, vote in all
Parliaments of England, without any election by or Commission from the people,
with the true grounds thereof. 2ly. That the judicial power, Judicature, and
Jugdements in Parliament, belong wholly and soly to the King and House of
Lords, not to the Commons House, and that in all criminal, civil, or
ecclesiastical causes whatsoever proper for Parliaments to decide, both in the
Cases of Commoners and Clergy men, as well as Peers; who are only triable both
in and out of Parliaments by their Peers, here plentifully evinced.

In debating these two points, I have briefly proved the Antiquity of our Lords
and Nobles sitting, ^oting in all Parliamentary Great Councils, both under our
British, Saxon, Danish, Norman, and English Kings, before any Knights, Citizens
or Burgesses were admitted into our Councils, or Parliaments; which having more
particularly demonstrated by undeniable presidents, in my Historical Collection
of all the ancient Great Councils and Parliaments of England; in my Antiquity
triumphing over Novelty, p. 9, 10.55. to 85. and in my 1, 2, and 3. parts, of
an Historical, Seasonable Vindication and Collection of the fundamental Rights,
Privileges, Laws, etc. of all English Freemen, printed 1655. 1656. and 1657.
(wherein all the Great Councils, and Parliamentary assemblies from Brute to
William the Conqueror, are Chronologically collected and epitomized:) I shall
referr the Reader thereunto for full satisfaction of the Antiquity of our
Parliamentary Councils, and the Lords constant sitting, voting, judging in them.

2ly, Because Polydor Virgil, Speed, Holinshed, in Anno 1216. See here, p. 165.
Judge Dodderidge, Mr. Agar, Mr. Cambden, and Joseph Holland, in their Treatises
of the Antiquity of the Parliaments of England, p. 18, 19, 20, 40. 85, 87. Sir
Walter Raleigh his Prerogative of the Parliaments of England, p. 2, 3. The
Freeholders Grand Inquest. p. 13, 14.
many of our late Historians, Antiquaries, Lawyers, and others, derive our
Parliament as now constituted, and the calling of Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses to them, from the Parliamentary Council held at Salisbury in the 16.
year of King Henry the 1. or at least from King Henry the 2. his reign, (which
the forged Imposture styled Modus tenendi Parliamentum, and 4 Institutes, p. 12.
Sir Edward Cook, seduced by it, would advance as high as Edward the Confessor,
as if there had been Knights, Citizens and Burgesses usually summoned to all
Parliaments in his reign and ever since;) I have herein given you an account
out of our antientest and best Historians, of all the Parliaments and
Proceedings in them, both under King Henry the 1. and 2. and most others under
their immediate Successors, infallibly proving there were no Knights, Citizens*
and Burgesses in the Parliaments held under either of them, and that their
first summons to Parliaments (for ought appears) was but in 49 H. 3. not
before, since which they have been usually summoned, but yet in a various
manner.

3ly. I have evidenced by many memorable Histories, Presidents, Records in all
ages: (the most whereof were never mentioned by any who have formerly written
of Parliaments) that the Judicature in our Parliaments resides solely in the
King and House Lords, not only in all See Walsingham, Hist. Angl. Anno 1 H. 4.
p. 402. DOMINI in praesenti Parliamento Regis ASSENSU IUDICANT and DECERNUNT,
etc. and ulterius DOMINI TEMPORALES REGIS ASSENSU IUDICANT and DECERNUNT, etc.
Criminal cases of Lords, Peers, Commons, and in all Civil and ecclesiastical
businesses, Appeals, and Writs of Error there descided; but likewise in all
cases of Elections, breach, or allowance of privilege of Parliament, and
misdemeanors relating to the House of Commons themselves, their Speakers,
Members, and menial Servants. To which I shall only add, That the late King in
his printed Exact Collection, p. 321.
Answer to the 19. Propositions of both Houses, June 1642. thus declares: That
the LORDS being trusted with a Iudicatory power, are an excellent Screen and
Bank between the Prince and People, to assist each against any encroachments of
the other; and by just judgments to preserve that Law, which ought to be the
Rule between every one of the three.

4ly, I have herein for the benefit of all Students, Professors of the Law, and
others, (who take all Sir Edward Cooks Opinions, Records, for undoubted
Oracles, without examination, and swallow down all his mistakes) discovered
many of his gross Errors, oversights, misrecitals and pervertings of Records,
in matters relating to our Parliaments; evidenced his much magnified Modus
tenendi Parliamentum, to be a mere late Imposture, full of mistakes, concerning
the Antiquity and Judicature of the Commons House; and Here, p. 147. to 161.
refuted Sir Edward Cooks mistaken Law, as in other points, so in this: 1
Instit. f. 9 b. 10 b. See 4 Instit. p. 6, 7. 44, 45, 46.
That the Kings general writ of summons to any Knight or Esquire to the House
of Lords, (by the name of Knight or Esquire, without any special clause of
creating him a Baron or Lord in the Writ.) does neither ennoble himself, nor
his heirs, nor make them Lords and Barons, though they sit in the Lords House
(as he asserts, it does;) unless they held by Barony of the King before, and
were Barons by their Tenure: the general writs of summons stiling them only
Knights and Esquires, as before, not Lords or Barons, and having no clause in
them, that will amount to the creation of a Lord, much less of a Baron, which
Title, or word Baron is not mentioned in the Writ; nor does it affix their
Lordship or Barony to any particular place, as all Seldens Titles of Honor, p.
745, 746, 747, 748, 749.
Writs and Patents that create men Lords or Barons use to do. For the further
clearing of this point, you may observe, that the writs of summons in the
Clause Rolls, do sometimes style the persons summoned, Barons: thus all or most
of the Sea my 1. Table to an Exact abridgment, etc, and the writs of summons in
that abridgement.
writs of summons from 25. E. 3. to 1 E. 4. are directed, Willielmo Baroni de
Graystocke Chivaler: Radulpho, Johanni, and Radulpho Baroni de Graystocke*
Sometimes the writs style them Lords; as An Exact abridgement, p. 549, 558,
633, 636, 637, 639, 640, 640. 645, 648, 649, 655, 660, 661, 668.
Johanni Talbot Domino de Furnival, in 4 H. 5, etc. In Ann: 25, 27, 28, 29, 31,
33, 38 H. 6. and 2 E. 4. the writs are, Henrico Peircy DOMINO de Poymiger,
DOMINO de Poynings, DOMINO de FERRARIIS de Groby, Thomae DOMINO de Roos,
Richardo Woodvil Militi, DOMINO de Rivers; Roberto Hungerford Mil* DOMINO de
Mollings, Willielmo Beuchamp, DOMINO de Sto Amando, Jacobo de Fynes, DOMINO de
Say et Seal; Edwardo Gray Mil. DOMINO de Groby, H. DOMINO de Poynings, Johanni
Sturton Mil. DOMINO de Sturton, Johanni DOMINO de Clinton, Edoardo Nevil DOMINO
de Burgaveny, Willielmo Bourchier Mil. DOMINO de Fitzwarren, Henrico Bromflet
DOMINO de VESSEY, Thomae Gray DOMINO de Richmond, Tho. Percie Mil. DOMINO de
Egremont, Ricardo Wells DOMINO de Willoughby Mil: Richardo Fynes DOMINO de
Dacre. Though in most ancient and later writs, the word Dominus is omitted; and
the name of the Barony only used* Sometimes there is a special clause of
Creation in the writ it self, as in Clause 27 H. 6. m. 26. dorso; An Exact
abridgement, p. 637. Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 745.
Henrico Bromfleet* Mil* crea^ing him and the heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten Barons of Vessey. These writs which thus style the Barons, Lords, and
create them such by special clauses, as patents do, will make those Knights
and Esquires, Lords or Barons, who were none before: but a General writ which
terms them only Knights or Esquires; and gives them neither the Title of Lords
or Barons; nor creates them such, cannot make themselves or their posterity
Lords or Barons, unless they held by Barony, and then they are Barons only by
Tenure, not Writ. This is clear, as I conceive, by the very year-books of 22 E.
3. f. 18. a. where a Juror in the Grand Assise was challenged, because he was a
Baner, or Baron, and this Challenge not allowed; car sil soit a BANER, and ne
tient pas per BARONI, il seruera in l'assise; By 48 E. 3. f. 30 b. Brook
Challenge 37. where Sir Ralph Everden Knight brought a writ out of Chancery,
and also a privy Seal to the Justices, rehearsing that he was a Baron, and
commanding them to Fitz. N. Brev. f. 165. e.
discharge him from being sworn in Assizes, because Barons ought not to be
sworn in any Enquest or recognisance against their wills. Whereupon Judge
Belknap examined him, Sil tient per Borony? and sil avera tout ceo temps Venus
a Parliament come Baron duist vener* who answered, That he held by a certain
part of a Barony, and that he and his Ancestors had always held so: After
which, upon good advice he was discharged. The tenure by Barony, and coming to
Parliaments in Belknaps opinion being that which makes men Barons, not the
general writ of Summons, unless they held by Barony: which Opinion is fortified
by An. 3 H. 3. Fitzh. Prescription, 56. M. 4 H. 3. Dower 180. M. 23 H. 3.
Partition, 18. Tr. 18. 2 E. 2. Fitz. Assise 383. 39 E. 3.35. b. 34 H. 6.50.
Trial. 18.35 H. 6.40. a. Sir Edward Cooks 4* Instit. p. 47. Gilbert de
Vmphrevils case; with what Sir Edward himself has observed in his 4 Instit. p.
5. which I thought fit to add (for further clearing of this moot-point) to what
I have herein collected touching this Subject.

5ly, I have here, p. 57. to 132.243. to 258.264, to 267. 192. to 206, etc.
produced many memorable presidents and Records of our Lords and Barons
magnanimous, strenuous, unanimous oppositions of all Regal and Papal
Usurpations, Oppressions, Exactions, Encroachments on the peoples Liberties, or
properties in former ages in our Parliaments; of their care, vigilance,
industry, courage to gain, retain, confirm, and perpetuate to posterity those
Grand Charters of our Liberties, and Fundamental Laws, privileges, franchises,
which we formerly enjoyed by their valor, and so long contested for both in
Parliaments and the field, against the late King, with the prodigal expense of
much Christian blood, and many Millions of Treasure; Which yet now at last are
almost totally lost, betrayed, deserted, disowned both by the Nobility, Gentry,
Lawyers, Clergy and Commonalty of the Nation, through base, unworthy,
unchristian, unEnglish, ignoble fear and cowardice, to their eternal infamy and
reproach, unless the Number. 16.22. c. 27.16.
God of the spirits of all flesh, shall infuse new life, and English Spirits
into their spiritless, stupid, timorous, faint-hearted, slavish, and almost
despairing Souls, by the serious contemplation of those heroic presidents of
their ancestors here represented to their view, especially when publicly
assembled in Parliament, and pressed to burden the people with new Aids and
Taxes, though very rare, small and inconsiderable, in respect of the manifold
heavy incessant Taxes, Excises, Imposts, which we have for many years last past
sustained, to fight our selves into greater slavery, beggary, confusion every
year than other, and hasten the total and final desolation of Church, State,
Religion, Laws, Liberties, Parliaments, kingdom, if* God of his infinite
goodness prevent it not, by induing the Lords of the Great Council of
Parliament, and all the Nobility, Clergy, Lawyers, Gentry, Commonalty, and
Soldiery of the Land with Grace, wisdom, understanding, magnanimity, unanimity
and activity to know and pursue Luke 19.42.
in this their day, the things which belong to their peace, liberty, ease and
settlement; which shall be my daily Letany for them.

6ly, I have here published to your view, the Articles, proceedings, ^udgements
in Parliament against the two Spencers, Roger M^rtimer Earl of March, King
Edward the 2. and Richard the 2. out of the Records themselves, more fully,
truly, than they are related by our Walsingh. Trussel, Hall, Fabian, Holinshed,
Grafton, Speed, Baker, Stow, and others.
vulgar Historians, to rectify some mistakes in them, and presented you with
the memorable petition of the Commons, and the Kings answer thereunto in the
Parliament of 1 Edw. 4. setting forth his pedigree, Title to the Crown at
large, disproving the Titles of Henry the 4, 5, 6. branding them as mere
Usurpers; condemning Henry the 4. his deposition and murder of King Richard the
2. as a most tyrannical, wicked, bloody, unchristian act, Murder, execrable
both to God and men, which dr^w down exemplary Judgments on the land, and
occasioned bloody intestine wars; repealing all proceedings, Acts, Ordinances
for the establishment of this Usurper: and attainting K. Henry the 6. his
Queen, Son, and all their adherents of High Treason: A record never formerly
published. And I have cleared these presidents from those false inferences, to
prove, the Commons joint interest in the Judicature of Parliament with the
Lords, and justify those exorbitant proceedings, which some have erroniously
deduced from them.

7ly, In this plea, I have for the most part recited the passages of our
ancient Parliaments and Records, in the same language our old Historians and
Records relate them, both to avoid all suspicions of any mistranslation, and
because their own language more elegantly expresses them; and will give
greater satisfaction to the learned of all professions (for whose benefit and
instruction I have chiefly published them, not for the illiterate vulgars) than
any translation whatsoever. If there be any lack-Latin Lords or Lawyers of so
ignoble education or extraction, that they cannot understand them, I presume
they have some Chaplains, Secretaries, Steward, or Clerk belonging to them, or
learned friends near them, who can interpret those passages in it, which will
be a shame for any Nobleman or Lawyer to profess in public he understands nor;
for if Lawyers understand not Latin or French Records when printed; how will
they be able to read or make use of them in the Tower, or Treasuries, the
principal Magazines both of that kind of learning and Law, which concerns
either our Parliamentary or State Affairs; which will be wholly lost in few
years more, if all Students of the Law (as many now do) turn English Lawyers
only, and cast off the use both of Latin and Law-French in their public
Mootes; the readiest method to make them real Ignoramusses, and as void of Law,
as of these Languages wherein the Records are registered.

It is our Saviors observation, John 3.19, 20. That light is come into the
world, and men love darkness more than light, because their deeds are evil: For
every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest
his deeds should be discovered or reproved. And Gal. 3.1. c. 4.15.
St. Paul complains of the foolish Galathians, whom some had bewitched that
they should not obey the truth; that though at first they so respected him,
that if possible, they would have plucked out their own eyes and given them to
him; yet soon after, reputed him to be their enemy, because he told them the
truth. I doubt the old and new Lights, and unknown Parliamentary truths,
proceedings discovered to the ignorant blind world in this Plea, though
amiable, delightful in themselves, and grateful to all true Philopaters,
Philologers, and lear^ed Nobles, Statesmen, Lawyers, Scholars, (in this
degenerous age, wherein all sorts of Learning, and insight in Records or
Parliamentary Antiquities are very much decayed;) will yet be very displeasing
to some sorts of ignorant, heady, extravagant persons, who love darkness* more
than light, because their deeds are evil; but more especially to the
Anabaptistical Levellers, Lilburnians, innovating Publicans and Republicans;
much like the Hab. 1.6, 9, 10*
Chaldeans of old, a bitter, and hasty Nation, lately marching through the
bre^th of the Land to posses^ the dwelling places that are not theirs: they are
terrible and dreadful; their judgment and dignity proceeds of themselves;
they are all for violence; they scoff at KINGS, AND PRINCES ARE A SCORN UNTO
THEM, as appears by their late Votes, Declarations, Engagements, not only
against Kings and Kingship, but the whole House of Lords, and to ^lliterate
self-conceited Lawyers, and ignorant Members of the Commons House, who deem
that House, and its Committees, if not every Member of it, the only Supreme
Judges and Judicature of the Realm, paramount our Kings, Lords, Laws,
Liberties, Great Charters, and all other Courts of Justice, having an absolute,
arbitrary, unlimited power, to act, vote and determine what they please,
without appeal or consult, which this Plea irrefragably disproves as a most
gross and dangerous mistake; for which they will frown upon it, if not ^ate and
prosecute me as their Enemy. But the Sun must not cease from shining because
weak and sore Eyes will be offended with its splendour, nor seasonable truths of
most public concernment be concealed, smothered in time of greatest need,
because ignorant, erroneous, sottish, ^air-braind, Levellers or Innovator
Ezech. 2.3. to 9.
will be displeased with, and storm against them, they being always Nihil est
veritatis luce dulcius, Cicero Ac. Quaest* l. 3.
Sweet and lovely in themselves, yea precious to the best of men* and will
prove victorious in conclusion, though clouded, suppressed, maligned for the
pre^ent; yea he who by the publication of such truths, Prove. 28.23.
rebukes wise, ingenuous men's extravagant actions and opinions for the present,
shall afterward find more favor with them (when they come to know themselves
and their mistakes, by meditating on the truths revealed to them) he^ he that
flattereth them with his lips, in their exorbitant actions, or erroneous
opinions.

I shall therefore recommend this Plea for the Lords, and all the truths
therein discovered, asserted, to the omnipotent ^rotection, and effectual
blessing both of, Deuteronomy. 10.17. Psalm. 136.3. 1 Timothy 6.15. Rev. 17.14. c. 19.8.
THE LORD OF LORDS, and Deuteronomy. 31.4. Psalm. 31.5. Ier. 5.3. Isay 56.24, 15.
GOD OF TRUTH, whose Eyes are upon the TRUTH, in this sad age of Errors,
Falsehoods, Lies, Fraud, and desperate Hypocrisy, wherein truth is fallen in
the Streets, and he that dares boldly assert it, is reputed mad, and makes
himself a prey: And shall leave it as a lasting monument to posterity of my
Cordial affection to the ancient Parliamentary proceedings, Lords, Peers, Laws,
Liberties, Properties, Great Charters of the English Nation, and my sincere
endeavors to plead their cause in the worst of times, against all their
Antagonists and professed Enemies, though never so numerous and formidable,
albeit to my own private prejudice.

Whatever the Reader shall find wanting in this Plea relating to the
Constitution, Summons, Proceedings of our ancient, English Parliaments in
general, or to the power, Judicature, Rights, privileges, transactions of our
Kings, Lords, or House of Com. in Parl. in particular, you may read at leisure
in my Preface and Tables to An Exact Abridgement of the Records in the Tower of
London, from the reign of King Edward the 2. to Richard the 3. and in the
Abridgement it self, collected by that famous Antiquarie, Sir Robert Cotton,
lately published; which will better instruct the Readers in all Parliamentary
affairs, than all the slight unsatisfactory Treatises of our Parliaments,
hitherto published, except this Plea; which I humbly submit to the friendly
Embrace, and impartial Censure of every Judicious Reader, especially of my own
profession, for whom it is most proper; whose general ignorance and mistakes in
Parliament Antiquities, proceedings, and matters of the Crown, has brought
some disparagement upon the function, and led others into dangerous public
Errors; which that this Plea may wipe off, and rectify hereafter for the
common benefit, ease, settlement, re-establishment of our late dissipated
Parliaments, and confused, distracted Nations, shall be the Vote and daily
prayer of

Thy unfeigned Friend, and his Countries public unmercenary Servant, WILLIAM
PRYNNE.
Lincolns-Inne 6 December. 1657.
A Plea for the LORDS, AND HOUSE of PEERS. OR, A short, yet full and necessary
Vindication of the Judiciary and Legislative Power of the House of Peers, and
the Hereditary just Right of the Lords and Barons of this Realm, to sit, vote,
judge in the high Court of Parliament.
THe treasonable destructive design of diverse dangerous Anabaptists, Levellers,
Agitators in the Army, City, Country, and of Lilburn, Overton, (their
Champions, Ringleaders in this Seditious Plot) to dethrone the King, unlord
the Lords, new-model the House of Commons, extirpate Monarch^, suppress the
House of Peers, and subvert Parliaments, (the only obstacles to their pretended
Polarchy and Anarchy) are now so legible in their many late printed Petitions,
L^bels, Pamphlets, so visible in their actings, and public proceedings, that
it rather requires our diligence and expedition to prevent, than hesitancy to
doubt or dispute them, they positively protesting against, yea denying both
King and Monarchy, in their A Remonstrance of many thousand Citizens to their
own House of Commons, p. 6. The just man's Justification, p. 10. Regal Tyranny
Discovered, A Declaration from his Excellency, and the General Council of the
Army, Jan. 11. 1647. p. 7. Speeches, etc. at a Conference newly published by
Walker, printed verbatim out of Dolman the Jesuit his Book, condemned formerly
as treasonable.
late printed Pamphlets, Remonstrances, with the Power, Judicature of the House
of Peers, and their undoubted just Hereditary right to vote, act, or sit in
Parliament, because they are not elec^ed by the people as Knights and Burgesses
are; asserting, Regal Tyranny discovered. Lilburns Just Man in* Bonds, p. 1, 2.
A Pearl in a Dunghill, The Free-mans Freedom vindicated, An Anatomy of the Lords
Tyranny; his Argument and Plea before the Committee against the Lords
Authority; his Petition to the Commons, his Letters to Henry Martin: Overtons
Arrow of Defiance shot into the Prerogative Bowels of the House of Lords; his
Petition and Appeal, A Defiance against Arbitrary Usurpation, The Agreement of
the People and Petitions wherein it was presented to the House of Commons, An
Alarm to the House of Lords. See M. Edwards Gangraena, part. 3. p. 192. to 204.
That they are no natural issues of our Laws, but the Exorbitances and
Mushromes of Prerogative, the Wenns of just Government, the Sons of Conquest
and usurpation, not of choice and election, intruded upon us by power, not made
by the people, from whom ALL POWER, PLACE, and OFFICE that is just in this
Kingdom OUGHT TO ARISE; mere arbitrary Tyrants, Usurpers, an illegitimate and
illegal power and Judicatory, who act and Vote in our affairs but as INTRUDERS;
who ought of right not to judge, censure, or imprison any Commoner of England,
even for libelling against them, refusing to appear before them, reviling and
contemning them and their Authority to their faces at their very Bar, (as
Lilburn, Overton boast and print they did) or breaking any of their undoubted
Privileges. To accomplish this their design the better, they endeavor by their
most impudent flattery to engage the House of Commons against the House of
Peers, the better to pull them down; stiling and proclaming the Commons in
their Overtons Petition and Appeal to the High and Mighty States, the Knights
and Burgesses in Parliament assembled, Englands legal Sovereign Power, The
Remonstrance of many thousands to their own House of Commons, A printed
Petition (now in agitation) of many Freeborn people to the only Supreme Power
of this Realm, the Commons in Parliament assembled. The Anatomy of the Lords
Tyranny, An Alarm to the House of Lords. See M. Edwards Gangraena, part 3. p.
154. to 204.
Petitions and Pamphlets, The ONLY Supreme legal Judicatory of the Land, who
ought BY RIGHT, to judge the Lords and their proceedings, from whom they appeal
for right and reparations against the House of Peers; affirming, That in the
Commons House alone resides the formal and legal Supreme Power of England, who
ONLY are chosen by the People; and THEREFORE IN THEM ONLY is the power of
binding the whole Nation, by making, altering, or abolishing Laws, without the
Kings or Lords concurrent assents: to whom they now absolutely deny any
Negative voice; making the Commons a complete Independent Parliament of
themselves; and therefore present all their Petitions, add esses to them alone,
without any acknowledgment or notice of the House of Peers, to whom they deny
any right or title to sit or vote in Parliament, unless they will first divest
themselves of their Peerage, and Barons right of Session, and submit to stand
for the next Knights and Burgesses place in the House of Common that shall fall
void; where, if they may have any voice or influence, the meanest Cobbler,
Tinker, Weaver, Waterman, shall be elected a Knight or Burgess, sooner than the
best and greatest Peer, and every John of Leyden preferred before King or
Prince Charles himself: Sic Sceptra ligonibus aequant; Which Petitions and
Pamphlets of theirs have so puffed, so bladdered up many Novices, and raw
Parliament Men in the Commons House, unacquainted with the original
Constitution, bounds, proceedings, Laws, Customs of the Parliaments of England,
that they begin to act, vote, dispose of the Army, Navy, etc. without, yea
against the Lords, not expecting their concurrence, contrary to all former
proceedings of Parliament, the Lords just Privileges, and their own Solemn
League, Covenant, to maintain them; which may prove very destructive to both
Houses, the Parliament, King, Kingdom; oppressive to their Representatives the
people, (who generally dislike it) if not timely redressed; and breed such a
deadly feud between the Houses, as may soon ruin them both and the Kingdom to
boot. The end of these Anabaptists, Levellers, Lilburnians being only to See M.
Edwards Gangraena, part 3. where this is fully demonstrated.
destroy the Parliament, by setting both Houses at variance, they inveighing as
bitterly against the power, proceedings, Ordinances, Votes, Members, undue
Elections, unequal Constitution of the House of Commons, as they do against the
Lords; Hereupon they have most earnestly pressed in their Lilburns Letter to a
friend. Innocence and Truth justified, and his late Letters to Cromwell, H.
Martin, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and others. Englands Birthright. Englands
lamentable Slavery. Another word to the wise. Comparata Comparandis. Liberty
against Slavery. The Arraignment of Persecution. The Ordinance against Tithes
unmounted. See M. Edwards Gangraena, part. 3. p. 109. to 204.
Pamphlets, their late See the several Remonstrances from his Excellency and
the Army, from June, til December last, 1647. and since in November and
January, 1648. The Agreement of the people, the grand Design, Putney Projects.
Remonstrances, Engagements from their Confederates and Agitators in the Army,
a speedy period and dissolution of this Parliament, a new modelling and more
equal distribution of the Members in the very House of Commons for the future,
etc. All which Petitions, Papers, Remonstrances, Pamphlets of theirs tending to
the utter subversion of Parliaments, the fundamental Laws, Government of the
Kingdom, yea, to an introduction of arbitrary popular Polarchy and Tyranny, are
rather to be ranked among and more agreeable to Jack Cades, or the Earl of
Straffords and Canterburies Treasons, (which they exceed by many degrees) than
to be slighted or countenanced as they are; the keeping up the honor of our
Peers, the rights, Privileges of both Houses within their just bounds, without
interfeiring or incroachment upon one another, or invading the peoples
Liberties, being the only probable means of their, of our preservation,
settlement, security; Upon which consideration, I shall here endeavor as
briefly, yet fully as I may, to vindicate the undoubted Right of the Lords or
Peers of this Realm to sit, vote in Parliament, notwithstanding they are not
elected by the people; and to make good their right, power of Judicature, as
well of Commoners as Peers, against all the cavils of Jesuited Anabaptistical
Levellers, Lilburnians, Sectaries, Agitators, whom I hope so far to silence
and stop their mouths, if not convince their judgments, that they shall never
be able to reply hereunto.

SECTION. 1. Proving the Lords ancient undoubted Right to sit and vote in all
English Parliaments, with the Grounds thereof, though not elected by the People.
THe sum of all these Levellers object against the Lords right of sitting,
voting, judging in Parliament, is this: Overtons Defiance against all arbitrary
usurpation of the House of Lords, p. 5, 6 15, 17, 18. his Arrow against all
Tyrants, p. 6.10, 11, 12. and others forecited* a. and b.
That they sit there only by Patent, by the Kings will, Tenure or descent; not
by the Peoples free Election alone, as the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
do: That the people never entrusted nor invested them with any power, but the
King; That they represent themselves only not the Commons; and are the Sons
only of Conquest, of Usurpation; (brought in by the Conqueror,) not of Choice
and Election,

1. To this I answer: first, That our Lords, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Nobles (yea
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors too who held by Barony) ^ate anciently in
all our General National Councels and Parliamentary Assemblies, many See my
Historical Collection of the ancient Parliaments and Great Councils of England.
hundred of years before the Conquest, both in the Britons and Saxons reigns,
by right of their Peerage and Tenures, as now they do, as I have unanswerably
proved in My Historical Collection of the ancient Parliaments and Great
Councils of England: My Antiquity triumphing over Novelty, p. 56. to 80. And in
my 1, 2, and 3. Parts of A Seasonable and Legal Vindication and Chronological
Collection of the good old Fundamental Laws, etc. of all English Freemen. Which
is likewise attested by Modus tenendi Parliamentum, Epist. to his 9. Report,
Institutes on Littleton, p. 110.4 Instit. c. 1.
Sir Edward Cook, Vowel, M. Seldens Titles of Honor, part. 2. chapter 5. where
this is abundantly manifested, Spelmanni Council. Tom. 1. Truth triumphing over
Falsehood, Antiquity over Novelty, p. 36, etc. The Freeholders Grand Inquest, p.
4. to 20.
others, and all our Historians; Therefore this is a gross mistake, That they
are the Sons of Conquest introduced by the Conqueror: The rather, because in
all Empires, Kingdoms in the world, though free and never conquered, their
Princes, Dukes, Nobles, Lords and great Officers, have ever sat in all their
Parliaments, Senates and General Councels of State, by reason of their Honors
and places only, without any popular Elections; as is clear by these Texts of
Scripture, 1 Chronicles. 23.1, 2. c. 28.1, 2. etc. c. 29.1.6.24. 2 Chronicles. 1, 2, 3.
c. 5.3, 4. etc. c. 23.2, 3.20, 21. c. 30.2, 3, 6, 12. c. 34.29, 30. c. 35.7, 8.
Neh. 9.38. c. 10. Esther 1.13. to 22. Dan. 3.2, 3. 2 Chro. 29.30. c. 32.3. Ezra
9.1. c. 10.8. 1 Samuel 5.8. c. 29.3. to 10. Psa. 68.27. Prove. 8.15.16. Isa.
19.11, 12, 13. Jer. 17.25. c. 26.11.16. c. 36.12.14. c. 37.14, 15. c.
38.4.25.27. Dan. 6.1, 6, 7, 8. Jonah 3.7. Psa. 2.2. Isa. 1.23.26. See 1 Chro.
19.3. 2 Chronicles 12. c. 6. c. 24.17 c. 32.3. Number. 10.4. Josh. 9.15, etc. c. 17.4.
Number. 32.2. etc. 21.
compared together, and by all Historians and Politicians testimonies.

2. Secondly, that they sit there only by the Kings Patent is false: For first,
many Peers, Nobles have been created in and by See M. Seldens Titles of Honor,
p. 2. chapter 5. 14 E. 3. n. 35. 9 R. 2. n. 16. 20 R. 2. n. 16. 20 R 2. n. 80. 1 H.
4. n. 81. Cooks 3. Instit. f. 9.16. with many more.
Parliament, at the Commons earnest Petitions, by Patents confirmed in
Parliament, of which there are many Presidents. Secondly, though the Kings Writ
or Patent create others of them Peers, Barons, without the peoples consent, yet
the Laws and Statutes of the Realm made by the Commons consents, and approved
by the people, allow the King this power, yea authorize 5 R. 2. Star. 2. c. 4.
31 H. 8. c. 10.
enjoin all Lords, Barons, to sit in Parliament, when thus creaned, if there be
no just exceptions taken to them by the Houses; therefore though they are
created Lords and sit in Parliament by the Kings Patents or Writs only, by way
of instrument or conveyance, yet originally they are made Lords, and sit there
only by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, to which all the people have
consented; of which more hereafter. Thirdly, all ancient and new Cities,
Buroughs who send Citizens or Burgesses to Parliament, and Counties, who send
Knights to Parliament, were originally created and invested with this power to
elect Citizens, Burgesses, and Knights for the Parliament See Litt. c. 10.
Sect. 162, 164. and Cook Ibidem. 49 Ass. 8.
only by our Kings Letters and Charters, not by the Peoples inherent Right of
Election; since none of them do or can choose or send Knights, Citizens, or
Burgesses to Parliament Cook 4. Instit. c. 1. and Cromptons Jurisdiction of
Courts, c. 1.
without the Kings Charters authorizing them, and his Wr^ to elect them first
directed to them but only by power and virtue of them; Therefore if the Lords
sitting in Parliament be illegal, unwarrantable, because they sit only by
Patents and Writs from the King; the sitting of Knights, Citizens, Burgesses
must be so too, because they are elected only by the Kings Writ, and the people
enabled to elect them only by his Patents, the 1 R. 2. c. 4. 8 H. 4. c. 14. 8
H. 5. c. 7. 32 H. 6. c. 15. and 1 H. 5. c. 3. ^. 1 H. 7.12. 2 H. 7.3. 2. 5 H.
7. 9 H. 7. 12. 14 H. 6.12. 7 E. 4.14. 15 E. 15. Cook 1. Instit. 250. a. Brook,
Tit. Parliament, Corporations.
power of creating Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Knights, being originally in the
King, as well as the power of creating Lords and Barons.

3 Thirdly, that the general election of the people is not absolutely
necessary, nor essential to the making of a Lawful King, Magistrate,
Counselor of State, Peer, Member of Parliament, (nor yet of a Minister) as the
Objectors falsely pretend, who take it for granted as an infallible truth and
Maxim of State: For then it will necessarily ensue from hence. 1. That Psalm.
47.2, 6, 7. Ps. 95.3. Psalm. 98.6. Psalm. 103.19.
God himself is no lawful King or Governor over all the World, and creatures
in it, because not chosen or elected by the General Voice of the Creatures and
Mankind to be King over them; and because the greatest part of men reject his
Yoke, Laws, Government, Exodus 5.2. Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. Lu. 1.14.27. yet the
Lord still reigns as a Lawful King over them, by his own Right of
Creatorship and Godhead, Psalm. 95.3.5. Ps. 96.10. Ps. 97.1. Ps. 99.1. Ps.
100.3. Ps. 103.15. Jer. 10.7. Dan. 4.32.34. Ps. 10.16. Psalm. 22.28. Ps. 48.7.

2ly, That Jesus Christ himself, who is a King by birthright, Sonship, and
inheritance only, being born King of the Jews, sitting upon the throne of David
his Father, and reigning over the house of Jacob for ever, by virtue of his
Sonship only; as Mat. 2.2. Lu. 1.32, 33. Ps. 2.6, 7, 8. Heb. 1.5, 8, 9. Acts
13.22, 23, 33. Ezech. 34.23, 24. c. 37.24, 25. Mar. 11.9.10. Isa. 3.6, 7. c.
11.1, 2, etc. Jer. 33. 15, 17, 20, 21. c. 23.5, 6. c. 30.4. Hos. 3.5. Rev. 2.2
etc. resolve, and was not chosen King ^is Saints, Church, Subjects, people, but
chooses them to be his Leiges, John 15.16. Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Pet. 2.9. Rev. 17.14.
Deuteronomy. 14.2. Ps. 132.13. Psalm. 135.4. shall upon this account be no lawful King
or Governor over his Saints, Church and Subjects; but a mere Usurper, Intruder,
Tyrant over them, (as they style Kings by Birthright, not popular Election)
which is the highest blasphemy to affirm.

3ly, Then it will likewise inevitably follow, That neither Exodus 3. and 4. and
7.
Moses, Deuteronomy. 3* 28. Number. 27.16. to 23. Deuteronomy. 31.3. to 9.14.23. c. 34 9. Josh.
1.
Joshua, Neh. c. 2. etc.
Nehemiah, 1 Samuel 9.16. c. 10.1.21. Acts 13.21
Saul, Psalm. 78.70, 71, 72. 1 Samuel 16.2 Sam. 7, 8. Acts 13.22.
David, 1 Chronicles. 23.1. c. 28.5, 6. 2 Chr. 1.8.
Solomon, nor any of the 2 Chronicles. 14.1. c. 17.1. c. 28.27. c. 29. 1. Acts
13.20, 21, 22.
pious Kings of Juda, nor Christ himself, and other Kings who came to the Crown
by 2 Samuel 7.12. Psalm. 132.11, 12. 2 Samuel 10.1. 1 Kings 14 20.35. c. 15.8.24. c.
16.6.28. c. 22.40. 2. Kings 1.17. c. 3.27. c. 8.24. c. 10.35. c. 12.21. c.
13.3.24. c. 14.16.29. c. 15 7.22.38. c. 16.20. c. 19.37. c. 20.21. c. 21.26. c.
24.6. 1 Chronicles. 29.28. 2 Chronicles. 12.16. c. 14.1. c. 17.1. c. 21.1. c. 22.1. c.
23.3. c. 24.27 c. 1.23. c. 27.9. c. 28.27. c. 32.33. c. 33.20.25. c. 36. 1 Jer.
22.11. Isay 19.11. c. 37.38. Matthew. 2.2.
Gods immediate designation, or by descent, birthright and lineal succession,
were just, lawful Governors or Kings, which none dare averr; That the Number.
11.16, 17, 24, 25, 26, 27.
70. Elders, the Princes* 1 Chronicles. 18.15.16, 17 c. 26.29, 30, 31, 32. c. 27. c.
28 1. Exodus 18.25, 26. 2 Chronicles. 19.5. to 7.
Nobles, chief Captains, Judges, and Rulers under Moses, and their Kings, with
other Governors, and the Jewish Sanhedrim, were no lawful Judges,
Magistrates, Counselors of State, or Members of their general Congregations,
Parliaments, assemblies, since we read of none of them chosen by the people,
but only designed by Judge. 3.9.15. c. 2.16. Acts 13.20. Number. 27.15. to 23.
Exodus 18.25, 26. Number. 1.4. to 18. 1 Samuel 8.1. 1 Chronicles. 26.30, 32. 2 Chr. 19.5.
to the end.
God himself, or made, created such by their Kings, Governors, who both called
and summoned them to their general congregations, assemblies, judicatures, as
the premised texts and others evidence. That Genesis 40.40, 41, etc. Exodus 18.25.
Psalm. 105.21. Acts 8.10.
Joseph, Esther 8. and 10
Mordecai, Dan. 2.48, 49.
Daniel, Shadrac, Mesec, Abednego, were no lawful Rulers or Magistrates,
because made such even by Heathen Kings, not by the peoples choice. And that
none of the Levites, Priests, High Priests, or Prophets under the Law were
lawful, because none of them (that we read of) were made Levites, Priests,
High Priests or Prophets by the peoples own choice, but by Exodus 40. Numb. 1,
and 3, and 4. 1 Chronicles. c. 23. c. 25.25, and 26. Numb. 25.13. Heb. 5.4.
descent and succession in the selfsame Tribe; or by Gods own immediate call
and appointment; as Mar. ^.
John Baptist, Isa. 61 1. c. 65.1. Io^. 20, 21. Heb. 5.4, 5.
Christ himself, the Mar. 10. Lu. 9.10. Mar. 28.19, 20. John 20.21. 1 Cor.
1.17. Gal 1 1. Acts 8.^.14, 15.
Apostles, the 70 Disciples, and others under the Gospel were made Ministers,
Apostles, Evangelists, preaching Elders, without the peoples call; yet our
opposites dare not deny their Ministry and Apostleship to be lawful, being not
of men, but by Gods and Christ's own call, without the peoples.

Fourthly, then it will from hence also follow; that all Hereditarie Kingdoms,
which Case Polit. l. 3. c. 2. Bodin de Repub. l. 2. c. 2, 3. Joan. Mariana de
Rege and Regum, Instit. l. 1 c. 3, 4.
Politicians and Divines generally hold the best of Governments, being the
title of Christ himself to his kingdom; all See M. Seldens Titles of Honor.
Patents, Commissions in all Empires, Kingdoms, States of the world creating
Princes, Dukes, Earls, Lords, and such like Titles of Honor, (whereby they are
enabled in all Christian kingdoms to sit, vote in their Parliaments and
Assemblies of State) for making Privy Counselors, Judges, Justices and other
Magistrates, are void, null, illegal; and so all the Laws, Orders Ordinances
made, Acts done, and Judgments given by them, are void or erroneous, because
they were not chosen, called to these public places, Counsels, Judicatures by
the people, but by Emperors, Kings, and Supreme Governors of (...) and what a
confusion such a Paradox as this would ^^eed in all our Realms, in all States,
Kingdoms of the world, let wise men consider, and those fools too who make this
Objection.

5. Fifthly, if there be no lawful Authority in any State but from the Peoples
immediate election, then it will necessarily follow; that Sir Thomas Fairfax is
no lawful General, his Officers, Council of War no lawful Officers or
Council; yea Colonel, and Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn, no lawful Colonel or
Lieutenant Colonel, and ought not to use or retain these titles, as they do,
because none of them were called, chosen to those places by the People, or
common Soldiers, but made such by Commission from the Parliament, General, or
Lords alone.

6. Sixthly, This paradox of theirs, touching the peoples choice, call, to
enable Peers to sit in Parliament, or bear any office of Magistracy or
Judicature, is warranted by no law of God, in old or new Testament, both which
See Mar. 2.2. Romans 13.1.2. Exodus 18.25, 26. Number. 1.4. to 20. c. 7.2. c. 10.4.
c. 23.6. c. 27.2 c. 32.2. Josh. 9.15.19. 1 Samuel 23.3, 4.9. 2 Samuel 10.3. 1 Chronicles. 13.1. etc. c. 23.2. c. 28.1. 2 Chro. 1, 2, 3. c. 5.3, 4. c. 23.1. etc.
20. c. 29, 30. c. 30.1, 2, etc. c. 32.3. c. 34.29.
contradict it: by no Laws or Statutes of these Kingdoms, Nations, which
absolutely disclaim it, and enact the contrary: by no Original Law of Nature,
which as all Arist. Polit. l. 1. Bodin. de Repub. l. 1. c. 2, 3, 4, 5. Dr.
Field, of the Church, l. 1. c. 1, 2. Seldens Titles of Honor, l. 1. c. 1.
sect. 3. Genesis 23.6. c. 10.9, 10.31, 32. Exodus: 21.15, 17. Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19.
Politicians and Divines assert, and the Scripture manifests, at first gave
every Father a Magistratical and Judicial rule, power over his children,
progeny, Family; and made him a King, Prince, Lord over them, without either
their choice or call; the Father and firstborn of the family, being both the
King, Prince* Lord over it, and Priest to it from the Creation till the Law was
given, as is generally acknowledged by all Divines: as God himself is Psalm.
47.2.6, 7.8. Psalm. 29.10. Psalm. 95.3. to 8. Isay 4^.15. Ierem. 10.7. Ephesians.
4.6. Heb: 12.9.
King over all the earth, world, as Creator and Father thereof.

7ly, It is very observable, that God himself expressly denied to his own people
Israel the free election of their Kings and Supreme Governors, reserving the
choice of them only to himself, as his own Prerogative: witness that notable
text of Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15. When thou art come into the Land which the Lord thy
God gives thee, and shall possess it and dwell therein, and shall say, I will
set a King over me like as all the Nations that are about me: Thou shall in any
wise set him King over thee WHOM THE LORD THY GOD SHALL CHOOSE: not the people.
Upon which account, when the Israelites grew weary of the Government of Samuel
and his Sons; all the Elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and came
to Samuel unto Ramah, and said unto him: Behold thou art old, and thy Sons walk
not in thy ways: Make, or Give thou us a King to judge us, like all the
Nations: not taking upon themselves the power to nominate and elect their very
first King; but referring the choice to Samuel himself: Who thereupon prayed
unto the Lord for direction therein: After he prayed, God commanded him to
hearken to the voice of the people, and to make them a King, 1 Samuel 8.4. to the
end; yet such a one as God himself, not Samuel or the people should appoint;
For soon after God told Samuel, that to morrow about this time he would send
him a man out of the Tribe of Benjamin; and thou shall anoint him to be Captain
over my people Israel; whereupon Saul coming to him at that time, when Samuel
saw him; The Lord said unto him, Behold the man whom I spoke to thee of, this
same shall reign over my people; then Samuel took a horn of oil and powered it
upon his head and kissed him, and said, Is it not BECAUSE THE LORD HAS
ANOINTED THEE KING OVER HIS INHERITANCE? Who being afterward brought forth
before all the people assembled at Mizpeh, Samuel said to all the people, See
ye HIM WHOM THE LORD (not I, or you) HAS CHOSEN, that there is none like him
among all the people: Upon which all the people shouted and said, GOD SAVE THE
KING. 1 Samuel 9.16, 17. c. 10.1.17.23, 24. So that God himself, not Samuel, nor
the people, elected and made Saul King over his own people; which is further
evident by the 1 Samuel 15.17.35. After which God rejecting Saul from being King,
he both elected, appointed, and anointed David to be King over Israel, 1 Samuel
16.1.12, 13. Psalm. 78, 70, 71. 2 Samuel 7.8. 1 Chronicles. 28.4. Whereupon all the
Tribes, after Saul's death, came to David to Hebron, made a League with him; and
anointed him King before the Lord, upon this account; that the Lord had said
unto him; Thou shall feed my people Israel, and thou shall be a Captain over
Israel, 2 Samuel 5.1, 2, 3. acknowledging thereby the choice of their King, to be
Gods peculiar right, not theirs. After which God himself, to manifest the
choice of their Kings to be, not in the people, but in his own disposal (being
but his Vicegerents, Substitutes, and sitting upon his throne, to be Kings for
the Lord their God, 2 Chronicles. 9.8. Isay 44.28. Acts 13.22.) settled the
inheritance of the Crown, and Kingdom of Israel in David, his Sons and
posterity for ever, appointing Solomon his Son immediately to succeed him, and
making him King over his people, as is evident by the 2 Samuel 7.8. to the end, 1
Kings 5.5. c. 6.12. c. 8.20. 1 Chronicles. 22.20. c. 28.4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Chronicles. 1.8, 9.
c. 2.11. Psalm. 89.3, 4, 20. to 38, 2 Chr. 23.3. c. 6, 16. c. 7.18. 1 Kings
15.4, 5. Jer. 33.15.17.20, 21. c. 23.5, 6. c. 30.9. Ezech. 34.23, 24. c. 37.24,
29. Hos. 3.5. Lu. 1.32, 33. Upon which account afterward, when the ten Tribes
revolted from Rehoboam and the House of 2 Kings 17.20, 21, 22.
David against Gods institution, and made Jeroboam their King; God thereupon
charge it upon them as a high incroachment upon his prerogative, in these
terms, Hosea 8.4. They have set up Kings, but not by me, they have made
Princes, and I knew it not. And hereupon Abijah (heir by hereditarie succession
to David) thus charged Jeroboam and all Israel with rebellion against God and
Rehoboam therein, 2 Chronicles. 13, 5, 6, 7, 8. Ought you (...) to know; THAT THE
LORD GOD OF ISRA^ ^AVE THE KINGDOM OVER ISRAEL TO ^D FOR EVER, EVEN UNTO HIM
AND TO HIS SONS BY A COVENANT OF SALT? But Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, the
Servant of Solomon, the Son of David, is risen up, AND HAS REBELLED AGAINST
HIS LORD. And there are gathered unto him vain men the children of Belial, and
have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the Son of Solomon, when Rehoboam
was young and tender hearted: And now you think TO WITHSTAND THE KINGDOM OF THE
LORD IN THE HANDS OF THE SON OF David, and ye have a great multitude, etc. O
children of Israel fight ye not against the Lord God of your Fathers, for YOU
SHALL NOT PROSPER. And God smote Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah (the
right heir) and Judah, and God delivered them into their hand: And Abijah and
his people slew them with a great slaughter: So there fell down slain of Israel
five hundred thousand chosen men. The greatest slaughter we ever read of in one
battle in sacred or profane Histories. If then God allowed not the free
election and nomination of Kings and Supreme Governors to his own people of
Israel, their Tribes or Elders, but reserved it only to himself, as his own
peculiar prerogative; which they might not intrude upon without high
presumption, and exemplarie punishments, as the forecited Scriptures, with
Judges 2.20. Acts 13.20, 21, 22, 23. undeniably evidence. By what Law of God or
Nature any other vulgar rabble or people of God, can now challenge this as
their proper birthright, and natural inherent due, to elect all their Kings,
all their Supreme, or subordinate Officers, and all Peers of Parliament,
(especially in an hereditarie kingdom,) transcends my reason to comprehend;
unless they will blasphemously tax God himself for injuring his own peculiar
people, in usurping upon and depriving them of this their Natural right and
freedom.

8ly, The Scripture is most express and positive, That it is God who removes
Kings and sets up Kings, Dan. 2.28. That the God of Heaven sets up
kingdoms and Kings: That the most high rules in the kingdoms of men, and
gives them to whomsoever he will, Dan. 2.44. c. 4.25.34, 35. That promotion
comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South; but God
(not the people) is the Judge, he pulls down one and sets up another, Psa.
75, 6, 7. He loses the bond of Kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle:
He powers contempt upon Princes, and weakneth the strength of the mighty, Job
12.18, 19. Whereunto God adds, Prove. 8.15, 16. By me Kings reign, and Princes
decree Justice. By me Princes rule, and Nobles, and all the Judges of the
earth. Hereupon Samuel used this speech to King Saul: 1 S^m. 15.26.28. The LORD
has rejected thee from being King over Israel. The LORD has rent the kingdom
of Israel from thee this day, and has given it to a neighbor of thine better
than thou. Yea, the Apostle, Romans 13.1, 2, 3, etc. commands Every Soul to be
subject to the higher powers, not only for fear, but conscience sake, upon this
ground, For there is no Power but of God: the powers that are are ordained (or
ordered) of God; and they are the Ministers of God to men for good. Hence God
and Christ are styled, The only Potentate, THE KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF
LORDS, The Prince of the Kings of the Earth, 1 Timothy 6.15. Rev. 1.5. c. 17.14.
c. 19.16. because they only by mere original right dispose of all Kings, Lords,
Potentates, kingdoms. Upon which reason the Apostle concludes, That all created
things in heaven and in earth, whether they be Powers or Principalities, or
Dominions, or Powers, are created BY AND FOR CHRIST; that in all things he
might have the pre-eminence, might, and dominion, being exalted far above all
Principalities and Powers, Col. 1.16, 17, 18. Ephesians. 1.20, 21. By what divine,
natural, inherent* just right or Title then the Commons or Vulgar people of our
own or other Realms can challenge to themselves the sole power of electing,
setting up and pulling down their Kings, Princes, Lords, Judges, kingdoms,
Principalities, Powers, Dominions, at their arbitrarie pleasures: of setting
up, pulling down, or electing their Supreme or subordinate Governors,
Magistrates, and all Peers of Parliament at their wills; of disposing kingdoms,
Powers, Lordships to whomsoever they please (as these Bedlam Objectors plead
they may) without contradicting all these Sacred Texts, and intruding upon
these royal incommunicable Preheminences, Prerogatives of God and Christ, let
all popular pretenders to, or advocates for such a power in the people and
Commons of the Realm, resolve me and all others when they are able, against all
these Texts, oppugning this their claim and interest.

9. Ninthly, I answer, that a particular, explicit actual choice and election
by the people, of any to be Kings, Magistrates, Judges, Ministers, Peers or
Members of Parliament, is neither necessary nor convenient to make them just
and lawful, except only when the Laws of God, of Nature, of Nations, or the
kingdom expressly require it; but only a general implicit or tacit consent;
especially when the ancient Laws of the Land, continuing still in full force,
and the custom of the Kingdom time out of mind, requires no such ceremony of
the peoples particular election or call; in which case the peoples dissent is
of no validity, til that Law and custom be repealed by the general consent of
the King, Lords and Commons in Parliament. Now the Cook 4 Instit. c. 1. p. 1.
etc. Seldens titles of Honor, part 2. chapter 5. Cambd. Brit.
ancient Laws, Statutes, and Customs of the Kingdom, enable all Lords who are
Peers and Barons of the Realm to sit in Parliament when ever summoned to it by
the Kings Writ, without any election of the people; and if the Laws and Customs
of the Realm were, that the King himself might call two Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses to Parliament, such as see 38 H. 6. n. 35.
himself should nominate in his Writ out of every County, City and Borough,
without the Freeholders, Citizens, and Burgesses election of them, by a common
agreement and consent to such a Law and usage made by their Ancestors, and
submitted and consented to for some ages without repeal, this Law and Custom
were sufficient to make such Knights, Citizens and Burgesses lawful Members of
Patliament, Number. 32.1. to 38. Josh. 22.23. to 31. Esth. 9.27, 28.31, 32. 1 Samuel
20.42. Jer. 35.2. to the end. 2 Samuel 21.7. Prove. 22.28. c. 23.10. 1 Samuel 30.24,
25. Deuteronomy 19.14. c. 27.17. Josh. c. 13. to chapter 23. See Littleton, Fitz-Herbert,
Brook and Ash, Tit. Warranty, Obligation, Covenant, etc.
obliging their posterity whiles unrepealed; as well as their Warranties,
Obligations, Statutes, Feofments, Morgages, Josh. 9.15. to the end, 2 Samuel 21.1.
to 15. Genesis 50.25. c. 13.19. Josh. 24 32. 1 Samuel 20.42. 2 Samuel 21.7.
Oaths, and alienations of their Lands, as the Objectors must acknowledge;
therefore they must of necessity grant, their present sitting, voting and
judging too in Parliament, to be lawful, because thus warranted by the Laws
and Customs of the Realm.

10. If all Power in Government, all right of sitting, judging, and making Laws
or Ordinances in Parliament, be founded upon the immediate free election of all
those that are to be Governed; and if it be of necessity, that all who are to
be subject and obey ought to be represented by those who have power in
Government; the Sum of See M. Edwards his Gangraena, part 3. p. 142. to 162.
Lilburns, Overtons, and the Levellers reasons against the Lords Jurisdiction;
then it will of necessity follow, (If this be good Divinity and Law) that the
Laws of God, Moses, and Christ himself, should not bind the Jews or Christians,
because made without their common consents, or any to represent them: Then the
Laws, Decrees of the Medes and Persians, made by their Kings alone, or by them
and their Princes, without any representative of their People, (as is evident
by Esth. 1.13. to the end: chapter 3.8. to 15. chapter 8.8, 9, etc. c. 9.32. chapter 10.1.
Ezr. 1.1, etc. chapter 4.6. to 24. chapter 5.13.17. c. 6.1. to 15. c. 7.11. to 27.
Jonah 3.6, 7, 8. Dan. 6, 7, 8, 9.) were mere nullities, and not binding to the
commonalty. Then the Laws of David, his Captains and Princes, concerning the
Levites, Priests, Temple, etc. 1 Samuel 30.2.45. 2 Chronicles. c. 22. to chapter 29. with
all our own ancient Brit^sh and Lambardi Archaion. Bromton, Spelman.
Saxon Laws, (made by our Kings and Nobles alone, without any Knights, Citizens
or Burgesses elected by, or representing the people; as were all our Laws and
Acts before Henry the 3d his reign, both before and after the Conquest (as we
usually call it) though many of them yet in force and vigor,) With all ancient
Laws made by Kings alone being the only Lawmakers in all Nations at first, as
Hist. c. 1.
Justine and others attest, and Ezr. 7.26. Esth. 3.8. Isay 33.22. intimate:
whence they are styled the Kings Laws, etc. should be mere Nullities by this
Doctrine, because not made by the Peoples previous consents and
representatives: Yea then the Orders, Votes, Ordinances, and Laws made, or
consented to by the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliam* ought not to
bind any Ministers, Women, Children, Infants, Servants, Strangers, Freeholders,
Citizens, Burgesses, Artificers, or others, (who cannot well, properly be
represented but by persons of their own sex, degrees, trade, calling; and so
each sex, trade, in each county, Corporation of Engl. should send Members of
their own to Parliament to represent them) but only such Freeholders and
Burgesses who had voices in, and gave free consent to their Elections, not any
who have no voices by Law, or dissented from those elected and returned; Yea
then it will necessarily follow; that those Counties, Cities and Boroughs whose
Members have been injuriously impeached, suspended, driven away, or thrust out
of the House of Commons by the Objectors and the Armies practice, violence
(contrary to all former presidents) are absolutely free, exempted from, and not
bound by any Votes or Ordinances made, or taxes imposed by the Commons House,
because they have no Members to represent them residing in Parliament; and that
those Counties and Boroughs whose Knights and Burgesses are dead or absent, are
no ways obliged by any Votes, Ordinances, or Grants in Parliament: And then
how few in the Kingdom will or ought to yield obedience to any the Acts,
Ordinances, or Votes of this present Parliament, or to any Mayors, Sheriffs,
Aldermen, or Heads of Houses made by their Votes and Authority, (usually made
by election heretofore) or to any Judges, Justices, Governors, Generals,
Captains, or other Military Officers made by their Commissions or appointment,
without the generality of the peoples Votes or consent; especially when above
half, or three full parts of the Members were In August 1647. and sundry Months
following, much more then since most of them secured and secluded by the Army
in December. 1648. and ever since, together with the whole House of Lords.
absent or driven from both Houses, by the Objectors violence and menaces.

These Answers premised, which have cut off the head of the Objectors Goliath
and chief Argument against the Lords sitting in Parliament; I shall now proceed
to the proof of the Lords undeniable Right and Authority to sit, Vote, and give
Judgment in our Parliaments, though not actually elected nor sent to them by
the people, as Knights and Burgesses are.

1. It is evident, by the Histories, Records of most ancient and modern
Kingdoms and Republikes in the world, that their Princes, Nobles, Peers and
great Officers of State, have by their Original Fundamental Laws and
Institutions, by right of their very 31 H. 8. c. 10. See Mr. Seldens Titles of
Honor, Cassanaeus Catalogus Gloriae Mundi: Alanso Lopez in Nobiliario, and
others who write of Nobility. Cambd. Britan. of the Nobility and Courts of
Justice in England, and the texts of Scripture, p. 6.
Nobility, Peerage, and great Offices, without any particular election of the
people, a just right and title to sit, consult, Vote, enact Laws, and give
Judgment in all their General Assemblies of State, Parliaments, Diets,
Councels; as might be manifested by particular instances in the Kingdoms,
Republikes, Parliaments, Diets, and General Assemblies of the Jews, Egyptians,
Grecians, Romans, Persians, Ethiopians, Germans, French, Goths, Vandals,
Hungarians, Bohemians, Polonians, Russians, Swedes, Scythians, Tartars, Moors,
Indians, Spaniards, Portugals, Danes, Saxons, Scots, Irish, and many others:
Hence Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Antiquitatum Romanorum l. 2. Sect. 2. affirms,
That both hereditary and elective Kings even in the antientest times, CONSILIUM
HABEBANT QUOD EX OPTIMATIbVS CONSTABAT, had a Council which consisted of Nobles
and Great men, as Homer and the most ancient Poets attest, Neque (ut nostro
seculo) Regum priscorum dominatus erat nimium sui juris, neque ab unius
sententia pendebat. Now to deny the like privilege to our English Peers and
Nobles, which all Nobles, Peers in all other Kingdoms, Nations, Republikes
anciently have enjoyed, and yet do constantly enjoy, without exceptions or
dispute, is a gross injury, injustice, oversight; yea a great dishonor both
to our Nobility and Nation.

Secondly, By, and in the very primitive constitution of our English
Parliaments, for many hundred years together there were no Knights nor
Burgesses at all, but only the King and his Nobles: after which, when elected
Knights gestes were first sent to Parliament about 49 H. 3. it was granted by
the Kings grace, and unanimously agreed by the kingdoms, peoples general
consents, that our Parliaments should always be constituted and made up, not
of Knights and Burgesses only, (elected only by 8 H. 6. c. 7. 10 H. 6. c. 2. 32
H. 6. c. 15. Cromptons Iurisd. p. 1, 2.3. Cook 4 Instit. c. 1.
Freeholders and Burgesses, not by the generality of the vulgar people, who
would now claim, usurp this right of Election) but likewise of the King, the
Supreme Member, by whose Cook 4 Instit. c. 1. p 1.10. Modus tenendi
Parliamentum; Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, tit. Parliament; Mr. Seldens
Titles of Honor, par. 2. c. 5. See the Abridgement of the Records of the Tower.
writs the Parliaments were and ought to be always summoned, and of the Lords,
Peers, Barons, (ecclesiastical, civil) and great Officers of the Realm, who
ought of right to sit, vote, make Laws, and give Judgment in Parliament by
virtue of their Peerage, Baronies, Offices, without any election of the people:
the Commons themselves being no Parliament, judicatorie, or Lawgivers alone,
without the King and Lords, as Modus tenendi Parliamentorum; Sir Ed. Cook in
his 4. Institutes, chapter 1. Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, part 2. chapter 5. Vowell,
Cambden, Sir Thomas Smith, Cowell, Minshaw, Crompton, with others who have
written of our English Parliaments assert, and all our Parliament Rolls,
Statutes, 33 H. 6.16. Br. Parliam. 4. 39 E. 3.7.35. 11 H. 7.27. Br. Parl. 107.
4 H. 7.18. 7 H. 7.14. Cromptons Jurisd. f. 9. Cook 4 Instit. p. 15.35. Fortesc.
f. 20. Dyer 92. Judge Huttons Argument of Mr. Hamdens case p. 22, 23.
Law Books resolve, without whose threefold concurrent assents, there is or can
be no legal Act nor Ordinance of Parliament made, since the Commons admission
to vote in Parliament and assent to Bills, which was but of later times, out of
the Kings fr^e Grace.

Thirdly, This right of theirs is confirmed by prescription and custom, from
the very first beginning of Parliaments in this kingdom till this present,
there being no president to be found in History or Record of any one Parliament
held in this Island since it was a kingdom, without the King personally or
representatively present (by a Protector, Custos Regni, Commissioners) as he
ought to be, or without Lords and Peers* anciently styled Aldermen, Heretockes,
Senators, Wisemen, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Counts, Nobles, Great men, etc. by
our Historians; who make mention of their constant resorting to, sitting,
voting, judging in our General Assemblies, and Parliamentary Councils, under
these Titles, without the peoples Election, (for many hundreds of years before
the Conquerors time) in the antientest Parliamentary Councils we read of under
the Britons and Saxons; witness Beda, Ingulphus, Geoffry Monmouth, Huntingdon,
Matthew Westminster, Florentius Wigorniensis, Malmsbury, Hector Boethius, Speed,
and others in their Histories; Antiquitates Ecclesiae Britannicae, Spelmanni
Concilia, Tom 1. Mr. Lambard his Archaion, Sir Edward Cook in his Preface to
the 9. Report, and fourth Institut. c. 1. M. Seldens Titles of Honor, part 2.
c. 5. which I have largely manifested in my Truth triumphing over Falsehood,
Antiquity over Novelty, p. 56. to 90. My Historical Collection of the ancient
Great Councils, Parliaments, etc: there being little (if any) express or direct
mention at all of any Knights of Shires, Citizens or Burgesses in any of our
Parliamentarie Councils, before the Conquest, or in the Conquerors time, nor
yet in the reigns of King William Rufus, Henry the 1. Stephen, Henry 2. Richard
1. King John, or first part of the reign of Henry the 3d, the Mr. Seldens
Titles of Honor, part 2. chapter 5. p. 717.
first direct Writ of Summons for any Knights, Burgesses or Commons to our
Parliaments, now extant, being that of Clause 49 H. 3. m. 10, 11. dorso: before
which no evident testimony can be produced for their sitting or voting in any
great Councils or Parliaments as Members, but only out of the Spurious
pretended ancient (though in truth late ridiculous) Treatise, styled Modus
tenendi Parliamentum, on which 4 Instit. p. 12.
Sir Edward Cook and others most rely: And whereas some conclude, that even in
the ancient Saxon Great Councils, the Commons were usually present as Members,
being comprehended under the Titles of Sapientes, Seniores populi, Aeldermanni,
etc. (which in the dialect of those times signify rather Lords and Great Men,
than Commons or Burgesses, as all accord) or at least wise under these phrases,
Spelman. Council. p. 194.
praesentibus omnibus Ordinibus illius Gentis, cum viris quibusdam Militaribus
(rather Soldiers than knights;) of which we find mention in the Council of
Spelman. Ibid. p. 219.
Bechenceld, Ann. 697. or, omnium Sapientum, Seniorum, and POPULORUM totius
Regni: coupled with these pre-eminent Titles of, Omnium Aldermannorum,
Principum, Procerum, Comitum, who met together in a General Council under Ine,
Anno 713. Or Spelman. p. 318.
cujuscunque Ordinis viros, in the Council of Clovesho, An. 800. which
expressions are now and then mentioned in some ancient Councils and
Parliaments, though rarely: yet these are rather conjectural or probable, than
direct or punctual proofs of what they assert, whenas the Lords Title to sit
and vote in them is most direct and infallible. And if that of Hist. p. 870
Ingulphus, with other our Historians, and some Lawyers be true, (which 1
Instit. f. 168.
Sir Edward Cook, and Titles of Honor, part 2 c. 5. sec. 3. p 614 ^15* etc.
Mr. Seldom deny) that King Alfred first divided the Realm into Counties, as
all grant he did into Hundreds and Tithings, and erected Hundred Courts,
wherein Knights of the Shire were always, yet are, and ought to be elected,
there could be no Knights of Shires at least (if any Citizens or Burgesses) to
serve in Parliament before this division; though there were Earls, Dukes,
Barons before his reign (who were present by the Kings summons, not peoples
elections, at our Great Councils or Parliaments,) as Titles of Honor, part 2 c.
5. sec. 2, 3, 4, 5.
Mr. Seldom, and Glossarium, tit. Comites, and Comitatus.
Sir Henry Spelman undeniably manifest, and I have Truth triumphing over
Falsehood; An Historical Collection of the Great Councils and Parliaments of
England; 2 and 3 Part of a Legal and Historical Vindication etc.
elsewhere proved at large. Their sitting, voting judging therefore in Great
Councils, Parliaments, being so ancient, clear and unquestionable ever since
their first beginning til now; and the sitting of Knights, Citizens, Burgesses
by the peoples election, in our antientest Great Councils, Parliaments, not so
clearly evident by History or Records as theirs: we must needs acknowledge,
subscribe to this their Right and Title; or else deny the Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses rights to sit, vote in our Great Councils, Parliaments, rather than
theirs, who have not so ancient nor clear a Title or right as they, by many
hundreds of years.

Fourthly, This Right and Privilege of theirs is vested legally in them by the
very Common Law and Custom of the Realm, which binds all men; By the unanimous
consent of all our Ancestors, and all the Commons of England from age to age
assembled in Parliament, since they sat in any Parliaments; who always
consented to, desired, and never opposed the Lords sitting, voting, power or
Judicature in Parliament; and by King John's Magna Charta in Mat. Paris. p. 247.
Magna Charta it self, signed and ratified by King John, wherein it is expressly
granted, Ad habendum COMMUNE CONCILIVM REGNI de auxiliis assidendis, and de
Scutagiis assidendis, submoneri faciemus Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates,
Comites and MAJORES BARONS REGNI singulatim per Literas nostras, etc. And in
the Proeme, and chapter 2.14.1^.37.38.
Great Charter of King Henry the 3. they are first mentioned and provided for.
Hereupon King Henry the third (not long after Magna Charta was granted, and at
the same time it was proclaimed, confirmed with a most solemn Excommunication in
the presence of all the Lords, and Commons, by all the Bishops of England,
against the infringers thereof) summoning a Parliament at London in the year
1255. to aid him in his wars in Apulia; the Earls and Barons absolutely
refused to give him any assistance or answer at all, for this reason; Quod
omnes (Barons) tunc temporis non fuerunt juxta tenorem Magnae Chartae suae
vocati; and ideo sine Paribus suis tunc absentibus, nullum voluerunt tunc
responsum dare, vel Auxilium concedere vel praestare. Mar. Paris, An. 1255 p.
884, 885. Daniel. p. 172.
That ALL THE BARONS were not summoned by him to this Parliament, as they ought
to be according to the tenor of Magna Charta; whereupon they departing in
discontent, and refusing to sit longer, Mr. St. John's Speech concerning
Shipmony, p. 33. 1 H. 4. n. 21.22, 25, 30.
the Parliament was first adjourned, and at last dissolved, And upon this very
ground, among others, the Parliament of 21 R. 2. with all the Acts and
proceeding therein were totally repealed and nulled by the Parliament of 1 H.
4. because the Lords who adhered to the King were summoned by him to the
Parliament, and some of the opposite party imprisoned, impeached, unsummoned;
and many of the Knights of the shire were elected only by the Kings nomination,
and Letters to the Sherifs: And the Parliament it self kept by force, viris
armatis, et sagittariis immensis, brought out of Cheshire, as an extraordinary
guard, quartered in the Kings Court at Westminster, and about Charing Cross,
and the Muse; of which Chron. p. 389, 390.
Grafton, and other Historians write thus. That they fell into so great pride
of the Kings favor, that they accounted the King to be as their fellow, and
they set the Lords at naught; yet few or none of them were Gentlemen, but taken
from the plough, and Cart, and other Crafts* And after these rustical people
had a while courted, they entered into so great a boldness, that they would not
let, neither within nor without the Court, to beat and slay the Kings good
Subjects; to take from them their victuals, and pay for them little or nothing,
at their pleasure (as our free-quar^erers do now) falling at last to ravish
men's wives and daughters: And if any man fortuned to complain of them to the
King, he was soon rid out of the way no man knew how, or or by whom, so as they
did what they listed; the King not caring to do justice upon them, but
favoring them in their mis-doings, confiding in them and their guards against
any others of the kingdom, which gave the Lieges of his kingdom great matter of
commotion and discontent. The bringing up of which guard to Westminster, to
force, and overawe the Parliament to effect his designs, is one principle
Article exhibited against him by the Parliament, of 1 H. 4. wherein he was
forced to resign his Crown, and then deposed. I pray God our new armed Guard
and Courtiers at Whitehall and the Muse (of as mean condition as those) fall
not by degrees to the self-same exorbitances, contempt of the King, Lords,
Parliament, and oppression of the people, to their general mutining and
discontent. In the Parliaments of 6 E. 3. N. 1. and Parl. 2, N. 5.6, 8 9, 8 E.
3. N. 5. 15 E. 3. N. 4. 17 E. 3. N. 2. 20 E. 3. N. 5. 21 E. 3. N. 4. 22 E. 3.
N. 1. 25 E. 3. N. 1. 29 E. 3. N. 4. 30 E. 3. N. 1. 37 E. 3. N. 1. 42 E. 3. N.
1. 50 E. 3. N. 1. 51 E. 3. N. 3. 1 R. 2. N. 1. 2 R. 2. N. 1. 3 R. 2. N. 1. 4 R.
2. N. 1. 5 R. 2. N. 65. 6 R. 2. N. 6. 7 R. 2. N. 1. 9 R. 2. N. 1. 8 H. 4. N.
54. We find in these Parliament Rolls, that these Parliaments have been usualy
prorogued, adjourned from the days they were summoned to meet, and have not
say, nor acted at all, because sundry of the Lords (and some Commons) were not
come, but absent by reason of foul weather, shortness of warning, or other
public employments: all their personal presence in Parliament being reputed
necessary and expedient. And 20 R. 2. N. 8. The Commons themselves in
Parliament required the King, to send for such Bishops and Lords who were
absent, to come to tho Parliament, before they would consult upon what the
Chancellor propounded to them in the Kings name and behalf to consider of. To
recite no more ancient presidents: In the Parliament of 2 Caroll, the Earl of
Arundel not sitting in the Parliament, being after his summons committed by the
King to the Tower of London, about his Sons marriage, May 25. 1626. without the
Lords privity and consent* whereby their privileges were infringed, and the
House deprived of one of their Members presence; thereupon the House of Peers
made this memorable Petition and Remonstrance of their Privileges to the King.

The humble Remonstrance and Petition of the Peers,
MAy it please your Majesty, we the Peers of this Realm, now assembled in
Parliament, finding the Earl of Arundel absent from his place amongst us, his
presence was therefore called for: But thereupon a message was delivered us
from your Majesty, by the Lord Keeper, That the Earl of Arundel was restrained
for a misdemeanor which was personal to your Majesty, and lay in the proper
knowledge of your Majesty, and had no relation to matter of Parliament. This
Message occasioned us to inquire into the Acts of our Ancestors, and what in
like cases they had done, that so we might not err in a dutiful respect to
your Majesty, and yet preserve our right and privileges of Parliament. And
after diligent search made, both of all Stories, Statutes, and Records that
might inform us in this case, we find i^ to be an undoubted Right, and constant
Privilege of Parliament; That no Lord of Parliament, sitting in Parliament, or
within the usual time of Privilege of Parliament, is to be imprisoned or
restrained (without sentence or order of the House) unless it be ^or Treason
or Felony, or for refusing to give surety for the Peace: And to satisfy our
selves the better, we have heard all that could be aleged by your Majesty's
learned Counsel at Law, that might any way infringe or weaken this claim of the
Peers; and to all that can be showed or alleged so full satisfaction has been
given, as that all the Peers in Parliament, upon the question made of this
Privilege, have una voce consented, that this is the undoubted right of the
Peers, and has been inviolably enjoyed by them.

Wherefore we your Majesty's loyal Subjects, and humble Servants, the whole
body of the Peers in Parliament assembled, most humbly beseech your Majesty,
that the Earl of Arundel, a Member of this Body, may presently be admitted, by
your gracious favor, to come sit and serve your Majesty and the Commonwealth
in the great affairs of this Parliament, And we shall pray, etc.
Upon which Remonstrance and Petition, the King refusing to enlarge him,
thereupon the Lords to maintain their Privilege, adjourned themselves on the 25
and 26 of May, without doing any thing; and upon the Kings refusal to release
him, they adjourned from May 26, till June 2. refusing to sit, and so the
Parliament dissolved in discontent: his imprisonment in this case being a
breach of privilege, contrary to Magna Charta. In this very Parliament the Lord
Digby Earl of Bristol being omitted out of the summons* of Parliament, upon
complaint to the Lords House was by order admitted to set therein, as his
Birthright, from which he might not be debarred for want of Summons, which
ought to have been sent unto him, ex debito Iustitiae, as Sir Edward Cook in
his 4 Institutes, p. 1. The Act for ttriennial Parliaments, and King John great
Charter resolve. And not long after the beginning of this Parliament, upon the
Kings accusation and impeachment of the Lord Kimbolton and the five Members of
the Commons House, An Exact Collection, part. 1. p. 36. to 56.
both Houses adjourned, and sat not as Houses, till they had received
satisfaction and restitution of those Members, as the Journals of both Houses
manifest, it being an high breach of their Privileges, contrary to the Great
Charter. If then the Kings bare not summoning of some Pears to Parliament, who
ought to sit there by their right of Perage; or impeaching, or imprisoning any
Peer unjustly, to disable them to sit personally in Parl. be a breach of
Privilege of the fundamental Laws of the Realm, and Magna Charta it self,
(confirmed in above 40 successive Parliaments) then the Lords right to sit,
vote, and judge in Parliament is as firm and indisputable as Magna Charta can
make it, and consented to, confirmed by all the Commons, people, and
Parliaments of England, that ever consented to Magna Charta, though they be not
eligible, every Parliament by the Freeholders, people, as Knights and Burgesses
ought to be: and to deny this birthright and privilege of theits, is to deny
Magna Charta it self, and this present Parliaments Declarations, proceedings in
the case of the Lord Kimbolton, a Member of the House of Peers.

5.
Fifthly, The Treatise (entitled See Cook 4 Instit. p. 12. for the Antiquity
and for the Authority of this treatise, which in truth is merely spurious. See
Seldens titles of Honor, p. 613.738. to 743.
The manner of holding Parliaments in England in Edward the Confessors time
(befose the Conquest) rehearsed (afterward) before William the Conqueror, by
the discreet men of the Kingdom, and by himself approved and used in his time,
and in the times of his successors Kings of England; (if the Title be true, and
the Treatise so ancient as Sir Edward Cook, and others now take it to be) When
as its mention of the An. 1132.
Bishop of Carlisles usual place in Parliaments; (which Bishopric was not
founded till the year of our Lord 1132. or 1134. as An. 1134. p. 400.
Matthew Paris, Matthew Westminster, Roger Hoveden, His Catalogue of Bishops of
Carlisle.
Godwin and others attest in the later end of Henry the first his reign:) Its
men^ion of the Mayors of London and other Cities, and writs usually directed to
them to elect two Citizens to serve in Parliament; whereas London it self had
Graftons and Stows Catalogues of the Majors of London.
no Mayor before the year 1208. (being the 9. year of King John) nor other
Cities Mayors til diverse years after; nor can any Writs for electing Knights of
Shires, Citizens or Burgesses to serve in Parliament, which it often times writes
of, be produced before 49 H. 3. nor any Writs to levy their expenses or wages
for their Service in Parliaments, which it recites, be produced before the
reign of King Edward the 1. Nor was the name of Parliament, which it mentions
and writes of, so much as used by any Author before the later end of King Henry
the 3. his reign, after whose reign this Modus was certainly compiled, toward
the end of K. Richard the 2. or after, as other passages in it evidence beyond
all contradiction) This magnified Treatise, be it genuine or spurious,
determines thus of the Kings and Lords rights to be personally present in all
Parliaments. The King is bound by all means possible to be present at the
Parliament, unless he be detained or let there from by bodily sickness; and
then he may keep his Chamber, yet so that he lie not without the Manor or Town
where the Parliament is held: and then he ought to send for twelve persons, of
the greatest and best of them that are summoned to the Parliament; that is, two
Bishops, two EARLS, two BARONS, two Knights of the Shire, two Burgesses, and
two Citizens to look upon his person to testify and witness his estate; and in
their presence he ought to make a Commission and give Authority to the
Archbishop of the Place, the Steward of England, and Chief Justice, that they
jointly and severally should begin the Parliament, and continue the same in his
name, express mention being made in that Commission of the cause of his absence
thence; which ought to suffice and admonish the OTHER NOBLES, and chief men in
the Parliament, together with the evident testimony of the twelve Peers, etc.
The reason is, Because there was wont to be a cry or murmur in the Parliament
for the Kings absence, because his absence is hurtful and dangerous to the
whole Commonalty of the Parliament and Kingdom. Neither indeed ought or may he
be absent, but only in the case aforesaid. After which it follows, The
Archbishops, Bishops, and other chief of the Clergy ought to be summoned to
come to the Parliament; and also EVERY EARL and BARON, and their PEERS OUGHT TO
BE SUMMONED and COME TO THE PARLIAMENT, etc. Touching the beginning of the
Parliament, The Lord the King, shall sit in the midst of the great bench, and
is bound to be present in the first and last day of Parliament. And the
Chancellort, Treasurer, and Barons of the Exchequer, and Justices were wont to
record the defaults made in Parliament according to the order following. In the
third day of the Parliament, the Barons of the Cinqueports shall be called, and
afterward the BARONS of England; after them the EARLS, Whereupon if the Barons
of the Cinqueports be not come, the Baronie from whence they are shall be
amerced at an hundred marks; and an Earl at one hundred pounds: After the same
manner it must be done to those who are Peers to Earls and Barons. After which
it relates the manner of placing the Earls, Baron; and Peers in Parliament;
Then adds, The Parliament may be held, and OUGHT every day to begin at one of
the clock in the afternoon: at which time the King is to be present at the
Parliament, and all the Peers of the Kingdom. None of all the Peers of the
Parliament may or ought to depart alone from the Parliament, unless he have
obtained (and that in full Parliament) leave from the King and all his Peers so
to do; and that withal there be a remembrance kept in the Parliament roll of
such Leave and Liberty granted. And if any of the Peers during the term of the
Parliament shall be sick or weak, so as he is not able to come to the
Parliament, then he ought three days together send such as may excuse him to
the Parliament, or else two Peers must go and view him* and if they find him
sick, then he may make a Proxy. Of the Parliament, the King is the Head, the
beginning and ending. So this Treatise. The Statute of 5 R. 2. Parl. 2. chapter 4.
enacts by Command of the King, and Assent of the Prelates, Lords and Eommons in
Parliament; That all and singular persons and Commonalties, which from
henceforth shall have the Summons of the Parliament, shall come from henceforth
to the Parliament in the manner, as they be bound to do, and has been
accustomed within the Realm of England of old time. And every person of the
said Realm which from henceforth shall have the said Summons (be he Archbishop,
Bishop, Abbot, Prior, Duke, Lord, Baron, Baronet, Knight of the Shire, Citizen
of City, Burgess of Burgh, or other singular person or Commonalty) do absent
himself, or come not at the said Summons, (except he may reasonably or honestly
excuse himself to our Sovereign Lord the King) he shall be amerced and
otherwise punished according as of old time has been used to be done, within
the said Realm in the said case. Which relates unto and agrees expressly with
that forecited out of Modus tenendi Parliamentum, (which took it out of this
Act.) If then all the Lords, Peers in Parliament are bound to attend in
Parliament, being often times there all called for by name, and ought not to
depart from it without the Kings and Houses leave, under pain of Amercement and
other punishment as this Statute resolves, and 3 Ed. 3.19. Fitzh. Coron. 161.
Stamford, l. 3. c. 1. f. 153. Cook 4 Instit. p. 15, 16, 17.43. 28 E. 3. Nu. 1,
2. 5 R. 2. n. 2. 8 H. 4. n. 55. and 31 H. 6. n. 45. ( Where fines were imposed
on absent Lords) most fully mamanifest; then questionless they ought of right
to sit in Parliament, else it were the height of Injustice thus to fine them.
In the tenth year of King Graftons chroh. p. 348.350.
R. 2. this King absented himself from his Parliament then sitting at
Westminster, residing at Eltham about forty days, and refusing to come to the
Parliament, and yet demanding from them four Fifteens for maintenance of his
Estate and outward Wars: Whereupon the whole body of the Parliament made this
answer; That unless the King were present they would make therein no allowance.
Soon after they sent the Duke of Gloucester and Bishop of Ely, Commissioners to
the King to Eltham, who declared to him among other things in the Lords and
Commons behalf; how that by That in the Modus Tenendi Parl. touching the Kings
absence from the Parliament, was grounded on this passage; therefore writ after.
an old Ordinance they have an Act, if the King absent himself 40 days not
being sick, but of his own mind, (not heeding the charge of his people, nor
their great pains) and will not resort to the Parliament, they may then
lawfully return to their Houses. And now sir (said they) you have been absent a
longer time, and yet refuse to come amongst us, which is greatly to our
discontent. To which the King answered; Well, we do consider, that our own
people and Commons go about to rise against us, wherefore we think we can do no
better, than to ask aid of our Cosen the French King, and rather to submit us
to him, than unto our own subjects. The Lords answered, Sir, that Counsel is
not best, but a way rather to bring you into danger, etc. By whose good
persuasions the King was appeased, and promised to come to the Parliament, and
condescend to their Petitions: and according to his appointment he came, and so
the Parliament proceeded, which else had dissolved by the Lords departure
thence in discontent, and the Kings wilful absence.

Ranulf de Glanvil the first writer of our Common Laws, in his Prologue to his
book De legibus and consuetuainibus Regni Angliae, (used in the reign of King
H. the 2. under whom he flourished, and his Predecessors) writes thus of the
Parliamentary Councils in that age, and their Members power to enact Laws.
Leges Anglicanas, licet non scriptas leges appellari non videtur absurdum, cum
hoc ipsum Lex sit, quod Principi placet, et legis habet vigorem: eas scilicet
quas super dubiis in Consilio desiniendis, Procerum quidem Concilio et
principis accidente authoritate constat esse promulgatas. And lib. 13. cap. 32.
f. 110. Cum quis itaque infra assisam Dom. Reg. id est, infra tempus, A Dom.
Rege de consilio Procerum, adhoc constitutum, quod quandoque majus quandoque
minus censetur. So as the Parliaments under this King and his Ancestors,
consisted only of the King and Nobles, who then made and enacted Laws by the
Kings royal assent, without any Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses elected by the
people, of which I find no mention in the Parliamentary Councils under this
King, Mat. Paris p. 96, 67. Mat. Westminster. an. 1164 Hoved. annal. pars poster. p.
499. Chron. Gervasii col. 1385, 1386. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 122. Radulf. de
Dicero Imagines, Hist. col. 536. Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton, Speed, Daniel.
who as some erroniously assert, first summoned Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
to our Parliaments. In the Parliamentary Council at Clarindon, under King H.
the 2. An. 1164. Jo. de Oxonia, by the Kings command (there present) sat
President, Presentibus etiam Archiep^scopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus,
Comitibus, Baronibus, et Proceribus regni, wherein they made a Recognition of
the customs and liberties of his Grandfather King Henry the 1. and other his
Ancestors, which ought to be observed by all persons within the Realm, by
reason of the discords often happening between the Clergy and temporal
Justices, and great men of the Realm. These they reduced to 16 Articles, very
much ecclipsing the Popes and Bishops ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. This
Chronica Gervasii, col. 1433.
Recognition the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Clergy, cum Comitibus
Proceribus et Baronibus cunctis una voce, firmly promised in the word of truth,
bona fide, to observe and keep to the King and his heirs for ever, without male
engine. The 11 of these Articles runs thus. Archiepiscopi et Episcopi sicut
caeteri Barons debent interesse Iudiciis Curiae (to wit of Parliament) cum
Baronibus, quousque perveniatur in judicio ad d^minutione^ membrorum, vel ad
mortem. Which proves the judicial power of Parliaments to be then only in the
Lords and Barons. In the year 1170. (the 16 of Henry ^.) on the Feast of St.
Bernard, Rex magnum celebravit Concilium Londoniis cum Principibus et
Magnatibus curiae suae, de coronatione Henrici filii sui: So Annal. pars
posterior, p. 518.
Hoveden, Anno 1172. Rex Angliae Henricus convocatis regui Primoribus apud
Northamptoniam renove^unt Assis^m Clarindoniae, eamque praecepit observari.
Roger de Hoveden Annal. pars post. p. 544.
In the year 1175. King Henry the second and his son held a great Council at
York, where the agreement between him and the King of Scots (there present,
with most of his Bishops, Abbots and Nobles) was read and confirmed before the
King and his Son, the Arehbishop of York, the Bishop of Durham, and Comitibus
and Baronibus Angliae. The Hoveden p. 546. Antiq. Ecclesias Brit. p. 94, 95.
some year Rex magnum congregavit coneslium ^pud Windeshores in octavis Sancti
Michaelis praesentibus and Rege filio Richardo Cant. Archiepiscopo and
Episcopis Angliae, and Laurent^o Dubli^ensi Archiepiscopo. Praesentibus e^i^m
Comitibus et Baronibus Angliae, In which some controversies in Ireland were
ce^cided.

In the year Hoveden Annal. pars post. p. 548.
1176. King Henry coming to No^ingham on the feast of Sr. Paul's conversion, ibi
celebravit Magnum Concilium de statute regni sui, et coram rege filio su^.
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus et Baronibus Regn^ sui, Communi omnium
Concilio divisit regnum suum in sex parts, per quarum singu^a^ tres*
Justiciarios itinerantes constituit; whose names, Commissions, and Articles are
there at large recorded. And the same year this King held another Hoveden P.
551.
Great Council at London, in which the King Consilio universorum Episcoporum,
Comitum et Baronum Regni concessit Regi Siciliae filiam suam. Hoveden annal.
pars poster. p. 561. to 566. Mat. Paris, p. 127.
In the year 1177. King Henry the 2. summoned a Great Counc^l to determine the
great Controversy between Sanctius King of Navarr, and Alphonsus King of
Castile; whose Advocates propounding and debating their cases in the presence
of the King and of his Bishops, Earls and Barons; the King habito cum
Episcopis, Comitibus et Baronibus nostris cum deiiberatione consilio, drew up
by their advice an award between them under his great Seal, recorded at large
in Hoveden, who writes Comites et Barons Regalis Curiae Angliae adjudicaverunt
plenariam, utrique parti supradictae, quae in jure petita fuer^nt, fieri
restitutionem. The like they did in the Hoveden p. 560.
Council of Northampton in other cases held the same year. Anno 1188. King
Henry the 2. on the 3d of February held a Parliamentary Council at Chronica
Gervasii, col. 1522. Hoveden, p. 642.
Gaintington, about 8 or 10. miles from Northampton, where convenerunt una cum
Rege PRAESULES ET PRINCIPES REGNI, de defensione sacrosanctae terrae
Jerosolymae tractaturi, where after long debate they made 8. Statutes
concerning that voyage. The very same year the Kings of England and France on
the 10. of February came to a conference about their Voyage to Jerusalem; cum
Archiepiscopis, Comitibus et Baronibus Regnorum suorum, as they had formerly
done in the same manner and place, An. 1173. and as they did afterward An.
1189. Cum Archiepiscopis, Episcopis et Baronibus suis. Hoveden p. 641.556.653.
So as during King Henry the seconds whole reign, we read of no Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses electcted by the people present in our Parliamentary
Councils, but only the King, Prelates, Earls, Barons and Nobles always
mentioned by name, and Judges in them. Only I find this one expression in
Annal. p. 643.
Hoveden, An. 1188. Rex statim (apud Gaintington) congregavit Magnum Concilium
Episcoporum, Abbatum, Comitum et Baronum, et aliorum multorum tam Clericorum
quam Laicorum, (but that these were Knights, Citizens and Burgesses elected by
the people, and not persons particularly summoned and nominated by the King
himself to be Assessors and Collectors of the Tenths, there to receive their
instructions for it, which is most probable, cannot be thence inferred) ubi in
publica audientia recitari fecit omnia supradicta capitula quae constituerat de
Cruce capienda: et tunc Dominus Rex misit servientes suos, Clericos and Laicos,
per singulos Comitatus Angliae ad Decim as colligendas (most likely the aliorum
muliorum tam Clericorum quam Laicorum, present at this great Council) secundum
praedictam Ordinationem in terris suis transmarinis constitutam, to wit, at
Cenomanum, ubi consilio suorum, (to wit, of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and
Barons there with him) ordinavit, quod unusquisque decimam redditorum et
mobilium suorum in eleemo sinam dabit ad subventionem terrae Jerosolymitanae
hoc anno (exceptis armis and equis, and vestibus militum, etc.) Sed de singulis
urbibus totius Angliae, fecit elegi omnes ditiores, videlicet, de Londonio 200,
and de Eboraco 100, and de aliis Urbibus secundum quantitatem and numerum
eorum: and fecit omnes sibi praesentari diebus and locis statutis, de quibus
caepit Decimam mobilium suorum secundum aestimationem virorum fidelium, qui
noverant redditus et mobilia eorum: Si quos autem invenisset rebels, statim
fecit eos in carcerari et in vinculis teneri, donec ultimum quadrantem
persolverent: similiter fecit de Judaeis terrae suae, unde inaestimabilem sibi
acquisivit pecuniam.

Andrew Horn in his Chapter 1. Sect. 2. p. 8, 9.
Mirror of Justices, in the reign of King Edward the first, writes, That our
Saxon Kings divided the Realm of England, after it was turned into an heritage,
into 38 Counties; over which they set so many Counts or Earls: and although the
King ought to have no Peers in his land, yet for that if the King should do
wrong to, or offend any of his people, neither he nor any of his Commissaries
ought to be both Judge and Party, it behooves of Right, that the King should
have COMPANIONS, for to hear and determine IN PARLIAMENTS, all Writs and
Plaints of the Wrongs of the King, of the Queen, and of their Children, and of
those especially, who otherwise could not have common right concerning their
wrongs. These Companions are now called Counts, after the Latin word Comites.
Chapter 3. Sect. 3.
For the good Estate of the Realm King Alfred assembled the COUNTS or Earls,
and ordained by a Perpetual Law, that twice a year or oftener, they should
assemble at London in Parliament, to consult of the Government of the people of
God, etc. By which Estate or Parliament many Laws and Ordinances were made;
which be there recites. Bracton l. 1. c. 8. l. 2. c. 16. l. 3. c. 9. in Henry
the 3d. his reign, and Fleta, l. 2. c. 2. p. 66. write thus in Edw. the first
his reign in the same words. Habet enim Rex cu^ia^ suam in concilio suo in
Parliamentis suis, PRAESENTIBUS Praelatis, But no Commons, of which he speaks
not a word; they having then no being or place in them*
COMITIBUS, BARONIBUS, PROCERIBUS, and aliis viris peritis: ubi terminatae sunt
dubitationes judiciorum, and novis injuriis emersis, nova constituuntur
remedia. And l. 17. c. 17. he writes thus, Rex in populo regendo superiores
habet, Videlicet, Legem per quam est Rex; and Curiam suam, (to wit, of
Parliament) videlicet, COMITES and BARONS. Comites enim a Comitia dicuntur,
qui cum viderint Regem sine froeno, Froenum sibi apponere TENENTVR ne clament
subditi: Domine Jesu Christ in Chamo and froeno maxillas eorum constringe. Sir
Tho. Smith in his Commonwealth of England, l. 2. c. 1. John Vowel, and Ralph
Holinshed, vol. 1. c. 6. p. 173. Mr. Cambden in his Britannia, p. 177. John
Minshaw in his Dictionary, Cowel in his Interpreter Title Parliament; Powel in
his Attorneys Accademy, and M. St. John's Argument at Law at Straffords
attainder. Daltons Office of Sheriffs.
others, unanimously conclude. That the Parliament consists of the KING, the
LORDS SPiRITUAL and TEMPORAL, and the Commons; which STATES represent the body
of all England; which make but one Assembly or Court, called the Parliament,
and is of all other the Highest and greatest Authority, and has the most high
and absolute power of the Realm: And that no Parliament is or can be holden
without the King and Lords. Mr. Crompton in his Jurisdiction of Courts,
affirms, particularly of the High Court of Parliament f. 1. etc. This Court is
the highest Court of England, in which the King himself sits in person, and
comes there at the beginning and end of the Parliament* and at any other time
when he pleases, ordering the Parliament. To this Court come all the Lords of
Parliament, as well Spiritual as temporal, and are severally summoned by the
Kings writ at a certain day and place assigned; The Chancellor of England and
other great Officers or Judges are there likewise present; together with the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses; who all ought to be personally present, or
else to be amerced, and otherwise punished, if they come not being summoned,
unles good cause be showed, or in case they depart without the Houses or Kings
special license, after their appearance before the Sessions ended: And he
resolves, That the King, Lords and Commons, do all jointly make up the
Parliament; and that no Law nor Act of Parliament can be made to bind the
subject, without all their concurrent assents.

Sir Edward Cook not only in his Epistle before his ninth Report and Institutes
on Littleton, p. 109, 110. But likewise in his 4. Institutes, (published by
Order of the Commons themselves this present Parliament, c. 1. p. 1, 2. etc.)
writes thus of the high and Honorable Court of Parliament. This Court
consists OF THE KINGS MAJESTY, sitting there, as in his royal politic
capacity; and of the three Estates of the Realm, viz. Of the Lords Spiritual,
Archbishops and Bishops, being in number 24. who sit there in respect of their
Counties or Baronies, parcel of their Bishoprics, which they hold also in
their politic capacity; and every one of these when the Parliament is to be
holden, ought ex debito Justitiae, to have a writ of summons. The LORDS
TEMPORAL, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons, who sit there by
reason of their dignities which they hold by descent or creation: And likewise
EVERY ONE OF THESE being of full age, OUGHT TO HAVE a writ of summons Therefore
their exclusion thence, is Ex Abysso Nequiti^, from the abyss of Injustice and
Iniquity.
EX DEBITO JUSTITIAE. The third Estate are the Commons of the Realm, whereof
there be Knights of Shires or Counties, Citizens of Cities, and Burgesses of
Boroughs. All which are respectively elected by the Shires or Counties, Cities
and Boroughs by force of the Kings writ, ex debito Justitiae; and none of them
ought to be omitted: and these represent all the Commons of the whole Realm,
and trusted for them, and are in number at this time 403. He adds, And it is
observed, that when there is best appearance, there is the best success in
Parliament. At the Parliament holden in the 7. year of H. 5. holden before the
Duke of Bedford Guardian of England, of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal there
appeared but 30. in all: at which Parliament there was but one Act of
Parliament passed, and that of no great weight. In An. 50 E. 3. all the Lords
appeared in person, and not one by Proxy: at which Parliament, as appears by
the Parliament Roll, so many excellent things were sped and done, that it was
called Bonum Parliamentum. And the King and these three estates are the great
Corporation or body of the kingdom and do sit in two Houses; and of this Court
of Parliament, the King is Caput, Principium, and Finis. The Parl. cannot begin
but by the Royal presence of the King either in person or representation, by a
Guardian of England or Commissioners, both of them appointed under the great
Seal of England, etc. And 42 E. 3. Rot. Parl. number. 7. It is declared by the
Lords and Commons in full Parliament, upon demand made of them, on the behalf
of the King; That they Nota.
could not assent to any thing in Parliament, that tended to the disinherison
of the King and his Crown whereunto they were sworn. And p. 35. he has this
special observation; That it is observed by ancient Parliament men out of
Records, that Parliaments have not succeeded well in five cases. First, when
the King has been in difference with his Lords and with his Commons. Secondly,
When any of the great Lords were at variance between themselves. Thirdly, When
there was no good correspondence between the Lords and Commons. Fourthly, When
there was no unity between the Commons themselves (in all which our present
Parliament is now most unhappy; and so like to miscarry and succeed very ill)
Fifthly, When there was no preparation for the Parliament before it began:
every of which he manifests by particular instances.

From all these and sundry Judge Huttons Argume^ of Mr. Hampdens case. p. 32,
33. Daltons office of Sherifs. Mr. St. John's Argument at Law at Straffords
Attainder, published by the Commons special Order, in which he at large asserts
The Kings and Lords undoubted right to sit and judge in Parliament, and that it
is high Treason to exclude them by force of Arms.
other Authorities, it is most evident and transparent; That both the King
himself and Lords, ought of right, duty to be personally present in Parl. and
ever have been so, as well as the Commons, and neither of them to be excluded,
since they all make up but one Parliament, that no Lords, Commons ought to
depart from it without special leave, under pain of amercement, and other
penalties, That no binding Law can be passed without their joint consents. And
that the Commons alone are no more a Parliament of themselves without the King
and Lords, than the Common Council of London are an entire City or Corporation
without the L. Mayor, and Aldermen, or the Covent without the Abbot, the
Chapter without the Dean, or the legs or belly a perfect man without the head,
neck, and heart.

Sixthly, 33 H. 6.17. Brook Parliament 4 Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts. f.
8. Mr. Hackwel of the manner of passing Blls in Parliament.
The ancient and constant form of endorsing Bills in Parliament, began in the
Commons house, in all Parliaments since the House of Commons, unanswerably
demonstrates the Commons of Englands acknowledgement of the Lords right, to
sit, vote* assent, or dis-assent to Bills in Parliament, viz. Soit Bail a
Seigneurs: let it be delivered, or sent up to the Lords. Yea, the Commons
constant sending up of their own Members, with Messages to the Lords; their
receiving Messages from them, and entertaining frequent conferences with them
in matters wherein their opinions differ; in which conferences the Lords
usually adhere to their dissents, unless the Commons give them satisfaction
and convince them, and the Lords often times convince the Commons, so far as to
consent to their alterations of Bills, Ordinances, Votes, and to lay them quite
aside, is an unquestionable argument of their Right to sit and vote in
Parliament; and of their Negative voice too: All which would prove but a mere
absurdity, superfluity, if the Commons in all ages, and now too, were not
convinced, that the Lords had as good right to sit and vote in Parliament, and
a Negative dissenting voice, as well as they; never once questioned nor doubted
till within this year or two, by some seditious disciples of Lilburns and
Overtons tutoring, who endeavored to evade their justice on them.

Seventhly, This just right of the Lords is expressly and notably confirmed by
all the Commons of England, in the Parliament of 31 H. 8. c. 10. concerning the
placing and sitting of the Lords and great Officers of State in the Parliament
House, made by the Commons consent: it being in vain to make such a Law
(continuing still till this very day both in force and use) if they had no
lawful right to sit and vote in Parliament, because they are not elective, as
Knights and Burgesses are. And likewise by the Statute of 39 H. 6. c. 1. made
at the Commons own Petition, to repeal the Parliament held at Coventry the year
before; and all procedings of it, by practice of some seditious persons; of
purpose to destroy some of the great Nobles, faithful and lawful Lords and
Estates, merely out of malice, and greedy and unsatiable covetousness to
possess themselves of their Lands, possessions, offices and goods; whereby
many great injuries, Enormities and Inconveniences, well nigh to the ruin,
decay, and universal subversion of the kingdom ensued. The very design of our
Lilburnists, Sectaries, and Levellers now, out of particular malice and
covetousness, to share the Lords and all rich Commoners lands and estates
between them, being poor indigent covetous people for the most part, scarce
forty of them worth one groat, at least before these times and wars.

8ly. This apparent Right of theirs, is undeniably ratified, acknowledged by
the very words of the Kings writs in all ages, by which the Lords themselves
are summoned to the Parliament, running in this form.

Clause 49 H. 3. m. 10. dors. in schedul^, Cromptons jurisdiction of Courts, f.
1.
Carolus, etc. Charissimo consaguineo suo Edwardo Com. Oxon. salutem: Quia de
advisamento and consensu consilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis et urgentibus
negotiis, Nos, statum et defensionem Regni nostri Angliae, and Ecclesiae Angli
canae concernentibus, quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem nostram.
Westmonasterium, 12 die November. prox. futuro tenere ordinavimus, et ibidem
vobiscum, cum Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni nostri colloquium
havere, ettractare; Vobis sub fide and ligeantiis quibus nobis teneamur
firmiter injungendo, Mandamus, quod consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate,
and periculis minentibus, cessante excusatione quacunque, dictis die et loco
personaliter inter sitis Nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, Proceribus
praedictis, super dictis negotiis tractaturus, vestrumque consilium impensurus,
sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem et defensionem Regni et Ecclesiae
praedictorum, expeditionem que dictorum negotiorum diligitis, nullatenus
omittatis, Test, etc.

Which writs firmly require and command their personal presence, counsel and
advise in all Parliaments, without any excuse, and that by the faith and
allegiance which they owe to the King, and as they do tender the King and his
honor, the salvation and defense of the Realm and Church of England, and the
dispatch of the arduous and urgent businesses which concern them. Which is
likewise seconded, expressed in the very words of all the writs for election of
Knights and Burgesses, the form and substance whereof are ancient, and can
recive no alteration nor addition but by Act of Parliament, as Instit. 4. p.
10. This is their only end, and trust, and none other, as the Writ and its
retorn attest; not to imprison, destroy the King, Realm, Church, and Parliament
of England it self, and those very Cities, Buroughs which elected them, under
pretext of a new Government, and more equal representative, the very Jesuits
plot, and Levellers design.
Sir Edward Cook resolves. By this Writ, the Prelates, Great men, Nobles of the
Realm are summoned to the Parliament, there to treat and confer with the King,
of the arduous and urgent affairs and defense of the King, Realm, and Church of
England, as the first Clause of the writ, Clause 4 E. 3. m. 41.32.27.19 dors.
5. E. 3. part 1. m. 25.7. 6 E. 3. Dors. claus. part 2. m. 36.4. Cromptons
Jurisdiction of Courts. f. 1.
Carolus, etc. quia, etc. pro quibusdam arduis et urgentibus negotiis; Nos
Statum and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae
concernent: quoddam Parliamentum nostrum etc. teneri ordinavimus; and ibidem
cum Praelatis* Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti Regni nostri colloquium and
haberet tractare, Tibi praecipimus, And the Commons are summoned, to perform
and consent to those things which shall there happen to be ordained by this
Common Council of the Kindom, etc. And if they are thus summoned, not to treat
amongst themselves as an independent, entire Parliament; but to confirm and
consent to what the King, Prelates, Great men, and Peers (the Sea the
Freeholders grand Inquest, and my Historical Collection, where this is largely
proved.
Common Council of the Realm) shall ordain about such affairs; as they must of
necessity admit the King, Lords and Peers to be altogether as essential (yea
more principal eminent) Members of Parliament, though not elective as the
Knights and Burgesses, who are but summoned to consent to and perform what
shall happen there by their common advise to be ordained; or at least to
consult and advise with them, as their inferiors, not to overruled them, as
their superiors, and the only Supreme power, authority in the Kingdom. So if
they will totally exclude either King or Lords from the Parliament (who are
distinct, principal and essential Members of it as well as the Commons, and
have always been so reputed until now) the Commons may sit alone as Ciphers,
but not as a Parliament or Council, to vote, impose, or act any thing that is
binding to the people; since regularly they neither are, nor ever yet were in
any age no more a Parliament in any case without the King and Lords, then the
King and Lords alone are now a Parliament (though anciently they were so of
themselves) without the Commons, or the trunk of a man, a perfect man without
head or shoulders. If Dyer. 61, 62. Cook 5. Report. f. 90, 91, 94.120, 121.1:
Rep. f. 111.173. 19 H. 8, 9. Br. executors 3.15.11.7.12.
3. be jointly empowered or commissioned to do any act by Commission, Deed, or
Warrant, any one or two of them can do nothing without the third. If many be
in Commission of the Peace, Sewers, or the like and three of the Quorum
jointly, to act therein jointly, if any one of the three be absent or dead, all
the rest can do nothing, because their authority is joint, not single. In
Parliament it self, if either house appoint a Committee of 3, 5, or 7. to
examine, act, or execute any thing: if but one of this number be absent, or put
out, the rest can do nothing that is legal or valid, even by course of
Parliament; neither can either House sit and vote as a House, unless there be
so many Members present, as by the Law and custom of Parliament will make up an
House, as every man's experience can inform him. If these Levellers then will
absolutely cut off or exclude the King or Lords from the Parliament, they
absolutely null and dissolve it: and the Act for See my legal Vindication
against illegal Taxes, p. 3.4.44. to 51. And this Lilburn himself expressly
asserts in part in his Letter or Epistle to the Speaker Mr. Lenthal. June 8.
1658. p. 34.39. to 59.
continuing this Parliament cannot make nor continue the Commons alone together
as a Parliament, no more than the Lords or King alone without the Commons; the
King or either house alone being no Parliament, but both conjoined and
enlivened with the Kings personal or representative presence. The cutting off
the head alone or of the head and shoulders, altogether destroys and kills the
body Politic and Parliament, as well as the body natural. If the King dies, or
resigns his Crown, or be deposed, the Parliament thereby is actually dissolved,
as it was resolved in the Parl. of 1 H. 4. n, 1, 2, 3. 1 H. 5. n. 26. 4 E.
4.44. and Cooks 4 Institutes, p. 46. The last Parliament of 21 Jac. dissolved
by his death, So if the Lords or Commons dissolve and leave their House,
without any adjournment, or if the King by his Writ dismiss, or dissolve
either of the Houses, the Parliament is thereby dissolved, as the forecited
Presidents, and the latter clause of the writ for the election of Knights and
Burgesses manifests. And a new kind of Parliament consisting only of Commoners,
when the old one (only within the Act for continuing this Parliament made up
both of King, Lords, and Commons) is dissolved; neither will nor can be
supported or warranted by the Letter or intention of this Law, or any other
Law, custom, or right whatsoever.

Ninthly, All the Petitions of the Commons in all ancient and modern
Parliaments to the King, and Peers, for their redress of grievances, recorded
in our ancient Parliamentary Rolls. The usual Prologue to most of our ancient
printed Statutes, in the Statutes at large, and in Poulton, The King at the
request of the Commons and of, or by the assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, and other great men there assembled, has ordained these things (or
Acts) underwritten: all Acts of Parliament now extant, usually running in this
form; Cook 4. Instit. c. 1,
The King with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
has ordained; And be it enacted by the Kings moct excellent Majesty, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in this present Parliament assembled. The famous
Petition of Right, 3 Car. so much insisted on, beginning thus. Humbly show unto
our Sovereign Lord the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in
Parliament assembled, thus answered by the King; Let right be done as is
desired. The Act for continuing this Parliament, made by the King and Lords, as
well as by the Commons, (who never intended to exclude themselves out of this
Parliament by that Act, or that it should continue if either of them were quite
dismembered from it) with all Acts and Ordinances since. Yea the very
Protestation, and Solemn League and Covenant, taken by the Commons, Lords and
prescribed by them to all others throughout the three kingdoms, which couple
the Lords and Commons always together (neither of them alone being able to make
any binding Act nor Ordinance to the Subjects, See my Irenarch. redivivus.
unless they both concur, and have the Kings royal assent thereto no more
than one Member alone of the House can make a House) and rank the Lords always
before the Commons, and the King before them both; so firmly hold forth,
establish the Lords and Kings undoubted Rights to sit and Vote in Parliament,
and decry this new invented Monopoly of a sole Parliament of Commons, without
King or Lords, and that absolute Sovereign Power these Lilburnists, new Lights
have spied out and set up for them in Utopia; that impudency it self would
blush to vent such mad, absurd, irrational Frenzies and Paradoxes as these
crack brained persons dare to publish; and they may with as much truth and
reason argue, that one man is three; that the Legs and trunk of a man are a
perfect man, without head, neck, arms, and shoulders; or that the Legs, Ribs,
Bowels of the Body are and ought to be placed above the head, neck, shoulders;
as that the House of Commons are or ought to be an entire Parliament; the sole
Legislative Power, the only Supreme Authority, paramount both King and Lords;
who must not now have so much as a Negative voice, to deny or contradict any of
the Commons Votes, or Ordinances, though never so rash, unjust, dishonorable,
prejudicial or dangerous to the whole Kingdom; as these new Dogmatists affirm.

Tenthly, The Commons themselves in their joint Declaration and Resolution with
the Lords, this Parliament, concerning his Majesty's late Proclamation, 9
August 1642. Exact Collection, p. 508.
printed by their special order declare and style his House of Peers to be, the
Hereditary Counselors of the Kingdom. The like they declare in their Exact
Collection, p. 846.
Declaration of 16 January 1642. Mr. John Pym in his Speech at Guildhall in
London, 14 January 1642. (made and printed by the Commons special order)
asserted; That the Lords have an Hereditary interest in making Laws in this
Kingdom. Exact Collection, p. 13, 19, 528.
The Commons House in their Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, 15
December 1641. affirm, That the Peers are the Kings Great Council: That the
King summoned the Great Council of Peers to meet at York the 24. of September,
and there declared a Parliament to begin the 3. of November following. In which
Parliament when the Lords and Commons met; they add* But what can we the
Commons do without the conjunction of the House of Lords? and what conjunction
can we expect there, when the Bishops and Recusant Lords are so numerous and
prev^lent? thereby confessing that without the Lords concurrence (who are the
Great Council of the Realm) the Commons can do nothing at all in Parliament:
since all Laws, Ordinances, Taxes, Votes that are valid and binding to the
people, must pass Both Houses, and have the Lords as well as Commons assent; as
they resolve in sundry Exact Collection, p. 213.276, 277.268, 269.278, 279,
280.250.360.364, 365.377.455.461.494.498.526, 528.531, 533, 544.502.546,
547.548, 550, 551.557.560, 561, 562.578.321, 322, 323. A Collection of
Ordinances, p. 110, 111.205, 227.879.
printed Rem^nstrances, and Declarations, mentioning Both Houses of Parliament,
and their concurrence to all things therein concluded; and the King likewise in
his. The Lords and Commons in their Declaration of the 5th of August 1645. to
the High and Mighty States General of the United Provinces; printed in A
Collection of Ordinances of Parliament, p. 699, 700. complain thus to them of
this misinformation of their Ambassadors, June 20. 1645. The Lower House has
caused the Chamber where they sit in, to be hanged with Tapistry, which was
heretofore never so. It is said it is done, that the Lords changing their
Chamber, shall come and sit in the House of Commons, and so to be both together
reduced into one body, and the better agree by number of Votes: When heretofore
the Parliament was full, then the Lords Chamber did consist of about 126. or
more Votes, and the Lower House of above 500 Votes; and they have always been
in several Houses, and the one could not conclude anything for a Resolution of
the King, unless the other House did also consent; but now the King is absent,
and the Upper House should now be melted into the Lower; and in the Common
Assembly of about 26 Lords which are now here, and some 200 Commoners, so the
most Votes should rule and Ordain all matters: Thus much we are told, and that
it tends to shun many disputes, and hindrances which happen in their resolution
every day. The Lords remain constant to maintain their Rights, and say: this is
to take away all their Right and prerogative, taking away their House; and so
to bring all the power under the Commons. ^o which Misinformation the Commons,
(and Lords too) returned this Answer to the States. My Lords, the Commons are
charged with endeavor of altering the fundamentals of Parliament, by taking
away the House of Peers, and melting it into the House of Commons, when as
there was never any debate in the House of Commons concerning a^y such matter,
nor was the same ever intended or desired by the said House. A Collection of
Ordinances, p. 877, 878.
After this the whole House of Commons in their Declaration of the 17 Aprilis
1646. of their true Intentions concerning the ancient and fundamental
Government of the Kingdom; thus positively declared to all the world; That our
true and real Intentions are, and our endeavors shall be, to maintain the
ancient and fundamental Government of the Kingdom By King, Lords and Commons:
that we have only desired, that with the consent of the King, such powers may
be settled in the two Houses, without which we can have no assurance but that
the like or greater mischiefs, which God has hitherto delivered us from, may
break out again, and engage us in a second and more destructive war. Seeing
then the very Commons House themselves in these and sundry other printed
Declarations have so fully, so frequently declared, resolved the Lords ancient
undoubted Hereditarie right and interest to sit, vote and assent unto all Laws,
Ordinances, Proceedings in Parliament, as the Great Council, and Counselors of
the kingdom, and acknowledged this their Privilege and the House of Peers to be
a part of the fundamental Constitution and Government of this kingdom, which
they are resolved to maintain, and not to alter: and that they never intended
nor desired, much less endeavored the altering the fundamentals of Government
by taking away the House of Lords; How any Commoners, Levellers or others can
now dare to question, deny or oppugn this their hereditary fundamental right of
Peerage, or attempt the actual abolishing of the House of Peers, without the
highest Impudency, Treachery, Absurdity, and incurring the Crime of a New
Gunpowder Treason, to blow up the House of Lords afresh, which the old
Jesuitical Popish Gunpowder Traitors only attempted, but could not accomplish,
transcends my understanding to comprehend.

11ly, The General Council of the Officers of the Army in their Declaration
made at Windsore; about January 1647. presented to the Lords House by Sir
Hardress Waller; asserted, The hereditary Legal Right of the Lords and their
House in Parliament, and the Armies fixed resolution to uphold and maintain
them and their Privileges with their swords. And if John Lilburns printed
Letter to the Speaker, July 8 1648. p. 26, 27. may be credited, Lieutenant
General Cromwell himself, protested to him and others at the Lord Whartons
house, and that upon his conscience in the sight of God, Nota.
That the Lords had as true a Right to their Legislative and Iurisdictive power
over the Commons, as he had to the coat on his back, and that he and the Army
would support the same. How dare then any Levellers or Officers in the Army or
elsewhere to question or attempt to abolish this their undoubted right to sit,
vote* and exercise a legislative and Juridical Jurisdiction in Parliament, and
that over Commons themselves in cases which concern their Peerage, and in cases
not triable properly elsewhere but only in Parliament?

12. Twelfthly, These very Sectaries and Levellers themselves have
acknowledged, asserted this Right and Power of the Lords all along this
Parliament till of late, as appears by their several Petitions and Complains to
them upon sundry occasions heretofore; by their resorting to them for Justice
against Strafford, Canterbury, and others; Yea See Innocence and truth
justified, p. 74, 75. Mr. Edwards Gangraena, part 3. p. 156.157. where his
words and contradictions in this kind are recited at large.
Jo. Lilburn himself, till his late quarrel with them, not only acknowledged
their very power of Judicature, but highly applauded their Justice, in his own
cause; Petitioning and suing to them not only for reversal of the sentence
against him in Starchamber, but likewise for damages and reparations against
his Prosecutors, pleading his cause by his Counsel before them, as his proper
Judges; who thereupon by judgment of the House, vacated the Decree against
him, as illegal; voted him Damages, and passed him an Ordinance for the
recovery and levying thereof; all which he himself has published in sundry of
his printed Pamphlets, wherein he acknowledges and extolleth their Justice.
Take but one passage for all in his Innocence and Truth justified, p. 74, 75.
If I be transmitted up to the Lords, I confidently believe I shall get forward,
out of the former experiences of their Justice there, and I will instance two
particulars. First, when I was a Prisoner in the Fleet, and secondly, May the
fourth, one thousand six hundred forty one. The King accused me of High
Treason, and before the Lords Bar was I brought for my life; where, although
one Littleton, servant to the Prince, swore point blank against me, He did not
then demur to their jurisdiction.
yet had I free liberty to speak for my self in the open House; And upon my
desire, that Master Andrews also might declare upon his Oath what he knew about
my business, it was done; And his Oath being absolutely contradictory to Master
Littletons, I was both freed from Littletons malice, and the Kings accusation,
at the Bar of the whole House: And for my part Nota.
I am resolved to speak well of those that have done me justice, and not to
doubt they will deny it me, till such time as by experience I find they do it.
And at that time he was so much for the Lo^ds, that he writes most
disgracefully, derogatorily of the Commons House, (and other his Confederates
by his example) tells them of their want of power, injustice, and illegal
proceedings His Letter to a friend: Innocence and truth justified. H^s Letters
to the General. Hen. Martin and L. G. Cromwell Englands Birthright. See Mr. Edw.
Gangraena, part 3. p. 146. to 228.
quarrels only with them, and their Committees, for their delays and injustice
toward him: telling them to their faces in many of his former, and late
printed The same he asserts in his Letter to the Speaker, June 8. 1648. And
that the Commons then sitting, without the King and Lords were no Parliament at
all, and could make no Acts, etc. See there p. 26. to 59. where he largely
proves it.
Libels: That they have no power at all to commit or examine him, or any other
Commons of England without the Lords: nor yet to give or take an Oath: That
they are but a piece, and lowest part of the Parliament, not a Parliament
alone; That they can make no binding Votes, Ordinances or Laws, nor commit nor
command any Commoner, without the Lords, and in one or two Pamphlets more he
endeavors to prove them to be now no lawful house of Commons, at all; nor
would he ever acknowledge them to be so; and that he would make no more
conscience of cutting theirs and the Lords throats (the Tyrants and Oppressors
at Westminster) than of killing so many Weasels and Polcats; with many other
like scurrilous and mutinous expressions. His own printed Papers, Petitions,
Actions therefore are an unanswerable confutation of his malicious
co^tradictions of their Authority and judicature since, for their exemplary
justice on him: And he must either now re-acknowlege their right of sitting,
voting, judging in Parliament to be lawful, or else renounce his own former
Petitions and addresses to them for justice; retract all his former printed
Papers, asserting their judicature, and extolling their justice; yea disclaim
their judgment for vacating his own sentence, in the Starchamber, their
awarding him damages, and passing an Order to recover them, as merely null and
void, being made before no lawful nor competent Judges, as now he writes,
since not elected by the Peoples Vote. Let those his followers, who admire him
for his Law, observe these his palpable, invincible contradictions, and be
ashamed and afraid to follow such an ignorant erroneous guide, who writes only
out of malice, faction, not of judgment, as his contradictions evidence.

13ly. The Acts for preventing the inconveniences happening by the long
intermission of Parliaments. And to prevent the inconveniences which may happen
by the untimely adjourning, proroging, or dissolving the Parliament (made this
Parliament, and assented to by the King at the Commons importunity) confirm the
Lords interest, right, to sit and Vote in Parliament beyond all dispute, and
give them now power to summon a Parliament themselves in some cases, in default
of the King, his Chancellor and Officers.

14ly. The ancient form still continued till this day, of dismissing and
dissolving Parliament, the King licenseth THE LORDS and COMMONS TO DEPART HOME,
and TAKE THEIR EASE. 37 E. 3. n. 34. 38 E. 3. n. 18. 40 E. 3. n. 16. 43 E. 3.
n. 34. 45 E. 3. n. 8.13. 47 E. 3. n. 7. (and all Parliaments since) proves
their right of sitting in, and attending the service of the Parliament in
person (without special license of the King, dispencing with their absence)
during its continuance, in despite of all ignorant cavils to the contrary, The
Kings license of them to depart being void and nugatory, if not bound by Law to
attend the Parliament in person, as well as the Commons.

15ly. Finally, this hereditary right of the English Barons, Lords, is
demonstrated, resolved in this very clause of their Patents of creation; when
first created Earls or Barons, inserted into all Patents since, 20 H. 2. and
employed by our Laws, though not precisely mentioned in all the ancient Patents
of creation before. Seldens Titles of Honor, part. 2. chapter 5. p. 663, 665.747,
748, 171, 763, 751, 757.
Volentes and per praesentes concedentes pro nobis, haeredibus, and
successoribus nostris, quod praefotus A. Comes (vel Baro, etc.) S. and haeredes
sui masculi, ut Comites, vel Barons, de S. in omnibus teneantur, tractentur,
and reputentur, et eorum quilibet habeat, teneat, et possideat sedem et locum
in Parlamentis nostris, haeredum et successorum nostrorum in^ra regnum nostrum
Angliae, inter alios Comites (vel Barons) ut Comes, vel Baro. Than which
nothing than be more positive and direct in point.

I shall close up all the premises with two memorable Clauses in two writs of
Summons to Parliament, evidencing not only the undoubted right, but absolute
necessity of the Lords personal fitting, voting, and advising in our
Parliaments.

In the Parliament held at York, in the 6 year of King Edward the third, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, with some other Bishops and Nobles being absent,
thereupon the Prelates, Nobles, Knights and Burgesses there present refused to
act any thing, and resolved they could conclude nothing by reason of their
absence: whereupon they prayed the King to adjourn the Parliament, and by a new
Writ to summon the Archbishop, and all other Bishops and Lords then absent
personally to appear at York on the day whereto the Parliament was adjourned,
under a penalty, as is evident by these Clauses in the Writs of Summons then
issued. Rot. Claus. 6 E. 3. in 4 Dors.
Rex e venerabili in Christo Patri eadem gratia Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc.
Verum quia dictis negotiis in eodem Parliamento praepositis, quae salvationem
jurium Coronae nostrae, and regni nostri intime contingunt, Et nobis incidunt
multum cordi, per Praelatos, Proceres, and Milites Comitatuum tunc ibidem
praesentes deliberato consilio responsum existit, quod in tam arduis negotiis
sine vestri, ac aliorum Prelat. ac Magnat. et Procerum prodictorum absentium
praesentia, consilium et assensum praebere non possunt, nec debent: Ita quod
nobis cum insta^ a suppli^ (...) Pa^liam. illud usque ad diem Mercur^i^ octav^s
Sancti Hilari, prox. i^de futur. continuari seu pro^ogari and inte^im vos e^
caeteros Prelatos, et Proceres tunc absentes convocari faceremus. Ac nos,
quanquam hu^usmodi ^i^tio no^s d^m^s^ e^ periculosa plurimum vide^tur, eorum
Petitioni in hac part annuentes, etc. Parliamentum praedictum usque ad octav.
praedictas duximus continuandum seu prorogandum. Ac Praelatis, Magnatibus,
Militibus, Civibus, and Burgensibus inj^nximus, quod tunc ibid. intersint,
quacunque excusatione cessante, ac omnibus aliis praetermissis. Ne igitur
contingat (quod absit) dicta negotia ad nostri and regni nostri damnum, and
dedecus per vestri seu aliorum ABSENTIAM, ulterius prorogari, vobis in fide and
dilectione quibus nobis tenemini, et sub periculo quod incumbit districte
iniungendo mandamus, quod omni excusatione cessanie sitis personaliter apud
Ebor. in dictis Octab. nobiscum, and cum caeteris Praelatis and Magnatibus
dicti regni nostri super dictis negotiis tractaturus, et vestrum consilium
imp^nsurus. Scientes, quod si per VESTRAM ABSENTIAM CONTIGERIT dicta negotia
(quid absit) ulterius retardari, dissimulare non poterimus, quin AD VOS EXINDE,
SICUT CONVENIT GRAVITER CAPIAMUS, Test Rege apud Ebor. 11 Die Decembris. Eodem
modo mandatum est 17 aliis Episcopis, 13 Abbatibus, and 40 Magnatibus, and
aliis. And in another writ of Summons the same year to the same Archbishop of
Canterbury, there is this Clause inserted against making any Proxy. Claus. An.
6 E. 3. part 2. m. 36. dors.
Scientes pro certo, quod nisi evidens et manifesta necessitas id exposcat non
intendimus Procuratores seu Excusatores pro vobis admittere ea vice, propter
arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum. Which Clause amongst other reasons was then
inserted, because the Clergy in a Parliament held at Eltham some two years
before, refused to grant this King an aid for the defense of Ireland; by reason
of the Archbishops absence from it, adjourning their answer to this aid, till
they all and the Archb^shop ass^mbled together in a future Convocation, to be
summoned by the Kings writ, Mat. Paris, p. 359.625.626.
as the Claus. Roll. An. 4 E. 3. m. 3. dorso record^. Thus the Bishops and
Clergy refused to grant an aid to King Henry the 3. Anno 1232. and likewise
another aid to the Pope, Anno 1244. because many of the Bishops and Abbots who
were summoned to the Parl. then held, were not present. Adding; Tangunt ista
Archiepiscopos necnon universos Angliae Praelatos; cum ergo Archiepiscopi,
Episcopi, and alii Ecclesiarum Praelati sint Absentes, Nota.
in eorum praejuditiis respondere nec possumus nec debemus. Ouia ^id ^cere
praesume^emus in prejuditium omnium Absentium fieret Praelatorum. All excellen^
Presidents both for the Lords and Commons in all succeeding ages, not to vote
or act any thing, or grant any aids, or Subsidies upon any occasion, menace, or
entreaty; whiles their Members who ought to be personally present are absent,
much more when forcibly secured, or secluded by internal confederacy, or
external armed violence, or the whole House of Peers sequestered or suppres^ed
by factious, seditious, Levellers, who now design their total and final
extirpation out of their future See their Agreement of the people.
New-modelled Parliaments.

Having thus impregnably evinced the Lords undoubted right to sit and vote in
Parliament, though they be not elective by the peoples voices, as Knights and
Burgesses are; I shall next discover unto our illiterate Ignoramusses, who
oppose their right, the justice, good grounds and reasons of our Ancestors, why
they instituted the Lords to sit and vote in Parliament by right of their very
Nobility and Peerage, which will abundantly satisfy rational men, and much
confirm their right.

First, the Nobles and Great Officers in all Kingdoms, and in our Kingdom too,
in respect of their education, birth, experience, employments in military and
State Affairs, have always been generally reputed the wisest, most experienced
Common wealths men, best able to advise, Counsel the King and kingdom in all
matters of Government, Peace, or War; as our Historians, Antiquaries,
Pol^tians, Records, acknowledge and attest; whence they were anciently styled
Mr. Seldens Titles of honor, part. 2. chapter 5. Sir Edward Cooks Epistle to the 9
Report, and 1 Instit. p. 110. 4 Instit. p. 2. Cambdens B^it. p. 177. Spelmanni
Council. Tom. 1. My Truth triumphing over Falsehood. p. 56 to 70. Stat. de 4 E.
1. e. 2. Lambards Archaion.
Aeldermen, Wisemen; Magnates, Optimates, Sapientes, Sapientissimi et
Clarissimi viri: Conspicui, Clarique Viri, Primates, Nobiles, etc. in our
Historians and Records: our Parliaments in that respect being frequently styled
in ancient times, Concilium SAPIENTUM: upon which Grounds our Kings, Lords, and
1 E. 3. n. 36.55, 56. 45 E. 3. n. 15, 16. 50 E. 3. n. 10. to 14. 1 R. 2. n. 18.
to 27.47.50, 51, 112 113. 17 R. 2. c. 1, 2. 13 R. 2. n. 6, 7. 17 R 2. n. 17,
18. 8 H. 4. n. 31. to 92. 11 H. 4. n. 24.28, 39, 44. 13 H. 4. n. 11.
Commons too, (when ever they recommended Counselors of State to the King in
Parliament, made choice of Lords, and other Peers for for their Privy
Counselors, as most wise, able, discreet.) Therefore it was thought fit, just
and equal, the King should ever summon them to the Parliament by his Writ,
without any election of the people, for their own inherent wisdom, excellency,
valor, learning, worth; the Original cause of advancing, enobling them at
first, as is expressed in their Patents: and evident by these Scripture Texts.
Esth, 1.13, 14. Isay 19.11, 12, 13. Jer. 5.5. c. 10.7. c. 51.57. Dan. 2.48. c.
6.1, 2, 3. Genesis 41.39.40. Psalm. 105.21, 22. compared together. This ground of
calling the Nobles to the Parliament, is intimated in the very words of the
summons, Et ibidem VOBISCUM Colloquium habere and tractare de arduis and
urgentibus Regni and Ecclesiae Anglicanae negotiis, VESTRUMQUE CONSILIUM
IMPENSURI, etc. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis: which clause (recited in the
Commons writs of election likewise) implies them to be men of most wisdom and
experience, able to counsel and advise the King in all hit weighty, arduous
affairs both of the Kingdom and Church: whence by Hereditary ancient right they
are, THE KINGS GREAT COUNCIL, and so acknowledged by the Commons themselves
this last Parliament. I could give many instances wherein the Commons in
Parliament have extraordinarily applauded the Lords and Peers for their great
wisdom, See the Sovereign power of Parliaments, part 1.2.
and specially desired their 25 E. 3. rot. Ordinat. n. 1, 2, 28. E. 3. n. 1.
50. E. 3. n. 151, 163.167.110. R. n. 68. Exact Collection, p. 13.19.
wholesome Counsel, as persons of greater wisdom and experience than themselves:
but for brevity sake I shall cite only these ensuing Records. In the Parliament
of 21 Edw: 3. rot. Parl. n. 4, 5. Will. de Thorp in the presence of the King,
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commons declared, that the Parliament was called
for two causes: See the Abridgement of the Records of the Tower, p. 51.88.
The first concerning the wars which the King had undertaken by the consent of
the Lords and Commons against his Enemies of France. The second, how the Peace
of England may be kept. Whereupon the King would the Commons should consult
together, and that within four days they should give answer to the King and his
Counsel what they think therein. On the fourth day the Commons declare, That
they are not able to counsel any thing touching the point of War; wherefore
they desire in that behalf to be excused: And that the King will thereof advise
with his Nobles and Council, and what shall be so amongst them determined, they
the Commons will thereto assent, confirm, and establish By which it is evident
the Commons then reputed the Nobles more wise and able to advise the King in
matters of war than themselves, who confessed their inability therein, and
therefore submitted to assent to whatever the Nobles and Council should therein
advise Him. 28 Edw. 3. n. 55, 58. The Commons submit the whole business of the
Treaty of peace with France, to the order of the King and of his Nobles. And 36
Edw. 3. n. 6. The LORDS only advise the king touching Truce or War with
Scotland. In the first Parliament of 15 Edw. 3. n. 11. the Commons having
delivered in diverse Articles concerning the redress of grievances and public
affairs to the King, prayed, that unto the Wednesday ensuing their Articles may
be committed to the Bishops, Barons, and other wise men there named, by them to
be amended; which the king granted: whereas the Lords exhibited their Articles
apart to the king, and the Bishops their Articles apart in this Parliament, and
protested, that they ought not to answer but in open Parliament by and with
their Peers, without joining with the Commons, number. 6, 7, 18, etc, 26, 27, 35,
37. which course they held in most following Parliaments. In the Parliaments of
47 E. 3. numero 15. 50 E. 3. n. 8. 51 E. 3. n. 18. 1 R. 2. n. 14. 2 R. 2. n.
23. 5 R. 2. n. 14. 6 R. 2. n. 14. Parl. 2. n. 8. 7 R. 2. n. 9.19. 4 H. 4. n.
10.11. See the Abridgment of the Records in the Tower, p.
10.79.116.120.145.155.175.196.282.287, 288.299.303.353.361.
The Commons Petition the King for certain Lords to be sent to them as a
Commi^tee, to assist and advise them in the matters propounded to them by the
King and his Chancellor, wherein their advise was required: as being more able
to advise and counsel them than any of their own Members. In the Parliament of
6 R. 2. Par. 2. n. 7. The Commons being demanded their advice touching the war
with Flanders, and the Kings going thither in person with an Army; answered:
That this consultation did properly belong to the King and Lords, yet it being
their pleasures to charge the Commons to deliver their conceits therein, they
thereupon did it with this Protestation, that what they spoke was not by way of
COUNSEL, but to show their advice. Whereto was answered for the King; That
there was but l^ttle difference between Counsel and Advice. In the Parliament
of 7 R. 2. n. 16, 17. The Commons being charged to deliver their Opinions
touching Peace with France. For answer to Peace, said; That it beseemed them
not to intermeddle with their Counsel therein: And therefore referred the whole
order thereof to the King and his Counsel of Lords. Whereupon the Commons being
urged to declare, whether they desired Peace or War? for one they must choose:
Answered: an honorable Peace for the King: but for that in the Articles were
contained many terms of the Civil Law, which they understood not; and for that
they understood the Articles were; The King should hold Guienne of the French
by Homage and Service, they knew not what to say; only they hope, that the King
meant not to hold Calice, and other Countries gotten by the sword, of the
French. In the Parliament of 17 R. 2. n. 17. The Commons being demanded their
opinions concerning Peace with France, declared by their Speaker, That the same
passed their capacity; and therefore they referred themselves to the King,
Lords and Council, And the rather, for that the Lords and Council affirmed,
that those wo^ds (Homage, Sovereignty, and Resort) contained in the Indenture
of Peace, should be mod^rated, etc. In the P^rliament of 20 R. 2. n. 9. The
Commons excuse themselves touching the Ambassadors and Embassy sent to France
for peace, referring the same to the Kings own pleasare and the Lords.

I shall conclude with one President more, most suitable to the present
deplorable condition of our State, and worthy imitation.

In the Parliament of 5 Hen. 4. Rot. Parl. number. 9, 10. The Commons having
presented to the King in Parliament diverse grievances, in the ill-managing of
his Revenues, the decay of his Castles, Houses and Parks; the great poverty
and pressures of his Subjects, and danger of the Enemies: thereupon they most
entirely and cordially prayed the King, to consider the eminent perils of all
parts of the Realm by reason of the Enemies and Rebels, of which they had news
from day to day; and that as the case then stood, if such mischiefs were not
speedily and graciously remedied and reformed in this Parliament, it might fall
out upon sudden arrival of Enemies, or by some other means, this Parliament
must of necessity be departed from by all and dissolved, so as the Lords and
Commons should never re-assemble again to redress the said Mischiefs, and
others, which God defend. And therefore that it would please the King,
considering the high Wisdoms and Discretions of the Lords, and that they had
knowledge of many Perils and Matters which could not be so clearly known to the
King, that he would now in this present Parliament charge all his Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, upon the faith they principally owe to God, and the
faith, Homage and Allegiance which they owe to our Lord the King himself, for
the aid and salvation of themselves, and of all the Realm, that the said Lords
would counsel and show him their advice and wholesome counsel in this behalf
severally and entirely without dissimulation, or adulation, having regard to
the great mischiefs and necessity aforesaid. And thereupon our Lord the King
most graciously, with his own mouth in full Parliament, charged and commanded
as well the Lords, as the said Commons, that they should do their diligence,
and show unto him their good and wholesome Counsels in this behalf, for the aid
of him and all his Realm. And after the said Commons in the same Parliament,
made request to the said Lordt, that seeing the King had given them such a
charge and command, and that in so high a manner of Record, that they would do
their diligence, well and loyally to pursue the same without any courtesy made
between them in any manner, as they would answer before the most High, and
before our Lord the King, and to all the realm in time to come; and that the
Commons themselves thereupon would do the like on their party. Which if both
Lords and Commons would now cordially and sincerely promise and engage to do,
without self ends or in^ests, we might see our Church and Kingdom speedily
settled in a peaceable and happy condition. In brief, the Lords alone in the
very Writs for choosing Knights and Burgesses, are styled, See the Freeholders
Grand Inquest.
The Common Council of the Kingdom, and the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses are
called; to effect and assent to that which they and the King, by their common
advice, shall Ordain, and 5 Rich. 2. Parl. 2. n. 3. 6 R. 2. n. 8, 9, 11, 26.
and Parl. 2 R. 2. n. 7.9. they are called THE GREAT COUNCIL OF LORDS, by reason
of their extraordinary wisdom and abilities. And so are they expressly styled by
the whole House of Commons themselves in their first printed Remonstrance of
the State of the Kingdom, 15 December. 1641. Exact Collection, p. 13. Therefore
most fit to sit, counsel, advise vo^e, and judge in Parliament.

Secondly, The Lords and great Officers of the Realm, as such; were ever
reputed persons of greatest Valor, Courage. Power, (in regard of their great
interests, Estates, worth many whole Boroughs, of which diverse of them are sole
Lords, their allies, and retainers) and so best able to withstand, redress all
public grievances, exactions, encroachments of the King, his Officers, and
others upon their own and the peoples Liberties, Laws, Great Charters, in
defense whereof they have in ancient times been always most ready, active to
spend not only their estates, but blood and lives too, wherewith they have
redeemed, preserved those Laws, Liberties, Great Charters concerning their
Freedoms, we now enjoy and contend for. And in this regard our Ancestors in
point of wisdom, policy, reason right, thought meet, that ex congruo et
condigno, et Sir Edw^ Cooks 4 Instit. p. 1.
debito Justitiae, they should always be summoned to, and bear chief sway in
our Parliaments, in respect of their Peerage, Power, Nobility only, without the
peoples election. This reason of their sitting in Parliament, we find expressly
recorded in Bracton, l. 2. c. 16. fol. 34. and in Fleta, l. 1. c. 17. The King
(say they) has a Superior, namely, God; also the Law, b^ which he is made a
King; likewise his Court, to wit, THE EARLS and BARONS, because they are called
Counts, as being the KINGS FELLOWS, and he who has a Fellow, has A MASTER.
And therefore if the King shall be without a bridle, that is, without a Law;
debent ei fr^num imponere, THEY OUGHT TO IMPOSE A BRIDLE ON HIM, etc. which the
Commons being persons of less power and interest were unable to do. Andrew Horn
in his Mirror of Justice, chapter 1.. 2.3. renders the like reason. In all the
contests in Parliaments, and Wars between K. John, H^n. 3. Edw. 2. and Rich. 2.
concerning Magna Charta, the Charter of the Forest, the Liberties, Properties
of the Subjects, and opposition of unjust Taxes, Ayds, Exactions, the Lords and
Barons were the Ringleaders, the chief Opposers of these Kings Usurpations,
Exactions, and Encroachments on the Great Charters, Laws, Rights, Liberties of
the people, as all our See Mat. Paris, Mat. Westminster, Walsingham,
Huntingdon, Holinshed, Polychronicon, Caxton, Grimston, Stow, Speed, Trussel,
Baker, Martin, Daniel, How, and the Sovereign Power of Parliaments and
Kingdoms, part. 1, 2, and 3.10 R. 2. c. 1, 2. 11 R. 2. c. 1. to 7. 21 (...) 13.
1 H. 4. c. 2. for proof hereof.
Histories and Records relate; whence they style the Wars in their times, THE
BARONS WARS: and before this, the Nobles were the principal Actors in resisting
the Tyranny of K. Sigebert, and K. Bernard, and dethroning them for their
misdemeanors, as is clear by Mat. Westminster in his Flores Historiarum, An.
756. and 758. To give some pregnant Instances of this kind not vulgarly known
or taken notice of, to clear this truth beyond contradiction. Upon the death of
William Rufus, Mat. Paris. Historiar Angl. Tigur. 1588. p. 52, 53, 54.
An. 1100. Magnates, the Nobles of England not knowing what was become of
Robert Duke of Normandy, who had been 5. years absent in the holy Wars;
thereupon Henry his Brother, Congregato Londoniis Clero Angliae, and populo
universo, (to wit, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal expressed by these terms,
not the inferior Clergy, Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Commons of the
Realm, Mr. Tate, Mr. Ager, and others.
as some Antiquaries and others mistake, who derive their sitting in
Parliaments from the beginning of this Kings reign) promisit emendationem legum
quibus oppressa fuerat Anglia tempore Patris sui and Fratris nuper defuncti: ut
animos omnium in sui promotionem accenderet et amorem, et illum in Regem
susciperent et patronum. Ad haec CLERO respondente et MAGNATIBUS CUNCTIS (the
Clerus and populus there summoned) quod si animo volente ipsis vellet
concedere, et Charta sua communire illas Libertates et Consuetudines antiquas
quae floruerunt in Regno tempore Regis Edwardi, in ipsum consentirent, et in
Regem unanimiter consecrarent. Henrico autem libenter annuente, et se id
facturum cum juramento affirmante, consecratus est in Regem favente Clero et
populo, cui continuo a Mauritio Londonensi Episcopo, et a Thoma Eboracensi
Archiepiscopo corona capi^i imponitur. Cum fuerat diademate insignitus, has
Libertates subscriptas in regno, ad exaltationem sanctae Ecclesiae et pacem
populi, tenendas concessit. His Charter is recorded at large in Historia. Angl.
p. 53.
Matthew Paris, Chronicon col. 1201, 1202. See Holinshed, and Speed.
Bromton, and others. It begins thus, Henricus Dei Gra^ia, Rex Angliae, etc.
Sciatis, me Dei misericordia* and Communi Consilio Baronum Regni Angliae Regem
esse coronatum (which proves that the Clerus Angliae and Populus forementioned,
were only the Spiritual and Temporal Barons, not ordinary Clergy and Commons,
as contradistinguished from them) et quia regnum oppressum erat injustis
exactionibus, Ego respectu Dei et amore quam erga vos omnes habeo, sanctam Dei
Ecclesiam liberam facio, etc. et omnes malas consuetudines quibus Regnum
Angliae injuste opprimebatur, inde aufero: quis malas consuetudines in part
hic pono. Si quis Baronum meorum, Comitum, etc. or Legem.
Lagam Regis Edwardi vobis reddo cum illis emendationibus quibus Pater meus eam
emendavit Consilio Baronum suorum. This Charter was subscribed by all the
Bishops, Earls, Nobles and Barons of England; Et factae sunt tot Chartae quot
sunt Comitatus in Anglia, et Rege jubente positae in Abbatiis singulorum
Comitatuum ad monimentum. So Matthew Paris relates. De Gestis Regum, l. 5. p.
156.
William of Malmsbury records: In regem electus est, aliquantis tamen ante
controversiis INTER PROCERES agitatis, atque sopitis. Which done, aliquarum
moderationem legum revocavit in solidum, and Sacramento suo et OMNIUM PROCERUM,
ne luderentur, corroboravit. De Gestis Regum Angliae, col. 225, 226.
Simeon Dunelmensis records, that Consecrationis suae die Sanctam Dei Ecclesiam
liberam fecit, ac omnes malas consuetudines, et injustas exactiones quibus
regnum Angliae opprimebatur, abstulit, Legem Regis Edwardi omnibus in commune
reddidit, etc. MAJORES NATU ANGLIAE, and MAGNATES TERRAE CONGREGAVIT LONDONIAE.
The Col. 997.
Chronicle of Bromton, records the same in the self-same words: and so does
Henry Knyghton de Eventibus Angliae, l. 2. c. 8, 9. Polychron. l. 7. c. 12.
Roger de Hoveden, Annal. pars 1. p. 468. and that the Lords procured this
Charter.

King Richardus Prior Hagustaldensis de Gestis Regis Stephani, col. 314, 315.
Mat. Paris, p. 71. Roger de Hoveden. Annal. pars prior. p. 482. Hen. Huntindon,
Hist. l. 8. p. 386, 387. Fabian, Holinshed, Speed, Grafton, Anno 1136.
Polychronicon, l. 7. c. 18. Hen. de Knyghton, de Eventibus Angliae, l. 2. c. 9,
10.
Stephen being elected and crowned King a PRIMORIBUS REGNI; against his own and
their former Oaths, Omnes tam Praesules, quam Comites et Barons, qui filiae
Regis et suis haeredibus juraverant Fidelitatem, consensum Stephano praebentes:
In pursuance of his Coronation Oath Anno 1136. EPISCOPOS and PROCERES REGNI SUI
regali Edicto in unum convenire praecepit, cum quibus GENERALE CONCILIUM
CELEBRAVIT Oxoniis. Wherein he confirmed all their Laws and Liberties by a
special Charter: in which there are these Clauses among others. Sanctam
Ecclesiam liberam esse concedo, et debitam reverentiam illi conservo. Omnes
exactiones et injustitias et meschemingas, sive per Vicecomites, sive per alios
quoslibet male inductas, funditus extirpo. Bonas leges et antiquas et justas
consuetudines in hundris and placitis, et aliis causis observabo, et observari
praecipio et constituo. This Charter was subscribed by all the Bishops, Earls
and Barons, who procured it, in this Common Council at Oxford. Which they
promised inviolably to observe, and generaliter se servaturum juravit: sed
nihil horum quae Deo promiserat observavit, writes Matthew Paris: Henry
Huntindon, Holinshed, and others observe, that the Archbishops, Bishops and
Nobles, who contrary to their Oaths of Allegiance to Henry the 1. Mawde, and
their heirs, elected Stephen King, for this their detestable perjury, soon
after came to exemplary ends: especially Roger the great Bishop of Salisbury,
qui secundum illud Sacramentum praefatum fecerat, et omnibus aliis
praedicaverat; unde justo Deo judicio postea ab eodem (Stephano) quem creavit
in Regem, captus et excruciatus, miserandum sortitus est exterminium, et omnes
Magni qui Stephano juramentum fecerunt MISERVM SORTITI SUNT FINEM.

In the Mat. West. Mat. Paris, Hist Angl. p. 232. to 282: Daniel, p. 140. to
144. Speed, p. 558. to 567. Holinshed, Grafton, Fabian, and others.
16. and 17. years of K. John, An. Dom. 1214, 1215. The Prelates, Earls, Nobles,
and Barons, being assembled together in a great Parliamentary Council held at
Paul's and after at St. Edmunds, there was produced and read before them a
Charter of King Henry the 1. which the Barons received from Stephen Archbishop
of Canterbury; which Charter contained certain Laws and Liberties of King
Edward, granted to the holy Church and the great men of the Realm, with some
other Liberties which the said King had added thereunto of his own grant. Which
being read, thereupon the BARONS ALL swore in the Archbishops presenc, that if
need were, they would spend their blood in its defense. And afterward at St.
Edmonds Bury, the BARONS swore upon the High Altar, That if King John refused
to confirm and restore to them those Liberties and Rights of the kingdom; they
would make War upon Him, and withdraw themselves from his allegiance, till he
had ratified them all by his Charter under his Great Seal. Which they
accordingly performed. The King promising to confirm their Liberties and the
Charter of King Henry the 1. which the Barons publicly read in 3. of their
Great Parliamentary Councils) and yet de^aying the same; thereupon all the
Nobles and Barons assembled together at Stamford, with their horses, friends
and followers, amounting to many thousands, resolving to force the King to
grant and ratify the same. Whereupon the King sent the Archbishop of
Canterbury, William Marshal Earl of Pembroke, and other prudent men to the
Earls and Barons, to demand of them, Quae essent Leges and Libertates quas
quaer^bant? Who thereupon produced a schedule of them to the Messengers, quae
ex part maxima Leges antiquas and regni consuetudines continebat* Capitula
earum partim in Charta Regis Henrici 1. superius scripta sunt; partimque ex
Legibus Regis Edwardi antiquis excerpt^. The Barons affirming, quod nisi Rex
illas in continenti concederet, et Sigilli munimine confirmaret, ipsi per
captionem Castrorum suorum, terrarum and possessionum IPSUM REGEM COMPELLERENT,
donec super praemissis satisfaceret competenter. The Archbishop returning to
the King, and repeating the Articles and Liberties they demanded to him by
heart; when he understood their contents, with great indignation and scorn
answered: Et quare cum istis iniquis exactionibus BARONS non postulant regnum?
Vana sunt, iniquit, et superstitiosa quae petunt, nec aliquo rationis titulo
fulciuntur. Affirmavit tandem cum iuramento fu^ibundus, quod nunquam tales
illis concederet Libertates, unde ipse efficeretur servus. When the Archbishop
and William Marshal the Earl, could by no means induce the King to consent
thereto, they returned by his command to the Barons, relating all that the King
had said to them in order. Whereupon tota Angliae Nobilitas in unum collecta,
all the Nobles of England collected together into one body, constituted Robert
Fitzwalter General of their Militia, calling him, MARESCALLV MEXERCITVS DEI ET
ECCLESIAE SANCTAE; and flying to their arms, besieged several of the Kings
Castles. Who thereupon seeing himself generally deserted almost by all men, and
fearing the Barons would take his Castles without any resistance; though he
bare an inexorable hatred against the Barons in his heart: yet thinking to be
revenged of them singly afterward, when he could not do any thing against them
all being united, he sent Messengers to assure them; quod pro bono pacis, and
ad exaltationem Regni sui et honor^m Gratanter concederet Leges et Libertates
quas petebant; desiring them to appoint a fitting time and place for them to
meet and conferr together, and perform what they desired. Whereupon the King
and all the Nobles and Barons meeting together at a Conference in Running Mead,
he after many debates granted them the Laws and Liberties they desired,
confirming them by his Charters under his Great Seal: the Tenor whereof is at
large recorded in Matthew Paris, and in the Red Book of the Exchequer; being
almost the same in Terms, with Magna Charta, and Charta Forestae, afterward
granted and confirmed in 9 H. 3. printed in all our Statute Books, and so
needless to transcribe. These Charters being sealed and confirmed by the King,
he at the Barons request, sent Letters Patents through all the coasts of
England, firmly commanding all the Sheriffs of the whole Realm, that they
should cause all men of what condition soever within their Bayliwicks, to
swear, that they would observe the foresaid Laws and Liberties, and that to the
best of their power they would constrain the King himself, by the seizing of
his Castles, to perform all the things aforesaid, as they were contained in his
Charter. In mean time the King sent Letters to Pope Innocent, to vouchsafe to
confirm the Liberties and Charters he had granted, with his Bull. After which
for their more inviolable observation, it was concluded and enacted; That there
should be 25 BARONS chosen by the LORDS (not Commons) who should, to their
utmost power, cause the Great Charter confirmed by K. John, to be duly
observed; That if either the King, or His Justicier should transgress the same,
or offend in any one Article, 4 of the said Barons should immediately repair to
Him, and require redress of the same without delay; which if not done within
forty days after, that then the said 4 BARONS and the rest should distrain and
seize upon the Kings Castles, Lands and Goods, till amends was made according
to their arbitration.

Rot. Patent, Anno 17. Johannis Regis, in the Tower, m. 21, 22. n. 23. Dorso.
Writs were sent to all the Sherifs and Counties of England, to swear all the
people to those 25 Barons, to aid and assist them in the premises, under pain
of seizing their lands into the Kings hands, and confiscation of all their
goods to him, if they refused to take the Oath within 15 days. And the City
and Tower of London were put into the Barons hands, till the King had performed
his agreement with them: Such confidence and power was then reposed in the
BARONS alone.

In the Patent Roll of 16 Johannis Regis, pars 1. dors. 3^ I find this
memorable Grant to the Barons. well explaining the Statute of Magna Charta, c.
29, Sciatis quod concessimus BARONIBUS qui contra nos sunt, quod eos nec
homines suos capiemus, nec dissaiseamus, nec super eos per vim, vel per arma
ibimus, nisi per legem Regni nostri, vel judicio Parium suorum in curia nostra.
A very excellent Privilege, Law, Liberty, purchased by the Barons industry,
inserted into K. John's Great Charter, Mat. Paris, p. 247, 248. liber Rep. in
Scac. f. 234* 235*
soon after published, ratifying it in these terms. Comites and Barons non
amercientur nisi per Pares suos, and non nisi secundum modum delicti. Nullus
liber homo capiatur vel imprisonetur, vel dissaisietur de aliquo libero
tenemento suo, vel libertatibus, vel liberis consuetudinibus suis, aut
utlegetur aut exulet, aut aliquo alio modo destituatur, nec super eum ibimus,
nec eum in carcere mittemus, nisi per legale judicium Parium suorum, vel per
legem terrae, Nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, aut differemus Rectum vel
Justitiam.

The Barons having by their valor, magnanimity, industry, procured these Great
Charters of their liberties; and of the Forest, were as careful, vigilant to
preserve them, to punish the Violations of them, and to get them reconfirmed,
repromulged, when violated by our Kings, which I shall manifest by some Records
and Histories, not commonly known, or taken notice of.

Rot. Pat. 17 Johannis, pars 1. m. 19, 21, 22, 23, 24. Dorso, and Chart. 17.
Joh. Dors. 27. There are sundry Patents, Commissions, Writs, for sending the
Great Charter, and Charter of the Forest into every County, for enquiring of
all evil customs contrary to them, that they might be abolished, and all
violations of them, that they might be redressed; all by the Barons
procurement, and by agreement between the King and Barons, whose names are there
inserted.

Pat. 1 Hen. 3. m. 13. and 15 The Great Charter, by advice of the Earls and
Great men, is sent by King Henry the third into Ireland, the exemplification
whereof was sealed with the Po^es Legates Seal, as well as the Kings: and
precepts are the^e sent to Sherifs, to read it openly; it being thus styled in
these Records. Libertates (and Charta libertatum) Regni nostri Angliae, a patre
nostro and a nobis concessae. so Claus. 12 H. ^3. pars 1. m. 17. There is
another precept for publishing and observing the Great Charter in Ireland.

Rot. Claus. 2 H. 3. m. 6. and 11. Dorso. The Great Charter, by special writs,
is commanded to be duly kept, read, and observed in most Counties, and sent
down into Yorkshire for that end, by the Barons advice and procurement.

Pat. An. 3. H. 3. pars 2. m. 3. There is mention of Charta nostra de
Libertatibus Forestae concessis probis nostris hominibus de Anglia. By the
Barons means, and order for its observation.

Anno Dom. 1223. The 7th. of Henry the 3 his reign, Mat. Paris, p. 305. Mat.
Westminster. An. 1223. p. 113. See Daniel, Holinshed, Speed, Grafton.
This King in the Octaves of Epiphany, apud Loudonias veniens cum Baronibus ad
colloquium, requisitus est ab Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, and Magnatibus aliis,
ut libertares, and liberas consuetudines pro quibus guerra mota fuit contra
patrem suum, confirmaret. Et sicut Archiepiscopus ostendit evidenter, idem Rex
diffugere non potuit, quin hoc faceret, cum in recessu Ludovici ab Anglia
juraverat, and tota Nobilitas Angliae cum illo, quod libertates praescriptas
omnes observarent, and ab omnibus traderent observandas. Quod audiens Gulielmus
de Briwere, qui unus erat ex Consiliariis Regis, pro Rege respondens, dixit:
Libertates, quas petitis, quia violenter extortae fuerunt, non debent de jure
observari. Quod verbum Archiepiscopus moleste ferens, increpavit eum, dicens*
Gulielme, si Regem in veritate deligeres, pacem regni non impedires. Videns
autem Rex Archiepiscopum in ira commotum, dixit, Omnes libertates illas
juravimus, and omnes astricti sumus, ut quod juravimus observemus. Et Rex
protinus habito super hoc consilio, misit literas suas ad singulos Vicecomites
Regni, ut per milites duodecim, vel legales homines, uniuscujuscunque
Comitatus, per sacramentum facerent inquiri, quae fuerunt libertates in Anglia,
tempore Regis Henrici avi sui, and facta inquisitione, Londonias mitterent ad
Regem in quindecim diebus post Pascham. These Writs and Letters of the King are
recorded in the Tower* Rot. Claus, 7. Hen. 3. part 2. m. 20. dorso. Commanding
the liberties found and returned, to be proclaimed and observed: But it seems
by Dors. 14. there was a countermand, neither to proclaim nor observe them:
Whereupon Mat. Paris, p. 305, 306. Mat. West. p. 114.
the King soon after sending the Archbishop with three other Bishops into
France to King Lewis, to render Normandy, with other lands, unto King Henry,
according to his Oath made to him in his recess from England, with the consent
of all the Barons: King Lewis thereunto replied, that King Henry had first
broken his Oath to him in this particular amongst others, De Libertatibus autem
regni Angliae, de quibus guerra mota fuerat, quae in recessu suo concessae
erant, and AB OMNIBUS JURATAE, ita actum est, quod non solum illae leges
pessimae ad statum pristinum sunt reductae, fed and illis nequiores per totam
Angliam sunt generaliter constitutae: nec etiam Ecclesiae sanctae Libertates,
quas in Coronatione sua inviolabiliter se juravit conservaturum conservat. Unde
qui prius pactum violavit, primus and injuriosus existit, non ego. Quod audiens
Archiepiscopus, and Episcopi qui cum eo erant, cum aliud responsum habere
nequiverant, confusi ad propria sunt reversi, Regi Angliae quae audierant
referentes.

Mat. Paris, p. 308. Mat. West. p. 117.
In the 8 year of King Henry the 3. the King by reason of the insurrection of
the Earl of Chester, and others, and the French Kings taking of Rochel from
him, Convenerunt ad Colloquium apud Northamptonam Rex cum Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis, Comitibus, Baronibus, and aliis multis de regni negotiis tractaturi,
etc. Wherein, Regi pro maximis laboribus suis and expensis, tam a Praelatis
quam a Laicis, concessum est Carucagium per totam Angliam de qualiter caruca
duo solidi argenti. Whereupon the King by the Barons and Nobles consent and
advice; as appears by Rot. Pat. 8. H. 3. pars 3. Dors. 14, 15. Sent Writs to
sundry Sherifs, and to the Bishop of Durham and his Chancellor, to proclaim and
observe the Great Charter of Liberties, and the Charter of the Forest.

Mat. Paris p. 311. Mat. West. p. 118.
In the 9 year of King Henry the 3. the King holding a Parliamentary Council at
Westminster, demanded advice, and also a fiftenth part of all the movables of
the Clergy and Laity through England, for the recovery of the ancient dignity,
rights and possessions of the Crown, then lost, and seized on by the French
King. Whereupon, Archiepiscopus, and Concio tota Episcoporum, Comitum and
Baronum, Abbatum and Priorum, habita deliberatione, Regi dedere responsum: quod
Regis petitionibus gratanter acquiscerent, si illis diu petitas libertates
concedere voluisset. Annuit itaque Rex cupiditate ductus, quod petebant
Magnates, Cartisque protinus conscriptis, and Regis sigillo munitis ad singulos
Angliae Comitatus Cartae singulae dirig^ntur, and ad Provincias illas quae in
Forestis sunt constitutae, duae cartae sunt directae, una scilicet de
libertatibus communibus, and alter de libertatibus Forestae, etc. Et sic soluto
Concilio delatae sunt cartae singulae ad singulos Comitatus, ubi ex Regis
mandato, literatorio interposito juramento, ab omnibus observari jubentur:
Ricardo fratre Domini Regis milite libertates generales, tam Forestarum, quam
aliarum libertatum, pro quibus tantum cum Rege Joh. decertatum fuit, licet nil
stabile vel solidum, vel pollicitae redderetur vel observaretur (as now in this
age) SUNT DECEPTORIAE ACCLAMATAE. These Charters are printed in all our
Statute-Books, varying from those ^f King John in some particulars.

Rot. Clause, An. 18 H. 3. m. 10. The King in a Writ to the Sherif of Lincoln
recites, that his Bailifs knew not how to levy their Hundred Courts in his
County, postquam concessimus omnibus Regni nostri libertates contentas in
Cartis nostris, quas inde fecimus, dum fuimus infra aetatem. Nos eandem cartam
nuper legi fecimus in praesentia Domini Cantuariensis, and Majoris, and
sanioris partis OMNIUM EPISCOPORUM, COMITUM ET BARONUM TOTIUS REGNI NOSTRI. To
the end that they might expound and resolve the 35 Chapter thereof, how the
County Courts and Sherifs Turns should be kept, which is fully explained and
resolved in this Record by their advice.

Rot. Claus. 20. H. 3. m. 11.15, 16. There are sundry Writs for reading and
observing the great Charter in Westmerland, and other Counties, upon the Barons
mo^ions, who were careful of its inviolable observation.

In the year 1231. Mat. Paris p. 354, 355.
on the 7 of Feb. Convenerunt ad Colloquium apud Westmonasterium Rex cum
PRAELATIS ET ALIIS MAGNATIBUS REGNI; ubi exegit Rex Scutagium de quolibet Scuto
tres Marcas, ab omnibus qui Baronias tenebant, tam Laicis quam Praelatis. Cui
Ricardus Cantuariensis, and quidam Episcopi cum eo audacter resistentes,
dixerunt; quod non tenentur viri ecclesiastici judicio subjici Laicorum, cum
absque illis concestum fuit scutagium in partibus transmarinis. Tandem vero
post multas tunc inde desceptiones negotium quantum ad Praelatos reclamantes
pertinebat, ad 15 dies post Pascha dilationem accepit. Anno 1232. Mat. Paris,
p. 359. Mat. Westminster. p. 133.
Convenerunt Nonas Martii ad Colloquium apud Westmonasterium, ad vocationem
Regis MAGNATES ANGLIAE, tam Laici quam Praelati: quibus Rex proposuit, quod
magnis esset debitis implicatus, causa bellicae expeditionis, quam nuper egerat
in partibus transmarinis, unde NECESSITATE COMPULSUS, ab omnibus generaliter
auxilium postulavit. Quo audito, Comes Cestriae Ranulphus, pro Magnatibus Regni
loquens, respondit: Quod Comites, Barons, (...) Milites, qui de eo tenebant in
capite, cum ipso erant ibi cotporaliter praesentes, and pecuniam suam ita
inaniter effuderunt, quod inde omnes pauperes recesserunt: unde Regi DE JURE
AUXILIUM NON DEBEBANT. Et sic petita licentia, Laici omnes recesserunt.
Praelati vero Regi respondentes dixerunt, quod Episcopi multi and Abbates qui
vocati erant non fuerunt praesentes, and sic petierunt inducias, quousque AD
DIEM CERTUM POSSENT OMNES PARITER CONVENIRE. Praefixa est itaque dies, a
quindecim diebus post Pascha, ut omnibus congregatis tunc fieret quod esset de
jure faciendum. Both Lords and Prelates denying the Aid demanded against right,
or to do ought when their House was not full, and many Prelates and Members
absent.

Mat. Paris, p. 420, 421.430. Mat. Westminster. p. 143, 144.
Anno 1237. the 21 of Henry the 3. the King immediately after the Feast of the
Nativity, Misit per omnes fines Angliae scripta Regalia, praecipiens omnibus ad
Regnum Angliae spectantibus, viz. Archiepiscopis, Espiscopis, Abbatibus et
Prioribus installatis, Comitibus and Baronibus, (without any Knights, Citizens
or Burgesses, not here mentioned) ut OMNES sine omissione in octavis Epiphaniae
Londoniis convenirent, Regia negotia tractaturi totum Regnum contingentia. Quod
audientes Magnates, regiis praeceptis continuo paruerunt, credentes se vel
Imperialia vel alia ardua negotia provisuros. Venit igitur die Sancti Hillarii
Londonias INFINITA NOBILIUM MULTITUDO, scilicet, Regni totalis Universitas.
When they were all assembled and sat in the Kings palace at Westminster,
William Kaele, in the Kings name and behalf, demanded an aid of money of them
to supply his wants, to be put into the hands of such Treasurers as they should
appoint, to be disbursed only upon the necessary affairs of the Realm: which
Speech they hearing, expecting no such thing, were much offended, and murmuring
at it, Indignantes responderunt, (and have we not much more cause to do and
say so now?) se undique and saepe, nunc vicesima, nunc tricesima, nunc
quinquagesima gravari promittendo et persolvendo: Asserentes, indignum nimis
fore and injuriosum, permittere Regem etc. ut a naturalibus hominibus suis,
quasi a servis ultimae conditionis, in detrimentum eorum, et alienorum juvamen,
tantam pecuniam, tot toties, extorqueret argumentis. Quod saepius gravati,
videbant alienigenos suis bonis saginati statumque regni prae paupertate
vacillare, et multiplex periculum imminere. Comes vero Cornubiae Richardus,
frater Regis, primus movit quaestionum adversus Regem, increpans eum acritor
super tanta Regni per eum nata desolatione: Et quod de die in diem adiuventis
novis causis cavillatoriis, Nobiles ac naturales Barons suos, suis bonis
spoliavit et quaecunque poterit obradere, inconsulte hostibus Regni distribuit,
ipsi Regi and regno insidiantibus. Quod ipse infinitos proventus et
innumerabilem pecuniam in suo tempore colligerat, nec erat in Anglia
Archiepiscopatus vel Episcopatus praeter Eboracensem, Bathoniensem et
Wintoniensem, qui non vacaverit suo tempore. Similiter intulit de Abbatibus et
Comitatibus et Baroniis Custodiis and aliis esca^tis: nec tamen thesaurus
regius, qui deberet esse Regni robur et confidentia senserat incrementum. Quod
cum Rex audisset, cupiens murmur hoc sedare generale, pollicebatur sub
jurejurando, se nunquam amplius Nobiles regni injurando lacessere, vel
molestare, dummodo sibi ad praesens tricesima pars mobilium Angliae benign
concessa, solveretur, etc. Rex vero suorum cupiens Baronum sibi gratiam
conciliare, se ex tunc et deinceps, quicquid factum fuerat antea, dedit se
consiliis fidelium ac naturalium hominum suorum. Praeterea, de hoc quod
dicebatur, quod conabatur ea quae concesserat et Chartis confirmaverat, per
autenticum summi Pontificis infirmare: dicebat Rex, hoc falsum esse, Et si tale
quod forte fuerat suggestum, in irritum affirmavit, seque talia penitus
revocare. Praeterea, sereno vultu, and spontanea promisit voluntate, libertates
Magnae Chartae suis fidelibus Regni sui ex tunc inviolabiliter observare. Et
quia videbatur non penitus immunis a sententia quam tulerat Arehiepiscopus
Stephanus, cum omnibus Episcopis Angliae in omnes violatores praedictae
CHARTAE, quam malo consilio fretus, in part laeserat; fecit in publico
innovare sententiam praetaxatam, in omnes ejusdem Chartae contradictores: Sic,
ut si ille, per aliquem conceptum rancorem forte eam non observaret, in latam
sententiam gravius recidivaret. Unde factum est, ut omnium corda haec
audientium sibi mirabiliter in verbo illo conciliavit. Whereupon, post multas
desceptationes, quia se Rex humilians promisit indubitanter, se eorum ex tunc
et deinceps standum consiliis, they granted him a 30th part of their movables
upon certain limitations and conditions, to be put into such persons hands, and
disbursed only as they there prescribed; which yet were not observed.

Mat: Paris, p. 505.506. Mat. Westminster. An. 1240.
In the 24. year of Henry the 3d. in the Octaves of Epiphany, the Archbishops
and Bishops, cum multis aliis Magnatibus, assembled at London, the Popes Legate
being also present, reponentes querimoniam coram Rege and Curia sua, super
variis injuriis et oppressionibus, et quotidianis desolationibus illaris
Ecclesiae per iniquum Regis consilium, contra suas Chartas and Iuramenta temere
veniendo, etc. Super quibus injuriis illatis, et diatim multiplicatis, omnes se
asserunt vehementer admirari, cum ipse Rex toties juraverit, se jura
ecclesiastica illibata conservare, ipsomet audiente and candelam tenente, quod
omnes Episcopi in violatores libertatum Ecclesiasticorum, simul sententiam
fulminabant; in cujus sententiae consummatione, Rex, ut alii, suam candelam
extinxit inclinando. Et erant contra Regem in querimoniis Episcoporum capitula
circiter 30. Et eatenus processum est, quod lata sit iterum sententia
terribiliter nimis in omnes Regis consiliarios, qui ejus animum ad praedicta
enormia conabantur inclinare.

Mat. Paris, p. 561, 562, 563. Matthew. Westminster. p. 165.
Anno 1242. the 26 of King Henry the 3d. Totius Angliae Nobilitas tam
Praelatorum quam Comitum and Baronum secundum Regium praeceptum, est Londini
congregatum: Et quia audiverant* quod Rex eos tam instanter convocaverat, et
toties eo modo cavillatorie fatigavera^, conjurando, et sub poena anathematis
firmiter inter se statuerunt, ne aliquis in concilio extorsioni pecuniari Regi
faciendae aliquo modo consentiret, etc. Igitur regi cordis sui propositum
irrevocabile in propatulo exponenti de transitu suo, et vocatione Comitis de
Marchia, et argumentose auxilium pecuniare postulanti; responderunt MAGNATES
cum magna cordis amaritudine; quod talia conceperat inconsultus, et talia
effrons impudenter postularat, exagitans et depauperans fideles suos tam
frequenter, trahens exactiones in consequentiam quasi a servis ultimae
conditionis, et tantam pecuniam tories extorsit inutiliter dispergendam.
Contradixerunt igitur Regi in faciem, nolentes amplius sic pecunia sua
frustratorie spoliari, Rex igitur, Romanorum usus versutis fallaciis, jussit ut
in crastino expectarent, voluntatem suam super hoc et aliis audituri. Et in
crastino, vocavit in secretam cameram suam singulatim, nunc hunc, nunc illum,
more Sacerdotis poenitentes vocantis ad consessionem. Et sic, quos non potuit
universos, singulos singulatim enervatos suis sermocinationibus conabatur
astutius enervare: petensque ab eis auxilium pecuniare, ait: Ecce, quid
concessit ille Abbas mihi in subsidium: ecce quid alius, and protendens
rotulum, in quo scriptum monstravit, quid ille vel Abbas vel Prior, tantum vel
tantum promisit se daturum: cum tamen nullus eorum assensum praebuisset, vel ad
notitiam cordis, devenisset: Talibus igitur falsis exemplaribus, and verborum
retiaculis, quamplurimos Rex cautius intricavit. Multi tamen steterunt, nullo
modo volentes recedere a communi responsione prout conjuraverant. Quibus Rex in
ira respondet, Erone perjurus? Juravi Sacramento intransgressibili, quod
transfretans jura mea in brachio extento a Rege Francorum reposcam, quod sine
copioso thesauro, qui a vestra liberalitate procedere habet, nequaquam valeo.
Nec tamen his vel aliis verbis potuit aliquos muscipelare, quamvis, ut
praedictum est, seorstm quemlibet per se conveniendum vocavit.

Iterum, autem vocavit aliquot simul sibi familiariores, and affatus eos, ait:
Quid perniciosum exemplum aliis praebetis? Vos qui Comites et Barons et
strenui Milites estis, non deberetis, et si alii timeant, scilicet Praelati
ecclesiae, trepidare, Avidiores caeteris esse deberetis Jura Regni reposcere,
et contra injuriantes Martia certamina potenter experiri. Nostram partem
solidare et consolari tenetur jus nostrum quod habemus, Magnatum vocatio cum
certa promissione, exemplum de Wallia, quod solet praeterita futuris prospere
continuare, ubi nuper foeliciter triumphavimus. Et qua front poteritis me
Dominum vestrum, ad tam arduum negotium Reipublicae procinctum, relinquere
pauperem and desolatum, cum tenear promissa de transitu meo adimplere,
jurejurando strictius obligatus? Et cum ad notitiam Universitatis perveniret,
responderunt: Supra id quod dici potest admiramur, in qua abyssum submersae
sunt innumerabiles pecuniae, quas a diversis Magnatum custodiis, variis
escaetis, crebris extorsionibus, tam ab Ecclesiiis pastore viduatis, quam
Nobilium terris, praeconsis donativis, stuporem in cordibus audientium
generantibus, Domine Rex emunxisti, quae nunquam regno vel modicum contulerunt
incrementum. Praeterea, nuper Legatos quosdam, vel Legatorum fungentes
officiis, in hoc Regnum advocasti, qui quasi racemos post vindemiantea sibi
reliquias residuae pecuniae colligerunt. Caeterum, nimis admirantur MAGNATES
ANGLIAE UNIVERSI, quod sine eorum consilio and assensu eam arduum tam
periculosum negotium es aggressus, fidem adhibens fidem carentibus. Spretoque
naturalium tuorum favore, exponis te tam ancipitis fortunae casibus. Treugarum
foedus, inter Regem Francorum and tu in anima tua captarum et juratarum,
indissolubiliter et inviolabiliter usque ad terminum observandarum, quem ex
part tua praefixerant praeclari viri Comes Richardus frater tuus, and Comes R.
Bigod, inhoneste and impudenter, non sine periculo animae tuae, and famae
laesione disrumpis. Adhibuistis praesentiam tui corporis notabilibus ipsis
Magnatibus ultra Marinis, contra dominum suum, Regem videlicet Francorum,
calcaneum levantibus eo ipso nulla fides est adhibenda, u^pote de multiplici
proditione notabilibus. His Rex auditis, in iram excanduit vehementem, jurans
cum Sanctorum artestatione, quod nullo revocaretur terrore, nullis verborum
ambagibus circumventus, ab incoepto proposito retardaretur, quin in octavis
Paschae naves ascendens, fortunam belli in partibus transmarinis contra Francos
imperterritus experiretur. Et sic solutum est concilium, utrobique reposita,
vel occulta mentis indignatione.

Postea vero, ne oblivio tenorem responsionis Baronum deleret, in scriptum
taliter haec redacta. Cum dominus Eboracensis Archiepiscopus, et omnes Episcopi
Angliae, Abbates and Priores per se, vel per Procuratores suos, necnon and
OMNES COMITES, and fere OMNES BARONS ANGLIAE, ad mandatum domini Regis
convenissent apud Westmonasterium die Martis proxima ante Purificationem beatae
Mariae, Anno Dom. 1242. Regni Henrici 3. Regis 26. audituri Domini Regis
voluntatem et negocium, pro quo ipsos mandaverat. Et idem Dominus, Rex
transmittens ad eosdem dictum dominum Eboracensem, et nobilem virum dominum
Comitem Richarduum, et dominum W. de Eboraco, Praepositum de Beverlaco, super
voluntate Domini regis in negociis suis, scilicet eisdem expositis per eosdem
solennes nuncios; omnes Magnates de regno suo rogasset de consilio ei dando, et
auxilio faciendo, ad haereditatem suam and jura sua perquirenda, in partibus
transmirinis, quae spectabant ad Regnum suum Angliae: tandem, dicti Episcopi,
Abbates and Priores, Comites and Barons, magno inter eos tractatu praehabito,
inprimis Domino Regi per praedictos Magnates dederunt consilium, videlicet.
Quod Dominus ipse Rex expectaret finem Treugarum inter eum et Regem Franciae
initarum. Et si forte idem Rex Franciae contra formam earundem treugarum
aliquas fecisset interprisas, tunc dictus Rex Angliae mitteret ad eum solennes
nuncios, ad rogandum, monendum et inducendum ipsum Regem Franciae, ut treugas
initas teneret, et interprisas emendaret, si quae per ipsum, vel per suos
factae essent. Quod si Rex Franciae, facere contradiceret, libenter ad hoc
consilium apponerent, pro posse suo de auxiliis ei dando. Omnes ita unanimiter
responderunt. Similiter, postquam fuerat Dominus eorum, multo^ies ad instantiam
suam ei auxilium dederunt, Videlicet, tertiam decimam mobilium suorum, et
postea quintam decimam, et sextam decimam, et quadragesimam, Carucagium,
Hydagium et plura Scutagia, et postea unum magnum Scutagium ad sororem suam
Imperatricem maritandam. Postea vero nondum quatuor annis elapsis, petit ab eis
iterum auxilium, et tandem cum magna precum instantia obtinuit tricessimam,
quam ei concesserunt, tali scilicet condition, quodilla exactio, vel aliae
precedentes, amplius non traherentur in consequentiam. Et inde fecit eis
Chartam suam. Et praeterea concessi^ eis tun* Quod omnes Libertates contentae
in Magna Charta, ex tunc in antea before tenerentur per totum regnum suum and
inde fecit eis quandam parvam Chartam suam, quam adhunc habent, in qua eaedem
continentur. Praeterea Dominus Rex concessit eis de voluntate sua, et de
consilio torius Barnagii sui, quod tota p^cunia ex dicta tricesima proveniens,
salva deponeretur in Castris Domini Regis sub Custodia quatuor Magnatum
Angliae, scilicet Comitis Warranniae* et aliorum, per quorum visum et consilium
pecunia illa expenderetur ad dicti Regis and Regni utilitatem, cum necesse
esset. Et quia Barnagium nescit, nec aud^ it quod de dicta pecunia per visum
vel consilium alicujus quatuor Magnatum praedictorum aliquid expendatur,
credunt firmiter, and been intelligunt, quod Dominus Rex adhuc totam habet
illam pecuniam integram, de qua nunc potest magnum habere auxilium. Praeteria
been sciunt, quod post tempus illud tot habuit escaetas, scilicet
Archiepiscopatum Cantuariensem, and plures Episcopatus Angliae ditiores, and
terras Comitum and Baronum, and militium de eo tenentium defunctorum, quod
solummodo de illis escaetis debet ipse habere grandem pecuniae summam, si been
custodiatur. Praeterea a tempore dictae tricessimae datae non cessaverant
Justitiarii itinerantes, itinerare per omnes parts Angliae, tam de placitis
forestae, quam de omnibus aliis placitis, ita quod omnes Comitatus Angliae, and
omnia Hundreda, Civitates and Burgi, and fere omnes villae graviter
amerciantur. Unde solummodo de illo itinere, habet Dominus Rex, vel habere
debuit, maximam summam pecuniae, si persolvatur, and been colligatur. Unde been
dicunt, quod per illa amerciamenta, and per alia auxilia prius data, omnes de
Regno ita gravan^ur and depauperantur, quod parum aut nihil habent in bonis,
(and may not we now more truly say so, after so many years uncessant importable
Taxes, Excizes, Impositions, Contributions, Exactions of all kinds, without any
interruption, in far greater proportions than these amount to, and all
sequestrations, sales of Delinquents, and others estates, not known in that
age) Et quia Dominus Rex, nunquam post tricessimam datam (nor our present
Rulers after all their Protestations, Declarations, Remonstrances, Votes,
Leagues and Covenants to preserve our Laws, Liberties, Properties, Great
Charters, and the Petition of Right, and all our contributions, Excises, Loans
or public faith, etc.) Cartam suam de libertatibus tenuit, imo plus solito
postea gravavit (as now) and per aliam Cartam eis concer^am, quod Exactiones
hujusmodi non traherentur in consequentiam; responderunt eidem Domino Regi
praecise. Quod nullum ad praesens ei facerent auxilium. A fit answer for all
our Nobles and Commons in this age, "after so many years Taxes, Imposts,
Excises, far heavier than any complained of in that age. Veruntamen quia
Dominus eorum est, sic se gerere poterit erga eos usque ad finem dictarum
treugarum, quod tunc bonum apponent consilium pro posse suo. Et cum dicti
Magnates Nuncii, ipso Domino Regi nunciassent Responsum, redeuntes ad
Barnagium, dixerunt, quod in part sufficiens Domino Regi dederunt responsum.

I have transcribed these memorable passages of this Parliament out of Matthew
Paris thus largely in his own words, for sundry reasons pertinent to my Theme.

1. To prove, that the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Peers, Earls, Barons
Lords, were the only Members of this, all the former, and most other succeeding
Parliaments in Henry the 3 his reign, this Historian, (who is most exact)
making mention of them only, both in the summons to their debates in
Parliament, and this their Remonstrance in Parliament, even in this case of
ayds demanded, and not of any Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses elected by the
people, of which there is not one syllable.

2. To manifest, that the Earls, Lords, and Barons of the Realm, have most
unanimously, resolutely, magnanimously opposed our Kings in Parliaments in
their unjust designs, and in Ayds, Taxes demanded, and earnestly begged,
importuned from them without any effect, resisting our Kings therein to their
faces, and withstanding all their wiles, policies, King-crafts, and private
solicitations persuasions to enervate their resolutions, and lay unnecessary
burdens on the people, which some other subsequent Presidents will further
ratify.

3. That they were the Granters of all public Ayds to the King, which they
granted very rarely, and that upon extraordinary pressing occasions, especially
in case of foreign wars, though to recover the ancient Rights and Dominions of
the Crown, and that in very small moderate proportions, with special provisoes,
how they should be employed, and that they should not be hereafter drawn into
consequence, which other Presidents will further evidence.

4. That they were very vigilant, active, zealous in complaning against,
examining all violations of the Great Charters of their liberties by the King
and his Officers: and reconfirming them by new promulgations, Oaths
proclamations, excommunications, refusing to grant any Ayds till this were
effectually done, or promised by our Kings: which the subsequent examples will
further clear.

5. That no wars ought to be made nor truces violated but by their Council and
advice: and that they deemed Truces sworn even to forain Enemies most sacred,
indissoluble, inviolable, and the violation of them most dishonest, impudent,
perilous to souls, and hurtful to the reputation even of Kings themselves:
much more then must Oaths, Leagues, and solemn sworn Covenants of Subjects to
their natural Kings, and Kings to their Subjects be inviolable, indissoluble,
and the violation of them most dishonest, shameful, perfidious, perilous,
hurtful to men's Souls and reputations; and that no faith or trust is to be
given to perfidious Traitors, Nobles, against their natural King.

Anno Dom. 1238. King Henry being wholly counseled by Foreiners, marying the
Nobles of the Realm to them, neglecting his natural subjects, and misgoverning
the Realm; thereupon Earl Richard his Brother, and the rest of the Nobles
publicly reprehended and opposed him. Which Mat. Paris thus relates.

Comes Richardus cum hoc audisset matrimonium clandestinum, eo scilicet
nesciente, Mat. Paris, p. 451.
vel assensu Magnatum terrae non interveniente, firmatum fuisse, nimia ira
succensus merito, praesertim cum Rex saepius perjurasset, si se nil arduum
facturum, nisi de consilio naturalium hominum suorum, and praecipueipsius.
Insurgens igitur Regem aggreditur verbis commonitoriis, et comminatoriis,
gravem movens adversus Regem quaestionem et calumniam, eo quod utens consiliis
alienigenarum quos amovere penitus perjuraverat, etiam ardua negotiae regni
perperam tractaverat, et Simonem de Monte forti, et I. Comitem Lincolniensem
aliis a latere suo amotis, non tantum audierat, sed contra nobilium
conniventiam matrimonia subdola procuraverant. Simon, ut praedictum est,
illicite inter eum et Comitissam Pembreciae sororem suam, et Johannes Comes
Lincolniensis inter filium Comitis Boloniae, scilicet Richardum de Clare, et
filiam ejusdem Comttis I. Rege subducto procuraverant. Insurgenti autem illi
Comiti Richardo, adduntur Comes Gilbertus Marescallus, et omnes Comites et
Barons Angliae, cum civibus et populo generaliter. Et sperabatur certissime
tunc quod ipse Comes Richardus esset et liberaturus terram, tam a Romanorum
quam aliorum alienigenarum misera qua premebatur, servitute, et omnes a puero
usque ad hominem senem crebras in ipsum benedictiones congesserunt, nec adhesit
aliquis Regi, nisi solus Comes Canciae H. de quo non timebatur, quod ideo quid
sinistri possit evenire, tum quia se juraverat nunquam arma gestaturum, tum
propter discretionem suam, multis experimentis examinatam. Quod comperiens Rex
animo et vultu nimis consternatus, Nobilium terrae singulos per nuncios suos
interogavit diligenter, sciscitando, si in hunc vel illum in hac jam exorta
tempestate possit de adjutorio confidere? Cui responderunt universi, praecipue
Cives Londinenses, asserendo universaliter quod honor suo, et commodo Regni
procuratum est circumspecte, quod incipiebatur ab ipso Comite R. licet ipse Rex
salubri consilio ejus non acquiesceret, unde incoepta nullo modo impedirent.
Haec comperiens Legatus, summam adhibuit, imminere videns pericula diligentiam,
ut Regem suis naturalibus hominibus reconciliaret, secreto admonens Comitem R.
and replicans, quod ipse qui capitaneus hujus impetus factus est. Deinceps ab
incoepto desisteret, promittens regem ei ampliores possessiones collaturam, et
Dominum Papam collatas confirmaturum; addens quod si omnes terrae in regem
insurgerent, ipse, qui frater ejus cum eo contra omnes stare haberet
indefessus. Ad quod respondit Comes R. Domine Legatae, de terris laicorum et
earum confirmationibus nil ad vos derebus autem Ecclesiasticis curam geratis.
Nec miremini, si status Regni moveat me, cum sim haeres solus apparens. Rex
enim cum fere omnium Episcopatuum terrae, et multarum escaetarum custodias
habuit, nullum tamen thesaurus ejus sentit ad Regni tuitiones incrementum, cum
tamen undique variis vallemur i^imicis. Praeterea admirantur nonnulli, quod Rex
qui maxim auxilio et discretione indiget, discretorum vestigia non sectatur.
Non Imperatoris, cui sororem nostram, cum magna pecunia dedimus, sperantes id
nobis profuturum, qui sola sua conjuge retenta, duces illius nobis remisit,
nulli little terras vel thesaurum conferens, cum tamen abundaret locuples and
opulentus. De Rege autem Francorum simile potest exemplum recitari, cui soror
Reginae nostrae matrimonio primogenita copulatur. Rex autem noster Angliae e
converso omnes uxoris suae affines, et consanguineos, terris, possessionibus et
thesauris saginavit, et sic se maritavit, ut ne thesauro plus ditaretur, imo
potius pr^^aretur, ne militari auxilio, si opus emerge et, roboraretur.
Praeterea, redditus et beneficia Ecclesiastica, a piis prdecessoribus nostris
nostris collata, precipue quae contulerunt antecessores nostri viris
religiosis; permittit, quasi spolia di^ipi, et alienigenis, cum abundet ipsa
terra viris idoneis distribui, et fit Anglia quasi Vinia sine maceria, quam
vindemiant omnes qui praetergrediuntur viam.

Cum autem audisset Legatus hos sermones, Regem adiit, una cum Episcopo
Wintoniensi P. monens et muniens, ut se ex tunc voluntati suorum, just in eum
insurgentium subderet, et obtemperaret, nunc minis, nunc monitis, nunc precibus
eundem reformantes. Rex videns impetus suos favoribus caruisse, et omnes fatri
suo Comiti R. in^linantes, quaesivit quae potuit diverticula, inducias
deliberandi postulando, ut competentius responderet. Indueiae igitur ad
instantiam petentium concessae sunt Regi, licet cum difficultate, usque in
crastinum Dominicae primae quadragessimae.

Convenerunt igitur Magnates die statuto Londini, super his diligenter
tractaturi. Et venerunt multi aequis et armis communiti, ut si Rex circumventus
per levitatem recalcitraret ad praemissa complenda cogeretur. Ibi igitur post
multas multorum deceptationes, se subjecit Rex quorundam provisioni de
gravioribus viris, jurans se eorum provisionis adquiescere. Quod et factum est,
et in scripta redactum, et appensa sunt tam Legati quam aliorum Magnatum
Sigilla, omnibus in communi manifestanda.

So in the Parliament held by King Henry, Anno 1242, and 1248. The Archbishops,
Bishops, Priors, Earls, Barons and Gentlemen assembled to it, in like manner
boldly and jointly reprehended the King for favoring Aliens, wasting his money
upon them, following their advice, and oppressing, neglecting, impoverishing,
exhausting, his Natural Subjects, as you may read at large in Mat. Paris, p.
560, 561, 562, 719. overlarge to transcribe. Mat. Paris p. 567,
The same year the king rashly commanded that Will. de Ros, (who deserted him in
his wars in France, out of mere want of moneys, offering to pawn his lands to
the King, if he would supply his necessities, which he refused to do) de
terris fuis licet sine judicio parium suorum disseiseretur. Quod videbatur
cunctis INJUSTUM ET TYRANNUM. Whereupon he was sharply reprehended by his
Brother Earl Richard; who with other Nobles left him in discontent upon this
occasion, and returned into England.

Mat^ Paris, p. 619, 620, 621, 624.
King Henry the 3. Anno 1244. the 28 year of his reign, summoned a Parliament
of the Nobles at London, thus recorded by Matthew Paris. Convenerunt Regia
submonitione convocati Londinum MAGNATES TOTIUS REGNI, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi,
Abbates, Priores, Comites and Barons: in quo Concilio petiit Rex ore proprio,
in praesentia Magnatum in refectorio Westmonasteriensi auxilium sibi fieri
pecuniare, sub silentio praeteriens propositum suum de Rege Scotiae potentur
impugnando. In propatulo tamen manifestans, quod anno transacto transfretaverat
in Gasconiam de consilio eorum, ut dicebat, ubi tenebatur aeris alieni non
modica quantitate, nec potuit nisi efficacissime sibi ab illis generaliter
subveniretur, liberari. Cui fuit responsum, quod super hoc tractarent
Recedentesque Magnates de refectorio, ^onvenerunt Archiepiscopi and Episcopi,
Abbate, and Priores seorsum per se, super hoc diligenter tractaturi. Tandem
requisiti fuerunt ex part eorum Comites and Barons, si velient suis consiliis
unanimiter consentire in responsione and provisione super his facienda. Qui
responderunt, quod sine communi universitate nihil facerent. Tunc de communi
assensu electi fuerunt ex part Cleri, electus Cantuariensis, Wintoniensis,
Lincolniensis, and Wigorniensis Episcopi, ex part Laicorum, Richardus Comes,
frater Domini Regis Comes Bigod, Comes Legriae Simon de Montefor^i, and Comes
Mareschallus W. ex partibus Baronum, Richardus de Muntsichet, and Johannes de
Bailliol, and de sancto Edmundo, et de Ramesia Abbates, ut quod isti duodecim
providerent in commune recitaretur, nec aliqua forma Domino Regi ostendaretur
auctoritate duodecim, nisi omnium communis assensus interveneret, Et quia
Charta libertatum, quas Dominus Rex olim concesserat, and pro cujus
conservatione Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis Edmundus juraverat, fide jusserat
and certissime pro Rege promiserat, nondum extitit observata, and auxilia quae
toties concessa fuerunt Domino Regi ad nullum profectum Regis vel regni
devenerant. Et per defectum Cancellarii Brevia contra justitiam pluries fuerunt
concessa, petitum fuit, and secundum quod eligerent, Justiciarius and
Cancellarius fierent, per quod statum Regni solidaretur, ut solebat. Et ne per
compulsionem Concilii aliquod novum statuere videretur, noluit (Rex) petitioni
Magnatum consentire; sed promisit, se ^mendaturum quae ex eorum part audierat,
unde datus fuit terminus eis usque in tres septimanas Purificationis beatae
Virginis, ut ibidem iterum tunc eonvenireot. Quod si mera voluntate Rex interim
tales Consiliarios eligeret, and taliter jura regni tractaret, quod Magnates
contenti essent ad terminum illum super auxilio faciendo, responsuri
providerent, ita tamen quod si aliqua pecunia eidem concederetur, per dictos
duodecim expenderetur ad commodum Regni. Et cum per plures dies protraheret eos
Dominus Rex, volens eos quasi tedio affectos flectere ad consensum, ut sine
termini prorogatione ad auxilium contribuendum consentirent, multipliciter
convenit eos nec circumvenit, quia Magnates hoc prudenter perpendentes
IMMOBILITER IN PROPOSITO PERSTITERUNT. Tunc Dominus Rex demum sperans sal^m
Clerum ad desiderium suum inclinare, convocatis Praelatis, porrexit illis
Papales apices in publico, (recorded at large by Matthew Paris) commanding and
persuading the Prelates, Abbots and Clergy to supply the Kings necessities, and
grant him an aid, with particular Letters to all the Prelates from the Pope to
the like effect. The Prelates notwithstanding all the Kings private
solicitations and policies, refused to return any answer to the Popes Letters,
till the time of the Lords reassembling or to do any thing but by Common
Counsel and consent of the whole Parliament, from which they would not be
divided, as you may there read at large. The Nobles and Great men meeting again
at the time prefixed agree on these ensuing Provisoes, after long debate, which
they tendered to the King for his assent, denying to grant him any aid of money,
unless he consented to them.

De libertatibus alia vice emptis, concessis, and per chartam Domini Regis
confirmatis, quod de caetero observentur. Ad cujus rei majorem securitatem,
fiat nova charta quae super haec specialem faciet mentionem. Et ab omnibus
Praelatis solenniter excommunicentur, qui scienter and prudenter libertates a
Domino Rege concessas, vel impugnare vel impedire, quo minus observentur,
praesumpserint, and reformetur status eorum, qui post ultimam concessionem in
libertatibus suis laesionem incurrerunt. Et quia propter virtutem sacramenti
praestiti, nec non propter timorem sententiae latae a sancto viro Edmundo, quod
ea vice promissum fuerat, hactenus non exstitit observatum, ne hujusmodi
periculum de caetero eveniat, and sic fiant novissima pejora prioribus de
communi assensu quatuor eligantur Potentes et Nobiles de Discretioribus totius
regni, qui sint de Concilio Domini Regis, et jurati, quod negotia Domini Regis
et Regni fidelitur tractabunt, et sine acceptione personarum, omnibus Justitiam
exhibebunt. Hi sequentur Dominum Regem, and si non omnes, semper duo eorum ad
minus praesentes sint, ut audiant querimonias singulorum, ut patientibus
injuriam celeriter possint subvenire. Per visum and testimonium eorum tractetur
Thesaurus Domini Regis, and pecunia ab Universis specialiter concessa, et ad
commodum Regis et Regni expendatur, secundum quod melius et utilius viderint
expedire, Et erunt Libertatum Conservatores. Et sicut de omnium assensu
eliguntur; sic etiam sine communi assensu non poterit aliquis eorum amoveri,
aut suo officio privari. Vno etiam sublato e medi^, de assensu et electione
trium, loco illius alius substituatur infra duos menses. Nec sine ipsis, sed
cum necesse fuerit, et ad eorum instantiam, iterum conveniant Universi. Brevia
contra Regem and consuceudinem Regni impetrata, penitus revocentur et
aboleantur. Memorandum quoque de sententia ferenda in contradictores. Item, de
obligatione Sacramenti in invicem. Item, de Itinere Justiciariorum,
Justitiarius and Cancellarius ab omnibus elegantur. Et quia frequenter debent
esse cum Domino rege, poterint esse de numero conservatorum. Et si aliqua
interveniente occasion Dominus Rex abstulerit sigillum suum a Cancellario,
quicquid fuerit interim sigillatum, irritum habeatur et inane. Deinde
Cancellario fiat restitutio. Nullus substituatur Cancellarius, vel
Justitiarius, nisi solummodo per solennem et universalem omnem Convocationem,
et liberum assensum. Duo Justiciarii eligantur in Banco. Duo itidem Barons in
Scaccario constituantur. Unus quoque ad minus Justiciarius Judaeorum deputatur.
Hac vice autem per communem universalem liberamque omnium electionem fiant et
constituantur omnes Officiarii praedicti: ut quemadmodum omnium negotia sunt
tractaturi, sic etiam in eorum electione concurrat assensus singulorum. Et
postmodum cum necesse fuerit alius loco alicujus ipsorum praedictorum substitui
aut subrogari, per provisionem et auctoritatem quatuor illorum Consiliatorum
praedictorum fiat illa substitutio vel subrogatio. Hactenus suspecti, aut minus
necessarii a latere Domini Regis amoveantur. Et dum hujusmodi negotia utilia
nimis Reipublicae in spacio trium hebdomadarum diligenter pertractassent
Magnates, hostis humani generis, pacis perturbator, et Schismatum suscitator
Diabolus, haec omnia per Papalem avaritiam impedivit, etc. Postea renovata fuit
petitio Domini Regis, super auxilio pecuniari sibi faciendo. Circa quod de die
in diem convenit eos Dominus Rex, tum in propria persona, tum per internuncios
solennes; per quos promisit, se Libertates quas juraverat in Coronatione sua,
super quibus CHARTAM confecerat integerrime servaturum. Ad quorum etiam
tuitionem, rogavit ut singuli Episcopi in Diocaesibus suis sententiam fer^ent
in ipsum, et omnes qui contra memoratas Libertates venirent in aliquo articulo.
Tandem unanimiter, cum nullo modo ad alium formam possent flecti, concesserunt
Domino Regi ad maritandam filiam suam primogenitam, de omnibus qui tenent de
Domino Rege in capite, de singulis scutis viginti solidos solvendos, scilicet,
medietatem ad Pascha, et aliam ad festum S. Michaelis.

Et cum relatum esset Domino Regi, ut ad memoriam haec quam praeterita
reduceret, recordatum est ei, quod similia a suis fidelibus, quos fovere
debuit, non depauperare truculenter et sine solutione promissorum, eisdem
extorserat. Post captionem Bedefordiae statim concessum est Carucagium, de tota
Anglia, scilicet, de qualibet caruca duo solidi Anno sequenti, Quintadecima
omnium mobilium. Iterum, iturus in Britanniam cepit non modicam pecuniam a
Praelatis etiam and viris Religiosis, Burgensibus and Judaeis. Post reditum
suum de Britannia, cepit Scutagium, scilicet de Scuto tres marcas. Item postea
concessa fuit Quadragesima pars omnium mobilium. Item postea Trigesima pars
omnium mobilium. Item quando maritavit sororem suam Isabellam domino Imperatori
Frederico, cepit dominus Rex ad maritagium suum Carucagium, videlicet, de
qualibet Caruca duas marcas. In nativitate autem filii sui, in magnum dedecus
sui, multa munera quae ad magnam summam pecuniae ascenderunt, violenter and
impudenter extorsit. Item iturus in Gasconiam, cepit a Praelatis, viris
Religiosis, Burgensibus and Judaeis, et a quibuscunque potuit aliquid abradere,
pecuniam multam, imo pene infinitam. Rediens autem a Gasconia inglorius and
seductus, jussit ut Magnates et Praelati ipsi occur^erente etiam usque ad mare;
qui ibidem illum diu expectantes frustra, tandem ipsum in muneribus multis et
impreciabilibus exceperunt. Similiter et cives Londinenses and alii. Et qui
munera nobilia compertus est non contulisse, aliquo argumento redargutus,
damnificabatur. Qualiter autem pro hac praesenti contributione et omnibus aliis
promissa et pacta adimplebat Rex, noverit ille qui nihil ignorant. Thus bold,
resolute, plain dealing were the Earls and Barons with the King in this
Parliament; all whose Ayds and Exactions here enumerated in 28. years space,
are not comparable to one years Excises, Imposts, Contributions, under the
pretended new Conservators, Protectors of our Liberties, and deliverers of us
from our former Petty Taxes of Shipmony and Knighthood, scarce amounting to one
Months contribution.

Mat. Paris, p. 631.
The same year (1244.) in Crastino Omnium animarum, convenientes Magnates
Angliae, Rex cum instantissime ne dicam impudentissime, auxilium pecuniare ab
eis, iterum postularet, toties lasi et illusi, CONTRADIXERUNT EI UNANIMITER ET
UNO ORE IN FACIE. Proponebat enim Dominus Rex contra Wallenses exercitum ducere
represuros, etc.

Mat. Paris, p. 718, 719. Mat. West. Anno 1248. p. 227.233.
In the 32. year of his reign; In octaxis Purificationis, edicto Regio
convocata totius Angliae Nobilitas convenit Londoniis, ut de Regni negociis
nimis perturbati, et depauperati, et temporibus nostris enormiter mutilati,
diligenter et efficaciter cum Domino Rege contrectaret, etc. Et cum
proposuisset Dominus Rex, pecuniare auxilium postulare, redargutus est graviter
super hoc, quod non erubescebat tunc tale juvamen and auxilium exigere:
praesertim quia quando in ultima tali exactione, cui Nobiles Angliae vix
consenserunt, confecit Chartam suam, quod amplius talem non faceret Magnatibus
suis injuriam et gravamen. Repraehensus est etiam gravissime, super indiscreta
alienigenarum vocatione, etc. And for all orher his misdemeanors there
specified at large. Haec cum audisset Dominus Rex, confusus in semetipso
erubuit, sciens haec omnia esse verissima. Promisit ergo verissime ac
certissime se haec omnia gratanter emendaturum, sperans per talem humilitatem,
licet fictam, omnium corda postulationi suae promptius incurvare. Cui inito
consilio crebrius in talibus promissis universitas irretita, respondit: Hoc
videbitur, et infra breve tempus apparebit manifest: Expectabimus patienter,
et prout se gerit Dominus Rex, et se habebit versus nos, et nos ei in omnibus
obtemperabimus, Dilata igitur sunt omnia et in respectu posita, usque ad
quindenam Sancti Johannis Baptistae. Sed Dominus Rex interim vel suo Spiritu,
vel aulicorum suorum, qui nollent suam enervari potestatem, induratus, and
contra suos homines magis exaspetatus, minimum emendationis in praedictis
excessibus, fidelibus suis, secundum quod promisi^, curavit impendere.
Whereupon they would grant him no aid at all. When he could not move the Nobles
all assembled together; Mat. Paris p. 732. Mat. Westminster. p. 233, 234.
the next year he sent begging Letters to every one of the Nobles apart for
aid, nor as a duty, but mere gratuity to carry on his wars against the King of
France, sed nihil ex inde a circumspectis nisi derisum et sibilum suscitavit.

Mat. Paris p. 821, to 828. Mat. Westminster. p. 252.
King Henry, Anno 1252. the 35. year of his reign, assembled all the Prelates
to London, and demanded of them a Tenth for 8. years granted him by the Pope;
which they refused to grant, taxing him for oppressing his Realm and the Church
with various and innumerable exactions, and depriving them of their ancient and
accustomed Liberties and their money against his Oath, and primitive
Protestation: The Lords and Prelates, after sundry public and private
Discourses and devices then used to draw them to a Contribution (recorded at
large in Mat. Paris) chiding and telling him to his face; asserentes ipsum
natum tantum ad pecuniam emungendam. Soluto igitur cum Regis, Cleri et Magnatum
indignatione Concilio, Rex iram et odium praecordiale thesaurizavit, credens
haec omnia sibi facta et dicta in spiritu maligno et exoso, malignandi materiam
parturire. About the same time, Isabella Countess of Arundell, coming to the
King about a Wardship, and he denying to do her justice therein, though a
woman, gave him this manly and bold answer. Domine Rex* quare avertis faciem
tuam a Justitia? Jam in curia tua quod justum est, nequit impetrari. Medius
inter Dominum and nos constitueris, sed nec teipsum nec nos sane regis, nec
ecclesiam veritus es multipliciter perturbare, quod non tantum in praesentiarum
sed multoties est aperta. Nobiles insuper Regni variis modis vexare non
formidas vel erubescis Quod cum audisset Rex corrugans nares, et subsannans,
voce dixit eleva^a: Quid est hoc, O Domina Comitissa? confecerunt ne Magnates
Angliae chartam, et pepigerunt tecum, ut fieres eorum quia eloquens es,
advocata et prolocutrix? Ad quod Comitissa licet juvencula, non tamen
juveniliter respondit. Nequaquam mihi, Domine, Regni tui Primates chartam
confecerunt, sed tu CHARTAM quam confecit pater tuus, et tu eam concessisti,
and jurasti observare fideliter et irrefragabiliter, et multoties ut eam
observares a fidelibus tuis pecuniam de libertatibus observandis eorum
extorsisti, sed tu semper eis impudens transgressor extitisti. Unde fidei
laesor enormis and Sacramenti transgressor manifestus esse comprobaris. May we
not make the self-same demand and appeal now?
Ubi Libertates Angliae toties in scripta redactae, toties concessae, totiesque
redemptae? Ego igitur licet mulier, omnesque indigenae et naturales ac fideles
tui appellamus contra te, ante tribunal tremendi judicis. Et erunt nobis testes
coelum and terra, quoniam inique nimis nos tractas insontes, et nos Deus
ultionum Dominus ulciscatur. Ad haec Rex siluit confusus, quia dictante propria
conscientia cognovit, quoniam a tramite veritatis non exorbitavit Comitissa; et
ait: Nonne postulas gratiam, eo quod mihi cognata sis? at illa: Ex quo mihi
quod jus expostulat denegasti, quomodo spem concipiam, ut mihi gratiam facias
postulanti? sed et contra illos ante faciem Christi appello, qui te fascinantes
et infatuentes, consiliarii tui sunt, et te a via veritatis avertunt, suis
tantummodo commodis inhiantes. His autem auditis Rex siluit, satis civiliter
redargutus; Comitissa autem nec licentiata, nec licentiam postulata, magnis
laboribus et sumptibus inaniter factis, ad propria remeavit.

Anno 1253. the 37 of Henry the 3d. Mat. Paris, p. 838, 839. Mat. Westminster. p. 254.
In quindena Paschae mense Aprilis tota edicto Regio convocata Angliae
Nobilitas convenit Londini, de arduis Regni negotiis simul cum Rege tractaturi.
Exti^erunt igitur ibidem cum Comitibus and Baronibus quamplurimis,
Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis, and Episcopi Angliae fere omnes, etc. Et cum de
magna Regis indigentia, qui postulavit sibi peregrinaturo infinitam exhiberi
pecuniam, diu. et inaniter tractassent, et hinc inde nuncios utrobique
consensus haberetur, contigit ut ex part Episcoporum and omnium Praelatorum,
destinarentur Archiepiscopus Cant: et Carliolensis, et Sarisburiensis Episcopi
et electus Wintoniensis, ad persuadendum et inducendum Regem, ut permitteret,
prout saepius solenniter jurando promisit, sanctam Ecclesiam suis gaudere
libertatibus, maxim de electionibus, in quibus praecipue ecclesiastica constat
libertas. Nullibi enim cum in Ecclesiis Cathedralibus vel Conventualibus potest
aliquis promoveri nisi per Regem intrusus, etc. Quod si hunc et alios mores,
SECUNDUM MAGNAE CHARTAE DE LIBERTATIBUS CONFECTAE TENOREM, emendaret, ipsi
usque ad gravamen magnum petitionibus suis inclinarent. Quibus Rex: Verum est,
et inde doleo, and poenitet me graviter hoc secisse. Instanter igitur
procurandum, ut et talia peracta corrigantur; et amplius similia non
perpetrentur. Et vos in hoc mihi sitis coadjutores, ne sic promoticum subditis
condemnentur, etc. Tandem protracto tempore diuturno et multis revolutis
disceptationibus, post quindecim et amplius dierum continuationem, in hoc
residit omnium unanimus consensus; ut voluntas Regis peregrinaturi et ideo pia,
non penitus suo desiderio fraudaretur, nec Ecclesiae vel Regni status enorme
pateretur dettimentum. Concessa est igitur Regi decima pars proventuum ab
Ecclesia recipiendo, cum iter Hierosolymitanum per visum Magnatum arriperet, in
viaticum distribuenda, per triennium, in succursum Terrae sanctae contra Dei
inimicos, and a militibus scutagium, illo anno, scilicet ad scutum tres Marcae;
et Rex bona fide, and sine aliqua cavillatione, Walsingham Ypodig. Neustr. p.
61.
promisit se CHARTAM MAGNAM ET OMNES EJUS ARTICULOS FIDELITER OBSERVARE: Quam
tamen a multis retroactis annis, Pater ejus Rex Johannes TENERE JURAVIT, and
limiliter qui prae^ens est in susceptione Coronae, et postea multoties, unde
infinitam emunxit pecuniam. Tertio igitur die Mali, in majori aula Regia Westminster.
sub praesentia and assensu Domini Henrici Dei gratia Regis Angliae illustris,
and Dominorum R^. Comitis Cornubiae fratris sui, and Ri. Comitis Norfollkiae
and Suffollkiae Mareschalli Angliae, H. Comitis Her^fordiae, and Comitis
Oxoniae, I. Comiris Warwiciae, and aliorum Optimatum Regni Angliae; Nos B.
divina misericordia Cant. Archiepiscopus, totius Angliae primas, F.
Londinensis, H. Eliensis, R. Lincolniensis, W. Wigo^niensis, W. Norwicensis, P.
Haerefordiensis, W. Sarisberiensis, W. Dunelmensis, R. Exoniensis, S.
Carleolensis, W. Bathoniensis, L. Roffensis, T. Menevensis Episcopi,
Pontificalibus indutis, candelis accensis, in transgressores libertarum, and
Ecclesiasticorum, and libertatum consuetudinem Regni Angliae, and praecipue
earum quae continentur IN CHARTA LIBERTATUM REGNI ANGLIAE, ET CHARTA DE
FORESTA, excommunicationis sententiam solenniter tulimus sub hac forma.
Auctoritate Dei Omnipotentis, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, and Gloriosae Dei
Genetricis, semperque Virginis Mariae, and beatorum Apostolorum Petri and
Pauli, omniumque Apostolorum, and beati Thomae Archiepiscopi and Martyris,
omniumque Martyrum, beati Edwardi Regis Angl^ae, omniumque Confessorum atque
Virginum, omniumque Sanctorum Dei, excommunicamus, anathematizamus, and a
limine sanctae matris Ecclesiae sequestramus, omnes illos qui amodo s^ien^er,
and malitiose Ecclesias privaverint vel spoliaverint suo jure. Item omnes illos
qui Ecclesiasticas libertates, vel antiquas Regni consuetudines probatas, and
praecipue libertates, and liberas consuetudines QUAE IN CHARTA COMMUNIUM
LIBERTATUM ANGLIAE, ET DE FORESTA CONTINENTUR, Concessis a Domino Rege Angliae
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, and caeteris Angliae Praelatis, Comitibus,
Baronibus, Militibus, and libere tenentibus, qualicunque art vel ingenio
temere violaverint, diminuerint, seu immutaverint clam vel palam facto, verbo,
vel consilio contra illas, vel earum aliquam, in quocunque articulo temere
veniendo. Item in illos qui contra illas, vel earum aliquam Statuta aliqua
ediderint, vel edita servaverint, consuetudines introduxerint, vel servaverint
introductas, Scriptores Statutorum, necnon consiliarios and executores, and qui
secundum ea praesumpserint judicare. Qui omnes and singuli superius memorati,
hanc sententiam incursuros se noverint ipso facto, qui scienter aliquid
commiserint de praedictis: qui vero ignoranter nisi commoniti infra quindenam a
tempore commonitionis se correxerint, and arbitrio Ordinariorum before
fatisfecerirt de commissis, ex tunc sint hac sententia involuti, Eadem etiam
sententia innodamus omnes illos, qui pacem Regis and Regni praesumpserint
perturbare. In cujus memoriam sempiternam, Nos sigilla nostra praesentibus
duximus apponenda. (How many in this age are involved in this communication and
execration, for the wilful violation of this great Charter of our Liberties,
and making Ordinances, Declarations, Remonstrances, Votes, Committees, and
extrajudicial judicatories, and giving Judgments and Sententes against it,
almost in every Article, is worthy consideration.) When this excommunication
was thus pronounced. Prolataque fuit in medium CHARTA patris sui Johannis, in
qua iterum concessit idem mera voluntate, and recitari fecit libertates
supradictas, Dum autem Rex memoratam sententiam audisset, tenuit manum suum ad
pectus suum sereno vultu, voluntario et alacri. Et cum in fine projecissent
candelas extinctas, et fumigantes, diceretur a singulis, sic extinguantur, and
foeteant hujus sententiae incursores in inferno, and campanae pulsarent: dixit
ipse Rex, sic me Deus adjuvet, haec omnia observabo fideliter, sicut sum homo,
sicut sum Christianus, sicut sum miles, and sicut sum Rex coronatus et
inunctus. Et sciendum quod in principio sententiae ferendae, cum traderentu^
omnibus Candelae accensae, tradita fuit Regi una, and cum accepisset eam,
noluit eam tenere, sed tradidit cuidam Praelatorum, dicens: Non decet me
candelam talem tenere, non enim sum sacerdos: Cor autem majus perhibet
testimonium. Et extunc tenuit Manum expansam ad pectus, donec totam sententiam
finiretur. Episcopus autem Lincolniensis Robertus praeconizans in cord suo,
and timens ne Rex a pactis resiliret, fecit illico, cum redieret in Episcopatum
suum excommunicari solenniter, in qualibet Ecclesia Parochiali per Diocoesim
suam, quae prae numerositate sua vix possunt aestimari, and praecipue
Sacerdotes omnes supra dictarum Chartarum infractores, quae sententia potuit
aures audientium tinnire, et corda non mediocriter formidare. In pursuance of
this Excommunication, the King issued out Writs and Proclamations to all
Counties, that all should be excommnicated, qui veniant contra CHARTAS de
libertatibus, etc. reciting this excommunication, and other Writs and
Proclamations, issued DE MAGNA CHARTA TENENDA AD INSTANTIAM PRAELATORUM ET
MAGNATUM REGNI NOSTRI, Mat. Paris, p. 839.
salvis Nobis et haeredibus nostris juribus et Dignitatibus Coronae nostrae,
etc. recorded in Claus. 37. H. 3. m, 9. and 13 Dorso, and Pat. 37. H. 3. m. 13.
(But O the Atheistical Hypocrisy, perfidiousnesse* and falsenesse of men's
hearts and protestations) Soluto autem sic Concilio, Rex confestim pessimo usus
confilio, omnia praedicta cogitabat infirmare, (as some have done, and yet do)
Dictum namque est illi quod non foret Rex, vel saltem Dominus in Anglia, si
supradictas tenerentur, et expertus est Rex Johannis pater ejus, qui mori
praeelegit quam sic pessundari calcibus subditorum, etc.

Anno 1254. the 38 of King Henry the 3. Mat. Paris, p. 858, 859. Mat. Westminster. p.
261.
Congregati sunt iterum Regni Magnates Londini: Quibus significavit Rex, quod
pecunia indigebat, and viribus amplioribus ad repellendam violentiam magni
hostis supervenientis: Quod mandatum fuit fignatum Regio sigillo. Responderunt
au^em omnes and singuli: Quod jam per tres septimanas Londini inaniter
expectantes adventum Comitis Richardi, and aliquorum Magnatum moram
protrahentium, and toties Regiis exactionibus vexebantur, quod vix poterant
respirare. Non tamen venire omitterent ad succursum Domini sui Regis
corporaliter, si de hostili adventu Regis Hispaniae hoc comminantis before
certi^icarentur: mirabanturque, ut dicebant, quod idem Rex Castillae nunquam
tempore quo Comes Legrecestriae Simon Gasconiae praefuit, et reb^lles multos
edomuit, Gasconiam vendicavit: Hoc igitur argumento, et multis aliis, sed et
per Comitem S. qui tunc de partibus rediit transmarinis, qui veritatem super
hoc nunciavit, Magnates edocti, Regis muscipulas praecaverunt, qui ex bonis
Angliae p^riclitantes alienigenas saginavit. Et sic cum summa indignatione
tristes admod^m Proceres recesserunt. Yet, to please the Nobles, I find in
Fitzh. Not. Brevium, f. 75. a.
Claus. 38. H. 8. m. 8 a Writ, ne quidem amercientur CONTRA TENOREM MAGNAE
CHARTAE de libertatibus Angliae, sed secundum modum delicti.

Mat. Paris, p. 876. Mat. West. p. 271.
Anno 1255. the 39 of Henry the 3. In quindena Paschae convenerunt Londini
OMNES NOBILES ANGLIAE, tam viri Ecclesiastici, quam seculares, ita quod nunquam
tam populosa multitudo ibi antea visa fuerat congregata. Ubi Dominus Rex se
multis debitis conquestus est fuisse implicatum, nec se posse sine MAGNATUM
SUORUM efficaci juvamine liberari, unde instanter and urgenter valde postulavit
auxilium sibi fieri pecuniare. Scilicet ut de Baroniis quas prius in auxilio
decimae sibi concessae, plenam reciperet portionem, ut ad plenitudinem
gratiaram persolvendarum teneretur. Quod esset manifestum Regni exterminium.
Regnum enim omne pecunia destitutum, volentibus illud occupari, quasi ulero
foret expositum et oblatum. Inito igitur consilio, quia illud nullo modo
fuisset tollerabile, inter eos concessum est, QUOD MULTUM SESE GRAVARENT PRO
MAGNAE CHARTAE SINE OMNI CAVILLATIONE OBSERVATIONE EX TVNC ET DEINCEPS, quam
toties tenere promisit, juravit, and sub summa distr^ctione se in anima
obligavi. Exigebat insuper, ut de communi consilio regni nostri sibi
sustitiarium, Cancellarium, and Thesaurarium eligerent, sicut ab antiquo
consuetum et justum. Qui etiam non amoverentur, nisi clarescentibus culpis, et
de communi Regni convocati consilio et deliberatione. Tot enim erant in Anglia
Reguli, ut viderentur in Anglia antiqua tempora renovari. Erat videre dolorem
in populo, quia nesciebant Praelati vel Magnates quo modo suum Prothea,
scilicet Regem tenerent, etiamsi omnia haec concederent, quia in omnibus metas
transgreditur veritatis, et ubi nulla veritas, nulla praevalet certitudo fixa
stabiliri. D^ctumque est illis a secretissimis Regiis cubiculariis, quod nullo
modo illa quae desiderabant, scilicet de Justiciario, Cancellario, vel
Thesaurario concederet. Praelati insuper pro decima, quam conditionaliter
promiserant, absolute et serviliter ancillante Ecclesia jam solvere eam
cogebantur, doloribus cruentabantur. Nobiles pro imminenti exactione, in
oneribus sauciabantur. Tandem in hoc convenerunt communiter, ut Regi
renunciaretur, ex part universitatis, quod negotium dilationem caperet, usque
ad festum Sancti Michaelis, ut et ipsi interim fidelitatem ejus, and
benignitatem experirentur, si forte sic se versus eos et eorum patientiam
fidelitatem ejus et benignitatem experirentur, si forte sic se versus eos et
eorum patientiam IN CHARTAE OBSERVATIONE TOTIES PROMISSAE, TOTIES REDEMPTAE,
corda eorum ad ipsa converteret, et merito reclinaret. Quod cum Rex dicitur non
acceptasse, sed tacendo non concessisse, Et cum summa desolatione et
desperatione, post multas inutiles* et diuturnas deceptationes, sic soluto
consilio, Nobiles Angliae facti jam ignobiles, ad propria remearunt.

Not long after the King to ingratiate himself with the people, commanded the
Great Charter to be observed. Mat. Paris, p. 878. Mat. Paris, p. 171.
Walsingham Ypodig. p. 61
Acclamatum est in Comitatibus, et annunciatum est in Synodis in Ecclesiis, et
ubicunque locorum homines convenerant, ut Magna Charta inviolabiliter
teneretur, quam Rex Johannes concessit, et isto Rex praesens multo ies
concessit, et lata est sententia solenniter in omnes ejusdem viol^tores, quam
tamen Rex minime adhuc observans, bona Ecclesiae Eboracensis inhumane
destruxit. Mat. Westminster. p. 272.
Dicebatque creb^o: Quare non observant Episcopi and Magnates Regni erga
subjectos suos Chartam illam, pro qua tan^um clamitant, et objurgant (a good
interrogation to our late and present swaying Grandees) Cui rationabiliter
responsum est, Dominus Rex, decet vos primitus secundum jusjurandum tuum
inchoare, et alii prosecto sequerentur, secundum illud Poeticum, Mobile
versatur semper cum Principe vulgus.

Mat. Paris, p. 884, 885.
Anno vero sub eodem ad festum Sancti Edwardi, fuerunt apud Westmonasterium
OMNES fere ANGLIAE MAGNATES; inter quas Rex prius alloquebatur fratrem suum
Comitem Cornubiae Richardum, petens ab eo instantissime auxilium pecuniare. Cui
Comiti Dominus Papa similiter literas deprecatorias direxerat, supplicans in
quadraginta millibus, salvo fratri suo, mutuo subveniret, ut quasi dans ea
eidem, pium daret aliis exemplum subveniendi, Comes autem nec preces Regis, nec
Papae voluit exaudire, et eo maxim, quod negotium eundi in Apuliam assumpsit
sine consilio suo, et assensu Baronagii sui, sibilis transalpinensium
fascinatus. Ab aliis autem interpellatum fuit de subventione facienda; et
responsum fuit, quod omnes tunc temporis non fuerunt JUXTA TENOREM MAGNAE
CHARTAE SUAE, vocati; Nota.
er ideo sine paribus suis tunc absentibus nullum voluerunt tunc responsum
dare, vel auxilium concedere, vel praestare. Rex itaque ad consuetas conversus
cavillationes, ut Magnates flecteret ad consensum, per multos dies negotium
Parliamenti distulit inchoati, ita usque in mensem fictis occasionibus negotium
protelaret. Et tunc ad alium locum conciliaturos, evacuatis in civitate
Londonensi crumenis, potius provocavit quam convocavit. Comes vero Richardus,
vir cautus et circumspectus, Episcopum Herefordensem, and Robertum Walerannum
socium suum, acriter et merito redarguit, eo quod tam enormiter in regni
subversionem Regem infatuarent. Et sic infecto negotio singuli provocati ad
propria remearunt.

In the 40 year of King Henry the 3. (1256.) the great Charter, to satisfy the
Prelates and Nobles, was again confirmed by the King, and a solemn
Excommunication denounced against the infringers thereof. Mat. Paris, p. 891,
892, 895. Mat. Westminster. p. 275.
Provisum est salubriter, UT MAGNAE CHARTAE REGIS JOHANNIS quas sponte promisit
BARONAGIO ANGLIAE, et iste Rex praesens iterum, and nunc iterum de novo in
magna aula Westmonasteriensi, SPONTE ET LIBERALITER CONCESSIT, SUB PAENA
HORRIBILIS ANATHEMATIS, CONSERVENTUR, et propter Regis tyrannidem, quam non
desinit exercere in Ecclesiis vacantibus, quam memoratus Rex Johannes concessit
Regno, conspectibus Papae praesentaretur: there recited at large and ratified
by the Pope; Yet notwithstanding the Prelates, animated by the Barons refused
to contribute any aid to the King out of their Baronies, notwithstanding
Rustan, the Popes Legate endeavored to induce and force them to do it, both by
wiles and menaces.

Mat. Paris, p. 935, 938. Mat. Westminster. 277.
Anno 1258. the 42. of Henry the 3d. his reign; he summoning a Parliament, and
demanding a pecuniary aid of the Nobles, cum constanter et precise
respondissent UNO ORE MAGNATES REGNI IN PARLIAMENTO REGI, cum urgenter auxilium
ab eis postulasset pecuniare, QUOD NEC VOLUERUNT, NEC POTUERUNT, (Mark it)
AMPLIUS SUSTINERE TALES EXTORSIONES. Rex iratus, ad alia se convertit astutiae
argumenta, ut ab Ecclesia pecuniam abraderet infinitam: there recorded at
large. Duravit adhuc praelibati Parliamenti altercatio, inter Regem and regni
Magnates, usque diem Dominicam proximam post Ascentionem, and multiplicabantur
contra Regem variae diatim querimoniae, eo quod promissa sua non observabat,
contemnens claves Ecclesiae, ET CHARTAE SUAE MAGNAE TOTIES REDEMPTAE TENOREM.
Fratres quoque suos uterinos intollerabiliter contra jus regni et legem, ut
naturales terrae erexit, nec sinebat aliquod br^ve exire de Cancellaria contra
eos etc. REDARGU^US EST INSUPER REX, quod omnes alienos promovet et locupletat,
et suos in subversionem totius Regni, despicet et depraedatur. Et ipse tam
egenus est cum alii abundent, quod thesauri expers jura Regni nequit revocare;
imo nec Wallensium, quae sunt hominum quisquiliae, injurias propulsare; et ut
brevibus concludatur; Excessus Regis tractatus exigit speciales. Rex autem ad
se reversus, cum veritatem redargutionis intellexisset, licet sero, humiliavit
se, asserens iniquo consilio saepius suisse fascinatum; promisitque sub magni
juramenti obtestatione super altar et feretrum S. Edwardi, quod pristinos
errores plane et plene corrigens, suis naturalibus benign obsecundaret. Sed
crebras transgressiones praecedentes se penitus incredibilem reddiderunt; and
quia nesciebant adhuc Magnates quomodo suum Prothea, tenere voluissent, quia
arduum erat nego^ium et difficile, dilatum est Parliamentum usque ad festum
Sancti Barnabae apud Oxoniam diligenter celebrandum. Interim Optimates Angliae,
utpote Gloverniae, Legrecestriae et Herefordiae comites, Comes Marescallus, et
alii praeclari viri, sibi praecaventes and providentes, confaederati sunt, quia
pedicas et laqueos alienorum vehementer formidabant, et Regis retiacula
suspecta nimis habuerant, veniebant cum equitibus et armatis, et comitatu
copioso communit^.

Mat. Paris, p. 940, 941.
Parlamento autem (Oxoniae) incipiente solidabatur Magnatum et consilium
immutabile, exigendo constantissime, UT DOMINUS REX CHARTAM LIBERTATUM ANGLIAE,
quam Johannis R^x pater suus Anglis confecit, and confectam concessit, quamque
idem Johannes renere juravit, FIRMITER TENE AT ET CONSERVET; quamque idem Rex
Henricus multoties concesserat, et tenere juraverat, ejusque infractores ab
omnibus Angliae Episcopis, in praesentia sua et totius Baronagii, horribiliter
^ecit excommunicare, and ipse unus fuerat excommunicantium. Exigebant insuper
sibi fieri Justiciarium, qui justitiam faceret injuriam patientibus,
aequanimiter divitibus et pauperibus, Quaedam etiam alia Regnum contingentia
petebant, ad communem Regis and regni utilitatem, pacem simul and honestatem.
Quorum consiliis et provisionibus necessarii^, Dominum Regem frequenter et
constantissime consulendo rogitabant obtemperare; jurantes fide mediante, et
mutuo dextras exhibentes, Nota.
quod non omitterent propositum persequi, pro pecuniae vel terrarum amissione,
vel etiam pro vita et morte sua et suorum. Quod Rex recognoscens; graviter
juravit consiliis eorum obsecundare, et Edwardus filius ejus eodem est
juramento astrictus. After which they expelled and chased away all the Aliens
about the King. "Et ita terminatur Parliamentum apud "Oxoniam, fine terminato
et certo non opposito. Hereupon there issued out sundry Writs and Commissions
for reformation of abuses and punishing offenses against the Great Charter,
recorded in Rot. Claus. 42 H. 3. m. 1. 3.6. and that PER CONSILIVM MAGNATUM, as
those Records attest.

Rot. Pat. An. 43 H. 3. m. 10. n. 41. and n. 15. there is a large Letters
Patents of the King recorded in French, declaring the good Government that
should be for the future; the due observation of Magna Charta; the Kings
faithful promise inviolably to keep the same according to his Oath and
promises; and that every man injured might freely sue and complain against or
arrest the King, or any other. And Rot. Pat. An. 44 H. 3, m. 4. Schedula; and
m. 5.9. There are Writs and Letters of the King to the Sherifs of every County,
to the same or like effect. All by the advice or procurement of the Nobles.

Rishanger, Continuatio Mat. Paris, p. 960, 961.
Anno 1263. the 47. of King Henryes reign, the King and Nobles, to procure
peace and reconciliation between them, submitted themselves to the arbitrament
of Jews King of France, touching the Provisions made at Oxford, about which
they had great contests and differences: who solemnly pronounced Sentence for
the King against the Barons of England; Statu^is Oxoniae, Provisionibus,
Ordinationibus et obligationibus penitus annullatis, Hoc excepto quod Antiquae
Chartae Regis Iohannis Angliae, universitati concessae, per illam Sententiam in
nullo intendebat penitus derogare. Quae quidem exceptio Comitem Leicestriae, et
caeteris qui habeant sensus exercitatos, compulit in proposito tenere firmiter
Statuta Oxoniae quae fundata fuerant super illam Chartam. Where upon they
taking up arms, wasting and pillaging the Kings Manors, Lands and adherents,
the King in the 48. year of his reign, mediantibus viris honoratis paci Baronum
acquievit ad tempus; ut Provisiones Oxoniae inviolabiliter observarentur, which
Provisions the King confirmed by his Patents, recorded at large in the Tower,
Rot. Pat. An. 47 H. 3, pars 1. m. 7. n. 25. and pars 2. nu. 2. Rot. Pat. 48 H.
3. pars 2. m. 3.

Rot. Pat. 46 H. 3. m. 18. Pat. 49 H. 3. m. 10.15, 18. Claus. 49 H. 3. m. 4.5.
and Claus. 50 H. 3. m. 1. dorso. There are several Patents, Commissions,
Proclamations procured by the Lords from the King, for the reading, proclaming,
and inviolable keeping of the Great Charter and Franchises of the Realm, and
reformation of Grievances contrary thereunto, overtedious to transcribe: and
the Agreements between the King and Barons touching the same.

Tho. Walsingham, Hist. Angliae, p. 35, 37, 38. Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 84.85,
86.
King Edward the 1. in the 25. year of his reign, by his own regal Authority,
without grant in Parliament, raised the Custom of Woolls to 40 s. upon every
sack, which he levied, whereas before they paid only half a mark a sack: And
likewise summoned some Nobles, and all those who held of him by Knights
service, with all others who had lands to the value of 20 l. or upwards a year,
to be ready with rheir horses and arms at London on the feast of S Peter's ad
Vincula, and to pass over with him into Flanders, to serve there in the Wars at
the Kings wages. Hereupon the Earls Marshal and of Hereford, with other
Nobles, refused to go in^o Flanders; and drew up this Notable Petition, or
rather Remonstrance to the King, against this unjust Imposition, foreign
service, and other Grievances against the Great Charter and their Liberties,
which they sent to Winchelsey by Messengers, ex part Comitum sui regni, as
Walsingham relates.

Haec sunt nocumenta quae Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates et Priores, Comites
et Barons, et tota terrae Communitas monstrant Domino nostro Regi, et
humiliter rogant eum, ut ad honorem suum, et salvationem populi sui, velit
corrigere et emendare. In primis, videtur toti Communitati terrae, quod
Praemonitio facta eis per Breve Domini nostri Regis, non erat satis sufficiens,
quia non exprimebatur certus locus, quo debebant ire, quia secundum locum
oportebat facere providentiam, et pecuniam habere. Et sive deberent servitium
facere sive non, quia dictum est communiter, quod Dominus noster vult
transfretare in Flandriam, videtur toti Communitati quod ibi non debent aliquod
servitium facere, quia nec ipsi, nec praedecessores sui seu progenitores unquam
fecerunt servitium in terra illa Et quamvis ita esset quod deberent ibi
servitium facere, ut alibi, tamen non habent facultatem faciendi, quia nimis
afflicti sunt per diversa Tallagia, Auxilia, Prisas, videlicet, de frumentis,
avenis, braseo, lanis, coriis, bobus, vaccis, carnibus salsis, sine solutione
alicujus denarii, de quibus se debuerant sustentasse. Propter hoc, dicunt, quod
non possunt auxilium facere propter paupertatem in quae sunt propter Tallagia
et Prisas antedictas, quia vix habent unde se sustentarent, and multi sunt qui
nullum sustentationem habent, nec terras suas colere possunt. Propter haec tota
terrae Communitas sentiunt se valde gravatam, quia non tranctantur secundum
Leges et consuetudines terrae, secundum quas tractari Antecessores sui solebant
habere, sed voluntary excluduntur. Sentiunt etiam se multi gravati super hoc,
quod solebant tractari, secundum Articulos contentos in Magna Charta, cujus
articuli omnes sunt omissi, in majus damnum populo universo. Propter hoc rogant
Dominum nostrum Regem, quod velit ista corrigere ad honorem suum, and populi
sui salvationem: Propter hoc Communitas terrae sensit se nimis gravatam de
assisa Forestae, quae non est custodita sicut consuevit, nec Charta Forestae
observatur, sed fiunt attachiamenta pro libitu extra assisam, aliter quam fieri
consuevit: Paeterea, tota Communitas sentit se gravatam de Vectigali lanarum,
quod nimis est onerosum, videlicet, de quolibet Sacco quadraginta solidos, et
de lana fracta, de quolibet sacco septem marcas, lana enim Angliae ascendit
fere ad valorem medietatis totius terrae, et vectigal quod inde solvitur,
ascendit ad quintam partem valoris totius terrae. Quia vero communitas optat
honorem et salutem Domino nostro Regi, sicut tenetur velle, non videtur eis,
quod sit ad bonum Regis quod transeat in Flandriam, nisi plus esset assecuratus
de Flanderensibus pro se and pro gente sua, et simul cum hoc, propter terram
Scotiae, quae rebellare incepit ipso existente in terra, et aestimant quanto
pejus facerent cum certificati fuerint, quod Rex Mare transierit. Nec solum pro
terra Scotiae, sed etiam pro terris aliis quae non sunt adhuc modo debito
stabilitatae.

The King having received those Petitions, answered, that he could not as yet
answer them without his Counsel, part of them being in Flanders, and the rest
left at London: And he entreated the said Earls by the Messengers who brought
the Petitions, that if they would not pass over with him, yet at least that
they would not hurt his Realm during his absence, for he hoped by Gods
assistance to return again, and settle his Kingdom in order. The King passing
into Flanders, the said Earls, Batons in person inhibited the Treasurer and
Barons of the Exchequer, that they should not levy the 8th. penny of the
people, being granted to the K. at St. Edmunds, Dicentes a Conscientia sua non
emanasse sine quorum assensu, Tallagium non debet exigi vel imponi, Mat. Westminster.
An. 1297. p. 410.
without their consent and induced the City of Land. to stand with them, for
the recovery of their liberties. Whereupon Prince Edwards counsel persuaded him
to send for the Earls of Hereford, and Marshal, and by any means possible to
allure them to peace, who repairing to him upon summons, were willing to
consent to the Articles and form of peace ensuing, but to no other. Primo, Quod
Dominus Rex Chartam magnam cum eaeteris articulis addictis, et Chartam de
Foresta annuat et confirmet: et Quod nullum auxilium vel vexationem exigat a
Clero vel Populo absque consilio et assensu: et quod omnem offensam Comitibus
et eorum confaederatis dimittat. Articuli adiecti ad magnam Chartam sunt isti.
Nullum Tallagium vel auxilium per nos vel haeredes nostros, de caetero in regno
nostro imponatur seu levetur sine voluntate et assensu communi
Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Abbatum et aliorum Praelatorum, Comitum,
Baronum, Militum, Burgensium, et aliorum liberorum hominum. Nullus minister
noster, vel haeredum nostrorum in toto regno nostro cap^at blada, lanas, Coria,
aut aliqua aliae bona cujuscunque, sine voluntate et assensu cujus fuerunt.
Nihil capiatur de caetero nomine vectigalis de Saccolanae. Volumus etiam et
concedimus pro nobis et haered bus nostris, quod omnes Clerici et Laici de
Regno nostro habeant omnes Leges, Libertates, et omnes consuetudines, ita
libere et integre, sicut aliquo tempore consueverunt melius pleniusque habere.
Et si contra illas vel quemcunque Articulum in praesanti Charta contentum
statuta fuerint aedita per nos vel Antecessores nostros, vel consuetudines
introductae: Volumus et concedimus, quod hujusmodi Statuta vacua sint, et
nullum in perpetuum. Remissimus etiam Humfredo dae Boun Comiti Herefordiae and
Essexiae, Constabulario Angliae, Rogero Bigot Comiti Norfolciae, Mareschallo
Angliae, Et aliis Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, Armigeris, Johanni de
Ferrariis, ac omnibus aliis de eorum societate confaederatione et concordia
existertibus, nec non omnibus vigenti libratas terrae tenentibus in regno
nostro, sive de nobis siv^ de alio quocunque in capite, qui ad transfretandum
nobiscum in Flandriam certo die notato vocati fuerunt, et non venerunt,
rancorem nostram and malam voluntatem quam ex causis praedictis erga eos
habuimus, et transgressiones si quas nobis vel fecerunt, usque ad praesentis
Chart^ confectionem. Et in majorem securitatem hujus rei, volumus et concedimus
pro nobis et haeredibus nostris, quod omnes Archiepiscopi, et Episcopi Angliae
in perpetuum in suis Cathedralibus Ecclesiis habita praesenti Charta relicta
excommunicent public, et in singulis Parochialibus Ecclesiis suarum D^ocesium
excommunicari faciant, seu excommunicatos denunciare bis in anno, omnes qui
contra tenorem praesentis Chartae vim et effectum in quocunque articulo
scienter fecerunt, aut fieri procuraverunt quovismodo. Missis igitur in
Flandriam nunciis ad ipsum Regem, confirmationem omnium istorum sub sigillo suo
(tanquam ab eo qui (...) ^tus erat, cedendum malitiae temporis censuit)
obtinuerunt. Pro eonfirmatione et harum rerum omnium dedit populus Anglicanus
Regi denarium nonum bonorum suorum, Clerus vero Cantuariensis Decimum, et
Clerus Eboracensis Quintum, qui propiordamno fuit. So Walsingham truly relates
the History of this transaction.

These Statutes thus obtained by the Earls and Barons from the King, are
printed in our Statutes at large, with the excommunication of the Prelates then
denounced against the infringers of them, in Rastals Abridgement of Statutes,
and Sir Edward Cooks 2 Institut. p. 527. to 537. being thus entitled:
Confirmationes Chartarum de Libertatibus Angliae et Forestae, et Statutum de
Tallagio non concedondo. made both in the 25 year of Edward 1. not in the 34,
as our Statute books, and Sir Edward Cook misdate the latter of rhem. The
differences between the King, these Earls and Nobles touching these liberties,
with his confirmation of them, and the aid granted him for the same, are
likewise recorded in the Patent Roll of 25 Ed. 2. par. 2. m. 6, 7, 9. And
Claus. 25 E. 1. m. 2.5.14.18.76 dors. there are sundry Writs and Proclamations
sent to all the Sherifs for the keeping of Magna Charta in all its articies,
and to the Bishops to excommunicate the Infringers of them, agreeing with
Walsinghams relation.

Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 42.44. Cook 2. Iustir. p. 537. Ypodigmae Neustriae.
p. 87. Mat. West. An. 1299. p. 415, 416.
Anno 1299. the 26 of King Edward the first, the king holding a Parliament at
York, the foresaid Earls, because the Confirmation of the Charters
forementioned was made in a foreign land, requested that for their greater
security, they might be again confirmed by the King in England, which the
Bishop of Durham and three Earls engaged he should do, upon his return out of
Scotland with victory. Whereupon this King the next year (being the 27 of his
reign) holding a Par^iament at London: Ubi rogatus a Comitibus saepe dictis, ut
Chartarum confirmationem renovaret, secundum quod in Scotia promiserat, post
aliquas dilationes instantiae eorum acquievit, hac additione, Salvo jure
Coronae nostrae infine adjecta. Quam cum audissent Comites, cum displicentia ad
propria recesserunt, sed revocatis ipsis ad quindenam Paschae ad votum eorum
absolute omnia sunt Concessa. And thereupon the Statutes entitled Articuli
super Chartas. (28 E. 1. in our printed Statutes, and Cooks 2 Institutes,
whereas it should rather be 27.) were then made and published by these Earls
and Nobles procurement; and Writs sent to all the Sherifs De quibusdam
Articulis in MAGNA CHARTA contentis, and Chartae de Foresta Henrici Patris
nostrae observandis. Rot. Claus. 27. E. 1 m. 17. And Pat. 28 E. 1. m. 14.
Commissions are sent into all Counties, de Artic. in mag. Chart. content. and
Stat. Regis apud Winton edita observandis, and that whosoever did not observe
every Article, should be punished per imprisonamentum, redemptionem, vel
amerciamentum, secundum quod transgressio exigeret, there being no certain way
of punishment before ordained. And Claus. 28 E. m. 7, 8. There are Writs sent
to every Sherif, to read and proclaim magna Charta in his County 4 times every
year, and to proclaim Articulos super Chartas a Rege populo concessos.

But the Execution of the Articles of the Forest being deferred,
notwithstanding these Proclamations, thereupon Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 48.
Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 88.
King Edward held a Parliament at Stanford the 29 year of his reign; ad quod
convenerunt Comites et Barons cum eqnis et armis, eo prout dicebatur
proposito, ut executionem Chartae de Foresta, hactenus dilatam extorquerent ad
plenum: Rex autem eorum instamiam and importunitatem attendens, eorum voluntati
in omnibus condescendit. To omit all other Presidens, these forecited
abundantly evidence the gallantry, stoutness, heroical courage, care,
vigilance, of the Lords in all our Parliamentary Councils, to maintain and
defend the fundamental Liberties, Properties, Great Charters of the Realm, and
to perpetuate them to posterity, without the least violation: to vindicate,
re-establish them when infringed, and to withstand, oppose all unjust aids,
taxes, subsidies, when either demanded, levied, exacted by our Kings, though in
cases of pretented or real necessity to supply their wants, maintain their
wars, and protect the Realm from foreign enemies. I shall only produce three of
four Historical Presidents more, demonstrating what great Curbs, Remoraes,
Obstacles, some particular potent Noblemen of great estates, alliance, public
spirits have been to the exorbitant arbitrary wills, power, proceedings of our
Kings, who most endeavored openly to subvert, or cunningly to undermine our
public Laws and Liberties.

Hist. Angl. p. 233.
Mat. Paris, speaking of the death of Geoffry Fitz-Peeter, one of the greatest
Peers of that age, writes thus of him, This year (Anno 1218.) Geoffry
Fitz-Peeter Chief Justice of all England, a man of great power and authority,
TO THE GREATEST DETRIMENT OF THE KINGDOM, ended his days the 2. day of October.
ERAT autem FIRMISSIMA REGNI COLUMNA, for he was the most firm pillar of the
Kingdom, as being a Nobleman, expert in the Laws, furnished with treasures,
rents, and all sort of goods, and confederated to all the great men of England
by blood or friendship: whence the King without love did fear him above all
men, for he governed the reigns of the Kingdom. Whereupon after his death,
England was become like a ship in a storm without an helm. The beginning of
which tempest was the death of Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, a magnificent
and faithful man, neither could England breath again after the death of these
two. When K. John heard of Fitz-Peeters death, turning to those who sat about
him, He said; By Gods feet, now am I first King and Lord of England. He had
therefore from thenceforth more free power to break his Oaths and Covenants
which he had made with the said Geoffry for the peoples Liberty and Kingdoms
peace. Such Pillars and Stays are great and stout Peers to a Kingdom, and
Curbs to tyrannical Kings; which caused Man. West. Flores Hist. An. 445. p. 151.
Vortigern the British King^ who usurped the Crown with the treacherous murder
of his Sovereign; Nobiles deprimere, et moribus et sanguine ignobiles
extollere, quod maxim regiae honestati contrarium est, to secure his throne
thereby against their predominant power; as other Usurpers and Tyrants since
have done: Therefore of mere Right they ought to have a place and voice in
Parliaments, for the very Kingdoms safety and welfare, without the peoples
election.

William Duke of Normandy having slain the Usurper King Harold, with many
thousands of Englishmen in the field, routed his whole Army, and caused the
City of London and most parts of England to subject themselves unto him as
their Sovereign, out of base fear; thereupon Chronicon Willielmi Thorn. col.
1786. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 89, 90. Cambdens Britannia, p. 325. Godwins
Catalogue of Bishops, p. 28. Speeds History, p. 437, 438. Sir John Heywood in
Will. 1. Lambard his Perambulation of Kent
Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, and Eglesine Abbot of St. Augustine, chief
Peers of the Realm, and Lords and Governors of Kent, to preserve themselves,
their Country, Laws and Liberties from vassalage to the Norman yoke, assembling
all the Commons of Kent to Canterbury; informed them: That they were born
freemen, that the name of bondage was never heard amongst them: that nothing
but servitude attended them, if they unworthily submitted to the insolency of
the invading Enemy, as others had done. And thereupon exhorted them, manfully
to fight for the Laws and Liberties of their County, choosing rather to end an
unhappy life, by fighting valiantly for them in the field, than to undergo an
unaccustomed yoke of bonduge, or to be reduced from their known Liberties to an
unknown and unsure slavery. After which the Archbishop and Abbot, choosing
rather to dye in battle, than to behold the misery and slavery of their Native
Country, became the Captains of the Kentish Army which they raised; and by a
Stratagem invironing Duke William and his whole Army at Swanscomb; they
procured this Grant and Concession from him, That all the people of Kent should
for ever enjoy their ancient Liberties without diminution, and use the Laws and
ancient Customs of their Country: they being resolved (as Stigand told the
Duke) rather to part with their lives than them; Liberty being the proper badge
of Kentishmen. After which Duke William marching to London to be Crowned King,
Gul. Nub^igensis, Rerum Angl. l. 1. c. 1. Chronicon Johannis Bromton, col. 982.
Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 89.
Cumque ^eracta victoria Tyranni nomen exhorrescens, et legitimi Principis
personam induere Gestiens, a Stigando tunc temporis Can^uariensi Episcopo
consecrari deposceret; Ille (out of an heroic gallant English Christian
spirit) Viro, ut ai^b^t, Cruento et alien^ juris Invasori, manus imponere
nullatenus adquievit. Whereupon he was crowned by Aldred Archbishop of York:
Mat. Paris, Mat. Westminster. Wigorniensis, Huntindon, Hoveden, Chronicon Willielmi
Thorn, col. 1787. Hen. de Knyghton de Eventibus Angliae, l. 2. c. 8. Antiq.
Ecclesiae Brit. and Godwin in Stigands life.
King William for this his stoutness and opposition in defense of his Countries
Laws and Liberties, under a pretense of honor, first carried him with him into
Normandy, as a Prisoner at large: afterward upon feigned pretenses, caused him
to be deprived of his Archbishopric, and then shut him up Prisoner in the
Castle of Winchester, where he soon after died of grief or famine, having
scarce enough allowed him to keep soul and life together: Such a curb and
terror was he to him, whiles he lived in place and power, that he could not
carry on his designs against the English, to captivate, or enslave them, till
he was removed out of the way of this Conqueror; who came to the Crown by the
effusion of so much Christian blood, that Rerum Angliae, Hist. l. 1. c. 1. p. 4.
Gulielmus Neubrigensis gives this censure of it; (and let all other invaders
of the Crown by blood observe it;) Sane quod idem Christianos innoxios
hostiliter Christianus impetiit, et tanto sibi sanguine Christianum Regnum
paravit, quantae apud homines gloriae, tantae etiam apud Deum noxae fuit.
Whence Stigand refused to crown him. Simon Mon^e^ort Earl of Leicester, the
greatest Pillar, and General of the Barons, in the wars against King Henry the
3d, for the preservation, corroboration of Magna Charta, the Liberties and
Properties of the People, was so terrible to this extravagant, oppressive King,
frequently violating both his Great Charters, Laws, Oaths, Mat. Paris, p. 944.
That being persuaded to enter into his house, in a tempest of thunder and
lightning, which he very much feared; the Earl courteously meeting him and
saying: Why do you fear? tht tempest is now past: the King thereunto replied,
not jestingly, but seriously with a stern countenance, I fear thundering and
lightning above measure, but by the head of God, I tremble more at thee, than
at all the thundering and lightning in the world. Being afterward slain in the
Battle of Eusham in defense of his Countries Liberties. In his Continuation of
Mat. Paris, p. 968. and Daniel, p. 178.
Rishanger gives this Encomium of him, Thus this magnificent Earl Simon ended
his days, who not only bestowed his estate but his person and life also, for
relief of oppressions of the poor, for the asserting of Justice and the Rights
of the Realm. A sufficient Ground for such Nobles and their Posterity to sit
and Vote as Peers in Parliament without the peoples election.

In the 3, 4, 14, and 15 of K. Edw. 2. his reign, Tho. Earl of Lancaster, and
other potent wealthy Barons, were the chief Sticklers against Gaverston and the
Spencers, who seduced the King, oppressed the people: and were the principal
Pillars of our Laws and Liberties, as our Walsingkam, Holinsh. Daniel, Speed
Stow, Grafton Fabian, Baker. in Ed. 2.
Historians relate at large, procuring those ill Counselors to be banished,
and removed from the King even by force of Arms. In 10 11, and 22. of King
Rich. 2. the Duke of Gloucester, the Earl of Arundel, and other potent Lords
were the principal opposers of the Kings ill Counselors, Tyranny, the chief
protectors of the Laws and peoples Liberties, to the loss of some of their
lives, heads, estates, as our Statutes, the Rolls of Parliament in those years,
and Walsingham, Trussle, Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton, Speed, Stow. in R 2.
Historians witness: whence Walsingham writing of the Duke of Glocester's
death, murdered by the Kings command at Calice who was the principal
Anti-royalist and head of all the Barons, uses this expression, Thus died this
best of men, the Son (and Uncle) of a King, in quo posita fuere spes and
solatium TOTIVS REGNI COMMUNITATIS, in whom the hope and solace of the
Commonalty of the whole kingdom were placed: who resented his death so highly,
that in the Parl. of 1 H. 4. Hall, who had a hand in his murder, was condemned
and executed for a Traitor, his Head, Quarters hung up in several places, and
K. Richard among other Articles deposed, for causing him to be murdered.

Since then our Peers and Nobles, as the premised Examples abundantly evidence,
have been always persons of greatest valor, power, estate, interest, most
able, forwards to oppose the Tyranny, Exactions of our Kings, and to preserve
the Great Charters of our Liberties, first gained, since preserved and
transmitted to us by their valor, blood, counsel, cate, with our other Laws,
which they have upon all occasions manfully defended, with the hazard, loss of
their lives, Liberties, Estates, and upon this ground were thought meet by the
wisdom of our Ancestors to merit and enjoy this privilege of sitting, voting,
judging in Parliament, by virtue of their Peerage, and Baronies: And since we
must all acknowledge, that the Lords (assembled in a Great Council by the King
at York, as the Commons themselves acknowledge and remonstrate, Exact.
Collection, p. 13.) were the chief instruments of calling this present
Parliament, and were therefore in the Act for Triennial Parliaments,
principally entrusted to summon and hold all future Parliaments in the Kings,
Lord Chancellors, or Lord Keepers defaults: Being also very active in
suppressing the Star Chamber, High Commission, Councel-Table, Prelates, and
other grievances, and those who fitst appeared in the Wars against the King and
his party, in defense of our Laws, Liberties, Religion, Parliaments Privileges,
to the great encouragement of others, (witness the deceased Lord General
Essex, Brook, Bedford, Stamford, Willougbie, Lincoln, Denbigh, Manchester,
Roberts, and others) it would be the extremity of folly, ingratitude and
injustice to deny our Peers this hereditary Right, Privilege, Honor now, which
they and their Ancestors purchased at so dear a rate; and a means to dis-ingage
them for ever siding hereafter with and setting them against the Commons, and
Republike, for such an high dishonor and affront as this will prove.

3ly. Our Lords and Nobles have been the stoutest Champions to defend the
Rights, Privileges, Liberties of the Crown, Realm and Church of England, the
Great Charters, Liberties, Laws, Franchises, Properties of the Clergy, people
therein, against the Popes and Prelates Antichristian invasions and
enchroachments on them; for proof whereof I shall present you with these few
pertinent presidents, instead of many others, recorded in our Annals. Chronica
Joh. Brompt. col. 999. Sir John Davis his Irish Reports. f. 90. Usserius de
Statu. and successione Ecclesiae, p. 127. Cooks 2 Institut. p. 97.
Pope Paschal the 2. and his Confederate Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury,
endeavoring by a Papal Decree, to deprive the King of the investiture of
Bishoprics, by a Ring and Staff, which his Ancestors enjoyed, The King
thereupon writ, and sent him a Letter by two of his Bishops, Anno Dom. 1103.
wherein he concludes thus. Beneficium quod ab Antecessoribus meis beatus Petrus
habuit, vobis mitto, eosque honores and eam obedientiam quam tempore Patris mei
antecessores vestri in Regno Angliae habuerunt, tempore meo ut habeatis volo;
eo videlicet tenore, ut dignitates, usus et consuetudines quas Pater meus
tempore antecessorum vestrorum in regno Angliae habuit, Ego tempore vestro, in
eodem regno meo integre obtineam, Notumque habeat Sanctitas vestra, quod me
vivente, Deo auxiliante dignitates, et usus Regni Angliae non minuentur. Et si
ego, quod absit, in tanta me dejectione ponerem, OPTIMATES MEI, imo TOTIUS
ANGLIAE POPULUS ID NULLO MODO PATERETUR. Habita igitur karissime Pater utiliore
deliberatione, ita se erga nos moderetur benignitas vestra, ne, quod invitus
faciam, a vestra me cogatis recedere obedientia. To pretermit the Statutes of
Clarindon. Anno 1164. made and sworn to be observed by the Prelates, Abbots,
Earls, Barons and Nobles, very derogatory to the Popes and Prelates
usurpations, in maintenance of the Kings Prerogative, and peoples liberties,
recorded in Mat. Paris, p. 96, 97. and Chronica Gervasii, col. 1386.

In the year 1185. Mat. Paris, Hist. Angl. p. 137. Gervasii Chron. col. 1474.
Radulphus de Diceto Imagines Histor. col. 626.
Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem coming into England with the Keys of the
Tower of David, and of Christ's Sepulcher, and the Banner of the holy Cross,
presented them to King Henry at Reading, whom they had elected King thereof,
with an earnest Letter from Pope Lucius to accept thereof, that so he in his
absence might the more securely invade the rights of his Crown and Kingdom.
Hereupon the King Convocatis apud Londoniam totius Angliae Primatibus, as
Gervasius Dorobernensis, or Convocato C^ero Regni ac populo (to wit the
Prelates and Nobles, not ordinary Clergy and Commons, usually expressed by this
phrase) as Mat. Paris relates it; Convenerunt Londoniis apud Fontem Clericorum,
decima Kalendas Aprilis Rex, cum universa Nobilitate Regni, which expounds
Clerus Regni et Populus. Whence Radulphus de Diceto thus relates it. Ad
vocationem Regis Cantuariensis electus, et Cantuariensis Ecclesiae Suffraganei,
Dunelmensis Episc. Abbat. Conventualium locorum Praelati, Comites et Barons
convenerunt apud fontem Clericorum 15 Kal. Apritis. Rex itaque Patriarcha,
Magistro sanctae domus hospitalis Jerosolomi audientibus omnes suos fideles qui
convenerant adjurationibus, multis obstrinxit, quatenus proponerent in medio,
quod super his saluti animae suae viderint expedire. Ad hoc enim cor suum
inclinatum dicebat, ut quod acciperet ex eorum consilio modis omnibus
observaret. Tunc Concilio universo super praemissis colloquenti, datum est
igitur sub deliberatione, quod esset consultius, vel quod Rex in propria sua
persona Jerosolomitanis succurreret, vel Anglorum regno, cujus gubernationem in
facie Matris Ecclesiae dudum susciperat, adhuc praeesse nulla ratione
desisteret. Ad illa siquidem tria quae Rex quilibet consecrandus promitiit
aliqui revocabant. Promittit namque se praecepturum and opem pro viribus
impensurum, ut Ecclesia Dei populusque Christianus veram pacem in omni tempore
servet. Promittit etiam, quod rapacitates, et omnes iniquitates omnibus
gradibus interdicet. Promittit adhuc, quod in omnibus judiciis aequitatem and
misericordiam praecipiet. Satius ergo visum est VNIVERSIS, and animae Regis
multo salubrius, quod regnum suum debita cum moderatione gubernet, et a
barbarorum irruptionibus, and a gentibus externis tu^atur, quam saluti
Orientalium in propria sua persona. De filiis Regis quidem, quorum petiis
aliquem Patriarcha, si Rex tamen recusaret, quicquid statuere cum essent
absentes, incongruum videbatur. Whereupon Heraclius returned, the Pope and he
by this advice of the Nobles being both deprived of their hopes: Mat. Westminster.
An. 1185. p. 58.
Rex inito consilio, responderat, quod oblatum sibi Regnum Hierosolomitanum
accipere et adire, et Regnum Anglorum deserere, and hostibus vicinis exponere,
non fuit ut credidit Deo acceptum, cum sit Deo tam gratum, tam devotum hoc, ut
illud.

Mat. Paris, p. 254* to 276.
King John in the 17 year of his reign having confirmed the Great Charter of
the liberties of England, and of the Forest, by his Seal, Oath, and the Popes
own Bull, after his surrender of his Crown and kingdom to the Pope, regranted
to him under an annual tribute, Pope Innocent by his Bull in a General Council
held at Rome, repealed these Charters of the King, as compelled to grant them
by force and fear against his will; commanding the King, under pain of a curse
and excommunication, not to observe, and the Barons not to exact or demand the
said Charters, or any obligations or cautions whatsoever, for or concerning
them, which he utterly cancelled and made void, ut nullo unquam tempore aliquam
habeant firmitatem: Writing also exhortatory and minatory Letters to the
Barons, not to claim the said Charters or Liberties, (obtained by force and
fear and therefore not only vile and dishonest, but unlawful and unjust under
pain of his displeasure and Sentence: But what was the issue, Page 258.
Matthew Paris thus records. Cumque tandem Rege Anglorum procurante, Magnates
Angliae has Literas tam commoni^oria^ quam comminatorias accepissent, Noluerunt
desistere ab inceptis, ed adhuc insurgentes, Regem acriter infe^tabant, dicendo
de Papa illud propheticum. Vae qui justificatis impium, etc.

The Pope being informed, that the Barons persisted in the prosecution of their
Liberties and Wars against the King; excommunicated them and al their adherents
in general, for contemning and disrespecting his said Papal Decree, Letters,
authority; and suspended the Archbishop of Canterbury for siding with them. But
they contemning this his Sentence, and persevering in their designs, and wars,
he thereupon excommunicated all the Barons by name, and likewise interdicted
them and their adherents; which being published in most places in the Country,
and thereby coming to the Londoners and Barons knowledge, they exceedingly
slighted his excommunications, and revi^ed, contemned the Popes authority in
the highest degree, (as Page 267, 268.
Matthew Paris (though a Monk) thus relates) Excommunicationis et interdicti
sententias civitas Londinensis, per contumaciam multiplicem adeo contemnendo
despexit, quod nec eas Barons observare, nec Praelati publicare DECREVERUNT.
Dicebant enim generaliter, omnes literas falsa suggestione fuisse impetratas,
and ideo nullius esse momenti, and hoc maxim, quod non pertinet ad Papam
ordinatio rerum Laicorum, cum Petro Apostolo, and ejus successorihus non nisi
ecclesiasticarum dispositio rerum a Domino sic collatae potestas. Ut quid ad
nos extendit Romanorum ^nsatiata cupiditas? Quid Episcopis Apostolicis et
militiae nostrae? Ecce Successores Constantini, and (...) Pe^ri: (...)
imitantur Petrum in meritis vel operibus, nec assimulandi sunt in Potestate;
Proh pudor, marcidi ribala^, qui de armis vel liberate minime norunt, jam toti
mundo propter excommunicationes suas volunt dominari, ignobiles usurarii et
Simoniales. O quantum dissimiles Petro, qui sibi Pe^ri usurpant parts? Sic
igitur blasphemantes and recalcitrantes, ponentes os in coelum, ad interdicti
sive Excommunicationis sententiam, nullum penitus habentes respectum, per totam
civitatem celebrarunt divina signa, pulsantes and vocibus altisonis modulantes.
Hereupon the Pope reviving his Excommunication against them, the Barons still
slighted it as before deposing King John from the Crown, and electing Jews of
France for their King, and thus revi^ing the Pope for siding with King John.
Mat. Paris, p. 268.
Et quid de te Papa? qui pater sanctitatis, speculum pietatis, tutor justitiae,
and custos veritatis toti mundo deberes lucere in exemplum, tali consentis,
talem laudas and tueris? Sed hac causa, exhaustorem pecuniae Anglicanae, and
exactatorem Nobilitatis Britannicae tibi inclinantem defendis, ut in barathrum
Romanae avaritiae omnia demergantur: sed haec causa et excusatio, est ante
Deum, culpa et accusatio. Et sic Barons lachrymantes and lamentantes, Regem
and Papam maledixerunt.

Mat. Paris, p. 349, 350.
Anno 1229. the 23. of King Henry the 3. Fecit convenire apud West monasterium
Dominica, qua cantatur, Misericordia Domini, Archiepiscopos, Episcopos,
Abbates, Priores, Templarios, Hospitilarios, Comites, Barons, Ecclesiarum
Rectores, and qui de se tenibant in capite (but no elected Knights, Citizens or
Burgesses that we read of) ad locum praefixum et diem; that they might hear the
businesses Stephen the Popes Chaplain and Legate had to propound unto them from
the Pope, and de rerum exigentiis communiter tractarent ibidem: Omnibus igitur
congregatis, tam Laicis quam Clericis, and eorum subjectis, Magister Stephanus
coram omnibus recitavit Literas Domini Papae; in quibus exigebat Decimas omnium
rerum mobilium de tota Anglia, Hibernia, et Wallia, ab universis Laicis and
Clericis, ad guerram suam sustinendam, quae contra Romanum Imperatorem
susceperat Fredericum, ipse solus, pro Universali Ecclesia etc. The Legate
herupon pressing them earnestly to grant this strange Tenth to the Pope, the
King, from whom all the rest expected to have protection and defense against
it, becoming formerly bound by his Proctors to pay this Tenth, seemed to give
consent thereto by his silence. Comites vero et Barons ac Laici omnes, Nota.
plane decimas se daturos contradixerunt, nolentes Baronias suas vel Laicas
Possessiones Romanae Ecclesiae obligare. Episcopi quoque and Abbates, Priores
et alii Ecclesiarum praelati, post trium vel quatuor dierum deliberation^m, et
murmurationem non modicam, tandem consenserunt, metuentes excommunicationis
sententiam vel interdicti sibi inferri, si mandatis Apostolicis obviarent. The
Earls, Barons, and Laity scaping scot-free from this Papal Exaction by their
strenuous opposition, when as the King and Clergy basely and unworthily
submitted to it out of fear, to their intolerable oppression.

An. 1239. The Pope usurping by his Provisions upon the Barons and Patrons
Rights and Advowsons in England: Thereupon the Earls, Barons, and other Great
men of England, dolentes se privari sua Liberate, and per cupiditatem Romanae
Ecclesiae jure conferendi ecclesias enormiter privari, et alienigenas praecepto
Papali illis ditari, quorum personas et conditiones penitus ignorabant; sent
this notable Letter to the Pope concerning it, by Sir Robert Tuinge, Knight.

Mat. Paris, p. 495, 496.
Excellentissimo Patri and Domino G. Dei gratia summo Pontifici, devoti sui de
Cestriae, and de Wincestriae, etc. salutem, reverentiam promptam, and paratam,
si placet, devotionem. Mergente jam navicula nostrae libertatis, primogenitorum
nostrorum sanguine subacta, prorumpentibus in nos plus solito perturbantium
procellis, dormientem Dominum in navicula Petri cogimur excitare, acclamantes
jugiter and una voce: Domine salva nos, perimus. Ut cum judicium et justitia
sint correctio sedis ejus, unicuique nostrum jus suum tribuat, and conservet
illaesum* Ne si secus fiere^, corruente charitate, devotioneque deseta,
provocarentur filii contra patris viscera, and mut^ae dilectionis affectus,
subintroducta injuria, penitus evanesceret. Cum igitur, sanctissime pater, a
prima Christianitatis fundatione in Anglia; tali fuerint hactenus progenitores
nostri gavisi liberate, quod dedecentibus ecclesiarum rectoribus, ecclesiarum
patroni personas idoneas eligentes ad easdem Diocesanis praesenta verunt, ab
eisdem ecclesiarum regimini praeficiendas: verum vestris temporibus, de
conniventia vestra vel voluntate nescimus, talis contra nos invaluit
adversitas, quod dedecentibus ecclesiarum rectoribus, quidam executores vestri,
ad hoc dati, ecclesias de patronatu nostro passim conferunt, in nostrae
praejudicium libertatis, and in eminens periculum juris patronalis, licet super
hoc pridem cautione literarum Apostolicarum nobis prospexeritis, continentium,
quod decedentibus ecclesiarum personis Italicis vel Romany, auctoritate
provisionis vestrae in Ecclesiis promotis, licite possemus personas idoneas
praesentare: cujus oppositum videmus quotidie demandari, de quo plurimum
miramur, cum non debeat ab uno and eodem font aqua dulcis and amara defluere.
Sane licet haec contra nos sit communis pestis introducta, pro qua
contentiones, emulationes, irae, rixae, necnon and caedes hominum poterunt
fortassis exoriri, unius tamen comparium nostrorum afflictionem exempli gratia
producere decrevimus in medium, ut quod contra eum and juris sui patronalis
periculum hactenus est improvide procuratum, auctoritate vestra, si placet,
revocetur in irritum. Cum igitur Robertus de Tuinge patronus ecclesiae de
Luthun, decedente N. Italico, ejusdem ecclesiae rectore, personam idoneam
praesentasset ad eandem, obstante mandato vestro, distulit ipsum admittere
dominus Eboracensis, licet contra personam praesentatam nihil inveniret quod
obsisteret, sed solam inhibitionem vestram praetenderet. Verum, cum in incendio
vicinae domus, nostrarum immineat periculum, vobis tanquam patri supplicamus,
quatenus tam praedictum Robertum, quam nos omnes and singulos praedicta
liberate praesentandi Clericos nostros ad ecclesias nostras vacantes libere
uti permittatis: injungentes praedicto Archiepiscopo, quod I. Clericum ad
praedictam ecclesiam ab eodem praesentatum, pro quo etiam preces effundimus
devotas: praesertim cum sit negotiis Regis and regno nostro necessarius, nisi
aliquod canonicum obstiterit, non obstante priori mandato vestro, admittat. Ut
ex hoc nos ad propensiorem and famulatum ecclesiae provocetis. Ne cum sit jus
advocationis praedictorum feudorum, pro quibus Domino nostro militamus, cogamur
illius invocare subsidium, qui jura and libertates laicorum protegere ^enetur
and confovere. Valete.

Mat. Paris p. 505.
Anno 1140. In octavis vero Epiphaniae, congregati sunt Londini Archiepiscopi
et Episcopi, cum multis aliis Magnatibus, praesente etiam Legato, reponentes
querimoniam coram Rege in curia sua, super variis injuriis and oppressionibus
and quotidianis desolationibus illatis ecclesiae, per iniquum Regis consilium,
contra suas chartas, and juramenta temere veniendo: nec patitur suis pastoribus
viduatas ecclesias, respirare, sed ut ab eisdem ecclesiastica bona variis
argumentis extorqueat, annis plurimis eas in manu sua detinet, nec patitur
electiones canonicas celebrari. Super quibus injuriis illatis, and diatim
multiplicatis, omnes se asserunt vehem^nt^r admirari, cum ipse Rex toties
juraverit, se jura ecclesiastica illibata conservare, ipsomet audiente, and
candelam tenente, quod omnes Episcopi, in violatores libertatum
ecclesiasticarum, simul sententiam fulminabant: in cujus sententiae
consummatione, Rex, ut alii, candelam extinxit inclinand^. Et erant contra
Regem in querimonium Episcoporum capitula circiter 30. Et eotenus processum
est, quod lata sit iterum sententia terribiliter nimis in omnes Regis
consilia^ios, qui ejus animum ad praedicta enormia conabantur inclinare.

In the Par. 20 H. 3. ^or. 13. Claus. 20 H. 3. m. 2.
Parliamentary Council held at Merton An. 1229. Anno, 20 H. 3. cap. 9. All the
Bishops (to set up the Popes and their own Canons above the Common Law of
England) earnestly entreated the Lords, that they would consent, that those who
were born before matrimony might be legitimare, as well as those born after
marriage, as to hereditary succession, because the Church held such for
legitimate: et omnes Comites et Barons una voce responderunt, nolumus leges
Angliae mutare, quae hucusque usitatae sunt and approbatae. Upon which 2 Inst.
p. 79.
Sir. Edw Cook observes; That the Nobility of England, have ever had the Laws
sf England in great estimation and reverence, as their best birthright.

Mat. Paris, p. 623, 624, 625. Mat. Westminster. p. 177.
Anno 1244. the 28 of Henry the third, Pope Innocent sent one Martin his Legate
into England, with letters, demanding a large contribution from the Prelates,
Abbats and Clergy, to be speedily collected as he should direct; which coming
to the knowledge of all the Lords, and Great men, omnes ad Praelatos
accesserunt, ut uno per omnia consilio uterentur, quia hoc negotium generalem
statum Regni contingebat. Whereupon all the Prelates by the Lords advice and
encouragement denied to grant the Pope any aid at all, and sic soluto Concilio
recesserunt.

Mat. Westminster. An. 1244. p. 180, 181.
Moreover this same year, Romana Ecclesia rubore deposito, tempore novi Papae
Innocentii 4. non cessabat provisiones cotidianas, redditus impudenter
extorquere a via antecessorum suorum non exorbitando, imo manum super omnes
aggravando. Exiit, igitur murmur licet sero, in cordibus Anglorum diu conceptum
et retentum, in manifestam querimoniam, et quasi parturientes loqui, non
poterant amplius se continere. Patientia enim eorum desidiosa erat, and
humilitas infructuosa est, imo potius and damnosa, et ipsa abutebatur, Romana
protervitas insatiabilis. Et in unum convenientes totius Regni Nobiles, Regem
efficacissime super hoc con^en^rum* asserentes se malle mori quam amplius tales
enormitates tollerare: Non enim eorum, neque antecessorum suorum intentio fuit,
quando contulerint bona viris religiosis, et aliis locis, pia consideratione
constructis, ut ipsa ad a^bitrium Papae viris Italicis ignotis, et eis quos
noverant Simoniis and usuris pollutos, and viciis multimodis, quibus non est
cura praedicatio vel hospitalitas Christi fidelibus impendenda, contribuerent.
Rex igitur non mediocriter ad iram provocatus, sciens ac sentiens talibus
queremoniis ines^e veritatem, scripsit Domino Papae verbis humilibus and
efficacissimis, ut talia studeret paterna solicitudine corrigere.

Mat. Paris, p. 638, 639. Mat. Westminster. An. 1245.
The next year, Anno 1245. This Martin violently seizing on the lands and
profits of diverse Churches and religious persons, "prorerva and injuriosa
authoritate, wherein the King protected him against all men, whereby the
condition of the Realm became most miserable: thereupon urgente igitur
necessitate totius Regni Angliae maxim, praeceptum est ab ipso tempore EX
PART ALIQUORUM MAGNATUM, pro multiformi, et incessabile oppressionne, et
depraedatione Regni dolentium et miserantium, and diligenter die and nocte
custoditis omnibus partibus Angliae, PAPALES LITERAE quae quotidie ad
emungendam pecuniam portabantur caperentur. Whereupon the Governor of Dover
took one of the Popes Posts laden with such Bulls and Letters to exact moneys
by diverse means, as he arrived at Dover, and took away all his Bulls and
Letters, as he was commanded by the Lords, imprisoning the Post in Dover
Castle: whom the King upon Martins complaint released, causing the Letters and
Bulls to be restored to him "in perniciem Regni, et Honoris sui. Hereupon the
Barons and Lords assembled at Laiton and Dunstable at Torneyes, and from thence
sent one Fulco to Martin, residing in the New Temple at London, commanding him
presently to depart the Realm, or else he and all his should be hewn in pieces
within 3 days: who thereupon repairing to the King for protection, and
demanding whether this were done by his direction? The King answered, no, Sed
BARONS MEI vix se continent, quin consurgant in me, eo quod tuas in Regno meo
and eorundem quae ^us and modum excedunt depredationes and injurias hactenus
tolleravi: Quorum etiam furorem vix compescui, quin et in te i^ruentes te
membratim non dilacerarent. Upon which Martin demanding that the Marshal might
convoy him safe to the Seaside, ^^ed with great have and fear out of England.
After which the king coming to himself, and discerning his Error, by the advice
of all the Nobility of the Realm, there was an elegant Epistle written, wherein
the over-execrable exactions of the Pope, and the manifold exactions of his
Legates, and of certain men exercising an unheard of power, were contained:
wherewith 6 Noble and discreet men elected by the Parliament and universality,
were sent to the Council of Lions, gravem super his SUPER EXACTIONE TRIBUTI, IN
QUOD NUNQUAM CONSENSIT REGNI UNIVERSITAS, coram Concilio querimoniam
reposituri, et talium releuamen onerum importabilium Regno Angliae
miserecorditer impendi rogaturi. The Proxi^s of the Parliament, and
universality of England arriving at the Council of Lions, by Mat. Paris p. 646,
647, 648. Mat. West. An. 1245.
William de Poweric, their Proctor, propounded their grievances, complaining,
That in time of War a Tribute was injuriously extorted by the Court of Rome,
Quod nunquam Patres Nobilium Regni, vel ipsi consenserunt, nec consentiunt,
neque in futurum consentient, unae sibi petunt exhiberi justit am cum remedio.
Ad quod Papa (there present) nec oculos elevans, nec vocem, verbum non
respondit. Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 60.
Thomas of Walsingham adds, That the Messengers sent to the Council by the king
de Consilio Praelatorum, Comitum, Baronum, were purposely sent ut concessioni
Regis Johannis de censu annuo pro Anglia and Hibernia contradicerent, eo quod
de Regni assensu non processerat, Mat. Westminster. p. 191.
Sed et per Archiepiscopum C^ntuariensem fuerat reclamatum vice totius Regni.
Sed Papa hoc indigere morosa deliberatione respondens: negotium posuit in
suspenso. This detestable Charter of King John being burnt amongst his writings
in this Council, as was reported, in the Popes own Chamber there casually set
on fire.

After which Poweric delivered to the Council the foresaid to the Pope,
concerning the manifold extortions, innovations, oppressions of the Church of
Rome exercised in England, there recorded at large, and worthy perusal: The
close of which Epistle of all the Barons, is this. That although the King being
a Catholic Prince, etc. would continue in the obedience of the Sea and Church
of Rome, and seek the increase of her honor and profit, jure tamen Regio,
dignitateque Regia before conservatis. Nos tamen qui in negotiis suis por^amus
pondus dierum et aestum et quibus una cum ipso Domino Rege, intendere
conservationi Regni diligenter incumbi, dictas oppressiones, Deo et hominibus
detestabiles, and gravamina nobis in oleribili^, non possumus aequanimiter
tolerare, nec per Dei gratiam amplius tolerabimus: Placeat igitur Paternitati
vestrae hanc ^upo^icationem nostram taliter exaudire, quod a Magnatibus et
universitate Regni Angliae, tanquam a filiis in Christo chatissimis, specia^es
gratias debeatis merito reportare. The Pope refusing to give any answer or
redress thereunto, at last through their importunity, be granted diverse
privileges to the Churches, Prelates, and Nation of England, ten^ing toward a
reformation of their grievances; but yet contrary thereunto, increased their
grievances instead of redressing them; whereupon Mat. Paris, p. 674, 675, 677,
678, 679, 680. Mat. Westminster. An. 1246. p. 206, 207. etc.
Anno Dom. 1246. the 30 of Henry the 3. by the Nobles solicitation, Medio
quadragessimae edicto Regio convocato convenit ad Parliamentum generalissimum
totius Regni Anglicani totalis Nobilitas Londini, videlicet, Praelatorum, tam
Abbatuum et Priorum, quam Episcoporum, Comitum quoque and Baronum, (without any
Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses chosen by the people to represent them in it)
ut de statu Regni jam vaci lantis, efficaciter, prout exigit urgens necessitas
contractarent. Angebat enim eos gravamen intollerale, a Curla Romana
incessanter illatum, quod non poterant sine Nota desidiae, et imminen^e ruina
tolerare, quod Papa promissionis suae transgressor, gravius quam ante eorum
querimoniam, manum diatim exasperans, aggravabat, et hoc quasi per contemptum,
etc. These Grievances they drew up into 7. Articles, which were read in and
approved by the Parliament, this being the tenor of them.

Gravatur regnum Angliae, ex eo quod Dominus Papa, non est contentus subsidio
illo quod vocatur Denarius beati Petri, sed a toto Clero Angliae, gravem
extorquet contributionem, and adhuc multa graviora nititur extorquere; and hoc
facit sine domini Regis assensu, vel consensu, contra antiquas Consuetudines,
Libertates, et regni jura, et contra appellationem et contradictionem
Procuratorum Regis and Regni in generali Concilio factam.

Item, gravatur Ecclesia et Regnum, eo quod Patroni eccle^iarum ad eas cum
vacaverint, clericos idoneos praesentare non ^ossunt, prout Dominus Papa eis
per literas suas concessit, sed ^onferuntur Ecclesiae Romany, qui penitus
idioma regni ignorant, in periculum animarum, et extra Regnum pecuniam
asportant, illud ultra modum depauperando.

Item, gravatur in Provisionibus a Domino Papa factis, in pensionibus
exigendis, contra literarum suarum tenorem, in quibus continetur, quod ex
omnibus retentionibus factis in Anglia, non intendebat confer, nisi 12
beneficia post praedictarum literarum confectionem; sed credimus multa plura
Beneficia ab eodem postea esse collata, et provisiones factas.

Item, gravatur quod Italicus Italico succedit, et quod Anglici extra Regnum in
causis auctoritate Apostolica trahuntur, contra Regni consuetudines, contra
jura scripta, eo quod inter inimicos convenire non debent, and contra
Indulgentias a praedecessoribus domini Papae, Regi and regno Angliae concessas.

Item, gravatur ex multiplici adventu illius infamis nuncii, NON OBSTANTE, per
quem Juramenti religio, consuetudines antiquae; Scripturarum vigor,
concessionum auctoritas, statuta, jura et privilegia debilitantur et
evanescuut: quod infiniti de regno Angliae oppressi sunt graviter and afflicti,
nec se Dominus Papa versus Regnum Angliae in plenitudine suae potestatis
revocanda, curialiter ita vel moderate gerit, prout Procuratoribus Regni ore
tenus dederat in promissis.

Item, gravatur in tallagiis generalibus, collectis et assisis sine Regis
assensu et voluntate factis, contra appellationem et contradictionem
Procuratorum Regis and Universitatis Angliae.

Item gravatur, eo quod in beneficiis Italicorum, nec jura, nec pauperum
sustentatio, nec hospitalitas, nec divini verbi praedicatio, nec ecclesiarum
utilis ornatus, nec animarum cura, nec in ecclesiis divina sunt obsequia, prout
decet et moris est patriae, sed in aedificiis suis parietes cum tectis
corruunt, et penitus lacerantur.

Upon the reading of these Articles, all and every one agreed to send both Mat.
Westminster* p. 207,
solemn Letters and Messengers to the Pope, and humbly to entreat him to remove
these intolerable Grievances and yoaks of bondage; all the Abbots and Priors
by themselves, the Bishops by themselves, the King by himself, and all the
Earls and Barons by themselves, in their own names, and of the whole Clergy and
people of England, writing several Letters to the Pope for this end, ^ecorded
in Matthew Paris; that of the Lords being very memorable, I shall here insert.

Mat. Paris, p. 679.
Sanctissimo Patri, etc. Devoti filii, Comes Cornubiae R. S. de Monte Forti
Comes Legrecestriae, H. de Boun Comes Herefordiae and Essexiae, R. de Bigod
Comes Norfolciae, R. Comes Gloverniae and Herefordiae, R. Comes Wintoniae. W.
Comes Albemarliae, Comes Oxoniensis and alii totius Angliae Barons, Proceres
et Magnates ac Nobiles; portuum maris habitatores, necnon et Clerus et Populus
universus, salutem, and debitam tanto Pontifici in omnibus reverentiam. Sic
matter ecclesia tenetur filios suos confovere, ipsos sub alas suas congregando,
ut filii sui non degenerent in obsequio matris suae, sed pro matre, si necesse
fuerit, manum suam mittant ad fortia, and arma et scutum assumentes pro
defensione sua cuilibet discrimini se opponat, de cujus uberibus lac sugunt
consolationis, et ad ipsius dependent ubera pietatis. Matter enim filiorum uteri
sui debet reminisci, ne si secus fiat, lactis pabulum subtrahendo videatur
novercari. Pater etiam a filiis suam subtrahens pietatem, non Pater, sed
vitricus merito debet appellari, cum filios naturales spurios deputat aut
privignos. Idcirco Pater reverende, currus Israel et auriga ejus, ad asylum
vestrae pietatis recurrimus confidenter, clamantes post vos. Implorantes etiam
humi^iter et devote, quatenus ob spem retributionis divinae, voces clamantium
post vos dignemini misericorditer exaudire, and gravaminibus, injuriis et
oppressionibus regno Angliae, and domino nostro Regi multipliciter impositis ac
illatis, velitis salubre remedium adhibere. Alioquin necesse est ut veniant
scandala, clamore populi tam Dominum Regem, quam nos intollerabiliter
impellente. Quoniam nisi de gravaminibus domino Regi and regno illatis, Rex and
regnum citius liberentur, Oportebit nos ponere murum pro domo Domini et
Liberate regni. Quod quidem ob Apostolicae sedis reverentiam hucusque facere
distulimus, nec ultra reditum nunciorum nostrorum, qui propter hoc ad redem
Apostolicam mittentur, Dissimulare pocerimus, quia regni Angliae tam Clero quam
Populo, qui talia nullatenus sustinebunt, pro viribus nostris subveniamus. Et
nisi citius praedicta per vos corrigantur, pro certo teneat Sanctitas vestra,
quod non immerito teneri potest, quod tam Ecclesiae Romanae, quam Domino regi
tale periculum immanebit, quod eidem remedium, quod absit, de facile non
poterit adhiberi.

The King in the mean time, by the Lords advice, sent this Prohibition to the
Clergy, not to pay any Tax or Tallage to the Pope; Mat. Westminster. An. 1146. p. 208.
H. Dei gratia etc. Venerabili in Christo tali Episcopo salutem. Licet alias
vobis scripserimus, semel secundo, and tertio, tam per literas nostras clausas,
quam patentes, ne ad opus domini Papae vel alterius tallagium aliquod vel
auxilium exigeritis a viris Religiosis, clericis vel laicis, cum nullum
hujusmodi tallagium vel auxilium exigi possit vel consueverit sine magno
praejudicio Regiae dignitatis, quod nullo modo poterimus aut volumus sustinere:
Vos tamen mandatum nostrorum in hac part co^emnentes, contra provisionem per
Magnates nostros, tam Praelatos quam Comites et Barons factam in Concilio
nostro Londoniensi: and concessam exactionem faciatis memoratam, super quo
miramur plurimum and movemur, praesertim cum facto vestro proprio non
erubescitis contraire, cum vos and alii Praelati in praedicto Concilio
communiter concesseritis, quod nihil de exactione hujusmodi faceretis, donec
nuncii nostri and vestri, necnon and aliorum Magnatum nostrorum and totius
universitatis regni nostri a curia Romana redirent, qui pro liberatione
oppressionum ad curiam illam, sicut nostis, fuerant specialiter destinati.
Vobis igitur mandatis inculcatis mandamus injungentes, firmius and districtius
inhibentes, ne ad exactionem praedicti tallagii vel auxilii faciendam
aliquatenus procedatis, sicut gaudere desideratis Baronia vestra and
possessionibus vestris, quas in regno nostro tenetis. Et si quid inde cepistis,
extra regnum nostrum asportari nullatenus permittatis, sed illud salvo
custodiri faciatis usque ad reditum nunciorum praedictorum, indubitanter
scituri, quod si secus egeritis, nos ad possessiones vestras manum gravaminis,
ultra quam credere velitis, extendemus. Hanc autem inhibitionem vobis in
jungimus faciendam Archidiaconis and officialibus vestris, quam quidem pro
liberate cleri and populi facimus, novit Deus, etc.

The Mat. Paris, p. 687.
Messengers sent with these Letters to the Court of Rome returning thence,
thereupon the same year, Die translationis beati Thomae Martyris habitum est
MAGNUM CONCILIUM inter Regem et REGNI MAGNATES apud Wintoniam: Wherein, Nuncii
memorati, verba Papalia, qui nihil mitigationis, imo potius exasperationis
tenorem continebant nunciantes, and affirmantes, quod nec in gestu vel verbis
Papalibus aliquid humilitatis vel moderationis super oppressionibus quibus tam
Regnum quam Ecclesia Anglicana gravabatur et conquesta est, poterant reperire.
Dixerat enim Papa, illis aliquod optabile responsum expectantibus; Rex Anglorum
qui jam recalcitrat et Frederizar, suum habet consilium, ego vero meum habeo,
quod et sequar. Et ex tunc vix aliquis Anglicus in Curia negotium aliquod
poterat expedire, imo velut scismatici repellabantur omnes, probris lacessiti.
Haec autem cum audisset Dominus Rex cum Magnatibus suis, commotus est
vehementer and merito, praecepitque voce praeconia in omnibus Comitatibus, per
omnes villas et terras, et congregationes public acclatuari, Ne quis per
regnum Papali contributioni consentiret, vel aliquid pecuniae in auxilium ejus
transmitteret. Quod factum est. Illud autem cum audi^et Papa, in vehementem
iram excanduit, and iterato asperius Praelatis scripsit Anglicanis, ut sub
poena excommunicationis and suspensionis, infra festum Assumptionis, nuncio suo
apud novum Templum Londini commoranti, de praedicto auxilio satisfacerent. Et
cum constanter pararetur, dominus Rex stare pro regni et Ecclesiae liberatione
(comminationibus Comitis Richardi fratris sui, et quorundam Episcoporum, quorum
principalis erat Wigorniensis, cui a Domino Papa concessa fuit potestas terram
etiam, ut perhibebatur, interdicendi,) fractus succubuit et perterritus. Unde
totus conatus tam Magnatum quam Episcoporum, et spes de regni et ecclesiae
Anglicanae liberatione miserabiliter, and non sine multorum cordium cruento
dolor, emarcuit adnihilatus, et impune hiatibus Romanae a varitiae de memorata
contributione est satisfactum.

Mat. Paris, p. 694.
The Pope hereupon taking more boldness than before to trample the English
Prelates and Clergy under his feet, and fleece them; imperiose and solito
imperiofius Praelatis Angliae demandavit, ut in Anglia omnes beneficiati, in
suis beneficiis residentiam facientes, tertiam partem bonorum suorum Domino
Papae conferrent, non facientes residentiam, dimidiam, multis adjectis
durissimis conditionibus praedictum mandatum restringentibus, per illum verbum,
et adjectionem detestabilem, NON OBSTANTE, quae omnem extinguit justitiam
praehabitam. The Bishops assembling in convocation to exact it, the King
thereupon (by his Nobles advice and instigation) sent Sir John de Lexeton a
Knight, and Lawrence St. Marin his Clark to them, strictly commanding them in
the kings behalf, not to consent by any means to this contribution demanded by
the Pope, to the desolation of the English kingdom. The next year 1247. Mat.
Paris, p. 697, 698, 706, 707. Mat. Westminster. p. 220, 221, 223.
Vrgente Papali mandato redivivo de importabili contributione Papali praetacta,
ad quam Episcopi in generali Concilio Clerum infeliciter obligarent, fecit
Dominus Rex MAGNATES SUOS, nec non et Angliae Archidiaconos per scripta sua
Regia Londini convocari. Quo cum pervenissent die ptaefixo, Episcopi omnes sese
gratis absentarunt, ne viderentur propriis factis eminus adversari. Sciebant
enim corda omnium usque ad animae amaritudinem sauciri. Convenerunt tunc ibidem
Archidiaconi Angliae, nec non, et totius regni Cleri pars non minima CUM IPSIS
MAGNATIBUS, conquerentes communiter super intolerabilibus and frequentibus
exactionibus Domini Papae, pro quibus and Dominus Rex non mediocriter
compatiendo tristabatur. Res enim publica periclatabatur, et commune negotium
regni totius agebatur, and imminebat tam populi quam cleri inanis desolatio et
cunctis temporibus inaudita. After long consultation, the King and Nobles by
common advise resolved, to send a remonstrance of all their grievances,
together with Letters, in the name of the whole Parliament and kingdom, to the
Pope and his Cardinals, speedily to redress them; which Letters they sealed
with the Common Seal of the City of London, and thereby obtained some show of
redress, of their grievances, which the Nobles further prosecuted and
complained of in another Parliament the selfsame year.

Mat. Westminster. p. 222.
Dominus Rex comperiens regnum suum enormiter undique "periclitari (by the
Popes, exactions, taxes, oppositions) " jussit OMNEM TOTIUS REGNI NOBILITATEM
CONVOCARI, ut de statu ipsius tam manifest periclitantis Oxoniae
contrectarent. Praelatos autem ad hoc Parliamentum vocavit anxius, quia videbat
eos tam frequenter per Papul^s extortiones depauperari, quod frequentia
consuetudinem, and regni ruinam manifest minabatur. Sperabatur igitur
communiter aliquod salubre Ecclesiae, et universitati ibi statuendum, quod
tamen omnes fefellit, through the Prelates and Clergies cowardice, and the
kings overmuch compliance with the Pope, the Nobles only continuing constant in
their oppositions against these papal exactions and enormities, being more
zealous for the Churches Clergies and Prelates liberties, against the Popes
intolerable exactions, oppressions, encroachments, than they themselves, and
the only persons who manfully and constantly maintained them, when the King,
Prelates and Clergy through fear, cowardice and treachery betrayed and deserted
them.

Mat. Westminster. p. 326.
Anno 1264. Pope Urban being much incensed against the BARONS spoiling the
goods of Ecclesiastical persons, who were Aliens advanced by his provisions,
said, That he desired to live no longer but till he had subdued the English;
whereupon he sent a Legate toward England, a great Person, to wit Sabin a
Bishop Cardinal, to interdict the Land and excommunicate THE BARONS the
oppugners of his Provisions. But when he would have entered England, he found he
could not safely do it, by reason of the Barons resistance; Whereupon citing
some Bishops of the Realm first to Ambayonne, and afterward to Bononia,
Sententiam excommunicationis et interdictionis super Civitatem Londoniae et 5.
Portus, necnon and quasdam personas illustres ET NOBILES REGNI fulminatum,
commisit exequendam. At illi Sententiam illam contra justitiam illatam
attendentes, appellarunt ad Papam, ad meliora tempora, vel ad generale
Concilium, necnon et supremu^ judice^, certis de causis et rationibus
commendabilibus: Quae postea appellatio, in Anglia congregato apud Radingum
Concilio recitata est, et ab Episcopis et Clero approbata et executa.
Interdictum autem, licet inviti suscipientes a Legato praedicti Episcopi secum
detulerunt. Sed cum applicuissent Doveriae, scrutinio ex more in portu facto,
int^^^eptum est a Civibus, et in minutias dilaneatum jactatur in mare. So
little did they then regard, and so much detest and scorn the Popes unjust
Interdict in so just a cause.

An. 2 E. 1. Rot. Fin. m. 9. in Sched. Cook 4 Inst. p. 13. Pope Gregory by his
Letters demanding the rent of 1000. marks by the year of K. Ed. the 1. reserved
for England, upon his regranting the Realm to King John, the king writ thus to
him: Se sine PRAELATIS ET PROCERIBUS REGNI NON POSSE RESPONDERE, and quod
jurejurando in coronatione sua fuit astrictus, QVOD JURA REGNI SUI SERVARET
ILLIBATA, nec aliquid quod Diadema tangit Regni ejusdem, absque ipsorum
requisitus consilio facere. And the Parliament being ended, he could do
nothing without them: who afterward gallantly opposed his usurpations, as will
appear by this following president

Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 48. to 56. Ypodig. Neustriae, p. 88. to 95. Mat.
Westminster. p. 435, 436.
King Edward the 1. in the 29. year of his reign, being summoned by the Pope,
by himself or his Proctors to declare his right to the Realm of Scotland in his
Court at Rome, where he should receive justice concerning it. The King
thereupon called a Parliament to consult about it: where he refused to return
any answer by himself, but committed it to the Earls and other Lords of the
Land to return the Pope an answer thereunto. Who making a large and learned
Historical Remonstrance of the subjection of Scotland and her Kings to the
Kings of England, and of their Homage done to them in all ages as their
Sovereign Lords, sent it to the Pope, with this notable Letter signed (as Mat.
Westminster and 2 Institutes, p. 98.
Sir Edward Cook inform us) with no less than 100 Seals of Arms of Earls and
Barons, in the name of the whole Parliament and Kingdom.

Sancta Romana Ecclesia, per cujus ministerium fides Catholica in suis artibus;
cum ea ut firmiter credimus et teneamus maturitate procedit, quod nulli
praejudicare, sed singulorum jura conservari velit illaesa. Sane convocato
nuper per Serenissimum Dominum nostrum* Edwardum, Dei gratia regem Angliae
illustrem, Parliamento apud Lincolniam generali, idem Dominus noster quasdam
literas Apostolicas, quas super certis negotiis conditionem et statum Regni ex
vestra part receperat in medio exhiberi, ac seriose nobis fecit exponi. Quibus
auditis and diligenter intellectis, ita sensibus admiranda quam hactenus
inaudita in eis audivimus contineri. Scimus enim Pater sanctissime, et notorium
in partibus nostris, ac nonnullis aliis non ignotum, quod a prima institutione
Regni Angliae, Reges ejusdem regni, tam temporibus Britonum, quam Anglorum,
superius and directum Dominium regni Scotiae habuerunt in possessione, vel
capitanei superioritatis et recti Dominii ipsius Scotiae successivis temporibus
habuerunt, nec ullis temporibus ipsum regnum in temporalibus pertinuit, vel
pertinet quovismodo ad Ecclesiam supradictam. Quinimo idem Regnum Scotiae dicti
Regni nostri Regibus Angliae atque sibi faeodale extitit ab ant^quo. Nec etiam
Reges Scotorum and Regnum, aliis quam Regibus Angliae subfuerunt, vel subjici
consueverunt, neque Reges Angliae super juribus suis in regno praedicto, aut
aliis suis temporalibus, coram aliquo judice ecclesiastico vel saeculari, ex
Praeeminentia status suae Regiae dignitatis et consuetudinis cunctis temporibus
irrefragabiliter observatae responderunt, aut respondere debebant. Vnde habito
tractatu et deliberatione diligenti super contentis in Literis vestris
memoratis, communis, concors, and unanimus omnium nostrum et singulorum
consensus fuit, et erit inconcusse Deo propitio in futurum, Nota.
quod praefatus Dominus noster Rex super juribus Regni Scotiae, aut aliis suis
temporalibus nullatenus respondeat judicialiter coram Vobis, nec judicium
subeat quoquo modo, aut jura sua praedicta in dubium quaestionis deducat, nec
ad praesentiam vestram Procuratores aut nuncios ad hoc mittat: praecipue cum
praemissa cederent manifest in exhaeredationem juris coronae Regni Angliae, et
Regiae dignitatis, ac subversionem Status ejusdem Regni notoriam, necnon ad
praejudicium Libertatis, Consuetudinum et Legum paternarum, ad quarum
obfervationem et defensionem debito praestiti juramenti astringimux, et quae
manutenebimus toto posse, totisque viribus cum Dei auxilio defendemus. Nec enim
permittimus, nec aliqualiter permittemus, sicut non possumus, praemissa tam
insolita, tam indebita, praejudicialia, and alias inaudita praelibatum dominum
regem, etiam si vellet, facere, seu modo quolibet attemptare. Quapropter
sanctitati vestrae humiliter supplicamus, quatenus eundem nostrum dominum
Regem, qui inter alios Principes orbis terrae Catholicum se exhibet, et Romanae
Ecclesiae devotum jura sua, Libertates et Consuetudines et leges praedictas
abique diminutione et inquietudine pacifics pof^idere, as illibata persistere
benignius permittatis. A most noble, heroical, loyal, magnanimous Resolution of
all the English Peers to their King and Country, even against the Popes
encroachments on them, though then their Ghostly Father.

Anno 1307. King Edward the 1. Mat. Westminster. p. 463, 464.
held a Parliament ar Carlisle, in quae per Majores regni graves deposita sunt
querimoniae de oppressionibus Ecclesiarum et Monasteriorum multiplicibus
extortionibus pecuniarum, per Clericum Domini Papae, Magistrum Gulihelmum de
Testa noviter in regnum inductis; praeceptumque est eidem clerico DE ASSENSU
COMITUM and BARONUM, ne de caetero talia exequatur; Ordinatum etiam erat quod
pro remedio super hiis obtinendo, ad dominum Papam assignati mitterentur Nuncii.

I shall close up this point with one memorable example more, Tho. Walsingham,
Hist. Angl. p. 76.
Anno 1312. there being a great difference between King Edward the 2. and his
Nobles, about his recalling Peter Gaverston after a double exile by sentence of
the Lords in parliament, who took up arms to expel him by force, and desired
the King to confirm and execute certain Ordinances they had made, else they
would by strong hand compel him thereunto: hereupon the Popes two Legates then
in England, came with the rest of the Prelates of England and Earl of Gloucester
to St. Albans, to mediate a Peace between the King and Lords: from whence they
sent their Clerks to Warhamstede, where the Barons then lay with their Army;
cum Literis summi Pontificis eis pro pace roganda directis. Magnates audientes
extraneos eis Literas apportate, ipsos quidem pacifice receperunt* sed literas
recipere noluerunt, dicentes se non esse literatos, sed armis and militia
exercitatos, et ideo videre literas non curarunt. Tunc qui missi fuerant
requisierunt, si placeret eis habere colloquium cum Dominis suis, Domini Papae
nunciis, qui pro pace reformanda personaliter accedere cupiebant. Ad haec
PROCERES responderunt, Se in regno multos habere probos and literatos
Episcopos, quorum consiliis uti volebant, et non ex^rancorum, quibus non esset
cognita causa commotionis suae; praeciseque dixerunt, se nullo modo permissuros
ut aliquis alienigena vel forensis intromitteret de factis suis, aut
quibuscunque negotiis eos tangentibus infra Regnum. So much did the Lords then
slight the Popes Letters and Legates. Nuncii Domini Papae tali modo perterriti
in crastino summo mane iter versus Londonias maturarunt, qui apud Sanctum
Albanum loci commoditate illecti, moram traxisse per Mensem vel amplius
cogitaverant. And so intermedled no more therein.

Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 74, 75, etc.
The same year, Henry de Lacy Earl of Lincoln, lying upon his deathbed, used
this Speech to Thomas Earl of Lancaster his Son-in-law, heir to 5. Earldoms.
Quomodo Deus eum prae cunctis in regno ditaverit, honoraverit, and gloriae
fecerat abundare. Quapropter, ait, et Deum diligere te, et honorare prae
caeteris obligaris. Cernis Sanctam Ecclesiam Anglicanam honorabilem quondam et
liberam, per Romanorum Oppressiones, and Regum hujus regni injustas Exactiones
(proh dolor) ancillatam. Vides and plebem regni Tributis and Tallagiis
apporiatam, and de condition Libertatis in servitutem actam (a true character
of our times, after all our wars for Liberty and Property.) Cernis regni
Nobilitatem (quandoque toti Christianitati venerabilem) jam ab alienigenis in
terra propria vilipensam. Adjuro te igitur per nomen Christi ut virum induas,
exurgas, et eriges te ad honorem Dei and Ecclesiae, et patriae liberationem:
adhibeasque tibi virum strenuum, nobilem and prudentem Guidonem Warwicensem
Comitem, cum necesse fuerit de regni tractare negotiis, qui and consilio
praeeminet et maturitate pollet. Non verearis insurgentes adversantes tibi
dimicaturo pro veritate. Si his meis monitis acquieveris, in aeternum honorem
and gloriam consequeris. Whereupon this Earl, pro relevanda sanctae matris
Ecclesiae oppressione et recuperanda regni debita liberate, confederated with
diverse other Earls and Nobles, who electing him for their General, regni
Nobilium communi decreti sententia. Then they sent Messengers to the K. to
banish Peter G^verston; which he refusing to do, they pursued him with their
arms, cut off his head, slighted the Popes Letters and Nuncios; regulated his
Extortions, and enforced the King to confirm the Ordinances they made for the
redress of all grievances both in Church and State; with the Great Charter,
Laws and Liberties of the Church and people, in whose defense and quarrel this
Earl afterward lost his life.

To these I could annex many other such like Letters, resolutions, oppositions
of our Earls, Lords, Barons in Parliament, against the Popes Usurpations,
Encroachments, upon the Crowns, Royalties of our Kings, and Liberties, See an
Exact Abridgement of the Records in the Tower, p. 64, 65.120, 121, 122.
Laws, Customs of our Kingdom, as 21 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 63.40 E. 3. rot. Parl.
n. 8. Cooks 4 Institutes, p. 13, 14.50 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 85. to 108. 27 E. 3.
c. 1. 38 E. 3. c. 4. and 16 R. 2. c. 5. wherein every one of the Lords temporal
in Parliament answered and averred by himself severally and jointly with the
rest, That neither King John nor any other could put himself or his Realm or
people into subjection or Tribute unto the Pope, without their common assents:
That the submission he made to the Pope, was without their assents, and against
his Oath at his Coronation: That if the Pope by process or otherwise would
attempt to enforce the King or his Subjects to render him the Services and
annual Tribute for England and Ireland, granted him by King John, they would
resist and oppose him with all their power: And moreover, That they will stand
with the Kings Crown and Royalty in all cases of the Popes usurpations clearly
in derogation of the Kings Crown, and in all other cases which shall be
attempted against the said Crown and Royalty in all points, with all their
power; whose Gallantry, loyalty, stoutness, have been the chief means under
God, to enfranchise our Kings, kingdoms, Church, from the manifold
Antichristian Tyrannies, Usurpations, Oppressions, Taxes, Vassallages, Slavery
of domineering Popes in all ages, as the premises with other instances
sufficiently evidence. And upon this ground it was (by reason of the Popes
incessant Usurpations in former times upon the Royalties, Rights, Liberties
both of the Crown, Realm and Church of England) that the Nobles in our
Parliaments were in the very Writs of Summons ever called thereunto, to consult
and treat with the King, Prelates, Lords and Great men of the Realm, of certain
weighty and arduous affairs concerning the State and Defense of the Realm, ET
ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE, and the Church of England; the Defense of the Church as
well as Realm against the Popes encroachments, being one chief business of our
Lords and Greatmen in our Parliaments; which now it seems is no part of our
New-modelled Parliaments, as some style them; there beieg neither DEI GRATIA,
nor Statum and defensionem ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE to be found in any of their New
Writs that I have seen; which had been an impious insufferable omission in all
former ages: This Clause engaging our Peers so stoutly to resist the Pope as
the premises demonstrate: which good service of theirs hoth in common Justice,
reason, equity; merited a Place and Vote for them and their Posterities in all
our English Parliaments, without any popular election.

Before I proceed to the next reason of our Lords sitting in Parliament, I
shall earnestly importune, yea adjure all the ancient Earls, Barons, Nobles and
Great men of our Realm; with all who have lately been, or pretend to be any
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses of real or pretended Parliaments, our late and
present swaying Grandees; and all Lawyers, Gentlemen, Freemen of our English
Nation, seriously to review, and cordially to ponder all the forecited
memorable presidents of their Noble Gallant public spirited Ancestors, here
recited and bundled up together for their information, reformation, and
undelayed imitation in this and the precedent reason, both in procuring,
regaining, reestablishing the Great Charters of our fundamental Liberties,
Rights, Properties, Freedom, with solemn New publications, Excommunications,
Execrations, Oaths, Confederacies, Penalties, Laws, Edicts, for their own and
their Posterities benefit; In denying, opposing, resisting all unreasonable or
illegal Aids, Subsidies, Tenths demanded, entreated of, or exacted from them by
our Kings upon real or pretended Necessities, Wants, Wars, or defense by Sea
and Land; their bold, frequent, unanimous, magnanimous reprehensions of our
Kings and their evil Counselors to their faces, for their Exorbitances,
Misgovernment, Exactions, Oppressions, Violations of their Great Charter, Laws,
Liberties, Privileges, Oaths, Promises, and unnecessary Wars, or Expenses
without their public Counsel or advice: in their resolute inflexible unanimous
resolutions, oppositions both in and out of Parliaments, against all illegal
Papal Encroachments, Usurpations, Exactions on the Rights, Privileges of the
Crown, Kingdom, Church, Parliament, Clergy, People, upon every fresh occasion;
and in their vigilant, indefatigable zeal, earnest care, diligence, with the
hazard of their Limbs, Lives, Liberties, Estates, and effusion of their blood
for the public Liberty, Freedom, Ease, weal, good Government of the Nation,
according to those wholesome Charters, Laws and Ordinances, which they procured
for that end, with much industry, strife and opposition in many successive
Parliaments. And then let them all with confusion of face, consternation of
spirit and grief of heart seriously consider how stupendiously, monstrously and
incredibly they have all for near ten years last past, most desperately
apostatized, degenerated both from the Heroic, Noble, Gallant, Memorable
Presidents, Practices, Courage, Zeal of these their Renowned Ancestors in every
of these particulars, and from their own Praiseworthy Actions, Remonstrances,
Councils, Parliamentary and Military proceedings of like Nature under our two
last Kings, out of unworthy, un-English, unchristian Cowardice, Fear,
Self-love, Sluggishness, Sottishness, Supineness, after all their late solemn
public Protestations, Remonstrances, Declarations, Vows, Oaths, Leagues,
Covenants, near ten years bloody intestine Wars, the overprodigal expense of
many Millions of Treasure, and whole Oceans of precious Christian, Protestant
English blood, for the real, or at least pretended Defense alone, and
maintaining, secuting those ancient undoubted Fundamental Great Charters, Laws,
Liberties, Properties, Privileges and Rights of Parliament, and exempting us
from all future arbitrary, tyrannical, illegal Exactions, Taxes, Excises,
Imposts, Imprisonments, restraints, exiles, and executions; which they have now
all most ignobly submitted to without the least manly public or private
Opposition, contradiction, or care, activity to break off those iron yoaks of
bondage, and intolerable, perpetual burdens; which some Impudent Intruders,
and new Egyptian Taxmasters have most illegally imposed on them, as if they
were all resolved to renounce all their former Great Charters, Laws, Liberties,
Privileges, and Rights of English Nobles, Parliamentmen, Freemen, and to become
the basest bondslaves under heaven. So that if these our Nobles Ancestors
should now rise from the dead, they might justly stand amazed at this their
ignoble, slavish cowardice, and universal degeneracy, yea disclaim them as
spurious, and none of their heroic English progeny, and they all may justly
demand this Question from themselves: Whether they be the genuine offspring of
these their Noble Ancestors, or natural Freeborn English Peers or Freemen, and
not rather the degenerate offspring of Russian Vassals or Turkish Gallyslaves,
who never knew what English Freedom was? as if now born only to the greatest
servitude and Bondage that ever mortals voluntarily submitted unto, through
pusillanimous fear or baseness: For alas, where is the Nobleman, Knight,
Citizen, Burgess, Lawyer, Gentleman or English Freemen to be found, who now
dares manfully to claim, plead, avow, defend, or contend for the undoubted
rights and privileges of his own Which some have disclaimed by unPeering
themselves.
Peerage, or our Parliaments, the famous Grand Charters of his own and the
Nations Liberty and Freedom, either in or out of Parliament, after so many old,
late military and Parliamentary Contests, Acts, Oaths, Excommunications,
Remonstrances, Declarations, Protestations, Vows, Leagues, Covenants for their
inviolable maintenance and defense in every Article, especially those which
concern Peerage, Liberty, Property, Freehold, Life, the Members, privileges of
our Parliaments? and that not only against their Sovereign and Superiors, with
whom they formerly contested; but even against those late or present
domineering Army Officers, and Vpstaris, who but a few years since were not
only their fellow Subjects, but their Inferiors in all respects, yea their
Mercinary Servants, Hirelings, and Mechanics of the lowest rank? or against
the meanest Publicans, Officers or Excisemen, Governors of our new-moulded
Commonwealth, who have trampled our Great Charters, Laws, Liberties,
properties and Parliaments themselves under feet, and not only scorn, deride,
but disgust the very Name and Mention of Styled Magna Farta, by some Grandees.
Magna Charta, as offensive to their lawless tyranny, and repute the urging of
it to control their arbitrary proceedings, encroachments, Taxes, Excises,
little less than a capital offense. For proof whereof, I shall instance in One
particulat. In August 1650. during my close Imprisonment in Dunster Castle, by
Mr. Bradshaw and his Whitehall Associates lawless warrant, there came an Order
from them, and the Committee of the Militia of Somersetshire, with near 200
pioneers of the County, to slight and demolish that Castle to the Ground,
without giving Mr. George Luttrel, then owner thereof, the least notice. Who
thereupon was advised by his Council, to send a Petition to Whitehall to stay
the execution. The Petition then drawn by his Council being long and
imperrinent, I did at his Wives request, draw up another short one for him to
this effect. That Dunster Castle, was the ancient inheritance and chief Seat of
his Ancestors and himself, of which many Manors were held by Knight Service and
Castle-Gard; That his Father fortified and held it for the Parliament at his
own charge; for which he was kept and died a Prisoner under the King: That his
Uncle (who was slain near the Castle) and himself, were both Colonels for the
Parliament, serving them gratis without any pay, for which the Kings party had
sequestered his estate, felled his woods, seized his rents to the value of ten
thousand pounds at least; that the Castle was regained from the Kings party
principally by his means, being his only Mansion house: which if now suddenly
pulled down, he and his family must lie in the Streets, and he sustain at least
thirty thousand pounds new damage by it, instead of a recompense for his former
losses and public unmercenary services, which would expose both himself and
the^ to the obloquy of their malignant Enemies. He thereupon humbly prayed,
that according to Magna Charta, he might not be disinherited or disseised of
this his Freehold, without any hearing or Legal trial, by this their Order, but
that they would suspend or revoke it. This petition being sent to London was
delivered to a Great Lawyer, (one of Mr. Bradshaws Associats, and a then
sitting Member) to present; who commanded the very name and mention of Magna
Charta only to be struck out, and the rest of the petition to be new written,
because the very name of it would give offense or distaste to the COUNCEL at
Whitehall, as he affirmed. Which I then found true by experience, my insisting
on it in my See my New Discovery of Free State Tyranny.
Letters to them to demand my Liberty, being so offensive, that they would
neither answer, nor read my Letters but with indignation. How others in late
and present power have vilified and contemned the Great Charter, the petition
of Righr, and all other Laws in confirmation of it, by dissolving the House of
Peers, making and unmaking new forms of Parliaments at their pleasures,
condemning, beheading Peers and others in new misnamed High Courts of Justice,
without trials by their Peers, imprisoning, close imprisoning, confining,
banishing, sequestring, disinheriting, disofficing Nobles, Parliament Men, and
all sorts of Freemen at their pleasures, without any lawful cause, hearing or
legal trial; by breaking up and ransacking their houses by armed Soldiers day
and night, seizing their horses, arms, Letters, papers, denying to grant them
when imprisoned Habeas Corporaes, or to return them when granted, or bayl them
when returned; by imposing intolerable, uncessant Taxes, Excises, Imposts,
payments, penalties, sequestrations, forfeitures, Treasons, exiles, restraints,
Engagements, Disabilities on the people; by See the Whitehall Ordinance for
Excise, March 17. 1653. and others since.
commanding all Courts of Justice in their new Commonwealth, and all Judges and
Justices of the same, Sherifs, Committee Men, Attorneys, Sollicitors, and all
other persons, without any Opposition or dispute whatsoever, to conform
themselves to their most tyrannical Ordinances touching Taxes, Imposts,
Excises, (though so much My first part of a Legal Vindication, etc. of the
Fundamental Laws of England, p. 67. to 72. My Protestation against Excise.
decried condemned by two Parliaments and themselves) authorizing their
Excisemen and Agents to levy their illegal new kind of Impositions by ex
officio Oaths, Distresses, Fines, Forfeitures, sequestrations, seisures both of
their real and personal Estates, breaking up of their houses, (which must stand
open to their searches day and night, without opposition) by imprisonment of
their persons, by indemnifying all Officers who shall thus illegally abuse
them, giving them good costs and damages if sued, staying all their actions at
Law for their just relief, and imprisoning all such Lawyers as grand
delinquents, who shall dare to move for their Liberties, or plead their causes,
(which not one dares do since Mr. Conyes late case.) And how our New-modelled
Parliaments (as some style them) instead of complaining against and regulating
these tyrannical oppressions, Exorbitances, Taxes, Ordinances, Excises, and
reprehending the Authors of them to their faces, have countenanced them by
their stupid silence, confirmed them by new Edicts, yea made it their principal
business to burden our 3. whole Nations with perpetual, endless, illegal New
Taxes, Excises, Imposts, Customs, Payments unheard of by our ancestors in any
former ages (amounting to more thousands, millions in one year, than King Henry
the 3. whom the Barons so much opposed and complained against for Exactions,
levied upon his Subjects by way of Tax or Ayds, in all his 51 years reign:) yea
to null the Great Charter it self, with all our fundamental Laws, Liberties,
and the Privileges, Essence of Parliaments themselves, by secluding, disabling
what members they please from sitting, by depriving the people of their Votes,
freedom in electing Members, both in ancient Boroughs and Counties; by
subjecting them to new imprisonments, forfeiteres of Estate, life, and trials
by Marshal Law in sundry particulars, against this Charter, instead of easing
them of their long-continued, illegal Taxes, Excises, Imposts, Imprisonments,
Confinements, etc. confirming their former Liberties, Franchises, Properties,
Parliamentary privileges, punishing the manifold high violations of them, with
those ill Councellers, Projectors, who were the chief contrivers of these
intolerable grievances, and resuming the antitient dissipated Lands, Revenues
of the Crown, which should defray al publik, ordinary expenses: yea, how
instrumental some of them have been to promote the desperate See my speech in
Parliament, and Epistle to my Legal Vindication, etc.
designs, Practices, Conspiracies of the Pope and Jesuits themselves (now
swarming amongst us, under sundry disguises) to ruin both our Kings,
Parliaments, Church and State, is so experimentally visible, and well known to
them all, that I hope the consideration thereof, compared with the forecited
Presidents of our noble Ancestors and Parliamen^s, will strike such a confusion
of face, such a compunction of heart into them for this their degeneracy,
Apostasy, and breach of public trust, that they will now at last, to regain
their own lost reputations, publicly renounce and abhor their former
Exorbitances, and study to equalize and out act those their heroic
predecesors, by regaining re-establishing our lost Great Charters, Laws,
Properties, Liberties, Parliaments, privileges, Peerage, and make us once more
a free, and thereby a happy and united Kingdom, Church, Nation, that so they
may be deemed worthy to sit, vote in our future Parliaments.

It is Mat. Westminster. p. 409. Walsingham, Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 83, 84.
storied of our renowned, victorious, warlike King Edward the 1. that in a
Parliament held at Westminster in July 1297. he ascended upon a wooden scaffold
before the great hall there, with his Son Prince Edward, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Earl of Warwick, and there before all the people standing by;
erumpentibus lach ymis veniam de commissis humiliter postulavit; dicens, se
minus been and tranquilliter quam Regem deceret ipsos rexisse, portiunculas
facultatum suarum, quas sibi dederaut, seu quas ministri ejus ipso inscio
extorserant, ideo acceptasse, ut in ^ur^osos hostium conatus, sitientium
sanguinem Anglicanum, sumpta Rei publicae particula massa quietius possidendo,
potentius expugnaret. Et addens, ecce expositurus meipsum discrimini propter
vos, peto si rediero, suscipiatis me velut in presentia habetis, and ABLATA
OMNIA REDDAM VOBIS, etc. If our late or present all-swaying Governors,
Officers, Swordmen, will now make but the self same ingenuous acknowledgement
as he, before all the people, that they have not governed them so well and
peaceably as they should have done, and became them to do; that they and their
Officers have much oppressed, extorted from them, not small but great sums of
Money, by undue and exorbitant means against their wills, though with a public
intention, to conquer those Enemies more effectually who thirsted after English
blood, for whose safety they are still ready to adventure their lives: That
they have sought their own wealth, advantage, honor, preferment, more than the
public or peoples welfare; and thereupon shall with weeping eyes humbly beg
pardon of the whole Nation, and those particular persons they have any ways
ruined or oppressed, and promise them full reparation of their injuries, and
what ever they have unjustly taken from them, as this noble King Edw. did, and
confirm and enlarge all their Great Charters, Laws, Liberties, as fully as
freely as he then did, upon his Nobles importunity, they may then expect that
reciprocal Love and dutiful respect to them, as the Archbishop with the people
then promised to King Edward and his Son, with stretched out hands, and be
deemed worthy to sit and vote in Parliament, notwithstanding their former
miscarriages exorbitant arbitrary Ordinances and Provisions, of which if they
repent not, I fear in conclusion what Anno 1265. p. 339.
Matthew Westminster records of the Barons provisions at Oxon. Jews and
London, will be recorded of them, to Posterity; Haec de provisionibus imo DE
PRODITIONIBUS Oxon, Lewens. and Londini, dicta sufficiant, and quae variis
aequitatis, and justitiae fictionibus dealbatae, intus autem plenae Versutiae
Provisores suos pessime prodiderunt, which some of our late swaying republican
Legislators have already found true by sad experience. 4


Fourthly, our See Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, Part. 2. chap. 5. and Coke 4
Instit. p. 1.
Nobles are persons of greater Estates, Families, Fortunes than others,
contribute most to all public Taxes, charges, and have more to keep and lose
than other ordinary Commoners; and therefore in respect of themselves, their
families, kindred, tenants, reretainers, allies, have greater interest in the
Commonwealth and State affairs than they: We see by Common experience in all
kingdoms, Nations, and our own Realm, that men's great estates innoble, and
enable them to bear public Titles, Places of Honor, Dignity, Trust, Power, as
to be Lords, Knights, Esquire. Privy Counselors, Justices, Sherifs, Mayors,
Aldermen, and the like, which persons of mean fortunes, unable to support these
Dignities, Offices, places of trust and expense likewise, are incapable or
unable to bear or manage: Wherefore our Ancestors thought it meet, just, equal
that they should have this privilege among others above ordinary Commoners, to
be present in all our Parliaments by Patent and Tenure only, and that of right
ex debito justitiae; not by election, as Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses are,
being persons of meaner, estate, quality; and present in Parliament only, in
the right of others who elect them, not in their own rights, as the Lords are:
whose estates anciently were, and still are far more worth, yea their public
payment greater, than many whole Buroughs put together; and their families,
retainers, followers, far more in number. And so their engagements to maintain
the Laws, Liberties, properties of the Subject, far greater than inferior
men's. Upon which ground all Barons and Peers of the Realm, in cases of debt and
11 H. 4.13. Cook 6 Report, f. 52, 53.
executions are free from arrests of their bodres, because by reason of their
estates, and Dignities the Law intends, they have lands and assets to satisfy
all their debts.

Fifthly, It is one principal property of Members of Parliament to be Coke 4
Inst. p. 3.
constant, stout, inflexible, and not to be bowed or turned from the right, the
public good, or liberties, by fear, favor, promises, rewards. Now Peers of
noble birth; education, and more generous heroic spirits than the vulgar sort
of men, are not so apt to be overawed with regal threats, terrified with
menaces, tempted with honors, preferments, wealth, (which they already enjoy
in a higher proportion than others) nor seduced with rewards and private ends
from the common good and interest (wherein their honor, wealth, safety are
imbarqued;) as ordinary Commoners, and men of As both Houses resolve in their
Declaration of August, 1642. Exact. Collection, p. 492.
meaner rank and fortunes are, which experience of former ages, and this
present manifests. Therefore it was thought just and reasonable by our
Ancestors, that the Nobles in this regard should sit in all our Parliaments in
their Modus tenendi Parliament. Vowel, Coxe 4. Inst. c. 1.
own rights, without the peoples election* and to leave the people to elect
such other persons to represent, assent and vote for them in Parliament, in
whom they most confided.

Sixthly, our Peers in Parliament 12 R. 2. c. 12.23 H. 6. c. 12.23 H. 6 c. 11.9
H. 6. c. 16.31 H. 8. c. 11.50 E. 3. m. 209. 1 R. 2. n. 137.
( though they there serve for the good of the whole Kingdom, which has always
trusted to them, in matters of Counsel, Judicature, and making Laws) yet they
represent no persons but themselves only, or their families, Tenants, Friends,
and Allies which depend upon them, and bear their own expenses; which are so
great and chargeable, that the Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor part. 2. chapter 5. p.
732. to 736.
Abbot of St. James without Northampton, in the Parliament of 12 E. 2. and the
Abbot of Leicester in the the 26 of E. 3. being summoned to Parliament,
petitioned and procured themselves and their successors to be exemped from any
future summons to, and attendance in the Lords House, as Barons of the Realm,
both because they held no lands of the King by Barony, but only in frank
almoign, and their Predecessors had not formerly or usually been summoned to
Parliaments, sed vicibus interpolatis only; And likewise, because it would tend
to the great grievance and loss of them and their houses, and much impoverish
them, by reason of the great expense it would bring upon them: One Peer, and
his retinue expending more every Parliament than the wages of 40 or 50 Knights
and Burgesses amount to. Wherefore there is no shadow of reason why the people
should elect them, since they do not represent them, nor pay them wages, as
they do to their Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, who serve for, and represent
them. Wherefore their Levelling Oppugners may as well argue, That our Nobles
ought to be elected by the people to their Honors, Lands, Estates which descend
unto them from their Ancestors, not from the common people, as that they ought
to sir in Parliament by the peoples election; only to represent themselves in
their own right, not the people. And that the Knights of the Shire ought to be
elected to their dignity of Knighthood (which the King only confers on them) or
to their Lands and Freeholds, which they enjoy in their own right, because they
are elected by the Freeholders to sit in Parliament in their right who elected
them, nor their own alone, which Barons do not.

7ly. On these grounds the suppressing, debasing, captivity or slaughter of the
Princes, Lords, and Nobles of a kingdom or Nation, is by God himself defined to
be, an immediate forerunner, concomitant, cause of the Kingdoms, Nations ruin,
and slavery, and a matter of great lamentation. Ezech. 19.1.14. c. 17.12. Lam.
1.6. c. 2.2. c. 5.12. Prove. 19.10. c. 30.21.22. Eccl. 10.5, 7. Isay. 3.4. etc.
c. 34.11, 12, 13. c. 40.23. c. 43.28. Jer. 4.9. c. 27.20. c. 29. c. 25.18, 19.
c. 50.35.41, 51, 55. c. 52.16. Hos. 7.16. Amos 2.15. c. 2.2, 3. 2 Kings 24.14.
Mich. 3.7. 2 Chronicles. 24.23. Jer. 24.8, 9. And the continuing of Kings, Princes
and Nobles, in honor and power in any kingdom and nation, are reputed and
resolved by God to be the greatest honor, happiness, defense, safety and
preservation of that kingdom and people. Jer. 17.24, 25. c. 22.4 Eccles. 10.17.
Jer. 30.21. Psalm. 68.27, 28. Prove* 8.15, 16. Isay 32.1. 1. Chron. 23.2. etc. c.
28.1. etc. c. 29.24, 25. Genesis 17.6.16. c. 35.11. 2 Samuel 11, 12. 1 Chronicles. 14.2.
c. 28.4, 5. etc. 2 Chronicles. 2.11. c. 9.8. 1 Kings 11.32, 36. 2 Chronicles. 21.6, 7. 2
King. 8.18, 19. 1 Kings 15, 45. 2 Chronicles. 23.3.11.20, 21. c. 9.26.27. Numb.
24.7. Ezech. 37, 22, 29. Mich. 2.13. c. 4.8. Therefore they cannot be rejected
suppressed by us now, without apparent danger, ruin and desolation to our
kingdom, whatever frantic Levellers and others fancy to the contrary, who
would be more than Kings and Lords themselves over the Nation, could they once
suppress both King and Lords, as they design and endeavor.

By all which premises it is most apparent, That our Lords and Barons sitting,
voting in Parliament, (who if you take them poll by poll, have in all ages been
more able Parliament Men, Statesmen in all respects, than the Commons, though
chosen by the people, who always make not choice of the best and wisest men,
as experience manifests) is not only just, lawful in respect of Right and
Title, but originally instituted upon such grounds of Reason, Justice, Equity,
Policy, as no rational understanding man can dislike or contradict, but must
subscribe to, as necessary and convenient; and so still to be continued,
supported in this their Right and Honor, to Exact collection, p. 320, 321, 322.
moderate the Excesses, Encroachments both of King and Commons one upon the
other, and keep both of them within their just and ancient bounds, for the
kingdoms peace and safety. The rather, for that the very Act made this
Parliament for the preventing of inconveniences happening through the long
intermission of Parliaments, not only enacts, and requires, ALL the Lords and
Barons of this Realm, to meet and sit in every Parliament, under a penalty; but
likewise prescribes an Oath to the Lord Keeper and Commissioners of the Great
Seal under severe penalties to send forth Writs of Summons to Parl. TO THEM
ALL, and in their default, enables and enjoins the Peers of the Realm, or any
twelve or more of them, to issue forth Writs of Summons to Parliament under the
Great Seal of England, for the electing of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses:
which Act will be merely void and nugatory, if their Votes and Right to sit in
Parliament be denied, or the House of Peers reduced to the House of Commons,
which this very Statute does distinguish.

Now whereas our whimsical Lilburnists and Levellers object; Object.
that the Lords have no right to sit or vote in our Parliaments, because they
are not elected as Knights and Burgesses by the people, under which Notion
alone, when thus elected, they will admit them a place and vote in the Commons
house, but not otherwise. I must inform these Ignoramusses, that by the Laws,
Statutes of our Realm, Answer.
and the custom, resolution of our Parliaments, the Earls, Lords and Barons of
the Realm, are altogether incapable of being elected Knights or Burgesses to
serve in Parliament, and their elections as such; merely void and null in Law
to all intents. This is most apparent, 1. By the very words of the writs of
Summons to the Lords: whereby they are summoned Cook 4 Instit. p. 16. Seldens
Titles of Honor, p. 736, 737, 715, 716.747.721.722, 724, 725.
Nobiscum and cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti Regni
nostri, colloquium habere and tractare etc. vestrumque consilium impensuri,
etc. not to treat, conferr, and consult with the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses. 2. By the express words of the Writs for the electing of Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses, which have the same clause; and then enjoin the Sherifs
to cause to be elected and returned, duos Milites, magis ido^eos and discretos
Comitatus praedicti, and de qualibet Civitate duos Cives, and de quolibet Burgo
duos Burgenses de discretioribus and magis sufficientibus, etc. ad faciendum et
consentiendum hiis, quae tunc, etc. Which disables them to elect any Lords or
Barons; being no such Knights, Citizens or Burgesses as the writ enjoins them
to elect and return. 3. By all the Statutes for electing Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses recorded in Rastall, Tit. Parliament; the Lords being not within
their words or intention. 4. By the Great Charter of King John, and express
Statutes of 5 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 4.31 H. 8. c. 10. and Rot. Par. n. 10. which
disable them to sit amongst the Commons, but only in the Lords house among
their Peers. 5. By the very words of the Patents of their Creation, which
authorize and prescribe all Dukes, Earls, Viconts, Barons in direct terms,
Seldens Titles of Honor part 2. c. 5. p. 663, 665.747, 748, 751, 757, 563.
Quod in omnibus tenerentur, tractentur et reputentur ut Duces, Comites,
Barons, and quod haeredes sui masculi et eorum quilibet, habeat, teneat, and
possideat sedem, locum et vocem in Parliamentis, publilicis Comitiis et
Consiliis nostris, Haeredum et Successorum nostrorum infra Regnum nostrum
Angliae, inter alios Duces, Comites et Barons (not amongst the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses,) ut Duces, Comites et Barons Parliamentorum,
Publicorum Comitiorum et Consiliorum; not as Knights, Citizens or Burgesses. 6.
By Sir Edward Cooks 4 Institutes, p. 46, 47. and Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor,
p. 736, 737. who resolve, That a Baron or Lord of Parliament, is not eligible
to be a Knight, Citizen or Burgess of the House of Commons, as was resolved in
the case of Thomas Camoyes, who was not only a Baronet, but also a Baron and
Lord of Parliament. The Lord Camoyes being elected by the Freeholders of the
County of Surrey for one of the Knights of the Shire to serve in Parliament for
them, Anno 7 R. 2. thereupon the King by advice of Council, declared his
election to be null and void in Law, and commanded a new election of some other
fit person to be made in his place, by this memorable Writ, extant on record.

Claus. 7 R. 2. mem. 32. dorso. Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 737. Cook 4 Instit.
p. 47.
Rex Vicecomiti Surriae salutem. Quia ut accepimus tu Thomam Camoyes Chivaler,
qui Baronettus est, sicut quamplures antecessorum suorum extiterunt, ad
essendum unum Militum venientium ad proximum Parliamentum nostrum pro
Communitate Comitatus praedicti, de assensu ejusdem Comitatus eligisti. Nos
advertentes quod hujusmodi Baronetti ante haec tempora in Milites Comitatus
ratione alicujus Parliamenti elegi minime consueverunt, ipsum de officio
Militis, ad dictum Parliamentum pro communitate Comitatus praedicti venturi,
exonerari volumus. Et ideo tibi praecipimus, quod quendam a^ium Misi em idoneum
et discretum, gladio cinctum, in loco ipsius Thomae elegi, et eum ad diem et
locum Parliamenti praedicti venire facias, cum plena et sufficienti potestate
ad consentiendum hiis quae in Parliamento praedicto, sicut juxta renorem
prioris Brevis nostri, tibi pro electione hujusmodi militum directi, et nomen
ejus Nobis Sciri facias. Test Rege apud Westmonasterium octavo die Octobris.

7ly, Both Houses of Parliament in their Exact Collection, p. 723, 724.
Remonstrance, of Nov. 2. 1642. declare and publish in print to all the World,
This to be so clear and fundamental a privilege of Parliament, That no Member
of either House of Parliament is to be taken away or detained from the service
of the House whereof he is a Member, until such time as that House has
satisfaction concerning the cause, and the cause be heard in Parliament first,
and dismissed from it, That the whole freedom of Parliament depends upon it,
For who sees not that by this means under false pretenses of crimes and
accusations, such or so many Members of both or either Houses of Parliament may
be taken out of it at any time by any persons to serve a turn, and to make a
MAJOR PART of whom they will at pleasure. So as the freedom of Parliament
depends in a great part on this privilege: yea without it, the whole Body of
the Parliament will be destroyed by depriving it of its Members by degrees,
some at one time, and others at another time, as both Houses further
remonstrate in their Exact Collection, p. 654.655.
Declaration of October 23. 1642. Which, as it infallibly demonstrates, that
the Lords House or Members cannot be taken away, or taken from them against
their wills, without the destruction, subversion of the whole Parliament, of
which they are chief Members, the Judicial power of Parliaments residing
principally in that House, if not wholly. So it likewise clearly resolves, that
no Peer or Member of the Lords House can be elected a Member of the Commons
house: For if the election of the Freeholders, Citizens or Burgesses of any
County, City or Borough of a Duke, Earl, Lord or Baron of the Realm to be a
Knight, Citizen, or Burgess in Parliament should be valid in Law, to make them
legal, actual Members of the Commons house, it would then lie in their powers
to un-Peer, un-Lord and degrade any Nobleman, yea all the Earls, Peers, Lords,
Barons of the Realm and their Posterity at their pleasures, to reduce them and
the whole House of Peers into the Commons inferior house, and so quite
dissolve the Lords House, in high affront, dishonor of the Lords and their
House, and of the Kings Sovereign royal Authority, the fountain of all Honor:
and that without any legal trial, or Judgment by their Peers, or just cause of
degradation on their parts, against the express words and meaning of Magna
Charta, c. 29. And if any Lords upon such Elections should so far degenerate,
debase or degrade themselves, as to accept thereof, and ignobly sit and vote as
Members of the Commons House; both they and their posteritie^ for such an
ignoble act meritoriously deserved, to be for ever degraded from their
Nobility, and secluded from all future sitting in the Lords House as Peers,
becoming thereby the very shame, scorn, scandal of Nobility, fit only to be
ranked with the basest Peasants, to whom these Levellers would now equallize
them. Yea, it would be now no less than wilful perjury in any Freeholders,
Citizens, Burgesses to elect them Knights or Burgesses, and in themselves to
accept of such Elections when chosen; and in the whole House of Peers and
Commons too, once to permit, allow, approve or connive at such elections; after
their late Protestation, Vow, and Solemn League and Covenant, to maintain to
their power, the Rights, Privileges of Parliament, and both Houses of
Parliament; whereof this is an unquestionable Right and Privilege; That no
Member of the Lords House should be elected a Knight, Citizen, Burgess, or
brought down from thence to sit only as a Commoner, in the Commons House, so
long as he continues a Peer or Member of the Lords House; (a distinct House
from, and superior to the Commons House in all ages, as its Title of the Stat.
of Ma^lbridge, 52 H. 2. Prologue. 33 H. 8. c. 1.
Lower House, and their standing always bare before the Lords, with other
evidences demonstrate) nor any Knight, Citizen or Burgess, a true real Member
of the House of Peers, Cokes 4. Institutes, p. 45.
unless a Peer by birth or creation; those who are called to it only by general
or special Writs, not being formerly for life or inheritance Peers, Nobles, or
holding by Barony of the King, being only Cokes 4 Instit. p. 4, 5.44, 45.
Assistants to the Lords, as the Judges and others usually are not Members
having votes.

It is the opinion of Fol. 9. b. 16. b.
Sir Edward Cook in his Institutes on Littleton, That if the King call any
Layman to the Upper house of Parliament generally by his Writ (which he there
recites) that this alone does create him a Baron and Lord of Parliament in fee
simple, without the word heirs, and ennoble both himself and his heirs after
him, so as to make them hereditary Barons. And this is the received opinion of
most Grandees of the Law, relying only upon his bare Ipse dixit, though
sometimes mistaken in his Judgment, and frequently in his Records and
Presidents whereon he grounds his Opinion; although he cites no president nor
record at all to make good his Assertion in this case. But under the favor of
this Great Oracle of Law, I conceive this Opinion of his to be no Law at all,
but a mere mistake, for these ensuing reasons.

1. Because there is not one word or syllable in this general Writ of Summons,
that gives him either the Name, Title, Honor or Dignity of a Lord or Baron of
the Realm: Therefore it cannot in Law or reason create him such a one. If he
were a Knight, an Esquire, a Master, or Gentleman, or Judge, when the Writ was
directed to him, it gives him only that Title, and summons him only by it:
without stiling him a Lord, Baron, Earl, Viscount or Peer of the Realm at all:
Therefore it cannot ennoble nor create him one; much less ennoble his posterity
and give him an hereditary Barony without the word heirs, since the Writ is
only personal, directed to himself alone.

2. Because the Kings end and intention in summoning him to Parliament by this
Writ is not to ennoble and create him a Lord, Peer, or Baron, much less to
ennoble his Posterity after him, but only to consult and treat with him, and
the Prelates, Lords, and Nobles of the Realm, concerning the affairs there
propounded: As this clause of the Writ demonstrates (which only must ennoble
him and his heirs, if any) to come to the Parliament at such a day and place,
that so the King may VOBISCUM with him (not his heirs) and cum Praelatis,
Magnatibus, and Proceribus dicti regni nostri colloqu^um habere and tractatum:
Which word, VOBISCVM, being distinguished from cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and
Proceribus Regni, can not possibly create him, a Lord or Baron, no more than a
Prelate of the Realm; the rather because the word Baro, is not in the Writ.
Neither can the following clause create him one; Viz. dictis die and loco
personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, and cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and Baronibus
supradictis, super dictis Negotiis tractaturis, vestrumque Consilium
impensuris: because it neither gives him the name nor style of a Lord or
Nobleman, much less of a Baron, no more than of a Prelate: and summons him, not
to be a Lord, Earl, Prelate or Baron of the Realm, but to be personally present
with them (which he may be, though a private person, and no Lord) and to treat
and give his advice with them concerning the businesses there propounded, the
only end for which he is summoned; not to be their fellow Peer, Lord or Baron.
So that it is against all sense and reason to aver, that such a general Writ as
this can create himself, much less his Posterity Lords or Barons of the Realm
in perpetuity. It is a rule in Law and often resolved, Plowden, f. 333, 334, 501
Dyer 348. a. 21 E. 4.46, 48.57.43. Aff. 15. Coke 1 Report. f. 48.52.3 Rep. f.
73, 74. 8 Rep. f. 55.167. Ashes Table, Grant le Roy 46.
That the Kings grant shall not inure to two intents, nor pass or give two
things at once, especially when one of them only is expressed, the other not:
Therefore this writ of the King shall not-doe it, to create the party summoned
a Baron merely by implication, which is not expressed: and to summon him to
conferr, treat and give his advice in Parliament, which is the only thing
intended and clearly expressed.

3ly, The Writ summons him only to that particular Parliament then to be held
at one certain day and place; not to any other, much less to all future
Parliaments to be held: Therefore it cannot create him and his heirs hereditary
Barons and Members of the Lords House, no more than the Writ for electing
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses for that particular Parliament, makes them and
their posterity, Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of Parliament for perpetuity:
It being both contrary to the words and intention of the Writ, to make him,
much less his heirs, Members of all succeeding Parliaments, to which they must
still be summoned by New Writs.

4ly. No Lord or Baron is or can be legally created, but of some particular
place, Town, City, or the like, whereof he is styled Earl, Lord, or Baron: But
the general writ of summons gives him no such particular style or title of
dignity; confined to such a certain place. Therefore it cannot create him
either a Lord or Baron, or if it does it must be sine titulo, which were absurd.

5ly. No Duke, Earl, when created Viscount, Lord, or Baron, is or can be
created a Peer of the Realm by the Kings Letters Patents for life, in tail, or
see simple, without express words in the Patent creating him such a one for
life, or him, and the heirs males of his body, or his heirs in general, Dukes,
Marquesses, Viscounts, Earls, Lords or Barons of such a particular place; as
all their Patents (whereof you have sundry Presidents in Mr. Seldens Titles of
honor, lib. 2. chapter 5. throughout) and our books of Heraldry plentifully
manifest; And in all late Patents of creation since 20 H. 8. of any Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, or Barons, there is a special clause inserted,
enabling them and their heirs males, and every of them, to have hold and
possess a seat and place in the Parliam. of us, our heirs and Successors,
within the Realm of England, among other Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts,
Lords and Barons of the Realm, as a Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount, Lord, or
Baron, as Titles of Honor, lib. 2. p. 663, 665, 747, 748, 751, 757, 763.
Mr. Seldom and their Patents inform us, and I have formerly touched p. 49. If
then the king by his Letters Patents cannot create men Nobles and Peers of
Parliament for life, in tail, or see simple, without these special and
particular clauses; then by the self same reason he cannot create them such by
his writ, unless it has such special words and clauses in it, and not by the
general writ of summons forementioned, wherein there is not one clause or
syllable tending to such a particular, personal, or hereditary creation. The
rather because 1 Inst. f. 16.8.
Sir Edward Cook himself confesses, that the Creation by Letters Patents is
the surer, though by writ be the antienter way; for he and his posterity may
sufficiently be created and made Noble by Letters Patents, though he to whom
they were first made never sat in Parliament. Whereas this writ has no
operation or effect to enoble him or his posterity, unless and until he
actually sit in Parliament; for if he die before he sit, or sit not at all,
neither he nor his issue are Noble.

This distinction and concession of his contradicts his former opinion, That
the Writ it self does not ennoble the person and his heirs; for if it did, then
he and they should be ennobled by it, though he died before he ^a^e in
Parliament, because they are thus ennobled by Letters Patents which create them
Nobles or Peers, and make them actually such, though they never sit in
Parliament.

7ly. Sir Edward Cook in his 4 Institutes, p. 44, 45. thus resolves. If the
King by his Writ calls any Knight or Esquire to be a Lord of the Parliament,
he cannot refuse to serve the King there in communi illo confilio, for the good
of his Country. But if the King had called an Abbot, Peer, or other regular
Prelate by Writ to the Parliament to the Common Council of the Realm, if he
held not of the King per Baroniam, he might refuse to sit in Parliament,
because quoad secularia, he was mortuus in lege, and therefore not capable to
have a voice or place in Parliament unless he did hold per Baroniam, and were
to that Common Council called by Writ, which made him capable. And though such
a Prelate regular had been often called by Writ, and had de facto, had place
and voice in Parliament; yet if in rei veritate he hold not per Baroniam, HE
OUGHT TO BE DISCHARGED OF THAT SERVICE, AND TO SIT NO MORE. To. Pa^. 26. E. 3.
part. 1. m. 21. See Rot. Claus. in dors. 11. E. 3. part 2. m. 11. Religious qui
teignunt per Barony sont tenus de Venier au Parliament Vid. ibid. 13 E. 3. part
2. m. 8. and 1.
For that the Abbey of Leicester was founded by Robert Fitz Robert Earl of
Leicester ( albeit the Patronage came to the Crown by the forfeiture of Simon
de Mountford Earl of Leicester) yet being of a Subjects foundation, it could
not be holden per Baroniam, therefore the Abbot had no capacity to be called to
the Parliament, and thereupon the King did grant, Quod idem Abbas and
successores sui de veniendo ad Parliamentum, and Concilia nostra, vel haeredum
nostrorum quie^i sint, and exonerati in perpetuum. But all these Cases
abovesaid, and others that might be remembered touching this point, as little
Rivers do flow from the fountain of Modus tenendi Parliamentum, where it is
said, Ad Parliamentum summoneri and venire debent ratione tenurae suae omnes
and singuli Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Modus tenendi Parl. c. 2.
and Barons, Priores and alii Majores Cleri, qui tenent PER COMITATUM VEL
BARONIAM, ratione hujusmodi tenurae, and nulli minores nisi eorum praesentia
necessaria and utilis reputetur. To which purpose he likewise cites the Act of
Parliament of 10 H. 2. called the Assize of Clarindon, and the Great Charter of
King John in the 17 year of his reign here forecited, p. 21, 30, 31. For Modus
tenendi Parliamentum (here so much magnified) I have already p. 20 sufficiently
discovered it to be a late forgery, and imposture out of the very Treatise it
self, by undeniable proofs, which I wonder Sir Ed. Cook, Mr. Agar, and other
pretended judicious Antiquaries observed nor, being so obvious; yet though it
be an imposture and erroneous in other things, I shall grant it true in this
particular here cited. As to the point in controversy; had Sir Ed. Cook here
thus distinguished in the case of Laymen, Knights, Esquires, as he does in case
of Abbots, Priors, and Religious persons, that if the King had by his Writ
called any Laymen, Knight ot Esquire to the Lords House of Parliament by his
general Writ, who held of him in fee or fee tail, per Baroniam, and was a Baron
by tenure, that this had enobled him and his posterity as Barons, and he could
not refuse to serve the King as a Baron in this Common Council for the good of
his Country; his opinion might have passed for good Law: For such who had lands
in fee, or fee tail of the King by an entire Barony, being Barons and Peers of
the Realm by their very tenures, ought of right, by the express words of the
Statute of Clarindon, the Great Charter of King John, and by the Common Law and
Custom of the Realm, to be summoned as Barons by the Kings special writs
directed to them, to all Parliaments and great Councils of the Realm, by virtue
of their Tenures, as well as Bishops, Abbots, Peers, and other regular Prelates
who held by Barony; yet the writ in this case does not make them and their
heirs Barons by writ, nor give them a right to sit and vote in Parliament; but
only declare them and their heirs to be Barons, and to sit there as Barons by
their Tenure, not by virtue of the Writ it self. But if the King by this
general Writ summon any Layman, Knight or Esquire to the Lords House, who holds
not by Barony, this does no more make him a Lord or Baron in perpetuity to him
and his heirs, nor no more oblige him or his heirs to sit there than Abbots,
but that they may refuse to serve in Parliam* if he were no Peer before, being
not obliged by any Law to sit and serve therein as a Baron or Member of the
House of Peers, by the Writ alone, which does not bind an Abbot, Prior, or
regular Prelate, or ennoble him and his Successors to be Peers and Barons of
the Realm, though they hold only by Frankalmoign, not by Barony: the Tenure By
Barony being that alone which obliges both of them to sit and serve in
Parliament, unless they be created Dukes, Earls, Viscounts, Lords, Peers, or
Barons by Patent, or else by a special Wrir, wherein the estate and dignity of
a Baron is both created and limited, as in the Dors. Claus. 27 H. 8. m. 24.
Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 541.
Writ that created Sir Henry de Bromflet Baron of Vescey, in the 27 year of
King Henry the 6 where after the Nullatenus omittati^, this Cl^se is inserted,
Volumus enim vos and haeredes vestros ma^culos de corpore vestro legitime
exeuntes BARONS DE UESCY EXISTERE, Test, etc. If a Layman who holds not by
Barony be created a Duke, Earl, Baron, or other Peer of the Realm for life, in
tail, or in fee by Letters Patents, or an Abbot or Prior who holds not by
Barony, and his Successors be created Lords of Parliament, by a special Patent
of the King, as Pat. 5. H. 8. part 2. m. 12 Seldens Title of Honor, p. 750,
751. Sir Edward Cook 4 Inst. p. 45.
Richard Banham Abbot of Tavestoke, and his Successors were b^ King Hen. the 8.
to whom the King gran^ed by special words, Ut eorum quilibet qui pro tempore
fuerit Abb^s, sit and erit unus de Spiritual^bus and religiosis DOMINIS
PARLIAMENTI NOSTRI haeredum and successorum nostrorum, gaudendo honore^
Privilegio, and libertaribus ejusdem: This obliges them to appear and serve in
Parliament upon every Writ of Summons, and they their heirs males and
Successors cannot refuse to serve, or voluntarily absent themselves without
cause or license, under pain of being fined, and otherwise punished for their
contempt, because bound thereto by their voluntary acceptance of such a special
Patent and dignity. But if they be summoned only by a general Writ, against
their wills being no Lords of Parl. by special Patent or Writ before, this does
neither make the one nor other Barons, nor enn^ble their heirs males, or
successors, nor oblige them to serne, nor subject them to any fine for
contempt; for then the King by his Writ might summon all the Knights, Esquires,
Gentlemen, and any other Commoner, Freeman, Lawyer, Clergy man of the Realm to
the Lords House, as a Member at his pleasure, and fine them for a contempt in
not appearing, and thereby increase that House in infinitum, and make it a
mungril House of all sorts of degrees and professions of men, instead of a^
House of Lords, to its utter subversion, against the fundamental constitution
and privilege of that House; Therefore such Writs of summons must be void and
null in Law, as well as the Patent to Abbot Banham (as See Cooks 4 Inst. p. 45.
Abbot Banhams case.
Sir Ed. Cook asserts it) for that he was neither Baro, nor held per Baroniam:
Now whereas he asserts, That Knights and Esquires, who hold not by Barony,
cannot refuse when summoned by Writ to serve the King in Parliament; but yet
Abbots and other regular Prelates that hold not by Barony may, because they are
dead in Law, as to secular affairs, and therefore not capable to have voice in
Parliament, unless they hold by Barony, and were called by Writ. This reason of
the difference is most absurd and unreasonable. For 1. They are both Subjects
to the king alike, and so both equally obliged to serve and counsel him in
Parliament. 2ly. If their tenures by Barony could make them capable to have
place and voice in Parliament, though dead in Law, quoad secularia, then much
more the kings and the kingdoms need of their presence, counsel and advice in
Parliament, touching the weighty affairs concerning himself, and the defense
and preservation of the Realm and Church of England, when specially summoned by
his writ to Parliament, 3ly. Though they were dead in some sense only, in
respect of their natural capacities to the world; yet in their politic
capacities they were not so, but secular, still to sue, purchase, advise, etc.
as well as Laymen, in the right of their Houses. 4ly. Parliaments being always
summoned as well to advise of Ecclesiastical things, touching the Church, as of
temporal things concerning the Realm of England; their being dead to the world,
quoad secularia, could no more enable them to refuse to serve in Parliament,
then Laymen, quoad Ecclesiastica negotia therein treated of, which concerned
the Church and Laymen (according to the doctrine in Popish times) might as well
refuse to serve in Parliament, when summoned, because they were no
Ecclesiastical or religious persons, who were properly to consult of the
affairs of the Church of England; as religious persons be exempted from, and
refuse to serve therein, because dead to the world, quoad secularia negotia,
concerning the King and Realm of England there debated and consulted of. 4ly.
The true and only ground then why such Abbots, Priors, and all other Clergy
men, who held not by Barony might refuse to serve in the Lords House of
Parliament, when summoned by Writ, was this, that they held not of the King by
Barony; and upon this ground alone, the Abbot of St. James without Northampton
summoned to Parliament by Writ, Anno 12 Ed. 2. upon his Proctors appearance and
Petitions for him in Parliament (recorded at large by Titles of Honor, 730,
731, 732, 733.
Mr. Seldom, out of the Legerbook of the Abbey worthy perusal, being most full
in point was discharged from his attendance, and his name struck out of the
Roll and Register of the Chancery by the Chancellor and his Council, as not one
of the list of those who ought to be summoned, for this very reason, because
NON TE NET PER BARONIAM, nec de Rege in capite, sed tantum in puram and
perpetuam Eleemosynam and nec ipse Abbas, nec Predecessores sui, unquam in
Cancellaria irrotulari fuerunt (except only in 49 H. 3. m. 10. Schedula,
voluntary) nec ad Parliamentum citati hucusque. Pat. 26 E. 3. part 2. m. 22.
Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 734, 735.
VNDE PETIT (and habuit) remedium. And upon the self same reason the Abbot of
Leicester and his successors were by special Patent in 26 E. 3. de veniendo ad
Parliam. and Consilia nostra, et haered^m nostrorum de caetero quieti sint et
exempti in perpetuum, (hough this Abbots predecessors had formerly been
summoned to and sat in Parliaments interpolatis vicibus, but no^ continue;
because idem Abbas aliquas terras sente^ementa de Nobis per Baroniam, seis a^o
modo non tenet per quod ad Parliamenta seu Consilia nostra venire teneatur. The
King reciting this as the only ground of his exemption; and thereupon Nolentes
Abbat^m indebite sic vexari; granted him and his successors this Patent of
Exemption; upon which his name was cancelled in the Seldom, ib. p. 727.
Clause Roll of 25 E. 3. part 1. m. 5. dorso; and this written in the margin
against it. Abbas Leicestriae cancellatur, quia habet cartam Regis quod non
compellatur venire ad Parliamentum. And that of Dors. Claus. 11 E. 3. par. 2.
m. 11. and 13 E. 3. par. 2. m. 28. and 1. cited by Titles of Honor, p. 727.
Mr. Seldom and Sir Edw. Coke in his Margin; mentioned in a Bill in Parliament;
Que toutes les religioses que teignont per Barony sayent tenus de venier au
Parliament; is also direct i^ point; That those who hold not by Barony, are not
bound to serve in Parl. be they Religious persons, or Lay persons, who are not
Peers or Lords of Parliament, upon general writs of summons; such Summons of
them being AN UNDUE VEXATION OF THEM, as King Edward styles it in his Patent,
(unless they voluntarily appear upon such a Summons, as this Patent informs us
those who were summoned in 49 H. 3. all did.) This reason therefore exempting
all Abbots, Peers, and religious persons from service and attendance in the
Lords House in Parliaments, though summoned thereto by writ, must necessarily
exempt all Knights and Laymen from it, there being the self same ground,
justice, equity for it in both, yea the selfsame unjustice, vexation, mischief
to both; and by consequence the selfsame Law. And if this be Law, as these
Presidents, Judgments, Records expressly resolve it to be beyond contradiction;
Then it inevitably follows, that the General writ of Summons to Parliament
alone, does neither create the persons summoned to it, nor their heirs or
successors Barons, Lords or Peers of the Realm, unless they hold by Barony, no
although they sit once or twice in Parliaments by virtue of them, or
interpolatis vicibus but not continue as the Abbots of Leicester did, for then
they could not allege or plead their not holding Lands of the King in Barony,
or any other tenure binding them to sit and serve in Parliament, in bar of the
Writs of Summons directed to them, because those writs themselves did ennoble
and make them, their posterity and successors Peers of Parliament, though they
held no Lands by Barony. 8ly, it is undeniable by sundry presidents, that the
Kings general writs of Summons create none Lords or Peers of Parliament for
life or Inheritance, if they hold not by Barony; which I shall evidence by
these presidents in point, Claus. 49 H. 3. m. 10 dors. in Schedula. Seldens
Titles of Honor, p. 723, 724.
To the Parliament of 49 H. 3. there were no less than 64 Abbots, 36 Priors,
the Master of the Temple, and 5. Deans of Cathedral Churches, namely of York,
Exeter, Salisbury, Lincoln, Bath and Wells, summoned by general writs, as the
Bishops, Earls, Barons, and other Nobles were; yet this did not make themselves
nor their Successors Barons or Peers of Parliament; for neither of these Deans
nor their successors were ever afterward summoned to Parliament, as they would
and must have been, had this writ made them or their successors Barons and
Lords: nor any of the Abbots or Priors, but such only who held by Barony, who
were constantly summoned, but those who then held not by Barony, or Militare
servitium, if casually summoned to one Parliament, were yet upon their
complaints thereof, omitted and discharged in the next, as the Writs of Summons
themselves attest, and Titles of Honor, p. 720. to 736.
Mr. Seldom manifests out of them. Therefore the Writs did neither create them
Barons for life, much less their successors after them; for then they should
still have of right been summoned to succeeding Parliaments, and ought not to
have been discharged. In the 18 of Ed. 2. Claus. 18 E. 2. m. 5. Seldens Titles
of Honor, p. 721.726.
A Writ of Summons was sent by the King, Magistro Gilberto de Middleton
Archidiacono Northampton, Officiali Curiae Cantuariensis; and Magistro Roberto
de Sancto Albano, Decano de Arcubus London. But no writ was ever directed to
them afterward, but in this one Parliament only; therefore it made them not
Lords and Barons for life, inheritance or succession. The like is evident by
the forecited presidents of the Abbots of St. James and Leicester and other
Priors. So the Gardians of the Spiritualties of Bishops during the vacancy, and
their Vicars Generals during their absence beyond the Seas, have been
frequently summoned to Parliaments by writs: But being summoned only as
substitutes, or in the right of the Bishops or Bishoprics, it made them no
Barons or Peers, neither were they ever esteemed such heretofore, or at this
day, as Titles of Honor, p. 720.
Mr. Seldom informs us. And as it was thus amongst Abbots, Priors, Deans, and
other Clergymen, that these writs made them not Barons for life, nor yet in
succession: so by the selfsame Law and Reason they made no Laics who held not
by Barony such for life or inheritance. Whence we find many such in the summons
to Parliament of King Henry 3. Ed. 1, 2, 3. R. 2. H. 4, 5, 6. who were summoned
once, twice or thrice, but never afterward, nor any of their name or
posterity; of which no other solid reason can be given, but that these general
writs of summons made them neither Barons for life nor inheritance, no more
than they did Abbots, Priors or Clergymen. For example See an Exact Abridgment
of the Records in the Tower, and my first Table thereunto.
I find Edmond Barstaff, Robert de Crendon, H. Huse, Ader de Estlye, Serton de
Hansladorn, and sundry others summoned by Writ to Parliament in 33 E. 1. Peter
Corbet, Andrew de Hamloe, Henry Tregor Maurice de Buen, Roger Banuent, and some
others in 13 E. 2. Simon Ward, Henry Dandle, William Blunt, in 4 E. 3. Roger de
Claudes, Ralph de Bevil, William de Kineston And John de Leyburn, ^m. 14.17.
and 18. E. 3.
in 14 E. 3. Ralph Bulmer, Thomas Bugworth, in 22 E. 3. William de Ridehal in
27 E. 3. Robert de Colvil, John de Kirton, John de Wodhurst, John Northwood,
John de Strivelin, in the Parliament summons of 37. and one of them again of 38
E. 3. Henry Quarts, in 6 H. 4. Henry Cuart, in 7 H. 4. William Cheyney Chief
Justice in 4. and 6 H. 6. But neither of their persons nor any of their
posterity, were ever after summoned that I find to any other Parliaments, as no
doubt they would have been, had those their writs of summons made them Lords
and Barons. In the Clause Roll of 5 E. 3. m. 12. dorso, the King sent writs
into Ireland to William de Burgh Earl of Ulster, James de Bot^ler Earl of
Ormond, William de Bremigham Knight, and Walter de Burgh, strictly enjoining
them with all speed to come over into England, Nobiscum tractaturi, vestrumque
Consilium impensuri, concerning his intended Voyage in person into Ireland, and
setting the peace and affairs thereof: and I read in the Chron. Joh. Bromton,
col. 1108. Mat. Paris, p. 431, 826. Hen. de Knyghton de Eventibus Angl. l. 3.
c. 2. Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 17, 18, 19. to 23.25.32, 33.42.49. to 56.
reign of King Henry 3. Edward the 1. 3. and other of our Kings, that the King
of Scots and his Nobles were often summoned by Writs to our English Parliaments
concerning the affairs of Scotland: yet these writs made none of them Peers and
Barons of our English Parliaments. From all which I may safely conclude, Sir
Edward Cooks and others Opinions to be no Law, but a clear mistake; that a
general writ of Summons does, or can create any who hold not by Barony, Peers
or Barons for life, much less in fee or fee-tayl. Therefore such may be
afterward elected Knights or Burgesses of Parliament, and be Members of the
Commons house, and refuse to sit or serve in the Lords house upon summons
without contempt or fine: but no Baron or Peer of the Realm may be thus chosen,
or neglect his service in the Lords house.

Finally, Mr. Cambden in his Britannia, p. 120, 122. and Apologia, p 11. and
Mr. J. Seldom in his Titles of Honor, part 2. chap. 5. Sect. 31. p. 708. to
718. assert, That as some Spiritual Barons, who were conceived to be Barons by
writ as well as by tenure, though sometimes summoned to Parliament by writ,
were wholly omitted at length, as not having of right Voice and Place with the
rest, because they held not by Barony; So sundry of the Lesser Barons and
Tenants in Capite holding only of the King as Vavasors by Knights service, and
not by an entire Barony, were likewise excluded the Parliament. and not
summoned thereunto by King John, Henry the 3. and Edw. the 1. being not great
and honourary Barons, nor having estates sufficient to support that dignity;
and that (as Mr. Seldom conceits by some Law made not long before the Great
Charter of King John, procured by MAJORES BARONS; who foreseeing that their
power and dignity might suffer much diminution, if the new tenants in chief, or
Patentees of Escheated Baronies, and the rest that were decayed should have
equality with them, and be indifferently Barons of the Kingdom every way as
they were, procured a Law in some of the Parliaments that preceded the Great
Charter of King John, by which themselves only should hereafter be properly
styled (and summoned as BARONS, and the rest only Tenants in chief, or Knights,
which Titles should be given them, as distinct names from Barons: which could
not but much lesen the dignity and honor of the rest. And if so, then
questionless such who hold not by an entire Barony, and are not Majores Barons
by Patent or Inheritance now, cannot be created such by a mere general writ of
summons; neither can the King by his general writ create or make them such
against this ancient Law and usage ever since. And the Earls, Lords and Great
honorary Barons, who excluded all such from sitting in Parliament with them as
Barons and their Peers then, may much more exclude and refuse to admit such
into their house, or to sit with them if summoned now; because their dignity,
honor, power, would suffer much diminution thereby; and the King might by writ
at any time call so many to their House, as might overtop, over^ote, and alter
their very Constitution as an House of Peers.

I shall close up this point of the Lords sole right to sit in Parliament with
one or two memorable presidents.

In the 7. year of King Edward 2. as Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 101.
Walsingham stories, in quindena Paschae per Regis brevia citatae sunt
generaliter omnes Parliamentales personae pro Parliamento teuendo Londoniis:
Sed multis Proceribus praetendentes impedimenti causas nihil h^c vice factum
su^t: So Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 86.
Anno 1316. King Edward in the 9th year of his reign, celebravit Concilium apud
Clarindon, sed Magnates noluerunt interesse. Whereupon nothing was there
effected. The Lords presence being held then so necessary, that by reason of
the absence of diverse of them upon some real or pretended impediments, though
all legally summoned by the Kings writs, nothing was done or concluded by those
who met, who held themselves no complete or legal Parliament without them.
Whereas in the Parliament of 5 E. 2. some of the Judges and Assistants
departing from the Lords, and diverse Knights, Citizens and Burgesses from the
Commons house, without license, yet the Lords continuing all together, and
making Ordinances for regulating the Kings house, and Revenues, the Parliament
still continued, and these Claus. 5 E. 2. m. 27. dorso.
special writs were sent to recall the Judges and Lords Assistants* quod
redeant exinde, et sine licentia nostra speciali durante Parliamento praedicto
non recedatis: Et hoc sicut indignationem nostram vitare volueritis, nullo modo
omittaris. Test Rege apud Haddely, 12 September. PER CONSILIUM. And this general
writ was sent to the Sheriff of Yorkshire, and all other Sheriffs of England
to summon all the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in their several Counties, to
return thither; or else to elect other fit persons in their places. Claus. 5.
E. 2. m. 26. dorso.
Praecipimus tibi firmiter injungentes, quod illos Milites, Cives and Burgenses
de Balliva tua quos nuper ad praesens Parliamentum nostrum apud London
inchoatum, de mandato nostro venire fecisti, et qui ab eodem Parliamento certis
de causis recesserunt, quod redeant exinde, etc. vel alios ad hoc idoneos loco
ipsorum SI AD HOC VACARE NON POSSUNT, usque ad Westmonasterium ad dictum
Parliamentum quod ibidem duximus continuandum, etc. proxime futur: ad ultimum,
cum sufficienti potestate Comitatus tui and Civitatum and Burgorum
praedictororum ad consentiendum hiis quae tunc ibidem contigerint ordinari,
etc. Test Rege apud London xi. die Octobris. This Parliament being thus
continued, Claus. 5 E. 2. m. 25. Special license was granted to some LORDS to
go home, who made Proxies to other Lords to supply their places, by these
words, Deputamus in loco nostro in Parliamento: and this in the Writ of
Prorogation.

This, I hope, will suffice to convince all Levellers and Gainsayers, of the
LORDS undoubted ancient Hereditary just Right and Title, to sit, vote in all
ENGLISH PARLIAMENTS, though not elected by the people.

SECTION II. Wherein the Lords House sole Right of Judicature in Parliament,
without the Commons, is fully cleared by Presidents, Histories, Records in all
ages, and undeniable Reasons, and that both in Criminal, Civil, Ecclesiastical
Causes of all sorts, as well in cases of Commoners, and Clergymen, as Temporal
Peers, and persons of the highest degree, proper for Parliament.
IT is the General confession, resolution, assertion both of 7 H. 6.16. m. 19
H. 6.63, 64 30 H. 6.26. a. 33 H. 6.18. a. 21 H. 7.1. Br. Parliament 28. 14 H.
8.9 b. Dyer, f. 60. St. Germin, l. 1. c. 26. Plowden, f. 126.388, 389. and 398.
Cook 8 Rep. f. 120.9 Report in the Epistle, 1 Institute, f. 109, 110.4. Instit.
c. 1. Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, f. 1, 2. Ashes Tables Parliament, sect.
15. Cowels Interpreter, Minshawes Dictionary, tit. Parliament, Sir Thomas
Smith, De Republica Angl. l. 2. c. 1, 2. Vowel, Cambdens Britannia, Justice
Doderidge, Mr. Tate, Mr. Agar.
Lawyers, Law Books, the Parliament and Statute of 31 H. 8. c. 10. and all who
have written of our Parliaments; That the Parliament of England is the
antientest, honourablest, highest Court and Supremest Judicature in the Realm;
to whose Judicature all other Courts, Persons, Subjects of the Realm are
subject and accountable for all Injuries, Oppressions, Crimes, Wrongs,
Corruptions, Errors, Abuses* Grievances, Misdemeanors, Treasons, Contempts,
Frauds, false Judgments, and matters of public or private concernment not
properly triable, remediable, or punishable in other inferior Courts of
Justice, and that Court to whom all Appeals concerning Misproceedings, Errors,
or Injustice in other Courts or places ought to be made, and from whose
Injustice and Sentence there is no appeal, but only to another Parliament; as
in the case of General Councils (as Divines assert) there is no appeal but to
another general Council in Ecclesiastical affairs concerning the Universal
Church, or matters of Faith. This being an unquestionable Principle and Truth,
the sole Question will be, in what House or Persons in Parliament this Supreme
Judicatory, or judicial power resides? Whether in the King alon^? or Lords
alone? or King and Lords jointly? or in the House of Commons alone? (never made
a question ^il now, by Lilburn and Overton) or in the King and House of Peers,
not separate from, but jointly with the Commons House? And for my part I
conceive, it resides wholly and solely in the King and House of Lords, not in
the House of Commons; which has no part nor share therein singly considered in
it self, nor yet jointly with the King and Lords, but only in some special
cases and proceedings, as when and where the King and Lords voluntarily require
their concurrence, or where the judgment and proceedings in Parliament are by
way of Bill or Act of Parliament; or when a judgment passed or confirmed by
Bill or Act to which the Commons consent was requisite, is to be altered or
reversed, but in no cases else, that I can find. To make this ou^ beyond
contradiction; it must be necessarily granted by all, and cannot be gainsaid or
disproved by any, that this Supreme power of Judicature has been vested in our
Great Councils and Parliaments even from their beginning and original
institution, it being the antientest, as well as highest and honourablest of
all other Courts: That it had this Sovereign Jurisdiction vested in and
exercised by it, both under our British, Saxon, Danish and Norman Kings, I have
elsewhere evidenced, and shall anon make good by undeniable presidents. Now the
Great Parliamentary Councils under them, consisted only of the King, the
Ecclesiastical and Temporal Lords, Earls, Barons, Nobles, without any Commons
House, or Knights of Shires, Citizens or Burgesses elected by the people; as I
have already touched, and manifested more fully in My Historical Collection of
the ancient Parliaments of England, And 2. and 3. Part of my Legal Vindication,
and Historical Collection of the Fundamental Laws of England.
other Treatises: yea the most, best Antiquaries and English Historians I have
seen who Treat of our Parliaments (except that Gross Impostor who composed that
ridiculous Treatise styled Modus tenend^ Parliamentum, when there was never any
Parliament held in any age in England or Ireland, in such manner as ^e there
relates and prescribes, with Sir Edward Cook, and some other injudicious
Antiq^aries seduced by this pretended, forged Antiquity) have not presumed to
derive the Antiquity of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses summons to, and
si^ting in our Parliaments higher than the Parliament held under Henry the 1.
at Salisbury, Anno Dom. 1116. the 16 year of his reign. To which Polydor
Virgil, Hist. Angl. An. 1116. Judge Dodridge and others in the Antiquity of the
Parliamen^s of England, p. 18, 19, 20, 40, 80, 86, 87. Holinshed in his
Chronicle, vol. 3. p. 38, 39. John Speed in his History of Great Britain p.
438, 439. refer their Original, if not the beginning of Parliaments
themselves. But under these learned men's correction (who produce no warrant
from histories or records in that age for proof of what they affirm) I dare
confidently assert, that there is nothing to be found in History or Record to
warrant this their fancy; but many direct evidences against it, which I shall
briefly clear, being very pertinent to the present controversy, and judicature
of the Lords House.

1. It is most clear, that to this Parliamentary Council held at Salisbury,
Anno 16 H. 1. No Commons, Knights Citizens, elected by the people were called
by this Kings Writs, as some of these Authors, with the Manuscript of
Canterbury positively assert, and others of them seem to incline unto; but only
the Lords spiritual and temporal of the Realm, as Chron. vol. 3. p. 38.
Holinshed himself relates, whom Hist. of Great Britain p. 438.
Speed styles the Estates both Spiritual and Temporal. This is evident by
Hist. Novor. l. 5. p. 117.
Eadmerus who then lived, and thus records the proceedings of that convention
under this King, 13 Kal. Aprilis, factus est Conventus Episcoporum Abbatum, et
Principum totius regni apud Serberiam, cogente eos illuc sanctione Regis
^enrici: Which Annal. pars prior, p. 473*
Rog. de Hoved. thus seconds, Comites et Barons totius. Angliae apud
Salisberiam convenerunt; Mat. Par. Anno 1114. p. 63. Mat. Westminster. p. 28.
who as Mat. Paris and Mat. Westminster, with them, relate, Jurarunt
fidelitatem Willielmo filio suo. De Gest. Reg. Angl. col. 237.
Simeon Dunelmensis ^^iles it, Conventus Optimatum et Baronum totius Angliae,
wherein jussu Regis omnes Comites et Barons cum Clero totius Regni, swore
fealty to him and his Son, as the Col. 1005.
Chronicle of Brompton also relates: not any of our ancient Historians making
mention of any Commons, Knights, Burgesses, but only of Bishops, Abbots, Earls,
Lords and Barons of the Realm there present at it.

In this Parliament, after the Earls, Barons, and Great men had done homage to
William the Kings Son, and sworn allegiance to him; the Cause and complaint
between Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury and Thurstan elected Archbishop of York,
was there heard and debated, which had been agitated between them a whole year
before. Mat. Paris Anno 1115. p. 62. Hen. Huntindon, Hist. l. 7. p. 380. Antiq.
Eccles. Brit. p. 112, 113. Radulph. de Diceto. Anno 1115. col. 502, 504.
Gervasius Actus Pontif. Cantuar. col. 1661. Thomas Stubs Actus Pontif.
Eboracensium, col. 1714. Henry de Knighton de Event. Angl. l. 2. c. 8. col.
2379. Will. Malmsbury de Gestis Pontif. l. 1. p. 232.
Thurstan being admonished by Ralph to make his subjection to the Sea of
Canterbury, and to receive his consecration from him after the ecclesiastical
and usual manner: Answered, That he would willingly receive his consecration
from him, but he would by no means make that profession of subjection to the Sea of Canterbury, which he exacted, but only that which Pope Gregory, and
after him Pope Honorius the 6. had ordained, who made this agreement between
the two Archbishops of England, Ut neuter alteri subjectionis professionem
faceret, nisi tantum ut qui prior ordinatus esset quamdiu viveret prior
haberetur: quod proprium est servorum Dei, ut verahumilitate sibi invicem
acclives sint, and nullus super alium primatus ambitionem exercere debet: Sicut
Dominus noster Verae humilitatis praedicator and amator discipulos suos, de hac
re litigantes redarguens, dixit eis, Qui major est vestrum erit omnium
minister; Nullus siquidem post beatum Augu^^inum ^ qui non tam Archiepiscopus
quam Apostolus Anglorum dicendus est) Archiepiscoporum Cantuariensium primatum
totius Angliae sibi vendicare praesumpsit, usque ad Theodorum Archipraesulem,
cui propter singularem in Ecclesiastica Disciplina solertiam, omnes Angliae
Episcopi subjici consenserunt, sicut Beda in Ecclesiastica Historia Angliae
testatur: Quamobrem Turstinus nullam aliam subjectionis professionem
Cantuariensi Pontifici facere voluit, nisi quam beatus Papa Gregorius
institui^: Ralph on the other side pleaded, the subjection of his predecessors
made to his Predecessors; Rex autem Henricus, ubi adv^rtit Turstinum in sua
stare pervicatia, aperte protestatus est, illum aut morem antecessorum suorum,
tam in professione facienda, quam in aliis dignitatis Ecclesiae Cantuariensis,
ex antiquo jure competentibus executurum, aut Episcopatu Eboracensi cum
benedictione funditus cariturum. His auditis ille suo cordis consilio
inpraemeditatus credens, renunciavit Pontificatui; spondens Regi and
Archiepiscopo, se dum viveret illum non reclamaturum, nec aliquam calumniam
inde moturum, qui cunque substitutus fuisset. But Thurstan afterward repenting
of his rashness, contrary to his agreement in Parliament, going to the Pope,
against the Kings command, to the Council at Rhemes, was there consecrated
Archbishop of York by Pope Calixtus himself; contrary to his promise to the
Kings agent, and Canterburies, who there publicly protested against his
consecration, without making any subjection to the Sea of Canterbury. Whereupon
the King prohibited Thurstan to return into England, or any of his Dominions,
swearing, that he should never return whiles he lived, unless he would make his
subjection to the Sea of Canterbury: Which Oath he refused to violate at the
Popes personal request to him, (though he then absolved him voluntarily from
this Oath) saying, Eadmerus, l, 5. p. 125, 126.
Quod dicit se quoniam Apostolicus est, me a fide quam pollicitus sum,
absoluturum: Si contra eandem fidem Thurstinum Eboraci recepero, non videtur
regiae honestati convenire hujusmodi absolutioni consentire. Quis enim fidem
suam cuivis pol^c^ntii amplius crederetur, cum eam meo exemplo tam facile
absolutione annihilari posse videret.

As in this famous Parliamentary Council of Salisbury, so in all precedent and
subsequent Great Councils and Conventions during the whole reign of king H. 1.
the Prelates, Earls, Barons, spiritual and temporal Lords were only summoned as
Members, not any Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, or Commons elected by the
people, which I shall next make good.

In a Parliamentary Mat. Paris, p. 53, 54. Eadmerus, Hist. Novor. l. 3. Chron.
Johan. Bromton, col. 1201, 1202. Malmsbury de Gest. Regum, l. 5. p. 156. See
Holinshed, Speed, Daniel.
Council in the 1. year of his reign Anno 1100. he was elected and crowned King
of England, abolished ill Laws, confirmed King Edwards Laws, and the Great
Charter of Liberties under his Seal, Communi Concilio Baronum regni:
Archiepisco^is, Episcopis, Comiti^u^, Proceribus, Magnatibus et Optimatibus
totius Regni Angliae, there subscribing to his Charter then granted, as
witnesses; See here, p. 58* 59. The same year, Simeon Dunelmensis, col. 226.
Chronicon Johannis Bromton, col. 998. Hovede^, annal. pars 1. p. 408.
Majores natu Angliae et Magnates terrae congregavit Londonii, by whose advice
h^ married Mawde, daughter of the King of Scots, right heir to the crown of the
Saxon line, and anointed and crowned her Queen: there being a great debate,
Eadmerus Hist. Novorum, l. 3. page 56, 57, 58.
whether she might lawfully marry, having worn a veil ^n a Monaste^y whiles she
was young? which was resolved in a Council at Lambeth, where Episcopi, Abbates,
Nobiles quique, ac religiosi ordinis viri, were a^embled ^o de^cide i^; who
upon debate resolved she might lawfully marry: as Eadmerus records at large.

The next year, Anno 1001. Eadmerus l. 3. p. 58, 59. Will. Malmsburiensis de
Gestis Pontif. l. 1. p. 124, 125.
Duke Robert returning from the holy Land, and laying claim to the Crown of
England as right heir and eldest Brother, thereupon King Henry, PRINCIPES
suspectos habentes, ne a se instabili ut sit fide dissilirent, and they
suspecting him, ne undique pace potitu, in se legibus efferatis desaeviret,
actum ex consulto est, ut certitudo talis exinde fieret, quae utrinque quod
verebatur excluderet. Sed ubi ad sponsionem fidei ventum est, TOTA REGNI
NOBILITAS, (assembled in a Parliamentary Council) cum populi numerositate (who
depended on their advice) Anselmum inter se and regem medium fecerunt, quanta
ei vice sui manu in manum porrecta promitteret. Justice et Sanctis Legibus se
totum regnum quo^d viveret in cunctis administraturum. After which, when as
upon the report of Duke Roberts arival, Statim MAJORES REGNI, quasi suae
sponsionis immemores ad illum relicto Rege, semet transfer parabant.
Whereupon Anselm AD UNATIS PRINCIPIBUS CUNCTIS, showed to them, and after that
to the whole multitude of the Army who came about them, quam execrabiles Deo et
omni bono homini forem, qui fidem quam Principi suo debebant quoquo modo
^iolarent. Whereupon cuncti ilico spreta vita non sequius eligerent morte
procumbere, quam violata fide sua Regem seducere: After which, Mat. Paris p.
55. Chronicon Johan. Bromton, col. 998.
PRINCIPES utrinque fratrum non ferentes dissidium colloquium inierunt, pio and
circumsp^cto consilio MVTUUM ET GENERALE, and by the Matthew. Westminster. Mat. Paris,
Hoveden, Huntindon, Simeon Dunelmensis, Chronicon Johan. Bromton, an. 1101.
Henry de Knyghton de Eventib. Angl. l. 2. c. 8.
Mediation of the NOBLES on both sides an accord was made between the King and
his Brother Robert, propter manifestum jus quod habuit ad regnum possidendum,
that Robert should receive 3000 marks yearly from England, and that the longest
liver of them should be heir to the other, if he died without issue male. Hoc
autem PER 12 MAGNATES juratum fuit utrinque. Eadmerus, Hist. Novorum, l. 3. p.
61, 62. Malmsburien. de Gestis Pontif. l. 1. p. 225.
Anno 1202. there fell out a difference between the King and Anselm, touching
investitures of Bishops, Anselm refusing to consecrate any Bishop, Abbot or
Clerk who received investitures from the King or the hand of any Layman, being
against the Decree of the General Council of Rome: whereupon the King sent for
him to his Court; where this business was at large debated EPISCOPIS, REGNI
PROCERIBUS QUE, verba hinc inde ferentibus, and in singulis Regiae voluntati
parere certantibus, imo ne Romanae Pontificis obedientiae subderetur summopere
^insistentibus. Not long after the King by other Letters summons Anselm to
appear at Winchester to compose this difference; Ubi EPISCOPIS TERRAE QUE
PRINCIPIBVS sub uno coactis, COMMUNI ASSENSU apud Anselmum actum est; Nuncii
prioribus excellentiores ex utraque part Romam mitterentur, Romano Pontifici
viva voce exposituri, illum aut a sententia decessurum, aut Anselmo, cum suis
extra Angliam pulso, totius regni subjectionem et commodum quod in^e singulis
annis habere solebat, perditurum. Which being accordingly pursued, and Eadmerus
l. 3. p. 66.
faventibus simul et incitantibus Regem Episcopis, regnique Proceribus, he
commanded Anselm to promise to do him homage, and consecrated all those to
whom he had given investitures without retractation. The same year 1102.
Eadmerus, l. 3. p. 67. Will. Malmsbury de Gestis Pontif. Angl. l. 1. p. 228.
Hoveden An. 1. p. 469. Mat. Par. p. 56. Matthew Westminster. p. 23. Simeon Dunelm.
Hist. col. 227, 228. Abbrev. Chron. col. 499. Chron. Johan. Bromton, col. 1000.
Antiquitates Eccles. Brit. p. 104, 106. Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 763.
Celeb^atum est generale Concilium Episcoporum et Abbatum totius Regni, at St.
Peter's Church on the West side of London: rege annuente huic conventui
affuerunt, Anselmo Archiepiscopo petente a Rege, Primates Regni, quatenus qui
qu d^ejusdem Concilii authoritate ^ecernectur utriusque ordinis concordi, cura
et sollicitudine ratum servaretur: Sic enim necesse erat, etc. In which Council
there were many Laws and Canons made for regulating the Church, Monks and
Clergy* communi consensu Episcoporum, et Abbatum, et Principum totius Regni,
Principes Regni omnes tam Ecclesiastici quam secularis ordinis* being present
at it; as the marginal Authors attest, but no Commons, Knights or Burgesses.

Not long after the same year, Anselm peremptorily refusing to consecrate those
Bishops whom the King invested with a pastoral Staff and Ring, and some of them
resigning them as unlawful, and publicly refusing to be consecrated by such
an investiture from the king, to his great dishonor, and prejudice of his
royal right and prerogative; the Eadmerus Hist. Nov. l. 3. p. 69, 70. Will.
Malmsbury de Gest^s Pontif. l. 1. p. 226. Antiq. Eccles. B^it. p. 105, 106.
Godwins Cat. of Bishops in the life of Anselm. Radulph. de Diceto col. 499
Chron. Gervasii col. 1658, 1659. Chron. Jo. Bromton. col. 999. Hoveden annal
pars 1. p. 47.
king thereupon repaired to Canterbury, where Anselm and he had a sharp
contest; At last he requested An elm to go in person to Rome to procure the
Pope to reverse his decree against investitures, ne ipse perdendo suorum jura
Antecessorum, eis vilior fiat, who desired that this business might be
deferred till Easter, ut audito Episcoporum Regnique Primatum Consilio, qui
modo non assunt, respondeam hinc: Which being granted, Anselmus in Pascha
Curiam venit, regni ingenuitatem de negotio praesens consuluit, COMMUNIS
CONCILII Vocem unam accepit (so Eadmerus) Convenitur a Rege, and EPISCOPIS ET
MAGNATIBUS (so Malmesbury relates it) ut ipse Romam dignatur proficisci, quod
alii minus egerant sua praesentia suppleturus, who thereupon consented to go,
NE CUCTORUM VOLUNTATI DEESSET. Mat. Westminster. anno 1103. p. 232. Mat. Paris, p.
56. Chron. Gervasiii col. 1659. Eadmerus l. 4. p. 76.
Mat. Paris, Matthew Westminster and others write, that he was then banished
out of England for his obstinacy, Regis injusto judicio, and all his
temporalties seized, which Eadmerus and others write, was not done nor executed
till after the Popes Decree against the Right of investitures passed against
the King and Anselms departure from Rome toward England; when the King
prohibited him to return into England, unless he would submit to do him
homage, and consecrate Bishops by his investiture, as all our Historians accord.

Mat. Par. p. 59. Mat. Westminster, Hoveden, Simeon Dunelmensis.
Anno 1106. Duke Robert coming to his Brother King Henry the 1. into England to
Northampton, to desire him to restore his Brotherly affection to him, whereof
he had deprived him, but could not obtain it. Rex itaque Henricus sentiens
conscientiam suam in obtentu regni cauteriatam, erat quippe eleganter
literatus, utpote a primaeva aetate praecepto patris addictus literis and jam
in jure, quod audierat secreto expeditus, coepit in semetipso impetus
insurgentium formidare, and Dei judicium in ipsum fulminare; eo quod fratri suo
primogenito, cui jus regni manifest competebat, temere usurpando, injuste
nimis abstulerat. Sed plus timens homines quam Deum, regni Nobiles primo
subdolis pollicitis inclinando conciliavit, cogitans postea per fundationem
Abbatiae, quam construere proposnerat; de tanta injuria Deo satisfacere.
Magnatibus igitur Regni, ob hoc Londonium edicto Regio convocatis, Rex talibus
alloquiis super mel and favum, oleumque, mellitis et mollitis blandiens, dixit;
Amici and fideles mei indigenae ac naturales, nostis veraci fama reference,
qualiter frater meus Robertus electus, and per Deum vocatus est, ad regnum
Hierosolymitanum foeliciter gubernandum, and quam frontose illud infoelicirer
refutaverit, merito propterea a Deo reprobandus. Nostis etiam in multis aliis
superbiam and ferocitatem illius, quia Vir bellicosus pacis impatiens est,
vosque scientet quasi contemptibiles, and quos desides vocat and gluttones,
conculcare desiderat. Ego vero Rex humilis and pacificus, vos in pace, in
antiquis vestris libertatibus, prout crebrius jurejurando promisi, gestio
confovere, and vestris inclinando consiliis, consultius ac mitius, more
mansueti principis, sapienter gubernare, and super his (si provideritis)
scripta subarata roborare, and iteratis juramentis praedicta certissime
confirmare: omnia videlicet, quae sanctus Rex Edwardus, Deo inspirante, provide
sancivit, inviolabiliter jubeo observari. Ut mecum fideliter stantes fratris
mei, imo et mei, and totius regni Angliae hostis cruentissimi, injurias
poten^er, animose and voluntary propulsetis. Si enim fortitudine Anglorum
roborer, innanes Normannorum minas nequaquam censeo formidandas, Talibus igitur
promissis quae tamen in fine impudenter violavit, omnium corda sibi inclinavit,
ut pro ipso contra quemlibet usque ad capitis expositionem dimicarent. This
Duke thereupon departing into N^rmandy, was followed thither by King Henry, who
there taking him, together with the Earl of Morton, and other Nobles Prisoners,
brought them over to England, where they were adjudged to perpepetual prison by
the BARONS, and Duke Robert to be put to death, as De Event. Angl. l. 2. c. 8.
col. 2374.
Henry de Knyghton thus relates, Robertus vero captus pudorosae et immani,
morti adjudicatus est, Henricus vero frater ejus non sustinens ignominiam
tantam protendere in sanguine suo* institit er go BARONS suos (who passed a
sentence on him in a Parliamentary Council) ET IMPETRAVIT AB EIS, quod
praedictus Robertus debet exoculari, and ex^^cari cum bacillo ardenti. Sicque
apud Lincolniam perpetuo carceri mancipatus.

Anno 1107. The King and Anselm by the Popes mediation and others coming to an
accord; Eadmerus l. 4. p. 90.
Hereupon the King returning into England; advenatis ad Curiam ejus in Pascha
Terrae Principibus, dilata est Ecclesiarum ordinatio quam Rex se facturum
disposuerat, by reason of the Popes coming into France to the Council of
Trecis: But afterward in August, Eadmerus l. 4. 91, 92. Mat. Westminster. p. 25, 26.
Mat. Paris, p. 60. Hoveden An. p. 471. Simeon Dunelm. Hist. col. 230. Radulph.
de Diceto Abbrev. Chron. col. 500. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 107, 108. Godw. in the
life of Anselm.
Factus est Conventus Episcoporum et Abbatum, pariter and Magnatum (or
Procerum) Regni Londoni^s in Palati^ (...)* where, per consilium Anselmi, and
Procerum Regni, annuit Rex and statuit, this accord and Decree was made; ut ab
eo tempore in reliquum, nunquam per donationem baculi Pastoralis, vel annuli
quisquam de Episcopatu vel Abbatia per Regem, vel quamlibet L^icam personam
investiretur in Anglia: Concedente etiam Archiepiscopo, ut nullus ad
Praelationem electus pro homagio quod Regi faceret, consecratione suscepti
honoris privaretur; which being concluded, Coepit Anselmus coram Rege Regnique
Episcopis atque Principibus, exigere a Gerardo Archiepiscopo Eboracensi
professionem de sua obedieutia and subjectione, quam non fecerat, ex quo de
Episcopatu Herefordensi ad Achiepiscopatum Eboracensem translatus fuerat. Ad
quae cum Rex ips^ diceret, sibi quidem non videre necesse, ut professioni quam
ordinationis suae tempore Gerardus fecerat, aliam superadderet, praesertim cum
licet Ecclesiam mutaverit, idem tamen qui fuerat in persona remansit, nec a
prima professione absolu^us extiterit. Anselmus in praesenti quidem Regiis
verbis adquievit, ea condition; ut Gerardus in manum sibi daret, se eandem
subjectionem in Archiepiscopatu ei servaturum quam in Episcopatu professus
fuerat; Which Gerardus a^enting to, and presently performing before them. Exin
STATUTUM EST, ut qui ad Episcopatum electi erant, Cantuariam i^e^t, and ibi
dignitatis ipsius benedictionem, ex more susciperent.

In the year 1108. Eadmerus l. 4. p. 94 95. Simeon Dunelm. col. 231. Hoveden,
p. 272.
King Henry in the Feast of Pentecost, advenatis ad Curiam suam apud Londoniam,
cunctis Magnatibus Regni, cum Anselmo Archiepiscopo, et caeteris Episcopis
Angliae tractavit, concerning the chastity and against the marriage of Priests
and Clergy-men^ (concerning which several Laws and Canons were then made and
published, with other good secular Laws against thieves, clipping and
falsifying of money, etc.) which were thus praefaced. Haec sunt Statuta, etc.
quae statuerunt Anselmus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, Thomas Eboracensis
Archieriscopus electus cum eo, Omnesque alii Angliae Episcopi, in praesentia
gloriosi Regis Henrici Assensu Comitum et Baronum suorum, statutum est, etc.

Eadmerus l. 4. p. 101, 102, 103. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 107, 108, 110.
Anno 1109. there arising a difference between Anselm and Thomas the elect
Archbishop of York, about his consecration and subjection to Anselm; thereupon
Anselm calling the rest of the Bishops to him, by their advice, summoned him by
2. Bishops to come to Canterbury, there to receive his consecration, and to
make such subjection to him as he required, unless he could prove he ought to
be exempted from it. Whereupon the King sent a Writ to Anselm under his Seal,
to adjourn the difference between Thomas and him till Easter. EGO enim si infra
praedictum ^terminum in Angliam rediero Consilio Episcoporum et Baronum meorum,
vos just and honorifice inde concorcabo, etc. Upon which Anselm returned this
peremptory answer, not to Thomas, but to the King himself. De induciis autem,
quas Thomae Ebor. Archiepisc. dare mandaverat, pro certo scirer, quod prius
pateretur totus membratim dissecari, quam de negotio, in quo illum contra
antiquas sanctorum Patrum sanctiones, se injuste and adversus Deum erexisse
sciebat, vel ad horam illas aliquando daret. And writ a peremptory Letter to
Thomas, not to presume to intermeddle in any kind in the exercise of his
pastoral cure, until he had desisted from his rebellion against the Sea of
Canterbury, and done that subjection to himself which his predecessors, Thomas
and Gerard, had formerly made out of the ancient custom of their antecessors;
charging him without such a profession of subjection, never to receive
consecration to that See, under pain of an Anathema, and interdicting all the
Bishops of England under pain of Excommunication, not to consecrate him, nor
yet to have any Christian communion with him, if consecrated by any foraign
Bishops. Soon after which Letter Anselm deceasing, the King keeping his Court
a^ London at Pentecost: Rex Regni Proceres atque Praesules ad incundum de
Eboracensi Archiep: consecratione Concilium Londinum convocavit: Wherein caepit
agere cum Episcopis et Regni Principibus, quid esset agendum de consecratione
electi Eccle^iae Eboracensi? Where Anselms recited Letter being produced and
read, the Earl of Mellent demanded, Which of the Bishops durst to receive that
Letter without the assent and command of the King their Sovereign Lord?
Whereupon the Bishops perceiving that the Earl by this question was willing,
calumniam movere, qua eos regiae Majestati obnoxios faceret, remoti a
multitudine, habito consilio staruunt apud se, suis omnibus, si regia sententia
hoc forte Comitis instinctu dictaret, se malie dispoliari, quam iis quae
Anselmus de praesenti quaerela praeceperat, non obtemperare. Istis ergo firmato
Consilio inter se; they sent for Samson Bp. of Worcester to know his opinion
therein^ who communing with them, and telling them, that himself was present
when as his brother Thomas Archbishop of York Elect, tum antiquis
consuetudinibus, tum invincibilibus allegationibus actus, eandem p^ofessionem
Lanfranco Archiepisco Cantuariensi, and cunctis suis successoribus fecit.
Thereupon, Eadmerus, l. 3. p. 103, 104.
simul omnes Episcopi ad Regem reversi sunt, constanter and literas quibus
Comes sciscitatus fuerat, se suscepisse, and contra eas nulla ratione quicquam
acturos asserentes; Ad quae* cum idem Comes caput agitare^, autumans jam in
illos quasi de contemptu Regis crimen injiciendum, dixit Rex, Quicquid in iis
aliorum sententia ferat, de me constat, quia cum Episcopis sentio, nec vel ad
horam excommunicationem Anselmi subjacere aliquatenus volo. Quibus a^ditis,
gavisi sunt omnes. Et agentes domino grates pariter conclama verunt, Anselmum
adesse, et quam, non poterat in corpore degens, j^m mundo abs^^tem causam
Ecclesiae suae determina^e. Deinde, in laudibus eximii Principis demoratum est,
ac ut ipse dignitatem Primatus Ecclesiae Cantuariensis humiliari a nul^o
permitteret postulatus; siquidem in hoc, dicunt, consuetudines antiquae et
earum confirmationes, astipulatione totius regni sub magno Rege Willielmo
factae, necne privilegia quae his priota existunt ab Apostolica Sede, ipsi
Ecclesiae collata corrumperentur, scinderentur, annihilarentur. Adquievit istis
Rex, and jussit ipsarum quoque scripta Auctoritatum, quae Ecclesia
Can^uariensis habebat, sub celeritate afferri, allata recitari. Quod ubi factum
est, intulit. Quid amplius quaeritur? Auctoritates, and privilegia Apostolicae
Sedis and quae in praesentia Patris and Matris meae, sub testimonio and
confirmatione Episcoporum, Abbatum, and Procerum Regni definita sunt, Nota.
ut quasi de Epistola Anselmi penitus taceatur, ego in quaestionem mitterem,
ego novis Ambagibus agitari permitterem? Immo sciat Thomas se aut subjectionem
and obedientiam Ecclesiae Cantuariensi ejusque primatibus* ut Antecessores sui
professi sunt, professurum, aut Archiepiscopatui Eboracensi ex toto cessurum.
Eligat.
Fugat ergo, quod vult. Consideratis itaque Thomas auctoritatibus quibus
Ecclesiam Dorobernensem niti, and circumvallari videbat, spretis clericis suis,
quorum se Consilio credidisse sero dolebat, se contra ipsas Auctoritates nolle
stare, sed morem Antecessorum suorum sequendo and ipsis adquiescere, and
Ecclesiam ipsam deinceps semper diligere velle dixit, and honorare. Praecepit
igitur Rex ut professio, quam Thomas erat facturus in sui praesentia
dictaretur, scriberetur, sigilloque suo, nequid in ea quovis molimine antequam
eam proficiendo Thomas legeret, mutaretur, servaretur inclusa. Quod et factum
est.

Dominica ergo die quae fuit IV. Kl. Julii conven^runt, jubente Rege, Richardus
Londoniensis, Willielmus Wintoniensis, Radulphus Roffensis, Herbertus
Norwicensis, Radulphus Cistrensis, Radulphus Dunelmensis, and Herveus
Pangornensis Episcopi in Ecclesia beati Pauli Londoniae pro consecratione
Thomae. Inter solitam ergo examinationem, suo loco professionem, de subjectione
and obedientia sanctae Ecclesiae Dorobernensi exhibenda Richardus Lundoniensis
Episcopus, qui Thomam erat sacraturus ab illo exegit. Professio igitur, sicut
erat sigillata sibi coram omnibus oblata est, factoque sigillo evoluta and
lecta ab eo est ita. Ego Thomas Eboracensis Ecclesiae consecrandus
Metropolitanus profiteor subjectionem and Canonicam obedientiam sanctae
Dorobernensi Ecclesiae, and ejusdem Ecclesiae Primati Canonice electo, and
conseerato, and successoribus suis Canonice inthronizatis salva fidelitate
Domini mei Regis Henrici Anglorum, et salva obedientia ex part mea tenenda,
quam Thomas Antecessor meus sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae ex part sua professus
est.

Intererat huic officio Prior Ecclesiae Dorobernensis Conradus nomine) and ex
Monachis ejusdem loci, quamplures, qui pro hoc ipso, quoniam res eos maxim
respiciebat, illo convenerant. Lectam itaque professionem cum a Thoma sibi
oblatam Richardus Antistes Londoniensis accipisset, eam nominato Priori and
Fratribus tradidit, dicens; Hanc Fratres and Domini mei in testimonium
auctoritatis vestrae Elclesiae suscipite, and ipsam vobis factam in memoriam
posteritatis, servate. Deinde a Radulpho Cicestrensi Episcopo dictum in populo
est ipsam consecrationem, ex recto, et antiqua consuetudine debere fieri
Cantuariae. Et adjecit. Verum quia ipsa Civitas, defuncto Patre nostro Anselmo,
nunc quidem Pontifice caret, v^sum Regi sacratisque ordinibus regni est, atque
Principibus, ^am hic atque ab hujus sedis Episcopo prae aliis potissimum
celebrandam, eo intuitu, ea ratione quod Episcopus Lundoniensis inter alios
Episcopos est Decanus Ecclesiae Cantuariensis, and ideo speciali quadam
dignitate, caeteris anteponendus. Ita ergo in Episcopatum Eboracensem Thomas
consec^atus est, suscipiens a Ministro, quod susscipere detrectavit a Magistro.

Anno 1114. Eadmerus l. 5. p. 109, 110.112.
King Henry by the admonition of the Pope, and prayers of the Monks of
Canterbury and other, and above all, being moved by divine instinct: Episcopos
et Principes Angliae in unum apud Windeshoram fecit veni^e, eorum consilium in
constituendo Pontifice Cantuariensi volens habere. The King first pi^ched upon
Faricius Abbot of Abendon, who was there present for that end by the Kings
command: Animus tamen Episcoporum et quorundam Magnatum in aliud vergebat,
praeoptantium, aut quemlibet Episcoporum de ordine Cleric^li, aut Clericum
aliquem de Capella Regis in opus illud ascisci. But when it was objected, that
there had been no Archbishop since Augustine, but only one, which was not of the
Monastic order, who for that presumption and other perverse things done by him
was deposed by the Pope: and therefore they ought not to subvert the ancient
and authentic custom, when there was no reason or necessity to do it; they
were compelled to desist from their enterprise, which they labored with much
endeavor to accomplish: whereupon by Gods disposing providence, they suddenly
gave their sentence for Ralph Bishop of Rochester to be Archbishop, requiring
the Kings assent thereunto: who altering his mind concerning promoting the
Abbot, willingly gave his assent to Ralph; to whom all the Monks, Elders, and
People of Canterbury gave their ready assents. Whereupon two Messengers were
sent to Rome to Pope Paschal for his Pall, with Letters from the King and
Bishops of England and Covent of Canterbury, wherein they recite his Election
to this See: adding; Huic electioni affuerant Episcopi, Abbates, et Principes
Regni, and magna populi multitudo, (to wit of Canterbury, not elected Knights,
Citizens or Burgesses) consentiente Domino nostro Rege, et eandem electionem
laudante, suaque auctoritate corroborante. The Pope hereupon, with much
difficulty, at the earnest entreaty of one Anselm, Nephew to the deceased
Anselm, sent a Pall to Ralph by him, together with an angry harsh Letter to the
King and Bishops the same year. Whereupon Eadmerus l. 5. p. 114, 115, 116.
Eodem anno Henricus Rex, jussi^ omnes Episcopos et Principes totius regni, ad
Curiam suam, sub uno venire. Unde rumor per totam terram dispersus est,
Pontificem Cantuariorum Generale Concilium (praes^nte Legato Domini Papae)
celebraturum, and nova quaedam, tantoque Conventui digna, pro correctione
Christianae Religionis in omni ordine promulgaturum. Itaque ut Rex jusserat 16
Kal. Octobris Conveutus omnium apud Westmonasterium in palatio Regis factus
est: and quod de Concilii celebratione, et Christianitatis emendatione, rumor
disperserat, nihil fuisse, quae confluxerat multitudo tandem advertit: Only the
Popes Letter to the King and Bishops (recorded in Eadmerus) was there read.
Wherein Pope Paschal setting forth his pretended universal Authority over all
Kingdoms and Churches derived from St. Peter; and that no great businesses
should be done concerning the Church without him or his Legates privitie and
advice; taxes the King and English Bishops, for electing, and translating
Bishops, holding Synods, Councils, and meddling with the affairs of Bishops
without his privity* for not permitting any Legates freely to pass into or
return from England, without the Kings special license: for hindering Appeals to
Rome, and not duly collecting and paying his Peterpence; admonishing them to
reform all these their Exorbitances, and concluding with this menace. Si vero
adhuc in vestra decernitis obstinatia permanere, nos Evangelicum dictum, et
Apostolicum exemplum, pedum in vos pulverem excutiemus, and tanquam ab Ecclesia
Catholica resilientes, divino judicio trademus. The King hereupon advising with
his Bishops and Nobles, what answer he should return to the Pope concerning
those things, and certain others which did very much offend his mind, Cono his
Legate having suspended and Excommunicated the Bishops of Normandy, eo quod
Conciliis (generalibus) tertio vocati, interesse noluerunt: Placuit in Communi,
ut Rex suos Nuncios mitteret per quos quae vellet securius Papa mandaret: and
withal sent that resolute Letter by them to the Pope here cited p. 108, 109.

Eadmerus l. 5. p. 118.126
An. 1116. When the forecited Parliamentary Council at Salisbury was held;
Anselm returning from Rome, came to the King into Normandy with Letters from
the Pope, appointing him his Legate and Vice-pope in England, Quod regno
Angliae, brevi innotuit. Admirati ergo Episcopi, Abbates et Nobiles quique
Londoniae aduniti sunt, super his, and quibusaam aliis, praesente Regina,
communi Consilio tractatur, Quid multa? PLACUIT OMNIBUS, Archiepiscopum
Cantuar. quem maxim res haec respiciebat, Regem adire, and exposita ei antiqua
regni consuetudine, SIMUL AC LIBERATE, si consuleret Romam ire, ET HAEC NOVA
ANNIHILARI: amplectitur ille consilium; and repairs thereupon to the King,
informing him of this their resolution; with whom he found Anselm, waiting for
a passage into England to exercise his Legatine authority. Sed Rex antiquis
Angliae consuetudinibus praejudicium inferri non sustinens, illum ab ingressu
Angliae detinebat. Itaque omnis de hujusce potestatis (Legati) exors effectus,
a Normanda est in suos regressus.

In the year 1121. K. Henry the 1. Eadmerus l. 6. p. 136.
Consilio Radulphi Cant. Pontificis et Principum Regni quos omnes in Epiphania
Domini, sub uno Londoniae congregavit, decrevit sibi in uxorem Atheleiden
filiam Godfredi Ducis Lotharingiae. After which she arriving in England;
Conventu Episcoporum, Principum, et Procerum Regni, qui pro occursu Reginae
factus fuerat; the difference between Archbishop Ralph and Thurstan about his
subjection to him, was moved: Pope Calix^us who ordained him, commanding the
King and Archbishop, to permit him to enjoy his Bishopric; aut Rex anathemate,
and Radulphus suspensione Pontificalis Officii, plecteretur. Hereupon the
privileges of the Church of Canterbury (recorded in Eadmerus) were recited, and
quam digne Deo haec Apostolica disponerentur, intellectum est ab omnibus. Tamen
ne praemissae intentio poenae, Regem vel Pontificem aliquatenus conturbaret, EX
COMMUNI CONCILIO permissus est idem Thurstinus Angliam redire, and Eboracum
Regia via veni^e. Quod and factum est, ea dispositione, ut nullatenus extra
parochiam Eboracensem divinum officium celebraret, donec Ecclesiae
Cantuariensi, de injuria, quam ei intulerat, abjurata cordis sui obstinatione
satisfaceret.

About the year 1122. Eadmerus l. 6. p. 137, 138.
Pope Calixtus having by force deprived Pope Gregory, sent one Peter to be
Legate over all Britain, Ireland, and the Orcades, as well as France, who sent
some Abbots and others before him to give notice of his coming, the whole land
being astonished at the expectation of his coming, the King sent the Bishop of
St. Davies, and another Clerk to him into France where he stayed, to signify
his pleasure and command, that they should bring him into England to him. The
King by prudent counsel enjoined them; That after his entrance into England,
they should so order his journey, that he should not enter into any Church or
Monastery for hospitality or lodging, and that no necessaries should be
administered to him from others; but only at his own expense. Being brought to
the King and worthily received, he related the cause of his coming: The King
pretending an expedition against the Welsh, answered; Se tanto negotio operam
tunc quidem dare non posse, cum Legationis illius stabilem auctoritatem non
nisi per conniventiam Episcoporum, Abbatum, et Procerum, et totius regni
conventum, roborari posse constaret. ^uper haec, ^ibi patrias consuetudines ab
Apostolica sede concessas, nequaquam se aequanimiter amissurum fore testabatur
(in quibus haec, and de maximis una erat, quae Regnum Angliae liberum ab omni
Legati ditione constituerat) donec ipse vitae praesenti supersit. His horumque
similibus regali facundia editis, praefa^us Petrus assensum praebere utile
judicavit, and annuit. Quapropter larga regis munificentia magnifice honoratus,
nullo modo se quicquam antiquae dignitatis derogaturum, immo ut dignitatis
ipsius gloria undecunque augmentaretur, spo^pondit plena fide elaboraturum. Pax
itaque firma inter eos firmata est, and qui Legati officio fungi in tota
Britannia venerat, immunis ab omni officio tali, cum ingenti pompa, via qua
venerat extra Angliam, a Rege missus est. At Canterbury he perused the ancient
privileges granted to the Prelates by the Sea of Rome touching their
superiority over York: Quibus ille perspectis atque perpensis, testatus etiam
ipse est, Ecclesiam Cantuariensem grave nimis immoderatum praejudicium esse
perpessam, and quatenus hoc velocius corrigeretur, ^e modis omnibus opem
adhibiturum pollicitus est, Post haec Angliam egreditur.

By all these Parliamentary Councils and Proceedings in them, and the Kings
answer to this Legate, it is most apparent from the testimony of Eadmorus
(present at most of them) and then ancient Hi^orians. 1. That they all
consisted during all the reign of King Henry the 1. of the King, Bishops,
Abbots, Earls, Lords and Barons, without any Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, or
Commons elected by the people. 2ly. That not only the legislative but judicial
power or judicature of Parliament in all civil, ecclesiastical and criminal
causes debated or judged in them, resided wholly in the King, Prelates, Earls,
Barons and Nobles, which they jointly and severally exercised by mutual
consent, as there was occasion. 3ly. That our Kings, Prelates, Nobles were then
all very vigilant, and zealous in opposing the Popes usurpations upon the
ancient Liberties, Privileges, Customs of the king, kingdom, and Church of
England. 4ly. That those See the Antiquity of the Parliaments of England, p.
18, 19, 40, 80.
Antiquaries and others are much mistaken, who affirm, the Commons were called
to the Parliament of 16 H. 1. as well as the Peers and Nobles; and that since
that time the authority of this Court has stood settled, and the COMMONALTY had
their voice therein, which the said H. 1. GRANTED TO THEM, in love to the
English Nation, being a natural Englishman himself, when as the Normans were
upon terms of revolt from him to his Brother Robert Duke of Normandy; it being
clear by these Histories, and all the Parliamentary Councils under King Henry
the 1. and under Hen. the 2. King Ric. the 1. King John, and Henry the 3.
forecited, and here ensuing; that there were no Knights Citizens, Burgesses, or
Commons elected by the people, summoned to our Parliaments in their reigns
succeeding Henry the 1. therefore not in his. 5ly. That the Opinion of In his
Britannia, p. 120, 122.
Mr. Cambden, The Antiquity of the Parliaments of England, p. 18, 20, 87.
Judge Dodridge, Jo. Holland, Posthuma, p. 346, 347, 348.
Sir To. Cotton, Titles of Honor, p. 712, 713, 717.
Mr. Seldom and others, is true, that the first Writ of Summons of any Knights,
Citizens, Burgesses or Commons to Parliament now extant, is no antienter than
49 H. 3. dors. 10.11. That King Henry the 3. after the ending of the Barons
wars, appointed and ordained, That all those Earls and Barons of the Realm, to
whom the King himself should vouchsafe to send his Writ of Summons should come
to his Parliament, and none else but such as should be chosen by the voice of
the Burgesses and Freemen, by other Writs of the king directed to them: And
that this being begun about the end of Hen. the 3. was perfected and continued
by Edward the 1. and his Successors. Which Chronicle vol. 3. p. 37, 38.
Holinshed, and History of Great Britain, p. 538, 559*
Speed, do likewise intimate in general terms: So that upon due consideration
of all Histories, Records, and judicious Antiquaries, it is most apparent, that
the Commons had no place nor votes by election in our Parliaments in Hen. 1.
his reign, no^ before the latter end of King H. 3. and Ed. 1. who perfected
what his Father newly before him began, in summoning them to Parliaments.

This being an irrefragable truth, as I conceive, the next thing to be
considered of is this; whether the Commons, when thus called and admitted by H.
3. and E. 1. into our Parliaments, had any share, right, or interest in the
judicature of Parliaments then granted to them, either as severed from, or
jointly with the King and Lords? And if any share or right at all therein; at
what time, and in what cases was it granted or indulged to them?

With submission to better judgments; I am clear of opinion, that the King and
Lords, when they first called the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to
Parliament, never admitted them to any share or copartnership with them in the
ancient, ordinary, Judicial power of Parl. in civil or criminal causes, brought
before them by Writ, Impeachment, Petition, or Articles of complaint, as they
were the supreme judicature and Court of Justice; but reserved the judicial
power and right of giving and pronouncing all Judgments in Parliament, in such
cases and ways of proceeding, wholly to themselves, admitting them only to
share with them in their consultative, Legislative and Tax imposing power, as
the Common Council of the Realm, and thereby in cases of Attainder by Act,
Bill, or Ordinance (a part of the Legislative not ordinary judicial authority
of Parliament) allowed them a voice and partnership with themselves, and a
share in reversing such A^tainders by Act, Bill, or Ordinance by another Bill
or Sentence; but in no cases else, except such alone, wherein the King or Lords
should voluntarily, at their own pleasures, not of mere right, requite their
concurrence with them. The Arguments, reasons, inducing me to this opinion and
irrefragably evincing it, are these.

1. The Form of the Writs for electing, Knights, Citizens, Burgesses of
Parliament, with the retorns and Indentures annexed to them, which are only ad
faciendum, and consentiendum his quae and tunc ibidem de Communi Concilio dicti
regni contigerint ordinari; Which gives them no judicial power in civil or
criminal causes there adjudged, as the Writs to the Lords do give to them by
these clauses; Ibidem cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, and Proceribus regni
colloquium habere and tractatum: vobiscum etc. colloquium habere and tractare:
Personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus
super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri; and usage,
custom time out of mind.

2. Because when first summoned to our Parliaments, they were never called nor
admitted thereunto as Members of the Lords house, or as persons equal to them
in power, nor admitted to sit in the same Chamber, as Peers, with them, but as
Members of an inferior degree, sitting in a My Levellers levelled, and Preface
to an Exact abridgement of the Records of the Tower.
distinct Chamber from them, by themselves, at first, as they have done ever
since, which See my Catalogue of the Speakers in my 2 Table to an Exact
abridgement, etc. p. 151.155.
I have elsewhere proved, against Sir Edward Cooks, and others mistakes, as
Modus tenendi Parliamentum it self resolves, if it be of any credit.

3ly. Because after their call to our Parliaments, in 49 H. 3. they had scarce
the Name, nor Form of an House of Commons, or Lower House, nor any Speaker of
their Hou^e, that we find in History or Record, till 51 E. 3. Therefore
doubtless they had no judicial power or jurisdiction.

4ly. When they became a House, and had a Speaker, they could neither choose
their Speaker in any Parliament without a command to and license first granted
them by the King, Lord Chancellor, or the person employed by the King to show
the causes of summoning the Parliament; See my Table of Speakers, an Title
Parliament, Speaker, Commons to the Exact abridgeme^ of the Records of t^
Tower, an^ p. 155, 174, 189, 390* 53 535, 618, 619 640, 649, 661
who gave them a command to elect their Speaker, and then to present him to the
King and Lords for their approbation of him at the time prescribed them; who
had then power to allow or disallow their Speaker, and to order them to elect
another then or afterward, incase of unfitness, sickness, imprisonment, or any
other just ground or excuse, as our Parl. Rolls and others attest. If then the
Commons can neither elect their own Speakers, nor approve nor remove them, but
by the Kings and Lords approbation; who may discharge them upon just grounds,
and order rhem to elect others in their places; and that against their wills,
as in the case of Thorpe hereafter cited: Then certainly the judicature in all
other cases, as well as this of their very Speakers, and Members too, resided
still in the King and Lords, and was not communicated to the Commons House.

5ly. The Commons House inability to administer an Oath to any person in any
case 1 R. 2. ^o^. Parl. n. 31.42.7 R. 2. n. 13, 14.21 R 2. n. 53.
which the Lords alone have power to do in Parliament.

6ly. Their Petitions, 21 E. 2. n. 68.50 E. 3. n. 16.^0 41.10 R. 2. n. 6.10
18.21 R. 2. n. 15, 16.1 H 4. pl. Co^ae, n. 1.2.28 H. 6. n. 14. ^ 53.
Articles of complaint, and Impeachments in all Parliaments, delivered and sent
up to the Lords against Delinquents in Criminal causes, as well of Commons as
Peers, Clergy men as secular persons; and their praying the Lord to judge and
give sentence against them.

7ly. Their prosecuting and giving in evidence against all sorts of Deliquents
at the Lords Bar, as accusers.

8ly. Their standing always in such cases; and that bare headed in the Lords
House, as Prosecutors, Informers, 8 R. 2.^.
Grand-Jurymen, whiles the Lords alone fit, and that covered, and only give,
pronounce the judgment, and that in the Commons absence for the most part, not
presence.

9ly. Their having Co^ks 4 li^stir. p. 21, 2^, 23.
no voice or share at all in the hearing, examining, debating, reversing
erroneous Judgments in other Courts upon Writs of Error brought in Parliament,
but the Lords alone.

10ly. The Kings and Judges not sitting amongst them, but only in the House of
Peers to authorize and assist them in their judgments, are all infallible
arguments and clear irrefragable demonstrations, that the Judicatory, or
judicial power of Parliaments was never communicated to the Commons House, upon
their first admittance into Parliament, nor since, but remained entirely, fully
in the King and Lords alone, as it did before. That this is so in truth, I have
the express acknowledgement and confession of the whole House of Commons
themselves long since, in the Parliament of 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 79. remaining
on record to all Posterity, with the Kings and Lords concurrent resolution,
both from the time of the Commons first admission, and for all succeeding ages.
The Commons in this Parliament, November 3. made their Protestation in the same
manner they had done in the beginning of the Parliament; and more over showed
to the King See an Exact abridgment of the Records in the Tower, p. 392.
Come les Ioggementz du Parliament apperteignent soulement au Roy et Seignieur,
et nient as Communes, etc. That the Judgments of Parliament appertained only
to the King, and to the Lords, and not unto the Commons. And thereupon they
pra^ed the King out of his special grace, to show unto them the said
Judgments, and the cause of them, that so no Record mig^t be made in
P^rliamen^ against the said Commons, which are or shall be parties to any
judgment given or hereafter to be given in Parliament, without that privity.
Whereunto the Archbishop of Canterbury gave them this answer by the Kings
commandment; That the Commons themselves are Petitioners and demanders, Et que
le Roy et les seigniours de tout temps ont eues et averont de droit les
juggement in Parliament en manner come mesmes les Communes sont monstrez, and
that the King and Lords from all times have had (for times past) and shall have
(for time to come of right the Judgments in Parliament, in manner as the
Commons themselves have showed, Saving that in Statutes to be made, ^or in
Grants and Subsidies, or in such things as are to be do^e for the common profit
of the REALM, the KING will have especially their advice and assent. By this
memorable Record in Parliament it is apparent by the Commons own confession,
First, That the Judgments in Parliament even in cases of Commoners themselves,
and Members of the Commons House as well as Peers, appertain only to the King
and to the Lords, in the Affirmative. Secondly, That they appertain not to the
Commons, in the Negative. Thirdly, A Confession both of the Commons, King and
Lords, That they have from all times in all ages before that Parliament
appertained to the King and Lords, and that of right, not by usurpation or
connivence. Fourthly, An express order and resolution, that the King and Lord
shall always keep and hold this their Right of Judicature in all times to
come, without admitting the Commons to share therein upon this their Petition,
as not fit to be granted them. Fifthly, That if the Commons should be admitted
at any time to be parties or privies to the Judgments in Parliaments, as they
then desired; it would be merely out of the Kings special Grace. Sixthly, That
the special reasons, ends of the Kings summoning the Commons to Parliaments at
the first and ever since, were only these especially, 1. to have their advice
in Statutes to be made, 2. in Grants, or Subsidies, 3. in such things as are to
be done for the common profit of the Realm; not to give them the least share,
right or interest in the Judicature or Judgments of Parliament, as it is the
supremest Court of Justice.

The Judicial Power and the Judgments in Parliament being never transferred in
part or whole by the King and Lords to the Commons House, but entirely reserved
to themselves, as before their admission in^o our Parliaments, as I have
proved, it follows inevitably from thence; 1. That all Judgments given by the
Commons House alone, or by any of their Committees of Sequestrations,
Examinations, plundered Ministers, etc. without the Lords, are merely void and
null in Law, being Coram non judice; and may be justly questioned and vacated
by the Lords upon appeal or complaint, as Nullities. 2. That the House of
Commons have no more right or power to judge or vote down the Lords House, or
question or null their Judgments upon appeals to the Commons from them (as
Lilburn and Overton* pretend they may) than the Grand or Petty Jury have to
Vote down the Judges and Justices of Assize or Sessions from the Bench, or to
reverse or repeal their Judgments and Orders; Or the Common Council of London
to vote down the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and reverse their Orders and
Judgments in their Court upon appeals unto them: They being in nature of Grand
Jury men, and the General Inquisitors of the Realm, to inquire of, present and
impeach, transmit delinquents of all sorts in Parliament to the Lords House,
their only Judges, Cooks 4. Instit. p. 24. 3ly, That the King and House of
Lords are now of right, and still ought to be the only true and proper Judges
of all Parliamentary Causes, and Controversies, Civil, Ecclesiastical or
Criminal, whether they concern Peers, Clergymen or Commoners, as they were
originally before any Knights, Citizens or Burgesses summoned to them.

To clear this from all Scruples and avoid mistakes, I must inform you, that
there is a twofold way of proceeding and judgeing in Parliaments. The 1.
extraordinary and extrajudicial, by way of Bill, Act, or Ordinance, by the
Legislative power alone; such Bills, Acts, Ordinances, ratifying only the
precedent judgments of the Lords passed against Malefactors, being not any
proper actual Judgments in their own name. This is evident by one of the first
cases wherein the Commons after their admission into our Parliaments, were made
parties to a Judgment by way of Bill. In Henry de Knyghton, de Event. Angl. l.
3. c. 4.5. Polychron. l. 1. c. 42: Exilium Hugonis, in Totles Magna Charta, f.
50. etc. Claus. 15 E. 2. dors. 32.
the Parliament of 15 E. 2. there were sundry Articles of High Treason in
accroaching royal Power in diverse cases etc. as likewise of misdemeanour and
Breach of the Great Charter, exhibited against the 2. Hugh Spencers (both privy
Counselors of the realm) which upon examination were found true Totle, f. 53,
54.
BY THE EARLS, BARONS and OTHER PEERS OF THE LAND: Parquoy NOVS PIERS DE
LATERRE COUNTS and BARONS en la presence nostre SEIGNOUR LE ROY, AGARD, que Sir
Hugh le Despenser le Fitz, and Sir Hugh le Despenser le piere soient disheritz
a touts jours, come disheritours de la corone and enemies du roy and de son
people, and que ilz soient de tout exiles horse du royalme Dangliterre, sans
retourner in null temps, si ceo ne soit de assent nostre Seignor le Roy, and de
lassent DES PRELATES, COUNTS ET BARONS, et ceo en parliament duement somons. Et
les donons port a Dover, and null part aillours, a voyder and a passer horse du
royalm Dangliterre, enter cy la feast de saint John le Baptist prochein
avenir, cest jour account. Et si les^ it Sir Hugh and Sir Hugh demurgent en le
royalme Dangliterre oustre le dit jour, que done lour est de voyder and de
passer, come desuis est did, ou que apres le dit jour retournet, adonques soit
fait de eux, come de enemies de roy and de roialme. This judgment being given
against them in Parliament only by the Peers, Earls and Barons in the presence
of the King, as the Close of the Act for their banishment and 15 E. 2. dors. 32.
Clause Roll of that year recite; thereupon there was an Act drawn up (wherein
all the Articles and the judgment given against them are recited) for
confirmation of this Judgment, wherein the Prelates and Commons were made
parties, though not to the judgment it self, beginning thus. Al honeur de
deiu, etc. luy monstrent Prelates, Counts, and Barons, et les autres Pieres de
la terre, and COMMON de Royalm, contre Sir Hugh, etc. To which Act the King
much against his will, to prevent a war, consented. The History of the Lords
proceedings against these Spencers is thus related by Historiae Angliae, p. 91,
92. Ypodig. Neustriae, p. 104.
Walsingham: There falling out a difference between Hugh Spencer the younger
and Earl of Hereford about lands which Spencer purchased of William de Brews,
which the Earl desired to buy and had first contracted for, but Spencer by his
power at Court bought from him; the Earl thereupon being much incensed,
complained of this injury to Thomas Earl of Lancaster; Historiae Angliae, p.
91, 92. Ypodig. Neustriae, p. 104.
qui allicientes caeteros pene cunctos Comites and Barons in partem suam,
conjurationem fecerunt maximum ad vivendum and moriendum pro justitia, and
regni proditores pro viribus destruendis, and praecipue utrunque Hugonem de
Spencer, patrem scilicet atque filium, quos odio inexorabili perstringebant, eo
maxim quia regem ducebant, pro suae voluntatis arbitrio, in tantum quod nec
Comes, nec Baro nec Episcopus quicquam valuit expedire in Curia sine horum
consilio vel favore. Omnium ergo livore persequebantur, qui omnibus pene
dominabantur, and quo plus crevit eorum gloria, and eo amplius contra illos
crevit invidia, quae semper accrescit abundantia aliorum. Igitur Barons duce
Thoma de Lancastria apud Shirborn in Elmedon convenerunt, faederati prout
dicitur and juramentis astricti, ad prosequendum propositum usque ad corporis
and animae divisionem. Sed tamen pene cuncti prae^er Thomam de Lancastria and
Humfridum Comitem de Herefordia and paucos alios ante finem negotii retrorsum
abierunt, and prae timore mortis sese Regi dediderunt: sed haec inferius
before videbuntur. Cumque Barons ut praefertur apud Shirburnam convenissent,
quosdam artirulos proscriptionem dictorum Hugonis and Hugoni^ composuerunt, sed
tamen vias juris et aequitatis in hac part penitus omiserunt, suorum pro
tempore exequentes impetus animorum. Nam illorum bona qui illis vel amicitia
vel affinitate juncti fuerant, furibunde invadebant, capientes castra per
violentiam, vastantes praedia per malitiam, and perimentes famulos reper^os i^
custodiis eorundem, dolentes ob hoc tantummodo, quod eorum personas capere quos
oderunt minime potuerunt: praedicta furia de die in diem vires sumente, Barons
vexillis explicatis ad sanctum Albanum veniunt, per viam deripientes ubique
victuali^, and pauperes terrae gravantes. In hac comitiva fuerant quidam, qui
propter inveteratum odium monasterium sancti Albani dictique loci Monachos, se
gravaturos devoverant. Sed tamen disponente Deo qui neminem temptari permittit
supra vires, horum magister and author tantae malitiae in villa de Alysbury
priusquam ad sanctum Albanu^ attingeret, morbo percussus irremediabili,
propriis seipsum descerpit manibus, and post duos dies miserabiliter expiravit.
Caeteri tam formidabili tremefacti vindicta, casum pro miracu^o reputantes, ab
executione voti illiciti timore magis quam amore destiterun^. Magnates vero
apud sanctum Albanum cum suis armatis exercitibus per triduum perhen in^ntes
miserunt solennes ad Regem nuncios Londoniis commorantem, Londoniensem,
Sarisburiensem, Eliensem, Herefordensem and Cicistrensem, Praesules qui tunc
apud sanctum Albanum convenerant pro pace reformanda; mandantes, ut dominus rex
non solum suam vacuaret curiam, sed regnum suum de regni Proditoribus Hugone
and Hugone le Spencer, per communitatem terrae in multis condemnatis articulis,
exiliumque meritum subire permitteret si diligeret regni pacem. Petierun^,
Barons insuper, ut rex ipsis and omnibus qui in eorum comitiva arma moverant,
literas patentes indemnitatis concederet, and ne pro transgressionibus
transactis vel praesentibus a rege seu quovis alio futuris tem^oribus
punire^ur. Ad haec dominus rex respondit, quod Hugo le Spencer pater in suo
negotio mare transierat, and Hugo junior in mari ad custodiendum quinque
Portus, prout ex officio renebatur, qui de jure vel consuetudine exulare non
debent ante responsa data per eosdem. Ad^c^ prae^ere^, quod eorum petitio juris
and rationis fundamento carebat, eo maxim quod dicti Hugo senior and Hugo
junior parati semper fuerant omnibus de se conquerentibus in forma juris
respondere, and si probare possent eos in aliquo statuta terrae laesisse,
parati semper suerant legibus regni parere. Postremo cum juramento addidit,
quod noluerit sacramentum violare ad quod astrictus fuerat in Coronatione sua,
concedendo literas pacis et indulgentiae tam notorie delinquentibus in suae
personae contemptum, et totius regni perturbationem, et majestatis regiae
laesionem. Hiis auditis, Proceres acti in ^u^iam, confes^im ad arma* rosiliunt,
and milites quidam super armatura coti^cas induerunt vocatas quarteloys,
Armigeri vero indumenta bendas habuerun^, quibus indumentis expost induti,
tracti sunt and suspensi plurimide procerum Comitiva. Cum fastu igitur and
pompa nimia Barons Londonias adierunt, hospitatique in suburbia civitatis,
manebant pacifice donec licentiam ingredi civitatem obtinuissent: obtento a
rege civitatis ingressu, Magnates sicut prius in petitione sua fortiter
perstiterunt. Tandem interveniente regina and praefatis episcopis laudabiliter
mediantibus, rex inductus est propter werrae periculum evitandum, ut
condescenderet votis and petitionibus Procerum praedictorum. Edictoque super
hiis per comitem Herefordiae in aula Westmonasterii publicato, Hugo senior in
exilium actus est. Sed Hugo junior in diversis locis latitans, in Anglia and in
mari permansit.

The Clause Roll of 14 E. 2. m. 17. Schedula, records the proceedings with this
addition: that King Edward the 2. having summoned the Lords to come to a
Parliament with the rest of the Council at Gloucester, Humfry de Boun, Roger de
Mortimer, and their confederates, refused to come upon the Summons, for fear of
Hugh Spencer, who was made Chamberlain in pleno Parliamento 12 E. 2. at York,
desiring that he might be committed and kept in safe custody till the
Parliament; for they we^e unwilling to come to him, so long as he was with the
King. The King said; he much wondered at this their carriage, in regard Spencer
was never questioned in any other Parliament since he was made Chamberlain, for
any misdemeanour: and ignorare non debetis nec potestis, quod mandata nostra
omnibus and singulis ad Nos ad hujusmodi mandata nostra convenientibus,
protect^o and desensio sunt and debent, secundum legem et consuetudinem Regni
nostri. As for removing Spencer from him, which they desired; he said, it were
unjust, and of ill example, aliis Ministris nostris s^ipsum amoveremas a Nobis
totaliter, sine caus^. Praef^ u^ vero Hugonem sive quema^is alium Custodiae
sine causa committere non possumus nec debemus, Nota.
cum hoc esset conira tenorem Magnae Chartae de libertatibus Angliae, et contra
Communem Legem Regni nostri, ac contra Ordinationes (made by himself and the
Lords in Parliament.) Idem enim Hugo se protulit plane ac public coram Nobis
ad respondendum in Parliamento nostro and alibi prout debuit querelis nostri
and si^gulorum a^ ipso conqueretium volentium, and ad standum inde recto, etc.
And thereupon he commands them to come and treat cum caeteris de Concilio, at
Oxford; whereas it appears by the Dorse of this Roll, he had formerly summoned
them and the rest of the Council to Gloucester, whether these Earls refused to
come. Claus. 15 E. 2. dorso 32. The whole proceedings against the Spencers in
Parliamen, are at large recorded (but cancelled by order of the Parliament at
York) They were sent to every Court to be enrolled: and the writ recites, thar
their judgment was per pares in praesentia Regis.

Soon after, the same year the King summoned a Parliament at York on the 3. of
September: Claus. 15 E. 2. m. 23, 24. and dors. 13.32. Claus. 17 E. 2. m. 30.
21 R. 2. rot. Parl. m. 55. to 67. See Holinshed, Fabian, Polychronicon.
where this judgment against the Spencers was questioned as erroneous; and
being referred to the consideration of the Provincial Council of Canterbury,
they conceived it to be erronice factum, because the Spiritual Lords never
assented to it, neither could they do it, because it was Jndicium sanguinis,
for if they submitted not to the exile they were to be proceeded against as
Enemies to the King and Realm. After which the King and some of the Lords had
the sentence read to them; and they said, It was erroni^ous. The Earls of
Richmond, Pembroke and Arundel said, They gave their voices for fear of the
other Noble men's power: and the Judges said; Consideratio praedicta fuit contra
Legem and consuetudinom regni. The King writes down all this, and then sends to
some of the Bishops that were absent from the Council to know their minds 4
Januarii: who concurring in judgment with the rest; thereupon the Process,
Judgment and Act against the Spencers, was nulled and made void, before the
King, Lords and Commons ( who were consenting to it before.) 1. Because they
were not called to it to make their defense. 2ly. Because the Lords Spiritual
(who were Peers,) assented not to it. 3ly, Because against MAGNA CHARTA, and
the franchises of England; Nullus liber homo utlagetur, etc. 4ly. Because the
Faults were not sufficiently proved. 5ly. Because the Lords in the Kings
absence, of their proper authority, usurping to themselves royal power, had
given the judgment of his royal assent, with the assent of the Lor^s and
Commons, without his privity, and against his will. The judgment and process
of this repeal and nulling their sentence, were sent by Writ into every County
to proclaim, and to null and cancel the first judgment. A little before which
Parliament Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and sundry other Lords, Knights, and
Gentlemen for adhering to him, and levying war against the king, were
arraigned, impeached before the Lords, and commanded to be hanged, drawn,
quartered and beheaded. Comitum et Baronum Consilio, as Hist. Angl. p. 94, 95.
Ypodigm. Neustriae, p. 120.
Walsingham relates, without the Commons peculiar assent, and accordingly
executed.

Anno 1326. Hugh Spencer the younger (notwithstanding the repeal of his exile)
being taken by the Kings forces was brought to Hereford, and there arraigned
publicly before William Trussel, a Judge: His indictment is at large recorded
in the Chronicle of Leicester, and in Henry de Knyghton de Eventibus Angliae,
l. 3. c. 15. col. 2547. etc. beginning thus; Hugo de Dispencere En Parliament
nostre Seignour le Roy que ore est, tenue a Westminstre lanquinzisme, per
examinent dez Praelates, Contes, Barons, et tote la commune de Realm fuist
notoriement trove, que vostre piere, and vous Hugh fu^stez agardez TRAITORS
and enmys del Realm; pur quel par assent and commandment nostre Seigniour le
Roy, vostre Piere, and vous Hugh fuistez exules del Realm, sanz james revenir,
si ceo ne fuist par lassent and commmandment nostre Seignious le Roy, and ceo
en plain Parliament duement al ceo summounz. And for his returning into England
against this Act, and his manifold murders, Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. ^06.
oppressions and misdemeanors since, there recited at large, he was condemned
to be hanged, drawn, bowelled, quartered and beheaded, which was executed
accordingly, December. 8. and his head fixed on a Poll, and set upon London
bridge.

The Repeal of the Spencers exile was not long after repealed, and the Act for
their exile re-confirmed in the Parliament of 1 E. 3. chapter 1, 2. in the Statutes
at large, which recites; That they were exiled, disinherited and banished out
of the Realm by the Commons assent, and award of the Peers and Commons of the
Realm, and by the assent of King Edward, as Traitors and Enemies of the King
and of his Realm: And that he by the Common Counsel of the Prelates, Earls,
Barons, and other Great men, and of the Commonalty of the Realm, in his
Parliament holden at Westminster, did ordain and establish, That the repeal of
the said Exile, which was made by Duress and force, should be adnulled f^r
evermore; and the same exile made by the award of THE PEERS AND COMMONS BY THE
KINGS ASSENT, as aforesaid, shall stand in its strength in all points, after
the tenor of every Article therein contained. But this Act of repeal by the
like power and assent was repealed as erroneous, and the heir of the Spencers
restored to blood and Lands by the Parliament of 21 R. 2. Rot. Parl. u. 35. to
57. And that whole Parliament again repealed and nulled by 1 H. 4. c. 3. Cooks
4 Instit. p. 25. This was the issue of this very first Attainder, wherein the
Commons concurred with the Lords, being carried by force and power on all hands
in those turbulent times.

In the Parliament of 11 R. 2. chapter 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. in the Statutes at
large. Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, Michael de
la Pale Earl of Suffolk, Robert Tresylien, chief Justice, R. Belknap, with
sundry other Judges, Lawyers, Knights, Gentlemen, Clergymen, and other Commons
and Prelates were impeached by the Duke of Gloucester, and other Lords
Appellants of High Treason, in 36 Articles, and thereupon attainted, condemned,
judgment of death, banishment, forfeiture of their lands and estates given
against them in Parliament by the Lords, without the Commons. After which the
Lords exhibited a Petition to the King for the confirmation of the said
Attainders and forfeiture. Whereupon the King considering the mat^er of the
said Petition to be true, at the request of the said Commons, of the assent of
the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and all others of this present Parliament,
granted the request of the said COMMONS in all points, after the form of the
said Petition; And moreover of the assent aforesaid, passed sundry Acts
touching their Attainders, Judgments, Exiles, and forfeitures, which all may
peruse at leisure in the Statutes at large. In the Parliament of 21 R. 2. upon
the Petition of the Commons, by the like assent, c. 2. to 12. in the Statutes
at large; these Attainders, Judgemens, forfeitures, and the whole Parliament of
11 R. 2. were repealed, as erroneous, and nulled. Yet after by the Parliam. of
1 H. 4. c. 3. the Parl. of 21 R. 2. is nulled, and that of 11 R. 2. revived and
confirmed, with all the attainders, and Judgments therein given. In the
Parliament of 9 H. 6. c. 8. Owen Glendor, formerly endited and attainted of
high Treason for his grand insurrections and rebellions, by the assent of the
Lords spiritual and temporal, and of the King^ at the special request of the
Commons, was by special Act, declared a Traitor; and all manner of Indictments,
Inquisitions, Processes, Records, Judgments, Ordinances, Statutes made against
him, authorized, established for Law, by assent of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament. In the Parliament of 29 H. 6. c. 1. The King by the advice of the
Lords spiritual and temporal, and at the request of his Commons, by a special
Act, attainted John Cade of several High Treasons, for traytorously iman^ging
the Kings death, the destruction and subversion of this Realm, in gathering and
levying great numbers of the Kings people, and them exciting to make
insurrection against the King, his regalty, crown, and dignity, and to make and
levy war falsely and traitorously against the King: for which they confiscated
all his Lands, Tenements, rents and possessions to the king, corrupt and
disable his blood for ever, and enact him to be called a false Traitor within
the Realm for ever. And in 31 H. 6. c. 1. with the advice and assent of the
Lords, and at the request of the Commons, it is ordained, established, that the
said John Cade shall be reputed, had, named, and declared a false Traitor to
the king; and all indictments and proceedings had and made under the power of
his Tyranny, were clearly repealed and adnulled for ever, and to be of no
effect, but void in Law, and put in oblivion, and destroyed for ever, as
purposed against God and Conscience, and the Kings royal estate and
pre-eminence, and also dishonorable and unreasonable. In the Parliament held
Anno 38 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 5. to 26. Richard Duke of York with sundry other
Lords and Commons were attainted of High Treason by Bill for conspiring and
levying war against the King. And in the Parliament of An Abridgement of the
Records, p. 670, 671, 672.677, 689, 691, 699, 702, 703, 707.
1 E. 4. rot. Parl. n. 12, 17. to 37 King Henry the 4 H. the 6 Queen Margaret,
Edward Prince of Wales, Henry Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Devonshire, with
sundry other Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, Priests and Yeomen were
attainted of High Treason by Bills, for levying war against king Edward the 4.
In the Parliament of 4 E. 4. rot. Parl. n. 2. to 39. the Duke of Somerset,
Henry Beauford, Sir Ralph Piercie, with sundry other Knights, Esquires and
Gentlemen were attainted of High Treason by Bill for levying war against the
king; most of which attainders in the Parliaments of 12 E. 4. rot. Parl. n. 15.
Cooks 2. Instit p. 39, 40, 41.
to 36.13 E. 4. n. 45.14 E. 4. n 45.27, 28, 29, 31, 32.17 E. 4. n. 19, 20, 21,
22. E. 4. n. 23* were repealed by Bills, and the parties, or their heirs
restored to blood and Lands. In the Parliaments of 14 E. 4. rot. Parl. n. 34,
35, 36, 37. Sir Richard and Sir Robert Wells, John Vere, Earl of Oxford, Sir
Thomas Vere, with sundry more Knights and Gentlemen were attainted by Bill of
High Treason, for Levying war against the king, and some of the Attainders
repealed by Bill afterward. In the Parliament of 25 H. 8. c. 12. Elizabeth
Barkin, Richard Master, Edward Barkin and sundry others were attainted and
condemned of High Treason, and John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, Thomas Gold and
others of misprission of High Treason, by Act of Parliament. In the Parliament
of 28 H. 8. c. 7. Queen Anne, George Lord Rochford, Sir Henry Norris, Sir
Francis Weston, William Breerton Esquire, and Mark Sutton were convicted and
attainted of High Treason, and their lands forfeited by Bill. In the Parliament
of 32 H. 8. Thomas Lord Cornwell was convicted and attainted of High Treason by
Bill (against Law, and the great Charter) without ever being called to answer,
or any legal hearing, for the Treasons therein expressed, according ^o his own
intentions to have thus proceeded against others without legal trial. In the
Parliament of 33 H. 8. c. 21. Queen Katherine, and Jane, Lady Rochford were
convicted and attainted of High Treason by Bill, to which Act the king was
enabled to give his royal assent, by Letters Patents, signed by him under his
hand with his great Seal, notified and published in the HIGHER HOUSE, to the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons there assembled, without coming
to the House in person to give his royal assent thereto. In the Parliament of 2
and 3. Ed. 6. chapter 17. Sir william Sharington Knight being indicted and
attainted of High Treason, for forging and coining of money called Testons, his
attainder was confirmed by Act of Parliament and his lands forfeited. And chapter
18, Nota.
Sir Thomas Seymor Lord Seymor of Sudley, and high Admiral of England, for his
traiterous aspiring to the Crown of this Realm, and to be King of the same, and
for compassing and imagining by open Act to deprive the King of his royal
estate, and title of his Realms, and for compassing and imagining the death of
his Noblemen, and most traitorously to take away and destroy all things which
should have sounded to the let or impediment of this his most traiterous and
ambitious enterprise (as the Act recites;) and for other his misdemeanors,
innumerable untruths, falsehoods, deceiptfull practices, outrages against the
King, oppression, and manifest extortion upon the Subjects of the Realm, was
adjudged and attainted of high Treason by Bill, and to sustain such pain of
death, and other forfeitures, aes in cases of High Treason have been used being
a Member so unnaturul: unkind, and corrupt, and such a heinous offender of his
Majesty and his Laws, that he cannot nor may not conveniently be suffered to
remain in the body of the Commonwealth, but to the extreme danger of the Kings
Highness, being the head, and of all the good Members of the same, and of too
pernicious and dangerous example, that such a person so bound to his Majesty by
sundry great benefits, and so forgetful of them, and so cruelly and urgently
continuing in his false and treacherous intents and purposes against his
Highness, and the whole estate of his Realm, should remain among us.

In the Parliament of 1 Mariae chapter 1. the Attainder of Queen Katherine is
reversed by Bill; and chapter 16. the Attainders of John Duke of Northumberland,
Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, William Marquess of Northampton, John
Earl of Warwick, Sir Ambrose Dudley, with other Knights and Gentlemen, formerly
convicted and attainted of Treason, according to the Law of the Realm, for
their detestable and abominable Treasons, in proclaiming and setting up Queen
Jane, to the peril and great danger of the person of Queen Mary, and to the
utter loss, disherison, and destruction of the Realm of England, if God in his
infinite goodness had not in due time revealed their traiterous intents (as the
Act recites) at the Petition and with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in Parliament, were confirmed and ratified by a special
Act. In the Parliament of 29 Eliz. c. 1. the Attainders of Thomas Lord Paget,
Sir Francis Englefield, and sundry other Knights and Gentlemen, who were
lawfully indicted, convicted, and attainted of many unnatural, detestable and
abominable Treasons, to the fearful peril and danger of the destruction of the
Queens Majesty's person, and of the Realm, were confirmed by a special Act, and
chapter 3. there is another Act, to avoid fraudulent assurances, made in certain
cases by Traitors. In the Parliament of 3 Jacobi, chapter 2. Sir Ever^rd Digby,
Robert Winter, Guy Fawkes, Robert Cates^y, and all the rest of the Gunpowder
Traitors who undertook the execution of the most barbarous, execrable and
abominable Treason that could ever enter into the hearts of most wicked men, by
blowing up the Lords House of Parliament, with the King, Queen, Prince, Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, Judges, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of Parliament,
therein assembled; were attainted of High Treason, and their former attainders
and convictions confirmed by a special Act: And in this very last Parliament,
the Sea Straffords trial.
Earl of Strafford Lord Deputy of Ireland, and See my Canterburies Doom.
William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, after judgment of high Treason, upon
their several impeachments and trials given against them by the Lords in their
House, were likewise attainted of Treason, and their judgments ratified by a
special Bill and Ordinance, to which the Commons assented, as well as the
Lords; their assents to Attainders, by way of Act or Bill being so necessary,
that if the King in Parliament Wills, that such a man shall be attainted of
Treason and lose his lands, and the Lords assent, and nothing is spoken of the
Commons in the Bill, this is no Act nor, good Attainder in Law, and the petson
shall be restored by the opinion of all the Judges, 4 H. 7. f. 18. Broke
Parliam. 42. Fitz. 3.7 H. 7.14. 11 H. 7.27. Broke Parliam. 107. Plowden 79.32
H. 6.18. As the Commons in our English Parliaments have assented to all these
and some other Bills, and Acts of Attainder cited in Sir Edward Cooks 4
Institutes, chapter 1, 2. and Mr. St. John's Argument at Law concerning the Bill of
Attainder of High Treason of Thomas Earl of Strafford, printed by Order of the
Commons House 1641. So I find that the Commons in Ireland have done the like in
the Parliaments held in Ireland, as the Printed Statutes of Ireland 28 H. 8. c.
1. for the Attainder of the Earl of Kildare, and others of High Treason. 11
Eliz. ch 1. for the Attainder of Shan O Neyle and others of High Treason, of 13
Eliz chapter 6. and 7. for the Attainders of Fi^zgerald and others of High Treason,
Of 27 Eliz. chapter 1. for the Attainders of James Eustace and others of High
Treason, of 28 Eliz. chapter 8. and 9. for the Attainders of the Earl of Desmond,
John Brown and others, and of 11 Jacobi chapter 4. for the Attainders of the Earl
of Tyrone and others of High Treason, for their several rebellions,
insurrections, wars, against their Sovereigns, and other Treasons mentioned in
these respective Acts, abundantly evidence.

But yet the Commons assents to all these Bills of Attainders in cases of high
Treason, did not institute them Judges of these persons, nor give them any
share in the judicial right and power of Parliaments, 1. Because most of these
persons thus attainted by Bill, were Queens, Dukes, Earls, Lords, Barons, and
Peers of the Realm, who were triable and to be judged only by their Peers, and
none else, by the Common Law of England, Magna Charta, c. 29. and sundry other
Acts, not by the Commons, who are not their Peers.

2ly. Because most of these parties thus attainted by those Bills, were first
attainted, tried, judged, condemned in Parliament by the Lords alone, as their
proper Judges, upon the complaints or impeachments of the Lords Appellants, or
of the Commons themselves, or else before some other Judges, upon indictments
and legal trials; and those Acts did only confirm and ratify their precedent
attainders recited in them.

3ly. Because in many of these Acts the Commons did only petition, that their
Attainders might be ratified by Bill, and the King and Lords assents thereto,
which was done at their request as Petioners, not Judges.

4ly. Because their Judgments and Attainders, passed formerly by the Lords and
Judges, were good in Law, though thus ratified afterward by Bill, for the
greater terror, certainty, and satisfaction; and these Bills did pass no new
Judgments and Attainders upon the parties, but only ratify the old; and in
cases where there was no precedent Attainder, they attaint them only by virtue
of their Legislative power, without any indictment, trial, or hearing of the
parties themselves, as Judges of them (some of them being dead when attainted)
taking all the charges in the Bills pro confesso, and notoriously true, and
proved such by some other precedent legal convictions and evidences.

2ly. There is a formal proper Judgment given in our Parliaments both in
criminal and civil causes, upon complaints, Articles, Petitions, Impeachments,
Inditements, Informations, Writs, Appeals, Reports, References, and that either
against or concerning Peers themselves, or against or concerning Commoners, and
other Laics or Clergymen. And in all such cases, proceedings, the King and
Lords alone have a proper judiciary power or right of Judicature without the
Commons, vested in and executed by them, which I shall abundantly evidence and
make good by sundry memorable Presidents out of our Histories and Records in
all ages, not vulgarly known, and for the most part never yet remembered by any
who have wri^ten of our Parliaments, and the proceedings in them, whose
Treatises are very slight, unsatisfactory, and in many things of this nature,
erroneous.

I shall begin first with presidents concerning Ecclesiastical and Temporal
Lords alone, proceeded against, impeached, judged, censured in our Parliaments
for sundry criminal causes, Offenses, Treasons, wherein the House of Commons can
challenge no share or voice in the Judicature, (especially in the case of
Temporal Lords, who are such in their own right, and sit in Parliament ratione
Nobilitatis) but the Lords alone, and that by the express Letter and Resolution
of the Great Chariers of King John, and of King Henry 3. and Ed. 1. c. 14.29.15
E. 3. c. 2, 3, 4. and ro^. Parl. n. 6.8.11 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 6, 7.5 H. 4.
rot. Parl. n. 12.28 H. 6. ror. Parl. n. 51, 52, 53. 20 H. 6. c. 9.26 H. 8. c.
13.28 H. 8. c. 7.18.31 H. 8. c. 12.32 H. 8. c. 4.33 H. 8. c. 12, 20, 23.35 H.
8. c. 2.1 Ed. 6. cap. 12. 1 Mar. c. 6.1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. c. 3.4 and 5 Phil.
and Mar. c. 4.1 Eliz. c. 1.5.5 Eliz. c. 11.13 Eliz. c. 1.14 Eliz. c. 1, 2, 3.
18 El. c. 1.23 El. c. 1, 2.27 El. c. 2.3 E. 3.19. Fit: Corone 16^.1 H. 4.1.10
E. 4.6. Brook Trial 142. Stamford* l. 3. c. 1. f. 152.33 H. 8. Brook^ Trial
142.34 H. 8. Bro: Corone 172.13 H. 8.11. Br. Treasons 29.38 H. 8. Br. Treasons
2.33. Dyer 99.107.208.360. Cook 6 Rep. f. 52.9 Rep. f. 30.87. and Cooks 2
Instit. f. 28, 29, 48, 49, 50. and his 3 Instit. c. 1. and 2. p. 27, 28, 29.30,
31. All which declare, enact, resolve, That the Peers of this Realm shall not
be tried or proceeded against, but only by the lawful judgment, and verdict
of their Peers. The Lords and Barons of Parliaments trial by Peers alone of
their own rank, being so essential, that they cannot waive, nor put themselves
upon the trial of the Country, by 12. ordinary Freeholders, as was resolved in
the Lord Dacres case, Pa. 26 H. 8. Cooks 3 Institutes, f. 30. much less then
can they waive their Peerage it self, and sit as Commoners in the Commons
house, as I have formerly proved.

The first president I meet with in our Histories of this nature, is in the
reign of Cassibelan the British King, who having repulsed Julius Caesar upon
his first landing in this Island and forced him to return into France,
Galfridus Monum: hist. l. 4. Porticus Verunnius, Hist. Brit. l. 4. Mat. Westminster.
Flores Hist. p. 66, 67. Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton.
Edictum fecit ut omnes Proceres Britanniae convenirent; to the City of
^roynovant, now London: where Evelin, nephew to Androgens Duke of Troynovant,
slaying Heralgas nephew to Cassibelan, upon a sudden quarrel as they were
playing together, Cassibelan thereupon commanded Evelin to be brought before
him, talem sententiam quam Proceres regni judicarent subire: which Androgeus
opposing, ^aying sese suam Curiam habere, and in illa diffiniri debere quicquid
aliquis in homines suos clamaret; thereupon Cassibelan threatened to waste his
Country with fire and sword, if he refused to deliver up his Nephew to justice,
to undergo the sentenc^ quam Proceres dictarent: which he accordingly executed,
for refusing to put his Nephew upon the Trial and Judgment of the Nobles for
this murder.

The next president I find, is that of Will. Malmsburiensis de Gestis Pontif.
Angl. l. 3. p. 264. to 269. Chron. Johan. Bromton, col. 792. to 795. Mat.
Westminster. Anno 692.711. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 160, 161. Stubs and Godwin in
Wilfrids life.
Wilfrid Archbishop of York, who for refusing to divide his Bishopric into two
Bishoprics more, and for endeavoring to persuade Queen Emburga, to become a
Nun, and desert her husband Egfrid, King of Northumberland, was through that
Queens malice and prosecution in two several Parliamentary Councils Anno 678.
and 692. twice deprived of his Archbishopric and banished the Realm, by King
Egfrid, Theodor Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest o^ the Bishops and
Nobles of the Realm assembled in these Councils; and at last restored to his
Archbishopric again, in another Council, An. 705. by King Osred his will and
consent.

About the year of our Lord 924. Willelm. Malmburiensis de Gestis Reg. Angl. l.
^* c. 6, p. 62. Spelmanni Council. p. 407, 408. Speed p. 396.
Elfred a Nobleman, who opposed Aethelstans title and election to the Crown,
though in vain, intended to seize upon him at Winchester, and put out his eyes;
but his Treason being discovered, he was apprehended and sent to Rome to purge
himself thereof by Oath: where he abjuring the fact before the Altar of St.
Peter in the presence of Pope John the 10th. fell down suddenly to the ground
as dead, and being thereupon carried away thence to the English School, he
there expired within 3 days after. The Pope acquainting the King therewith,
and craving his advice, what to do with him, and whether he should have
Christian burial? the King thereupon assembled a Council of the Nobles of his
Realm, at whose inteaty he granted him Christian burial; but for this his
Treason, they confiscated all his Lands great and small to the King, who by
their consent granted them all to the Abbey of Malmsbury by his Charter:
wherein he recites Elfreds Treason, death, and the judgment given against him
by the Nobles: adding Sciant Sapientes regionis nostrae, non has praefatas
terras me in just rapuisse, rapinamque Deo dedicasse* sed sic eas accepi
quemadmodum judicaverunt omnes Optimates regni Anglorum: et sic adjudicata est
mihi tota possessio ejus in Magnis et Modicis. Here we have a direct judgment
given against Elfred after his death, by all the Nobles of the Realm assembled
in a Parliamentary Council, for Treason against the King, for which they
adjudged, he should forfeit all his Lands to the King: whose seizure of them by
this legal judgment, was no rapine, but a just and legal perquisite, which he
in gratitude dedicated unto God.

Mat. West. Sim. Dunelm. Florent. Wigorn. Hoveden, Bromton. an. 985.986* 992,
993. Malmsb. de Gestis Regum l. 2. c. 10.
Anno 985. as some; or 986. as others relate, King Ethelred banished Alfric
Duke of Mercia* out of the Realm: the cause and manner thereof, not expressed
by our Historians, is thus recited in King Ethelreds Charter to the Abbot of
Abingdon, in the Leiger book of Abingdon, f. 91. that Alfric had forcibly
ravished and taken away, Willemetrant and Syrene from a widow named Eadfeild,
for which he was banished: after which being recalled, and made one of the
Kings Admirals against the Danes, Anno 992^ he played the Traitor and revolted
to the Danes, as our Historians record; for which Treason, and as that Charter
recites; quia cum Ducatu suo contra Regem Ethelredum reus exstitit, omnes
possessiones ejus Regis ditioni subactae sunt: and that by the Lords judgment
given in a COUNCIL at CIRENCESTER: styled Synodale Concilium ad quod omnes
Optimates mei simul in unum convenerint, et eundem A^fricun Majestatis reum, de
h^c patria profugum, expu^erunt: by whose Judgment, as he seized his Dukedom
and Lands there adjudged to be forfeited for his Treason, it is likewise
probable he caused the Eyes of Algarus, son of this Traitor Alfric to be put
out: An^o 993. when this Council at Cirencester was held, as I conjecture.

In a great Parliamentary Council held at Oxford, Malmsb. de Gest. Reg. l. 2.
c. c. 10. Fl. Wigor. p. 382. Mat. Westminster. p. 395. Hoveden, p. 433.
Anno 1015. King Ethelred caused some Nobles of the Danish race, whereof
Sygeforth and Morcar were chief, to be suddenly and secre^ly slain and put to
death, as being noted and accused of Treason and Perfidiousness toward the
King; who thereupon seized upon their Earldoms, Lands and Goods.

King Cnute Aethelredus Abbas de Geneal. Regum Angl. col. 965, 966. Flor.
Wigorniensis, p. 389* 390. Simeon Dunelmensis, col. 175, 176. Hoveden, p. 436.
Hen. de Knyghton de Eventibus Angl. l. 1. c. 3. Polychron. l. 6. c. 18. Hen.
Huntindon, Hist. l. 6. p. 363.
Anno 1017. by his precepts assembled all the Bishops, Dukes, Princes and
Nobles of the English Nation in a Great Parliamentary Council at London, where
they all swore allegiance and homage to Cnute as their King, totally rejected,
abjured Edmond Ironsides Sons and Brothers, (right heirs to the Crown;) against
their former Oaths of Allegiance to them, and by wicked advice, ad^udged Prince
Edwin to be banished the Realm, and Edmond Ironsides Sons to be sent beyond the
seas, to be slain by the Barbarians; for which, by divine retaliation, ^he
chiefest of them within one year after, were slain or banished the Realm by
King Cnute, whom they endeavored to ingratiate and secure by this their unjust
sentence. The Col. 937, 938.
Chronicle of Bromton, Part. 6.
Caxton in his Chronicle, and Titles of Honor, part. 3, chapter 5. Sect. 6. p. 634.
Mr. Seldom, record this memorable proceeding in an Appeal of Treason against
Earl Godwin in a Parliamentary Council held about the year 1043. Godwin Earl of
Kent being enforced to fly into Denmark to preserve his life, for the murder of
Prince Alfred, Brother to King Edward the Confessor, hearing of Edwards piety
and mercy, resolved to return into England, humbly to implore his mercy and
grace, that he might regain his lands then confiscated for it; having provided
all things for his journey he put to Sea, arived in England, and posted to
London, where the King then held a Parliamentary Council wi^h all his Nobles.
Comes Godwinus usque Londonias ubi Rex et omnes regni Magnates ad Parliamentum
tunc fuerant, properavit, rogans ibi et petens amicos and consanguineos suos,
qui post Regem majores terrae fuerunt, ut gratiam et amicitiam a Rege sibi
perquirere studerent. Qui super hoc consilio inter eos deliberato, ipsum coram
Rege pro grat^a obtinenda secum duxerunt. Sed statim cum Rex eum intuitus
esset* De proditione et morte Alfredi fratris sui, ipsum appellavit in haec
verba. Proditor Godwine ego te appello de morte Alfredi fratris mei, quem
proditionaliter occidisti. Cui Godwinus se excusando respondit. Domine mi Rex,
salva reverentia et gratia vestra, pace and dominatione, fratrem vestrum
unnquam prodidi veloccidi; unde super hoc pono me in consideratione Curiae
vestrae. Tunc d^xit Rex, Karissimi Domini, Comites et Barons terrae: qui est^s
homines me^ liget modo hic congrega^^, and appel^um meum responsumque Godwini
audisti^, Volo, quod inter nos in ista appellatione rectum judiciam decernatis
et debitam justitiam faciatis: Comitibus vero et Baronibus super hoc ad in
vicem tractantibus, quid^m inter eos de justo judicio faciendo diversimodo
sentiebant: Alii enim a^cebant; Quod nunquam per homagium, servitium, seu
fidelitatem Godwinus Regi exstitit alligatus* et ideo Proditor suus non fuit;
and quod ipsum etiam manibus fuis non occiderat. Alii vero dixerunt: Quod
Comes, nec Baro, nec aliquis Regi subditus bellum contra Regem in appellatione
sua-de Lege potest vadiare, sed in toto ponere in misericordia su^, et emendas
sibi of^er^e competentes. Tunc Leofricus, Consul Cestriae* probus homo quoad
Deum and seculum, dixit: Comes Godwinus, post Regem and homo melioris
parentelae totius Angliae, et dedicere non potest, quin per consilium suum
Alfredus frater Regis interemptus fuit; unde per me considero, quod ipsemet and
filius suus, et nos omnes 12. Comites, qui amici et consanguinei sui sumu^,
coram Rege humiliter procedamus, onerati cum tanto auro et argento quantum
inter brachia sua quilibet nostrum poterit bajulare, illud sibi pro su^
transgresin afferendo, et suppliciter deprecando, ut ipse malevolentiam suam,
rancorem et iram Comi^i con onet: et acce^ it is homagio suo and fidelitate,
terras suas sibi integre restituat e^ retradat. Illi au^em omnes sub ista forma
thesauro se onerantes, et ad Regem acced^ntes, seriem and modum considerationis
eorum sibi demonstr^bant. Quorum considerationi Rex contrad^cere nolens,
quicquid judicaverant per omnia ratificavit: Concordia igitur sub isto modo
inter eos facta, Comes statim reobtinuit integreterras suas See the 3. Part of
my Seasonable Legal and Historical Vindication, etc. p. 273. to 277.
By this notable president it is most apparent: That the Peers and Barons in
Parliament, were then the sole and only Judges, and gave judgment in it: That
Peers in the Confessors reign and before, were only to be tried, judged by
their Peers: and that their Judgment and resolution was binding even to the
King himself, who ought to assent to and confirm their judgments given in his
own Appeal and particular cases.

Malmsb. de Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 13. Mat. Westminster. Wigorniensis, Hoveden,
Bromton, an. 1051. Huntindon Hist. l. 6. p. 366, Holinshed, Grafton, Fabian,
Speed.
In the year of our Lord, 1051. this Earl Godwin refusing to execute King
Edwards unjust command, to fall with his Army upon the Inhabitants of Dover,
upon the complaint of Eustace Earl of Boloigne, whose men they slew in an
affray raised by their own insolency and abuse; conceiving it to be unjust to
condemn and execute them before a Legal hearing, trial and conviction, upon a
mere accusation; thereupon Eustace and the Normans accused Godwin and his two
sons, Harold and Swain, to the King, that they disobeyed and went about to
betray him. Wherefore, TOTIUS REGNI PROCERES, all the Nobles of the Realm were
commanded to meet together at Gloucester, that the business might be there
debated in a Great Parliamentary Assembly. Syward Earl of Northumberland,
Leofri^ Earl of Mercia, and all the Nobility of England there meeting upon this
occasion; Godwin and his two sons only absented themselves, thinking it not
safe to come thither without a strong armed guard: upon this they raised a
great Army under a pretense to curb the Welshmen, marching with their forces
into Glocestershire as far as Beverston Castle. Whence he sent a Message to
the King, to deliver up to him Earl Eustace, with his Companions, and the
Normans and Bononians who kept Dover Castle, else he would denounce war against
him. The King having raised a powerful Army, returned him this answer; That he
would not deliver them up to him: withal commanding him and his Sons to come
unto him on a set day, to answer his raising of an Army against him, and
disturbing the Peace of the Realm without his license, and to submit himself to
the Law for the same. At last to prevent a bloody battle, by the mediation of
the Nobles of England (engaged on both parties in this quarrel) it was agreed,
that hostages should be given on both sides, and that the King and Godwin
should meet in another Parliamentary Council at London on a certain day, to
plead one with another: where such a Council (or Parliament as our English
later Historians style it) being assembled: Godwin and his sons were summoned
to appear therein only with 12 men to attend them: which they thinking both
unsafe and dishonorable to them, refused to appear without hostages and
pledges also given for their safety, refusing to surrender their Knights fees
to him; the King for their contempt to appear and justify themselves in his
Court of Parliament, thereupon in suo Concilio communi Curiae suae judicio; by
the Common Council and Judgment of his Court (of Parliament) banished Godwin
and his 5. Sons out of England: and a Decree was published, that they should
depart w^thin 5. days out of England; Which Judgment and Outlawry against
them, was given in Parliamento pleno, as Radulphus Cistrensis in his
Poly^h^onicon, Henry de Knyghton, de Eventibus Angliae, l. 1. c. 11. and other
Historians inform us. Godwin and his Sons hereupon departing the Realm,
infested it both by Sea and Land, till at last raising a potent Navy and Army,
to prevent further danger and effusion of blood; the King by the COUNCIL OF HIS
NOBLES assembled for that purpose; reversed the unjust Judgments given against
them, restored them to their Lands, Honors, Powers, and banished those Aliens
who gave the King ill Counsel, and incensed him against Godwin and the English.

Henry Huntindon Hist. l. 6. p. 366. Polychron. l. 6. c. 20 Chron. Johan.
Bromton, col. 445.
King Edward Anno 1055. Habito Londini Concilio, holding a Parliamentary
Council with his Prelates and Nobles at London, banished Algarus Son of Leofric
Earl of Mercia out of the Realm Hen. de Knyghton, de Event. Angl. l. 1. c. 11.
Willelmus Malmsburiensis, de Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 23.
Quia de Proditione Regis in CONCILIO CONVICTUS fuerat; because he was
convicted in the Council of Treason against the King; as some Historians write:
yet Florentius Wigorniensis, Simeon Dunelmensis, Hoveden Henry de Knyghton, and
others affirm, that he was banished sine culpa, without any crime at all:
whereupon he coming with 18 ships out of Ireland, joined with Griffin King of
Wales, raised a great Army and invaded England; whereupon by agreement he was
restored by the King to his Earldom: After which, Ingulphi Hist. p. 898.
Wigorniensis, Simeon Dunelmensis Hoveden, anno 1055, 1058.
Anno 1058. he was banished the second time, and by the aid and assi^tance of
Gr^ffin, restored again to his Earldom (whereof he was unjustly deprived.)

In the year 1074. Hoveden, Annal. pars prior, p. 456, 457. Simeon Dunelmensis,
col. 208, 209. Florent. Wigorniensis, Huntindon, Bromton, Holinshed, Speed,
Daniel and others, Anno 1174, 1075.
Waltheof Earl of Northumberland, with sundry other Earls, Bishops and Abbots,
and other Eng^ishmen, meeting together at the marriage of Earl Ralph to the
daughter of William Fitz O^bert, conspired together against King William the
first (then in Normandy) to expel him out of his kingdom, reputing it a great
dishonor, that an illegitimate Bastard should rule over them: for which
purpose they raised forces and confederated themselves with the Danes and
Welshmen. But being resisted by the Kings party and routed; thereupon the King
posting into England, imprisoned Roger Earl of Hereford, and Earl Waltheof,
though he revealed the whole conspiracy to Archbishop Lanfranke, and submitted
himself to the King before it brake out, by which means it was timely
suppresed. The King the next Nativity of our Savior following, CURIAM SUAM
TENUIT held his Court (of Parliament) at Westminster; wherein, Ex eis, qui
contra eum cervicem suam erexerant, de Anglia quosdam exlegavit, quosdam eru^is
oculis, vel manibus truncatis, deturbavit; Comites vero Walt^eolfum and Rogerum
JUDICI ALI SENTENTIA DAMNATOS arctiori custodiae mancipavit; and the next year
1075. Comes Waltheofus ju^su Regis Willielmi extra Civitatem Wintoniae ductus
est indigne, et crudeliter securi decapitatur, et in eodem loco terra obruitur
et in bivio sepelitur. Sir Edward Cook in his 2. Institutes p. 50. affirms,
that this Roger Earl of Hereford was tried BY HIS PEERS, and found guilty of
this Treason, PER JUDICIUM PARIUM SUORVM: who was thereupon imprisoned all the
days of his life. If then this Court thus held, was a Parliament, and those
Earls there tried and found guilty of Treason in it by their Peers even under
the Conqueror himself; it is a most pregnant Authority to prove; that Peers are
triable only by their Peers in Parliament; that they are the only Judges in
Parliament in cases of Treason, and did then give sentence of banishment, and
pulling out the eyes, and cutting off the hands of Traitors of inferior
condition, as well as sentence of death, decapitation, and perpetual
imprisonment against those two Earls.

Florentius Wigorniensis, Mat. Westminster. Mat. Paris, Bromton, Simeon Dunelmensis,
Hoveden and others, Anno 1070.
Anno 1070. There was a GREAT COUNCIL held at Winchester, jubente and praesente
Rege Gulielmo, wherein Si^gan^ Archbishop of Canterbury, his Brother Bishop
Agelmar, and lundry Abbots were degraded for many pretended rather than real
crimes and misdemeanors, operam dante Rege ut quamplures ex Angliis suo honor
privarentur, in quorum loco suae gentis personas subrogavit, in confirmationem
sui (quod noviter acqusierat) regni. Hic and nonnullos tam Episcopos quam
Abbates, quos nulla evidenti causi, nec Concilia, nec leges seculi damnabant,
suis honoribus privavit, and usque ad finem vitae custodiae mancipatos
detinuit, suspicione tantum inductus novi Regni: As Florentius Wigorniensis and
others inform us. And in another Florentius Wigorniensis, Anno 1070, p. 435,
436. Mat. Paris, Hoveden, Huntindon, Simeon Dunelmensis Bromton.
Council held the same year at Windsore, Bishop Agelric (for pretended crimes)
was uncanonically degraded, without any fault, and presently after sent
Prisoner to Marlebridge: In this Council many Abbots were likewise degraded,
and Norman Monks put in their places.

In the 7 year of William Rufus, Eadmerus Hist. Nov. l. 1. p. 25. to 32.
Antiquitates Eccles. Brit. p. 101, 102. Gul. Malmesbury de Gestis Pontif. Angl.
l. 1. p. 219 to 230, Speeds History, p. 462, 463, 464: Holinshed, vol. 3. p.
22, to 36.
Anno Dom. 1094. there fell out a great difference between the King and
Archbishop Anselm upon this occasion. The King alleged that it was the royal
prerogative of him and his Ancestors, That no man without his license or
election should nominate or acknowledge any one within the Realm of England, to
be a lawful Pope, or yield obedience to him as Pope: and that whosoever would
deprive him of this royal prerogative, it was all one as if he endeavored to
deprive him of his Crown. Anselm whiles he was Abbot of Becca in Normandy,
before he was made Archbishop of Canterbury, had acknowledged Urban to be
lawful Pope, whom the King had nor yet received as Pope, and resolved to
receive his Pall from him, and by no means to recede from this his subjection
and obedience to him. Upon which occasion the King being highly displeased with
him, protested, That Anselm could not possibly keep that allegiance which he
owed to him, and likewise his obedience to the Apostolic See, against his
will, they being inconsistent together; and thereupon reputed him a Traitor to
his Crown and dignity. Anselmus igitur ^e^ivit inducias ad istius rei
examinationem quarenu^ Episcopis, Abbatibus, cunctisque regni Principibus una
coeuntibus communi assensu definiretur; ^rum s^lva reverentia and obe^ientia
sedis Apostolicae possit fidem Regi terreno ser^are, an non? Quod si probatum
inquit, fuerit, utrumque fieri minime posse, fate or malo terram tuam, donec
Apostolicum suscipias, exeundo devitare, quam beati Petri ejusque Vicarii
obedientiam vel ad horam abnegare. Dantur ergo induciae atque ex Regis
sanctione firm totius Regni Nobilitas quinto Id. Martii, pro ventila^ione
istius causae in unum apud Rochingh^ham coit. All the Bishops, Abbots and
Nobles being there assembled in a Parliamentary Council, this controversy
between the King and Anselm being stiffly debated for many days, The King
required, and the Bishops and Nobles much pressed Anselm, singly to submit
himself to the Kings Will, without any saving of his obedience to the Pope:
which he peremptorily refused, this being the sum of his answer to the Bishops
and Nobles. Cuncti noveritis in communi, quod in his quae Dei sunt, Vicario be
ti Petri obedientiam; and in his quae terrenae Domini mei Regis dignitati jure
competunt; and fidele consilium and auxilium propensus mea capacitate impendam.
The King extremely incensed with his answer, most entirely inquired of his
Bishops and Nobles; what he should object against his speeches? After much
consultation they agreed upon an answer; telling Anselm, Noveris totum regnum
conqueri adversum te, quod nostro communi Domino conaris decus Imperii sui,
Coronam auferre, Quicunque enim Reg^e dignitatis and consuetudines tollit,
Coronam simul and regnum tollit, etc. Whereupon they advised him to renounce
Urban, and to submit to the King, and crave his pardon for his offense; Which
he refusing, they perswad^d the King to give him no longer time to advise, if
he persiste^ in his obstinacy; Sed in eum mox judicii sententiam invehi,
juberet: The King and Bishop of Durham pre^ed, That he might be deprived of his
Ring, Pastoral staff, and Bishop^ick, and banished the Realm, if he would no
submit to the Kings will; which some of the Nobles misliking (concei^ing, that
he being their Superior and Metropolitan, could not be judged by them, but by
the Pope alone) the King said, Quid placeat si haec non placent? dum vivo parem
mihi in regno utique sustinere nolo, etc. Anselm thereupon desired the Kings
safe conduct, promising voluntarily to depart the Realm, but refused to resign
his Bishopric; which the King refused to grant unless he resigned it: At
last, by the mediation of the Nobles and Bishops, the King granted him longer
time to consider of his absolute submission to him; upon the promise of his
loyal and peaceable deportment in the interim, and so this Parliamentary
Council ended, the proceedings whereof are at large recorded by l. 3. p. 70.
etc.
Eadmerus, well worth perusal.

Anno Th. Walsingham Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 33, 34.
1095. Robert de Mulbrain, William de Auco, and many others, conspired to
deprive King William Rufus both of his kingdom and life, and to make Stephen
Earl of Albemarl King, whom the King having thereupon taken Prisoners by an
Army raised against them, and committed to safe custody, till their trial in
Parliament.

Anno 1996. 8 days after Epiphany, apud Salisberiam tenuit CONCILIUM; in quo
jussit Gulielmi de Auco, in duello victi oculos eru^re, and testiculos
abscindere, and dapiferum illius Gulielmum de Alderi, suspendi. Comitem Odonem
de Campania, praedicti Stephani patrem, and quosdam alios traditionis
participes in custodiam posuit. Here the King and Lords in a Parliamentary
Council, judge and condemn Traitors to death, imprisonment, or other corporal
punishment, as well Commons as Peers.

In the year of Christ, 1.100. Chron. Jo. Bromton, col. 997. Hen. Huntind.
Hist. l. 7. p. 378. Mat. Paris, p. 51, 54. Will. Malmesb. de gestis Pontif.
Angl. l. 3. p. 277, 278. Hen. de Knyghton de Event. Angl. l. 2. c. 8. Polychr.
l. 7. c. 12. Godwins Catalogue of Bishops, p. 645, 646, 647. Roger de Hoveden
Annal. pars prior, p. 648.
Ranulph Flambard Bishop of ^urham, Consilio gentis Anglorum, By the Vote of
the whole Parliament of England, was clapped up Prisoner in the Tower of London
by King Henry the 1. at the importunity of the Nobles, and the innumerable
complaints made against him, he being the chief Author and promoter of all the
evil customs, extortions, and unjust oppressions of the Realm and people,
exercised by King William Rufus (then redressed by the Charter of King Henry,
made and ratified by the assent, advice of his Nobles and Barons) exacting many
times twice as much of the people as W^lliam Rufus required, wherewith the K.
very well content, would laugh, and say, That Ranulph was the only man for his
turn, who cared not whom he displeased, so he might please his Master. After he
had been imprisoned some space, he made an escape out of the Tower by a rope,
hurting his Leg and Arm by a fall from the wall to the ground, the rope being
too short; and then escaping into Normandy, instigated D. Rob. to claim the
Crown, and invade the Realm; to his own great loss, the effusion of much
Christian blood, and great disturbance and damage of the kingdom; being ad omne
scelus paratus.

Anno Dom. 1102. Eadmerus Hist. Nov. l. 3. p. 67. Will. Malmesbury de gestis
Pontif. l. 5. p. 220. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 103, 104. Mat. Westminster. Mat.
Paris, Hoveden, Bromton, An. 1102. Simeon Dunelm. col. 227, 228. Radulph. de
Diceto, col. 499. Bromton, col. 1000.
There was a GENERAL Council held in the Church of St. Peter's in Westminster on
the Westside of London; Communi assensu Episcoporum, et Abbatum, et Principum
totius regni: huic conventui affuerunt (Anselmo Archiepiscopo petente a Rege)
PRIMATES REGNI, quatenus quicquid ejusdem Concilii auctoritate d^cerneretur,
VTRIUSQUE ORDINIS concordi cura and sollicitudine tatum servaretur; sic enim
necesse erat. I^ this Council the Sin of Symony was first of all condemned by
the authority of the holy Fathers, and Wido Abbot of Pescore, Wimundus of
Tavestock, and Baldwin of Ramsy, Godric of Burgh, Haymo of Cernel, Egelric of
Midleton being therein convicted of Simony, were removed and deposed for it by
this Council, and Richard Abbot of Ely, Robert of St Edmonds and the Abbot of
Miscelen deposed for other particular crimes and offence^. A^o^ which the King
being much incensed against Anselm and other Bishops for refusing to consecrate
those Bishops whom the King invested with a staff and ring, the King and Anselm
having a hot contest about it at Canterbury, Ne ipse perdendo suorum jura
An^ecessorum ipsis vilior esset: Eadmerus l. 3. p. 70 etc. Antiq. Eccles. Brit.
p. 105, 107. See here p. 170, 171. ^
Anselm requested the King ^ deferr ^he business till Easter* ut aud^to
Episcoporum, Regni^ue Primatum Concilio, qui modo non assunt; responde^m hi^*
which the ^ing consenting to, at Easter, communis Concilit vocem unam accepit,
that he should go to Rome to the Pope to procure a repeal of the Canon, made
against investi^ures; and that as the Kings Ambassador, Regis preces, Regnique
negotia Apostolicis auribus expositurus: Anselm undertaking the journey to
Rome, like an Arch-Traytor, so incensed the Pope against investitures, and the
King, That William Warenast the kings Ambassador telling him, H^ kn^w the King
would rather lose his Crown than this Privilege of Investitures: The Pope
thereto replied; Yea, let him lose his head also if he will, whilst I live, he
shall never appoint any Bishop in his Realm, but I will resist him what I may.
The King hereupon (by the advice of his Nobles) prohibited Anselm to return
into England, and seized all his Temporalties, and ^oods moveable and
unmovable into his hands, keeping him in exile for 9 years space, after which
he was conditionally restored, at the mediation of the Kings Sister Adela.

Anno 1106. Henry de Knyghton, de Event. Angl. l. 2. c. 8. col. 2374. Here p.
172.
Robert Duke of Normandy, was first adjudged to a shameful cruel death, and
after that to have his eyes pulled out, and he kept perpetual Prisoner: and
Earl Morton with others adjudged to perpetual prison, BY THE PEERS, for taking
up arms against King Henry the 1.

King Will. Malmesbury Historiae Novel. l. 2. p. 181, 182, 183. Godwins
Catalogue of Bishops, p. 319, 320, 321, 322. Holinshed, p. 50, 51.
Stephen having against his own, the Bishops and Nobles Oaths to King Henry and
Maude, usurped the Crown, Anno 1199. There were diverse rumors spread abroad,
that Robert Earl of Normandy, and Mawde would invade England, and that Roger
Bishop of Salisbury, and Alexander his Nephew, Bishop of Lincoln, who were very
powerful, wealthy, and had built, fortified and furnished diverse strong and
stately Castles, would upon the Empress landing surrender them to her, and
revolt from Stephen to her party, Paternorum scilicet beneficiorum memoria
inducti, being both advanced and enriched by her father: Whereupon the Nobles
often times wished Stephen to compel them speedily to resign their Castles to
him, least he repented too late for not doing it, when they were in the Enemies
power. Thereupon the King on the 8 of July apud Oxenford, FACTO CONVENTU
MAGNATUM, summoned both these Bishops to this Parliamentary Assembly; to which
Bishop Roger was very unwilling to come, having a great reluctance in his mind
against it; whereupon he excused his coming, by reason of his age and
infirmity: but that would not be admitted, come he must, and did. When these
Bishops came to Oxford, there fell out a sudden quarrel between the servants of
the Bishops, and the servants of Alan Earl of Britain, as they sat together at
the Table, the Bishops men quarrelling with the Earls, and falling first a
fighting with one another with their fists, and at last with their swords, a
sore fray was made, diverse being wounded on either side, and one slain; the
Earls servants being put to slight by the Bishops. The K. taking this occasion,
Conveniri jussit Episcopis, ut Curiae suae satisfacerent de hoc, quod homines
eorum pacem ipsius exturbassent: Modus fatisfactionis foret, ut claves
castellorum suorum quasi fidei vadis traderent. The Bishops said they were
ready to give the King satisfaction, but delaying the surrendering of their
Castles, he commanded them to be more strictly watched, lest they should
depart; and the king carrying the Bishop of Salisbury with him, besieged his
Castles till they were surrendered to him by composition. This act of the king
was variously interpreted, and very i^l resented by all the Bishops, who
thereupon revolted from him, first in their affections, and then by their
actions to Mande, when she arived, and elected, declared her right heir to the
Crown. Henry Bishop of Winchester the Popes Legate, though King Stephens own
Brother, publicly to the Kings face, as well as privately, affirmed, Si
Epis^opi tramitem Justitiae in aliquo transgrederentur non esse Regis sed
Canonum judicium: sine publico et Ecclesiastico Concilio illos nulla
possessione privare debuisse: Regem id non ex rectitudinis zelo, sed commodi
sui compendio fecisse, qui Castella non Ecclesiis, ex quarum sumptibus, et in
quarum terris constructa erat, reddider^t; sed Laicis, eisdemque parum
religiosis, contradiderit, etc. Quapropter vigorem Canonum, experiendum ratus,
CONCILIIO quod quarto Calend. Septembris celebraturus erat Wintoniae, fratrem
Stephanum, incunctanter adesse praecepit. Dicto die omnes fere Episcopi
Angliae, cum Theobaldo ARCHIEPISCOPO Cantuariensis, venerunt Wintoniam: In
which Counc^l the Bp. of Winchester first reading his Legates Commission in
England granted him by the Pope, and then relating the great indignity done by
King Stephen to those Bishops by imprisoning their persons and seizing their
Castles against the Canons, demanded the Archbishops and Bishops advice what to
do therein: concluding, Se ad executionem Concilii, nec pro Regis amicitia, qui
sibi frater erat, nec pro damno possessionum, nec etiam pro capitis periculo
defuturum. Rex causae suae non diff^sus Comites in Concilium misit, quaerens
cur vocatus esset? Responsum est a Legato in compendio: Non debere illum, qui
se Christi fidei subjectum meminisset, indignari, si a ministris Christi ad
satisfactione^ vocatus esset, tanti reatus conscius, quantum nostra secula
nunquam vidissent, etc. Consulte vero in praesentiarum Rex faceret, si rationem
facti sui redderet, vel Canonicum judicium subiret: Ex debito etiam oportere ut
Ecclesiae faveret, cujus sinu exceptus non manu militum in regnum promotus
fuisset. Hereupon the Earls departing, having provided an answer, returned with
one Albric de Vere, an experienced Lawyer: who aggravating the Bishops offenses
against the King, and the ^ray of their Servants at Oxford in a modest manner,
without reproach; alleged, that they being accused by general reports in all
men's mouths, for intending to deliver up their Castles to Maud upon her arival,
the King had thereupon apprehended and imprisoned them, not as Bishops, but as
his Servants and Officers, and had not taken away their Castles by force, but
by the Bishops voluntary surrender, ut calumniam de tumultu, quem in Curia
coneitaverant, evaderent: That the money found in them, was only that the
Bishops had collected for King Henry his Uncles use, and belonged now to his
own Eschequer; and that the Bishops willingly parted with the money and Castles
to him, for fear of the things they had committed against the King, who wanted
not Witnesses to prove it. Therefore he desired the agreements between him and
the Bishops might remain confirmed. Bishop Roger on the contrary, denied he was
ever the Kings Officer, or received his moneys; adding, Si justitiam de rebus
sibi ablatis in illo CONCILIO non inveniret, eam in audientia majoris Curiae
q^aerendam. The Legate gently replied, Omnia quae dicuntur contra Episcopos
prius in Concilio Ecclesiastico et accusari, and a^ vera essent, decuisset
inquiri, quam in indemnes contra Canonum Decreta sententiam proferri. Rex
itaque faciat quod in forensibus judiciis legitimum est fieri, ut revestiat
Episcopos de rebus suis. Alioquin jure Gentium, disseisati non placitabunt.
After much debate on both sides, the cause was put off 3. days one after
another till the Archbishop of Rhoan came. Is ubi venit, dixit, se concedere ut
Castella Episcopi haberent, si se jure habere debere per Canones probari
possent; quod quianon possent, extremae improbitatis esse contra Canones niti
velle. Et esto (inquit) justum sit ut habeant; Certe, quia suspectum est
tempus, juxta morem aliarum gentium, Optimates omnes claves munitionum suarum
debent voluntati Regis contradere, qui pro omnium pace debet militare. Ita
omnis controversia Episcoporum infirmabatur. Aut enim secundum Canonum scita
injustum est, ut habeant Castella; aut si hoc pro indulgentia principali
toleratur, ut tradant claves necessitati temporis debent cedere. Albric the
Kings Lawyer added; that the King was informed the Bishops intended to send
some of themselves to Rome against him: But he advise^h none of you to presume
to do it: for if any of you shall presume to go any whither against his will
and the dignity of the Realm of England it is provided that his return will be
very difficult. Hereupon the Council presently dissolved, and so ita discessum
est, ut nec Rex censuram Canonum pa^i vellet, nec Episcopi eam consultum
exercere ducerent duplici ex causa; seu quia Principem excommunicare sine
Apostolici conscientia temera^ium esset, seu quoniam audirent, quidam etiam
viderent gladios circa se nudari.

Chronicon Gervasii, col. 1371. Gul. Nub^igen. l. 1. c. 32. Matthew. Westminster. anno
1152. Gervas. Dorobern. Act. Pontif. Cant. col. 1668. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p.
117. Godwins Catal. of Bishops, p. 85, 86. Holinshed Vol. 3. p. 57, 59. Speeds
History, p. 496 497.
King Stephen in the ^ea^ 1152. Convocato apud Londonium, Generali Concilio,
cum Episcopis, Proceribus et Nobilibus Angliae, tum pro Regni negotiis, cum
etiam pro negotio vacantis Ecclesiae Eboracensis; much fearing and suspecting
the valor and power of Young Henry Duke of Normandy (right heir of the Crown)
ne in primo gradu haereditas cassaretur, fraud retenta, proposuit animo filium
suu^ Eustachium, regio diademate insignire, and de jure debito and jurato
Henricum praevenire and penitus privare. This design of his being propounded in
this Great Council, the Earls and Barons assented to it; and thereupon (as
Matthew Westminster records) Comites and Barons Angliae fecerunt ligantiam and
fidelitatem Eustachio, filio Regis Stephani. Whereupon King Stephen requested
Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, with the rest of the Bishops, to crown and
anoint Eustace King. Which the Archbishop peremptorily refused, the Pope having
expressly prohibited him by his Letters; ne filium Regis qui contra jusjurandum
regnum usurpasse videbatur, in regem sublimaret: that he should not crown the
Son of a King, who had usurped the Crown and kingdom, against his Oath to Henry
the first, Queen Maud, and their heirs. Hereupon King Stephen and his Son
Eustace with their accomplices, being highly incensed, commanded all the Bishops
with the said Archbishop, to be shut up in one house where they were assembled,
desiring to extort that from them by terrors and threats, which they could not
gain by prayers or price. Some of the Bishops struck with fear, deserted the
Archbishops advice, and seemed to comply with the King; but the Archbishop
continuing firm and resolute in his purpose, escaping out of the House by a
miraculous accident, took his barge, and rowing down the Thames, got beyond
Sea, and so escaped the threats of the King and Eustace, and defeated him of
his much desired honor. Whereupon the King being more exasperated than before
(by the advice of the Council) presently banished him the Realm, seized his
Temporalties and confiscated all his goods: Who by way of revenge stirred up
Duke Henry, right heir to the Crown, to invade the Realm, the very next year;
to whom most of the Nobles and people (mindful of their former Oaths)
presently flocked, deserting the perjured Usurper Stephen; who against his Oath
invaded the crown by the instigation also of Roger Bp. of Salisbury; who though
advanced by King Henry the 1. from a mean condition to the greatest place and
power next to the King; yet proved so treacherously ungrateful to his heir
Queen Maud, to whom he had sworn allegiance, Neubrigensis hist. l. 1. c. 6.
U^ Rege defuncto qui ei tantae in hoc seculo claritatis author extiterat, circ^
legitimos ejus haeredes insidus, ut S^ephanum Sacramento illo aeque astrictum
allocaret, non solum non est veritus iucurrere perjurium, verum etiam aliis
insigne pejerandi praestruxit exemplum. And therefore was himself as
ingratefully and perfidiously handled by King Stephen, who imprisoned his
person and his Nephew Alexanders, Bishop of Lincoln very strictly, seized all
their magnificent Castles, Wealth, Treasures, and pined them with famine; so
that this perjured Bishop for loss of his Castles or Treasures, fell distracted
through grief, and died mad de perspicuo Dei judicio vitam longo tempore
splendidissimam infelicissimo fine concludens; as Neubrigensis observes.

Chronicon Gervasii, col. 1386, 1387, Roger Hoveden, annal. pars posterior, p.
491. to 534. Mat. Paris, p. 94. to 127. Mat. Westminster. Bromton, ann. 1166 etc.
Antiqui. Eccles. Brit. p. 118. to 124. Godwins Catalogue of Bishops, p. 86* to
96. Fox Acts and Monum. p. 186. to 206. Speeds History, p. 503. etc. Holinshed,
p. 69. to 81.
King Henry the second succeeding Stephen, Ann. 1164. to suppress the
usurpations of the Pope and Prelates on the Crown, summoned all the Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, Ea^ls, Barons and Nobles of the Realm to a Parliamentary Great
Council a^ Clarindon, where they made a recognition of all the ancient Customs
and liberties of the Realm, used in the reign of king Henry the first, which
they all took a solemn Oath inviolably to preserve to the King and his heirs
for ever, and Archbishop Becket amongst the rest. The 11 Article was this:
Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and universae personae regni, qui de rege tenent in
capite, habent possessiones suas de Domino Rege sicut Baroniam, etc. sicu^
Barons caeteri debent interesse judiciis curiae Regis, (to wi^ of his Court of
Parliament, An Abridgement of the Records in the Tower, p. 322. Seld^ns Titles
of honor, part 2 p. 735. 11 R. 2. Rot. Parl. p. 1. m. 2. rot. 34.
as the protestation of the Archbishop and Prelates in the Parliament of 11 R.
2. rot. Patl. n. 9.11. resolves it) cum Baronibus, quousque perveniatur in
judicio ad diminutionem Membrorum vel ad mortem, An unanswerable authority tha^
the Barons and Peers in Parliament, had anciently, in the reigns of Henry the
1. and 2. and long before, a judicial power even in criminal (as well as
canonical) causes deserving loss of Member or death, and that as well in cases
of Commons as Peers. It is observable that though according to this Article the
Bishops in those days did not pronounce sentence, nor were not actually present
at the giving of judgment by the other Barons in cases of blood; yet they took
upon them the name of Barons, and were present on that account, at all the
debates, in criminal causes, and gave their votes therein in our Parliamentary
Councils, absenting themselves only from the sentence and execution, for which
Petrus Blesensis Archdeacon of Bath under king Henry the 2. thus justly
censures them. Canon Episcopalis Tractatus de Institutione Episcopi Bibl.
Patrum, Tom. 12. pars 2. p. 942.944.
Quidam Episcopi Regum munificentias and eleemosinas antiquorum, abusive
BARONIAS and REGALIA VOCANT, and in occasion turpissimae servitutis, SEIPSOS
BARONS appellant; vereor ne de illis quereletur Dominus, and dicat Osea 8.4.
Ipsi regnaverunt, et non ex me, Principes extiterunt, and ego non cognovi.
Scias te assumpsisse Pastoris officium NON BARONS, Cer^e Genesis 48.38.
Joseph in Aegypto patrem suum and fratres instruxit, ut dicerent Pharoni, viri
pastores sumus. Maluit eos profiteri Pastoris officium, quam PRINCIPIS aut
BARONIS, etc. Vacuum a secularibus oportet esse animum divinae servitu^is
obsequio consecratum, etc. Illud coelestem exasperat iram, et plerisque
discrim^n aeternae damnationis accumulat, quod quidam Principes Sacerdotum et
Seniores populi, licet non dictent judicia sanguinis, eadem tamen tractant
disputando ac disceptando de illis, seque adeo immunes a culpa reputant, quod
mortis aut truncationis Membrorum judicium decernentes, a pronuntiatione
duntaxat, et executione paenalis sententiae se absentant. (The very words of
this Article of Clarindon) Sed quid hac simulatione perniciosius est? Nunquid
discutere and diffinire licitum est, quod pronunciare non licet? Certe Saul de
morte David multiplici machinatione tractabat, (let others observe it) and ut
malitiam suam sub umbra innocentiae palliaret, dicebat, 1 Reg. 18.17.
Non sit manus mea in eum* sed sit super eum manus Philistinorum. Sane quantum
haec dissimulatio ipsum excusabat apud homines, tantum apud Deum eundem
damnabilius accusabat; Expressa fimilitudinis forma, in CONSITORIO illo, in quo
Christus ad mortem damnatus est, Pharisaei and Scribae dicebant, Johan. 18.3.
Nobis non licet interficere quemquam: cumque tamen clamarent dicentes,
crucifige, sententiam in eo occisionis cruentae malignitate dictabant. Quem
occidebant gladio linguae, public protestabantur, sibi occidere non licere:
eorumque iniquitas eo ipso detestabilior erat, quia ut evaderent humanum
judicium, eam simulatione innocentiae occultebant; Animabus praelatus es, non
corporibus: nihil Praelato commune est cum Pilato: Christi villicus es, and
Vicarius Petri; nec respondere oportet Coesari, de commissa tibi jurisdictione,
sed Christo, Quidam tamen per usurpatas seculi administrationes se vinculo
curiali obnoxiant, and quasi renunciaverint suae privilegio dignitatis,
calculum durioris eventus expectant.

These Articles of Clarindon were not only sworn to, but likewise subscribed
and sealed by all the Bishops, except Archbishop Becket, who refused to sign or
set his seal unto them, unless the Pope would first confirm them by his Bill.
The King hereupon sent two Ambassadors to Rome unto the Pope, to crave his
allowance of these Laws; but Becket had so dealt with the Pope before hand (who
knew the cause to be more his own than Beckets) that he rejected the suit, and
withal absolved Becket and the other Bishops from the Oath of allegiance they
had taken to observe them. Whereupon the King being highly offended with
Becket; summoned a Great Parliamentary Council of the Prelates and Nobles at
Northampton, wherein he demanded an account of 30000 l, which came to Beckets
hands during his Chancellorship: which he excusing, and refusing punctually to
answer unto, the PEERS and BISHOPS condemned all his movables to the Kings
mercy. After which the Lords and Peers by joint consent adjudged him guilty of
perjury, for not yielding temporal obedience to the King, according to his Oath
taken at the Council of Clarindon, The Bishops thenceforwards openly
disclaiming all obedience to him, as their Archbishop: The next day, whiles THE
BISHOPS and PEERS were consulting of some further course to be taken with him,
Becket caused to be sung before him at the Altar, The Princes set and speak
against me, and the Ungodly persecute me, etc. And forthwith taking his silver
Crosier in his hands (a thing strange and unheard of before) entered armed
therewith into the Kings presence, though earnestly dissuaded from it by all
who wished him well; wherewith the King being enraged, commanded the Peers
there assembled in a Parliamentary Council, to sit in judgment upon him, as on
a Traitor or perjured person; who accordingly adjudged him both a Traitor and
perjured Rebel, and that he should be forthwith apprehended and cast into
prison as such a one, and forfeit all his goods and temporalties. The Earls of
Cornwall and Leicester, who SAT AS JUDGES, citing him forthwith to hear his
sentence pronounced; he immediately appealed to the Sea of Rome, as holding
them no competent Judges: Whereupon all the Prelates and Nobles reviling him
with the name of Traitor and perjured person; he replied, That were it not for
his function, he would enter the duel or combat with them in the field, to
acquit himself from Treason and Perjury. And so speeding away from them for
fear of imprisonment, and disguising himself under the name and habit of
Dereman, fled in a small Fisher boat into Flanders; Thereupon the King seized
all his goods and temporalties into his hands, and sent Ambassadors to the Earl
of Flanders, the French King and Pope, praying them in no wise to suffer or
foster within their Dominions one that was such a notorious Traitor to him.

The Proceedings against this Traitor Archbishop Becket.
In this Magnum et solenne Concilium held at Northampton, Anno 1165. being very
memorable, and more fully relating the manner of our Parliamentary Process in
that age, and the judicial jurisdiction and proceedings of the Lords in
Parliament, as well in civil as criminal causes than any other I have met with,
I shall give you a more full account of them out of three of our Historians
(who record the same) Annalium pars posterior p. 494, 495.
in their own words.

The first of them is Roger de Hovedrn, who thus relates the proceedings. Anno
gratiae 1165. qui erat annus und^cimus Regni Henrici Regis, idem Rex Henricus
Magnum congregavit Concilium, apud Northampton, ubi Rex taedium magnum fecit,
Thomae Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo. Imprimis enim fecit Rex equos suos hospitari
in hospitiis illius: Sed Archiepiscopus mandavit Regi, quod ipse AD CURIAM NON
VENIRET, DONEC hospitia sua vacuarentur ab equis and hominibus fuis. In
chrastino Colloquii venit Thomas Archiepiscopus AD CURIAM REGIS in capella
ejus, and statim petiit ab eo licentiam tranfretandi ad Alexandrum Papam, qui
ea tempestate moram faciebat in Francia, sed habere non potuit. Dixit enim ei
Rex; tu prius respondebis mihi de injuria quam fecisti Johanni Marescallo meo
in Curia tua. Conquestus enim erat regi idem Johannes, quod cum calumniatus
osset in Curia Archiepiscopi terram quandam de illo tenendam jure hereditario,
and diu inde placitasset, nullam inde potuit assequi Justitiam; and quod ipse
curiam Archiepiscopi Sacramento falsificaverat secundum consuetudinem Regni.
Cui Archiepiscopus respondit: Nulla justitia defuit Johanni in curia mea, sed
ipse (nescio cujus consilio, an proprae voluntatis motu) attulit in Curia mea
quondam toper, and juravit super eum, quod ipse pro defectu justitiae a Curia
mea recessit: Et videbatur Justiciariis Curiae meae, quod ipse injuriam mihi
fecit, quia sic a Curia mea recessit; cum statutum sit in regno vestro: Quod
qui Curiam alterius falsificare voluerit, oportet eum jurare super sacrosancta
Evangelia. Rex quidem non respiciens ad verba haec, juravit, quod ipse haberet
de eo ju^titiam and judicium* Et Barons Curiae Regis judicaverunt eum esse in
misericordia Regis. Et quamvis Archiepiscopus niteretur judicium illud
falsificare, tamen prece and consilio BARONUM posuit se in misericordia Regis
de quingentis libris, et invenit ei inde fidejussores. Et sic a Curia recedens,
ad hospitium suum ivit, and propter al. ^ram et indignatione^. quam,
taedium and dolorem quam in animo conceperat decidit in lectum, and in gravem
aegritudinem. Quod cum Regi constaret, ut eum magis affligeret, statim misit ad
eum, et summonuit eum per bonos summonitores, quod in crastino venisset,
paratus reddere illi rationem villicationis sua, quem habuit in regno suo ante
consecrationem suam. Archiepiscopus autem sciens, quod grave ei immineret
exterminium, si in Curiam venire properasset, modis omnibus dilationem
quaesivit: tum quia tempus sommonitionis brevissimum erat, tum quia ipse
graviter infirmabatur. Cumque Rex vidisset quod Archiepiscopus non veniret ad
diem illum, misit ad eum Robertum Comitem Leicestriae, and Reginaldum Comitem
Cornubiae, ad videndum aegritudinem illius. Qui cum venissent, invenit eum in
lecto jacentem infirmum; et ad petitionem illius dederunt e^ respectum veniendi
ad Curiam usque mane. Eodem die dictum erat ei, et nunciatum a familiaribus
regis, quod si ipse ad Curiam Regis venisset, vel in carcerem mi^teretur, vel
interficeretur. Super his igit ur Archipraesul habito cum suis familiaribus
consilio, per consilium cujusdam Sapientis, in crastino antequam ipse ad curiam
pergeret, cum summa de^otione celebravit Missam de S. Stephano protomartyre;
cujus officium tale est, Etenim sederunt Principes, and adversum me
loquebantur, etc. causam suam Judici, qui Deus est, commendavit. Tamen pro
celebratione Missae illius graviter accusatus fuit postmodum a Gileberto
Londonensi Episcopo, quod Missam il^am celebraverat per artem magicam, and in
contemptu Regis. Itaque post celebrationem Missae Archiepiscopus imposuit collo
suo stolam, deinde induit cappam nigram canonicalem, et profectus est statim ad
Curiam Regis. Et statim factus est undique magnus concursus populi, ut viderent
finem. Ipse autem portebat crucem suam in manu sua dextra, cum sinistra veto
tenebat loram equi, in quo sedebat: et cum venisset ad aulam Regis, descendit,
and ipse crucem suam bajulans, intravit domum Regis. Deinde intravit exteriorem
cameram solus portans crucem suam: nullus enim suorum sequebatur eum: and cum
intrasset, invenit plebem multam in ea, seditque inter illos. Tunc venit ex
part Regis ad Archiepiscopum Gilbertus Londinensis Episcopus, qui multum
increpavit eum, quod sic cruce armatus venit in Curia: and voluit crucem e
manibus suis eripere, sed Archiepiscopus fortius eam tenuit. Henricus igitur
Wintoniensis Episcopus dixit Londinensi Episcopo, frater, demitte
Archiepiscopum crucem suam tenere, ipse enim debet illam been portare. Tunc
Londoniensis Episcopus multum iratus adversus Wintoniensem Episcopum, dixit ei*
m^le locutus es, frater, et malum inde tibi contiget, quia contra Regem locutus
es. Deinde venit ad eum Rogerus Archiepiscopus Eboracensis, etc. qui plurimum
increpabat eum, quod sic armatus Cruce ad Curiam veniret: dicens, quod Rex
gladium habebat acutiorem; and ideo si consilio suo acquiesceret, tolleret
crucem suam. At quidam de circumstantibus sic ait: Creed mihi, si credis ei, tu
decipieris.

Fistula dulce canit volucres dum decipit auceps.

Impia sub dulci melle venena latent.

Archiepiscopus autem Cantuariensis crucem suam deponere noluit, sed dicebat.
Si gladius Regis carnaliter corpora caedit, gladius meus spiritualiter
percurit, and animam mittit in gehennam. Et dum ipse sederet expectans,
dixerunt quidam secreto, quod mors ejus jurata erat a regalibus; and ex illa
hora quaesivit occasionem recedendi a Curia: Et ut commodius recedere possit,
appellavit ad sententiam summi Pontificis; et causam Ecclesiae and suam posuit
sub protectione Dei, et Domini Papae; and praecepit universis Episcopis
appellationem suam inviolabiliter servare. Tunc omnes Episcopi laudaverunt ei,
ut ipse satisfaciens voluntati Regis, redderet ei Archiepiscopatum suum in
misericordia illius; sed Archiepiscopus noluit iis inde credere. Tunc mandavit
ei Rex per milites suos, ut sine dilatione veniret et redderet ei plenariam
computationem de omnibus receptis, quae receperat de redditibus Regni, quamdiu
Cancellarius ejus fuit. Et nominatim de triginta millibus librarum argenti.
Quibus Archtepiscopus respondit: Dominus meus Rex scit, quod ego saepius ei
reddidi computationem de omnibus hiis, quae ipse modo a me petit; antequam
electus fuissem ad Archiepiscopatum Cantuariensem. Sed in electione mea,
Henricus filius ejus, cui Regnum adjuratum fuit, et omnes Barons Scaccarii,
and Richardus de Lucy Justitiarius Angliae, clamaverunt me quietum Deo, and
sanctae Ecclesiae de omnibus receptis and computationibus, and ab omni
exactione seculari ex part Domini Regis: and sic liber et absolutus electus
fui ad hujus officii administrationem; and ideo amplius nolo inde placitare.
Quod cum Regi constaret, dixit Baronibus suis, cito facite mihi judicium de
illo, qui homo meus ligiu^ est, and stare juri in Curia mea recusat. Et
exeuntes, judicaverunt eum capi dignum et in carcerem mitti. Tunc misit Rex
Reginaldum Comitem Cornubiae, et Robertum Comitem Leicestriae ad judic^ndum ei
Iudicium de illo factum: Qui dixerunt ei, Audi Iudicium tuum. Quibus
Archiepi^copus respondit; prohibeo vobis ex part omnipotentis Dei, and sub
anathemate, ne faciat^s hodie de me judicium, quia appellavi ad praesentiam
Domini Papae. Dum autem praedicti Comites redirent ad Regem cum responso illo,
Archiepiscopus exivit^e thalamo, et progrediens per medium illorum veni^ ad
palefridum suum, and ascendi^, et exivit ab aula, omnibus clamantibus post eum
and dicentibus, Quo progrederis proditor? expecta et audi judicium tuum. Cum
au^em veniret ad portas in^e^i^eas c^au^as, and timuit sibi valde ne ab
inimicis suis caperetur: sed Deus omnipotens eum liberavit. After which he
privily departed out of England.

Stephanides de Vita and Passione Tho: Cant. Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, part
2. c. 5. p. 705, 706.
The 2d. is William Fitz. Stephen, a Monk of Canterbury who attended Becket in
his troubles. He after a large relation of the charge of John the Kings
Marshal against him for injustice, mentioned by Hoveden, relates the difference
then happening between the Ecclesiastical and Temporal Barons in giving
judgment against him, and the judgment it self, and proceedings therein in
these words. Secunda die consulentibus Episcopis, Comitibus et Baronibus
Angliae omnibus; Nec Roffensis Episcopus, Chronicon Gervasiii col. 1394.
Will. N^raic. cum plurib^s a^is non ^um venerat: Archiepiscopu laesae
Majestatis Coronae Reglae arguitur, quia scilicet ut supra narratum e^, a Rege
ci^atus pro causa Johannis (the Marshal) neque venerat, neque idonie se
excusasse^, Archiepiscopi depulsio nullum locum habuit: allegata tamen Johannis
supradicti injuria, et jurisdictione hujus causae propria and Curiae suae
integritate, REX EXIGIT JUDICIUM. Archiepiscopi ratio nulla est approbara.
VISUM EST OMNIBVS ex reverentia Regiae Majestatis, et ex astrictione ligii
homagii quod Domino Regi fecerat Archiepiscopus, and ex fidelitate e^
observantia ^ene^i ejus honoris quam ei juraverat, quod pa^um esset defensus
vel excusatus, quia citatus a Rege, neque venerat, neque corporis infirmitatem,
vel necessariam quae differri non possit officii, ecclesiastici
administrationem per nuncios allegaverat: Condemnandumque eum dixerunt in
paenam pecuniariam omnium bonorum suorum mobilium ad misericordiam Regis, De
proferendo Iuducio ^itan^ia fuit in^e^ Episcopos et Barons, utr^sque a^teris
illud imponen^ibus, u^r^que se excusantibus: Aiunt BARONS; vos EPISCOPI
pronunciare debe^is sententiam, ad nos non pertinet. Nos Laici sumus; vos
personae ecclesiasticae, sicut ille; consacerdotes ejus, Coepiscopi ejus. Ad
haec aliquis Episcoporum: Imo vestri potius est hoc officii, non nostri; Non
enim est hoc judicium Ecclesiasticum, sed Seculare. Non sudemus hic EPISCOPI,
sed BARONS. Nos BARONS and vos BARONS: PARES hic sumus. Ordinis autem nostri
ratione frustra inni imini. Quia si in nobis ordinationem attenditis, and in
ipso simi^itet attendere debetis. Eo autem ipso, quod Episcopi sumu^, non
possumus Archiepiscopum and Dominum nostrum judicare. Sed quid? Rex, haec
audita de pronunciando controversis, motus est. Et controversia super hoc
desicum est. Dominus Wintoniensis (then Henry de Bloys) impositus dicere,
tandem et invitus PRONUNCIAVIT. Archiepiscopus autem, quia sententiae vel
recordationi Curiae Regis Angliae non licet contradicere, sustinuit; consilio
Episcoporum, ad acta, ad mitigandum et honorandum Regem, solenni and manuum
ipsius missione, quasi concessionis judicii, ut moris est ibi: et omnibus
Episcopis datis vadibus praeter Gilbertum illum Londinensem, qui rogatus pro eo
sponder noluit* quae ejus singularitas notam fecit.

The 3d. is Chroniea Gervasii, col. 1389. to 1394.
Gervasius Dorob^rnensis, who thus records the proceedings in this Council
against Becket: Timens autem Rex, ne impune manus ejus Cantuariensis
Achiepiscopus evaderet, jam edoctus mulriplici cogitatatione et pravorum
eruditione quibus eum pravitatis laqueis innodaret; praecepit PRAESULES ET
PROCERES REGNI apud Northamptoniam, una cum ipso Archiepiscopo, CONVENIRE. Qui
cum die tertia ante ^estum Sancti Calixi Papae conveni^ent, Archiepiscopus in
multis accusatus est. Primo, quod cuidam Johanni coram ipso litiganti plenam
justitiam non exhibuit, and super hoc ad Regis praesentiam vocatus, venire
contempsit. Respondens Archiepiscopus; praefato JoJohanni dixit condignam non
defuisse justitiam, and Johannem non legaliter curiam suam infamasse, qui non
super Evangelium, ut moris est; sed super veterum cantuum codicellum quem secum
tulerat, voluerit pejerare. Quod autem super hoc citatus ad Regis non venit
praesentiam, non contemptus fuit, sed infirmitate valida invitus retentus est.
His rationibus Archiepiscopus excusari non poruit, sed Curiali Iudicio et
Episcoporum consensu condempnatus est, ita ut omnia mobilia ejus in
misericordia Regis ponerentut. Quo facto; repetit ab eo Rex quingentas libras
quas ei dum esset Cancellarius dicebat commodasse; Cumque allegaret
Archepiscopus e contra et diceret; praefatam non commodatam sed de plano datam
esse pecuniam: nihilominus de suis fide jussores idoneos coactus est exhibere.
Et haec opera secundae diei. Tertia vero die appetitur absque misericordia,
jubeturque de fiscalibus et Episcopatibus and Abbatiis vacantibus ratiocinia
reddere, quas in custodia sua habuerat tempore Cancellariae. Respondit; se
super his non teneri, eo quod die electionis suae hujusmodi non fuit quaestione
pulsatus, and quod ecclesia Cantuariensis eum susciperet ab omnibus his liberum
et absolutum. Attamen super his prudentiores se velle consulere dicebat, and de
consulto respondere. Convocatis igitur Episcopis, quaesivit Archiepiscopus;
quid Domino Regi super hujusmodi quaestione esset respondendum? Whose several
advices, and Speeches are there recorded at large, which I pretermit.

His ita gestis sederunt aliquandiu sub silentio, nec erat qui amplius his
aliquid adderet, etiam ante quaesita ut pateret eis exitus, inclusi enim erant.
Volo, inquit Dominus Cantuariensis, loqui cum duobus Comitibus qui cum Rege
sunt, Roberto scilicet Legecestrensi, and Reginaldo Cornubensi. Quibus, i^ico,
apertis o^tiis, a^tantibus dixit Cantuariensis. Super his de quibus nos Dominus
Rex convenit contulimus; et quia non habemus ad praesens eos quibus res ipsa
migis innotuit, ideo usque in crastinum petimus inducias tunc responsuri sicut
Deus nobis inspiraveri^. Datis igitur u^cunque peti^is induciis ea die
discesserunt ab invicem. Crastina autem die, scilicet Dominica, usque in
secundam feriam dilatum est negotium. Archiepiscopus autem ea nocte iliaca
passione dirissime vexatus lecto decubuit anxiatus: Mane autem facto ad Curiam
accersitur, and in absentem saevitur. Verum quia putabant aulici quod
aegritudinem singeret, missi sunt ad eum Comites duo, quos supra nominavimus:
qui licet viderunt eum excusabilem, mandatum tamen Curiae aegrotanti
retulerunt. Ipse autem usque mane sequentis diei petens inducias, fatetur se
venturum in Curiam etiamsi lectica esset deferendus. Renuntiantibus illis in
palatio quae audierant et viderant, secreto intimatum est Archiepiscopo, quod
si in Curiam veniret, vel trucidaretur, vel in carcerem truderetur. Crastino
summo m^ne venerunt ad eum Episcopi plures, suadentes ei, ut pacem Ecclesiae et
evitandum tanti periculi scandalum, rigorem animi mitigaret, et Regis penitus
se committeret arbitrio: adjicientes; and quod nisi fieret sic, jam audiret in
Curia Regis Perjurii sibi crimen imponi, and tanquam Proditorem JUDICANDUM; eo
quod terreno Domino terrenum honorem non servaret, cum a vitas regni
consuetudines, observaturum firmasset. Ad quas specialiter observandas,
jusjurandi nova se et alios astrixerat religione. At ille inquit; Fateor
fratres inexcusabilis sum ante Deum contra Deum praestans juramentum: Sed quia
melius est ad animum redire quam perire, legem legi Dei repugnantem non
admitto. Davit male juravit, sed poenituit: Herodes juramento suo stetit, and
perlit. Ideo vobis praecipio, ut respuatis quae respuo, suffocantes ea quae
sanctam suffocant ecclesiam. Detestabile quidem est quod vos non solum me solum
deseruistis in certamine, sed et me qualemcunque Patrem vestrum sam per duos
dies cum Aulicis judicastis, qui simul mecum stare deberetis. Quod ne fiat de
caetero, vobis in virtute obedientiae prohibeo, unde and matrem nostram Romanam
Ecclesiam appello. Quod si ut rumor est in me violenta manus injecta fuerit,
vobis itidem in virtute obedientiae praecipio, quatenus districta
excommunicationis sententia ecclesiasticas injurias vindicetis. Quod audiens
Gilebertus Londoniensis Episcopus, appellavit. Discesserunt igitur Episcopi ad
Curiam properantes. Archiepiscopus autem in Ecclesiam ingressus, sacris indutis
vestibus and pallio redimitus, devotissime de Sancto Stephano missam
celebravit, officium inchoans: Etenim sed^runt, etc. non ut alii dixerunt
tanquam pro persona sua Officium inchoare^, sed quia idem altar beato Stephano
esset dedicatum jussit Archiepiscopus missam de martyr celebrari. Igitur
expleto ministerio amotoque ab humeris cum infula pallio, caeteris indutus
sacris vestibus cappa Clericali super injecta, Curiam introivit, In^raturus
autem cameram qua Rex and anlici ipsius praestolabantur adventum, de mann
Clerici, Alexandri nomine, crucem accepit, eamque manu propria portavit. Unde
admirantes Episcopi qui eum praevenerant, assurgentes ei de manu ipsius quasi
pro reverentia crucem accipere voluerunt, ne iram regis crucem bajulando magis
accendere videretur. Herefordensis sibi eam tradi petivit. Londoniensis vero
eam concupivit, dicens eum non debere contra regem dominum suum armatum
incedere: Si viderit, inquiens, Rex te armatum intrare, gladium suum in caput
tuum exeret fortiorem and tunc videbis quid tibi proderunt arma tua. Haec ait
Cantuariensis, Deo committimus. Et Londoniensis: Stultus hactenus, inquit,
fuisti, and ab hac stultitia ut video non recedis, hodie in te tua fatuitas
apparebit. Audiens autem Rex quod sic Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus armatus
incederet, secessit citius in cameram ulteriorem, sedente hac seorsum
Cantuariensi solo fere, cum suis admodum paucis, Episcopis loco and animo
sedentibus ex adverso. Rex autem multo stipatus agmine cogitabat Archiepiscopum
de clericis male tractandis primo appetere. Sed ne Episcopi qui jam solum
reliquerant, pro Clericis pugnaturi ad eum redirent, fiere^que ex consensu in
regem conflictus acrior, ex consulto aulicorum, Rex ad alias calumpnias se
convertit. VOCATIS igitur EPISCOPIS and PROCERIBUS, gravem et ^grandem Rex
deponit querimoniam, quod Archiepiscopus sic armatus in Curiam veniens, ipsum
et suos omnes inaudita a seculis forma NAEVO NOTAVERIT PRODITORIS. Cum autem
Rex inde supra modum excandesceret, et universi fere ipsius animum stimularent,
abierunt retrorsum etiam ipsius Archiepiscopi adversarii, acsi jam in caput
ejus vibratum viderent gladium. Unde and in ar^o Pontifices positi, volvunt and
revolvunt quid agendum, qualiter haec sit necessitas evitanda. Et tandem ex
communi consilio, Nos, inquiun^, eum appellabimus coram Papa, de facili
convincetur, SINE REMEDIO DEPONETUR. Quae cum plurimum placerent Regi, exierunt
omnes Episcopi ad Cantuariensem; quorum unus caeteris eloquen^ior and
arrogantior, Hilarious scilicet Cicestrensis Episcopus, prorumpens in vocem.
Quandoque, air, noster fuisti Archiepiscopus, et tenebamur tibi obedire; sed
quia Domino regi fidelitatem jurasti, hoc est vitam, membra and terrenam
dignitatem sibi per te salvam fore, et consuetudines quas ipse repetit
conservandas, and tu niteris eas destruere, cum praecipue spectent ad terrenam
sui dignitatem and honorem, ICCIRCO TE REUM PERJURII DICIMUS, and perjuro
Archiepisco de caetero obedire non habemus. Nos itaque and nostra sub Domini
Papae protectione ponentes, te ad ipsius praesentiam appellamus super his
responsurum. Audio, inquit Cantuariensis, quae dicitis. Substraxerunt se itaque
Episcopi ex adverso sedentes diutius in summo silentio. Rex autem interius cum
Principibus sedens pro tribunali, Euntes ait, DISCERNITE QUID PERJURUS and
CONTUMAX PRODITOR DEBEAT SUSTINERE. Itur, JUDICATUR. Et a quo vel qualiter
pronunciandum esset JUDICIUM informatur. Processerunt tandem a Rege Comites and
Barons cum turba multa, quorum primi and praecipui erant, Robertus
Leicestriae, and Reginaldus Comes Cornubiae. Qui cum Archiepiscopo quasi
improperantes retulissent, quae et quanta ei bona Dominus Rex contuli^set,
tandem Comes Leicestriae qui erat dux verbi, caepit sub^iliter inflectere
sermones, quasi ad judicium Curiae in Archiepiscopum proferendum. Prae^entiens
hoc Archiepiscopus, mox non expecta^o judicio surgit, protestans, non esse
eorum Archiprae^ulem suum judicare de crimine. Non est, inquit, in eum ferenda
sententia qui judicem superiorem appellavit, etiam si Laico liceret Episcopum
judicare. Unde tibi Comes Leicestriae, potestate mihi a Deo collata ut filio
Ecclesiae praecipio ne in patrem tuum spiritualem judicium proferre praesumas
Verum mox improperatum et inclamatum a nonnullis est, quod tanquam Perjurus et
Proditor a Curia discederet. Ipse vero sic se vertens, et austero vultu
respiciens r^spondit; quod nisi ordo sacerdotalis obstaret, et si sibi fas
esset, in armis bellicis a Perjurio and Proditione se contra ipsos defenderet.
His dictis a Curia discessit, et per aulam transiens probris multis a
Curialibus affectus est. Cum autem januam clausam repperisser, et j^nitor puero
^erberando intendisset, accurrens quispiam clavem repperit, januam apperuit,
patrem demisit, and sic pater patriae manus impiorum evasit, etc.

King Gul. Nub^igensis Rerum Angl. l. 4. c. 14, 17, 18. Hoveden, annal. pars
posterior, p. 663.680. to 735. Mat. Paris, p. 151. to 161. Holinshed, p. 129.
to 133. Speed, p. 531. etc. Godwins Catal. of Bishops, p. 247. to 261. Fox Acts
and Monuments, p. 214.223, 224. Mat. Westminster. anno 1191.
Richard the 1. Anno 1189. going to the holy Wars, made William Longchamp
Bishop of Ely, not only his Chancellor and Chief Justice, but the chief
Protector and Guardian of the whole Realm; who having obtained a Legatine Power
also from the Pope, and getting the Militia, with most of the Kings Castles
into his hand, proved a most unsufferable Tyrant to the Nobility, Gentry, Laity
and Clergy, so oppressing, domineering over their persons, Liberties* Estates,
imprisoning, taxing, disseising, spoiling them of their Offices, Castles,
Lands, Privileges, Estates at his pleasure, and over-awing them with Troops of
Horse, Garrisons and New Governors set over and quartered in every County, and
with his great Guards of armed horse which he constantly kept about his person,
that Earl John the Kings brother, the Nobility, Prelates and People, being no
longer able to endure his exorbitant insolency, intolerable Pride,
Oppressions, Rapines, Exactions, and transcendent Tyranny, raised great forces
against him, to regulate his Excesses, and bring him to Justice. Whereupon he
being somewhat terrified in the 2. year of King Richard the 1. Anno 1191. Earl
John, and the Bishops, with the Prelates, Earls, and Nobles of the Realm,
assembled in a kind of Parliamentary Council, came to an agreement touching the
future settlement, reformation, Peace and Government of the Realm, and
preventing all future tyranny and oppression; which was drawn up in writing,
published, subscribed and sworn, to be inviolably observed both by the Earl
John and Chancellor, and by 14. other Earls and Barons on either side. One of
the Articles of this Agreement (recorded at large by Annal. pars posterior, p.
700, 701, 702.
Roger de Hoveden) was this: Concessum est, quod Episcopi and Abbates, Comites
and Barons, Vavasores et liberi tenentes, non ad voluntatem Justiciarium vel
Ministrorum Domini Regis, de terris and catallis suis disseisientur, sed
judicio Curiae domini Regis, secundum legitimas consuetudines et Assisas Regni
tractabuntur, vel per mandatum domini Regis: (agreeable to Magna Charta, c.
29.) No sooner had the Chancellor taken his Oath, but his foreign forces he had
privily sent for ariving in England, he presently violated it, and played the
Tyrant worse than before, commanding the Kings own Brother Geoffry, Archbishop
of York, to be apprehended at Dover in the very Church, dragged out violently
in his Archiepiscopal robes from the Altar, and then thorough the dirty streets
in the sight of all the people, who cried out after the Chancellors servants,
who thus abused him. Hoveden Ibid. Mat. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 160, 161.
O ignavi! quare ita ducitis illum, quid mali fecit? Archiepiscopus est, and
Regis filius, Regisque frater: But they taking no notice of their clamors,
carried him to Dover Castle* and there kept him Prisoner, till he was thence
released by Earl John's command. The Archbishop coming to London complained to
Earl John, the Bishops, and other Nobles of the injury done to him by the
Chancellor: ut Cancellurius juri staret in CURIA REGIS super injuria illa, quam
Archiepiscopo Eboracensi fe^erat, et Hugoni Dunelmensi Episcopo. Quod cum ipse
Cancellarius facere de die in diem distulit, Eodem tempore ad instantium
Comitis Johannis, Convenerunt apud pontem de Loedone inter Radingum and
Wyndleshores, die Sabbathi p^oxime post festum Sancti Michaelis ad Colloquium
MAGNATES ANGLIAE, de arduis and magnis Regis and regni negotiis tractaturi. The
next day the Archbishop and Bishops who all came to this Parliamentary
Assembly) meeting at Reading, excommunicated all those who were aiding and
assenting to the imprisonment of the Archbishop: After which, Comes Johannis,
and Archiepiscopus Rothomagensis, and Episcopi and Principes Regni, statueru^t
illi diem peremptorium apud Ridinges. Ad diem autem illum venerunt illuc COMES
Moretonii, and fere omnes Episcopi and Comites and Barons Regni; Et post diem
peremptorium moram fecerunt ibi expectantes adventum Cancellarii: sed ipse
venire noluit, nec nuntium mittere. Deinde Comes Johannes et Episcopi, and
Barons qui cum eo erant paraverunt se Londoni^s ire, ut ibi in Major^
audientia Londinensium fruerentur consilie, quid eis faciendum esset de
Cancellario, qui sic conturbaverat regnum and juri stare noluit. The Chancellor
hereupon flying from Windeshores into the Tower of London for shelter: Comes
Johannes, and fere omnes Episcopi, and Comites and BARONS Angliae, eadem die
(scil. 3. die post octavas Sancti Michaelis) intraverunt Londonias: Et in
crastino praedistus Johannis frater Regis, and Archiepiscopus Rothomagensis,
and omnes Episcopi and Comites and Barons (and cives Londinenses cum illis)
convenerunt in atrio Ecclesiae Sancti Pauli: (where sitting together as in a
Great Parliamentary Council and Court) post longos tractatus Ricardo regi
fidelitatem juraverunt. Imprimis Comos Johannis, deinde duo Archiepiscopi, et
omnes Episcopi, and quotquot convenerunt Comites and Barons. Deinde die Jovis
proximo habitum est Colloquium in Orientali part turris Londinensis,
praesentibus MAGNATIBUS praedictis. Accusabant praedictum Cancellarium in
multis, and praecipue in injuriis quas fecit Domino Eboracensi Archiepiscopo,
and Domino Dunelmensi Episcopo. Socii autem praedicti Cancellarii, quos Rex
associaver at illi in regimine regni, accus^bant eum in multis: dicentes, quod
ipse spretis illorum consiliis omnia negotia regni cum impetu, and voluntaria
dispositione faciebat. Archiepiscopus vero Rothomagensis, and Willielmus
Marescallus Comes de Strogoil, ostenderunt coram populo literas Domini Regis
figillatas: per quas Dominus Rex mandavit a Messana, quod ipsi associarentur
Cancellario in regimine regni, ut et Cancellarius sine illorum consil^o and
aliorum assignatorum nihil de nego^io regis, ac regni tractaret, et ut
praedictus Cancellarius, si ipse quod^unque ^n detrimentum Regni, vel sine
consil^o praedictorum fecisset, deponeretur, et loco illius institueretur
Rothomagensis Archiepiscopus. Placu^ ergo Johanni fratri Regis and omnibus
Episcopis et Comitibus, et Baronibus Regni (as Judges) and civibus Londoniarum,
(which Matthew Paris and others mention not, but only Hoveden, and that as
auditors, spectators and approvers of their Sentence) quod Cancellarius ille
deponeretur, et deposuerunt eum, and in loco ill^us instituerunt Rothomagensem
Archiepiscopum, qui nihil operari voluit in regimine regni, nisi per voluntatem
^t assensum Sociorum suorum assignatorum, and per Consilium Baronum Scaccarii.
Hoveden p. 702, 703, 704.
Hugh de Nuvant Bishop of Coventry in his Epistle, de Dejectione Eliensis
Episcopi Regis Cancellarii: writes of him, that by reason of his intolerable
Tyranny and Oppression: Per totam insulam a Laicis publi^e proclama^ur: Pereat
qui perdere cuncta festinat: opprimatur ne omnes opprimat: and then thus
relates the manner and grounds of his deprivarion. Mane ergo habito Concilio
cum omnibus fere Magnatibus Regni, praesente Domino. Johanne fratre Regis. and
Rothomagen^i and Eboracensi Archiepiscopis Episcopis et prusentibus Dunelmensi,
Londinensi, Wintonensi, Bathoniensi, Ronensi, No^wice^si, Linco^niensi,
Herefordensi, Menevensi, Coventrensi, factoque Consilio coram omni populo
totius Civit^tis, praesen^ ^ustu^a^is D^mini Regis and apprebantibus Consilio
universorum statuitur, Nota.
ne talis de cae^ero in Regno Angl^ae a^mine^ur, per qu^m Ecclesia Dei ad
ignominiam, and populus ad inopram erat redactus: ut en^m caetera omi^tam, ipse
et ganeones sui totum regnum exhauserant, nec viro baliheus, nec foeminae
monile remans^t, nec annulus nobili, nec quodlibaet preciosum etiam alicui
Judaeo. The saurum quoque Regis exaninaverat prorsus, ut in omnibus scriniis
vel sacellis nihil praeter claves de toto illo biennio posset inveniri. They
likewise made him take a solemn Oath to deliver up all the Kings Castles to
them, and to give pledges to perform it, and banished him the realm. Hoveden,
p. 708.
Deinde praedicti Justitiarii et omnes Episcopi et Comites and Barons Angliae
in communi scripto mandaverunt Regi, qualiter Cancellarius suus regnum Angliae,
and the sauros suos destruxerat, ot qualiter ipse per Commune Concilium regni
ejectus est. To which Rerum^ Anglicarum l. 4. c. 18.
Gulielmus Nub^igensis subjoyns. Tyranno igitur qui regnum turbaverat,
propulsato EPISCOPI and OPTIMATES cum JOHANNE Londoniis congregati, de regni
ordinatione tractare caeperunt. Et primo quidem ab omnibus Regis Richardi
propter Christum pereginantis Omnes Magnates Regni convenerunt in unum, and
juraverunt fidelitatem and fidele servitium RICHARDO Regi Angliae, and haeredi
suo contra omnes homines, Roger de Hoveden, Annal. pars posterior. page 702,
718.
fidelitate jurata, regni administrationem Rothomagensi. Archiepiscopo DECRETO
COMMUNI tradiderunt, amotisque Ministris tyrannicis, provinciarum regimen
melius ordinari voluerant. Quibus actis, Anglia in cunctis finibus suis pacem
recepit, and decenri sub novis caepit recteribus moderamine gubernari: malis
plurimis quae sub tyranno pullulaverant, atque viguerant, pariter cum ipso
eliminatis, A happy Public change and Parliamentary reformation worthy our
imitation.

In the Roger de Hoveden, annal. pars posterior, p. 724, 734, 739. Mat. Westminster.
Mat. Paris, anno 1192, and 1193.
year of our Lord 1193. Earl John conspiring with the French King to deprive
king Richard his brother of his Crown, kingdom, and Dominions, seizing many of
his Castles beyond the Seas, (profering the Emperor great ^ums of money not to
release him, being then his prisoner,) and endeavoring to get possession of
the Realm of England, Anno 1194. Venit in Angliam Adam de Sincto Edmundo
clericus et familiaris Comitis Johannis, mi^sus ab eo in Angliam cum literis ad
castella sua munienda contra fratrem suum. Who coming to the lodging of Hubert
Archbishop of Canterbury, and boasting much of the prosperity of his Lord, and
what Castles the French King had delivered to him as he sat at dinner; to the
great of^ence of the Archbishop and others; thereupon after dinner, Adam
returning to his lodging in London, Major Londoniarum injecit manus in eum, and
tenuit; and cae^it omnia brevia sua, in quibus mandata Comitis Johannis
continebantur, and tradidit ea Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo. Qui in crastino
convocatis coram eo Episcopis, Comitibus et Baronibus Regni, ostendit e^s ^eras
Comi^is ^ohannis and earum ^enorem. and statim per Commune Concilium Regni
definitum est, quod Comes Johannes di^e^^retur de omnibus tenementis suis in
Anglia; and ut Castella sua obsiderentur: ( for this his Treason) and factum
est ita. Eodem die Hubertus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, Hugo Lincolniensis,
Richardus Londoniensis, Gilbertus Roffensis, Godefridus Wintoniensis, and
Wigorniensis and Herefordensis Episcopi, and Henricus Exoniensis electus, and
Abbates et Clerici multi Cantuariensis dioeceseos convenerunt in capella
Monachorum infirmorum apud Westmonasterium, et sententiam anathematis tulerunt
i^ Comitem Johannim, et in omnes fautores ejus et consiliarios qui pacem et
regnum Regis Angliae turbaverunt vel turbarent, nisi relicta hostilitate ad
satisfactionem venirent. After which they appointed what persons should besiege
and reduce Earl John's Castles, who vigorously executed their commands. King
Richard soon after being enlarged returning into England, summoned a Great
Parliamentary Council at Nottingham, the proceedings whereof against Earl John
and others, are thus recorded by Annal. pars posterior. p. 736, 737. Seldens
titles of Honor, par. 2. ^h. 5. p. 707.
Roger de Hoveden. Tricesima die mensis Martu ^eria quarta Richardus Rex
Angliae celebravit prim^m CONCILII SUI diem apud N^tingham; cui interfuerunt,
Alienor regina matter ejus, et Hubertus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, qui in
dextris Regis sedebat in Concilio ilio; et Gaufridus Eboracensis
Archiepiscopus, qui a sinistris ejus sedebat, et Hugo Dunelmensis, et Hugo
Lincolniensis, et W^llielmus Eliensis regis Cancellarius, et Willielmus
Herefordensis, and Henrious Wigorniensis, et Henricus Exoniensis, et Johannes
Candidae Casae Episcopi: Et Comes David frater Regis Seotiae, and Hamelinus
Comes de Warenna, and Ranulfus Comes Cestriae, et Willielmus Comes de Ferreres,
and Willielmus Comes de Salisberia, and Rogerus Bigot. Eodem die Rex
disseisivit Gyrardum de Canvilla de Castello, and Vicecomitatu Lincolniensi, et
Hugonem Bardulf de Vicecomitatu Eboracensis sciriae, et de Castello Eboraci et
de Scardebur^, and de custodia de Westmerland ( for their disloyalty toward
him) et omnia supradicta disposuit venditioni, etc. Tricesima prima die mensis
Maii, Rex Angliae celebravit secundum diem Concilii ^ui: in quo ipse petiit
sibi fieri judicium de Comite Iohanne fratre suo, quod contra fidelitatem quam
ei juravera^, Castella sua occupaverat et tertas suas transmarinas et
cismarinas dest^uxera^, et foedus cum inimico suo Rege Franciae contra eum
inierat: Similiter and de Hugone de Nunant Coventrensi Episcopo SIBI FIERI
JUDICIUM postulavit, qui secreti sui conscium eum reliquerat, et Regi Franciae
et Comiti Johanni inimicis suis adhaeserat, omne malum in perniciem regni sui
machinans. ET JUDICATUM EST, quod Comes Johannes, et Episcopus Coventrensis
citarentur, and si intra quadraginta dies non venerint, nec juri steterint,
JUDICAVERUNT COMITEM JOHANNEM DEMERUISSE REGNUM, and Episcopum Coventrensem
subjacere judicio Episcoporum, in eo, quod ipse Episcopus era^, et JVDICIO
LAICORVM in eo, quod ipse Vicecomes Regis extiterat. Secunda die mensis Aprilis
Sabbato celebravit diem quar^um, and ultimum Concilii sui, in quo omnes, tam
Cleri^i quam Laici qui volebant sibi conqueri de Archiepisc: Eboracensi,
fecerunt queremonias multas de rapinis et injustis exactionibus: sed
Archiepiscopus Eboracensis nullum eis dedit responsum. Deinde per consilium et
machina^ionem Cancellarii ut dicitur) Girardus de Camvilla fuit retatus de
receptatione praedonum, qui rapuerunt bona Mercator^m euntium ad nundinas de
Stanford: et ab eo recesserunt ad rapinam illam faciendam, et de rapina illa
redierunt ad eum. Praeterea appellaverunt eum DE LAESIONE REGIAE MAJESTATIS, in
eo quod ipse ad vocationem Ju^titiarium Regis, venire noluit, nec juri stare de
praedicta receptatione rap^orum, neque eo^ ad justitiam regis producere: Sed
respondit; Se esse hominem Comitis Johannis, et velle in curia sua juristare.
Prae^erea appellaverunt eum, quod ipse fuit ^n viet adjutorio cum Comite
Johanne et aliis inimicis Regis ad Castella Regis de Notingham et de Tikehill
capienda. Girardus vero de Camvilla negavit omnia quae objiciebantur ei ab
illis, et illi dederunt vadium de prosequendo, et Girardus dedit vadium
defendendo se per unum de liberis hominibus suis. A clear evidence of the form
of proceedings in our Parliamentary Councils in that age against Traitors and
other Offenders there impeached, accused in criminal causes, and of the Lords
ancient undisputable right to give judgment therein, both in case of Peers (as
Earl John, the Bishop of Chichester, and Archbishop of York then were) and in
case of Commoners, Girard de Camvil (as I take it) being then no Peer or Baron
of this Realm, but only a Servant to Earl John, though afterward in Hoveden,
p. 811.
King John's reign I find him numbered amongst the Barons, who were Witnesses to
the homage and Oath of Allegiance made by William King of Scots to King John.
Earl Mat. Paris p. 169.
John soon after coming to his Brother King Richard, ca^^ himself down at his
feet, and with many tears, confessing his folly, ill counsel and practices
against him craved his pardon; whereupon he received him into his favor, and
presently restored his lands which he had seized into his hands as forfeited by
the Parliaments sentence denounced against him for his treason.

The Mat. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 218. See Seldens Titles of Honor, part. 2. c. 5.
p. 707.
Pope in the year 1208. having interdicted the whole Realm of England, King
John thereupon fearing that he would likewise excommunicate him and absolve his
Nobles from their Allegiance to him; to preserve his royalties, sent a Company
of armed Soldiers to all the Potent Nobles of the Realm, and especially to
those he suspected, exacting See Claus. 7 H. 3. m. 8. The Barons of the Marches
of Wales summoned to put in their Sons for Hostages to the King.
Hostages from them, that so if they should afterward be absolved from their
allegiance, he might reduce them to due obedience. Many submitted to the Kings
commands, and delivered some their Sons, others their Nephews, others their
Kinsmen for hostages to the Messengers. Who at last coming to William de Brause
a Noble man, and requiring pledges from him as they had done from others, found
a repulse. For Matilda his wife out of a womanish procacity, taking the word
out of her husbands mouth, answered the Messengers: I will not deliver my
children into the hands of your Lord King John, because he most dishonourably
slew his Nephew Arthur, whom he ought to have honorably kept and preserved.
Which her Husband hearing, rebuked her, saying; That she had spoken like one of
the foolish women against our Lord the King; for if I have offended him in any
thing, I am and will be ready to answer my Lord, and that without hostages,
SECUNDUM JUDICIVM CVRIAE SUAE ET BARONUM PARIUM MEORUM assignato die and loco.
The Barons in that age being to be judged and tried only by their Peers, and
that in the Kings Court of Parliament, for any offenses against the King; not
by the Commons or any inferior persons.

In the year of Christ 1233. Mat. Paris, p. 370, 371.372. to 384. Mat. Westminster.
an. 1233.1234
King Henry the 3. removing most of his English great Officers and Counselors
from his Court, and placing Poic^o ^es and Aliens in their room, by whole
Counsel he was wholly sw^yed and misguided (especially by Peter de Rivallis)
qui homines Angliae naturales, and Nobiles totis viribus opprimebant,
proditores eos vocabant, quos etiam de proditions apud Regem ^ccusabant*
^ne^aurorum ^e^iam suorum Rexeis custodias cum ^egibus pat^ii and judicii^
commisit. Quid plura? Judicia commit^ntur injustis, leges exlegibus, justicia
inj^riosis. Et eum NOBILES de regno, and in regno de oppressionibus sibi
irrogatis, coram Rege causam deponerent, Petro Episcopo impedience, non fuit
qui eis justitiam exhiberet, etc. Cumque his and consim^^ibus injuriis
RICHARDUS COMES, regni MARESCHALLUS, vider^t tam NOBILES quam ig^bbiles
op^rimere, and i^ra regni penitus deponere, zelo justitiae provocatus,
associatis sibi quibusdam Magnatibus ad Regem, audacter accessit, increpans eum
audientibus multis, quod per pravum Consilium advocarat extraneos Pi^taviense,
no pressionem r^gni, and hominum suorum de regno naturali^m, LEGUM PARITER AC
LIBERTATUM. Unde Regem humiliter ^ogabat, u^ tales excessus corrigere
festinarer, per quos Coronae suae and regni sui subversio immineba^. Affirmabat
insuper, quod si hoc emendarc distugerer, IPSE ET CAETERI DE REGNO MAGNATES,
tamdiu se ab ipsius consilio subtraherent, quamdiu alienigenarum consortio
frueretur: Ad haec autem respondens Petrus Wintoniensis Episcopus, dixit, quod
been licuit Domino Regi extraneos quoscunque vellet vocare ad defensionem Regni
sui and Coronae, and etiam tot and tales, qui possent homines suos superbos and
rebels ad debitum compellere famulatum. Comes vero Mareschallus, and caeteri
MAGNATES perturbati a Curia recedentes, cum aliud non poterant habere
responsum, firmiter promiserunt ad invicem, quod pro hac causa, quae omnes
tangebat, usque ad divisionem corporis and animae, viriliter dec^r arent. After
which the King with the Bishops advice filling all England with Po^o^ovines
newly called over; and being wholly guarded, counseled, swayed by them, out of
hatred and contempt to the English Nation^ Rex mi^^is li^eris f^ is, ^ocavi^
omnes de regno Comites et Barons ad colloquium, (...) apud Oxoniam, (...) ^m
Sancti ^ohannis, sed ipsi noluerunt ad ejus mandatum ve^ire, tum prop^er
in^idias al^enigenarum, ^um prop^er indignationem quam conciperant adversus
Regem, qui ex^ran^ os ad eorundem Baronum vocavit con^emp^um. Et cum hoc Regi
per nuncios solennes denuncias^ent, iratus est vehementer and judicialiter
jussit diffinire, quo ordine debeat eos compellere ad suam Curiam (the
Parliament) convenire* Tunc decretum est per Of the Lords who appeared.
judicium, ut secundo et tertio vocentur a Rege, ut probet ^venire ve ^in^,
ve^non. Significavit ergo Rex MAGNATIBUS memoratis, ut venirent apud
Westmonastirium quinto Idus Julii, AD COLLOQUIUM, and ibi per eorum consilium
emendaret, quicquid de ju^e noverat corrigendum. Sed cum audissent Magnates
prae^ati, quod paulatim applicuerunt in regno praedones multi cum equis and
armis a Rege invitati; cum nullum pacis vidissent vestigium, suspectas habentes
Pictavensium innaras versutias, supersederunt ad diem ^^bi statu^um venire;
denunciantes Regi per nuncios solennes, quatenus omni dilatione remota,
Ejicerer Pet^um Wintoniensem Episcopum, and c^eceros Pictavenses de Curia sua:
Sin autem nolle^, ipsi omnes, de communi Concilio totius regni ipsum cum
iniquis Consiliariis suis a regno depellerent, et de novo Rege creando
contractarent. His ira ge^^is, Rex animo ^on^ternatus est vehementer, et ejus
Curia tota, vultum demittentes, and non mediocriter me^entes (...) fiet error
filii patris errore deterior, quem homines sui de fa^igio ^egni deponere
satagentes, ad illud nomen quod ei per quoddam prae^agium datum est, scilicet
Johannes Extor^is, fere derruserunt Tunc Petrus Episcopus Con^ium Regi dedit,
ut a^ma moveret contra rebels homines suos, and Castella eorum and terras
Pictavensibus con^^erre^, qu^regnum Angliae a s^is proditoribus tuer^tur. The
King following his evil counsel. spoiled Gilbert Basset a Nobleman of a Manor
given him by King John, and when he demanded restitu^ion of it, called him
Traitor, and threatened to hang him unless he departed his Court^ he also
imprisoned Sir* Ric. Swa^d and suspecting all the other Nobles and Great men of
the Realm, demanded hostages from them, signifying to them all by his Letters,
that before the Calend^ of August they should present to him so many and such
hostages; wherewith they might remove all suspicion of jealousy out of his
mind. Cumque Comites ac Barons Angliae in magno militiae appar^ (...)
COLLOQVIUM Calend. August^ sibi praesticum* the Earl Marshal being informed by
his Sister Isabel, as he was going thither, that there were ambushes laid to
take him by his enemies, to present him to the King and Bishop of Winchester,
who would imprison and deal with him as they had done with Hubert Earl of Kent;
he thereupon departed in the night and posted into Wales to avoid the danger.
Venerunt autem AD COLLOQUIUM praedictum, Comes Cestriae, Comes Lincolniae,
Comes de Ferrariis, and Comes Richardus Frater Regis, cum aliis Comitibus and
Baronibus multis* sed nihil ibi actum fuit propter absentiam Comitis
Mareschalli, et Gileberti Basset, et quorundam aliorum absentium Magnatum (the
Lords refusing to act, si^, or grant any thing to the king whiles the^e eminent
Members were absent, Nota.
and their House no full.) Unde Rex per Consilium Episcopi Wintoniensis and
Stephani de Segrave fecit invitari per literas omnes de regno Magnates, qui
sibi ad militare servitium* renebantur, ut venirent apud Gloverniam cum eq^is
and armis die Dominica ante Assumptionem beatae Mariae. Sed Richardus
Mareschallus, and alii multi qui fuerunt confaedera^i, cum venire noluisseut ad
diem statutum, fecit Rex, ac si proditores essent, villas eorum concremari,
pa^cos and vivaria eorum destruere, castella obsidione vallare; the King
outlawing them of Treason: Whereupon there arose a war and many skirmi^hes
between the Kings party and Poictovines, and the Earl Marshal and his
Confederates for near two years space.

Mat. Patis, p. 381, 382.
Anno 1234. Rex Anglorum venit ad COLLOQUIUM apud Westmonasterium in
Purificatione beatae Mariae, in quo quosdam Episcopos and maxim Alexandrum
Cestrensem Episcopum, graviter increpavit de n^mia familiaritate Comitis
Mareschalli, and quod ipsum a regni s^lio depellere nitebantur. Episcopus autem
ille, Pontificalibus indutu, cum talia sibi objecta cognovisse^, ne^non quosdam
qui Regi suggesserant exasperando; Episcopos foventes parts Mareschalli, velle
alium Regem erigere, commotus est vehementer. Excommunicavit igitur in
continenti omnes qui contra Regem iniquitatem hujusmodi sceleris cogitabant,
vel super Episcopos, qui omnino de salute and honor regis sollicitabantur,
malitiose talia imponebant. Et sic manifestata Episcoporum ac probata
innocentia, confusis discordiae seminatoribus, siluit legista ( Rogerus de
Cantelu) ab anathemate ut videbatur, non immunis. Sic igitur intervenientibus
Episcopis, qui aderant, pacificatus est Alexander Cestrensis Episcopus, and
quievit spiritus illius nimis ante amaricatus. Affuit quidem hinc COLLOQUIO
Magister Aedmundus Cantuariensis Electus, cum multis Episcopis suffraganeis,
qui omnes Regis, and Regni desolationi condolentes, venerun^ ad Regem, and
quasi uno cord, animo et ore dixerun^: Domine Rex, dicimus vobis in Domino, ut
fideles vestri, quod consilium quod nunc habetis, and quo utimini non est ^anum
nec securum, sed crudele and periculosum vobis et regno Augliae, Petri
videlicet Wintoniensis Episcopi, and P^tri de Rivallis, and complicium suorum.
Imprimis, quia gentem Anglicanam odio habent and contemnunt, vocantes eos
proditores, and facientes omnes sic vocari, and avertentes animum vestrum ab
amore gentis vestrae, and corda nostra, and gentis vestrae a vobis; quod
apparet in Mareschallo, qui melior homo est terrae vestrae, quem per mendacia
interseminata a vobis elongantes perverterunt. Et per hoc idem consilium,
scilicet per dictum Epis^opum, amis^^ Pate^ vester Rex Johannes, primo corda
gentis suae, deinde Norma^mam, post alias terras, and in fine totum the
the^aur^me exhau^ie* and ^ere Dominium Angliae, and nunquam po^^ea pacem
habuit. Per idem con^ilium tempotibus nostris, turbatum fui^ reguum, and venit
interdictum; et denique factum est regnum tributarium* et princeps provinciarum
fact^s est pro^ do^or ignobilibus sub ^^ibuto, et inita guerra et diu
protelara, mortuus est pater vester quas^ extorris, nec in pace regni vel
animi, et h^ mortem per eo^ admodum incurrit periculosam. Per idem consilium
contra vos detentum ^uit Castellum de Bedeford, ubi multum thesaurum, et
stre^uos nomines perdidisti: ob quam causam interim Rupe^am in ignominiam
totius regni tui amisisti. Item perturbatio nunc imminens toti regno
periculosa, per eorum consilium iniquum accidit, quia si per justitiam et
rectum judicium terrae tractati fuissent, homines vestri, non eveni^^et ista
perturbatio, et haberetis terras vestras non destructas, et thesaurum
inexhau^lum. Item in fide dicimus, qua vobis astringimur obligati, quod
consilium vestrum non est pacis, sed perturbationis terrae, Nota
quia sic crescere volunt, qui per pacem non possunt, scilicet per regni
perturbationem, et aliorum exhaeredationem. Item, quia Castra vestra, et
fortitudinem vestram habent in manu sua, quasi de gente vestra diffidere
debeatis. Item quia ^caccarium vestrum, et omnes custo ias et eschaet^s maximas
habent in potestate sua, placet ^alis expectatio, et quomodo vobis respondebunt
in fine, ut credimus comprobabis. Item, quia nisi per sigillum vestrum, vel
praeceptum sine sigillo Perri de Rivallis, vix aliquod magnum nego^i^m ^it in
regno, quasi ^vos pro Rege non haberent. Item, per idem consilium naturales
homines de regno vestro de curia vestra expulsi sunt: unde ^imendumest tam de
vobis quam de regno, cum videamini magis esse in eorum potestate, quam ipsi in
vestra sicut per plurima constat exempla. Item, quia pnellam de Britannia, et
sororem vestram habent in potestate, et alias plures puellas nobiles, et alias
mulieres nubiles, cum wardis et maritagiis quas dant suis, et disparaban^.
Item, quia legem terrae juratam et confirmatam; atque per excommunicationem
corroboratam, pariter et justitiam confundunt et pervertunt, un^e ^imendum est,
ne sin^ excommunicati, and vos eis communicando. Item, quia non observant
alicui promissionem, fidem, vel juramentum, vel scripturae munimentum, nec
timent excommunicationem. Unde qui a veritate recessetunt, sunt desperati, ut
qui in timore remanent diffidentes. Haec autem fideliter vobis dicimus, et
coram Deo et hominibus consulimus rogamus et monemus, ut tale consilium
amoveatis a vobis, et sicut est in aliis regnis consuetudo, regnum vestrum
tractetis per fideles homines vestros et juratos de regno vestro. Denunciamus
enim vobis in veritate, quod nisi infra breve tempus ista correxeritis, in vos,
and in omnes alios contradictores, per censuram ecclesiasticam procedemus,
nihil nisi consecrationem venerabilis Patris nostri electi Cantuariensis
expectantes. Et his ita dictis, Rex humiliter postulavit inducias, dicens, se
non posse ita subito consilium suum amovere, donec de thesauro suo illis
commisso, ratiocinium audisset. Et sic solutum est COLLOQUIVM, recedentibus
cunctis cum fiducia concordiae celeriter ob inendae.

Mat. Paris p. 383.
On the 5 of April following, Convenerunt ad COLLOQVIUM apud Westmonast. REX
CUM COMMITIBVS ET BARONIBUS, and Archiepiscopus nuper consecratus, cum suis
suffraganeis, ut regno perturbato salubriter providerent, Archiepiscopus quidem
conjunctis sibi Episcopis, accaeteris qui aderant Praeclatis, ostendit ei
consilium suum and Episcoporum, super desolatione regni, and periculo
imminenti, replicando suprascripta incommoda, in COLLOQUIO superius habito sibi
expressa. Denunciavit etiam ipsi express, quod nisi celerius errorem
dimitterei, and cum fidelibus regni sui pacifice componeret, ipse in continenti
cum omnibus qui aderant Praelatis, IN IPSUM REGEM SENTENTIAM FERRET
EXCOMMUNICATIONIS, and in omnes alio^ hujus pacis contradictor^s et concordi^
perversones. Rex autem pius audiens consilium Praelatorium, humiliter
respondi^, quod consiliis eorum in omnibus obtemperaret: unde post dies pauco^,
intellige^^ proprium errorem, po^uitentia ductus, ^raecepit Petro Wintoniensi
Episcopo, ut pergens ad Episcopatum suum, curis intenderet animarum, et de
caeteris Regiis negotiis nequiquam interesse^. Petro eti^m de Rivallis
immurabiliter jussit, cujus Angli^ ^ota dispenfacionibus subjacebat, ut
redditis sibi Castellis suis, and ratio^inium de thesauris in continenti
reddere^, et a Curia recederet; affirmans cum juramento, quod nisi beneficiatus
et in sortem ^lo^i^orum esset admissus ipse ei ambos oculos eruere faceret.
P^^tavienses insuper omnes ^am de Curia sua, quam de castrorum presidiis
expellens, remisit in patri^m suam, praecipiens ut ultra faciem suam non
viderent. Et sic Rex dimissis iniquis Consiliariis suis, revocavit ad obseq^ium
suum naturales homines de regno suo, subjiciens se consilio Archiepiscopi et
Episcoporum, per q^os sperabat regnum perturbatum, ad statum prosperum
revocare. Soon after the King (as appears by Claus. 18 H. 3. m. 19.) by the
advice and judgment of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and other his
Great men in the Parl. at Gloucester, reversed and nulled all the Outlawries
against Hubert Earl of Kent, Ralph Basset, and other adherents to the Earl
Marshal, eo quod injuste, et contra legem terrae in eos fuerant promulgata,
(which he caused the Sherifs publicly to proclaim;) recalled Hugh de Burgo
Earl of Kent, Gilbert Basset, S^r Richard Sward, whom he had formerly banished,
imprisoned, injured, cum omnibus qui cum eis, et pro eis in exilium fuerunt
pulsi; in gratiam suam plenam et non fictam revocavit, et eis in osculo pacis
receptis reddidit omnia jura sua, IN COLLOQVIO 510 Calend Junii; admitting (in
this Parliament) the said Hubert, Gilbert, and Sward, to be his domestic
servants and familiar counselors: runc demum intelligens, quod primum fuerat
seductus astutia consiliatoru^* In the mean time R.E. Marshal being
treacherously slain in Ireland, by a Letter sent hence from the Kings ill
Counselors under the Kings Seal; hereupon, in eodem Colloquio, Aedmundus Cant.
Archiepiscopus fecit recitari exemplar literarum, de proditione Richardo Comiti
praeparata coram Rege et unverso Conventu Episcoporum, Comitum pariter ac
Baronum qui affuerunt, quae a Consiliariis regis mi^^ae fuerunt ad Magnates in
Hybernia. Unde Rex ipse et alii omnes qui eas audierant, admodum sunt
constricti, and usque ad lachtymarum compuncti sunt effusionem. Rex autem
confessus est in veritate, quod compulsus ab Episcopo Wintoniensi et Petro de
Rivallis and aliis Consiliariis suis, jussit figillum suum apponi in quibusdam
literis sibi praesentatis, sed tenorem eorum se nunquam audisse cum juramento
affirmavit. Ad hoc respon^um Archiepiscopus dixit, Scrutamini Rex conscientiam
vestram, quia omnes illi qui literas illas mitti procuraverunt, et hujus
proditionis conscii fuerunt, rei sunt de morte Marescalli, ac si illum propriis
manibus occidissent. Tunc Rex, HABITO CONSILIO, fecit vocari per literas
Episcopum Wintoniens^m, Petrum de Rivallis, Stephanum de Segrave, et Robertum
de Passeleve, ut venirent ad festum Sancti Johannis, ratiocinium reddituri de
thesauris suis receptis pariter and expensis, sed et de sigillo suo quod male
tractaverant, ipso penitus ignorante, mandavit ut tunc venirent RESPONSURI ET
JURI PARITURI. Sed illi proprias conscientias habentes suspectas in omnibus, ex
una part Regem, ex altera fratres et amicos metuebant Marescalli, cujus necem
procurasse videbantur. Unde ad pacem Ecclesiae confugients, Episcopus et Petrus
de Rivallis in Ecclesia Cathedrali apud Wintoniam latitabant, a conspectu
hominum sese penitus subtrahentes. Stephanus vero de Segrave in Ecclesia
Sanctae Mariae in Abbatia Canonicorum apud Legecestriam delituit, et qui prius
a clericatu ad militiam per arrogantiam confugerat, ad clericatus officium
reversus, coronam quam reliquerat, inconsulto Episcopo revocavit. Robertus
quoque Passeleue ad latibulum divertit incognitum, etc. Sed revera ad Novum
templum, ^e infirmum simulans, in quodam secreto celatus cellario la^itabat,
more tectus leporino. Tandem Aedmundus Cant. Episcopus, impetravit a Rege, ut
sub salvo conductu ipsius et Episcoporum possunt ad diem certum coram illo
^enite, ut omnis in regno dissentionis occasio sopiretur. Statuit igitur illis
diem Rex pridie Idus Julii apud Westmonasterium, ubi sub protectione
Archiepiscopi et Episcoporum ad Regis praesentiam sunt producti. Petrus de
Rivallis primus in causam vocatu^, apparuit coram Rege in habitu clericali, cum
tonsura et lata corona, Regem^ue reverenter salutavit cum Iusticiariis su^s in
Banco sedentem. Quam Rex torvo respiciens oculo, O PRODITOR inquit, per iniquum
consilium tuum, sigillum meum ignorans apposui literis de proditione Comitis
Mareschalli. Per tuum etiam pravum consilium, ipsum et alios de regno meo
homines naturales et eorum animos a me pariter, and amorem averti. Per pravum
etiam consilium tuum et complicum tuorum, guerram contra illos movi, in
jacturam irrestauribilem, et regni opprobrium, per quam guerram thesaurum meum
et vitam multorum illustrium, simul et honorem meum amisi lamentabiliter.
Exigit igitur Rex praeterea ratiocinium de thesauro suo et custodia puerorum
nobilium et escheatarum cum aliis proventibus multis, quae ad Coronam
spectabant. Cumque haec et alia multa Rex ab eo sub proditionis nomine
exigisset; nihil omnino de objectis sibi criminibus negavit, sed coram Rege in
terram corruens, per haec verba ejus misericordiam imploravit. Domine Rex,
inquit, nutritus sum a vobis et in bonis temporalibus dives factus; ne
confundes hominem quem creasti, sed concede sa^tem tempus deliberandi, ut de
rebus exactis, competenter vobis valeam reddere rationem. Cui Rex: Mittam te iu
Turrim Londinensem ut ibi deliberes donec mihi satisfacias praevia ratione. Ad
haec Petrus, Domine, Clericus sum, nec debeo incarcerari, vel sub Laicorum
custodia deputari. Respondit Rex: Te ut laicum hactenus gessisti, a te agitur
ut Laico, cui meum commisi thesaurum, exigo. Veruntamen e^^e pro sens est
Archiepiscopus, qui si pro te fidi^ubere voluerit; tradam te illi ut mi^i
^^tisfaci^t de exactionibus supradictis. Ad quod cum silui^se^ Archiepiscopus,
misit Rex praedictum Petrum in Turrim memoratam, accipie^s in manus suas omnes
laioas possessiones ejus, quia sub habitu clericali l^ica erat induius, gestans
anela^ium ad lumbare, quod clenicum non decebat. Et tunc P^t^us fle^it amare,
scilicet ingredie^s n^ ioulum ^ ducendus ad turrim supradictam. Fuit autem in
ea die Jovis, et s^quenti die Veneris. Et tunc ab Archiepiscopo liberatus, apud
Wintoniam perductus est, et in ecclesia dimissus cathedrali.

Apparuit autem eadem die in Regis praesentia Stephaphanus de Segrave, veniens
sub protectione Archiepiscopi, de rebus sibi impositis res^onsu^u^. Qui cum
staret in judicio Juri pariturus; increpavit eum Rex sub nomine nequissimi
proditoris, de domnibus articulis de quibus increpave^at Petrum de Rivallis;
hoc etiam ad^iciens, quod consilium dederat et, ut Hubertum de Burgo ab offici^
Justiciarii amoveret, incarceraret, patibulo suspenderet, and Nobil^s de regno
exilio relegaret. Cumque haec and alia multa ei imposuisset slagitia, exegit ab
eo ratiocium de ossicio Justiciarii, quod sub eo ministraverat post Hubertum de
Burgo, de rebus receptis pariter et ^xpensis. Super his autem Archiepiscopus et
Episcopi impetraverunt inducias a Rege usque ad festum S. Michaelis, ut
deliberandi tempus haberet. De pravis quoque consiliis sibi imputatis, alios
altiores eo medios scilicet int^r Regem et eum quibus necesse habuit immediate
respondere, nepote W^lierum Carleolensem and Petrum de Rivalli^ non me
redarguat. Et sic de aliis umbonem f^oiens recessit, in alios crimen
retorquendo. Et sic absdondit se iterum Robertus Passeleue. The King made Hugh
de Pateshulle, an honest and faithful man chief Justice of England, much
against his will, in Passeleues place. And at the Archbishops request, in the
same Parliament, restored to Gilbert, Brother and heir to murdered Richard Earl
Marshal, all his inheritance both in England and Ireland, received his homage,
knighted, and gave him the rod of his Marshals Court, as the manner is, to hold
that office as well and freely as his ancestors enjoyed it. And so this Civil
war and Combustion between the King and his Nobles was fully reconciled.

I have transcribed this History, and these Parliamentary proceedings at large
out of Matthew Paris. First, to manifest the Gallantry, Courage, Zeal,
Vigilance, Unanimity of our Nobles, Lords, Barons, and Prelates in that age, in
opposing, reprehending the King himself to his face, and threatening to depose
and excommunicate him, both in and out of Parliament, for entertaining
foreigners and ill counselors about him; neglecting, hating, banishing his own
Nobles and natural Subjects as Traitors, without any just cause or legal trial,
and subverting, confounding their Laws, Liberties, Justice, etc. 2ly, To
manifest the proceedings, impeachments in these Parliaments against the Earls
and Nobles refusing to appear at these Parliaments upon the Kings these
successive Writs of Summons; his outlawing them of high Treason, and spoiling,
burning, seizing their houses, Lands thereupon, being adjudged by the Lords in
Parliament, to be illegal and afterward reversed as unjust and against the
Law, Claus. 18. H. 3. m. 19. 3ly, To manifest, that the Lords in Parliament
would not act any thing in the absence of these eminent Lords refusing to
appear. 4ly, To evidence the Sentence and Justice of the King and Lords,
against these ill Counselors, Aliens and Traitors to the Public, whom they
caused to be removed from the King, Court, Kingdom, put from their public
Trusts and Offices, called to an account, publicly arraigned before the King
himself and his Justices; by whom they were imprisoned, their lands
confiscated, and better Counselors of State and Judges put into their places.

Mar. West. p. 1531
Anno 1240. Accusatus est graviter Comes Cantiae Hubertus de Burgo CORAM REGE
ET CURIA TOTA London: ubi post mult^s disceptationes, ut ira^undia Regis, quae
immoderate nimis con^^^ ipsum excanduerat, quiesceret, ADJUDICA^UM EST, ut
quatuor Castra sua Charissima (scilicet Blancum Castrum, Grosmunt, Scenefrithz,
and Haetfeild) Domino Regi^ resignaret, ut caetera sibi cum Regis benevolentia
in pace remanerent.

Mat. Paris p. 938.
Anno 1258. The Nobles complained in Parliamnnt of the Kings advancing his half
Brothers, who were aliens, swaying all things, and impoverishing the Realm, and
of their intolerable pride, insolency, and injuries; and the Earl of Leicester
particularly complained to the Parliament of William de Valentia; non tam^n
Regi sed universitati praecordialiter est conquestus, exigens instanter sibi
justitiam adhiberi. The Mat. Paris p. 940, 241. Mat. Westminster. p. 277, 278.
same year the Great men and Nobles of the Land, Videntes Regnum undique
desolatum, tum exactionibus and tallagiis tam Curiae Romanae quam Regis, quam
etiam alienigenarum, and praecipue Pictavensium elatione praesumptuosa, fivore
regio in regno nimium in sublimi provecta, tantas in Anglia Dominationes sibi
usurpantium and magisteria, ^ost Pentecosten apud Oxon. COLLOQUIUM GENERALE
CELEBRAVERUNT (being summoned to this Parliament by the Kings Writ) super hiis,
necnon and status regni melioration^ efficaciter and exquisite tractaturi. Quo
non sine armis and equis electissimis muniti venerunt, ut si Rex and
alienigenae sui^ provisionibus, and statutis sponte contemnerent assentire,
vigore opposito cogerentur, aut ipsi alienigeni universaliter, sine morae
regnum Angliae poenitus evacuarent, Quas quidem provisiones Oxon. and stat.
necnon ET MAGNAM CHARTAM TAM DE LIBERTATIBUS ET DE FORESTA; tandem Domino Rege
ad suorum PROCERUM observantiam statutorum inclinato, per que^dam de suis
militibus tactis sacrosanctis jurame^tum praestante, 24 prudentium virorum and
Nationis Anglicanae, quos ad Regni gubernationem sub eodem duxerint inter se
eligendos, consilio se commendavit and consideration^. His igitur p^ractis
fidelitatem Regi and regni ET AD CONSIDERATIONEM SUORUM PARIUM STARE omnes,
quotquot in regno commorare vellent, fecerunt jurare The Nobles in this
Parliament required, that all the Poictovines might surrender up all the
Castles they held in England into the Kings hands; Whereupon they peremptorily
swore by the passion and wounds of Christ, that they would never do it whiles
they breathed. Whereupon the Earl of Leicester said to William of Vairencia,
the most insolent of them all, That he should either surrender up the Castles
he held of the Kings, without delay, VEL CAPUT AMITTERET on he should lose his
head. Similiter ALII COMITES ET BARONS DICEBANT etiam constructissime
assertione consistentes. The Poictovines being very much terrified with these
words; not knowing what to do, and fearing to fly to any Castle, lest they
should there be besieged and soon taken or starved by the Lords, fled secretly
and speedily from the Parliament to Winchester; not sparing their horses sides,
and setting spies upon hills and Towers to observe whether the Barons pursued
them; who hearing of their flight, commanding all their followers to arm
themselves, and dissolving the Parliament, without adjourning it to any certain
day, Walsingham Ypodig. Neustriae, An. 1258. p. 61, 62. Mar. West. p. 278. Mat.
Paris, p. 222.
pursued them to Winchester; where the King and Nobles holding another
PARLIAMENT, the Poictovines JUDIDIUM EXPECTARE NOLENTES, nec ausi exhibitionem
JUSTITIAE, quae singulis secundum juramentum REGIS and PROCERUM debebatur
expestare (being the sole judges of them in Parliam. for their exorbitant
offenses) they presently fled out of the Realm beyond the Sea, to avoid their
sentence. Hereupon Mat. Paris p. 945.
Significatum est literatorie, ad multos etiam quos praedicti Pictavienses
impudentur offenderant; ut ^nerelam super hoc repone^res* ostenderent
Maguatibus Regni da^a sibi a dictis Regis fratribus illata, and eas querelas
dilucidantes, constanter moras sequerentur, and ut sibi omnia, secundum quod
jus dictaret restituerentur. Sed quia instabat tempus messium, considerantes
simultatem, et instantes labores forte inutiles sequi renuerunt donec majorem
cernerent opportunitatem. The Lords in Parliament being willing to award them
damages and reparations against the Kings own Brothers in Law, upon complaint
and clear proof of the injuries and damages they sustained by them.

Mat. Westminster. Anno 1260, p. 295, 296.
Anno 1260. There falling out a great difference between King Henry the 3. and
Prince Edward his Son: Simon Earl of Leicester and other Nobles; thereupon,
Convocato in praesentia Regis apud sanctum Paulum, BARONAGIO, habitoque prius
tractat^ de Eadwardo super injuriis Regi (ut dicebatur) illatis; paratus est
idem Eadwardus, se omnium objectorum probare immunem, et ad duorum Regum, scil.
Patris sui, et Avunculi, provisionem in emendatione facienda se dare
tractabilem: dicens, Omnes alios Barons, et Comites sibi de jure non esse
Pares, nec suas in eum exercere discussiones. Unde d^cu^a hinc inde veritate,
omniumque relatorum falsitate probata, pacificato Regi concordatus est filius,
multiplicatis de jure inimicorum confusionibus. Concordato itaque Eadwardo Regi
et Reginae, et aliis amicis, mox querela subsequitur de Comite Leicestriae
Simo^e, super pluribus injuriis tam citra mare quam ultra, contra Regem (ut
dicebatur) perpetratis. Praefixo igitur die ad respondendum, and se de objectis
expurgandum, idem Comes ad dictum diem, licet breviorem, paratus est
quantotiens petitis satisfacere, et ad discutiendam super oppositis veritatem,
omnium transmarinorum quam cismarinorum, arbitrio obtemperare, exceptis quinque
tantum minutis, tam suae quam Eadwardi, discordiae seminatoribus. Q^o audito
Comes Gloverniae cum suis consentaneis, rimens sibi post praedicti Comitis
purgationem, gravissimas de se suscitati querelas, US QUE AD ALIUD PARLIAMENTUM
praefatum diem procuravit prorogandum, Unde tumultu ad tempus sedato, Rex
proprium adivit Palatium cum gaudio. Articuli vero praetactarum culparum cum
suis fabricatoribus plures sunt, and ultra modum transgressibiles, si very
essent. Sed quia incredibiles sunt, and nulla fulciuntur veritate, ne
mendaciorum scriptor dicerer, a^t fabricator, eos huic paginae non arbitror
annotari. Jmo qui eos si^ienter audire desiderat a mendac^ monda^i^ ex^auriet,
and me in noc relinquens alium relatorem exquirat.

Anno 1261. Man. West. p. 306, to 318. Mat. Pa* p. 938, 939, 940, etc.
Prince Edward returning out of France, brought. William de Valentia the Kings
Brother-in-law with him, lately banished out of the land, who could then scarce
obtain any admission into it, but upon this condition, Ut praestito in ingressu
sacramento BARONUM PROVISIONI IN OMNIBUS OBEDIRET, and singulis contra eum
d^posi^is quaerelis et deponendis, si nece^se fuerit, responderet. Eadwardus
vero super vanis Regis consiliis, and consiliariis edoctus, eisdem valde
iratus, sponte se patris absentavit obtutibus, and fideliterut perjuraverat,
assensit Baronibus. Inquisitis itaque diligenter praedictae contentionis
fautoribus, et cognitis, unanimiter omnes cum Eadwardo conjurarunt, quod
nunquam regi consentirent in uno, donec quoldam non nominandos a suo amoveret
consilio. Addentes quod per talium pacis perturbatorum suggestiones Rex saepe
decipitur, and in praetacta papali absolutione juramenti sui (to observe the
provisions of the Barons made at Oxford.) provisio Regi and regno salutaris
infirmatur. Unde revelato eorum secreto, nunquam Rex, talium consilio
intermediante, suo poterit BARONAGIO prout decet consenti^. Com^^es antem
Gloverniae et Leicestriae, pace sunt tunc firmissima confaederati simul cum
Eadwardo and aliis, contestantes, quod aut praedictorum perturbatocum a rege
removerent consorrium, aut guer^a vi^iniore suscitanda alterutros se darent in
interitum. In pursuance whereof the Barons continued in arms so long, till they
forced the Kings ill Counselors from him, constrained him to reconfirm and
assent to their provisions made at Oxford, to banish all strangers out of the
Realm, and to put all his Castles into their hands.

Anno 1264. Richard King of Romans, Mat. Westminster. p. 322. Mat. Paris p. 962, 963.
Prince Edward the Kings eldest Son, caterique BARONS OMNES ET NOBILES
praedicto regi Angliae constanter sincerae fidei and devotionis operibus
adhaerentes, in their memorable Letter and answer immediately before the battle
of Jews, Simoni de Monte forti, Gilberto de Clara, caeterisque universis and
singulis perfidiae suae complicibus* who accused them of giving neither good
nor faithful Counsel to the King, in their Letter then sent to them, write
thus, in order to a legal trial in the Kings Court of Parliament by their
Peers. De hoc autem quod falso nobis imponitis, quod nec fid^le, nec bonum
consilium regi Domino vestro damus, nequaquam verum dicitis. Et si vos, domine
Simon de Monte forti, vel Gileberte de Clara, velitis hoc idem IN CURIA DOMINI
REGIS ASSERERE, parati sumus securum veniendi ad dictam CURIAM procurare
conductum, and nostrae super hoc innocentiae veritatem, and vestrum sicut
PERFIDORUM PRODITORV^M mendacium declarare per ALIOS (misprinted in some Copies
alium) NOBILITATE ET GENERE VOBIS PARES (not parem) relating to that of Magna
Charta, c. 29. Per legale judicium PARIUM SUORUM, by which Peers only are
legally triable.

In the year of our Lord 1265, being the 49 year of Henry the 3 his reign, the
Earl of Leicester, Simon de Montefort, and sundry other of the Barons being
slain, and the rest of them totally routed in the Battle of Evesham by Mat.
West. An. 1265, p. 340. Mat. Paris, p. 967. Walsing-Ypodigm. Neustriae, An.
1265. See Holinshed, Fabian, Daniel, Speed, Grafton, An. 49 H. 3. Hen. de
Knighton de Eventibus Angliae.
Prince Edward; thereupon the King being rescued out of their hands, and
restored to his royal authority, summoned a Parliament at Winchester on the
Nativity of the blessed Virgin. In which Parliament, REX ET REGNI MAGNATES
ORDINARVNT (as Mat. Westminster relates) quod di^iores Civitatis Londinensis,
in carcerom truderentur; quod Cives and Civitas Londinensis (Nota) suis
antiquis Privilegiis and libertatibus privaretur OB SUAM REBELLIONEM: and quod
stipites and cathenas quibus Civitas fuerat roborata, de medio tollerentur, PRO
EO QUOD Simoni de Montiforti, Comiti Leicestriae IN REGIS CONTEMPTUM, ET ETIAM
DAMNUM REGNI FORTITER ADHAESERANT. Capitunei etiam factionis contra Regem,
juxta voluntatem ejus pl^ctendi, carcere manciparentur. Quod and totum factum
est. Nam and potentiores Civitatis, apud Castrum Windesoram Carceri fuerunt
mancipa^i, qui post modo poena pecuniaria, ad summam non modicam mulctabantur.
Libertas fuit civibus interdicta, and Turris London per stipites and Cathenas
Civitatis forti^r facta, Post ho^ aprid Westmonasterium in festo Translatio^is
Sancti Edwardi, there was another Parliament held at London summoned by this
Writ yet extant on Record.

Dorso Claus. 49. H. 3. m. 11. in Schedula. Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 717,
718,
Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, etc. Cum post gravia turbationum
discr^minadudum habita in regno nostro, Carissimus filius Edwardus primogenitus
noster, pro pace in regno nostro assecurenda, et firmanda obses traditus
extitisset, et jam sedata, (Benedictus Deus) turbatione praedicta, super
deliberatione ejusdem salubriter providenda, et plena securi^a^e et
tranquillitate pacis, ad hono^em Dei, and utilitatem totius regni nostri
firmanda, et totaliter complenda, ac super quibusdam aliis regni nostri
nego^^is quae sine Consilio vestro et aliorum Praelatorum et Magnatum nostrorum
nolumus expediri, cu^ eisdem tra^tatum nos habere oportet; Vobis mandamu^
rogantes in fide et di^ectione, quibu^ Nobis tenemini^ quod omni occasion
postposita, and negotiis aliis praetertermissi^ ad Nos Londoniis. etc. Nobiscum
et cum Praedictis Praelatis et Magnatibus nos^ris, quos ibid. v^c r^cimus supe^
praemi^is istis trac^a uri* et Consil. impensuri. Et hoc sicut, Nos et honorem
nostrum ac ve^^rum necnon et communem regni nostri tranquillitatem diligitis,
nullatenus omittatis. The Test of this Writ to the Bishops, bears date of
Winchester (where the former Parliament was held) December. 14. the Writs to the
temporal Lords. Selden^ Titles of Honor p. 72^.724.
Abbots and Peers b^ar date at Woodstock the 24 of this Month; there being no
less than 64 Abbots, 36 Priors, the Master of the Temple, and 4 Dears of
Cathedral Churches summoned thereunto, Paten^. 26 E. 3. part* 1. m. 22. Sel^
Titles of Honor, p. 724.734.
besides Knights and Burgesses now first summoned to that Parliament to settle
peace, most of them being VOLUNTARY SUMMONITI, and not bound of right to come,
not holding of the King by Barony. In this Parl. by judgment of the King and
Lords SENTENTIA EXHAEREDATIONIS IN REGIS ADVERSARIOS FEREBATUR; 'and omnes qui
contra Regem cum Comite Simoni 'steterunt; exhaeredicabantur; quoram terras Rex
suis sideli bus tradidit sine^ mora, pensatis meritis singulorum. The Execution
of this Sentence appears in the Patent Roll of 50 H. 3. m. 10. Schedula. Where
the Lands and Menors of Simon de Montfort and other Rebels adhering to him
against the King, are confiscated to the King, and granted by him to sundry
others there mentioned; as the Lands of the Barons adhering to King Lewis
against King John their native Sovereign, were in like manner forfeited to and
granted by him, Claus. 17 Johan. Regis, dors. 7, 10, 11. By these two last
Parliamentary presidents and proceedings against the Londoners, Simon Montfort,
the Baron^, and a^ other his Confederates whether Peers or Commoners in case of
Treason and Rebellion against the King, to the forfeiting of their ancient
Customs and Liberties, imprisoning and fining of their persons confiscation of
their goods disinheriting them of their Lands and Freeholds, by judgment and
^entence of the King and Lords, it is undeniable, that the King and Lords have
an ancient undoubted right to judge and censure both Peers and Commoners too in
Parliament, in cases of Treason and other misdemeanors there properly triable.

In the year Mat. West. an. 1251. p. 3^3, 344.
1266. King Henry the 3d. and REGIONIS NOBILES assembling together at
Westminster at Christmas, to treat about settling the Peace of the realm after
the accustomed manner, there issued out an Edict against Earl Ferrers, who was
perpetually depri^ed of his Earldom according to the form of his Obligation,
(for his Treason and rebellion against the King) and Edward the Kings son was
put in possession of two Counties (or Earldoms) to wit, Derby and Leicester.
The same year after diverse skirmishes between the disinherited Barons and
persons, and the Kings forces; to settle a firm peace upon the Legates motion
there was another Parliament held at Mat. West. ibidem.
Kenelworth, wherein by the accord and consent of the King and Lords, the
persons disinherited, whose Lands the King had confiscated for their Treason
and Rebellion in the two former Parliaments, were notwithstanding admitted upon
their submission to the King, for reasonable fines and compositions, (reduced
to a certainty by Bishops, and other Lords Commissioners) both to their
Pardons, Liberties, Charters, and Inheritance^, 3. only exc^pted; their fines
not exceeding 3. years value, nor to be under one; without any imprisonment, or
loss of Member^: as you may read at large in the accord between them and the
King at Dictum de Kenelworth.
Kenelworth printed in the Statutes at large. See Par. 50 H. 3. dors. 9. the
Patent Charter and Claus. Ro^s of 50, 51, 52, 53. of Henry the 3. and Claus. 4
E. 1. m. 15. d^rso.

In the Claus. 21 E. 1. m. 3.2. Dorso: plac. Parl. 21. E. 1. pla* 17:
Parliament of 21 E. 1. John Archbishop of York was impleaded and complained
against for excommunicating the Bishop of Durham being juxta latus Regis per
ipsius praecep^um, against the dignity of the King; and for imprisoning William
of Willicon, and John Rowman, two of the Bishops servants, in the Castle of
Durham, being excommunicated by him in his Ecclesiastical Court, for the
Wardship of certain Lands to which the Archbishop pretend^d a Right; the
Custody of which lands being a Temporal matter, belonged not to Ecclesiastical
cognizance. The Archbishop protes^ing, that although he ought not to answer for
this matter in the Court of our Lord the King, yet he was willing to answer:
And thereupon allegeth, that the Bishop of Durham was his Subject and
Suffragan; and shows the whole matter and manner of the proceedings against him
and his Servants in his Court, and justifies the same. To which Richard de
Breelwell who prosecuted for the King, answered, that the Bishop of Durham was
to be considered in a twofold estate, one as a Bishop, the often as an Earl, in
respect of his Temporalties and Tenements: In which l^ter respect he was not
subject to his Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction; to which the Archbishop replied.
After much and ^ong debate, it was adjudged and resolved by the Lords, in
Parliament* that for this offense, the Archbishop should be committed to
prison: and likewise agreed* that in like cases it should ever be so: this his
Excommunication of them in his Ecclesiastical Court for a temporal matter:
being an high contempt against the King, to the disinherison of his Crown and
dignity. Moreover, he was adjudged to make his submission to the King, and to
pay a fine of 4000 maerks to the King for this offense. The Archbishop hereupon
makes his submission; aend after much mediation to the King by his friends, his
imprisonment was remitted, but the King would not abate one penny of his sine,
for the due payment whereof, he was enforced presently to enter into a
Recognisance; and so dismissed. The Record is very long, worthy perusal, but
this is the summary of it.

Anno 1283. Walsingh. Ypodigma^ Neustriae, p. 7 ^ Mat. West. an 1283. p. 371.
after the feast of St. Michael in PARLIAMENTO tento Salopiae, David quondam
frater Lewlini Principis Walliae, per Potentiores Angliae judicatus,
judicialiter condemnatus, ad caudas equorum per municipium Salopiae, tractus et
suspensus est, visceribusque combustis, corpus capite truncatum, and in quatuor
parts est divisum, quibus in Civitatibus Angliae Nobilioribus suspensis, caput
Londoniis super palum fixum est, ad terrorem consimilium proditorum.

Tho. Walsingham, Hist. Angl p, 34, 35. Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 82, 83. Mat.
Westminster. anno 1296, 1297. p. 405.407. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 209. to 220.
Godwins Catalogue of Bishops, p. 125 126. Fox Acts and Monum. p. 310, 311.
Holinshed, p. 301, 302.
King Edward the 1. Ann. 1297. the 14. of his reign holding a Parliament at St.
Edmonds, where there was granted him an 8. part of the goods of Cities and
Boroughs, and a 12. part of the rest of the people: the Clergy by reason of the
Constitution of Pope Boniface made that year, prohibiting under pain of
Excommunication, that no Taxes nor exaction^ should by any means be exacted
from the Clergy by secular Princes, or paid by them of the goods of the Church,
denied the King a Subsidy which he demanded of them to maintain his wars.
Whereupon the King that they might deliberate of a better answer, deferred the
business to another Parliament to be held at London the next day after St.
Hillary, An. 1298. The Parliament then assembling, the Clergy therein persisted
in their denial of a Subsidy, upon the foresaid ground; The King thereupon (by
his Nobles advice) excluded them from his protection, and prohibited any
Lawyers to plead for them in the Exchequer or before any other Regular Judge,
as being unworthy of his peace, and seized all the goods, movables and
immovables of Clergy men found in Lay fees, and confiscated them. To redeem
which Protection many of the Clergy by themselves, and many by Mediators
afterward gave the King a fifth part of their goods. The King finding the
Archbishop more rigid than the rest, seized all his lands, and commanded all
his debts found in the Rolls of the Exchequer to be speedily levied on his
goods: For the same Archbishop by the assent of the Clergy had procured from
the Pope an Inhibition; Ne quis Clericorum Regi respiceret, de bonis Ecclesiae.
The Clergy being thus put out of the Kings Protection, and thereby disabled to
sue, or sit in Parliament, were secluded the Parliament house, the King holding
the Parliament with the Temporal Lords and Commons alone, and making valid,
good Acts and Ordinances therein in this case without the Clergy, as Defense of
the Apolog. pr. 6. c. 2. p. 521, 522.
Bishop Jewel Jurisdiction of Courts f. 19.
M. Crompton, True Difference between Christian Subjection, and Unchristian
Rebellion, part. 3. p. 541. See my Antipathy of the English Lordly Prelacy to
Unity and Monarchy, part 1. p. 50. part 2.511.460.
Dr. Bilson and others affirm; which Dr. Standish averred he might lawfully do
before the Kings Council and a Committee of Lords and Commons, in the
Parliament of 7 H. 8. Keilwayes Reports, f. 184. b. Sir Edward Cook being of
the self^ame opinion in his 4 Institutes, p. 25. citing other Presidents of
this kind to prove, that Acts may be made without the Bishops, as 15 E. 2.
Exilium Hugonis le Dispenser. 3 Rich. 2. c. 3.7 Rich. 2. c. 12.11 R. 2. n. 9,
10, 11. 21 R. 2. n. 9, 10. 1 H. 5. c. 7.6 H. 6. n. 27.

Peter de Gaverston Mat. West. p. 463. Thom. Walsingham, Ypodigm. Neustriae, p.
99, 100. Hist. Angliae, p. 68, 69, 70. to 77. See Holinshed, Giaf^on, Stow,
Speed, Daniel, Sir Richard Baker, and others in Edward S. Henry de Knyghton, de
Eventibus Angliae, l. 3. c. 13, 14*
a de^ oi^ lascivious person* for his misdemeanors, and corrupting Prince
Edward, with whom he was educated from his infancy) in the year 1306 in a
Parliament then held by King Edw. the 1. assensu Communi Procerum, fuerat
exilio penpetuo condemn^tus. This King was no sooner dea^, and the Crown
descending to King Edward the 2. but he presently recalled Gaverston from his
exile, against the will of the Lords, made him Earl of Cornwall, and gave him
the Isle of Man: An. 1307. the very first year of his reign. He being more high
in the Kings favo^r, more glorious in his apparel, and insolent in his
behavior than any other; thereupon, Anno 1309. Regni Proceres et Nobiliores
viden^es se contemni, and Petrum de Gave^on cunctis anteferri, access^runt ad
Regem, humiliter rogantes, ut Baronum suorum vellet consiliis tractare Regni
negotia, quibus a pericu^ sibi imminentibus non solum cautior, sed t^tior esse
possit. Quorum votis facie tenus Rex annuit^ Parliamentum Londini institu^t
fiori, ad quod omnes qui interesse debebant (mark it) venire mandavit. The
Parliament there assembling Anno 1310. Decreto Parliamenti, ad Baronum
instantiam, Petrus de^ Gaver^on in Hyberniam, Exilio relegatur. No sooner was
the Parliament ended, but the King caused special writs to be written and
sealed in his own presence, for recalling Gaverston from his exile, and
restoring him to his Lands; which writs he took into his own hands for a time,
and then sent them to the Sheriffs, with special command to see them duly
executed, under grievous penalties, In these Claus. 5 E. 2. m. 155.
Writs he recites, that Mounsieur Piers de Gaverston Earl of Cornwall, was of
late exiled out of ou^ Realm, against the Laws and Vsages of the said Realm,
which he was bound to keep and maintain by the Oath he took at his Coronation.
For which cause he did out of that common right and justice which was due to
all his Subjects, recall and restore him, without the Lords, against their
wills; as the writs in the Clause Rolls inform us. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 99,
100.
Thomas of Walsingham thus relates the manner of it, and ill consequence
thereof to Gaverstons ruin, in these words. Soluto Parliamento cunctis
gaudenter ad sua disced n^ibus, rex remansit tristis, cogitans and disquirens
cum privato suo concilio, qualiter posset ipsum ab exilio revocare.
Suggestumque fuit (...) q^od si sororei^ Comitis Gloverniae, qui pro ^unc (...)
j^venis ^o^i (...), and sub tu^ Regis, prae^a^o Pet^ (...) co^uge^, posset
ipsum intrepide revocare. (...) hi^s audicis cum omni festinatione missis
nuneil^ ^^cersivit e^m, and inter ipsum and sororem Comicis fecit celebrati
nuptiae, licet multum Gomi^i displicerent. E^i^de Petrus superbiens plus
solito, regni nobiles vilipendit, subsannabat Proceres, mediocresque despexir,
Et quia Rex permiserat sibi faculta^em pene facien^i qu^e vellet, quantum ad ea
quae respiciebant personam regiam, caepit sicut prius thesaurum regis
colligere, and negotiatoribus ultra marini^ accommo lare, non ad usus quidem
regios, sed suos proprios. Qui in tantum expilavit regem, ut non haberet unde
solveret expensas solitas domus suae. Regina vero tantum rebus necessariis
arctab^tur, ut regi Franciae patri suo lachrymabiliter quereretur, honor
debito se privatam. Barons igitur considerantes, quod eorum tollerantia Petro
malignandi praestabat au^atiam, domino regi denunciaverunt assensu communi, ut
vel dictum Petrum a sua propelleret comitiva, articulosque provisos effectui
manciparet, vel ips^ certe in eum tanquam perjurum insurgerent. Durus videbatur
hic sermo regi quia Petro carere nescivit, sed plus periculi cernebat emergere,
si petitionibus Proce^um non ob^emperaret. Petrus igitur abjurat regnum* regis
plus ^ermissione quam beneplacito addita a Baronibus conditions, quod si de
caetero posset in veniri in Anglia vel aliqua terra regi subiecta, caperetur,
et velut hostis public^s damnaretur. Igitur sub praemura condition da^o sibi
conductu, Angliae regnum I^gons desernit and Franciam est ingressus. Quo adito
Rex Francorum jussit suis ut eum caperent, si quo modo possent, and diligente^
cus^odirent, n^ dire^ in Angliam, and Proceres sicut prius turbaret, and
filt^m. Petrus de ^is praemonitus fugit in Fland^iam, ibi quae^iturus requiem
nec invenit. Tandem cum suis consortibus a^ienigenis redivit in Angliam, de
amicitra confisus Comitis Gloverniae cujus sororem duxerat in uxorem. Parum
ante festum natalis domini, regis se presentavit ob^utibus, qui prae gaudio sui
adventus, juramenta, pacta, promissa, negligens, tanquam coeleste munus
hilariter suscepit eum, and secum detinuit cum familia sua tota.

Anno 1311. post natale rumore vulgato de Petri reversione, regni Magnates and
plebei conturbati sunt. Qui necessitate ducti, elegerunt sibi Thomam de
Lancastria in ducem et defensorem, ut periculis consulerent and malis futuris.
Nobiliores vero regni de communis de^reti sententia, miserunt honorabiles
domino regi nuncios exorantes, ut vel dictum Petrum eis traderet, vel ut
ordinatum fuerat ipsum regnum evacuare juberet. Rex vero sinistro ductus
consilio, Baronum supplicationes parvipendens, ab Eboraco recessit ad Novum
Castrum. Magnates proinde sub omni celeritate ad Novum Castrum iter arripuere.
Quod cum Rex audisset, quasi proscriptus aut exul, fugit cum dicto Petro
Tynemutham, et inde Scardeburgiam ubi habebatur castrum regale, ubi praecepit
Castellanis, ut custodiam Petri susciperent and castellum victualibus
instaurarent, rege se alias transferente, nec opem far valente, quin
caperetur and reduceretur usque ad villam de Dadington. Ubi Comes Warwici,
Guido de bello campo fecit eum decollari tanquam legum regni subversorem and
publicum proditorem; Communi Iudicio. Which he more amply relates in his
History of England, p. 69. to 77. Here we have judgment of banishment given
against Gaverston by the Lords in Parliament 3. several times* the 1. whiles a
Commoner; the two later whiles an Earl, as an Enemy to the Realm and public
Traitor; and a Sentence of death denounced against him, in case he returned;
which was accordingly executed on him by the common Sentence of the Lords; A
Convincing proof of their Jurisdiction in criminal Causes, both over Commoners
and Peers. His second banishment by the Lords, was ratified by a Bill, (as the
Spencers was) to which the Commons gave their Assent, (as they did to two Acts
in the Parliament of 7 Edward the 2. printed in Totles Magna Charta, part. 2.
f. 43, 44. Ne quis occasionetur pro reditu; as also, pro morte Petri de
Gaverston, made by the Grant and Assent of the King, Archbishops, Bushops,
Abbots, Priors, Earls and Barons, ET TOUTE LA COMMVNALTIE de nostre Royalm;) By
which Bill his Lands were all forfeited and give^ to the King; as appears by
Claus. 1.2 E. 2. m. 5. where Hugh de Audeley the younger, and Margaret his
wife, petitioned; A nostre Seigneur la Roy and son Counscil, PRELATES, COUNTS
and BARONS de la terre: The Petition was for the Earldom of Cornwall after the
death of Peter de Gaverston, to whom it was given in general tail, Margaret
being his daughter and heir; because THE* GREAT CHARTER wills, that after the
death of a Baron, his heir shall have his heritage and marriage; and the Statute
of Westminster 2. wills, That heirs in tail shall not be prejudiced by the
deed, fine or feofment of their Ancestors* and the GREAT CHARTER also wills,
That no man shall be outed of his freehold, without the award and judgment of
the Law of the Land. Afterward upon debate of this Petition, pro eo quod
recordatum fuit by the LORDS AND COMMONS, that it had been AGREED BY THEM, that
all things given by the King to Gaverston and Margaret, should be revoked; per
quod in hoc Parliamento modo per praefatos Praelatos, Comite^, Barons, et
totain Communitatem Regni cousideratum est, that the Earldom and all the rest
of his Land^ should remain in the King: that all Charters of it should be
repealed, all enrolments cancelled; and quod est adjudicatum intretur ad
Scaccarium, et ad utrumque C^ri^m, there to be enrolled also. And there is a
writ directd to the Treasurer and Barons and Chief Justices of both Benches to
inrol it, in this Roll. This judgment being by way of Bill, in pursuance of
the former Bill for his attainder, had the Commons assent thereto, as well as
the Lords, though the Peti^ion here was directed only to the King and Lords,
for restitution, not to the Commons* who could not be Gaverstons proper Judges
in Parliament, being a Peer, but only by way of Bill of Attainder.

In the 15 year of King Ed. 2. the two Sir Hugh Spencers Father and Son, were
articled against, impeached and condemned of High Treason by the Lords in
Parliament, and exiled by their judgment, without the Prelates or Commons, who
only consented to the Act for their banishment after the judgment given, of
which at large before; Exilium Hugonis le Dispenser 15 E. 2. Totles Magna
Charta, f. 52, 53, 54. Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 91, 92. Henry de Knyghton de
Event. Angl. l. 3. c. 14. col. 2539.
to which I shall here annexe the Arricles of their impeachment being very
memorable.

Alhonnour de Dieu and de saint esglise, et de nostre seignour le roy, et au
profit de luy, et de son royalm^, and a peace de quiet maintenir en son
people, et pur meinteynment de lestate de la Corone, luy monstrent Praelates,
Coun^z, et Barons, et les autres Pieres de la terre, and common du royalme
contresir Hugh le Despenser le fitz, et Sir Hugh le Despenser le Pier, que come
le dit sire Hugh le Despenser le fitz au Parliament Deverwike fuit nosme et
assentu destre en lossice du Chamberlain nostre seignor le roy de servir en cel
office, come afferoit: An quel parliament fuit auxi assentu, que certeins
Prelates et ^u res Grandes du roialme demorerent pres de roy par s^isons de
lan, pur meulx counseiler nostre seignor le roy, sans queux null gross bosoigne
ne se deveroit fair: le dit sir Hugh le fitz attreit a luy sir Hugh son pier,
que ne fuit nient assentu ne accord en parliament, a demourer ensi pres de roy,
and enter eux deux, acroachant a eux royal power sur le roy and fes ministers,
and le guyment de son royalme, a dishor our du roy, emblemisement de sa corone,
et destruction du royalme, des grandes et du people, et sesoient les maluesiees
des^us escriptes en compassant de^^oigner le coer nostre seignour le roy des
Piers de la terre pur avoir eux soul governance de la terre.

En primes que sir Hugh le Dispenser le fitz feusi coruce verse le roy, et sur
ceo coruce fist un bille, sur la quel bille, il voillet auoir en aliance de sir
John Gyffarde de Brymmesfeld, sir Richard de Greye, et dautre davoir mesne le
roy par aspertee de fair sa volunte; issent que en luy ne temist mye, que il
ne ^e eu^t fair, ^a tenure de la bille sensuit sous escript.

Homage and serement de ligeance est pluis par reason de la corone, que per
reason de person le roy, and pluis se lie a la corone que a la person, and ceo
piere que avaunt que ^estate de la corone soit descendu, null ligeance est a la
person regardant. Don't si le roy par case ne se meisne par reasone en droit de
la corone, les leiges sont lies per s^rement fait a la corone de remeuer le
roy, et le state de la corone par reason: and au^rement ne serroit le serement
tenus. Ore fait a demander coment lem doit amesner le roy, ou par suite de ley,
ou par aspertee? par suite de ley ne luy poet home pas redresser: ^ar il navera
pas juge, si ceo ne soit depart le roy. En quel case si la volunte le roy ne
soit accordant a reason, si naveroit il forsque error maintenue and confirm.
Don't il covient pur le serement lauuer, et quant le roy ne voet chose redresser
and oustre que est pur le common people malueis et damageous pur la corone, a
judger est que la chose soit ousle par aspertee, que il est lie par ^on
serement de governer son people and ses lieges, and ses liege, ^ont lies de
govern en eide de luy, and en defaut de luy.

Et auxint, par lour covin and malveistz mesneront and male conseileront nostre
seignour le roy, si que a sa presence, quel il doit de son devoir monstrer a
les grandz, et a son people, and a les graces and droit que eux luy requeront
responder ne luy fil^ point forsque a la volunte and a la taille les ditz sir
Hugh, and sir Hugh, en oustance le roy d^ son devoir contre son serement, et
les ^ueurs des grandes et du people de son seignour liege.

Auxint, mesnes ceux par lour male conueigne ne suffrerent pas les grands du
realm, ne les bons counselors le roy parler ne approcher le roy pur luy bien
counseyler, ne le roy parler a eux, et a lour volunte, et solone lo^ taille, et
chose que ils voillent in rebotaun^es les grandes et les bons counseilors le
roy de lour bone volunte ^uers lour seignour liege, et acroachaunt a eux royal
power* maistree, and soveraigntie sur la person le roy, a grand dishonor et
peril du roy, and de la corone, and de son royalm.

Auxint mesmes ceux pur attainder a lour malvesiees, and covesties, et
disheritance des grandz de la terre, et destruction du people, ousleront bones
et cove^ables ministers que ^urent mis par assent, et ministrent au res faux
and malueys de lour covine, que ne suffrent droit estre fait, et viscountz,
escheitour, conestables des chastelx, et autres en les offices du roy, nient
covenables pur le roy, ne pour le people, and fesont mettre Justices, nient
conusant en ley de la terre, doier et terminer les chooses tounchant les grandes
et le people du royalme, si come le dit sir Hugh le pere, sir Raufe de Basset,
sir Rafe Camoys, and sir John Juge, et autres lour alies et jures especialment:
and par covine de tielz ministres, and lour faux procurours and fautours
sauxement fesoient enditer par faux jurrours de lour alliance les Peers de la
terre, cest a scauoir le Count de Hereford, mon sir Gyffard de Brumfelde, et
mon sir Robert de Mouchant, et autres bons gentz, pur couetise davoir lour
terres, and issint eeo que denst estre a la maintenance de la peax, and des
bons, and punishment des malueis, mesneront a disheritance des grandes et
destruction del people.

Auxint, fauxement and malueisement counseileront nostre seignor le roy daler
oue chiualx and et as arms verse les parties de Gloucester, et luy sierent
chiuaucher et les gent arms en cells parties a cour sur les bons gentz contre
la form de la grande chartre, et lesgard des Piers de la terre: and issent par
lour faux et malueis counsel, voloient avoir mou guerre en la terre, a
destruction de saint esglise et de people pur lour querel propre.

Auxint, lou le count de Herford, et le seignor de wygmore par commandment de
roy assign dalier de guerre sur Thlewelyn Bten, que feust leave encounter le roy
en Glamorgan, ant come les terres furent en mayn de roy par la morte le count
de Glove, le dit Thlewelyn se rendist a les ditz seignours a la volunte le roy
en sa grace, et ses seignours luy par mittrent bone grace, et sur tiel
condition le recovererent, et luy liverent a nostre seignour le roy. Et nostre
seignour le roy en tiel form luy receust, et puis come les ditz seignours
feurent ho^s de la terre, les ditz Sir Hugh le fitz, e^ Sir Hugh le piere, que
avoient ^croche royal po^ar, sicome de suis est, pristent le dit Thlewelyn, et
luy mesnerent a Cardiff, puis que Sir Hugh le fitz feust seisies illonques de
sa pur party, et par lour coveigne en parnant jurisdiction lou null est en cel
case ne poient par reason avoir, et luy firent illonques: treiner et pender,
decoller, et quartroner felonousement pur chose fair entemps le roy Henry. Et
ensi purparnant roial poyar et jurisdiction, que appendant a la Corone en
disheritance de la Corone, et a deshonour nostre seignor le roy, et des dites
seigneure de Hertford et de Mortimer, et en malveis exemple et graunde peril,
par case en temps a venir.

Et auxint male counseilant nostre seigneur le roy de prender en sa mayn les
terres et les chateux Sir Hugh Dundle le fitz: et le foriugerent de ses terres
sans du process solonques la lee de la terre, pur covetise davoir acroche au dit
Sir Hugh le Dispenser le fits certeins terres. Et par autre faux compassements
compassa davoir les terres mon Sir Roger Dammorie pour avoir atteynt par tielx
et faux compa^sementz al entire del Count de Gloucestre, en disheritance des
piers de la terre.

Auxint la ou nostre seigneur le roy, par ses letters patentz desous son grande
seal en plain Parliament a West^ grant a Count de Warwike, que si mort luy
avenust, que les executours puissent avoir ses tertes, tanque al age son heir:
la quel grant puis la mort du dit Count le roy confirma a son parliament a
Nicolne, al request et par assent de piers de la terre, le dit Sir Hugh le
Despenser le pier, par meintenance, abbette, et procurement le dit Sir Hugh son
fitz, fist nostre feigneur le roy repeller ce le fait sans encheson, et baille
au dit Sir Hugh le pier. pur son propte profit, la guard de mesmes celes
terres, et issint d fesantz par lour malveis counseil ceo que le roy lour avoit
grant en ses parlementes par son bon counseile, et par assent des piers de la
terre, a deshonour du roy, et encountre droit et raison.

Auxint, mesmes ceux nount pas suffertz nostre seigneur le roy prender
reasonable fines des piers de la terre, et autres que sont enter son fee, come
ad este use eins ces ^eurs: Mes pur covetise dattendre a tielx terres, par
poiar roial a eux accroche, ount sait metter en teiels bosoigne non dues
empechementes, surmettantes la terre estre forfair, come de Mounsire John de
Mombray pur les terres de Gower, et des autres, a damage et dishonor nostre
seignour le roy, et country la loy de la terre, en desheritance des grandes et
des auters du Royalm, ensi feisant le roy veer en parliament contre son serement.

Auxint, pur lour malveis covetise, et par poiar roial a eux acroche, ne
susterent nostre seignor le roy doier, ne droit fair' as grandes de la terre,
sur la demonstrance que ilz fesoient a luy, pur luy et pur eux de la
disheritance de la corone et de eux, touchant les terres que furent as
templers. Et issint par yoiar roial a eux accroche ont ils mesne nostre
seignour le roy, son counseil et ses prelatz, que des chooses touchant eux ou
lour alies, ount emprise et embrace par eux que droit ne poet estre fait
forsquea lour volunte, et a damage et a dishonor de nostre dit seigneur, et
peril de son serement, et dishinheritaunce, et destruction de plusours autres
grandes du people de son royalme. Et auxint de eslues as evesque abbes, et
priours, que devoient de droit estre resceux de nostre seignour le roy, lou ils
sont en due manner estues, ne poient approcher a nostre seignour le roy, ne one
luy parler de querer sa grace, tanque ils avoient fait sine et fret Sir Hugh le
fitz a sa volunte.

Ne null que eust grant aquere de nostre seignour le roy, ne poet a null grant
atteinder avantque ilz avoient faitfine a luy. Estre ceo lou John de Lacchelegh
et autres fuerent agardes a la prisone pur un trespass que ils avoient fait a la
dame de Merk, a damag'. de la did dame de M. Centz marcz, don't ils furent
atteintz devant mon Sir Robert de Middyngle er ses compaignons Justices
assigns a oier et terminer cel temps, cel trespass, et le dit John feust en la
prison de Colcestre par la guard suisdit, Sir Hugh le fitz accrochantz a luy
roial poiar amesna le di^ John* horse de la prison, contre leye de la te^re,
eius que il avoir fait gree a la dit dame des damages avantditz, et luy fist
vender sa terre a luy, et ^ever sur ceo un fine.

Claus: 16 E. 2. m. 5. There is this memorable case recorded. The King being at
Bishops. Thorpe near York; held a Council with his Lords (diverse of which are
there named) concerning the Truce with Scotland: inter qu^s Nobiles, Hen. de
Bellamont Baro, and de Magno et secreto Concillo ipsi Domino Regi juratus,
vocatus fuit, and ibidem venit. Being there pre^ed by the King to give his
advice herein, quodam motu excessius, and animo quasi irreverents dicto Domino
Regi saepe respondit: quod sibi consulere noluit in hac part. Whereupon the
King commanded him thence: Upon which he went out of the Council, and said: He
had rather be absent, than there. Upon which contemptuous carriage and words
consideration being had by the Lords and Council, and by all the Judges and
Barons of the Exchequer, being there amongst others (to wit, as assistants) in
regard he was sworn, and had taken the Oath of a privy Counselor to the King,
being called in again, Committitur Scalae Prisonae pro contemptu and
inobedientia praedictis. After which he was let to mainprise; and a truce being
there concluded with the Scots; thereupon the writs ad arma, etc. were revoked,
that were formerly i^sued to the Tenants by Escuage and Knights service.

In the Henry de Knyghton de Event. Angl. l. 3. c. 16. col. 2255. Walsingham
H^st. Angliae, p. 100. 101. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 111. Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 18.
dorso.
Parliament held at Winchester, Ann. 2 E. 3. Edmund Earl of Kent the Kings
Uncle, by the instigation and power of Roger Mortimer Earl of March, was
arrested, impeached, condemned and execut^d, for conspiring and attempting to
rescue his Brother King Edward the 2. and saying he was alive, after the time
he was murdered; which Treason, was said to be manifestly proved by Letters
found about him, and by his own voluntary confession before the Coroner
(recorded in Walsingham, and the Clause Roll of 4 E. 3.) which Letters and
confession were openly read in Parliament; pur que oue le assent des Countz,
Barons et autres Grantz et Nobles ^n mesme le Parliament, par agard dicelle,
estoiet le dit Count come Nostre Trayture et Traiture de Royalm adjudge a la
mort: as the King himself recites in his Writs and Letters to all Sherifs.
Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 16. dorso; Demorte Edmundi nuper Comitis Cantii publicanda;
commanding them to publish this as the cause and manner of his death, and to
arrest all those that said, King Edward the 2. was alive, or that the said Earl
of Kent was otherwise put to death. So that by this record, being a Peer; he
was adjudged to death only by the Earls, Barons, Great men and Nobles in
Parliament, without the Commons, not named in this record. And therefore
Cottoni Posthuma, p. 349.
the Kings Letter to the Pope in 4 E. 3. relating the proceedings and judgment
against the Earl in these words, if truly recited, Comitibus Magnatibus,
Baronibus, and aliis de COMMUNITATE dicti regni ad PARLIAMENTUM illud
congregatis, injunximus, ut super hiis DISCERNERENT ET JUDICARENT quid rationi
and justitiae conveni et, habentes prae oculis solum deum; qui eum CONCORDI ET
UNANIMI SENTENTIA tanquam reum criminis laesae Majestatis, ADJUDICARENT ejus
sententiae etc. Objected by Sir Robert Cotton, to prove the Commons to have a
share and voice in judicatures in Parliament, and that not in the case of a
Commoner but this great Peer; must needs be understood of an Attainder by Bill,
to confirm the judgment formerly given against him by the Earls, Barons, and
Lords alone in this Parliament, as in the case of the two Spencers, not long
before; not of his original sentence, given only by the Lords, Barons, and
other Great men and Nobles, as the Clause Roll and all Writs to the Sheriffs
record. Which the Parliament Roll in 4 E. 3. n. 11, 12. does likewise intimate,
where Earl Edmonds eldest Son, and Margaret Countess of this Earl of Kent, by
their Petitions prayed, that THE RECORD (or Bill) against the said Earl might
be reversed for errors therein appearing, and he to be restored to blood and
lands of his Father, and she to her Dower, which was granted and ordered by
Parliament, saying to the King the wardship of the same during his minority;
and thereupon it was further enacted, That no Peer of the land, nor other
persons should be impeached for the death of the Earl of Kent, but only the
said Mortimer and 3 more (then impeached and condemned of High Treason for his
murder as well of the deposed Kings) and that his Countess should have her
Dower, as Claus. 5 E. 3. part. 1. m. 24. assures us.

In the Parliament of 4 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 14. 4 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 3, 4.13.
Cooks 3. Inst. p. 7.
Edward the eldest Son of Edward Earl of Arundel, condemned and beheaded
without any legal trial by his Peers, by Roger Mo^timers power and procurement,
Anno 18 E. 2. petitioned that he might be restored to his Fathers blood, lands,
and goods considering the said Earl was unduly put to death, See Hen. de
Knyghton, de Event. Angl. l. 3. c 14. col. 2549. Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 106.
being not tried by his Peers, according to the Law and the grand Charter, But
for that the said Attainder was afterward confirmed by Parliament, he amended
his Petition, and prayed in such wise to be restored of the Kings mere grace;
Whereupon he was restored to all his Fathers lands, and to Arundel Castle,
saving to the King all such lands as were given to this Earl by King Ed. 1.
whereupon he did homage to the King in Parliament, and had livery of the king
of all his lands, per assensum of the Lords; as i^ recorded in rot. Fin. An. 3
E. 3. m. 14. Claus. 4 E. 3. in dorso, and Claus. 5 E. 3. part. 1. m. 2, 3.

In this Parliament of 4 E. 3. n. 6. An Exact Abridge-of the Records, p. 6.8.
The Lords claim to be JUDGES OF THEIR PEERS IN THAT and FUTURE PARLIAMENTS, in
cases of Treason, etc. And n. 1. Roger Mortimer Ear of March, who had formerly
condemned and beheaded other Peers, without any legal trial by their Peers, and
deposed, murdered King Edward the 2. was by divine retaliation arrested at the
Parliament held at Nottingham by the Kings command, then sent Prisoner to the
Tower, impeached, attainted, condemned and executed himself as a Traitor,
without any hearing, or personal defense, BY THE LORDS AND PEERS AS JUDGES OF
PARLIAMENT by the Kings assent: The Articles of his Treasons, Felonies, and
other misdemeanors enter in that Parliament Roll scarce legible now were read
before the Lords against him and other of his companions. The Articles against
him are thus related by Walsingham Ypodig. Neustriaet p. 111, 112. Hist.
Angliae, p. 112.4. E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 1.
Walsingham. Causae quae imponebantur eidem, prove accepimus, istae fuere,
writes Walsingham, Prima causa, quod fuit consentiers more Regis Edwardi in
castro de Berkley. Secundo impositum ei fuit, quod ipse impedivit honorem Regis
et regni apud Stannyparke, ubi Scoti fugerunt, qui capi and intersici
potuerunt. Tertio, quod ipse accepit 20 millia mercarum a Scotis, and illas
tunc permisit evadere, and turpem pacem postmodum inter Scotos, et Regem ju
venem sieri procuravit; et super hoc Chartam Regis sieri fecit eisdem. Et etiam
illud vile matrimonium contractum inter sororem Regis et David filium Roberti
de Brus, consummari consuluit and procuravit. Quarto, quod male consumpsit
totam pecuniam in the sarris patris hujus Regis, et Domini Hugonis de Spencer
inventum, et omnia bona regni, postquam Angliam regina intravit, suae
dispositioni subjecit, ita quod ipse and Regina abundabant, and Dominus Rex
egebat. Quinto, quod appropriavit sibi custodias, et maritagia nobiliora per
totam Angliam. Et quod fuit malus Consiliarius Regis and Reginae matris, et
nimis secretus cum ea, ut d^ aliis taceamus. These with other Articles
mentioned in the Parliament Roll being read; thereupon, Les ditz COUNTZ,
BARONS, ET PIERS, COME JUGGES DU PARLIAMENT (as the Parliament Roll it self
recites) per assent du Roy in mesme le Parliament agarderent et ajugerent, que
le dit Roger COME TRAITOR ET ENEMY du ROY, et du ROYALME, fuist tr^yne et
pendis. Upon which sentence, without being called to answer, the Earl, Marshal,
by the Kings and Lords command, assisted with the Mayor and Sherifs of London,
and the Constable of the Tower, executed him the Thursday next after the first
day of the Parliament. Ubi mortis excepit sententiam trastus and suspensus apud
Elmes, super communi furca latronum, as Walsingham relates.

The Articles of this Regicides impeachment being very memorable, and somewhat
larger than those in Walsingham, scarce legible in the Parliament Roll of 4 E.
3. I shall here present you with, together with the manner of his apprehension
and judgment, out of De Event. Angl. l. 3. c. 16. col. 2556.2557, etc.
Henry de Knyghton. King Edward perceiving the great malice and cruelty of
Queen Isabel his Mother and Mortymer, that they occasioned many seditions,
favored the Scots to the great dishonor of the King and Kingdom, destroyed
the King her Husband: Et quanta mala eorum consilio and auxilio exercebantur in
regno, qu ^ntaque mala opera eorum somento vel^bantur, by the secret advice of
his friends, resolved to separate them from one another, to prevent greater
mischiefs. Nam in tantum invalescebant in terra, quod totum regnum in
periclitando labi videbatur. Deinde Rex tenuit CONCILILM SUUM apud Notyngham in
quindena Michaelis cum pene omnibus Magnatibus regni. In quo Rex saniori
consilio de eorum fraud et malitia salu^r^us edoctus, vidensque periculum tam
praeteritum quam in posterum ^am in praesenti per dictos Isabellam et le
Mortymer evidenter imminens, graviter in cord condolens suscepit; sicque die
Veneris in crastino sancti Lucae Rex cum electa comitiva in obscuro noctis,
perr^xit per quendam viam subterraneam de villa Notynghamiae usque in
castellum, et venit ad cameram matris suae Isabel^ae, et invenit ibi prope eam
in alia camera Rogerum de Mortymer, et Episcopum Lincolniensem Henricum. Et
statim Rex jussit Rogerum apprehendi, et in securam custodiam usque in
crastinum poni. In crastino fecit apprehendere omnes suos adhaerentes per^ tam
villam dispersos Et statim misit omnes Londonias, videlicet le Mortymer, Et
duos filios ejus, scilicet Galfridum and Edmundum milises, et Dominum Oliverum
de Byngam, Dominum Simonem de Berforde. Et in captione Rogeri Mortymere occisus
est Dominus Hugo de Tryplyngton miles, et senescallus familiae regis per dictum
Rogerum Mortymer in ingressu regis in camera eorum. Isabella matter regis ad
udicata est perdere omnes terras suas, et cum difficultate evas^t dampnationem
ad mortem, eo quod er at matter regis, et ob reverentiam regis dilata est
sententia. Et ordinatum est singulis annis caperet de cista domini regis ad
sustentationem suam tria millia mercarum, et mane^et in uno certo loco ubi rex
pro ea disponere vellet. Magnates regui imposuerunt contra Rogerum Mortymer
Articulos sequentes.

4 E. 3. n. 1. 28 E. 3. n. 9, 10
Primerment, que parla on ordenee fuist al parliment de Londrez proscheyne apres
la coronnement nostre seignour le roy, que quatres Eveskes, quatre Contes, et
vj. Barons dustent estre pres du roy pour la conseyller, issint que tote foitz
quatre y fuissent; Cest assavoir une Eveske, une Conte, et dieux Barons, a
meynez, and que nule gross bosoigne soit faite sanz lour assent, and que
chescu^e respondist dez ces fetz pur son temps: la dit Roger nyent eyant
regard al dit assent, accrocha a luy real pouare and le government del realm
sur lestate le roye, ousta et sist oustre et mettre ministres en loustele le
roy et aillours par my la realm a sa volunte de ceux que surent de son acorde.
Et mist John Wyarde and altres entour le roy despyer cez faitz et c^z ditz,
issint que le roy fuist en tiele manner envyrone de cez enmys qil poet riene
fair de sa volunte, mes auxi come une homme de south altre guard.

Ensy, par la ou le piere nostre seigniour le roy feust a Kenilworthe par
ordinancez dezpieres de la terre a demorer illoeques a ces estres, pur estre
servi come afferoit un tiele seigniour, le dit Roger par real pouare a luy
accroche ne lessa tant qil leust devers luy a sa volunte. Et ordyna qil fuist
mande au chastiel de Berkeleye, ou par luy et par les sons f^ist fausement,
traytouresment et selonesment mordre et tue.

Ensy, le dit Roger fist defendre par brief le roy souz le grante seal, que
nule venist al parliment de Salisbury a force et arms, sor quant qil poet
forfere devers le roy. Et la vynt le dit Roger et autres de sa covygne a force
et arms al dit parliment contre la dite defense. Par quoy plusours de la
terre, come le Conte de Lancastre et autres sachans la manner de sa venue,
nevyndrent point. Et come par la ou lez prelatz estoyent assemblez al dit
parliment en une meason pur counseiller sour lez bosoignez le roy, et de
realm, le dit Roger debrusa les eos de la measone ove gentz dez armez sour lez
ditez prelatez, et lez manassa de vye er de membre sil^ fuissent si hardys a
dire oue fair riene encontre sa volunte et ordinancez. Et en mesme le
parliment fist tant, que le roy luy fist conte de la March, et luy dona
plusours terres et tenementz en disheritance de sa coronne. E puis mena le dit
Roger e ceux de sa covygne nostre seigniour le roy armez sur le contede
Lancastre et autres piers de la terre tanque a Wincestre, la one yls estoient
venancez devers le roy, au dit Parliament de Salesbury. Parquay le dit conte et
lez autres pieres de la terre pur eschewere le peril que poet avenir, a la
reverence du roy, departirent et aillerent envers lour pays, dolons qils ne
poyent ove lour seigniour lige parlere ne conseiller come ils deveront.

Ensy, le dit Roger fist le roy chivacer forciblement sur le conte de Lancastre
et autres piers de realm que estoient ordeignes davoyr estre pres du roy pur
luy conseiller. Et en tant les enchasa par force, que le dit conte et autres
grantez del realm que voil rent profiteau roy, se mistre^t a la grace le roy,
sauve a eux vie et membre, et qils ne fuissent disherites ne al trop grant
ranson; Mes ils furent mys au trop grante ranson que lours terres vendront a
tous joure. Et les autres fit enchacer horse de la terre a seiser lours terres,
contra la form de la Grante Charte et leye de terre.

Ensy, par la oue le dit Roger sa^oit biene que le piere nostre seigniour le
roy est oit morte e enterre, il par altiez de sa covygne en desceyvance manner,
fist entendre al Edmund conte de Kent, qil fuist en vye: par quey le dit conte
fuist moult desirous de savoire la verire. Et fist espier par to^ez lez bonez
voiez qil savoit, tanke le dit Roger, par real powere a luy accroche, fist
prendre al parliment de Wincestr^ le dit cont le Kent, procuta qil fuist
iilocques mys a la mort.

Ensy le dit Roger fist le roy doner a luy sez enfantz e a sez alies
chastieles, viles, manners, et francheses en Engleterre, Irland, et Gales en
decre^e de la coronne.

Ensy le dit Roger en disceivaunce manner fist les chivalers dez contez gratier
au dit De Winchester.
parl: al roy de chescune vile Dengliterre que respont par quatre, et le provost
en air vne homme de arms a lour costages en sa guerre de Gascoyne par une an;
la quele charge le dit Roger avoit compass a tourner ceo avoyr en autre
profit pur luy et autres de sa covygne, en destruction de people.

Ensy, le dit Roger par real ponare a luy accroche fist maundre lettres suth la
grante chartre au plusours grantz chivalers et altres, qe ils venesont al roy
queu part qil fust, et a lour venue le fist chargere qils se addre^ent daler en
Gascoyne, ou qils feissent fyn oue ranson a sa volunte; Dez quenz ascunez
fyrent fyn grievous, et tout le pluis est venuz au profit le dit Roger.

Ensy, le dit Roger fausement et maliciousment fist le discord enter le piere
nostre seigniour le roy et la reyne sa compaigne, et sa fist entendre, que si
ele out venuz a luy, qil la out tue de cotele, ou altre arm, ou autre manner
de mordre, et par tiele cause, et autres sotilletes si fist il tant que la
reyne ne vint pas devers son seigniour, al grant dishonor du roy et de tote
realm, et damage par cas en temps avenir, qe de dieu deffende.

Ensy, le dit Roger sy ad pris er faite prendre devers luy et les autres de sa
company de tresore le roye a sa volunte sans noumbre en deners et jeueux, en
destruction du roy; issint qe le roy and rien de paiere pur son viure.

Ensy, le dit Roger si ad fait prendte devers luy et devers sez alliez lez xx
mill marz quex sont venus horse dez Scozce pur la form de la pees, et rien
est venue al profit du roy.

Ensy le dit Roger cez prises par my le realm auxi come roy et seigniour de
tutte, et enter luy et lez autres de la covigne merent al double del gentz et
chivalez en la company le roy qe le roy ne fist, en destruction del people,
sans fair payment altre qe a lour volunte.

Ensy, le dit Roger par son real pouare fist le roy, granter a la montance del
CC. chivalers a ceoux Dirland que avount ruez lez grantes et autres de la terre
que furent de la foy le roy en cellez pa^. P^r la ou le roy devoit pluis ost
par reason avoyre vengee loure mort de pardonee contre form de parliament.

Ensy le dit Roger compassa devoyre destrut lez noryes le roy et lez secrettez
le roy de queuz il se pluis a^ya. Et susmyt al roy en presence la reyne sa
miere et dez eveskes de Nichole et de Salusberye et autres de counsel le roy
qe lez avanditez secretez le roye luy exciterent destre la covygne dez enmys
par de lay, en destruction de sa miere et del avaunt dite Roger; La quela chose
il affirma tant sour le Roy que le parole le Roye ne poet creu. Et cele
vendurdi deinz la nute qils estoient prisez, a la myt nyt suant, donke pur lez
caulez susescriptes et molt dez autrez chooses que ne sont pas ore a dyre touz,
si fist le dit roy prendre en la manner par eide et avisement dez priveez et
nuriicz come il vous ad souent monstres.

Tunc propter causas subscriptas et multas alias quae jam non sunt recitandae
ad praesens, Rex praecepit Comitibus, Baronibus, et caeteris Magnatibus regui,
justum judicium far super praedicto Rogero Mortymere. Qui omnes adinvicem
consulentes venerunt, dicentes, quod omnes et singuli articuli superius de
dicto Rogero attestati very sunt et notorii, et omni populo terrae cogniti, et
praecipue articulus tangens mortem regis apud Berkeleye; unde respiciatum est
et adjudicatum, quod praedictus Rogerus, ut proditor et inimicus regis et
regni, distrastus sit et suspensus tertio kalend. Septembris apud Londonias.
Cujus corpus duobus diebus et duabus noctibus nudum pendebat super furcas.

By these Articles it is evident, 1. that it was adjudged high Treason in him
to murder King Edward the 2. after his resignation of, and deposition from the
Crown, by his own and a Parliaments consent; How much more then to destroy,
murder him, when an actual lawful King, when never deposed, without and
against his Parliaments consents, and contrary to their resolutions,
protestations, Covenants, Oaths? 2ly. That to come with armed forces to any
Parliament, to overawe, force, menace, terrify thereby, and drive away any of
the Members thereof from it and compel the rest to comply with, or not to
oppose what this armed party propounds (or to put any Nobleman to death) is a
high and treasonable offense; That Lords and other Members may justly depart
from Parliament without doing any thing, when there is any such force upon
them: Let Lilburn and others guilty of such Treasons sadly consider them, and
take timely warning by this president.

In the An Exact Abridgemen. p 85, 86.
Parliament of 28 E. 3. n. 7. to 14. Roger Mortimer of Wigorn, Cousin and heir
to this executed Roger, required by his Petition, that the Act of his Attainder
in the Parliament of 4 E. 3. n. 1. might be examined, and for manifest Errors
therein reversed; whereupon the record was brought into Parliament, and all the
Articles, Proceedings and Circumstances of his Judgment at large recited.
Which being read, it was alleged, that the judgment was defective and erroneous
in all points (not for the substance of his Charge) for that the said Earl was
put to death and disinherited, (by the Lords, as Judges o^ Parliament, by the
Kings command) Sans nulle accusement, et sans estre mesne au juggement, au en
respons, without any accusation, and without being brought to Judgment, or to
answer: for which causes it was prayed, That the said Statute and Judgment
might be reversed and annulled. For which causes, Nostre Seignour le Roy, et
les dits Prelates, Prince, Duks, Countz et Barons, per accord des Chivalers des
Counts, et des ditz Comunes, re^ellent et anientissent, et pur erroigne et
irr^t ajudgent les Records et Iuggements suis dits. This Judgment (whose
reversal is also recited in Claus. 28 E. 3. m. 7. and 29 E. 3. rot. Parl. n.
29.) though given in Parliament, being erroneous and void in Law, because given
without any lawful accusation, trial, answer and arraignment of the party,
against the Great Charter and Law of the Laud; which ought to be observed, not
violated by the Lords or Parliament it self in their Judicial proceedings.

In this Parliament of 28 E. 3. ^. 13. Richard Earl of Arundel by Petition
showed; that in the Parliament of 1 E. 3. touching the attaind^ of Edmund Earl
o^ Arundel his Father, a Statute was made without forfeiture, albeit he was put
to death, and prayed, that he may now be taken as heir of his Father, and that
Act reversed as erroneous* which being read, and duly considered, (...) su^ce^
oue bon deliberation et auys a grant (...) nostre Seigniour le Roy, Prelates,
Prince, Duk^, (...) Barons (...), il apiert clerement que le dit Edmund fuist
non (...) a la mert, et que parols recites eu le dit Statute touchant la mort
et destruction de dit Edmund sont voydes, erroignes et nulles. Pur quoi nostre
Seignior le Roy et les ditz Prelates, Prince, Dukes, Countz e^ Barons, per
accord des Chivalars des Counte^ et des dites Commune, ajuggent et agardent,
que la recitation et quelque est en le dit Statute touchant la mort et
destruction du dit Edmund, sont Voides, erroignes et nulles, etc. et soint
anientez et pur null toutz a toutz jours. The said Edmund being put to death
without due process or trial by his PEERS, according to the Law of the Land and
the Great Charter; Therefore the Act confirming this erroneous attainder, was
thus reversed, repealed, and nulled.

In these two last Records it is observable: First, that the King and Lords
debated, adjudged these Judgments and attainders to be erroneous; but because
they were confirmed by Act of Parliament, the assent of the Knights of Shires
and Commons was required and had to their reversal, as well as to the nulling
and repealing of other public Acts.

In the Parliament of An Exact abridgement of the Records of the Tower, p. 121,
122.
50 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 21. to 31. William L^d Latymer was accused by the
Commons, for diverse oppressions by him done to the Kings people, both during
his command in Britain, and also in the time that he was Chamberlain to the
King, and of his Council in levying diverse sums of money for victuate and
ransoms amounting to many thousand pounds, for which he never accounted; For
the loss of sundry Fo^s and Towns in Normandy and Britain to the Enemy, of
which he had the command, and partaking with Richard Lions in those illegal
Impositions, and misdemeanors, whereof he was then impeached by them.
Whereunto the Lord Latymer, saving the trial of his Peers, offered to answer
any particular person^ that would complain against him; but that the Commons
would not do, but prayed he might answer their charge in general: whereupon he
answered every of the Charges against him, and that very fully in open
Parliament before the LORDS. Yet notwithstanding the Bishops and Lords gave
Judgment against him in full Parliament; that for his ill Counsel and
Government, against the profit of the King and Realm, and namely for diverse
Chevisances to the Kings loss, for procuring grants to the destruction of the
Staple and Town of Calice, and for diverse impositions laid upon wools, he
should be committed to prison, under the custody of the Marshal, and make fine
and ransom at the Kings pleasure. Whereupon the Commons further required; That
he might lose all his Offices, and be no longer of the Kings Council: which the
King granted. After which this Lord found certain Lords and others of quality
(whose names are mentioned in a Schedule annexed to the Parliament roll) to be
his Mainpernors, for the forth-comming of his body during the Parliament; Upon
which the Marshal offered him to be at large.

In the same An Exact abridgement, p. 123.
Parliament, 50 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 34. John Lord Nevil was accused, that
during the time he was of the Kings privy Council he bought certain debts due
by the King to the Lady Ravensham and Simon Love, a Merchant, at under values;
and for receiving of the King more wages and for a longer time than was due for
one hundred Soldiers in Britain. Upon which he confessed he received 95 l. of
the Lady for the obtaining of her debt only, our of her mere good will, which
was not disproved. The Charge touching Love, he wholly denied. Love thereupon
being brought into the Parliament before the Lords; wholly excuses the Lord
Nevil: But because Love the day before had confessed the contrary unto two of
the Knights of the Parliament; he was committed to Prison by the LORDS. To the
receiving of Wages, he fully cleared himself: Notwithstanding the LORDS GAVE
JUDGMENT of imprisonment, and of l^s^ of Lands, Goods and Offices against him*
and that he should make restitu^ of the 95 l. to the Ladies Executors.

These Judgement^ (...) the Commons importunity were so unjust; that in the
very next An Exact abridgement, p. 150.
Parliament of 51 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 75. upon the prayer of certain Bishops,
Lords, and the Commons themselves, the Lord Latymer by the Kings grant and
royal assent, and the Authority of the Lords was restored to his Offices and
Privy Counsellorship, whereof he was deprived by them this Parliament, upon
untrue Suggestions. Such partiality and injustice is there many times even in
Parliaments themselves, out of malice, faction or affection.

In the An Exact abridgement, p. 291, 292, 293. Walsingham, Hist. Angl. p. 332,
333.
Parliament of 7 R. 2. holden at Westminster the Monday next before the feast
of All Saints, rot. Parl. n. 13.15. to 24. Ralph Nevil the martial Bishop of
Norwich was accused in Parliament, for not serving the King in his wars in
Flanders for so long a time, and with so many men, and with a sufficient
General, as he promised, whereby the Voyage was lost, to the Kings dishonor
and damage, and for selling the Castle of Gravelin to the French for money:
which the Chancellor in open Parliament declared against him: The Bishop
answered thereunto in person, albeit in this case he said, he might have
Counsel: with this Protestation, that he might at all times, avoid or amend his
answer. To which answer of his the Chancellor replied: In conclusion upon
debate, THE KING AND LORDS resolved his answer to be no sufficient excuse of
what was charged against him: Whereupon the Chancellor by ASSENT OF THE LORDS,
concluded, That although the King might pass on the Bishop as a Temporal Lord,
by reason he took upon him to serve him as a Soldier, and had the Sword
carried before him, contrary to his profession; yet for that time (in regard he
was a Bishop) the King would spare to lay hands on, or imprison his person, as
he might do. And therefore they ADJUDGED him, to make fine and ransom to the
King, at his pleasure, whereunto he should be compelled by the seizure of his
temporalties: And it was commanded that from thence the Sword should no more be
carried before him.

In the same Walsing. Hist. Angliae, p. 337.
Parliament held this year, about the feast of St. Martin in quo (prout jam a
multis consuevit temporibus) nihil dignum memoria fuit actum, praeter illud
quod sedulo actitabatur ( as now in our age) extortio, videlicet pecuniae de
clero et communi plebe ad sustentationem militibus werrae regalis. Nondum
Parliamentum finitum fuerat, cum nova de partibus borealibus sunt allata de
captione Castelli de Berwico per Scotos, cujus custodiam Comes Northumbriae,
domibus Henricus Percey avito jure possedit. Scoti namque mediante pecunia, de
quodam qui secundarie castri custodiam tunc habebat, introitus castelli
dolosenacti sunt. Factum est ergo Duce procurante Johanne (ut dicitur) ut pro
perditione dicti Castelli regalis Come^ Iudicium qui aderani Optimatum et regis
sententiam da^ationis exciperet in eum public promulgatam. Cujus executionis
vindicta per regem postea cito relax^ta fuit, quamvis id Duci (ut dicitur)
displiceret. Acta sunt haec, 14 die Decembris in eodem Parliamento, non
obstante quod idem Comes ad dictum Parliamentum vocat^s fuerat per breve
regium, et ad custodiam suae patriae morari maluisset. Haec ideir^o causa inter
ipsum Ducem er Comitem postea irae et odii ^omitem ministravit.

At the Parliament held at Walsingh. Hist. Angliae, p. 334, 335. Ypodigma
Neustr. p. 141.
Salisbury, an Irish Friar Carmelite delivered a Schedule to the King,
containing diverse treacherous plots and Treasons against him by the Duke of
Lancaster, that he had resolved suddenly to kill, oppress the King, and seize
upon the Kingdom; setting down the time, place, and all other circumstances;
taking his Oath upon the Sacrament of Christ's body that every word contained in
that Schedule was true: advising the King not to believe the Dukes excuses, nor
to deferr his judgment, lest he should raise forces against him to effect his
design, or be deceitfully reconciled to him. The King hereupon being young, NON
DOMINOS, NON PARES REGNI super tantis negotiis, ut disecr^erant qui^ (...)
co^sulait, but two C^eras of his Chapel his accustomed Counselors: whiles the
King and they were privately debating the business, the Duke came in unto them;
whom the King beholding with a stern countenance, and not receiving him with
that honor as formerly; he suspecting the King conceived something in his mind
against him, withdrew himself: But by the Chaplains advice he was called in
again, and the Schedule delivered him to read. Which having read, he said with
a great sign to the King. Heu Domine mi, cur fidem datis talibus dela toribus?
Cur de mea persona talia opinamini? Nonne sum a^unculus vester? Nonne tutor
extiti? Nonne post vos principalis i^ regno? Quid mihi suaderet vos prodere,
vel certe necare qui nihil lucri reciperem de vestra morte? Nunquid hosts
^estri me ditiorem facerent in terra sua, quam effectus sum in terra vestra, et
in natali solo? Aut si regnum affectarem credendu ^ne est post vestram
inte^fectinnem (quod absit) Dominos hujus Regni aqu^nimiter far me posse
Domini mei et patriae pro^^torem? Deli^ere (si placet) fidem ^ar^ ^alia
^leren^bus, quia paratus sum, more militis, contra quemcunque mundi mihi in hac
causa adversantem pugnare, et meam innocentiam defendere et purgare. Upon which
and other words, the King believed the Duke and received his excuses: and
committed the Friar at his request to the Custody of the Lord John Holland,
usque ad diem quo causam diceret horum quae praeposuerat contra eum. In ipsa
nocte quae processit diem suae responsioni^, the Friar was strangled and
pressed to death by the said John and another Knight, and the next day his dead
corpse was drawn through the street like a Traitor, to take away the suspicion
of his unjust death. Ipsi judices, ipsi ministri, ipsi tortores extiterunt. Et
hic fructus Parliamenti praesentis, praeter hoc, quod dominus Willielmus la
Zouche, quamvis gravissima detineretur aegritudine, accersitus erat ad
Parliamentum, ad standium judicio Regis et Dominorum, quia idem ^rater eum,
velut inventorem, inceptorem, et incentorem dixerat omnium quae scripserat
extitisse: Qui cum venisset lectica delatus, quia propter guttam equitare non
poterat, compulsus est discinctus, et discooperto capite ad haec omnia sibi
objecta, more latronum vel proditorum respondere. Qui viriliter negavit
objecta, Sacramento firmans, haec nunquam audisse, vel hujusmodi cogitasse, et
ita demum absolutus est, et domum redire permissus.

In this An Exact abridgement, p 299, 300.
Parliament holden at Salisbury 7 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 11. to 16. John Cavendish
a Fishmonger of London, made his complaint first to the Commons, and after to
the Lords, against Sir Michael de la Poole Chancellor of England, demanding the
Peace against him; which THE LORDS granted: after which he accused him for
taking Bribes, and delays and injustice in a suit of his depending before him:
whereof he cleared himself by his own Oath, and the Oaths of other witnesses
sworn and examined before THE LORDS: Whereupon the Lords being troubled with
other weighty matters, referred the Chancellors reparation for the Scandal to
the ordering of the Judges.

an Exact abridgement p. 315, 316.
The same Sir Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, and Chancellor of England, in
the Parliament of 10 R. 2. rot. Parliamenti, n. 6. to 18. was accused in full
Parliament before THE KING BISHOPS and LORDS by the Commons who exhibited
sundry Articles against him; recorded at large by De Eventibus Angliae, l. 5.
c. to. col. 2680. to 2685.
Henry de Knyghton (agreeing with the Parliament Roll.) The effect of them was
this; That whiles he was Chancellor, against his Oath, to procure the profit of
the King; he had purchased lands and tenements of the King of great value at
under rates, and exchanged uncertain^ customs and rents for good lands, in
deceit of the King; and for spending the Aids granted to the King the last
Parliament, to guard the Seas, in another manner than they were granted;
whereby the Seas were not guarded, and much mischief happened to the Realm, etc.
The Lords and Commons refused to act any thing till the King came in person to
Parliament, and the Chancellor removed upon these Articles.

The Chancellor demanded of the LORDS 1. Whether he should answer these
Articles without the Kings presence, for things done whiles he was Chancellor,
for that he being Chancellor of England for the time represented the Kings
person (in Parliament) during his absence thence; Secondly, Whether his Brother
in Law Sir Richard Scroope might not answer for him, whom he had by advice of
his Counsel, appointed to do it? To which the LORDS answered and resolved, It
was honest and fit for him to answer for himself: Whereupon he making
protestation, that he might add to, or diminish from his answer, and that
which might be honorable to him by advice of his Counsel; the Lords granting
thereunto: He thereupon put in an answer and replication to all the Articles;
to which his Counsel added some things in making his defense: The Commons
replied to his answer, to which he by way of rejoynd^r replied and answered to
them, his defense s^eming very solid: Yet the Commons upon his replication
before judgment, pressed the King then being in Parliament, and she Lords,
that he might be committed for the grievous offenses charged against him.
Whereupon he was arrested by the Kings command, and committed to the custody of
the Constable of England, and after let to mainprise. Ar last THE LORDS in full
Parliament GAVE JUDGMENT AGAINST HIM; That for breach of his Oath, all the
Manors and lands which he had of the Kings gift, contained in the Articles
should be seized into the Kings hands, to have them to him and his heirs for
ever, together with their mean profits and issues, saving to him the name and
Title of a Knight and Earl, together with an annuity of 20 l. yearly, granted
him out of the profits of the County of Suffolk. The like judgment was given
against him for the lands exchanged by the King for the customs of Hull, and
the Priory of St. Anthony, Ypodigm. Neustriae. p. 144. Hist. Ang. p. 352, 353,
354.
Walsingham adds, That he was deprived likewise of his Chancellorship and
adjudged worthy of death; yet the Lords would not put him to death but sent him
prisoner to Windsore Castle. Rex autem non multo post annullavit quicquid in
Parliamento statutum fuerat contra ipsum.

In the an Exact abridgement, p. 321, 322.
Parliament of 11 R. 2. rot. Parl. ^. 6, 7. Thomas Duke of Gloucester kneeling
before the King, said, that he understood the King was informed, he went about
to depose him, and to make himself King; Wherefore he offered to put himself
upon his trial in that behalf, as the Lords of the Parliament would award;
Whereupon the King said in open Parliament, that he thought the said Duke was
nothing faulty, and therefore held him excused.

After which all THE LORDS, as well spiritual as temporal being in the
Parliament, claimed their liberties and franchises, namely, That all weight^
matters in the same Parliament, which should be after moved touching THE PEERS
OF THE LAND, ought to be discussed, JUDGED AND DETERMINED BY THE M, by the
course of Parliament, and not by the Civil Law, nor yet by the Common Law of
the Land, used in other Cou^ts of the Realm. The which claim and liberties the
King most willingly allowed and granted thereto in full Parliament. After which
Thomas Earl of Gloucester, Henry Earl of Derby, Richard Earl of Arundel, Thomas
Earl of Warwick, and Thomas Earl of Marshal, Lords Appellants, impeached
Alexand^r Archbishop of York, Robert de Vere Earl of Ireland, M^chael de la
Poole Earl of Suffolk, Robert Tresylam Chief Justice, Nicholas Bramber Knight,
and other of their adherents of High Treason against the King and his Realm.

The Articles they exhibited against them were 36 in number, at large recorded
in Henry de Knyghton de Eventibus Angliae, l. 5. col. 2713. to 2727. with the
whole proceedings thereupon, for which many were attainted, condemned, executed
BY JUDGMENT OF THE LORDS, notwithstanding the Kings intercession for some of
them to the LORDS: they are likewise mentioned in the printed Statutes at
large, of 11 R. 2. c. 1, 3, 4. in Walsingham Hist. Angliae, p. 359 to 367. and
other vulgar Holinshed, Trussel, Graft. Stow, Speed, Baker.
Historians: I shall therefore for brevity refer you to them. Exactum est
juramentum a rege, ad standum REGULATIONI PROCERUM, et non solum a rege, sed a
cunctis regni incolis, idem juramentum est expetitum.

In the Exact abridgement, etc. p. 338, 391, 392.
Parliament of 14 R. 2. n. 14. The King and Lords (without the Commons)
declared, That in the 7 year of this King, the Earldom of Richmond, with the
appartenances, WERE ADJUDGED BY THE KING AND LORDS to be forfeited to the King,
by reason of the adherence of John Duke of Britain, then Earl of Richmond, to
the French; against his allegiance to the King, and his father king Edward the
3. which judgment was not then enrolled in the Rolls of Parliament for certain
causes known to the King and LORDS, but was now enrolled, and the lands granted
to the Earl of Westmerland, which King Henry the 4th would not revoke upon the
Commons Petition to restore them to the Duke, 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 78.

In the Parliament of 17 R. 2. n. 11 Richard Earl of Exact abridgement p. 352.
Arundel, in the presence of the KING and LORDS accused the Duke of Lancastre
of 5 particular misdemeanors: In which when the King had justified him; it was
awarded by the King, BY THE ASSENTS OF ALL THE LORDS, that the Earl should in
full Parliament make a formal submission to the Duke, and crave pardon for his
false accusation.

Exact abridgement. p. 368.
In the Parliament of 21 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 12. to 17. the Commons impeached
Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury of high Treason, for procuring the Duke
of Gloucester and others there named to accroach to themselves regal power, and
execute the Commission of 10 R. 2. when he was Chancellor; praying that he
might be kept under safe custody, with a protestation of making for her
accusations during the Parliament against him and others. After which they
prayed the King to give judgment against the Archbishop, according to his
desert: who submitted himself to the Kings mercy: Walsingham Ypodig. p. 151.
Hist. Angl. p. 3^2, 39^.
Whereupon the KING and LORDS and Sir Thomas Piercy, (the general Proctor for
the Bishops in this case) adjudged the fact of the Archbishop to be Treason,
and himself a Traitor; and that thereupon he should be banished, his
temporalties seized, and all his lands in proper possession or use, together
with his goods forfeited to the King, and presenting the day and place of his
departure into exile.

After this in the same An Exact abridgement, p. 376, 377, 378. Placita Coronae
eoram Domino Rege in Parliamento suo, etc. anno 21 R. 2. n. 1. to 26.
Parliament of 21 R. 2. the Lords Appellant therein named accused the Duke of
Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel and Warwick, and others of High Treason, for
procuring the Commission in 10 R. 2. for raising forces, and coming to the
Kings person armed; For accroching to themselves royal power, and adjudging
some to death, and executing them as Traitors in the Parliament of 11 R. 2. For
intending to surrender up their Homage and allegiance to the King, and then to
depose him; and saying they had good cause to depose him, etc. Hereupon the
Earl of Arundel being brought in custody to the Parliament before the Lords, by
the Kings command and assent of the Lords, had his charge read and declared
before him by the Duke of Lancaster Steward of England; to which he pleaded his
pardon: which plea being disallowed, because his pardon was revoked by this
Parliament, and he relying on it without any other plea* the Lords appellants
prayed judgment against him, as convict of the Treasons aforesaid: Whereupon
the Duke of Lancaster, by assent of the KING, Bishops, Earls, and LORDS,
adjudged him convict of the Articles aforesaid, and thereby a Traitor to the
King and Realm, and that he should be therefore hanged, drawn and quartered,
and forfeit all his Lands in fee or fee-tayl which he had in the 10. year of
this King, with all his goods and chattels. But for that he was come of Noble
blood, the King pardoned his execution of hanging, drawing and quartering, and
granted that he should be beheaded: which was accordingly executed the same day
on Tower hill by the Marshal of England. The 28. of September, the Walsingham,
Hist. Angliae, p. 392, 393. Ypodig. Neustriae p. 151, 152.
Earl of Warwick was brought ao his Trial in the same manner as the Earl of
Arundel; who confessed all the Articles, submitted to the Kings grace, and had
the same judgment pronounced against him in the same manner as the Earl of
Arundel. But the King at the Lords Appellants and others requests pardoned his
execution, granted him his life, and banished him into the Isle of Man. The
Duke of Norfolk by assent and Act of Parliament, was tried in a Court Martial
by the King, Lords and some Knights, for words spoken against the King, and
judgment was there given that he should be banished into Hungary, and his
lands forfeited to the King.

Within one year after (such is the vicissitude of all worldly honor and
power) in the An Exact abridgement, p. 399, 400, 408.
Parliament of 1 H. 4. Plac. Coron. n. 1. to 11. at the prayer of the Commons,
the great Lords Appellants, Edward Duke of Albemarl, Tho. Duke of Surry, John
Duke of Exeter, John Marquess Dorset, John Earl of Salisbury, and Thomas Earl
of Gloucester, were all questioned and brought to their several answers before
the King and Lords for their Acts and proceedings in the Parliament of 21 R. 2.
the records whereof being read before them in Parliament, they made their
several answers and excuses thereunto: whereupon the King and Lords, after
consultation thereupon, ADJUDGED, that the said Dukes, Marquis, and Earls
should lose their several Titles and Dignities of Dukes, Marquess and Earls,
with all the honor thereunto belonging; and that they should forfeit all the
Lands and goods which they or any of them had given them, at the death of the
Duke of Gloucester, or since: and that if they or any of them should adhere to
the quarrel or person of King Richard, lately deposed, that then the same
should be Treason. The which Judgment was pronounced against them, by William
Thurning, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in Parliament, by the Kings
command; but in the Parliament of 2 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 33. upon the Petition
of the Lords and Commons to the King, the Earls of Rutland and Somerset were
pardoned, and restored by the King in Parliament.

In the An Exact abridgement, p. 405, 407.
Parliament of 2 H. 4. n. 14. the Bishop of Norwich, was accused by Sir Thomas
Erpingham, the Kings Vice-Chamberlain before the King and Lords, of diverse
offenses against the King; who taking the accusation to be good because of the
Bishops order, and that he was of the king^ lineage; pardoned the said Bishop,
all his misprisions done against his person, and reconciled the Bishop and Sir
Thomas one to another. And n. 30, 31. all the Lords Temporal (whose names are
there recorded, being 25. in number) by assent of the King, declared and
ADJUDGED, Thomas Holland late Earl of Kent, John Holland late Earl of
Huntingdon, John Mountague late Earl of Salisbury, Thomas le Despencer, Sir
Ralph Lumley Knight, and diverse others (who were for their Rebellions and
Treasons, in levying war against the King, taken, slain or beheaded by certain
of the Kings Subjects) to be Traitors, and that they should forfeit all such
Lands as they had in fee the 5. of January, the first year of the King, or at
any time after, with all their goods and chattels: The Record is, Toutz les
Seigneurs temporelz esteantz en Parliament, per ussent du Roy declarerent, et
adjuggerent les ditz Thomas, etc. pur Trayteurs, pur la leve de Guerre
encountre lour Seignior le Roy, nient obstant qils furent mortz sur le d^t leve
de guerre sanz process de ley. Lo here the Lords alone by the Kings assent,
declare and adjudge what is Treason, both in the case of Lords and Commoners
too, and ^taint and give Judgment against them both, without the Commons,
after their deaths, without legal trial.

In the Cook 3 Instit. p. 22. etc. Exact abridgment, p, 426.
Parliament of 5 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 11, 12, 13, 14. On Friday the 18 of
February the Earl of Northumberland came before the King, Lords and Commons in
Parliament, and by his Petition to the King, acknowledged, that he had done
against his Laws and allegiance; and especially for gathering power and giving
of Liveries, for which he put himself upon the Kings grace and prayed pardon,
the rather, for that upon the Kings Letters he yielded himself, and came to the
King at York; whereas he might have kept himself away. Which Petition by the
Kings command was delivered to the Justices to be examined, and to have their
counsel and advice therein: Whereupon the LORDS made a Protestation; que le
Juggement appentient a ^ux tout soulement, THAT THE JUDGMENT APPERTAINED ONLY
TO THEM. And after the said Petition being read and considered before the King
and the said Lords, as Peers of Parliament, aus queux teils juggeme^t
apperteignent de deoit; to whom such Judgments appertained of right, having
had by the Kings command competent deliberation thereupon: and having also
heard and considered as well the Statute made in the 25. year of King Edward
the Kings Grand father that now is, concerning the Declaration of Treason, as
the Statutes of Liveries made in this Kings reign, ADJUDGED; That that which
was done by the said Earl contained within his Petition, was neither Treason,
nor Felony, but Trespass; for which the said Earl ought to make fine and ransom
at the will of the King. Whereupon the said Earl most humbly thanked our Lord
the King, and the said Lords his Peers of Parliament for their rightful
judgment and the Commoners for their good affections and d^ligence used and
shown in this behalf; And the said Earl further prayed the King, that in
assurance of these matters, to remove all jealousies and evil suspicions, that
he might be sworn a new in the presence of the King, and of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament; and the said Earl took an Oath upon the Crosier of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, to be a faithful and loyal liege to our Lord the
King, the Prince his Son, and to the heirs of his body inheritable to the Crown
according to the Laws of England; Whereupon the king out of his grace pardoned
him his fine and ransom for the trespass aforesaid. After which, number. 17. the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, humbly thanked the King, sitting in his royal
Throne in the white Chamber, for his grace and pardon to the said Earl of his
fine and ransom: and likewise the Commons thank^ the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, for the good and just Judgment they had given, as Peers of
Parliament to the said Earl.

From this memorable Record* I shall observe; First, that though this
Declaration of this Earls case was made by his Petition in the presence of the
King, Lords and Commons in Parliament, according to the Statute of 25 E. 3. yet
the Lords only by Protestation in presence of the King and Commons, claimed to
be the sole Judges of it, as Peers of Parliament, and belonging to them OF
RIGHT. Secondly, That this claim of theirs in this case, was acknowledged and
submitted to both by the King and Commons: and thereupon the Lords only, after
serious consideration of the case and Statutes whereon it depended, gave the
definitive sentence and judgment in this case; that it was neither Treason nor
Felony, but Trespass only, etc. Thirdly, That the Earl thanked the King, only
for his grace, the Lords for their just Judgment, and the Commons only for
their good hearts and diligence, having no share in the judgment, though given
by the Lords both in the Kings and their presence; and that the Commons
themselves returned special thanks to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament, for their good and just judgment. Fourthly, That this judgment of
the Lordr only, was final and conclusive, both to the King and Commons, who
acquiesced in it.

In the Exact abridgement, p. 539.
Parliament of 2 H. 5. rot. Parl. number. 13, 14. Thomas Mountague Earl of
Salisbury, son and heir of John Mountague Earl of Salisbury, exhibited his
petition in Parliament to reverse a judgment given against his said father in
the Parliament at Westminster in the second year of King Henry the fourth, rot.
Parl. n. 30, 31. forecited, wherein amongst others he was attainted of Treason
by judgment of all the Temporal Lords in Parliament: and thereupon he
exhibited certain reversals of Judgments given in Parliament, as making on his
behalf, to the Lords consideration, reversed for some errors assigned in those
judgments; to wit, one judgment given against Thomas heretofore Earl of
Lancaster, before King Edward the second at Pomfract, the Monday before the
feast of the Annunciation, in the fifteenth year of his reign* and another
Judgment against Roger de Mortymer, late Earl of March, in the Parliament of
King Edward the third, the Monday after the feast of St. Katherine, in the
fourth year of his reign, at Westminster. Which Judgments being distinctly and
openly read^ and fully understood; It seemed to the King and Lords, that the
case of the death and execution of the said John late Earl of Sarum, and of the
judgment aforesaid against him given, is not, nor was like to the case of the
executing of the said Th. heretofore Earl of Lancaster, nor to the case of the
putting to death of Roger Earl of March, nor to any judgment given against the
said Thomas and Roger, as aforesaid, but that the judgment and declaration had
and given against the said John late Earl of Sarum were a good, just and legal
Declaration and Judgment. Per quod: consideratum suit in praesenti Parliamento
per praedictos Dominos tunc ibidem existentes, de assensu di^ Domini nostri
Regis quod praefatus nunc Comes Sarum nihil capiat per petitionem, aut
prosecutionem suam praedictam. Et ulterius tam Domini spirituales quam
temporales supradicti, judicium et Declarationem pradicta versus dictum Joannem
quondam Comitem Sarum, ut praemittitur habita sive reddita de assensu ipsius
Domini Regis affirmarunt fore et esse bona, justa et legalia, et ea pro
hujusmodi ex abundanti decreverunt et adjudicarunt tuuc ibidem. Exact
Abridgement, p. 539.
This is all that is mentioned in that Parliament Roll concerning this
business.

Sir Edw. Cook who has an excellent faculty above all others I have yet met
with, in mistaking, mis-reciting, and perversing Records, and Law Books too often
times, which he had no leisure to peruse (which I desire all Lawyers and others
to take notice of who deem all he writes to be Oracle, lest they be seduced by
him) in his 4 Institutes, p. 23. affirms with confidence, That in this Rot.
Parl. 2. H. 5. n. 13. Error was assigned (to reverse this judgment) that the
Lords gave judgment without Petition or assent of the COMMONS; citing it to
prove, that the COMMONS have a power of judicature, together with the LORDS.
But under his favor, I can assure ye Reader, 1. That there is no such error at
all either mentioned or intended in this Record, nor any one syllable tending
to that purpose.

2ly. The Petition mentions no error at all in this judgment; but only
remembers two presidents of judgment formerly reversed; the first in the case
of Thomas Earl of Lancaster, in 15 E. 2. which judgment was given against him
at Pomfret Castle, which was afterward reversed, as Sir Edward Cook himself
informs us in his 3 Institutes, c. 7. p. 52, 53. in Pas. 39 E. 3. Coram rege,
rot. 92. for this only reason, Qua contra Chartam de libertatibus, cum dictus
Thomas fuit unus PARIVM and MAGNATUM Regni, non imprisonetur, etc. nec dictus
Rex super eum ibit, nec super eum mittet, nisi per legale judicium PARIUM
SUORVM, etc. tamen tempore pacis absque juramento, seu responsione, seu legale
judicio PARIUM SUORUM, etc. adjudicatus est morti. The other was the judgment
given against Roger Mortymer in the Parliament of 4 E. 3. reversed for the like
reason in the Parliament of 28 E. 3. n. 10, 11, 12. forecited, being condemned
and executed by the Lords, without any arraignment, hearing, trial, or answer,
against the Great Charter. Now these two Presidents are pointblank against this
pretended error alleged by Sir Edward Cook, That the Lords gave judgment
without the assent of the Commons, and it had been very improper for them to
allege the reversal of them for want of a legal trial by their Peers; to prove
that the Commons, who are no Peers, should have assented to the Earl of
Salisburies judgment; and because they did it not, it was Error and
reversible; These presidents therefore might have minded him of his gross
mistake.

3ly. The King and Lords upon consideration declared, and adjudged these two
cases and judgments, upon perusal of them not to be like the case of the Earl
of Salisbury, who being slain in rebellion, and actual war against the king;
could not be personally arraigned and condemned, as the other two might, and
ought to have been, and therefore the judgment given against him in this case
by the King and Lords in Parliament, who were his Peers, was a good, just, and
legal judgment, and no ways against the great Charter.

4ly. The Commons themselves in the Parliament o 13 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 19.
acknowledged this judgment to be good without their assents, by their Petition
to the King that John Lumly whose Father was attainted of Treason by it
(together with the Earl of Salisbury, might be restored to blood and lands (by
Act of Parliament, and the Kings grace) notwithstanding this judgment of
Treason against them. Which the King; by assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, consented unto.

5 ly. In the Parliament of 3 E. 4. n. 31, 32. this judgment was made void and
repealed out of the Kings Grace, by a special act of Parliament, and the heir
restored, but the judgment not reversed for any Error.

6ly. Had there been any such Error assigned, as is alleged; yet the King and
Lords, upon solemn debate and deliberation, overruled, and adjudged it to be
no Error at all (as he pretends it) and thereupon abated the Petition, and
adjudged the Judgment and Declaration given by the Lords alone, with the Kings
assent, in 2 H. 4. (without the Commons Petition or assent) to be GOOD, JUST,
AND LEGAL, reconfirming it a new on Record as such: Therefore it was a gross
oversight in him to assign and print it as an Error, and a President of the
Commons House, or both Houses power of judicatures together: when as it is a
most undeniable double Parliamentary resolution, of the Kings and Lords sole
right of judicature, and of their declaring and judging in Parliament what is
Treason, and what not within the Statute of 25 E. 1. without the Commons assent
or privity, and an unanswerable refutation of his sole opinion to the contrary
in his 3 Institutes, c. 2. p. 22. which he opposes against not only these two
Parliamentary resolutions, but likewise against 5 H. 4. n. 11, 12.15 and 17 R.
2. rot. Parl. n. 20. there quoted by him. By this you may judge how little
credit is to be given to Sir Edwards quotations and authority, in matters
concerning Parliamentary Judgments and Records.

In the Exact Abridgement, p. 641, 642, 643, 644.
Parliament of 28 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 14. to 53. The Commons generally
accusing, William de la Pool Duke of Suffolk to the King and Lords, he
thereupon required of the king, that he might be specially accused, and heard
to answer to that which many men reported of him to be an untrue man, making
therewith a protestation of his manifold good services in the wars, and as a
Privy Counselor for sundry years; and so asking God mercy, as he had been true
to the King and his Realm, required his purgation; The 26 of January the
Commons required, that for this his Confession he might be committed to ward.
The Lords and Judges upon consultation, thought there was no good cause for
that, unless some special matter were objected against him. The 28 day of
January, the Speaker declared that the said Duke (as it was said) had sold the
Realm to the French, who had prepared to come hither, and for his own defense
had furnished Wallingford Castle with all warlike necessaries; upon whose
request the said Duke was then committed to the Tower of London. The 7 day of
February, the Commons by William Trussel their Speaker, brought up and
presented to the King and Lords in the Lords House a Bill against the said
Duke, containing an impeachment of several High Treasons committed by him
against the King, requiring of the Lords all their Articles therein to be
enacted, with prosecution therein. The 9. of March they exhibited new articles
of complaint against the Duke, comprising sundry misdemeanors against the king,
and other persons, which they require might be enrolled, and that the Duke
might answer to them. The 9. of March the Duke was brought by the kings writ
from the Tower into the Parliament Chamber, before the King and Lords; where
the Articles were rehearsed to him, who desired Copies of them, which was
granted: And he for more ready answer was committed to certain Esquires, to be
kept in the Tower, within the kings palace. The 14 of March the Duke appeared
before the K. and Lords where on his knees he denied as untrue the 8 Articles
of Treason, and the same offered to prove, as the King shall appoint.

The Chief Justice thereupon by the kings command, asked this Question of the
Lords, what advise they would give the King, what is to do further in this
matter? which advise was deferred till Monday then next following; whereon
nothing was done in that matter. On Tuesday the 17 of March, the king sent for
all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal then being in Town (being 24 in all) into
his Inner Chamber within his Palace of Westminster, where when they were all
assembled, he then sent for the Duke thither; who coming into the Kings
presence, kneeled down, and continued kneeling till the Chancellor of England
had delivered the kings command to him; and demanded of him, what he said to
the Commons Articles, not having put himself upon his Peerage? Whereupon the
Duke denied all the Articles touching the kings Person, and state of the Realm,
as false and scandalous. And so not departing from his said Answers, submitted
himself to the kings Rule and Governance, without putting himself upon his
Peerage. Where thus the Chancellor told him. That as touching the great and
horrible crimes contained in the first Bill, the king holds him neither
declared nor charged. And as touching the second Bill, containing misprisions
which are not criminal, the king by force of his submission, by his own advice,
and not reporting him to the advice of the Lords, nor by way of judgment, for
he is not in place of judgment, puts you to his Rule and Governance; that
before the first of May next coming, he should absent himself out of the
kingdom of England, and all other his Dominions, in France, or elsewhere, and
that he, nor no man for him, should show or wait any malice, nor hate, to any
person of what degree soever of the Commons in the Parliament, in no manner of
wise, for any thing done to him in this Parliament or elsewhere. And forthwith
Viscount Beaumont, in behalf of the said LORDS both spiritual and Temporal, and
by their advice, assent, and desire, said and declared to the Kings Highness;
That this that so was decreed and done by his Excellency, concerning the person
of the said Duke, proceeded not by their advice and Counsels; but was done by
the Kings own demeanoir and rule. Wherefore they besought the King that this
their saying might be enacted in the Parliament Roll for their more declaration
hereafter; with this protestation, that it should not be, nor turn in prejudice
nor derogation of them, their heirs, ne of their successors in time coming; but
that they may have and enjoy their liberty, as they, or any of their Ancestors
and Predecessors had and enjoyed before this time.

This is the sum of this large Record, which makes nothing to the purpose for
which Sir Edward Cook cites it in his 4 Institutes, p. 25. That it is ERROR
when both Houses join not in the Judgment. For first, here is nothing but an
impeachment only by the Commons of a Peer, who ought to be tried, judged only
by his Peers, not by Commoners. Secondly, there was no judgment given in
Parliament in this case, but only a private Award made by the King, out of the
Parliament House in his own Chamber, in presence of the Lords. Thirdly, the
Lords entered a special protestation against it, as not made by their advice or
consent. Fourthly, they enter a special claim in the Parliament Roll, for the
preservation of their Right and Freedom of Peerage for hereafter, both of being
tried and judged only by their Peers in Parliament; and so an express
resolution, that the Peers in Parliament are and ought to be Judges, especially
of Peers, not the Commons. These Records of these cited at large, lest Sir
Edward Cooks brief quotation and mis-recital of them should deceive the
credulous or ignorant Readers.

In the Exact abridgement. p. 653.
Parliament of 31 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 28. Thomas Earl of Devonshire, was
accused of Treason, tried for, and acquitted thereof by his Peers, before
Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, Steward of England for the time being: And for that
the Duke of York thought the loyalty of the said Earl to be touched; thereupon
the said Earl protesting his Loyalty, referred himself to further Trial as a
Knight should do: upon which declaration THE LORDS in Parliament acquitted him
as a loyal Subject.

Exact Abridgement, p. 670, 671, 676, 677.
Edward Duke of York, with the Earls of March, Warwick, Salisbury, Rutland,
John Lord Clinton, and others, were impeached and attainted by Judgment of the
Lords in Parliament, of High Treason, for raising forces and levying war
against King Henry the 6. and afterward attainted by Bill; in the Parliament
of 38 H. 6. n. 7. to 26.

In the An Exact abridgement, p. 670, 671, 672, 677, 699.
Pa^liamenr of 1 E. 4. n. 17. to 71. The Duke of Exeter, Viscount Beamont, the
Earls of Pembroke Wilts, and Devonshire, the Lords Nevil, Roos, Gray, Dacre,
Hungerford and others, were first attainted and condemned of High Treason by
THE LORDS, and after by Bill, for levying war against King Edward the fourth.
The Duke of Somerset, and others in the Parliament of 4 E. 4. n. 28. to 39. and
John Vere Earl of Oxford, with others in the Parliament of 14 E. 4. n. 34. to
41. were in the same manner for the same offense, attainted of High Treason,
and their Lands forfeited. To pretermit all other Attainders of this Nature in
cases of High Treason, in the reigns of Henry the 8. Edward the 6. Queen Mary,
Queen Elizabeth, and King James, both in our English and Irish Parliaments,
formerly touched, p. 196, 197, 198 199. In Cooks 4 Institutes, p. 23. 3
Institutes, p. 148.
the Parliaments of 18, and 21 Jacobi, Sir Francis Bacon Viscount St. Alban,
Lord Chancellor of England, and the Earl of Middlesex Lord Treasurer of
England, were impeached, accused, convicted of Bribery, Corruption, and other
misdemeanors, removed from their places, fined ( Middlesex 50000 l.)
imprisoned, made incapable of any Office, and thus censured by Judgment of the
Lords house, as the Journals of those Parliaments inform us. In the Parliament
of 2. Caroli, the Sea my Hidden works of Darkness brought to public light.
Duke of Buckingham impeached the Earl of Bristol, and the Earl of Bristol
impeached this Duke before the Lords, in sundry Articles, for diverse
misdemeanors touching the Spanish match, King, Prince, to seduce him in his
religion, praying judgment of the Lords thereupon against each other. In the
Parliament of 3. Caroli, the Duke of Buckingham was accused and Impeached by
the Commons before the Lords for sundry high Misdemeanors, and the Parliament
thereupon dissolved to prevent his censure.

In this very Parliament of See this Impeachment and Trial. Mr. John Pyms
Speech, and Mr. Oliver St. John's argument at Law, at his Trial and concerning
his Bill of Attainder, 12 April 1641.
King Charles now sitting, Thomas Earl of Strafford was accused and impeached by
the House of Commons of High Treason, and other misdemeanors, comprised in
sundry Articles, which they transmitted ^o the House of Lords, desiring that he
might be put to answer them, and such proceedings, examination, trial and
judgment thereupon had and given against him by the Lords, as is agreeable to
Law and Justice. Hereupon he was openly tried in Westminster Hall, before the
House of Lords, there sitting as his Judges, where the House of Commons
prosecuted and gave in Evidence against him sundry days; and in conclusion,
demanded the Lords to give Judgment against him, in the Judicial way. After
which they proceeded against him by way of Bill; not to decline their Lordships
Justice in a Judicial way; but to husband time, by preventing some doubts and
as the speediest and soonest way: Upon the passing of which Bill, he was
beheaded and executed as a Traitor.

See Mr. Pyms Speech, Feb. 26. 1640. and My Canterburies Doom, p. 25, 26, 27,
28.48, 49, etc.
On the 26 of February, 1640. William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, was accused
and impeached of High Treason by the House of Commons of 14. Articles then
transmitted by them to the House of Lord; The first whereof was this; That he
had traitorously endeavored to subvert the fundamental Laws and Government of
the Realm, and instead thereof, to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government against Law: And the last of them, this: That he had labored to
subvert the rights of Parliament and the ancient Course of Parliamentary
proceeding (which the New-modellers of our Parliaments, more guilty hereof by
many degrees than he, may do well to consider:) Upon which they prayed, from
the Lords such proceedings, examination, trial and Judgment against him, as is
agreeable to Law and Justice. Upon these Articles he was brought to a public
Trial in the Lords House the 12. of March, 1643. and after 17. whole days
spent in his mere Trial, and proof of the Charge against him, and his defense
thereto morning and evening; and several other days spent in the hearing of
him and his Council, and the Commons Reply touching his Charge and the matters
of Law, whether the Charge pr^ against him amounted to High Treason; the Lords
upon most mature deliberation, voted him Guilty, of all the Articles and
matters of fact charged against him, and also of High Treason; and thereupon
passed an Ordinance for his Attainder; by virtue whereof he was beheaded as a
Traitor on Tower Hill, January 10. 1644.

To these I might add the Sea My Antipathy of the English Lordly Prelacy to
Regal Monarchy, etc p. 277, 278, 279, 305, etc.
seveeal Articles of Impeachment transmitted by the House of Commons this
Parliament to the Lords, against Matthew Wren, Bishop of Norwich the 20. of
July 1641. against William Pierce Bishop of Bath and Wells; and against the
Bishops of Winchester, Coventry and Litchfield, Gloucester, Chichester, Exeter,
St. Asaph, Hereford, Ely, Bangor, Bristol, Rochester, Peterborough and
Landaffe* August 4. 1641. requiring such proceedings from the Lords against
them, as to Law and Justice shall appertain. All which are a superabundant
impregnable Evidence of the Lords inherent Judicial power and right of
Judicature in our English Parliaments, even by the Commons House own
Impeachments and acknowledgements, against the Levellers pretenses, to the
contrary.

By all these forecited presidents it is most apparent: 1. That the King and
Lords in our Parliaments in all ages both before and since the Commons
admission to sit and vote in Parliaments, have been the sole Judges of
Ecclesiastical Peers and Lords in all criminal cases, without the Commons. 2ly,
That the Lords and Peers of the Realm, (except only in case of appeal^) both in
and out of Parliament, are triable only by their Peers: And therefore the
Trial, condemnation and execution of any of them by Marshal Law, or now
misnamed High Courts of Justice by Commoners and others who are not their
Peers, is most illegal, unjust, and naught else but murder; as the An Exact
abridgement, p. 388, 670.
Parliaments of 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 45. of 1 E. 4. rot. Parl. n. 18. resolve*
and as it was adjudged in the case of Thomas Earl of Lancaster, Pa^ch. 39 E. 3.
Coram Rege, Rot. 92. Wi^. Cooks 3. Institutes, p. 52, 53.

Secondly, The next and main question now con^roverted, will be; Whether the
King, and House of Peers, have any lawful or sole power of Judicature in and
over the persons, of the Commons of England, as well as over Peers, in criminal
causes, misdemeanors, offenses, or breaches of their Parliamentary privileges;
so far as to fine, imprison, censure, judge or condemn them in any kind,
without the House of Commons concurrent vote or judicature?

This the ignorant sottish Levellers, Sectaries, (seduced by their blind
guides, John Lilburn, and Overton) peremptorily deny: the contrary whereof, I
shall here infallibly make good, to their perpetual shame and refutation, by
unanswerable Reasons and presidents in all ages.

1. I have Page 163, 164, 183, 184, 185, 186.
already manifested, That the Parliament being the supremest Court of
Judicature in the Realm, must consequently have a lawful Jurisdiction over all
persons and members of the Realm, whether Spiritual or Temporal Lords or
Commons, in all criminal and civil Causes proper for Parliaments to judge or
punish; That this power of judicature was originally and primitively vested in
the King and Lords alone, before there were any Knights, Citizens, Burgesses or
Commons summoned to our Parliaments; (as is evident by Here, p. 30, 31, 33, 34.
the ancient writers Glanvil, Bracton, Fleta, Horn, the Parliament of
Clarindon, Anno. 1164. and other forecited authorities;) and never transferred
by them to the House of Commons upon or after their admission into our
Parliaments, but remaining entirely in the King and Lords as at first; as the
whole House of Commons acknowledge upon record 1 H. 4. rot. parl. n. 79.
Therefore they may lawfully exercise this their judicial power and jurisdiction
over the Commoners of England in all such causes now, and hereafter, and that
of right, as this record resolves they may do, in positive terms.

2ly, Our Histories, Law Books and Records agree, that in ancient times, our
Earls, who were called Comites, or Counts from the word County, had the chief
Government and Rule of most of the Counties of this Realm under our King, and
that they, and the Barons were the proper Judges of the Common people, both in
criminal and civil Causes in the Tourns, and County-Courts; even by virtue of
their Dignities and Offices, as our Sheriffs are now; in which Courts they did
instruct the people in the Laws of the Land; and administer Justice to them in
all ordinary Civil and criminal causes. For proo^ whereof you may peruse at
leisure, M. Seldens Titles of Honor, Part 2. c* 5. Sect. 5. Sir Edw. Cooks
Institutes on Magna Charta, c. 35. His 4. Institutes, c. 53. the Laws of King
Edgar, and Edward there cited. Spelmanni Glossarium, Tit. Comites, Mr. Lambards
Archaion, f. 135. Horns Mirror of Justices, c. 1. Sect. 2, 3. If then they
were Judges of the Commons and people in every County, by reason of their
Honors, Dignities, even in antientest times, in ordinary Causes; there is
great right and reason too, they should be their Judges also in all their
extraordinary causes, as well criminal as civil, even in Parliament,

3ly, The Lords, Peers and great Officers of State, in respect of their
education, learning, experience in all proceedings of Justice and Law, are more
able, fit to be Judges of Commons in Parliament, than ordinary Citizens and
Burgesses (especially if chosen out of the Cities and Boroughs themselves for
which they serve, as anciently they were, and still ought to be by the Statutes
of 1 H. 5. c. 1. 32 H. 6. c. 15. and by the very purports of the writs for
their election at this very day: and de qualibet Civitate Com. praedict. DVOS
CIVES, and de quolibet Burgo DUOS BVRGENSES,) who have better knowledge, skill
in Merchandise, and their several Trades, than in matters of Judicature, or
Law. Therefore the Right of Judicature was thought meet, even after the Commons
admission to our Parliaments, to be still lodged and vested in the House of
Peers, as before, who are the ablest and fittest of the two, rather than in the
Commons House.

4ly, Since the division of the Houses one from another, (if ever they sat
together, which cannot be proved) the House of Peers are dis-ingaged and
indifferent parties between the King and Commons, and so fittest of all to he
Judges between them, as the Mirror of Justices, c. 1. resolves, so it has
been still furnished with the ablest Temporal and Spiritual persons for their
Assistants in judgment and advice; to wit, with all the Judges See Modus
tenendi Parliamentum Vowel, Cowel, Crompton, Sir Thomas Smith, Coke, and
others, 17 E. 3. n. 23. 21 E. 3. n. 7. 7 R. 2. n. 30, 31. 9 R. 2. n. 13. 2 R.
1. pt. 2. n. 27. 31 H. 6. n. 26, 27, 28. 28 H. 6. n. 6.
of the Realm, Barons of the Exchequer, of the Coy^, the Kings learned Counsel,
the Masters of the Chancery who are Civilians or Lawyers, the Master of the
Rolls, the Principal Secretaries of State, with other eminent persons for parts
and learning, and the Procuratores Gleri; all which are called by Writ to
assist, and give their attendance in the upper House of Parliament, where they
have no voices, but are to give their counsel and advice only to the Lords when
they require their assistance, especially in cases of Law and Judicature. For
proof whereof you may consult the Statutes of 31 H. 8. c. 10. The Register of
Writs, f. 261. Fitz. Not. Brev. f. 229. a. b. M. Seldens Titles of Honor, part
2. c. 5. Sir Edw. Cooks 4 Instit. p. 4, 5, 6, 44, 45, 46. and the Parliament
Rolls and Authorities there cited by them, seconded by our present experience.
Now the House of Peers being thus assisted with the advice of all the Judges of
England, the Kings learned Counsel, and others ablest to advise them in all
Criminal, Civil or Ecclesiastical matters, cases that come before them: were in
this regard thought fittest by our Ancestors, and the 1 H. 4. n. 79.
Commons themselves (who have no such assistants) to have the principal and
sole power of Judicature, in all civil and criminal causes as well of Commoners
as Peers, that are proper for the Parliaments Judicature by way of censure or
redress.

5ly, There can be no judgment given in any of the Kings Courts in Criminal
causes, but where the Sea the Freeholders Grand Inquest, p. 25. Cokes 4 Instit.
c. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11.
King is personally or representatively present, sitting upon the Tribunal, and
where the proceedings are Coram Rege. And therefore in the end of most ancient
Parliament Rolls, we find the Title of An exact abridgment, p. 377.399.
Placita Coronae, CORAM DOMINO REGE IN PARLIAMENTO SUO, etc. as in 4 E. 3. 21
R. 2. 1 H. 4. and other Parliaments. Now as the Kings person is represented,
Judgments given, Justice executed, in all Criminal and Civil cases in the
Kings Bench, Eyres, Goal Deliveries, Oyers and Terminers, and all his other
Courts, by his Judges and Justices, in his absence* So is it represented in our
Parl. in the Lords house by his Commissioners and the Lords and Judgments
given, Justice executed by them in all criminal and civil causes; and no ways by
the Commons, who neither sit, nor judge in the House of Peers. Therefore the
House of Peers only, no^ the Commons, are the true and proper judicato^y; where
the King the supreme judge fits usually in Person, and always in
representation in his absence.

6ly, There can be no legal trial or Judgment given in Parliament, in Criminal
causes or others, without examination of witnesses upon Oath, as in all other
Courts of justice. But the House of Peers alone have power to give, and examine
witnesses upon 7 R. 2. par. 2. n. 14. 1 R. 2. n. 31, 32.
Oath; and the whole House of Commons no such power, but to take Informations
without Oath, which neither they nor their Committees can administer, unless by
special Order and Commission from the King or Lords: Therefore the power of
judicature in Parliament, even in Commoners cases, is inherent only in the
House of Peers, and not in the Commons House.

7ly, It is a rule both of Law and justice, Littleton, sect. 21^. Coke ibid. 4
E. 3.7. 2 H. 6.10. 14 H. 4 8. 2 R. 2.29. 5 H. 7, 8. Bro. Challeng. 23, 42, 71.
that no man can be an informer, prosecutor, and judge too of the persons
prosecuted, and informed against it being contrary to all grounds of justice:
therefore he ought to complain and petition to others for Justice. But the
Commons in all ancient Parliaments, and in this present, have been informers
and prosecutors (in nature of a Cokes 4. Instit. p. 24.
Grand Inquest, to which some compare them, being summoned from all parts of
the kingdom to present public Grievances and Delinquents to the King and Peers
for their redress) and thereupon have always petitioned, complained to the
King and Lords for Justice against all other Delinquents and offenders in
Parliament, not judged them themselves: witness their many impeachments,
accusations, complaints sent up and prosecuted by them in 50 E. 3. n. 5. to 37.
21 R. 2. n. 14, 15, 16. 28 H 6. n. 14, to 52. 31 H. 6. n. 45, 64. 38 H. 6. n.
38.
former Parliaments, and this, to the Lords, not only against Peers* but
Commoners, of which there are hundreds of presidents this very Parliament:
Therefore the House of Lords has the proper right of judicatory vested in
them, even in Cases of Commoners, not the Commons; who are rather Informers,
Prosecutors, and Grand Jury men, to inform, impeach, than Judges to hear,
censure, determine and give judgment, as is resolved in 1 H. 4. n. 79.

8ly. Those who are proper Judges in any Court of Justice, whiles the cause is
judging sit in their Robes, and that covered, 25 E. 3. c. 2. 20 R. 2. c. 3. 6
R. 2. c. 5. 14 H. 6. c. 3. 8 R. 2. c. 3. 2 R. 2. c. 10.
on the Bench, not stand bare at the bar; sweat and examine the witnesses in
the cause, not produce them or manage the evidence; and when the cause is fully
heard, argue and debate the business between themselves, and then give the
definitive sentence. But in all cases that are to be tried and judged in Parl.
the Lords only sit upon the Bench, and that covered, and in their Parliamentary
Robes the badges of Judicature; but the Commons stand and that bare at the Bar,
without any robes at all: the Lords only swear, examine the witnesses, and
judge of their testimony; the Commons only Coke 4 Instit. p. 24.
produce the witnesses, press and manage the evidence; and when the bu^nesse
is fully heard, the Lords only debate the cause among themselves, and give the
final Sentence, Judgment without the Commons, (though sometimes in their
presence) and that both in cases of Commoners and Peers. Therefore the Lords
and House of Peers are sole Judges in Parliament, not the Commons.

9ly. The Commons themselves in all ages since admitted into our Parliaments,
See an Exact Abridgement of the Records of the Tower, and the Table to to it.
Tit. Commons, Lords, Parliaments Petitions, Cooks 4. Inst. p. 16.
have always presented their Petitions in Parliament to the King and Lords
alone, for redress of all Grievances, wrongs, misdemeanors, abuses whatsoever,
public or private, criminal or civil, ecclesiastical, marine, or military: And
the Lords House alone have in all ancient Parlaments appointed particular
persons of their House to receive al Petitions, Triers of them to hear and
answer them by their advice, and the kings assent, when necessary; which Triers
of Petitions had power given to call the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer,
Chamberlain, Judges, kings Servants, and others to this assistance, prescribing
where, when their Petitions should be presented, examined, redressed, at all
our Parliament Rolls a^est, and Sir Edward Cook, himself relates: There being
few or no Petitions at all presented by any to the Commons before ^^ H. 7. c.
19. and. 4 H. 7. c. 6. These Petitions then presented to them, and all ever
since, with all in this present Parliament, being only to this end, that they
upon the examination of the truth, matters, complaints, grievances mentioned in
them, might transmit and represent them in the name of the Commons House to the
Lords House, for to give, full redress, relief, and judgment on them to the
Petitioners* not for the Commons themselves to judge, finally determine them,
or give relief upon them without the Lords; as all the transmissions of private
and public Petitions by the Commons to the Lords heretofore and in this
Parliment, in the cases of Dr. Layton, Dr. Bastwick, Mr. Burton, Mr. Walker, my
self, and of Lilburns own Petition against his censure, attest. See here, p.
46, 47.
Therefore the Judicature of our Parliaments, must wholly rest and entirely
reside in the Lords House, as well in all Criminal as civil cases, both of
Commoners and Lords.

10ly. The surest badge and highest evidence of the right and exercise of
Juridical, and Judicial Authority in Parliament, is the examination,
affirmation, control, repeal, nulling, adjudging, and final determining all
Errors in Judgments, Decrees, Proceedings, and all Misprisions, Abuses,
Corruptions, grievances whatsoever of Judges, Justices, in all other Courts of
Justice, Civil, Ecclesiastical, Marine or military; Now the Lords-alone in
Parliament, upon Wtits of Error, Appeals, Complaints, Petitions, etc, examine,
confirm, repeal, null, redress, and finally determine all Errors, misprisions
in Judgments, Decrees, Proceedings, and all Abuses, Corruptions, Grievances
whatsoever, in all other Courts of Justice; whether Civil, as the Kings Bench,
Chancery, Exchequer Chamber, Common Pleas, Exchequer, Court of Wards, Courts of
Requests, Stanneries, etc. or Ecclesiastical, as the High Commission,
Archbishops, Consistories, the Convocation, and the Admiralty, Court Marshal,
Council Table, Star Chamber, and in former Parliaments, as is evident by sundry
presidents in former ages, and in this present Parliament of King CHARLES in the
cases of Dr. Layton, Dr. Bastwick, Mr. Burton, Lilburn himself, Mr. Grafton,
Alderman Chambers, Mr. Rolls, Sir Rob* Howard, Alderman Langham and Limry, Mr.
John's, and le Gay, with sundry others: But more especially in cases of Writs of
Error brought in Parliament by Peers or Commoners, upon any Erroneous
judgments touching their real or personal estates, lives, limbs, liberties,
persons, upon Indictments or Attainders, In all which writs the King and Lords
only are sole judges (without the Commoners) and the returns of the proceedings
upon such Writs are only before the Lords in the Upper House, secundum legem et
consuetudinem Parliaments: So Sir Edward Cook himself expressly resolves in
direct terms, in his 4 Institutes, p. 21, 22, 23. And 22 E. 3.3. Fitz Error 8
Br. 3.1 H. 7.20, 21, 22. Br. Error, 137. Old Book of Entries, p. 302.16 E. 3.
Fitz. Brev. 651.21 E. 3.46. Br. Error, 65.29 E. 3.24.39. Ass. 18.42. Ass. 22.7
H. 6.28. 8 H. 5. Fitz. Error 88.19 H. 6.12.35 H. 6.19.37 H. 6.16.11 H. 4.65.9
E. 4.3.2 R. 3.22.37 H. 8.14, 15, 25. Dyer, f. 62.196, 201, 315, 375. intimate
as much. This is most clear by the Writs of Error, Judgments and Proceedings
on them in the Parliament House, before and by the Lords alone mentioned in the
Parliament Rolls themselves, Exact abridgement, p. 66.85, 86, 123, 156, 164,
176, 177, 168, 169, 282, 300, 301, 304, 305, 331, 543, 344, 348, 352, 353, 359,
363, 369, 372, 373, 393, 408, 418, 429, 440, 535, 539, 546.
as 14* E. 1. ro^ Parl. 1.4 E. 3. n. 13, 14.21 E. 3. n. 65, 66.28 E. 3. n. 8.
to 14.50 E. 3. n. 38.1 R. 2. n. 28, 29, 105.2 R. 2. n. 31, 32, 33, 37, 38.
Parl. 2. and Parl. 1. n. 21. to 27.3 R. 2. n. 19.20, 21, 22.6 R. 2. n. 17.7 R.
2. n. 20, 21.8 R. 2. n. 13, 14, 15, 16.13 R. 2. n. 16, 17* 15 R. 2. n. 22, 23,
24.16 R. 2. n. 17, 18.17 R. 2. n. 17.19.^8 R. 2. n. 11, 12, 13.20 R. 2. n.
^6.21 R. 2. n. 25, 55. to 66, 71.1 H. 4. n. 91, 92.2 H. 4. n. 38, 39, 40.4 H.
4. n. 26.5 H. 4. n. 40.6 H. 4. n. 31.1 H. 5. n. 19.2 H. 5. n. 13, 14.3 H. 5. n.
19. with sundry Writs of Error in succeeding Parliaments, and this now sitting,
adjudged, determined by the King and Lords alone, without the privity or
interposition of the Commons. A truth so clear, that Lilburn himself in his
Argument against the Lords jurisdiction, confesses i^. If then the Lords
House, be the so^e Judges in all Writs of Error, and Appeals from all other
Courts of Justice, concerning the Lands, Tenements, Goods, Estates, Liberties,
Members, Lines, Attainders of all English Freeholders, and Commoners
whatsoever, notwithstanding the Statute of Magna Charta, chapter 29. No Freeman
shall be taken or imprisoned, etc. neither will we pass upon him nor condemn
him, but by the lawful judgment of his Peers, etc. (the grand and principal
objection against the Lords Judicature in Cases of Commoners) then by the self
same reason they are their lawful Judges, and may regally proceed against them
in all other criminal or Civil causes, especially in cases of breach of their
own Privileges, wherein they are the sole and only Judges, since no other Court
can judge of, nor yet punish them, as Sir Ed. Cook resolves, being properly
triable only in Pa^liament (as contempt against all other Courts, are
punishable and triable by themselves alone) the present cases of Lilburne and
Overton.

Now that they are and always have been so de facto (unless by way of Bill of
Attainder, or in such extraordinary cases when their concurrence has been
desired) even in criminal cases, misdemeanors and offenses of Commons as well
as Peers, I shall prove by most clear and infallible evidences and presidents
as well ancient as modern,

Our Noble King Alfred, as he Cooks 1 Instit. f. 110 a.
ordained for the good estate of the Realm, that the Earls and Noble thereof,
by a perpetual custom, should twice every year, or oftener, in times of Peace,
assemble together in Parliament at London, to govern the people of England, and
keep them from sin, as Andr. Horn informs us in his Mirror of Justices, c.
1. p. 10. So the same Author records, c. 5. p. 296, 297, etc. That this royal
Justiciary (who took a short account each year of all his Judges proceedings in
his Parliaments) condemned and hanged up in one year about An. 890 as I
conjecture) no less than Cooks 3 Instit. p. 224.
44 of his Judges and Justices, as Murderers, for executing his Subjects and
putting them to death against Law, without any legal cause or sufficient
evidence, or trial, by a Jury of their Peers: and imprisoned, fined, punished
others of them, in the self same kind as they had injuriously imprisoned, fined
and punished his Subjects against Law: and that no doubt by the advice and
assent of his Nobles in Parliament, upon complaint of their injustice and
corruption; the proper Court for punishment of such Offenders, whose names and
causes (recorded at large by this Author) show them to be all Commoners and no
Peers of the Realm.

Walsingham Ypodig. Neustr. p. 93, 94. Here, p. 213.
Anno 1096. William de Anco and William de Alderi were hanged for Treason
against William Rufus, by judgment of the Lords, in a Parliament at Salisbury.

Mat. Paris, Hist. Angl. p. 101.
King Henry the 2. Anno 1166. holding a Council at Oxf^quidam pravi dogmatis
seminatores tracti sunt IN JUDICIUM, praesente Rege et Episcopis Regni; quos a
fide Catholica devios, et in examine superatos, facies cauteriata notabiles
cunctis exposuit, qui expulsi sunt a regno. These Heretics thus branded in the
face and banished the Realm by the judgment of the King and this Council, ae
Rerum Anglic. Hist. l. 2. c. 13. See my Sword of Christian Magistracy
supported, p. 51, 52.
Nubrigensis informs us, were above 30. men and women who came out of Germany
into England, under one Gerard their Captain, styled Publicans, who went about
the Country to spread their errors; but at last being detected, they were
apprehended and cast into prison; and then brought before the King, and a
Council of his Bishops; where being convicted of Heresy, they were adjudged by
the K. to be publicly whipped, branded in the face, and then banished the
Realm. Hujus severitatis pius rigor, non peste illa quae jam irrepserat Angliae
regnum purgavit, verum etiam ne ulterius irreperet incusso haereticis terrore
praecavit, as Nubrigensis observes.

In the year 1224. the 8. of King Henry the 3. his reign, Mat. Paris p. 308,
309, 310, 318. Mat. Westminster. Ann. 1224. p. 119, 127.
the King requiring a restitution and resumption of his Castles and Lords
detained from him by some Nobles and others, who at last for fear of the
Bishops excommunication against such as detained them, and disturbed the peace
of the Realm; and also of the Kings power and justice, much against their
wills, reddiderunt singuli Castella, et municipia, et honores, et custodias
Regi quae ad coronam spectare videbantur: Thereupon Falcatius de Breut, a
Norman born, a Soldier under King John in the Barons wars, trusting on the
Kings and other great men's favors, fortified the Castle of Bedford, situated on
another man's ground, and presuming on his friends, and his own military power
and wealth gained in the wars, he feared not violently and unjustly to take
away the Freeholds, lands and possessions of diverse of his neighbors, and more
epecially he disseised 52. Freemen in the Manor of Luiton of their Freeholds
and Tenements without judgment, and appropriated their Common pastures to
himself: Whereof complaint bing afterward made to King Henry the 3. Anno 1224.
the King assigned Martin de Pateshulle, Thomas de Multon, Henry de Braibroc,
and certain other Justices, to take the recognition of the parties complaining
of these disseisins, by an Assise of Novel disseisin, and to do them Justice.
Who having received their recognitions according to custom, the said Falcatius
was condemned to pay them costs and damages for the spoils done in the said
Tenements, to which the Plaintifs were judicially restored. Which Falcatius
taking very impatiently, being likewise amerced one hundred pounds to the King
for every of the said Tenements, for his forcible entry into them; he in a
great fury commanded his Garrison soldiers in the Castle of Bedford, to march
armed to Dunstaple, where the Justices Itinerant sat and gave judgment
against him, and to take and bind them in chains, and carry them to Bedford
Castle, and there detain them close prisoners in the Dungeon. The Justices
having notice thereof, fled thence with all speed, some one way, some another;
but Henry de Braibroc flying, was at unwares taken by the Soldiers, who used
him very inhumanly, then carried him prisoner to Bedford Castle, and there kept
him prisoner. King Henry at that time was at Northampton, where he held a
Parliamentary Council, Cum Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus, Baronibus, et
aliis multis, de regni negotiis tractaturi: voluit erim Rex uti consilio
MAGNATUM SUORUM de terris transmarinis, quas Rex Francorum paulatim
occupaverat: but it happened otherwise than he hoped: For the rumor of this act
of Falcatius being divulged, the wife of the said Henry Braibroc came to the
King at Northampton; et audiente univer^o Concilio, de viro suo cum lachrymis
Querelas.
querulans deposuit; Quod Rex factum minus indigne* ferens; quaesi vit
Consilium a Clero simul et Populo (to wit, the Spiritual and Temporal Lords,
Clerus Regni and Populus when single, being frequently used for the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, both in Matthew Paris, Hoveden, Bromton and others, not
for the inferior Clergy and Commons house, not then in being, as some
Antiquaries mistake) quid sibi super tanta injuria foret agendum? At omnes una
voce concilium Regi dederunt, quatenus sine mora et omnibus aliis praetermissis
negotiis in man^ valida et armata ad Castrum praedictum procedens, tantam
temeritatem studeat vindicare. Cumque Domino Regi placuisset SENTENTIA, ipso
jubente omnes ad arma quam citius convolantes, ad castellum praedictum de
Bedeford, tam Clorus quam Populus pervenerunt; The whole Parliament marching in
person to execute this their Sentence upon these transcendent military
Malefactors. Hereupon the King sending Messengers to the Commanders of the
Castle, required entrance to be given to him, and commanded Henry Braibroc his
Justice to be rendered. But William de Brent, Brother of Falcatius, and the
rest within it, answered the Messengers, that they would not render the Castle
nor Justice, unless they had a command from their Lord Falcatius, and
especially for this reason, quod Regi de Homagio vel fidelitate non tenebantur
astricti. With which answer the King being much incensed, commanded the Castle
to be presently encompassed with military trenches; and those within prepared
to defend their walls and Bulwarks: Then the Archbishop and all the Bishops
with burning Papers smote Falcatius himself and all within the Castle with the
sword of Excommunication: The King commanded all warlike engines to be brought,
and gave many assaults to the Castle to win it by force, since they refused to
render it; many were slain and wounded on both sides. At last after many weeks
siege the Kings soldiers entering the Castle by force, those within it being
unable to hold out any longer, rendered themselves to the Kings mercy: who
putting them in close custody and chains, commanded 24 of the Knights and
Soldiers (who stouted it most against him even when the siege was ended) QVI
OMNES SVSPENDIO ADJUDICATI SVNT, to be hanged that day: Matthew Westminster
writes, there were near one hundred of them hanged up. Henry Braibroc being
then restored to the King safe and sound, rendered him many thanks. In the mean
time, the King sent an armed Troop to seek out and apprehend Falcatius, and
bring him prisoner to him: who having notice thereof fled into Wales for
shelter: The K. thereupon swore, that if he took the Castle by force, he would
hang up all who were within it; And withal seized upon all Falcatius his
Manors, Lands, Corn, goods and chattels throughout England, as confiscated. At
last Falcatius hearing that the Castle was taken, and his Brother and soldiers
hanged, came to the King to Bedford, under the con^uct of Alexander Bishop of
Coventry, and there casting himself at the Kings feet, humbly implored his
mercy, in respect of the many great and costly services he had done in his
father and himself in time of war* Tum Rex per Consilium of his Nobles and
Barons) tradidit illum Casteliis, Terris et rebus omnibus spoliatum sub
custodia Eu^ch^ Londoni (...) E^iscopi, donec quid de illo ageret esset
sententialiter de^nitum. Et sic quasi in momento idim Falcatius de duissimo
pauperimus effectus multis et maxim nocentibus poterit fieri in exemplum. Regi
autem pro maximis laboribus et expensis (in the siege of this Castle) tam a
Clericis quam a ^nicis concessum est per totam Angliam Carucagium, de qualibet
caruca duo solidi argenti. MAGNATIBUS item concessit Rex scutagium, scilicet de
scuto quolibet duas marcas sterlingorum: et sic omnes ad propria recesserunt.
Castellum quoque illud fecit Rex complanari et redigi in acervos A most
memorable example of regal and Parliamentary Justice upon insolent contemners
of Law, Justice and Justices, the whole Parliament turning Soldiers, and
continuing together at the Siege of this Castle above two Months space, till
they had taken the Castle and Malefactors by force, and done execution on both.
And an eminent president of the Ks. and Lords Jurisdiction in causes both of
Commoners and Soldiers, as well as Peers and Nobles.

Mat. Par. p. 785, 788, 793, 794.
Henry de Bathonia, a learned Knight, most skillful in the Laws of the Realm,
one of the Kings Justices and special Counselors, in the year 1251, (the 35 of
Henry the 3.) was most grievously defamed and accused of bribery and
corruption, in the Office of his Justiceship, wherein he feared not
treacherously to empty other men's purses, to fill his own, growing thereby in a
short time extraordinary rich in Rents, Moneys, Gold and Silver, being
instigated thereunto by his wife; whereby adeo turpibus per fas et nefas
emolumentis inhiabat, ut in una sola itinaratione Justiciaria dicebatur,
plusquam ducentas libratas terrae sibi appropriare: Whereupon appellatus est de
infidelitate et proditione, by Philip de Arci Knight, coram Rege et Curia
Regis, And attached for to answer it. John Mansell the Kings Chief Justice
proffered to bayl him, and to be his Manucaptor, ut staret Justitiae, but he
could not be heard, the King being so incensed, that he answered he would take
no Clergyman for his bayl in such a case, reputing it to be HIGH TREASON; at
last by the Bishop of Londons and others mediation and intercession, he was
bayled by 24 Knights, and delivered to their custody, pro ipso Hen.
responsionem and justificationem rite, et judicialiter statuto termino
facturum. After which by gifts and large promises he earnestly solicited his
friends to intercede for him with the King, and procure his pardon; or else, if
they could not effect it* to stand constantly for him in the day of peril,
armis, si necesse sicut et equis communiti, which they by unanimous consent
promised to do. The King being privily informed thereof majori iracundia
accensus, omnia munera et verba reconciliationis praecise refutabat, jurans
quod per medium judicii districti necessario fuerat transiturus. Upon this, he
by entreaties and gifts procured Earl Richard to mediate to the King for him;
adjungens sub tremendi judicii attestatione, quod si Dominus Rex mortem suam,
imo etiam exhaeredationem procuraret, totum regnum in ipsum Regem insurgeret,
and tota perturbaretur; quod si fieret, cum sub sint aliae causae, and maxim
alienigenarum injustae dominationes, and Anglorum oppressiones, non sedaretur
schisma ventilatum. The Earl hereupon most effectually interceded for him, and
the peace of the Realm, but could not mitigate the Kings wrath and indignation.
In March there was a great Parliament held at London, where Henry was appointed
to appear and answer; who came thither guarded with a great multitude of
Soldiers of his Wives, and his own kindred and friends: Whereupon the King
being highly incensed, he was on every side grievously assaulted and accused by
his adversaries, and by the King more heavily than the rest; imponens eidem
inter caetera, quod totum regnum perturbavit, et Barnagium universum contra
ipsum Regem exasperavit: unde seditio generalis imminebat. Fecit igitur
acclamari voce praeconia Londini et in curia, ut si quis aliquid habere
actionis vel querelae adversus Henricam de Bathonia, veniret ad curiam ante
Regis praesentiam, ubi plene exaudiretur. Insurrexerunt igitur multi queruli
contra eum, ita quod unus etiam sociorum suorum, scilicet Justitiarius palam
protestaretur, quod unum facinerosum convictum and incarceratum abir^ permisit
impunitum, sine judicio, opimis respectus muneribus: quod factum est in Regis
praejudicium, and Justitiariorum comitum suorum periculum et discrimen. Rex
igitur magis inde provocatus, ascendit superius, exclamavitque, dicens: Si quis
Henricum de Bathonia acciderit, quietus sit a morte ejus, and quietum eum
protestor: and sic propere recessit Rex. Et fuerunt ibi multi, qui in ipsum
Henricum hostiliter irruissent, nisi Domini Johannis Mansel prudentia eorum
impetum temperans, refranasset: Dixit enim, Domini mei et amici, non est
necesse quod in iu^a praprepere dicitur, prosequamur. Poenitebit forte dominum
nostrum jam elapso irae tempore haec innotuisse. Praeterea, si aliquid
^iolentiae ipsi Henrico intuleritis, ecce Episcopus Londinonsis, qui
spiritualem, et alii amici ejus militares, qui vindictam exercebunt materialem,
et sic in magna part cessavit. Extunc igitur procurante efficaciter Comite
Richardo et Episcop^ memorato, mitius actum est cum eo. Dictum enim est domino
Regi secretius, quod mirum est, quod aliquis ei curat servire, cum eis post
ministerium etiam mortem nititur infer. Promissa igitur quadam pecuniae
summa, a mortis discrimine recessit liberatus. After which he paying to the
King 2000 marks for a fine, and being reconciled to the King, ad Curiam est
reversus, immemor laqueorum quos evaserat. Here we have, 1. A corrupt Judge
accused of bribery by others, and by the King of rebellion and sedition, and
that before the Lords in Parliament. 2ly. A Proclamation for all that were
grieved to complain against him. 3ly. A rash unjust sentence given against him
by the King himself, for any man that would to kill him, with impunity. 4ly.
the Lords opposition and contradiction of this sentence, and its execution as
unjust and dangerous. 5ly. A remission of his sentence by the Lords mediation,
and a fine imposed and paid to the King for his offenses.

In the 49 year of King Henry the 3. at the Parliament held at Winchester, Mat.
West. anno 1265, p. 34. Mat. Paris p. 967.
diverse Commoners, as well as Lords were attainted and condemned of High
Treason, for levying war against the King; their persons imprisoned, their
lands and goods confiscated, and the liberties of the City of London forfeited
by judgment of the Lords.

Anno ^290. Walsingh. Ypodig. Neust. p. 72. Hist. Angl. p. 15. Parl. 20 E. 1.
f. 5. Cooks 3. Instit. p. 145. Holinshed, p. 284, 285.
King Edward the 1. held a Parliament at London, at which time, Rex auditis
multorum queremoni^^* fere Justiciarios omnes de falsitate deprehensos, a suo
Officio deposuit, puniens eos juxta demerita gr^vi m^a, by the advice of his
Lords in Parliament.

It appears by the Clause Roll of 5 E. 2. m. 22. dorso, and Rot. Finium, 5 E.
2. m. 11. in Schedula, that in a Parliament held at Stamford 3 E. 2. the
Commons of England exhibited sundry Articles of complaint to the King: Amongst
others, that they were not used as they ought to be by THE GREAT CHARTER, in
taking Prises and Purveyances without money, etc. That the King by his Ministers
took ijs. of every Tun of wine, and ijs. a cloth from Merchants aliens, and 3
d. pur aver de poys, to the damage of his people, and hinderance of trade:
which new Impositions being against Law, the King promised to redress for the
future, and to content himself with the Prises and Customs anciently due. They
likewise complained of the abuses, oppressions, and extravagances of Purveyors,
Constables of Castles and Escheators, and abuses of Protections and Pardons
granted by the King to Murderers and other Malefactors to their encouragement;
whereto redress was promised. In their 6. Article, they complained, That the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of Parliament came up with diverse Petitions for
matters not remediable at the Common Law, and could not find to whom to
deliver them. Whereunto was answered; The King willed, that in his Parliaments
for time to come, certain persons should be appointed to receive Petitions; and
that they should be delivered TO HIS COUNCIL, as was used in the time of his
Father, and examined and answered by him, with their advice. Whence we find in
See An Exact abridgment of the Records in Tower, title, Petitions, Commons,
Parliment, in the Table, and Petitions of the Commons in the Abridgment it self.
all our Parliament Rolls ever since in the beginning of every Parliament
certain persons nominated by the King and Lords, being Members or Assistants of
the Lords house, to receive the several Petitions of England, Ireland,
Scotland, Gascoigne, Iersey, Gernsey, Alderney, and other Isles; and other
persons of the LORDS House appointed to try, examine and answer them in the
Kings name and behalf; as he by their advice shall think meet; and sundry
Petitions of Grievances of all kinds presented to them, and answered
accordingly by the King and Lords in every Parliament, as well by the whole
house of Commons, as by particular Counties, Cities, Corporations and private
Persons; a most clear Evidence, that the King and Lords are the sole Judges of
all criminal and civil causes and Grievances of the Commons in Parliament,
since they thus constantly petition them for redress; and that the Commoners
are only Petitioners, not Judges, as the Parliament roll of 1 H. 4. n. 79.
resolves in direct terms.

Claus. 8 E. 2. m. 7. dors. The Chaplains of the House of Converts exhibited a
Petition in Parliament against Adam de Osgodby the Keeper thereof, for putting
them out of their lodgings, and placing his Clerks therein, they being founded
by King H. 3. to pray and sing Masses for his and his ancestors Souls, and not
to lodge the Clerks of the Chancery.

Upon consideration of the Petition by the Lords and Council in Parliament, it
was referred to the Chancellor to examine and determine; tanquam principali
Custodi omnium Hospitalium et Domorum de eleemosyna Domini Regis fundatorum, ut
ipfe inde faceret quod de jure esset faciendum. He sends a Commission to the
House to inquire the truth of the complaint, and finds the Complaint unjust,
and that the Keeper of the House was falsely charged, and that especially by
William de Okelines, being one of the Chaplins, Whereupon consideratum est per
Cancellarium, quod Willielmus idem nihil haberet de contentis in petitione sua
praedicta sed quod committeretur ad custodiam suam pro fals^ querela sua
castigandus, juxta discretionem dicti custodis.

Pasch. 8 E. 2. Norfolk: The Archdeacon of Norfolk was accused for citing the
Countess of Warren, being the Kings Niece, and divorced from her husband, to
the damage of the King 2000 l. and it was adjudged by the Lords in Parliament
against the Archdeacon, quod nec citatio, nec summonitio fieri debet versus eot
qui sunt de sanguine Regis, quia illis Major reverentia debita est; and
therefore he was fined.

Walsingham, Ypodig. Neustr. p. 102.
About the year 1316. when the Northumberland Soldiers* (like some in this age)
raised against the Scots, de tyron^bus facti sunt Tyranni, de defensoribus
destructores, de propugnatoribus proditores, etc. one Polychro: l. 7. c. 42. f.
312. Henry de Knyghton, de Event, Angliae l. 3. c. 14. col. 2535.
John Tanner said openly, that he was heir of England. Therefore at Northampton
before the King and Lords, he was proved false, and hanged and drawn. See more
of him in Fabians Chronicle* part. 7. Anno 1314. p. 169. who relates, that he
reported he was son to King Edward the 1. but was stolen out of his cradle by a
false nurse, and Edward who was another son, laid in the cradle for him; and
that he had a Fiend in form of a C^t whom he served 3. years, which assured him
he should be King of England.

Placita Parl. An. 18 Edw. 1. in the Parchment bnok in the Tower, f. 2. b. 50,
51.
In the Parliament of 18. E. 1. the Prior of Trinity in London, and Bago de
Clare were attached, brought into the Parliament, there fined a 1000 l. to
Edmond Earl of Cornwall, and 2000 marks to the Abbot of Westminster, and
committed to the Tower of London, by JUDGMENT of the King, Earls, Barons, and
Justices in full Parliament, for citing and attaching the said Earl of Cornwall
in Westminster hall, to appear before the Archbishop sitting the Parliament,
whereof he was a Peer, against his Privilege, and the privilege of Sanctuary
granted to the Abbot of Westminst. and remained prisoners there till they put
in Sureties, and paid the 1000 l. fine to the Earl, notwithstanding their plea
of ignorance of these their Privileges.

In the Parliament of 4 E. 3. n. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Sir Simon Bereford knight, John
Mautravers, Boso de Bayons, John Deverall, Thomas de Gournay, and William of
Ocle, confederates with Roger Mortimer Earl of March, in all his Treasons and
misdoings, for which he was then impeached and condemned, and guilty of the
murders of King Edward the 2. after his deposition, in Berkley Castle, and of
the Earl of Kent his Brother; were attainted and condemned of High Treason by
the Lords, Barons and Peers in Parliament, as Judges of Parliament, though they
were Commoners, and not their Peers, whom they were not at all obliged to judge
as Peers: adjudging them by the Kings assent, as Traitors and Enemies of the
King and his Realm, to be drawn and hanged: Whereupon Sir Simon being in
Custody, was executed by the Marshal; and Proclamation made by the Kings writs
by the Lords order, to apprehend the others, with promise of great rewards to
those who should apprehend them, that they might be executed; and if they could
not take them alive to bring in their heads, for which thty should receive the
reward of 500 l. from the King.

It is true indeed, that after these Judgments given the Lords the same
Parliament entered this special Protestation in the Parliament Roll n. 6.
against being forced to give Judgment in such cases against those who were not
their Peers; which 2 Instit. p. 50.
Sir Edward Cook styles an Act of Parliament, though it be no such thing, but a
voluntary Protestation of the Lords, with the Kings assent.

It is assented and agreed by our Lord the King, and all the Great men in full
Parliament, that albeit the said Peers, as Judges of Parliament, took upon them
in the presence of our Lord the King, to make and render the said Judgments by
assent of the King, upon some of those who were not at all their Peers, and
that by reason of the murder of our Liege Lord, and destruction of The Earl of
Kent, King Edwards Brother.
him who was so near of the blood royal, and son of a King; that thereby the
PEERS which now are, o^ the Peers which shall be in time to come, shall not be
bound or charged to render Judgments upon others who are not their Peers; nor
yet to do it but upon the Peers of the Land, but that they shall from
henceforth be for ever acquitted thereof. And that the said Judgments now
rendered, shall not be drawn into example nor consequence for time to come,
whereby the said Peers may be charged hereafter to adjudge others than their
Peers, against the Law of the Land, if such another case should happen, which
God defend.

From this Protestation of the Lords (which Lilburn principally insists on) he
and Cook 2 Instit, p. 50.
some others conclude; that the Peers in Parliament have no right at all to
imprison, fine, judge, or pass sentence of death against any Commoner for any
offense, no, (not for breach of their own Privileges) but only the Commons,

To which Objection I answer: First, that this is no Act of Parliam. as Sir E.
Cook mistakes, but a bare Protestation of the Lords alone, assented to by the
King, without the Commons assent, which no ways impeacheth the Lords right of
judicature. Secondly, that neither the House of Commons, nor the Commoners then
attainted of Treason, and adjudged to death by the Lords, ever demurred or
excepted against their Jurisdiction, as Lilburn and Overton do, but
acknowledged and submitted to it. Thirdly, That in this very Protestation the
Lords profess and justify their right of BEING JVDGES in Parliament, without
admitting or acknowledging any Joint or sole right of Judicature with them in
the Commons. Fourthly, That this Protestation was merely voluntary, not in
derogation, but preservation of their own Honor, Right, Peerage, and the
Parliaments privileges too; The substance of it is no more than this; That the
Lords should not be constrained against their wills by the Kings command, and
in his presence, to give judgment of death in ordinary cases of Treason or
Felony in the high Court of Parliament, or elsewhere out of it, against such
who were no Peers, who in such cases Magn. Char. c. ^9. 15 E. 3. c. 2.4. 28 E.
3. c 3.37 E. 3. c. 8.42 E. 3. c 3. Cook 2 Instit. p. 50, 51.
by the Law might, and ought to be tried in the Kings Courts at Westminster, or
before the Justices of Oyer and Terminer by a Jury of their equals; but only in
cases which could not well be tried elsewhere* and were proper for their
Judgment in Parliament; they fearing that by this president in Parliament they
might be sworn and impannelled on Juries in cases of Treason committed by
Commoners, against the Great Charter, c. 29. and the Privilege of their
Peerage, which exempted them being sworn or put into Juries, as Fitz. Not.
brev. f. 165.48 E. 3. f. 30. Exemption 6.48. Ass. 6.27 H. 8. f. 22. b. This is
the whole sum and sense of their protestation. To argue therefore from hence,
That they cannot pass sentence, or judgment against any Commoners in any case
proper for their Judicature in Parliament, because they protested only against
being COMPELLED to give Judgment against such as were no Peers, in cases
triable elsewhere, and not proper for their tribunal (as the Objectors hence
conclude) is quite to mistake their meaning, end, and to speak rather
nonsense, than reason or Law. Fifthly, This Protestation was made only against
the Lords giving sentence in Felony and Treason, and that in the Kings own
presence in Parliam. (who usually pronounced the judgment himself, or by some
other, with the Lords assent, and did not charge the Lords to pronounce it, as
here) not against sentencing, fining, imprisoning any Commoner for railing and
libelling against their Persons, Jurisdiction, and procedings; or refusing to
answer, and contemning their Authority to their faces at the bar; or appealing
from their Judicature in case of breach of Privilege, of which themselves alone
and no others are or can be Judges; the cases of Lilburn and Overton; whose
commitments are warranted by hundreds of Presidents, in this and former
Parliaments. Therefore for them to apply this Protestation to their cases, with
which it has no Analogy, is a manifestation of their injudiciousness and
folly, rather than a justification of their Libellous Invectives against the
Lords injustice. Sixthly, The Lords gave judgment against all these persons by
the Kings command in their absence, without any Indictment, hearing, Trial,
witnesses heard or examined against them face to face, or due process or Law,
against the Great Charter and Law of the Land. And this was the main reason of
this their Protestation, as the close of it shows, to prevent such dangerous
presidents for the future. Upon which ground the Judgments they then gave
against Roger Mortymer and John Mautravers were reversed in the Parliament of
21 E. 3. n. 65.28 E. 3. n. 8. to 16. Lastly, This Protestation did not
foreclose the Lords in this or future Parliaments to give Judgment against
Commoners in other cases of Felony and Treason, even without the Commons, which
I shall prove by some other instances.

In the Parliament of 4 Ed. 3. n. 16. Exact abridgement, p. 8.
Sir Thomas Berkeley Knight was arraigned and tried by a Jury for Treason, as
being guilty of the death of King Edward the 2. committed to his custody, who
pleaded not guilty, and was tried in full Parliament before the King by a Jury,
and by them acquitted: Which case being rare and memorable, I shall here insert
the whole Record.

Thomas de Berkele Miles venit coram Domino Rege in pleno Parliamento suo
praedicto, et allocutus hoc: Quod eum Dominus Edwardus nuper Rex Angliae, pater
Domini Regis nunc, in custodia ipsius Thomae, et cujusdam Johanuis Mautravors
nuper extitit collatus ad salvo custodiendum in castro ipsius Thomae apud
Berkele, in Com. Gloucestriae, et in eodem castro in custodia ipsorum Thomae
and Johannis murdratus extitit, et interfectus, qualiter se velit de morte
ipsius Regis acquietare? Dicit, quod nunquam fuit consentiens, auxilians, seu
procurans ad mortem suam, nec unquam scivit de morte sua usquam in praesenti
Parliamento isto, et de hoc paratus est acquietare se, prout CURIA REGIS
consideraverit. Et super hoc quaefitus est ab eo, ex quo ipse est Dominus
castri praedicti, et idem Dominus Rex in custodia ipsorum Thomae and Johannis
extitit liberatus ad salvo custodiend. and ipsi custodiam ipsius Regis
recepe^unt, et acceptarunt, quali er se excusare possit quin de morte ipsius
Regis respondere debeat? Et praedictus Thomas dicit, quod verum est quod ipse
est Dominus Castri praedicti, et quod ipse simul cum Johanne Mautravers,
custodiam ipsius Regis recepit ad salvo custodiend; ut praedictum est. Sed
dicit, quod eo tempore quo dicitur ipsum Dominum Regem esse murdratum et
interfectum fuit ipse taliter tanta infirmitate apud Bradeley extra Castrum
praedictum detentus, quod ei currebat memoriae. Et super hoc dictum est ei,
quod ex quo cognovit, quod ipse simul cum dicto Johanne custodiam ipsius Domini
Regis obtinuit, ut praedictum est, et ipse custodes et ministros sub se posuit
ad custodiam de eo faciendam, si per aliquam infirmitatem excusari posset, quin
respondere debuit in hac part? Et praedictus Thomas dicit, quod ipse posuit
sub se tales custodes et ministros in castro praedicto pro custodia facienda, a
quibus ipse se confidebat, ut de seipso, qui custodiam ipsius Regis simul cum
praedicto Johanne Mautravers inde habuerunt, unde dicit, quod ipse de morte
ipsius Domini Regis auxilio, assensu, seu procuratione mortis suae, in nullo
est inde culpabilis. Et de hoc de bono et malo ponit se su^er patriam. Ideo
venerint inde Juratores coram Domino Rege in Parliamento suo apud Westminster. in
Octabis Sancti Hilarii proxime futuri, etc. Ad quam diem venit praedictus
Thomas coram Domino Rege in pleno Parliamento, ac similiter Juratores, scil.
Johannes Darci, Johannes de Wisham, Willielmus Trussell, Rogerus de
Swyneuerton, Constantius de Mor^imer, Johannes de sancto Phileberto, Richardus
de Rivers, Petrus Hussy, Iohannis de Dynton, Richardus de la Rivere, Robertus
Dabenhate, and Richardus de Corveyes, omnes milites, Qui dicunt super
Sacramentum suum, quod praedictus Thomas de Berkelie, in nullo est culpabilis
praedicti Domini Edwardi Regis, Patris Domini Regis nunc, nec de assensu,
auxilio, seu procuratione mortis ejusdem. Et dicunt, quod tempore mortis
ejusdem Domini Edwardi Regis, patris Domini Regis nunc, fuit ipse tali
infirmitate gravatus apud Bradely extra castrum suum praedictum, quod de vi^a
ejus desperabatur. Ideo idem Thomas inde quietus: and Juratores quaesiti, si
idem Thomas unquam substraxit se occasion praedicta? dicunt, quod non: Et quia
idem Thomas posuit custodes et ministros sub se, scil. Thomam de Gourney, et
Willielmum de Ocle ad custodiam de ipso Domino Rege faciendam, per quod idem
Dominus Rex extitit murdratus et interfectus, datus est ei dies coram Domino
Rege nunc in proximo Parliamento suo, de audiendo JUDICIO SUO, etc. Et
praedictus Thomas de Berkelei interim committitur Radulpho de Nevill
Mareschallo hospitii Domini Regis, etc.

It is observable that though Edward the 2. was murdered after he was deposed
by this Parliament, yet he is still ^^lled a King in this Indictment, and
record, and his murder adjudged Treason in those who did it.

After his acquittal he put in Mainpernors to appear in the next Parliament,
Exact abridgement, p 10.
Where appearing, he and his Mainpernors were discharged, but yet himself
ordered to appear again the ensuing Parliament, as appears by the Parliament
Roll of 5 E. 3. n. 16.

Rot. Part* 24 E. 3. pars- 3. m. 2. dors. Rot. Pat. 25 E. 3. part. 1. m. 17.
Cooks 3 Inst. p. 223, 224. Mr. S. ^0. argument against the Shipmony Judges, p.
22, 23, 14.
William Thorp Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and one of the Justices of
Assize in the County of Lincoln, in the 23 year of Ed. the 3. against his Oath
took 10 l. of Richard Saltley, 20 l. of Hildebrand, of Beresward 40 l. of
Gilbert Holliland 40 l. and 10 l. of To. Daldorby to stay an Exigent upon an
Indictment of diverse felonies, that should have issued against them; Whereupon
he was indicted before the Earls of Arundel, Warwick, and Huntingdon, the Lord
Gray and Lord Burghers, Anno 24 E. 3. to whom the King by Commission referred
the examination of the business, before whom he could not deny, but confessed
the Bribery. Ideo consideratum est per dictos Justiciarios assignatos, ad
judicandum secundum voluntatem Regis, et secundum regale posse suum; quod quia
praedictus Willielmus Thorp^, qui sacramentum Domini Regis quod erga populum
suum habuit custodiendum fregit malitiose, false et rebelliter, in quantum in
ipso fuit, and ex causis supradictis ipsum Willielmum express cognitis, ideo
SUSPENDATUR, et quod omnia terra et tenementa, bona et catalla sua remaneant
forisfacta. The King by a writ under the privy Seal, stayed his execution, and
sent him Prisoner to the Tower. In the Parliament of 25 Ed. 3. nu. 10. command
was given, Exact abridgement, p. 74.
that the record of this Judgment against Judge Thorp should be brought into
the Parliament, and there read openly BEFORE THE LORDS, to have every of their
advice concerning it, whether this Judgment were legal or not? et nullo
contradicente, all the Lords affirmed the judgment to be legal and good,
considering that he against his Oath received Bribes: And therefore it was
agreed by all the Lords, that if the like case should hereafter happen, the
King might take to him such Nobles as he should think meet, and therein do
according to his pleasure. Provided this judgment should not be drawn into
example against any other Officers who should break their Oaths; but only
against those, qui praedictum Sacramentum fecerunt (of Justices) et fregerunt,
et habent leges Regales Angl. ad custod. Here the Lords were sole Judges of the
Judge, who was a Commoner, and gave judgment against him without the Commons,
yea declare the Law in this new case, both in and out of Parliament.

Exact abridgement, p. 67.
In the Parliament of 21 E. 3. n. 68. The Commons by diverse Bills complained to
the Lords of diverse extortions, grievances, prejudices done to the King and
Commons by John Wattenham, and Walter de Cheriton Merchants, who desired the
King would command them to come before THE COUNCIL and LORDS in Parliament, to
answer what should be objected, and clear themselves.

Exact abridgement, p. 120. Henry de Knyghton, de Event. Angl. l. 5. col. 2636.
In the Parliament of 50 E. 3. n. 17, 18, 19, 20. The Commons accused Richard
Lions Merchant of London of diverse deceits, extortions, and misdemeanors,
whiles he was farmer of the Customs and last subsidy, for transporting wools,
and staple Commodities, procuring new Impositions on staple ware, for buying
debts from the Kings Creditors at under rates, and making the King to pay the
whole, for taking of bribes, and defrauding the King. To some of which charges
he answered, and to the rest submitted himself to the King touching Body, Lands
and Goods. Whereupon THE LORDS adjudged him to prison during the Kings will,
that his lands tenements and goods should be seized to the Kings use, that
Commissions should issue throughout all England to inquire of his Extortions,
whiles farmer of the subsidies, and that he should be disfranchised. Upon this
Judgment, in the Fine Roll of 50 E. 3. m. 19, 21, 22. there issued out writs
for the arresting and selling the goods of Richard Lions to the Kings use,
which were his on the 19 of March, certis de causis coram Nobis et Concilio
nostro in praesenti Parliamento nostro propositis, etc. per Concilium in
Parliamento.

The same Exact abridgement. p. 122, 123.
Parliament, 50 E. 3. n. 31, 32. William Ellis of great Yarmouth was accused by
the Commons of sundry extortions whiles he was Deputy Farmer of the kings
subsidy to Richard Lions; To which he seemed sufficiently to answet; yet was
BY THE LORDS adjudged to prison, and to make a fine at the Kings pleasure.
Ibidem, Number. 33. John Peach of London was impeached by the Commons for
procuring a license under the Great Seal, that he only might sell sweet wines
in London, by color whereof he took 4 s. 4 d. of every man for every Tun
thereof sold, which he justified he lawfully might do: Notwithstanding
JUDGMENT was given against him by THE LORDS, that he should be committed
during the Kings pleasure, and make recompense to all parties grieved. Number 37.
Adam de Bury was accused of diverse deceits and wrongs done by him whiles Mayor
of Callice, and Captain of Bellingham. Being sent for to come to the
Parliament, he came not, nor could he be found. Thereupon the Lords agreed,
that all his goods and chattels should be arrested, and so they were. All these
Commons were first impeached by the Commons, and thus judged and censured by
THE LORDS in this GOOD PARLIAMENT, as Historians and others style it: And in
the Commons petitions therein, there are diverse Petitions of Grievances from
sundry Counties, Towns, persons, complaining of wrongs and grievances,
presented to the King and Lords for redress of oppressions, extortions,
Monolies, etc.

In the Exact abridgement, p. 158.
Parliament of 1 R. 2. n. 41, 42, 43. Dame Alice P^etrees was brought before
THE LORDS by Sir Richard Scroop Knight, and there charged for pursuing matters
at the Court, contrary to an Order made in the Parliament, of 50 E. 3. n. 35.
and procuring King Edward to restore Richard Lions to his lands and goods, etc.
she denied she pursued any such thing for singular gain, against that
Ordinance; whereupon diverse Officers, Counselors, and Secretaries of king
Edward 3. were examined against her, who proved she made such pursutes, and
that for private gain in their conceits. Whereupon the Lords (alone, without
the Commons) gave Judgment against her, that she should be banished according
to the order aforesaid, and forfeit all her Lands, Goods, and Tenements to the
King,

The same Exact abridgement, p. 157.
Parliament; 1 R 2. n. 32, 33. The Lords committed William Fitzhugh Goldfiner,
and Citizen of London to the Tower, for refusing to averr a Petition exhibited
by him in the name of the poor Commonalty of that mystery, complaining against
John Chichester and John Bolcham of the same mystery, of diverse oppressions
done by them to the said Commonalty.

In this very An Exact abridgement, p. 157, 158. And my Doom of Cowardice and
Treachery, p. 2, 3, 4, 5.
Parliament of 1 R. 2. n. 38, 39, 40. The Commons prayed, that all those
Captains who had rendered or lost Castles or Towns through default, might be put
to answer it in this Parliament, and severely punished according to their
deserts BY AWARD (or Judgment) OF THE LORDS and BARONS, to eschew the evil
examples they had given to other Governors of Towns and Castles. Whereupon Sir
Alexander de Buxton Constable of the Tower, was commanded to bring BEFORE THE
LORDS IN PARLIAMENT William de Weston, and Lord of Gomynes (both of them
Commoners) on Friday the 27 of November, to answer such Articles as should be
surmised against them on the Kings behalf. Being brought BEFORE THE LORDS in
full Parliament, they were severally articled against at the command of THE
LORDS, by Sir Richard le Scrop Knight, Steward of the Kings House; and their
several Articles, and answers to them in writing, read before THE LORDS; Which
done, the Constable was commanded to bring them again before THE LORDS on
Saturday next ensuing, being the 20 of November; on which day it was showed
unto them severally by the said Steward, by THE LORDS COMMAND* That THE LORDS
OF THE PARLIAMENT (whose names are particularly mentioned in the Roll) had met
together, and considered of their respective answers, and that IT SEEMED TO THE
LORDS AFORESAID, that the said William had delivered up the Castle of
On^herwycke to the Kings enemies, without any duress or want of victuals,
contrary to his allegiance, and undertaking safely to keep it; and therefore
the Lords abovenamed sitting in full Parliament adjudge you to death, and that
you shall be drawn and hanged. But because our Lord the King is not informed of
the manner of the Judgment, the execution of it shall be respited till the
king be thereof informed.

After which Judgment given, it was showed to the said John Lord of Gomynes by
the said Steward, how the said LORDS had assembled and considered of his
answer, and THAT IT SEEMED TO THE LORDS sitting in full Parliament, that
without duresse, or default of victuals or other necessaries, for the defense
of the Town and Castle of Arde, and without the Kings Command, he had evilly
delivered and surrendered them to the Kings Enemies by his own default, against
all appearance of right or reason, contrary to his undertaking safely to keep
the same; Wherefore THE LORDS aforesaid here in full Parlia-ADJUDGE YOU TO
DEATH. And because you are a Gentleman and a Baronet, and have served the Kings
Grandfather in his wars, and are no Liege man of our Lord the King, you shall
be beheaded, without having OTHER JUDGMENT: And because that our Lord the King
is not yet informed of the manner of this Judgment, the execution thereof
shall be put in respite until our Lord the King be informed thereof.

Lo here two express Judgments given in Parliament by the LORDS alone,
without King or Commons in case of Treason, even against Commoners themselves.
And an express acknowledgement by the Commons of the Lords right to award
Judgment in these cases, without the King or them; than which a fuller and
clearer proof cannot be desired.

An exact abridgment, p. 176.177.
In the Parliament of 2 R. 2. n. 34, 35. Sir Robert Howard knight was committed
prisoner to the Tower upon the complaint of the Lady Nevil by the Lords in
Parliament, for a forcible imprisonment of her daughter, to which he was
accessory, that she might not prosecute a divorce in Court Christian.

Walsingh. Hist. Angliae, p. 245, 246, 247. Ypodig. Neust. p. 138.
In the 50 year of King Edward the 3. (in the Parliament called the good
Parliament) Sir John Anneslee Knight, accused Thomas Katrington Esquire of
Treason, for selling the Castle of St. Savior in the Isle of Constantine to
the French for an inestimable sum of money, cum nec defensio sibi, nec
victualia defuissent: whereupon he was taken and imprisoned, but in King
Edwards sickness, enlarged by the Lord Latymers means (as was reported.) In the
Parliament held at London (Anno 1380. the 3. of Rn. 2.) he was again accused by
Sir John Anneslee, and there resolved, that being a Treason done beyond Sea,
not in England, it ought to be tried by duel before the Constable or Marshal of
the Realm. Whereupon a day of battle was appointed in the Court at Westminster
the 7. of June, and lists set up. On which day in the morning they fought the
battle in the presence of the KING, Nobles and Commons of the Realm (which
Walsingham at large describes) till both of them were tired, and lay tumbling
on the ground; where the Esquire got upon the Knight, as if he had conquered
him: Others said, the Knight would rise again and vanquish the Esquire. Interea
Rex pacem clamari pr^cepit, et militem erig^. The Knight refused to be lifted
up as the Esquire was, desiring he might be laid upon him again, for he was
well, and would gain the victory, if he were laid upon him again. When he could
not obtain his request, being lifted up, he went cheerfully to the King without
help, when as the Esquire could neither stand nor go, but as two held him up;
and thereupon was set in a chair to rest himself. The Knight when he came
before the King* rogavis Eum et Proceres, ut sibi illam concederunt gratiam, ut
it^rum in loco quo prius, posset reponi, et armiger super eum. Rex vero et
Proceres, cum vidissent mili^em tam animose, ^am vivide bellum repetere, et
insuper magnam summam auri offerre public ut id posset effici, decreverunt eum
iterum reponendum, and armigerum super eum, modo universaliter servato quo
^acuerant ante prostrati. But the Esquire in the mean time in a swoun, fell out
of the chair as dead, between the hands of those who stood by him. Whereupon
many running to him, chafed him with wine and water, but could not recover him
till they pulled off his arms. Quod factum et Militem victorem probavit, and
Arm gerum esse victum. After some space the Esquire reviving, opened his eyes,
and began to lift up his head, and to look terribly on every one that stood
round about him: which the knight being informed of, went presently to him in
his arms which he never put off, and speaking to him, et Proditorem et falsum
appellans, quaerit si iterum audeat Duellum repetere? Ille vero nec sensum, nec
spiritum habente respondendi; ^lamatum est pugnam finitam, et ut quisque ad
propria remearet. The Squire was carried to his bed senceless, and died the
next morning. Here we have a Duel ordered by Parliament, and the King and Lords
Judges in it, not the Commons, for a Treason done beyond the Seas not triable
here by Law.

In the An Exact abridgement, p. 189, 190. Walsingham, Hist. Angliae, p. 154,
155.
Parliament of 4 R. 2. n. 17. to 26. Sir Ralph Ferrers being arested for
suspicion of Treason on the borders of Scotland, was brought into the
Parliament before the Lords, to answer the same: where diverse Letters under his
hand and Seal (as was pretended) were produced and read against him, sent to
the Lord Admiral of France, and other French Officers, informing them, that he
in the behalf of the French had made a League and alliance with the Scots, and
desiring them to make payment of the moneys promised him, and of his own fee,
and inviting the French to invade England, etc. with discoveries of the Kings
designs against the French, and answers to them. Sir Ralph desired Counsel in
this case, which was denied him: These Letters were found by a beggar besides
London; diverse of his familiars were called into the Parliament house before
the Lords, and likewise the beggar, and the whole matter strictly examined: The
Letters sent by Sir Ralph to the parties beyond Seas, and certain Letters sent
by them in answer to his, were all sealed together, and all of one hand, and
the Seal larger than the Seal of the said Sir Ralph, whereupon they seemed to
be forged by some of his Enemies for his overthrow; himself being once or twice
urged to answer, Whether the Letters were his, or no? answered, that he did not
remember they were his own Letters, and that he was ready to approve, as the
Lords should think fit; having formerly offered combat with any that would
justify it, from which he was put. In conclusion, the Lords thought him to be
innocent: whereupon he was delivered to 4. Earls, and 2. Lords, who became
pledges body for body, to answer when he should be called between that and the
next Parliament, and so he was enlarged. The Letters and his Seal were
delivered to Sir John Cavendish Chief Justice of England, and the beggar being
thought privy to this falsehood, was committed to prison by THE LORDS.

In the Sea an Exact abridgment, p. 199.200.
Parliament of 5 R. 2. n. 44, 45. Richard Clindow Esquire exhibited a Bill to
the King, wherein he accused Sir William Cogan knight, for extorting 300 l. by
menaces from the Prior of St. John's; Sir William appearing upon Summons, prayed
Counsel, which was denied, for that it concerned Treason; whereupon he pleaded
Not Guilty. After which the same Parliament, n. 46. to 61. The Mayor, Baylifs
and Commonalty of Cambridge were accused before the King and Lords, that in the
late insurrection, they confederating with other Malefactors, did break open
the Treasury of the University of Cambridge, burn sundry Charters of the
University, and compel the Chancellor and Scholars under their common Seal to
release to the said Mayor and Burgesses all manner of Liberties, real and
personal actions, and also to become bound to them in great sums of money.
Whereupon special writs were directed to the Mayor, Baylifs and Commonalty to
appear in Parliament to answer the premises. The Mayor and Baylifs appear in
person, and plead; that they (...) not privy to any such act, but if any thing
was done it was by compulsion by others, which the Kings learned Counsel
disproved; whereupon they pleaded Not Guilty: The Commonalty appeared by
Attorney, and delivered in the Release and Bond of the University complained of
under their Seal, which were ordered to be cancelled. After which the
Chancellor and Scholars of the University exhibited Articles against the Mayor
and Baylifs, showing their whole carriage and discourse in this tumult. Upon
reading whereof, it was demanded of them in the Kings behalf, What they could
say why their Liberties lately confirmed should not be seized into the Kings
hands as forfeited? They thereupon required a Copy of the Articles, Council,
and respite to answer. To the Copy of the Bill, it was answered by the Lords,
that seeing they had heard it read, it should suffice, for by Law they ought to
have no Copy. For Council, it was said; That to such articles, if any were
wherein Council was to be had, they should have it; otherwise not. Wherefore
they were then appointed to answer to no crime or offense, but only to their
Liberties. To which they answered by their Council; That this Court ought not
to have any Conusance or Jurisdiction of them for certain causes then alleged.
But at last they were ordered to say what they could, otherwise they would give
Judgment against them, as those who had nothing to say. Whereupon they
pleaded, they did nothing but by Duress and constraint of the Rebels. At last,
after many dilatory shifts, touching their Liberties, they wholly submitted
themselves to the Kings mercy and grace, saving their answer to other matters.
The KING therefore by the assent of the Prelates and Lords in Parliament (^o is
the Rol^) seized their Liberties into his hands as forfeited; and by assent of
the Lords and Prelates in Parliament, granted to the Chancellor and Scholars
the Assise and correction of bread, weights, measures, and forestallers, and
fines thereof within the Town and Sub^rbs of Cambridge which the Townsmen had
before. The King, Lords, and Prelates being Judges, and giving the Judgment in
this case of Commoners, as the record a ^ge attests.

Hist. Angliae, p. 328.
Walsingham relates, that in a Parliament holden at London this year about the
feast of St. John, upon the Petition of the knights of Shires, John Straw,
Captain of those in the insurrection at Bury and Myldenhale, tractationi et
suspentioni ADJUDICATUR, (to wit by the King and Lords) licet multi putassent
eum fuisse pecunia redimendum.

Walsingh. Hist. Angl. p 316.
In the 7. year of R. 2. Rege vocante congregati sunt multi de Nobilibus Regni
apud Rading; to restrain the seditious motions of John de Northampton, late
Mayor of London, qui ingenia facinora nisus est, de quibus et convictus est
ibidem, his familiar Clerk accusing him, both of diverse practices and designs
projected by him, as well to the prejudice of the King, as of the whole City of
London, and objecting them against him. When Judgment was to be given against
him in the Kings presence, he pleaded, that such a Judgment ought not to be
given against him in the absence of the Duke his Lord; whereby he raised a
sinister suspicion as well in the people, AS NOBLES, against the Duke (of
Lancaster.) The Justice (who was to pronounce the Judgment) told him, He ought
to refute his charge by Duel, or by the Laws of the Realm to submit himself to
drawing, hanging, and quartering. At which when he stood mute and said nothing,
DECRETVM EST, ut perpetuo carceri tradiretur, et e^us bona regis usibus
confis^arentur, and ut Londonias non appropinquaret per centum miliaria in vita
sua: whereupon he was sent prisoner to Tyntagel Castle in Cornwall, and his
goods seized on by the Kings Officers.

An Exact abridgement, p. 292, 293, 294. See nay Doom of Cowardice, p. 14, 15.
Walsingham, Hist. Angl. p. 3^3.
In the Parliament of 7 R. 2. holden at Westminster the Monday next before the
feast of All Saints* number. 17. Briars Cressingham, and John Spic^worth Esquires,
were accused before the LORDS for surrendering the Castle of Drinkham in
Flanders to the kings enemies for money, without consent of the kings
Lieutenant. Spickworth proved, that the same was not in his custody; and
thereupon he was discharged. Cressingham pleaded, that he yielded the same upon
necessity, without money, and submitted himself to the Lords order: who thought
this no good cause; and therefore committed him to prison. The same Parliament,
n. 24, 25. Sir William de Elinsham, Sir Thomas Trivet, Sir Henry de Ferriers,
and Sir William Farnden knights, and Robert Fitz-Ralph Esquire, were accused
before the Lords in Parliament for selling the Castle of Burburgh, with all the
arms, ammunition, and provisions therein to the French, the kings enemies* for
sundry sums of gold received by them of the French, without authority from the
king or his Lieutenant: who pleaded, they surrendered it for salvation of
themselves and their people, etc. After all their excuses made; they were upon
consideration, adjudged insufficient by the Lords; and the Chancellor, by their
order, pronounced this Judgment against them, That they should repay all the
moneys they received from the Enemy to the King; be committed to prison;
ransomed at the Kings will; and moreover, that Sir Will. de Farnden (being the
greatest Offender) should be at the Kings mercy both for body and goods, to do
with them as he pleases.

Walsingham, Hist. Angl. p. 337.
In this Parliament there was a Duel fought between John Walsh an English
Esquire, and one of Navarr: who accoused him of Treason against the King and
Realm effectually* but yet falsely out of envy; Walsh having layen with his wife
whiles he was under Captain of Cherburgh; as he afterward confessed. This Due^
was fought within the lists in the presence of the King and Nobles of the
Realm, where this Navarrois being vanquished by Walsh, REGALI JVDICIO tractus
et suspensus est, quanquam Regina et plures alii pro eo preces sedulas
porrexissent.

An Exact abridgement, p. 299, 300.
In the 2. of Parliament of 7 R. 2. n. 13.10 19. John Cavendish a Fishmonger of
London, praying Surety of the peace against Sir Michael de la Pool Knight,
Lord, Chancellor of England; first before the Commons, and afterward before the
Lords, which was granted: Then he accused him BEFORE THE LORDS for bribery and
injustice; and that he entered into a bond of 10 l. to John Ottard, a Clerk to
the said Chancellor, which he was to give for his good success in the business:
in part of payment whereof, he brought Herring and Sturgeon to Ottard, and yet
was delayed and could have no justice at the Chancellors hands: Upon hearing
the cause, and examining witnesses upon Oath before THE LORDS, the Chancellor
was cleared: The Chancellor, thereupon required reparation for so great a
slander: the Lords being then troubled with other weighty matters, let the
Fishmonger to Bail, and referred the matter to be ordered by the Judges; who
upon hearing the whole matter, condemned Cavendish in three thousand marks for
his slanderous complaint against the said Chancellor, and adjudged him to
prison till he had paid the same to the Chancellor, and made fine and ransom to
the King also: which the Lords confirmed.

An Exact abridgement, p. 304.
In the Parliament of 8 R. 2. n. 12. Walter Sybell of London was arrested and
brought into the Parliament before the Lords, at the suit of Robert de Veer
Earl of Oxford, for slandering him to the Duke of Lancaster, and other Nobles,
for maintenance: Walter denied not but that he said, that certain there named,
recovered against him the said Walter, and that by maintenance of the said
Earl, as he thought. The Earl there present protested himself to be innocent,
and put himself upon the trial. Walter thereupon was committed to Prison by the
Lords, and the next day he submitted himself, and desired the Lords to be a
mean for him, saying; he could not accuse him: whereupon THE LORDS CONVICTED
and FINED HIM FIVE HUNDRED MARKS TO THE SAID EARL; for the which, and for his
fine and ransom to the King he was committed to prison BY THE LORDS. A direct
case in point.

By these two last Presidents of the Lords ^ining and imprisoning Cavendish and
Syber* two Commoners in Parliament, for their standers and false accusacions
only of two particular Peers and Members of their house, it is most apparent,
the Lords now may most justly, not only imprison, but likewise fine both
Lilburn and Overion for their most scandalous Libels* against all the Members
just Privileges, Judicatory, and Authority of the whole House of Peers, which
they have contemned, vilisied, oppugned, and libelled against in the highest
degree, and most scurrillously abused, reviled in sundry seditious Pamphlets,
to incite both the Army and whole Commonalty against them.

Henry de Knyghton, de Eventib. Angliae, l. 5. col. 2535. to 2577. Walsingham,
Hist* Angl. p. 364, 365, 366. Ypodig. Neustr. p. 146, 147.
In the Parliament of 11 R. 2. the Duke of Gloucester and other Lords came to
London with great forces to secure themselves, and remove the kings ill
Counselors and bring them to judgment; whereupon the King for fear securing
himself in the Tower of London, and refusing to come to them at Westminster,
contrary to his faithful promise the day before, they sent him this threatening
Message; nisi venire maturaret juxta condictum, quod eligerent alium sibi Regem
qui vellet et deberet obtemperare consiliis Dominorum. Wherewith being
terrified* he came unto them the next day: Cui dixerunt PROCERES, pro honor
suo, and regni commodo, oporter^^, ut Proditores, susurrones, adulatores, et
male fici detractores and juratores, a suo Palatio et Comitive etiam
eliminarentur; Whereupon they banished sundry Lords, Bishops, Clergymen,
Knights and Ladies from the Court, and imprisoned many other Knights, Esquires,
and Lawyers, to answer their offenses in Parliament. The first man proceeded
against in Parliament, was the Chief Justice Tresylian, whom the Lords
presently adjudged to be drawn and hanged. The like Iuegement the Lords gave
against Sir Nicholas Brambre Knight, Sir John Salisbury, Sir James Burw^yes,
John Beauchamp, John Blakes* who were all drawn and hanged accordingly as
Tray^ers one after another: and Simon Burly beheaded after them, by like
judgment, notwithstanding the Kings, and Earl of Derbies intercessions for him
to the Lords. After their Execution, Robert Belknap^, John Hol^, Roger
Fulthorp, and William Burgh, Justices, were banished by the Lords sentence, and
their lands and chattels confiscated, out of which they allowed them only a
small annual pension to sustain their lives. After which these Judgments
against them were confirmed by Acts of Attainder, as you may read in the
Statutes at large of 11 R. 2. where their Crimes and Treasons are specified, in
Cokes 3 Institutes, c. 2. p. 22, 23. and in Knyghton, Holinshed, Fabian, Speed,
Trussel, with other Historians.

In the Exact abridgement, p. 330, 331.
Parliament of 13 R. 2. n. 12. Upon complaint of the Bishop, Dean and Chapter
of Lincoln against the Mayor and Bailiffs thereof, for injustice in keeping
them from their rights and rents, by reason of the franchises granted them,
which they abused; Writs were sent to the Mayor and Baylifs, to appear at a
certain day before the Lords, and to have full authority from the whole
Comonalty to abide their determination therein: At which day the Mayor and
Bailiffs appearing in proper person; for that they brought not full power with
them from the said Commonalty, they were an^ go^ by the Lords to be in
contempt, and so were the Mayor and Bailiffs of Cambridge, for the self same
cause this very Parliment, n. 14.

In the Exact abridgement, p. 342, 343.
Parliament of 15 R. 2. n. 16. The Prior of Holland in Lancashire, complained
of a great riot done by Henry Treble, John Greenbo^, and sundry, and others for
entering into the Parsonage of Whitw^rke in Leicestershire; thereupon John de
Ellingham, Sergeant at Arms, by virtue of a Commission to him directed,
brought the said Treble and Greenbow, the principle malefactors into the
Parliament before the Lords; who upon (...) confessed the whole matter, and
were therefore committed to the Flea^, there to remain at the Kings pleasure:
after which they made a fine in the Chancery, agreed with the Prior, and found
sureties for the Good behavior; whereupon they were dismissed. The same
Parliament, n. 19. Sir Will. Bryan, was by the King with the assent of the
Lords, committed prisoner to the lower during the Kings will and pleasure, for
purchasing a Bull from Rome to the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, to
excommunicate all such who had broken up his house, and taken away diverse
Letters, Privileges, and Charters, which Bull was adjudged prejudicial to the
King; his Counc^l, and in derogation of the Law. Number. 20. Thomas Harding was
committed to the Fleet by the King and Lords assent, there to continue during
the Kings pleasure, for falsely accusing Sir John and Sir Ralph Sutton, as well
by mouth as writing, of a conspiracy, whereof upon hearing they were acquitted.
And n. 21. John Shadwell of Baghsteed in Sussex, was likewise committed to the
Fleet by THE LORDS, there to remain during the Kings pleasure, for misinforming
of the Parliament, that the Archbishop of Canterbury had excommunicated him and
his neighbors wrongfully in his spiritual Cour^, for a temporal cause
belonging to the Crown, and Common Law, which was adjudged by the Lords upon
examination to be untrue.

To pass by the accusation of Sir Philip Courtney, of diverse heinous matters,
oppressions, dissensions before the King and Lords in the Parliament of 16 R.
2. n. 6.13, 14. of which more anon. In the Parliament of 17 R. 2. n. 20, 21.
Exact abridgement, p. 346, 347, 35^, 354 Cooks 3 Inwit. p. 22.
John Duke of Lancastre Steward, and Thomas Duke of Gloucester Constable of
England complained to the King, that Sir Thomas Talbot Knight with other his
adherents conspired the deaths of the said Dukes in diverse parts of Cheshire,
as the same was confessed and well known, and prayed, That the Parliament might
judge of the fault. Whereupon the King and the Lords in Parliament (without the
Commons) adjudged the said fact to be open, and High Treason. And thereupon
they awarded two Writs, to the Sherifs of Yorks and of Derby, to take the body
of the said Sir Thomas, retornable in the Kings Bench, in the month of Easter
next ensuing: And open Proclamation was made in Westminster Hall* That upon the
Sherifs retorn, and at the next coming in of the said Sir Thomas, he should be
convicted of Treason, and incurr the loss and pain of the same; and that all
such who should receive him after the Proclamation, should receive the like
loss and pain.

In the Exact abridgement, p. 361, 362.
Parliament of 20 R. 2. n. 15, 16, 23. Sir Thomas Haxey Clark, was by the King
and Lords in Parl. adjudged to die as a Traitor, and to forfeit all his Lands,
Goods, Chattels, Offices and Livings, for exhibiting to the House of Commons a
scandalous Bill against the King and his Court, for moderating the outrageous
expenses of his Court by Bishops and Ladies, etc. Upon the Bishops intercession
the King spared his life, and delivered him into the custody of the Archbishop,
to remain as his Prisoner.

In the Exact abridgement, p. 369, 379, 381.
Parliament of 21 R. 2. n. 19, 20. Pl. and Parl. n. 2. to 15. The Lords
Appellants appealed Sir Tho Mortimer Knight, of High Treason, for raising war
against the King, accroaching royal power, and purposing to surrender his
homage and allegiance, and depose the King: Who flying into the parts of
Ireland; thereupon the Lords in Parliament assigned him a certain day to come
and render himself to the Law, or else to be adjudged and proceeded against as
a Traitor: and Proclamation thereof was made accordingly in England and
Ireland, to render himself within 3 months: And that after that time all his
Abettors and Aiders should be reputed for, and forfeit as Traitors. He not
coming at the day, The Duke of Lancaster Steward of England, by assent of the
Lords in Parliament, adjudged him a Traitor; and that he should forfeit all his
Lands in fee and see tail, together with all his Goods and Chattels. The like
Judgment in like manner was in the same Parliament given against Sir John
Cobham Knight, for the like Treason, Placit. Coronaen. 16.

On the 22 day of March, 22 R. 2. n. 27. Exact Col. p. 381.
The King, by assent of the Lords, adjudged Sir Robert Plesington, Knight, then
dead, a Traitor, for levying war against him with the Duke of Gloucester at
Harrengary; for which he should lose all his Lands in fee, or fee tail, and all
his goods. And n. 28. Henry Bowht Clerk, for being of Counsel with the Duke of
Hereford in his device, was adjudged by the King and Lords to die, and forfeit
as a Traitor; after which his life was pardoned and he banished.

In the Parliament of 1 H. 4. n. 79. As the Sea here, p. 196, 197.
Commons acknowledged, that the Judgments in Parliament had always of right
belonged to the King and Lords, and not unto the Commons: So therein the King
and Lords alone, without the Commons, gave Judgment in sundry cases, as Judges
in Parliament.

1. In Sir Thomas Haxey his case, Rot. Parl. 1 H. 4. n. 90.
who in his own name presented a Petition in this Parliament, a nostre
tresedoute seigniour le ROY, and a LES SEIGNIORS DU PARLIAMENT, showing, that
in the last Parliament of 21 R. 2. that he delivered a Bill to the Commons of
the said Parliament for the honor and profit of the said King, and of all the
Realm; for which Bill, at the will of the King, he was (by the King and Lords)
adjudged a Traitor, and to forfeit all that he had; praying that the record of
the said Judgment, with the dependants thereupon might be vacated and nulled
by them in this present Parliament as erroneous; and that he might be restored
to all his degrees, farms, estate, goods, chattels, ferms, pensions, lands,
tenements, rents, offices, advow sons and possessions whatsoever, and their
appurt. and enjoy them to him and his heirs; notwithstanding the said
Judgment, or any grant made of them by the King. 1 H. 4. n. 104.
The Commons House exhibited a Petition likewise on his behalf, to the like
effect; adding, that this judgment given against him, for delivering this Bill
to the Commons in Parliament, was eneontre droit, et la course quel avoit estre
use devant in Parliament en anientesment des Customs, de^ le^ Communes. Upon
which Petitions; Nostre Seignior le ROY, de Induis and assent des touz les
Seigniors esperituelz et temporelz ad ordinez et adjudges, que le dit juggement
renus verse le dit Thomas in Parliament soit de tout casses, revorses, repellez
et adnullez, et tenus pur null force n'effect, et que le dit Thomas soit
restitut a ses nom et fame, etc. nient obstant mesme le juggement.

2ly. In the case of Judge Rickhill 1 H^ 4. n. 92. On the 18 of November, the
Commons prayed the King that Sir William Rickhill late Just. of the Common
Bench, arrested for a Confession he had taken of the Duke of Gloucester at
Calice, might be brought to answer for it devant les Seigniors du Parliament:
whereupon he was brought into Parliament before the Kings presence, and all the
Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons assembled in Parliament, where Sir
Walter Clapton Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, by the kings command, examined
the said Sir William, how and by what warrant he went to Calice, to the said
Duke of Gloucester, and upon what message? Who answered, that king Richard sent
him a special Writ into Kent (there recited verbatim) commanding him by the
faith and allegiance whereby he was obliged to him, and under pain of
forfeiting all he had, to go unto Caleys. And that at Dover he received a
Commission from the said king by the hand of the Earl Marshal, to confer with
the Duke of Gloucester, and to hear whatsoever he would say or declare unto him,
and to certify the king thereof in proper person, wherever he should be, fully
and distinctly under his Seal. Whereupon he went thither, and took the said
Dukes Examination in writing, according to the purport of the said Commission,
a Copy whereof the Duke himself received, etc: Upon the hearing of his answer
and defense, every temporal Lord being in full Parliament examined touching the
answer of the said Sir William, and the matters and evidences which they had
examined, said severally; that the said William had done his message well and
legally, and that in the person of the said William there was no fault nor evil
touching the said message, nor any thing that he did to the person of the said
Duke. Whereupon Walter Clapton Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, by command of
the king adjudged and declared, that the said William should be fully excused
and acquitted for ever in time to come touching this matter.

3ly. The 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 93.
last day of this Parliament, it was agreed by the King and Lords, that all the
remembrances called Raggemans or Blant^es Charters, lately sealed in the City
of London, and diverse Counties, Cities and Buroughs of England, should be sent
to the City of London; and from every County, City and Borough from whence
they came, and Writs sent to every of them rehearsing, That the king held all
the resiants and Inhabitants in them for his good and loyal Subjects; and that
no confession by them made, comprised in the said remembrances, are nor shall
be in derogation of the estate of any such person: and that the same
remembrances shall be burnt and destroyed in the most open place of the said
Counties, Cities and Buroughs, and if any thing remain of record in any Court,
or place, the king wills that it shall be cancelled, and totally adnulled,
revoked and repealed, and held for no record; and of no force nor value for
time to come.

4ly. The 19th. of November in the said Parliament, Placita Coronae coram
Domino Rege in Parliamento suo, etc. Anno regni Regis Henrici quarti post
Conquestum, primo n. 17. The Commons prayed she King, that the pursuit, arrest,
and judgments made against Sir William le Scrop^ knight, Henry Green knight,
and John Bassy knight, might be affirmed and held good. Whereupon Sir Richard
Scroop humbly prayed the King, that nothing which should be done in this
Parliament might turn to his or his Childrens dis-inherison. Of which Sir
Richard it was demanded, whether the said pursuit, arrest and judgments were
good or not? who answered, that he feared not to say, and must confess, that
when they were made they were good and profitable for the King and Realm, and
that his Son was one of them, for which he was very sorrowful. Whereupon the
king rehearsed, that he claimed the Realm and Crown of England, with all their
members and appurietenances, as heir of the blood by the right line of king
Henry the 3d. and although through the right which God had sent him, by the aid
of his Parents and friends, he recovered the said Realm, which was at the point
to be undone by default of government, and defesance of the Laws and customs of
the Realm, yet it was not his will that any should think, that by way of
Conquest, he would disinherit any man of his heritage, franchise, or other
right which he ought to have, nor out any man of that which he had, or should
have by the good Laws or Customs of the Realm, except these who had been
against the good purpose and common profit of the Realm; of which only the King
held the said Sir William, Henry, and John for such, and guilty of all the evil
which had come upon the Realm: and therefore he would have and hold all the
Lands and Tenements they had within the Realm of England, or elsewhere, by
conquest: Whereupon, fuist demand de touts les Seigniors temporellez lour
advys de les pursuit, arreste, and juggem (...) sui^di^z. Les queux Seigniors
touz de ^ne accord disorent, que mesmes les pursuit, arreste, juggement and
quin^que fuist fait come defuist dit uist bons, et les affirmente Piur bons et
profitables.

5ly. In the case of Exact abridgement, p. 400, 401.
John Hall, 1 H. 4. Placita Coronae, n. 11 to 17. who being in custody of the
Marshal of Englana, was brought by him before the Lords in Parliament, and
there charged before them by Walter Clapton, Lord Chief Justice, by the King
command, with having a hand in the murder of the Duke of Gloucester, who was
smothered to death with a Featherbed at Calves by king Richard the seconds
command; the whole transaction whereof he confessed at large, and put in
writing before James Billingford. Clerk of the Crown, which was read before the
Lords; upon reading thereof, the King and all the temporal Lords in Parliament
resolved, that the said John Hall, by his own confession, deserved to have as
hard a death as they could adjudge him to, because the Duke of Gloucester was so
high a Person; and thereupon toutes les Seigneiors temporelz per assent du Roy
adjuggerent, all the temporal Lords by assent of the King ADJVDGED, that the
said Jo. Hall should be drawn from Tower hill unto the Gallows at Tiburn, and
there bowelled, and his bowels laid before him; and after he should be hanged,
beheaded, and quartered, and his head sent to Calice where the murder was
committed, and his quarters sent to other places where the king should please;
and thereupon command was given to the Marshal of England to make execution
accordingly, and it was so done the same day.

Lo here the Lords in Parliament gave judgment against a Commoner in case of a
murder done at Calice, (and so not ^riable in the Kings Bench, but in
Parliament) and pass a Judgment of High Treason on him, for murdering of a
great Peer only.

In the Parliament of 2 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 23, 24. The Commons showed to the
King, that See this case abridg'd in an exact abridgement, p. 406.
William Bagot had been impeached of many horrible deeds and misprisions, the
which if they had been true, the Commons supposed, the the King aad ths Lords
would have had good notice thereof, for that they had made many examinations
thereof whiles the said William was in distress. And therefore the said Commons
prayed the King, that the said Sir William being in Flanders and no offense
found in his person, upon the slanders in his impeachment aforesaid; that he
would be pleased to restore him to his lands: To which prayer was answered in
the Kings behalf, that although the said Sir William upon the said impeachment
made the last Parliament, was put to his answer before the King and the Lords,
and there pleaded a general Charter of pardon, against which Charter, it seemed
to all the Lords then present, that the said Sir William ought not to be
impeached nor put to answer by the King, on his part; for that the said Sir
William was not attainted of any impeachment suggested against him, and that
the King had done him justice in this behalf; therefore he would in the same
manner do him justice in the residue at the Commons request. A most full proof
of the Kings and Lords judicial power in Parliaments, even in case of a
Commoner.

The same Parliament, Fox Acts and Monum. Vol. 1. p. 875. Fitz. Nature. Brev. f.
269. my Sword of Christian Magistracy supported, p. 55, 56. An Exact
abridgement, p. 407.
2. H. 4. number. 29. William Sautre, being condemned of Heresy in the
Convocation by Archbishop Arundel and the Clergy, thereupon by order and advice
of the Temporal Lords, without the Prelates, (who must not have their hands in
blood, though they gave the Sentence, that he should be burned) or the Commons;
there issued out a Writ to the Sherifs of London, for the burning of Sautre as
an Heretic, accordingly burnt thereon, being the first writ of this Nature;
issued by the Lords alone in the Kings name, before the Statute of Heresy was
made and passed in this Parliament.

In the same An Exact abridgement, p. 407.
Parliament of 2 H. 4. n. 30. The Temporal Lords, by assent of the King,
adjudged and declared Sir Ralph Lumly Knight and others Traitors, for levying
war in sundry parts to destroy the K. and his people; and that they should
forfeit all their lands in fee, goods and chattels, though they were Walsingh.
Hist. Angl. p. 404, 405.
slain in the field, and not arraigned nor indicted by reason thereof.

In the An Exact abridgment p. 407.
Parliament of 4 H. 4. n. 19, 20, 21. Sir Philip Courtney being complained
against and convicted of a forcible entry into Lands, and for a forcible
imprisonment of the Abbot of M^nthaem in Devonshire, and two of his Monks, was
upon hearing and examination adjudged by the King and Lords, to be bound to his
good behavior, and for his contempt committed to the Tower of London prisoner.

Walsingham Hist. p^ 409, 410, 411. See Holinshed Grafton, Speed.
Anno 1403. Henry Percy the younger, confederating with Thomas Percy Earl of
Worcester, to raise forces and rebel against the King, sent Letters to the
people of every County, propositum quod assumpserant, non esse contra suam
ligeantiam, et fidelit tem quam regi fecerant, nec ab aliunde exercitum
congregasse, nisi pro salvatione personarum suarum, and reipublicae meliori
guvernatione, Quia census et Tallagia Regi concessa, pro salva regni custodia,
covertebantur (ut dixerunt) in usus indebitos, et inutiliter consumebantur:
praeterea querebantur, quod propter aemulorum dilationes pessimas, rex eis
insensus fuerat, ut non auderent personaliter venire ad ejus praesentiaem,
donec Praelati, regnique Barons regi supplicassent pro eisdem, ut coram Rege
permitterentur declarare suam innocentiam, and per Pares suos legaliter
justificari. Plures igitur visis his literis collaudabant tantum virorum
solertiam, and extollebant fidem quam erga Rempublicam praetendebant. Having
raised great forces against the King by this means; which the kings forces
encountered at Shrewsbury in a pitched battle; Henry Percy and sundry of his
adherents were there slain in the field, and the rest routed; For which levying
of war in the An Exact abridgment, p. 426, 427.
Parliament of of 5 H. 4. n. 15. the said Henry Percy and his Co^federa^es were
declared and adjudged Traitors by the King and Lords in full Parliament; and
their Lands, goods and cha^tels confiscated. In the same Parliament, n. 18. At
the Petition of the Commons, The Lords ^en^ed and ordered, that the Kings
Confessor, the Abbot of Door, Mr, Richard Durham, and Crosby of the Chamber,
should be removed out of the Kings house and Court; whereupon 3. of them
appearing before the King and Lords in Parliament; the King though he excused
them, yet charged them to depart from his house, for that they were hated of
the people.

In the An Exact abridgment, p. 479.
Parliament of 13 H. 4. n. 12, 13. The Lord Roos complained against Robert
Thirwit one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, for withholding from him, and
his Tenants Common of Pasture and Turb^ry in Warbie in Lincolnshire, and lying
in wait with 500 men for the Lord Roos. Thirwit before the King and Lords
confessed his fault, and submitted himself to their Order, who appointed 3.
Lords to end the difference; who made an award between them, that Thirwit
should confess his fault to the Lord Roos, crave his pardon, and tender him
amends.

In the An Exact abridgment, p. 553, 554. Wa^singham, Ypodig. p. 181 to 184.
Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 726. to 772.
Parliament of 5 H. 5. n. 11. Sir John Oldcastle knight, being outlawed of
Treason in the Kings bench, and excommunicated before the Archbishop of
Canterbury for Heresy, was brought before THE LORDS, and having heard his
conviction, made no answer nor excuse thereto. Upon which Record and Process
THE LORDS ADJUDGED, that he should be taken as a Traitor to the King and Realm,
carried to the Tower of London, from thence drawn through the City to the new
Gallows in St. Gyles without Temple-barr, and there hanged and burned hanging:
which was accordingly executed.

An Exact abridgment, p. 568.
Sir John Mortymer knight, being committed to the Tower upon supposition of
Treason done against King Henry the 5. in the 1. year of H. 6. brake out of the
Tower; for which breach he was indicted of Treason: being afterward
apprehended, he was brought into the Parliament of 2 H. 6. n. 18. and upon the
same Indictment, then confirmed by assent of Parliament, JUDGMENT was given
against him BY THE LORDS, that he should be carried to the Tower, drawn through
London to Tiburn, there to be hanged, drawn and quartered, his head to be set
on London Bridge, and his four quarters on the four Gates of London.

In the An Exact abridgment, p. 662, 663, 670, 671, 677, 679.
Parliament* of 38 H. 6. n. 20, 2^, 22. Sir William Oldham knight, and Thomas
Vaughan Esquire, were attainted of Treason by the LORDS and in the Parliaments
of 1 E. 4. n. 19. to 31. 4 E. 4. n. 28. to 38. ^4 E. 4. n. 34. to 40. sundry
Knights, Esquires, Citizens and Commoners are attainted of Treason by the Lords
for levying war, and holding forts against the King, then after by Bill whose
names are overtedious to rehearse; which you may peruse at leisure in the Exact
Abridgement of the Records in the Tower.

To omit all other presidents of this Nature in the reigns of King H. 7.8. Ed.
6. Qu. Mary, and Qu. Elizabeth, of Commoners censured in and by the Lords house
in Criminal causes, upon impeachments, complaints, petitions, which those who
please may find recorded in the Journals of the Lords house; I shall recite
only some few Presidents more of late and present times.

Cooks 4 Inst^. p. 23.
In the Parliaments of 18. and 21 Iacobi, Sir Giles Mompesson, and Sir John
Michel, upon complaints and impeachments by the Commons for promoting
Monopoli^s, Corruption, and other Misdemeanors, were fined, imprisoned by
Judgment of the Lords House, and Sir Giles degraded of his knighthood.

In the Parliament of 3. Carol^, the Commons impeached Roger Manwaring, Dr. of
Divinity; for preaching and printing Seditious and dangerous Sermons; and sent
up this Declaration against him to the Lords. June 14. 1628.

For the more effectual prevention of the apparent ruin and destruction of
this kingdom (which must necessarily ensue, if the good and fundamental Laws
and customs therein established should be brought into contempt and violated,
and that form of government thereby altered, by which it has been so long
maintained in peace and happiness:) And to the honor of our Sovereign Lord the
King, and for the preservation of his Crown and Dignity, the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, do by this their Bill show, and declare against
Roger Manwaring Clerk, Dr. in Divinity, that whereas by the Laws and Statutes
of this Realm, the Free Subjects of England do undoubtedly inherit this right
and liberty, not to be compelled to contribute to any tax, tallage, aid, or to
make any Loans, not set or imposed by common consent by Act of Parliament, and
diverse of his Majesty's loving Subjects relying upon the said Laws and Customs,
did in all humility refuse to lend such sums of money, as without authority of
Parliament were lately required of them.

Nevertheless he the said Roger Manwaring in contempt, and contrary to the Laws
of this Realm, has lately preached in his Majesty's presence two several
Sermons: That is, the 4. day of July last, one of the said Sermons, and upon
the 29. day of the same month the other of the same Sermons: Both which
Sermons he has since published in print, in a Book entitled, Religion and
Allegiance; and with a wicked and malicious intention to seduce and misguide
the conscience of the Kings most excellent Majesty, touching the observation of
the Laws and Customs of this kingdom, and of the rights and liberties of the
Subjects, to incense his royal displeasure against his good Subjects so
refusing, to subvert, scandalize, and impeach the good Laws and Government of
this Realm, and the Authority of the High Court of Parliament, to avert his
Majesty's mind from calling of Parliaments, to alienate his royal heart from
his people, and to cause jealousies, sedition and division in the kingdom: He
the said Roger Manwaring does in the said Sermons, and book persuade the kings
most excellent Majesty.

First, That his Majesty is not bound to keep and observe the good Laws and
Customs of the Realm, concerning the rights and liberties of the Subjects
aforementioned, and this his royal will and command in imposing loans, taxes,
and other aids upon his people, without common consent in Parliament, does so
far bind the Subjects of this Realm, that they cannot refuse the same without
peril of eternal damnation.

Secondly, That those his Majesty's loving Subjects, which refused the loan
aforementioned, in such manner as is before recited, did therein offend the Law
of God, against his Majesty's supreme authority, and by so doing became guilty
of impiety, disloyalt^e, rebellion, and dis-obedience, and liable to many other
taxes and censures, which he in the several parts of his book does most fasly
and maliciously lay upon them.

Thirdly, That authority of Parliament is not necessary for raising of aids and
subsidies, that the slow proceedings of such assemblies are not fit for the
supply of the urgent necessities of the estate; but rather apt to produce
sundry impedimen^s to the just designs of Princes; and to give them occasion of
displeasure and discontent.

All which the Commons are ready to prove, not only by the general scope of the
same Sermons, and books, but likewise by several clauses, aspersions and
sentences therein contained, and that he the said Roger Manwaring by preaching
and publishing the Sermons and book aforementioned, did most unlawfully abuse
his holy function instituted by God in his Church, for the guiding of the
consciences of all his servants, and chiefly of sovereign Princes and
Magistrates, and for the maintenance of peace and concord betwixt all men,
especially between the King and his People, and has thereby most grievously
offended against the Crown and dignity of his Majesty, and against the
prosperity, and good government of this estate, and Commonwealth.

And the said Commons by protestation saving to themselves the liberty of
exhibiting of any other accusation, at any time hereafter* or impeachment
againg the said Roger Manwaring, and also of replying to the answers, which he
said Roger shall make unto any of the matters contained in this present bill of
complaint, and of offering further proof of the premises, or of any of them, as
the cause (according to the course of the Parliament shall require) Do pray,
that the said Roger Manwaring may be put to answer to all and every the
premises, and that such proceeding, examinat^on, trial, judgment, and
exemplary punishment may be thereupon had and executed, as is agreeable to Law
and Justice.

On June the 14, 1628. the Lords sending a message to the House of Commons,
that they were ready to give judgment against Manwaring, if the House of
Commons would demand it. Thereupon they went with the Speaker up to the Lords
House, having agreed he should demand judgment in these words, which he then
used at the Lords Bar: The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of
Commons have impeached Roger Manwaring of sundry misdemeanors, and your
Lordships having taken consideration thereof, they do now by me their Speaker
demand judgment against them, Which upon reading his impeachment, and full
proof thereof out of his Sermons, in his presence, was done accordingly. The
Judgment was given and pronounced by the Lord Keeper, all the LORDS being in
their Robes, and Manwaring at the Bar, it was delivered in these words.

Whereas Roger Manwaring Doctor in Divinity has been impeached by the House of
Commons for misdemeanors of a high nature in preaching two Sermons before his
Majesty in Summer, which since are published, in print, in a Book entitled
Religion and Allegiance; and in another Sermon preached in the Parish of St.
Giles in the Fields the 4th. of May last: And their Lordships have considered
of the said Manwarings answer thereunto, expressed with tears and grief for his
offense, most humbly craving pardon therefore of the Lords and Commons; yet
nevertheless, for that it can be no satisfaction for the great offense
wherewith he is charged by the said Declaration, which does evidently appear in
the very words of the said Sermons, their Lordships have proceeded to judgment
against him, and therefore this High Court does adjudge,

"First, That Dr. Manwaring shall be imprisoned during "the pleasure of the
House.

"2ly. That he de fined at 1000 l. to the King.

3ly. That he shall make such submission and acknowledgement of his offenses,
as shall be set down by a Committee in writing, both at the Bar, and in the
House of Commons.

4ly. That he shall be suspended for the time of 3 years from the exercise of
the Ministry, and in the mean time a sufficient preaching Minister shall be
provided out of his living, to serve the Cure; this suspension and this
provision of a preaching Minister shall be done by the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction.

"5ly. That he shall be for ever disabled to preach at the "Court hereafter.

"6ly. That he shall be hereafter disabled to have any "Ecclesiastical dignity,
or secular Office.

7ly. That his said Book is worthy to be burnt; and that for the better
effecting of this, his Majesty may be moved to grant a Proclamation to call in
the said Books, that they may be all burnt accordingly in London, and both
Universities, and for the inhibiting the permitting thereof, upon a great
penalty.

Here we have a most direct president, where the whole House of Commons by
their Speaker acknowledge the right of judicature in the case of a Commoner to
be only and wholly in the Lords, even in a criminal cause, and thereupon pray
the Lords to give judgment against him upon their Impeachment, which they did
accordingly in their robes, as Judges, by the mouth of the Lord Keeper their
Speaker.

In this very See the Lords and Commons Journals, Diurnal Occurrences, p. 15,
16.19, 39, 191, to 264. Mr. St. John's Speech and Declaration against them at a
conference of both Houses. The Speeches of Mr. Hide, Mr. Waller, Mr. Perpoint,
Mr. Hollis at their impeachments. The 1 part of my legal and historical
Vindication, etc. p. 36* 37.
Parliament now sitting, December. 21. Jan. 14. Febr. 11. 1640. and July 6. 1641.
The Commons House by their Members impeached Sir John Bramston Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench, Sir John Finch Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir Humphry
Davenport Chief Baron, Judge Berkly, Judge Crawly, Baron Weston, and Baron
Trever of high Treason, and other misdemeanors; for that they had traitorously
and wickedly endeavored to subvert the fundamental Laws and established
Government of the Realm of England, and instead thereof to introduce an
arbitrary and tyrannical Government against Law, which they had declared by
traiterous words, opinions, and judgment, in the point of SHIP MONEY by their
subscriptions, and judgment given against them in the case of Mr. Hamden in
the Exchequer Chamber; Which Impeachments they transmitted to the Lords House,
praying THE LORDS to put them to answer the premises; and upon their
examinations and trial to give such judgment upon every of them as is
agreeable to Law and Justice. To avoid which judgment Sir John Finch fled the
Realm, and the rest of them made fines and compositions to the public, and
were most of them removed from their Judges places. After this, the Lords
themselves, as Judges in Parliament passed several judgments and censures
against. Dr. John Pocklington for his Sunday no Sabbath, and other Books, and
against Dr. Bray for licensing them; In October 1643. The Lords fined and
imprisoned Clement Walker Esquire in the Tower for some scandalous words against
the Lord Viscount Say, a Member of he House of Peers: After that the Lords
alone, without any Impeachment of the Commons, on their privity, imprisoned,
fined and censured one Morris, upon complaint of Sir Adam Littleton, after a
full hearing, at which I was present, for forging an Act of Parliament, with
four or five more of his confederates therein, which was most clearly proved by
Witnesses upon Oath; whereby he would have defrauded Sir Adam of some Lands in
Essex. And at least one hundred more Commoners have been committed by THE LORDS
this Parliament and fined by them for several offenses, Misdemeanors and
Breaches of their Privileges, as well as Lilburn and Overton* yet none of them
ever excepted against, or demurred to their Jurisdiction; nor did the Commons
House ever yet except against them for these their proceedings, as injurious,
or illegal, but approved and applauded this their Justice. Finally, John
Lilburn himself, in his printed Pamphlet, entitled; Innocence and Truth
justified, p. 74, 75. See here, p. 36, 37.
relates that on May 4. 1641. himself was accused of High Treason, and brought
before the Lords Bar for his life; where one Littleton swore point blank
against him. But he having Liberty given to speak for himself, (without any
demurring to their Jurisdiction, because we was a Commoner.) desired that his
Witnesses might be heard to clear him, and was upon Mr. Andrews Oath acquitted
at the Bar of the whole house. And thereupon concludes, I am resolved to speak
well of those who have done me JUSTICE.

From all these punctual successive presidents, impeachments and clear
confessions of the Commons House, themselves in many former and late Parliam
and in this now sitting, it is undeniable; That the King and Lords jointly, and
the Lords severally without the King, have an indubitable right of Judicature,
without the Commons, vested in them, not only over Peers themselves, but
likewise Commoners, in all extraordinary criminal cases of Treason, Felony,
Trespass, and other Misdemeanors triable only in Parliament, which has been
constantly acknowledged, practiced, submitted to in all ages without dispute:
much more then have they such a just, judicial, rightful power, in cases of
breach of their own privileges, of Cooks 4 Instit. p. 15.
which none are, or can be Judges but themselves alone, as Sir Edw. Cook
resolves, they being the supremest Court. And to deny them such a power, is to
make the Highest Court of Judicature in the Realm inferior to the Kings Bench,
and all other Courts of Justice, who have power to judge and try the persons,
causes of Commoners, yea to commit and fine them for contempts and breaches of
their Privileges, as our See Brook and Ashes Tables, Tit. Contempts; Fines pur
Contempt and Imprisonment
Law books resolve, and every man's experience can testify.

The Lords right of Judicature both over Peers and Commoners in criminal
causes, being thus fully evicted against the false^ ignorant pretenses of
illiterate Sectaries, altogether unacquainted with our Histories and Records of
Parliament, which they never yet read nor understood; there remains nothing but
to answer some Authorities, Presidents, and Objections, produced against it.

These presidents in Sir Edward Cook, Sir Robert Cotton, and others) are of 3
Sores. 1. Such as are produced by them only, to prove that the Commons have a
Copartnership and joint Authority with the King and Lords in the power and
right of Judicature in our Parliaments. 2ly, Such as are objected to evidence
they have a sole power of Judicature in themselves in some cases, without the
K. and Lords. 3ly. Such as are urged to prove, they have no right of Judicature
in Parliament in the cases of Commoners that are capital or criminal.

I shall propose and answer them all in order.

1. Sir Edward Cook, and Sir Robert Cotton produce these presidents, to prove,
That the Commons have a Joint in^erest, right and share with the King and Lords
in the Iudicatory, or Judicial power of Parliaments; which I shall propound
according to their Antiquity. The 1. President alleged for it, is that of In
Cottoni Posthuma, p. 348.
Adomar Bishop of Winchester elect, (cited by Sir Robert Cotton, in his
Post-humous Discourse concerning the Power of the Peers and Commons in
Parliament in point of Judicature) who An. 44 H. 3. as affirms, he was then
exiled by the Joint Sentence of the King, Lords and COMMONS, as appears by the
Letter sent to Pope Alexander the 4th: ( Si Dominus Rex et Regni Majores hoc
vellent, meaning Adomars revocation) COMMUNITAS tamen ipsius ingressum jam
nullatenus sustineret. The Peers subsign this answer with their names, and
Peter de Mo^tfort, vice totius COMMUNITATIS as Speaker or Proctor of the
Commons.

I answer, under the favor of this renowned learned Antiquary, that this
president is full of gross mistakes. For 1. Bishop Adomar was not banished the
Realm at all, either by King, Lords or Commons, but fled out of it voluntarily
for fear, to avoid the Barons, who pur^i^ed him with forces, as Hist. Angl. P.
943, 959.
Mat. Paris, with others, relate; which the Nobles and Generality of the Barons
in direct terms inform this Pope, in another Letter sent together with this
objected. Man. Paris Auctuarium Additamentorum Londini, 1639. p. 222.
Maxim cum ipse a regno expuisus non extiterit, sed sponte cesserit, non ausus
exhibitionem justi^iae, quae singulis, secundum Iuramenta Regis et Procerum
debebatur, expectare. 2. The reason why he thus sled, was to avoid the Justice
of THE KING and LORDS, as they in plain terms inform the Pope; without any
mention of the Commons. 3ly, This expulsion is said to be in 44 H. 3. or rather
in 41. as Page 947.
Mat. Paris and others inform us, An. 1458. And that is at least 5. or 8. years
before any Commons, Knights and Burgesses were summoned to our Parliaments, by
Sir Robert Cottons, Mr. Seldens, and others confessions, and that by the Writ
in 49 H. 3. Rot. Claus. m. 10. dorso. Therefore if the Commons had any vote in
his banishment, it was 5. or 8. years before they were admitted into our
Parliaments: and so a Banishment not in, but out of Parliament. 4ly, This
Letter to Pope Alexander begins thus, Sanctissimo Patri in Christo, Alexandro.
etc. COMMUNITAS COMITUM, PROCERUM, MAGNATUM, ALIORUMQUE REGNI ANGLIAE; and it
is subscribed jointly by 6. Earls, and 5. Noblemen, whereof Petrus de Montfort
is the last, VICE TOTIUS COMMUNITATIS (to wit, Communitas Comitum, Procerum,
Magnatum aliorumque Regni Angliae, who writ the Letter, mentioned in the
beginning thereof, not of the Commons House, contradistinct from the Earls,
Nobles, Great-men, and Barons of the Realm) praesentibus literis sigilla nostra
apposuimus; in testimonium praedictorum; not by the 10 first Earls and Nobles,
in behalf of themselves, the Earls, Lords and great men of the Realm, and by
Peter de Montford, as Speaker or Proctor of the Commons, who (as An Exact
abridgement of the Records in Tower, p. 12* 151.
Sir Robert Cotton himself acknowledges) had no Speaker a^ all, in 6 E. 3.
(An. 1332. being at least 74. years after this Letter) nor yet till 51 E. 3.
rot. Parl. n. 87. for ought appears by History or Record, being 119. years
after this Letter. Wherefore this president consisting of so many mistakes (as
I have more largely proved in my Preface to Sir Robert Cottons Exact
Abridgement of the Records in the Tower,) makes nothing at all for the Commons
joint Right of Judicature with the King and Lord: The rather, because the
Communitas in the objected clause of the Letter, is not meant, of the Commons
in Parliament; but the Communitas or Universitas Regni popularis etsi non
Nobiles, (as Page 941
Mat. Paris styles them,) or popular rabble of Commons out of Parliament.

The 2. president, is that of Sir Nicholas Segrave 33 E. 1. rot. 33. Cooks 3.
Institutes, p. 7. and 4 Instit. p. 23. in the margin. Who being charged in
Parliament in presence of the King, Earls, Barons and OTHERS OF THE KINGS
COUNCIL, (not the Commons or Burgesses, but the Judges, and Kings learned
Council at Law, See the Freeholders Grand Inquest, p. 39, 40 41, 42.
or his Privy Council, who were assistants to the Lords, as I conceive, which
Sir Edward Cook mistaking, would have to express the Commons in Parliament)
then and there present; that the King in the wars of Scotland, being among his
enemies, Nicholas Seagrave, his leigeman, who held of the King by Homage and
fealty, and served him for his aid in that war, did maliciously move discord
and contention without cause with John de Crombewell, charging him with many
enormous crimes, and offered to prove it upon his body. To whom the said John
answered, that he would answer him in the Kings Court, etc. and thereupon gave
him his faith. After which Nicholas withdrew himself from the Kings have and
aid, leaving the King in danger of his enemies, and adjourned the said John to
defend himself in the Court of the King of France, and prefixed him a certain
day: and so as much as in him was, subjected, and submitted the Dominion of the
King and kingdom, to the subjection of the King of France: and to effect this
he took his journey toward Dover to pass over into France. All which he
confessed, and submitted himself therein de alto et Basso, to the Kings
pleasure. And hereupon the King willing HABERE AVISAMENTUM, to have the advice
of the EALS, BARONS, LORDS, ( magnatum) and OTHERS OF HIS COUNCIL, enjoined
them upon the Homage, fealty, and allegiance wherewith they were obliged to
him, quod ipsi sideliter CONSULERENT, that they should faithfully ADVISE HIM,
what punishment should be inflicted for such a fact thus confessed? Qui omnes,
habito super hoc diligenti tractatu, et avisamento, etc. Who all having had
thereupon di^igent debate and advise, having considered and understood all
things contained in the said fact, DICUNT (not by way of Judgment judicially
pronounced, but of answer to the Kings question propounded, and as their
opinion of the cause) Said, that this fact deserved loss of life and members
etc. So as this offense (notes Sir Edward Cook) was then adjudged in
Parliament to be High Treason. But under his favor, First, here was no
judgment at all given against the party himself, but only an opinion and
advice touching this case (not pending judicially in Parliament by way of
Indictment or impeachment, but voluntarily proposed by the King) in answer to
the kings question; and so it can be no proof of any actual proper judicature
vested in both Houses. Secondly, For ought appears, this question was only
propounded to the Earls, Lords, Barons, and the Kings Council that assisted
them; and so only to the House of Peers, not to the Commons: and answered,
resolved only by them; See the Freeholders grand Inquest p. 39, 40, 41, 42.
aliorum de Concilio suo; not expressing nor including the Commons, as I
apprehend, being never so entitled in any Parliament Records for ought I can
find.

That these alii de Concilio, were not the Commons, as Sir 4 Inst. p. 23. 3
Inst. p. 7. and 22.
Edward Cook insinuates, but the Kings Justices and Judges who attended them,
is most clear by this passage of Flores Hist. pars 2. Anno 1305. p. 449, 450.
Matthew Westminster, who lived and writ the story of it at that time in these
words. Sub illo quoque tempore, Nicholaus de Segrave unus de praestantioribus
de regno, pro tali causa arrestatus fuerat coram rege: Alius quidam Johannis de
Crom^ewell ipsum de proditione arguerat. Ille autem in defensionem obtulit se
duello. Rex propter bella sua noluit ista pati; ille vero non licentiatu^, et
contra prohibitionem Regis, mare transivit, persequens accusatorem, ipso Rege
adhuc inter hostiles acies constituto. Ideirco reputa^ eum Rex in judicio vitae
suae contemptorem, nec per ipsum stare, quin Rex ab hostibus interiret. Et ille
in gratiam Regis se submisit. Cui Rex justitiam fieri volo in judicio. Proinde
JUSTITIARII (mark it, not the Commons) TRIDUO SUPER HOC CONSULTANTES,
responderunt regi; hujusmodi hominem reum esse mortis, et omnia bona sua
mobilia et immobilia regii juris esse. Veruntamen, propter generositatem
sanguinis addiderunt, non hunc in regis contemptum, Angliam egressum fuisse,
sed propter iram se de suo criminatore vindicandi. Regis autem esse, posse
facere misericordiam cum eodem. Quibus Rex, O diu consultati sed inconsulti*
Equidem meum est posse, et velle confer gratiam, and cui voluero, miserebor.
Nec propter vos amplius, quam pro cane. Quis in gratiam meam se submisit, and
repulsam passus est? Veruntamen vestrum judicium in scriptura redigatur, et pro
lege amodo teneatur. Proinde dictus miles ad carcerem ducebatur, ne impunitas
armare^ audaciam, et rigor caeteris timorem incuteret contemnendi. Et post
paucos dies, elaborantibus multis nobilio^ibus regni, et offerentibus
ostendentibus se 30 suis paribus, cinctis gladiis, corpus pro corpore, et bona
pro bonis, una in solidum, quoquo die Rex eum vocaverit, nec adesset, liberatus
est, et per regem cunctis facultatibus suis restitutus: So this Historian,
which compared with the Record infallibly proves, that this resolution was
given by the Earls, Barons, Lords, and Judges advice, who were the only aliorum
de Concilio, as assistants to the Lords then in all matters of Law, as now they
are, not the Commons, of which there is no mention in the records or this
Historian, that they were parties to it. And this is likewise evident by the
case of Margery, the Wife of Thomas Weyland, an abjured Judge, in the
Parliament of 19 E. 1. Cooks 1. Institutes. f. 133. n. Where the Barons of the
Exchequer, and Justices of the Kings Courts, were called to advise and assist
the King and his Council of Lords in Parliament, in a difficulty of Law,
therein to be resolved by their advice.

And therefore it follows, that the LORDS ONLY IN THAT AGE were the Judges even
of Commoners cases. Thirdly, Admit the Commons were included; yet it proves
only a right of advising and delivering their opinions with the Lords, when
required by the King, not of judging or pronouncing sentence. Fourthly, Sir
Edward Cook citing this president, to prove That both Houses together have
power of judicature; must grant, that even in 33 E. 1. there were two distinct
Houses of Parliament, who upon special occasions, (as now at conferences, etc.)
met and advised together; and therefore the division of the Houses was before
Edward the third his reign, and very probable as ancient as the summoning of
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to the Parliament, which some make as ancient
as King Henry the first, or King Henry the 2. others not before King Henry the
third, in the The first Writ of summons now extant is but in 49 H. 3. Seld.
Titles of Honor, patt 2. c. 5.
49 year his reign, Father to King Edward the first. So as this president makes
quite against the Levellers and Lilburnians designs and opinions.

The Cook 4 Inst. p. 21. Cottoni Posthuma, p. 347.
3 and 4. Presidents are those of Hugh Audley his Wife, Claus. 12 E. 2. m. 5.
of Gaverston and the two Spencers Exiles, 15 E. 2. forecited: wherein the
Commons gave their assents to the attainders and exiles of Gaverston, and the
Spencers, and to the reversal of them: But this I have already proved, to be
only by way of Bills, not judicature, by the legislative, not judicial power of
Parliament, and that they were judicially condemned only by the Lords,
therefore these are nothing to the purpose, and against the Objectors.

The 5. and 6. are the depositions of King Ed. the 2. and Richard the 2. for
their mis-government, wherein the Commons had a joint vote and concurrence with
the Lords, which I shall hereafter answer in the supplement. p. 429. to 460.

The seventh President is that of Eliz. Burgh* Widow, Sir Robert cottons
Posthuma p. 348, 349,
in the Parliament of 1 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 11. who complained by Petition to
the King, that in the reign of King Edward the 2. she was by his Writ commanded
to come unto him to York; and there by Hugh Spencer the younger, and Robert
Baldock, and William Cliff his instruments, enforced by duresse to enter into
an Obligation, to this effect: that if she received any who were contrary to
the King, or married any man without the Kings consent, or if she gave any lands
or tenements: which she held in fee or in dower to any man living without the
Kings license, that for any of these she should forfeit all her Lands,
Tenements, Goods, and Chattels to the King: as appeared by the transcript of
the Bond annexed to her Bill; whereupon she prayed Grace, and remedy against
this duresse, and acquittance of our Lord the King from this Obligation.
Hereupon a Writ was sent to the Clerk of the Privy Seal, in whose custody the
Obligation was, to bring it without delay, Coram Concilio nostro in
Parliamento, ad faciendum inde ulteriut, quod per idem Concilium nostrum
contige it ordinari: which being brought and delivered accordingly the 5 of
March, and deliberately read in full Parliament, and agreeing with the
transcript annexed to her Petition in all things: Pur ceo que avys est as
Archievesques, Evesques, Counts, and BARONS and auires Grandes, et a TOVTELA
COMMONALTIE de la terre, que lo dit escrit est fait contre ley de la terre, and
enconter tout manner de reason, si fuist le dit escrit PER AGARD DEL PARLIAMENT
dampne illeoques and livera ala dit Elizabeth.

I answer, 1. That this judgment was given only in a civil case touching an
Obligation made by duress, not in a criminal. 2ly. That this Petition was
directed only to the King and his Council, not to the Commons in Parliament,
and the business heard before them. 3ly. That this being a Common case, there
being then many Petitions and complaints that Parliament of bonds of this
nature, the Commons joining with the King and Lords in this judgment of
Parliament in her case, was only by way of Bill, not in an ordinary way of
judgment; they exhibiting and passing a Bill for that purpose as well as a
Petition, as is clear by the words of the Roll, and by the printed Statute of 1
E. 3. c. 3. That fines, sales, and gifts of land, and recognizances of debt
made by force and duress to this Sir Hugh Spencer, Robert Baldocke, etc. or to
any of them, be defeated: And Parl. 2. chapter 15. Whereas many of the Realm, in
the time of the Kings Father that now is, by means of his false and evil
Counselors have been excited by diverse to bind themselves to come to the K.
with force and arms, whenever they should be sent for upon pain of life and
limb, and to forfeit all that ever they might forfeit; by virtue of which
writings diverse of his land have been often destroyed; The King considering
that such writings were made to the Kings dishonor, sithence that every man is
bound to do to the King, as to his Liege Lord, all that pertains to him,
without any manner of writing; will that from henceforth no such writing be
made. And that such as be made by the sight of the Chancellor and Treasurer
shall be showed to the King, and the K. shall cause all such as be made against
right and reason to be cancelled: So that this main president merely falls to
the ground being but by Bill.

The 8th. President that may be objected is this: Adam de Walsingham Hist.
Angl. p. 98. to 106. Ypopig. An. 1326, 1327. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 227, 228.
Godwins Catalogue of Bishops, p. 129, 130. Fox acts and Monuments, p. 342, p.
339, 340. and Speeds Hist. p. 679, 680.681, 685, 686. See my Antipathy of the
English Lordly Prelates, etc. p. 54, 55, 56, 265, 266, 267.
Arleton or Tarlton, Bishop of Hereford, in a Parliament held at London, Anno
1322. was apprehended by the Kings Officers, and brought to the Bar to be
arraigned for Treason and Rebellion, in aiding the Mortimers and others in
their wars with men and arms; where having nothing to say for himself in
defense of the crimes objected, and standing mute for a space; at last he
flatly told the King, That he was a Minister and Member of the Church of
Christ, and a consecrated Bishop, though unworthy; therefore I neither can, nor
ought to answer to such high matters without the consent of my Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury (my direct Judge next after the Pope) and of the other Fathers
the Bishops my PEERS. At which saying the Archbishops and Bishops there
present, rose up, and interceded to the King for their Colleague; and when the
King would not be entreated, they all challenged the Bishop as a Member of the
Church, exempt from the Kings Justice and all secular judicature. The King
forced thereunto by their claimors, delivered him to the Archbishops custody,
to answer elsewhere for these crimes. Within few days after, being apprehended
again, and brought to answer before the Kings royal Tribunal in the Kings Bench
at Westminster, for his Treasons; the Archbishops of Canterbury, York and
Dublin, hearing of Tarltons arraignment, came with their Crosier staves carried
before them, accompanied with 10 Bishops more, and a great company of men,
entered into the Court, and by open violence rescued and took away the Bishop
from the Bar, before any answer made to his charge, chasing away the Kings
Officers, and proclaiming openly, That no man should lay violent hands on this
(Trayterly) Bishop, upon pain of excommunication, and so departed. The King
exceedingly incensed at this High affront to Justice and himself, commanded an
Inquest to be impanelled, and a lawful inquiry to be made of the Treasons
committed by the Bishop, in his absence, being thus rescued from Justice. The
Jury, without fear of the King, or any hatred of the Bishop, found the Bishop
guilty of all the Articles of Treason and Rebellion, whereof he was indicted.
Whereupon the King banished the Bishop, and seized all his temporalties, lands
and goods. But yet notwithstanding the Bishop; by consent of all the Prelates,
was by strong hand kept in the Archbishops custody, till he had reconciled him
to the King. After which, by way of revenge he was a principal instrument of
the Kings deposing and murder; which having effected, in the Parliament of 1
E. 3. 6. this Claus. 1 E. 3. m. 13.
Bishop petitions that the Indictment and Judgment against him, and the
proceedings therein might be brought into Parliament and there nulled, as
erroneous, which was done accordingly: Et quia recitatis et examinatis coram
nobis et consilio nos^ro recordo et processu praedictis, Et etiam coram
Praelatis, Comitibus, Baronibus, Magnatibus, and tota communitate regni nostri,
praesenti Parliamento nostro praesentibus, compertum fuit, quod in eisdem
recordo et processu errores manifesti intervenerunt, per assensum totius
Parliamenti adnullatur: and so he had restitution.

I answer, that as this rescue of, proceeding, and judgment against this
traiterous Bishop were singular, So is this repeal and reversal of it as
erroneous, before and by all the Commons and whole Parliament, as well as King,
Prelates, and Nobles, and that no doubt at the special instance of this, and
all the other Bishops, highly concerned in this cause. Wherefore this one
Swallow makes no Summer, and proves no judicial authority jointly with the King
and Lords, since they never joined with them before nor since in reversing of
any such error upon Judgment in the Kings Bench; but only where an erroneous
Attainder by Bill in one Parliament was reversed by Bill in another.

Cottoni Posthuma, p. 349.
The 9th. is the Clause of King Edward the thirds Letter to the Pope in the 4th.
year of his reign, already answered, p. 274.

The Freeholders Grand Inquest p. 13, 14, 15.
The 10th is Sir John at Lees case, 42 E. 3. n. 20. said to be ADJVDGED by the
Lords and COMMONS. I answer, this Case is somewhat m^staken; For the Record
only mentions, That the 21 day of May, the King gave thanks to the Lords and
Commons for their coming and aid granted; on which day all the Lords and sundry
of the Commons dined with the King. After which dinner Sir John at Lee was
brought before the King, LORDS and COMMONS next aforesaid (who dined with the
King) to answer certain objections made against him by William Latymer, about
the wardship of Robert Latymer; that Sir John being of power, had sent for him
to London, where by duresse of Imprisonment he enforced the said William to
surrender his estate unto him; which done, some other Articles were objected
against the said Sir John, of which for that he could not sufficiently purge
himself, HE was committed to the Tower of London, there to remain til he had
made fine and ransom at the Kings pleasure, and command given to the Constable
of the Tower to keep him accordingly. And then the said Lords and Commons
departed: After which he was brought before the Kings Council at Westminster,
which COUNCIL ORDERED the said ward to be reseised into the Kings hands: So as
this record proves not that this judgment was given in the Parliament house,
nor that the Lords and Commons adjudged Sir John, but rather the King and his
Council in the presence of the Lords and Commons, after the Parliament ended.

The 11, 12, 13. Are the cases of the Lord Latymer, Lord Nevil, and Richard
Lions, forecited: Here, p. 283, 284, 350. which are nothing to purpose, the Sea
the Freeholders Grand Inquest, p. 13, 14, 15.
Lords alone giving judgment in them without the Commons, who did only impeach
them; and the Cooks 4. Instit. p. 23. Cottoni Posthuma, p. 249.
King removing the Lord Latymer from his Council at their further request: So
that these 3. cases refute their opinions who object them.

The 14. is the Cooks 3. Instit. p. 23. Sir Robert Cottons Posthuma, p. 249.
Case of Weston and Gomines, 1 R. 2. n. 38, 39. In which the Lords alone gave
the Judgment, as I have proved, p. 332, 333: Therefore pointblank against the
Objectors.

The 15. president is that of Cooks 3. Instit. c. 1. p. 8. Mr. Sr, John's
Argument sat Law, at the Earl of Straffords Attainder, p. 75, 76. Walsingham,
Hist. Angliae, p. 255. Ypodigm. p. 128. An Exact abridgement, p. 183.
John Kirby and John Algar, two Citizens of London, in the Parliament of 3 R.
2. n. 18. who conceiving malice against John Imperial, (an Ambassador sent
hither from the State of Genoa, who had procured a Monopoly to furnish* England
with all such wares as come from the Levant, keeping his staple at
Southampton,) killed him in London, upon a sudden quarrel picked with him; for
which they being committed, this being a new and difficult case, and the Judges
being in doubt, whether it were Treason, or no? it was thereupon propounded in
Parliament, (according to the Statute of 25 E. 3. c. 2.) like that of 25 E. 3.
Parl. 2. of those who are born beyond the Seas, 14 E. 3. c. 5. 13 E. 1. c.
24.32 E. 1. rot. 17. and 22. Claus. 46 H. 3. n. 3. Claus. 14 E. 2. dors. 17. 17
E. 3. n. 24.21 E. 3. n. 60.40 E. 3. n. 14, 15.14 E. 3. n. 30, 31.1 R. 2. n.
95.1 E. 3. f. 6, 7.39 E. 3.21. a. 40 E. 3.34. b. Cook 8 Rep. f. 158.3 Instit.
p. 6, 7.4 Instit. p. 67, etc. 2 Instit. p. 408. West. 2. c 24. and Bracton, l.
2. c. 16, l. 3. c. 9. Fletae l. 2. c. 6. resolving that all difficult causes
are to be declared to and determined in and by Parliaments. This case being
examined and debated by and between the Lords and Commons, was afterward there
declared before the King, and determined and agreed That this fact and murder
is Treason, and a crime against the Kings Majesty; in which case no privilege
of Clergy ought to be allowed to any man. Whereupon 7 R. 2. rot. 8. Kirby and
Algar were attainted of High Treason in the Kings Bench, and executed as
Traitors. Walsingham writes this Parliament was held at Northampton, against
the consent of most of the Realm, but especially against the will of the
Londoners; that so revenge might be taken upon Kirkeby for this murder: they
fearing, that if the Parliament were held at London, the Londoners would not
suffer him to be executed, without some danger to those who condemned him:
whereupon he was condemned, drawn, and executed at Northampton.

To this I answer first: That Kirby and Algar were not impeached, arraigned,
tried or condemned in Parliament for this Treason, but in the Kings Bench, for
if they had, the Lords only had judged and given sentence against rhem, as in
all the premised cases. 2ly, Their case being new, was thought fit to be
propounded to the Commons by the Kings direction, as well as to the Lords, who
upon debate agreed it to be Treason. 3ly, When it had been debated, it was
declared and finally resolved and agreed before the King in full Parliament,
and that by Bill, and the Legislative, not Judicial power, as Mr. S^. John
informs us. Therefore it makes nothing for the Commons right and power of
Judicature; which after all these presidents all the Commons in the Parliament
of 1 H. 4. n. 79. confess to have been always of right in the King and Lords,
and not in them; which sways away all the forecited presidents at once, as
impertinent, and misapplied.

For the presidents of 21 R. 2. n. 29. 2 H. 5. n. 13* and 28 H. 6, n. 19.
misrecited by Sir E. Cook, 4 Instit. p. 23. and 3 Inst. p. 22. they are already
answered p. 296, 297, 299, 344. And for those of Sir Giles Mompesson, Sir John
Michel, Viscount St. Alban, and the Earl of Middlesex: himself confesses, (and
I have here cleared, p. 303, 304.) that the notable Judgments against them
were given by the Lords, at the prosecution of the Commons, who were only their
prosecutors, not Judges. These are all the Presidents I find, that are
objected, to give the Commons a share with the King and Lords in the Judicature
in our Parliaments; which evince it not, but clearly disprove it.

The 2. sort of Presidents insisted on by Sir Ed. Cook, are to prove, a
Judicial Authority in the House of Commons alone, without the Lords, in cases
of their own Members, and Servants, in matters of elections, breach of
Privilege, or misdemeanors in the Commons house; for which they have imprisoned
and sometimes fined Sergeants, Baylifs, Sherifs, committed their own Members,
adjudged their elections void, suspended, excluded, ejected them the house. The
1. ease is that of Muncton 2 Aprilis 1 Mariae committed by the Commons to the
Tower for striking William Johnson a Burgess. The 2. of Thomas Lucy 8 Eliz.
removed out of the House for giving 4 l. to the Mayor of Westbury to be chosen
a Burgess, and the Mayor fined and imprisoned. The 3, of Arthur Hall, 23. Eliz.
who for discovering and publishing the Conferences of the House, and writing a
Book to the dishonor of the house, was committed to prison. These matters were
examined and adjudged in the House of Commons, Secundum leg^m and Consuetudinem
Parliamenti, and he thereupon committed to the Tower for 6. Months, fined 500
marks, and expelled the House. And in that Parliament 18 Martii, a fine was
asses^ed by the House on every Member that was absent without leave. To these
alleged by Sir Edw. Cook, I shall superadd the ensuing; Sir Robert Brandling
was committed to the Tower 27 Eliz. for striking Withe^ington a Burgess. 3
Jacobi one was fined for causing a Members Servant to be arrested; though he
claimed his privilege. 12 Jacobi Lock and More were ordered by the Commons to
ride both on one horse, with their faces to the horses tail, for arresting a
Servant of Mr. Whitlocks, then a Member, against his privilege; which was
accordingly executed. In 2 Caroli, Sir George Hastings being elected knight for
Leicestershire, and he then being arrested, his witnesses had their charges
given them against the Sherif, and he fined. In the Parliament of 3. Caroli,
Sir Thomas Savils case, 29. April 1628. Thomson Sherif, and Henloe Alderman of
York for abuses in the election, were ordered to be committed to the Sergeant
of the House, during the pleasure of the Commons House, to acknowledge their
offenses at the Bar on their knees, and pay all due fees, and to make a
submission in York. In 3. Caroli, Mr. John Baber was suspended the house about
billetting Soldiers. In 3. Car. the Commons house committed Mr. Laughton and
Mr. Trelawny to the Tower during pleasure, and Sir William Wray, and Mr. Edward
Trelawny to the Sergeant at Arms, and ordered them to make a submission, and
acknowledgement of their offenses in the House at the Bar, and in the County at
the Assizes, they kneeling at the Bar all the while the Speaker pronounced the
Judgment against them, for writing menacing Letters to Sir John Elliot, and
Mr. Coriton, and to others of the County of Cornwall, disturbing their
election, and contemning the warrant of the House when sent for. In this
Parliament of 17 Caroli now sitting, the Commons house turned out sundry
Members, who were Projectors, and voted out many others for Delinquency,
ordering New elections in their places, without the King or Lord.

I answer, 1. That all these objected presidents are of very puny date within
time of memory; therefore unable to create a Law or custom of Parliament, or
any right of sole Judicature in the Commons House. 2ly, They were all made by
the Commons themselves, unfit Judges in their own cases, much less over one
another, being all of equal Authority, and See my Ardua Regni.
so unable to seclude, imprison or fine one another, no more than one Judge or
Justice to fine, imprison, or uncommission another; since Par in parem non
habet imperium. 3ly, They are all against Law, because and coram non Judice,
the Commons House having no right or power of Judicature, much less of sole
Judicature in our Parliaments, but only the King and Lords, as I have formerly
proved by reasons and presidents in all ages. 4ly, These presidents are but
few, never judicially argued, and rather connived at, than approved by the King
and Lords, taken up with other more public businesses; therefore passing sub
silentio, they can make no Law rule, or right, as is resolved in Long. 5 E. 4.
f. 110. Cooks 4. Reports, f. 93 94. Slades case, and 6 Report, f. 75. Druries
case. 5ly, There are many express ancient Presidents, Statutes, Judgments, in
most former Parliaments to the contrary, sundry of them upon the Commons own
Petitions and complaints, which will overbalance and control these few late
Presidents warranted by no old Records or Statutes whatsoever, but contradicted
by the constant practice of former ages; To clear which truth beyond
contradiction, I shall show you the very Original of the Commons summons to
Parliament by the Kings writs, (out of mere grace, not ancient right or
custom,) with the several varieties of Writs, Statures touching elections of
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and chief cases resolved in Parliaments touching
Elections and breaches of Privileges, relating to Members or their menial
Servants, that I find upon record, which will abundantly clear this point, and
refute these irregular puny presidents.

The original of our Parliaments, as now constituted, of King, Lords and
Commons, is by Polydor Virgil, Holinshed, Speed, Sir Walter Raleigh his
Prerogative of Parl. p 2, 3. The Freeholders Grand ^nquest, and others
forecited, p. 165.
several of our Historians, Antiquaries, and Writers, referred to the 16. or
17. year of King Henry the 1. or at least to Henry the 2. his reign; which I
have already refuted, by a particular list of all the Parliaments under them:
Yet many of this opinion affirm, that the Commons were not constantly summoned
to our Parliaments, but only the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, before the 49.
of King Henry the 3. and beginning of Edward the 1. his reign, neither had they
a Speaker, till 51 E. 3. Therefore no power of Judicature over their Members.
The first Writ I find extant, that savors of summoning Knights to Parliament,
is that in the 15. year of King John, wherein this King sent a Writ to the
Sherif of Oxon in these words.

Claus. 15 Joh. Reg. pars 2. m. ^. dorso. Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 710.
Rex Vicecomiti Oxon salutem. Praecipimus tibi quod omnes Milites Ballivae
tuae, qui summoniti fuerunt esse apud Oxoniam, ad Nos a die Omnium Sanctorum in
15. dies, venire facias cum armis suis, Corpora vero Baronum, sine armis
singulariter: et IV. DISCRETOS MILITES DE COMITATU TUO illuc venire facias ad
Nos ad eundem terminum, AD LO QUENDUM NOBISCUN DE NEGOTIIS REGNI NOSTRI. Test
meipso apud Witten 11 die Novembris.

Eodem modo scribitur omnibus Vicecomitibus. This is no Writ of Summons to
Parliament, as some take it, but rather to a Military Council, as I conceive
it. For 1. There is no mention of any Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Spiritual Lords,
Citizens or Burgesses summoned thereto* but only of Barons without arms; and
Knights with arms. 2ly, Of all knights they had formerly summoned to appear
there. 3ly, Of 4. not 2. discreet Knights out of every County; and that not ad
Parliamentum nostrum, but, ad Nos venire facias. 4ly, They were not to be
elected by the people, but immediately summoned, elected and sent by the
Sherifs themselves. 5ly, They were to come ad loquendum nobiscum, not, ad
faciendum and consentiendum hiis, etc. as the usual Writs of Summons for
Knights of Shires are since; without any power of Judicature to fine, seclude,
or question one another elections or returns, as now.

The very first express writ extant in History or Records that I can meet with
upon search, for the calling of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to Parliament,
is in Claus. 49 H. 3. m. 10. dorso in schedula. Seldens Titles of Honor, p.
717, 718.723, 724.
49 ^3. where the King after the battle of Evesham by his Writs summoned no
less than 64 Abbots, 36 Priors, besides the Bishops, and 5. Deans of
Cathedrals, and the Temporal Earls and Barons, only 23. in number, the rest
being slain in the field, or in actual rebellion. After their Writs of Summons
and name, ^ollows this Writ or Note of summons for Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, and Barons of the Cinqueports. Item mandatum est singulis
Vicecomitibus per Angliam, quod VENIRE (not, el^gi.) FACIANT duos Milites de
Legalioribus, Probioribus, et discretioribus Militibus singulorum Comitatuum AD
REGEM Londoniis, in Octabis praedictis, in forma supradicta. Item in forma
praedicta scribitur CIVIBUS* Eborum, Civ^bus Lincoln, and caeteris Burgis
Angliae, quod mittant in forma praedict. DUOS DE DISCRETIORIBUS* LEGALIORIBVS
and PROBIORIBUS TAM CIVIBUS QUAM BURGENSIBUS SUIS. Item in forma praedicta
mandatu^ est Baronibus et probis hominibus Quinque Portuum, prout continetur in
brevi inrotulato inferius. Here the King 1. limited both the number and quality
of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, when first summoned to our Parliaments:
2ly, He directed particular Writs to all Sherifs to summon (not to elect by the
choice of the Freeholders) two of the legallest, honestest* and discreetest
Knights in their Counties, which they alone were then to make choice of* 3ly,
He sends particular Writs to some (not all) Cities, and the rest of the
Buroughs of England, to send two of their discreetest, legallest and honestest
Citizens; and so to the Cinqueports to send such Barons to this Parliament, And
if they returned any not thus qualified, against the form of these Writs, no
doubt the King himself might refuse, seclude them: and he with his Lords, were
the sole Judges of their fitness for that service, not they themselves to judge
of their own or their fellow Members fitness or incapacity.

The first seclusion of any Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament, and
electing others in their places, was by the King himself with his Councils
advice, (not by the Commons themselves) for wilful absence. Claus. 5 ^. ^. m.
26 dorso: where diverse Knights of Shires, Citizens and Burgesses departing from
the Parliament held at London, without the Kings special license, the King
thereupon issued out Writs to the Sherifs of Yorkshire and other Counties, to
summon all such Knights, Citizens and Burgesses within their Bayliwicks to
return to the Parliament, vel alios ad hoc idoneos loco ipsorum, si ad hoc
vacare non possunt, eligere, etc. or to cause others who were fit to be elected
in their places, if they could not attend* the Parliament; with sufficient
authority from the Counties, Cities, and Boroughs, to consent to those things
which should be ordained at the next Session of Parliament, then prorogued to a
certain day. Here the King alone by his Writ takes authority to discharge those
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, who departed from the Parliament without his
license, and would or could not attend it, without the Commons votes or
assents; and to command the Sherif to elect other sit persons in their places.

Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 13 Dorso. The King having issued out writs of Summons to
Parliament, dated October. 23. The 3 of November following, he sent writs to all
Sherifs, to proclaim in all places, That he being informed of diverse
oppressions and injuries done to sundry people of his Realm, by diverse of his
Officers and Ministers, and likewise by some of his Counselors, by reason of
his tender age, to his damage and dishonor, which things he would not suffer,
and desired to redress; that thereupon any persons which would complain of any
oppressions, durances, and grievances done to them against right, and the Laws
and Usages of this Realm, should repair to Westminster the next Parliament, and
there show their plaints to him, and such as he should appoint, where they
should receive convenient and speedy remedy. Then follows this Clause. And
because before these times, some of the Knights who have come to Parliament for
the Commnalties of Counties, have been people of covyne, and maintainers of
false quarrels, and have not suffered that good men should declare the
grievances of the Common people, nor their things, which ought to have been
redressed in Parliament, to the great damage of us and our people: We command
and charge you, that you cause to be chosen by the common assent of the County,
two of the most loyal, (or lawful) and most sufficient Knights or Esquires, 22
E. 3.18. a. 26 E. 3.57. Fitz Droit 37.
Sergeants of the said County, who are not at all suspected of any crime, nor
common maintainers of Parties, to be at the said Parliament, according to the
form of our Writ which you have received, And this you may not fail to do, as
you will eschew our grievous indignation. Here the King by a special Writ takes
care to prevent the election of Knights of Shires that were any way guilty of
crime or maintenance, as in former times had been used, and that the loyalles^
and most sufficient Knights or Esquires in the County should be elected by
common consent, because when once duly chosen and returned by the Counties, as
their lawful Proxies and Attorneys, and empowered by them as such; neither the
King nor Lords could justly seclude or eject them; much less the Commons House
(as they have ejected Projectors and other Members of late times) having no
such authority given them by their Writs or ret^rns, but only to assent to such
things, as by the Common advice of the King, Lords, and Commons shall be there
agreed concerning the King, Church, and Realm; and being all of equal rank and
power, as Attornie and Proctors for the Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, for
which they serve, can no more discharge or eject one another, than one Attorney,
Proctor, Grand Juryman, Juror, Justice of Peace, Judge, Commissioner, or
Executor, discharge or remove another of his Colleagues, equally empowered,
entrusted with them by the parties they represent.

To omit the summoning of sundry Merchants to attend the Parliament and
Council, to be advised and treated with upon sundry occasions, in the Clause
Rolls of 11, 12, 13, 14. and 16 Edw. 3. Claus. 26 E. 3. m. 14. dors. there is a
Parliamentary Council summoned, to wit, two Knights are by the Writ to be
chosen and sent out of every Counry, and but one Burgess out of every Borough:
Claus. 27 E. 3. m. 12. dorso; Summonitio Concilii; the Writ commands only one
Knight to be chosen, and sent out of every County, but 2 Citizens and Burgesses
out of every City and Borough: And the Prologue of the printed Statute of the
Staple made therein, 27 Ed. 3. recites, that there was in it only, of every
County one Knight for all the County, according to the limitation in the Writ.

Claus. 45 E. 3. m. 29. The Parliament having granted a Subsidy to the King
payable out of every parish, and then departing, the King for the better and
speedier levying thereof, desired the advice of the Commons, yet would not put
them to the trouble to meet all together; And therefore issued out Writs to
summon one Knight out of every County, and one Citizen and Burgess out of every
City and Borough, that had been of the former Parliament, to meet together at
Winchester. Who meeting accordingly, had their expenses allowed them. Dors. 22.
Here the King summons only half the Commons House, to complete what the whole
had granted; without the other moity, for their greater ease and saving
expenses.

In the Parliament of 46 E. 6. n. 13, 14. There was this Ordinance made and
read; Because that men of Law which pursue diverse businesses in the Court of
the Kings for particular persons, with whom they are of Counsel, procure and
make diverse Petitions to be preferred in Parliament, in the name of the
Commons, which nothing concern them; but only those singular persons, or those
whom they cause to put them in: as also Sherifs, which are common Officers to
the people, and ought to reside upon their Office, to do right to every man,
are named, and have been before th^se hours returned Knights of Shires in
Parliaments by the same Sherifs. It is agreed and assented in this Parliament,
that from henceforth no man of Law pursuing businesses in the Courts of the
King, nor Sherif, for the time that he is Sherif, shall be returned or accepted
Knights of Shires; and that those who are men of Law and Sherifs now returned
to Parliament shall have no wages. But THE KING WILL that Knights and Esquires.
SERGEANTS of the best esteem in the Country, shall be henceforth returned
Knights in Parliament, and that they shall be chosen in full County. Sir Edward
Cook inform us, That this Ordinance was made in the Lords house, 4 Instit. p.
10, 48.
(to wit by the King and Lords without the Commons, as he insinuates) If so,
then the K. and Lords alone in that age, had the sole power, 1. of disabling,
secluding unfitting Members, as practicing Lawyers and Sherifs, to be elected
knights of Shires for the future. 2ly. of depriving them of wages, though
elected for that Parliament before the Ordinance made; but not of ejecting them
out of the House when duly elected, because till now there was no Law or
Ordinance against their choice. 3ly. Of rejecting and refusing to accept such
for knights, if elected and returned after this Ordinance; as the words, no
accepted chivalers des Countees, superadded too ne ^oient returnez imply. 4ly.
By virtue of this Ordi^ance, all Sherifs of Counties have been not only
disabled, but prohibited to be elected knights, and Members of the Commons
House, by this special Clause inserted into all writs for elections. Nolumus
autem quod tu, vel aliquis alius Vicecomes ALIQUALITER SIT ELECTUS. Now the
Writ being the sole authority and ground for all elections, prescribing the
Freeholders to elect 2 of the most discreet, fit and sufficient persons, and
precisely inhibiting the election of any Sherifs in any sort, either for
Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses, by virtue of this Ordinance. The elections of
such are merely void, and the King and Lords may justly seclude them, if
e^ected and returned whiles Sherifs. 5ly. As Sherifs have been secluded by this
Clause and Ordinance ever since; so in the Parliament of 6 H. 4. All
Apprentices, and other men at Law, were likewise secluded by this special
Clause inserted into the Writs of Summons. Nolumus autem quod tu, seu aliquis
alius Vicecomes regni nostri, aut Apprentius, aut aliquis alius homo ad Legem
aliqualiter sit electus, as appears by the Exem. ^ca^ron thereof in the Claus.
Roll of 5 H. 4. pars 2. m. 4, dorso, in the Tower, (which I have viewed with
mine own eyes) by sundry transcripts thereof in Manuscripts, and by this
testimony of Thomas Walsingham, who lived, Historiae Ang. p. 414.
and in writ the History of that time. Direxit ergo Rex Brevia Vicecomit bus,
ne quosquam pro Comitatibus eligerent quovismodo milites, qui in jure Regni vel
docti fuissent vel Apprenticii, sed tales omnino mi^teren ur ad hoc n^gotium
quo^ constat ignorare cujusque juris* methodum, factumque est ita. Whence he
styles it in his Margin* PARLIAMENTUM INDOCTORUM; No Lawyer being elected by
reason of this Clause grounded on the forecited Ordinance. Sir Edward Cook,
(who is not only full of mistakes and mis-recitals of Records, but most
confident in them) citing this passage of Walsingham thus bodly contradicts
him, But the Historian is deceived, for there is no such Clause in these Writs,
but it was wrought by the Kings Letters by pretext of an Ordinance in the Lords
House, in 46 E. 3. when as the Writ it self in the Clause Roll, concurring
which Walsingham, ascertains me, that Sir Edward himself was deceived, not the
Historian, by whom, or upon what misinformation I know not. And that he was so
in truth, we have his own express confession and testimony against himself
within few leaves after. 4* Inst. p. 48.
At the Parliament holden at Coventry, Anno 6 H. 4. the Parliament was summoned
BY WRIT, and by co^ler of the said Ordinance of Parliament in the Lords House,
in 46 E. 3. it was forbidden, that no Lawyer should be chosen, Knight, Citizen,
or Burgess by reason whereof this Parliament was fruitless, and never a good
Law made thereat, and therefore called Indoctum Parliamentum, or Lack-latin
Parliament: And seeing these Writs were against Law* (ergo this Clause against
Lawyers elections was in the Writs themselves) Lawyers ever since, (for the
great and good service of the Commonwealth) have been eligible: And then
contradicting himself again in the very next lines, he adds: And albeit the
prohibiting clause had been inserted in the Writ (implying it was not) yet
b^i^g against Law, Lawyers were of right eligible, and might have been elected
Knights Citizens or Burgesses in that Parliament of 6 H. 4. His reason is,
because Lawyers being eligible of Common right, cannot be disabled by the said
Ordinance of Parliament in the Lords House, being no Act, though Acts and
Ordinances of Parl. are both the same in substance vigor, (as I have elsewhere
proved at large against his New false Doctrine to the contrary. See my
^renarches redivivus, and Table to an Exact Abridgment, Tit. Parliament and
Ordinance*
Wherefore this Ordinance is still obligatory to practicing Lawyers, whiles
they practice, as well as to Sherifs, whiles they are Sherifs, unless they
give over their practice sitting the Parl. to attend the service of the House,
which their practice makes them to neglect.

Clause 8 E. 2. m. 31. The chief Justice, and other Officers of Ireland, and R.
de Burgo Earl of Vlton, are sent for by Writ to come to the Parliament of
England, ad tractandu^ cum Praelatis et Proceribus de regno nostro praedicto,
Claus. 50 E. 3. part. ^. m. 23. Pro Hibernis de Hibernia venientibus ad
Parliamentum Angilae, there is a Writ directed to the Justices and Chancellor
of Ireland, Quod de Communitate Comitatuum and Burgorum terrae praedictae
faciatis habere per Breve de magno sigillo nostro hominibus ejusdem terrae
nostrae praedictae regnum nostrum* Angliae penes Concilium nostrum, pro
Communitate Comitatuum and Burgorum, ultimo venientibus; videlicet euilibet
eorum de Communitate Comitatus, pro quo electus fui^, sive Civitatis, sive
Burgi, rationabiles expensas suas, etc. Test 25 Julii. The Parliament ended
the 10th. of July. By which Writ it is apparent, That not only the great
Officers, and some Nobles, but likewise knights and Burgesses were sometimes
summoned, and chosen in Ireland to come to this Parliament of England, and had
Writs for wages allowed them. These varieties of the Kings writs for electing
Knights and Burgesses, summoning sometimes 4. sometimes 2. sometimes but one
Knight out of a County; most times 2 Citizens and Burgesses, sometimes but one;
limiting the qualifications of their persons, and summoning not only Great
Officers and Peers, but likewise, Knights, Citizens and Burgesses out of
Ireland, and particular persons by name amongst the Commons, as in 32 Ed. 3.
part 2. m. 32. dorso, together with his making of new Buroughs by his Patents,
and authorizing them to send Burgesses to Parliam. when they never sent any
before, there being now three times as many Burgesses of Parliament as there
were in the reigns of King Edward the 1, 2, and 3. (as appears by the Writs in
the Dorse of the Clause Rolls, for their expenses and wages) are clear proofs
and evidences, that the King and his Council in the Lords House, are the sole
Judges of the elections of the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses of the Commons
House; and that they themselves have no power at all to seclude or eject any
persons duly elected, and sent thither by the Kings Writs, though more or less
than usual, or from new erected Buroughs. And if any City or Borough which
sends Members to the Commons House by the kings Charter or usage forfeit their
Charters and Privileges, for which the king seiseth them into his hands, as in
49 H. 3. he seized Londons and others Liberties, and Cambridges since; he may
deny to send them Writs to elect Citizens or Burgesses, till their Franchises
be restored, and their Charters renewed, and deny to grant them this liberty of
Election any more if he please, proceeding from his mere grace and grant to
them at first, and so to be restored out of Grace, not Justice, when forfeited
by their default.

The Statute of 5 R. 2. Parl. 2. c. 4. The King wills and commands, and it
is assented to by the Prelates, Lords and Commons, That all persons which shall
from henceforth receive the Summons of Parliament, be he Archbishop, Bishop,
Abbot, Peer, Duke, Earl, Baron, Baronet, knight of the Shire, Citizen of the
City, Burgess of the Burgh, or other singular person or Commonalty, and come
not at the said Summons (except he may reasonably and honestly excuse himself
to our Sovereign Lord the King) he shall be amerced* and otherwise punished, as
of old times has been used to be done within this Realm. Here the Excuse is to
be made by the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Commons, as well as Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, to THE KING, not Commons House; and if they cannot
excuse themselves unto him, then they are to be amerced, as of old time have
been used: And that was never by the Commons House, but rather by the King,
with the Lords assent in Parliament, Cooks 4 Inst. p. 38, 39, 40, 41, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20.
or by Indictment in the Kings Bench, as Sir Edward Cook himself confesses, and
proves by the Cases of Segrave, St. Amand, and others, Placitae In Parliamento
Dom. Regis, 33 E. 1. The Bishop of Winchesters Case, Pas. 3 E. 3. coram Rege,
Rot. 9. attached for a contempt in departing from the Parliament, during its
sitting, without the Kings license, and contrary to the Kings inhibition, in
contempt of the King: who pleaded, that this contempt ought to be corrected and
amended in Parliament by the Peers, and not else where in any inferior Court.
3 E. 3.19. Fitz Corone 161. Stanford, f. 153* 3 and 4 Phil. and Mar. B. R. rot.
39. and is most clear by 31 H. 6. n. 45, 46. where special fines are taxed on
absent Lords, by the Lords assent. Therefore the Commons House cannot fine or
tax their Members, as now they do, since they never did it before this act,
and therefore are prohibited by it; which restrains them to ancient usage
before it.

In 7 R. 2. The Lord Thomas Camoyes, a Peer of the Realm, being elected Knight
of the Shire for Surrey by the Freeholders of the County, the King himself
discharged him by special Writ, and commanded the Sherif to cause another fit
person to be elected in his place, as I formerly proved, p. 139, 145.

I read in Hist. Angliae, p. 359.
Thomas of Walsingham, that King Richard the 3. in the 11 year of his reign,
intending to call a Parliament, summoned all the Sherifs of England to
Nottingham Castle, inquiring of them, What power they could raise for him in
every County against the Barons? and charging them, ut ipsi nullum Militem d^
Pago vel Schira permitterent eligi, nisi quem Rex et ejus Concilium elegissent,
(who it seems gave them a list of the Names of those persons they should elect
and return, as the Major Generals have newly done:) Whereunto the Sherifs
answered: That all the Commons favored the Lords, neither was it in their
power to raise any Army or Forces in this cause. De Militibus eligendis
dixerunt, Communes velle tenere consuetudines usitatas, quae volunt, quod a
Communibus Milites eligantur. Whereupon they were dismissed. Upon this the King
soon after issuing out Writs to the Sherifs to elect Knights and Burgesses for
the Parliament, inserted this unusual Clause into them: that they should choose
such Knights, as were most fit and discreet, and in the modern debates (between
the king and Lords most indifferent: as the Writs themselves attest.

Claus. 11. R. 2. m. 24. dorso.
Rex Vic. Kanc. salutem: quia de avisamento Consilii nostri pro quibusdum
arduis and urgentibus negotiis nos, statum et defensionem Regni nostri Angliae,
ac Ecclesiae Anglicanae contingentibus, quoddam Parliamen^um nostrum apud
Westminster. in crastino purificationis beatae Ma^iae prox. futur. teneri
Ordinavimus, et ibidem vobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, and Proceribus
Regni nostri Angliae, colloquium habere and tractatum; tibi praecipimus
firmiter injungentes quod de Comitatu tuo duos Milites gladiis cinctos, magis
idoneos et discretos, Com. praed. et in debatis modernis magis indifferentes,
etc. T. R. apud Wyndesore, xvii. die Dec.

Per ipsum Regem.


But the King being soon after informed by his Council, that these Writs were
contrary to the ancient form of elections, and contrary to the Liberty of the
Lords and Commons hitherto obtained; sent out new writs to all Sherifs of
England to revoke and repeal this Innovating Clause, before the Elections made.

Rex Vic. Kanc (...) licet nuper per breve nostrum inter caetera tibi
praec^pimus firmiter injungentes, Claus. 11 R. 2. m. 23. dorso.
quod de Comitatu tuo duos Milites, gladiis cinctos, magis idoneos et discret^s
Com. prad. et (...) debatis ^dernis magis indifferentes eligi, (...)
Parliamentum nostrum quod apud Westminster. in Crist (...) purifiecationis b^atae
Mariae, pro^. futur. ten^re Ordi^avimu^: ad e^sdem idem and (...) ve^ire
facere^. Nos tamen attendent^s, dictam clausulam, in debatis modernis magis
indifferentes, contra formam electionis antiquitus usitatae, ac contra
libertatem Dominorum et Communitatis Regni nostri Angliae hactenus obtentam
existere: Volen^esque proinde praedictos Milites libere eligi, modo et forma
prout antiquitus fieri consuerit; Tibi praecimus firmiter in^ungentes, quod de
Com. tuo praedicto duos milites gladiis cinctos magis idoneos and discretos
Com. praedicti, prout hactenus fieri consuevit eligi, and eos ad pradictos diem
and locum venire fac. dicta clausula non obstante: caeteraque omnia et singula
in dicto brevi nostre contenta fac. and exequaris juxta tenorem ejusdem, dictam
clausulam penitus omittens. Et habeas ibi hoc breve et aliud breve. T. R. apud
Westminster. primo die Jan.

Per ipsum Regem et Consillum.
Consimilia brevia diriguntur singulis Vicocomitibus per Angl. Ac carissimo
Aqun^ulo R. Johanni Regi Castle. et-Legionis, Duci Lancastr. vel ejus
Cancellar, in eodem Ducatu sub eadem da^a.




A clear evidence, that neither the Sherifs nor Commons house had any power to
repel this new Clause, but the King himself, which here he did by his Council^
Apples, before any complain against it in Parliament.

In the An Exact abridgement, p. 346, 347.
Parliament of 16 R. 2. n. 6. etc. The Wednesday after the Parliament began,
Sir Philip Courtney, returned by the Sherif of Devon for one of the Knights for
that County, came before the King in full Parliament, and said, that he
understood, how certain people had accused and slandered him to the King and
Lords, as well by Bill as by mouth, of heinous matters; and therefore prayed to
be discharged of the said employment, until the said accusations and complaints
were tried, and found true, or not true: and because his said prayer seemed
honest to the King and the Lords, the King granted him his request* and
discharged him in full Parliament: and the Monday following, at the instance
and prayer of the Commons, the King granted, that he should be restored and
remitted to his place, according to the return of the said Sherif, for to
counsel and do that which belonged unto his office; and after, because he had
been good and treatable with those who had complained upon him, and
condescended to a good treaty, he was restored in full Parliament to his good
fame. The charge against him is expressed in the same Parliament roll, n. 13,
14. where two Petitions are preferred against him to THE KING and LORDS IN
PARLIAMENT, for putting Thomas Pontyngdon forciblyout of possession of the
Ma^or of Bygeloge without just cause, and Richard Somestre out of other lands,
and detaining them from them, he being so powerful in the County, that no poor
man durst to sue him. Which Petitions were referred by consent in Parliament to
certain Arbitrators to determine. In the An Exact abridgement, p. 417.
Parliament of 4 H. 4. n. 19, 20, 21. upon these and other Petitions, of
forcible disseisins, and for imprisoning the Abbot of Meniham in Devonshire,
THE KING and LORDS adjudged, that this Sir Philip Courtney should be bound to
his good behavior, and committed to the Tower for his contempt.

From which records it is evident: First, that Members of the Commons house may
be complained and petitioned against for misdemeanors, and put to answer*
before the King and Lords in Parliament, and there fined and judged (not before
the Commons house) and that this was the ancient way of proceeding. Secondly,
that the Sea my Ardua Regni.
Commons cannot suspend or discharge any of their fellow-Commoners or Knights
from sitting in Parliament, but only the King and Lords in full Parliament, in
whom the power of Judicature rests: much less then can they expel or eject any
of their Members* by their own authority without the King and Lords concurrent
consents. No more than one Justice of peace. Committee-man, or Militia-man, can
un-Justice or ^move another; since Par in parem non habet Imperium, neither in
civil, military, ecclesiastical nor domestical affai^. Thirdly, that the power
of restoring, readmitting a^ended Member of the Commons house, belongs not to
the Commons themselves, but to the King and Lords, to whom the Commons in this
case addressed themselves by petition for Courtneys readmission, after his
submission of the complaints against him to the arbitrament of those Members to
whom the King and Lords referred the same.

In the Exact abridgement, p. 354^
Parliament of 17 Rich. 2. number. 23. It was accorded and resolved by the King
and Lords, at the Complaint, petition, request of the Commons, that Roger
Swinerton who was endited of the death of one of their companions, John de
Ipstones, Knight of the said Parliament for the County of Stafford, slain in
coming toward the said Parliament by the said Roger, should not be delivered
out of prison, wherein he was detained for this cause, by bail, mainprise, or
any other manner, until he had made answer thereunto, and should be delivered
by the Law: The Commons alone by their own power having no authority to make
such an order, even for the murder of one of their own Members, without the
King and Lords, who made this ordinance at their request.

I find this objected against King Richard the 2. See here, p. 438.
in the Parliament of 1 H. 4. n. 37. That he frequently sent his Mandates to
Sherifs, to return certain persons named only by himself, and not freely chosen
by the people, to be knights of Shires, thereby to effect his own ends, and
oppress the people with Subsidies, But yet I find not in all his reign any one
Knight thus unduly returned, questioned by the Commons, or suspended the House,
much less ejected by them, or by the King and Lords upon the Commons complaint
thereof unto them. A clear evidence they had then no such power to eject their
Members for being unduly elected, returned, as how they use.

In the Parliament of 20 R. 2. n. 14, 15, 16, 17. The King being highly An
Exact abridgement, p. 361, 362.
offended with the Commons for receiving Haxyes Bill, said, that the Commons
thereby had committed an offense against him, his dignity and liberty, the
which he willed THE LORDS to declare the next day to the Commons: Who thereupon
delivering up the Bill, came fort with before the King, showing themselves very
sorrowful, declaring to him, that they meant no harm, and submitting
themselves to the King herein, most humbly craved his pardon. Whereupon the
Chancellor by the Kings commandment declared, That the King held them excused,
and the King by mouth declared, how many ways they were bound unto him. Lo
here the whole House of Commons submit themselves to the King in the House of
Lords, as Judges of them and their misdemeanors in Parliament, and crave pardon
for offending him. In the An Exact abridgement, p. 408.
Parliament of 2 H. 4. n. 45, 46. The Commons house petitioning the King, that
the Act for his moderation of the Statute against Provisions might be examined,
for as much as the time was recorded otherwise than was agreed by them. The
King granted thereunto by protestation, that the same should be no example,
where after Examination by the Bishops and Lords, they affirmed the same to be
duly entered; which the King also remembered. Whereupon the COMMONS the same day
(for this their misinformation) came into the Lords House, and kneeling before
the King* beseeched the King to pardon them, if happily they through ignorance
had or should offend him: which the King granted. Here the Bishops and Lords
are Judges of the Commons misinformation and misentry of an Act, and the King
of their Offense against him in Parliament by this misinformation; which he
pardons them upon their humble submission, and no doubt might have punished
them for it, by the Lords assent and advice, had he pleased. So far are they
from being Judges in Parliament, that themselves may there be judged, if they
therein offend, as all their Speakers usual protestations and petitions to the
King when presented, evidence. See Cook, 4 Instit. p. 8. The Freeholders grand
Inquest, p. 56, 58.
That the Commons may have liberty of speech, and that if any. Members in the
House of Commons, in communication and reasoning should speak more largely than
of duty they ought to do, that all such offenses may be pardoned: which the
King may punish if there be cause, un^e^^^ he pardon it of record, upon the
Speakers Protestation before hand.

Sir 4 Inst. p. 8.
Edward Cook himself (as well as the Parliament Rolls, and experience) informs
us of these particulars touching the Speakers of the Commons House in
Parliament, their chiefest Member. 1. See my Table of Speakers to an Exact
abridgement and Title, Parliment and Commons.
That though the Commons are to choose their own Speaker (and that by the kings
special command and license to them in every Parliament since they had one, not
with due ^, who likewise prescribes them the time when to present him) yet the
use is, (as in the Conge de esl^yer of a Bishop) that the king does name a
discreet and learned man to them, whom the Commons do e^ect (pro form^ only)
because he cannot be appointed for them without their election, being their
mouth, and ^usted by them. 2ly. That after the Commons choice the King may
refuse him. 3ly. That after he is chosen, he must be presented to the king by
the Commons in the Lord House for his approbation and confirmation in that
pla^s, the Commons sending up some of their Members to acquaint the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, Rot. Parl. 23 and 25 H. 6. n. 9, 10.
that according to the Kings command they had chosen such a one their Speaker,
and are ready to present him at the ^me appointed* 4ly. That where he is thus
presented, he is in disable himself for so weighty a service, and to make sut^
to the King to be discharged, and a more sufficient man chosen in his place: To
which I shall add, that upon this excuse the king may discharge him if he
please, and command the Commons to elect another; as King Exact Collection, p.
640.
Henry the ^. did discharge Sir John Popham when presented Speaker to him by
the Commons, in the Parliament of 26 H. 6. n. ^. upon his excuse; Whereupon
William Tresham was elected in his place, presented to, and approved by the
King, n. 7. 5ly. That when he is elected and approved, yet in case of sickness,
and infirmity he may be removed, and another chosen and presented in his place,
( and that upon the Commons special Petition to the king in his behalf, out of
his mere Grace to discharge him, and accept of another) Thus in the Exact
collect. p. 390, 534, 535, 618, 619, 620.
Parliament of 1 H. 4. n. 62, 63, 64. Sir John Cheyney Knight, after his
election and approbation was discharged, and Sir John Dorew Knight elected,
presented, and admitmitted by the Kings license, to be Speaker in his room. So
in the Parliament of 1 H. 5. n. n. 7, 9, 10.11. Will. Sturton Esquire, after he
was chosen and allowed Speaker, was removed for grievous sickness, and John
Doreward chosen in his place. At the Parliament holden 15 H. 6. n. 10, 27. Sir
John Tirril knight was chosen and allowed, yet removed for grievous sickness,
and William Beerell chosen in his place, and that by the Kings special license
and approbation, to whom all those new Speakers were again presented by the
Commons, for his royal assent thereto. 6ly. That if he be altered by his
Majesty ( by See 23 and 25 H. 6. n. 9, 10.
assent of the Council and Lords, as the entry is in the Parliament Rolls) then
he makes a protestation, or Petition to the king (which consists of three
parts.) 1. That the Commons in this Parliament may have freedom of speech, as
of right and custom they have used, and all their ancient See Dyer f. 60. a.
and just Privileges and Liberties allowed them (which the King usually granted
with this caution) That he hoped, or, doubted not Rot. Parl. H. 4. n. 10. An
Exact Abridgement, p. 471. See the Freeholders Grand Inquest p. 56, 58.
That the Members would not speak any unfitting words, or abuse this freedom
and privilege; for abuse whereof some have been committed Prisoners to the
Tower by our Kings and Queens command. 2ly: That if he shall commit any Error
in any thing he shall deliver in the name of the Commons, no fault may be
imputed to the Commons, and that he may resort again to them for declaration of
his good intent, and that his Error may be pardoned. 3ly. That as often as
necessity for his Majesty's service, and the good of the Commonwealth shall
require, he may by direction of the House of Commons have access to his
Majesty. If then the King has the sole power and jurisdiction thus to
nominate, approve, confirm, disallow, refuse, discharge and remove the very
Speakers of the Commons House themselves, and not the Commons, but by and with
his special license, grace, and royal assent: yea, to grant them freedom of
speech, and their usual Privileges and liberties every Parliament upon their
Petition, and to pardon theirs and their Speakers Errors, and that sitting in
the Lords House with their assents, then doubtless the king and Lords alone,
are the sole Judges of the Speakers, and all other Members of the Commons
House, and have the sole power to judge of their undue elections, retorns,
misdemeanors, breaches of Privileges, and all other matters concerning their
Membership, not the Commons; And if they can neither constitute, elect nor
remove their own Speaker for sickness, or any other cause, without the kings
privity and consent declared in the House of Lords; much less can they
suspend, seclude, or eject any Member out of the House, when chosen and
returned by the Freeholders, Citizens, or Burgesses, as their Attorney or
Trustee in equal power with themselves, without the Kings or Lords consents,
for any pretext of unfitness or undue election. And if the king (as Sir Edward
Cook grants, and these presidents prove) may discharge the Speaker from his
Office for grievous sickness and inability to discharge it; I make no question
but he may likewise, upon the like Petition of the Commons or Speaker,
discharge him of his attendance in the House, or any other Member for the self
same reason, and grant a Writ to elect another able and fitting person in his
place, according to the opinion of 38 H. 8. Brooks Parliament, 7. and Crompton
in his Jurisdiction of Courts, f. 16. approved by the whole House of Commons,
and accordingly practiced in 38 H. 8. against 4 Inst. p. 8.
Sir Edward Cooks bare opinion (without reason) to the contrary.

In the Parliament holden at Westminster 5 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 38. Exact
Abridgement, p. 429.
Thomas Thorp his Case, Item* because that the Writ of Summons of Parliament
returned by the Sherif of Roteland was not sufficiently nor duly returned as
the Commons conceived* the said Commons prayed our Lord the King, and the Lords
in Parliament, that this matter might be duly examined in Parliament, and that
in case ther^ shall be default found in this matter, that such a punishment
might be inflicted, which might become exemplary to others to offend again in
the like manner: Whereupon (...) said Lord the King, in full Parliament,
commanded the Lords in Parliament to examine the said matter, and to do therein
as to them should seem best in their discretions. And thereupon the said Lords
caused to come before them in Parliament, as well the said Sherifs, at William
Oneby, who was returned by the said Sherif for one of the Knights of the said
County, and Thomas Thorp, who was elected in full County to be one of the
Knights of the said Shire, for the said Parliament, and not returned by the
said Sherif. And the said parties being duly examined, and their reasons well
considered, in the said Parliament, it was agreed by the said Lords, that
because the said Sherif had not made a sufficien^ return of the said Writ, that
he shall amend the said return, and that he shall return the said Thomas for
one of the said Knights, as he was elected in the said County for the
Parliament: and moreover that the said Sherif for this default shall be
discharged of his Office, any committed Prisoner to the Flee^, and that he
should make sins and ransom at the Kings pleasures. ^o^ here the Lords in
Parliament, at the Commons request, and by the Kings command, examine and give
judgment in case of an undue election, and retorn, even without the Commons.

In this same Parliament Richard Cheddar Esquire, a menial servant and
attendant on Sir Thomas Brook, chosen one of the Knights to serve in Parliament
for the County of Somerset, was horribly beaten, wounded, blemished and maimed
by one John Savage: Whereupon the Commons complained thereof to the King and
Lords, petitioning them for redress both in his particular case for the
present, and all others of that nature for the future, Exact abridgement, p.
433.
that they might make fine at the Kings (...) and render double damages to the
party maimed, whether Members of theirs Servants. Whereupon, it was ordained
and established by the King and Lords; that for as (...) deed was done within
the time of the said Parliament, that Proclamation be made where it was done,
that the said John appear, and yield himself in the Kings Bench, within a
quarter of a year after the Proclamation made: and if he do not, he shall be
attainted of the said deed, and pay to the party grieved his double damages, to
be taxed by the Judges of the said Bench for the time being, or by Enquest, if
need be, and also he shall make fine and ransom at the kings will (which was
accordingly executed, as appears by 8 H. 4. f. 13, 14.) And moreover, it is
accorded in the same Parliament, that likewise it be done in time to come in
case like. By which Petition and Act it is most apparent, 1. That the King and
Lords have the sole power of judging and punishing the breaches of Privilege of
Parliament, by batteries, wounding, or imprisonment, and that both in the cases
of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, and of their menial servants in such and
the like cases. 2ly. That this Act gives the Commons no power at all to punish
any man for breach of privilege in like case; but only prescribes a certain
remedy for time to come, by imprisonment, action, double damages, fine and
ransom at the kings pleasure in the Kings Bench; not Commons House, or
Parliament, who are not fit to be troubled with such particular cases of
privileges, which would interrupt the more public affairs. Hence THE KING
willing to provide for the ease and tranquillity of them that came to his
Parliaments and Councils by his commandment, has ordained and established
(upon the Commons Petition) by the Statute of 11 H. 6. c. 13. That the self
same remedy, proceeding, damages and punishment shall be had in the Kings
Bench, (not Commons House or Parliament) (as was prescribed in 5 H. 4. c. 6.)
against any person that shall do any assault or affray to any Lord Spiritual
or Temporal, Knight of the Shire, Citizen, or Burgess coming to the Kings
Parliament or Council by his command: How then the Commons can judge or
determine such violation of privileges, now against these Statutes and
presidents, and create themselves Judges of them, transcends both my Law and
reason.

In the Parliament of 7 H. 4. (as I find in a special note, though not in the
Parliament Roll) Sir John Tibetot the Speaker, prayed, que plest le Roy and
Seigniors, That it would please THE KING AND LORDS, that Robert Clifford,
companion of Richard Chiderough, chosen knights for the County of Kent, might
appear for them both, and do all in both their names, as if both of them were
present in Parliament, which the king and Lords assented to.

In the Parliaments of 8 H. 4. n. 83. and 139. and of 11 H. 4. n. 54. Upon
Petitions and complaints of the Commons to the king and Lords, there were two
Statutes made to prevent the abuses and false retorns of Sherifs, touching the
Elections of knights of Shires, and to inflict penalties on them by a Law
(which formerly were arbitrary at the kings and Lords discretion) 7 H. 4. c.
15. and 11 H. 4. c. 1. The penalty inflicted by these Acts on the Sherif, for a
false return, contrary to these Acts, is only 100 l. fine to the king, and such
undue retorns are from thenceforth to be examined and tried (not by the Commons
alone by information without Oath as now, but) by the Justices assigned to take
assizes, and that by Enquest and due examination upon trial before the said
Justices; which is likewise afterward ratified by the Statutes of 6 H. 6. c.
4. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 32 H. 6. c. 15. whereof if the Sherif be found guilty, he shall
forfeit 100 l. to the king, and the knights of Counties unduly returned, shall
lose their wages of the Parliament, of old time accustoned (not be turned out
by a Committee of Privileges, and others chosen in their places by the Commons
Order, as now:) And the Statutes of 1 H. 5. c, 1. 6 H. 6. c. 4. 8 H. 6. c. 7.
12 H. 6. c. 2. 32 H. 6.15. touching elections of knights, Citizens and
Burgesses made since the former, do not alter this Law, nor give the House of
Commons the least power or authority to judge or determine the legality or
illegality of any elections; but leave this to the King and Lords to redress,
as at first, before their making, and give the knights duly chosen, but not
returned 100 l. damages against the Sherif, and Citizens and Burgesses 40 l.
against Mayors and Baylifs who make false returns, by way of action of Debt in
the kings Courts at Westminster, where the parties must sue for relief, or in
the Starchamber before the Kings Lords and Council, as in Bronkers case, Trin.
1. Eliz. not in the Commons house, as these Statutes and presidents in our
Law Books, Dyer, f. 113.168. Plowden, f. 118. to 131. Old Book of Eniries, f.
446, 447. resolve; How then the Commons are now become sole Judges of all false
returns and elections, and that per legem et consuetudinem Parliamenti, against
all these Acts and presidents, let Sir Edward Cook and others resolve me, and
the intelligent when they are able: not by the objected late arbitrary
presidents, which are of no value; but by ancient usage and Law of our
Parliaments and solid reason, which cannot be produced for to justify these
late Innovations and extravagances.

It is most true, that in the cases of undue elections, and breaches of
privilege of the Commons house Members or Servants, the King and Lords were
anciently sole Judges, (not the Commons in any one case) and that upon the
Commons own Petitions, as the premises evidence, and I shall fully manifest by
these ensuing punctual presidents.

In the Parliament of 8 H. 6. n. 39. The Commons petitioned the King for a Law
to be made, to prevent the manifold tumults, uproars at, and disorders in the
election of knights of the shire by the vulgar rabble, and meaner sort of
people, of small or no estate, (most busy and tumultuous in them, having then
a voice,) that the King by advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, would seclude all from having voices at such elections for the future
but freeholders, who held 40 s. freehold by the year above all reprisals (more
than 40 l. a year now) or upwards* Which the King and Lords assented to and the
Statute of 8 H. 6. c. 7. was hereupon made agreeable to this petition, with
that of 10 H. 6 c. 2. by like Petition in pursuance of it. In this very
Parliament of An Exact abridgment, p. ^96.
8 H. 6. rot. parl. n. 57. One William Lake, servant to William Mildred a
Burgess of London, was taken in execution for a Debt, and committed Prisoner to
the Fleet, contrary to the privilege of the Commons house; whereupon the
Commons petitioned the King, that by the advice and assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, at the special request of the Commons, he might be
enlarged; which the King and Lords assenting unto, gave order for his release,
and authorized the Chancellor to appoint certain Commissioners to take him
again in Execution, after the Parliament ended. The Commons not then claiming
the least power or jurisdiction to enlarge him, or to fine or imprison those
who took him in Execution, as of late times they have done. And in this
Parliament, upon the petition and supplication of the Prelates and Clergy, n.
32. the King, by the assent and advice of the Lords, enacted the Statute of 8
H. 6. c. 1. That the Clergy and their Attendants called to the Convocation by
the Kings writ, should have and enjoy for ever hereafter the same liberty and
immunity in going, coming and tarrying, as the Great men and Commonalty of
England called, or to be called to the Kings Parliaments have used and enjoyed;
they complaining to the king, that they and their servants coming to the
Convocation, were oftentimes, and commonly arrested, molested and inquieted.
Which they had no power to redress, but only the King and Lords, upon their
complaints thereof.

In the Parliament of An Exact abridgment, p 620.
18 H. 6. n. 13. It was showed to the King and the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, that Gilbert Hoar, Sherif of the County of Cambridge, upon the kings
writ directed to him to choose 2. knights for that shire, and had made no return
of any knights for that County, for certain reasons therein expressed.
Whereupon the King by advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
(not the Commons house alone, as now, nor yet jointly with them) ordered, that
a New writ for electing 2. knights for that County should be directed to him;
and that he should make proclamation, that no person should come to the
election with arms, or arrayed in warlike manner in disturbance of the said
election, and breach of the kings peace. A memorable president of the Kings and
Lords Jurisdiction, even in point of elections.

In the An Exact abridgment, p. 632.
Parliament of 23 H. 6. n. 41. The Commons petitioned the king, that by the
advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at their special
request, it might be enacted; that every Member of the Lords and Commons house,
who should have any assault or affray made upon him, being at the Parliament,
or going to or coming from thence might have the like remedy, at Sir Thomas
Parr knight had given him in this Parliament: (to wit, upon petition of the
Commons in his behalf to the King and Lords, being the same as was enacted in
Chedders case, and 11 H. 6. c. 11. before.) Whereunto the king answered, The
Statutes therefore made shall be observed.

In the Cook 4 Instit. p. 47. touches it: ^ut cites nor the Record at large.
An Exact abridgement, p. 651.
Parliament of 31 H. 6. rot. parl. n. 25, 26, 27, 28. we have this memorable
famous case touching privilege of Parliament, in their very Speakers own case,
resolved by the Lords. Thomas Thorp chief Baron, was chosen Speaker of the
Parliament, after his election, and before the Parliament (which was prorogued)
sat, he was arrested and taken in execution at the suit of the Duke of York:
whereupon some of the Commons were sent up by the House to the king, and Lords
spiritual and temporal sitting in Parliament, desiring that they might enjoy
all their ancient and accustomed privileges, in being free from arrests, and
propounded the case of Thomas Thorp their Speaker to them, desiring his
enlargement; whereupon the said Lords spiritual aad temporal, not intending to
hurt or impeach the privilege of the Commons, but equally after the course of
Law to administer Justice, and to have knowledge what the Law will weigh in
that behalf, declared to the Justices, the premises; and asked of them, whether
the said Thomas ought to be delivered from prison by force and virtue of the
said privilege of Parliament or not? To the which question the chief Justices,
in the name of all the Justices aforesaid, communication and mature
deliberation had among them, answered and said; That they ought not to answer
that question, for it has not been used aforetime, that the Justices should in
any wise determine the privilege of this high Court of Parliament; for it is so
high and mighty in his nature, that it may make that Law which is not, and that
that is Law, it may make no Law, and the determination and knowledge of their
privilege belongs to the Lords of the Parliament, and not to the Justices:
But as for declaration of proceedings in the lower Courts in such cases, as
writs of Supersedoas of Privilege of Parliament be brought and delivered, the
said chief Justice said, that there be many and diverse Supersedeas of
privileges of Parliament brought into the Courts; but there is no general
Supersedeas brought to furcease all Processes, for if there should be, it
should seem that this high Court of Parliament, that ministers all Justice and
equity, should let the process of the common Laws, and so it should put the
party plainant without remedy, for so much as Upon this ground 1 R. 2. n.
20.87.114. 2 R. 2. n. 8.49. 5 R. 2. n. 44. 13 R. 2. n. 10.30.33. 15 R. 2. n.
9.17 R. 2. n. 10. We find the Commons and Parliament very zealous to maintain
the Common Law; and referring causes and petitions to it when proper for it,
and improper for the Parliament.
actions at Common Law be not determined in this high Court of Parliament. And
if any person that is a Member of this high Court of Parliament, be arrested in
such cases as be not for Treason or Felony, or surety of the Peace, or for
condemnation before the Parliament, it is used, that all such persons should be
released of all such arrests, and make an Attorney, so that they may have the
freedom and Liberty freely to attend upon the Parliament. After which answer
and Declaration it was thoroughly agreed, assented and concluded by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, that the said Thomas, according to the Law* should
remain still in prison for the causes abovesaid, the privilege of the
Parliament, or that the same Sir Thomas was Speaker of the Parliament,
notwithstanding. And that the premises should be opened and declared to them
that were comen for the Commons of this land, and they should be charged and
commanded in the kings name that they with all goodly have and speed proceed to
the election of another Speaker. The which premi^es, for as much as they were
matters of Law, by the commandment of the Lords, were opened and declared to
the Commons by the mouth of Walter Moyle, one of the kings Sergeants at Law, in
the presence of the Bishop of Ely, accompanied with other Lords in notable
number: and there it was commanded and charged to the said Commons by the said
Bishop of Ely, in the kings name, that they should proceed to the election of
another Speaker with all goodly have and speed, so that the matters for which
the king called this his Parliament might be proceeded in: and this Parliament
take good and effectual conclusion and end. Whereupon the Commons accordingly
elected Thomas Charlton knight, for their Speaker the next day, and acquainted
the Lords therewith, and desired the kings approbation of their choice, which
was accorded unto by the king, by assent of the Lords. Lo here 1. the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, are the sole Judges of the privilege of the very
Speaker of the House of Commons, who is here adjudged to remain in execution,
notwithstanding their petition for his enlargement. 2ly, The whole House of
Commons could not then send for, nor yet enlarge their own Speaker when
imprisoned, but are enforced to petition the King and Lords for his
enlargement. 3ly, The Lords, in the kings name, command the Commons to choose
and present another Speaker in his room, and that with all speed; which they
accordingly did, and then present him to the King and Lords, for their
approbation, who allowed of their choice.

In the Parliament of 38 H. 6. n. 35. There were diverse Knights of Counties,
Citizens and Burgesses named, returned, and accepted, some of them without any
due or free election some of them without any election at all; against the
course of the Kings Laws, and the Liberties of the Commons of the Realm, by
virtue of the Kings Letters, without any other election, and by the means and
labors of diverse seditious and evil disposed persons, only to destroy certain
of the great faithful Lords and Nobles, and other faithful liege people of
the Realm, out of hatred, malice, greedy and unsatiable covetousness, to gain
their Lands, Exact abridgement, p. 664.
Inheritances, Possessions, Offices, and goods, as the Statute of 39 H. 6. c.
1. relates. The Commons were so far from having power to exclude, or confirm
their elections themselves; that they petitioned the King, by advise and assent
of the Lords, That all such Knights, Citizens and Burgesses as were thus
returned to this Parliament by virtue of the Kings Letters, without any other
election, should be good, and that no Sherif for returning them might incurr
the pain therefore provided by the Statute of 23 H. 6. c. 15. Which the King
and Lords assented to at their request.

In the Exact abridgement, p. 665.
Parliament of 39 H. 6. n. 9. Walter Clerk, one of the Burgesses of Parliament
for Chippenham, was arrested and imprisoned in the Fleet for diverse debts due
to the King and others, upon a Capias Vilagatum; whereupon the Commons
complained thereof to the King and Lords by Petition, and desired his release,
and rendered them an Act of Parliament ready drawn for that purpose; to which
Petition and Bill of theirs, the King by the assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal assented; And thereupon he was freed. Not by the Commons power, order,
or judgment, but by the Kings and Lords advice and assents.

Exact abridgement, p. 701.
William Hyde, a Burgess of Chippenham in Wiltshire, being taken in Execution,
upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum, and imprisoned in the kings Bench during the
Parliament, contrary to his privilege, the Commons thereupon by a Petition
praved the King, that by advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
he might be delivered for the present by a Writ of privilege out of the
Chancery; which the King by the advice and assent of the Lords, granted, saving
the right of his Prosecutors, to have execution upon him again after the
Parliament ended. 14 E. 4. n. 55.

In the An Exact abridgement, p. 704.
Parliament of 17 E. 4. n. 36. John at-Will, a Burgess for Exeter, was
condemned in the Exchequer upon 8. several Informations during the Parliament,
at the prosecution of John Tailor of the same Town; upon complaint thereof by
the Commons to the King and Lords in Parliament by Petition, the King by advice
and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, ordered, that he should have as
many Supersedeas against the said Judgments and Informations as he pleased,
until his coming home from the Parliament.

In these last recited cases, the Commons had no power at all to deliver or
enlarge their own Members when imprisoned (as of late years they have
practiced) but always petitioned to the King and Lords for their release and
relief; who thereupon released and relieved them against the breaches of their
privileges, when they saw good cause. Which cases I have examined by, and
transcribed out of the Parliament Rolls themselves in the Tower, and not taken
upon trust, or the Abridgements of them, which leave out the main ingredients;
the Commons Petitions to, and advice and assent of the King and Lords,
expressed in the Rolls at large.

Richard Strode Gentleman, one of the Burgesses of Parliament for the Burge of
Plympton in Devonshire, in the Parliament of 4 H. 8. for agreeing with the
Commons house in putting out Bills against certain abuses of the Tinners, being
a Tinner himself, by the malice of John Furse Tinner, Under-Steward of the
Stann^ries, and his misinformation, that the said Richard Str^de at the last
Parliament held^n at Westminster, would have avoided, and utterly destroyed all
Liberties, Privileges and Franchises concerning the Scanne^ies, was upon 4.
Bills thereof made by the said Furse presented and found guilty of the premises
in 4. several Stannery Courts and condemned to forfeit 40 l. on every Bill to
the King, upon an Act and Ordinance made by the Tinners, to which he was never
warned nor called to make answer, contrary to all Laws, right reason and good
conscience: And one John Agui^^iam begging 20 l. of the said forfeiture from
the King, caused the said Richard to be taken and imprisoned in Lidford Castle
in a dungeon and deep pit under ground, where he was fed only with bread and
water, to the peril of his life, and was to have irons laid upon him. Upon
which he petitioned the Parliament for remedy, and that it might be ordained
and enacted by the King* the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, that the
condemnations against him for the said 160 l. in the Stanneries, and every
parcel thereof, and judgments and executions had, or to be had for the
premises, might be utterly void, and of none effect against him* which was done
for him accordingly* And moreover it was enacted, That all suits, accusations,
condemnations, executions, fines, amerciameuts, punishments, corrections,
grants, charges, and impositions, put or had, or hereafter to be put or had
upon the said Richard, and to every other person or persons that were in this
Parliament, or that of any Parliament hereafter shall be, for any Bill,
speaking, reasoning, or declaring of any matter or matters concerning the
Parliament to be communed or treated of, be utterly void, and of none effect:
And that any person vexed or troubled, or otherwise charged for any causes as
aforesaid, shall have an action of the case against every person or persons so
vexing or troubling him contrary to this Ordinance, and recover treble damages
and costs: And that no protection Essoign or wager of Law, shall in the said
action in any wise be admi^red nor received; as you may read in the Statutes at
large, 4 H. 8. chapter 8. entitled, an act concerning Richard Strode: The Commons
themselves being unable to relieve him in this high breach of privilege, but by
a petition to the King and Lords, and a special Act of Parliament made for him.

In the Parliament of 34 H. 8. there fell out this famous case, thus at large
recorded by Holinsh. Chronicle, p. 1584.
Holinshed and Crompt. Jurisdiction of Courts, f. 8, 9, 10.
Crompton out of him.

In the Lent season, whilst the Parliament yet continued, one George Ferrers
Gentleman, servant to the king, being elected a Burgess for the Town of
Plimmouth, in the County of Devon, in going to the Parliament House was
arrested in London by a Process out of the Kings Bench, at the suit of one
White, for the sum of two hundred marks or thereabouts, wherein he was late
before condemned as a surety for the debt of one Welden of Salisbury, which
arrest being signified to Sir Thomas Moile knight, then Speaker of the
Parliament, and to the knights and Burgesses there, order was taken, that the
Sergeant of the Parliament, called S. I. should forthwith repair to the Counter
in Bredstreet, whither the said Ferrers was carried, and there to demand
delivery of the Prisoner. Thereupon the Sergeant as he had in charge went to the
Counter, and declared to the Clerks there, what he had in commandment; but they
and other Officers of the City were so far from obeying the said commandment,
as after many stout words, they forcibly resisted the said Sergeant, whereof
ensued a fray within the Counter Gates, between the said Ferrers and the said
Officers, not without hurt of either part, so that the said Sergeant was driven
to defend himself with his mace of arms, and had the Crown thereof broken by
bearing off a stroke, and his man stricken down. During this brawl, the Sherifs
of London, called Rowland Hill, and H. Suckley came thither, to whom the
Sergeant complained of this injury, and required of them the delivery of the
said Burgess, as before; but they bearing with their Officers, made little
account either of his complaint, or of his message, rejecting the same
contemptuously, with much proud language, so as the Sergeant was forced to
return without the Prisoner, and finding the Speaker, and all the knights and
Burgesses set in their places, declared unto them the whole cause as it fell
out: who took the same in so ill part, that they altogether (of whom there were
not a few, as well of the Kings privy Counsel, as also of his privy Chamber)
would sit no longer without their Burgess, but rose up wholly and repaired to
the Upper House, where the whole case was declared by the mouth of the Speaker,
before Sir T. Audeley knight, then Lord Chancellor of England, and all the
Lords and Judges there assembled: who judging the contempt to be very great,
referred the punishment thereof to the order of the Common house. They
returning to their places again, upon new debate of the Case, took order, that
their Sergeant should eftsoon repair to the Sherifs of London, and require
delivery of the said Burgess, without any writ ^ warrant had for the same, but
only as before. Albeit the Lord Chancellor offered there to grant a Writ, which
they of the Common House refused, being of a clear opinion, that all
commandments and other acts proceeding from the nether House, were to be done
and executed by their Sergeant without Writ, only by show of his Mace, which
was his warrant. But before the Sergeants return into London, the Sherifs
having intelligence how hainously the matter was taken, became somewhat more
mild, so as upon the said second demand, they delivered the Prisoner without
any denial. But the Sergeant having then further in commandment from those of
the nether House, charged the said Sherifs to appear personally on the morrow,
by 8 of the clock before the Speaker in the nether House, and to bring thither
the Clerks of the Counter, and such other of their Officers as were parties to
the said affray; and in like manner to take into his custody the said White,
which wittingly procured the said arrest, in contempt of the privilege of the
Parliament; which commandment being done by the said Sergeant accordingly, on
the morrow, the two Sherifs, with one of the Clerks of the Counter (which was
the chief occasion of the said affray) together with the said White appeared in
the Common House: where the Speaker charging them with their contempt and
misdemeanor aforesaid, they were compelled to make immediate answer, without
being admitted to any counsel; Albeit Sir To. Cholmley then Recorder of L. and
other the Counsel of the City then present, offered to speak in the cause,
which were all put to silence, and none suffered to speak, but the parties
themselves; whereupon in the conclusion the said Sherifs and the same White,
were committed to the Tower of London, and the said Clerk (which was the
occasion of the fray) to a place there called Little Base, and the Officers of
L. which did the arrest, called Tailer, with 4 Officers more to Newgate, where
they remained from the 28 until the 30 of March, and then they were delivered,
not without humble suit made by the Mayor of L. and other their friends. And
forasmuch as the said Ferrers being in execution upon ^ condemnation of debt
and set a^ large by privilege of Parliament, was not by Law ^o be brought again
into execution, and so the party without remedy for his debt, as well against
him as his principal debtor, after long ^ebate of the same by the space of 9 or
10 days together; at last they resolved upon an Act of Parliament to be made,
and to revive the execution of the said debt against the said Welden, which was
principal debtor, and to discharge the said Ferrers. But before this came to
pass the Commons House was divided upon the question: but in conclusion, the
Act passed for the said Ferrers, who won by 14 voices. The King being then
advertised of all this proceeding* called immediately before him the Lord
Chancellor of England and his Judges, with the Speaker of the Parliament, and
other the gravest persons of the nether House, to whom he declared his opinion
to this effect. First, commending their wisdom in maintaining the privileges of
the House (which he would not have to be infringed in any point) alleged, that
he being head of the Parliament, and attending in his own person upon the
business thereof, ought in reason, to have privilege for him and all his
Servants attending there upon him. So that if the said Ferrers had been no
Burgess, but only his servant, that in respect thereof he was to have the
privilege as well as any other. For I understand (quoth he) that you not only
for your own persons, but also for your necessary servants, even to your Cooks
and Horsekeepers, enjoy the said privilege, insomuch as my Lord Chancellor here
present, has informed us, that he being Speaker of the Parliament, the Cook of
the Temple was arrested in L. and in execution upon a Statute of the staple:
And forasmuch as the said Cook, during the Parliament served the Speaker, in
that office, he was taken out of execution by the privilege of the Parliament;
and further we be informed by our Judges, that we at no time stand so highly
in our estate Royal as in the time of Parliament; wherein we as Head, and you
as Members, are conjoined and knit together into one body politic, so as
whatsoever offense or injury (during that time) is offered to the meanest
Member of the House, is to be judged, as done against our person, and the whole
Court of Parliament: which prerogative of the Court is so great (as our learned
Counsel informs us) as all Acts and Processes coming out of any other
inferior Courts, must for the tiime cease and give place to the highest. And
touching the party it was a great presumption in him, knowing our servant to be
one of this House, and being warned thereof before, would nevertheless
prosecute this matter out of time, and therefore was well worthy to have lost
his debt, which I would not wish; and thereforefore do commend your equity,
that having lost the same by Law, have restored him to the same against him who
was his debtor; and this may be a good example to other, not to attempt any
thing against the privilege of this Court, but to take the time better;
Whereupon Sir Edward Montague then Lord chief Justice, very gravely declared
his opinion, confirming by diverse reasons all that the King had said, which was
assented unto by all the residue, none speaking to the contrary. The Act indeed
passed not the higher House; for the Lords had not time to consider of it by
reason of the dissolution of the Parliament.

From this President, I shall observe, 1. That this is the first President,
that the Commons house ever sent their Sergeant to demand a Member imprisoned,
without first acquainting the King and Lords: whereupon the Sergeant was thus
resisted, affronted. 2ly, That upon the Sergeants report of this resistance and
contempt, the Commons house did not undertake to punish it themselves, though
there were many of the Kings privy Council then of and in it; but according to
former presidents, went and complained thereof in the Lords house; praying them
to redress and punish it. 3ly, That all the Lords and Judges there assembled,
judged the contempt to be very great. 4ly, That thereupon (being busied with
other weighty public affairs) they by special order, referred the examination
and punishment thereof to the Commons House. 5ly. That thereupon the Commons by
virtue of this See the Freeholders grand Inquest p. 53, 54.
special reference from the Lords, (not by their own inherent authority or
Jurisdiction) sent for the delinquent parties, examined the contempt,
imprisoned the Sherifs of London, and White in the Tower, and the under
Officers in Newgate. 6ly. That afterward they acquainted the King and Lords
with their proceedings, who approved and commended the same. 7ly, That they
would have confirmed part of their judgment by an Act, to discharge Ferrers of
the execution, and not to revive it after the Parliament, which passed but by
14. voices; and never passed the Lords house, who would not assent thereto. All
which particulars unanswerably evidence, that the judgment and punishment of
contempts and breaches of privilege of the Commons house and their Members,
belong wholly and solely to the Lords, not to the Commons house at all; unless
by special order and reference from the Lords to the House of Commons, who are
to be informed of their proceedings and censures upon such a reference, and to
ratify them by their assents, or some Act of Parliament. Therefore the
conclusion of Jurisdiction of Courts, London 1594* f. 7. b.
Crompton from this president, and Dyer, f. 60. (which has not a syllable to
this effect) That any Knight, Burgess, Baron of the 5. Ports, or others called
to the Parliament of the King, shall have privilege of Parliament during the
Parliament or Session of it: so that he who arrests any of them during that
term shall be imprisoned in the Tower by the Nether House of which he is, and
shall be put to a fine, and the Keeper also if he will not deliver him, when
the Sergeant at Arms shall come for him by command of the House; is but a me^r
mistake. And the late objected Presidents, have been grounded only upon his
Authority, and the mistaking or misapplying of Ferrers case,

Pasch. 16 and 17. H. 8. Dyer, f. 59, 60.
W. Trewynnard, a Burgess of Parliament in 35 H. 8. (the very next year after
this case of Ferrers) was taken in execution upon an Exigent, grounded on a
Capias ad sa^isfaciendum, by the Sherif of Cornwall; upon a complaint thereof to
the King and Lords in Parliament, there issued a Writ of Privilege in the Kings
name during the Sessions of Parliament, to R. Chamond, then Sherif of Cornwall,
to release him, reciting that he was a Burgess, and likewise the Custom of the
privilege of Parliament: whereupon he was released; the personal attendance of
every Member being so necessary in Parliament, that he ought not to be absent
for any business, because he is a necessary Member; and therefore ought to be
privileged from arrests. Now the Parliament consisting of 3. parts: to wi^ of
the King as chief Head, the Lords, the chief and principal Members of the Body,
and the Commons, the Inferior Members, making up one body of Parliament; (as
Chief Justice Dyer there resolves) these inferior Members, have no means to
relieve themselves when their persons are arrested, but by complaint to the
Head, or Chief and principal Members of this body; as in all other
Corporations, where the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, Justices, and chief Officers
are the only Judges, not the Commons, to hear and determine all injuries done
to any Commoner.

Cooks 4 Instit. p. 17, 18, 19.
Pasch. 1. and 2. Phil. and Mariae, Rot. 16. B.R. The Attorney General in the
Kings and Queens name, exhibited an Information against 34. Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses of the Commons House, for absenting themselves, and departing
from the Parliament then held, without the Kings and Queens special license,
contrary to their Prohibition, and in manifest contempt of the said King, Queen
and Parliament, and to the great detriment of the state of the Commonwealth of
this Realm, and the ill example of others. The Great Lawyer Edmond Plowden
being one, pleaded he was present at the Parl. from the very beginning of it to
the end, and that he departed not from it; which he was ready to verify as the
Court should direct, and prayed judgment to be discharged. Edward Harford
another of them, pleaded a special license to depart, whereupon his prosecution
was stayed; but so that Process ^ill issued against the rest. The Commons house
therefore i^ Q. Mary's reign, were not re^ted sole Judges of their own Members
in cases of departure from Parliament in contempt, to the public prejudice,
and ill example of others, as now they deem themselves, by Sir Edward Cooks
new-invented Law and Custom of Parliaments.

In the Sea the Iournal, and The Freeholders Grand Inquest, p. 54, 55.
Parliament of 18 Eliz. Feb. 22. A report was made to the Commons House, by a
Committee appointed to consider how Mr. Halls man, then a Member, and
imprisoned against his privilege, might be released; that the Committee found
no President for setting at large by the Mace, any person in arrest, but only
by Writ of Privilege: And that by diverse presidents and records perused by the
Committee, every Knights, Citizen or Burgess, requiring privilege for his
Servant, has used to take a Corporal O^th before the Lord Chancellor, that the
pa^ty for whom such Writ is prayed, came up with him, and was his servant at
the time of the arrest made. Whereupon Mr. Hall was moved to repair to the Lord
Keeper, and make such Oath, which he did, and then had a Writ of privilege.

In the Sea the Freeholders Grand Inquest, p. 54, 55.
Parliament of 23 Eliz. 21 Jan. Saturday; Mr. Paul Wentworth, moved for a
public Fast, and for a Sermon every morning at 7. a clock before the House
sat: The House upon debate were divided about the Fast; 115. were for, and
100. against it: It was thereupon ordered, That as many of the House as
conveniently could, should on Sunday fortnight after assemble and meet together
in the Temple Church, there to hear preaching, and join together in prayer,
with humiliation and fasting, for the assistance of Gods spirit in all their
consultations during this Parliament, and for the preservation of the Queens
Majesty and her Realm: and the Preachers to be appointed by the privy Council
that were of the House, that they may be discreet, not meddling with Innovation
or unquietness. This Order being made by the Commons alone, without the Lords
and Queens privities and assents, the Queen being informed thereof, sent a
Message to the House by Master Vice-chamberlain, a Member of it; That her
Highness had great admiration of the rashness of this House in committing such
an apparent contempt of her express command (not to meddle with her person, the
State, or Church Government) as to put in execution such an Innovation, without
her privity or pleasure first known. Thereupon the Vice-chamberlain moved the
House, to make humble submission to her Majesty, acknowledging the said offense
and contempt, craving the remission of the same, with a full purpose, to
forbear the committing of the like hereafter. Upon which, by consent of the
WHOLE HOUSE, Mr. Vice-chamberlain carried this their submission to her Majesty:
as being the Judge and punisher of their misdemeanors even in the House it
self, though carried by majority of Voices.

In the Sea the Freeholders* Grand Inquest p* 58, 59.
Parliament of 28 Eliz. the Commons questioning the choosing and returning of
the knights of the Shire for Norfolk, the Queen said: She was sorry the Commons
meddled therewith* being a thing impertinent for that House to deal withal: it
belonging only to the Office of the Lord Chancellor, from whom the Writs issue,
and to whom they are returned.

In the Sea the Freeholders Grand Inquest, p. 60.
Parliament of 35 Eliz. Mr. Peter Wentworth, and Sir Henry Bromley, delivered a
petition to the Lord Keeper, desiring the Lords of the Upper House to be
suppliants with them of the Lower House unto her Majesty, for intayling the
succession of the Crown; whereof a Bill was ready drawn by them. The Queen
being highly displeased therewith, as contrary to her former strict command,
charged the LORDS of her COUNCIL to call the parties before them, which they
did; and after Speech with them commanded them to forbear the Parliament, and
not to go out of their lodgings: after which Mr. Wentworth was committed by
them to the Tower, Sir Henry Bromley, with Mr. Richard Stevens, and Mr. Welsh,
(to whom Sir Henry had imparted the matter) were committed to the Fleet,
sitting the Parliament. And when Mr. Wr^th moved in the House, that they might
be humble suitors to her Majesty, that she would be pleased to set at liberty
those Members of the House that were restrained; It was answered by all the
Privy Counselors there present: That her Majesty committed him for causes best
known to her self, and to press her Highness with this suit, would but hinder
them whose good as fought^ That the House must not call the Queen to account
for what she does of her royal Authority: That the causes for which they are
restrained, may be high and dangerous: That her Majesty likes no such
questions, neither does it become the House to search into these matters. In
the same Parliament, M. Morris, Attorney of the Court of Wards, by a Sergeant
at Arms was taken out of the Commons House, Febr. 28. and committed to prison
by the Queens command; for delivering in a Bill against the abuses of the
Bishops, on Tuesday Febr. 27. against which many Members spoke, that it should
not be read: The Queen hearing of it, sent for Sir Edward Cook, then Speaker,
the same day, giving him in command with her own mouth to signify to the
House, her dislike of the said Bill preferred by Mr. Morris, and charging him
upon his Allegiance, if any such Bill he exhibited, not to read it. Adding, It
is in me and my power to call Parliaments, it is in my power to end and
determine them: it is in my power to assent or dissent to any thing done in
Parliament. Lo here several Members of the Commons House, imprisoned by the
Queens command by the Lords of her Council, for disobeying her express commands
in her Speech, in meddling in matters of State and Ecclesiastical affairs,
which she had forbidden them to do: So far was the Commons house then from
being the Judges, or sole Judges of their own Members, privileges, speeches, or
actions in the House it self, even in this good Queens late reign of blessed
memory.

In the same Parliament of 35 Eliz. when Sir Edward (...) was Speaker of the
Commons House, there fell out a question in the Commons House about the
Amendment of a mistake in the (...) of the Burgess of Southwark: and after long
debate it was resolved* that the House could not amend it, but the L^. Keeper
in Chancery, ^here the return was of record, if he thought it amendable by Law;
and that Master Speaker should wait upon the Lord Keeper about it, which he
did; who advised with the Judges concerning it, as appears by the Journal.

In the same Parliament, Thomas Fitz-Herbert of Staffordshire was elected a
Burgess of Parliament, and two hours after, before the Indenture returned, the
Sherif took him prisoner upon a Capias Utlagatum; Whereupon he petitioned the
House, that he might have a Writ of Privilege and be enlarged. After many days
debate and Arguments of this case in the House by sundry Lawyers, and Sir
Edward Cook, then Speaker; it was agreed; That no Writ of Privilege could in
this case be returned into the House of Commons, being but a Member of
Parliament, and no Court of Record, but only into the Chancery or House of
Peers; And that this being a point of Law, it was meet the Judges should be
advised with, and determine it, not the House: And at last he was outed of his
privilege by the Houses resolution,

These forecited presidents in all ages will sufficiently prove the late
objected presidents, for the Commons sole Judicial Authority and Jurisdiction
in cases of Privilege and Elections, and the suspending, ejecting, fining,
secluding, imprisoning their own Members, and such who violate their
privileges, or make false returns; to be a mere late Groundless Innovation, if
not Usurpation, upon the King, House of Peers, and Chancellors of England, no
ways grounded on the Law and custom of Parliaments, as 4 Instit. p. 15.23.
Sir Edward Cook mistakes, but point blank against them both, and that the
Statutes concerning Elections, and attendance or absence of Knights and
Burgesses, as 5 R. 2. c. 4. 7 H. 4. c. 15. 11 H. 4. c. 1. 1 H. 5. c. 1. 6 H. 6.
c. 4. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 10 H. 6. c. 2. 11 H. 6. c. 11. 23 H. 6. c. 15. which See
the Freeholders Grand Inquest, p. 15, 16
cite Our Lord the King wills, commands and Ordains, or has Ordained, by
advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, upon complaint, or at
the special request of the Commons: (to show that they are only Petitioners,
not Judges, nor Ordainers in all or any of them,) give them not the least title
of Jurisdiction in cases of elections, or privileges. And therefore, according
to the resolution of all the Judges, Hill. 2. Jacobi, in the case of Penal
Statutes, Cook 7 Rep. f. 37. That the prosecution of penal Statutes cannot by
law be granted to any, nor be prosecuted or executed in any other order or
manner of proceeding, than by the Acts themselves is prescribed and provided;
the Commons cannot, against the Letter and provision of all those Acts, be
Judges of them in any other manner or order than they prescribe.

As for their proceedings in the Committee of Privileges touching Elections,
since they have interposed in them as they have been very irregular, illegal,
in respect all the Witnesses they examine touching them are unsworn, and give
their testimonies without Oath, upon which they Ground their Votes: So they are
for the most part very partial, and for that cause it is usually styled, The
Committee of Affections; he that can make the most Friends and strongest party,
being sure to carry the election for the most part, both at the Committee and
in the House, though never so foul, as I could instance in many cases of late
times; and more especially in the case of the Election of Cirencester 1647. too
foul to blot my paper with.

For their suspending, secluding, ejecting their own Members, I have
sufficiently manifested its illegality long since in my Ardua Regni; being a
late dangerous president began within our memories, the sad effects and
consequences where of we now discern by these dangerous gradations. 1. The
Commons began to seclude one another upon pretense of Cook 4 Instit. p. 23.
undue elections and retornes in Queen Elizabeth's reign, but not before, which
they have since continued, and that rather to strengthen or weaken a party in
the House, then to rectify undue elections and retorns, which a good Act would
easily do. 2ly. In the later and last Parliaments of King Charles they See an
Exact Collection of Ordinances, p. 541, 542, 543, to 558.
began to seclude Projectors; though duly elected. 3ly. They proceeded to
suspend and eject such who were royallists, and adhered to the late Kings
party. 4ly. They proceeded to imprison and eject those Members whom the Army
See my Epististle to my Speech in Parliament, December. 4. 2648. The 2 part of
the History of Independency.
Offices impeached or disliked as opposite to their designs. 5ly. The Minority
of the House at last, by the power of the Army, secured, secluded, expelled the
Majority, and 50 or 60. near 400 Members, and made themselves the Commons House
without them. 6ly. They then proceeded to See their Declarations and knacks of
17 and 19 Martii 1648. and Jan. 2. 1649.
vote down and seclude both King and House of Lords, then voted themselves to
be the Parliament of England, and sole Legislators, and supreme authority of
the Nation without either King or House of Lords, or majority of their fellow
Members, prescribing an Engagement under strictest penalties, against K. and
House of Lords, to seclude them from all future Parliaments. 7ly. Hereupon the Sea their Declarations concerning the grounds of their dissolutions, Aug. 22.
1652. and since.
Army Officers and Soldiers, (who made, continued them an absolute Parliament,
and first of all subscribed the Engagement to be true and faithful to them
without King and House of Lords) at last by Divine Justice, against their very
engagements to them, secluded and suppressed them all, as they had done the
King, Lords, and their fellow Members, and declared them to be actually
dissolved, and no longer to be a Parl. or the supreme authority of the Nation.
8ly. They then proceeded to choose and nominate a Parliament at Whitehall alone,
without the peoples election; and then one part of them, without the rest,
resigned their new sovereign power, and secluded, dissolved the residue, and
turned them out of doors. 9ly. They then proceeded to a New model of
Parliaments, wherein they disabled most of the Freeholders, Citizens and
Burgesses of England to be either Electors or elected Members, contrary to
their privilege, and all former laws for elections: appointed those they
styled, the Council of State at Whitehall, to seclude what Members they pleased
(though duly chosen according to their new ill-tuned instruments) before or
without any examination, or reason rendered for their seclusion to the secluded
Members, or their Electors for their new created Parliaments: by which means
they secluded whom and how many they pleased in all their late conventions; And
most of those Reipublican Members and some cashiered Army Officers, who were
most active in securing, secluding their fellow Members in December 1648. and
in voting down the King and House of Lordspunc; who may now justly say as
Ado^bez^eh once did in another case, Judge. 1.8. As I have done unto-others, so
God has requited me; being secluded, secured, cashiered, dissolved, and some
of them sent prisoners to remote Castles, (as they secluded and thus imprisoned
my self, with other their fellow Members without cause) and most justly branded
in several Pamplets and The Declaration of the General and Officers of the
Army, Aug. 22. 1653. p. 4, 5, 6. A true State of the Commonwealth of England,
etc. p. 8, 9, 10, 11.12. etc.
Declarations for a CORRVPT PARTY, carrying on their own ends, to perpetuate
themselves in their late Parliamentary and supreme Authority; never answering
the ends which God, his people, and the whole Nation expected from them, but
exercizing an arbitrary power at Committees (and elsewhere) over them, likely
to swallow up the ancient Liberties and Properties of the People, and to
increase their vexations, etc. as they had most unjustly taxed the secluded
Members 1648. for See my Epistle to my Speech in Parliament.
A CORRVPT MAJORITY, acting contrary to their trusts: Which I desire them now
seriously to lay to heart, and to acknowledge Gods Sovereign Justice therein.
10ly. Their new Major Generals in their last elections, prescribed to all
Countries, and to most Cities, Buroughs, by letters, and lists of names sent
to them, what persons they must elect, secluding those they elected which were
not in their lists, and caused Sherrifs to return many they nominated, though
never elected, but protested against by those who were to choose them: rather to
carry on private interests, designs, than the private or public good Laws,
Liberties, Properties, Peace, Ease of the Nation from importable Taxes,
Excizes, Slaverie; and armed guards, and to set up private Conventicles,
Parties, instead of free public English Parliaments, duly elected and
constituted. These the sad effects of this Innovation and Usurpation of the
Commons over their own Members, by the objected Presidents, which by Divine
Justice, have made all their new modelled Conventions abortive, successess, yea
to end in sudden confusions, and unexpected dissolutions ever since. Besides,
from this their late fining, imprisoning and judging of their fellow Members in
the House, they proceeded in the last long Parl. to make almost every Committee
of the Commons House, a most arbitrary and tyrannical Court of Justice,
independent on the House it self, without any report at all of their
proceedings to the House; An Exact Collection, p. 500, 523, 526.
authorizing Committees to secure, imprison, close imprison, cashire, banish,
condemn, execute many persons, sequester, confiscate, sell, dispose their
Inheritances, Offices, Lands, Tenements, Benefices, real and personal estates;
to deprive them of their callings, professions; to search and break up their
houses, by Soldiers and others, without any legal sworn Officers, day and
night, to seize their Letters, Papers, Horses, Arms, Plate, Money, yea debts in
other men's hands at pleasure; to indemnifie and stay their legal actions,
suits, Judgments at Law, and null their executions at their pleasures; yea to
commit them till they released all suits, actions, Judgments, and paid costs
and damages to those they justly sued, and recovered against, to add
affliction to affliction, and cruelty, oppression to injustice. These are the
bitter fruits of Commons usurped judicature, whereof there are thousands of
most sad presidents which may hereafter be objected to prove the sole Power of
Judicature to reside of right, not in the K. or House of Lords, but in the
Commons House alone, and every of their Committees, especially for
Examinations, Plundered Ministers, Sequestrations, Indemnity, Haberdashers and
Goldsmiths Halls, Privileges, sales of Delinquents, the Kings Queens, Princes,
Lands and Estates, Excise, the Army, Navy, and the like: yea in their new
created High Courts of Justice; who have acted as absolute arbitrary,
unlimited, lawless Courts of justice in the highest degree, to the subversion,
destruction of the ancient Liberties, Freeholds, Properties, Great Charters,
and fundamental Laws of the Nation in general, and of thousands of the highest
and lowest degree of English Freemen in particular; with as much ground of
reason, and Warrant from the many late Presidents of this Nature, as these here
objected, to prove a so^e right of ^udicature in the Commons House, in cases of
undue elections, retorns, misdemeanors, privileges relating to their Members
and their servants. Which strange exorbitant Presidents and Proceedings, if they
should be made Patterns for future Parliaments and Committees; I shall desire
all sober minded men to consider of the dangerous consequences of them, thus
notably expressed by the late King in his Exact Collect. p. 768, 769, 770.
Answer concerning the Ordinance for imposing and levying the 20th. part of
men's estutes 29 November 1642. After this Ordinance and Declaration, it is not in
any sober man's power to believe himself worth any thing, or that there is such
a thing as Law, Liberty, Property, left in England under the jurisdiction of
these men; and the same power that robs them now of the twentieth part of their
estates, has by that but made a claim, and entitled it self to the other
nineteen, whne it shall be thought fit to hasten the general ruin. Sure, if
the minds of all men be not stubbornly prepared for servitude, they will look
on this Ordinance, as the greatest prodigy of Arbitrary power and tyranny that
any age has brought forth in any Kingdom; other grievances (and the greatest)
have been conceived intolerable, rather by the logic and consequence, than by
the pressure it self; this at once sweeps away all that the wisdom and justice
of Parliaments have provided for them. Is their property in their estates (so
carefully looked to by their ancestors, and so amply established by Us against
any possibility of Invasion from the Crown) which makes the meanest Subject as
much a Lord of his own, as the greatest Peer, to be valued or considered? here
is a twentieth part of every man's estate (or so much more as four men will
please to call the twentieth part) taken away at once, and yet a power left to
take a twentieth still of that which remains, and this to be levied by such
circumstances of severity, as no Act of Parliament ever consented too. Is their
liberty which distinguishes subjects from slaves, and in which this freeborn
Nation has the advantage of all Christendom dear to them? they shall not only
be imprisoned in such places of this kingdom (a latitude of judgment, no Court
can challenge to it self in any cases) but for so long time as the Committee of
the House of Commons for Examination shall appoint and Order; the House of
Commons it self having never assumed, or in the least degree pretended to a
power of Judicature, having no more authority to administer an Oath (the only
way to discover and find out the truth of facts) than to cut off the heads of
any our Subjects; and this Committee being so far from being a part of the
Parliament, that it is destructive to the whole, by usurping to it self all the
power of King, Lords, and Commons. All who know any thing of Parliament, know
that a Committee of either House ought not by Law to publish their own results,
neither are their conclusions of any force without the confirmation of the
House, which has the same power of controling them, as if the matter had never
been debated; but that any Committee should be so contracted (as this of
examination, a style no Committee ever bore before this Parliament) as to
exclude the Members of the House, who are equally trusted by their Country,
from being present at the Counsels, is so monstrous to the privileges of
Parliament, that it is no more in the power of any man to give up that freedom,
than of himself to order, that from that time the place for which he serves,
shall never more send a Knight or Burgess to the Parliament, and in truth is
no less than to alter the whole frame of government, to pull up Parliaments by
the roots, and to commit the lives, liberties, and estates of all the people of
England, to the arbitrary power of a few unqualified persons, who shall dispose
thereof according to their discretion, without account to any rule or authority
whatsoever. Are their friends, their wives, and children (the greatest
blessings of peace, and comforts of life) precious to them? would their penury
and imprisonments be less grievous by those cordials? they shall be divorced
from them, banished, and shall no longer remain within the Cities of London and
Westminster, the Suburbs and the Counties adjacent, and how far those adjacent
Counties shall extend no man knows.

The 3 sort of Presidents and Objections are such, as Lilburn and Overton
insist on, to prove; That the King and Lords have no power at all to judge or
censure Commoners in our Parliament. The only Record they insist on is the
Lords own Protestation in 4 E. 3. n. 2. and 6. in the case of Sir Simon
Bareford; which because I have already fully answered, p. 323, 324, 325. and
cleared by sundry subsequent presidents, and there being no one president in
any Parliament since to contradict it, I shall wholly pretermit, and proceed to
their objections, which are only two.

The first and principal objections whereon they most insist and rely, is the
Statute of Magna Charta, chap. 29. Objection
That no Freeman shall be imprisoned, outlawed, exiled, or any other may
destroyed; Nor we shall not pass upon him nor condemn him, but by the lawful
judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. Whence thus they argue: The
Lords in Parliament are not Commoners Peers, but the Commons only; therefore
they cannot be judged in Parliament by the Lords, but by the Commons alone; and
if Peers there judge Commoners, it is a tyranny and usurpation even against
Magna Charta it self, though it be in case of privilege.

To take away this grand seeming Objection, Answer
and give it a satisfactory answer, I say: First in general, that there is
scarce one Parliament ever since Magna Charta was first confirmed, but the
Lords have sentenced and given Judgment against some Commoners capitally, or
penally, in body, purse, or both, without the Commons (and did so doubtless
before Magna Charta was made, as I have already manifested) yet never did the
Commons in any one of those Parliaments till this present, complain of it, as a
violation of Magna Charta, or a tyrannical usurpation, as Lilburn and Overton
style it; but acknowledged ir as a just right in the Lords, even in 3 Caroli it
self when the Petition of Right was passed, in the Lords Judgment and Sentence
against Here p. 353. etc.
Dr Manwaring a Commoner, impeached by the Commons in Parliament. And therefore
for this Ignoramus alone, against the judgment of the Commons in Parl. in all
ages, to averr this a breach of Magna Charta for imprisoning and sining him for
the highest affront and breach of privilege ever offered to any Parl. is the
extremity of ignorance, malice, singularity.

Secondly, I answer, That the Statute of Magna Charta extends not to, nor was
ever intended of the high Court of Parliaments Judgments, Proceedings, but
only to and of the Proceedings, Judgments in the Kings great Courts of Justice
at Westminster Hall, the Exchequer, his Privy Council, and other inferior
Courts held before Judges, Justices of Assise, and other Officers, as is
evident by comparing this objected Chapter with c. 11, 12, 13, 14, 18, 28, 30,
34, 37. by the Statutes of 25 E. 3. Stat. 5. c. 4. 28 E. 3. c. 3. 37 E. 3. c.
18. 38 E. 3. c. 9. 42 E. 3. c. 2. 17 R. 2. c. 6. and the Petition of Right it
self, 3. Caroli, which so expound it; there being never any complaint against
the Parliament it self or House of Peers in any age, for breach of Magna
Charta, in censuring or imprisoning Commoners till now. Therefore this
misapplying of this Law to the Parl. and House of Peers, is a gross oversight.

Thirdly, the very literal sense of this Law is much mistaken by the Objectors;
The main scope whereof is this, That no man should be deprived of his Freehold,
Liberties, Limbs, life, or outlawed, exiled, or otherwise destroyed, without
legal process in due form of Law, in Courts of Justice; not by mere force,
violence, injustice, arbitrary and tyrannical power, or martial Law, nor being
brought to his legal trial or answer: And that none should pass upon them in
any trials for freehold, or life, but only English Freemen. Now in respect of
Freedom, any, every Freeman of England is a Peer to another Freeman, quatenus
such a one, within this Law, though of an higher degree in point of honor,
dignity, office, estate; as Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Yeomen, Citizens,
Merchants; these as Freemen, are all Peers one to another, and may pass upon
each other in Juries, both in civil and criminal causes and this clause Dyer
99. Cook 2 Instit. on Magna Charta, c. 14. 29. See Cook 2 Instit. p. 27, 29,
49, 50, 51.
No Freem^n shall be imprisoned, etc. but by the lawful judgment of his
Peers; extends only to villains and those who are not Freeholders from being
Judges of Freemen and Freeholders in trials by Jury, (whence the Writs to the
Sherifs to summon Jurors, require them always to return Liberos and Legales
homines) not to exclude Lords or Peers (who are Freemen in the highest degree)
to be Judges of Commoners who are Freemen. So as the Argument from the true
meaning of this Law can be but this, in respect of the persons quality who are
to give judgment; Villains, and those who are no Freemen, are not to be Judges
of, or impannelled in Juries to condemn Freemen; because they are not their
Peers, nor Freemen as well as they: Therefore Lords who are Freemen of the
highest degree, may not give judgment against Commoners who are Freemen; Very
learned nonsense! We all know that the Lord Chancellor of England, Lord Keeper,
Lord Treasurer, Master of the Court of Wards, and some of the Judges of the
Kings Courts in Westminster Hall in former times, with the Chief Justiciar, and
Justices in Air, were anciently, and of late too (as the Earl of Holland and
others) Peers of the Realm, not Commoners; and that all the Peers of the Realm
are in Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, and of the Peace; yet did we never
hear of any Commoner demurring or pleading thus to any of their Jurisdictions
in Chancery, Kings Bench, the Exchequer Chamber, Eyres, Assizes or Sessions;
Sir, I am a Commoner, and you are a Peer of the Realm, but no Commoner as I am;
besides, you sit here only in the Kings right, doing all in his name, and
representing his person, who is not my Peer, but Sovereign. Therefore you ought
not to judge my cause, condemn my person, nor give any sentence for or against
me, it being contrary to Magna Charta, which enacts, That no freeman should be
judged or passed upon, or condemned, but by the lawful judgment of his Peers.
Certainly no person was ever yet so mad or sottish, to make such a Plea before
Ignoramus Lilburn; And if Lords, Peers may judge the persons, causes of
Commoners in the Chancery, Kings Bench, Exchequer, Court of Wards, Eyres, and
at Assizes, Sessions, without any violation of this clause in Magna Charta;
(though they are 48 E. 3.30. Br. Exempt. 3. Fitz. N. Brev. f. 165. e.
exempted to be impannelled or serve in Juries, in cases of Commoners, as
Commoners in Juries to try them) much more may the House of Peers in Parliament
do it; who are certainly Peers to Commoners, as Freemen, though Commoners be
not Peers to them, as Lords, within the meaning of Magna Charta, chap. 29.

Fourthly, If the Lords in Parliament cannot meddle with, or give judgment in
Commoners causes, without breach of this clause in Magna Charta, then why did
See his Innocence and Truth justified.
Lilburn himself sue and petition to the Lords as the only competent Judges to
reverse his sentence in Star, Chamber, and give him damages, because it was
against this very Chapter of Magna Charta? If Lords cannot give judgment in
the case of Commoners, as now he holds, without express violation of this Law;
then himself in petitioning the Lords to relieve him against the Star Chamber
sentence, because contrary to this very Law and Chapter of Magna Charta, was a
great a violator of it, as his Star Chamber censurers, and his sentence in
Star Chamber remains still unreversed, because the Lords examining, reversing
of it, (they being no Commoners as he is, but Peers,) was Coram non judice, and
merely void, by the Statute of 25 E. 3. Stat. 5. c. 4. because contrary to
Magna Charta it self, as he now expounds it. Let him therefore unriddle, assoyl
this his own Dilemma, or for ever hold his tongue and pen, from publishing such
absurdities to seduce poor people, as he has done; to exasperate them to
clamor against the Lords, for being more favorable in their censure of him,
than his transcendent Libels and contempts against them deserved.

Fifthly, This Statute is in the disjunctive, by the Lawful Judgment of his
Peers; OR BY THE LAW OF THE LAND, which this Ignoramus observes not. Now by the Sea Brook and Ash, Amerciament and Fine for contempts.
Law of the Land, every inferior Court of Justice may fine and imprison men
for contempts, or misdemeanors against them and their authority: therefore the
Lords in Parliament being the highest Tribunal, may much more do it, and have
ever done it, even by this express clause of Magna Charta, and the Law and
Custom of Parliament, as well as they may give Cook 4. Instit. p. 21.
judgments in writs of Error against or for Commons, without the Commons
consent, as himself does grant: yea, and by the Kings concurrent assent,
declare what is Treason, and what not, within the Statute of 25 E. 3. c. 20. in
the cases of Commoners as well as Lords, without the Commons; as they did in
the forecited cases of William de Weston and Lord of Gomines, 1 R. 2. n. 38,
39, 40. Of William Thorp, 25 E. 3. n. 10. Of Thomas Haxey, 20 R. 2. n. 15,
16.23. Of Sir Thomas Talbot, 13 R. 2. n. 20, 21. Of Sir Robert Plesington, and
Henry Bowhert, 22 R. 2. Plac. Coronae in Parliamento, n. 27, 28. Of John Hall,
1 H. 4. Plac. Coronae in Parl. n. 11. to 17. Of Sir Ralph Lumley and others, 4
H. 4. n. 15. 19, 20, 21. Of Sir John Oldcastle, 5 H. 5. n. 11. and of Sir John
Mortymer, 2 H. 6. n. 18. as the Commons and Judges in all those Parliaments
agreed without contradiction, against the erroneous opinion of Sir Edward Cook
to the contrary in his 3. Institutes, p. 22.

Sixthly, It is granted by Lilburn, that by this express Law, No Freeman of
England ought to be judged or censured but only by his Peers, and that
Commoners are no Peers to Nobles, nor Noblemen Peers to Commoners; Then by what
Law or reason dared he to publish to the world, And my Lords, I tell you to
your faces, THAT BY RIGHT THE HOUSE OF COMMONS ARE your JUDGES IN THIS CASE, as
well as mine. An Anatomy of the Lords Tyranny and Injustice, p. 14.
That the House of Commons are the Supreme Power within this Realm, and THAT BY
RIGHT THEY ARE THE LORDS JUDGES? certainly this is a Note beyond Ela; a direct
contradiction to Magna Charta in this very clause wherein he places his
strength, and subverts his very groundwork against the Lords Jurisdiction in
their censure of him. For if the House of Commons be by right the Lords Judges,
then by Magna Charta, c. 29. they are and ought to be their Peers; and if the
Commons be the Lords Peers, then the Lords must be the Commons Peers too; and
if so, then they may lawfully be his Judges even by Magna Charta, because here
he grants them to be no other than his Peers; Lo the head of this great Goliath
of the Philistin Levellers, cut off with his own sword; and Magna Charta for
ever vindicated from his ignorant and sottish contradictory Glosses on it. Now
to convict him of his Error, in affirming the House of Commons to be by right
the Lords Judges, I might inform him (as I have formerly proved at large) that
Magna Charta it self, c. 14. and 29. and Sir Edward Cook (his chief Author) in
his commentary on them, are express against him; that in the Parliament of 15
E. 3. chapter 2. in print, it was enacted: That whereas before this time the Peers
of the Land have been arrested and imprisoned, and their Temporalties, Lands
and Tenements, Goods and Chattels seized into the Kings hands, and some put to
death, without Judgment of their Peers; that no Peer of the Land, Officer or
other, by reason of his office, nor of things touching his office, nor by other
cause shall be brought in judgment, to lose his Temporalties, Lands,
Tenements, Goods, Chattels, nor to be arrested or imprisoned, outlawed, exiled,
nor forejudged, nor put to answer, nor to be judged, but by award of the said
Peers in Parliament; which privilege of theirs was both enjoyed and claimed in
Parliament, 4 E. 3. n. 14, 15 E. 3. n. 6, 8, 44, 49, 51. 17 E. 3. n. 22. 18 E.
3. n. 7. to 16. 10 R. 2. n. 7, 8. 11 R. 2. n. 7, etc. and sundry other
Parliament Rolls. See Cook 4. Instit. p. 15. 17 E. 3. 19. Cromptons
Jurisdiction of Courts, f. 4. 12, 13. Stamford, f. 151, 152. This Paradox
therefore of his, is against all Statutes, Law Books, Presidents whatsoever,
and Magna Charta it self. And as false an assertion, as that the Subjects are
the Judges of their Sovereign, the Servants of their Masters, the children of
their Parents, the Wi^es of their Husbands, the Soldiers of their General, and
the feet and lower members of the Head.

The second and only Objection more of moment, is this; Objection 2.
If the House of Peers may without the Commons fine and imprison Commoners;
then if their fine and imprisonment be unjust and illegal, they shall be
remediless, there being no superior Court to appeal unto; which will be an
intolerable slavery and grievance, not to be endured among freeborn people.

I answer, first, Answer.
That no injustice shall or ought to be presumed in the highest Court of
Justice, till it be apparently manifested. Secondly, If any such censure be
given, the party (as in Chancery) upon just grounds showed, may Petition the
House of Peers for a review and new hearing of the cause, which they in justice
neither will nor can deny; and if they do, then the party grieved may petition
the house of Commons to intercede in his behalf to the Peers for a rehearing;
but for them to discharge, free any Commoner judicially censured by the Lords,
I have hitherto met with no president in former Parliaments, nor power in the
house of Commons to do it, who cannot reverse Erroneous judgments in any
inferior Courts by writ of Error, but the Lords alone, much less then the
judgments of the Higher House of Peers, which is paramount them. Thirdly, I
conceive the House of Peers, being the Superior Authority, and only Judicatory
in Parliament, may relieve or release any Commoners unjustly imprisoned or
censured by the Commons house, or any of their Committees, and ought in justice
to do it; or else there will be the same mischief or a greater, in admitting
the house of Commons to be Judges of Commoners, if there be no appeal from them
to the Lords, in case their sentences be illegal or unjust. Thirdly, This
mischief is but rare, and you may object the same against a sentence given, or
Law made in Parliament, by the King and both Houses, 28 E. 3. n. 8. to 16. 21
E. 3. 46. b. 7 H. 6. 29 a. Cook 4. Instit. p. 21, 23. 4 E. 3. n. 14. Brook,
Cromptons Jurisdiction of Parl. and all Statutes for repealing former
Parliaments, Acts, Judgments, or Attainders.
because there is no appeal from it, but only to the next or some other
Parliament that shall be summoned, by petition in the nature of a Writ of
Error. There is a greater grievance in all ill public Acts which concern
many, than in ill judgments which concern but one or two particular persons;
which yet cannot be repealed but by another Parliament; as the Errors and
decrees of one General Council cannot be rectified or reversed, but by and till
another General Council meets to do it. The same mischief was and is in
Errors, Judgments, and Decrees given in the Kings Bench, Chancery, and in
illegal commitments by them; for which there is no relief out of Parliament,
but to wait till a new Parliament be called.

For this I shall cite one memorable Record (besides the forecited cases of the
two Spencers, Roger Mortimer, Matravers, Earls of Arundel, Salisbury, and
others) relating to the Parliaments of Ireland. Claus. 46 E. 3. m. 25. Pro
Hominibus de Hybernia de Custumae oneribus revocandis, Roberto de Ashton
Justice. Hyberniae. A complaint was made from some of Ireland to the King, that
Willielmus de Windsore being Lieutenant of Ireland, at the first Parliament
held there after his coming, desired diversa Custumae et onera quae antea
alique tempore concessa non fuerunt, viz. de quolibet lasto halicium, 3 s. with
diverse impositions more on most commodities there expressed. Et licet Praelati,
Magnates, et alii ligei nostri PRO MAJORI PART in dicto Parliamento nostro
existentes, concessionem, levationem et solutionem Custumae et onerum
supradictorum ABSQUE ASSENSU MINORIS PARTIS DICTI PARLIAMENTI CONCESSERVNT per
tres annos tantum, et non ultra concesserunt, praefatus tamen Willielmus et
alii de Consilio suo, ^ rotulo Cancellariae nostrae ejusdem terrae irrotulari
et registrari fecerunt, quod dictae Custumae et onera per OMMES in dicto
Parliamento praesentes perpetuis temporibus percipienda, concessa fuerunt; in
ipsorum nostrorum ligeorum terrae nostrae praedict: destructionem et
depauperationem manifestam. Unde Nobis supplicarunt, etc. Et ideo Vobis
mandamus, quod praemissa omnia et singula ejusdem, modo et forma quibus gesta
et act a fuerunt IN PROXIMO PARLIAMENTO NOSTRO in terra praedicta tenendo,
coram Praelatis, Magnatibus e^ Communitate dicti Parliamento recitari ac
dec^arari facias. Etsi per expositionem et examinationem Vobis constare poterit
praemissa veritatem continere, tunc irrotulationem ac recordum concession^s
custumae et onerum praedict: DE ASSENSV DICTI PARLIAMENTI cancellari, et
damnari, et levationem et exactionem Custumae praedict: ratione concessionis
antedictae post dictum triennium supersederi facias omnino. Test, etc. 28
Maii. It appears likewise by Claus. 47. E. 3. m. 3. De quodam subsidio in
Hybernia levando, that they likewise complained by Petition to the King that
the said William de Windsor whiles he was Lieutenant of Ireland, had imposed on
them a subsidy of 5000 l. in the two last Parliaments there held at Kilkenny
and Balydoill, against their wills and their free grants; whereupon the King
had sent a Writ, that it should not be levied: pro eo tamen, that we are since
informed by the GREAT MEN, and other credible persons of Ireland, that the 5000
l. was FREELY GIVEN AND GRANTED by the Lords, Greatmen, and Commons in these
Parliaments, ET NON PER VIAM IMPOSITIONIS EXACT: as was suggested. Volumus de
avisamento Concilii nostri, quod omnes denarios de dicta summa 5000. librarum
qui a retro existunt; and nondum levati de hominibus et ligeis nostris terrae
nostrae praedictae, juxta formam concessionis eorundem leventur, etc. Test
apud Westmonasterium 20 Decembris.

Finally, He that suffers by and under an unjust censure, will have the comfort
of a good Conscience to support him till he be relieved; and therefore he Luke
21.19 1 Pet. 3.14. Heb. 10.32, 33, 34.
must possess his Soul with Patience, and rejoice under his cross, and not
rail, murmur, and play the Bedlam, as Lilburn, his Companions, Overton, Larnar,
and other Sectaries do, against our 1 Pet. 2.15. to 21. c. 4.16. Isay 53.7
Saviors own precept and example, and then God in his due season will Psalm. ^,
and 37. and 46.
relieve and right them in a legal way; whereas their impatience, raving, and
libellous railing Pamphlets and Petitions (not savouring of a Christian, meek
and humble spirit) will but create them new troubles, expose them unto just and
heavy censures, and rob them both of the comfort and glory of al their former
sufferings against Law and Reason.

Having answered these Objections, I shall now earnestly desire all Lilburns
and Overtons seduced Disciples, whether Members or others, seriously to weigh
and consider the premises, that so they may see how grossly they have been
deluded, abused; and misled by these two Ignes fatui, or New-lights of the Law,
and Circumscribers of the Lords and Parliaments Jurisdictions, which (God
knows) they no more know nor understand than Balams Ass; as the premises
demonstrate; and I shall seriously adjure them (if they have any grace, shame,
or remainder of ingenuity left in them) ingeniously to recant, and publicly
to retract all their seditious railing Libels and Scurrilous Invectives against
the Lords Which to deprive them of must be an act of the highest injustice and
unrighteousness that may be excluding the Actors thereof both from the reallity
of Christians and Heaven it self Mich. 2.1, 2, 3, etc. Cor. 6.8, 9. Romans 13.1.
to 10. Isa. 9.16.
undoubted Privileges, Jurisdiction, and Judicature, which I have here
unanswerably made good by undeniable Testimonies, Histories, Records, and the
grounds of policy and right reason (which they are unable to gainsay) to
undeceive the many ignorant over-credulous poor Souls they have corrupted and
misled to the public disturbance of our Kingdoms Peace; and let all their
followers consider well of our Saviors caution, Mat. 15.14. If the blind lead
the blind (as these blind-guids do them) both of them shall fall into the
Ditch, and there perish together: O consider therefore what I have here written
to undeceive your judgments, and reform your practice; consider that Dominion,
Principality, Regality, Magistracy and Nobility are founded in the very Law of
Nature, and Prove. 8.15, 16. Dan. 2.21, 37. Romans 13.1. to. 7. Col. 1.16, 17, 18.
Hph. 1.21. Acts 13, 20, 21, 22. Tit. 3.1. 1 Timothy 2, 1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
Genesis 17.6.16. c. 35.11. c. 36.15. to 43. Deuteronomy. 17, 14, 15. 2 Samuel 7.8. to 17. 1 Chronicles. 28.^. 5. 2 Chronicles. 1.9.10. c. 2.11. c. 9.8.
Gods own institution, who subjected not only all beasts and living Creatures
to the sovereign Lordship of man, to whom he gave Dominion over them, Genesis
1.28, 29. c. 9.2, 3, 5^ Psalm. 8.6, 7, 8. by virtue whereof men still enjoy
Dominion over the Beasts; but likewise one man unto another; as Gen 3.16. Exodus
20.12. Ephesians. 5.22. to 30. c. 6. 1. to 10. Rom 13.1, 2, 3. Tit. 3.1. Col. 3, 20,
22. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 18. c. 3. 15. Heb. 13.17. Josh. 1.16, 17, 18. Mat. 8.9.
Children to their Parents, Wives to their Husbands, Servants to their Masters,
Subjects to their Kings, Princes, Magistrates, Soldiers to their Captains,
Mariners to their Ship-Masters, Scholtars to their Tutors, People to their
Ministers* which order, if denied or disturbed, will bring absolute and speedy
confusion in all Families, Corporations, States, Kingdoms, Armies, Garrisons,
Schools, Churches, and dissolve all humane Societies, which subsist by order
and subordination only to one another; and seeing God himself and Jesus Christ
are frequently styled in Scripture, not only King, Lord, the Head of all
Principalities, Powers, Thrones, Dominions, but also KING OF KINGS, and LORD OF
LORDS, Deuteronomy. 10.17. Ps. 136.3. 1 Timothy 6.15. Rev. 1.5. c. 17.14. c. 10.6. (which
glorious Titles they must lose if all Kings and Lords be totally abolished:)
And since Monarchy, Royalty, Principality, Nobility; yea Titles of Honor and
Nobility, (as Specially promised by God as a blessing to his people, Genesis 17.6,
16. c. 35. 11. Ier. 17.24, 25. c. 22.4. 1 Chronicles. 28.4, 5, 6. c. 11, 12.
Kings Princes, Dukes, Lords, etc.) are of Divine institution: Col. 1.16. Romans
13.1, 2. Ephesians. 3.10. yea as ancient almost, as the world it self, universally
received, approved among all Nations whatsoever under heaven, and honored with
special privileges, as not only all See Seldens Titles of Honor, Dr. Humphreys
and others of Nobility. Catanaeus Catologus gloriae mundi
eminent Authors and experience manifest, but these ensuing Scripture Texts,
Genesis 12.15. c. 14. ^. to 10. c. 17.6.16. c. 20.2. c. 21, 22, 23. c. 25.16. c.
26.1.8.26.26. c. 36.15, 16, 17, 18, 29, 30, 31, to 43. c. 9.1, 2. c. 41.40, to
47. c. 47.22, 26. Exodus 1.8. Numb. 20.14, etc. c. 21.1, 18, 21, 33. c.
22.7.10.14, 15, 40. c. 23.17. c. 2, 3, 10. c. 16.2. c. 27.2. c. 32.2. Deuteronomy.
17.14.15, 16. Josh. 1.16, 17, 18. c. 5.1. c. 5.1. c. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Judge.
9.6, 18. 1 Samuel 8.5, 9. 2 Samuel 11.2. 1 Kin 4.34. c. 10.15, 23, 29. c. 20.19. c.
23.22. Job 3.14. c. 36.7. Psalm. 2.2.10. Psalm. 62.12.14.29. Ps. 72.10, 11. Ps.
102.15. Ps. 136.17, 18. Ps. 138.4. Prove. 8.15, 16. Prove. 30.31. Eccl. 10.16,
17. Judge. 3.5. c. 16.8. 1 Samuel 5.11. c. 29.2.6, 7. Jer. 25.18. to 27. Dan.
4.36. c. 5.9, 10, 13. c. 6.27. Mat. 8.9. Mar. 6.21. c. 10.42. 1 Cor. 8.5. Romans
13.1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Timothy 2.1. 2 Tit. 3.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. Acts 9.27.
(which I wish our Sectaries Levellers, and Lilburnists to consider and study,
with the others forecited; it will be a mere folly and madness in any man to
prove Antipodes to this institution of God, Nature, Nations: to run quite
contrary to all men, and to level the head, neck, shoulders to the feet; the
tallest Cedars to the lowest Shrubs; the roof of every building to the
foundation stones, the Sun, Moon, Stars, Heavens, to the very Earth, center,
and even men themselves to the meanest beasts. I shall therefore conclude with
Saint Paul's serious admonition, which these refractory persons have quite
forgotten, Romans 13.1, 2.3. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers; for
there is no power but of God, the powers that be are ordained of God; whosoever
therefore resists (much more oppugneth, abolisheth) the Power, resists
(oppugneth, abolisheth) THE ORDINANCE OF GOD. and they that resist (oppugn or
endeavor to abolish these powers) shall receive to themselves DAMNATION; for
Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil; wherefore YE MUST
NEEDS BE SUBJECT, NOT ONLY FOR WRATH, but likewise FOR CONSCIENCE SAKE. And for
this cause pay you tribute also, for they are Gods Ministers, attending
continually on this very thing. Render therefore to all (such just higher
Powers) the^ues, tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, HONOR to whom HONOR IS DUE, (which Saint Peter likewise seconds almost
in the self same words, which you may do well to peruse and study, 1 Pet.
2.12. to 20.) and then you will never dare to question or dispute any more the
Power, Judicatory, Privileges of the Right Honorable House of Peers, much
less to Revile and Libel against their lawful power, persons, Judicature, as
now you do, to the infinite Scandal of your Schismatical faction, and Religion
it self, which you profess only in show, but deny in deeds and practice.

I shall close up this Plea with these ensuing Presidents of Power given by Act
of Parliament to the Lords of the Kings Council, to answer those Petitions, and
redress those grievances, which were not answered nor redressed sitting the
Parliament, after the Parliaments themselves were ended; and that at the
Commons special requests.

Parl. 15 H. 6. n. 33. I^e^ lavantdir 27 iour de Marcz. un au^^e petition fuist
baillez a nostre Seignior le Roy en mesme le Parliament per les Comunes dicel,
De potestate concessa Dominis de Consilio Regis ad audiend. et terminand.
Petitiones in Parliamento minime determinat.
le tenor de quell petition ey e^suit^ Please au Roi nostro Soverayn Seignior
considerer, comet plusours petitions ount estez baillez et exhibitez a vestre
tresnoble ha^tesse par les Comunes de cest present Parliament pur ent avoir
covenable remedy, et unquore meant determin^z, d'ordenier, per advis des
Seigniors Esperituelx et temporelx and assent des Comunes avantaitz, que les
ditz petitions purront estre deliveres a les Seigniors de vestre tressage
Counseill; lez que^x appellez a eux les Justices et autres gentz aprisez en
v^stre ley si besaigne y foit, aiant poair par auctoritee du dit Parliament, p^r
enter cy et la fest del Nativite de Seint Johan Baptiste prouohein avenir,
doier et terminer les dites petitions, et que Ycelle ensi terminez del advis et
assent suis ditz, pu^runi estre enactez, enrollez et mys de Record de mesme
vestre Parliament. La quell petition lev en mesme le Parliament et entenditz, del
advis et assentdes Seigniors Espirituelx and temporelx en le die Parliament
adonqes esteantz, fuit restonduz a icell en manner ensuant.

Le Roi le voet Et postea videlicet vicessimo sec^ndo die Junii tunc proxime
sequenti, omnes et singulae Petitiones quae Domino nostro Regi per Comunes
Parliamenti praedicti pro congruo remedio inde auctoritate ejusdem Parliamenti
habend. libertatae et exhibitae minimeque ante dissolutionnem Parliamenti
praedicti determinatae, fuerunt certis Dominis de Consilio Regis subscriptis,
videlicet carissimo Avunculo Regis, Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae, ac
venerabilibus patribus Johanni Archiepiscopo Ebor. Johanni Bathon et Wellen
Cancellario Angliae, and Willielmo Lincoln Episcopo, necnon et Radulpho
Cromwell Militi Thesaur. Angl. Waltero Hungerford Militi et Magistro Willielmo
Lyndwode Custodi privati figilli, Dom. Dom. Regis apud Westminster. in Camera
stellata preatextu auctoritatis praedictae aexhibitae fuerunt et libertatae,
qui quidem Domini appellatis sibi prius Justiciariis ac aliis peritis in lege,
tam communes quam spirituales Petitiones subscript. de petitionibus antedictis
coram eos legi fecerunt, easque auctoritate praed* in forma qua in indorsamento
earundem Petitionum continetur determinaverunt: quarum quidem petitionum
tenores una cum responsionibus earundem inferius hic sequuntur.

The like was enacted and done in the Exact Abridgement, p. 564, 584, 591.596.
Parliaments of 1 H. 6. n. 21. 4 H. 6. n. 21. 8 H. 6. n. 45. 8 H. 6. n. 69.
Since then the Lords at the Commons request, were thus au^horized to be Judges,
Answerers, Reformers of their Petitions and Grievances in Parliament, which
could not be there answered, redressed* during the Parliaments sitting, even
after those Parliaments determined; much more must they be the only proper
Judges, Answerers and Redressers of them in our Parliaments, whiles they
continued sitting; and those who are proper Judges of their Petitions and
Estates in Parliament, must by the self-same reason be admitted to be the
proper Judges of their persons likewise in all cases proper for Parliamentary
Conusance, maugre all pretenses to the contrary.

A Supplement to the Premises.
THe Principal scope of the Precedent Plea for the Lords and House of Peers,
being only to justify and ratify their ancient just Right to sit and vote in
all English Parliaments, and Great Councils or State and their Judicial
Authority in them, without the Commons, especially in Criminal Causes, then
only controverted, contradicted by Lilbourne, Overton, and their Disciples; I
reputed it both useful, and necessary to superadde thereto some memorable
Presidents in former ages (which no Vulgar writers of our English Parliaments
have remembered) of the Kings and Lords Proceedings, Judicature in Parliament in
Civil and Ecclesiastical Causes* of public and private concernment, as no way
heterogeneal, but homogeneal to my Theme, to make this Plea more complete, and
communicate some more knowledge of Parliamentary Affairs and Proceedings, both
to the Ignorant and Learned in this declining age wherein learning and learned
men of public spirits in all Professions, are so much decayed, and little
Visible Probability left of any speedy reparations of this inestimable loss,
for want of public encouragement; I shall proceed herein, only in a
Chronological Method, as I have done for the most part in the premises,
beginning with the ancientest president I meet with of this kind, and so
descending to succeeding ages.

About the year of Christ, 536 Our Galfridus Monumetensis, Hist. Regum. Brit.
l. 10. c. 1. to 14. Mat. Westminster. Flores Hist. An. 539. Speeds, Hist. p. 272.
famous British victorious King Arthur, by his Letters and Messengers summoned
all the Kings, Prelates, Dukes and Nobles subject to him, to meet at the City
of Caerleon on the feast of Pentecost* then to be new crowned, and settle the
peace and affairs of his Realms; whereupon there assembled at that time and
place thirteen Kings, three Archbishops, and many Princes, Dukes, Consuls,
Earls and LORDS (whose names are registered in Geoffry Monmouth) whiles they
were thus convened, there arrived twelve men, with letters from Lucius
Tiberius, procurator of the Roman Republic, demanding in high language, The
Tribute of Britain, which the Senate command King Arthur to pay, with the
arrears injuriously detained, because Julius Caesar had reserved it (upon his
conquest of Britain, and he with other Roman Emperors had long received it:
summoning him likewise to appear at Rome in August the year following, to
satisfy the Senate for the injuries done them, and submit to the sentence
their Justice should pronounce; or else denouncing war against him. This Letter
being publicly read before all the Kings, Princes, Dukes and Nobles present;
the King consulted with them, craving their unanimous advise and sense
concerning this business; affirming, That this Tribute was exacted, ex
irrationabili causa) against all reason; for he demanded it to be paid as due,
because it was paid to Julius Caesar, and his successors, who invited by the
devisions of the old Britains arrived with an Army in Britain, and By force
and violence subjected the Country to their power, shaken with domestic
commotions. Now because they obtained it in this manner, vectigal ex eo injuste
receperunt; therefore they unjustly received tribute out of it. Nihil enim quod
vi and violentia acquiritur, just ab ^llo possidetur, qui violentiam intulit:
irrationabilem ergo causam prae^endit qua nos jure sibi tribitarios arbitratur.
For nothing which is acquired by force and violence, is justly possessed by any
man who has offered the violence. Therefore he pretends An irrationable cause
whereby he reputes us to be Tributaries to him, etc. The whole Council upon
debate fully assented to this opinion, and promised the King their assistance
against the Romans in this cause. Whereup^n King Arthur returned this answer,
That he would by no m^ans render them tribute, neither would he submit himself
to their judgment concerning it, nor repare to Rome, etc. An express
resolution. That Conquest by war, force, and violence, is no good, just, nor
lawful, but an unlawful and unjust Title to any Tributes or Possessions, which
these who now pretend they are Conquerors, and us a mere conquered Nation, and
therefore they may impose what Taxes, Excises Tributes, Laws, Executions they
please upon us (when as they were only raised, waged commissioned, to defend,
preserve our Laws, Liberties, King, Parliament, and Kingdoms, not to conquer
or enslave them) may do well to consider.

In the year of our Lord, 799. Evidentiae Eccles. Can^. Col. 2212.
King Kenulfus, upon the petition and complaint of Athelardus Archbishop of
Canterbury, consentientibus, EPISCOPIS ET PRINCIPIBUS MEIS, assembled in a
Parliamentary Council, restored four parcels of Lands to Christ-Church in
Canterbury, which King Offa heretofore had taken from this Church, and
conferred on his Officers.

Evidenti^ Eccles. Cant. Col^ 2212, 2213. Spelmanni Council. p 3^^, 319.
Kenulfus King of Mercia, calling a Provincial Council held at Cloveshe, Anno
Dom. 800. wherein all the Bishops, Dukes, Abbots, and Nobles of every order
were assembled, complaint was made therein, that after the death of Archbishop
Cuthhert, Verheb and Osbert, led by a malignant spirit, stole away the
evidences and writings of the Monastery of Cotham, and all the Lands thereunto
belonging, given by King Athelbald to our Saviors Church in Canterbury, and
brought them to Kenulfus King of the West Saxons, who thereupon converted the
said Monastery and Lands to his own use. After which ^regwin and Jambert
Archbishops of Canterbury, complained of this injury done to the Church in
sundry Councils, both to King Kenulfus, and Offa King of Mercia, who took from
Kenulfus the Monastery of Cotham, with many other Lands, and Towns, and
subjected them to the Realm of Mercia. At last Kenulfus induced by late
repentance, restored the evidences and writings of the said Monastery, together
with a great sum of money to the said Church, to prevent the danger of an
excommunication, but King Offa, as he received the said Monastery without
writings, so he retained them during his life, and left them to descend to his
heirs without any evidence after his death; whereupon Athelardus the
Archbishop, and other wise men of Christ-Church, brought these Evidences and
Writing touching Gotham into this Council of Clovesho; where when they had been
publicly read; OMNIUM VOCE DECRETUM EST, that it was just the Metropoliticall
Church should be restored to the said Monastery, of which she had been
unjustly spoiled for so long a time. Athelardus receiving also in this Council
the dignities and possessions which King Offa had taken from Jamber^; annuente
ipso Rege, as Act^ Pontif. Cant. Col. 1642.
Gervasius records.

In Mat. Westminster Anno ^97. Will. Malmesburi de Gestis Pontif. l. 1. c. 4.
Spelmanni. Council. p. 320 to 326. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 27. to 30.
a Council held at Clovesho, Anno 813. Upon complaint of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Archbishopric of Litchfield was dissolved, and the
Bishoprics annexed to it by King Offa taken from the Sea of Canterbury,
restored and reunited thereunto, by the consent of King Kenulfus, his Bishops,
Dukes, and Nobles, (who writ a Letter to Pope Leo for that purpose) unanimo
consilio totius sanctae Synodi. And in this Council also, other lands were
restored to the Bishop of Worcester, and other controversies between Bishops
concerning their Lands and Limits decided.

Evidentiae Eccles. Christi Cantuar. Col. 1213, 2214. Spelmanni Conc. p. 332,
333, 334.
In another Council at Clovesho, Anno 821. Wherein King Kenulfus, Wulfred,
Archbishop of Canterbury, with the rest of the Bishops, Abbots, LORDS, and
GREAT MEN, as well Ecclesiastical as secular were present; inquiry was made,
whether any were unjustly spoiled and deprived of their rights? Whereupon it
was showed, that Archbishop Wulfred was unjustly deprived of his just Lordship
and Jurisdiction near six years space, and forced under pain of confiscation of
his goods and banishment, to convey three hundred Hydes of Land to him, upon
condition that he should be restored to his full Archiepiscopal authority;
which condition was not performed. After the Kings death, Abbess Kenedrytha,
his daughter and heir, was summoned to this Council, where the Archbishop
complained of the injuries done to himself, and Christ-Church in Canterbury by
her Father, requiring reparations for them from the Abbess, if it were just.
Whereupon ALL THE COUNCIL held it just, and DECREED BY AN UNANIMOUS DECREE,
that all the Lands and things taken away from the Archbishop by her Father,
should be restored, together with the profits thereof lost for so long a
space, as also all the Books and Writings, by the Abbess being heir to the
King, which was accordingly performed by her.

Ingulphi Historia p. 858, 859, to 863. Spelman. Council. p. 344, etc.
King Bertulfus, Anno 850. Holding a Great Council, with the Prelates and
Nobles of the whole Realm of Mercia, upon the complaint of Siward, and the
Monks of Croyland, of certain injuries maliciously done unto them by their
adversaries, in violating the Bounds and Privileges of their Sanctuary, to the
great prejudice of their Abbey: Thereupon the King, Prelates and Nobles in this
Council for redress of this injury, prescribed a Perambulation of their Bounds
to be made by the Sheriff of the County, and to certify the same unto them
when made; which was accordingly made, certified to, and confirmed by THE KING,
PRELATES and NOBLES in the Council, held by them at Kingsbury, in the year,
851. (as you may read at large in Ingulphus) upon the petition of Abbot Siward.

After the death of Ingulphi Hist. p. 889. Malmesb. de Gestis regum l. 2. c.
4.9. Mat. Westminster. Wigorniensis Hunrondin, Houeden, Fox. Acts and Monuments, Vol.
1. p. 203, 204, 205. The third part of my seasonable and legal Vindication, p.
131, to 138.
King Edgar, Anno 975. there being a great difference between the Nobles of the
Realm about electing a new King; some of them siding with Ethelred, others
with Edward, his two Sons, all the Bishops, Abbots, and NOBLES assembled in a
great Parliamentary Council to debate and determine their rights and titles to
the Crown. Wherein they elected and crowned Edward the elder Brother King. In
this Council, and two or three more succeeding it at Winchester and Calne; the
married Priests complained TO THE LORDS, that they were unjustly expelled out
of their Churches by the Monks, and their prevailing party during King Edgars
Reign, to their dishonor, and the great injury of the Nation, desiring that
the Monks might be ejected, and they restored to their Churches they anciently
enjoyed: about which there were great contests and disputes in sundry Councils,
the King and LORDS inclining to restore them, against Archbishop Dunstans, and
other Monkish Prelates wills.

About the year 982. There was a Seldens Titles of Honor, part. 2. c. 5. p.
693.
Witenagem^t, or Parliamentary Council held at London, to which the DUKES,
PRINCES and NOBLES resorting from all parts; Adelwold Bishop of Winchester
complained, that one Leofsi, who had purchased Lands of him in the Isle of Ely,
not only refused to pay for them, but also disseised him of three other
Manors. The cause being opened and pleaded by the Bishop, and the Lawyers
flocking thither from all parts: They ALL ADJUDGED, that the Lands and Manors
should be restored to the Bishop, together with all his damages, and that
Leofsi for this his rapine should also pay a fine and ransom to the King.

Co^roni Pesthuma. p. 346.
Queen Edgen in a civil cause and suit in the County Court between her and
Goda, appealed from that Court to King Ethelred, and a Parliamentary Council at
London, Congregatis Principibus and sapientibus Angliae. In the time of St.
Edward, a suit between the Bishops of Winchester and Durham, coram Principibus
et Episcopis Regni in praesentia Regis, ventilata and finita est. In the tenth
year of King William the Conqueror, Episcopi, Comites et Barons Regni regia
potestate ediversis Provincis ad universalem Synodum pro causis audiendis et
tractandis convocati sunt, Florentius Wigorniensis, p. 3^2. Houeden, p 433.
Mat. West.
as the Ledger Book of Westminster records. Hence I suppose it was, that what we
now call a Parliament, was sometimes styled by our ancient Historians in former
ages MAGNUM PLACITUM because of the great Pleas and suits therein decided, and
judged BY THE KING and LORDS.

Florentius Wigorniensis, Anno 1070. p. 434, 435, 436, 437. Radulfus de Diceto.
Abbrevi. Chron. col. 482, 483. Sim. Du^elmensis, de gestis Reg. Ang. col. 202,
203. Mat. Paris Anno 1078. p. 80 Gudwin in the life of Ulstan.
King William the first, Anno 1071. held a great Council of his PRELATES and
NOBLES at Winchester. In hoc Concili^ dum caeteri trepidi, ut pote Regis
aegn^scentes animum, ne suis honoribus privarentur venerandus Vir Wulstanus,
Wigorniensis Episcopus, quamplures possessiones sui Episcopatus ab Aldredo
Archiepiscopo du^ a Wigorniensi Ecclesia ad Eboracensem transferretur sua
potentia retentas qui eo tunc defuncto in Regiam potestatem devenerant,
constanter proclamabat, JUSTITIAMQUE INDE FIERI, tam AB IPSIS QUI CONCILIO
PRAEERANT, quam a Rege FLAGITABAT. At quia Eboracensis Ecclesia non habens
Pastorem qui pro ea loqueretur, muta erat, JUDICATUM EST, ut ipsa querela sic
remaneret quousque Archiepiscopo ibi constituto qui Ecclesiam defenderet) dum
esset qui ejus querelae responderet, and objectes and responsis posset
ebiden^us et Iustius Iudicium fieri, sicque tunc a querela ad tempus remansit.
But Thomas being soon after consecrated Archbishop of York, thereupon
reverendi Wulstani Wigorniensis Episcopi mota est iterum querela, Archiepiscopo
jam consecrato Thoma, qui pro Eboracensi loqueretur Ecclesia; and in Concilio
in loco qui vocatur Pedreda, celebrato coram Rege ac Doroberniae A^chiepiscopo
Lanfranco, and Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus and Primatibus totius Regni, Dei
gratia adminieulante Termina^um. Cunctis siquidem machinationibus, non veritate
stipatis, qu^bus Thomas, ejusque fautores Wigorniensem Ecclesiam deprimere, and
Eboracensi Ecclesiae subj^cere aniliamque facere modis omnibus satagebant,
justo Dei judicio in scriptis evidentissim is detritis and penitus
annihillatis, non solum vir Dei Wulstanus proclamatas and expetitas
possessiones accepit, sed and suam Ecclesiam (Deo clamante and Rege concedente)
ea liberate liberam suscepit qua primi fundatores ejus, sanctus Rex
Ethelredus, Offa, etc. ipsam liberaverunt. By which History it is apparent,
that the King and Lords in that age had the sole judicature in civil causes in
the Parliaments then held, and decided civil Titles and controversies therein
between Bishops and spiritual, as well as temporal persons.

In the year-Book of 21 Ed. 3. fol. 60. There is a recital, that upon the
complaint of the Abbot of St. Edmonds de Bery against the Bishop of Norwich for
infringing the liberties of the Abbey, in the Reign of William the Conqueror,
in a Parliament held under him; (most likely in this Council of Pedreda) it was
ordained per le R^y, et per Larchebesque de Canterbury, et per touts les Auters
Ebesques de la terre, Countes et Barons (without mentioning any Commons) that
at what time soever hereafter the Bishop or any of his successors should go
against the points of the foundation or exemption of the said Abbey, that he who
should be Bishop for the time, should pay to the King or his heirs thirty
talents of gold. The Bishop of Norwich in 21. E. 3. contrary to the Kings
prohibition, not to enter the franchises, nor entrench upon the Privileges of
the said Abbey against this ancient ordinance, visited in the foresaid Abbey, and
summoned them to show the Charters of their foundation, wrongfully, and in
despite of our Lord the King. Whereupon the King sued forth a writ of contempt
against the Bishop; to which the Bishop appearing by his Attorney, pleaded not
guilty; whereupon he was found guilty by inquest: upon which it was awarded,
that his temporalties should be seized into the hands of the King, by force
whereof his temporalties were seized, and a Scire facias issued against the
Bishop to appear before the Chancellor, to show cause why he should not
likewise pay the thirty talents to the King* according to this ordinance. To
which the Bishop pleaded, that the Bishop at the time of this ordinance made,
might charge himself with these Talents, but not his successors in perpetuity,
neither does it appear that the Bishop himself was present in Parliament, when
this Ordinance was made, and the other Bishops had no power to charge him or
his successors without his consent. But because it was done by ordinance made
in Parliament, and there of record, it was adjudged it should bind him and his
successors, and that he should pay the thirty talents of gold to the King,
and that the King himself shall set the price of them, be it more or less.

Eadme^us Hist. Nou. l. 1. p. 9. Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 702. Antiquitates
Ecclesiae, Brit. p. 97. Will. Malmesbury de Gestis Pont. Angl. l. 1. p. 214.
Odo Bishop of Bayon, Earl of Kent, brother to William the Conqueror, by his
great power and favor about the year 1071. Non modo terras, sed and libertates
Ecclesiae Cantuariensis, nullo ei resistente multipliciter invaserat,
oppresserat, tenebat, before Lanfranc his investiture in this See. Lanfranc
being made Archbishop, and informed of this rapine, complained thereof to the
King; whereupon King William, Anno 1074. Praecepit Rex, quatenus adunatis
PRIMORIBUS, and probis viris, non solum de comitatu Cantiae, sed and de aliis
Comitatibus Angliae, querelae Lanfranci in medium ducerentur, examinarentur,
determinarentur. Disposito itaque apud Pinnedene Principum Conbentu Galfridus
Episcopus Constantiensis, ( Vir ea tempestate praedives in Anglia) Vice Regis
Lanfranco justitiam de suis querelis strenuissime facere jussus, fecit:
Lanfrancus enim valida ratione subnixus Ex Communi omnium Astipulatione et
Iudicio, ibi cuncta recuperavit, quae ostensa sunt antiquitus ad jura Ecclesiae
Christi Cantuariensis pertinuisse, tam in terris, quam in diversis
consuetudinibus; he there recovering no less than five and twenty Manors,
besides smaller Farms and parcels of Lands which Odo and others had seized
upon in several Counties, and restoring them to the Church, in this Assembly.
Actus Pontif. Cantuar. Col. 1655.
Gervasius Doroberniensis, writes thus of it. In Congregatione illa Famosa
Nobilium Angliae and Seniorum quae ex praecepto Regis facta est apud Pinendene,
dirationavit Lanfrancus and recuperavit terras ablatas, libertates and
consuetudines revocavit; Et sicut Rex tenet libere consuetudines sibi debitas
in terris suis, ita Archiepiscopus and Ecclesia Cantuariensis in omnibus locis
tenent homines, suas consuetudines, terras, jura, and libertates, secundum
cartas Regum. The whole Plea and Proceedings in this Parliamentary Assembly at
Pinendene are recorded in the Leiger-Book of the Church of Rochester, and
published by Mr. Seldom, ad Eadmerum and Notae and Spicilegium, p. 197, 198,
199. It continued three whole days: The Names of the Bishops, Nobles, and
BARONS present at it, are there recorded; and it concludes thus; Hujus placiti
multis testibus multisque rationibus determinatum finem post quam Rex audivit;
landavit, laudans, cum consensu omnium Principum suorum confirmabit, and ut
deinceps incorruptus perseveraret, firmiter praecepit; so that the King and
Nobles were the Judges in this great Plea and controversy, and both adjudged
and perpetually ratified what was therein adjudged to the Church of Canterbury,
both in Lands, Customs, Liberties.

Hist. Noverimus, l. 1. p 9, 10.
Eadmerus writes, that at another time, Odo by the Kings permission, placitum
instituit contra saepefatam Ecclesiam, and tutorem ejus patrem Lanfrancum, and
illuc omnes quos peritiores legum, and usuum Anglici regni gnarus adduxit; Cum
igitur ad ventilationem causarum ventum esset, omnes qui tuendis Ecclesiae
causis quaque convenerant in primo congressu ita convicti sunt, ut in quo eas
tuerentur simul amitterent: Lanfranc being then absent, and not using to be
present at such Pleas, nisi necessitas summa urgeret, being at his study, and
informed of this evil success, was nothing dejected at it, sed dicta
adversariorum non recte processisse asseruit, and ideo cuncta in chrastinum
induciari praecepit. Placitum mane ipsemet hilaris intrat, suas itaque causas
quodam exordio quasi a rebus quae tractatae fuerant vel tractandae penitus
alieno* cunctis stupentibus orsus, ita processit, ut quae super eum pridie
dicta fuerunt sic devinceret and inania esse monstraret, ut donec Vitae
presenti superfuit, nullus exurgeret qui inde contra eum os aperiret,

In the year Will. Malmesburiensis de Gestis Pontif. l. 1. in La franco Antiqu.
Eccl. Brit. p. 9^, 95.
1072. There falling out a difference at Rome between the two Archbishops,
Lanfranc of Canterbury, and Thomas of York, about the subjection which Lanfranc
demanded of this Thomas and his Church of York to the Sea of Canterbury, and
Pope Alexander the xj. quia consuetudinibus, and privilegiis ac privatis
Episcopatus institutis certius, quam jure scripto definiri posse videbatur;
decretum est a Papa, ut a Rege et Regni Proceribus Dijudicaretur. Whereupon the
King, Bishops, Abbots and Nobles assembling together in Windsor Castle,
determined this controversy between them, against the Archbishop of York, and
made a final DECREE therein, at the Feast of Pentecost, ratified with the
subscriptions of the King, Queen, both the Archbishops, all the Bishops, and
sundry Abbots; recorded at large in William of Malmesbury; and Antiquitates
Ecclesiae Brittannicae, where they who please may peruse it.

This Eadmerus Hist. Nov. l. 3. p. 117. Sim Dunelm. de Gest. Reg. Angl. Col.
237.
controversy about Primacy, subjection and canonical obedience, being
afterward renewed, and eagerly prosecuted between Anselme, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Thurstan of York, was again discussed and determined in a
Parliamentary Council at Salisbury by King Henry the first, the Bishops, Abbots
and Nobles of the whole Realm. As I have formely evidenced, p. 165, 166, 167.
Eadmerus Hist. Nov. l. 4. p. 91, 92.
After this there arising the like difference and contest between Archbishop
Anselme and Gerard of York about his oath of subjection and obedience to the
Archbishop and Church of Canterbury, Anno 1107. it was again resolved in
another Parliamentary Assembly held that year by King Henry the first, the
Bishops, Abbots, Great men and Nobles of the Realm, as you read before, p.
173. Anno 1109. there sprung up another ^ot contest between Archbishop
Anselme, and Thomas Elect of York, about the oath of subjection and canonical
obedience which was again debated: and Eadmerus l. 4. p. 101, 102, 103.
after Anselmes death again debated and finally settled in another Parliamentary
Council, by the King, Bishops, Nobles and Barons of the Realm, of which at
large before, p. 174, 175, 176, 177. The Eadmerus l. 6. p. 136.
same Debate coming again between Ralph, Archbishop of Canterbury and Thurstan
of York, after his return from Exile Anno 1121. was again concluded, omnium
Concilio Episcoporum, Principum and Procerum Regni, p. 180.

After many years intestine bloody wars between the perjured Usurper King
Stephen, Mawde, and Duke Henry her Son, for the Crown of England, Mat. Paris
Hist. Angl. p. 82. Gul. Neubrigensis, l. 1. c. 30. Houeden. Annal. part. 1. p.
490. Mat. Westminster. p. 42. Chron. Gervasis, Col. 1373, 1374. Sim Dunelmensis,
Hist. Col. 282. Chron. Iohannis Bromton, Col. 1238, 1039. See Polychronicon,
Fabian, Caxton Holinshed, Grafton, Speed. Baker in the life of King Stephen.
Anno 1153. apud Walingford in conventu Episcoporum et aliorum Regni Optimatum,
there was a final accord made between Stephen and Henry, touching the
inheritance and descent of the Crown, that Stephen should adopt and constitute
Henry for his son, heir, and successor to the Crown of England immediately
after his death, which Stephen should enjoy during his life, yet so, as that
Henry should be chief Justice and Ruler of the Kingdom under him. This accord
made between them by the Prelates, Earls, and Barons of the Realm, was
ratified by King Stephens Charter, and subscribed by all the Bishops, Earls
and Barons in their Parliamentary Council at Walingford.

Roger de Houeden Annal. pars posterior p. 546, 547.
The difference and suit between King Henry the 2d. and Roderic King of Conact
in Ireland, touching his Kingship, Royalties, Dominions, Services, Homage,
Loyalty, and Tribute to King Henry, were heard, decided and a final agreement
made between them in a great Parliamentary COUNCIL held at Windeshores, Anno
1175. wherein King Henry the 2d. and his Son, with the Archbishops, Bishops,
Earls and Barons of England (without any Commons) were present, who made and
subscribed this agreement, recorded at large in Houeden where you may peruse it.

Houeden Annal. part. poster. p. ^60
King Henry the 2d. Anno 1177. Celebrato generali CONCILIO apud Northampton
after the feast of St. Hilary (by the advice of his Nobles) restored to Robert
Earl of Leicester, all his Lands on this side and beyond the Sea, as he had
them fifteen days before the War, except the Castles of Mounsorel and Pasci.
He likewise therein restored to Hugh Earl of Chester all the lands which he
had fifteen days before the war, and gave to William de Abbine Son of
William Earl of Arundel in the County of Southsex. And in the same Council
Deane Guido resigned into the hand of Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, the
deanery of Walteham, and all his right which he had in the Church of Walteham,
quietum clamavit simpliciter and absolute; similiter fecerunt canonici
seculares de Walteham, de praebendis suis, resignantes eas in manis
Archiepiscopi, sed Dominus Rex dedit eis inde plenariam recompensationem, ad
Domini Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi aestimationem. Deinde Dominus Rex
authoritate Papae Domini, instituit in eadem Ecclesia de Walteham, canonicos
regulares de diversis domibus Angliae sumptos, and constituit Walterum de
Garent, canonicum sumptum de Ecclesia de Osencie, Abbatem primum super
congregationem illam, and magnis redditibus, and domibus pulcherrimis dotavit
illos. And then he expelled the Nuns out of the Monastery of Ambresbury, for
their incontinency, and distributed them into other Nunneries, there to be
kept more strictly under restraint, and gave the Abbey of Ambresbury to the
Abbess and house of Frum Everoit, to hold it for ever.

Roger de Houeden Annal. pars p^st^r. p. 522, to 566. Mat. Paris. p. 12^. Mr.
Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 706.
Sanctius King of Navar, and Alfonso King of Castile, in the year 1177.
submitted the differences between them concerning certain Lands, Territories,
Towns and Castles, to the determination of King Henry the 2d. who thereupon
summoned a Parliamentary Council of his Bishops, Earls, Nobles and Barons, to
hear and decide it by their advice: Wherein the case being propounded, debated
and opened before them by the Ambassadors and Advocates of both Kings;
appeared to be this. That King Sanctius during the minority of King Alphonsus,
an Orphant, his Nephew, Pupil, and innocent from any crime, unjustly and
forcedly took from him without any demand, hearing or Title, diverse
Territories, Towns and Lands there specified, which his Ancestors had enjoyed,
and of right descended to him, which he forcibly detained; Whereof he
demanded restitution and damages. On the other side, Sanctius complained, that
Alphonsus the Emperor, Father of this Alphonsus, had by force of arms,
unjustly dispossessed his Grandfather of the Kingdom of Navarre, after whose
death Garsias his Nephew, and next heir by the help of his friends and subjects
recovered the greatest part thereof from the Emperor, but not all. Who dying,
leaving his Son Alphonso an infant, with whom Sanctius made a league for ten
years; Alphonso during the League took by force of arms, diverse Castles, Towns
and Lands from Sanctius, being his inheritance; who thereupon demanded
restitution both of the Castles, Towns, Lands, and Territories taken from his
Grandfather by Alphonsus his Father, and from himself by Alphonsus, together
with the maine profit of the latter, quia sine ordine judiciario ejectus est;
King Henry having fully heard their cases; by the Advice and Assent of his
Bishops, Earls and Barons, adjudged, that both these Kings should make mutual
restitution, of what had been forcibly taken from either party, together with
the mean profits and damages for part of them, by an award and judgment under
his Great Seal, subscribed by all his Bishops, Earls and Barons, which
recites: super quaerelis vero praetaxatis de castellis and terris, cum omnibus
terris and pertinentis suis hinc inde violenter et injuste ablatis; cum nichil
contra Violentiam utrinque objectam a part alterutra alteri responderetur, nec
quicquam quo minus restitutiones quas petebant faciendas essent, alligaretur
Plenariam utrinque parti supradictorum quae in jure petita erant fieri
restitutionem adjudicabimus. A clear Parliamentary resolution and judgment in
point, That Territories, Lands, Towns, Castles injuriously taken by one King
from another by force of arms and war, without just Title to them, ought in
Law and Justice to be restored to the right heirs and owners of them, and that
Conquest, and the longest Sword, are no good Titles in Law or conscience
against the right heir or inheriter; which I desire those Swordmen and
Lawyers, who now pretend us a conquered Nation, determine Conquest, or the
longest Sword, a just Title to the Crowns, Lands, Revenues, Offices,
Inheritances, Houses, Estates of other men now sadly to consider, together with
the sacred Texts, Hab. 7. Micha 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Job 20.10, 18, 19, 20. Obad.
10. to 17. Ezekiel. chapter 19. and 35. Isa. 33.1. 1 King. 21.1. to 25. Matthew. 21.33,
to 41. Luke 20.14, to 17. chapter 19.8. Judge. 17.2, 3, 4. Exodus 22.1, to 16. Levit.
6.4, 5. chapter 24.17, to 22. chapter 25.27, 28. Judge. 11.12, 13. 1 Samuel 12.3, 4. 2 Samuel 9.7. chapter 12.5, 6. chapter 19.9, to 43. 1 Samuel 7.13, 14. 2 King. 14.22. Ezra
1.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. chapter 6.5. which warrant the judgment and restitution they
then awarded, together with this memorable Act of resumption of the Crown,
Lands, Rents and Revenewes alienated and given away by King Stephen to many
Lords and Soldiers, to maintain his usurped Title, to be just.

Chronicon Johannis Bromton, Col. 1046. Gul. Neubrigensis, Hist. Angl. l. 2. c.
2. See D^niel and Holinshed.
King Henry the 2d. Anno 1155. Praecepit eacum omni integritate infra tempus
certum a quibuscunque dete^toribus resignari, and in jus statumque pristinum
revocari. Quidam vero indies car^as quas a Rege Stephano, vel extorserant, vel
obsequiis emerant, qu^bus tuti forent, protulerunt; pleading them in bar
against the Kings resumption. Qu^bus fuit a Rege responsum (and let those who
have purchased or gotten any of the Crown Lands, Rents, Revenewes, by gift, or
otherwise, now remember it) Quod car^ae Inbasoris praejudicium legitimo
Principi minime facere deberent. Primo ergo indignati, deinde territi and
consternati, aegre quidem, sed integre Usurpata, vel diu tanquam solido ^ure
detenta, omnia resignarunt; their Charters being all adjudged void eisdemque
instrumentis minime tuti esse potuerunt, as Nubrigensis and Brompton inform us.

The great and long suit between William de Stutevill and William de Moubray,
which had continued many years in the Kings Courts* concerning the Barony of
Moubray, was ended in a Parliamentary Council, by a final award there made
between them; that William de Stutevil should release all his right and claim
to the Barrony to William de Moubray, he giving him nine Knights fees, and
twelve pounds Annual Rent for this release, cumque super hoc diu certatum
esset, tandem (Anno 1200. the 2d. of King John's Reign) concilio Regni et
voluntate Regis, pax and finalis concordia facta est inter praedictos; Annalium
pars posterior p. 803 Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 707.
as Roger de Houeden relates, who records the agreement at large.

King Mat. Paris. p. 417, 433.
Henry the 3d. Anno 1236. in a Parliamentary Council held at York, Consilio
sultus Magnatum Regni, ended the controversy between himself and Alexander
King of Scots, touching the Lands King John had granted him by his Charter in
Northumberland, ratified by the subscriptions and assents of his Nobles,
Earls, and Barons, Anno 1237. Rex scripsit omnibus Magnatibus suis, to appear
before him and the Popes Legate at York de arduis negociis regnum contingentibus
tractaturis, where the difference between King Henry the 3d. and the King of
Scots, (summoned to be present at this Parliament) touching his Lands in
England, were finally determined, and a firm peace made between them; the King
of Scots being to receive three hundred pound lands a year in England, sine
castri constructione, homagiumque Regi Angliae faceret, and faedus inter eos
amicitiae sanciretur, and hoc se fideliter facturum Regi Angliae, and
conservaturum juraret. After this Mat. Paris. p. 666.667.
Anno 1244. King Henry summoning all the Bishops, Abbots, and lay Barons to
present all their military Services to him, marched with a great army to
New Castle against the Scots, who had fortified two Castles, harbored rebels
against the King, and made a peace with France against their former Covenant
and League: Where to avoid the effusion of Christian blood, which will cry to
God for vengeance, congregata Vniversitate Angliae Nobilium apud memoratum
castrum, tractatum est diligenter super tam arduo negotio, Concilio habito,
circa Assumptionem beatae Maria, dligentissim^, Wherein the NOBLES made an
agreement between the Kings of England and Scotland, Alexander King of Scots by
his special Charter (recorded in Matthew Paris) promising and swearing for him
and his Heirs, to King Henry, and his Heirs, quod in perpetuum bonam fidem eis
servabimus pariter and amorem, etc. Most of the Prelates, Earls and Barons of
Scotland, sealing the charter with their Seals, and swearing to observe it
inviolably, as well as their King.

In the Parliaments of 18, 20, 21, 31, and 33. Ed. 1. There were many Pleas and
Actions for Lands, Rents, and civil things as well as criminal, held before the
King in Parliament, and adjudged, resolved in these Parliaments by assent of
the King, and advice of the Lords, the Kings Judges and Council learned in the
Laws; there being a large Parchment Volume of them in the Tower of London,
where all may peruse them, some of them being also entered on the dorse of the
Clause Rolls of these years. Pasche 21. E. 1. Banco. Regis, Northumberland,
Rot. 34. John le Machon a Merchant, lent a great sum of money to Alexander
King of Scots, who dying, his Son and Successor refused upon petition to pay
it: Whereupon he appealed to the King of England for right, propter suum
supremum Dominium Scotiae: Thereupon the Sheriffs of Northumberland by the
Kings command, accompanied with four men of that County, went into Scotland to
the Scots King, and there personally summoned him, to appear in England before
the King of England, to answerr this Debt: After which all parties making
default at the day, the Merchant was amerced. The King of Scots afterward
appeared before the King, but at the first time refused to answer; at last he
desired respite to be given him that he might advise about it with his Council
of Scotland, promising to appear at the next Parliament, and then to give his
answer. And in Placit. coram Rege, Trin. 21. E. 1. Scotia, there is an Appeal
to the King of England between subjects of Scotland in a civil cause, tanquam
superiori regni Scotiae Domino. And Clauso 29. E. 1. dorso 10. there is a
letter of all the Nobles in Parliament to the Pope, de Jure Regis in regne
Scotia forecited, p. 127, 128. and Claus. 10. E. 3. dorso. 9. The King of Scots
is styled, Vassallus Domini Regis Anglia.

It appears by Claus. 5. E. 2. M. 30. that in a Parliament held at Stanford. 3.
E. 2. a business touching Merchandise, and a Robbery on the Sea was heard and
decided before the King and Lords in Parliament, between the Earl of Holland
(who sent over a Proctor about it) and others. Claus. 8. E. 2. m. 15. The
Petition of David Earl of Ascelos in Scotland; by the Kings command, was read
in full Parliament before the Prelates, Earls and Barons, that he might be
restored to his inheritance in Scotland, to which it was answered by all their
Assents, that his inheritance was forfeited by his Ancestors, for offenses by
them committed, etc. but yet the King would give him some other Lands for it.
In Claus. 12. E. 2. it appears, that the Popes Legate came into the Parliament,
and petitioned the King and Lords for a Legacy given by the Bishop of Durham,
Patriark of Jerusalem, lately dead: for which the King by assent of the Lords,
gave him remedy by a Writ out of the Chancery. Claus. 14. E. 2. m. 12. in the
Schedula; there is a Judgment in Parliament by King Lords and Council touching
the Abbey of Abingdon, and a composition formerly made between the Abbot, Prior
and monks thereof, reversed, nulled, because inconvenient, Claus. 14. E. 2. m.
17. dorso, there is a case concerning a reprisal brought by appeal out of the
Chancery into the Parliament before the King, Lords and Council, and there
heard and decided. And Claus. 15. E. 2. there are many cases and Writs touching
Reprises.

In the Parliament of 1. E. 3. there were many Judgments given in sundry civil
cases upon petitions; To the King and his Council, by the King Lords and
Council, extant in the bundle of Petitions, and Claus. Rolls of that year, and
those things that were proper for the Courts of Law and Chancery were referred
to them to be there ended, Claus. 1. E. 3. m. 1. Upon the petition of Alice
Gill, and Robert Carder to the King, Council, and Parliament, that they buying
Corn in Abevil in France to transport to London, it was arrested by the Baily
of St. Valeric to the value of one hundred pounds at the suit of Will de
Countepy of Crotye in Picardy, and delivered to him against their wills,
because the Ship of the said Will; was taken upon the Sea by the men of Bayon,
which ship the petitioners finding in the port of London had arrested by writ
out of the Chancery directed to the Sheriffs of London, until the said hundred
pounds was paid them by the Merchant; the King and Council ordered (upon their
petition) that the ship might not be discharged till the 100 l. was satisfied;
and that a Writ should be directed out of the Chancery to the Sheriffs of
London, to do Justice upon the contents in the Petition according to the Law of
Merchants. The like case of Reprise upon the Petition of Hugh Samson, is in 1.
E. 3. rot. 5. In Claus. 1. E. 3. part 1. m. 10. There is a Judgment given by
the Lords and Council for the Bishop of Durham, touching the Liberties and
Royalties of his Bishopric against the Kings revocation; where in sundry
Petitions and answers in former Parliament under King Edward the 2d. are
rehearsed, wherein he could have no right. Mem. 12. there is a Judgment given
by the Lords and Council in Parliament for the Bishop of York, his prisage and
preemption of wines next after the King in the Port of Hull, and in Claus. 1.
E. 3. P^. 2. m. 11. Claus. 4. E. 3. m. 9. remembered in the year Book of 6. E.
3. f. 50. So Claus. 2. E. 3. m. 20. in Schedula, there is Placitum in
Parliamento, before the King and his Council of the Dean and Chapter of
Litchfield, touching their Title to Camock, Claus. 14. E. 3. part 1. m. 41.
Upon the Petition of the Bishop of Carlisle, it was resolved by the Lords and
Council in that, and sundry other Parliaments in the Reign of this King and his
Father, non esse ^uri consonum, that Churches and other things spiritual
annexed to Archbishopricks and Bishoprics, should belong to the King and
Gardians of the temporalties, but to the Gardians of the spiritualties, and so
ordered accordingly; yea so was it resolved upon the Petition of the Bishop of
Winchester to the King and his Council in the Parliament of Claus. 1. E. 3.
rot. 9. dorso Where coram Rege et Magno Concilio concessum est et concordatum,
quod custod^s temporalium Episcopatus, non se intromittant amplius temporibus
vacationum hujusmodi fructibus Ecclesiarum, de Estanmer, and Hamoldan, annexed
to the Bishopric of Winchester.

An exact Abridgement. p. 30.
In the Parliament of 14. E. 3. Sir Geoffry Stantens case, upon his Petition to
the King and Lords in Parliament, the Justices of the Common Pleas came with
the record of his case, which had long depended before them in the Court of
Common Pleas, which being read and debated in the presence of all the LORDS,
Justices and others of the Kings Council (their assistants in this case of Law)
they resolved, that the Son being a stranger might aver, that his Father who
levied the fine, had nothing in the Lands; and that the Wife in this case could
not vouch her Husband. And thereupon a Writ under the great Seal was sent to
the Judges by the Lords order, to give judgment accordingly. Claus. 35. E. 3.
m. 40. A villain commits felony, and is attainted after that the Lord had
seized his goods, whereupon his goods were prized and seized on for the King,
notwithstanding the Lords seizure; upon a Petition in Parliament, It was
resolved by the Lords and Council, that it was just the goods should be
restored to the Lord, if they were not seized fraudulently to prevent the Kings
seizure of them. And a Writ of Restitution was thereupon awarded, per ipsum
Regem et per Petitionem in Parliamento.

An exact Abridgement. p. 123, 136, 137. to 213. to Walsingham. Hist. Angl. p.
332.
In the 6. year of King Richard the 2d. it was agreed between the Duke of
Lancaster, and the Scots in the Marches, that for the benefit of both parties*
ut ^de cater^ ipsi nee Anglici vexaren^ur per tot labores and expensas, sed
singulis annis certi utriusque gentis destinarentur ad Parliamentum Regni
utriusque, qui et injurias acceptas proferrent in medium, and emendas
acciparent secundum quantitatem damu^rum per Judicium Dominorum, (here the
Lords both in the Parliament of England and Scotland are made sole Judges of
injuries and damages done by Scots or English upon one another in the
Marches:) Quia vero Scoti ad Parliamentum Londoniis (Anno 1383.) supersederunt
venire juxta conductum, and insuper damna interim plura Borealibus
praesumpserunt infer, etc. decretum est per Parliamentum; ut frangenti fidem,
fides frangatur eidem. Et concessae sunt Borealibus commissiones congregandi
virtutem exercitus, and Scotis resistendi, and damna pro damnis inferendi,
quoties contingeret Scotos irrumpere, vel hostili m^re parts illas intrare*

In the An exact Abridgement. p. 417.
Parliament of 4. H. 4. n. 9. Upon the complaint of Sir Thomas Pomeroy and his
Lady against Sir Philip Courtney and others forcible entry into several Lands
and Manors in the Country of Devon. The King and Lords adjudged, that the said
Sir Thomas should enter into the said Manors and Lands, if his entry were
lawful, or bring his Assize, without all delays, at his election.

In An exact Abridgement. p. 430*
the Parliament of 5. H. 4. n. 41, 42, 43, 44. in a case concerning Manors,
and certain Lands in the County of Cornwall, between the Prince, and John
Cornwall, and the Countess of Huntington his wife, the King and Lords gave
Judgment, that the Prince should ^e restored to the said Manors and Lands
being parcels of the Dutchey of Cornwall, and that the Prince after seisin had,
should regrant them unto them, which was done accordingly in Parliament. An
exact Abridgemen^, p. 440.
In 6 H. 4* n. 28. Upon the Petition of the Prior of Coventry, the King
grants by Assent of the Bishops and Lords, that no man do break the head of
their Conduit, nor cast any filth into their water called Sherbou^n, on pain of
ten pound, and treble damages to the Prior.

In An exact Abridgement. p. 560.
the Parliament of 9. H. 5. n. 12. Upon long debates of the Lords and Justices,
it was resolved by them, that the Abbot of Ramsy should have no prohibition
against Walter Cook, parson of Somersham, who sued for Tithes of a Meadow
called Crowland Mead, in the hands of the Abbots Tenants.

In the An exact Abridgement. p. 577, 578.
great case of Precedence, between the Earl Marshall, and Earl of Warwick, in
the Parliament of 3. H. 6. n. 10, 11. etc. The Lords being to be Judges of the
same, suspended both of them from sitting in the house, till their case was
fully heard; and they all (voluntarily) swore on the Gospel, that they would
uprightly judge the case, leaving all affection.

In the An exact Abridgement, p. 610.
Parliament of 11. H. 6. n. 32, 33, 34, 35. Upon a Petition, the King and Lords
in Parliament, adjudged, the Dignity, Seigniory, Earldom of Arundel, and the
Castle and Lands thereunto belonging to John Earl of Arundel, who proved his
Title thereto by a deed of Entayle, against the Title of John Duke of Norfolck,
who laid claim thereunto. And in the Parliament of 39 H. 6. n. 10. to 33. An
exact Abridgement. p. 665, 666, 667
The claim of the Duke of York, and his Title to the Crown of England, against
the Title of King Henry the 6 th. was exhibited to the Lords in full
Parliament; the Lords upon consultation willed it to be read amongst them, but
not to be answered without the King. The Lords upon long consultation declared
this Title to the King, who willed them to call his Justices, Sergeants and
Attorney to answer the same. Who being called accordingly, utterly refused to
answer the same: Order thereupon was taken, That every Lord might therein
freely utter his conceit without any impeachment to him. In the end there were
five objections made against the Dukes Title, who put in an answer to every of
them; which done, the Lords upon debate, made this order and agreement between
the King and Duke. That the King should enjoy the Crown of England during his
life; and the Duke and his heirs to succeed after him. That the Duke and his
two sons should be sworn, by no means to shorten the days, or impair the
pre-eminence of the King during his life; That the said Duke from thenceforth
shall be reputed and styled to be, the very Heir apparent to the Crown, and
shall enjoy the same after the death or resignation of the said King. That the
said Duke shall have hereditaments allotted to him and his sons of the annual
value of ten thousand marks. That the compassing of the death of the said Duke
shall be Treason. That all the Bishops and Lords in full Parliament shall
swear to the Duke, and to his heirs in form aforesaid. That the said Duke and
his two sons shall swear to defend the Lords for this agreement. The King by
Assent of the Lords (without the Commons)) agrees to all the Ordinances and
accords aforesaid; and by the Assent of the Lords, utterly repealeth the
statute of intayle of the Crown made in 1. H. 4. so always as hereafter there
be no better Title proved, for the defeating of their Title and this agreement
by the King. After all which the said Duke, and the two Earls his sons came
into the Parliament Chamber before the King and LORDS, and swear to perform
the award aforesaid, with protestation, if the King for his part duly observed
the same, the which the King promised to do. All which was enrolled in the
Parliament Rolls. Lo here the Lords alone without the Commons, judge and make
an award between King Henry the 6th. and the Duke of York, in the highest point
of right and title that could come in question before them; even the right and
title to the Crown of England, then controverted and decided, the King and
Duke, both submitting and assenting to their award, and promising, swearing
mutually to perform it; which award when made* was confirmed by an Act passed
that Parliament, to which the Commons assented, as they did to other Acts and
Bills.

And here I cannot but take special notice of Gods admirable Providence and
retaliating Justice, in the translation of the Crown of England from one head,
family of the royal blood, to another, by blood, force, war, treason, and
countenance of the Authority of the temporal and spiritual LORDS and COMMONS in
Parliament, in the two most signal presidents of King Edward, and King Richard
the 2 d. which Cottoni Posthuma. p. 350.
some insist on, to prove the Commons Copartnership with the Lords in the power
of Judicature in our Parliaments, the Histories of whose Resignations of their
Regal Authority and subsequent depositions by Parliament, I shall truly relate.

Walsingham. Hist. Angl. p. 104, to 119. Fabian, Holinshed. Grafton, Speed.
Baker in Ed. 2.
Anno 1326. the 19. of Ed. 2d. Queen Isabel returning with her Son Prince
Edward, and some armed forces from beyond the Seas into England, most of the
Earls and Barons (out of hatred to the Spencers and King^ repaired to them,
and made up a very great army: The King thereupon proclaimed, that every man
should resist, oppose, kill them (except the Queen, Prince and Earl of Kent,
which they should take prisoners if they could) and neither hold any
correspondency with them, nor administer victuals, nor any other assistance to
them, under pain of forfeiting their bodies and estates. But they prevailing,
and the King being deserted by most, he fled into Wales for shelter: Whereupon
Proclamation was made in the Queens army every day, that the King should return
and receive his Kingdom again, if he would conform himself to his Leiges.
Quo non comparente Magnas^es Regni, Here^ordiae Concilium inje^unt, in quo
filius Regis Edwardus, factus est Cus^os Angliae communi Decreto: cui cuncti
tanquam Regni custodi fidelitatem fecerunt per fidei sacramentum. Deinde
Episcopum Norwicensem fecerunt Cancellarium, Episcopum vero Wintoniensem regni
Thesaururium statuerunt. Soon after the King himself, with most of his evil
Counselors were taken prisoners, being betrayed by the Welsh in whom they most
confided. Hagh Spencer, Simon Reding, Baldoik, and others of the Kings party
being executed at Hereford, Anno 1327. the King came to London about the feast
of Epiphany, where they were received with great joy and presents. Then they
held a Parliament wherein they all agreed, the King was unworthy of the Crown,
and fit to be deposed, for which end there were certain Articles drawn up
against him; which Adam de Orleton Bishop of Winchester thus relates, in his
Apology (i) Ea autem quae de Consilio et assensu omnium Praelatorum, Comitum et
Baronum, et totius Communitatis dicti Regni concordata and ordinata fuerunt
contra dictum regem ad amotionem suam a regimine regni, contenta sunt in
instrumentis publicis Reverendo patre domino J. Dei gratia nunc Cantuariensi
electo, tunc Wintoniensi Episcopo et Angliae Thesaurario, c^nceptis et
dictatis, and manu magistri Willielmi de Mees Clerici sui Secretarii and
publici Notari conscriptis et in publ^cam formam redactis. Quam quidem
concordiam ad mei excusationem duxi praesent bus inferendam, quae talis est.

Accord est, qe sire Edward fiz aisne du roy, ait le government del Roialme,
et soit rois Coronne par les Causes qe sensiwent:

1. Primerment, Pur ceo qe la person ly Roy nest pas suffisaunt de governer.
Car en touz son temps ad il este mean et govern par autres qe ly ount
mavoisement consaillez, a deshoneur de ly, et destruction de s^int Eglise, et
de tout son people, saunz ceo qe il le vousist veer ou conustre le quel il sust
bon ou mavoys, ou remedy mettre, ou fair le vousist quant il fuist r^quis par
les graunts et sages de s^n Roialme, ou suffrir qe amend fuist faite.

2. Item Par tout son temp, (...) se voloit doner a bon consail no le croire,
ne a bon governeme^t de son Roialm, meys se ad done toux jours as ouraignes et
occupationes nient covenables, enter lessaunt lesploit des bosoignes de son
Roialme,

Item, Par defaute de bon government ad il perdu le* Roialme Descoce et autres
terres et seignuries en Gascoygne and Hytland, les quex son pere li lessa en
pees and amiste ly Roy de France, et detz moults des autres graunts.

4. Item, Par sa fierte and qualte and par mavoys consail ad il destruit seint
Eglise, and les persons de seint Eglise tenuz en prisoun les uns, Et les
alires en destresce, et auxint ^lusours graunts et nobles de la terre mys a
hountose m^nt, enpris^nez, exul^tz and disheritez.

5. Item, La ou il est tenuz par son serement a fair droit a toux, il ne bad
pas volu fair, pur son propre prof^it et convetise de ly and de ces mavois
con^saili es ^e ount este pre^ de ly, Ne ad guard les autres pointz del
serement qil fist a son corounement, si com i^ feust tenuz.

6. Item, Il deguerpist son Royalme, et fist taunt come en ly fust qe son
Roialme and son po^ple fust perduz, and qe pys est, pur la crualte de ly and
defaute de sa person il est trove incorrigible sauntz esperaunce de
amendment: les quex chooses fount si notoires qil ne poount estre desdi^z*

The form and instrument of his deposition is thus recorded by Polychron, l. 7.
c. 43
Ranulp* Cistrensis, and De Event. Angl. l. 3. c. 15. col. 2549, 2550.
Henry de Knyghton: Also that year in the Octaves of Twelfth day was made a
Parliament at London: There BY ORDINANCE with a solemn message is sent to the
King that was in prison, 3 Bishops, 3 Earls, 3 Barons, 2 Abbots, 2 Justices,
for to resign to the King that was then in ward, the homage that was make to
him some time, for they would no longer have him for their Lord; One of them
Sir William Trussel Knight, Walsingham H^st. Angl. p. 328. to 402. Hall,
Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton, Stow, Speed, Baker, Trussel, Henry de Knyghton, and
others.
and PKOCURATOR OF ALL THE PARLIAMENT, spoke to the king in the name of all the
other, and said: I William Trussel in the name of all men of the land of
England, and of all the Parleament Procurator, I resign to thee Edward the
homage that was made to thee sometime. And from this time forthward now
following I defy thee, and pryve thee of all ryal power, and I shall never be
tendant to thee as for King after this time. Also this was openly cried at
London. The true form of his deprivation is thus recorded in the Chronicle of
Leycester, and transcribed out of it by Henry de Kryghton in French: Jeo
William Trussel Procurator dez Prelatez, Conrez, et Barons, et altrez Gentz en
ma procuracye nomes, Eyantal ceo ployne and suffysant pour, e^ Homages, et
Fealtez au vous Edward Roy Dengleterre come al Roy avaunt ces ^enres de par lez
ditz persons en ma procuracye nomes renk et rebaylle sus a vous Ed. et deliver
et face qui^ez lez persons avaunt ditz, en la me^l^our manner que ley et
custom donnent, E face protestacion en nom de eaux; qils ne voillent deformes
estre en vostre s^al^e, ne en vostre lyance, ne cleyment de vous come ^e Roy
^iens teni^. Encz vous teignent de ^horse priveye person sans nule manner de
^eale dignite. Cum haec Rex audisset, multum de fuis malefactis doluit, rugitus
et lamenta emittens, eo quod per falsos et proditiosos consiliarios sic omni
suo tempore ductus fuerat.

Hist. Angl. p. 107.
Thomas of Walsingham thus relates the proceeding. Convenit etiam illuc tota
regni Nobilitas citata per prius ad Parliamentum tenendum ibidem trastino dicti
^esti, ubi cuncti centuerunt regem indignum diademate, et propte^ plures
articulos deponendum, er Edwardum filium ejus primogenitum in regem unanimiter
eligendum. Quod etiam consequenter factum fuit, et electio in aul^ magna
Westmonasterii public divulgare, per quendam ex Magnatibus sapientem. Cui
electioni consensit populus universus. Archiepiscopus vero Cantuari^e praesenti
consensit electioni, ut omnes Praelati: and Archiepiscopus quidem assumpto
themate, vox populi, vox Dei; sermonem feci populo, exhortans omnes ut apud
regem regum intercederent pro electo. Facto sermon discessum es^* Ut autem
notuit Reginae filli^ni electio, et viri dejectio, plena dolor (ut foris
apparuit) sere mente alienata fuit. Edwardus quoque filius suus mate^no do^ori
compassus, juravit, quod invito patre nunquem susciperet coronam regni. Idcirco
communi decreto, ex part totius regni tres Episcopi duo Comite^ et duo
Abbates, et de quolibet Comitatu regnitre milites, ac etiam de Londoniis et
aliis civitatibus et magnis villis, ut praecipue de portubus, de qualibet
certus raimerus perso^arum missi sunt ad regem apud Kenelworth, qui nuncia^ent
electionem filii sui, et requirerent diligenter, quod renunciaret dignitati
regiae et coronae, et permitteret eundem filium suum regnare pro eo; alioquin
ipsi reddirent sibi homagia, et procederent in praetact^s. Rex autem ut haec
audivit, ^um stetu et ej^latu respondit; quod multum doluit de eo, quod sic
demeruit erga populum s^i regni; et ab omnibus qui aderant veniam precabatur.
Sed ex quo aliter el^e non potuit, gratias egit quod filium suum primogenitum
elegissent. Nuncii vero ad Parliamentum Londonias read untes cum regis respon^o
et insigniis, plebem laetam fecerunt, mox tota regni Communitas Edwardum
juvenem quatuordecim annos habentem, in regem promptissime admisserunt, et
vicessimum diem Ianuarii, diem primum regni sui esse decreverunt, et in omnibus
comitatibus pacem ejus proclamari fecerunt sub hac forma.

Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae; dominus Hiberniae, dux Aquitaniae, vicecomiti
de N. salutem. Quia Dominus Edwardus nupet Rex Angliae, pater noster, de
communi consilio et assensu Praelatorum, et Comitum, et Baronum, et aliorum
Magnatum nec non Communitatum totius regni praedicti, spontanea voluntate se
amovit a regimine dicti regni, volens et concedens, quod nos tanquam ipsius
primogenitus, et haeres ipsius, regni gubernation^m et regimen assumamus.
Nosque ipsius patris nostri beneplacito in hac part de Consilio et avisiamento
Praelatorum, Comitum et Baronum praedictorum annuens, gubernacula suscepimus
dicti regni, et fidelitates, et homagia ipsorum Praelat. et Magnat* recepimus
ut est moris. De sderantes igitur pacem nostram pro quiet et tranquillitate
populi nostri inviolabiliter observari, tibi praecipimus, quod statim vifis
praesentibus, per totam Ballivam tuam pacem nostram facias public proclamari,
universis et singulis ex part nostra inhibendo, sub poena et periculo
exhaeredationis et amissionis vitae et membrorum, ne quis dictam pacem nostram
inf^ingere seu violare praesumat, sed quilibet actiones and quaerelas absque
quacunque prosequatur, secundum leges et consdetudines regni nostri. Nos enim
parati sumus, er semper erimus omnibus er singulis conquerentibus tam divitibus
quam pauperibus in curiis nostris plenam justitiam exhibere. Test meipso, etc.
Calendas Febr. die dominica in vigilia purificationis.

The Proceedings and Articles against Rich. 2. and the manner of his
Resignation, Deposition being somewhat mistaken, and not so fully related in
our vulgar H^storians, I shall present you with the true Narration thereof out
of the Parliament Roll it self where it is thus at large recorded.

Rotulus Parliamenti Summoniti and tenti apud Westmonasterium in festo Sanctae
Fidis Virginis, anno regni Regis Henrici quarti post Conquestum primo, Membr.
20.

Les Record and process del renunciation du Roy Richard le Second apres le
conquest and del acceptance de mesme la renunciationi, ensemblement ove la
deposition de mesme le Roy Richard ensuent ^y apres.

MEmorand. Quod die Lunae in festo sancti Michaelis Archangeli Anno Regni Regis
Ricardi secundi 23, Domini Spirituales and Temporales, and aliae personae
notabiles: videlicet, Dominus Richardus le Scrop, Archiepiscopus Eboracensis,
Io. Episcopus Hereford, Hen. Comes Northumbr. and Radulfus Comes
Westmorelandiae, Dominus Hugo le Burnel, Tho. Dominus de Berkley, Prior
Cantuar. and Abbas Westmonasterii, Williel: Thyrninge Miles, and Johan. Markham
Justiciarii, Tho. Stow, and Johan. Burbache, Legum Doctores, Thom. de
Erpingham, and Tho. Gray Milites, Will. de Feryby, and Dionysius L^pham,
Notarii publici: de quorundam Dominorum Spiritualium, and Temporalium, ac
Justitiariorum and aliorum tam in Jure Civili and Canonico, quam in regni
legibus peritorum, apud Westmonast. in loco consueto Concilii congregatorum
assensu and avisamento ad actum subscriptum primitus deputati, ad praesentiam
dicti Regis Ricardi infra turrim London. existentis circiter nonam pulsationem
horologii accesserunt, and recitato coram eodem Rege per praedictum Comitem
Northumbr. vice omnium praedictorum, sibi ut premittitur adjunctorum, qualiter
idem rex alias apud Coneway in Northwallia, in sua liberate existens promisit
Domino Thomae Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi and dicto Comiti Northumbr. se velle
cedere, and renuntiare Coronae Angliae and Franciae, and suae regiae Majestati
ex causis per ipsum Regem ibidem de sua inhabilitate, and insufficientia
confessatis, and hoc meliori modo, and forma quibus facere poterit, prou^
peritorum consilium melius duxerit ordinandum. Idem rex coram dictis Dominis
and aliis superius nominatis, ad hoc benign respondens dixit, se velle cum
effectu perficere quod prius in ea part promisit. Desideravit tamen habere
colloquium cum Henrico Duce Lancastriae, and praefato Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi consanguineis suis, antequam promissum suum hujusmodi adimpleret.
Petivit tamen copiam cessionis per ipsum faciendae sibi tradi, ut super illa
possit interim deliberare; qua quidem copia sibi tradita, dicti Domini, and
alii ad sua hospitia recesserunt. Postea eadem die post prandium, dicto rege
plurimum affectante praedicti Ducis Lancastriae adventum, and illum diutius
praestolante, tandem idem Dux de Lancastria, Domini and personae superius
nominati, ac etiam dictus Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis venerunt ad praesentiam
dicti Regis in turri praedicta, Dominis de Roos, de Wiloghby, and de Abergeny,
and pluribus aliis runc ibidem praesentibus. Et postquam idem Rex cum dictis
Duce Lancastriae and Archiepiscopo colloquium habebat, ad partem vultu hilari
hinc inde inter eos exhibito, prout circumstantibus videbatur, tandem dictus
Rex accersitis ad eum omnibus ibidem praesentibus, dixit public coram illis,
quod paratus erat ad renuntiationem faciendam, and ad renuntiandum and cedendum
secundum promissionem per cum ut praemittitur factum; Sieque incontinenti,
licet potuisset ut sibi dicebatur ab aliis cessionem and renuntiationem in
quadam schedula pargameni redactam per aliquem deputatum organum vocis suae
fecisse, pro labor tam prolixo lecturae vitando, Idem tamen Rex gratanter, ut
apparuit, ac hilari vultu schedulam illam manu sua tenens, dixit, semetipsum
velle legere, and distinct prelegit eandem. Necnon absolvit ligeos suos,
renuntiavit, and cessit, and juravit, and alia dixit, and protulit in legendo
and le subscripsit m^nu sua propria, prout before continetur in dicta
schedula, cujus tenor talis est.

IN NOMINE DEI, Amen. Ego Rich. Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, and
Dominus Hiberniae, omnium dictorum Regnorum, and Domini^rum Archiepiscopos,
Episcopos, and alios quoscunque Ecclesiarum Secularium, vel Regularium
Praelatos cujuscunque dignitatis, gradus, status, seu conditionis existant;
Duces, Marchiones, Comites, Barons, Vasallos, and Valvassor^s, and Ligeos
homines meos quoscunq ecclesiasticos, vel seculares quocunque nomine
censeantur, a juramento fidelitatis and homagii, and aliis quibuscunque michi
factis, omnique vinculo ligeantiae, and Regaliae, ac Dominii quibus obligati
mihi fuerint, vel sint, vel alias quomodolibet adstricti, absolvo; Et eos, and
haeredes ipsorum, and successores in perpetuum, ab iisdem obligationibus, and
juramentis, and aliis quibuscunque libero, relaxo, and quieto, and liberos,
solutos and quietos ac immunes, quantum ad personam meam attinet, dimitto, ad
effectum omnem juris qui ex praemissis sequi poterit, seu aliquo praemissorum,
omnique Regia dignitati, ac majestati, and Coronae, neonon Domini^, and
potestati dictorum Regnorum, and Dominii: aliisque Dominiis and possessionibus
meis, seu mihi quomodolibet pertinentibus, seu competentibus quibuscunque,
quocunque nomine censeantur infra Regna, and Dominia praedicta, vel alibi
ubilibet constitutis, Omnique juri, and colori juris, ac titulo, possessioni ac
dominio quae unquam habui, habeo, seu quovismodo habere potero, in iisdem, seu
eorum aliquo, vel ad ea cum su^s juribus and pertinentiis universis, seu
dependentibus qualitercunque ab eisdem, vel eorum aliquo, Necnon regimini, and
gubernationi dictorum Regnorum and Dominiorum hujusmodi, and eorum
administrationi, omnibusque and omnimodis mero and mixto imperio, ac
jurisdictioni in iisdem regnis, and Dominiis mihi competentibus, vel
competituris, nominique, honori, ac Regaliae, and Celeitudini Regiis, pure,
sponte, simpliciter, and absolute, melioribus modo, via, and forma quibus
poterit in his scriptis renuntio, and ea in totum resigno, acre, and verbo
demitto, and iisdem cedo, and ab iisdem recedo in perpetuum. Salvis
successoribus meis regibus Angliae in Regnis, and Dominiis, and ^aeteris
omnibus praemissis in perpet^um, juribus in iisdem, seu eorum aliquo
competentibus, vel competituris quibuscunque. Meque ad regimen, and
gubernationem dictorum Regnorum, ac Dominiorum cum suis p^rtinentiis universis
fateor, recognosco, reputo, and veraciter, ex certa scientia judico fuisse, and
esse insufficientem penitus, and inutilem, ac propter mea demerita notoria non
immerito deponendum. Et juro ad haec sancta Dei evangelia, per me corporaliter
tacta, quod nunquam praemissis resignationi, renuntiationi dimissioni, and
cessioni contraveniam, seu ea quomodolibet impugnabo facto, vel verbo, per me,
vel per alium, vel per alios, seu contraveniri, vel impugnari permittam quantum
in me est public vel occulte; sed easdem renuntiationem, resignationem,
dimissionem, and cessionem in perpetuum ratas and gratas habebo, and firmiter
tenebo, and observabo in toto, and omni sui part, sicut Deus me adjuvet, and
haec sancta Dei Evangelia.

Ego Richardus Rex antedictus propria mea manu hic me subscribo. Et statim idem
Rex renuntiationi, and cessioni praedictis, verbo tenus adjunxit; quod si esset
in potestate sua, dictus Dux Lancastriae succederet sibi in Regno; sed quia hoc
in potestate sua non dependebat ut dixit, dictos Eboracensem Archiepiscopum,
and Episcopum Herefordensem, quos protunc constituit suos procuratores ad
declarandum, and intimandum cessionem, and renuntiationem hujusmodi omnibus
statibus dicti regni, rogavit ut intentionem, and voluntatem suam in ^a part
populo nuntiarent, and in signum suae voluntatis, and intentionis hujusmodi,
annulum auri de signeto suo, patenter de digito suo tunc ibidem extraxit, and
digito dicti Ducis Lancastriae apposuit, Desiderans hoc ipsum ut asseruit,
omnibus regni statibus innotesci. Quo facto, valefacientes hinc inde omnes
turrim praedictam exieruntad sua hospicia reversuri.

In crastino autem, videlicet in die Martis in festo Sancti Hieronymi in magna
aula apud West monasterium in loco ad Parliamentum tenendum honorifice
praeparato, dictis Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi and Eboracensi, ac Duce
Lancastriae, aliisque Ducibus, ac Dominis tam Spiritualibus quam Temporalibus
quorum nomina describuntur inferius, populoque dicti regni tunc ibidem propter
factum Parliamenti in magna multitudine congregato praesentibus; ac praefato
Duce Lancastriae locum statui suo debitum, and solitum occupante, ac sede
regali cum pannis auri solempniter praeparata, tunc vacua absque presidente
quocunque, supradictis Archiepiscopus Eboracensis suo and dicti Herefordensis
Episcopi nomine juxta dicti Regis injunctum cessionem and renuntiationem per
ipsum sic fuisse ut praemittitur factam, etiam cum subscriptione regiae manus,
and traditione signeti sui public declaravit, eandemque cessionem, and
renuntiationem per alium, primo in Latinis verbis, postea in Anglicis legi
fecit ibidem; and statim, ut fuerat interrogatum a statibus and populo ibidem
praesentibus, primo videlicet ab Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi praedicto, cui
ratione dignitatis and praerogativae ecclesiae suae Cantuariae Metropoliticae,
in hac part competit primam vocem habere inter caeteros Praelatos and Proceres
regni, si pro eorum interesse, and utilitate regni vellent renunciationem, and
cessionem hujusmodi admittere: statusque iidem, and populos reputantes ex
causis per ipsum Regem in sua renunciatione, and cessione praedictis
significatis, hoc fore multum expediens, renuntiationem, and cessionem
hujusmodi singuli singillatim, and in communi cum populo unanimiter* and
concorditer admiserunt. Post quam quidem admissionem fuerat public ibidem tunc
expositum, quod ultra cessionem and renunciationem hujusmodi ut praefertur
admissam, valde forer expediens, ac utile regno praedicto, pro omni scrupulo,
and sinistra suspicione tollendis, quod plurima crimina, and defectus per
dictum regem circa malum regimen regni sui frequentius perpetrata, per modum
articulorum in scriptis redacta, propter quae ut idem asseruit, in cessione
facta per eum, esset ipse merito deponendus, public legerentur, quodque essent
populo declarata. Sicque maxima pars articulorum illorum erat public perfecta
tunc ibidem; quorum omnium articulorum tenor talis est.

Sequitur forma juramenti soliti and consueti praestari per Reges Angliae in
eorum Coronatione, quod Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis ab eisdem regibus exigere
and recipere consuevit, prout in libris pontificalium Archiepiscoporum and
Episcoporum before continetur.

Quod quidem juramentum Ricardus Rex Angliae post Conquestum secundus in
Coronatione sua praestitit, and ab Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi erat receptum;
and illud idem juramentum dictus Rex postmodum iteravit, prout in rotulis
Cancellariae before reperiri poterit de recordo.

Servabis ecclesiae Dei, and populo pacem ex integro and concordiam in Deo
secundum vires tuas. Respondebit, Servabo. Facies fieri in omnibus judiciis
tuis aequam and rectam justiciam and discretionem in misericordia and veritate
secundum vires tuas. Respondebit, Faciam. Concedis justas leges and
consuetudines esse tenendas, and promittis per te esse protegendas, and ad
honorem dei corroborandas quas vulgus elegerit, secundum vires tuas.
Respondebit, Concedo and promitto.

Adjicianturque praedictis interrogationibus quae justa fuerint;
Praenunciatisque omnibus confirmet Rex, se omnia servaturum Sacramento super
altar praestito coram cunctis.

Inprimis, Objicitur Regi Richardo quod propter malum regimen suum, videlicet
bona and possessiones ad Coronam suam spectantia, etiam personis indignis
donando, and indiscrete dissipando, and ob hoc collectas, and alia onera gravia
and importabilia populo sine causa imponendo, necnon alia mala innumerabilia
perpetrando, alias de assensu, and mandato suis per totum Parliamentum ad
gubernationem regni certi Praelati, and alii Domini temporales erant electi,
and assignati, qui totis viribus suis circa justam gubernationem regni propriis
sumptibus suis fideliter laborarent; tamen Rex facto per eum Conventiculo cum
suis complicibus, dictos Dominos tam Spirituales quam Temporales circa Regni
utilitatem occupatos de alta proditione impetere proponebat, ac Justitiarios
Regni ad suum nefandum propositum corroborandum metu mortis, and cruciatus
corporis violenter attraxit, dictos Dominos destruere satagendo.

2 Item, Idem Rex nuper apud Salopiam coram se, ac aliis sibi faventibus venire
fecit quamplures, and majorem partem Justitiariorum cameraliter, and eos per
minas* and terrores varios, ac etiam metus qui possunt cadere in constantes,
induxit, fecit, and compulit sigillatim, ad respondendum certis quaestionibus
pro part ipsius Regis factis ibidem tangentibus leges regni sui, praeter, and
contra voluntatem eorum, and aliter quam respondissent, si fuissent in
liberate sua, and non coacti* Quarum Responsionum color idem Rex proposuit
processisse postmodum ad destructionem Thoma Ducis Gloucestria, and Comitum
Arundel, and Warwick ac aliorum Dominorum, contra quorum facta and gesta
praedictus Rex erat quamplurimum indignatus, maxim quia desiderabant eundem
Regem esse sub bono regimine. Sed divino nutu obstante, resistentia and
potentia dictorum Dominorum Rex propositum suum hujusmodi perducere non potuit
ad affectum.

3 Item, Cum Domini Temporales ejus malitiae ac dolositati seipsos defendendo
restitissent, dictus Rex diem Parliamenti sui pro justitia eis, and aliis
Regni-colis in hac part ministranda praefixisser, dictique Domini Temporales
in suis domibus sub spe and fiducia Parliamenti praedicti quiet, ac pacifice
resedissent: Rex clanculo Ducem Hiberniae cum suis litteris, and vexillo ad
parts Cestriae destinavit, ibique nonnullas gentes ad arma commovit, and
contra dictos Dominos, and magnates Regni, and Reipublicae servitores insurgere
fecit, vexillum eius contra pacem per cum juratam public erigendo; unde
homicidia, captivitates, dissentiones, and alia mala infinita in totum regnum
secuta fuerunt quare perjuriam incurrebat.

4 Item, Licet dictus Rex omnem offensam dictis Duci Gloucestriae, and
Comitibus Arundel, and Warwick, and omnibus aliis sibi in hujusmodi factis
assistentibus, and aliis in pleno Parliamento de assensu ejusdem perdonasset
pacisque and amores signa per plures annos ei^dem Duci, and Comitibus, and
aliis vultum hilarem and benignum exhibuisset; Idem tamen Rex semper and
continue fell in cord gerens, tandem opportunitate captata dictum Ducem
Gloucestriae ipsius Regis avunculum, necnon bonae memoriae Edwardi nuper Regis
Anglia filium, and Conestabularium Angliae dicto Domino Regi cum pro cessione
solempni humiliter occurrentem, dictosque Comites Arundell and Warwick capi,
and arestari fecit, and ipsum Ducem extra regnum Angliae usque ad Villam
Calesiae duci fecit, and ibidem incarcerari, and sub custodia Comitis
Nottingham unius ipsum Ducem appellantium detineri, and sine responsione and
processu quocunque legitimo occulte suffocari, strangulari,, and murdrari
inhumaniter, and crudeliter fecit, Comitemque Arundel, tam carram de dicta
perdonatione generali, quam cartam perdonationis postea sibi concessam
allegantem, and justitiam sibi fieri petentem, in Parliamento suo, viris
armatis, and sagittariis innumeris vallato, per impressionem populi per eum ad
hoc collecti dampnabiliter decapitari fecit; Comitemque Warwick, and Dominum de
Cobham perpecuis carceribus mancipavit, eorum terras, and tehementa, tam in
feodo simplici quam in feodo talliato de se and haeredibus suis contra
justitiam and leges regni sui and juramentum suum expressum nequiter
confiscando, and eorum appellantibus concedendo.

5 Item, Tempore quo idem Rex, in Parliamento suo fecit adjudicari Ducem
Gloucestriae, and Comites Arundell, and Warwick, ut liberius possit exercere
crudelitatem in eosdem, and voluntatem fuam injuriosam in aliis adimpler^, sibi
attraxit multitudinem magi^am malefactorum de Comitatu Cestriae, quorum quidam
cum Rege transeuntes per regnum, tam infra hos pitium Regis, quam extra ligeos
regni crudeliter occiderunt, and quosdam verberaverun^ vulneraverunt, and
depraederunt bona populi, and pro suis victualibus solvere recusarunt, and
uxores, and alias mulieres rapuerunt, and violaverunt, and licet super eorum
hujusmodi excessibus graves querimoniae deferebantur ad audientiam dicti Domini
Regis, idem tamen Rex super hiis justitiam, seu remedium facere non curavit,
sed favebat iisdem gentibus in maleficiis eorundem, confidens in eis, and eorum
praefidio contra quoscunque alios regni sui, propter quod fideles regni sui
magnam commotionis and indignationis materiam habuerunt.

6 Item, Licet dictus Rex per brevia sua proclamari fecerit per totum regnum
suum, quod Avunculum suum Ducem Gloucestriae, and Comites Arundell and Warwick
capi fecerit, and arrestari, non pro aliquibus congregationibus, and
equitationibus per eos infra regnum. Anglia factis, sed pro quampluribus
extortionibus oppressionibus and aliis contra Regaliam suam, and Regiam
Majestatem postmodum factis and perpetraris per cos, quodque non erat
intentionis ipsius regis quod aliquis de familia praedictorum Ducis
Gloucestriae, ad Comitum Arundell, and Warwick seu eorum qui in comitiva seu
tempore congregationis, and equitationis praedictarum fuit, ea occasion
molestetur aliqualiter, seu gravetur: Idem tamen Rex tandem in Parliamento suo
dictos Dominos non pro extortionibus, oppressionibus aut aliis praedictis
impetiit, sed pro congregationibus and equitationibus supradiotis eos
adjudioavit ad mortem, and quamplures de familia eorudem Dominorum, and aliorum
qui in comitiva sua tempore congregationis, and equitationis fuerunt, metu
mortis compulit fines and redemptiones facere, ut pote traditores, vel
proditores, ad gravem destructionem quamplurium hominum de populo suo. Sicque
dictos Dominos and eorum familiares hujusmodi and populum regni sui callide,
fraudulenter and malitiose decepit.

7 Item, Postquam quamplures de personis illis facientibus fines and
redemptiones hujusmodi impetraverunt a Rege literas s^s patentes pardonationis
plenariae in praemissis, nullum commodum ex hujusmodi literis perdonationis
poterant reportare, donec novos fines, and Redemptiones pro eorum vita
conservanda fecislent, unde fuerant quamplurimum depa^perati; pro quo nomini,
and statui Regis fuerat plurimum derogatum.

8 Item, In Parliamento ultimo tento apud Salopiam idem Rex proponens opprimere
populum suum procuravit subtiliter* and fecit concedi quod potestas Parliamenti
de consensu omnium Statuum Regni sui remaneret apud quasdam personas, ad
terminandum dissoluto Parliamento certas petitiones in eodem Parliamento
porrectas, protunc minime expeditas; Cujus concessionis color personae sic
deputatae processerunt ad alia generaliter Parliamentum illud tangentia, and
hoc de voluntate Regis, in derogationem Status Parliamenti, and in magnum
incommodum totius regni, and pernitiosum exemplum. Et ut super factis eorum
hujusmodi aliqualem colorem and authoritatem viderentur habere, Rex fecit
Rotulos Parliamenti, pro voto suo mutari and deleri, contra effectum
concessionis praedictae.

9 Item, Non obstante quod dictus Rex in Coronatione sua juraverit, quod fieri
faceret in omnibus judiciis suis aequam and rectam justitiam and discretionem
in miscricordia and veritate secundum vires suas: dictus tamen Rex absque omni
misericordia rigor^se inter caetera statuit, and ordinavit sub gravibus poenis,
quod pro Henrico Duce Lancastriae relegato, pro aliqua gratia sibi facienda
nulius rogaret, aut intercederet apud eundem Regem; In quo facto idem Rex
contra charitatis vinculum operabatur, juramentum praedictum temere violando.

10 Item, Quamvis Corona ^egni Angliae at jura ejusdem Coronae, ipsumque regnum
^int ab omni tempore re^acto adeo libera, ut dominus summus Ponti^ex, nec
aliquis alius extra regnum se intromittere debeat de iisdem: tamen praefatus
Rex ad reborationem statutorum suorum erreneorum supplicavit Domino Papae, quod
statuta in ultimo Parliamento suo ordinata confirmaret, super quo Dominus Rex
literas Apostolicas impetravit, in quibus graves censurae proferuntur contra
quoscunque qui dictis statutis in aliquo contravenire p^aesumpserint. Quae
omnia contra Coronam, and dignitatem regiam, ac contra statuta, and libertates
dicti regni tendere dinoscuntur.

11 Item, Licet Dominus Henricus nunc Dux Lancastriae billam suam, statum and
honorem Regis concernentem ad ipsius Regis mandatum contra Ducem Nor fulci^
proposuit, and eandem fuisset debite prosecutus, adeo quod juxta Regis
ordinationem se ad duellum in omnibus paratum exhibuisset, prae^atusque Rex
ipsum nunc Ducem Lancastriae, debitum suum in hac part honorifice quantum in
ipso fuerat implevisse pronuntiasset, and declarasset per decretum, and hoc
coram toto populo ad duellum hujusmodi congregato fuisset public proclamatum*
Idem tamen Rex praedictum nunc Ducem Lancastriae, sine quacunque causa legitima
ad decennium exlegari fecit and mandavit, contra omnem justitiam, and leges,
and consuetudines regni sui ac jura militaria in ^ac part, perjurium
dampna^ilitet incurrendo.

12 Item, Postquam dictus Rex gratiose concessit per literas suas patentes
Domino Henrico nunc Duci Lancastria, quod in ipsius absentia dum fuerat
exlegatus generales atturnati sui possent prosequi pro liberatione sibi
facienda de quibuscunque haereditatibus, sive successionibus ipsum extunc
contingentibus, and quod homagium suum respectuari deberet pro quodam fine
rationabili faciendo, literas illas patentes injuriose revocavit, contra leges
terrae perjurium incurrendo.

13 Item, Non obstante quod statuum erat, quod singulis annis Officiarii Regis
cum Justitiariis, and aliis de Consilio Regis Vicecomites per omnes comitatus
regni eligant, and nominarent Domino Regi secundum quod eorum discretioni, and
conscientiae pro bono, and utilitate regni videbitur expedire: Idem Rex non
nominatos aut electos hujusmodi, sed alios pro suo libitu voluntatis, quandoque
suos familiares, quandoque tales quos scivit nolle resistere voluntati suae in
Vicecomites fieri mandavit pro suo and aliorum commodo singulari, ad magnum
gravaraen populi sui, and contra leges regni sui, perjurium notorie incurrendo.

14 Item, Tempore illo quo Rex praedictus petivit, and habuit a quampluribus
Dominis and aliis de regno plures pecuniarum summas ex causa mutui, certo
termino solvendas, Non obstante quod idem Rex per singulas literas suas
patentes promisit bona fide singulis personis a quibus mutuo recepit pecunias
illas, quod eis limitato termino praedicto resolveret hujusmodi pecunias
mutuatas; promissionem suam hujusmodi non adimplevit, nec de pecuniis illis est
hactenus satisfactum, unde creditores hujusmodi valde gravantur, and non tam
illi, quamplures alii de regno regem reputant infidelem.

15 Item, Ubi Rex Angliae de proventibus regni sui, and patrimonio ad Coronam
suam spectante possit honest vivere absque oppressione populi sui, dummodo
regnum non esset guerrarum dispendio oneratum. Idem Rex quasi toto tempore suo
durantibus treugis inter Regnum Angliae, and adversarios ejus, non solum magnam
immo maximam partem dicti patrimonir sui donavit etiam personis indignis, verum
etiam propterea tot onera concessionis subditis imposuit quasi annis singulis
in Regno suo, quod valde and mimium excessive populum suum oppressit, in
depauperationem regni sui, ea bona sic levata, non ad commodum and uti itatem
regni Angliae convertendo, sed ad nominis sui ostentationem, and pompam, and
vanam gloriam prodige dissipando, and pro victualibus hospitu sui, and aliis
emprionibus suis maximae summae pecuniarum in regno suo debentur, licet
divitiis and thesauris plusquam aliquis progenitorum suorum de quo recolitur
abundavit.

16 Item, Idem Rex ^olens justas leges and consuetudi^es regni sui servate, seu
protegere, sed secundum suae arbitrium voluntatis facere quicquid desideriis
ejus occurreret, quandoque and frequentius quando sibi expositae and declaratae
fuerant leges regni sui per Justitiarios, and alios de Concilio suo, and
secundum leges illas petentibus justitiam exhiberet, dixit express vultu
austero, and protervo, quod leges suae erant in ore suo, and aliquotiens in
pectore suo, and quod ipse solus possit mutare, and condere leges regni sui;
and opinione illa seductus quampluribus de ligeis suis justitiam fieri non
permisit, sed per minas and terrores quamplures a prosecutione communis
justitiae cessare coegit.

17 Item, Quod postquam in parliamento suo certa statuta erant edita, quae
semper ligarent donec authoritate alicujus alterius Parliamenti fuerint
specialiter revocata, Idem Rex cupiens tanta liberate gandere, quod nulla
hujusmodi statuta ipsum adeo ligarent quin posset facere, and exequi secundum
suae arbitrium voluntatis, prout non potuit, procuravit subtiliter talem
petitionem in parliamento suo pro part Communitatis regni sui porrigi, and
sibi concedi in genere, quod posset esse adeo liber sicut aliquis progenitorum
suorum extitit ante eum, quarum petitionis and concessionis color frequentius
mandavit, and fecit idem Rex quamplura fieri contra statutae hujusmodi minime
revocata; veniendo express and s^ienter contra juramentum suum in coronatione
sua praestitum ut praefertur, prout inferius declaratur.

18 Item, Licet statutum fuit and ordinatum quod nullus Vicecomes officium suum
occuparet continue ultra annum unum, sed trienulum laberetur antequam ad
officium illud admitteretur de novo; Idem Rex Richardus quandoque pro suo
commodo singulari, and quandoque ad prosecutionem aliorum pro eorum commodo and
utilitate, quosdam Vicecomites stare* and remanere permisit and fecit in eorum
officiis continue aliquotiens per biennium, and aliquotiens per triennium,
contra tenorem and effectum statuti praedicti, perjurium incurrendo; and hoc
est notorium, pub^cum, and ^amosum.

19 Item, Licet de statuto, and consuetudine regni sui in convocatione
cujuslibet Parliamenti populus suus in singulis comitatibus regni debeat esse
liber ad eligendum and deputandum milites pro hujusmodi comitatibus ad
interessendum Parliamento, Nota.
and ad exponendum eorum gravamina, and ad prosequendum pro remediis superinde
prout eis videretur expedire; tamen praefatus Rex ut in Parliamentis suis
liberius consequi valeat suae temerariae voluntatis effectum, direxit mandata
sua frequentius Vicecomitibus suis, ut certas personas per ipsum Regem
nominatas ut milites comitatuum venire faciant ad Parliamenta sua, quos quidem
milites eidem Regi faventes inducere poterat, prout frequentius fecit,
quandoque per minas varias, and terrores, and quandoque per munera, ad
consentiendum illis quae regno fuerant praejudicialia and populo quamplurimum
onerosa; and specialiter ad concedendum eidem Regni subsidium lanarum ad
terminum vitae suae, and aliud subsidium ad certos annos, suum populum nimium
opprimendo.

20 Item, Idem Rex ut liberius adimplere, and sequi posset in singulis suae
arbitrium voluntatis, illicite fecit, and mandavit, quod Vicecomites per totum
regnum suum, ultra antiquum and solitum juramentum jurarent quod omnibus
mandatis suis, sub magno, and privato sigillo suis, ac etiam literis sub
signeto suo quotiescunque eis directae fuerint, obedirent, and in casu quo
iidem Vicecomites scire poterant aliquos de ballivis suis, cujuscunque
conditionis fuerint, aliquod malum dicere sive loqui public, vel o^^dite, quod
^edire possit in dedecus, aut scandalum personae re^iae^ ipsus arestarent vel
arestari facerent, and prisonae mancipari, in eadem salvo custodiendos donec
aliud a Rege habuerint in mandatis, prout reperiri poterit de record^. Quod
quidem factum posset verisimiliter tendere ad destructionem quorumcunque
ligeutum dicti regni.

21 Item, Idem Rex nitens subpeditare populum suum, and bona sua subtiliter
sibi adquirere ut divitiis superfluis habundaret, induci fecit populum de xvij.
comitatibus regni ad submittendum se Regi tanquam proditores per literas sub
figillis eorum, cujus color obticuit magnas summas pecuniarum sibi concedi per
clerum and populum comitatuum eorundem pro benevolentia Regis captanda. Et
quamvis ad placendum populo idem Rex fecerat eis restitui literas illas
obligatorias, tamen procuratores ipsius populi babentes plenatiam potestatem
eis concessam ad obligandum se and haeredes suos dicto Regi, idem Rex fecit
obligari sibi sub sigillis eorum nomine ejusdem populi; sicque decepit populum
suum, and bona eorum subtiliter extorquebat ab eis.

22 Item, Quamvis idem Rex in coronatione sua juraverit de servando libertates
ecclesiae, Anglioana concessas* tamen dictus Rex ratione viagii sui in terram,
Hiberniae faciendi quampluribus viris religiosis videlicet. Abbatibus and
Prioribus regni sui per literas ejus districte praecipiendo mandavit, ut eorum
aliqui certos equos, and aliqui eorundem non solum equos, sed etiam quadrigas
sive charectas, alioquin magnas pecuniarum summas eidem Regi pro dicto viagio
suo transmitte^^nt in eisdem literis expressatas, per quem modum scribendi
plures hujusmodi Religiosos metu ductos artavit ad complendum voluntatem and
praeceptum ipsius Regis, uni^e gravite^ depauperati fuerant and oppressi in
derogationem libertatis ecclesiasticae manifestam, Cujus prae^ dictus Rex
Ricardiu perjuritu^ incurrebat.

23. Item, In pluribus magnis ^oncilius reg^ quando Domini regni, Justiciarii
and alii one^ati fuerant ut fideliter consulerent Regi in tangentibus statum
suum and regni sui, iidem Domini Justiciarii and alii frequentius in dando
consilium juxta discretionem suam fuerant per Regem subito and tam acriter
increpati and reprobati, quod non essent ausi dicere pro statu Regis and regni
in consiliis suis dandis veritatem.

24 Item, Thesaurum coronas Feliquias and alia ^ocaliu videlicet bona regni,
quae ab antiquo dimissa fuerant in archivis regni pro honor Regis and
conservatione regnisui in omnem eventum, praefatus Rex exiens regnum suum
versus Hiberniam, abstulit and secum deferri fecit sine consensu statuum regni,
unde regnum illud fuisset valde depauperatum nisi de recaptione bonorum
hujusmodi contra voluntatem dicti Regis Deus aliter providisset; and praeterea
rotulus recordorum statum and gubernationem regni sui tangentium praedictus Rex
deleri and abradi fecit in magnum praejudicium populi and exhaeredationem
Coronae regni praedicti, and ut verisimiliter creditur in favorem and
sustentationem sui mali regiminis.

25 Item, Idem Rex consuevit quasi continue esse adeo variabilis, and
dissimilans in verbis, and in scripturis suis, and omnino contrarius sibi ipsi
and specialiter in scribendo Papae and Regibus and aliis Dominis extra regnum,
and infra ac etiam and aliis subditis ejus, quod quam nullus vivens habens
notitiam suae conditionis hujusmodi poterit aut velit de eo confidere, ymmo
reputatui adeo infidelis and inconstans, quod cedit ad scandalum non solum
personae suae, set etiam torius regni, and potissime apud extraneos totius
orbis inde no^tiam optinentes.

26 Item, Licet terrae and tenementa, bona and catalla cujuscunque liberi
hominis per leges regni ab omnibus retroactis temporibus usitatas capi non
debeant nisi fuerint forisfacta, nichilominus dictus Rex proponens and satagens
leges hujusmodi enervare, in praesentia quamplurium Dominorum and aliorum de
communitate regni frequenter dixit and affirmavit, quod vita cujuscunque li^
sui as ipsius terrae, nenomenta bona and catalla sunt ^ua ad voluntatem suam
absque aliqua foris actum. Quod est omnino contra leges and consuetudines regni
sui supradicti.

27 Item, Quamvis statutum fuerit and ordinatum, ac etiam hactenus confirmatum,
quod nullus liber homo capiatur, etc. nec quod aliq^ modo destruatur, nec quod
Rex supereum ibit nec super eum mitter, nisi per legale judicium parium suorum,
vel per legem terrae, tamen de voluntate, mandato and ordinatione dicti Regis,
quamplures ligeorum suorum malitiose accusati super eo, quod debuissent aliquid
dixisse public vel occulte quod cedere poterit ad vituperium, scandalum seu
dedecus personae dicti Regis, fuerant capti and imprisonati, and ducti coram
Constabulario, and Mateschallo Anglia in Curia militari, in qua Curia dicti
ligei accusati, ad aliud responsum admitti non poterant, nisi respondendo se in
nullo fore culpabiles, and per eorum corpora, and non aliter, se justificarent,
and defenderent, non obstante quod accusatores, and appellatores eorum essent
juvenes, fortes and sani, and illi accusati senes and impotentes, mutulati vel
infirmi; unde non solum destruction Dominorum and Magnatum regni, set etiam
omnium and singularum personarum communitatis ejusdem regni verisimiliter sequi
posset. Cum igitur Rex praedictus hujusmodi regni sui statuto voluntatie
contravenerit, non est dubium quin proinde perjurium incurrebat.

28. Item, Q^amvis populus regni Angliae vigore ligeanciae suae satis pleno
Regi suo teneatur, and astringatur ^^seque Rex populum suum si quovis modo
deliquerit, per leges and consuetudines regni sui corrigere valeat and punire;
ramen dictus Rex cupiens suppeditare, ac nimis opprimero popolum suum, ut
liberius exequi, and sequi valcret sua ^ptae and illicitae voluntatis
arbitrium, per literas suas ad omnes Comitatus regni sui direct indixit etiam
and mandavit, ut ligei sui quicunque tam Spirituales quam Temporales certa
juramenta praestarent in genere quae eis fuerant nimium onerosa, quaequa
verisimiliter causare possent destructionem finalem populi sui, and quod sub
literis and sigillis eorum juramenta hujusmodi roborarent. Cui quidem mandato
regio populus regni sui paruit and obedivit, ne ipsius indignationem incurreret
aut o^^eniam, ac etiam metu mortis.

29 Item, Cum parts in foro ecclesiastico, in causis mere Ecclesiasticis and
Spiritualibus litigantes, prohibitiones regias ad impediendum processum
legitimum in eisdem a Cancellario Angliae impetrare laborassent, and idem
Cancellarius ex justitia ad hoc rescribere recusasset; idem tamen Rex per
literas sub signeto suo judicibus ecclesiasticis hujusmodi frequenter districte
prohibuit, ne in causis hujusmodi procederent, libertates ecclesiasticas in
magna carta approbatas ad quas conservandas juratus extiterat, nequiter
infringendo, perjurium and sententiam ex communicationis contra hujusmodi
violatores a sanctis Patribus latam, dampnabiliter incurrendo.

30 Item, Dictus Rex Dominum Thomam de Arundell Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem,
totius Angliae Primatem, patrem suum Spiritualem, in Parliamento suo viris
armatis hostili more vallato tunc de callido Consilio dicti Regis se
absentantem, absque causa rationabili, seu legitima quacunque seu alio juris
processo contra leges regni sui per ipsum ut praefertur juratas, in exilium
perpetuum adjudicavit.

31 Item, Per inspectionem testamenti dicti Regis sub magno and privato
sigillis suis and signeto signati, inter caetera continetur haec clausula sive
articulus. ITEM volumus quod auri nostri residuum, solutis tamen nostrorum
hospicii, camerae, and garderobae veris debitis, ad quae persolvenda legamus
viginti milia libratum, reservatis, executoribus nostris quinque vel sex
milibus marcarum, quas pro uberiori sustentatione leprosorum ac capellanorum
eoram eis celebraturorum per nos apud Westmonast. and Bermonde^eyd ordinatorum,
volumus per dictos executores nostros expendi, nostro remaneat successori, dum
tamen omnia and singula statuta, ordinationes, stabilimenta and judicia in
Parliamento nostro decimo septimo die Mensis Septembr. anno Regni v^cesimo
primo apud Westmonast inchoato, and in eodem Parliamento ui que Salopiam
continuato and ibidem tento, facta, lata and reddita, necnon omnia ordinationes
and judicia ac stabilimenta decimo sexto die Septembr. anno regni vicesimo
secundo apud Coventriam postmodum apud Westmon; decimo octavo die Marcii anno
praedicto, auctoritate ejusdem Parliamenti facta, habita and reddita, ac etiam
omnia alia ordinationes and judicia quae autoritate ejusdem parliamenti in
futurum contigerit fieri, approbet, ratificet, and confirmet, teneat, and
teneri faciat, ac firmiter observet; alioquin si praedictus successor noster
praemissa facere nolu^rit, vel recusaverit, quod non credimus, volumus quod
Thomas Dux Surriae, Edwardus Dux Daumarle, Johannes Dux Exomae and Willielmus
Lescrop Comes Wilteshirae, solutis prius debitis nostrorum hospitii, camerae,
and garderobae, reservatis quinque vel sex milibus marcarum ut supra pro
hujusmodi itatutorum, stabilimentorum, ordinationum, and judiciorum
sustentatione, and defensione, secundum eorum posse, etiam usque ad mortem si
oporteat, residuum habeant and teneant memoratum; super quibus omnibus and
singulis eorum conscientiat prout su die judicii respondere voluerint oneramus.
Per quem quidem articulum satis constare poterit evidenter, quod idem Rex illa
statuta, and ordinationes, qu^ sunt erronea, and iniqua, and omni juri and
rationi repugriantia pertinaciter man^tenere, and defendere ^^tebatur, non tam
in vita quam su morte, nec de animae suae periculo, nec de dicti regni sui, seu
ligeorum suorum ultima destructione e^rando.

32 Item, Anno undecimo dicti Regis Richardi, idem Rex in capella mane^^ sui de
Langley, in presentia Ducum Lancastriae and Eborum, ac aliorum quamplurium
Dominorum personaliter constitutus, cupiens, ut apparuit, ut ejus avunculus Dux
Gloucestri^ tunc ibidem praesons de ipsius Regis beneplacito plene confideret
ad venerabile corporis Dominici Sacramentum ibidem super altar repositum sua
sponte juravit, quod eidem Duci Gloucestriae pro aliquibus factis ejus quae
contra personam ipsius Regis dicebantur esse commissa nunquam extunc inferret
dampnum aliquod vel gravamen, set omnem offensam illius, si qua fuerat,
hillariter, and ex integro sibi remisit. Postea tamen juramento hujusmodi non
obstante, dictus Rex praefatum Ducem pro sic praetensis offensis horribiliter
and crudeliter murdrari fecit, reatum perjurii dampnabiliter incurrendo.

33 Item, Postquam unus de militibus Comitatuum dicti regni, vocem habens little
in Parliamento, dictum Dominum Thomam Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem super certis
defectibus contra regiam majestatem, ut minus veraciter asserebatur commissis,
impetiit public coram Rege and omnibus statibus regni, Quamquam idem
Archiepiscopus statim tunc ibidem optulit se paratum ad respondendum hujusmodi
sibi impositis, and ad hoc petierit se admitti per Regem, satis plene confisus,
ut dixit, se posse suam in ea part innocentiam declarare, idem tamen Rex
machina^s viis and modis quibus poterat eundem Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem
opprimere and in nichilum redigere statum ejus, prout tandem rei exitus
declaravit, benign ac hillari vultu Archiepiscopum alloquens in sede sua
regali, consuluit and attente rogavit eundem Archiepiscopum, quod illa vice
taceret tempus ad hoc magis aptum and congruum expectando: Quo die lapso de die
in diem been per quinque dies and amplius Rex praefatus ipsum Archiepiscopum
fraudulenter and dolose decepit, consulens and suadeus quod non veniret ad
Parliamentum, set apud hospitium suum intrepidus expectaret, quoniam, ut idem
Rex fideliter sibi promisit, in ipsius Archiepiscopi absentia nullum sibi
dobelet inferri dispendium vel gravamen: Ver^tamen dictus Rex in suo
Parliamento praedicto ipsum Archiepiscopum ut praefertur absentem, ac ad
responsum suum nullo modo vocatum, absque quacunque causa rationabili
adjudicavit in exilium, ad ipsius Regis beneplacitum duraturum, omnia bona sua
contra leges regni ac omnem justiciam voluntary confiscando, cujus praetextu
perjurium incurrebat. Volens praeterea dictus Rex suam in ea part versutiam
palliare, per ipsius blanda colloquia cum dicto Archiepiscopo frequentius
habita, tantam sibi illatam injuriam a se prorsus excutere nitebatur, and ad
aliorum facta transfer; unde dictus Archiepiscopus habens cum eodem Rege and
cum Duce Norfolciae, and aliis Dominis and magnatibus dicti regni colloquium,
dixit aliqualiter lamentando, quod ipse non erat primus qui exilium pertulit,
nec erit novissimus, quia purabat quod infra breve dictus Dux Norfolciae and
alii Domini ipsum Archiepiscopum fequerentur, and constanter asseruit dicto
Regi quod omnium praemissorum asperitas in caput ipsius Regis debeat finaliter
retorqueri; Ad quod idem Rex vultu demisso acsi inde fuisset attonitus,
incontinenti respondit, quod been putabat illud accidere posse, quodque per
ligeos suos a regnosuo deberet expelli; Et ulterius dixit idem Rex, quod si
illud forsan acciderit, vellet ad locum ubi idem Archiepiscopus fuerit se
confer; Et ut dictus Archiepiscopus huic assertioni fidem adhiberet in
dubium, ostendit idem Rex Archiepiscopo memorato quoddam magnum auri monile
juxta fimbrium tunicae dicti Regis subtus vestem e^^^ exteriorem miro modo
firmatum, intimans eidem Archiepiscopo pro constanti, quod cum illud monile
sibi pro intersigno transmitteret, non differret illu^ venire ubi dictus
Archiepiscopus moraretur; Et ut idem Archiepiscopus majorem haberet materiam
confidendi in eo, misit ipse Rex praefato Archiepiscopo, consulens sibi quod
omnia jucalia sua and alia ad Capellam suamspectantia dicto Regi secret
transmitteret pro salva custodia eorundem, ne color dicti judicii super ipsius
exilio redditi quisquam ad bona praedicta manus injuriosas apponeret; Quo sub
maxima confidentia facto, praefatus Rex bona hujusmodi visa per eum in
quibusdam coffris reponi fecit, and costras illas ferari, ac per unum de
clericis ipsius Archiepiscopi sigillari. Retentisque penes illum hujusmodi
coffris, claves earum per eundem clericum Archiepiscopo memorato remisit; Et
postmodum coffras illas dicto Archiepiscopo hoc penitus ignorante frangi
mandavit, and debonis hujusmodi mox disposuit pro suae libito voluntatis.
Promisit etiam idem Rex fideliter dicto Archiepiscopo, quod si pararet se ad
portum de Hampton ut regnum exiret, saltem intercessione Reginae protinus
revocaret eundem, Et si contigerit ipsum Archiepiscopum regnum exire, citra
Pascha proximo extunc sequens sine falso rediret in Angliam, neque suum
Archiepiscopum amitteret ullo modo; and hoc fideliter promisit jurando super
crucem dudum sancti Thomae Martyris Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi per ipsum Regem
corporaliter tactam. Quibus promissionibus non obstantibus, idem Rex dictum
Archiepiscopum regnum exire coegit, and statim ad sedem Apostolicam pro ipsius
translatione transmisit literas speciales, sicque and alias per frauds and
dolositates dicti Regis erat idem Archiepiscopus ut homo bonae fidei callide
circumventus.

Et quoniam videbatur omnibus statibus Regni superinde singillatim ac eciam
communiter interrogatis* quod illae causae criminum and defectuum erant satis
sufficientes and notoriae ad deponendum eundem Regem, attenta eciam sua
confessione super ipsius insufficientia and aliis in dicta renunciatione and
cessione conrentis patenter emissa, omnes status praedicti unanimiter
consenserunt, ut ex habundanti ad depositionem dicti Regis procederetur pro
majori fecuritate and tranquillitate populi ac regni commodo faciendam* unde
status and communitates praedicti certos Commissarios, videlicet Episcopum
Assav, Abbatem Glas^onia^ ^omitem Gloucestriae, Dominun^ de Berkeley, Tho^am
Erpyngham and Tho^am Gray Milite^, and Willielmum Thirnyng Justiciarium,
unanimiter and concorditer constituerunt and deputarunt public tunc ibidem, ad
le^endum sententiam depositionis hujusmodi, and ad deponendam eundem Richardum
Regem ab omni dignitate, majestate and honor regiis, vice, nomine and
auctoritate omnium statuum praedictorum; prout in consimilibus casibus de
antiqua consuetudine dicti regni fuerat observatum. Et mox iidem Commissarii
onus Commissionis hujusmodi in se assumentes and ante dictam sedem regalem pro
tribunali sedentes, praehabita super hus deliberatione aliquali, hujusmodi
depositionis sententiam in scriptis redactam vice nomine and auctoritate
praedictis tulerunt, and per dictum Episcopum Ass^v^^. Commissarium and
Collegam suum eandem sententiam de ipsorum Commissariorum voluntate and mandato
legi and recitari fecerunt, in haec verba.

IN DEI NOMINE, Amen. Nos Johannes Episcopus Assivens. Johannes Abbas
Glastoniae, Thomas Comes Gloucestriae, Thomas Dominus de Berkely, Thomas de
Erpyngham, and Thomas Gray milites, ut Willielmus Thyming Justiciarius, per
Pares and Proceres regni Angliae, Spirituales and Temporales, and ejusdem regni
Communitates, omnes status ejusdem regni repraesentantes, Commissuri^ ad
infrascripta specialiter deputati, pro Tribuna^^ sedentes, atte^tis perjuriis
multiplicibus a^ crudelitate aliisque quampluribus criminibus dicti Richardi
circa regimen suum in regnis and dominio supradictis pro tempore sui regimnas
commissis and perpetra^is, ac coram dictis statibus pa^ and public propositis,
exhibitis and recitatis, quae ad^ fuerunt and sunt publica, notoria, manifesta
and famosa quod nulla poterant aut possunt ^ergiversatione celari, Necnon
confessione praedicto Richardi recognoscen^i^ and (...) scit^tia sua judicanti^
se fuisse and esse (...) and ^inii praedictorum and pertinentium corundem, ac
propter sua domorita notoria non immerito deponendum per ipsum Richardum prius
emissa, ac de voluntate and mandato suis coram dictis statibus publicata,
eisque notificatae and exposita in vulgari; praehabita super hiis and omnibus
in ipso negotio actitatis coram statibus antidictis and ^obis deliberatione
diligenti, vice, nomine and auctoritate: ^is in hac part commissa, ipsum
Richardum ex habundanti, and ad cautelam ad regimen and gubernationem dictorum
regnorum and dominii juriumque and pertinentium eorundem fuisse and esse
inutilem, inhabilem, insufficientem penitus and indignum, ac propter praemissa
and eorum pretextu ab omni dignitate and honor regiis, si quid dignitatis and
honoris hujusmodi in eo remanserit, Nota.
merito deponendum pronunciamus, decernimus and declaramus, and ipsum simili
cautela deponimus per nostram diffinitivam sententiam in hiis scriptis. Omnibus
and singulis Dominis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis and Praelatis, Ducibus,
Marchionibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, Vassallis and Valvassoribus, ac
cateris hominibus dictorum regnorum and dominii, ac aliorum locorum ad dicta
regna and dominium spectantium subditis ac ligeis suis quibuscunque inhibentes
express, ne quisquam ipsorum de caetero praefato Richardo, tanquam Regi vel
Domino regnorum aut dominii praedictorum paret quomodelibet vel intendat.

Volentes autem praeterea dicti status ut nichil desit quod valeat aut debeat
circa praemissa requiri, superinde singillatim interrogati, personas easdem
prius per Commissarios nominatos constituerunt Procuratores suos conjunctim and
divisim ad resignandum and reddendum dicto Regi Richardo homagium and
fidelitatem prius sibi facta, and ad praemissa omnia hujusmodi depositionem and
renunciationem tangentia, si oportuerit, intimanda.

ET CONFESTIM ut constabat ex praemissis and eorum occasion regnum Angliae cum
suis pertinentiis vacare, praefatus Henricus Dux Lancastria de loco suo
surgens, and stans adeo erectus quod satis intueri posset a populo and muniens
se humiliter signo crucis in front and in pectore suo, Christi nomine primitus
invocato, dictum regnum Anglia sic ut praemittitur vaca^s, una cum Corona ac
omnibus membris and pertinentiis suis vindicavit in lingua materna, sub hac
forma verborum.

In the name of Fader, Son and holy Ghost; I Henry of Lancastre challenge this
Rewine of Ynglonde and the Croune, with all the members and the appurtenances,
als I that am descendit be right line of the blood coming fro the good Lord
King Henry therde, and thorghe that right that God of his grace has sent me,
with help of my kyn, and of my friends to recover it; the which Rewme was in
point to be ondone for defaut of governance, and undoyng of the good Laws.

Post quam quidem vindicationem and clameum, tam Domini Spiriuales quam
Temporales, and omnes status ibidem praesentes singillatim and communiter
interrogari quid de illa vindicatione and clameo sentiebant? iidem status cum
toto populo absque quacunque difficultate vel mora, ut Dux praefatus super eos
regnaret, unanimiter consenserunt. Et statim ut idem Rex ostendit statibus
regni signetum Ricardi Regis sibi pro intersigno traditum suae voluntatis, ut
praemittitur, expressivum, praefatus Archiepiscopus dictum Henricum Regem per
manum dextram apprehendens duxit eum ad sedem regalem praedictam; Et postquam
idem Rex coram dicta sede genu flexus parumper orasset, idem Archiepiscopus
Cantuariensis, assistente sibi Archiepiscopo E^orum praedicto, dictum Regem
posuit and sedere fecit in sede regali praedicta* populo prae nimio gaudio
fortiter applaudente; Et mox dictus Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis, vix facto
silentio propter gaudium omnium circumstantium, collationem modicam fecit and
protulit, in haec verba.

VIR DOMINABITUR POPULO, Reg. ix. c. Haec sunt verba summi Regis loquentis ad
Samuelem, and docentis eundem qu^lem deberet instituere ad gubernandum populum,
quando potebat sibi dari Regem populus ille, and non inepte de Domino nostro
Rege moderno dici possunt: quae verba si intime considerentur praebent nobis
materiam magnae consolationis. Non enim Deus nobis comminatur sicut quondam per
Ysai. comminabatur populo dicens, Ysai. 3. Dabo pueros Principes eorum, set ex
sua misericordia, qui cum irascitur misericordiae recordatur, visitavit plebem
suam, and non modo, ut prius fuerat in regno, pueri dominabuntur, set dicit
dominus vobis, quod Vir dominabitur populo. Poterat enim de Rectoribus istius
regni sive eorum quolibet praeteritis in persona parvuli non inconvenienter
dici illud Apostoli, Cor. 13. Cum essem parvulus loquebar ut parvulus, sapiebam
ut parvulus, cogitabam ut parvulus: ecce, ter dicit Apostolus, loquebatur ut
parvulus, sapiebat, and cogitabat. Quantum ad loquelam, certum est quod
parvulus inconstans est in loquendo, faciliter vera loquitur, faciliter falsa,
faciliter verbo promittit, set quod promittit cito obliviscitur; haec enim sunt
inconvenientia and nimis moleste regno, nec possibile est regnum feliciter
stare ubi hae conditiones regnant; set ab istis defectibus liberatur regnum cum
vir dominatur, ad virum namque pertinet circa linguam servare custodiam. Modo
autem non puer dominatur set vir, do quo spero dici potest illud Eccl. ix.
Beatus vir qui non est lapsus in lingua. Post inquit Apostolus, sapiebam ut
parvulus; parvulus enim non sapit nisi placentia and adulatoria, arguentem
secundum veritatem non diligit, ymmo odit supra modum. Quondam autem veritus
fuerat subpeditata ut nullus auderet loqui; satis constat, and per hoc patet,
quod ille qui regnabat sapiebat ut parvulus, vir enim non sapit talia, set
sapientiam, unde per Dei gratiam dici poterit de isto viro quod scribitur Eccl.
ix. Beatus vir qui in sapientia morabitur; sicut enim puer diligit vanitatem,
ita vir sapit veritatem and sapientiam; veritas ergo intrabit, adulatio
recedat, quae tot mala in regno nostro fecerunt, quia vir dominabitur populo,
qui veritatem sapit, non qui vanitatem vel adulationem. Tertio dicitur,
Cogitabam ut parvulus, parvulus enim solum studet facere omnia voluntary non
ex ratione, cum igitur puer regnat voluntas sola regnat, ratio e^ulat; ubi vero
voluntas regnat and ratio recessit* constantia fugata est, and ita imminet
magnum periculum; ab isto periculo liberati sumus, quia vir dominabitur, ille
scilicet qui dicit non sicut parvulus set sicut ratione perfectus, Non veni
facere voluntatem meam, set ejus qui misit me, scilicet Dei; and ideo de viro
isto non solum dicemus quod in sapientia morabitur, set eciam ut vir and non ut
puer in sensu cogitabit circumspectionem Dei, id est circumquaque diligenter
aspicit ut Dei voluntas non sua fiat, and ita loco pueri voluntary
lascivientis, vir modo dominabitur in populo, and iste vir est talis quod
dicetur, Regnabit Rex and sapiens erit, and faciet judicium and justitium
interra.

Qua collatione completa, dictus Dominus Rex Henricus ad ponendum suorum
subditorum animos in quiet, dixit public tunc ibidem haec verba.

Sires, I thank God and you Spirituel and Temporel, and all the estates of the
Land, and do you to wit, it es noght my will that no man thynk that be way
of conquest I would disherit any man of his heritage, Nota.
franches or other ryghts that him aght to have, to put him out of that that he
has, and has had by the good Laws and Customs of the Rewme; Except those
person^ that has been agan the good purpose, and the common profit of the
Rewme.

Et protinus hoc attento quod per prius vacant sede regali per cessionem and
depositionem praedictas cessavit omnis potestas quorumcunque Justiciariorum,
Vicecomitum, and aliorium Officiariorum ubique per regnum, ne exhibitio
justitiae in gravamen populi dilationis incommodo subjaceret, suos officiarios
principales ac eciam Justiciarios deputavit ibidem juramento consueto Regi
praestito per singulos eorundem. Et fuit ilico de dicti Regis mandato public
proclamatum ibidem, quod die Lunae proximo post festum sancti Michaelis,
Parliamentum ibidem teneri and celebrari deberet; quodque die Lunae proximo
extunc sequente, videlicet in festo sancti Edwardi, Coronatio dicti Regis
fieret apud Westmonasterium, and quod omnes illi qui vendicare voluerint
aliquod servitium se in dicta Coronatione facturos, and eo praetextu aliquid
sibi deberi, venirent ad Albam aulam palacii coram Senescallo, Constabulario
and Marescallo Angliae, die Sabbati proximo ante diem Parliamenti praedicti,
quod in ea part justum fuerit petituri, quibus plena justitia fierit in
petitis. Quantum autem ad abbreviationem assignationis diei Parliamenti
praedicti, fuerat pro part dicti Regis protestatio talis facta, videlicet quod
non erat intentionis suae ut statibus regni sui praejudicium afferatur exinde,
nec quod hoc trahatur de caetero in exemplum, quinymmo quod abbreviatio illa
fiebat tantummodo pro commodo and utilitate regni, and specialiter ut
quorumcunque ligeorum suorum parcatur laboribus and expensis, quodque super
gravaminibus populi celere possit remedium adhiberi.

Quibus omnibus sic peractis, Rex desede sua regali surgens, and populum vultu
hillari and benigno respiciens, abinde populo congaudente recessit, and in Alba
aula praedicta convivium regni Proceribus ac generosis illuc in multitudine
maxima congregatis eodem die solempnissime celebravit.

ET POSTMODUM die Mercurii proximo extunc sequente dicti Procuratores ut
praemittitur deputati, ad praesentiam dicti Richardi nuper Regis infra dictam
Turrim existentis, prout eis injunctum fuerat, accesserunt, and praefatus
Dominus Willielmus Thirnyng Justiciarius, pro se and dictis sociis and
comprocuratoribus suis nomine omnium statuum, and populi praedictorum
admissionem dictae renunciationis ac modum, causam and formam sententiae
depositionis hujusmodi eidem Ricardo notificavit, ac before declaravit; and
statim homagium and fidelitatem eidem Ricardo nuper Regi ut praemittitur facta,
resignavit and reddidit, sub hiis verbis.

Les paroles qe William Thirnyng parla a monsire Richard nadgaires Roy d'
Engleterre, a le Toure de Londres, en sa Chamber, le Mesqerdy procheyn apres le
fest de Seint Michell larchaunchel, sensuent.

SIRE, It is well know to you; that there was a Parliament somond of all the
States of the Reaume for to be at Westmynstre, and to begin on the Tuesday in
the morn of the fest of Seint Michell the Archaungell that was yesterday; by
cause of the which Sommons all the States of this land were there gadyrd, the
which States hole made these same persons that been comen here to you now her
Procuratours, and gafen hem full auctorite and power, and charged hem for to
say the words that we sall say to you in her name, and on their behalve; that
is to wytten, the Bishop of Seint Assa for Ersbisshoppes and Bisshoppes; the
Abbot of Glastenbury for Abbots and Priours, and all other men of holy Church
Seculers and Rewelers, the Earl of Gloucestre for Dukes and Earls, the Lord of
Berkeley for Barons and Barnerettes, Sir Thomas Irpyngham Chamberleyn for all
the Bachilers and Commons of this Land be south, Sire Thomas Gray for all the
Bachilers and Commons by north, and my Felawe Johan Markham and me for to come
with hem for all these States; and so Sire these words and the doing that we
sall say to you, is not only^h our words, bot the words and the doings of
all the States of this Land, and our charge, and in her name. And he answered
and said, that he wist wel^ that we would noght say, but as we were charged.
Sire, ye remember you well that on Moneday in the fest of Seint Michell the
Archaungell right here in this Chamber, and in what presence ye renounsed and
cessed of the state of King and of Lordesship, and of all the Dignite and
Wyrs^hipp that longed thereto, and assoiled all your Leiges of her ligeance and
obeisance that longed to you uppe the form that is contened in the same
Renunciation and Cession, which ye read your self by your mouth, and affermed
it by zour oath, and by your own writing; upon which ye made and ordained
your Procuratours, the Ersbysshopp of York, and the Bisshopp of Hereford, for
to notify and declare in your name these Renunciation and Cession at
Westmynstre, to all the States, and all the people that was there gadyrd,
because of the Sommons foresaid; the which thus don yesterday by these Lords
your Procuratours, and well herd and understonden, these Renunciation and
Cession ware pleinelith and frelith accepted, and fullich agreed by all the
States and people foresaid. And over this Sire, at the instance of all these
States and people, there ware certain Articles of defauts in your governance
read there, and tho well herd and plesnelich understonden to all the States
foresaid, hem thought hem so true and so notorie, and known that by the causes,
and as by mo other as they said, and havyng consideration to your own words
in your own Renunciation and Cession, that ye were not worthy, ne sufficient,
ne able for to govern for your own demerites, as it is more pleinerlich
contened therein, hem thought that wos reasonable and cause for to depose you
and her Commissaries that they made and ordained, as it is of record there
declared and decreed, and adjudged you for to be deposed and prive^, and in
deed deposed you, and pryved you of the astate of King, and of the Lordsship
contened in the Renunciation and Cession foresaid, and of all the Dignite and
Wyrsship, and of all the administration that longed thereto. And we
Procuratours to all these States and people foresaid, os we be charged by hem,
and by her auctorite giffen us, and in her name, yield you uppe for all the
States and people foresaid, Homage, Liege and Feaute, and all Ligeance, and all
other Bonds, Charges and Services that long thereto; and that non of all tbes
States and people fro this time forward, ne here you feyth, ne do you
obeisance ^s to thar King. And he answered and said, that he looked not
thereafter: but he said, that after all this he hoped that is Cosyn would be
good Lord to him.

Joesdy le ^xiiij. De sausement garder Richard Nadgairs Rey.
Doctober Lerecuesque de Canterbire chargea deper le Roy touz les Seigneurs
Espirituales and temporales and toutz antres y estantz sur Leur Ligeance que
ceo que lors serroit monstres on parlez illoeqe serroit tenuv cons^il and qil
ne serroit ascunement discoverez a nully vivant. Et pius apres demandez feust
per le Count de Northumbr. pur la seurte du Roy and de touz Lestatz du Roialme,
Coment leure semble que serroit erdeignez de Richard nadgaires Roy pur Luy
mettre and saufegard, Sauvant su vie, quele le Roy voet que luy soit sauvez and
touz manners? Surquoi responduz feust per toutz Les Signiars severalment
examines don't les nomes si ensuent que leur semble qil serroit mys en sauso and
secregard and en tiel Lien on null concours dos g^ntz yad and qil soit gardez
perseures and sufficientz person, and que null que este familier du dit
nadgairs Roy soit ascunement entour sa person and que ceo soit fait en le
pluis se^re manner que fair sa purra.

Les nomes des Seigneurs demandez and assentez en La question suisditz cy
ensuent Cestassavoir.

Lerceuesque de Canterbrie. Lerceuesque Deuerwyck. Leuesque de Londres.
Leuesque Dely. Leuesque de Nicholl. Leuesque de Norwich. Leuesque de Roucestre.
Leuesque de Sar. Leuesque Dexcestr. Leuesque de Cicestr. Leuesque de St. Asaph.
Leuesque de Cestr. Leuesque de St. David's. Leuesque de Landafe. Leuesque de
Duresme. Labbe de Westminster. Labbe de St. Albon. Labbe de St. Austyn. Labbe
de Bury. Labbe de St. Doverwycke. Labbe de Glocestr. Labbe de Battaill. Le
Prince. Le Duc de Nerwyck. Le Count Darundell. Le Count de War. Le Count de
Staff. Le Count de Northumbr. Le Count de Suff. Le Count de Wircestr. Le Sgr.
de Roos. Le Sgr. de Gray de Ruthin. Le Sgr. de Cherleton. Le Sgr. de Bardolf.
Le Sgr. de Willughby. Le Sgr. de Furnival. Le Sgr. de Ferrers. Le Sgr. de
Beaumont. Le Sgr. de Berkeley. Le Sgr. de Fitz Wauters. Le Sgr. de Manley. Le
Sgr. de Scales. Le Sgr. de Morley. Le Sgr. de Burnell. Le Sgr. de Lovell. Le
Sgr. de Camoi. Le Sgr. de Seymore. Le Sgr. de Crombwell. Le Sgr. de Cobham.
Monsr. Henr. Peircy. Monsr. Richard Scroop. Le Sgr. Fitz Hugh. Le Sgr. de
Bergeueny. Le Sgr. de Lomley. Le Baron de Greystocks. Le Baron de Hilton.
Monsr. Thomas Erpingham Chambr. Monsr. Mayhew Gowinay.
Mr. Hall in his Chronicle, fol. 10. and Walsingham. Hist. Angl. Anno 1490. p.
404. Graftons Chronicle. p. 407, 408, 409. Holinshed. p. 511. Sect. 4. p. 516.
Speed. p. 764, 765. Godwins Catalogue of Bishops, p. 541, 542.
others relate, that in this Parliament, when it was demanded by the Kings
friends, what should be done with King Richard? Thomas Menkes Bishop of
Carlisle, which was a man both well learned and well stomacked, rose up and
said; My Lords, I require you take heed what answer you make to this question.
For think there is none of you worthy or meet to give judgment on so noble a
Prince as King Richard is, whom we haven taken for our Sovereigne and Liege
Lord by the space of two and twenty years; and I assure you, there is not so
rank a traitor, nor so arrant a thief, nor so cruel a murderer, which is
apprehended and detained in prison for his offense, but he shall be brought
before the Justice to hear his judgment; and yet you will proceed to the
judgment of an anointed King, and hear neither his answer nor excuse. And I
say, that the Duke of Lancaster, whom you call King, has more offended, and
more trespassed to King Richard and this Realm, than the King has either done
to him, or to us. For it is manifestly known, that the Duke was banished the
Realm by King Richard and his council, and by the judgment of his own Father,
for the space of ten years, for what cause all you know, and yet without
license of King Richard he is returned again into the Realm; yea and that is
worse, has taken upon him the name, title, and pre-eminence of a King. And
therefore I say and affirm, that you do apparently wrong, and manifest injury
to proceed in any thing against King Richard, without calling him openly to his
answer and defense. When the Bishop had ended, he was incontinent by the Earl
Marshal attached and committed to ward in the Abbey of S. Albanes. And then it
was concluded, that King Richard should continue in a large prison, and should
be plentifully served of all things necessary both for viands and apparel.

From the proceedings against these 2. deposed Kings, these 2. inferences have
been made.

1. Cortoni Posthuma, p. 350.
That the Commons have a joint interest with the Lords in the Judicature and
Jugements in Parliament.

2. Regal Tyranny discovered, p. 58, 59, 60. John Melton Answer to Salmasius,
Mr. Bradshaw and others.
That the Proceedings against our late condemned beheaded King are justifiable,
and warranted by them.

I answer, that neither of these 2. Consequences are proved by them. For 1. The
Commons themselves in this Parliament of 1 H. 4. n. 79. immediately after King
R^chards deposition, confess, That the Judicature and Judgments of Parliament,
belong only to the King and Lords, not to the Commons. 2ly, The Commons neither
in nor out of Parliament, are, may or ought to be the Judges of the meanest
Lord or Peer of the Realm, who are to be judged, tried by their Peers alone; as
I have abundantly evidenced in the premises: Much less then can they be lawful
Judges of their Sovereign Lord and King, who is a degree above all the Peers of
highest dignity. In the Mat. Paris, p. 295 296. Here. p. 256.
Parliament, An, 1260. Prince Edward, as I have proved before, would be tried
only by 2. Kings; because all the rest of the Earls and Barons were not his
Peers, neither could they be his Judges: much less then can Peers or Commons be
their Kings Judges and Peers to ondemn or try him. 3ly, Our Law Books resolve,
Bracton, lib. 1. c. 8. lib. 3, cap. 3. Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 5. 3 Edw. 3.19.
Fitz. Corone 161. 21 Edw. 3.3. b. Dyer 297. Stamford, lib. 3. cap. 1. f. 153.
That the King has no Peers in his own Realm; and, Therefore he can neither be
legally tried nor judged by the Peers themselves, much less by the Commons in
Parliament. 4ly, The Spelmanni Concilia, Tom. 1. p. 411
Laws of Hoel Dha King of Wales, about the year 940. Lex 20. resolve, Rex non
poterit secundum legem in lite stare coram Judice suo, agendo vel respondendo,
per dignitatem naturalem; yea all the Lords and Commons of England in the
Parliament of Lincoln, Anno 29. E. 1. in their forecited Letter to the Pope (p.
128.) resolve, That the Kings of England, Ex praeeminentia status suae Regiae
dignitatis, ex consuetudine cunctis temporibus observata, neque responderunt,
neque respondere debebant coram aliquo Iudice Ecclesiastico vel seculari sup^r
juribus suis in regno, etc. Much less then may or ought they to be put to
answer criminally for their lives, or Crowns before any Ecclesiastical or
Temporal Judge, Peers or Commons House, or High Court of COMMONS. 5ly, The
Statutes of 16 R. 2. c. 5. and of 25 H. 8. c. 19.21. thus declare, resolve, and
the Archbishop of Canterbury in the Parliament of 16 R. 2. n. 20. protested
against the Popes pretended Supremacy, That the Crown of England has been so
free at all times, that it has been in subjection to no Realm or Person; but
immediately subject to God* and to none other, in all things touching the
Regality of the said Crown. And the Statutes of 25 H. 8. c. 19, 21, 22. 26 H. 8
c. 1.3. 27 H. 8. c. 15. 28 H. 8. c. 7.10. 31 H. 8. c. 10.15. 32 H. 8. c. 22.24,
26. 33 H. 8. c. 29. 35 H. 8. c. 1.3.17, 19. 37 H. 8. c. 17. 1 E. 6. c. 2. 1
Eliz. c. 1. 8 Eliz. c. 1. 3 Jac. c. 3, 4. declare and enact, The King to be the
only Supreme Head and Governor (upon Earth) both of the Church and Realm of
Engl. both of which recognize no Super or under God, but only the King. To
affirm then, that the Lords or Commons in Parliament may lawfully judge, depose
the King and deprive him of his Crown, Regalities, Head, Life: is to
contradict, repeal all these Statutes: since the inferior Members can no more
legally judge the Supreme head of the body politic, than the head of the body
natural; or the Courrs in Westminster hall, or Hundred Courts, judge the High
Court of Parliament, and condemn, repeal their Acts or Judgments. 6ly, Though
Articles were drawn up against these two Kings pro forma, yet neither of them
was ever required, or judicially summoned to make answer to them, or heard, or
brought to trial before the Lords or Commons Bar, or any other Tribunal, or
Court of Justice. Whence the Bishop of Here, p. 456.
Carlisle protested against it, as most illegal, unjust and traiterous.
Therefore neither the Lords nor Commons could be properly said their Judges in
this case; and their Judgment without hearing or trial of them must needs be
most erroneous, as well as Mortimers and the Earl of Arundels Here, p. 275. to
283.
forecited. 7ly, The Lords and Commons resignation of their Homage to these 2.
Kings, when deposed; show, that even then they este^med them their Superiors
and Lords: Glanvil, l. 9. c. 1. Lit. l. 2. c. 1. Cooks 1 Instit. f. 64, 65.
Homage being the most honorable and humble service that a franktenant may do
to his Lord: the tenant being ungirt, his head uncovered, kneeling down on both
his knees before his Lord sitting covered and holding up his hands jointly
together between his Lords and the Kings hands, when he does his homage;
saying, I become your man from this day forward of limb and of earthly worship,
and unto you shall be true and faithful, and bear faith for the tenements I
hold of you. And when done to any other Lord, it is with a Saving the faith I
owe unto our Sovereign Lord the King, and his Heirs. 8ly, The Sentences of
Deposition against them, were given only by the Legislative power, not
JUDICIAL, by way of Bill consented unto in the Parliament house by the Lords
and Commons, then sent to these Kings to their prisons, and there read unto
them by Committees and Proxies, representing all the Estates in Parliament.
Therefore the reading of them to these Kings in their prisons, was not properly
a judgment, neither did it constitute them who read it to them their Judges,
much less create the Commons Judges of these Kings. 9ly, All the Lords
Spiritual Temporal, and Commons concurred jointly in this Act of resigning
their Homage to these Kings, to whom they were all jointly obliged, and in whom
they had all a common interest: Et quod tangit omnes, ab omnibus debet
approbari: Therefore it is no warrant for the proceedings against our late
King, without the consents, and against the Express Votes of the whole House of
Lords, and of the Majority of the Commons house. 10ly, The Lords alone, without
the Commons, gave Judgment for the close and perpetual imprisonment of King
Richard the 2. therefore they were his sole and proper Judges by way of
Sentence, his deposition being by the Legislative, not Judicial power. 11ly,
These Kings (especially the later of them) had no sentence of deposition, nor
proceedings against them; til they had through fear or pusillanimity first
resigned their Crowns, and kingship, as unfit to reign or govern any longer;
which was made the principal ground of their subsequent declaratory
depositions, by the Lords and Commons, when they had reduced themselves into
the condition of Si Rex imperium abdicavit, aut manifest habet pro derelicto,
in eum post id tempus omnia licent quae in privatum. Hugo Grotius, de Jure
Belli and Pacis, l. 1. c. 4. Sect. 9.
private men, by their resignations. These presidents therefore cannot justify
the late proceedings against an actual, lawful, hereditary King, by a small
party of the Commons house alone, without the House of Peers, or the Majority
of their Fellow Members, who never resigned his Crown, nor unkinged himself, as
unworthy to reign any longer. 12ly, King Edward the 2. after this his
deposition, was reputed a King de jure still; and therefore styled by the whole
Parliament, all the Lords, and King Edward the 3d. himself, in 4 E. 3. n. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 10. their See here, p. 276.
King and Leige-Lord, and Mortimer, with his accomplices, were condemned and
executed as TRAITORS, for murdering him after his Deposing: contrary to Sir
Edward Cooks false Doctrine, 3 Institutes, f. 7. And in the Parliament of 21 R.
2. n. 64, 65. the revocation of the Act for the 2. Spencers restitution in the
Parl. of 1 E. 3. was repealed because made at such time by King Edward the 3.
as Edw. 2. his Father BEING VERY KING was living and imprisoned: so that he
could not resist the same An express resolution by these two Parliaments, that
his deposition was both void in Law, and illegal. 13ly, Neither of these 2.
Kings, though their articles were more heinous, and Government more unkingly,
arbitrary than the late Kings, were condemned or adjudged to love their heads
or lives for their misdemeanors, but merely deprived of their royal Authority,
with a promise to preserve their lives, and treat them nobly, and that upon
this account, that they were Kings, yea anointed Kings, when they transgressed,
therefore exempted from all capital censures, penalties of Laws by any humane
Tribunals: as David resolves, Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee only have I
sinned; whence S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, Arnobius, with others in their
Expositions on that Psalm, S. Hierom Epist. 22, and 47. Peter Martyr on the 2 Samuel 2.13. learned Grotius, and others conclude in these words: De Jure Belli.
l. 4. c. 1.
Liberi sunt Reges a vinculis delictorum* neque enim ad paenam ullis vocantur
legibus, tuti Imperii potestate. Hence Epist. Dedicatoria, prefixed to his
Chronicon.
Otto Frisingensis Episcopus, writes thus to the Emperor Frederick; Praeterea
cum nulla inveniatur persona mundialis qui mundi legibus non subjaceat,
subjaciendo coerceatur SOLI REGES, utpote constituti super leges in respect of
corporal penalties) DIVINO EXAMINI RESERVATI, seculi legibus non cohibentur:
unde est illud tam Regis quam Prophetae testimonium; Tibi soli peccavi. These
2. presidents therefore no ways justify the proceedings against the late
beheaded King, as I before hand manifested in my Speech in Parliament, December.
4. and in my Memento in Jan. 1648. which gave See the 2. Part of the History of
Independency: where it is inserted.
ample satisfaction herein, not only to out 3. kingdoms at home, but to the
learned Protestant Divines and Churches abroad both in France, and Germany,
as Samuel Bochartus (an eminent French Divine) in his Latin Epistle to Dr.
Morley, printed Parisiis 1650. attests Sect 3. De Jure and potestate Regum, p.
145. Where after a large and solid proof out of Scripture, Fathers, and other
Authors of the unlawfullnesse of our late Kings trial, judgment and Execution;
and that the Presbyterian English Ministers and Membees did then professedly
oppugn, and write against it; he thus proceeds. Ex hoc numero PRYNNIUS, vir
multis nominibus insignis, and Parlamenti Delegatorum unus, e carcere in quo
cum pluribus aliis detenebatur, Libellum composuit Parliamento oblatum; in quo
december rationibus, iisque validissimis, contendit eos rem illicitam attentare
(in proceeding Criminally and Capitally against the King;) Then reciting the
Heads of my reasons against it, he concludes thus: Haec ille and multo plura,
SCRIPTOR MIRE NERVOSUS, cujus verba sunt stimuli et elavi in altum defixi:
After which he there prooves by several instances, how much the Protestant
Ministers, Churches of France and Geneva, condemned these proceedings as
repugnant to Scripture, and the Principles of the Protestant Religion: And Dr.
Wolfgangus Mayerus (a famous Writer and Professor of Divinity at Basil in
Germany) in his Epistle Dedicatory before his printed Latin Translation of my
Sword of Christian Magistracy, supported. Basil. 1649. Viro Nobilissimo ac
consul^issimo, omnium Doctrinarum, Virtutumque Ornamentis excultissimo, verae
pietatis zelo flagrantissimo, Orthodoxae Religionis, libertatisque Patriae
defensori Acerrimo GVLIELMO PRYNNE. J. V. Doctori celeberrimo, Domino atque
Amico suo plurimum honorando Authori, Interpres, S. P. D. has published to my
self in particular, and the world in general, That the beheading of the K. as
it was contrary to the Parls. primitive intention; so it was, cum magna gentis
Anglicanae ignominia, qui jam discincti, laudatissimique corporis compage
miserrime rupta atque dissipata, far coguntur, quod evitari amplius non
potest. At sane non exiguam laudem APUD OMNES REFORMAT AS ECCLESIAS consecuti
sunt illi Angliae Pastores, qui naevos, et Errores Regiae administrationis,
quos magnos fuisse agnoverunt, precibus potius a Deo deprecandos, quam capitali
poena vindicandos esse censuerunt, suasque Ecclesias ab omnibus sanguinariis
consiliis, magno zelo, animo plane intrepido, dehortati, omnemque criminis
istius suspicionem, ab ipsis hoc pacto, prudentissime amoliti sunt. Sed hanc
causam aliis disceptandam relinquo: Which learned Salmasius soon after
professedly undertook in the Netherlands; Vincentius, Heraldus and Bochartus,
(3 most eminent Protestant Ministers) in France, in printed Treatises published
against the Kings Trial, etc. as repugnant to the Principles of the Christian
and Protestant Religion; Which another famous Frenchman in his French
Translation of 47 London Ministers Petition against it, thus brands. Samuelis
Bocharti Epistola, p. 155.
Post Christum crucifixum nullum atrocius crimen uspiam esse admissum, and
universam terram eo concuti, and bonos omnes ad luctum provocari, USQUE AD
FINEM SECULI: Which Mr. Bradshaw may do well to ruminate upon now in cold
blood, and all others engaged with him in this unparalled Judgment and
execution; being no way warranted by the depositions of King Edward, or Richard
the 2.

14ly. When the News of K. Richards deposing was reported into France, King
Charles and all his Court wondered, Halls Chron. fol. 15.
detested and abhorred such an injury to be done to an anointed King, to a
crowned Prince, and the head of the Realm: But in especial Waleram Earl of St.
Paul, which had married King Richards half Sister, moved with high disdain
against King Henry, ceased not to stir and provoke the French King and his
Counsel to make sharp war in England, to revenge the injury and dishonor
committed and done to his Son-in-law King Richard, and he himself sent Letters
of defiance to England. Which thing was soon agreed to, and an Army royal
appointed with all speed, to invade England. But the French King so stomached
this high displeasure, and so inwardly conceived this unfortunate chance in his
mind, that he fell into his old disease of the Frensy, that he had need
according to the old proverb, to sail to the Isle of Anticyra, to purge his
melancholy humor; but by the means of his Physicians, he was somewhat relieved
and brought to knowledge of himself. This Army was come down into Picardy,
ready to be transported into England. But when it was certainly certified that
King Richard was dead, and that their enterprise of his deliverance was
frustrate and void, the Army scattered and departed asunder.

But when the certainty of King Richards death was declared to the Aquitaynes
and Gascons, the most part of the wisest men of the Country fell into a bodily
fear, and into a deadly dread; for some lamenting the instability of the
English people, judged them to be spotted with perpetual infamy, and brought to
dishonor and loss of their ancient fame and glory, for committing so heinous a
crime and detestable an offense against their King and Sovereign Lord. The
memory whereof they thought would never be buried or extincted. Others feared
the lost of their goods and liberties; because they imagined that by this
civil dissension and intestine division, the Realm of England should so be
vexed and troubled, that their Country (if the Frenchmen should invade it)
should be destitute and left void of all aid and succor of the English Nation.
But the Citizens of Bordeaux took this matter very sore at stomach, because
King Richard was born and brought up in their City, lamenting and crying out,
that since ^he beginning of the world, there was never a more detestable or
more villainous or heinous act committed: which being sad with sorrow, and
inflamed with melancholy, said that untrue, unnatural, and unmercifull people
had betrayed and slain, contrary to all Law and Justice and honesty, a good
man, a just Prince, and lawful Governor; beseeching God devoutly on their
knees, to be the revenger and punisher of that detestable offense and notorious
crime. 15ly. The proceedings against King Richard the 2. in the Parliament of 1
H. 4. were in the Sea an Exact Abridgment, p. 670.
Parliament of 1 E. 4. n. 9, 10, 11, 12. condemned as illegal, the Tyrannous
usurpation of Henry the 4th. with his heinous murdering of King Richard the 2.
at large set forth, his reign, declared by Act of Parliament to be an intrusion
and mere usurpation, for which he and the heirs of his body are utterly dis
enabled, as unworthy to enjoy any inheritance, estate, or profits within the
Realm of England or Dominions of the same for ever; and that by this memorable
Petition of the Commons, wherein the pedigree of King Edward the 4th. and his
title to the Crown, are likewise fully set forth, a Record most worthy the
public view, being never yet printed to my knowledge.

Ex Rotulo Parliamenti tenti apud Westminster. anno primo Edwardi Quarti, n. 8.
Declaratio tituli Regii and restitutio ad eundem.
Memorandum quod quaedam Petitio exhibita fuit praefato Domino Regi in
praesenti Parliamento per praefatos Communes sub eo qui sequitur tenore
verborum. For as much as it is notary, openly, and evidently known, that the
right noble, and worthy Prince Henry, King of England, the third, had issue
Edward his furst gotten Son, born at Westminster in the 15 kalende of Juyll in
the vigille of Seint Marce and Marcellian, the year of our Lord M.C.C.XLV. the
which Edw. after the death of the said King Henry his Fader, entitled and
called King Edward the furst, had issue his furst gotten Son, entitled and
called after the decease of the same Edward the furst his Fader King Edward the
second, which had issue the right noble and honorable Prince King Edward the
third, true and undoubted King of England and of France, and Lord of Irelond;
which Edward the third had issue Edward his furst gotten Son Prince of Wales,
William Hatfield secund gotten Son, Leonel third gotten Son Duke of Clarence,
John of Gaunt fourth gotten son Duke of Lancaster; Edmund Langley the fifth
gotten son Duke of York, Thomas Wodestoks the sixth gotten son Duke of
Gloucester, and William Wyndesore the seventh gotten Son. And the said Edward
Prince of Wales, which died in the life of the said King Edward the thurd his
Fader, had issue Richard, which after the death of the same King Edward the
third, as Cousin and heir to him, that is to say Son to the said Edward Prince
of Wales, Son unto the said King Edward the third, succeeded him in royal
estate and dignity, lawfully entitled and called King Richard the secund, and
died without issue, William Hatfield the secund gotten Son of the said King
Edward the third died without issue, the said Leonel Duke of Clarence the third
gotten Son of the same King Edward had issue Phelip his only daughter and died,
And the same Phelip wedded unto Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, had issue by
the same Edmund, Roger Mortymer Earl of March her Son and heir, which Edmund
and Phelip died, the same Roger Earl of March had issue Edmund Mortymer Earl of
March, Roger Mortymer Anne and Alianore and died. And also the same Edmund and
Roger sons of the foresaid Roger, and the said Alianore died without Issue. And
the same Anne wedded unto Richard Earl of Cambridge, the Son of the said Edmund
Langley, the fifth gotten son of the said king Edward the third, as it is before
specified, had issue that right noble and famous Prince of full worthy memory,
Richard Plantagenet Duke of York: And the said Richard Earl of Cambridge, and
Anne his Wife died, And the same Rich. Du. of York had issue the right high and
mighty Prince Edward, our Liege and Sovereign Lord, and died, to whom as Cousin
and heir to the said King Richard the Crown of the Realm of England, and the
royal power, estate, dignity, pre-eminence and governance of the same Realm,
and the Lordship of Ireland, lawfully and of right appertains, of the which
Crown, Royal power, estate, dignity, pre-eminence, governance and Lordship the
said King Richard the second was lawfully, rightfully and justly seized and
possessed, and the same joyed in rest and quiet without interruption or
molestation, unto the time that Henry late Earl of Derby, son of the said John
of Gaunt, the fourth gotten son of the said King Edward the third, and younger
Brother of the said Leonel, temerously agenst rightwisnes and Justice, by force
and Arms agenst his faith and liegeaunce rered werre at Flynte in Wales agenst
the said King Richard, him took and enprisoned in the Tower of London of great
violence. And the same King Richard so being in prison, and living, usurped and
intruded upon the royal power, estate, dignity, pre-eminence, possessions and
Lordships aforesaid, taking upon him usurpously the Crown and name of K. and L.
of the same Realm and Lordship. And not therewith satisfied or content, but
more grievous thing attempting, Nota.
wickedly of unnatural, unmanly, and cruel tyranny, the same King Richard, King
anointed, crowned and consecrate, and his Liege and most high Lord in the
Earth, agenst Gods Law, Man's liegeance and Oath of fidelite, with uttermost
punicion attormenting, murdered and destroyed, with most vile, heinous and
lamentable death; whereof the heavy exclamation in the doom of every Christian
man sounds into Gods hearing in Heaven, not forgotten in the Earth, specially
in this Realm of England, which therefore has suffered the charge of
intolerable persecution, punicion and tribulation, whereof the like has not
been seen or heard in any other Christian Realm by any memory or Record: Then
being on Live, the said Edmund Mortymer Earl of March, son and heir of the said
Roger, son and heir of the said Philip, daughter and heir of the said Leonel,
the third Son of the said King Edward the third; To the which Edmund after the
decease of the said King Richard, the right and title of the same Crown and
Lordship, then by law, custom and conscience descended and belonged, and of
right belongs at this time unto our said Liege and Sovereign Lord, King
Edward the fourth, as Cousin and heir to the said King Richard, in manner and
form abovesaid. Our said Sovereign and Liege Lord King Edward the fourth,
according to his right and title of the said Crown and Lordship, after the
decease of the said right noble and famous Prince Richard Duke of York, his
fader, in the name of Jesu, n. 10^
to his pleasure and loving the fourth day of the Month of March last past,
took upon him to use his right and title to the said Realm of England and
Lordship, and entered into the exercise of the royal estate, dignity,
pre-eminence and power of the same Crown, and to the reign and governance of
the said Realm of England and Lordship; And the same fourth day of March amoved
Henry, late called King Henry the sixth, son to Henry, son to the said Hen.
late E. of Derby, son to the said John of Gaunt from the occupation,
usurpation, intrusion, reign and governance of the same Realm of England and
Lordship, to the universal comfort and consolation of all his Subgetts and
Liegemen, plentevously joyed to be amoeved and departed from the obeisance and
governance of the unrightwise usurpour, Nota
in whose time, not plenty, Pees, Justice, good governance, policy, and
virtuous conversatien, but unrest, inwa^d war and trouble, unright wiseness,
shedding and effusion ^f innocent blood, abuse of the Laws, partiality, riot,
extortion, murder, rape and vicious living, Nota.
have been the guiders and leaders of the noble Realm of England, in ancient
time among all Christian realms laudably reputed of great honor, worship, and
nobly drad of all outward Lands, then being the lau^ier of honor, prowess and
worthiness of all other Realms, in the time of the said usurpation fallen from
that renown unto misery, wretchedness, desolation, shameful and sorrowful
decline. And to live under the obeisance, governance and tuition of their true
right wise and natural Liege and Sovereign Lord. The Commons being in this
present Parliament, having sufficient and evident knowledge of the said
unrightwise usurpation and intrusion by the said Henry late Earl of Derby, upon
the said Crown of England, knowing also certainly without doubt or ambiguity
the right and title of our said Sovereign Lord thereunto, Nota.
true, and that by Gods Law, Man's Law, and the Law of Nature, he and none other
is and ought to be their true right wise and natural Liege and Sovereign Lord.
And that he was in right from the death of the said Noble and famous Prince his
Fader, very just King of the said Realm of England. And the said 4. day of
March in lawful possession of the same Realm with the royal power,
pre-eminence, estate and dignity belonging to the Crown thereof, and of the
said Lordship; take, accept and repute, and will for ever take, accept and
repute the said Edward the fourth their Sovereign and liege Lord, and him and
his heirs to be Kings of England, and none other, according to his said right
and title. And beseech the same their said Liege and Sovereign Lord King Edward
the fourth, that by the advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
being in this present Parliament, and by authority of the same, his right and
title to the said Crown before specified, be declared, taken, accepted and
reputed true and rightwise, the same right and title to abide and remain of
Record perpetually, by the said advice, assent and authority. And that it be
declared and judged by the said advice, assent and authority, that the said
Henry late Earl of Derby, for the said Nota.
rearing of war against the said King Richard, then his Sovereign Lord, and
the violent taking, imprisoning, unrightwise usurpation, intrusion, and
horrible cruel murder of him; agenst his faith and ligeance, wickedly and
unjustly offended and hurted the Royal Majesty of his said Sovereign Lord. And
that the same Henry unrightwisely, agenst Law, conscience, and custom of the
said Realm of England, usurped upon the said Crown and Lordship. And that he,
and also Henry late called King Henry the fifth, his son, and the said Henry,
late called King Henry the sixth, the son of the said Henry, late called King
Henry the fifth, occupied the said Realm of England, and Lordship of Irelond,
and Nota.
exercise the governance thereof by unrightwise intrusion and usurpation, and
in none other wise. And that the taking of possession and entry into the
exercise of the Royal Estate, dignity, reign and governance of the said Realm
of England, and Lordship of Irelond, of our said Sovereign Liege Lord King
Edward the fourth the said fourth day of March, and the amotion of the said
Henry, late called King Henry the sixth, from the exercise, occupation,
usurpation, intrusion, Nota.
reign and governance of the same Realm and Lordship, done by our said
Sovereign and Liege Lord King Edward the fourth, the said fourth day of March;
was and is rightwise, lawful, and according to the Laws and customs of the
said Realm, and so ought to be taken, holden, reputed and accepted. And over
that, that our said Sovereign and Liege Lord King Edward the fourth, the said
fourth day of March, was lawfully seized and possessed of the said Crown of
England in his said right and title, and from thenceforth have to him and his
heirs Kings of England, n. 11.
all such Manors, Castles, Lordships, honors, lands, tenements, rents,
services, fees, feefarms, rents, Knights fees, advowsons, gifts of Offices, to
give at his pleasure, fairs, markets, issues, fines, and amerciaments,
liberties, franchises, prerogatives, escheats, customs, reversions, remainders,
and all other hereditaments, with her appurtenance, whatsoever they be, in
England, Wales and Irelond, and in Caleys, and the Marches thereof, as the said
King Richard had in the feast of Sr. Matthew the Apostle the 23. year of his
reign, in the right and title of the said Crown of England, and Lordship of
Irelond, and should after his decease have descended to the said Edmund
Mortimer Earl of March, son of the said Roger Mortimer Earl of March, as to the
next heir of blood of the same King Richard after his death, if the said
usurpation had not been committed; or after the decease of the same Edmund, to
his next heir of blood by the Law and custom of the said Realm of England the
Manors, Castles, Honors, Lordships, lands, tenements, possessions, and
hereditaments, with their appurtenances, which come to the hands of the said
King Richard by forfeiture, by force of an Act made in a Parliament holden at
Westminster the 21. year of his reign except; the said Commons beseeching our
said Liege Lord to have and take all only the issues and revenues of all the
said Castles, Manors, Lordships, Honors, lands, tenements, rents, services, and
of other the premises aforesaid, with their appurtenances, except before except,
from the said fourth day of the said month of March, and not before. Saving to
every of the liegemen and subjects of our said Sovereign and liege Lord King
Edward the fourth, such lawful title and right, as he, or any other to his use
had in any of the premises the said third day of March, other than he had
either of the grant of the said Henry late Earl of Derby, called King Henry the
fourth, the said Henry his son, or the said Henry, late called King Henry the
sixth, or by authority of any pretenced Parliament holden in any of their days.
And that it be ordained, declared and stablished, by the assent, advice* and
authority aforesaid, That all Statutes, Acts and Ordinances heretofore made, in
and for the hurt, destruction and avoiding of the said right and title of the
said King Richard, or of his heirs, to ask claim, or have the Crown, Royal
power, estate, dignity, pre-eminence, governance, exercise, possessions and
Lordship abovesaid Nota.
be void, and be taken, holden, and reputed void, and for naught, adnulled,
repealed, revoked, and of no force, value or effect. n. 12.
And furthermore consideration and respect had to the Nota.
horrible, detestable, cruel and inhuman tyranny by the said Henry late Earl of
Derby, against his faith and ligeance done and committed to the said King
Richard, his rightwise true and natural Liege and Sovereign Lord, the unright
wise and unlawful usurpation and intrusion of the same Henry upon the said
Crown of England and Lordship of Irelond, the great intolerable hurt,
prejudice, and derogation that thereby followed to the said Edmund Mortymer
Earl of March, next heir of blood of the said King Richard, time of his death,
and to the heirs of the said Edmund, and the great and excessive damage that by
the said usurpations and the continuance thereof has grown to the said Realm
of England, and to the politic and peaceable governance thereof, by inward
wars moved and grounded by occasion of the said Usurpation; It be therefore
Ordained, declared and stablished by the advice, assent and authority
aforesaid, for the more stablishing of the assured and undoubted inward rest
and tranquillity of the said Realm of England; And for the avoiding of the said
usurpation and intrusion very cause and ground of the tribulation, persecution,
and adversity thereof, that the said Henry late Earl of Derby, and the heirs of
his body coming, Nota.
be from henceforth unabled, and taken and holden from henceforth unable and
unworthy, the premises considered, to have, joy, occupy, hold or inherit any
estate, dignity, pre-eminence, enheritaments or possessions within the Realm of
England, Wales or Irelond aforesaid, or in Caleys or the Marches thereof. And
since that the Crown, Royal estate, dignity and Lordship above rehearsed, of
right appertained to the said Noble Prince Richard Duke of York; n. 13.
And that the said Usurper late called King Henry the sixth, that
understanding, to the intent that in his opinion he might the more surely stand
and continue in his usurpation and intrusion of and in the same Crown, Royal
estate, dignities, and Lordship evermore, intended and labored continually by
subtle imaginations, frauds, deceipts and exorbitant means, to the extreme and
final destruction of the same noble Prince Richard and his issue. And for the
execution of this malicious and damnable purpose therein* in a pre^ence
Parliament by him and his usurped authority holden at Coventree the 38 year of
his usurped Reign, without cause lawful or reasonable, declared and judged the
same noble Prince Richard, and the Noble Lords his Sons, that is to wit Edward
then Earl of March, and now the King our Sovereign Lord abovesaid, and Edmund
Earl of Ruthland, to be his Rebels and Enemies, them, and all their issue
dis-inheriting of all name, state, title, and pre-eminence, tenements,
possessions and enheritaments for evermore, cruelly, wickedly and unjustly, and
agenst all humanity, right and reason; whereby the said noble Prince Richard
and his sons above named, were compelled by the dread of death to absent them
for a time out of this Realm of England, the natural land of their birth, unto
their intolerable hurt, prejudice, heaviness and discomfort. And where after
these the said noble Prince Richard Duke of York using the benefice of the Law
of Nature, and sufficiently accompanied for his defense and recovery of his
right to the said Crown of the said Realm came thereunto, not then having any
Lord therein above him but God. And in the time of a Parliament holden by the
said Henry, late called King Henry the sixth, the sixth day of October, the 39
year of his said usurped reign, intended to use his right, and to enter into
the exercise of the royal powers, dignitees, and Lordships abovesaid, as it was
lawful, and according to Law, reason, and justice him so to do; and thereupon
showed, opened, declared, and proved his right and title to the said Crown, to
fore the Lords Spiritual and temporal, and Commons being in the same
Parlitment, by ancient matters of sufficient and notable Record, undefaisible;
whereunto it could not be answered or replied by any matter that of right ought
to have deferred him then from the possession thereof; yet nevertheless for the
tender zeal, love, and affection that the same Duke bare of Godly and blessed
virtues, and natural disposition to the restfull governance and policy of the
same Realm, and the Common well thereof, which he loved all his life, desired
and preferred before all other things earthly, though, all the seid Lords
spiritual and temporal, after long and mature deliberation by them had by good
advice, upon the said right and title, and the authorities and Records proving
the same, the answers thereunto gives, and the repl^cations to the same made,
knew the same right and title true, by them and the seid Commons so declared,
accepted and admitted in the same Parliament. I^ liked him, at the great
instance, desire and request of the seid Lords, solemnply, and many times unto
him made, to assent and grant unto a convention, concord and agreement between
the seid Henry, late called King Henry the sixth on that op^party, and him on
that other, upon the seid right and title by the same late called King, by the
advice and assent of the seid Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, being
in the seid Parliament auctorized, in the same, comprehending, among other,
that the seid Usurper, late called King Henry the sixth, understanding certainly
the seid title of the said Richard Duke of York, just, lawful, true and
sufficient, by the advis and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commyns in the seid Parliament assembled, and by authorite of the same,
declared approved, ratified, confirmed and accepted the seid title, just, good,
lawful and true, and thereunto gave his assent and agrreement of his free will
and liberty; And over that by the seid advis and auctorite, declared, affirmed,
and reputed the seid Richard Duke of York very true and rightful heir to the
Crowns, Royal estate and dignite of the Realms of England and France, and
Lordship of Irelond aforeseid: And that according to the worship and reverence
thereto belonging, he should be taken, accepted and repu^ed in worship and
reverence by all the Estates and persons of the seid Realm of England. The seid
Usurper late called King Henry the sixth, saving and reserving to himself the
seid Crowns, Realms, royal estate, dignite and pre-eminence of the same, and
the seid Lordship of Ireland during his life natural. And further more by the
same advice and authoti^e would, consented and agreed, that after his decease,
or when it should please him to lay from him the seid Crowns, estate, dignity,
and Lordship, or thereof ce^^ede, the seid Richard Duke of York and his heirs
should immediately succeed him in the seid Crowns, Royal Estate, dignity and
Lordship, and them then have and enjoy, any Act of Parliament, Statute,
Ordinance or any thing to the contrary made, or interruption, or discontinuance
of possession notwithstanding: And if any person or persons from thencefor^h
imagined or compaced the death of the seid Richard Duke of York, it be deemed
and judged high Treason, in manner and form as it is specified in the seid Act;
And that the seid Noble Prince Richard Duke of York, by way and consideration
of recompense for his abstaining for a time of the exercise of the seid royal
power of the benign and noble disposition that he bare to the said Common
well, and to the rest and tronquillity of the seid Realm, should have Castles,
Manors, lands and tenements to the value of 10 Mil. Marc. whereof the Earldom
and City of Chester was parcel, assigned to the said Duke by special Act made
in the seid Parliament, the which Earldom and City the seid Duke gave among
other unto our seid Sovereign Lord then being Earl of March, as parcel of
Manors, Lordships, lands and tenements of the yearly value of 3 Mil. Marc.
which, by virtue of the seid convention and concord, and the Act thereof made,
was given unto him for the sustentation of his estate; abiding and persevering
like a true Christian and honorable Prince, in full purpose to keep and
observe the seid Convention and concord for his party, trusting verily that the
seid Usurper Henry, late called King Henry the sixth, would have truly,
faithfully, justly keped and observed for his party the same convention and
concord inviolable, as by Law, reason, Princely honor and duty he was bounden
to do; and not have departed and varied from such convention made of so high
and so great authority as it was made, whereunto neither our seid Sovereign
Lord, ne the seid noble Prince assented, but without prejudice of the seid
right and ritle, as it is plainly specified in the s^id Act made upon the seid
convencion and Concord, and under protestation and condition, that the seid
Usurpour should keep and perform without fraud or male ingyne, all things
therein contained for his seid party, declared openly by their mouths in the
presens and heryng of the said Lords in the seid Parliament, and therein
enacted of Record, at the great instaunce and prayer of the same Usurpour, late
called King Henry the sixth; And at the solemn request of all the seid Lords,
for the tender and special zele, love, and affection that he bare to the rest
of the seid Realm, and to the Commyn well and policy thereof, took his viage of
good, blessed and virtuous intent, and disposition toward the North parties of
the said Realm, to repress and subdue certain riots, rebellions, insurrections,
and commotions there begun. And the premises notwithstanding the seid Henry
Usurpour, late called King Henry the sixth, continuing in his old rancour
malice, using the fraud and malicious disceit and dissimulation agenst troth
and conscience that accord not with the honor of any christian Prince, to
thentent that the said Agreement, concord and Act should take no due effect: And
into the frustacion of the same in the matiers and things above reherced; that
is to say, that neither the seid Richard Duke should have ne enjoy the same
Castells, Manoirs, lands and tenements, name, title, reverence and worship
above reherced, neither he ne his sons and heirs succeed in the seid Corones,
Royal estate, dignity, lordship, after the tenure, fourm and effect of the said
agreement, concord and Act, with all subtle imaginacions and disceitful ways
and means to him possible intended, and covertely labored, excited and
procured the final destruction, murdre and death of the said Richard Duke, and
of his Sons, that is to sey of our seid new Sovereign Lord King Edward the
fourth, then Earl of March, and of the noble Lord Edmund Earl of Ruthlande: And
for the execution of his dampnable and malicious purpose, by writing and other
messages, moeved, excited and stirred thereunto the Dukes of Excester and
Somerset, and other Lords, being then in the North parties of this Realm;
whereupon at Wakefeld in the Shire of York, the seid Duke of Somerset falsely
and traitorously the same Noble Prince, Duke of York, on Teiusday the 30 day of
December. last passed, horribly, cruelly, traitorously murdered, And also the
worthy and good Lords Edmund Earl of Ruthland, Brother of our seid Sovereign
Lord, and Richard Earl of Salesbury. And not therewith content, of their
insatiable malice after that they were deed made them to beheaded with
abhomynable cruelte and horrible despite, agenst all humanite and nature of
Nobles, And after that the same Henry Usurpour gretely and wonderfuly joying
the seid dolorous and piteous murder of the same noble Prince and worthy Lords,
to the Realm, an heavy and a lamentable sorrow, and lost; forthwith, and
oftentimes after openly declared to diverse Lords of the same Realm, That he
would not in any wise keep the seid Convencioun and accord, ne the act thereof
made: and to the infraccion and violatiation of the said convention and
concord, not only sent Letters made under his prive Seal unto certain Knights
and Squiers, commanding and charging them by the same, to spoil and disseise
our seid Sovereign Lord by the name of Earl of March, of his possession of the
seid Earldom and City of Chester, whereof he was lawfully possessed and seized
by virtue and reason of the seid Convencion and Concord, but also of extreme
violence, utter and final breche of his party of the seid convencions and
concord, sent out writs under his Seal to the Mayer, Aldermen, and Commonalte
of the City of London, bering date the 22 day of Feverere last past, and other
like Writs to diverse Officers, Governors, and Ministers of diverse other
Citees, and to many Shires and Buroughs of the seid Realm, to make falls,
untrue and injust proclamations against our seid Sovereign and Liege Lord K.
Ed. the 4th. by the name of Ed. late E. of March, to provoke and excite his
destruction. And also by his Letters signed with his hand directed unto the
seid Dukes of Excester and Somerset, and other Lords refused and denied to keep
and observe the seid accord, convention and agreement, and by the same writing
falsifying his promise, departed from the same Convention and accord, before
either the same our Sovereign Lord, or the seid noble Prince his Fader any
thing did, or attempted to the contrary of the same convention and concord for
their party. Be it declared and juged by the seid advis, assent and authorite,
the premises considered, n. 14.
that the seid Usurper Henry, late called Henry the sixth, agenst good faith,
troth, conscience, and his honor, brake the seid Convention and concord, and
departed therefrom of wilful malice long before the seid fourth day of March,
as by the matters before declared it appears sufficiently: And that the breche
thereof on his party, discharged our seid Sovereign Lord of all things that
should or might charge him to the keeping thereof in any Article or point after
the seid breche. And that he was then at his freedom and liberty to use his
said right and title of the seid Crowns, and to enter into the exercise
thereof, and of the Royal power, dignite and pre-eminence longing thereunto, as
he lawfully did in manner and fourm above specified, the seid convention and
concord, and the Act thereupon made, or any thing therein contained
notwithstanding. And over this it be declared and juged by the seid advis,
assent and authorite, that the seid agreement, concord, and Act, in all things
which been in any wise repugnant or contrary to the seid right, title, entree,
state, seasen and possession of our Sovereign Lord King Edward the fourth, in
and to the Crown Royal, estate, dignite and Lordship above said, be void and of
no force ne effect. And that it be Ordained and stablished by the seid assent,
advis and authorite, that every person having any parcel of the seid Castles,
Manors, Lands, Honors, tenements, rents, services, possessions or
hereditaments aboveseid, the which were given in exchange, or in recompense of
or for any other Manors, Castles, lands, tenements, rents, advowsons,
fee-farms, reversions, or any other possessions or enheritaments given to the
seid Henry late Earl of Derby, to the seid Henry his son, late called King
Henry the fifth, or to the seid Henry his son late called King Henry the sixth,
or to any other person or persons to or for their or any of their use at their
or any of their desire, or to perform and execute their or any of their will,
mow, enter; And that they and their heirs and successors enter into the same
Manors, Castles, Lands, tenements, rents, services, possessions, advowsons or
hereditaments so given, And them have, hold, keep, joy, occupy and inherit of
like estate as the giver or givers thereof had them at the time of the gift
thereof made, though it be so that in any of the Letters Patents or gifts made
of any of the premises, no mention be made of any recompense or eschange. Qua
quidem petitione in Parliamento praedicto lecta, audita, and before
intellecta, de avisamento and assensu Dominorum Spiritualium and Temporalium in
eodem Parliam. existen. and ad requisitionem Communitatis praedictae,
respondebatur eidem, modo and forma hic Inferius annotatis.

The King, by the advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in this
present Parliament assembled, Respons.
at the request of the Commyns being in the same, agrees and assenteth to this
Petition, and it accepts, with certain moderations, provisions and exceptions
by his Highness thereupon made, and in schedules written, and in the same
Parliament delivered, the tenours of which hereunder follow, etc.

Convenit cum Recordo. This Judgment, censure, repeal in full Parliament of
the deposition and proceeding against King Richard the 2. upon the Commons own
Petition, by this Act, never yet reversed, as most wicked, treasonable,
unrighteous, against Gods Laws and Man's, crying for vengeance in Gods hearing
in heaven, and exemplarily punished upon the whole kingdom, Nation, and Henry
the 4. his posterity on earth, with the sad intestine wars, miseries that
attended it, are sufficient arguments of its unlawfulness and detestableness,
against all those who deem it just, or allege it for a president to justify
their extravagances of a more execrable and transcendent Nature. 16ly, It is
very observable, that Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, who had the chief hand in
deposing, murdering King Edward the 2. after he was deposed, was Henry de
Knyghton, de Event. Angl. l. 3. c. 16. col. 2556, 2557, 2558.
in the Parliament of 4 E. 3. condemned and executed for it as a Traitor,
without any legal trial, all his lands confiscated; and Queen Isabel her self
(who concurred with him) like to be questioned for her life and abridged in her
maintenance. Moreover, King Richard the 2. Granchild and next heir to King
Edward the 3. who imprisoned, deposed and invaded his Fathers throne, (though
somewhat against his will) was imprisoned, deposed, proceeded against in the
self same manner as Edw. the 2. was, by his very president, and soon after
murdered (like as Edw. the 2. was) by King Henry the 4. After which king Henry
the 4. his Granchild, Henry the 6. was also in the self same manner,
imprisoned, deposed, attainted of high Treason, with his Queen and Adherents in
the Parliament of 1 Edw. 4. n. 8. to 33. and at last murdered by Edw. the 4.
his procurement, to secure the Crown to himself and his Posterity. Yet no
sooner was King Edw. the 4. dead, but his own Brother See Sir Tho. Moor, Hall
Holinshed, Grafton, Speed, Baker, in R. 3. An Exact abridgment, p. 709, 710,
711, etc.
Richard Duke of Gloucester, (who by his instigation murdered King Henry the 6.
with his own hands) procuring himself to be Protector of his son, King Edw. the
5. then young, getting his Brother and him into his custody by treachery,
perjury, and hypocrisy, caused them both to be barbarously murdered, to set
the Crown on his own head; which he most ambitiously aspired after, yet seemed
unwilling to embrace, till enforced to accept it, by a Petition and Declaration
(drawn up by his own Instruments) presented to him, in the name of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of the Realm of England; wherein he branded
his Brother king Edw. the fourth his marriage, as illegal, and his issue as
illegitimate; aspersed his Life and Government, as one by whom the Laws of God,
of Gods Church, of the Land, and of nature, and also the laudable Customs and
Liberties of England (wherein every English man is inheritor) were broken,
subverted, contemned, against all reason and justice; So that the Land was
ruled by self-will and pleasure, fear and dread, all manner of Equity and Law
laid apart and despised, so that no man was sure of his life, land, or
livelihood; and many inward discords, battles, effusion of much Christian
blood, and destruction of the Nobles blood of this land, ensued and were
committed through all the Realm, unto the great sorrow and heaviness of all
true Englishmen. And then he declared himself, undoubted heir and inheritor of
the Crown by descent, grounded on the Laws of God and Nature, and the ancient
Laws and laudable Customs of this Realm; yet for further security superadded
another Title, of lawful Election by the three Estates in Parliamen^; then he
intayled the Crown upon the issue of his body begotten, and declared his son
Prince Edward to be his heir apparent, to succeed him in the Crown and royal
Dignity by Act of Parliament, which he ratified with his own royal assent. This
done, he reputed the Crown cock-sure to him and his heirs for all generations.
Yet notwithstanding all his Machiavilian Policies, Power, Vigilance, care,
industry to secure his usurped Royalty, by the murder of two Kings and many
others, (some of them most instrumental to advance him to the royal Throne)
before he had worn the Crown full 3. years, Henry Earl of Derby laying Title
it, and landing in Wales only with 2000 soldiers, King Richards own Soldiers,
Friends and others revolting from him, and joining with the Duke; he was slain
in Posworth field, and lost both his life and Crown together, if not his soul
for all eternity: and by the Statute of 1 H. 7. c. 6. he was declared an
Usurper of the Realm. So unable are Parliaments themselves to secure Crowns on
Usurpers heads, or to entayl them for any long continuance on their
Posterities; as these sad tragical domestic presidents of later times with
sundry antienter demonstrate.

See Hall, Grafton, Speed, Holinshed, Sir Francis Bacon, in his life*
King Henry the seventh, having gained actual possession of the Crown, as right
heir thereunto by the Lancastrian line, and espoused the better title of York,
by marrying the heir female; to secure himself and his adherents for the
future, if any wars should arise about these dubious litigious Titles by Perkin
Warbecks or others claims, confirmed by several Acts of Parliament, and
Successions of Kings of both Houses, claiming both as next heirs of the ancient
royal Line; not to secure any future Usurpers, without just right or title,
though not of the old blood Royal, if once Kings de facto, as 3 Instit. f. 7.
Sir Edward Cook seems to intimate, and some ignorant Lawyers assert, (against
the intent and Prologue of the Act it self,) caused it to be enacted, 11 H. 7.
c. 1. That from henceforth no person or persons whatsoever, that attend upon
THE KING and Sovereign Lord of this Land for the time being in his person, and
do him true and faithful Service of allegiance in the same, or be in other
places by his commandment in the wars within the Land or without; shall for
the said deed, and true duty of allegiance, be in no wise convict or attaint of
High Treason, or other offenses for that cause by Act of Parliament, or
otherwise, by any process of Law, whereby he or any of them shall lose or
forfeit life, lands, goods, chattels, or any other things; but to be for that
deed and service utterly discharged of any vexation, trouble or loss. And if
any Act or Acts, or any other process of the Law hereafter thereupon for the
same happen to be made, contrary to this Ordinance, that then that Act or Acts,
or other process of the Law, whatsoever they shall be, shall stand and be
utterly void: The reason is rendered in the Prologue; That it is not reasonable,
but against all Laws, reason and good conscience, that the said Subjects going
with their Sovereign Lord in wars, attending upon his person, or being in other
places, by his commandment, within this Land or without, any thing should lose
or forfeit for doing their true duty and service of Allegiance. This Act (which
some conceive to be only See 1 H. 7. c. 6.
personal and temporary for Henry the 7. alone) could not secure the Heads,
Lives, Liberties, Lands, Offices, Goods or Chattels of those Lords, Gentlemen,
and other English Subjects, from Executions, Imprisonments, Banishments,
Forfeitures, Sequestrations, who accompanied, assisted our late King in his
wars against the Parliament, though King de facto, and de jure too, without
any competitor: See An Exact abridgment, p. 150, 151, 259, 260, 261, 299, 300,
576, 611, 612. The History of Independency, Part. 2.
Both Houses declaring them to BE TRAITORS, and sequestring, proceeding against
them as Traitor, yea our Grandees since have executed them as such, in their
new erected High Courts: How then it can totally indemnify any Perkin Warbecke,
Jack Cade, or apparent Usurpers of the Crown without right or Title, who shall
per fas aut nefas, get actual possession of the Royal throne, and be Kings de
facto; or secure all those who faithfully adhere unto them (though to
dispossess the King de jure, or his right heir of their just royalty and right,
against all Laws of God, man, all rules of justice, and their very Oaths of
Allegiance, Supremacy, Homage, Fealty, Protestations, Leagues, Covenants
formerly made unto them) from all suits, vexations, losses, forfeitures
whatsoever, and null all Act or Acts, and legal Process made against them (as
many Grand Lawyers now conceive it does) transcends both my Law and reason too.
That opinion of Sir Edward Cook 3. Instit. f. 7. and 9 E. 4. f. 1. b. (whereon
this erroneous Gloss is grounded) That a King regnant in possession of the
Crown and kingdom, though he be Rex de facto, and non de jure; yet he is,
Seignior le Roy, within the purview of the Statute of 25 E. 3. chapter 2. of
Treason: and the other King that has right and is out of possession, IS NOT
WITHIN THIS ACT. Nay, if Treason be committed against a King de facto, et non
de jure, and after the King de jure comes to the Crown, he shall punish the
Treason done to the King de facto. And a pardon granted by a King de jure, that
is not also de facto, is void: being no doubt a very dangerous, and pernicious
Error both in Law and policy, perverting those Laws which were purposely made
for the preservation of the Lives, Crowns, Rights, Titles, Persons of lawful
Kings, against all attempts, Treasons, Rebellions against them; and for the
exemplary punishment of all Traitors, Rebels, Usurpers who should rebel, wage
war, or attempt any Treason, Conspiracy against their royal Persons, Crowns,
Dignities, Titles; into a mere Patronage of Traitors, Rebels, Usurpers and a
Seminary of endless Treasons, Assassinations, Conspiracies against them; by
indemnifying, exempting both them and their Confederates from all legal
prosecutions, penalties, forfeitures whatsoever, if they can but once gain
actual possession of the Crown by any means, upon the forcible expulsion,
deposition, assassination, or murder of the King de jure. Which if once
declared for Law, I appeal to all Lawyers, Politicians, Statesmen whatsoever,
whether it would not presently involve our kingdoms in endless, perpetual
Rebellions, Usurpations, War, Regicides, as it did the Norwegians heretofore:
where by a kind of Law and Custom, as our Hist. Angl. l. 3. c. 8. p. 233, 234.
Gulielmus Nubrigensis relates: Q^cunque Rege tyrannice occiderat, eo ipso
personam et potestatem Regiam induens, suo quoque occisori tandem post modicum
fortunam inveteratae consuetudinis lege relicturus. Quippe ut dicitur) a centum
retro annis et eo amplius, cum Regum ibidem numerosa successio fuerit, Nullus
eorum senio aut morbo vitam finivit, fed omnes ferro interiere, suis
interfectoribus, tanquam legitimis successoribus, regni fastigium relinquentes:
ut scilicet omnes qui tanto tempore ibidem imperasse noscuntur, illud quod
Scriptum est respicere videatur; 1 Kings 21.19.
OCCIDISTI INSUPER ET POS SEDISTI. Wherefore to prevent the dangerous
Consequences of these false Glosses on the Statutes of 25 E. 3. c. 2. and 11 H.
7. c. 1. I shall lay down these infallible grounds: 1. That all See Fortesc^e,
de Laudibus legum Angliae.
public Laws are and ought to be founded in Justice, righteousness, and common
honesty, for the preserving, securing the lives, persons, estates of all men,
especially of lawful Kings and Supreme Magistrates from all violence, invasion
force, disseisins, usurpations, conspiracies, assassinations, (being against
all rules of Law and Justice,) Exodus 20.12. to 18. c. 21, and 22. and 23. Mat.
5.17. to 48. c. 7. 12. Deuteronomy. 4.18. Psalm. 19.8.9. Ps. 119.7.106, 137, 138^160,
167. Romans 7.12. Deuteronomy. 6.25. Ps. 33.5. Ps. 45.7. Ps. 72.2. Ps. 74.15. Prove.
8.18. Prove. 24.21. Romans 13.1. to 7. Lu. 20.25. Tit. 3.1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 1.9, 10.
Job 20.19. c. 24.2. Mich. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. Jer. 6.7. c. 20.8. c. 22.3.17. Ezech.
45. c. Hab. 1, 2. to 10. Lu. 3.14, Whence De Legibus, p. 490.
Cicero thus defines Law; Lex est ratio summa, insita in natura, quae jubet ea
(justa) quae facienda sunt, prohibe que contraria. Therefore these 2. Statutes
were purposely made for those great ends, and ought to be interpreted only for
the best advantage of Lawful Kings and their adherents; not for the indemnity,
impunity, encouragement of Traitors, Rebels, Intruders, Usurpers. 2ly, What De
Inventio: p. 50.
Tully writes of the Roman Senators, we ought to do the same of our English
Parliaments and Legislators: Ea virtute et sapientia majores nostri fuerunt, ut
legibus scribendis nihil sibi aliud quam salutem atque utilitatem reipublicae
proponerent. Whence he there inferrs: A Legibus nihil convenit arbitrari, nisi
quod reipublicae conducat, proficisci; quoniam ejus causa sunt comparatae.
Therefore these Laws are to be interpreted for the best security, safety,
preservation of the lawful heads of the Commonwealth, and their rightful
heirs and loyal dutiful subjects; not for their destruction, and the
indemnity, security of Usurpers, Traitors, Rebels, aspiring after their Crowns,
Thrones, Assassinations, to the public ruin. 3ly, All the branches of the
Statute of 25 E. 3. c. 2. ( made at the special request of the Lords and
Commons, and that by a lawful King at that season) declare this Statute to be
meant only of a lawful King whiles living, whether in or out of actual
possession of the Realm, not of a bare Usurper in possession without right, as
Sir Edward Cook expounds it: See Cooks 8 Report. s. 28.
else it will necessarily follow That it shall be no Treason at all to compass
or imagine the death of the King de jure (if once dispossessed for a time by
Violence and Treason) or of his Queen, or eldest son and heir; or to violate
his Queen or eldest daughter not married: or to levy war against the lawful
King in his Realm, or to be adherent to his Enemies within the Realm or
elsewhere, or to counterfeit his Great or Privy Seal or money; etc. But high
Treason in all these particulars in relation only to the Usurper in possession,
without and against all right and Title: which would put all our rightful Kings
and Supreme Governors into a far worser, sadder condition, than their
Traiterous Usurpers: and into a worse plight than every Disseisee, or lawful
heir intruded upon by abatement, or dispossessed by torcions, unjust, or
forcible entries; for which our See Brook, Fitzherbert, Statham, Ash, and
Rastals Abridgments, Title, Disseisin, Abatement, Forcible Entries, Assize,
Imprisonment, Intrusion, etc.
Common and Statute Laws have provided many speedy and effectual means of
recovering their possessions, and Damages too against Disseisor^; Abators,
Intruders on their Inheritances, Freeholds; and for exemplary punishment,
fining, imprisonment of the Disseisors, Abaters; but no means of recovery at
all for our dishinherited, disposse^ed Kings or their heirs against Intruders,
Usurpers of their Crowns; nor punishments against them, their Confederates, or
Adherents, if our Laws concerning Treasons extend not unto them, though Kings
de jure, but only to Usurpers de facto, et non de jure; and if the Statute of
11 H. 7. exempt them from all kinds of penalties, forfeitures by the lawful
King, when he regains possession of the Crown; as some now expound them, 4ly.
It is resolved both by our 1 E. 4. n. 10, 11. 1 Ja^. c. 1. Cook 7 Rep. f. 10,
11. Calvin's case, and fol. 30, 31. Cooks 3 Instit. f. 7.
Statutes, Judges, Lawbooks, over and over: That there is no Inter-regnum in
our hereditary kingdom, or any other: That so soon as the rightful hereditary
King dies, the Crown and Realm immediately descend unto and are actually vested
in the person and possession of the right heir, before either he be actually
proclaimed or crowned King* and that it is high Treason, to attempt any thing
against his Person or royal authority before his Coronation, because he is both
King de jure, and de facto too: as was adjudged in Watsons and Clerks case,
Hill. 1. Jacobi: Hence upon the death of Mat. West. An. 1272. p. 251, 252. See
Walsingham, Holinshed, Daniel, Speed Grafton, Baker, An. 1 E. 1.
King Henry the 3. though Prince Edward his heir was absent out of the Realm in
the holy wars, where he received a dangerous wound by an assassinate, and was
not certainly known to be alive; yet all the Nobility, Clergy and people going
to the high Altar at Westminster, swore fealty and allegiance to him as their
King, appointed a New Seal and Officers under him, qui thesauram Regis and
pacem regni fideliter custodirent: Sicque pax Novi Regis Edwardi in cunctis
finibus regni proclamatur; Edwardo fidelitatem Jurantes; qui si viveret penitus
ignorarunt. Besides it is both enacted, resolved in our Praerog. Regis, c.
8.13. Stamf. Prerog. c. 14. f. 40. c. 24 f. 72. See all the Books cited in
Ashes Tables, Tit. Intrusion, Praerogative 22. Britton, f. 88 Littleton sect.
178. Cooks 1 Instit. f. 119. Cook 7 Rep. f. 28.
Statutes, Lawbooks, That Nullum tempus occurrit Regi: and that when the King
is once in legal possession of his Crown Lands, or any Lands holden of him by
reason of his Praerogative, he who enters or intrudes upon them, shall gain no
freehold thereby: yea, if the Kings Tenant dies, and his heir enter into the
lands his ancestors held of the King, before that he has done his homage and
received seisin of the King, though he has a right of inheritance to the Lands
by Law, yet he shall gain no freehold, and if he die, yet his wife shall not be
endowed, because he gained no freehold, by his entry, but only a naked
possession; much les then shall a mere Intruder gain any Freeheld or interest in
the Crown or Crown lands it self, to the prejudice of the rightful King or his
heirs; This is most evident, by the sacred presidents of K. David, still King,
when unjustly dispossessed and driven out of his kingdom by his unnatural Son
Absolon, who made himself King de facto: (who was yet a traitor with all his
Adherents, and came to a tragical end) 2. Sam. c. 15. to c. 20. by the case of
1 Kings 1.2.
Adonijah the Usurper and his Adherents, slain and degraded as Traitors; and of
the Usurper Athaliah, who had near 7. years possession of the Throne, and slew
all the blood royal, but Ioash; yet was she dispossessed, slain as a murderer,
traitor, usurper, and Ioash the right heir set upon the Throne, and crowned
King by Jehoiada the high Priest, the Captains and Rulers of the host, and
Officers, people of the Land who all rejoiced and the City was quiet after that
they had slain Athaliah with the sword; 2 Kings 11. 2 Chro. c. 23. And as this
was Gods Law amongst the Jews: So it was the ancient Law of England, under the
ancient Britons; as is evident by the case of the Usurper Vortigern, Mat. West.
An. 445. to 467. See Holinshed, Grafton, Speed, and others in their lives.
Galfridus Monumetensis, and Ponticus Verunnius: Hist. l. 6, 7, 8.
who after his Usurpation of the Crown by the murder of two rightful Kings,
Constantine and Constance, and near 20 years possession by usurpation; the
Britons calling in and crowning Aurelius Ambrosius the right heir, for their
lawful King, he was prosecuted by him, as a Traitor both to his Father and
Brother, whom he caused to be murdered to gain the Crown, besieged, assaulied
and burnt to death in the Castle of Genorium in Wales with all his adherents
that were in it. This Law continued not only under our Saxon Kings, but
English too: as is evident by the case of See Hoveden, Nubrigensis, Mat. Paris,
Mat. Westminster, Bromton, Daniel, Holinshed, Polychronicon, Fabian, Baker
Stow, Speed, in the life of King Stephen, and Henry 2.
Qu. Maud, reputed a lawful Queen, notwithstanding the usurpation, Coronation
and actual possession of King Stephen in her absence* Gulielmus Nubrigensis,
lib. 2. cap. 2. Chronicon Johan. Bromton, col. 1044.
all whose grants of the Crown lands were resumed by her Son King Henry the 2.
and King Stephens Charters and Grants of them, resolved null and void against
King Henry, because made by a Usurper, and Invader of the Crown.

Mat. West. Mat. Paris, An. 1216. Polychronicon, Fabian, Daniel, Holinshed,
Grafton, Speed, in K. John, and H. 3.
King John in the year 1216. was renounced by most of his Nobles, Barons,
people, who elected, crowned, and swore allegiance to Jews, as their King; and
dispossessed King John of all or most of the Realm: who thereupon, at his
death, cum summa mentis amaritudine, maledicens, and non valedicens omnibus
Baronibus suis, pauper and omni thesauro destitutus, nec etiam tantillum terrae
in pace ^inens, ut vere JOHANNIS EXTORRIS, diceretur, ex hac vita miserrime
transmigravit; Henricum primogenitum suum REGNI CONSTITUENS HAEREDEM; Yet no
sooner was he dead, though Jews was K. de facto, and that by the Barons own
election, who called him in and crowned him; but Gualo the Popes Legate, and
many of the Nobles and People as^embling at Gloucester, there crowned Henry his
Son, for their true and lawful King at Gloucester, cogente necessitate: quoniam
Westmonasterium, ubi locus est ex consuetudine regiae consecrationis deputatus,
tunc ab inimicis suis suit obsessum. After his Coronation he received the
homages and fealties of all the Bishops, Earls, Barons, and others present at
his Coronation, Mat. Paris. p. 278.
Sicque Nobiles Universi and Castellani, eo multo fidelius quam regi Johanni
adhaeserunt, quia propria patris iniquitas, UT CUNCTIS VIDEBATUR, filio non
debuit imputari, After which most of the Nobles and English deserting Jews,
submitted themselves to Henry as their lawful Sovereign, routed the French
forces, besieged Jews in London, forced him to swear that he would depart the
Realm, and never to return more into it during his life, and presently restore
all the Lands and Castles he had taken in England, by war, and resign them to
King Henry: Which he accordingly performed. Most of the Barons who adhered to
Jews, and submitted themselves to King Henry, were by agreement restored to
all their rights, inheritances and Liberties: But Mat. Paris, p. 288. Mat.
West. p. 106.
some Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Secular Canons, and many Clergymen, qui
Ludovico and Baronibus consilium praestuerant, et favorem, and continued
obstinare, were excepted out of the composition between King Henry and Jews,
and thereupon deprived of their livings, goods, and forced to make fines and
compositions, for adhering to the Usurper Jews, though King de facto for a
season. Therefore a King de facto, gets neither a legal freehold against the
King de Jure, or his heirs; nor can he indemnify his adherents against his
Justice, who are still Traitors by adhering to him though crowned: and the King
de jure may punish them as such. 5ly, Since the Statute of 25 E. 3. See An
exact Collection, p. 670, 671, 672, 677, etc.
(which altered not the Law in this point before it) in the Parliaments of 1 E.
4. ro^. Parl. n. 8. to 37.4 E. 3. n. 28. to 41.14 E. 4. n. 34, 35, 36. King
Henry the 6. himself, (though king de facto for 39. years, and that by Act of
Parliament, and a double descent from Henry the 4th, and 5th, Usurpers and
Intruders) together with his Queen, and sundry Dukes, Earls, Barons, Nobles,
Knights, Gentlemen who adhered to him in his wars against Richard Duke of
York, and Edward the 4th, King de jure; were all attainted of high Treason,
all their lands, goods, chattels forfeited, some of them executed as Traitors,
for adhering to Henry the 6. and assisting him in his wars against Edward the
4th. king only de jure, it being adjudged High Treason within the Statute of 25
E. 3. against Sir Edward Cooks fond opinion to the contrary. As for the
Year-book of 9 E. 4. f. 1. b. that the King de jure when restored to the Crown,
may punish Treason against the king de facto, who usurped on him, either by
levying war against him, or compassing his death, it was so far from being
reputed Law in any age, (being without and against all Presidents) or in King
Edward the fourths reign, that those who levied war against Henry the 6. were
advanced, rewarded as loyal Subjects, not punished as Traitors for it, by King
Edward the 4th, when actually King; It being not only a disparagement,
contradiction to the Justice, Wisdom, Title, Policy, and dangerous to the
person, safety of any King de jure, to punish any of his Lieges, Subjects for
attempting the destroying, deposing of an Vsuper of his Crown, and Archtraytor
to his person; but an owning of that Usurper as a lawful King, against whom
high Treason might be legally committed, and a great discouragement to all
loyal Subjects for the future, to aid him against any Intruders that should
attempt or invade his Throne, for fear of being punished as Traitors, for this
their very loyalty and zeal unto his safety. Moreover all the gifts, grants
made by Henry the 4, 5, 6. themselves; or in and by any pretenced Parliaments
under them, were nulled, declared void, and resumed, they being but mere
Usurpers and kings de facto, not de jure. 6ly, It is the judgment, resolution
of Plutarchi Poplicola, Bodins Commonwealth, l. 2. c. 5. Cicero Orat. pro T.
Ann: Milone. Aquinas de Regimine Principum, l. 1. c. 6. 2 Did. artic. 44. qu.
2.2.5 m. Emanuel Sa. Aphorism, verb. Tyrannus* Mariana de Rege and Regum
Instit. l. 1. c. 5, 6, 7, 8. Buchanan de Jure Regni apud Scotos: and Rerum
Scot. Hist. Junius Brutus Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, quaest. 2, 3. Grotius de
Jure Belli, l. 1. c. 4.
learned Politicians, Historians, Civilians, Canonists, Divines, as well
Protestants as Papists, Jesuits, and of some Regal Tyranny Discovered: Killing
no Murder.
Levellers, in this age, that it is no Offense, Murder, Treason at all by the
Laws of God or men, but a just, lawful, commendable, heroic, righteous, and
meritorious action, to kill, destroy, dethrone or wage war against a professed
Tyrant, especially such a one who invades his lawful Sovereigns Throne, Crown,
by perjury, treason, force, regicide, expulsion, deposition, or assassination
of his rightful undoubted Sovereign, against his duty, and allegiance, without
any color of just Title to the Crown. And this they hold unquestionable, when
done either by command or commission from the King de jure^ or his rightful
heir or successor, though out of actual possession; or out of mere loyalty and
duty to restore them to the just possession of their Thrones, or to free their
Native Country from the miseries, oppressions, wars, murders, bloudsheds, and
apparent destruction occasioned by his Usurpation of the Crown; which is
warranted by the presidents of Athaliah 2 Kings 11. and 2 Chronicles. 23. and of
Zimri, 1 Kings 16.8. to 23. recorded in Scripture, with hundreds of examples in
other Histories of all ancient and modern Empires, kingdom^. Besides, when the
usurping King de facto is removed, dead, destroyed, and the king de jure, or
his right heir, restored by way of Littleton, sect. 659, etc. and Cook, ibid.
remitter to the actual possession of the Crown, in disaffirmance of the
usurpers right and possession, they are in the selfsame plight and condition in
Law, as if they had never been usurped upon or dispossessed of the Throne.
Therefore the King de jure can neither in Law nor Justice when remitted, punish
any such attempt against the king de facto, as Treason; it being no Treason in
it self, and the Usurper no lawful king at all, but the very worst and
greatest of Traitors, whiles a Usurper. So that 9 E. 4. f. 1. b. can be no Law
at all, but a most gross absurdity. 7ly, It is a Principle in Law, that no Lit.
sect. 237, 238, 240, 461. Cooks 1 Instit. f. 271. ^. 9 H. 7.21. b.
Disseisor, Trespassor or Wrong-doer, shall apportion or take advantage of his
own wrong, in the case of a common person: much less then shall the Usurper of
the actual possession of his lawful Sovereigns Crown, being the highest
Offender, Traitor, Wrong-doer, take advantage to secure himself or his
adherents, by his wrongful, traiterous possession, against the Statute of 25.
E. 3. or the ax of Justice. The rather, because this See here, p. 275, 276.278,
281.323, 324, 327, 328.
Statute was made, and the Treasons therein specified, declared and enacted to
be Treason by King Edward the 3. and most of of those Lords, who in the
Parliament of 4 E. 3. (but 21. years before) at this Kings request, and by his
assent, declared, adjudged, condemned, executed Roger Mortimer, and his
Accomplices as Traitors, guilty of HIGH TREASON for murdering King Edward the 2.
his father, after he was deposed in Parliament, because he was still king de
jure, though not de facto: Therefore they most undoubtedly resolved the king de
jure, though not regnant, to be a King within that Act; not the king de facto,
without right or title, as Sir Edward Cook erroniously asserts. 8ly, If the
imagining or compassing the death, or deposing, or imprisoning of the King
declared by overt act, or rearing war against him, or adhering to his enemies,
by any ambitious Usurper, be High Treason within this Act, for which he and his
adherents shall lose their lives, lands, estates, and suffer as Traitors,
though he never actually kill, depose, imprison or dispossess the King of his
actual Regal power, as the Spelman. Council. p. 297.521.
Council of Calchuth, An. 787. cap. 3. The Council of Aenham, An. 1009. cap.
26. with all our ancient Bromton, Chron. col. 822.828.
Laws, Lawbooks, Lawyers cited by Sir Edw: Cook in his 3. Instit. c. 1, 2. the
Statutes of 25 E. 3. all our Rastals Abridgment, Tit. Treason, See Crookes
Reports, p. 117, to 126.583.
other Acts concerning Treason: and the forecited Judgments, Presidents in
Parliament, with others in Queen Elizabeth's reign abundantly evidence: Then it
is much more High Treason in the highest degree within the letter* intention of
all these Laws, actually to usurp and get possession of the Crown by levying
war against, and imprisoning, degrading, expelling, banishing or murdering the
lawful King himself, and depriving him or his right heir of the possession of
the Crown; there being a complication of all the highest Treasons involved in
an actual usurpation, and a greater damage, prejudice to the King, kingdom,
than in a successless attempt alone, which proves abortive, and is quickly
ended. And if so, then such an Arch-Traytors actual usurpation of the Crown,
must by consequence be so far from indemnifying him, or mitigating, or
expiating his Treasons, that it does aggravate them to the highest pitch, and
expose him and his adherents to the highest penalties though king de facto, and
that both by the Law of God himself; as is evident by the cases of 2 Kings 11 2 Chronicles. 33.
Athaliah, and of 1 Kings 15.25. to 31. c. 16.1. to 21.
Baasha, who conspiring against and slaying his Sovereign Nadab, son of
Jeroboam, and then reigning in his stead, smote all the House of Jeroboam, not
leaving to him any that breathed, according to the saying of the Lord: yet
because he provoked God to a^ger with the works of his hands in being like the
House of Jeroboam, 2 Kings 16.
and BECAUSE HE KILLED HIM; his son Elah (who reigned in his stead two years)
was by Gods retaliating Justice slain by Zimri: who reigning in his stead,
as soon as he sat on the Throne, slew all the house of Baasha, so that he left
him not one that pissed against the wall, neither of his kinsfolks nor of his
Friends, according to the word of the Lord which he spoke against Baasha by
Jehu the prophet. When Zimri had thus reigned by Usurpation, bloodshed but 7.
days, all the people of Israel that were encamped against Gibethon, hearing
that Zimri had conspired and also slain the King made Omri, Captain of the
host, king over Israel that day in the camp: who presently all marched from
Gibethon to Tirzah, and besieged Zimri in it; where he was burnt with fire in
the Kings house, and died for his sins, and THE TREASON which he wrought. All
these Usurpers, though kings de facto, and Gods special instruments to punish
and cut off other evil Kings and their families (who usurped the Crown of
Israel and kept the 10. revolting Tribes from the house of David to whom God
had annexed them at first, till rent from it by Jeroboams rebellion for
Solomon's sin) were yet Traitors still in Gods and men's account, and thus
exemplarily slain and punished as such. The like Examples we find in the
Gothish and Spanish Histories, every such actual Invader of the Crown, qui
regem nece attractaverit, aut potestate Regni exuerit, aut praesumptione
tyrannica regni fastigium usurpaverit; being condemned and for ever accursed
excommunicated with the highest Anathema that can be inflicted, by the Su^ius
Council. Tom. 2. p. 736, 737, 739.
4. Council of Toledo, can. 74. and also by the 5. Can. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. The like
presidents we find in the Histories of the Roman Emperors, of the kings of
Denmark, Poland, France, Scotland, and other Realms, where Usurpers of the
Crown, though in actual possession, have been often times slain and executed as
the archest Traitors by the rightful Kings or their heirs, or the Nobles and
people of th^se Realm; their possessions of the Crown, being no expiation of
their Treasons, Regicides, but an 1 Kings 21.19. Mat. 21.38, 39, 40, 41.
aggravation of them, both in Law and Gospel account, unable to secure their
heads, lives, by their own Law and concession, since the actual coronation,
unction and possession of the kings de Jure whom they murdered, deposed against
their Oaths, allegiance, duties, could neither preserve their crowns, persons,
nor lives from their violence and intrusion. To omit Chytraei Chron. l. 14.
Sleidans Com. l. 5.10.
he hanging up of John of Leyden, who crowned himself a king, with his
companions, for Traitors, at Munster, An. 1535. with all ancient domestic
presidents of this kind among our British and Saxon kings: it is very
observable, that in the An Exact abridgement, p. 670* 666, 667.
Parliament of 1 E. 4. n. 17, 18. Henry the 6. though king de facto, together
with his Queen, Son Edward Prince of Wales, the Duke of Somerset, and sundry
others, were attainted of high Treason, for killing See here, p. 474, 475, 476.
Rich. Duke of York at Wakefield, being only king de jure, and declared heir
and successor to the Crown after King Henry his death; in the P^rliament of 39
H. 6. n. 18. though never crowned, and not to enjoy the possession of it during
the reign of King Henry: yet Henry the 6. his murder after his deposition, was
never inquired after, though king de facto for sundry years, and that by
descent from 2. usurping ancestors, nor yet reputed Treason. After this
Graftons Chronicle, p. 852. Hall, Holinshed, Speed, and others in his life.
king Richard the 3d. usurping the Crown, and enjoying it as king de facto for
2. years, 2. months, and one day; was yet slain in Bosworth field, as an
usurping bloody Traitor, stripped naked to the skin, without so much as a clout
to cover his privy members, all sprinkled over with mire and blood, then
trussed like a Hogg or Calf behind a pursuivant, and ignobly buried. Sir
William Catesby a Lawyer, one of his Chief Counselors, with diverse others,
were two days after beheaded at Leicester, as Traitors, notwithstanding he was
king de facto; and no doubt had not king Richard been slain in the field, but
taken alive, he had been beheaded for a Traitor, as well as his adherents,
being the principal Malefactor, and they but his instruments; So that his
kingship and actual possession of the Crown by intrusion, did neither secure
himself nor his adherents from the guilt or punishment of High Treason, nor yet
the Act of Parliament which declared him true and lawful King, as well by
inheritance and descent, as election; it being made by a packed Parliament of
his own summoning, and ratified only by his own royal assent; which was so far
from justifying, that it did make his Treason more heinous in Gods and men's
esteem; it being a framing of mischief, and acting Treason by a Law, Psalm.
94.20, 21. which God so much abhors, that the Psalmist thence infers, v. 23.
And the Lord shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut them off
in their own wickedness; yea, the Lord our God shall cut them off: as he did
this Arch bloody Traitor and his Accomplices, though king de facto by a Law.

9ly, Since the Statute of 11 H. 7. c. 1. (some clauses whereof, making void
any Act or Acts of future Parliaments and Legal process against it, are merely
void, unreasonable, and nugatory, as 4 Instit. p. 42.
Sir Cook himself affirms of Statutes of the like nature) there have been
memorable Presidents, Judgments in point against his and others false glosses
on it in favor of Usurpers, though King or Queen de facto, and their
Adherents, against the lawful Queen and heir to the Crown, which I admire Sir
Edward Cook, and other Grandees of the Law forgot, or never took notice of,
though so late and memorable.

King Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol. 3. p. 6. to 37. Holinshed, Grafton, Speed,
How, Stow, Baker, Sir John Heyward, and others, in Edward the 6. and 1 Mariae.
Edward the 6. being sick and like to dye, taking notice, that his Sister Queen
Mary was an obstinate Papist, very likely to extirpate the Protestant Religion,
destroy that Reformation which he had established, and usher in the Pope and
Popery, which he had totally abandoned, by advice of his Council instituted and
declared by his last will in writing, and Charter under the Great Seal of
England, the Lady Jane (of the blood royal, eldest Neice to King Henry the 8. a
virtuous Lady and zealous Protestant, without her privity or seeking) to be his
heir and Successor to the Crown immediately after his death; for the better
confirmation whereof, all the Lords of his Privy Council, most of the Bishops,
Great Officers, Dukes, Earls, Nobles of the Realm, all his Judges and Barons
exept Hales, the Sergeants and great Lawyers, with the Mayor and Aldermen of
London, subscribed their Names, and gave their full and free assents thereto:
whereupon immediately after King Edwards death, July 9. 1553. Jane was publicly
proclaimed Qu. of this Realm, with sound of trumpet, by the Lords of the
Council, Bishops, Judges, Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London: So as now she was
a Queen de facto, backed with a very colorable Title from King Edward himself,
his Council, Nobles, Judges, and the other subscribers to it, being likewise
eldest Niece to King Henry the 8. of the bloud-royal. For defense of her person
and Title when proclaimed Queen, and to suppress Mary the right heir, the
Council speedily raised a Infer vim, eorum est, qui vires, habent absque
consilio: Praeterea si quis violenter audeat agere, non paucis egebit sociis,
qui vero persuader^ potest, nullis. Xenophon Memorabilium, l. 1. p. 713.
great power, of 8000 foot, and 2000 horse, of which the Duke of Suffolk was
first made General, being her Father, but soon after the Duke of Northmberland
by Commission from the whole Council in Queen Janes Name, who marched with them
to Cambridge, and from thence to St. Edmunds Bury, against the Lady Mary, Queen
only de jure, not de facto. But many of the Nobles, and the generality of the
people inclining to Queen Mary the right heir, and resorting to her aid to
Fotheringham Castle; thereupon the Council at London repenting their former
doings, to provide for their own safety, on the 20. of June 1553. proclaimed
Mary Queen; and the Duke of Northumberland hearing of it, did the like in his
Army, who thereupon deserted him. From which sudden alteration, the Author of
Rerum Anglicanaru^ Annals, printed Land. 1616. l. 3. p. 106. has this
memorable observation. Tali tamen and constanti veneratione nos Angli legitimos
Reges prosequimur, ut ab eorum debito obsequio nullis fucis aut coloribus, imo
ne Religionis quidem obtentu, nos divelli patiamur: cujus rei Janae hic casus,
indicium poterit esse plane memorabile. Quamvis enim Dominationis illius
fundamenta validissima jacta fuissent, cui et summa art superstructum est,
quam primum tamen Regni vera et indubitata haeres se Civibus ostendit, omnis
haec accurata structura concidit illico, and quasi in ictu oculi dissipata est:
idque eorum praecipue opera, quorum propter Religionis causam propensissimus
favor Janae adfuturus sperabatur, etc. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 3. p. 101, 102.
All the Martyrs, Protestant Bishops and Ministers, imprisoned and burnt by
her: humbly requiring, and in the bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ beseeching
all that fear God, to behave themselves as obedient Subjects to the Queens
Highness, and the superior powers which are ordained under her, rather after
their example to give their heads to the block, than in any point to rebel
against the Lords anointed, Queen Mary: in no point consenting to any Rebellion
or sedition against her Highness; but where they cannot obey, but must disobey
God, there to submit themselves with all patience and humility to suffer as the
will and pleasure of the higher powers shall adjudge. Against the doctrine,
practice of some new Saints of this iron age, who will ward off Christ's wooden
Cross, with their iron swords, and rather bring their Sovereigns heads to the
block, than submit their own heads unto it for their very Treasons, and
Rebellions against them. So far are they from believing, practicing the very
first Alphabetical Lesson of our Saviors prescription, and real Christanity,
Mat. 16.24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross and follow me.

The Duke of Northumberland for that he was appointed General of the Army in
this Quarrel of the Lady Jane, though Queen de facto, was arrested of High
Treason, together with 3. of his Sons, the Marquess of Northampton, the Earl of
Huntindon, with sundry Knights, Gentlemen, and sent prisoners to the Tower of
London. The 16. of August next following, the said Duke and Nobles were
publicly arraigned of High Treason, in Westminster hall before Thomas Duke of
Norfolk High Steward of England: being brought to the bar, the D. used great
reverence to his Judges, professing his faith and allegiance to the Queens
Majesty, whom he confessed he had grievously offended, saying Graftons
Chronicle, p. 1326.
that he meant not to speak any thing in defense of his face, but would first
understand the opinion of the Court in 2. points.

1. Whether a man doing any Act or thing by authority of the Graftons
Ch^onicle, p. 1326.
Princes Council, and by Warrant of the Great Seal of England, and nothing
doing without the same, may be charged with TREASON for doing any thing by such
Warrant? Which question was grounded on this very Statute of 11 H. 7. c. 1.

2. Whether any such persons as were equally culpable in that crime, and those
by whose Letters and Commandment he was directed in all his doings, might be
his Judges, or pass upon his Trial, as his PEERS?

To the 1. was answered (mark it) That the Great Seal he had for his W^rrant,
was not the Seal of the Lawful Qu. of the Realm, nor p^ssed by her Authority,
but the Seal of an Usurper, and therefore could be no Warrant to him.

To the 2. That if any were as deeply to be touched in that Case as himself;
yet so long as no attainder was of Record against them, they were nevertheless
persons able in Law to pass upon any trial, and not to be challenged therefore,
but at the Princes pleasure. After which the Duke and the rest of the Lords
using but few words, declaring their earnest repentance, and imploring the
Queens mercy, confessed this Indictment of Treason, and thereupon had Judgment
passed upon them as Traitors; And the Duke (with Sir John Gates and Sir Thomas
Palmer) were accordingly executed on Tower Hill, August 22. confessing the
Justice both of their Judgment and Execution, as TRAITORS, and not justifying
themselves by the Act of 11 H. 7.

After this See Antiq. Eccles. Brit. and God win in his Life: Fox, Grafton,
Holinsh. Speed, 1 Mariae.
Archbishop Cranmer though at first, he refused to subscribe K. Eds. will to
dis-inherit Queen Mary, alleging many reasons against it, yet was committed
Prisoner to the Tower, indicted, arraigned, condemned of High Treason in
November following for aiding the Earl of Northumb. with Horse and Men against
Queen Mary: And Queen Jane herself, though Queen de facto, and merely passive,
not active in this case, never aspiring after the Crown (being proclaimed Queen
against her will) with the Lord Guyldsord her husband, were both indicted,
arraigned, condemned of High Treason, and accordingly executed as Traitors,
Feb. 12. 1 Mariae, the one for usurpation of the royal Estate AS QVEEN OF
ENGLAND; the other as principal adherent to her in that case; both of them
confessing, that BY THE LAW THEY WERE JUSTLY CONDEMNED. After which the Duke of
Suffolk her father, and sundry others were condemned of High Treason, executed
upon the same account; and that by the judgment of all the several Peers,
Nobles, Judges, Lawyers, and Great Officers of Engl. though guilty of the same
crime seconded with the Judgment of the whole Parl. of 1 Mar. c. 16. which
confirmed their Attainders as JUST and LEGAL, notwithstanding the Statute of 11
H. 7. c. 1. which extends only to indemnifie those Subjects who do their true
duty and service of allegiance, to their King and Sovereign Lord; which none
certainly do who adhere and join with an apparent Usurper in possession against
their lawful undoubted King and Sovereign Lord, as they here adjudged, and the
Parliaments of 1, 4 and 14 of King Edward the 4th. long before: no Acts of
Parliament whatsoever being able to secure Usurpers Titles, though Kings de
facto, to themselves or their posterity, or to save their own or their
adherents Heads from the block, or their estates from confiscation, as the
recited tragical Presidents and Judgments prove, against the absurd opinions
of many Grandees of the Law in great reputation; who take all Sir Edward Cooks
and others Dotages for Oracles, and well deserve a part in Ignoramus, for being
ignorant of these late notorious Judgments and authorities against their
erroneous opinions, wherewith they seduce their silly Clyents and young
Students of the Law to their great peril, for whose better information, I have
the larger insisted on this point, to rectify this dangerous capital mistake,
which may hazard both their lives, estates, and souls to boot. And so much in
answer to the objected Presidents of Edward and Richard the 2d. to prove the
Commons Right of Judicature in Parliaments, etc. As good an evidence as that
grave Sir E. Cook produces, 4 Instit. p. 28.
to prove this House of Commons (who had no Mr. Hackwills Epistle to his manner
of passing Bills.
Journal Book till ^ Ed. 6.) to be a distinct Court of Judicature, because upon
signification of the Kings pleasure to the Speaker, they do and may prorogue or
adjourn themselves, and are not prorogued, adjourned by the House of Lords. By
which reason he might prove every Committee of the Lords or Commons House to be
a distinct Court, because they may adjourn and prorogue themselves without the
House, and all Commissioners for examination of Witnesses, Charitable uses, the
petty Sessions of Justices of Peace, all Country Committees, Archdeacons and
other visitors, all Auditors of Accounts, Arbitrators, Referrees, etc. to be
Courts, because they may all adjourn themselves from one day and place to
another; when as their presenting of their own Speakers in, and the Kings
calling them into the Lords House at the beginning and end of every Parliament,
or Session, and at the passing of Bills, 33 H. 8, c. 21. Mr. Hackwill of
passing of Bills. p. 76, 77.
and their dissolution in the Lords House, is a stronger argument to prove them
no Court at all, at least of Judicature, than their adjournment or prorogation
of themselves, to evidence them to be a distinct Court from the House of Lords.

Should I here subjoyn to the premises all the cases extant in the Lords
Iournals and Parliament Records, evidencing the Lords real Jurisdiction,
proceedings and Judicature in civil causes, in the reigns of King Ed. the 4.
Richard the 3. Henry the 7. and 8. Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, King James and
King Charles, I should be over tedious to the Readers, I shall therefore only
trouble you with 2 cases more.

In the The Freeholders Grand Inquest p. 29. See Mr. Hakwills passing of Bills,
p. 80*
Parliament of 18 Elizabeth, there arose a question about place and precedence
in the case of the Lord de la Ware: upon debate thereof in the Lords House, ALL
THE LORDS except the Lord Windesore ADJUDGED, that he should have place next
after the Lord Wil^oughbie of Erisbe. And the Lord Keeper was appointed to
acquaint the Queens Majesty with this determination of the Peers, and to know
her pleasure concerning the same.

In the last long Parliament Pasch. 20 Caroli, this cale of Note and
Consequence, was adjudged by the Lords (against the late resolutions of some
Judges, touching the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court) between Fairfax and
le Gay, and Mr. John's a London Merchant. In Lent Vacation 1638. Mr. John's
libelled in the Admiralty against one Hooper for 26000 weight of Barbados
Tobacco, sold to him, at St. Maloes in France, in partibus transmarinis infra
jurisdictionem Admiraltatis Angliae, by one B^les factor to Hooper for freight
due unto him by Hooper for his Ship called the William and Anne, whereof John's
was owner, without alleging, that this sale and contract was made super altum
mare: Fairfax and le Gay became sureties for Hooper in the Admiralty; John's had
a sentence against Hooper in the Admiralty upon this Libel, who soon after
became a Bankrupt. Whereupon Fairfax and le Gay his sureties, appealed to the
Delegates to avoid the sentence and execution against them, and then moved in
the Kings Bench for a Prohibition to stay the suit; suggesting the contract to
be made at St. Maloes upon the land, and not super altum Mare; and so not
within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty; Upon which they procured a rule to
stay the Proceeding; Whereupon John's petitioned the House of Lords for relief
against this rule, and that the Delegates might proceed to give sentence upon
the Appeal, that so he might have execution against the sureties; Hooper being
a Bankrupt for above one hundred thousand pounds, and all his estate sold, so
as his debt would be wholly lost if he should be deprived of the benefit of his
sentence, to which the sureties were liable. Upon his Petition this point in
Law amongst others whereon the hinge of his case turned, was argued at the
Lords Bar by Mr. Sergeant Rolls, and Mr. Maynard for Fairfax and le Gay, and by
my self for John's. Whether the Admirals Court had any true, ancient, legal
Jurisdiction of Contracts made at St. Maloes, and other parts beyond the Seas,
between Merchants and Mariners touching their Merchandise and marine affairs
upon the Land, as well as on the Sea? The Sureties Counsel argued confidently
they had not, upon the Statutes of 13 R. 2. c. 5.15 R. 2. c. 3. 2 H. 4. c. 14.
and the Presidents cited in Sir Ed. Cooks 4 Instit. p. 124. and c. 22. of the
Court of Admiralty, and in Hubberts Reports ^.331. But I argued to the
contrary, and clearly proved by the Laws of Oleron, Lex 1, 2, 6, 8, 9, 10, 15,
16, 22, 23. made in the reign of King Richard the 1. Anno 1190. ratified under
the Seal of that Island by that King, confirmed and used by Henry 3. Edw. 1.
and practiced ever since as the Law of the land in the Court of Admiralty, as 1
Instit. ^.11. b. 260.
Sir Edward Cook himself asserts) and by the notable Record of 22 E. 1. in
Cooks 4 Institutes p. 142, 143, 144. and Seldens Mare Clausum, l. 2. c. 28* f.
275. the Black Book of the Admiralty, and the Parliament Roll of 4 H. 4. n. 47.
for confirmation of the Laws of Oleron: 1. That the Admiralty in all ages since
King Rich. the 1. ^ill the making of these Statutes, Cooks 4 Instit. p. 139.
and ever since (till Hill. 2 Jacobi C. B. between Tomlinson Plaintiff, and
Philips Defendant) had held Jurisdiction of such contracts between Merchants
and Mariners, made upon the land in foreign parts, as well as on the Sea: as the
48 E. 3.2^ 3.13 H. 4.45.8 R. 2. ror. Parl. n. 31.13 R. 1. Stat. 2. c. 2.1 H. 4.
c. 14 Cooks 4 Institutes, p. 123, 124.21 E. 4.17.
Marshal had always used to hold plea of Contracts, and deeds of Arms, War,
Treasons, Murders and Felonies out of the Realm, which cannot be determined by
the Common Law: And that without any Prohibi^ion granted to stay the
proceedings in all that large tract of time, both before and since these
Statutes.

2ly. That these Acts were made only to restrain the Admirals, Encroachments of
Jurisdiction, in Contracts, Pleas, Quarrels, and other things made or done by
Landor Water, within the 19 H. 6.76. Br. Admiralty, r. Plowden, f. 37 b. Cook 5
Report, f. 106, 107.
Body of the Counties of this Realm, or in any Port, Harbor, Haven, or Creek
within the Counties, the Conusance whereof properly belonged to the Kings
Courts, or to the Courts of Cities, Buroughs; and other Lords, and to confine
them only to such contracts and things within the Realm (whereof the Bracton,
l. 2. c. 24. f. 56, 57.6 R. 2. Fitzh. P^otection 46.7 R. 2. Statham Trespass
53, Temps Ed. 1. Fitz Avowry 192. Cook 1 Instit. f. 260.4 Instit. p. 142, 143,
144. Rot. Pat. 51 H. 3. m. 11. Rot. Scotiae, 10 E. 3. m. 16. Rot. Parl. 46 E.
3. m. 10. Rot. Parl. 8 H. 5. n. 3. Artic. 6. Seldens Mare clausum, l. 2. Rot.
Parl. 14 E. 2. pars 2. m. 26. dorso.
Sea is a part, being under the Kings Dominion and Lordship) as are made or
done upon the Sea, not upon the Land o^ Water in any Haven, Port, River, Creek
within the precinct of any County: but not to debar them in the least degree of
their ancient, undoubted jurisdiction they always had and exercised de Jure,
without complaint or restraint, in contracts of Merchants and Mariners made
upon the Land in foreign parts beyond the Seas, of which the Kings Common Law
Courts, and the Courts of other Cities, Buroughs, Ports, Lords, 2 E. 2. Fitz.
obligat. 16 Tr. 18 E. 3. Fitz. Test. 6 Tr. 13 E. 3. Fitz. Oblig. 12 38 E. 3. c.
4.41 E. 3.23 b. 48 E. 3.3. Bro. Oblig. 1. Farts 95.13 H. 4.3, 4.10 H. 6. c.
11.20 H. 6.28. Bro. Oblig. 7.21 E. 4.74.6 R 2. c. 2.13 R. 2. Stat. 1. c. 2.26
H. 8. c. 13.35 H. 8. c. 2.28 H. 8. c. 15.5 E. 6. c. 11. Cook 3 Inst. f. 112.48.
2 Instit. p. 51.2 Rep. f. 93.5 Rep. f. 107 ^.
never had nor could have the least Jurisdiction, since out of the Realm, and
no Jury de Vicineto could be thence awarded or summoned to try the Contract in
England: which I proved by the Parliament Rolls and Commons Petitions, whereon
these Statutes were grounded, being most express in point, as 13 R. 2. Rot.
Paerl. n. 41.14 R. 2. n. 37.15 R. 2. n. 30.2 H. 4. n. 89.4 H. 4. ^. 47.11 H. 4.
n. 61. compared with 27 E. 3. c. 13.2 R. 2. c. 4.32 H. 8. c. 14.5 Eliz. c. 5.27
Eliz. c. 27. which so interpret it, and by most of the Cases cited by Edward
Cook in his Chapter of Admiralty, extending only to contracts made within the
body of any County within the Realm, not in any foreign parts on the Land or
Sea, without or beyond the Realm, whereof the Common Law Courts had never
Jurisdiction before Sir Sir Edw. Cook was Chief Justice, and that by a Dr.
Ridlyes view of the civil Law l. 3. c. 1. p. 129. Tr. 13 E. 3. Fitz. Abbe 12.9
E. 3.42. Dyer. 166.
mere fiction, and false contradictory surmise, contrary to truth, reason,
Justice, Law, and the Letter of Charterparts and Contracts themselves; viz.
that they were made at St. Maloes, Bordeaux, Sevil, Dantzick or Hamborough, in
France, Spain, Denmark, or Germany, within the Ward of Cheap London, a
suggestion never made before his time, in or by any Law-Book or Record, only to
rob the Admiralty of its ancient unquestionable right and Jurisdiction.

3ly, That the words of the Statute of 13 R. 2. c. 5. (whereon Sir Edward Cook
and other Judges ground their Prohibitions to the Admiralty), That the Admirals
and their deputies shall not meddle from henceforth, with any thing done within
the Realm of England, but only of things done upon the Sea, etc. are clearly
strained and construed by them directly against the words, meaning and intent
of the Lawmakers, and Commons Petition whereon it was made: For the later
clause; See 10 E. 1. Modus levandi fines. 2 E. 3.9. a. 4 E. 3.46. b. 7 E. ^.37
b. 8 R. 2. Contin. Claim. 13.1 R. 3. c. 7.4 H. 7. c. 24.28. H. 6.3. a. Bro.
Protection 11. Fitz. Amerciament 4.26 H. 8. c. 13.35 H. 8. c. 2.5 Ed. 6. c. 11.
Plowdens Com. 359. Cook 8 Rep. f. 10.2 Instit. p. 516. Seldens Mar^ Clausum, p.
255, 256. Littleton, sect. 677.25 E. 3. c. 2.
but ONLY of things done upon the Sea; is put in opposition and
contradistinction to the precedent words, with any thing done within the Realm
of England; or within the bodies of the Counties as well by land as by water;
as the Stat. of 15 R. 2. c. 3. and 5 E^l. c. 5.27 Eliz. c. 11.25 E. 3. c. 2.
directly interpret and explain the sense thereof: And they strain and apply
them to contracts made by Merchants and Mariners, not within the Realm of
England, or bodies of the Counties thereof by land or water, but beyond the
seas, and quite out of the Realm, being no part of the Realm, or within the
body of any County of England, or Kings Dominions; Than which a greater
Solecism and contradiction cannot be imagined against the scope and letter of
these Statutes. For by this construction, they may likewise strain the very
Oath of Supremacy, That no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate
has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, power, etc. Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual WITHIN THIS REALM: With the Statute of 13 Eliz. chapter 2. for the
abolishing of the usurped Jurisdiction of the Bishop and See of Rome, WITHIN
THIS REALM; and against raising s^dition, bringing in Bulls, Agnus, Dei,
Crosses, Pictures, etc. WITHIN THIS REALM; and other the Dominions thereof: to
the punishment of all such, as shall avetr, that any foreign Prince, Person,
Prelate, State, Potentate, or the Pope, have or ought to have any Jurisdiction,
power or Authority OUT OF THIS REALM, or the Dominions thereof; or shall raise
any sedition, or vent Popes Bulls, etc. in any foreign Kingdom or Country (as
France, Spain, Italy, Poland, Germany) out of the Realm, as if they had done it
within this Realm of England.

4ly, That by the opinion, resolution, agreement of the Judges of the Kings
Bench, 1575. and of See Crooks Reports, p. 296, 297.
all the Judges of England (whereof Hutton and Crook were 2.) 4 Febr. 1632.
Hi^. 8. Caroli, (the original whereof I produced subscribed with all their
hands) If suit he commenced in the Court of Admiralty upon Contracts made, and
other things personal done beyond the Seas, or upon the Sea; no Prohibition is
to be awarded: (contrary to Sir Edward Cooks opinion) This being the Judgment
of all our Judges in former ages, wherein no record or president could be
produced of any such Prohibition from Richard the 1. till the later end of
Queen Elizabeth's or King James his reign.

The Lords upon my Argument were so fully satisfied in this point of Law, that
they all unanimously and immediately 15 May 1645.
adjudged, and ordered (notwithstanding Justice Bacons and Reeves opinions upon
the late presidents to the contrary) that the Rule for the Prohibition in the
Kings Bench should be vacated; and that the Delegates should proceed to
Sentence in the cause; which they did: And so my Client got both Judgment and
Execution soon after against these Sureties.

I might here very fitly inform our Levellers and their Confederates, That the
Lords in Parliament (as they did anciently, so since the Commons admission unto
this Great Council, have) made not only some See an Exact abridgement, p. 354.
Acts for the Government of London without the Commons, as in 17 R. 2. n. 25,
26, 27. Ibid. p. 17.34.57.156.136.431, 432.592, 594.584.589.615.652.
Granted Ayds for themselves to the King, and likewise for the Merchants by the
Merchants consents; confirmed Charters, Patents in Parliament; reversed
attainders, restored persons attainted and their heirs to Lands and blood,
elected the Kings Great Officers, Privy Counselors; and prescribed them Laws,
Rules, Orders: appointed a Protector during the Kings Minority, limited his
power, and discharged him from his place without the Commons: confirmed an
imposition upon Cloth by the King, against the Commons petition to take it off;
Ordered a Subsidy to be paid absolutely, which the Commons granted but
conditionally; called receivers of Subsidies and Moneys to account, without the
Commons, and opposed the Commons encroachments upon their privileges* as you
may see in the Parliament Rolls of 13 E. 3. n. 5, 6. Parl. 1. and Parl. 2. n.
8.15 E. 3. n. 41.21 E. 3. n. 16. Par. 2 R. 2. n. 22. to 27.57. 5 R. 2. n. 16. 5
H. 4. n. 51. to 58. 4 H. 6. n. 22. 6 H. 6. n. 22, 23. 8 H. 6. n. 13.27, 28.14
H. 6. n. 10. 31 H. 6. n. 34. In Claus. 50 E. 3. m. 3. and 4. De essendo in
Parliamento; there are writs directed to particular persons in this form. Sis
coram Nobis, et cateris Proceribus et Magnatibus regni nostri Angliae in
praesenti Parliamento (without mentioning the Commons) apud Westminster. convocato,
hac instante di^ Sabbat^, proxime post futur: ad informandum Nosipsos, Proceres
et Magnates (not the Commons) super quibusdam de quibus per te volumus
informari, etc. 4. Junii. Per Concilium in Parliamento. And for the Nobles of
Ireland, I find this Record. Claus. 2 E. 3. m. 17. Sir John Davis Reports f.
37, 38.
Rex dilecto et fideli suo Johanni Darcy de Nevien, Justiciario suo Hyberniae
salutem. Ex part quorundam hominum de Hybernia Nobis exstitit supplicatum, u^
per statutum inde faciendum concedere volumus, Quod omnes Hybernici qui
voluerint, legibus utantur Anglicanis, ita quod necesse non habeant super hoc
Cartas aliquas a Nobis imperrare. Nos igitur certiorari volentes si sine aliquo
praejudicio, praemissis annuere valeamus, vobis mandamus, quod voluntatem
Magnatum terrae illius, (not of the Commons) in proximo Parliamento nostro
ibidem tenendo super hoc cum diligentia praesentari facias, and de eo quod inde
inveneritis, una cum vestro consilio and advisamento Nos distinct and aperte
cum celeritate, qua potestis, certificetis, hoc Breve nostru^ Nobis
remittentes, etc. upon which Petition the use of the English Laws was
afterward granted, as appears by Clause 5 E. 3. part 1. m. 25. But I shall
close up this Plea and Supplement with a few Presidents more, pertinent to
demonstrate the Lords undoubted Right of Judicature, Council and Advice in
public affairs, both in and out of Parliament.

In the Parliaments of 5 E. 2. n. 31.4 E. 3. c. 14.36 E. 3. c. 10.50 E. 3. n.
181.1 R. 2. n. 35.2 R. 2. n. 5. It was enacted, that a Parliament should be
holden once every year, or more often if need be, to redress diverse mischiefs
and grievances which daily happen? especially delays in Judgments and suits
at Law, through difficulty, or diversity of Opinions among the Judges. To
prevent which, the Statute of 14 E. 3. c. 5. enacts; that from henceforth at
every Parliament shall be chosen a Prelate, two Earls, and two Barons, which
shall have Commission and power of the King, to hear by Petition delivered to
them, the complaints of them that will complain of such delays and grievances,
and to cause the records of such Judgments to be brought before them, and to
hear the cause and reasons of such delays, and by the assistance and advice of
the Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices of both Benches, and as many other of the
Kings Council as shall seem convenient, shall proceed to take a good award and
make a good judgment therein: And that the Judges shall proceed hastily to
give Judgment according to their determination. And in case it seems to them
the difficulty be so great, that it may not well be determined without the
assent of the Parliament, that the said Prelate, Earls and Barons, shall
present the tenor or tenors of the said record or cause to the Sea here, p.
370, 420.
next Parliament, and there shall be a final accord taken, what judgment ought
to be given in his case. And according to this award shall be commanded to the
Judges, before whom the plea did depend, that they shall proceed to give
Judgment without delay. And to begin to give remedy upon this Ordinance, it
was assented, that a Commission and power be made to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Earls of Arundel, and Huntington, the Lord of Wake, and the
Lord Raufe Basset, to endure till the next Parliament. After which I find this
Commission made in pursuance of this Ordinance.

Pat. 18 E. 3. pars 2. m. 3^.
Edwardus Dei gratia, etc. authorizing the Bishop of Chichester, the Earls of
Huntingdon and Devonshire, and Tho. Wake of Lidell, and Thomas de Berkley
Barons, assigned to hear querelas omnium qui se de gravaminibus and
dilationibus sibi factis coram Justice. et aliis conqueri voluerint, per
avisamentum Cancel. These. Justice. de atroque Banco, and aliis d^ Consilio
Regis, according to the Ordinance made in Parliament 14 Ed. 3. c. 5. that Unus
Praelatus, Duo Comites, et Duo Barons should have Commission and power to hear
and determine such complaints, Test. Rege apud Westminster. nono die Iunii.

There is this Petition of the Commons to the King, for declaring Treasons, in
25 E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 17. Item come les Justices nostre Seignior le Roy,
assignez en divers^es Countees ajuggent les gentz que sont empeschez devant eux
come Traiteurs, pur diverses Causes desconues a la Comune estre Treason, que
please a nostre Seignior le Roy per son Counse^l, e^ per les Grantz, et s^ges
de la terre, declarer les pointz de Treason en cest present Parliament.

Quant a^la Petition touchant Treason, nostre Seignior le Roy ad Fait declarer
les Articles de Y celle en mane^ que ensuit See Cooks 3 Instit. c. 1. and 2.
as in the Statute of 25 E. 3. c. ^. By which Petition, Act, and the like
Petition in 21 E. 3. n. 15. it is apparent* That the Right of declaring,
Judging what is High Treason in Parliament, belongs originally to the King
himself, by the advice of his Council, Great men, and Sages of the Land and not
unto the Commons House, at whose request the KING then made a Declaration of
the Articles of Treason, as in this Statute, by his Nobles, Councils and Judges
advice: Therefore the Declaration of all other Treasons in particular cases not
within this Statute, belongs wholly to the King Lords Council and Judges in the
Lords House, not to the Commons alone, or jointly with them within the later
branch of this Act (as well as the Treasons within the body thereof: viz.
Because that many other like cases of Treason may happen in time to come which
a man cannot imagine nor declare at this present time; it is accorded, that if
any other case, supposed Treason, which is not before specified shall happen de
novel before any Justice, the Justice shall demur^ without going to Judgment
of the Treason, tanque per devant le ROY EN SON PARLIAMENT, soit le case monstre
et declare, de que leceo doit estre a jugge Treason, ou autre Felony. Against
the Opinion of Sir Edward Cooks 3 Institutes, p. 22. The Commons having no
power at all to declare and judge what shall be Treason in such new particular
cases, but only when a See Rastals Abridgement of Statutes, Title, Treason
New Treason is made or declared for the future by Bill, or Act of Parliament,
wherein their concurrence is necessary (as in all new Acts concerning Treasons
since 25 E. 3.) as is evident by Mr. Sr. John's Argument at Law this very last
Parliament, at the Attainder of Thomas Earl of Strafford, and Mr. Samuel Browns
Argument at the Lords House Bar, to prove and satisfy the Lords House, that
he, and Archbishop Laud were guilty of High Treason upon the Articles of their
several Impeachments exhibited and proved against them, of which the Lords and
King alone were the proper Judges, but the Commons, only their Impeachers and
Prosecutors in the Judicial way of Parliamentary Proceedings, as I have
formerly evidenced. Therefore all the late Votes, knacks, Declarations of the
Commons House alone before, or without the Kings and House of Lords
Declarations, Resolutions, of sundry things to be high Treason, and diverse
persons to be Traitors, upon bare informations, suggestions, (though not within
the Letter of 25 E. 3. c. 2.) are but mere illegal innovations, extravagancies,
yea Nullities in Law, fit to be eternally exploded, especially by Lawyers, the
chiefest Innovators, Promoters of them, rather out of ignorance or rashness,
than Prudence, Law, or solid Judgment, for which they can produce no
presidents in former ages.

In the year 1392. the 15 of King Rich. the 2. we have this memorable President
of the Lords Judicature together with the King, assembled in a Great Council,
without the Commons, in the case of the Mayor, Sherifs, Citizens and City of
London thus related by Hist. Angl. p. 382, 383, 384.
Walsingham at large.

Misit Rex ad Cives Londoniarum petens ab eis mutuo mill libras: cui
procaciter et ultra quam decuit restiterunt. Sed and quendam Lumbardom volentem
accommodare regi dictam summam, male tractave^unt, ve^beraverunt, er paulominus
occiderunt. Quae cum Rex ^udisset, i^a^us est valde, et convocaas omnes
regnipene Major^s, apperuit proterviam civium Londoniarum, et de praesumptione
conqueritur eorundem. Qui omnes infesti Civibus propter diversas causas,
consulunt, ut reprimatur citius eorum insolentia, et superbia destruatur. Eranc
quippe tunc inter omnes fere nationes gentium clarissimi, arrogantissimi, et
avarissimi, ac male creduli in deum and traditiones avitas, Lolardorum
sustentatores, religiosorum detractores; decimarum detentores, et communis
vulgi depauperatores. In tantumque excrevit eorum supercilium, ut auderene
leges condere, quibus adventantes de circumjacentibus villis, vel Provinciis,
contra rationem omnem humanam, Deum, et justiciam, molestarent, gravarent et
fatigarent. Praetereo eorum inhumanitatem, sileo rapacitatem, reticio
infidelitatem, transeo malignitatem, quam indisciplinate in adventantes populos
exe^ouerunt. Qui si^ cuncta describere quae perpetraverunt hoc tempore, volumen
credo maximum conficeret. Objecta sunt eis igitur quae contra regem fecerant,
et suae majestatis notoriam laesionem; objecta sunt quae in provinciales
commiserant, ad regis ac dominorum regnique populi detrimentum: quae si vellent
inficiari praesto erant accusatores e patria, qui sacramento suo eorum probare
cuperent acta prava. Londonienses ergo in medio miseriarum subito constitui, et
velut versati inter cudem et malleum, cum non esset locus excusationis,
decreverunt se potius submittere regis gratiae, quam succumbere veridicto vel
judicio duodenae. Regis ergo Iudicio arrestatus est Mayor Londoniarum, et
vicecomites, cum quibusdam de Majoribus, caeteris domum redire permissis. Major
autem missus est ad Castellum de Windeshores, caeteri ad diversa castella
destinati sunt, sub arcta custodia conservandi, donec Rex cum Confilio
deliberasset quid faceret de eisdem. Ibidem decretum est, ne de caetero
Londonienses Maiorem eligerent vel haberent, sed rex de suis militibus
provideret aliquem qui, rector foret, et custos civitatis vocaretur, et esset
(quem alio nomine vocamus vulgariter Gardianum) ibi subsequenter, et eorum sunt
privilegia revocata, libertates, annullatae, et leges quas vel condiderant, vel
a diebus habuerant abrogatae. Tunc primo Rex constituit custodem civitatis,
abrogato Maioris vocabulo, quendam militem dictum Edwardum de Dalyngrygge, qui
et ^ive^ regeret, and justitiae cunctorum aeque pro^piceret: sed is cito fuit
per regem depositus, quia convictus est civibus fecisse juramentum, vel de
eorum consuetudinibus defendendis, vel certe pro posse suo, subtiliter
revocandis. Fuerunt qui dicerent eum ex indus^ria hoc fecisse, plusque regis
commodo quam civium in hac part prospexi^se, Quod cum regi fuisset cognitum,
poenituit eum militem benevolum sic tractasse. Nihilominus rex et alium militem
loco suo constituit nomine Baldewynum de Radyngton, virum certe providum et
discretum, qui sciret delinire moerorem civium, et eorum mentes erigere ad s^em
bonam. Nam cives prae tristitia contaburunt and dolor.

Interea multis mediantibus (sed praecipue duce Gloverniae ensistente) rex
factus animi aequioris paulatim discedit a sui rigore propositi, reducens ante
mentis oculos honores varios, quos per Londinenses acceperat, et magnifica dona
per eos praestita: unde decernit mitius cum eis agere, et eos ad spem aliqualis
gratiae revocare. Mittit nempe mandans Londinensibus, ut ad castellum de
Wyndesore conveniant, demonstraturi privilegia, libertates ac jura civitatis
nova et vetera coram eo, consilio quoque suo, ut ibi decerneret quae servanda
forent in civitate, vel quae penitus obolenda. Quibus ^ostensis, quaedam
ratificata, quaedam permi^a, quaedam damnata f^ere, Maioris tamen nec personam,
nec dignitatem ea vice recuperavere, neque plenam regis gratiam, donec
satisfecissent regi de damnis et injuriis quae vel sibi, vel regis plebi antea
intulissent. Equidem ea vice convenit inter regem, et Dominos ne eorum
satisfactionem acceptaret, nec cum eis quovismodo componeret sine consilio
Dominoru^. Nempe rex cum primo contra eos incanduisset (propter causas qua^
s^pra notavimus.) meditatus est exercitum congregasse, and in civitatem
i^ruisse cum impetu, et cives de sub coelo delevi^e. Quod tamen, Ducis
Lancast^ae oratione mutatum est; qui censuit eos (ut praemitti^u^) evocandos,
et (ut praefettur) castigandos, vel (si obstinati fuissent) tunc juxta regis
propositum obsidendos, end ^erraviventium disperdendos. Rex autem in hac
collectione apud Wyndesore, Dominos temporales regni cunctos, et Episcopos pene
omnes, necnon exercitum talem contraxerat, qui merito terrori Londin. posset
esse. In quos omnes incredibiles fecit expensas, pro quibus certum erat
Londonienses solu^uros. Ipsi vero non ignorantes quod horum finis esset
expositio argenti et auri, submiserunt se et sua regi, voluntary ei december
millia librarum vadiantes, dimissi tamen sunt domum rediere, incerti quid
solueren^, donec regis consilium et formam satisfaciendi, and summam solvendi
definisset. Cumque et cives regressi fuissent and Proceres qui cum rege
fuerant, ac reliquus (...) pulus ad propria remeassen^. Rex audiens Londinenses
in tristitia constitutos, et mente lapsos, ait suis: Vadam Inquit Londonias, et
consolabor cives, nec patiar eos ultra de mea gratia desperare. Quae sententia
mox ut cognita fuit in civitate, incredibili jocunditate replevit omnes, unde
omnes et singuli ei generaliter statuerunt occurrere, et non minores expensas
facere in xeniis, and donativis quam fecerant in ejus coronatione. Rex igitur
ut venit Londonias, tanta gloria, tanta pompa, tanta varietate diversorum
apparatuum est susceptus, quanta suscipi regem aliquem triumphantem decuis^er.
Nam equos et phaleros, tabulas aureas et argen^eas, pannos aureos et
holosericos, pelues et lavatoria de fulvo metallo, aurum in pecunia, gemmas et
monilia, tam ditia, tam nobilia, tam speciosa donaverunt eidem, ut cunctorum
valor et pretium non posset facile estimari. Sicque recuperaverunt cives
consuetudines et libertates antiquas quae saltem civitati possent esse
fulcimento, nec extraneis detrimento. Indu^tumque fuit eisdem, ut Majorem
possent eligere sicut prius. Credebant autem Londonienses quod per haec dona
domigerium evasissent, et in posterum quieti fuissent: sed fefellit eos eorum
opinio, qui coacti sunt expost solvere regi december millia librarum, de
communitate collecta, in amaritudine mentis magna: Proceres vero regni qui
regis consilio interfuerant, audientes quod Rex contra pactum indulsisset
Londoniensibus, offensi sunt valde inter se, regis levitatom et inconstantiam
condemnantes. Nemo tamen palam regem redarguit de praemissis.

In the Parliament of 11 H. 4. rot. parl. number. 14. The Commons exhibited this
Petition to the King; by which it appears, that as in the Parliaments of 1, 2.
and 4 E. 3. n. 1.10 R. 2.17 R. 2. n. 6.7 and 8 H. 4. n. 66, 67. some of the
valiantest, wisest, discreetest Spiritual and Temporal LORDS, were by Petition
of the Commons, and special Order of the Lords in Parl. placed about these
Kings, to BE THEIR PRIVY COVNSELLORS, to advise, counsel them, and manage all
the Great affairs of the Realm under them; so in this Parliament they exhibited
this Petition to the like e^^ect.

Primerement, que plese a nostre dit Seigniour le Roy ordeigner et assigner en
cest present Parliament, les pluis vaillantz sages et discretes Seigniours
espirituelx et temporelx de son roialme, pur estre de son counseil, en eid et
supportation del bone et substancial gouvernance, et la bien de Roy et de
Roialme; et que les ditz Seigniours de counseill et les Justices de Roi soient
overtement (jurez) any cest present parliament, de eux bien et loialment en lour
counseill et faitz acquiter pur le bien de Roy et de Royalm, en toutz pointz,
saunz favor pur affection, ou affinite fair a ascune manner de person. Et
que plese nostre dit Seigniour le Roy en presence de toutz les Estates de
parliament, comander les ditz Seigniours, et Justices sur lour foy et ligeance,
que lui devont, qils feront pleyne justice et droit ouelment a chescuny sanz
tarians, si bonement come ils purront, sanz ascun commandment on charge de
queconque person a contrary.

Le Roy le voet, was the answer which was answered. Resp.
An Exact abridgement p. 329, 456, 457, 471.564, 568, 594, 611.
See the like Petitions afterward in 1 H. 6. n. 26.2 H. 6. n. 15, 16.8 H. 6.
n. 27, 28.11 H. 6. n. 41.

I shall conclude with these 2. memorable late presidents: A Catalogue of the
Speakers Names, by W. Hackwill of Lincolns Inn, Esquire; 1641. p. 141, 142, 143.
In the Parliament of 8 Eliz. upon the death of Thomas Williams Esquire,
Speaker of the Commons house, Richard Onstoe Esquire, the Qu^ens Solicitor,
first chosen a Member of the Commons house, and after called by Writ to attend
the Lord House as an Assistant; at the request of the Commons to the Queen and
Lords, was sent down again to the Commons house, without any new election, and
there chosen and presented by them for their Speaker; and allowed of by the
Queen and Lords. So in the Parli^ment of 23 Eliz. upon the Queens making John
Bell Esquire; then Speaker, chief Baron of the Exchequer, John Popham Esquire; then
Queens Solicitor, called from the Commons house to the Lords as an Assistant
by writ; at the Commons request to the Queen and Lords, was remitted to them
again, upon his old, without any new election, and the chosen, presented,
accepted for their Speaker. Which 2. late presidents infallibly prove, 1. That
the King has an absolute power over any Members of the Commons house upon a
just occasion, to call them thence by writ to be Assistants to the Lords house;
or else to create them Peers and call them to be Members of the Lords house, as
he did Sir Francis Seymore, Mr. Arthur Capell, and others, created Lords the
last long Parliament: 2ly, That the calling of any to the Lords house from the
Commons by writ, as Assistants only, does not totally disable them to be
Members of the Commons house again, the self-same or the next Parliament, but
that upon the Commons Petion, and assent of the King and Lords, they may be
remanded to the Commons house, and be Members and Speakers thereof again; but
not by the Commons votes or order, but only by the Kings, with the Lords
assent, who may refuse to remand them if they please. A very pregnant argument,
chat the power of removing, judging, suspending, approving, readmitting Members
of the Commons house, upon Elections or Misdemeanors, belongs not of right to
the Commons house, but to the King and House of Peers, as I have formerly
evidenced. Admit^ing then that the Commons have de facto gained, exercised this
privilege of late years to judge, suspend or eject their own Members in such
cases without the King and House of Peers, yet having most grossly abused it of
late, to the ruin, subversion of Parliaments, I must conclude with the
Gratian, Cause. 11. qu. 2.
Canonists; Privilegium meretur amittere qui abutitur potestate.

Jer. 6.16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for the
old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for
your souls; But they said, We will not walk therein.

Prove. 24.21, 22. My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
those who are given to change: For their Calamity shall rise suddenly; and who
knows the ruin of them both?

Jer. 21.3, 4. c. 17.25, 27. Thus says the Lord, Execute ye judgment, and
deliver the spoiled out of the hands of the Oppressor, and do no wrong: do no
violence to the stranger, the fatherless nor the widow; neither shed innocent
blood in this place. For if ye do this thing indeed, then shall there enter
into the Gates of this House, KINGS and PRINCES sitting upon the Throne of
David, riding in chariots and on horses, they and their PRINCES, the men of
Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and this City shall remain for ever.
But if you will not hearken unto me, etc. then will I kindle a fire in the
gates thereof, and it shall devour the PALACES of Jerusalem, and it shall not
be quenched.

FINIS.
An Omission in page 30: l. 7.
RAnulph de Glanvil Chief Justice under King Henry the 2. In his Tractatus de
Legibus et Consuetudinibus Regni Angliae, See lib. 8. c. 2, 3.
written in the 33 year of his reign has this memorable passage relating to
the Parliamentary Councils in that age, l. 2. c. 7. Est autem magna Assisa,
REGALE QVODDAM BENEFICIUM, CLEMENTIA PRINCIPIS DE CONSILIO PROCERUM POPVLIS
INDVLTUM (to wit in a Parliamentary Council of the King and Lords without any
Commons) quo vitae hominum et status integritati, tam salubriter consulitur, ut
in jure quod quis de libero soli tenemento possidet retinendo, duell^ casum
declinare possunt homines ambiguum, etc. Ex aequitate autem, maxi^ prodita est
LEGALIS ISTA INSTITUTIO. Jus enim quod post multas and longas dilationes, vix
evincitur per duellum, per beneficium ISTIUS CONSTITUTIONIS, commodius et
acceleratius expeditur. By which it is evident that the Grand Assize was no
original Process or Trial at the Common Law, but a legal institution, and
beneficial constitution proceeding from the Grace of the Prince, and indulged
to the People BY THE COUNSEL OF THE LORDS assembled together in a Parliamentary
Council (which Lib. 2. c. 9. Glanvil styles, Recordum per Assisam DE CONSILIO
REGNI inde factum) for the speedier and better recovery of their freeholds,
without endangering their lives by a Duel to recover them, which was fuller of
delays, but less certain, and more unjust than a recovery by verdict in this
new action. And this Court he styles, CAPITALEM CURIAM DOMINI REGIS, l. 6. c.
8. l. 8. c. 11. l. 12. c. 1. to which causes usually were adjourned, out of the Sea here, p. 406.
Hundred Courts and Court Barons for difficulty, and there decided as well as
in the Kings Bench. Quando aliquis BARO habet aliquam loquelam in Curia sua,
ita quod Curia ipsa non sufficiat eam determinare, tunc potest Dominus ipse
Curiam suam ponere: in Cur. Dom. Reg. ita quod de dubitatione ipsa Consilium et
Assensum habeat Curlae Dom. Reg. quid inde de jure fierl ^ebeat, Et hoc debet
Dom. Rex de Iure Baronibus suis, scilicet ob talem causam possunt sui Barons
Curias suas sic in Curiam suam ponere: ita quod faciat eis habere in Curia sua
de peritis hominibus suis, qui eis super hoc consilium prestent. Cum autem in
Curia Domini Regis super dubitationibus suis fuerint certificati, poterunt inde
cum loquela sua redire, et ipsam in Curia sua deducere et terminare: as he
resolves l. 8. c. 11.

Errataes and Omissions.
KInd Reader correct these Errors at the Press; p. 14. l. 10. powers, r.
Thrones, p. 18. l. 26. r. and Burgesses, p. 24. l. 22. in, the, p. 25. l. 24.
Charters; p. 26. l. 15. fore; p. 31. l. 33. statu; p. 33. l. 14. reddituum; p.
39. l. 12. imminentibus; p. 40. l. 7. and haberet, r. habere et; p. 50. l. 23.
aliquod, p. 53. l. 28. his; p. 60. l. 27. Dei; p. 67. l. 19. levy, keep; p. 72.
l. 36. vindemiantes; p. 80. l. 7. Gentlemen, Greatmen; l. 19. tyrannicum; l.
37. Abbates; p. 81. l. 27. convenirent; p. 90. l. 20. excom: p. 100. l. 35.
addictis, adjectis; p. 103. l. 10. nostri; l. 17. E. 1. p. 110. l. 26. petiit;
p. 11 4. l. 10.15. decedentibus; p. 126. l. 25 fulminatam; p. 151. l. 12. Peer,
Prior; p: 152. l. 24. had, held; l. 32. Peers, Priors; p. 155. l. 33.
irrotulati; p. 160. l. 30. sole, old; p. 167. l. 32. crederet; p. 170. l. 5.
consecrate; l. 14. decerneretur; p. 173. l. 3. and 36. adunatis; p. 179. l. 36.
tractaturi; p. 180. l. 9. Normannia; p. 182. l. 1. then, other; l. 1, 2. Tha^
they, r. that all Parliaments; p. 188. l. 27. name, r. nature; p. 196. l. 19.
p. 196. l. 19. Seigniors; l. 27. that, their, l. 31. juggements; p. 192. l. 16
m. 7. p. 196. l. 30. imngining; p. 198. l. 7. Cromwell; p. 200. l. 12. dele
given; p. 207. l. 16. et, est; p. 213. l. 27. r. Rex, Anno 1096. p. 216. l. 32.
vadia; p. 223. l. 5. bull; p. 225. l. 11. propriae; l. 38. invenerunt; p. 238.
l. 18. et, p. 246. l. 22. hinc, huic; p. 255. l. 5. Valencia; l. 9.
constantissima; p. 261. l. 36. King and Lords; p. 262. l. 22. r. the 24; p.
265. l. 32. audito; p. 272. l. 27. eflues; p. 275. l. 7. as, of; p. 280. l. 3.
grantier p. 286. l. 26. Comitem; p. 287. l. 37. erat; p. 292: l. 3. presenting,
r. prescribed; p. 296. l. 16. Lords; p. 297. l. 34. yet, the; p. 298. l. 6.
qua, Quia; p. 299. l. 23. judicature; l. 27. r. E. 3. p. ^^^, l. 22. of ^^^^e,
I have; p. 304. l. 20. of, in; p. 310. l. 37. Servants, Sergeants; lin. 38.
this, their; p. 311. l. 4.14 H. p. 314. l. 1. short, strict; p. 315. l. 3.
Lords, Lands; p. 319. l. 31. haberet; p. 318. l. 2. dele as; p. 328. l. 1.
nichil ei; p. 340. l. 1. dele of; p. 242. l. 29. dele and; p. 344. l. 16. pl.
and. r. plac. p. 345. l. 38. rendus; p. 348. l. 19. pur; p. 355. l. 4. he, the;
l. 23. them him; p. 359. l. 31. r. as he affirms; p. 368. l. 1. dele 6. p. 371.
l. 7. sways, sweeps; p. 378. l. 34. Courts of the King; p. 380. l. 7.
Apprenticius; p. 390. l. 9. Doreward; l. 16. Beerly; p. 393. l. 37. r. excuse;
by reason of his age and impotency by his service in the war, which he alleged;
p. 396. l. 36. dele and; p. 406. l. 16. dele fore; p. 411. l. 34. question; p.
415. l. 2^. dele and; l. 34. These are; p. 417. l. 18. when; p. 419. l. 9.
Bereford; l. 15. Objection; l. 18. may, way; p. 429. l. 13.10. r. 19. p. 432.
l. 4. eis.

In the Margin, p. 16. l. 5. r. Hist. l. 1. p. 29. l. 1. Chron. p. 31. l. 16.
Ecclesiae; p. 93. l. 3. Paris, r. Westminster. p. 153. l. 2. H. 8. r. 6. p. 264. l.
2. m. 15. p. 393. l. 3.5 H. 4. c. 5.5 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 71, 78. are omitted.

In the Supplement (being under-cast, beginning p. 401.) and the pages from p.
408. to 428. being misfigured, pray correct the pages first, then the Errataes
in it thus; p. 403. l. 2. these, r. those; p. 407. l. 29. ancillamque; p. 413.
l. 2. dele in; p. 414. l. 27, pertinentiis; p. 415. l. 6. the, these; l. 7.
Hab. 1.7. p. 417. l. 27. Sheriff; p. 419. l. 26. Parliaments; l. 31. part; p.
424. l. 38, 39. r. King being Prisoner in Kenelworth Castle, the Queen and
Prince came, etc. p. 436. l. 1. Statutum; p. 446. l. 18. Archiepiscopatum; p.
447. l. 5. ferendam; l. 6. deponendum; p. 445. l. 6. pius, r. puis; p. 461. l.
17, supra; l. 33. Members; P. 480. l. 21. to it; l. 24. Duke, Earl; p. 483. l.
11. regem.


