The first and Second Part of A SEASONABLE, LEGAL, AND HISTORICAL VINDICATION,
AND Chronological COLLECTION of the Good, Old, Fundamental Liberties,
Franchises, Rights, Laws of all English Freemen their best Inheritance,
Birthright, Security, against all Arbitrary Tyranny, and Egyptian Burdens) and
of their strenuous Defense in all former Ages; of late years most dangerously
undermined, and almost totally subverted, under the specious Disguise of their
Defense and future Establishment, upon a sure Basis, by their pretended,
Greatest Propugners.

WHEREIN IS, Irrefragably evinced by Parliamentary Records, Proofs, Presidents,
That we have such Fundamental Liberties, Franchises, Rights, Laws. That to
attempt or effect the Subversion of all or any of them, (or of our Fundamental
Government) by Fraud or Force, is High Treason. The principal of them summed up
in X. Propositions; The chief printed Treatises asserting them, specified: A
Chronological History of our Ancestors, zeal, vigilance, courage, prudence, in
gaining, regaining, enlarging, defending, often confirming and perpetuating them
to Posterity, by Great Charters, Statutes, New Confirmations, Excommunications,
Special Conservators, Consultations, Petitions, Declarations, Remonstrances,
Oaths, Protestations, Vows, Leagues, Covenants, and likewise by their Arms,
when necessitated, during all the Britons, Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans and
English Kings Reigns, till this present; collected for present and future
public benefit: with a Brief Touch of their late unparalelled Infringments
and subversions in every particular: The Trial of all Malesactors by their
Peers and Juries, justified, as the only legal, best, most indifferent, and
all other late arbitrary Judicatories, erected for their Trial, exploded, as
destructive both to our Fundamental Laws and Liberties.

Collected, recommended to the whole English Nation, as the best Legacy he can
leave them, By William Prynne of Swainswick, Esquire.

The Second Edition Corrected and much Enlarged.

Psalm. 11. 3. If the Fundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do? Psalm.
82. 5. They know not, neither will they understand, they walk on in darkness:
all the Foundations of the earth are out of course. London, Printed for the
Author, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas in Green Arbor, 1655.

Errata.
IN the Epistle, letter C. page 8. l. 6. read effect, D. p. 2. l. 9. (...)
Tesmond, H. p. 5. l. 19. Censurers, I. p. 5. l. 13 of r. our K. p. 7. l. 28. r.
Heirs, L. p. 4. l. 20. r. exercerunt. In the Margin H. p. 3. l. 42. aliquem, I.
p. 6. l. 27. pacti L. p. 8. 13. r. 23.

In the Book p. 4. l. 25. r. as of, p. 13. l. 36. r. were resolved. p. 19. l.
14. r. Vote of p. 24. l. 16. of p. 26. l. 15. of and p. 29. l. 33. Statutes. p.
32. l. 26. r. E. 6. c. 5. p. 35. l. 6. to sedition p. 38. l. 19. r. parts.

Margin, p. 27. l. 13. there r. other, p. 64. l. 3, 4, 5. r. 10. R. 2. cap. 1. 1
H. 5. c. 1. 28 H. 6. n. 51. l. 11. r. 4. E. 4.

To all truly Christian Free men of England, This Epistle should have been
printed before the first part; but was omitted through have.
Patrons of Religion, Freedom, Laws, Parliaments, who shall peruse this
Treatise.
Christian READER,
IT has been one of the most detestable Crimes, and highest Impeachments
against the Antichristian See the several Epistles of Frederick the Emperor
against Pope Gegory the 9, and Innocent the 4 recorded by Mat. Paris, p. 332.
to 693. sparsim.
Popes of Rome, that under a Saint-like Religious pretext of advancing the
Church, Cause, Kingdom of Jesus Christ, they have for some hundred years
bypast, usurped to themselves ( as fool Monarchs of the World in the Right of
Christ, whose Vicars they pretend themselves to be) both by Doctrinal Positions
and Treasonable Practices, See Extra^ de Majoritate and Obedientia: Augustinus
Triumphus: Bellarminus, Becanu^, and others, De Monarchia Remani Pontificis.
Hospinia^ Hist. Jesui. l. 3, and 4.
an absolute Sovereign, Tyrannical Power over all Christian Emperors, Kings,
Princes of the World (who must derive and hold their Crowns from them alone,
upon their good behaviors at their pleasures) not only to Excommunicate,
Censure, Judge, Depose, Murder, Destroy their sacred Persons; but likewise to
dispose of their Crowns, Scepters, Kingdoms, and translate them to whom they
please.

In pursuance whereof, they have most traitorously, wickedly, seditiously,
atheistically, presumed to absolve their Subjects from all their sacred Oaths,
Homages, natural Allegiance, and due Obedience to them, instigated, encouraged,
yea expressly, enjoined (under pain of interdiction, excommunication, and other
censures) their own Subjects, (yea own sons sometimes) both by their Bulls and
Agents, to revolt from, rebel, war against, depose, dethrone, murder, stab,
poison, destroy them by open force, or secret conspiracies: and stirred up one
Christian King, Realm, State, to invade, infest, destroy, usurp upon another;
only to advance their own Antichristian Soveraignties, Usurpations, Ambition,
Rapines, worldly Pomp and Ends: as you may read at leisure in the Statutes of
25 H. 8. c. 22. 28 H. 8. c. 10. 37 H. 8. c. 17. 13 Eliz. c. 2. 23 Eliz. c. 1.
35 Eliz. c. 2. 3 Jacob. c. 1, 2, 4, 5. 7 Jacob. c. 6. The Emperor Frederick
his Epistles against Pope Gregory the 9. and Innocent the 4. recorded in
Matthew Paris, and Henricus de Knighton, de Eventibus Angli ae, l. 2. c. 14, 15.
others, Aventinus Annalium Boiorum, Mr. William Tyndal's Practice of Popish
Prelates; the second Homily upon Witsunday; the Homilies against disobedience,
and wilful Rebellion; Bishop Jewels view of a seditious Bull; John Bale in his
lives of the Roman Pontifs; Doctor Thomas Bilson in his True difference between
Christian subjection, and unchristian Rebellion; Doctor John White his Sermon
at Paul,s Cross, March 24. 1625. and Defense of the Way, c. 6, 10. Doctor
Crakenthorpe of the Popes temporal Monarchy; Bishop Morton's Protestant
Apology; Doctor Beard 's Theater of God's Judgments, l. 1. c, 27, 28. Doctor
Squire of Antichrist; John Bodin his Commonwealth, l. 1. c. 9. The learned
Morney Lord du Plessy, his Mystery of Iniquity, and History of the Papacy. The
General History of France. Grimston's Imperial History. Matthew Paris, Speed,
Holinshed, Cambden, and others, in the lives of King John, Henry the 3. Queen
Elizabeth, and other of our Kings, with hundreds of printed Sermons on the 5 of
November.

The principal Instruments the Popes employed of late years, in these their
unchristian Treasonable Designs, have been pragmatical, furious, active
Jesuits, whose Society was first erected by Ignatius Loyola (a Spaniard by
Birth, but A See Massaeus Vegius and Petrus Ribadeniera in vita Ignatii
Loyolae. Heylins Micracosme, p. 179.
SOLDIER by Profession) and confirmed by Pope Paul the 3. Anno 1540^ which
Order consisting only of ten persons at first, and confined only to sixty by
this Pope, has so monstrously increased by the Popes and Spaniards favors and
assistance (whose chief Janissaries, Factors, Intelligencers they are) that in
the year 1626. See Lewis Owen his Jesuits Lookingglass, printed London 1629.
the Epistle to the Reader, and p. 48 to 58. Jubilaeum, sive speculum
Jesuiti^um, printed 1644. p. 307 to 213. Hospinian Hist. Jesuitica, l. 2.
they caused the picture of Ign^tius their Founder to be cut in Brass, with a
goodly Olive Tree growing (like Jessees root) out of his side, spreading its
branches into all kingdoms and Provinces of the World, where the Jesuits have
any Colleges and Seminaries, with the name of the Province at the foot of the
branch, which has as many leaves as they have Colleges and Residencies in
that Province; in which leaves, are the names of the Towns and Villages where
these Colleges are situated: Round about the Tree are the Pictures of all the
illustrious Persons of their Order; and in Ignvtius his right hand, there is a
Paper, wherein these words are engraven, Ego sicut Oliva fructifera in domo
Dei; taken out of Ps. 52. 8. which pourtraictures they then printed and
published to the world: wherein they set forth the number of their Colleges
and Seminaries to be no less then 777. (increased to 155 more, by the year
1640.) in all 932. as they published in like Pictures and Pageants printed at
Antwerp, 1640. Besides sundry New Colleges and Seminaries erected since.

In these Colleges and Seminaries of theirs, they had then (as they print)
15591 Fellews of their Society of Jesus, besides the Novices, Scholars, and
Lay-brethren of their Order, amounting to near ten times that number. So
infinitely did this evil weed grow and spread it self, within one hundred years
after its first planting. And which is most observable, of these Colleges and
Seminaries they reckoned then no less then 15 ( secret ones) Speculum
Jesuiticum. p. 210. See Romes Master-peice and Conterburies Doom, p. 435, etc.
Hidden works of Darkness. 88, 144.
IN PROVINCIA ANGLICANA, in the Province of ENGLAND, where were 267 SOCII or
Fellows of that Society: besides 4 COLLEGES OF ENGLISH JESUITS ELSEWHERE. In
IRELAND and elsewhere 8 Colleges of IRISH JESUITS: and in SCOTLAND and
otherwhere 2 Residencies of SCOTTISH JESUITS.

What the chief employments of Ignatius and his numerous swarms of Disciples
are in the World, his own Society at the time of his Canonization for a Romish
Saint, sufficiently discovered in their painted Pageants, then showed to the
people, Mercure Iesu^le, tom. 1. p. 67. Speculum Jesuitieum p. 1. 56.
wherein they pourtraied this new Saint holding the whole world in his hand,
and fire streaming out forth of his heart (rather to set the whole world on
fire by Combustions, Wars, Treasons, Powder-plots, Schisms new State, and old
Church-Heresies, then to enlighten it) with this Motto; VENI IGNEM MITTFRE: I
came to send fire into the World; which the University of Cracow in Poland
objected (amongst other Articles) against them, Anno 1622. and Alphonsus de
Vargas more largly insisteth on in his Relatio, de Stratagematis and
Sophismatis Politicis Jesuitarum, etc. An. 1641. c. 7, 8, 24.

Their number being so infinite, and the Sea Lewis Owen his running Register,
and his Jesuited Looking glass. The Anatomy of the English Nunnery at Lisbone.
Pope and Spaniard too, having long since (by De Monarchia Hispanica, p. 146,
147, 148, 149, 204, 234, 235, 236, 185, 186.
Campanella's advice) erected many Colleges in Rome, Italy, Spain, the
Netherlands, and elsewhere, for English, Scottish, Irish Jesuits (as well as
for such secular Priests, Friars, Nuns) of purpose to promote their designs
against the Protestant Princes, Realms, Churches, Parliaments of England,
Scotland, Ireland, and to reduce them under their long prosecuted See Thomas
Campanella de Monarchia Hispaniae. Watsons quodhbets, Co^loni Posthuma, p. 91.
10 107. Cardinal de Ossets Letters. Arcana Imperii Hispanici Del^h. 1628.
Advice a tous les Estat's de Europe, touches les maximas Fundamentales de
Government and diss^iennes Espaginols, Pa^is, 1625.
UNIVERSAL MONARCHY over them, by Fraud, Policy, Treason, intestine Divisions,
and Wars, being unable to effect it by their own Power; no doubt of late years
many hundreds, if not thousands, of this Society, have crept into England,
Scotland and Ireland, lurking under several disguises; yea, an whole College
of them sat weekly in counsel, in or near Westminster, some few years since,
under Conne the Popes Nuntio, on purpose to embroyle England and Scotland in
bloody civil wars, thereby to endanger, shake, subvert these Realms, and destroy
the late King (as you may read at large in my Romes Masterpiece, published by
the Commons special Order, An. 1643.) who occasioned, excited, fom^nted, the
first and second intended (but happily prevented) wars between England and
Scotland, and after that, the unhappy Differences, Wars, between the King,
Parliament, and our three Protestant Kingdoms, to bring them to utter
desolation, and extirpate our reformed Religion.

The Kings Forces (in which many of them were Soldiers) after some years wars
being defeated, thereupon their Father Ignatius being a SOLDIER, and they his
Military sons, not a few of them Set my Speccb in Parliament, p. 107. ^o 119.
and the History of Independency.
secretly insinuated themselves as Soldiers, into the Parliaments Army and
Forces, (as they had formerly done into Exact Coll^ction, p. 651, 652, 662,
666, 813, 814, 8^6, 826, 827, 832, 902, 904, to 920. A Coll^ction of
Ordinances, p. 267, 313, 354, 424.
the Kings) where they so cunningly acted their parts, as extraordinary
illuminates, gifted brethren, and grand Statesmen, that they soon leavened
many of the Officers, Troopers and common Soldiers, with their dangerous
Jesuitical State-politicks, and See Put^^y Projects, the History of
Independ^ncy, and Armies Declarations, Papers, Proposals. printed together,
London, 1647.
Practices, put them upon sundry strange designs, to new-mould the old
Monarchical Government, Parliaments, Church, Ministers, Laws of England;
erecting a New General Council of Army Officers and Agitators for that purpose;
acting more like a Parliament and Supreme Dictators, then Soldiers. And at
last instigated the Army by open force* (against their Commissions, Duties,
Oaths, Protestations and Solemn League and Covenant) to Impeach, imprison,
seclude, first eleve^ Commoners; then some six or seven Lords; after that to
secure, seclude the Majority of the Commons House, suppress the whole House of
Lords, destroy the King, Parliament, Government, Privileges, Liberties of the
Kingdom and Nation, for whose defense they were first raised, which by no other
adverse power they could effect. This produced new bloody divisions,
animosities, wars, in and between our three Protestant Realms and Nations; and
after with our Protestant Allies of the Netherlands, ( De Monarchia Hisp. c.
25, 27.
Campanella's express old projected Plots to subject us both to the Popes and
Spaniards Monarchies, effected by the Spaniards Gold and Agents) with sundry
heavy Monthly Taxes, Excises, Oppressions, Sales of the Churches, Crowns, and
of many Nobles and Gentlemen's Lands and Estates, to their undoing, our whole
Nations impoverishing, and discontent, an infinite profuse expense of Treasure,
of Protestant blood both by Land and Sea, decay of Trade, with other sad
effects in all our three Kingdoms; yea, sundry successive New changes of our
public Government, made by the Army Officers, (who are still ringing the
changes) according to Campanela's and Parsons Platforms. So that if Fire may be
certainly discerned by the smoke; or the Tree commonly known by its Fruits, as
the Truth it self resolves, Matthew. 12. 33. we may truly cry out to all our
Rulers, as the Jews did once to the Rulers of Thessalonica, in another case,
Act. 17. 6. THOSE ( Jesuits) WHO HAVE TURNED THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN, ARE COME
HITHER ALSO; and have turned our Kingdoms, Kings, Peers, Monarchy, Parliaments,
Government, Laws, Liberties, (yea, our very Church and Religion too, in a great
measure) UPSIDE DOWN, even by those very Persons, who were purposely raised,
commissiond, waged, engaged by Protestations, Covenanes, Vows, Oaths, Laws,
Allegiance and Duty, to protect them from these Jesuitical Innovations and
subversions.

And those Jesuits, Spanish Romish Agents, who have so far seduced, so deeply
engaged them, contrary to all these Obligations, and to their own former
printed Engagements, Remonstrances, Representations, Proposals, Desires, and
RESOLUTIONS, for settling this Nation in its just Rights, the Parliament in
their just Privileges, and the Subjects in their Liberties and Freedoms;
published to all the World, in the name of Sir Thomas Fairfax, THE ARMY, AND
THE GENERAL COUNCIL OF THE ARMY, none Volume. London, 1647. (which they may do
well to peruse) yea, against the Votes, Entreaties, Desires, Advices, of both
Houses of Parliament, the Generality of the good Ministers, people of the three
whole Kingdoms, and their wisest, best affected Protestant Friends, who
commissioned, raised, paid, assisted them for far other ends O whether may
they, will they not (in all humane probability) rashly, blindly, suriously
henceforth lead, drive, precipitate them, to our whole three Kingdoms,
Churches, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties total, final desolation, and the Armies
too in conclusion, beyond all hopes of prevention, unless God himself shall
miraculously change their Hearts, Councels, and reclaim them from their late
destructive, heady violent courses: or put an hook into their Noses, to turn
them back by the way by which they came: or, set a timely period to their
usurped Armed power and extravagant late proceedings, of such a desperate
unparalled, unprotestant strange Nature, as none but the very worst of
Ignatius his Disciples and Engineers durst set on foot, or still drive on
amongst us Protestants. Which I earnestly beseech, adjure, and conjure them now
most seriously to lay ^o heart, before it be overlate.

Those who will take the pains to peruse all or any of these several printed
Books (most of them very well worth their reading) written against the Jesuits
and their Practices, as well by Papists as Protestants, as namely, Fides Jesus
and Iesuitarum, printed 1573. Doctrinae Iesuiticae praecipua capita, Delph.
1589. Aphorismi Doctrinae Iesu^ticae. 1608. Cambitonius, De Studiis Jesuitarum
abstrusioribus. Anno 1608. Iacobus Thuanus, Passages of the Jesuits. Hist. l.
69, 79, 83, 94, 95, 96, 108, 110, 114, 116, 119, 121, 124, 126, 129, 131, 132,
134, 136, 137. 138. Emanuel Meteranus his Passages of them. Belgicae Hist. l.
9, 12, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23, 26, to 34. Willielmus Baudartius, Continuatio
Meterani, l. 37, 38, 39, 40. Donatus Wesagus, Fides Jesus and Iesuitarum, 1610.
Characteres Iesuiticae, in several Tomes. Elias Husenmullerus, Historia
Iesuitici Ordin^, Anno 1605. Speculum sive Theoria Doctrinae Iesuiticae, necnon
Praxis Jesuitarum, 1608. Pasquier his Jesuit displayed. Petrus de Wangen,
Physiogmonia Jesuitica, 1610. Christopherus Pelargus, his Novus Jesuitismus.
Franciscus. de Verone, his Jesuitismus Sicarius, 1611. Narratio de proditione
Jesuitarum in Magnae Brit. Regem, 1607. Consilium de lesuitis Regno Polonia
ejiciendis. The Acts of the States of Rhetia, Anno 1561, and 1612. for
banishing the Jesuits wholly out of their Territories, NE STATUS POLITICUS
TURBARETUR, etc. mentioned by Fortunatus Sprecherus, Palladis Rheticae, l. 6.
p. 251, 273. Melchior Valcius, his Furiae Gretzero, etc. remissae, 1611.
Censura Jesuitarum, Articuli Jesuitarum, cum commonefactione illis oppositae
Anti-Jesuites, au Roy par. 1611. Variae Doctorum Theologorum Theses adversus
quaedam Jesuitica Dogmata. The Remonstrance of the Parliament of Paris to Henry
the Great against the re-establishment of the Jesuits; And their Censure of
Mariana his book, to be publicly burnt, printed in French, 1610. recited in
the General History of France, in Lewis 13. his life, and Peter Matthew, l. 6.
par. 3. Historia Franciae. Variae Facultatis Thologiae and Curiae Parisiensis,
quam aliorum Opuscula, Decreta and Censurae contra Jesuitas, Paris 1612.
Conradus Deckerus, De proprietatibus Iesuitarum, 1611. Quaerelarum inclyti
Regni Hungariae adversus corruptelas Iesuiticas defensio. Lucas Osiander, his
writing about the Jesuits bloody Plot, Han. 1614. Iesuitarum per unitas Belgii
Provincias Negotiatio, Anno 1616. Radulphus An Excellent cove^y of (...)
stable, asonakle (...) and (...).
Hospinianus, Historia Iesuitica, 1619. Bogermannus his Catechismus Iesuiticus.
Lodovicus Lucius, Historia Iesuitica, Basil. 1627. Arcana Imperii Hispanici,
1628. Mercure Jesuit, in several Tomes, Geneve 1626, De Conscientia
Iesuitarum, tractat. Censura sacrae Theologiae. Parisiensis, in librum qui
inscribitur, Antonii Sanctarelli societatis Jesus, de Haeresi, Schismate and
Apostasia, etc. Paris, 1626. Anti-Cotton; Ioannes Henricius, Deliberatio de
compescendo perpetuo crudeli Conatu Iesuitarum, Fran. 1633. A Proclamation of
the States of the united Provinces, Anno 1612. And another Proclamation of
theirs: with two other Proclamations of the Protestant States of the Marquesate
of M^ravia, for the banishing of the Jesuits, London 1629. Alfonsi de Vargas
Toletani, Relatio ad Reges and Principes Christianos, De Stratagematis and
Sophismatis Politicis Societatis Jesu, ad Monarchiam Orbis terrarum sibi
conficiendam: in qua Jesuitarum erga Reges and Populos optime de se meritos
infidelitas, ergaq ipsum Poutificem perfidia, contumacia, and IN FIDEI REBUS
NOVANDI LIBIDO, illustribus documentis comprobatur, Anno 1641. Jubilaeum, sive
Speculum Jesuiticum, exhibens PRAECIPUA JESUITARUM SCELERA, MOLITIONES,
INNOVATIONES, FRAUDS, IMPOSTURAS, ET MENDACIA, CONTRA STATUM ECCLESIASTICUM
POLITICUMQUE, in and extra EUROPEUM ORBEM; primo hoc centenario, confirmati
illius Ordinis INSTITUTA ET PERPETRATA: ex variis Historiis, inprimis vero
Pontificiis collecta, Anno 1644. (a piece worth perusing) Or else will but cast
their eyes upon our own forecited Statutes, and the No^ (...) date.
Proclamations of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles against
Jesuits, and Seminary Priests. A brief Discovery of Doctor Allens Seditious
Drifts, London 1588. Charles Paget ( a Seminary Priest) his Answer to Dolman,
concerning the succession of the English Crown, 1601. William Watson ( a
secular Priest) his Dedachordon or Quodlibets, printed 1602. now very well
worthy all Protestants reading. A Letter of A. C. to his Dis-Jesuited Kinsman,
concerning the Jesuits, London 1602. Romish Positions and Practices for
Rebellion, London 1605. The Arraignment of Traitors, London 1605. John King
Bishop of London, his Sermons on November 5. 1607, 1608. King James his
Conjuratio Sulphurea, Apologia pro Juramento fidelitatis: and, Responsio ad
Epistolam Cardinalis Peronii. An Exact Discovery of the chief Mysteryes of the
Jesuitical iniquity: and, The Jesuits secret Consultations; both printed
London 1619. William Crashaw his Jesuits Gospel, London 1621. William Feak of
the Doctrine and Practice of the Society of Jesus, London 1630. The many
printed Sermons of Doctor John White, Bishop Lake, Bishop Andrews, Doctor
Done, Doctor Featly, Doctor Clerk, and others, preached on the fifth of
November. Lewis Owen, his Running Register, London, 1620. His Unmasking of all
Popish Monks and Jesuits, 1628. And his Jesuits Looking-Glass, London, 1629.
John Gee, his Foot out of the Snare, etc. London, 1624. with the Jesuitical
Plots discovered in my Romes Masterpiece; and, Hidden works of darkness
brought to public Light, London 1645. shall see the Jesuits and their
Seminaries charged with, convinced of, and condemned for these ensuing
Seditious, Treasonable, Antimonarchical, Anarchical Positions and Practices;
for which, their Society has by public Acts and Proclamations been several
times banished out of Hungaria, Bohemia, Moravia, Poland, the Low Countries,
Rhetia, France, Transylvania, Sweden, Denmark, the Palatinate, Venice,
Aethiopia, Japan and Turkey, as well as out of England, Scotland and Ireland,
as most insufferable Pests and Traitors; in many of which they have yet gotten
footing again.

1. That at least ^ifty several prime Authors of that infernal Society of
Jesus* in several printed books (which you shall find specified in Doctor John
Whites Defense of the Way, c. 6, 10. Aphorismi-Jesuitarum: Iubilaeum, or,
Speculum Iesuiticum, p. 187, 188. and the Appendix to my Fourth part of the
Sovereign power of Parliaments, p. 187, 188.) have dogmatically maintained;
Hospinian. Hist. Jesuit. l. 4.
That the Pope has absolute power, not only to excommunicate, but judicially
to suspend, mulct with temporal penalties, depose, dethrone, PVT TO DEATH, and
destroy any Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, Potentates, by open Sentence,
War, Force, secret Conspiracies, or private assasinations, and to give away
their Crowns and Dominions to whoever will invade them, by Treason or
Rebellion, at the Popes command; and that in cases of Heresy, Schism,
Disobedience to, Rebellion against the Pope or See of Rome,
Maladministration, refusal to defend the Pope or Church against her
adversaries, Insufficency to Govern, Negligence, Tyranny, Excesses, Abuses in
Government, Incorrigibility, Vitiousness of Life, and Quando eorum malitia hoc
exigit and Reipub. vel Ecclesiae NECESSITAS sic requirit. Speculum Jesuiticum,
p. 168, 169, 170. Mercure Jesuit, Part. 1. p. 884, 885. Alfonsi de Vargas
Relatio. etc. ^. 55.
NECESSITY OF THE PUBLIC GOOD, OR SAFETY OF THE CHURCH, STATE, OR CAUSE OF
GOD; as Antonius Sanctarellus the Jesuit particularly defines, in his Book De
Haeresibus, Schismatibus, etc. printed in Rome it self, Anno 1625. who affirms
it to be, Multum aequum and Reipublicae expediens, ut sit aliquis supremus
Monarcha, qui Regum hujusmodi excessus possit corrigere, and DE IPSIS IVSTITIAM
MINISTRARE; sicut PETRD concessa fuit facultas PVNIENDI PAENA TEMPORALI, imo
etiam, PAENA MORTIS, DICTAS PERSONAS AD AL^^^VM COKKEECMIONEM ET EXEMPLVM.
(Whether the Erection, Title of, or Proceedings against our beheaded King, in
the late mis-named High Court of Justice, had not their original from hence;
and whether the Army Officers derived not their very phrase, See their
Remonstrance from Sl. Albans, 16 Nov. 1648, and December. 7. with other Papers.
of bringing the King TO IVSTIEE, with their pretended NECESSITY OF PVBLICK
GOOD AND SAFETY, for it, from these very Jesuits, or their Agents in the Army;
let themselves, the whole Kingdom, and all Wisemen now consider.) Moreover,
some of the fifty Authors, (as Creswel, or Parsons the English Jesuit, in his
Philopater, Sect. 2. and Attributed to ^ne Jesuit Tresham.
De Officio Principis Christiani, chap. 5. affirm, That the whole School both
of (their) Divines and Lawyers, make it a Position certain and undoubtedly to
be believed, That if any Christian Prince whatsover, shall manifestly turn from
the Roman Catholic Religion, or desire, or seek to reclaim others from the
same; or but favor, or show countenance to an Heretic (as they deem all
Protestants, and Dissenters from the Sea of Rome in any punctilio, such) HE
PRESENTLY FALLS FROM, and LOSES AL PRINCELY POWER and Dignity; and that By
Vertus and Power OF THE LAW IT SELF, BOTH DIVINE AND HVMANE, EVEN BEFORE ANY
SENTENCE PRONOVNCED AGAINST HIM BY THE SVPREAM PAS^OR AND IVDGE. That thereby
his Subjects are absolved from ALL OATHS AND BONDS OF ALLEGIANCE TO HIM AS TO
THEIR LAWFUL PRINCE. Nay, THAT THEY MAY AND OUGHT ( See Watsons Q^^libets, P.
295. etc.
PROVIDED THEY HAVE COMPETENT POWER AND FORCE) TO CAST OVT SVCH A PRINCE FROM
BEAKING RVLE AMONGST CHRISTIANS, as an Apostate, an Heretic, a Back-slider, a
Revolter from our Lord Jesus Christ, AND AN ENEMY TO HIS OWN ESTATE AND
COMMONWEALTH; lest perhaps he might infect others, or by his example or
command, turn them from the faith. And that the Kingdom of such an Heretic or
Prince, is to be bestowed at the pleasure of the Pope, with whom the people
upon pain of Damnation, are to take part, and Fight against their SOVEREIGN.
Out of which detestible and Treasonable Conclusions, most Treasons and
Rebellions of late time have risen in the Christian World; and the first smoke
of the Gunpowder-treason too, as John Speed observes in his History of Great
Britain, p. 1250. Whereupon the whole Alphonsi de Vargas Relatio, etc. c. 55.
Spe^ulum Jesuiticum, p. 162, 163.
University of Paris censured them, An. 1625, and 1626. not only as most
pernioious, detestable, damnable, erroneous, and perturbing the public Peace;
but likewise, as Subversive of Kingdoms, States, and Republics, seducing
Subjects from their Obedience and subjection, and stirring them up to Wars,
Factions, Seditions, and Principum parricidia, and the Murders of their KINGS.

2. That the Jesuits have Hospinian. Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3.
frequently put these Treasonable, Seditious, Antimonarchical, Jesuitical,
damnable Doctrines into practice, as well against some Popish, as against
Protestant Kings, Queens, Princes, States: which they manifest,

1. By Hist. Gallica, and ^elgica, l. ^. p. 126. Speculum Jesuiticum p. 46.
Hospinian. Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. ^. 159.
their poisoning Jone Albreta Queen of Navarre, with a pair of deadly perfumed
Gloves, only for favoring and protecting the Protestants in France against
their violence, Anno. 1572.

2. By their suborning and animating See Speculum Jesuiticum and the General
History of France in H. 3. Hospinian. Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. f. 151, 152.
James Clement a Dominican Friar, to stab King Henry the third of France in the
belly with a poisoned Knife, whereof he presently died, Anno. 1589. for which
they promised this Traitor, a Saintship in heaven. Pope Sixtus the fifth
himself commending this foul Fact in a long Oration to his Cardinals, as
Insigne and memorabile sacinus, non sine Dei Opt. Max. particulari providentia,
and dispositione, ET SPIRITUS SANCTI SUGGESTIONE DESIGNATUM: facinusque long
majus quam illud S. Judith, quae Holofernum e medio sustulit.

3. By Speculum Jesuiticum, p. 75.
Cammolet the Jesuits public justification of this Clement in a Sermon at
Paris Anno 1593. wherein he not only extolled him above all the Saints, for his
Treason against, and murder of Henry the 3. but broke out likewise into this
further Exclamation to the people: We ought to have some Ehud, whether it be a
A Monk, or A Soldier, or a Varlet, or at least a Cow-herd. For it is
necessary, that at least we should have some Ehud. This one thing only yet
remains behind: for then we shall compose all our Affairs very well, and at
last bring them to a destred end. Whereupon, by the Jesuits instigation, the
same year 1593. one Peter Bariere, undertook the assasination of King See the
General History of France in the life of Henry 4. and Lewis 13. Speculum
Jesuiticum, p. 77, 80, 126, 235. Hospinian. Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. p. 153, to
158.
Henry the 4 of France: which being prevented, and he executed, thereupon they
suborned and enjoined one of their own Jesuitical Disciples, John Castle, a
youth of 19 years old, to destroy the King: who on the 27 of December 1594.
intending to stab him to the heart, missing his aim, wounded him only in the
cheek, and stroke out one of his teeth; for which Treasonable act he was
justified, applauded, as a renowned Saint and Martyr, by the Jesuits, in a
printed Book or two, published in commendation of this his undertaking. As
namely, by Bonarscius the Jesuit, in his Amphitheatrum, Franciscus Verona
Constantinus, (a Jesuit) in his Apologiapro Iohanne Castello, contra Edictum
Parliamenti, and supplicium de eo ob Parricidium sumptum, An. 1595. Where he
thus writes of the attempt upon Hen. 4. Whosoever diligently ponders, that
Henry was excommunicated, an Heretic, relapsed, a prof^ner of holy things, a
declared public enemy, an oppressor of Religion; and (thereupon) a person
secluded from all right to the Kingdom; and therefore a Tyrant, not a King; an
Usurper, not a lawful Lord; he verily, unless he be mad, and destitute of
humane sense, and love toward God, the Church, and his Country, cannot
otherwise think or speak; but that the fact of Castle was generous, conjoined
with Virtue; and Heroical, to be compared with the greatest and most
praiseworthy facts which the ancient Monuments of Sacred and Profane
Histories have recorded. One thing only may be disliked, namely, That Castle
has not utterly slain and taken him from the midst of us. In sum, He denies
this Henry to be any King of France, by right or inheritance, because, (in his
and the Jesuits Opinion only, not in Truth) he was both an Heretic, and A
TYRANT. Asserting, That it was lawful for Castle, or any other private man, TO
DESTROY AN HERETIC OR TYRANT, much more then, him that was both.

And Speculum Jesuiticum, p. 80, 81. Hospinian. Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. f. 156,
157.
John Guignardus a Jesuit, (Fellow of the Jesuits College of Claremount) in
his Papers then seized by, and reported to the Parliament of Paris, Anno 1595.
not only compared Henry the third and fourth to Nero and Herod, and justified
Clements murder of the one, and Castles attempt upon the other, as most
Heroical and praiseworthy Actions: but likewise added, That if we in the year
1572. on Saint Bartholmews day, (in the General Massacre of the French
Protestants) had CVT OFF THE BASILICON VEIN, ( Henry King of Navarre) we had
not fallen out of a Feavour, into that Plague, which now we find. Sed quicquid
delirant Reges plectunctur Achivi, SANGVINI PARCENDO. That King Henry should be
but over-mildly dealt with, if he were thrust from the Crown of France, into a
Monastery, and there had his crown shaven. That if he could not be deposed
without a war, then a war was to be raised against him: but if a war could not
be levied against him, the cause being dead, CLAM E MEDIO TOLLATVR: he should
then be privily murdered and taken out of the way. For which the Parliament of
Paris adjudged and executed him for a Traitor. Yea, so desperately were the
Jesuits after this, bent to destroy this King, that Hospinian. Hist. J^su. l.
3 ^. 157, 158.
Alexander Hay (a Scottish Jesuit of Claremont,) privy to Castles villainy,
used to say, That if King Henry the fourth should pass by their College (the
first there built for them) he would willingly cast himself out of his window
headlong upon him, so as he might break the Kings neck, though thereby he brake
his own. Yet was he punished but with perpetual Banishment. After which
Jesuitical conspiracies detected and prevented, notwithstanding this King Henry
(before these two attempts to murder him) had by their solicitations,
renounced the Protestant Religion, professed himself a zealous Romanist,
recalled the Jesuits formerly banished for the murder of Henry the third,
against his Parliaments and Counsels advice, reversed all the decrees of
Parliament against them, razed the public Pillar set up in Paris, as a lasting
Monument of their Treasons and Conspiracies; built them a magnificent College
in Paris, endowed them with a very large Revenue; entertained Pere Cotton (one
of their Society) for his Confessor (who revealed all his Secrets to the King
of Spain;) bequeathed a large Legacy of Plate and Lands to their Society by his
will, and was extraordinary bountiful and favorable toward them; yet these
bloody ungrateful Villains, animated that desperate wretch, See the General
History of France in Hen. 4. and Lewis 13. Dr. John Whites Defense of the ^^^y,
c. 10. p. 46.
Ravilliac, to stab him to death in the open street in Paris, Anno 1610.
Albigni the Jesuit being privy to this murder, before it was perpetrated. Yea,
Francis de Verona in his Apology for John Castle, p. 258. thus predicted his
second mortal stab, in these words, Though this Prince of Orange escaped the
first blow, given him in his cheek, yet the next hit, whereof this was a
presage; as the blow given by Castle SHALL BE THE FORE-RVNNER OF ANOTHER BLOW.
Such implacable Regicides are the Jesuits.

4. By their suborning, instigating sundry bloody instruments one after
another, to murder See Grimstons History of the Netherlonds p. 764. Thuanus l.
79. p. 186. Speculum Jesuiticum. p. 60, 61.
William Prince of Orange, prevented in their attempts by God's providence,
till at last they procured one Balthazar Gerard to shoot him to death with a
Pistol, charged with three Bullets, An. 1584. the Jesuits promising him no
less then HEAVEN it self, AND A CANONIZATION AMONG THE SAINTS AND MARTYRS, for
this bloody Treason, as they did to James Clement before, for murdering the
French King. And it is very remarkable, That after this murder of his, De
Monarch. Hisp. ^. 27. p. 258.
Thomas Campanella (a Jesuited Italian Friar) prescribed this as a principal
means to the King of Spain of reducing the Netherlands under his Monarchy
again, to sow emulation and discords amongst their Nobles, States, and to
murder Prince Maurice his son and successor, which he expresses in these
direct terms. Maxim opus est, ut Serpens seditionis, Comes Scilicet Mauritius
Interimatur; non vero per bellum diuturnum, copia illi danda est, magis
magisque succrescendi: which they Chron. Belgiae Tom. 1. p. 719. Tom. 2. p. 97.
Meteranus l. 17. p. 575. Hospinian. Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. f. 205.
twice likewise attempted to affect; An. 1594, and 1598. No wonder that they so
much endeavor by all means and instruments to suppress that noble family now,
to whom the Netherlands principally owe their infranchisement from the Spanish
yoke of bondage.

5. By Speculum Jesuiticum, p. 127.
their poisoning Stephen Botzkay Prince of Transylvania, for opposing their
bloody persecution.

6. By their manifold bloody Plots and Attempts from time to time, See Speed
and Cambden in her life. Bishop Carletons Thankful Remembrance of Gods Mercy,
London 1624.
to murder, depose, stab, poison, destroy our famous Protestant Queen
Elizabeth, by open Insurrections, Rebellions, Invasions, Wars, raised against
her both in England and Ireland; and by intestine clandestine Conjurations;
from which Gods ever-waking providence did preserve her. Amongst other
Conspiracies, that of Patrick Cullen, an Irish Friar, (hired by the Jesuits
and their Agents to kill the Queen) is observable. Hospinian. Hist. Jesuitica,
Speeds History, p. 1181. Cambden, Stow, Holinshed in the Life of Queen
Elizabeth. Speculum Jesuiticum, p. 73.
Holt the Jesuit, (who persuaded him to undertake the murdering of her) told
him, that it was not only lawful by the Laws, but that he should merit Gods
Favor, and Heaven by it; and thereupon gave him remission of all his sins, and
the Eucharist, to encourage him in this Treason; the chief ground whereof (and
of all their other Treasons against this Queen) was thus openly expressed by
Iaquis Francis, for Cullens further encouragement; That the Realm of England,
then was and would be so well settled, that unless Mistras Elizabeth (so he
termed his Dread Sovereign, though but a base Landressson;) were suddenly taken
away, All the Devils in Hell would not be able to prevail, to shake and
overturn it. Which then it seems they See Watsons Quodlibets.
principally endeavored, and oft-times since attempted, and have now at last
effected, by those who conceit they demerit the Title of Saints (though not in
a Romish Calendar) and no less then Heaven, for shaking, overturning, and
making it No Kingdom.

7. By their See Speeds Hist. p. 1240, 1242, 1243. John S^ow, and How; 1 Jac.
Conspiracy against King James, to dep^ive him of his Right to the Crown of
England, imprison, or destroy his person: raise Rebellion, alter Religion, and
Subvert the Stat^ and Government; by virtue of Pope Clement the eighth his Bull
directed to Henry Garnet, Superior of the Jesuits in England: whereby he
commanded all the Archpriests, Priests, Popish Clergy, Peers, Nobles and
Catholics of England, That after the death of Queen Elizabeth by the course of
Nature, or otherwise, whosoever shall lay claim or title to the Crown of
England, (though never so directly or nearly interessed by descent) should not
be admitted unto the Throne, unless he would first tolerate the Rom^sh
Religion, and by his best endeavors promote the Catholic cause; unto which by
his Solemn and Sacred Oath he should religiously subscribe, after the death of
that miserable woman; ( as he stilled Queen Elizabeth.) By virtue of which
Bull, the Jesuits, after her decease, dissuaded the Romishminded Subjects,
from yielding in any wise obedience to King James, as their Sovereign; and
entr^d into a Treasonable Conspiracy with the Lord Cobham, Lord Gray, and
others, against him, to imprison him for the ends aforesaid; or destroy him:
pretending that King James was no King at all before his Coronation; and that
therefore they might by force of Arms, lawfully surprise his person, and Prince
Henry his Son, and imprison them in the Tower of London, or Dover-Castle, till
they enforced them by duress, to grant a free toleration of their Catholic
Religion, to remove some evil Counselors from about them, and to grant them a
free Pardon for this violence; or else they would put some further project in
execution against them, to their destruction. But this Conspiricy being
discovered, The Traitors were apprehended, arraighned, condemned, and Watson
and Clerk ( two Jesuited Priests who had drawn them into this Conspiracy, upon
the aforesaid Pretext) with some others, executed as Traitors; Cook 3
In^^itutes, p. 7. and Calvin's Case 7^ Report, f. 10, 11. 1 Jac. c. 1.
all the Judges of England resolving, that King James being right Heir to the
Crown by descent, was immediately upon the death of Queen Elizabeth, actually
possessed of the Crown, and lawful King of England, before any Proclamat^on or
Coronation of him, which are but Ceremonies, (as was formerly adjudged in the
case of See Fox, Holinshed, Speed, 1 Mariae,
Queen Mary, and Queed Jane, 1 Mariae) there being no Interregnum by the Law of
ENGLAND, as is adjudged, declared by Act of Parliament, 1 Iac. c. 1. worthy
serious perusal.

8. their See 3 Jac. c. 1, 2, 4, 6. Speeds History, p. 1250, to 1256. The
Arraignment of Traitors, with others. Prayers for the 5 of November. Hospinian.
Hist. Jesuitica l. 3. f. 163, to 170.
horrid Gunpowder Treason Plot; contrived, fomented, by Garnet (Superior of
the English Jesuits) Gerard, Tensmod and other Jesuits; who by their
Apostolical power, did not only commend, but absolve from all sin the other
Jesuited Popish Conspirators, and Faux The Sculdier, who were their instruments
to effect it. Yea, the Jesuitical Priests were so Atheistical, as that they
usually concluded their Masses with Prayers, for the good success of this
hellish Plot, which was, suddenly, with no less then 36 Barrels of Gunpowder,
placed in a secret Vault under the House of Lords, to have blown up and
destroyed at once, King James himself, the Queen, Prince, Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, with the Commons assembled together in the Upper-House of Parliament,
upon the 5 of November, Anno Dom. 1605. and then forcibly to have seized with
armed men prepared for that purpose, the persons of our late beheaded King,
then Dake of York, and of the Lady Elizabeth his Sister (if absent from the
Parliament, and not there destroyed with the rest) that so there might be none
of the Royal Line left to inherit the Crown of England, Scotland and Ireland;
to the utter overthrow and subversion of the whole Royal Family, Parliament,
State and Government of this Realm. Which unparalled, inhumane, bloody Plot,
being miraculously discovered, prevented, the very day before its execution, in
perpetual detestation of it, and of the Jesuits and their traitorous Romish
Religion, (which both contrived and approved it) the 5 day of November, by the
Statute of 3 Jacobi, chapter 1. was enacted to be had in perpetual Remembrance,
that all Ages to come, might thereon meet together publicly throughout the
whole Nation, to render public praises unto God, for preventing this infernal
Jesuitical Design, and keep in memory this joyful Day of Deliverance; for which
end, special forms of public Prayers and Thankesgivings were then appointed,
and that Day ever since more or less annually observed, till this present. And
it is worthy special observation, that had this Plot taken effect, Speeds Hist.
p. 1242. The Arraignment of Traitors, and M. John Vicars History of the
Gunpowder Treason.
It was agreed by the Jesuits and Popish Conspirators beforehand, That the
Imputation of this Treason should be cast upon the Puritans, to make them more
Odious: as now they father all the Powder-Plots of this kind, which they have
not only laid, but fully accomplished of late years against the King, Prince,
Royal Posterity, the Lords and Commons House, our old English Parliaments and
Government, upon those Independents, and Anabaptistical Swordmen, (whom they
now repute and style, See Militiere his victory of Truth, 1654. dedicated to
the King of Great Britain.
the most reformed PURITANS,) who were in truth, but their mere under-
Instruments to effect them; When as they See my Epistles to Jus Patronatus, and
Speech in Parliament.
originally laid the Plots; as is clear by Campanella's Book, De Monarchia
Hisp. chapter 25. and Cardinal Richelieu his Instructions at his death, to the King
of France. And it is very observable, that as Courtney the Jesuit, Rector of
the English Jesuits College at Rome did in the year 1641. (when the name of
Independents, was scarce heard of in England) openly affirm to some English
Gentlemen, and a Reverend Minister (of late in Cornwall) from whom I had this
Relation, then and there feasted by the English Jesuits in their College,
That now at last, Nota.
after all their former Plots had miscarried, they had found out a sure way to
subvert and ruin the Church of England (which was most formidable to them of
all others) by the Independents; who immediately after (by the Jesuits
clandestine assistance) infinitely increased, supplanted the Presbyterians by
degrees, got the whole power of the Army, (and by it, of the Kingdom) into
their hands, and then subverted both the Presbyterian Government and Church of
England in a great measure, with the Parliament, King and his Posterity; as In
his Victory of Truth, 1654. p. 15, 18, 24, 25, 26, 27.
Monsieur Militiere a Jesuited French-Papist observes. So some Independent
Ministers, Sectaries and Anabaptists, ever since 1648. have neglected the
observation of the fifth of November, (as I am credibly informed) and refused
to render public thanks to God for the deliverance thereon, contrary to the
Act, for this very reason, which some of them have rendered; That they would
not mock God in public by praising him for delivering the late King, Royal
Posterity, and House of Lords from destruction then, by Jesuits and Papists,
when as themselves have since destroyed and subverted them through Gods
providence; and repute it a special mercy and deliverance to the Nation from
Tyranny and Bondage, for Upon which ground, many of them have since solemnized
the 30 of January, instead of November 5.
which they have cause to bless the Lord: Performing that for the Jesuits and
Powder-Traytors, which themselves could not effect. The Lord give them grace
and hearts to consider, how much they acted the Jesuits, and promoted their
very worst Designs against us therein; what See Militiere his Victory of
Truth, p. 4, to 50
infamy and scandal they have thereby drawn upon all zealous Professors of our
Protestant Religion, and Jer. 5. 31.
what will they do in the end thereof?

9. (To omit all other Foreign instances cited in Speculum Jesuiticum, p. 124,
to 130. where you may peruse them at leisure) By Romes Masterpiece, p. 8, 18,
19.
their poisoning King James himself in conclusion, as some of them have boasted.

10. By the Popes Nuntio's, and a Conclave of Jesuits Conspiracy at London,
Anno 1640. Romes Masterpiece, p. 8, to 22.
to poison our late King Charles himself, (as they had poisoned his Father)
with a poisoned Indian Nut, kept by the Jesuits, and showed often by Conne the
Popes Nuntio to the Discoverer of that Plot; or else, to destroy him by the
Scottish wars and troubles, (raised for that very end by the Jesuits,) in case
he refused to grant them a universal liberty of exercising their Popish
Religion throughout his Realms and Dominions: and then to train up his Son
under them, in the Popish Religion; To which not only heretofore, but now
likewise they strenuously endeavor by all possible means to seduce him; as
appears more especially by Monsieur Militiere his The Victory of Truth, Anno
1653.
late book dedicated to Him for that purpose, to invite him to the Roman
Catholic Faith. Surely all these premised instances compared together, and
with that memorable passage of the English Jesuit Hospinion. Hist. Jesuitica,
l. 3. f. 214. l. 4. f. 264.
Campian, in his Concertatio Ecclesiae Catholicae: (or Epistle to Queen
Elizabeth's Council.) Treviris 1583. p. 22. Velim sciatis, quod ad Societatem
nostram attinet, omnes nos, qui per totum Orbeni long lateque diffusi sunt,
quarum est continua successio, and magnus numerus, Sanctum foedus infisse, nec
quamdiu unus nostrum supererit, studium, and consilia nostra intermissuros, ad
Reges Hereticos quovis modo tollendos (as Hospinian relates, and expounds his
words and meaning) and Religionem vestram exting^ere. Iampridem jacta est
ratio, and inchoatum certamen nulla vis, nullus Anglorum impetus superabit; so
as to hinder this their holy League and Covenant long since entered into, To
destroy, take out of the way, ruin all Protestant Kings throughout the World,
under the Notion of Heretics by any means whatsoever, (and the Protestant
Religion togetherwith them.) With a Printed by it self, and at the end of my
Speech in Parliament.
Copy of a Letter sent by an Independent Agent from Paris, some few weeks
before the Kings removal from the Isle of Weight, by the Army Officers,
declaring the Jesuits implacable Enmity to the King, and to hereditary
Monarchy throughout the World. And an Express sent from Paris to the King
himself, some three days before his seizure and translation from Weight, to
this effect, (as I have heard from persons of Honor) That the Jesuits at a
general meeting in France, had resolved, by the power of their friends in
England, to seize on his Majesty, bring him to justice, and cut off his head,
because he had, contrary to their expectation, closed with the Parliament,
consented to the abolishing of Episcopacy, and) to five new Bills against
Jesuits, Popish Priests, Mass, Popery, and all Popish Ceremonies, in the last
Treaty; and advising Him, to prepare for this new storm, which within few days
after fell upon him: will sufficiently inform the world, that the late
unparalled capital proceedings against our Protestant King, (contrary to the
Votes of both Houses of Parliament) the Parliament Members, Peers House, and
forced, dissolved late Parliament too, See An Apologetical Declaration of the
Province of London, etc. Jan. 24. 1649.
proceeded not from the Principles of our reformed Protestant Religion, as this
Page 5, 7. 8, 18, 33, 39. etc.
Monsieur in his printed Pamphlet, would make his Reader, the youg King; to
whom he dedicates it, and all the World believe; but from the Popes and
Jesuits forecited Treasonable Opinions, seconded with their clandestine
Solicitations and Practices: and that they, with some French Cardinals,
Jesuits, as well as Spanish and English, (then present in England to promote
their Designs) were the chief original Contrivers, Promoters of them, whoever
were the immediate visible Instruments, as I have See my Speech in Parliament,
and Memento. The Epistle to my Jus Patronatus, and Tho. Campanella De Monarchia
Hisp. 6. 25.
elsewhere more fully demonstrated, for the wiping off this Scandal from our
reformed Religion, and the sincere Professors of it, who both abominated and
See the Declaration of the secluded Members, The London - Ministers and others,
Representation to the General, and the second part of the History of
Independency.
protested against it in print. (...) Radolphus Hospinian in his excellent
Historia Jesuitica, l. 4. f. 244, 245. reckons up these three prime causes of
the Jesuits Regicides, and other Notorious Treasons. The first is, that blind
Obedience, which they vow to their Superiors, to execute with great celerity,
spiritual joy, and perseverance, whatever their Superiors shall enjoyne them,
by being persuaded, That all their Cemmands are Just to them; by renouncing
their own Opinion and Judgment with a certain Blind Obedience: and by
believing, that those who live under Obedience, are carried and governed by
Divine Providence, (a word now most in use with our Army-Saints, and Soldiers,
wholly infected with this Jesuitical Doctrine of To their General and Officers,
even in unlawful acts against the Parliament, King, Kingdom.
Obedience) by their Superiors, whithersoever they shall suffer themselves to
be carried, or in what sort soever they shall be dealt with by them, (like a
staff in the hand of a man, which readily obeys him that holds it, wheresoever
and in what thing soever he will please to use it,) especially when backed with
a pretext of Necessity, Religions Safety, Public Good, Exemplary Justice, and
promoting the common Cause for which their Society was first instituted. 2.
That they hold themselves obliged to no Kings, Princes, or Civil Magistrates by
any Oath of Allegiance, but only to the Pope and their Generals; and therefore
think themselves free and unable to commit any Treason at all against them,
although at the Popes and their Superiors commands they still rise up against,
murder, ^stroy them. 3. That they deem those Kings, Princes, which the Pope and
Jesuits, or other learned men of their Religion, or the common people shall
deem Heretics, to be thereby wholly made incapable of any Empires, Kingdoms,
or Principalities, or any other civil Diguity; yea, to be accursed Tyrants,
unworthy of the name of Kings; that thereby their Subjects are totally absolved
from the bond of Allegiance to them; and that thereupon it is lawful to kill
and destroy them, and the murders of such are meritorious. Now that these three
Jesuitical Grounds and Principles, (infused into our Army Officers and
Soldiers by the Jesuits and their Instruments of late years, against their
Primitive Orthodox Positions, Protestations, Declarations, Oaths, Covenants,
Engagements) backed with secret Avarice, Ambition, and Self Ends, were the
principal impulsive Causes of all the extravagant violent Proceedings both
against the late King, and Parliament (not the loyal Principles of the
Protestant Religion) is apparent unto all the World, by the Armies own
Declarations of Nov. 16. and December. 7. 1648. Their True State of the
Commonwealth of England, etc. 1654. and other Pamphlets for their
justification, which all true Protestants blush at. (...)

3. That the Jesuits ever since the Establishment of their Military Order,
under Ignatius their Martial General, have been the Hospinian. Hist. Jesuitica,
l. 3. Romes Masterpiece.
principal Firebrands, Bellows, Instruments of kindling, somenting, raising,
continuing all the public commotions, wars, seditions and bloody fewds that
have happened in or between any Kings, Kingdoms, States, Princes, Sovereigns or
Subjects throughout the Christians world; and more particularly, of all the
Civil commotions, wars in France, Germany, Transylvania, Bohemia, Hungary,
Russia, Poland, England, Scotland and Ireland, to the effusion of whole Oceans
of Christian blood: which one poetically thus expresses, Jubilaeum, five
Speculum Jesuiticum Epigramma.
Quicquid in Orb mali passim Peccante Gradido est,
Quicquid turbarum tempora nostra vident,
Cuncta Sodalitio mentito Nomine Jesu
Accepta Historia test, refer licet.
It^ modo and vestrae celebrate Encaenia Sectae,
Militis inventum, Loiolana cohors.


Yea, it is well worthy observation, what Jacobus Crucius, Hasen mullerus Hest.
Jesuit. c. 1. Speculum Jesuiticum, p. 61.
a Jesuit (Rector of the Jesuits Novices at Landsberge) presumed to publish,
in his Explication of the Rules of the Jesuits, Anno 1584. in these words: The
Father of our Society ought to be a Soldier; because, as it is the part of a
Sculdier, to rush upon the Enemy with all his Forces, and not to desist, till
he become a Conqueror; so it is our duty to run violently upon all, who resist
the Pope of Rome; and to Destroy and Abolish them, not only with Counsels,
Writings, and Words; Sed invocato etiam brachio seculari, Igne and Ferro
tollere and abolere, sicut Pontifer and nostra Vota (contra Lutheranos
suscepta) Volunt and Mandant. But likewise by calling in to our assistance the
secular Arm (of an Army) to take away, and destroy them with Fire and Sword, as
the Pope and our Oaths (taken against the Protestants) Will and Command. And
may we not then safely conclude, they have been the Original Contrivers,
Fomenters, Continuers of all our late intestine and foreign wars, by Land and
Sea, with our Christian Protestant Brethren and Allies, (as Exact Collection,
p. 12. 10 20 97, 98, 106, 108, 207, 461, to 465. 491, 492, 498, 508, 574, 616,
631, to 670. 812, to 828, 832, 834, 849, 890, to 918, 651, 652, 653.
sundry Parliament Declarations of both Houses aver and attest?) And that many
of them have secretly crept into, and listed themselves Soldiers in our
Armies, on purpose to put on foot their designs against our King, Kingdoms,
Churches, Religion, and perpetuate our Civil Wars? And so much the rather,
because, Relatio de S^ratogematis and Sophismatis J^suitarum, c. 4, 6, 7.
Alphonsus de Vargas (a Spanish Popish Priest) informs us: That the Jesuits,
being a Generation of Incendiaries, are so welpleased with the name of their
Founder Ignatius, derived from Fire, and signifying a Caster about of
Wildfire, or an Incendiary; that though his christened name at first was
Innicus, or Inighistas; Yet Johannes Eusebius Nirenberger, a Jesuit, in his
Book, De Vita Ignatii, printed at Madrid, 1630. most falsely records, That his
Parents at his Baptism, being in doubt what name to give him, thereupon the
Infant himself, with a loud voice, said, He would be named Ignatius, to
signify what office he should obtain in the Church and world, even to cast
abroad fire in them, and set them all in a flame. Hereupon his Disciples the
Jesuits, considering that this their founder was by his name A firebrand, and
a Soldier by his profession, professed publicly to the King of Spain, his
council and the world, that it was no less consonant to the mind, institution
and statutes, then to the name of their warlike Father Ignatius, that they
should not only exercise, but Publicly profess and teach to others, Artem
Pyrotechnisam, etc. the art how to make and cast abroad fireballs, fireworks
and wildfire, to fire and burn houses and Cities: and likewise the art of
war, of setting Armies in battle array, of Assaulting cities, the manner of
making Gunpowder, bullets, fire-bals; of casting Guns, and the manner and ways
of making all other Military works, Engines, together with rules and precepts
belonging to Navigation, and omnia maritini belli munia: and all duties and
incidents belonging to Sea Fights. Upon which they persuaded the King of Spain
(notwithstanding the opposition of all the Universit^es of Spain against it) to
erect a public University for their fiery martial order at Madrid, and to
endow it with an annual Revenue of ten thousand Crowns; wherein they set up a
public Lecture concerning war and all incidents appertaining thereunto; with
this Printed title: Acroasis, De re Militari; in qua pracipietur Doctrina and
forma Militiae veteris and Hodiernae, and Species Mathematum arti isti
subordinatarum: quae sunt Tactica, five De Acie instruenda, Topographica,
Machinaria Militaris, Organo Poetica, Pyrotechnica, etc. Hanc acrosia faciet,
P. Hermannus Hago (a Jesuit) quarta pomeridiana usque ad quintam. This is the
first public Military Lecture I ever read of erected in any University amongst
Christians, and Professors of the Romans 10. 15
Gospel of peace; who are expressly enjoined by the Romans 15. 33 Heb. 13 29.
God of peace, and Prince Isai. 9. 6.
of peace Mat. 26. 52.
To put up their swords into their scabberds, because all those that that the
sword, shall perish with the sword. Isai. 2. 4. Mica. 4. 3.
To beat their swords into plow^shares, and their spears into pruning-hookes:
not to lift up the sword against one another, neither To learn war any more.
Yet such bloody incendiaries and delighters in war are the Jesuits, that they
thus publicly teach others the art of war and fire-workes, to set the whole
Christian world in combustions and open wars against each other; which they
have everywhere accomplished, and that upon this account: that the Gospel of
Jesus is principally to be taught and propagated by armed power, exercitu and
armorum usu; by An army and the use of arms (whereby they now propagate it in
our Kingdoms the quite contrary way, to the ruin of our Church and religion:)
whereupon Cap. 7. p. 47 and c. 23. p. 132.
Vargas passes this just censure on them: Hos velut Ignigenos illis Comici
verbis recte quis a se amoliri, and in malam rem abire jusserit.

Apage illum a me; nan ille quidem Vulcani irati est filius.
Quaqua tangit, Omne amburit; si prope abstes, calefacit.
And a German Friar in his Astrum inextinctum, gives this true Character of
them: Discordias inter suprema Reipublicae Christianae capita seminare credimus
esse veritati patrocinari; quam salvam esse negant, quamdiu Principes isti
inter se non colliduntur Hoc est flammas in Europa suscitare, sicut gloriantur
Patrem societatis Ignatium, esse illum, de quo Christus dexerit, Veni ignem
mittere in terram, hoc est, classicum in aulis Principum canere, and illos
inter so committere.

4. That the Sea Hospinian. Historia Jesuitica. l 4. f. 212, 213, 214. and l.
3. throughout. Thuanus Hist. l. 4.
Jesuits from the first erection of their Military order, have conspired,
attempted to subvert and utterly extirpate (under the name of Schismatickes,
Heretics, Gospellers, Heresy, and the Gospel) all professors whatsoever of
the Protestant Religion and their Doctrines throughout the world, not only by
Machivilian plots and treasons, but by war, fire, sword, holy leagues, Armies
and armed power, as is evident both by their books and Practices. To instance
in a few particulars both abroad and at home. Franciscus Veronas
Constantiensis, a Jesuit, in his Apology for John Castle, Anno 1595. part 5.
c. 13. resolves, That all wars to extirpate heretics (Protestants) Ar^
lawful, yea more lawful then against all other Infidels, because Heresy
according to Gods word, is worse then all Infidelity. And if war be Just
against Heretics, how much more just is it against the head of the
Heretics? And if it be just to Extirpats heretical Kings out of all
Christian Kingdoms (which the Jesuits entered into an holy League to effect,
as you heard before out of Campian) How much more just is it in the most
Christian Kingdom (France) to root out King Henry the 4? (whom they not only
warred against, but stabbed and murdered as aforesaid.) Genevae, 1620.
Thuanus Historiae, l. 65. p 238. and lib. 67. 299. records; That it is the
opinion and Sentence of the Jesuits, that it is a Pious and wholesome thing,
that all Christians should lay violent hands upon Sectaries and Protestants,
ought to be armed against them, and to make no peace, keep no faith nor truce
with them; yea, that it would be more profitable for the Church, and more
conducing to Gods glory, for all Christians to give over their wars they wage
against the Turks by common consent, and to let the Turks alone, and to turn
all their arms and forces against the Evangelical Sectaries (or Protestants)
which live amongst them, who are worser, and ought to be more odious to true
Christians then Turks; and Yet these plead for a Toleration among us, and
enjoy it.
utterly to destroy and persecute them to death, rather then to delete the
unbelieving Mahometans, who are not so dangerous as they. Hoc quam pie, et
juxta mansuetudinem Christianam dicatur, ipsi qui conscientias alioram
moderantur, conscientiam suam rogant; Subjoynes Thuanus, though a Papist. And
Joannis Paulus Windeck, in his Book De extirpandis Haeres. antid. 10. p. 404.
412. antid. 11. p. 480. and p. 244. positively determines, That the Lutheranes
and Calvinists are to be persecuted with wars, and not only to be terrified,
but likewise deleted, cut off, taken out of the way, and utterly extirpated
with arms and flames. That all Catholic Princes ought to enter into Holy
leagues, associations and confederacies, to destroy and root them out, as they
did in France, Anno 1587. That the opportunity is not to be neglected, namely,
Nota.
Quando Protestants Pecuniis exhausti sunt; when the Protestants Purses and
money are exhausted (as they are now amongst us by excessive endless Taxes,
Excises, Civil wars, and a perpetual army too much swayed by Jesuitical
counsels, to eat us out, and ruin us with our Religion in conclusion, ere
disbanded.) And that the Catholics may more easily oppress and destroy these
Sectaries, they are to be severed one from, and divided against each other, by
sundry various arts and means, and all occasions laid hold on for this purpose.
(And are we not so now in all our Realms and Dominions more then ever, by the
Jesuits and Romish Emissaries?) Which the Emperor Charles the 5 observed (in
his proceedings against the Protestants in Germany) to his great advantage. In
pursuance of these Jesuitical Richardi Dinothi Historia de pello Civili
Gallico, l 6. p. 151. etc. The General History of France. p. 778. 779
Hospinian. Historia Jesuitica f. 149. 150 Thuanus Historia. l. 63.
Positions, Anno 1576. and 1577. the King of Spain, Duke of Guise, with sundry
others, Jesuited Popish Princes, Nobles and Papists of all degrees, by the
Jesuits instigation, and Popes special approbation, entered into a bloody
Conspiracy, or holy League, as they term it: To restore and retain the most
holy worship of God, according to the form and manner of the holy catholic
Apostolic Church of Rome: to abjure all errors or corruptions contrary
thereunto, etc. To spend not only all their Estates, but lives, to repeal all
public Edicts in favor of the Protestants and their associates; to extirpate
all Heresies, heretics, and pursue all such as public enemies, with fire and
sword to death, who should any way oppose or withstand this League, or refuse
to join with them in it, or fall off from it upon any pretext, after this Oath
to observe it. Which League they several times renewed: and in the Dinothus,
Peter Matthew, Thuanus General History of France, Meteranus, and others.
renovation thereof Anno 1598. the Jesuits openly boasted, That they would use
their utmost endeavors, that before the year 1600. began, Evangelium (So they
termed the Protestant Religion) Radicitus ex orbs toto extirpetur; Should be
clean extirpated out of the whole world. The Massacres, Slaughters of how many
thousand Protestants by open intestine wars and bloody Conspiracies, this
League occasioned in France, Germany and the Netherlands, together with the
murders of two French Roman Catholic Kings, the Speculum Jesuiticum, p. 92.
French and Belgic Histories of those times, will sufficiently inform the
Reader. Meteranus Historia. l. 23. Speculum Jesuit. p. 100.
In the year 1602. the Jesuits erected a new College and Society at Thonon in
Savoy, to convert or utterly extirpate the Protestants, under the Notion of
Heretics. 1. by Preachings. 2. by pious frauds. 3. by Vi armata: by force of
arms: to which new Society, many Popish Kings, Nobles and others, gave their
names; and in June that year listed above 25000 expert Soldiers, all Roman
Catholics, to put this their Design against the Protestants in execution
upon the next opportunity: there being above 50 Jesuits disguised in Laymens
habits employed in England, to stir up the Papists and people there to join
with them in this new Association, to root out the Protestants in all places by
the Sword, the Principal Engine used by these Ignatians to effect it. To pass
by See H^spinian. Historia Jesuitica l. 3. f. 160. 161. 162
all the conspiracies and attempts of the Jesuits in Queen Elizabeth's reign,
to extirpate our Religion and the Professors of it by open wars, Rebellions,
Spanish and foreign invasions both in England, Ireland and Scotland, recorded
by Mr. Cambden, Speed and others in her life, and William Watson in his
Quodlibets; with their attempts of like Nature in the beginning of King James
his reign, recited in the Statutes of 3. Jacobi, c. 2. where all may peruse
them: I shall only acquaint you; That a little before the beginning of our
late bloody wars, Divisions, ( contrived, fomented by the Jesuits and Papists,
as I Hidden Works of darkness brought to public light. Romes Masterpeece,
Conterburies Doom.
have elsewhere at large, discovered, and Exact Collect. p. 651, 652. 662. 668.
813. to 832. 902. to 920.
many Parliament-Declarations attest) one Francis Smith an English Jesuit,
openly affirmed to Mr. Waddesworth and Mr. Yaxly, That it was not now a time to
bring their Religion by disputing or Books of controversy, but It must be done
by an Army, and By the Sword. And it is very considerable, That when the
Jesuits Spanish and Romish Agents had engaged the King and English Protestants
against their Protestant Brethren of Scotland, 1639. to cut one another
throats; the King of Spain had provided a great new Spanish Armado by the
Jesuits solicitation, and a great Land-Army of old Spanish Soldiers to invade
the Western and Southern parts of England, then destitute of all forces, Arms
and Ammunition to defend it, all drawn to the Northern parts against the Scots;
and to join with the Popish confederates here, to extirpate the English he
retickes and Protestants: which design of theirs, through the Hollanders
unexpected encounter, which scattered their fleet upon the English Coasts, and
the Pacification with the Scots, before any engagement of both Armies, was
happily prevented. That this Spanish Fleet was then especially designed for
England, appears (besides other Evidences, which I have The Royal Popish
favorite p. 58, 59. Hidden works of darkness brought to light p. 198.
elsewhere touched) by the confession of an English Pilot in that Navy upon his
deathbed, mortally wounded in the first fight, to an English Minister and
others, to whom he revealed it out of conscience; by some Letters I have met
with; and by a Pamphlet made and printed by the Jesuits, Anno 1640. entitled
The Royal Popish favorite. p. 58. 59. Hidden works of darkness p. 198.
The Jubilee of the Jesuits, taken from a Papist at Redriffe, and presented by
Sheriff Warner to the whole Commons House, November 14. 1640. Wherein among
other Passages then read in the House, (entered in the Journal of that day, out
of which I transcribed them:) there was a Particular prayer, For the holy
martyrs that Suffered in the Fleet sent against the Heretics of England, Nota
1639. with this advice; That the Papists must fish in troubled waters, (to
wit, whiles that The King was Engaged in the wars against the Scots:) with
Exact Collect. p. 12, 13.
certain prayers added, For their good success in that Design against the
Scots. For the more effectual carrying on whereof, the Popes Nuncio, with the
Hidden works of darkness brought to public light p. 189. to 199. and Romes
Masterpiece.
College of Jesuits then in Queen Street, secretly summoned a kind of
Parliament of Roman Catholics and Jesuits in London, out of every County of
England and Wales, in which Conne the Popes Nuncio sat President, by the
Queens commission and direction, in April, 1639. Who granted and collected an
extraordinary large Contribution, by way of Subsidy, from the Papists, to carry
on this war against our Protestant Brethren of Scotland, and raise forces to
join with the Spainards, whom they then expected, to cut the English
Protestants throats. The Jesuitical and Prelatical Popish party much displeased
with the defeat of this their Plot, by the unexpected Pacification with the
Scots, 1639. induced the King soon after to break and revoke it, See the Kings
declaration concerning that Treaty, Hidden works of darkness.
Anno 1640. (the very year of the Speculum sive Jubilaeum Jesuiticum.
Jesuits Jubilee, which they solemnized in all places, being the 100. year
from the first Erection of their Order by Ignatius, Anno 1540.) they caused a
new Army to be raised and sent into the North against the Protestants of
Scotland, to subdue and destroy them. At the same time they secretly Hidden
works of darkness p. 225. 226. Canterburies Doom. p. 459.
listed an Army of no less then 7000. Romish Catholics, kept in private pay,
of purpose To cut the Protestants throats who should resist them, and to
Conquer the Protestants in England first, and then in Ireland; which Design
they were to put in execution, when the Pope or his Legate, with the Spanish,
French and Venetian Ambassadors should appoint; who designed them to begin to
execute it, When the King went into Scotland against the Scots; as O Conner
(the Queen-Mothers Priest) confessed to Anne Hussy, Nota.
who justified it to the Lords of the Council then, and afterward, before the
Lords in Parliament upon her Oath. The Jesuits were so confident of the good
success of their designs amongst us, and complete Victory over all the
Protestants throughout the world this year of their Jubilee (making See
Bellarmin. de No^is Eccl. Nota. 15.
Triumph over their Enemies, one of their Notes of the true Church) that
Speculum five Jubilaeum Jesuiticum. p. 220. to 224.
they appointed a solemn Interlude to be acted by their Society in the
public Hall at Aquisgran in Germany, in honor of their Jubilee: wherein they
signified to the people, by printed Tickets and Pageants, that the Popish
Church of Rome should be brought in upon the Stage, happily fighting against,
triumphing and reigning over all her enemies every where throughout the world,
in all ages till that present day, and especially of later times, by their
means. The beginning of this Interlude being happily acted, and succeeding
according to their minds; at last there were two Armies of soldiers brought by
them upon the Stage, ready to encounter each other: the one of Jesuits and
Papists, fighting for the Church of Rome; the other, representing the
Protestants warring against her. Before their fight, a Jesuitical actor, clad
in black, personating a Popish Mass Priest, divineth good success to the
Popish Army, praying for it with an affected devotion and solemn invocation
(or rather profanation) of Gods name: after which, the Popish Army of actors,
as being certain of the instant victory, uttered these words to their Captain
(as their parts directed them) with a loud reiterated voice and shout; Pereat,
Pereat, Quisquis est hostis Ecclesiae: Let him perish, let him perish, whoever
is an enemy of the Church: whereupon a great part of the Stage on which they
acted, together with the whole Popish Army (not one Soldier or Captain
excepted) at the repeating of these words and wishes, fell to the ground
immediately, with so great celerity, that many of them felt they were fallen
down, before they discerned themselves to fall; their feigned enemies of the
Church (representing the Protestants) standing all fast, at least in place, if
not in mind, on the other part of the Stage, which fell not at all. With this
sudden fall, many of the Popish Army were bruised in pieces with the beams of
the Stage falling upon them; who through pain and horror, needed Monitors to
silence their outcries; others having their bones broken and Limbs put out of
joint, were carried to the Chirugions to be dressed; and all the rest
confounded with shame, crept away secretly under the Veil to their Lodging.
And so this Jesuitical Interlude, by divine justice, ended in a real unexpected
bloody Tragedy and real rout of the whole pretended victorious Popish Army of
Jesuits; and the Scottish Wars that year (which they so much depended on)
through Gods mercy, concluded in a blessed Peace and Union between both
Nations. Whereupon, the Sea Hidden works of darkness brought to public light,
p. 219. to 250. The Rise and Progress of the Irish R. bellion, and others.
Irish Popish Rebels, by the Jesuits Plots and instigations, seconded with
secret encouragements, and promises of assistance with Arms and Moneys from
Cardinal Richliou, the King of Spain, Pope, and other foreign Popish Princes,
undertook the late horrid bloody Massacre of all the Protestants in Ireland,
and surprisal of all the Forts, Castles, Arms and Ammunition therein, on the 23
of October, 1641. Hidden works of darkness, p. 243.
being Ignatius day, the Founder and New Canonized Saint of the Jesuited
Society, for the greater Honor of their Patron, Order; they being the chief
Plotters of this horrid bloody Treason. Which horrid Conspiracy, though
happily discovered the night before its execution, at Dublin, and some few
places else; yet it took effect in most other parts of Ireland, to the
slaughter of near two hundred thousand Protestants there, in few months space;
seconded with a bloody War, for sundry years; to the loss of many thousands
more lives. To this Plot Hidden work^ of darkness, p. 226.
all the Papists in England were privy, who intended the like Massacre in
England; and soon after by the Popes and Exact Coll. p. 662, 666, 813 to 832. A
Collection of Ordinances, p. 267, 318, 354, 424, and the History of
Independency.
Jesuits instigations, by the assistance of sorragin Popish Princes, they
eugaged the King and Parliament in a longlasting bloody uncivil, unchristian
war against each other, concluding in the Kings and Parliaments joint ruins by
an Army raised for their mutual defense, seduced thereunto through the Jesuits
instigations and policies. After which, they engaged the Protestants of England
and Scotland (formerly united by the strictest B^nds and Covenants against
them) to war upon, invade and destroy each other by land; and soon after that
(by the Spanish See Tho. Campanella de Monarchi^ Hisp. c. 25, 27.
Agents Assistance) raised a most dangerous bloody War between our Protestant
old Allies of the Neitherlands and the English by Sea; to the infinite damage,
prejudice of both, and the effusions of whole Oceans of the Gallantest
Christian Protestant blood, that ever yet was shed, the expense of more
treasure and men in these intest^^e Wars, than would have conquered all Spain,
Italy, and the Indies, had they been employed upon such a design; and to the
entailing of a See the 27 Article of the Instrument of Government.
perpetual Army on us and our Posterities; more ready (as we have of late
years found by sad experiments) to hearken to the Jesuits clandestine
suggestions, ^eductions, and execute their foreplotted Designs to ruin our
Kingdoms, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Monarchy, Church, Religion, then to
follow the Advice, Votes Councels, Directions, Commands of our Parliaments,
Kingdoms, and the best affected Protestants of all ranks who first raised, and
have so long maintained them, for quite other ends (hereafter touched) then
what they (of late times) have most pursued, to the Popes and Jesuits great
content.

5. That the Jesuits have endeavored, attempted the convulsion, concussion,
subversion not only of the Empires, Realms, and ancient settled Governments and
States of Germany, Russia, Bohemia, Hungaria, France, Poland, but likewise of
England, Scotland and Ireland, and to new model them into Exact Coll. p. 3, 4.
461, 462 491 497, 498, 917, 631.
other Forms of Government. What mould of Government they intended to cast
England into, is thus long since described by William Watson (a secular Priest)
in his Quodlibets, Anno 1602. page 309, 310, 330, 331. England is the main
chance of Christendom at this present, by seditions, factions, tampering and
aspiring Heads: the only But, Mark, White, the Jesuits aim at, as well in
intention as execution of their pretended expedition, exploit and action. I am
of opinion, that no man on earth can tell what Government it is they intend to
establish, ratify and confirm, when they come to their preconceited Monarchy;
no not any of their Plot casters. No question it is, but their Government shall
be as uncertain as their New conceited Monarchy; their Monarchy as mutable as
their Reign, and their Reign as variable as the Wind, or Proteus in his
Complements. But no question is to be made of it, but that the Government they
do directly intend at this present is, A MOST ABSOLUTE SOVEREIGNTY, DOMINION
AND STATE, CLEARLY EXEMPTED from any subordination, TO ANY LAW or Legifer
divine or humane; and therefore it is rightly called DESPOTICON in the highest
degree of exemplary immuni^le, Is not ours so ^ow?
IMPERIALITY AND ABSOLUTE REIGN, RULE AND AUTHORITY, as containing in it three
sorts of Government; S^il. Monarchical, Aristocraticall, Democraticall, in
matters of Counsel and mannaging of Common wealths causes; not in point OF
REGALITY, HONOR AND INHERITANCE; For there shall be neither Title, nor Name,
nor Honor given, taken or done to any Prince, Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount,
Lord, Baron, or the like, (all the Jesuitical Governors being Puritan like,
Seniours, Elders, Provincials, etc.) neither shall there be any successions by
Birth or blood, TO ANY HONOR, OFFICE OR MAGISTRACY from the Monarch, Pater
General, to the Minor, P^ter Minister, but ALL SHALL GO BY See the New
Government of the Commonwealth of England, Artic. 25, 26, 32. 33, 34. 41.
ELECTION OR CHOICE. Whether our late and present variable floating New molded
Governments have not been cast by this long since predicted Jesuiticall Mould,
let wise men, with all our late, yea present Governors, now sadly consider and
determine.

6. That the Alphonsi de Va^gas Relatio cap. 5.
Jesuits in a public Disputation held at Madrid, published by them under this
Title; Conclusiones Politicae sub Regis Domini nostri praesidio, instructed the
King of Spain (their Chief Protector, Speculum Jesuiticum p. 217 218, 219.
whom they most extol above all other Kings, to promote both his universal
Monarchy and their own thereby.) That in relation to his Empire, Power was
necessary, which power they defined to be; A faculty, not only of retaining
the Kingdoms he already possessed, but likewise of acquiring other men's.
Persuading him by this Doctrine to believe: That he was therefore consecrated a
Catholic King by God, that he might enjoy a faculty, not only of keeping his
own, but also OF INVADING AND SEIZING UPON OTHER MEN'S DOMINIONS. For to retain
ones own, was the praise only of a private family: DE ALIENIS CERTARE REGIA
LAUS EST: but it was a Royal praise to fight for that which is other men's: NEC
REGNANDI CAUSA JUS VIOLARE CRIMEN EST, DUM CAETERIS REBUS PIETAS COLATUR:
Neither is it a Crime to violate Law or Right, to reign or gain a Crown, whiles
that Piety in other things shall be observed. Which Jesuitical Machivilian
unrighteous Doctrine, though (as Alphonsus Vargas, a Spanish Popish Priest
resolves) it be diametrically contrary to the doctrine of our Lord Jesus
himself, instructing men, that See Joh. 10. 1. Ezech. 18. 5. to 14. Levit. 6.
1. 4. Job. 20. 19, 20 c. 24. 2. to 15 Obad. 5. Jer. 49. 9, 10.
aliena obtinere non Potentis Principis, SED IMPOTENTIS AC VIOLENTI PRAEDONIS
EST: Yet the Jesuits and their Instruments of late years have sufficiently
propagated it amongst our English Grandees and Army-Saints; for a most sacred
Oracle, as their violent invasions of other men's Realms, Powers, Offices,
Palaces, Lands, Estates, and Possessions of all kinds, by mere armed power
and might, demonstrate beyond contradiction.

7. That the Alphonsi de Vargas relati^ etc. c. 5. 7. see c. 2, 3, 16, 18, 19
56, 57. and Hospinian Historia Jesuitical. 206 207.
Jesuits in their Book, De Zelo S. Ignatii in Religione sua instituenda,
printed at Madrid, p. 13, do glory; Hoc Societatis proprium esse, ut quotidie
nov^^ promat inventiones quibus homines ad Deum perducantur: That this is the
property of their Society, that it DAILY BRINGS FORTH NEW INVENTIONS, whereby
men may be brought home to God (that is, to their Religion and Society) the
principle whereof they, and Vargas record, to be these. Their persuading of men
to embrace the Gospel, by AN ARMY; the use of ARMS, Power, Terror, Fire:
Their Exercise of Merchandise (which many of them in most places and in Hidden
works of darkness brought to public light, p. 203, 204.
England too, now use, they being very great Merchants, Factors, and Returners
of Moneys by Bills of Exchange) and of all other Secular Employments, Callings,
in Laymens habits, the more easily to insinuate themselves into all Countries,
Places, Companies and Societies of men to infect, seduce, and discover their
secrets, according to this their received Maxim; JESUITA EST OMNIS HOMO: a
Jesuit is every man: that is, a man of all Professions, Callings, Sects,
Religions to effect his ends: Their questioning, traducing, oppugning,
censuring of all the Articles of the Apostles Creed, and received Principles,
Doctrines of Christian Religion; corrupting, slighting, falsifying the
Scriptures themselves, together with Councils, Fathers, Schoolmen, and all
other Divines; but those only of their own Order, which they incomparably
extol above and prefer before all other: Their venting of new Opinions,
Notions, Revelations, Expos^^ions, Crochets, Herefies, Problems, both in
Divinity itself, and all other Arts and Sciences in the Press, Pulpit,
Universities, Schools. And if these (as Vargas assures us) be their properties
and new inventions to propagate the Gospel, and draw men unto God (which our
Lord Jesus himself and his true Disciples were wholly ignorant of) may we not
certainly conclude, that they have of late years been extraordinary busy at
this their harvest work amongst us, and more especially in spreading their
Gospel by AN ARMY, and taking upon them the use of Arms, in (...) of their
Military Father Ignatius, with all other secular Employments, and New Sects to
draw Proselites and new separate Congregations to them, throughout our Realms,
to destroy both our Church Discipline and Religion, as well as our Civil
Government and Laws?

8. That as the whole House of Commons in their Exact Coll. p. 3, 4 etc.
Remonstrance of 15. December 1641. charge the Jesuits, and late Jesuited
Court-Counsellors, with a Malignant and pernicious design, of SUBVERTING THE
FUNDAMENTAL LAWS and Principles of Government upon which the Religion and
Justice of the Kingdom are firmly established. So William Watson a Secular
Priest, charge Father Parsons, the English Jesuit, and his Jesuited
companions, in their Memorial for Reformation of England, when it should be
reduced under the power of the Jesuits (as Parsons was confident it would be,
though he should not live to see it) written at Sevil in Spain, Anno Dom. 1590.
that they intended to have Magna Charta, with our Common Fundamental Laws and
Liberties, abrogated and suppressed: thus expressed by William Watson in his
Quodlibets, page 92, 94, 95. Father Parsons and the Jesuits in their deep
Jesuitical Court of Parliament, begun at Styx in Phlegeton, have compiled their
Acts in a complete Volume, entitled: THE Quere, whether the High Court of
Justice had not its title from hence
HIGH COURT OF REFORMATION FOR ENGLAND. And to give you a taste of their intent
by that base Court of A TRIBE of TRAITORS sawcily (like to Gade, Jack Straw,
and Tom Tiler) VSVRPING the AVTHORITY of both STATES, ECCLESIASTICAL and
TEMPORAL in all their REBELLIOVS ENTERPRICES: these were principal points
discussed, set down, and so decreed by them, etc. He first mentions three of
them relating to Stew Watsons Dialogue between a secular Priest and Lay
Gentleman* printed at Rhemes, 160^. p. 95.
Churchmen, Scholars, and Church and Colledge-Lands: which were to be put in
Fee off^^s hands, and they all to be reduced unto Arbitrary Pensions, etc. And
then proceeds thus to the Fourth. The fourth Statute was there made concerning
the COMMON LAWS of this LAND; and that consisted of this one principal point,
That, ALL THE GREAT CHARTERS of ENGLAND MUST BE BURNT; the manner of holding
Lands in Fee simple, Fee tail; Kings service, Soccage or Villanage, brought
into villainy, scogg^^y and popularity; and in few, the Common Law must be wholly
annihillated, abolished, and trodden down under foot, and Caesar's civil
Imperials brought amongst us, and sway for a time in their places. All
whatsoever England yields, being but base, barbarous, and void of all sense,
knowledge, or discretion showed in the first Founders, and Legifers; and on the
other side, all whatsoever is or shall be brought in by these outcasts of Moses,
stain of Solon, and refuse of Lycurgus, must be reputed for metaphysical,
seme-divine, and of more excellency than the other were. Which he thus seconds,
Quodlibet 9. Article 2. p. 286. First, it is plain, that Father Parsons and his
Company (divide it amongst them how they list) have laid a plot, as being most
consonant and fitting for their other Designments, That the Common Laws of the
Realm of England must be (forsooth) either abolished utterly: or else, bear no
greater sway in the Realm than the Civil Law does. And the And is not this the
chief Reason of their late endeavored alterations
chief reason is, for that the State of the Crown and Kingdom by the Common
Laws is so strongly settled, as whilst they continue, the Jesuits see not how
they can work their wills. And on the other side, in the Civil laws, they think
they have some shreds, whereby they may patch a cloak together to cover a
bloody show of their Treasons for the present, from the eyes of the Vulgar
people. Secondly, the said good Father has set down a course how every man may
shake off all authority at their pleasures, as if he would become a new
Anabaptist, or King John of Leydon, to draw all the world into Mutiny,
^ebellion and Combustion. And the Stratagem is, how the And was not this the
very principal engine lately used to alter our old Fundamental Government, cut
off the King, and divest his Posterity of their three Kingdoms? witness the
Armies printed Declarations, and the Junctoes Votes in pursuance of them, Jan.
3. 1648. See Mean T^kel Percz by John Rogers.
Common people may be inveigled and seduced to conceit to themselves such a
liberty or prerogative, as that it may be lawful for them, when they think
meet, to place and displace Kings and Princes, as men do their Tenants at will,
hirelings or ordinary Servants. Which Anabaptistical and abominable Doctrine,
proceeding from a turbul^nt tribe of Traitorous Puritan^s, and other Heretics,
this treacherous Jesuit would now foist into the Catholic Church, as a ground
of his corrupt Divinity. And p. 330, 332. He intends to alter and change all
Laws, Customs, and Orders of this Noble Isle. He has prejudiced the law of
Property, in instituting Government, Governors, and Hereditary Princes to be,
BENEPLACITVM POPVLI, and all other private possessions, ad bene-placitum sui
etc Whether any such new deep Jesuitical Court of Parliament, and high Court of
Reformation for England, to carry on this old Design of the Jesuits against
our Laws, has been of late years sitting amongst us in or near Westminster, or
elsewhere, in secret Counsel every week, as diverse intelligent Protestants have
informed me, and A great stickler against our Laws and a promoter of this
Jesuitical design.
Hugh Peter's reported to diverse on his own knowledge (being well acquainted
with their Persons and practices of late years) it concerns others nearer to
them, and more able then I to examine. Sure I am, a greater man by far then
Hugh Peter's, in an Assembly of Divines and others, for reconciling all
dissenting parties, not long since This he has since this Epistle penned,
affirmed in a printed speech in the Painted Chamber before a greater Assembly,
Sep. 4. 1654 p. 16, 17.
averred to them on his own knowledge: That during our late innovations,
distractions, subversions in Church, State, and overturning of Laws and
Government, the common adversary has taken many advantages, to effect his
designs thereby in civil and spiritual respects. That he knew very well, that
Emissaries of the Jesuits The more shame for those who suffer it?
never came over in those swarms, as they have done, since these things were on
foot. That DIVERSE GENTLEMNE CAN BEAR WITNESS WITH HIM, that they had a
CONSISTORY AND COUNCIL ABROAD, THAT Therefore of the army and others Rulers by
this clear public confession in print.
RULES ALL THE AFFAIRS OF THE THINGS IN ENGLAND. That they had fixed in
England, in the limits of most Cathedrals (of which he was able to produce the
PARTICULAR INSTRUMENT) an Episcopal power, with Archdeacons and other persons,
to pervert, seduce, and deceive the people: And all this, whiles we were in
this sad and deplorable distracted condition. Yea, most certain it is, that
many hundreds (if not some thousands) of them, within these few years, have
been sent over from Foreign Seminaries into England under the disguises of A^
amongst other, Eleazar and Joseph Bar Isaiah, 2 cheating Impostors and
Villains, who bavecheated good people of some thousands of pounds The 1 of them
would have for tibly ravished a maid in March last, and fled away in the night
to avoid apprehension, from Dursly in Glocestershire. He confessed in his drink
he was a soldier in Prince Ruperts army.
converted Jews, Physicians, Chyrurgions, Mechanics of all sorts, Merchants,
Factors, Travelers, Soldiers, and some of them particularly into the Army; as
appears by the late printed Examination of Ramsey the Anabaptized, New-dipped
Jesuit, under the mask of a Jewish Convert, taken at New Castle in June 1653.
and by sundry several late instances I could name. To pretermit all instances
of diverse particular Jesuits come over into England, not only within these
few years but months, discovered by persons of credit; with Sir Kenelm Digby;
who though the son of one of the executed old popish Gunpowder Traitors; a
dangerous active seducing Jesuited papist, if not a professed Jesuit; 3 Jac. c.
1, 2. The arraignment of traitors, Speed, Stow. 3. Jac.
who in the years 1638 and 1639. conspired with the Popes Nuncio and a Conclave
of Jesuits sitting in Council at London, to subvert our Religion, introduce a
universal tolleration of the popish Religion in our kingomes, new modle and
shake our former established government, and to poison, destroy the late King
himself, in case he consented not to them therein: and for this very purpose,
both plotted, raised, promoted the first Wars between the Protestants of
England and Scotland, Romes Master piece p. 8. etc. 13, 24. Hidden works of
darkness brought to public light p. 189. 190. 196. 202. 211. 253, 254. Exact
Collection p. 12. 13. Canterburies Doom p. 453.
which he abetted all he could, by his letters and secret Collections of moneys
from all the Papists throughout England and elsewhere, who largly contributed to
this war and design: for which he, Sir John Winter, Master Mountague and
others (who had a hand in this conspiracy) were convented and brought upon
their knees at the Commons House-bar, Jan. 28. 1640. upon which he retyring
into France was about May 1645. sent as a special Ambassador from the Queen
to the Pope of Rome himself, to solicit him for ayds of moneys, men, arms,
against the Parliament; is first audience, he had the best reception; and
fairest Promises of Aid in general that could be wished; writing hopefully of
supplies of Moneys from Rome to the Queen and others, as both Houses of
Parliament in their A Collection of Ordinances, etc. p. 831, 832, 833 851, 852,
858, 869.
Declaration and Letters, (published 26 March 1646.) proclaim to all the world)
and likewise good Hopes of Hidden Works of Darkness, etc. p. 252, 253, 254.
a Cardinals Cap for himself, or the Lord Aubeny, or Mr. Mountagne, for which
he and the Queen solicited. After that, upon his return from Rome, he was sent
over into England about December. 1648. as See the Letter in the Appendix to my
Speech in Parliament, and Relation of the Armies Proceedings against the
Members: The II. Part of the History of Independency.
a fit instrument to New-moddle us into a Commonwealth, and promote the violent
Proceedings of the Army Officers and their Confederates (set on work by the
Jesuits and their Agents,) against the late King, Parliament, Members: where,
upon his arrival, he was, instead of being apprehended and brought to justice
for the premises, hugged by some Grandees whom he courted, permitted to ride
and walk about at large, while the Members were under strict guards and
restraints; frequently repaired to Whitehall, where he was well received; his
Sequestration totally taken off, without any Fees or gratification, by special
order; and himself now at last permitted to lodge not only in Wildemans House,
(where the Queens Capuchins formerly resided) but sometimes in Whitehall it
self; to the admiration of many understanding Protestants, who justly suspect,
he has there more disguised Jesuits to consult with, and promote both their
old and new designs against our Church, State, Religion, Laws, Liberties, till
they have brought them and us to utter ruin. I shall for brevity sake acquaint
you with one memorable general instance, discovering what swarms of Jesuits
are now amongst us, under other visors. An English Protestant Nobleman (a
person of honor) whose Ancestors were Papists, being courteously entertained
within these two years at Rome by some eminent Jesuits, in their chief College
there, was brought by them into a Gallery having Chambers round about it, with
Titles over every door for several Kingdoms, and amongst the rest, one for
ENGLAND. Upon which, he enquiring of the Jesuits, what these titles signified;
was answered by them, That they were the Chambers of the Provincial Jesuits, of
each Kingdom and Province (written ever the respective doors) wherein they had
any members of their society now residing, who received all Letters of
intelligence from their Agents in those places every week, and gave account of
the to the General of their Order. That the Provincial for England, lodged in
the Chamber over which the title ENGLAND was written, who could show him the
last news from England: which he desiring to see, they thereupon knocked at the
door, which was presently opened: the Provincial being informed who and what
the Lord was, read the last news from England to them. Hereupon the Nobleman
demanded of them. Whether any of their society were now in England? and how
they could stay with safety, or support themselves there, seeing most of the
English Nobility, Gentry, and Families that were Papists, were ruined in their
estates, or sequestered by the late wars and troubles, so as they could neither
harbor, conceal nor maintain them, as they had done heretofore? They answered,
It was true; but the greater the dangers and difficulties of those of their
society now in England were, the greater was their merit. And that they had
then above fifteen hundred of their Society in England, Nota,
able to work in several Professions and Trades, which they had there taken
upon them, the better to support and secure themselves from being discovered;
(who, together with some Popish Priests and Friars no doubt, upon diligent
inquiry will appear to be the Sea the Quakers unmasked.
chiefest Speakers, Quakers, Disputers, Seducers, Rulers in most separate
Congregations, and the principle brochers of all New Opinions, Blasphemies, now
abounding amongst us.) This Relation I have heard from the mouth of a Reverend
Divine more than once; to whom this Noble Lord, upon his return into England not
many Months since, seriously related the Premises, averring the truth of them
upon his Honor. Yet for all this, since the stupendous pretended repeals and
annihilations of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and that of Abjuration
of Popery (consented to by the late King in the Isle of Wight) purposely made
for the better detection and prevention of Jesuits, and their treasonable
forementioned practices against our Church, Kingdoms, Princes, Religion,
Parliaments, 1 Eliz. c. 1. Eliz. c. 1. Jac. c. 1, 2, 3, 7 Jac. c. 6.
and Government, by the wisdom and zeal of our best affected vigilant *
Protestant Parliaments; I can neither hear nor read of any effectual means,
endeavored or prescribed by any in power, for the discovery of these Romish
Ianizaries, or banishing, feretting, and keeping them out of England, where
they have wrought so much mischief of late years, and whose utter ruin they
attempt: nor any encouragement at all given to the Discoverers of their Plots
and Persons; but many affronts and discouragements put upon them, and
particularly on my self, lately mewed up close Prisoner, under strictest Guards
in remotest Castles, near three years space (without My Imprisoners have lately
professed to me, that they knew* not the cause why I was thus close imprisoned.
any Accusation, hearing or particular cause yet assigned or disclosed to me,
though often then and since demanded by me from my Imprisoners) whiles they all
walked abroad at large, of purpose to hinder me from any discoveries of their
practices by my Pen, where as they printed, vended publicly here in England
above 30000 Popish Books of several kinds during my imprisonment, without the
least restraint, to oppugn our Protestant established Religion (as See Causia,
the Jesuits Holy Court printed in Folio.
many of them do in terminis as most damnable Heresy) propagate the Jesuits
Plots, and antichristian Romish Church and Religion amongst us, as you may read
at large in the Stationers Beacon fired; which seasonable book, and Discovery
of these Romish Emissaries books and plots, some T. P. the new Faux is first.
Officers of the Army, in their Beacon quenched, publicly traduced in print,
as a New-Powder-Treason of the Presbyterian Party, to blow up the Army, and
that pretended Parliament (of their own erection) which themselves soon after
blew up and dissolved in good earnest, pleading for a free Toleration of such
Popish Books, and all Religions, as agreeable to the Armies Engagements and
Principles, to carry on their designs against our Religion and Laws. But most
certain it is; there has been of late years not only a General Council of
Officers of the Army sitting many months together in Council, to See their
Declarations, Proposals, and printed Papers, 1647. 1648, 1649, 1652. and since
for that purpose.
alter and new model all our ancient Laws and Statutes, in pursuance of Father
Parson's design; but likewise two Conventicles of their own selection and
election, sitting of late in the Parliament House at Westminster, assuming to
themselves the Name, and far more than the Power, of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England; together with the transcendent ambitious Title of The
Supreme Authority of the Nation, (in derogation of the Army Officers Supremacy,
who sufficiently chastised them for this strange Usurpation) who have made it
their chief business, not only to Newmodel our ancient Fundamental Government,
Parliaments, Ministry, Ministers maintenance, by Glebes, Tithes, and our
Universities, much according to Parsons and his Fellow Jesuits forementioned
Plat-formes, and Thomas Campanella his Instructions to the King of Spain, De
Monarchia Hisp. c. 25. but likewise to New-mould, subvert, eradicate the whole
Body of our Qui tam facile receptas and patrias leges cum novis aliis
commutant, certe legum ipsarum authoritalem debilitant atque enervant. Necenim
tantum legis abrogatio proderit, quantum Magistratibus non obediendi mos
oberit. Aristotle Polit. l. 2. c. 6.
municipal Laws, and with them the great Charter of our Liberties it self. And
in their last cas^iered, unelected Convention, (as some of their Companions,
now in greatest Power assure us, in their And since this in a Printed Speech,
Sept. 4 1654.
True State of the Case of the Commonwealth of England, etc. London, 1654. p.
5, 16, 17, 18.) there was a strong prevailing party whom nothing would
satisfy, but A Total Eradication of the whole body of the good old Laws of
England ( the Guardians of our Lives and Fortunes) to the utter subversion of
civil Right and Propriety; who likewise took upon them (by virtue of a supposed
right of Saintship in themselves) to lay the foundation of a new Platform,
which was to go under the Name of A Fifth Monarchy* never to have an end, but To
Has not the Army done this in our three Nations? See their own Chaplain
Sedgewick, his Justice on the Armies Remonstrance 1648.
war withal other powers and break them to pieces, baptizing all their
proselites into this Principle and persuasion; that the Powers formerly in
being, were branches of the The Monarchy of England has been, 1. In the
Britons, 2. in the Saxons, 3. in the Danes, 4. in the Normans Royal Line', and
now the 5. must be elective in others.
Fourth Monarchy (of England, Scotland; and Ireland) which must be rooted up
and destroyed. And what other Fifth Monarchy this could be, but that projected
universal Monarchy of the Jesuits, which would bring the whole Monarchy of
Great Britain and Ireland, together with France, Spain, and all other Princes,
States in Christendom under the ^esuites subjection, and break all other
powers in pieces; (mentioned by Watson, in his Quodlibets p. 306, to 333. and
Alphonsus de Vargas, Relatio de Stratagematis and Sophismatis Politicis
societatis Jesus, Ad Monarchiam orbis terrarum sibi conficiendam c. 8. etc.) or
else, that Elective New Monarchy of Great Britain and Ireland, projected by De
Monarchia Hisp. c. 25. See the Epistle to my Jus Patronatus.
Campanella and Cardinal Richelieu, which some Grandees now endeavor by their
Instrument to erect and perpetuate for ever Art. 1, 2, 12, 25, 32, 33, 41, 42.
without alteration in themselves and their Successors, (though they thus
expressly brand it in others;) let themselves, and wise men resolve? it being
apparent, by the practices and proceedings of all the Propugners of this new
Project, that this Fifth Monarchy they intend to erect, is neither the
spiritual Luke 17. 21. Romans 14. 17. 2 Pet. 1. 11. Col. 1, 13. Heb. 12. 28. Rev.
12. 10.
Kingdom of Jesus Christ in their own hearts, mortifying their ambition,
covetousness, pride, self-seeking, unrighteousness, violence, rapines, and
other worldly lusts; nor the personal reign of Christ himself alone, in and
over our 3 Kingdoms, and all other Nations for ever, Non abripit mortalia, qui
Regna dat coelestia. Sedulius in hymno acrast: de vita Christi. Rex iste
quinatus est non venit Reges pugnando superare, sed moriendo mirabiliter
subjugare. Venit enim non ut regnet vivus, sed ut triumphet occisus; nec ut de
aliis gentibus auro exercitum quaerat, sed pro salvandis Gentibus preti^sum
sanguinem fundat. Hujus pueri regnum non est de hoc mundo; sed per ipsum
regnatar in hoc mundo. Ipse est enim Sapientia Dei, quae dicit in Proverbiis,
Per me Reges regnant. Tu enim regnum nullatenus habuisses, nisi ab isto puero
qui nunc natus est accepisses. Claudius l. 1. in Matthew.
depriving all Temporal Kings and Princes of their Crowns, Rights, and
Government over their Subjects; which they falsely endeavor to evince from Dan.
2. 44, 45, c. 7. 14, 27. Micah 4. 1, 2, 7. Luke 1. 32, 33. Rev. 20. 1. to 8. 1
Cor. 15. 24, 25. Heb. 12. 26, 27, 28. but a mere supreme, arbitrary, temporal
Authority without Bounds or Limits, encroached by and erected in themselves and
their confederates, without any color of Right or Title by the Laws of God or
the Realm, and no ways intended, but refuted by all these sacred Scriptures and
others, which explain them. This design of the Jesuits, to alter and subvert
the whole body of our Laws, was so far promoted by the Iesuitical and
Anabaptistical party in this last Assembly, (elected only by the A True State,
etc. p. 13.
Army Officers,) that on Aug. 20. 1653. (as our News-books print,) they
Ordered, there should be a Committee selected, to consider of a A new Body of
the Law, for the Government of this Commonwealth, who were to new-mould The
whole Body of the Law: according to Parsons his mould. And hereupon our
cheating Astrologers (especially Lilly and Culpeper, the Sea The: (...)
Jesuits grand Factors to cry down our Laws, Tithes, Ministers) from the mere
visible earthly Conjunctions, Votes, Motions, Influences of these New wandering
excentrick Planets at Westminster only, (not of any Celestial Stars, as they
would make Country-Clowns believe, always moving and acting themselves by an
unalterable Law from the very Creation until now, Genesis 1. 14. to 19. c. 8. 22.
Psalm. 104. 19. Psalm. 136. 8. 9. Ier. 31. 35, 36. c. 33. 20, 21. Job 38. 32, 33.
therefore no ways exciting men to alter Fundamental Laws and Governments here
on earth) took upon them in their See ^h^ir Alm^n^^k^ in Janurary* February*
(...)
Monthly Prognostications for this year 1654. versity and College Lands by
Monthly endless Taxes, Excises, and a perpetual Law, Tith-oppugning,
Parliament-dissolving Army, in whose Councels, we have cause to fear, the
Jesuits have been most predominant of late years, and will still make use of
them to our final ruin, if not effectually purged out, and the Army new
molded, new principled, if any longer continued under pretext of public
safety, and not wholly disbanded for the peoples ease and Liberty.

It is worthy observation, that Tho. Campanella De Monarchia Hispanica c. 25.
p. 204, etc.
prescribed the sowing, and continual nourishing of Divisions, Dissentions,
Discords, Sects and Schisms among us, both in State and Church (by the
Machivilian Plots and Policies he suggests, punctually prosecuted among us of
late years) as the principal means to weaken, ruin both our Nation and
Religion, and bring us under the Spanish and Popish yokes at last: witness his,
IAMVERO AD ENERVANDOS ANGLOS NIHIL TAM CONDUCIT QUAM DISSENTIO ET DISCORDIA
INTER ILLOS EXCIT AT A PERPETUOQUE NUTRITA, Quod cit^ meli^res occasiones
suppeditabi^: and that principally, by instigating the Nobles and chief Men of
the Parliament of England: UT ANGLIAMIN FORMAM REIPUBLICAE REDUCANT AD
IMITATIONEM HOLLANDORVM: which our Republicans lately did by the power of the
Army- Officers; or, by sowing the seeds of an inexplicable war, between England
and Scotland; By making it an Elective Kingdom, (as some now endeavor under
another Notion) or by setting up Other Kings of another Race, without Legal
Right, or just Title, against that ancient, unquestioned, undoubted Right and
Title settled, established in King James and his Royal Posterity by Inherent
Birthright, and lawful right of Descent by See 25 H. 8. c. 22. 31 H. 8. c. 4.
37 H. 8. c. 17. 1. Eliz. c. 3.
God himself and his Laws, confirmned and strengthened by all possible Titles
and Rights of compact, Laws, Statutes, Oaths, perpetual uncontradicted custom,
Protestations, Covenants, the solemn Public Faith and Engagement of our
English Parliaments and Nation, for themselves, Their Heirs and Posterities for
ever, as the Statutes of 1 Iacobi c. 1. 2, 3, Iac. c. 1. 4, 7. Iac. c. 6. which
both houses of Parliament in their Declaration of Nov. 2. 1642. Exact Collect.
p. 705 resolve. And that upon this suggestion to the People; Crudelem fore
SCOTUM ubi semel Imperium in illos obtinuerit* (...)mente, repostum, quanta
injuria Angli Scotos superioribus illis annis afficerint. Praeterea suspicionem
cis incu^iat, fore ut Jacobus CAEDEM MATERNAM VINDICATURUS SIT, etc.
Exasperandi sunt etiam animi Episcoporu^ (Presbyteroru^) Anglicorum proponendo
illis REGEM SCOTIAE Calvinismum amplexum esse SPE and CUPIDITATE REGNI,
ADACTUMQVE VI, A BARONIBUS HAERETICIS; quod si vero Regnu^ Angliae etiam
^btineat, TVM ILLVM CITO PRIOREM RELIGIONEM REVOCATURUM ESSE: quandoquidem non
solum MARIA EJVS MATTER moriens, virum etia^ REX IPSE GALLIARVM SVMMOPORE EI
RELIGIONEM CATHOLICAM COMMENDARINT, etc. yet now transcribed almost verbatim
out of De Monarchia Hisp. c. 25.
Thomas Campanella, (who suggested it against King James to alienate the
English from him, and keep him from the Crown) and very freshly by the Authors
of, The True state of the Case of the Commonwealth, etc. p. 48, 49. objected
against the present King of Scots and royal Issue, to deprive him and them from
the Crown of England, and engage the whole English Nation against their Title,
to vest it in some other Family in greatest power.) Or if these projects should
fail, then by dividing us into many Kingdoms or Republics, dislinct one from
another; and by sowing the seeds of Schisms, and making alterations and
innovations in all Arts, Sciences, and our Religion. The old Plots of De
Monarchia Hispan. c. 25.
Campanella, Seewatsons Quodlibets, p. 286. to 332. A Dialogue between a
secular Priest and Lay Gentleman, printed at Rhemes, 1601. p. 93, 94, 95.
Parsons, and late designs of Conte de Galeazzo Gualdo Priorato, Hist. part. 3.
Venetiis 1648. p. 175, 176.
Cardinal Richelieu, of the Pope, Spaniard, Jesuits, to undo, subvert our
Protestant Churches, Kings, Kingdoms and Religion, as the marginal Authors
irrefragably evidence: yet all visibly set on foot, yea, openly pursued, and in
a great measure accomplished by some late, nay present Grandees and
Army Officers, who cry up themselves for our greatest Patrons, Preservers,
Deliverers, and Anti-Jesuits, when they have rather been but the Et quidem quid
refert an Mulieres (and Iesuitae) praesint an hi qui praesunt mulieribus
obedient? Arist. Polit. l. 2. c. 7.
Jesuits, Popes, Spaniards and other Foreign enemies instruments and factors,
in all the late changes, new-models of our Government, Parliaments, and
pretended reformations of our laws and Religion, through inadvertency,
circumvention, or self-ended respects, as many wise and godly men justly fear.
For prevention whereof, I shall recommend to the whole Kingdoms serious
consideration, the memorable Preamble of the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 22.
discovering the like Plots of the Pope and our Foreign Enemies to (...) to
prevent them for the future, in these ensuing words. In their most humble wise
shown unto your Majesty, Your most humble and obedient Subjects, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled:
that since it is the natural inclination of every man, gladly and willingly to
provide for the surety, both of his Title and Succession, although it touch his
only private cause: We therefore, most rightful and dreadful Sovereign Lord,
reck^n our selves much more bounden, to beseech and instant your Highness,
although we doubt not of your Princely heart and wisdom, mixed with a natural
affection to the same, to foresee and provide for the perfect surety of both
you and of your most lawful Succession and heirs, upon which depends all our
joy and wealth; Nota.
in whom also is united and knit, the only mere true inheritance and title of
this Realm, without any contradiction: Wherefore, We your said most humble and
obedient Subjects in this present Parliament assembled, calling to our mind the
great divisions, which in times past have been in this Realm, by reason of
several Titles pretended to the Imperial Crown of the same; which sometimes,
and for the most p^rt, ensued by occasion of ambiguity and doubts, then not so
perfectly declared, but that men might upon froward intents expound them to
every man's sinister appetite and affection, after their sense, contrary to the
right Legality of the Succession and Posterity of the lawful Kings and
Emperors of this Realm, whereof has ensued great effusion and destruction of
Man's blood, as well of a great number of the Nobles, as of other Subjects, and
specially Inheritors in the same. And the greatest occasion has been, because
no perfect and substantial provision by law has binmade within this realm it
self, when doubts and questions have been moved, and proponed of the certainty
and legality of the Succession and posterity of the Crown. By reason whereof,
Nota.
The Bishop of Rome, and See Apostolic, contrary to the great and inviolable
grants of Jurisdictions By God immediately to Emperors, Kings and Princes in
succession to their heirs, has presumed in time past, to invest who should
please them to inherit in other men's Kingdoms and Dominions; which thing, we
your most humble Subjects, both Spiritual and Temporal, do most abhor and
detest: And sometimes other foreign Princes and Potentates of sundry degrees,
^ota.
minding rather dissension and discord to continue in the realm, to th'utter
desolatio^ thereof, then charity, equity, or unity, have many times supported
wrong titles, where by they might easily and facilly aspire to the Superiority
of the same, the continuance and sufferance whereof deeply considered and
pondered, were too dangerous and perilous to be suffered any longer within
this Realm, and too much contrary to the unity, peace and tranquillity of the
same, being greatly reproachful and dishonorable to the whole Realm. In
consideration whereof, your said most humble and obedient Subjects, the Nobles
and Commons of this Realm, calling further to their remembrance, that the good,
unity, peace, and wealth of this Realm, and the succession of the Subjects of
the same, Nota.
Most specially and principally above all wordly things, consists and rests
in the certainty and surety of the procreation, and posterity of your Highness,
in whose most royal person at this present time, is no manner of doubt or
question, Do therefore most humbly beseech your Highness, etc. to declare the
establishment of the succession of your royal posterity in the Imperial Crowns
of this realm: as he and they did by this and other succeeding acts of Parl.
and in 1 Eliz c. 3. and 1 Jac. c. 1. to prevent the like civil wars and
mischiefs for succeeding ages, now revived, promoted by the Pope, Jesuits, and
Foraign Popish Princes to work our ruin.

Certainly, whosoever shall seriously ponder the premises, with these passages
in William Watsons Quodlibets concerning the Jesuits, Quodlib. 3. ar. 4. p. 65.
41.
1. That some of the Jesuits society have insinuated themselves into all the
Princes Courts of Christendom, where some of their Intelligencers reside, and
set up a secret counsel, of purpose to receive and give intelligence to their
General at Rome, of the secrets of their Sovereigns, and of all occurrents in
those parts of the world, which they dispatch to and fro by such ciphers, which
are to themselves best, but comm^only only to themselves known, so that nothing
is done in England, but it is known at Rome within a month after at least, Nota.
and reply made back as occasion is offered, to the consequent overthrow of
their own natural Country of England, and their native Princes and Realms, by
their unnatural Treasons against them; that so the Jesuits might be those long
gowns, which should reign and govern the Island of Great Britain. To which I
shall add that of Rob: Turner an English Jesuit, in his Epistles printed at
Ingolstad, An. 1584. Ep. 19. Volui irrepere, volui irrumpere in intimas Aulas
Principum; volui videre omnia, ut ad Justitiae norman praeclare exigerem. Vix
coeperam obi^e Principu^ Aulas, cum viderim Hoereticoru^ illum Mundum
ADMINISTRARI A STULTIS, etc. with that of Hospinian, Historia Jesuitica l. 3.
p. 148. That the Jesuits are so subtle, vigilant, bold, laborious, and endued
with such a faci^lty of flattery, insinuation, acting and hurting in Princes
Courts, that they exactly discover, know, and fish out all their secrets,
(which they eve^l to their Superiors, the Pope and Spaniard) and alone rule all
things in them: so that the Courts of Europe are more grievously infested and
afflicted by the Jesuits, than the Court of Pharaoh was of old by the
Egyptian ^rogs. And may we not then justly fear our new Court has been as
much pestered and infested by them of late years, as our old Court heretofore?

(...) Quodlibets p. 39. 209, 233, 234, 305, 306, 307, 30^.
That the Jesuits hope and endeavor to have England, Scotland and Ireland
under them, to make these Northern Islands a Iaponian Island of Jesuits, and
one Iesuitical Monarchy,; and to infeoffe themselves by hook or by crook In the
whole imperial Dominions of great Britain with the remainder over To their
Corporation, or puni-Fathers succeeding them, as heirs specially in their
society, by a state of perpetuity: Putting all the whole Blood Royal of England
to the Formidon, As but Heirs general in one Predicament together, as now they
have done.

3. Quodlibets p. 11, 12, 14, 16, 17, 42, 45, 50, 283, 285, etc, 332, 333. A
Dialogue between a secular Priest and a Lay Gentleman, An. 1601.
That the Jesuits have Magistracy, Kings, Magistrates, Ministers, Priesthood,
and Priests in high contempt; publishing many slanderous, seditious;
traiterous, and infamous speeches, libels, and books against them, to render
them odious and contemptible to the People, full of Plots, exasperations
against the Church and Commonwealth, like rebellious Traitors, to bring all
into an uproar, that they may have all Countries, Kingdoms, Governments,
Successions, States, Inhabitants, and all at their pleasure.

4. That the Quodlibets p. 295 to 313 61, 286, 287, See the Right and
Jurisdiction of the Prelate and Prince, by J. E. 1617
Jesuits have taught the people (in order to get England under their power,
and in order to God or Religion, as they style it,) That Subjects are bound no
longer to obey wicked or heretical Princes and Kings deflecting from the
Catholic Religion, and drawing others with them, but till they be able by
force of arms to resist and depose them. That the popular multitude may upon
these grounds, when they think meet, place and displace their Princes and chief
Officers at their pleasure, as men may do their Tenants at will, hirelings, or
ordinary Servants, putting no difference in their choice Upon any Right or
Title to Crowns or Kingdom, by Birth or Blood or otherwise, then as these
Fathers (forsooth) shall approve it, By this all things must be wrought and
framed, conformable to opportunities of times and occasions; as for example:
The people must have a right and interest in them, and to do what they list in
choice of their Kings and Supreme Governors, til they have set such a person
or Usurper in the Crown, See I. E. his Treatise of the Right and Jurisdiction
of the Prelat and Prince, printed 1616. and reprinted 1621, by the Jesuits.
as they for their ends have designed; and then the times and occasions
changing, when such a one is settled in the Throne, the former doctrine and
practices must be holden FOR A MISTAKING; yet such, as seeing it cannot be
helped, the people must beware herafter of attempting the like again. By this a
check must be given to the publishers of such paradoxes, (when they have
accomplished their designed ends,) after that a dispensation procured for the
Offenders, and then all shall be well ever after; till a new opportunity for
their further advantage.

5. That the Quodlibets p. 26.
Jesuits by abs^rd equivocations, counterfeited perjuries, Sacriledges, and
cousenage, become all things to all men, that they may gain all; as to be
Seminary Priests amongst Seminaries; Secular Priests, among Seculars; Religious
men, among Religious; Seditious men among Seditious; Factions Spaniards amongst
Spaniards; ENGLISH TRAITORS AMONG TRAITORS; SCOTTISH VILAINS, AMONG SCOTS, etc.
and amongst all these, to deny and affirm, to object and answer, to swear and
forswear, whatsoever may be a gain to them, for their pragmatical Commonwealth
and society. No wonder then, if they transform themselves into all shapes, and
take upon them all professions now amongst us.

6. That the Quodlibets p. 62, 69, and elsewhere.
Jesuits by their devices and practices, have brought all to Machiavels rule,
DIVIDE ET IMPERA, in sowing division, breeding of jealousies, and making of
hoslile strife, by opposition of King against King, State against State, Priest
against Priest, Peer against Peer, Parents against children, children against
parents, sisters against brothers, servants against masters, wives against
husbands, husbands against wives, and one friend against another, raising up
rebellions, MVRDRING OF PRINCES, making uproars every where, until they make
those they cannot otherwise win unto them, either yield to be their vassals
to live quiet by them, or force them to flight, or drive them out of their
wits, or otherwise plague them to death.

7. That the Quodlibets p. 43. 61, 62, 64. 16.
Jesuits by their cursed positions, and machiavillian practices, have made
religion it self a mere political and atheal device; a pragmatical science of
Figboys, and but an art of such as live by their wits, and the principles of
Machiavel taught by their Rabb^es; yea, a very hotch potch of omnium gatherum,
religious, secular, clergical, laical, ecclesiastical, spiritual, temporal,
MARTIAL, civil, Aecomenical, political, liberal, mechannical, municipal,
irregular, and ALL WITHOUT ORDER; so that they are not worthy to be called
religious, ecclesiastics, catholics, nor temporal mechannical Christians; but
rather Machiavillians, Atheists, Apostates; their course of life showing what
their study is; and that howsoever they boast of their perfections, holiness,
meditations and exercises, (as if they were all Superlatives, all
Metaphysicians, all entia transcendentia) yet their platform is heathenish,
tyrannical, sathannical, able to set Aretine, Lucian, Machiavel, yea, and Don
Lucifer, in a sort to school.

Those, I say, who shall sadly ponder all these premises, and compare them with
the late practices, policies and proceedings of some swaying politicians of our
age (infected likewise with this Atheistical State-Maxime, amongst others
derived from the Jesuits, and Machiavillian Spanish State-Counsellers:) In
Reipublicae administratione, quaedam LICITA ESSE RATIONE STATVS, alia respectu
Conscientiae: which De Monarchia Hisp. c. 32. p. 297, 298.
Thomas Campanella (as bad as he is) not only severely censures, but thus
declaims against with highest detestation, Qua opinione profecto NIHIL MAGIS
ABSVRDVM AV^ IMPIVM ne excogitari quidem potest: Nam qui conscientiae
universalem suam jurisdictionem in omnes res humanas TAM PVBLICAS QVAM
PRIVATAS, subtrahit, ostendit, SE NEC CONSCIENTIAM, NEC DEVM HABERE, etc.
Siquidem omnia scandala Ecclesiae Dei, and PERTVRBATIONES ORBIS TERRARVM, INDE
ORTA SVNT: that men may do against all Laws of God and Man, their own
Consciences, Trusts, Oaths, out of a pretext of the benefit, safety of the
State, and public good, as most now do; Or, compare the^ with the constitution
of our Church, State, Religion, public affairs, must needs acknowledge, that
these pragmatical Jesuits have bin very active, prevalent, powerful,
successful, and not only militant but triumphant, of late years amongst us,
under some disguise or other: that they have dangerously poisoned us with these
their Machiavillian and Atheal policies, practices positions, and have more
real Disciples, Factors, if not Tutors, now amongst us, then in any former
ages: And is it not high time then to endeavor to detect their persons, and
prevent their dangerous designs upon us, with greatest care and diligence?
Truly though most others be negligent and fearful herein, yet that text of
Ezekiel. 2. 6, 7. And thou son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of
their words, though briars and thorns be with thee, and thou do dwell among
scorpions, be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though
they be a rebellions house. And thou shall speak my words unto them, whether
they will hear, or whether they will forbear, for they are most REBELLIOVS;
has animated me to exonerate my conscience herein, and to say with the
prophet, Isai. 62. 1. For Zions (Englands) sake I will not hold my peace, and
for Ierusalems sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth
as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns. Wherefore,

Upon serious consideration of all these Premises, and of all those Sacred
Solemn Oaths, that Protestation, Vow, League, and National Covenant, which I
have formerly taken (lying still as so many) Josh. 9. 19, 20. and Psalm. 89. 34.
Psalm. 15. 4. Heb. 6. 17, 18.
indissoluble Obligations on my Soul, notwithstanding the ingrate, malicious,
unchristian Requitals of all my former unmercinary services, Sufferings for
Religion, Laws, Liberties, and the public, in times of greatest Danger,
recompensed only with long causeless, close imprisonments, injuries, affronts,
losses of all kinds, by pretended friends and Patrons of our Liberties, as well
as by professed causeless Enemies. And notwithstanding all other
Discouragements from the general baseness, cowardice, Sottishness, slavishness,
degenerated Spirits of the whole Nation, and their strange fearfulness even
publicly to own, much less cordially, to assist, defend, (according to the
sixth Article of the Covenant) those few courageous Patrons who have hazarded
their Lives, Liberties, Limbs, Estates, and all earthly comforts for the
public defense of our Religion, the Laws, Liberties, Privileges of our
Kingdom, Church, Parliament, against the old and late avowed subverters of
them, whose very When our Savior himself was apprehended, carried away
prisoner, and like to be crucified, all his Disciples forsook him, and fled,
and Peter denied him with an oath, Mat. 26. 56. 70. 10 75. And at Paul's first
appearance before Nero, no man stood with him, but all men forsook him, I pray
God it be not laid to their charge, 2 Timothy 4. 9. 16. And so it is now with most
public sufferers.
Company, visits the generality of their former friends and acquaintance have
declined, (as if they had some plague sores on them;) not only during their
late restraints, but likewise since their enlargements out of them, (enough to
persuade them never to write, speak, act, or suffer any thing more, for such
ingrate, unworthy Creatures, but rather to put their helping hands, to make
them and their Posterities slaves for ever.) I have yet once more, out of pure
zeal, love, conscience toward my native Country, adventured my life, liberty,
and decayed estate, (considering the lawlessness and Danger of the times, not
the justice and goodness of the Common Cause, I plead) for the necessary
defense of the Fundamental Liberties, Franchises, Laws, Rights, Parliaments,
Privileges, and Government of our enslaved Nation, (though every way Zeph: 2.
1.
unworthy to be beloved by God, or men of noble spirits) in this Seasonable,
Legal, Historical Vindication and Collection; wherein I have with all boldness,
faithfulness, without the least fear or flattery of any Mortals or created
powers whatsoever, argued, evinced, maintained my own particular, with the
whole Nations public right and inheritance in them, (of which few or none
take any care, but only of their own private gains, case, safely, though with
the Unusquisque majorem temporis sui parte^ in rebus privatis curandis ponit,
and Rempublicam nihil detrimenti ex hac sua negligentia cap^re posse putat; sed
and aliquam alium esse existimat qui Rempublicam curet, ei pro setpso
perspiciat. Ita^ cadem omnium privatorum opinione Universam Rempublicam perdi,
non animadvertit. Thucidides H^st. l. 1. page 110.
Public ruin) and endeavored (as much as in me lies) to preserve them and
our Religion from the several Jesuitical plots, counsels, specified in the
whole Commons House Remonstrance of 15 December 1641. Exact Collection, p. 3.
to 14. of late years revived, and more vigorously pursued than ever, and to
rescue them out of the Claws of Tyranny, and all usurping arbitrary powers,
which have avowedly encroached on, yea trampled them under feet of late, more
than ever the worst of all our Monarchs, or beheaded King did, though declaimed
against, as the greatest of Tyrants by some who have transcended him in his
worst Regal Exorbitances; and particularly in this, which the Lords and Commons
in Parliament, in their Exact Coll. p. 492. 497. 494.
Declaration of Aug. 4. 1642. thus grievously complained of, and objected
against the Kings ill Counselors, That the LAWS, were no protection or defense
of any man's right, all was subject to will and power, which imposed WHAT
PAYMENTS THEY THOUGHT FIT, to drain the Subjects purses, and supply THOSE
NECESSITIES, which their ill counsel had brought upon the King, and gratify
such as were instrumental in promoting most ILLEGAL and OPRESSIVE COVRSES.
Those who yielded and complied were countenanced and advanced, all others
disgraced and kept under, ( and are they not so now, as much as then?) that ^o
their minds made poor and base, (as they were never so poor and base as now)
and THEIR LIBERTIES lost and gone (as they were never so much as now) they
might be ready to Are they not now more ready to let it go, then ever? and have
not thousands done it?
LET GO THEIR RELIGION whenever it should be resolved to alter it, which was,
and still is, the GREAT DESIGN, and all the rest made use of as instrumental
and subservient to it. Upon which consideration they thus concluded that
Declaration, Therefore we the Lords and Commons are resolved, to expose our
lives and fortunes for the defense and maintenance of the true Religion, the
Kings person, honor and estate, the power and privilege of Parliament, the
just rights and liberty of the Subject, And we do hereby require all those who
have any sense of piety, honor or compassion, TO HELP A DISTRESSED STATE,
especially SVCH WHO HAVE TAKEN THE PROTESTATION, and are bound in the same duty
with us unto their God, their King and Country, to come into their aid and
assistance.

That which has not a little encouraged me hereunto, is not only this their
public call, but likewise this memorable passage, vow, protestation of the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, in their printed Exact col. p. 650.
659. 660.
Declaration in answer to his Majesty's of October 23. 1642. Which I fear most
of them since in power have quite forgotten; and therefore I beseech them now
seriously to remember it. Though we know very well, there are too many of the
Gentry of this Kingdom, who to satisfy the LVSTS OF THEIR OWN AMBITION, are
content, like Esau, TO SELL THEIR BIRTHRIGHT, AND CARE NOT TO SVBMIT
THEMSELVES TO ANY ARBITRARY AND UNLIMITED GOVERNMENT, Nota.
so they may FOR THEIR OWN TIME PARTAKE OF THAT POWER, to trample and insult
over others: (And have not, are not some of these declarers and censures such
themselves?) yet we are assured, that there are of the Gentry many worthy and
true hearted Patriots, ( but where are those many now?) who are ready to lay
down their lives and fortunes, and of late have given ample testimony thereof,
for maintenance of their Laws, Liberties, and Religion; and with them and
others of their resolution we shall be ready to live and die. ( But how many of
these Declarers have made good this public engagement? yea, have not some of
them been, and still are more ready to secure, seclude, disoffice, imprison,
kill, slay any such true-hearted Patrons, as I have felt by sad experience,
than to live and die with them?) And we must own it as our duty, to use our
best endeavors, that the meanest of the Commonalty may enjoy their own
Birthrights, Freedom and Liberty of the Laws of the Land, being Nota.
equally entitled thereto with the greatest Subject. I trust therefore the
greatest Grandees in late or present power, neither will nor can be offended
with me, and that all the Nobility, Gentry, Commons, and true-hearted. Patrons
in the Nation, who bear any love to the Laws, Li-Liberties, Freedom of the
people, for which their Ancestors and they have so long, so stoutly contended
heretofore, and lately with our Kings; will live and die with me in this their
Vi^dication and Defense, against any of their Fellow Subjects, who shall
endeavor to subvert or deprive them of the full and free enjoyment of all or
any of them, according to this Engagement and Declaration: Wherein there are
these further observable passages, relating to the Parliaments privileges and
its Members, which I desire our Army-Grandees, who impeached, secured, secluded
my self with other Members of the last true Parliament, levied war against and
forcibly dissolved it; with the Contrivers of our late New-Modelled
Governments, would seriously ponder; who in common justice must be content to
be as freely told of and reprehended for their Frauds propemodu^ omnes atque
Injuriae ab Ambitione and Ava^itia p^oficiseuntur. Arist. Polit. l. 2. c. 7.
frauds, faults in print (where the public and every man's private interest,
Right, Liberty, Security, is concerned) as they have censured others, as well
their Superiors, as Equals, often in print, though perchance l^sse peccant than
themselves See the Armies old and new Declarations against the Parliam. and
Members. Their True state of the Commonwealth etc. which, mutato nomin^, is but
a direct Arraignment of themselves under the name of others.
in that they object against them. Exact col. P. 652. 654. 655, etc.
For the matter of his Majesty's raising an Army against the Parliament
(wherein many Papists, Priests, Jesuits were employed) and taking away the
privilege thereof, we shall refer it to the judgment of every ordinary
capacity, whether it be void of sense to say, that this War is raised against
the Parliament; But the truth is, that it is not a few persons, but the
Parliament it self, is the thorn that lies in these men's sides, which,
heretofore when it was wont to ^rick them, was with much ease (by a sudden
dissolution) pulled out: But now that is more deeply fastened by the Act of
Continuance, they would force it out by the power of an Army. (Has not this
been the very practice of some Army-Grandees of late, here objected against the
King Jesuitical and Popish ill Counselors?) And whosoever will peruse the
several Speeches and Declarations, made upon the breaking up of former
Parliaments, since the beginnning of his Majesty's Reign, will find, the
pretenses of those unjust and illegal Dissolutions, to be grounded upon the
exceptions against some particular Members, under the name of A few factious
and seditious persons: so that the aspersing and wounding of the Parliament
through the sides of a few Members, is no new invention: (And has not this
been the very Army Officers practice, since the first year of their reign till
now, to wound the last real Parliament; yea, their own late dissolved Mock
Parliaments since, through the sides of a few corrupt Members, or a corrupt
Majority in the House, as all their Printed See their declarations in May,
June, July, Aug. 1647 in ^ovemb. December. Jan. 1648. An. 1652, and 1653. and
their True state of the case of the Commonwealth of England, etc. p. 4. to 35.
Ann. 1654. with some other Papers and Speeches since.
Declarations upon their d^ssolutions attest. And is this then no crime? or no
Jesuitical practice in them, though such in the late Exact collect. p. 3, 4. to
16.
King and his ill Counselors?) And for the satisfaction of all indifferent
men, that this War is raised against the Parliament, we shall refer them to
former Declarations, ^issued out in His Majesty's name, being so many
invectives and ground less accusations, not against particular Members only,
but against the Vote and proceedings of both Houses. (And are not many of the
Armies Declarations in 1647. and 1648. yea, the late Pamphlet of some present
Grandees, entitled, A True State of the Case of the Commonwealth of England,
Printed 1654, Such? let them now then see whence they took their pattern, even
from the beheaded Kings Exact col. p. 3, 4, to 16. 651, 652, 653. Nota.
Jesuited evil Counselors, whose steps they exactly trace in this:) But if the
truth were, as that Declaration seems to imply, That this Army is raised to
force some If one Member suffer, all the Members suffer with it, 1 Cor. 12. 26.
particular Members of this Parliament to be delivered up, yet upon that ground
would it follow, that the same is levied against the Parliament. For it cannot
be denied by any ingenious man, but that the Parliament by their See Cooks 4
Instit. c. 1. p. 15, 16, 17. 23. 24, 25, and my Plea for the Lords.
inherent rights and privileges has the power to judge and punish their own
Members: [yet the Army Officers took upon them to secure, seclude them without
Charge, and their future New-minted* Parliament Members, though only elected by
the People, must be tried, judged by the new Whitehall Members, ere they can be
admitted to sit, Article 21 of the New Government.] And we have often declared
to His Majesty and the World, That we are always ready to receive any
evidence or accusations against any of them, and to judge and punish them
according to their demerits; yet hitherto Nor yet against my self, and other
secured secluded and long imprisoned Members.
no evidence produced, no Accuser appearing: And yet notwistanding, to raise an
Army to compel the Parliament to expose those Members to the fury of those
wicked Counselors, that thirst for nothing more than the ruin of them and the
Commonwealth: What can be more evident, than that the same is levied against
the Parliament? For did they prevail in this, then by the same reason (pray
observe it) They might demand 20 more, and never rest satisfied until their
malice and Tyrany did devour all those Members they found cross and opposite
to their lewd and wicked designs [And was not this the practice of the
Army Officers, who levied a real actual War against the Parliament? They first
impeached, secluded XI. Members of the Commons-House; and some Lords soon
after. An. 1647. (...) then they secluded other Members, by their high
Declaration of Aug. 18. 1647. after that they secured, imprisoned my self, with
44 Members more, and secluded the greatest part of the Commons House, leaving
not above 50 or 60 at first sitting, who confederated with them, in December
1648. within two months after this, they beheaded the King; then suppressed
the whole Lords House, to carry on their designs since acted: At last they
dissolved their own Mock Parliaments, when they crossed their ambitious
aspires: What they did in September last since this was first penned to those
now sitting, is fresh in memory.] Touching the Privileges of Parliament, which
the contrivers of that Declaration in his Majesty's name, ( and the Contrivers
of sundry See that of June 14. of Aug. 2 and 18. 1647, and the Letters of July
29. 1647. The Declarations of Nov. 16. Dec. 6. 1648.
Declarations since in the Armies name, who imitated them herein.) seem to be
so tender of, and to profess all conformity unto, and deny this Army to be
raised in any degree to violate: we shall appeal to the judgment of any
indifferent man, how little truth is contained in this their assertion, (or in
the Army Officers printed Papers to the same effect.)

The Parliament is to be considered in three several respects: First, As a
Council to advise. Secondly, As a Court to judge. 3. As it is the body
representative of the whole Kingdom, to make, repeal, or alter Laws: and
whether the Parliament has enjoyed its privileges in any of these respects (
under the Army Officers and powers, as well as late King) let any that has
eyes open judge.

For the first, We dare appeal even to the Consciences of the Contrivers
themselves, (and to the consciences of the Army Officers, Soldiers, and
Whitehall men themselves) whether matters of the highest importance, (witness
all the public proceedings against the late Parliament, King, Peers,
Government; the Wars with Scotland, Holland: their new Magna Ch^rta, repealing
the old, Entitled, The Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and
Ireland, wherein they take upon them such an Omnipotent Sovereign power, as, To
pass a decree upon the wavering humors of the people, and to say to this
Nation, (yea to Scotland and Ireland too,) As the Almighty himself said once to
the unruly Sea, Job 38. 11.
Here shall be thy bounds, hitherto shall thou come and no further; as some of
them most arrogantly, if not blasphemously publish in print to all the world in
their True State of the Case of the Commonwealth, p. 34. Their making of new
binding Laws and Ordinances, repealing old Laws and Statutes in and by pretext
of this Instrument, out of Parliament, as their manifold Whitehall Folio new
Edicts, amounting to near 700 pages, attest) have not been agitated and
determined (in and by the Army Officers, General Council, and other
unparliamentary Juncto's,) not only without, but contrary to their Advice, (and
Votes too;) and whether private unknown Councels (in the Army, Whitehall, and
elsewhere, yea the private Councels, Plots, conspiracies of Jesuits, of Foreign
Popish and Spanish Agents) have not been hearkened unto, approved and followed,
when the Faithful and wholesome advice of the great Counsel has been scorned and
neglected (by the Army Officers and their Confederates.) And yet none can deny,
but it is one of the Principle ends why a Parliament is called, To Consult the
great Affairs of the Church and State. And what miserable effects and sad
events, this neglect of the great Council, and preferring of unknown and
private Councels before it, has produced; let the present Distractions of this
Kingdom bear witness, ( with all the bloody, unchristian Wars, Taxes,
Oppressions, Distractions, since the Armies force upon the King, Members,
Houses, Anno 1647. and 1648. to this present time.)

Concerning the Second, it sufficiently appears by the making the Kings Court,
by the Force and Power of the Kings Army; the Sanctuary and refuge of All sorts
of Delinquents against the Parliament and Kingdom, and protecting and defending
them from the Justice thereof: and by admitting such to bear places of great
trust in the Army, and to stand in defiance of the Parliament and the Authority
thereof; (and is it not a far greater crime to make the Parliaments Army it
self, a Delinquent against the Parliament and Kingdom; the sanctuary of such
Delinquents against both, and to continue such Officers in places of greatest
trust in the Army, who have levied actual war against the Parliament, secluded,
secured members of Parliament, kept diverse years under their armed guards in
defiance of the Parliament, without any particular Charge or Impeachment,
refusing to release them, even when the Sergeant was sent at first from the
House it self, to demand the Members seized?)

By all which it is apparent, how our Privledges have been torn from us by
piece-meals, from time to time. And we might mention many passages, whereby
they were endeavored to be And are they not so now, almost past hopes of any
future re-planting?
pulled up by the root, and totally subverted. As the attempt to bring up the
late Army from the North to force Conditions upon the Parliament: His Majesty's
Letters and Commands to the Members of both Houses (which found obedience in a
great many) to attend him at York; and so, By depriving the Parliament of their
Members, destroy the whole Body: (And was not the actual twice bringing up of
the Parliaments own Army, by the Army Officers, against the Parliament it self,
to impeach, secure some principal Members of both Houses; seclude the Majority
of the Commons House, suppress the whole House of Lords; break off the Treaty,
behead the King, ( the Modus tenendi Parliamentum. Cook 4. Instit. c. 1.
Head of the Parliament) against the Parliaments Votes, alter the Government,
force conditions on the Parliament it self, to omit the 12, 21, 24, 32, 37, 38,
39 Articles of their New Government, with the secluding of all the Members
lately admitted by Armed Soldiers, till they took a New Engagement, and
keeping out all others) a taking of the Privileges of the Parliament from them
all by Wholesale, and a more desperate pulling up by the Roots, and total
subversion of all the Privileges and whole Body of the Parliament, than this
objected against the Northern Army, or the Kings Jesuitical ill Council?) Which
is enough to prove the vanity of the Contrivers of that Declaration (and of the
Army Officers too) to feed themselves with hope of belief, That the Privileges
of Parliament are not Violated, but intended to be preserved, with all due
observance.

Concerning the Allegation, That the Army raised by the Parliament, is to
murder the KING, (often alleged by the Exact Coll. p. 550. 595. 321, 322, 364.
618. 894, 895. 919, 920. A Collection of Ordinances, p. 28 39. 116. 117.
King and his Party, in many printed PROCLAMATIONS, Declarations before and
after this here mentioned) We hoped the Contrivers of that Declaration, or any
that professed but the name of a Christian, could not have so little charity as
to raise such a SCANDAL, especially when they must needs know, the Let those
who took it, remember their violations of it, and repent, See Exact Collect. p.
497, 498.
Protestation taken by every Member of both Houses (and Army Officers too)
whereby they promise in the presence of Almighty God, TO DEFEND HIS MAJESTY'S
PERSON. The Promise and Protestation made by the Members of both Houses upon
the nomination of the Earl of Essex to be General, and to live and die with
him; wherein is expressed, THAT THIS ARMY WAS RAISED FOR DEFENSE OF THE KINGS
PERSON, Our often, earnest, and most humble Address to his Majesty to leave that
desperate and dangerous Army, etc. A request inconsistent with any purpose to
offer the least violence to His Person, which has, and Was this verified by
many of these Remonstrants?
ever shall be dear unto us.

And concerning the imputation laid to our Charge, of Raising this Army, to
Alter the whole Frame of Government and Established Laws of the Land, (which
the King and his party Exact Coll. P. 262. 282. 284. to 289. 297, 298. 490.
424. 500, 502, 404, 514, 517, 521, 522, 526. 528, 530, 531, 534. 550, 551, 554,
558, 561, 564, 574. A Collection, p. 117. 452, 453.
frequently objected in print) we shall need give no other Answer but this:
That the Army Raised by the Parliament is to no other end, but for the
Preservation of his Majesty's Person, to Defend themselves, the Laws of the
Land, and the true Protestant Religion. After which, they there and elsewhere
conclude. And by this time (we doubt not) but every man does plainly discern
through the Mask and Visard of their Hypocrifie, what their (the Kings ill
Counsels) design is, To Subject both King and Parliament and Kingdom to their
needy, Ambitious, and Avaritious Spirits, and to the violent Laws, Martial law,
of Governing the People by guards and by the Soldiers.

But alas for grief, how superlatively have many of the Army Officers, and
their confederate members (though parties to these Declarations and
Protestations) violated them, and both Houses Faiths, Trusts, intentions, ends
in raising the Army, in every of these particulars? How have they verified,
justified the Kings Declarations, Jealousies, concerning the Parliaments Army,
in every point, here (and Exact Coll. p. 688, 689. 696, 697.
elsewhere) disclaimed by both Houses? How have they exceeded, out-acted the
Kings Jesuitical Counselors, and most desperate Popish Army, in violating,
subverting both the Parliaments Privileges, Members and Parliaments
themselves, together with our So styled, Exact Col. p. 4. 12. 34. 61. 243. 262.
321. 500, 502. in the Decl. of the Lords and Commons concerning His Majesty's
Proclamation. June 6. 1642. p. 4. besides the authorities in the 1. chap.
Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Government; for whose preservation they were only
raised, paid? How have they pursued the Kings and his worst Jesuited
Counselors footsteps in all the charges here objected against them by both
Houses, in relation to the Parliaments privileges, Members, Constitution,
Rights, Laws, to their utter subversion, dissolution, and waged war against
them? And does not every man plainly discern through the Mask and Visard of
their Hypocrifie, (to use both Houses expressions) that their design is just
the same with that here objected by the Parliament to the Kings ill Jesuited
Counselors, and Popish army; even to subject both King, Parliament and
Kingdom, to their needy, ambitious, avaritions spirits, and to the violent
Laws, marshal Law, of Governing the People, (yea Parliaments themselves) by
Guards, and by the Soldiers? and By Conquest to establish an absolute and
unlimited power over the Parliament and good Subjects of this Kingdom; as the
Houses Exact Coll. p. 617. 631, 730.
elsewhere thrice objected against the late King, his Army and party: being the
very design (as many wisemen fear) of the 27 Article of their New Government;
to settle a constant Annual revenue for the maintenance of 20000 Foot, and
10000 Horse and Dragoones, (to be always constantly, kept up Winter and
Summer, without disbanding or diminution) for the Defense and Security of
England, Scotland, and Ireland? Which must henceforth be kept under by
Mercinary Fo^ces, to guard of Protectors, when as the Horace.
Heathen Poet assures us, ^nteger vitae scel^risque purus, non eget Mauri
jaculis nec arcu; much less our English Nation, ever formerly secured by their
own unmercinary Militia of the Trained Bands, and those Lords and Gentlemen who
hold their Lands by Knight Service. O that they would now in the name and fear
of God (as they tender the eternal salvation of their Souls, the honor and
privileges of all future Parliaments, the ease, welfare, settlement of our
Nation) Lay all this most seriously to their Hearts, and make it a matter of
their greatest lamentation, and repentance! Besides this, have they not
falsified that memorable Exact Col. p. 686, to 730.
late Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, November. 2.
1642. in Answer to his Majesty's (well worthy perusal now) and made good (both
for the time past, and all succeeding Parliaments, whiles there shall be any
standing Army in England able to overpower them) all the odious, scandalous
positions, in relation to the English Parliament, its Members and privileges
(deduced from the Kings Declaration, only by inference, but disclaimed by the
King) summed up by them, in the close of that Remonstrance; and published in
these ensuing terms, as will evidently appear, if applied to the Army, and
their General Council of Officers, by adding or exchanging their names, only
for the Kings in a parenthesis?

1. Exact coll. p. 729. See their Declarations and Papers of Aug. 7. 1647. D.
c. 7. and Jan. 3. 1648 where they thus Declare and brand them.
That the King (the * Army, General, and their General Council of Officers)
when he pleases, may declare the Major part of both Houses, (which in all
sorts of Republics does, yea ought of right to over sway the Minority, and
their Votes to be firm and binding to all men, as Quod pluribus visum
probatumque fuerit, id in OMNIBUS REBUS-PUBLICIS VALET. In Oligarchia enim and
Aristocratia, and Democratia, quod eorum qui Rempublicam gerunt, MAJORI PARTIS
PLACUERIT, i. e. RATUM AC FIRMUM. Politicorum l. 4. c. 8. See 33 H. 8. c. 27.
Aristotle himself resolves;) a faction of Malignant, Schismatical, and
ambitious Persons: so that all Parliaments that have been heretofore and SHALL
BE HEREAFTER, AND ALL LAWS MADE IN THEM* may by this means be called in
question at pleasure; (yea nulled and repealed for ever, as some former
Parliaments have been, when held and overawed by armed power, or unduly
elected, packed, summoned without Lawful Authority, or some of the Members
forcibly secluded, as you may read at large in the Statutes of 21 R. 2. c. 11,
12, 16, 17, 18. 1 H. 4. c. 3. 1 H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 22, 23, 36, 48, 66, 70.
113. 39 H. 6. c. 1. and 17 E. 4. c. 7. worthy the serious perusal of our
present Grandees, and all illegitimate Parliaments, where they may read the
fatal end of all new unparliamentary projects, laws, devices, wherein many now
so much glory, as if they would continue form for ever: when as in a few years
space, they will all probably prove nullities, be for ever reversed; yea,
branded to posterity, as most pernicious presidents.

2. That his Majesty ( the Army and their General Council) may declare what is
the known Law of the Land, against the judgment of the Highest Court, and
consequently of all his Courts: So that the safety and right of King and
people, and THE LAW IT SELF must depend upon his Majesty's ( the Army, General,
and their Councels) pleasure.

4. That as the King has a property in his Towns, Forts, and Kingdoms; so he
( the Army and their General Council) may Which now they do.
dispose of them as he pleases; and the Representative body of the whole
Kingdom may not intermedle in discharge of his Majesty's ( the Armies,
Generals, Councels) trust, though by the advice of evil Councellers they see it
diverted to the hazard of the public peace and safety of the Kingdom.

5. That his Majesty ( the Army, General, and their Council) or any other
person, may upon suggestions and pretenses of Treason, Felony, or breach of
peace ( or of their Trusts, a fourth See their impeachment of the xi. Members,
and the humble Answer of the Genesis Council and Officers of the Army, etc. Jan.
3. 1648.
Army new-minted cause) Take the Members of Parliament, without giving
satisfaction to the House, whereof they are Members, of the grounds of such
suggestion or accusation, and without and against their consent (as in the case
of the late secured, secluded Members, and their two Junct^'s since) so they
may Have they not lately done so since this was penned, as well as heretofore?
Dismember a Parliament, when they please, and make it what they will, when
they will.

6. That whosoever shall follow the King ( Army, General and their Council,) in
the wars ( against the Parliament) though it were to destroy Laws, Liberty,
Religion, the Parliament it self, and the whole Kingdom; yet he shall be free
from all crime or punishment. And that on the other side, to oppose by force
any such force, though in the most Legal way, and by authority of the
Representative body of the whole Kingdom, is to leavy war against the King (
Army, General) and TREASON (within the Letter of 25 E. 3. or of their new
Knacks since:) So our Lands, Liberties, Lives, Religion, and Laws themselves,
Whereby all the Rights both of King and People are due to them, and preserved
for them, shall be at the sole will and pleas^re of the Prince (Army, General,
and General Council of Officers, in their new High Courts of Injustice, or
other Martial Judicatories, as now they are.)

O consider, consider seriously by these particulars, to what a sad, low,
despicable condition all English Parliaments are now for ever reduced, and
their pristine ancient Privileges, Honor, Freedom, Power, violently ravished
from them by the late Army practices, violences, and rebellious insolences
against them, never to be paralleled in any age; which has really verified
this clause in the Declaration of both Houses, Exact coll. P. 496.
August 4. 1642. objected against the King and his popish Army, in relation to
the Parliaments Army, purposely raised, commissioned, and engaged for their
defense. That if the King ( by his Army) may force this Parliament (as the
Parliaments Army both forced and dissolved it) they may bid farewell to all
Parliaments, for ever receiving good by them; And if Parliaments be And are
they not so lost now?
lost, they (the People) are lost, their Laws are lost, as well those lately
made, as in former times, ALL WHICH WILL BE CVT IN SVNDER WITH THE SAME SWORD,
NOW DRAWN FOR THE DESTRVCTION OF THIS PARLIAMENT: (as we now find true by sad
experience.)

Epistola ad solitariam Vitam agentes. Sir Christopher Sybthorpe his Reply to
an Answer made by a Popish Adversary, Dublin 1625. p. 27, 28, 29.
Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria (about the year of our Lord 340.) objected
this as a great crime, barbarism, cruelty, and violation of the privileges of
Councels, to the Arrian Emperor Constantius. That whenever he called a
Council or Assembly of Bishops, it was but for a show: For he would not permit
them to be guided by the Ecclesiastical Canons, but his Will alone must be
their only Canon. And when they advised him, not to subvert the Ecclesiastical
order, nor bring the Arrian Heresy into the Church of God, he would neither
hear, nor permit them to speak freely; but grievously bending his brows (if
they had spoken cross to his designs) and SHAKING HIS SWORD AT THEM, COMMANDED
THEM TO BE TAKEN AWAY. Whereupon he thus infers, What Liberty for persuasion,
or place for advice is there left, when he that contradicts, shall for his
labor lose either his Life, or his Country? Why has the Emperor gathered so
great a number of Bishops, partly terrified with threats, partly enticed with
promises, to condescend, that they will not communicate wi^h Athanasius? And
Hilary Bishop of Poictou Ann. 360. in his first Book against this Tyrannical
Arrian Emperor Constantius, thus censures his violent proceedings of this
kind, to the subversion of the freedom and privilege of Councils and their
members. Thou gatherest COUNCILS, and when they be shut up together in one
City, thou TERRIFIEST THEM WITH THREATS; THOU PINEST THEM WITH HVNGER, THOU
LAMEST THEM WITH COLD, (as the Army Officers did the secluded Members 6 and 7
December. 1648. when they shut them up all night in Hell, on the bare boards
without beds in the cold, and kept them fasting all the next day at Whitehall,
til 7 a clock at night) Thou depravest them with Dissembling; O THOU WICKED
ONE, what a mockery do thou make of the Church and Councels? Only Dogs return
to their Vomit; and thou compellest the Priests of Christ, to sup up those
things which they have disgorged, and command them in their confessions, to
allow that WHICH BEFORE THEY CONDEMNED. What Bishops hand have thou left
innocent? What tongue have thou not forced to falsehood? Whose heart have thou
not brought to the condemning of his former opinion? Thou have subjected all to
thy will, yea, to thy violence. And have not some swaying Army Officers, by
their frowns, menaces, frauds, Swords, open force upon the Parliament and its
Members, beyond all the presidents in any ages, done the like, and exceeded
this Arrian Tyrant herein? And is it not then high time for all friends to
Parliaments, to protest and provide against such detestable, treasonable
violences for the future, destructive to all Parliaments, if permitted, or
silently pretermitted without question, exemplary censure, righting of the
imprisoned Members, or any provision to redress them for the future?

Our prudent Ancesters were so careful to prevent all violence, force, arms,
and armed men, in or near any places where Parliaments were held, to terrify,
overawe, or disturb their proceedings or Members; See the Declaration of the
Lords and Commons, June 6. 1642. concerning this Statute.
That in the Parliament of 7 E. 1. (as you may read in Rastals Abridgement,
Armor, 1. Provision was made by the King, by common consent of the Prelates,
Earls, and Barons, by a general act, That in all Parliaments, Treaties, and
other Assemblies, which should be made in the Realm of England FOR EVER, every
man shall come without Force, and without Armor, well and peaceably to the
honor of the King, and of the peace of him, and of his Realm, and they
together with the Commonalty of the Realm upon solemn advise, declared; That it
belonged to the King, and his part it is by his Royal Signiory strictly to
defend Wearing of Armor, and all other Force, against his peace at all times,
when it shall please him (especially at such times, and in places where such
Parliaments, Treaties, and Assemblies are held) and to punish them which shall
do contrary according to the Laws and usage of the Realm* And hereunto they
are bound to aid the Kind, as their Sovereign Lord, at all seasons when need
shall be. Hereupon our Kings ever since this statute, by virtue thereof, and by
the Law and Custom of the PARLIAMENT, (as Sir Edward Cook in his 4 Institutes
c. 1. p. 14. informs us) did at the beginning of every Parliament, make a
special Proclamation, Prohibiting the bearing of Arms or weapons, in or near
the places, where the Parliament sat, under pain of forfeiting all they had;
Of which there are sundry presidents cited by Sir Edward Cook in his Margin;
whereof I shall transcribe but one (which he omits) and that is 6 E. 3. Rot.
Parliament n. 2. 3. Because that before these days, at the Parliaments and
Counsels of our Lord the King, Debates, Riots and commotions have risen and
been moved, for that People have come to the Is not the quartering of Horse and
Foot in or near such places, to affright and overawe Parliaments and their
Members, a Violation of this Law, Proclamation, Law and Custom of all English
Parliaments, fit to be redressed?
places where Parliaments have been summoned and assembled, armed with privy
coats of plate, spears, swords, long, knives, (or daggers) and other sort of
arms, by which the businesses of our Lord the King and his Realm have been
impeached, and the great men which have come thither by his command, have been
affrighted: Our Lord the King, willing to provide remedy against such
mischiefs, defends, that no man of what estate or condition soever he be,
upon pain of forfeiting all that he may forfeit, to the King, shall be seen
armed with a Coat of Male, nor yet of plate, nor with an Halberd, nor with a
spear, nor sword, nor long knife, nor any other suspicious arms, within the
City of LONDON, nor within the Suburbs thereof; nor any place near the said
City, nor yet within the Palace of WEST MINSTER, or any place near the said
Palace, by Land or Water, under the foresaid pain: except only such of the
Kings men as he shall depute, or by his command shall be deputed to keep the
peace within the said places: and also except the Kings servants, according to
the Statute of Northampton. And it is not the intention of our Lord the King,
that any Earl, or Baron may not have his Lance brought to him in any place, but
only in the Kings presence, and in the place of Council. The like
Proclamations were made in the beginning of the Parliaments of 9. 1^, 17, 18.
20, 25 ^dw. 3. and sundry others: more necessary to be revived in all
succeeding English Parliaments now than ever heretofore, since the
unpresidented forces upon the late Members of both Houses, and the Parliament
it self, by the Army Officers and Soldiers, raised to defend them from
Violence: The Treasonablenesse and Transcendency whereof being at large related
in my Epistle to the Reader, before my Speech in Parliament 4 December 1648, I
shall not here criminally press, nor insist on, but referred them thereunto:
However for the future security and freedom of our Parliaments from violence,
I must crave liberty to inform these Army Parliament drivers, forcers,
dissolvers, (habituated to this trade) That if the Exact coll. p. 34. 56. 66,
67, 68, 76, 77, 198, 200, 201, 202, 246, 695, 723. 729.
late Kings march to the House of Commons, accompanied only with some of his
Pensioners and others, armed with Pistols and Swords, merely to demand but five
Members thereof to be delivered up to Justice, particularly impeached by him of
High Treason some days before: to wit, Let those observe this Impeachment, who
are now really guilty of it in the highest degree.
That they had traitorously endeavored to subvert the Fundamental Laws and
Government of this Kingdom: To deprive the King of his Royal power: To place
over the Subjects an Arbitrary and Tyrannical power, To subvert the very Rights
and being of Parliaments: and by force and terror to compel the Parliament to
join with them in their designs; for which end they had actually raised and
countenanced Tumults against the King and Parliament.

Or if the Exact Coll. p. 118, 195, 207. to 237. 248, 273, 293. 523, 524, 525,
617, 631, 660, 695.
Kings bare tampering with some Officers of his own Northern Army, to draw a
Petition from them to the Houses, or march toward London from their quarters;
(not to seize upon, force or dissolve the Parliament or its Members, but only
to over-aw them, and impeach the freedom of their debates, Votes touching
Episcopacy, Church Government, and the Kings Revenues) were such high
transcendent violations of the Privileges and Freedom of Parliament, and
unsufferable injuries, as both Houses of Parliament separately, and jointly
proclaimed them to all the world, in Exact Coll. in the pages quoted before.
several Declarations, during his life; Or such capital crimes, as those who
condemned and executed him for a Traitor and Tyrant, have published in their
Declaration of 17 March 1648. (touching the grounds of their proceedings
against him, and settling the Government in the way of a Free State, without
King or House of Lords) since his beheading, in these very words. But ABOVE
ALL, the English army was labored by the King to be engaged against the
English Parliament; a thing of that strange in piety and unnaturalness for the
King of England, that nothing can answer it, but his being a Forraigner;
neither could it have easily purchased belief, but by his succeeding visible
actions in full pursuance of the same; as the Kings coming in Person to the
House of Commons, to seize the five Members, whither he was followed with some
hundreds of unworthy debauched persons, armed with swords, and pistols, and
other arms; and they attending him at the door of the House, ready to execute
what the Leader should command them. Which they charged against the King, as
the highest of his unparralleld Offenses; for which they appeal to all the
world of indifferent men to judge, whether they had not sufficient cause to
bring him to Justice? Though neither he nor his followers then seized, secured,
secluded, injured any one Member, when they thus went to the Commons House; Yea
Exact Coll. p. 51, 52, 54. 66, 67. and elsewhere.
presently retracted his Impeachment, and offered all satisfaction that should
be desired by the House for this breach of Privilege: and though neither the
Northern Army, nor their Officers ever advanced toward, or offered the least
violence to the Houses, or their privileges, by Petition or otherwise.

Then certainly the Parliaments own Armies Officers, Counsels, manifold high
printed Declarations, of June 14. 23. July 7. Aug. 18. 1647. Nov. 16. and
December 7. 1648. and others before and since, their professed open Oppositions,
Impeachments, against the very Proceedings, Votes, Orders, Ordinances, Members
of both Houses of Parliament, which first raised them principally for their
defense; [ Printed by their order in their Book of Declarations, The History of
Independency, and my Speech in Parliament,] their Impeachment of eleven Members
of the House of Commons, and sundry Lords at once; their securing of above 40,
and secluding of above five parts of six of the whole House of Commons at once;
their See their Declaration of June 23. 1647. and Aug. 18. Dec. 6. 1648
avowed marches with the whole Body of the Army, in Ba^talia, several times to
force the Houses, seize their Members, over-aw, affright, dis-member, dissolve
the Parliament it self, and their own new erected Junctoes since, and
justification of it to all the world in print [ in their humble Answer touching
the secured and secluded Members, Jan. 3. 1648. The true state of the case of
the Commonwealth of England, 1654. and their Declarations concerning their
dissolution of their two Junctoes] after these Misdemeanors of the King,
without the least repentance for them, must needs be far more execrable,
unwarrantable and criminal, than the Kings, and deserve a severer censure than
his Peccadilioes in respect of their crimes. And if by the And their Generals
Letter from Bedford, 29 July 1647.
whole Armies printed Remonstrances, August 2. and 18. 1647. the tumult of some
unarmed London Apprentices, who offered some small force to the Houses, to the
violation of their Privileges, (without securing or secluding any one Member)
deserved a speedy and exemplary capital proceeding against the principal
contrivers and Actors in it, See a Declaration of the Genesis Council and Armies
Engagements, etc. p. 49.
as they then declared, and vehemently urged again and again in those
Remonstrances) Or if by their own Charge in the Name of the whole Army, June
14. 1647. against the XI. Members, it was so high an offense in them, That they
jointly or severally invited, encouraged, abetted or countenanced several
Reformadoes, and OTHER OFFICERS AND SOLDIERS TVMVLTVOVSLY AND VIOLENTLY TO
GATHER TOGETHER AT WESTMINSTER, TO AFFRIGHT and ASSAULT THE MEMBERS OF
PARLIAMENT IN PASSAGES TO and FROM THE HORSE, TO OFFER VIOLENCE TO THE HOUSE IT
SELF, and BY SVCH VNRVLY OVTRAGES and THREATS TO AWE AND ENFORCE THE
PARLIAMENT; And that upon their bare suggestion thereof (without any proof at
all, or color of truth) they presently demanded, That the persons impeached
MIGHT BE FORTHWITH SECLVDED FROM SITTING IN THE HOUSE, and removed thence,
before any hearing or trial, which the Officers and Army eagerly pressed in
their Paper of June 15. 1647. Nay, if by their own late printed Instrument of
the Government of the Commonwealth of England, etc. Articles 14. 16. All and
every person and persons, who have aided, advised, assisted, or abetted in any
war against the Parliament since the first day of January, 1641. (unless they
have since been in the Service of the Parliament, and given signal testimony of
their good affections thereunto) shall be disabled, and be incapable to be
elected, or to give any Vote in the Election of any Member to serve in the
next, or in the three succeeding triennial Parliaments: and all Votes and
Elections given to the contrary, shall be null and void. And if any person so
made incapable, shall forfeit one full years value of his real estate, and one
full third part of his personal estate, in case he shall give his Vote for
election of Members to serve in Parliament: as they there adjudge; though such
persons as they intend thus to disable, never waged any actual war against the
Parliament it self, or its Members, immediately, but only against the Forces
raised by the Parliament, and so mediatly and indirectly only against the
Parliament, (the case of all the late Kings adherents and assistants, not
within the letter, but meaning of these Articles:) then doubtless those
Army Officers, Soldiers, and their Confederats, who advised, sided, assisted
abetted in one or more wars against the Parliament Houses, and Parliament
Members themselves, whom they immediately assaulted, forced, secured, secluded,
dissipated, dissolved, destroyed, and have justified it several times in print,
without giving any signal testimony of their good affections to the Parliament;
and in this their Instrument have laid Article 10, 12, 21, 22, 24, 27, 30, 32,
36, 37, 38, 39.
many Chains, clogs, restraints, on all new future Parliaments, of their own
framing, inconsistent with the Honor, Freedom, Privileges, being of real
English Parliaments; deserve a far higher and severer censure than these
Apprentices, or impeached Members did in their repute; or those Members they
most insolently accuse and impeach, in their Declarations of June 2^. and
August 18. 1647. (not to be presidented in any age since the Creation, till
then:) and they all are by their own Verdict, Instrument, totally disabled (as
much as the archest Malignants and Cavaliers) by the very letter of these
Articles, to be elected, or give any vote for the election of Members in the
four next succeeding Parliaments; and those who have given their Votes in the
late Elections, have thereby forfeited at least one full years value of their
real, and one full third part of their personal estates; and deserve as high,
(if not an higher) censure, as any sequestered, or other Delinquents condemned
formerly by them, for bearing arms, levying or abetting any war, but only
mediately against the Parliament; and as high an uncapacity to be put not only
on themselves, but their Heir males to serve in Parliament, as the Statute of
21 R. 2. c. 6. imposed heretofore on others, for a far less offense; to
secure the Members and Privileges of all succeeding Parliaments, from such
unpresidented forcible violences, ruptures, dismembrings, dissolutions, as the
last Parliament sustained, by the Armies outrage and confederacy against them,
(of most dangerous president to Posterity;) of which I desire to make them
truly sensible.

The last real and See Exact Collect. p. 320 321, 322. 561, the true and
excellent constitution of our Parliament.
duly constituted English Parliament we had, were so deeply sensible, of the
dangerous destructive Consequences of securing or secluding their Members, and
keeping them from the Houses, upon any Impeachments or Surmises, without the
Notice and consent of the House; that in their forementioned Remonstrance of
Nov. 2. 1642. they claimed and asserted this. TO BE SO CLEAR AND ESSENTIAL A
PRIVILEGE OF PARLIAMENT, Exact Col! p. 723, 724. 726, 727
THAT THE WHOLE FREEDOM THEREOF DEPENDS UPON IT. That NO MEMBER OF EITHER
HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT was to be proceeded against, or judged, NOR TAKEN AWAY, OR
DETAINED FROM THE SERVICE OF THE HOUSE, WHEREOF HE IS A MEMBER; ( no, not in
case of Treason, Felony, or Breach of Peace, much less in any other) until
such time as that House has satisfaction concerning the cause: though in such
cases they confessed, he might be arrested by the Officers of Parliament, or
any other Ministers of Justice, to the intent only, That he might be brought to
the Parliament Corpus cum causa, and detained in safe custody till he may be
brought to the Parliament; but not to be proceeded against in any inferior
Court, before such time^ as the cause be heard in Parliament, and dismissed
from it. For (else) who se^s not, Nota.
that by this means, UNDER FALSE PRETENSES OF CRIMES AND ACCUSATIONS, SVCH AND
SO MANY MEMBERS OF BOTH OR EITHER HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT MAY BE TAKEN OVT OF IT AT
ANY TIME, BY ANY PERSONS TO SERVE A TVRN, AND TO MAKE A MAJOR PART OF WHOM THEY
WILL AT PLEASVRE. And as the grand Inquest of the whole Kingdom should be (by
this means) subject to the grand Inquest of one particular County; So the whole
Representative Body of the Kingdom should be at the Devotion of a Middlesex
Jury, (as since of their own Army, raised to protect them from these
mischiefs.) And therefore, as THE FREEDOM OF PARLIAMENTS DEPENDS IN A GREAT
PART UPON THEIR PRIVILEGES, AND THE FREEDOM OF THIS NATION UPON THE FREEDOM OF
PARLIAMENTS, Nota.
WE HAVE GOOD REASON TO BELIEVE, that the People of England knowing their Lives
and Fortunes are bound up in this bundle, will venture their Lives and Fortunes
in this Quarrel: Which I entreat all those who have so highly infringed this
principle Privilege of Parliament of late years, with all the people of England
now seriously to consider, to vindicate, preserve it in all succeeding ages
from the like violations, if ever they expect to be Freemen, or to enjoy free
English Parliaments again; Exact Coli. p. 561.
which are such an ESSENTIAL PART OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE KINGDOM, that we
can attain TO NO HAPPINESS WITHOUT THEM, and like Hipocrates twins, We must
laugh and cry, LIVE AND DIE TOGETHER WITH THEM.

Now farther to convince the Army Officers, Soldiers, of their late great
injustice to, and affronts, contempts against the Parliament which raised them,
in relation to our ancient fundamental Government and chief Member of the
Parliament; I shall desire them and all their confederates in cold blood,
seriously to consider, whether they have not, by their undutifull, violent
proceedings against them, contrary to the Votes, Declarations, Remonstrances of
the PARLIAMENT, endeavored (as much as in them is) to falsify this clause in
both Houses Declaration Nov. 2. 1642 Exact Coll. p. 696.
Although they would persuade his Majesty, That there is little confidence to
be placed in our Modesty and Duty; yet, AS GOD IS WITNESS OF OUR THOVGHTS, SO
SHALL OUR ACTIONS WITNESS TO ALL THE WORLD; that TO THE How much it and they
have been dishonored by the contrary, let the Army Officers read at leisure in
Militiere his Victory of Truth.
HONOR OF OUR RELIGION, and OF THOSE WHO ARE MOST ZEALOUS IN IT ( so much
stricken at by the contrivers of that Declaration, under odious names) we shall
suffer more for and from our Sovereign, than we hope God will ever permit the
malice of evil Counselors to put us to: And although the happiness of this
and all Kingdoms depends chiefly upon God; Yet WE ACKNOWLEDGE THAT IT DOES
SO MAINLY DEPEND UPON HIS MAJESTY, Nota.
and THE ROYAL BRANCHES OF THAT ROOT, that as WE HAVE HERETOFORE, SO WE SHALL
HEREAFTER, esteem no hazard too great, no reproach too vile; but that we shall
willingly go through the one, and undergo the other, That we, and the WHOLE
KINGDOM MAY ENJOY THAT HAPPINESS, which we cannot in an ordinary way of
providence expect FROM ANY OTHER FOUNTAIN OR STREAM, Nota.
than those from whence (were the poison of evil Councels once removed from
about them) no doubt, but we and THE WHOLE KINGDOM SHOULD BE SATISFIED MOST
ABUNDANTLY. And on the contrary, have they not fully and actually verified, in
respect of themselves and their Confederates in the Houses, this Odious
aspersion, then (only in prediction) cast by the KING on the PARLIAMENT, but by
them at that time renounced with greatest detestation; and drawn those sad
consequences on the whole Kingdom, wherewith both HOUSES conclude that
Declaration in these words?

7. Exact Coll. p. 730.
That the Representative Body of the whole Kingdom (since dissolved by the
Army) is a Faction of Malignant, Schismatical, ambitious Persons, whose DESION
IS AND ALWAYS HAS BEEN TO ALTER THE WHOLE FRAME OF GOVERNMENT, BOTH OF CHURCH
AND STATE, AND TO SUBJECT BOTH KING AND PEOPLE TO THEIR OWN LAWLESS ARBITRARY
POWER AND GOVERNMENT, and that they DESIGN THE RUIN OF HIS MAJESTY'S PERSON
and OF MONARCHY IT SELF: and consequently that they are TRAITORS and all the
Kingdom with them, (for their act is the act of the whole Kingdom) And
whether their punishment and ruin may not also INVOLVE THE WHOLE KINGDOM IN
CONCLUSION, AND REDUCE IT INTO THE CONDITION OF A CONQUERED NATION (as some
ARMY OFFICERS, and SOLDIERS openly aver we are now reduced to by and under
them) NO MAN CAN TELL: BUT EXPERIENCE SHOWS US (and now we find it most true
in the Who in their Letters of July 18. 1647. Propositions of Aug. 2. and other
of their Declarations, professed to all the world, That it was fully agreeable
to all their Principles, and should be their desires and endeavors to maintain
Monarchy, the Privileges and Freedom of the Parliament; and the Rights of his
Majesty and Royal Family, that so a lasting Peace and Agreement might be settled
in this Nation, etc. Which otherwise, they confessed then in good earnest,
could not be hoped for, nor expected. Whence they entitled their Printed Book,
A Declaration of the Engagements, Remonstrances, Representations, Proposals,
Desires, and Resolution from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fair^ax, and THE GENERAL
COUNCIL OF THE ARMY, FOR SETTLING OF HIS MAJESTY IN HIS JUST RIGHTS, THE
PARLIAMENT IN THEIR JUST PRIVILEGES, and THE SUBJECTS IN THEIR LIBERTIES AND
FREEDOMS: Printed by their and the Lords House special Order London 1647. Let
them now seriously consider and perform it in good earnest.
ARMY OFFICERS, COUNCIL, SOVLDIERS) THAT SVCCESSE OFTEN DRAWS MEN NOT ONLY
BEYOND THEIR PROFESSION; but also many times beyond their first intentions.

Surely as the Armies and their Confederates late proceedings in relation to
themselves, (though not unto the forced, dismembered, dissolved Parliament, and
secured Members) have fully verified this charge in every particular, then
reputed most false and scandalous; which I thus press upon their consciences at
this time, and so largely insist on, not to defame or asperse them to the
world, as many others do, who apply that black Character of Ier. 9. 2. to 6. c.
12. 6. Rev. 3. 10. to 19. ( They are all an ASSEMBLY OF TREACHEROVS MEN: Thine
habitation is in the MIDST OF DECEIT, etc. Destruction and Misery are in their
ways, and the way of Peace they have not known; there is no fear of God before
their eyes) unto them in a more eminent manner, as being really verified by
their unparalleld exorbitances formentioned; but to vindicate the Innocence,
Integrity of the Majority and secluded Members of both Houses, against the
scandalous printed aspersions of Militiere and other Papists, to preserve and
justify the Honor of our Reformed Religion, and of the most zealous
Professors thereof; to restore, re-establish if possible, the Privileges, the
Freedom of all Future Parliaments, much impaired, endangered by their heady
violent Proceedings, and most pernicious Presidents to Posterity (if not
publicly abominated, exploded by them, or exemplarily punished (to deterr all
others from their future imitation) to convince them by what Jesuitical,
Popish, old Court-Principles, Counsels, Practices, they have hitherto been
misguided; and to reclaim them, as much as in me lies, for the future, from
the like destructive. Practices, for the public Safety, Peace, Settlement of
our distracted Kingdoms; and do most earnestly beseech them, as they are
Englishmen, Soldiers, Christians, seriously to repent of and lay to heart,
lest they perish eternally for them at last; as likewise to take heed, lest by
teaching and instigating the Common Soldiers of the Army, to suppress,
oppress, betray the Parliament, Kingdom, People, who raised, paid, and
entrusted them only for their safeguard and defense, they do not thereby
instruct and encourage them at last to betray and destroy themselves; it being
a true observation of De Clement. l. 1. c. 26.
Seneca the Philosopher, Aliquando Tyrannorum praefidia in ipsos
consurrexerunt. PERFIDIAMQVE ET IMPIETATEM ET FERITAREM, ET QVICQVID AB ILLIS
DIDICERANT, IN IPSOS EXECRERVNT: Quid enim potest ab eo quisquam sperare, QVEM
MALVM ESSE DOCVIT? Non diu paret, nequitia, nec quantum jubetur, peccat; as we
have seen by many late presidents: So the Army Officers, Soldiers Great
Successes in all their Wars, Designs, and forcible ill Proceedings against the
King, Parliament, Kingdom, Government, Laws and Liberties; as it has caused
them not only beyond their Professions, but also beyond their first Intentions,
Commissions, Protestations, to forget that Gospel-precept given to Soldiers,
Luke 3. 14. to advance themselves to a more absolute Sovereign arbitrary Power
over them, than ever any Kings of England claimed or pretended to, (as their
late Proceedings, Remonstrances, and transcendent Instrument of the Government
of the three Kingdoms, manifest;) so it has been the Psalm. 37* 7 Psalm. 73. 3,
etc. Eccles. 8. 11, 12.
principal Ground, whereby they have justified all their unpresidented
forementioned Exorbitances, as lawful, commendable, Christian: and that which
has struck such a stupifying pannick fear, such a stupendous cowardice,
baseness, sott^shness, into the Generality of the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry,
and Commons of our late most heroic English Naton, that there is scarce Ez^k.
22. 30.
a man to be found throughout the Realm of any Eminency (though we should seek
after him like Diogenes, with a Candle) that dares freely open his mouth
against their most irregular, illegal, violent, destructive arbitrary
Proceedings, Usurpations, Innovations, Oppressions, Taxes, Projects, to the
shaking and utter subverting of our ancient Fundamental Laws, Liberties,
Rights, Properties, Parliaments, Parliamentary privileges, Government, and
taking away of the very Lives of some (and thereby endangering the Lives of all
other) English Freemen of all Degrees, in mischristened High Courts of Justice.
Such a strange Charm is there in Success alone, to metamorphise Men into mere
See 2 King. 10. 1, to 12. Esth. 8. 17.
temporising, slavish, sordid sotts and beasts; yea, to cause not only persons
truly honorable, but the very Deuteronomy. 32. 17. 1 Cor. 10. 20. Rev. 9. 20. Ephesians.
2. 2.
Devil himself, and the worst of beasts, to be wondered after, applauded,
adored, not only as Saints, but Gods. We read Rev. 13. of a Monstrous deformed
BEAST, to whom the Dragon (the Devil) gave his Power, Seat and Great Authority;
whereupon, all the world wondered after the Beast, and worshipped not only the
Dragon, that gave him power, but the Beast likewise; saying, Who is like unto
the Beast? WHO IS ABLE TO MAKE WAR WITH HIM? And there was given unto him a
Mouth speaking Great things, and blasphemies, and power was given him to
continue and make war forty and two months. And power was given unto him to
make war with the SAINTS, AND TO OVERCOME THEM; and power was given him over
all Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations. And (HEREUPON IT FOLLOWS) all that
dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the
Lambs Book of Life. And another Beast (under him) caused the earth and all that
dwell therein to set up the Image of this Beast, and to worship it; and he
caused all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive the
ma^k of the Beast in their right hand, and in their foreheads; and none might
buy or sell, but he that had this mark; and as many as would not worship this
Beasts Image, were ordered to be killed. Yet this Blasphemous Beasts reign and
power continued but forty two Months, Rev. 13. 5. This Beast, (in the height of
his Power and Victories) was by God himself, threatened to go into captivity,
and be killed with the Sword, as he had led others into captivity, and killed
them with the Sword, ver. 10. All his followers and worshippers shall (soon
after) drink of the wine of Gods wrath, and be tormented with fire and
brimstone, etc. Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11. The Saints at last shall get the victory
over this Beast, Rev. 15. 2. And the Beast himself (notwithstanding all his
former Victories, Friends, and great Armies) was at last taken, and his false
Prophet with him; and were both cast alive into a lake burning with fire and
brimstone, and all his Forces were slain with the Sword, and the fowls were
filled with their flesh, Rev. 19. 18 19, 20, 21. From which Texts I have
frequently silenced, confounded some of our conquering Army Officers and
Soldiers, whiles prisoner under them, when they were vapouring of their Great
Victories, Successes, and concluding from thence, both their Saintship, and the
Goodness of their Actions; saying oft-times like the Beasts followers here, Who
is able to make war with us? And that with these genuine deductions from these
Texts, which they could not reply against; worthy all Soldiers and others
saddest meditations.

1. That God may, nay oft-times does give great power to the very worst and
most blasphemous of all Men and Beasts; and that not only over one or two, but
many Tongues, Nations, as in this Text, and Dan. 7. 3, to 29. c. 8. 4. to 27.

2. That such Beasts many times may, and do not only make war with, but even
overcome the very Saints themselves in battle, as the Babylonians, Assyrians,
and other ungodly Beasts did the Israelites, Gods own Saints and People, Psa.
79. 1, 2, etc. Dan. 7. 21, 23, 24, 25. Isa. 10. 5, etc. c. 14. 16, 17. Jer. 26.
6, 7, 8. c. 25. 9. etc. yet they were but blasphemous Beasts, and wretches
still, not Saints.

3. That if such Beasts have but Great Power and Success in their Wars,
Enterpri^es against their Enemies, or the Saints themselves; though their
mouths utter blasphemy against the God of Heaven, his Name, Tabernacle, Saints;
though their Actions, Designs be never so impious, atheistical, treasonable,
detestable: their power but short and fading, yet whiles they are in Power and
Prosperity, the whole world will wonder, run after, worship, flatter, Saint,
Deifie and Adore them for Gods, (as Plutarch Arrianus, Quintus Curtius,
Suetonius, Grimston, in the life of Alexander, and Julius Caesar, Balaeus, his
Lives of the Popes. Mornyes Mystery of Iniquity.
Alexander the Great, and Julius Caesar's friends, flatterers did them; and some
wicked Popes Favorites them too;) yea, set up, and worship their very Images,
receive their marks in their hands, foreheads, and extol them to the skies,
saying, Who is like unto the Beast? who is able to make war with him?

4. That such adulatious Speeches, Vaunts, Practices as these, and such
Arguments of Saintship, of the Goodness of men's causes, undertakings, actions,
only from their present Power, Victories and Successes, are the arguments,
practices, of worldly, earthly, beastly men; of worshippers of the Beast and
Dragon of 2 King. 18. 33, 34, 35. c. 19. 17, 18, 19. Isa. 10. 7. to 16.
Assyrians, Turks, Popes, not of the Elect real Saints of God, Whose names are
written in the Lambs Book of life; who will neither flatter, worship, nor
adore such Beasts, nor receive their marks in their hands or fireheads, though
they be prohibited to buy or sell, or slain for refusing it by their
Instruments, Rev. 13. 8, 15, 17. Dan. 3. 12. to 29.

5. That such Beasts in power, will never want under-Beasts and Instruments,
nor yet Rev. 13. 1. to 18. c. 16. 13. 14. c. 19, 20. 1 King. 22. 6. to 24.
false Prophets to persuade or enforce Obedience and Subjection to them, even
by dis-franchisements, death, lying wonders, flattering Prophecies, Speeches,
Sermons, and Hypocritical Mockfasts.

6. That the Power and Dominion of such Beasts, is given and derived to them
immediately by the Dragon (the Ephesians. 2. 2.
Prince of the power of the Air) only by Gods permission, not his approbation;
Rev. 13. 2. Hos. 8. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4, 8 9. And that in wrath, for the
punishment of the Peoples sins, and destruction, greater condemnation of the
beasts themselves at last. Hos. 13. 11. Rev. 13. and 14, and 19. Psalm. 94, 23.
Ier. 51. 24, etc. c. 5 ^. throughout. Hab. 2. 6, 7, 8.

7. That this their Dominion, Reign and Triumph, is commonly very short, like
this Beasts here for forty two Months, Rev. 13. 5. which is but three years and
an half Paterculus, Pluta^^h, Su^tomus, Antonni Chronica, Grimston, and others,
in hi^ Life. Jacobus Usserius Ann^lium pars p^sterior, p. 366, 367.
Julius Caesar that great first Conqueror of this Island and a great part of
the World; usurping the supreme Power over the Roman Senate, and changing the
Government, lived only FIVE MONTHS A SOVEREIGN LORD IN PEACE (though some
compute his whole dominion 3 years and 7 months) and then was suddenly stabbed
to death in the Senate House, by those friends in whom he reposed greatest
trust; for his Tyrannical Usurpations, and alteration of their former
Government; for endeavoring (as was suspected) to make himself KING OF THE
ROMANS, (though he rejected the Title of King when offered unto him by M.
Antonius, saying, That Jove was only King of the Romans, that so he might seem
to be compelled to receive it by the people, (being their King before in deed,
though not in name:) and for saying, That the Do not some now by words and
deeds, repute it and the People so?
Commonwealth was but a Voice or Name, without a Body or Substance. Nullum
violentum est diuturnum, See Isa. 10, and 14. Job. 20. 4, 5, etc. Psalm. 37 and
73. Psalm. 92. 6, 7. Isa. 17, 13, 14. 2 Chronicles. 23. and Sir Walter Rawlies
Preface to his History of the World, worthy serious perusal by the Grandees of
these times.

8. That in conclusion such Conquering, Usurping Beasts, notwithstanding all
their Power, Friends, Followers, Confederates, Armies, Policies, are usually
conquered, taken, slain on Earth, and cast into the Lake burning with fire and
brimstone for ever, for their Tyrannies, Blasphemies, Bloodsheds Oppressions of
the People and Gods Saints, and their Confederates, Armies, false Prophets,
followers, adorers See Mat. West. an. 655. 1 Kings 16. 2 Kings 15. 2. Chron.
13. 17, 18, 19, 20. and our King Richard the third.
destroyed with them even on earth; and then made to drink the Cup of Gods
wrath, fury and torments for ever in hell, Isa. 10, and 14. Jer. 50. and 51.
Rev. 19. 19. 20, 21. c. 6. 15, 16, 17.

9. That though they continue Conquerors and victorious for many years; and
conquer not only, one, two or three, but many Kings and Kingdoms; cut off not
only the thumbs of their Kings, that they might not lift up a Sword against
them, and their great toes, that they may not run from them, but their Heads
too; Yet God at last (in his retaliating Justice) does usually pay them home in
their own coin, as is evident, not only by See the Turkish History in his
life.
Bajazet the Turkish Emperor, our See Huntingdon, Mat. west. An. 655. Grafton,
Speed, Holinshed, Fabian Brompton, in the life of Penda.
King Penda, (who slew no less than 5. Christian Kings in several battles,
took sundry other Kings prisoners, and at last was slain himself, with all his
old victorious Captains and Soldiers, by King Oswi, and a small despicable
Army of raw Soldiers, not half so many as they, Ann. 655. who thereupon seized
on his Kingdom) and others in profane Stories; but by that memorable History
of Judge. 1. 2. to 8.
Adonibezeck; who after his Conquest of no less than seventy Kings, (who ever
in this latter age, conquered one quarter so many?) and tyrannizing over their
persons, was, by a small party of Judah and Simeon, fought with on his own
dung-hil, his victorious old Army totally routed, ten thousand of them slain,
himself forced to fly, pursued, and taken prisoner by these contemptible
Enemies, who cut off his thumbs and his great toes. Whereupon Adoni-bezek
(though an idolatrous Canaanite) used these memorable words, worthy all
Conquerours and Tyrants memorial; recorded by God himself to all Posterity,
Judges 1. 7. Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs, and their great toes
cut off, have gathered their meat under my table (like so many Dogs rather than
Kings) AS I HAVE DONE, SO GOD HAS REWARDED ME: and they brought him (Prisoner)
to Jerusalem, and there he died. See the like retaliation threatened, inflicted.
Hab. 2. 6, 7, 8. Isa. 33. 1. Dan. 7. 23. to 27. Obad. 15. Ezech. 35. 5, 6, 15.
Rev. 16. 5. 6. Ier. 51, and 52. Nah. 3. 1. etc. Rev. 13. 10. Joel 3. 6, 7, 8.
Deuteronomy. 32. 43. Isa. 10. and 14. 2 Chronicles. 22. 10. compared with c. 23. 12. to the
end.

10. That the Elect Saints of God, do by faith in the Word of God, and upon
consideration of the usual Providence and Justice of God toward such Beasts
and bloody Conquerors, most assuredly see their downfall, and with patience
expect it, Rev. 13. 9, 10. If any man have an ear let him hear. See Joel 3. 6,
7, 8. Mat. 26. 52. Sir Walter Rawleighs Preface to his History of the World,
and Dr. Beards Theater of Gods Judgments, on the 6 and 8 Commandments.
HE THAT LEADS INTO CAPTIVITY, SHALL GO INTO CAPTIVITY; HE THAT KILLS WITH
THE SWORD, MVST BE KILLED WITH THE SWORD: Here is THE PATIENCE AND THE FAITH OF
THE SAINTS. O that we had this Patience and Faith within us now!

11. That upon this Faith and Assurance, the true Elect Saints of God, neither
will, nor do, nor dare to admire after, follow, worship or adore such B^asts,
or their Image, nor receive their marks in their hands, or foreheads, though
all the world else readily do it without opposition; enduring patiently rather
to be warred upon, killed, secluded from buying or selling any thing, then
unchristianly to adore, subject, or enslave themselves unto them, Rev. 13. 2,
15, 17. Esther 3^ 1, to 7. 2 Kings 3. 13, 14. John 10. 4, 5. Dan. 3. 4. to 30.
1 King. 19. 18. 2 Chronicles. 11. 13. to 18.

Which serious seasonable considerations, as they should daunt the hearts and
allay the high Presumptious Spirits of the most Successful Conquerors,
Powerful Usurpers over and violent Invaders of the Liberties, Lives, Estates,
Rights, Properties of their Lawful Superio^s or Christian Brethren, and all
Subverters of the Laws, Privileges, Parliaments, Government of their Native
Country, especially against their Oaths and Trusts: So the Meditation on them,
together with the contemplation of the infinite Power, Wisdom, Faithfulness,
Justice, Holiness, Presence, and gracious Promises of God, have at all times
and seasons hitherto, invincibly animated, steeled, fortified my Soul in the
midst of all my sufferings, both under the domineering Prelates,
Parliament-assaulting Army Officers, the late Tyrannical cashiered Republicans,
and all other self-created oppressing Powers, which (if not already dead and
buried in the dust, with all their thoughts and high aspiring Projects,) yet
shall certainly Isa. 51. 6. 12. c. 26. 13, 14. Psalm. 82. 7. Psalm. 146. 354.
die ere long like men, and become us dung; yea, they have enabled me by Faith
and Patience to be Romans 8. 36. 37. Psalm. 3. 6.
more than a conquering triumpher over them: and to sing aloud with magnanimous
David (a man after Gods own heart) long before their downfall, Psalm. 27. 1, 2,
3. The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, wh^m shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? When the wicked even mine
enemies and my foes came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell.
Though an Host should encamp against me (as they did at Westminster, at my
House, and in sundry Garrisons, where I was a Prisoner under Soldiers) my
heart shall not fear: though war should rise against me, in this I will be
confident. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set
themselves against me round about. And to cry out in Paul's words of defiance
against all Enemies and Perils in the cause of my God and Country (uttered in
his own and all true Elected Saints names) Romans 8. 35, etc. Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? (or our Native Country, as well actively as
passively considered;) Shall tribulation? or distress? or persecution? or
famine? or peril? or SWORD? (of an whole Army, or other Powers) Nay, in all
these things we are more than Conquerors through him that loved us. For I am
persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor PRINCIPALITIES, NOR
POWERS, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. And to say with him in all threatened Dangers for my
sincere conscientious public Services, Act. 20. 22. 24. And now I go bound to
Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall there befall me, save, that the
Holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying; That Bonds and Afflictions wait
for me. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto me,
so ^s I may finish my course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received
of the Lord Jesus, etc. And verily me thinks the serious contemplation thereof,
and of all the premises, with that of 2 Samuel 10. 12. Isa: 51. 12. 13. Ier. 1.
8. Ezech. 2* 2, to 6. Matthew. 10. 26. 28 coupled with Psalm. 11. 2. If the
foundati^ns be destroyed, what can the righteous do? Prove. 24. 22, 23. My Son,
fear thou the Lord and the King, AND MEDDLE NOT WITH THOSE WHO ARE GIVEN TO
CHANGE; For their calamity shall rise suddenly (which we have seen verified in
many late Changers, Mock Parliaments, and self created new Powers,) and wh^
knows the ruin of them both? should now at last banish all base carnal fears
out of all timorous hearts, rouse up the languishing, fearful, dead, stupid
Spirits of our degenerated English Nation, and engage them all unanimously,
undauntedly to claim, vindicate, regain, re-establish those ancient undoubted
Hereditary Fundamental Rights, ^iberties, Privileges, Franchises, Laws,
Government, (purchased with their Ancestors and their own dearest Blood, sweat,
Treasures) which belong to the whole Kingdom; to all true English Parliaments,
Freemen in general, and to every of them in particular; whereof they have of
late years been forcibly disseised, or ^ypocritically cheated by pretended
Patrons, Preservers, and Propuguers of them; the substance whereof I have here
set before their eyes in ten brief Propositions, and by Records, Statutes,
Presidents, Histories, Contests, Resolutions in all ages, undauntedly, (as
their Common Advocate) asserted, fortified to my power, for their Encouragement
and president in this public work. And if they will now but courageously
second me herein, with their joyn^, bold, rightful Claims, Votes,
Declarations, and Resolut^ Demands of all and every of their enjoyments, and
future inviolable Establishments; with strenuous Oppositions of all illegal
perpetual Imposts, Excises, Contributions, Payments (the chief nerves and cords
to keep them still in bondage by Mercinary Forces, supported only by them to
keep them still in slavery) according to their Oaths, Vows, Protestations,
Duties, manifold late Declarations, Remonstrances, Solemn League, Covenant, and
the encouraging memorable Presidents of their Ancestors in former ages here,
recorded; I dare assure them (by Gods blessing) a desired good-Success, whereof
their See Part. 1. p, 14, 15, 16.
Ancestors never failed: no mortal Powers nor Armies whatsoever, having either
Impudency or Ability enough to deny, detain them from them, if they will but
See 1 Samuel 8. 4, to 22. chapter 12. 2. 2 Samuel 18. 2, 3, 4. Jer. 38. 5.
generally, unanimously, courageously, importunately claim and demand them as
their Birthrights. But if they will still basely disown, betray, and cowardly
desert both them and their Assertors, and leave them to a single combat with
their combined Jesuitical enemies (whom none take care to discover, suppress or
banish out of our Realms, where they now swarm more than ever) and Armed
Invaders; the Fate of our old English Britons, when they improvidently
neglected to unite their Counsels, Forces against, and fought only singly with
the invading united Armies of the Romans, is like to be Englands condition now;
Tac^^us in vita Agricole.
Dum pugnant singuli, vincunntur universi: the single Champions of our
Liberties, Laws, Rights, will be easily overpowered, destroyed, for the
present; and all others (by their unworthy Treachery and Baseness, in not
adhering to, but abandoning their present Patrons) discouraged, disabled to
propugne, regain them for the future: and the whole Kingdom vanquished, yea
enslaved for eternity in all humane probability, to those who have broken your
Jer. 28. 13, 14.
former yokes of wood, but instead thereof have made for, and put upon you
yokes of Iron: and by the Jesuits Machiavilian Plots and Policies, will reduce
you by degrees under a mere Papal yoke at last, having deeply leavened many in
power and arms, with their forementioned most desperate Jesuitical Positions,
Practices and Politics, which will soon usher in the whole body of Popery, and
all damnable Heresies whatsoever, by degrees, to the ruin of our Religion, as
well as Laws and Liberties.

Wherefore, seeing it neither is, nor can be reputed Treason, Felony, Sedition,
Faction, nor any Crime at all, but a commendable bounden Duty, to which our
Protestations, Oaths, Leagues, Covenants, Reason, Law, Conscience, our own
private and the public Interest, Safety of the Nation engage us, for all and
every Freeborn Englishman, jointly and severally to claim, maintain, preserve,
by all just, honorable, public and private ways they may, their
unquestionable Hereditary Birthrights, Laws, Liberties, Parliamentary
Privileges, etc. here asserted and presented to them, after so much Blood,
Treasure, Labor spent to rescue them out of the hands of old and late
oppressing Tyrants; nor any Offense at all, but a praiseworthy service now in
me, or any other, publicly to encourage them to this duty, (and the strenuous
defense of our endangered undermined Protestant Religion, subverted with our
Laws and Liberties, and living or dying together with them) at this present
season, as I have done heretofore upon all occasions; And seeing none can
justly censure them or me, for discharging our Oaths, Consciences, Covenants,
Protestations, Duties in this kind, but such as shall thereby declare
themselves Public Enemies and Trayters to the whole Nation, Laws, Government,
Parliaments of England, as the Resolutions, Presidents, Part. 1. chapter 1.
herein cited, yea their own best friends, (and our See the Homilies against
Disobedience, and wilful Rebellion.
Reformed Religion too) have already adjudged them: And seeing A Declaration of
the Egagements, Remonstrances, and Resolutions of Sir Tho. Fanfax, and the
General Council of the Army, London, 1647. p. 150.
Sir Thomas Fairfax and the General Council of his Army, held at Putney Sept.
9. 1647. in their Declararation, concerning THE FVNDAMENTAL AVTHORITY and
GOVERNMENT OF THE KINGDON; printed by their appointment, in these words:
Whereas a Member of the General Council of this ARMY, has publicly declared
and expressed himself, THAT THERE IS NO VISIBLE AUTHORITY IN THE KINGDOM, BUT
THE POWER and FORCE OF THE SWORD, (as others of them say since, and now both by
words and deeds, without control.) We therefore the said GENERAL COUNCIL (to
testify. How FAR OUR HEARTS and MINDS ARE FROM ANY DESIGN OF SETTING UP THE
POWER OF THE SWORD ABOVE OR AGAINST THE FUNDAMENTAL AUTHORITY and GOVERNMENT OF
THE KINGDOM and OUR READINESS TO MAINTAIN AND UPHOLD THE SAID AUTHORITY:) have
by a Free Vo^e (in the said Council, no man contradicting) judged the said
Member, TO BE EXPELLED THE SAID COUNCIL. Which we hereby thought fit to
publish, as A CLEAR MANIFESTATION OF OUR DISLIKE and DISAVOWING SVCH PRINCIPLES
OR PRACTICES, (which notwithstanding they have since avowed pursued in the
highest degree; and I desire them now to repent of* reform, and really make
good) have engaged to maintain and propugne with their Swords, what I here
endeavor to defend, support, with my Pen. And seeing they entitled their
Printed Papers, A Declaration of the Engagements, Remonstrances,
Representations, Proposals, Desires, and Resolutions, from his Excellency Sir
Tho: Fairfax, and THE GENERAL COUNCEL OF THE ARMY, for settling OF HIS MAJESTY
IN HIS JUST RIGHTS, The PARLIAMENT in their JUST PRIVILEGES, and the SVBJECTS
in their LIBERTIES and FREEDOMS. Also Representations of THE GRIEVANCES OF THE
KINGDOM, and REMEDIES PROPOVNDED, for REMOVING THE PRESENT PRESSVRES WHEREBY
THE SVBJECTS ARE BVRDENED (and EXCISES, TAXES amongst the rest) And the
Resolutions of the Army, For the establishment of a firm and lasting peace IN
CHVRCH and KINGDOM, printed by their own, and the Lords House special Or^er,
London 1647: the self-same things I here contend, plead for, (which I wish they
would now really make good by their future consultations and actions to avoid
the just censures of mere Hypocrites and Impostors, as the whole World will
else repute them.) I shall therefore exhort not only the whole Army,
Army Officers, and their General Council; but likewise the whole English
Nation, and all real Lovers of their own or their Countries Liberties, Peace,
Laws, Ease, Safety, Religion, and future establishment in this common Cause, in
the words of the Philistines one to another in a time of need, when they were
greatly afraid, 1 Samuel 4. 9. Be strong and 1 Cor. 16. 13.
quit your selves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye be not servante to the
Hebrews, as they have been to you^ quit your selves like men, fight, etc. That
so (as the Apostle writes in the like case, Phil. 1. 27, 28.) Whether I come
and see you, or be absent from you* I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand
fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of the
Gospel; (and the ancient Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights, Privileges,
Parliaments, Government and Religion of our Realm, which the Jesuits and their
Instruments make their Masterpiece totally to undermine and subvert) And in
nothing terrified by your Adversaries, which is to them an evident token of
Perdition, but to you of Salvation, and that of God. If the Presidents of your
renowned Ancesters here recorded; the Paterns of Recorded in Livy, Tully,
Plutarch, Valerius Maximus, and others. Recta honesta digna Imperio, digna
populo Romano, omnia pericula pro Republica subire, mori pro patria. Cicero de
Finibus bonorum, etc. p. 365. and Tus^c. Q^^aest. p. 445.
many gallant Pagan Romans, Graecians, who have spent their Lives, for their
Countries, Laws, Liberties; Or if my example and these my Lucubrations shall
provoke you hereunto; I shall think my labor well bestowed; and you and your
Posterities worthy to live like English-Freemen. But if you will now neither
manfully demand, speak, nor contend for them any more, out of a slavish fear of
a prevailing Army raised only for their just defense, or any other humane
Powers whatsoever; nor once adventure with united Spirits now at last, so much
as confidently, boldly to ask these your unquestionable Birthrights at the
Thrones of any mortal Grandees, your Fellow Subjects, when God Almighty himself
commands you, to come with boldness to his celestial Throne of Grace, that
you may obtain (not mere right as here, but) Mercy it self, and Grace to help
in time of need, Heb. 4. 16. Qui timide rogat, docet negare; you can neither
hope for, nor ever obtain them for the future, but deserve eternally to forfeit
them, and you and yours to be made slaves for ever: However I (though these
Collections prove successless) shall carry this as a comfortable Cordial with me
to my grave, That I have faithfully discharged my Conscience and bounden Duty
to my degenerous Native Country, by endeavoring all I could both to make and
preserve it free indeed; to detect and prevent all Jesuitical Plots and
Practices, to undermine, imbroyl, divide, subvert, ruin it; and used my utmost
sincerest constant endeavors in my place and calling herein. But if through
the Malice, Tyranny or Injustice of any prevailing Enemies of public Freedom,
or Jesuitical Agents, I shall chance to suffer for it in any kind, (as I have
formerly done for most of my public services of this nature) be it
close-imprisonments, Fines, Pillories, Stigmatizings or Death it self; I shall
only say beforehand, as Gregory the Great did heretofore: Indict. 2. Epist.
78. In causa qua Deo place^e cupio, homines non formido: and as noble Heroic
Esther did, in a like public case for her endangered captivated Nation, Esth.
4. 16.
If I perish, I perish: and this my unrighteous suffering, shall be a new
Glorious permissive, ordering, overruling Providence, does no ways justify
nor extenuate the guilt of any Traitors, Rebels, Murderers, Conspirators
sins* Treasons, Rebellions, Murders, Regicides, Conspiracies, Rapines,
Oppressions, or Wicked Devices, which he permits them to plot, act, accomplish;
so it does in no wise exempt them in Gods or Men's esteem from being the true
Original Plotters, Contrivers, and immediate instrumental Actors of them; nor
from the divine or humane Punishments which they in justice demerit; as is most
evident by Genesis 50. 15. to 21. Psalm. 37. 7. 9. Prove. 24. 10, 21, 22. Job 20. 5,
6, etc. 1 Kings 12. 12. to 25. c. 15. 23. to 30. c. 16. 1. to 30. specially
ver. 7, 8. 2 Kings 11. 1. to 17. c. 14. 5, 6. c. 15. 8. to 32. c. 17. 21, 22. 1 Samuel 8. 2 Samuel 1. 2. to 17. c. 4. throughout. Hos. 1. 4. c. 8. 4, 5. Isay 29.
15, 16 c. 10. 5, 6, 7, etc. Acts 1. 16. to 21. c. 2. 23. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14, 15,
16. Mat. 27* 3, 4, 5. compared together. And if we should look upon all our
late Changes, Revolutions in our Kingdoms, Government, Church, Parliaments,
Religion, Laws, (wrought by the Jesuits and their Instruments) as the mere
wonderful immediate Productions and Glorious Operations of God himself in the
world, and upon the instruments employed in them, only as Gods own precious
chosen Saints and Servants, accomplishing nothing but his own determinate Will,
Providence, Council, (though to satisfy their own ambition, covetousness,
malice, rapine, blood-thirstinesse, lusts) as many now proclaim them, and not
as Conspirators, Treacherous, Perfidious, Pernicious Malefactors in the highest
degree, as well as Jack Cade, Wat Tyler, Strafford, Canterbury, or the
murderers of our Savior, Joash, Ishbosheth, with other Kings heretofore, and
of Henry the 3. and 4. of France, of late; there should then be no Traitors,
Conspirators, Murderers, Sinners, Treasons, Conspiracies, Murders, Sins, in
the world (being all perpetrated by Gods permissive Providence) no Law, nor
Hell to punish them: and it would be no less than a direct resisting, fighting
against God and his Providence, for any Christians, Kingdoms, Kings, or Loyal
Subjects, to pray against, resist, oppose the Treasons, Murders, Conspiracies,
Usurpations, Rebellions, Innovations, Plots, of any Jesuits or Romish
Emissaries, or their under-Agents, against our Kings, Kingdoms, Governors,
Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Government and Religion; which would be professed
Blasphemy, or Frenzy at least, for any man to affirm.

2. That this Jesuit Parsons* in his ^o^ks of the Reformation of all the
States of England, as he prescribed Reformations to the Prince, Court,
Counselors, Noblemen, Bishops, Prelates, Pastors, Universities, Lawyers, Laws,
in which he will have STRANGE METAMORPHOSES; so likewise, THE COURT OF
PARLIAMENT HE WILL HAVE BROVGHT TO BETTER FORM, as W. W. (a secular Priest) in
A Dialogue between a Secular Priest and a Lay-Gentleman, printed at Rhemes, An.
1601. p. 95. Watson in his Quadlibets, p. 92. to 96. 320. to 334. William Clark
(a s^cular Priest in his Answer to Father Parsons L^bel, p. 75. etc.) in direct
terms attest. And may we not then justly suspect, that the late New-models and
Reformations of our Kingdoms, Parliaments, Government, Laws, etc. (originally
promoted by our See their printed Declarations of June 14. 23. Aug. 1. 2. 1647.
Their Agreement of the People, Jan. 1648. and Government of the Commonwealth of
England, 1654. molded by them.
Army Counsels, and Officers) proceeded primarily from the Jesuits Projections
and Plots against them, if the Statutes of 23 Eliz. c. 1. 27 Eliz. c. 2. 35
Eliz. c. 2, 3. Iac. c. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7. 7 Iac. c. 6. and the manifold
Declarations of both Houses of Parliament, Exact Collection, p. 491, 492, 497,
498, 616. 631, 666, 698, 813, to 828. may be judges?

3. That the Jesuits drift directly is (immediately by means of Do not many now
boast, talk, write of such a Conquest by the Army over England?
CONQUEST intended for England) to bring it and all Christendom into an uproar,
FOR COMMON SOVLDIERS TO EXAMINE THEIR SOVEREIGNS, WHAT TITLE THEY HOLD BY; that
thereupon themselves by craft, money and multitudes gathered together through
their Policy, may bring England, ( and then) Spain, and all the rest under
their subjection and Monarchy: And that principally by this Iesuitical
Position; That every Precopie or Tartarian multitude, getting once the style
and title of a PUBLIC STATE, or HELVETIAN COMMONWEALTH, may alter, change and
innovate the course of inheritances and succession TO CROWNS AND KINGDOMS, and
also to every private Persons heritage holden in Fee-s^mple: as Quodlibets, p.
322, 323, 333, 334.
William Watson assures us in these very terms. And whether the Jesuits have
not instructed our Army Officers and Common Soldiers upon this pretext, and
for this very end, to examine their Sovereigns, yea, our Parliaments Titles,
Privileges, and Powers too of late, and dispose of, reject, suppress them at
their pleasure; let themselves, the whole Nation, with all in present power, in
the fear of God, most seriously consider, without passion or affection, before
it be over-late.

4. That the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance ( which all Members of
Parliament ought by Law to take, before they can sit, or vote as Members)
specially made and prescribed by our most wise, zealous 1 Eliz. c. 1. 5 Eu. c.
1. 1. Jac. c. 4. 3. Jac. c. 4, 5. 7 Jac. c. 6. 16 Caroli. The Act for Triennial
Parliaments.
Protestant Parliaments, to prevent the Treasonable plots and designs of Popes,
Jesuits, and Papists, against our Protestant Princes, Realms, Parliaments,
Religion, though confirmed by many Statutes, and containing in them, only the
Declaration of such a Duty, as every true and well-affected Subject, not only
by the bond of Allegiance, but also by the COMMANDMENT OF GOD, ought to bear to
the King, his Heirs and Successors; and none but See J. E. his Right and
Jurisdiction of the Prelate and the Prince; cap. 15. Becanus, Bellarmine,
Lessius, Eudoemon Johannis, and others against this Oath.
persons infected with Popish Superstition formerly oppugned, ( as the Prologue
of the Statute of 7 Iacobi c. 6. positively resolves) have by late State
innovators, not only been discontinued, suspended, but declaimed against and
repealed (as much as in them lay) as See the printed Edicts repealing the^, and
enforcing the Engagement, An. 1649.
UNLAWFUL OATHS; the old Laws against Jesuits and Popish Seminaries,
discontinued, abrogated, or coldly executed. See the Propositions for the
Treaty.
The New Oath for abjuration of Popery, with all Bills against Jesuits and
Papists, presented to the late King by both Houses the last Parliament, and by
him consented to in the Isle of Wight, wholly laid aside, and quite buried in
oblivion. The Solemn Protestation, League and Covenant, prescribed by the last
Parliaments taken by all the well-affected in all the 3 Kingdoms (to See the
Preface to the Covenant.
prevent the dangerous plots of Papists, Jesuits, and our common enemies to
destroy our Religion, Churches, Realms, Government, Parliaments, Laws,
Liberties) quite antiquated, dec^ied, detested, and a See the Edicts for the
Engagement, An. 1649.
New Engagement forcibly imposed under highest penalties and disabilities upon
all men, diametrically contrary to these Oaths, Protestations and Covenants,
which have been (by a new kind of Papal power) publicly dispensed with, and
the people absolved from them, to become sworn Homages to other new
self-created Lords and Masters. And are not all these, with the late Proclaimed
Universal Toleration and Protection of all Religions, to considerate zealous
Protestants, strong Arguments of the Jesuits Predominancy in our late
counsels, transactions, and changes of public Government?

5. That the Notion of THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT, (in my weak apprehension)
derived its original from the Jesuits late-invented Bellarmin de Pont^f.
Romano. Sir Hum: Linde his Via devia.
PRESENT CHURCH, the only Supreme Power and Judge of Controversies, which all
men must submit unto, by a mere absolute blind Obedience, and implicit faith,
without dispute by their determination: as they must do, by a like Iesuitical
blind obedience ( newly taught and obtruded on us) to that present Republican
Government, and new Optimacity, and Popularity, lately set up instead of our
Monarchy. Which two forms of Government, and want of a King and Monarchy, as
they are the punishment of a peoples Sins, and the Transgressions of a Land by
Gods own resolution, not a Mercy. Hosea 10. 3. c. 1. 4. Ier. 18. 7. Prove. 28.
2. Ez^. 19. 14. Lam. 4. 20. c. 5, 7, 8, 12. so they were the inventions of
Factious Grecians at first, w^ch Thucidides Hist. l. 1. 3. Plutarch, Lysander,
Aristot. Polit. l. 4, and 5.
put all their Cities into Combustions, fury, frenzy, and civil wars against
each other, to their utter overthrow in conclusion: witness these verses of See
Grotius de jure Belli and Pacis, l. 3. c. 15. P. 537.
Heniochus, a Greek Comedian:

Tum geminae ad illas accesserunt Mulieres (TITAS QUAE CUNCTA CONTURBARUNT:
OPTIMAEst nomen alteri: alteri POPULARITAS; (RUNT. Quarum incitatis PRIDEM
EXTERNATAE FU^

So the Jesuits, Watsons Qu^dlibets, p. 320, 321, 312, 332, 333.
Parsons, De Monar. Hisp. c. 25.
Campanella, Conte de Galiazzo, Gualdo Priorato Hist. part 3. p. 175, 176.
Car. Richelieu, designed to introduce and set them up among so us in Engl.
Scotl. and Ireland, of purpose to divide^ destroy us by civil wars and
combustions, and bring us under their Jesuitical power at last, as the marginal
Authorities declare to all the world. And if this be undeniable to all having
any sense of Religion, Peace or public Safety left within their breasts, is it
not more than high time for us to awake out of our former lethargy, and fordid,
selfish stupidity, to prevent our ruin, by these and other forementioned
Jesuitical practices? Of can any Englishman, or real Parl. be justly offended
with me for this impartial discovery of them? Or for my endeavors to put all
the dislocated Members and broken bones of our old inverted fundamental body
Politic, into their Optandu^ quidem est, st modo Respublica salva et incolumis
futura sit, ut Civitatis part^s omnes quidem sibi constent, in suoq statu
permaneant. At ut praesen^^ti statu gaudeant, Reges Regiae dignitatis splendore
commoventur; Optimates Senatoriae, haec enim illis pro virtutis suae praemio
est: populus Ephoriae. Aristot. Polit. l. 2. c. 7.
due places, joints and postures again, without which there is no more See 1
Cor. 12. 12. to 31. 25 H. 8. c. 22. 26 H. 8. c. 3. 1 Jac. c. 1, 2. 3 Jac. c. 1,
2.
possibility of reducing it to its, pr^stine health, ease, settlement,
tranquillity, prosperity, or of preserving it from perpetual pain, inquietation,
consumption and approaching death, than of a natural body whose principal
members continue dis-joynted, and bones broken all in pieces, as all prudent
State-Physicians must acknowledge.

These five Considerations, together with the Premises; will I presume
sufficiently wipe off all the malicious scandalous Imputations, which Militiere
and other Papists, have injuriously cast upon the Principles and chief
Professors of our Reformed Religion, in relation to the late exorbitant
Proceedings against the King, Parliament, the public Revolutions, Confusions,
Ataxies both in our Church and Kingdoms; and retort them on the Iesuitical,
Papal, seditious, Treasonable, Antimonarchical Principles and Professors of
their Religion, especially the Jesuits and French Cardinals (Militiere his late
Lords and Masters) the original Contrivers, and chief clandestine Promoters of
them, as every day more and more discovers to the world. And withal abundantly
justify this my undertaking and impartial discovery of Jesuitical plots to
ruin our Church, Religion, Kingdoms, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Government,
against all malicious Enemies, Accusers Maligners whatsoever, before all the
Tribunals of God or Men, where I shall be ready to justify them upon all
occasions. In perpetual testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand, and by
Gods Grace shall ever be ready to seal them and the truth of God with my blood,
if called out to do it.

Swainswick, Aug. 12. 1654. William Prynne.

A Seasonable Legal and Historical VINDICATION and Chronologicall Collection
of the good Old Fundamental Liberties, Franchise^, Rights, Laws of all English
Freem^n; (their best Inheritance, Birthright, Security, against all Arbitrary
Tyranny, Egyptian Slavery and Burdens) of late years most dangerously
undermined, oppugned, and almost totally subverted, under the specious feigned
Disguise of their Defense, Enlargement, and future Establishment upon a sure
Basis.
IT is an universal received Principle, and experimental truth, beyond all
contradiction, That no natural structure, no artificial building, no Civil or
Ecclesiastical Corporation, Realm, Republike, Government, or Society of men; no
Art or Science whatsoever, can possibly be erected, supported, established,
preserved or continued in their being or well-being, without FOUNDATIONS;
Whereon, as they were at first erected, so they must necessarily still depend,
or else they will presently fall to utter ruin.

Hence it is (to wave all Humane Authorities in so clear a verity) that in Gods
own sacred unerring John 17. 17. 2 Cor. 6. 7. Ephesians. 1. 12. Jam. 1. 18.
word of Truth, we find frequent mention of the natural 2 Sa. 22. 8. 16. Job
38. 4 6. Ps 18. 15. and 102 5. Pro. 8. 29. Is. 24. 18. and 40. 21 and 48. 13.
and 51 13. 16. Zech. 12 1. Mic. 1. 6. Joh. 17. 24 Ephesians 4. 4 Heb. 1. 10. and 4 3.
and 9. 26 1 Pet. 1. 20
Foundations of the the vast natural Fabric of the Earth, Heavens and world it
self; of the Artificial, Material 1 Kin. 5. 17 and 6. 37. and 7. 9, 10 Ezr. 4.
13. and 6. 3. Ps. 137. 7. Ezech. 41. 8. Hag. 2. 8. Zech. 4 9. and 8 9. Mat. 7.
26, 27 Luke. 6. 48, 49.
Foundations of the Material Temple, Walls, City of Gods own most famous
Jerusalem; and of private Houses: of the spiritual Isa. 28. 16. and 54. 11.
Ps. 87. 1 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11, 12. Heb. 11. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 6 Rev. 21. 14. 19.
Foundations of the Spiritual Temple, City, Jerusalem, and whole Church of God;
even Jesus Christ himself: of Doctrinal 2 Timothy 1. 19. Heb. 6. 1. 2.
Foundations, and first Principles of Religion; Christianity, Salvation: yea,
of the Political Foundations of Kingdoms, Republics, Churches, Governments,
States: Which being once shaken, undermined, subverted, razed, or d^stroyed,
bring unavoidable ruin and desolation upon them, ( Psalm. 11. 3. Psalm. 82. 5.
Jer. 50. 15. and 51. 25, 26. Micah 1. 6, 7, 9.) Even as we daily see Castles,
Walls, Houses to fall instantly to the ground, and become an heap of Confusion,
when their Jer. 50. 15 Mic, 1. 6, 7 Luke 6. 48, 49 Matt. 7. 26, 27
Foundations are blown up, decayed, or demolished.

Upon which consideration, those public Laws, which establish, fence,
fortify, support the Fundamental Constitutions, Rights, Liberties, Privileges
of any Nation, Kingdom, Republike, (essential to their being and subsistence,
as a free or happy people, against the Invasions, underminings, enchroachments
of any Tyrants, Usurpers, Oppressors, or public enemies, are usually styled
Fundamental Laws; and have ever been reputed so sacred, inviolable, immutable,
in all ages, upon any pretenses of necessity, or public safety, that most
Nations, and our own English Ancestors above others, have freely chosen to
hazard, yea, lose their estates, lives, in their just defense, against such
exorbitant tyrannical Kings, and other Powers, who by force or policy have
endeavored to violate, alter, or subvert them; rather than out of a Cowardice,
Sottishness, Carelessness, or want of cordial love to the Public, to suffer
the least infringment, repeal, or alteration of them to the inthrawling of
themselves or their posterities to the arbitrary wills of such domineering
Tyrants and Usurping Powers.

Now because, after all our Old and New (many years) bloody, costly, dangerous
Contests and Wars, for the maintenance of our good Old Fundamental Liberties,
Laws, ^ights, Privileges, against all secret or open underminers of them, I
clearly behold with grief of heart, that there is a strange monstrous generation
of new Tyrannical State-Hereticks, sprung up amongst us; who are grown so
desperately impudent, as not only to write, but publicly to assert in print,
in Lilburn tried and cast p. 39, 142. to 148, 154. Ca^^es Voice from the
Temple, which perswade^ the subversion and abolishing of al former Laws,
especially for Tithes and Ministers support.
Books printed by AUTHORITY, (even in Capitals, in every Title page) That the
Freemen and People of England have no such unalterable Fundamental Laws and
Liberties left them by their forefathers (as our Ancestors heretofore
contested for, both in the Field and Parliament House, with William the
Conqueror, Henry the first, King John, Henry the third, Edward 1. 2. 3. Richard
2. with other Kings and Princes; and our late Parliament^ and Armies too, with
King James and King Charles.) That neither Magna Charta, nor the Petition of
Right, nor the Laws for trying Malefactors by Juries of their Pears, are
Fundamental or unalterable; but that the State Physicians (or rather
Mountebanks) of our time (who are not tied up to them, but left free unto
themselves) may lay them quite aside, either in part or whole, as they see
cause. Yea, have now attained to such a super-transcendent Authority, that they
may (as they assert) lay aside all Parliaments and Parliamentary ways, and
appoint something else, as more seasonable and proper to us, and as Providence
makes way for it, if they see it more conducing to the safety and good of the
Commonwealth (that is, to their own private Interests, Honors; Profits,
Securities, Designs, Oppressions, Rapines, gilded over with this specious
pretext) And then peremptorily conclude, That to plead for these and other
fundamental laws and liberties, as unalterable, (though the only Bulwarks and
Badges of our Freedom) is nothing else, but to enslave the Nation: for by such
a Principle, people do not only lose their Liberty, but are brought under such
a kind of Tyranny, out of which (AS BEING WORSE THAN THE EGYPTIAN BONDAGE)
there is no hope of deliverance. An absurd Tyrannical Paradox, transcending any
I ever yet met with in any Author; stripping us naked of all our long enjoyed
Laws, Liberties, Franchises, great Charters at once; tending only to reduce,
and perpetually inthrall us under such an absolute EGYPTIAN BONDAGE and
Tyranny, without any hope of future deliverance from it, which some now
endeavor S^e the Government of the Commonwealth of England, etc. Artie. 3.
12. 21. 22, 24, ^7, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 38, 39, 41.
to entaile on us and our posterities for ever, by an Iron law, and Yoke of
Steel, in stead of restoring to us that glorious Freedom, which we have so
long expected from them in vain.

And because I find the generality of the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, Commonalty
of our Nation, after all their late years expensive bloody wars, and
Parliamentary Disputes, for the defense and preservation of these our ancient
Hereditary Fundamental Charters, Laws, Liberties, Privileges, so strangely
degenerated both from themselves, and their Heroic prudent Ancestors, as that
they are more readily inclined, upon every occasion, out of a base,
unchristian, unmanly, un-english fear, or sottish cowardice and stupidity,
wittingly to desert, betray, surrender them al up into the hands of any
invading Vs^rpers, without the least Public Claim, Dissertation, Defense,
Dspute; then diligently or courageously to contend or suffer for them, of late
they did: So as that which Paul once taxed in the ^lavish besotted Corinthians,
2 Epist. 11. 20. may be most truly averred of our degenerated, infatuated
English Nation: Ye suffer if a man bring you into bondage, if a man de^^ur you,
if a man take of you, if a man ex^lt himself (above your Laws, Liberties,
Franchises, Parliaments, Kings, Nobles, Properties, Lives, Consciences, and all
2 The^^. 2. 4.
that is called God, or warshipped) if a man smite you on the face;
notwithstanding all their manifold late See Exact Collect. and a General
collection of all Ordinances, etc.
Protestations, Vows, Covenants, Remonstrances, Declaration^ and Public
Engagements to the contrary. And withal, after diligent enquiry, discovering
scarce one man of Eminency or Power in the Nation, nor so much as one of my
degenerated temporizing Profession of the Law, (even when the S^e Culpepers and
^illy's M^rlins and Almanacks, John Cannes Voice. Lilb. tried and cast, with
many Petitions and Pamphlets against the Law and Lawyers. The Order of Aug. 19.
1653. That there should be a Committee selected to consider of a New body of
the Law for the government of this Commonwealth.
whole body of our laws, and all its Professors, are violently assault^d, and
devoted unto sudden ruin, by many lawless spirits) who has so much courage,
magnanimity, honesty, zeal, or cordial love to his Native Country, remaining in
his breast, as manfully to appear in public, for the strenuous necessary
defense of these our Hereditary, fundamental laws, liberties, rights,
franchises, (though their own, and every other English Freemans best
inheritance and security) for fear of being persecuted, imprisoned, close
imprisoned, exiled, condemned, destroyed, as a Traitor, Rebel, Seditious
person, enemy to the Public, or disturber of the Kingdoms peace, by those who
are truly such: I thereupon conceived, I could not undertake or perform a more
necessary, seasonable, beneficial service for my Country and ingrate unworthy
Nation (who are now ashamed, afraid, for the most part, to own, visit, or be
seen in the company of those Gallant men, much less to assist, defend, and
stick close unto them in their dangers, according to the sixth Article of their
late Solemn League and Covenant, who have suffered, acted, and stood up most
for their Common Liberties, Rights, Freedoms, Religion, against all invading
Tyrant^, to their great discouragement and betraying:) not pitch upon any
Subject more proper for me, either as a common Lawyer, or as a constant
Advocate and Sufferer for the public Cause, and Liberties of the Nation, as
well under our late extravagant Free State, as former Regal and Episcopal
arbitrary Tyranny, than in this juncture of our public affairs, to present our
whole distracted unsettled Kingdom, with A Legal and Historical Vindication,
and Chronological Collection, in all ages, of these Ancient, Hereditary
liberties, Franchises, Rights, and all those National, Parliamentall, legal and
Martial Contests, Laws, Charters, Records, Monuments of former and late times,
for their Confirmation and inviolable observation, which our Ancestors and our
selves have always hitherto reputed Fundamental, unalterable and inviolable,
upon any pretext, and have most eagerly contended for, with the Prodigal
expense of many millions of treasure, and whole Oceans of gallant Christian
English blood.

And if upon the serious perusal of them, the universality of our degenerated
Nation, after their many solemn Protestations, Vows, Leagues, Covenants,
Remonstrances, inviolably to defend and maintain them, shall still so
undervalue them now at last, (as most actually have done) as not to esteem them
worth the owning, maintaining, vindicating, or perpetuating any longer; and
thereby draw upon their heads, the real guilt of all those bloody Wars,
Murders, Tumults, Violences, Rapines, Oppressions, Sins, Mischiefs, illegal
Taxes, Excises, Exorbitancies, which their many late years pretended necessary
defense and preservation have brought upon our three whole Nations; let them
henceforth, like so many dastardly conquered bondslaves, Exodus 21. 6.
bored through the ears, publicly disavow, disclaim, renounce, abjure them,
for themselves and their posterities for ever, as mere worthless toys, or
pernicious inventions, fit only to kindle perpetual wars and discords between
King and People, head and members, superiors and inferiors; or, as poor
slender Cobwebs, (as now they prove) able to hold none within compass, but the
very weakest Flies, broken through with ease and impunity, by every greater Fly,
or armed Waspe, creeping up into any Power or Supreme Authority, by right or
wrong; and swept down to the very ground, by every new Broom in the hand of
vpstart Innovators.

But if upon saddest deliberation, they shall really estimate them to be such
incompatable, rich, precious Jewels, and ancient Inheritances, as are every way
worth the infinite Treasures, Wars, Blood, Cares, Consultations, Troubles,
heretofore and of late years expended, both to gain, retain, confirm, and
perpetuate them, to them and their Posterities for ever, as their principal
earthly security, and beatitude; I hope they will all then unanimously conclude
with the Poet,

Non minor est virtus quam quaerere, PARTA TVERI: And both by their Votes and
Actions, return the self-same peremptory magnanimous answer to any Caesar,
Conqueror, Potentate, power, or Combination of men, whatsoever, (who shall
endeavor by force, fraud, or flattery to compel or persuade them, to sell,
resign, betray, or give up these their Ancestrall Privileges, Inheritances,
Birthrights to them) as Naboth once did to King Ahab, 1 Kings 21. 3. The Lord
forbid it us, that we should give (sell or betray) the INHERITANCE OF OUR
FATHERS (and our Posterities likewise) unto thee, or you; though they should
suffer for this Answer and Refusal, as much as Naboth did from bloody Ahab and
Jezebel.

But whatever low price or estimate this spurious, stupid, sordid, slavish age
may set upon these richest Pearls; yet for my own particular, upon serious
consideration of these Chronological Collections, and the Solemn Oaths,
Protestations, Vows, League and Covenant, obliging me to defend them to the
uttermost; I value the whole Nations public, and my own (with my cordial
friends) private interest in them, at so high a rate, that I would rather
cheerfully part with ten thousand lives, and all the treasures of the Nation,
Indies, were I owner of them, then wittingly, negligently, or unworthily sell,
betray, or resign them up to any mortals or powers whatsoever, upon any
pretenses or Conditions, after all my former Publications, Contests,
Sufferings, Losses, etc. for their just defense.

And to the end al others might now take special notice of the inestimable
value our Ancestors in all ages have set upon them, and what successive wars,
conflicts, they have cheerfully undertaken for their preservation; I have at
vacant hours compiled this ensuing Vindication and Collection of the old
Fundamental liberties, franchises, laws of all English freemen, which I shall
bequeath to my most beloved Native Country, in general, and every real Heroic
Patron of them in particular, as the best Legacy I can leave behind me, both
for their present and future Enfranchisment, Immunity, security, from all
Arbitrary Tyranny, Slavery and yokes of Bondage, under which they have a long
time languished, and lamented in the bitterness of their spirits.

The Method I resolve herein to pursue, is this:

1. I shall produce some punctual Authorities of moment, to evidence, That the
Kingdom and Freemen of England, have some ancient Hereditary just Rights,
Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Laws and Customs, properly called
FVNDAMENTAL; and likewise a Fundamental Government, no ways to be altered,
undermined, subverted directly or indirectly, to the public prejudice, under
pain of highest Treason in those, who shall attempt it, especially by fraud,
force, or armed power.

2. I shall, in brief Propositions, present you with the chiefest and most
considerable of them, which our Ancestors in former ages, and our latest real
Parliaments have resolved to be, and eargerly contended for, as FUNDAMENTAL,
essential to their being and well-being, as a Free People, Kingdom,
Republique, unwilling to be enslaved under any Yokes of Tyranny, any arbitrary,
(...) positions or Powers whatsoever, Then give you a brief touch of their
several late unparalelld violations, both by the Edicts and Actions of
usurping Powers.

3. I shall in a Chronological way, tender you a large Historical Catalogue of
National Parliamental, civil and military* Contests, Votes, Declarations,
^emonstrances, Oaths, Vows, Protestations, Covenants, Engagements,
Excommunications, Confirmations, Evidences, Statutes, Charters, Writs, Records,
Judgments and Authorities in all ages, undeniably evidencing, declaring,
vindicating, establishing, perpetuating these Fundamental Hereditary Rights,
Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Customs, Laws, and abundantly manifesting
the extraordinary care, industry, zeal, courage, wisdom, vigilance of our
Ancestors, to defend, preserve, and perpetuate them to posterity, without the
least violation or diminution.

4. I shall vindicate the excellency, indifferency, and leg^lity of trying all
Malefactors whatsoever, by Juries of their ^eers, upon legal Process and
Indictments; and manifest the illegallity, injustice, partiality, dangerous
consequences, of admitting or introducing any other form of Trials, by New.
Arbitrary Martial Commissions, or Courts of High Justice, (or rather
Summumjus, est summa injuria, Cic. de Officiis p. 611.
injustice) inconsistent with, and destructive to the Fundamental Rights,
Liberties, Privileges, Laws, Franchises of the English Nation, and of most
dangerous President to Posterity; being set up by the greatest pretenders to
public Liberty, Law, and the ^heifest inveighers against Arbitrary Regal
Tyranny and Power, which never publicly established such arbitrary illegal
Trials and new Butcheries of Christian English Freemen, by any law, and may
fall to imitate them in future Ages, by their example. Each of these I intend
to prosecute in distinct Chapters in their order.

CHAP. 1.
1. For the first of these: That the Kingdom and Freemen of England, have some
ancient Hereditary Rights, Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Laws and
Customs, properly called FVNDAMENTAL; and likewise a FVNDAMENTALL GOVERNMENT,
no ways to be altered, undermined, subverted, directly or indirectly, under
pain of High Treason in those who shall attempt it; especially by fraud, force,
or armed power.

I Shall confirm the first part of it, by these ensuing punctual Authorities of
moment, against those Lilbourn tried and cast p. 39, 40, 142, to 148 and
elsewhere. John Cannes ^ Voice from the Temple. John Rogers Mean Tekel, Perez.
p. 6. Lilly and Culpeper in their Prognostications An. 1653, and 1654. See the
Armies Proposals.
traitorous late published Pamphlets, which professedly deny it, and endeavor,
a total abrogation of all former Laws, to set up a New model and Body of the
law, to rule us for the future, according to their pleasures.

The first is, the express words of the great Charters of the Liberties of
England, granted by King John, Anno 1215. in the 16 year of his Reign;
Regranted and confirmed by King Henry the third, in the 9 year of his Reign,
and sundry times afterward and by King Edward the first, in the 25 and 28
years of his reign: Wherein these three Kings successively, by their several
grand Charters, under their great Seals, did grant, give, and confirm, to all
the Nobility, (...) is, and ever shall be, far from the thoughts and intents of
all good Kings, Governors and Parliament, who bear a sincere care and
affection to the Subjects of England, to alter or innovate them. 3. That by
these ancient good Laws, Privileges and customs, not only the Kings Regal
Authority, but the peoples Security of lands, livings, and privileges, (both
in general and particular) are preserved and maintained. 4. That by the
abolishing or altering of them, it is impossible, but that present confusion
will fall upon the whole state and frame of this Kingdom: Which I wish all
Innovators and New Modellers of our Laws and Government would now at last lay
seriously to heart, and the whole Kingdom and English Nation sadly consider,
who have found it an experimental truth of late years, and no imaginary seigned
speculation.

3. The third is, The Remon^trance of the whole House of Commons in Parliament,
delivered in Writing to King James, in the Parliament of 7. Jacobi, Anno 1610.
which begins thus:

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
Whereas we your Majesty's most humble Subjects, the Commons assembled in
Parliament, See the 1 and 6 Proposition in cap. 2.
having received first by Message, and since by speech from your Majesty, a
Command of restraint, from debating in Parliament your Majesty's Right of
imposing upon your Subjects Goods exported out of, or imported into this Realm,
yet allowing us to examine the grievance of these Impositions, in regard of
quantity, time, and other circumstances of disproportion thereto incident: We
your humble Subjects nothing doubting, but that your Majesty had no intent by
that command, to infring the ancient and fundamental Rights of the Liberty of
PARLIAMENT, in point of exact discussing of all matters concerning them and
their Possessions, Goods, and Rights whatsoever: Which yet we cannot but
conceive to be done in effect by this Command; Do with all humble Duty make
this Remonstr^nce to your Majesty.

First, we hold it an Ancient, general and undoubted Right of Parliament, to
debate freely all matters, which do properly concern the Subject and his Right
or Estate: which freedom of debate being once fore-closed, the essence of the
Liberty of Parliament is withal dissolved, etc.


Here the whole House of Commons, in a special Remonstrance to King James,
(printed and published by Order of a Committee of the House of Commons for
licensing of Books, dated 20 Maii 17. Caroli 1641.) Declare, resolve, vindicate
and maintain, one principal, ancient, fundamental, general, undoubed right of
the Liberty of Parliament, against the Kings intrenchment on it: Of which
should they be but once fore closed, the Essence of the Liberty of Parliament
is withal dissolved.

And peradventure it may not be unworthy the most serious disquisition of the
next ensuing nominal or real Parliament, to examine, whether some clauses and
restrictions in the 9. 12. 14. 16, 17. 21. 22. 24, 25. 27. 30. 32, 33. 36, 37,
38, 39, 40. Articles (or strings) of the New Instrument entitled, The
Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging; as it was publicly declared at Westminster the
16. day of December 1653, etc. do not as much, nay far more entrench upon the
ancient Fundamental, General undoubted Rights and Liberty of Parliament, and
parliamentary free debates, to the dissolution of the Essential liberty of all
future Parliaments, as this Command of King James did, or as the Bishops late
Canons, imposed on the Clergy in and by the Convocation, Anno 1640. ever did;
and this clause in their, etc. Oath then made, (now See the Government of the
Commonwealth of England, etc. Arti^ 12. the writs and printed returns for new
^lections; and enforced new Test and Engagement imposed on the three Kingdoms
and new Members, se^luding m^^^, of them.
imitated by others, who condemned it) I. A. B. do swear, that I will never
give my consent to alter the Government of this Church, by Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans and Archdeacons, etc. as it stands now established, and as by
right it ought to stand. Which clause and Oath imposed only on the Clergymen.

Resolved by the whole House of Commons and Peers too, in Parliament, without
one dissenting voice, December 16. 1640. to be a most dangerous and illegal
Oath, contrary to the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and to the
Fundamental Laws and Statutes of the Realu^, etc. and of dangerous consequence:
the contriving whereof was objected to the late Archbishop of Caterbury, in his
original Articles of High Treason, for which amongst other things he lost his
head.

The fourth is the notable Petition of Grievances of the whole House of Commons
in Parliament, presented to King James in the seventh year of his Reign, after
their Vote against his Right, to levy Impositions on goods imported, or
exported, without assent and grant of Parliament, in these ensuing words.

The Policy of this your Majesty's Kingdoms, appropriates unto the Kings of
this Realm, See Proposition 1. in chapter 2.
with assent of Parliament, as well the Sovereign power of making Laws, as that
of taxing or imposing upon the Subjects Goods or Merchandises, Nota.
wherein they have justly such a property, as may not without their consent be
altered or changed: this is the cause, that the people of this Kingdom, as
they have O how are they now degenerated!
ever showed themselves faithful and loving to their Kings, and ready to aid
them in all just occasions, with voluntary contributions: so have they been And
should they not be so now then?
ever careful to preserve their own Liberties and Rights, And should we now at
last fail herein?
when any thing has been done to prejudice or impeach the same. And therefore
when their Princes, either occasioned by war, or by their own bounty, or by any
other necessity, have without consent of Parliament set on Impositions, either
within the Land, or upon commodities exported or imported by the merchants,
they have in open Parliament complained of it, in that it was done without
their consents, and thereupon How dare then any self created powers who are
neither Kings nor Parliaments now arrogate to themselves, or exercise such a
super-Reg al arbitrary power and Prerogative, against all our Laws and the^^
own instrument and oaths.
never failed to obtain a speedy and full redress, without any claim made by
the Kings, of any Power or Prerogative in that point. And though the Law of
property be original, and carefully preserved by the Common Laws of this Real,
WHiCH ARE AS ANCIENT AS THE KINGDOM IT SELF, yet those famous Kings, for the
better contentment and assurance of their loving Subjects, agreed, THAT THIS
OLD FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT (observe the words) should be further declared, and
established by Acts of Parliament, wherein it is provided, That no such Charge
shall ever be laid upon the People, without their common Consents, as may
appear, by sundry Records of former times.

We therefore your Majesty's most humble Commons assembled in Parliament Nota.
And oh that we would follow it now again, both in and out of Parliament?
following the example of this worthy care of our Ancestors, and out of our
Duty to those for whom we serve, finding that your Majesty, without advice of
your Lords and Commons, has lately (in times of Peace) Set both greater
Impositions, and far more in number, than any your Noble Ancestors did ever
in time of War, do with all humility present this most just and necessary
Petition unto your Majesty, THAT ALL IMPOSITIONS SET WITHOUT ASSENT IN
PARLIAMENT, MAY BE QVITE ABOLISHED AND TAKEN AWAY. And that your Majesty
likewise, in imitation of your Royal Progenitors, will be pleased, that a Law
in your time, and during this Session of Parliament, may be also made, Nota.
to declare, That all Imposition of any kind, set, or to be set upon your
people, their Goods or Merchandises, save only by common Consent in
Parliament, are and shall b^ Void; wherein your Majesty shall not only Give
your Subjects great Satisfaction in point of their Right; but also bring
exceeding joy and comfort to them, who now suffer partly through the abating of
the price of Native Commodities, and partly through the raising of all
Foreign, to the overthrow of Merchants, and shipping, the causing of general
dearth, and decay of all wealth among your people; who will be thereby no less
discouraged, than disabled to supply your Majesty when occasion shall require.
In which memorable Petition, the whole House of Commons resolve in direct
terms: 1. That the Subjects of England have old original Fundamental Rights
(and more particularly) in the Property of their Goods, exempted from all
Impositions whatsoever, in times of peace or war, without their common consent
in Parliament; declared and established both by the ancient and common law of
England and sundry Acts of Parliament, and records, of former times. 2. They
declare, the constant vigilant care, zeal of our ancestors and former
Parliaments in all ages, inviolably to maintain, defend, preserve the same,
against all enchroachments, together with their own care, duty and vigilance in
this kind in that very Parliament. 3. They relate the readiness of our Kings
to ratify these their Fundamental Rights by new Acts of Parliament, when they
have been violated in any kind. 4. They declare the benefit accruing both to
Prince and People, by the inviolable preservation and establishment of this old
Fundamental right, and the mischiefs accruing to both by the infringment
thereof, by arbitrary illegal impositions, without full consent in Parliament.
5. They earnestly (in point of Conscience, prudence, and duty to those for whom
they served) Petition his Majesty, for a new Law and Declaration, against all
new Impositions and Taxes on inland Goods, or Merchandises imported or
exported, without the peoples free consent in Parliament, as null, void,
utterly to be abolished and taken away: Whether it will not be absolutely
necessary for the whole English Nation, and the next ensuing National, or real
Parliament, to prosecute, enact, establish such a Declaration and Law against
all such former and future arbitrary, illegal, oppressive Taxes, Impositions,
Excises, that have been imposed and continued for many years together on the
whole kingdom, by See the whitehall Ordinances for the six months
contribution, Excise, till 1656. tunnage and Poundage till 1658. beyond all
Presidents in any age, and the very words and letter of the 30 Article of their
government.
new extravagant, self-created, usurping ARMY OFFICERS, and other Powers,
without free and full consent of the people in Lawful English Parliaments,
against all former Laws, Declarations and Resolutions in Parliaments, to their
great oppression, enslaving, undoing, in far greater proportions, multiplicity,
and variety, than ever in former Ages, without the least intermission; and
likewise against their late declared design, to perpetuate them on our
exhausted Nation, without alteration or diminution, (beyond and against all
presidents of former Ages) both in times of Peace and War, for the future, by
the 27, 28, 29, 30, 39. Articles of the Instrument entitled, The Government of
the Commonwealth of England, etc. I remit to their most serious considerations
to determine, if ever they resolve to be English Freemen again, or to imitate
the wisdom, prudence, zeal, courage and laudable examples of their worthy
Ancestors, from which they cannot now degenerate without the greatest Infamy,
and enslaving of themselves with their Posterities for ever, to the arbitrary
wills of present or future Usurpers on their Fundamental Rights and Liberties,
in an higher degree then ever in any precedent Ages, under the greatest
Conquerours or Kings, after all their late, costly, bloody Wars, for their
Defense against the beheaded King.

5 The fifth is, A learned and necessary Argument made in the Commons House of
Parliament, Anno 7. Jacobi, to prove, That each Subject has a Property in his
Goods; showing also, the extent of the Kings Prerogative in Impositions upon
the Goods of Merchants, exported or imported, etc. by a late learned Judge of
this Kingdom, printed at London by Richard Bishop, 1641. and Ordered to be
Published in Print, at a Committee appointed by the Honorable House of Commons,
for examination and Licensing of Books, 20. Maii 1641. In which Parliamentary
Argument, p. 8. 11. 16. I find these direct Passages: That the New Impositions
contained in the Book of Rates, imposed on Merchandises, imported and exported
by the Kings Prerogative, and Letters Patents, without consent in Parliament,
is against the natural Frame and Constitution of the Policy of this Kingdom,
which is, JVS PVBLICVM REGNI, AND SO SVBVERTETH THE FUNDAMENTAL LAW OF THE
REALM, Nota.
and introduces a new Form of State and Government: Can any man give me a
reason, why the King can only in Parliament make Laws? No man ever read any
Law, whereby it was so ordained; and yet no man ever read, that Yet those who
have pulled down our Kings as Tyrants, now presume to do it: Witness their New
White Hall Laws and Ordinances, amounting to near 700. pages in folio in a few
months space.
any King practiced the contrary; therefore IT IS THE ORIGINAL RIGHT OF THE
KINGDOM, AND THE VERY NATURAL CONSTITUTION OF OUR STATE AND POLICY, being one
of the highest Rights of Sovereign Power. If the King alone out of Parliament
may impose, And do not those do so, who now ^ay Monthly Taxes, Excises,
Customs and New Imposts on us daily, out of Parliament, and that for many
months and years yet to come, against the Letter of their own Instrument and
Oath too?
HE ALTERS THE LAW OF ENGLAND IN ONE OF THESE TWO MAIN FUNDAMENTAL POiNTS; he
must either take the Subjects Goods from them, without assent of the Party,
which is against the law, or else he must give his own Letters Patents the
force of a law, to alter the property of the Subjects goods, which is also
against the Law.

In this and sundry other Arguments (touching the Right of Impositions) in the
Commons House of Parliament by the Members of it, arguing against them, it was
frequently averred, and at last Voted and Resolved by the House, 7. Jacobi.
That such Impositions without consent in Parliament, were And are they not so
now?
AGAINST THE ORIGINAL FVNDAMENTAL LAWS AND PROPERTY OF THE SVBJECT, and
Original Right, Frame and Constitution of the Kingdom; as the Notes and
Journals of that Parliament evidence: An express parliamentary Resolution in
point, for what I here assert.

6. The sixth is, A Conference desired by the Lords, and had by a Committee of
both Houses, concerning the Rights and Privileges of the Subject. 3. Aprilis
4. Caroli 1628. entered in the Parliament Journal of 4. Caroli, and since
printed at London 1642. In the Introduction to which Conference, Sir Dudley
Digs by the Commons House Order, used these expressions: My good Lords, whilst
we the Commons, out of our good affections, were seeking for money, we found, I
cannot say a ^ook of the Law, but many A FVNDAMENTAL POINT THEREOF NEGLECTED
AND BROKEN, which has occasioned our desire of this Conference: wherein I am
first commanded to show unto your Lordships in general: That the Laws of
England are grounded on Reason more ancient than Books, consisting much in
unwritten Customs; yet so full of Justice and true Equity, that your most
honorable Predecessors and Ancestors propugned them with, a 20. H. 3. c. 9. See
Cooks 2 In^^it. p. 97, ^8.
NOLVMVS MVTARI; and so ancient, that from the Saxons days, notwithstanding
the injuries and ruins of time, they have continued in most parts the same,
etc. Be pleased then to know, THAT IT IS AN UNDOUBTED AND FUNDAMENTAL POINT OF
THIS SO ANCIENT COMMON LAW OF ENGLAND, Proposition 1, 4
THAT THE SUBJECT HAS A TRUE PROPERTY IN HIS GOODS AND POSSESSIONS, which does
preserve as sacred, that MEVM and TVVM, that is the Nurse of Industry, and the
Mother of Courage, and without which, there can be no Justice, of which MEVM
and TVVM is the proper object: But the VNDOVBTED BIRTHRIGHT OF FREE SVBJECTS,
has lately not a little been invaded and prejudiced by pressures, the more
grievous, because they have been pursued by IMPRISONMENT, contrary to the
Franchises of this Land, Proposition 2.
etc. Which the Commons House proved by many Statutes and Records in all ages,
in that Conference, to the full satisfaction of the Lords House; since
published in print.

7. The Seventh is, The Vote the Sea Canterburies Doom, p. 19. Exact Coll. p.
12.
whole House of Commons, 16. December 1640. Nullo contradicente, entered in
their Journall, and printed in Diurnall Occurrences, page 13. That the Canons
made in the Convocation (Anno 1640.) ARE AGAINST THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THE
REALM, the Property and Liberty of the Subject, the Right of Parliament, and
contain diverse things tending to Faction and Sedition. Seconded in their
Remonstrances of 15. December 1641.

8. The eight Authority is, Exact Collect. p. 112, 113.
The Votes of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the security of the
Kingdom of ENGLAND and Dominion of Wales, 15. Martii 1641. Ordered by the
Lords and Commons in Parliament to be forthwith printed and published (as they
were then by themselves, and afterward with other Votes and Orders) Resolved
upon the Question, nemine* contradicente; That in case of extreme danger, and
his Majesty's refusal, the Ordinance agreed on by both Houses for the MILITIA
(to secure the Houses, Members and Privileges of Parliament and Kingdom
against ARMED-VIOLENCE, since brought upon them by the MILITIA of the Army)
does obliege the people, and ought to be obeyed, by the FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF
THIS KINGDOM. A very vain and delusory Vote, if there be no such Law, as some
now affirm.

9. The nineth punctual Authority is, Exact Coll. p 850, 584, ^87, 888.
a Second Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
concerning the Commission of Array; Printed by their special Order of 12.
January 1642. Wherein are these observable passages, The main drift of all the
answer is to maintain, That the King by the Common Law may grant such a
Commission of Array, as this is, upon this ground, because its for the Defense
of the Kingdom: And, that the power, which he has to grant it by the Common
law, is not taken away by the Petition of Right, or any former Statute, but the
King notwithstanding any of them, may charge the Subject for Defense of the
Kingdom; so as the charge imposed come not to himself, nor to his particular
advantage.

These grounds thus laid, extend not to the Commission of Array alone, but to
all other charges that his Majesty shall impose upon his Subjects, See Chap. 2.
Proposit. 1, 2. 3.
upon pretense of Defense of the Kingdom; for there is the same reason of Law
for any other charge that is pretended for Defense, as for this. If his Majesty
by the Common Law may charge his Subjects to find Arms, and other things in
the Commission enjoined, because they are for Defense of the Kingdom; by the
same reason of Law, he may command his People to build Castles, Forts and
Bulwarks, and after to maintain them with Garrisons, Arms, and Victuals, at
their own charges: And by the same reason he may compel his subjects to find
Ships, and furnish them with Men, Ammunition and Victuals, and to find
Soldiers pay, Do not the Army Officers now enforce them to all this without a
Parliament, to support their usurped new Powers and Possessions, and establish
themselves in a most absolute Sovereignty over our three kingdoms?
Coat and Conduct money; provide victuals for Soldiers, and all other things
NECESSARY FOR AN ARMY; these things being as necessary for Defense, as any
thing that can be done in execution of this Commission. And for that exposition
of the Petition of Right and other Statutes therein noted (if it should hold)
does it not overthrow, as well the Petition it self, at all other Laws that
have been made for the subjects benefit against Taxes and other charges, either
(...) or any other Parliaments?

These Positions thus laid down and maintained, Nota.
Do shake the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom (the ancient Birth right of
every Subject) both for the Property of his Goods, and Liberty of his Person:
Nay, they strike at the root of Parliaments: What need his These expostulations
reach to them at Whitehall now, who presume to impose Taxes, Customs, Excises
and make binding laws and Instruments for our whole 3 kingdoms, Nations,
Parliaments, which no King there ever did in like nature, nor their C^^^cels in
any age.
Majesty call Parliaments, to provide for Defense of the Realm, when himself
may compel his subjects to defend it without Parliaments? If these grounds
should hold, what need the subjects grant subsidies in Parliament for Defense
of the Kingdom in time of real danger, if the King for Defense at any times,
when he shall only conceive or pretend danger, may impose Charges upon his
Subjects without their Consent in Parliament?

Upon that which has been said in this and our former Declaration, we doubt
not but all indifferent men will be satisfied, that this Commission of Array,
is full of danger, and inconvenience to the Subjects of England, AND AGAINST
THE FUNDAMENTAL^ LAWS OF THE LAND, both for PROPERTY OF GOODS, AND LIBERTY OF
PERSON, etc. As it is against THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THE REALM, so no statute
makes it good, etc. And the Lords and Commons do upon the whole matter here
conclude, That they are very much aggrieved, that after so many Declarations
and solemn Protestations made by his Majesty to rule by the known Laws of this
Land, his Majesty by advice of his ill Counselors should be persuaded to set
such a Commission on foot, which is so clearly contrary TO THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS
OF THIS LAND, the Rights of Property, and Liberty of the Subject, contrary to
former resolutions of Parliament, and to the Petition of Right.

I am certain, the generality of the Nation are now as much and more agrieved,
that some, who were Parties to this Declaration, and others, who have made as
many or more Declarations and Protestations as his Majesty ever did, to rule by
the known laws of the Land; should since this, far exceed his Majesty in the
like, nay greater, more exorbitances in the Militia, Excises, Taxes,
Impositions, Imprisonments arbitrary extravagant proceedings, capital
executions in new erected Courts of Injustice, and whole volumes of new binding
Ordinances, as they term them, and their ill-sounding Instrument, obliging all
our three Nations, both for the present and all future ages, in See the true
state of the case of the Commonwealth of England, etc. p. 33, 34.
their intention; as diametrically contrary as the Kings Commissions of Array,
to the Fundamental Laws of the Land (four times together so styled and
insisted on, as such, in this one Declaration of both Houses) the Right of
Property of the Subject, contrary to former Resolutions, and the Petition of
Right; yea (which is most abominable) to their own Declarations, Remonstrances,
Votes, Protestations, Vows, Solemn Leagues and Covenants in Parliament, to
their own eternal Infamy, as well as the peoples intolerable oppression and
slavery; who thereupon may justly conclude and protest against them, as both
Houses did in the close of this Declaration against the Array, viz. Exact
Collect: p. 888.
And the Lords and Commons do and shall adhere to their former Votes and
Resolutions, That all those that are Actors in putting of this Commission of
Array (these Instruments, Ordinances new Taxes, Imposts, Excises) in execution,
shall be esteemed disturbers of the Peace of the Kingdom, and of the
Properties and Liberties of the Subject.

10. The tenth Evidence is, A Collection of all public Orders, Ordinances, and
Declarations of Parliament, p. 451, 452, 457, 458.
the Vote and Letter of both Houses of Parliament sent to his Majesty at
Oxford, 9. March 1643. in Answer to his Majesty's, of the third of March* and
wherein there is this passage: We the Lords and Commons assembled in the
Parliament of England, etc. Have resolved, with the concurrent advice and
consent of the Commissioners of Scotland, to represent to your Majesty in all
humility and plainness as follows; That this present Parliament convened,
according to the known and How have others of late (which they style
Parli^ments) been convened?
FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THE KINGDOM (the continuance whereof is established by a
law consented to by your Majesty) is in effect denied to be a Parliament, etc.
And hereupon we think our selves bound to let your Majesty know; That since the
Yet forcibly dissolved by the Army, and some now in Power, against their
Commissions, Oaths, Trusts, Protestations Covenant, and an Act of Parliament
for their continuance; who may do well to peruse this clause. See c. 2.
Proposition 6, 7.
continuance of this Parliament is settled by a Law, (which as all other laws
of your Kingdom, your Majesty is sworn to maintain, as we are sworn to our
Allegiance to your Majesty; those Obligations being reciprocal) we must in
duty, and accordingly are resolved, with our Lives and Fortunes, to Defend and
preserve the ^ust Rights and full Power of this Parliament: To which the Earl
of Essex (then General) by both Houses order, in his Letter to the Earl of
Forth January 30. 1643. adds this Corolary. My Lord, the main^enance of the
Parliament of England, and the Privileges thereof, is that for which we are
resolved to spend our blood, as being THE FOUNDATION WHEREON ALL OUR LAWS AND
LIBERTIES ARE BVILT: Which both the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
in their Declaration 23. March 1643. touching their proceedings upon his
Majesty's Letter, concerning a Treaty of Peace; (wherein this Earls former
letter is recited) thus second: The Parliament of England is the only Basis,
the chief Support and Pillar of our Laws and Liberties, etc. And if
notwithstanding all these Obligations, the King shall at his pleasure dissolve
this Parliament, the Kingdom is not only deprived of the present, but made
incapable of enjoying the benefit of any future Parliament, or Laws, any longer
than shall stand with the will and pleasure of the King: and consequently THE
FUNDAMENTALS OF ALL OUR LAWS AND GOVERNMENT ARE SUBVERTED. Let the
Parliament-purging, securing, sequestring, dissolving Officers Army, and their
Confederates, seriously ponder this, yea let all the whole English Nation and
their Trustees who shall hereafter sit in Parliament, consider and reform it in
the first place, if ever they expect any Freedom, free Parliaments, Peace,
settlement, enjoyment of their Fundamental Laws, Rights, or Liberties for the
future, depending on our Parliaments Freedom, and exemption from all force and
violence on its Members.

The eleventh is, the A Collection etc. p. 504.
Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, 13. Junii 1644. For the Forces raised
in the County of Salop, which begins thus: The Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, taking into their serious considerations, the great Oppressions
under which the Inhabitants of the County of Salop lie, by reason the
insupportable Taxes, etc. and the present condition of the County, by reason of
the great number of Irish Rebels that have invaded it, and joined with Papists
and other ill affected Persons, now in those parts, which threaten the
extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and the subversion of the FUNDAMENTAL
LAWS and GOVERNMENT OF THE KINGDOM. For prevention whereof, etc. A direct
Ordinance in point.

The twelfth is, A Collection etc. p. 877, 878, 879.
a Declaration of the Commons of England, assembled in Parliament, 17. Aprilis
1646. Of their true intentions concerning the ANCIENT and FUNDAMENTAL
GOVERNMENT OF THE KINGDOM, securing the people against ALL ARBITRARY
GOVERNMENT, etc. wherein they complain, That the Enemy being in despair to
accomplish his Designs by War, do mis-represent our intentions in the use we
intend to make of the great successes God has given us, and the happy
opportunity to settle Peace and Truth in the three Kingdoms; to beget a belief
that we now desire to exc^ed, or swerve from our first Aym's and Principles in
the undertaking of this War, and to recede from the Solemn League and Covenant,
and Treaties between the two Kingdoms; and that we would prolong these
uncomfortable troubles, and bleeding distractions, IN And is not all this now
proved a real experimental truth, in some of these Remonstrants, to their
shame?
ORDER TO ALTER THE FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTION AND FRAME OF THIS KINGDOM, to
leave all Government in the Church loose and unsettled, and ourselves to
exercise THE SAME ARBITRARY POWER OVER THE PERSONS and ESTATES OF THE SVBJECTS,
which this present Parliament has thought fit to abolish, by taking away the
Star Chamber, High Commission, and other arbitrary Courts, and the exorbitant
Power of the Council Table, (all which we have seen experimentally verified in
every particular, in the highest degree, notwithstanding this Declaration, by
some in late and present power, and new White Hall Council Tables, exceeding
the old in illegal Taxes, Law-making, and other extravagances:) All which being
seriously considered by us, etc. We do declare, THAT OUR TRUE and REAL
INTENTIONS ARE, and OUR ENDEAVOR SHALL BE, to settle Religion in the purity
thereof, And can most of these Remonstrants in late or present Power, now say
this in truth or realty? and must not they be utterly ashamed, confounded,
before God and man, when they consider how they have dissembled, prevaricated
with God and men herein, in each particular?
TO MAINTAIN THE ANCIENT and FUNDAMENTAL GOVERNMENT OF THIS KINGDOM, TO
PRESERVE THE RIGHTS and LIBERTIES OF THE SUBJECT; to lay hold on the first
opportunity of procuring a safe and well grounded peace in the three Kingdoms,
and to keep a good understanding between the two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, according to the grounds expressed in the Solemn League and Covenant:
And lest these generals should not give a sufficient satisfaction, we have
thought fit, to the end men might no longer be abused in a misbelief of our
intentions, or a misunderstanding of our actions, to make a further enlargement
upon the particulars.

And first, Concerning Church Government, etc. because we cannot consent to the
granting of an Arbitrary and unlicensed Power and Jurisdiction, to near ten
thousand Judicatories to be erected within this Kingdom, and this demanded in
such a way, as is not consistent with the FVNDAMENTAL LAWS and GOVERNMENT OF
THE SAME, etc. Our full resolutions still are, sincerely, really and constantly
to endeavor the Reformation of Religion in the Kingdom of England and
Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, and Government, according to the word of God,
and the example of the best Reformed Churches, and according to the Covenant.
WE ARE And can the new Modellers of our Government over and over, who were
parties to this Declaration, and then Members of the Commons House, say so now?
or read this without blushing and self-abhorrence?
SO FAR FROM ALTERING THE FUNDAMENTAL GOVERNMENT OF THIS KINGDOM BY KING,
LORDS and COMMONS, that we have only desired, that with the consent of the
King, such Power may be settled in the TWO HOUSES, without which we can have no
assurance, but that the like, or greater mischiefs than those which God has
hither to dilivered us from, may break out again, and engage us in a second and
more destructive war; whereby it plainly appears, Our intentions are not to
change the Ancient Frame of Government within this Kingdom, but to obtain the
end of the Primitive Institution of all Government, The safety and weal of the
People; not judging it wise or safe, after so bitter experience of the bloody
consequence of a Is not a superintendent power in the Army over, above and
against the Parliament or People, far more dangerous and likely to introduce
such an arbitrary Government in the Nation, if lest in the General, Officers or
their Councels power?
pretended Power of the Militia in the King, to leave any colorable authority
in the same, for the future attempts of introducing AN ARBITRARY GOVERNMENT
OVER THIS NATION. We do declare, That we will not, nor any by color of any
Authority derived from us, shall interrupt the Did not the imposing a strange
New Engagement, and sundry arbitrary Committes of Indemnity, etc. int^r^upt it
in the highest degree; and the misnamed high Courts of Justice, falsify this
whole clause?
ordinary course of Justice, in the several Courts of Judicatories of this
Kingdom, nor intermeddle in the cases of private interest other where
determinable, unless it be in case of Maladministration of Justice; wherein
we shall see and provide, that Right be done, and punishment inflicted, as
there shall be occasion, ACCORDING TO THE LAWS OF THE KINGDOM.

Lastly, Whereas both Nations have entered into a Solemn* League and Covenant;
we have, and EVER SHALL BE VERY CAREFUL DULY TO OBSERVE THE SAME: that as
nothing has been done, SO NOTHING SHALL BE DONE BY US REPUGNANT TO THE TRUE
MEANING AND INTENTION THEREOF, etc. WHO WILL NOT DEPART FROM THOSE GROUNDS AND
PRINCIPLES, upon which it was framed and founded.

Though the generality of the (afterward,) secured and secluded Majority of
the House of Commons, endeavored constantly to make good this Declaration in
all particulars; yet how desperately the garbled Minority thereof, continuing in
power after their Seclusion, prevaricated, apostatized, and falsified their
Faith herein in every particle, in the highest degree, we cannot but with
greatest grief of heart, and detestation remember, to the subversion, ruin of
our King, Lords, Commons, Kingdom, Parliaments, Fundamental Laws, Government,
and the peoples Liberties, etc. almost beyond all hopes of restitution or
reparation in humane probability, without a miracle from heaven. The Lord give
them grace most seriously to consider repent of, and really, sincerely reform
it now at last, and to make it the principle subject of their prescribed
public Humiliations, Fasts and Lamentations, as God himself prescribes; Isa.
58. 5, 6, 7, 8. Jer. 34. 8. to 22. Ezech. 19. 1. 14. Hos. 10. 3, 4. and not
still to add drunkenness to thirst, lest they bring them to temporal and
eternal condemnation for it in Gods own due time, and engender endless Wars,
Troubles, Taxes, Changes, Confusions in our Kingdoms, as they have hitherto
done and will do till all be restored to their just Rights, Powers, Places,
Possessions and Liberties.

By this full Jury of Parliamentary Authorities, to omit many others, of Exact
Collect. p. 4. 12. 34. 61. 243. 260. 321. 500. 502.
like, or See the humble Remonstrance against the illegal Tax of Ship Money
briefly discussed, p. 2. etc. Englands Birth righ and their Treatises. The
Declaration of Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army under his Command, tendered to
the Parliament, June 14. 1647. concerning the Just and Fundamental Rights and
Liberties of the Kingdom.
inferior nature, and less moment, it is undeniable: That the people of
England, have both ancient Fundamental Rights, Liberties, Franchises, Laws,
and a Fundamental Government, which like the Laws of the Medes and Persians,
neither may nor ought to be altered, or innovated upon any pretense, but
perpetually maintained, defended, with greatest care, vigilance, resolution;
and he who shall deny or oppugn it, deser^^s no refulation by further
arguments, since it is a received Maxim in all Arts, Contra Principia negantem
non est disputandum; but rather demerits a sentence of Condemnation and public
execution at Tyburn, as a Common Enemy, Traitor to our Laws, Liberties, Nation;
it being no less than a transcendent crime, and High Treason by our Laws, for
any person or persons, secretly or openly, to attempt the undermining or
subversion of our fundamental laws, rights, Liberties, Government, especially
by fraud, treachery, force or armed power and violence ( the later part of my
first proposal) which I shall now confirm by these twelve following Presidents
and Evidences, corroborating likewise the former part, That we have such
Fundamental laws, liberties, rights, franchises, and a fundamental Government
too.

In the Walsingham, Stow, Holinshed Speed Grasion, Trussel, Baker in 5 R. 2.
John Stows Survey of London p. 89. to 103 Mr. St. John's Argument at Law, at
Straffords Attainller p. 14.
fifth year of King Richard the second, the vulgar rabble of people and
villains, in Kent, Essex, Sussex, Norfolk, Cambridge-shire and other Counties,
under the Conduct of Wat Tyler, Jack Straw and other Rebels, assembling
together in great multitudes (occasioned at first by the new invented Tax of
Poll-money, granted by Parliament, and the over-rigorous levying thereof, on
the people, by the Kings Officers (though nothing so grievous as our Excises,
Contributions, and new Imposts now, so long exacted without any legal Grant in
true, free and full English Parliaments) resolved by force and violence, to
abrogate the law of Villenage, with all other laws they disliked, formerly
settled; to burn all the Records, kill and behead all the Judges, Justices, and
men of law of all sorts, which they could get into their hands; to burn and
destroy the Inns of Court, (as they did then the new Temple, where the
Apprentices of the law lodged, burning their Monuments and Records of Law there
found) to alter the tenures of lands, to devise new laws of their own, by which
the Subjects should be governed: to change the ancient Hereditary Monarchical
Government of the Realm, and to erect petty elective Tyrannies and Kingdoms to
themselves in every shire: (A project eagerly prosecuted by some Anarchicall
Anabaptists, Jesuits, Levellers, very lately) and though withal they intended
to destroy the King at last, and all the Nobles too, when they had gotten
sufficient power; yet at first to cloak their intentions from the people, they
took an Oath of all they met; Quod Regi and Communibus fidelitatem servarent;
that they should keep Allegiance and Faith to the King and Commons: Yea, Wat
Tyler demanded a Commission from the King, to behead all Lawyers, Escheaters,
and others whatsoever that were learned in the laws, or communicated with the
law by reason of their Office, conceiving in his mind, that this being brought
to pass, all things afterward would be ordered according to his own and the
common peoples fancy. And he made his vaunt, putting his hand to his own lips;
That before scure days came to an end, ALL THE LAWS OF ENGLAND SHOULD PROCEED
FROM HIS MOUTH. (Which some of late times seem to speak not only in words, but
deeds, by their manifold new laws and Edicts, repealing or contradicting our
old) This their resolution and attempt thus to alter and subvert the Laws and
Government, upon full debate in the Parliament of 5. R. 2. n. 30. 31. was
declared to be High Treason against the King and the Law, for which diverse of
the chief Actors in this Treasonable Design, were condemned and executed, as
Traitors, in several places; and the rest enforced to a public submission,
and then pardoned. Let these imitators now remember this old President.

2. In the The Statutes at large, Stow, Holinshed, Speed, Grafton, Baker
Trussel, in 10 and 21 R. 2. and 1 H. 4. M. St. John's Speech concerning the
Shipmony Judges p. 28. to 37. and argument at Law, at Straffords Attainder.
Parliament of 11. R. 2. (as appears by the Parliament Rols and printed
Statutes at large) three Privy Councillors, the Archbishop of York, the Duke
of Ireland, and the Earl of Suffolk, the Bishop of Exeter, the Kings Confessor,
five Knights, six Judges (whereof Sir Robert Tresylian Chief Justice was one)
Blake, of the Kings Council at Law, Vsk, and others, were impeached and
condemned of High Treason, some of them executed as Traitors, the rest
banished, their lands and goods forfeited, and none to endeavor to procure
their pardon, under pain of Felony; for their endeavoring to overthrow a
Commission for the good of the Kingdom, contrary to an Act of Parliament, by
force of Arms, and opinions in Law delivered by these temporizing Judges and
Lawyers, to the King, (through threats and terror at Nottingham Castle)
tending to subvert the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, overthrow the Power,
Privileges and proceedings of Parliament, and betray (not As some of late
years have done.
all the House of Lords, but only) some of the Lords of Parliament. Which
Judgment being afterward reversed in the forced and packed Parliament of 21.
R. 2. was reconfirmed in the Parliament of 1 H. 4. c. 3, 4, 5. and the
Parliament of 21. R. 2. totally repealed, and adnulled for ever, and has so
continued. Read Statut. at large.

3. In the M. St. John's argument at Law, at Straffords Attainder p. 13, 14, 17.
Parliament of 17 R. 2. n. 20. and Pas. 17 R. 2. B. Regis Rot. 16. Sir Thomas
Talbot was accused and found guilty of High Treason, for conspiring the death
of the Dukes of Gloucester, Lancaster, and other Peers, who maintained the
Commission confirmed by Act of Parliament, 10. R. 2 and assembling people in a
warlike manner in the County of Chester, for effecting of it, in destruction of
the estates of the Realm; and the Laws of the Kingdom.

4. In the Hall, Fabian Holinshed, Speed, Grafto^, Stow, Martin, Baker.
29. year of King Henry the sixth, Jack Cade, under a pretense to REFORM, alter
and abrogate some laws, Purveyances and Extortions importable to the Commons
whereupon he was called JOHN AMEND ALL) drew a great multitude of Kentish
people to Black Heath, in a warlike manner, to effect it: In the Parliament of
29 H. 6. c. 1 this was adjudged High Treason in him and his Accomplices, by Act
of Parliament: and the Parliament of 31. H. 6. c. 1. made this memorable Act
against him, and his Imitators in succeding ages; worthy serious perusal and
consideration by all, who tread in his footsteps, and overact him in his
Treasons.

Whereas the most abominable Tyrant, horrible, odious, and errant FALSE
TRAITOR, John Cade, calling himself sometimes Mortimer, sometime Captain of
Kent, (which Name, Fame, Acts and Feats, be to be removed out of the speech and
mind of every faithful Christian man perpetually) falsely and traitorously
purposing and imagining the perpetual destruction of the KINGS PERSON and
FINAL SVBVERSION OF THIS REALM, taking upon him And have not others of late
assumed to themselves more Royal power than he? resolved to be Treason by 21.
^. 3. Rot. Parl. and Cooks 3. Institut p 9.
ROYAL POWER, and gathering to him the Kings People in great number, BY FALSE
SVBTIL, IMAGINED LANGVAGE: and seditiously made a stirring Rebellion, and
insurrection, UNDER COLOVR OF JUSTICE, FOR REFORMATION OF THE LAWS OF THE SAID
KING, robbing, slaying, spoiling a great part of his faithful people: Our said
Sovereign Lord the King, considering the premises, with many other, which were
more odious to remember, by advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and at THE REQUEST OF THE COMMONS, and by Authority aforesaid, Has
ordained and established, that the said John Cade shall be had, named and
declared, A FALSE TRAITOR, to our said Sovereign Lord the King; and that all
his Tyranny, Acts, Feats, and false Opinions, shall be voided, abated,
adnulled, destroyed, and put out of remembrance for ever. And that all
Indictments, and things depending thereof, had and made under the power of
Tyranny, shall likewise be void, adnulled, abated, repealed, and holden for
none: and that the blood of none of them be defiled, nor corrupted, but by the
Authority of the said Parliament clearly declared for ever. And that all
Indictments in time coming, in like case, under power of Tyranny, Rebellion and
stirring had, shall be of no regard or effect, but void in Law: And all the
Petitions To wit by Cade and his Confederates for the alteration of the laws
delivered to the said King in his last Parliament holden at Westminster, the
sixth day of November the 29. of his Reign, against his mind, by him not
agreed, shall be taken and put in Oblivion, out of Remembrance, undone, voided,
adnulled and destroyed for ever, as a thing purposed against God and his
Conscience, and against his Royal estate and pre-eminence, and also
DISHONORABLE and UNREASONABLE.

5. In the Sea Mr. St. John's argument against Strafford, p. 17. Halls Chronicle
and Holinshed.
8 year of King Henry the 8. William Bell, and Thomas Lacy, in the County of
Kent, conspired with Thomas Cheney ( the Hermit of the Queen of Fairies) TO
OVER THROW THE LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF THE REALM: for effecting whereof, they with
200 more met together, and concluded upon a course of raising greater forces in
Kent, and the adjacent Shires; This was judged High Treason, and some of them
executed as Traitors. Moreover, it Cooks 3. Institutes p. 9, 10.
was resolved by all the Judges of England, in the reign of Henry. 8. that an
Insurrection against the Statute of Laborers, or for the inhansing of Salaries
and wages, or against any Statute, or to remove Counselors, or to any other
end pretending Reformation of their own heads, was TREASON, and a levying war
against the King, BECAUSE IT WAS GENERALLY AGAINST THE KINGS LAW, and the
Offenders took upon them THE REFORMATION THEREOF, which Subjects by gathering
of power ought not to do.

6. On Cooks 4. Institutes c. 8. p. 89. to 96.
December 1. in the 21. year of King Henry the 8. Sr. Thomas Moore, Lord
Chancellor of England, with fourteen more Lords of the Privy Council, John
Fitz-James, Chief Justice of England, and Sir Anthony Fitz-Herbert, Herbert,
one of the Judges of the Common Pleas, exhibited sundry Articles of Impeachment
to King Henry the 8. against Cardinal Wolsey: That he had by diverse and many
sundry ways and fashions, committed High Treason, and NOTABLE GRIEVOUS
OFFENSES, by misusing altering and subverting of his Graces Laws, and
otherwise, contrary to his high Honor, Prerogative, Crown, Estate, and Dignity
Royal; to the inestimable great hinderance, diminution and decay of the
universal wealth of this his Graces Realm. The Articles are 43. in number, the
20, 21, 26, 30, 35, 37: 42, 43. contain, his illegal arbitrary practices and
proceedings to the subversion of the due course and order of his Graces Laws,
to the undoing of a great number of his loving people. Whereupon they pray.
Please therefore your mostexcellent Majesty of your excellent goodness toward
the Weal of this your Realm, and subjects of the same, to set such order and
direction upon the said Lord Cardinal, as may be to terrible example of other,
to beware to offend your Grace, and your Laws hereafter: and that he be so
provided for, that he never have any Power, Jurisdiction or authority
hereafter, to trouble, vex or impoverish the commonwealth of this your Realm,
as he has done heretofore, to the great hurt and damage of every man almost,
high and low. His See Speed, Hollinshed, Grafton, Stow, Antiquitates Ecclesiae
Brit. p. 378. and 379. and Godwin in his life.
poisoning himself prevented his legal judgment for these his Practices.

7. The Statute of 3. and 4. Ed. c. 5, 6. enacts, That if any persons, to the
number of twelve or more, being assembled together, shall intend, go about,
practice or put in use with force and arms, unlawfully of their own authority,
TO CHANGE ANY LAWS made for Religion, by authority of Parliament, OR ANY OTHER
LAWS OR STATUTES OF THIS REALM, STANDING IN FORCE, OR ANY OF THEM; and shall
continue together by the space of an hour, being commanded by a Justice of
Peace, Mayor, Sheriff, or other Officer to return: or shall by ringing of any
Bell, sounding of any Trumpet, Drum, Horn, etc. raise such a number of
persons, to the intent to put any the things aforesaid in ure, IT SHALL BE HIGH
TREASON, and the parties executed as Traitors: After this the Statute of 1
Mariaec. Mr. St. John's Argument against Strafford p. 14, 15.
12. Enacted, That if twelve or more in manner aforesaid, shall endeavor by
force to alter any of the Laws or Statutes of the Kingdom; the offenders shall
from the time therein limited, be ad^udged ONLY AS FELONS, whereas it was
Treason before: but this Act continuing but till the next Parliament, and then
expiring, the offense remains Treason, as formerly.

8. In the Cooks 3 Instit. c. 1. p. 9, 10. Mr. St. John's Argument at law
against Strafford, p, 15, 16.
39. year of Queen Elizabeth, diverse in the County of Oxford consulted together
to go from house to house in that County, and from thence to London and other
parts, to excite them to take arms for the throwing down of enclosures
throughout the Realm; nothing more was prosecuted, nor assemblies made; yet in
Easter Term 39. Elizabeth, it was resolved by all the Judges of England (who
met about the Case) that this was High Treason, and a levying war against the
Queen, because it was to throw down all enclosures throughout the Kingdom, to
which they could pretend no right: and that the end of it was, TO OVER THROW
THE LAWS AND STATUTES for enclosures. Whereupon BRADSHAW and BURTON (two of the
principal Offenders) were condemned and executed at Ainstow Hill in
Oxfordshire, where they intended their first meeting.

9. To come nearer to our present times and case: In the last Parliament of
King Charles, Anno 1640. See the Journals of both Houses, and Act for his
Attainder. Mr. Pyms Declaration upon the whole matter of the Charge of High
Treason, against him, April 12. 1641. Mr. St. John's argument at law, at his
Attainder, and Diurnal Occurrences.
The whole House of Commons impeached Thomas Earl of Strafford, Lord Deputy of
Ireland, of High Treason; amongst other Articles, for this crime especially
(wherein all the other centred) That he has TREASONABLY ENDEAVORED by his
Words, Actions and Counsels, TO SUBVERT THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS and GOVERNMENT OF
ENGLAND and IRELAND, and introduce an arbitrary and Tyrannical Government. This
the whole Parliament declared and adjudged to be High Treason, in and by their
Votes, and a special Act of Parliament for his Attainder; for which he was
condemned, and soon after executed on Tower Hill, as a Traitor to the King and
Kingdom, May 22. 1641.

10. The whole House of Commons the same Parliament, impeached See the Commons
and Lords Journals, his printed Impeachment, Mr. Pyms Speech thereat,
Canterburies Doom p. 25, 26, 27, 38, 40.
William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, of HIGH TREASON; in these very terms,
February 6, 1640.

First, That he has traitorously endeavored to subvert the Fundamental Laws
and Government of this Kingdom of England, and instead thereof, to introduce
an arbitrary and tyrannical Government against Law: And he to that end has
wickedly and TRAYTEROVSLY advised his Majesty, See Chap. 2. Proposition 1.
that he Do not others now do it, who impeached and condemnedhim, in an higher
degree then he?
might at his own will and pleasure, levy and take money of his Subjects without
THEIR CONSENT IN PARLIAMENT; and this he affirmed was warrantable by the law of
God.

Secondly, He has for the better accomplishment of that his Traitorous
Design, advised and procured Sermons and other Discourses, to be preached,
printed and published; in which the Is it not so in the New Instrument Article
1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 12, 13, 16, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30* 31, 32,
33, 34, 37, 38, 39, 40. 42. of our New Government, and those that compiled and
prescribed it to the 3 kingdoms.
Authority of Parliaments, and the force of the Laws of this Kingdom have been
denied, and absolute and unlimitted Power over the Persons and Estates of his
Majesty's Subjects maintained and defended, not only in the King, but in
himself and other Bishops, against the Law.

Thirdly, He has by Letters, Messages, Threats and Promises, and by diverse
other ways to Judges, and other Ministers of Justice, interrupted, perverted,
and at other times by means aforesaid has endeavored to interrupt and pervert
the course of Justice in his Majesty's Courts at Westminster and other Courts,
TO THE SUBVERSION OF THE LAWS OF THIS KINGDOM, whereby sundry of his Majesty's
Subjects have been stopped in their just suits, deprived of their lawful Rights,
and subjected to his Tyrannical will, to their ruin and destruction.

Fourthly, That he has traitorously endeavored to corrupt the other Courts of
Justice, by advising and procuring his Majesty to sell places of Judicature and
other Offices, CONTRARY TO THE LAWS and CUSTOMS in that behalf.

Fifthly, That he has TRAITOROUSLY caused a a Book of Canons to be compiled
and published, without any lawful warrant and Authority in that behalf; in
which pretended Canons Are there not more such matters contained in the new
Instrument of Government than in these?
many matters are contained, contrary to the Kings Prerogative, to the
Fundamental Laws and Statutes of this Realm, to the Rights of Parliament, to
the Property and Liberty of the Subject, and matters tending Sedition, and of
dangerous consequence, and to the establishing of a vast, unlawful
presumptuous power in himself and his successors, etc.

Seventhly, That he has traitorously endeavored to alter and subvert Gods
true Religion BY LAW ESTABLISHED; and instead thereof to set up Popish Religion
and Idolatry: And to that end has declared, and maintained in Speeches and
printed Books, diverse Popish Doctrines and Opinions, contrary to the Articles
of Religion ESTABLISHED BY LAW. He has urged and enjoined diverse Popish and
Superstitious Ceremonies WITHOUT ANY WARRANT OF LAW; and has cruelly
persecuted those who have opposed the same, by corporal punishment, and
imprisonments; and most unjustly vexed others, who refused to conform thereunto
by Ecclesiastical Censures, Excommunication, Suspension, Have not arbitrary
Committees in most places done the like, or worse, in many cases?
Deprivation, and Degradation, CONTRARY TO THE LAWS of this kingdom.

Thirteenth, He did by his own authority and power contrary Have not others
done the like in an higher degree?
to Law, procure sundry of his Majesty's Subjects, and enforced the Clergy of
this Kingdom to contribute toward the maintenance of the War against the
Scots.

That to preserve himself from being questioned, for these and other his
Traitorous courses, he has labored to subvert the Rights of Parliament, and
the ancient course of Parliamentary proceedings, (and have not the Army
Officers and others actually done it since upon the same account?) and by false
and malicious slanders to incense his Majesty against Parliaments.

All which being proved against him at his Trial, were after solemn Argument
by Mr. Samuel Brown, in behalf of the Commons House, proved; and soon after
adjudged, to be High Treason at the Common Law, by both Houses of Parliament;
and so declared in the Ordinance for his Attainder: for which he was condemned
and beheaded as a Traitor, against the King, Law and Kingdom, on Tower Hill,
January 10. 1644.

11. In the Sea the Commons and Lords Journals, Diurnal Occurrences, p. 15, 16
19, 37, 191 to 264. and Mr. St John's Speech at a Conference of both Houses of
Parliament concerning ship money and these Judges. Togegether with the Speeches
of Mr Hide, Mr. Waller, M. Pe^rpoint, M Denzill Hollis at their Impeachments,
July 6. 1641. aggravating their offenses, in Diurnal Occurrences and Speeches,
p. 237 to 264.
same Parliament, December 21. Jan. 14. Febr. 11. 1640. and July 6. 1641. Sir
John Finch, then Lord Keeper, Chief Justice Bramston, Judge Berkley, Judge
Crawly, Chief Baron Davenport, Baron Weston, and Baron Trevour, were accused
and impeached by the House of Commons, by several Articles transmitted to the
Lords, OF HIGH TREASON, for that they had Traitorously and wickedly
endeavored, to subvert the Fundamental Laws and established Government of the
Realm of ENGLAND, and instead thereof to introd^ce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government against Law; which they had declared, by traitorous and wicked
words, opinions, judgments; and more especially in this their extrajudiciall
opinion, subscribed by them in the case of Ship money, viz. We are of opinion,
that when the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is concerned, and the
whole Kingdom in danger; your Majesty may by Writ, under the Great Seal of
England (without consent in Parliament) command all your Subjects of this your
Kingdom, at their charge to provide and furnish such a number of Ships, with
Men, Victual and Ammunition, and for such time as your Majesty shall think fit
for the Defense and safeguard of the Kingdom, from such danger and peril. And
we are of Opinion, that in such case, your Majesty is the Now others presume to
do it without writ of consulting with the judges who condemned it in them. See
c. 2 Proposition 1.
sole Judge both of the danger, and when, and how, the sum is to be prevented,
and avoided And likewise for arguing and giving judgment accordingly, in Mr.
John Hampdens case, in the Exchequer Chamber, in the point of Ship money, in
April 1638: which said opinions, are Destructive to the Fundamental Laws of the
Realm, Have not others been sole Judges of it, and other pretended dangers
since?
the Subjects Right of Property, and contrary to former Resolutions in
Parliament, and the Petition of Right; as the words of their several
Impeachments run. Sir John Fin^h fled the Realm, to preserve his head on his
shoulders; some others of them died through fear, to prevent the danger, soon
after their Impeachments, and the rest who were less peccant, were put to
Fines.

12. Mr. John Pym, in his Declaration upon the whole matter of the charge of
High Treason against Thomas Earl of Strafford, April 12. 1641. before a
Committee of both Houses of Parliament in Westminster Hall; printed and
published by Order of the House of Commons; proves his endeavor to subvert the
Fundamental Laws of England, and to introduce an Arbitrary Power; to be High
Treason, and an offense very heinous in the nature, and mischievous in the
effects thereof; which (says he) will best appear, if it be examined by that
universal and supreme Law, Salu^ Populi: the element of all Laws, out of which
they are derived: the end of all Laws, to which they are designed, and in which
they are perfected.

1. It is an offense comprehending all other Offenses. Here you shall find
several Treasons, Murders, Rapines, Oppressions, Perjuries. There is in this
Crime, a Seminary of all evils, hurtful to a State; and if you consider the
Reasons of it, it must needs be so. The Law, is that which puts a difference
betwixt good and evil; betwixt just and unjust. If you take away the law, all
things will fall into confusion; every man will become a law to himself, Nota.
which in the depraved condition of humane nature, must needs produce many
great enormities; And are they not so now?
Lust will become a Law; and Envy will become a law; Covetousness and Ambition
will become laws; and what Dictates, what decisions such laws will produce, may
easily be discerned in the late Government of Ireland (and England too since
this.) The law has a power to prevent, to restrain, to repair evils: without
this all kinds of mischiefs and distempers will break in upon a State. It is
the Law that intitles the King to the Allegiance and Service of his people: it
intitles the People to the Protection and Justice of the King, etc. The Law is
the Boundary, the measure betwixt the Kings Prerogative, and the Peoples
Liberties; whiles these move in their Orb, they are a support and security to
one another; but if these Bounds be so removed, that they enter into
contestation and conflict, one of these great mischiefs must needs ensue: if
the Prerogative of the King overwhelm the Liberty of the people, it will be
turned into Tyranny; If Liberty undermine the Prerogative, it will turn into
Anarchy. The Law is the safeguard, the custody of all private interests: your
Honors, your Lives, your Liberties, and your estates, are all in the keeping
of the Law: without this, every man has a like Right to any thing: and this is
the condition into which the Irish were brought by the Earl of Strafford; (and
the English by others who condemned him) And the reason which he gave for it,
has more mischief than the thing it self: THEY ARE A CONQUERED NATION, (let
those who now say the same of England, as well as Scotland and Ireland,
consider and observe what follows) There cannot be a word more pregnant and
fruitful IN TREASON, than that word is. There are few Nations in the world,
that have not been conquered, and no doubt but the conqueror may give And did
not some at White Hall do so of late, and now too witness their volumes of new
Declarations, Edicts, Ordinances there made.
what Laws he please to those that are conquered. But if the succeeding Parts
and Agreements do not limit and restrain that right, what people can be secure?
England has been conquered, and Wales has been conquered, and by this reason
will be in little better case than Ireland. If the King by the Right of a
Conqueror give Laws to his people, shall not the people by the same reason be
restored to the Right of the conquered, to recover their Liberty if they can?
What can be more hurtful, more pernicious, than such Propositions as these?

2. It is dangerous to the Kings Person: and dangerous to his Crown: it is apt
to cherish ambition, usurpation, and oppression in great men: and to beget
sedition, discontent in the people, and both these have been, and in reason
must ever be great causes of trouble and alterations to Prince and State. If
the Histories of those Eastern Countries be perused, where Princes order their
affairs, according to the Have not others taken up such Principles in their
practices, proceedings even against Kings Kingdoms, Parliament, Peers, as well
as private persons?
mischievous Principles of the Earl of Strafford, Loose and absolved from all
Rules of Government, they will be found to be frequent in combustions, full of
Massacres, and the tragical end of Princes. If any man shall look into our own
Stories, in the times when the Laws were most neglected, he shall find them
full of Commotions, of Civil distempers, whereby the Kings, Nota.
that then reigned, were always kept in want and disresse, the people consumed
with CIVIL WARS: and by such wicked Counsels as these, some of our Princes have
been brought to such miserable ends, As Note this, all the whole Commons-House
opinion then.
no honest heart can remember without horror and earnest Prayer, that it may
never be so again.

3. As it is dangerous to the Kings Person and Crown, so it is in other
respects very prejudicial to his Majesty, in honor, profit and greatness
(which he there proves at large, as you may there read at leisure) and yet
these are the Guildings and Paintings, that are put upon such Counsels: These
are for your Honor, for your Service.

4. It is inconsistent with the Peace, the Wealth, the Prosperity of a Nation.
It is destructive to Justice, the mother of Peace: to Industry, the spring of
Wealth; to Valor, which is the active virtue whereby the Prosperity of a
Nation can only be procured, confirmed, and enlarged. It is not only apt to
take away Peace, and so entangle the Nation with Wars, but does corrupt Peace,
and pours such a Malignity into it, as produces the effects of War: both to
the Is not this an experimental truth now?
NOBILITY and others, having as little security of THEIR PERSONS OR ESTATES, in
this peaceable time, as if the Kingdom had been under the fury and rage of
War. And as for industry and valor, who will take pains for that, which when
he has gotten is not his own? or who fights for that wherein he has no other
interest, but such as is subject to the will of another? etc. Shall it be
Treason to embase the Kings Coin; though but a piece of twelve pence or six
pence, and must it not needs be the effect of greater Treason to And were they
ever so base, cowardly, slavish as now?
embase the spirits of his Subjects, and to set a stamp and character of
Servitude upon them, whereby they shall be disabled to do any thing for the
service of the King or Commonwealth?

5. In times of sudden danger, by the Invasion of an Enemy, it will disable his
Majesty to preserve himself, and his Subjects from that danger: When war
threatens a Kingdom, by the coming of a Foreign Enemy, it is no time then to
discontent the people, to make them weary of the PRESENT GOVERNMENT, and more
inclinable to a change. The supplies which are ^o come in this way, will be
unready, uncertain; there can be no assurance of them, no dependence upon them,
either for time or proportion. And if some money be gotten in such a way, the
distractions, the divisions distemper^, which this course is apt to produce,
will be more prejudicial to the public safety, than the supply can be
advantageous to it.

6. This crime is contrary to the Pact and Covenant between the King and his
People; by mutual agreement and stipulation, confirmed by OATH on both sides.

7. It is an Offense that is contrary to the ends of Government.

1. To prevent Oppressions; to Was ever their power, violence so unlimited,
unbounded in all kinds as now, against Kings, kingdoms, Parliaments, Peers,
People?
limit and restrain the excessive power and violence of great men; to open
passages of Justice with indifferency toward all.

2. To preserve men in their Estates, to secure them in their Lives and
Liberties.

3. That Virtue should be cherished, and Vice suppressed; but where Laws are
subverted, and Arbitrary, and unlimited power set up; a way is open not only
for the security, (as now of all heresies) but for the advancement and
encouragement of evi^l, Such men as are Is it not most true of late and still?
^ptest for the execution and maintenance of this power, are only capable of
preferment; and others, who will not be Instruments of any unjust Commands, who
make Conscience to do any thing against the law of the Kingdom, and liberties
of the Subject, are not only not passable for employment; but SVBJECT TO MVCH
JEALOVSIE and DANGER. ( Is not this their condition of late and present times,
even in Parliament Members themselves, as well as others, secured, secluded,
kept close prisoners perforce, for making Conscience of doing nothing against
the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and their Oaths and Covenants too? and
refusing to comply with usurping Innovators in all their self-seeking
extravagancies and Treasons? expertus loquor.)

4. That all accidents and events, all Counsels and Designs should be improved
for the public good. But this arbitrary power is apt to dispose all to the
maintenance of it self. ( And is it not so now?)

8. The Treasons of subversion of the laws, violation of Liberties can never be
good or justifiable by any circumstance or occasion, being in their own nature,
how specious or good soever they be pretended. He alleges it was a time of
GREAT NECESSITY and DANGER, Note
when such Counsels were necessary, FOR THE PRESERVATION OF THE STATE; ( the
Plea since, and now used by others, who condemned him;) If there were any
NECESSITY IT WAS OF HIS OWN MAKING. He by his evil Counsel had brought the
King ( as others the Kingdom since) into a Necessity; and by no rules of
Justice can be allowed to gain this advantage to his Justification; which is A
GREAT PART OF HIS OFFENSE.

9. As this is Treason in the nature of it, so it does exceed all other
Treasons in this; that in the Design and endeavor of the Author, it was to
be A CONSTANT and PERMANENT TREASON; a standing perpetual Treason; which would
have been in continual Act, not determined within one time or age, but
transmitted to Posterity, even from Generation to Generation. And are not See
Article 2, 2, 3, ^, 5, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
31, 32, 33, 39 and p. 45, 46. of the Government of the Commonwealth of England,
etc.
others Treasons of late times such, proclaimed such, in and by their own
Printed papers; and therein exceeding Straffords?

10. As it is odious in the nature of it, so it is odious in the Judgment and
estimation of the Law. TO Does not the Declaration of 17 March 1648 and the
Instrument of the new Government do it, in the highest degree*
ALTER THE SETTLED FRAME and CONSTITUTION OF GOVERNMENT, IS TREASON IN ANY
ESTATE. (Let those consider it who are guilty of it in the highest degree,
beyond Strafford, Canterbury, or the Ship mony-Judges in our own State.) The
Laws whereby all parts of a Kingdom are preserved, should be very vain and
defective, if they had not a power to secure and preserve themselves.

The Forfeitures inflicted for Treason by our Law, are of Life, Honor, and
Estate, even all that can be forfeited: and this Prisoner, although he should
And others as well as he, of far inferior place and estate.
pay all these Forfeitures, will still be a Debtor to the Commonwealth.
Nothing can be more equal, than that he should perish by the Justice of the
Law, which he would have subverted: neither will this be a New way of blood.
There are marks enough to trace this Law to the very Original of this Kingdom.
And if it has not been put in execution, as he alleges, this two hundred and
forty years; it was not for want of LAW, but that all that time had not bred a
man But have not our times bred men much bolder than he, since this speech was
made, and he executed?
bold enough to commit such Crimes as these: which is a circumstance much
aggravating his Offense, and making him no less liable to punishment: he is
THE Since, he has many followers.
ONLY MAN, that in so long a time has ventured UPON SUCH A TREASON AS THIS.

Thus far Mr. John Pym; in the Name and by the Order and Authority of the whole
Commons House in Parliament: which I wish all those, who by their Words,
Actions Counsels (and printed Publications too) have traitorously endeavored
to subvert the Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Government, Parliaments of England
and Ireland, and to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government against
law, as much as ever Strafford did, yea, far out stripped him therein (even
since his execution) in all particulars, for which he was beheaded; would now
seriously lay to heart, and speedily reform, lest they equal or exceed him in
conclusion in capital punishments for the same, or endless Hellish Torments.

13. The next Authority I shall produce in point, is, The Speech and
Declaration of Master Oliver St. John, at a Conference of both Houses of
Parliament, concerning SHIPMONEY, upon Judge Finches Impeachment of High
Treason, January 14. 1640. printed by the Commons Order, London, 1641. wherein
he thus declares the sense of the Commons, p. 12. etc.

That by the Judges opinions ( p. 36.
forecited) concerning Shipmony, THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THE REALM CONCERNING
OUR PROPERTIES and OUR PERSONS ARE SHAKEN: whose Treasonable Offense herein, he
thus aggravates, page 20. etc. The Judges, as is declared in the Parliament of
11 R. 2. are the Executors of the Statutes, and of the Judgments and Ordinances
of Parliament. They have made themselves the Have none done so since them*
EXECUTIONERS OF THEM; they have endeavored the DESTRUCTION OF THE
FUNDAMENTALS OF OUR LAWS and LIBERTIES. Holland in the Low Countries, lies
under the Sea: the superfices of the Land, is lower than the superficies of the
Sea. See Chap. 2. Proposition. 1.
It is Capital therefore for any man to cut the Banks, because they defend the
Country: Besides our own, even Foreign Authors, as Comines, observes, That
the Statute DE TALLAGIO, and the other Old Laws, are the Sea Walls and Banks,
which keep the Commons from the inundation of the Prerogative.

These Have not other Pioneers and Judasses done the like*
Pioners have not only undermined these banks, but have levelled them even
with the ground. If one that was known to be Hostis Patriae, had done this,
though the Damage be the same, yet the Guilt is less; but the Conservatores
Riparum, the Overseers entrusted with the Defense of these Banks, for them to
destroy them; the breach of Trust aggravates, nay, alters the nature of the
offense: Breach of Trust, though in a private Person, and in the least things,
is odious amongst all men: much more in a public Person, in things of great
and public concernment, because This is grown a mere Paradon of late years, in
Judges, soldiers and others.
GREAT TRUST BINDS THE PARTY TRUSTED TO GREATEST CARE AND FIDELITY.

It is TREASON in the Constable of Dover Castle to deliver the Keys to the
known enemies of the Kingdom: Whereas if the Housekeeper of a private person,
deliver possession to his Adversary, it is a crime scarce punishable by Law.
The What are they now of late times of public Changes?
Judges under his Majesty, are the Persons trusted with the Laws, and in them
with the Lives, Liberties and Estates of the whole Kingdom. This Trust of all
we have, is primarily from his Majesty, and See 27 H. 8. c. 24. 26. Magna
Charta c. 12. 29. 52. H. 3. c. 1, 3, 5, 9, 20. 3 E. 1. c. 44, 45, 46. 13 E. 1.
c. 10, 12, 30, 31, 35, 39, 44, 45. 25 E. 1. c. 1, 2. 27 E. 1. c. 2, 3. 34 E. 1.
c. 6. 12 E 2. c. 6. 2 E. 3. c. 3. 14 E 3. c. 10. 16. Rastal Justices.
from him delegated to the Judges. His Majesty at his Coronation, is bound by
his Oath TO EXECUTE JUSTICE TO HIS PEOPLE ACCORDING TO THE LAWS; thereby to
assure the People of the faithful performance of his GREAT TRUST: His Majesty
again, as he trusts the Judges with the performance of this part of his Oath;
so does he likewise exact another Oath of them, for their due execution of
Justice to the people, according to the Laws: hereby the Judges stand entrusted
with this part of his Majesty's Oath. If therefore the Judges shall do
wittingly against the Law, they do not only break their own Oaths, and
therein the Common Faith and Trust of the whole Kingdom; but do as much as in
them lies, asperse and blemish the sacred Person of his Majesty, with the
odious and hateful sin of Was it ever so frequent a sin as now in all sorts of
late Judges, Officers, Subjects*
Perjury.

My Lords, the heinousness of this offense is most legible in the Do none
deserve as severe now?
severe punishment, which former Ages have inflicted upon those Judges, who
have broken any part of their Oaths wittingly, though in things not so
dangerous to the Subject, as in the case in question.

See Cooks 3. Institutes p. 146, 147, and page 133. Holinshed, page 284, 285.
Speeds History page 651. Stow, Walsingham, Daniel in 18 E. 1.
Sir Thomas Wayland, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas 17. E. 1. was attainted
of Felony for taking Bribes, and his Lands and Goods forfeited, as appears in
the Pleas of Parliament, 18 E. 1. and he was banished the Kingdom, as unworthy
to live in the State, against which he had so much offended.

Sir See Cooks 3. Instit. p. 145.
William Thorpe Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in Edward the thirds time,
having of five persons received five several Bribes, which in all amounted to
one hundred pounds, was for this alone, adjudged to be hanged, and all his
Goods and Lands forfeited: The reason of the Judgment is entered in the Roll,
in these words. Quia praedictus Willielmus Have none of this name, or of this
Function since done as bad or worse in an higher degree?
Thorp qui Sacramentum Domini Regis erga populum suum habuit ad custodiendum,
fregit malitiose, falso and rebelliter, quantum in ipso fuit. There is a
notable Declaration in that Judgment, that this judgment was not to be drawn
into example, against any other Officers, who should break their Oaths, but
only against those, qui praedictum Sacramentum fecerunt, and fregerunt, and
Let Custodes Legum and Libertatum Angliae and those now called Judges, remember
it*
habent Leges Angliae ad custodiendum: That is, only to the Judges Oaths, who
have the Laws entrusted unto them. This Judgment was given 24 E. 3. The next
year in Parliament 25 E. 3. Numb. 10. it was debated in Parliament, whether
this Judgment was legal? Et nullo contradicente, it was declared, TO BE JUST
AND ACCORDING TO THE LAW: and the Let the Reporter and others now consider it
same Judgment may be given in time to come upon the like occasion. This case
is in point, That it is death for any JVDGE wittingly to break his OATH in any
part of it. This OATH of THORP is entered in the Roll, and the same Verbatim
with the Judges OATH in 18 Edw. 3. and is the same which the Judges now take.
(And let those who have taken the same Oath, with the 1 Eliz. c. 1* 3 Jac. c.
4. 7 Jac. c. 6.
OATHS OF SUPREMACY and ALLEGIANCE too, remember and apply this PRESIDENT,
lest others do it for them.)

Your Lordships will give me leave to observe the differences between that and
the case in question.

1. That of Thorp, was only a selling of the Law by Retaile, to these five
persons; for he had five several Bribes, of these five persons; the Passage of
the Law to the rest of the Subjects, for ought appears, was free and open. But
these Opinions are a conveyance of the Law by whole sale, and that not to, but
from the Subject.

2. In that of Thorp, as to those five persons, it was not an absolute denial
of Justice, it was not a damming up, but a straitning only of the Chanel. For
whereas, the Judges ought Judicium reddere, that is, the Laws being THE
BIRTHRIGHT and INHERITANCE OF THE SUBJECT, the Judge when the parties in suit
demand Judgment, should re-dare, freely restore the Right unto them; now he
does not dare, but vendere, with hazard only of perverting Justice; for the
party that buys the Judgment, may have a good and honest cause. But these
Opinions, besides that, they have cost the Subjects very dear, dearer than any;
nay, I think, I may truly say, than all the unjust Judgments that ever have
been given in this Realm, witness the many hundred thousand pounds, which
under color of them, have been levied upon the Subjects, amounting to This is
nothing incomparison to the late Taxes, Ship money, Excises imposed on the
subjects, without a Parliament, amounting to above 20 times as much as the
Kings Ship money, and more frequent, uncessant, and endless then it.
seven hundred thousand pounds and upwards, that have been paid unto the
Treasurers of the Navy (in sundry years) besides what the Subjects have been
forced to pay Sheriffs, Sheriffs Bailiff^ (and now an hundred times more to
Troopers, and Soldiers, who forcibly levy their unlawful Contributions and
Excises, though adjudged HIGH TREASON in Straffords case, and proved such by
Master St. John) and otherwise; which altogether as is conceived, amounts not
to less than a Million (in five years space, whereas we pay above two Millions
in Taxes, Imposts, Excises, every year) besides the infinite vexations of the
Subject, by suits in Law, binding them over, and attendance at the Council
Table, taking them from their necessary employments, in making Sesses and
Collections, and imprisonment of their persons (all now trebled to what then.)
I say, Besides what is past, to make our miseries complete, they have as much
as in them is, MADE THEM ENDLESS (as others since have done, by uncessant
endless Taxes and Excises:) for by these opinions, they have put upon
themselves and their successors, An impossibility of ever doing us right again,
and an incapacity upon us of demanding it so long as they continue. (As the
Compilers of the late Instrument, with 42 Strings, entitled, The Government of
the Common Wealth of England, etc. Article 1, 2, 3, 9, 10, 12, 22, 24, 25, 27,
28, 29, 31, 32, 36, 37, 38, 39. have done, as far as they, and much beyond
them.)

In that sore famine in the land of Egypt, when the inhabitants were reduced to
the next door to death; (for there they say, why should we die?) for bread,
first they give their money, next their Flocks and Cattle; last of all, their
Persons and Lands for Bread, all became Pharoahs; but by this, Lex Regia, there
is a transaction made, not only of our Persons, but of our bread likewise,
wherewith our persons should be sustained; that was for bread, this of our
bread. For since these Opinions, if we have any thing at all, we are Are we now
beholding to it for any thing against the only new Law of the longest sword?
Which takes, imposes what when, and how much it pleases, without account, or
dispute, from all sorts and degrees of Persons; and that by those who were
commissioned, trusted, engaged by Oaths, Protestations, Vows, League and
Covenant to preserve our laws and properties.
not at all beholding TO THE LAW FOR IT, but are wholly cast UPON THE MERCY and
GOODNESS OF THE KING.

Again, there the Egyptians themselves, sold themselves, and all they had to
the King: if ours had been so done; if it had been so done by our own free
consent in PARLIAMENT, we had the less cause to complain. But it was done
against our Wills, and by those who were entrusted, and that UPON OATH, with the
preservation of these things for us. The Laws are our Forts and Bulwarks of
defense: If the Captain of a Castle, only out of fear and cowardice, and not
for any compliance with the enemy, surrender it, this is Treason, as was
adjudged in Parliament, 1 R. 2. in the two Cases of Gomines and Weston, and in
the Case of the Lord Gray, for surrendering Barwick Castle to the Scots, in
Edward the thirds time, though good Defense had been made by him, and that he
had lost his eldest Son in maintenance of the Seige: and yet the loss of a
CASTLE loses not the Kingdom, only the place and adjacent parts, with trouble
to the whole. But by these Opinions, there is a Surrender made of all our
Legal Defense of Property: that which has been Preached, is now judged; that
there is no Meum and Tuum, Is there any between the late and present powers and
them, further or longer than they please*
between the KING AND PEOPLE; besides that which concerns our Persons.

The LAW is the TEMPLE, the Sanctuary, whether Subjects ought to run for
SHELTER and REFVGE: Hereby it is become Templum sine Numine, as as was the
Temple built by the Roman Emperor, who after he had built it, put no Gods into
it: We have the Letter of the Law still, but not the sense: We have the Fabric
of the TEMPLE still, but the Are they not so now?
Dii Tutelares are gone. But this is not all the case, that is, That the law
now cease to aid and defend us in our RIGHTS, for then possession alone were
a good Title, if there were no Law to take it away: Occupanti concederetur, and
melior esset Possidentis conditio: But this, though too bad, is not the worst:
for besides that which is Privative in these Opinions, there is somewhat
Positive. For now the Law does not only not defend us, but the Law, it self,
(by temporizing Judges and Lawyers) is made the Instrument of taking all away.
For whenever It is not so now, when others who condemned and beheaded him for
a Tyrant, say, pretenda^d act it over and over.
his Majesty or his Successors, shall be pleased to say, that the good and
safety of the Kingdom is concerned, and that the whole kingdom is in danger,
the when, and how the same is to be prevented, makes our persons and all we
have liable to bare Will and Pleasure. By this means, the Sanctuary is turned
into a Shambles; the Forts are not slighted, that so they might neither do us
good or hurt; Nota.
But they are held against us by those who ought to have held them for us, and
the mouth of our own Canon is turned upon our own selves: (And that by our own
Military Officers, Soldiers and others since, as well as the Ship money Judges
then.) Thus far Master Oliver St. John (by the Commons Order) whose words I
thought fit thus to transcribe at large, because not only most pertinent, but
seasonable for the present times; wherein as in a Looking Glass, some
pretended Judges and Grandees, of these present and late p^st times, may behold
their own faces and deformities; and the whole Nation their sad condition under
them. In the residue of that Printed Speech, he compares the Treason of the
Ship Money Judges, and of Sir Robert Tresylium and his Accomplices in the 11 of
R. 2. (condemned, executed for Traitors by Judgment in Parliament, for
endeavoring to subvert the Laws and Statutes of the Realm by their illegal
Opinions, then delivered to King Richard at Nottingham Castle, not out of
conspiracy, but for fear of death, and corporal Torments, wherewith they were
menaced:) whose offense he makes transcendent to theirs in Worth consideration
of those of the long robe.
six particulars, as those who please may there read at leisure, being over
large to transcribe.

I could here inform you, that the Fundamental Laws of our Nation, are the
same in the Body Politic of the Realm, as the Arteries, Nerves, Veins, are
in, and to the natural Body, the Bark to the Tree; the Foundation to the House:
and therefore the cutting of them a sunder, or their Subversion, must of
necessity, kill, destroy, disjoyn and ruin the whole Realm at once: Wherefore
it must be Treason in the highest degree. But I shall only subjoyn here some
material Passages, in Master St. John's Argument at Law, concerning the
Attainder of High Treason of Thomas Earl of Strafford, before a Committee of
both Houses of Parliament in Westminster Hall, April 29. 1641. soon after
Printed and published by Order of the Commons House: Wherein p. 8. he lays down
this Position; recited again, p. 64.

That ( Straffords) endeavoring, To subvert the Fundamental Laws and
Government of England and Ireland, and instead therefore to introduce a
Tyrannical Government against Law, is Treason by the Common Law. That Treasons
at the Common Law are not taken away by the statutes of 25. E. 3. 1 H. 4. c.
10. 1 Mar. c. 1. nor any of them.

The Authorities, Judgments, in and out of Parliament, which he cites to prove
it, have been already mentioned, some others he omitted; I shall therefore but
transcribe his Reasons to evince it to be Treason, superadded to those alleged
by him against the Ship money Judges.

Page 12. It is a War against the King (Let our Military Officers and Soldiers
consider it) when intended. For alteration of the Laws or Government in any
part of them. This is a levying War against the King (and so Treason within the
Statute of 25. E. 3.)

1. Because the King does maintain and protect the Laws in every part of them.

2. Because they are the Kings Laws: He is the Fountain from whence in their
several Channels, they are derived to the Subject. Whence all our indictments
run thus: Trespasses laid to be done, Contra pacem Domini Regis, etc. against
the Kings peace for exorbitant offenses; though not intended against the Kings
Person; against the King, his Crown and Dignity.

Page 64. In this I shall not labor at all to prove, That the endeavoring by
words, Counsels and actions, To subvert the Fundamental Laws and Government of
the Kingdom, is Treason at the Common Law. If there be any Common Law Treasons
at all left And how mamy are guilty of this Treason See Hos. 3 4, 5. cap. 10.
3, 4. cap. 1. 4. cap. 1. 4. Zech. 9. v. 5. Hab. 1. 10, 14, 15. Mic. 4. 9, 10.
Amos 1. 13, 14, 15. Lam. 5. 16. Ezech. 19. 1. 14. Isay 17. 3. c. 7. 16. Jer.
17. 25. 27. cap. 18. 7, 8. cap. 22. 3. to 13. cap. 25. 8 to 38. cap. 51. 20.
Proverb 28. 2. Ezech. 17. 14. cap. 29. 14, 25 Isa. 47 verse 5. Daniel 4. verse
17.
NOTHING TREASON IF THIS IS NOT, TO MAKE A KINGDOM NO KINGDOM. Take the
Policy and Government away, Englands but a piece of earth, wherein so many men
have their commerce and abode, without rank or distinction of men, without
property in any thing further than in possession; no Law to punish the
murdering or robbing one another.

Page 70, 71, 72. The horridness of the offense in endeavoring to overthrow
the Laws and present Government, has been fully opened before. The Parliament
is the representation of the whole Kingdom, wherein the King as Head, your
Lordships as the more Noble, and the Commons, the other Members are Are they so
now? and who have dissolved the Ligaments that formerly united and held them
together?
knit together in one body Politic. This dissolves the Arteries and Ligaments
that hold the body together, THE LAWS. He that takes away the Laws, takes not
away the Allegiance of one Subject only, but of the whole Kingdom. It was made
Treason by the Statute of 13 Eliz. for her time to affirm, That the Law of the
Realm do not bind the descent of the Crown. No Law, no descent at all, NO LAWS
NO PEERAGE, no ranks nor degrees of men, the same condition to all. Its Treason
to kill a Judge upon the Bench; this kills not Judicem, sed Judicium. There be
twelve men, but no Law; never a Judge amongst them. Its Felony to embezell any
one of the Judicial Records of the Kingdom: THIS AT ONCE SWEEPS THEM ALL AWAY
and FROM ALL. Its Teason to counterfeit a Twenty shilling piece; Here Is a Have
we not many counterfeit laws and Acts of Parliament of law? and yet some
counterfeit Judges that execute and give them in charge as true ones?
counterfeiting of the Law: we can call neither the counterfeit nor the true
Coin our own. Its Treason to counterfeit the great Seal for an Acre of Land: No
property is left hereby to any Land at all: NOTHING TREASON NOW, AGAINST KING
OR KINGDOM; NO LAW TO PVNISH IT.

My Lords, If the question were asked in Westminster Hall, whether this were a
Crime punishable in the Star Chamber, or in THE KINGS BENCH, by Fine or
Imprisonment? They would say, It were higher. If whether Felony? They would
say, That is an Offense only against the Life or Goods of some one, or few
persons. It would I believe be answered by the JVDGES, as it was by the Chief
Justice Thirning, in the 21 R. 2. That though he could not judge the Case
TREASON there before him, yet if he were a Peer in Parliament; HE WOULD SO
ADJUDGE IT. (And so the Peers did here in Straffords, and not long after in
Canterburies case, who both lost their Heads on Tower Hill.)

I have transcribed these Pass^ges of Mr. Oliver S. John at large for five
Reasons.

1. Because they were the Voice and Sense of the whole House of Commons by his
mouth; who afterward owned and ratified them by their special Order, for their
publication in Print, for information and satisfaction of the whole Nation, and
terror of all others, who should after that, either secretly or openly, by
fraud or force, directly or indirectly, attempt the subversion of all, or any
of our Fundamental Laws or Liberties, or the alteration of our Fundamental
Government, or setting up any Arbitrary or Tyrannical Power, Taxes,
Impositions, or new kinds of arbitrary Judicatories, and imprisonments against
these our Laws and Liberties.

2. To mind and inform all such who have not only equalled, but transcended
Strafford and Canterbury in these their HIGH TREASONS, even since these
PUBLICATIONS, SPEECHES, and their EXEMPLARY EXECUTIONS, of the heinousness, in
excusablenesse, wilfulness, maliciousness, Capitalnesse of their Crimes;
which not only the whole Parliament in generality, but many of themselves, in
particular, so severely prosecuted, condemned, and inexorably punished of late
years in them: that so they may sadly consider, bewail, repent, reform them
with all speed and diligence, as much as in them lies. And with all, I shall
exhort them seriously to consider that Gospel terrifying passage, (if they have
not quite sinned away all Conscience, Shame, Christianity, Religion and Fear of
the last Judge, and Judgment to come) Romans 2. 1, 2, 3. Therefore thou art
inexcusable O man, whosoever thou art that judge; for wherein thou judge
another, thou CONDEMNEST THY SELF, FOR THOU THAT JUDGE DO THOU THE SAME
THING. But we are sure that the Judgment of God is according to truth, against
them who commit such things. And think thou this, O man, that judge them
which do such things; and do the same, that thou shall escape the Judgment
of God?

3. To excite all Lawyers (especially such, who of late times have taken upon
them the style and power of Judges) to examine their Consciences, Actions, how
far, all or any of them have been guilty, in the highest degree of these Crimes
and Treasons, so highly aggravated, so exemplarily punished of former and later
times, in corrupt, cowardly time-serving, degenerate Lawyers, and Judasses,
rather than Judges; to the disgrace of their Profession, (now generally spoken
against) their own dishonor, infamy, reproach, the scandal of Religion, which
some of them have eminently professed: the prejudice and subversion of the
Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights, Privileges of our Nation, Peers,
Parliaments, and of the ancient Fundamental Government of this famous Kingdom,
whereof they are Members: and that contrary to some of their own late
Judgments, sciences, Consciences, Votes, Printed Arguments, Speeches,
Declarations, against others, even in and out of Parliament? and their own
first Charges in their Circuits, repugnant to their later.

4. To instruct those Jesuited Anabaptists, Levellers, and their Factors,
(especially John Can, and the rest of the Compilers, Publishers, Abetters of
the Pamphlet entitled, Leiutenant Colonel John Lilburn, tried and east; and
other forementioned publications:) who professedly set themselves by Words,
Writings, Counsels and overt Acts to subvert both our old Fundamental (with
all other) Laws, Liberties, Customs, Parliaments, and Government, what
transcendent Malefactors, Traitors, and Enemies they are to the public, and
what Capital punishments they may incur, as well as d^merit, should they be
legally prosecuted for the same; and thereupon to advise them timely to repent
of, and d^sist from such high Treasonable attempts.

5. To clear both my self and this my seasonable Defense of our Fundamental
Laws, Liberties, Government, from the least suspicion or shadow of Faction,
Sedition, Treason and Emnity to the public peace, weal, settlement of the
Nation, which those, (and those only) who are most factious, and seditious,
and the greatest Enemies, Traitors to the public tranquillity, Weal, Laws,
Liberties, Government, and establishment of our Kingdom (as the premises
evidence) will be ready maliciously to asperse both me and it with, as they
have done heretofore some other of my Writings of this Nature, with all which,
they must first brand Mr. St. John, Mr. Pym, the whole House of Commons, the
two last, with all other Parliaments forecited, and themselves too (from which
they are so much changed and degenerated of late years) ere they can accuse,
traduce, or censure me; who do but barely relate, apply their words and
judgments in their purest times, without malice or partiality, for the whole
Kingdoms benefit; security, and resettlement.

To these punctual full Juries of Records and Parliament Authorities in point,
I could accumulate Sr. Edward Cook his 3. Institutes, p. 9. printed and
authorized by the House of Commons special Order, the last Parliament. The
several Speeches of M. Hide, M. Waller, M. Pierpoint, and M. Hollis, July 6.
1641. at the Lords Bar in Parliament, by Order of the Commons House, at the
Impeachment of the Shipmony Judges of High Treason, printed in Diurnal
Occurrences, and Speeches in Parliament, London, 1641. p. 237, to 264. M.
Samuel Browns Argument at law before the Lords and Commons at Canterburies
Attainder, all manifesting, their endeavoring to subvert the Fundamental Laws
and Government of the Realm, to be High Treason; with sundry other printed
Authorities to prove; That we have, See Exact. Collection, p. 4. 12 243, 262.
321.
Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights; and a Fundamental Government likewise;
which ought not to be innovated, violated, or subverted upon any pretenses
whatsoever, by any power or prevailing Faction. Which Fundamental Rights,
Liberties, Laws, Sr. Thomas Fairfax, and the Army under his Command, by their
Declaration of June 14. 1647. particularly promise and engage, to assert and
vindicate against all arbitray power, violence, oppression, and against all
particular parties or Interests whatsoever, which they may do well to remember
and make good. But to avoid prolixity (the double Jury of irrefragable and
punctual authorities already produced being sufficient to satisfy the most
obstinate opposites formerly contradicting it) I shall only add three swaying
authorities more, wherewith I shall conclude this point.

The first, is a very late one, in a Treatise, entitled, A Surely there are
sundry falsehoods in it, as well as some truths.
true State of the Common Wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging, in Reference to the late established Government
by a Lord Protector and a PARLIAMENT. It being the Judgment of DIVERSE
PERSONS, who throughout these late troubles, have approved themselves If we
believe themselves in their own cases
faithful to the Cause and interest of God, and their COUNTRY: presented to
the public, for the satisfaction of others. Printed at London, 1654. who
relating the miscarriages of the last ASSEMBLY at Westminster (elected,
nominated by the Censurers of them, the Army Officers only, not the people)
use these expressions of them, page 13, 14, 16, 17, 21, 22. But on the
contrary, it so fell out in a short time, that there appeared many in this
Assembly of very contrary principles to the interest aforesaid, which led them
violently on to attempt and promote many things, the consequence whereof would
have been, A subverting of the Fundamental Laws of the Land, the Destruction
of Property, and an utter extinguishment of the Gospel. In truth their
Principles led them TO A PULLING DOWN ALL AND ESTABLISING NOTHING. So that
instead of the expected settlement, they were running into FURTHER ANARCHY AND
CONFUSION. As to the Laws and Civil Rights of the Nation, nothing would serve
them, but a TOTAL ERADICATION OF THE OLD, AND INTRODUCTION OF A NEW: and so
the good Old Laws of England ( the Guardians of our Laws and Fortunes)
established with prudence, and confirmed by the experience of many Ages and
Generations: ( The Preservation whereof, was a Some men's act ons since, declare
they had some other ground and ayms than this.
principal ground of our late quarrel with the King) having been once
abolished, what could we have expected afterward, but an inthroning of
Arbitrary power in the Seat of Judicature, and an exposing of our Lives, our
Estates, our Liberties, and all that is dear unto us, as a Sacrifice to the
boundless appetite of mere Will and Power, etc.

Things being at this pass, and the House (through these proceedings) Those
who severe and disjoynt one house from the other; and by force and armed power
seclude, exclude and disjoyn the members of the same House, one from another,
so many times one after another, and justify it too, are the greatest
disjoyners of the House and Parliament, and very unlikely to make any firm or
real settlement of this Nation.
perfectly disjointed, it was in vain to look for a settlement of this Nation
from them, thus constituted: but on the contrary, nothing else could be
expected; But that the Commonwealth should sink under their hands, and the
great cause hitherto so happily upheld and maintained, to be for ever lost,
through their preposterous management of these affairs, wherewith they had been
entrusted. Whereupon they justify their dissolution, and turning them forcibly
out of doors by the Soldiers, with shame and infamy; to prevent that
destruction, which thereby was coming on THE WHOLE LAND, by this New Powder
Treason plot, set on foot by the Jesuits and Anabaptists, to destroy our Laws,
Liberties, Properties, Ministers, and Religion it self, at one blow, and that
in the very Parliament House, (where some destroyed and blowed up Kings, Peers
and Parliaments themselves, as well as Laws and Parliament Privileges of late
years) where they had been constantly defended, vindicated, preserved,
established in all former Ages, by ALL TRVE ENGLISH PARLIAMENTS.

The second is, See my Speech in Parliament, p. 100. to 108.
The Votes of the House of Commons, concerning a Paper presented to them,
entitled, An Agreement of the people for a firm and present peace, upon
grounds of Common Right, 9. November 1647, viz.

Resolved upon the Question, That the matters contained in these Papers, are
destructive to the being of Parliaments, and to the fundamental Government of
this Kingdom.

Resolved; etc. That a Letter be sent to the General, and those Papers
enclosed, together with the Vote of this House upon them; And that he be
desired to examine the proceedings of this business in the Army ( where it was
first coined) and return an Account hereof to this House.

These Votes were seconded soon after with these ensuing Votes, entered in the
Commons Journal, and printed by their special Order, 23 November. 1647.

A Petition directed to the Supreme Authority of England, The Commons in
Parliament assembled, The humble Petition of many Freeborn people of England,
etc. was read the first and second time.

Resolved upon the Question, That this Petition is, A seditious and
contemptuous avowing, and prosecution of a former Petition, and Paper annexed,
styled, An agreement of the People, formerly adjudged by this House, to be
destructive to the being of Parliaments, and Fundamental Government of the
Kingdom.

Resolved, etc. That Thomas Prince Cheese-monger, and Samuel Chidley, be
forthwith committed Prisoners to the Prison of the Gate House, there to remain
Prisoners during the pleasure of this House, for a Seditious avowing, and
prosecution of a former Petition and Paper annexed, styled, An Agreement of the
people; formerly adjudged by this House, to be destructive to the being of
Parliaments, and fundamental Government of the Kingdom.

Resolved, etc. That Jeremy Ives, Thomas Tailor, and William Larnar, be
forthwith committed to the Prison of Newgate, there to remain Prisoners during
the pleasure of this House, for a seditious and contemptuous avowing, and
prosecution of a former Petition and Paper annexed, styled, An Agreement of the
People; formerly adjudged by this House, to be destructive to the being of
Parliaments, and fundamental Government of the Kingdom.

Resolved, etc. That a Letter be prepared and sent to the General; taking
notice of his proceeding in the execution (according to the Rules of War) of
a Mutinous person (avowing, and prosecuting this Agreement in the Army contrary
to these Votes) at the Rendezvous near Ware, and to give him thanks for it; and
to desire him to prosecute that Business to the bottom, and to bring such
guilty persons as he shall think fit, to condign and exemplary punishment.

Resolved, etc. That the Votes upon the Petition and Agreement annexed, and
likewise the Votes upon this Petition, be forthwith printed and published.

After which, by a special Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, 17 December.
1647. no person whatsoever, who had contrived, plotted, prosecuted, or entered
into that Engagement, entitled, The Agreement of the people, declared To be
destructive to the being of Parliaments, and Fundamental Government of the
Kingdom; for one whole year was to be elected, chosen, or put into the Office,
or place of Lord Mayor, or Alderman, Sheriff, Deputy of a Ward, or Common
Counselman of the City of London, or to have a voice in the Election of any
such Officers.

All these particulars, with the Capital proceedings against White, and others
who fomented this Agreement in the Army, abundantly evidence the verity of my
foresaid Proposition, and the extraordinary guilt of those Members and
Soldiers, who contrary to their own Votes, Ordinances, Proceedings, and
Censures of others, have since prosecuted this, the like, or far worse
Agreement, to the destruction of our ancient Parliaments, and their
Privileges, and of the fundamental Government, Laws, and Liberty of our
Nation: which I wish they would now sadly lay to heart, with that saying of
Augustine, approved by all sorts of Divines, and See Gratian, Cause. 2. Qu. 1.
2. Summa Angelica, Rosella, and Hostiensis. Tit. Restituito.
Casuists; Non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatu^^, and sciendum
est, Quod Restitutio est IN PRISTINUM STATUM POSITIO.

The third, is the memorable Statutes of 3 Jacobi, c. 1, 2, 4. and 5. which
relating the old Gunpowder Treason of the Jesuits and Papists, and their
infernal, inhuman, barbarous, detestable plot, to blow up the King, Queen,
Prince, Lords, Commons, and the whole House of Peers with Gunpowder, when they
should have been assembled in Parliament, in the upper House of Parliament,
upon the fifth of November, in the year of our Lord, 1605. do aggravate the
hainousness and transcendency thereof, by this circumstance, That it was (as
some of the principal Conspirators confessed) purposely devised and concluded
to be done in the said House, That where sundry necessary and religious Laws,
for preservation of the Church and State, were made, ( which they falsely and
slanderously termed, Cruel Laws enacted against them, and their Religion) both
Place and Persons should be all destroyed and blown up at once; and by these
dangerous Consequences, if it had not been miraculously prevented, but taken
effect; That it would have turned to the utter ruin, overthrow, and subversion
of the whole State and Commonwealth of this flourishing and renowned Kingdom,
of Gods true Religion therein established by Law, and of our Laws and
Government. For which horrid Treason, they were all attainted, See Speeds Hist.
p. 1250. etc. Mr. Vicars History of the Gunpowder-Treason, The Arraignment of
Traitors.
and then executed as Traitors, and some of their Heads, Quarters, set upon the
Parliament House for terror of others. Even so let all other Traitors,
Conspirators against, all Blowers up, and subverters of our fundamental Laws,
Liberties, Government, Kings, Parliaments, and Religion, treading
presumptuously in their Jesuitical footsteps, perish, O Lord, Judge. 5. 21.
but let all them who cordially love, and strenuously maintain them against all
Conspirators, Traitors, Underminers, Invaders whatsoever, be as the Sun when
he goes forth in his might; That the Land may have rest, peace, settlement
again, for as many years at least, as it had before our late Innovations,
Wars, Confusions, by their restitution and reestablishment.

CHAP. 2.
HAving thus sufficiently proved, That the Kingdom, and Freemen of England,
have some ancient Hereditary Rights, Liberties, Franchises, Privileges,
Customs, properly called FUNDAMENTAL, as likewise a Fundamental Government, no
ways to be altered, undermined, subverted, directly or indirectly, under the
guilt and pain of High Treason in those who attempt it, especially by fraud,
force, or armed Power.

I shall in the second place present you in brief Propositions, a Summary of
the chiefest and most considerable of them, which our prudent Ancestors in
former Ages, and our latest real Parliaments, have both declared to be, and
eagerly contested for, as fundamental, and essential to their very being, and
well being, as a Free People, Kingdom, Republic, unwilling to be enslaved
under any Yorkes of Tyranny, or Arbitrary Power: that so the whole Nation may
the more perspicuously know and discern them, the more strenuously contend for
them, the more vigilantly watch against their violations, underminings in any
kind, by any Powers or pretenses whatsoever, and transmit, perpetuate them
entirely to their Posterities, as their best and chiefest inheritance.

I shall comprise the sum and substance of them all in these Ten Propositions,
beginning with the Subjects Property, which has been most frequently,
universally invaded, assaulted, undermined by our Kings, and their evil
Instruments heretofore, and others since, and thereupon more strenuously,
frequently, vigilantly maintained, fenced, regained, retained by our Nobles,
Parliaments, and the people in all Ages (till of late years) than any or all of
the rest put together, though every of them has been constantly defended,
maintained, when impugned, or incroached upon, by our Ancestors, and our selves.

1 That See the Laws of King Edward the Confessor, confirmed by William the
Conqueror, Lex. 55, 56, 57. The great Charters of King John, and Henry 3. c.
29, 30. 25 E. 1. c. 5, 6. 34 E. 1. De Tallagio. c. 1, 14 E. 3. Stat. 1. c. 21.
Stat. 2. c. 1. 35 E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 1. 15 E. 3. Stat. 3. c. 5. 21 E. 3. Rot.
Parl. N. 16. 25 E 3. Rot. Parl. N. 16, 27 E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 2. 36 E. 3. Rot.
Parl. N. 26. 38 ^. 3. c. 2. 45 E. 3. Rot. Parl N. 42. 11 H. 4. Rot. Parl. N.
50. 1 R. 3. c. 2. The Petition of Right, 3 Caroli, the Acts against Ship Money,
Knighthood, Tonnage, and Poundage, 16. and 17. Caroli.
no Tax, Tallage, Aid, Subsidy, Custom, Contribution, Loan, Imposition, Excise,
or other Assesment whatsoever, for defense of the Realm by Land or Sea, or any
other public, ordinary, or extraordinary occasion, may or ought be imposed,
or leavied upon all or any of the Freemen of England, by reason of any
pretended or real Danger, Necessity, or other pretext, by the Kings of England,
or any other Powers, but only with and by their common consent and grant, in a
free and lawful English Parliament duly summoned and elected; except only such
ancient, legal Ayds, as they are specially obliged to render by their Tenures,
Charters, Contracts, and the common Law of England.

2 That See Magna Charta, c. 29. and Cooks Institutes on it. 5 E. 3. c. 9 15 E.
3. c. 1, 2 25 E. 3. c. 4 28 E. 3. c. 3 37* E. 3. c. 18 42 E. 3. c. 3 2 R. 2. c.
2 4 5 H. 4. c. 10 19 H. 7. c. 10 23 H. 8. c. 8 The Petition of Right, 3 Caroli,
and other Acts in chapter 3. 2 H 4. Rot. Parl. N. 60. and 69.
no Freeman of England ought to be arrested, confined, imprisoned, or in any
private Castles, or remote unusual Prisons, under Soldiers, or other
Guardians, but only in usual or Common Gaols, under sworn responsible Goalers,
in the County where he lives, or is apprehended, and where his friends may
freely visit and releeve him with necessaries; And that only for some just and
legal Cause expressed in the Writ, Warrant, or Process, by which he is arrested
or imprisoned; which ought to be legally executed, by known, legal, responsible
sworn Officers of Justice, not unknown Military Officers, Troopers, or other
illegal Catchpolls; That no such Freeman ought to be denied Bail, Mainprise,
or the benefit of an Habe as Corpus, or any other Legal Writ for his
enlargement, when Bailable or Mainprizable by Law; nor to be detained Prisoner
for any real or pretended Crime, not bailable by Law longer than until the 4 E.
3. c. ^ 17 R. ^. c. 10
next general or special Jail-deliver, held in the County where he is
imprisoned; when and where he ought to be legally tried and proceeded against,
or else enlarged by the Justices, without denial or delay of Right and Justice.
And that no such Freeman may, or ought to be outlawed, exiled, condemned to
any kind of Corporal punishment, loss of Life or Member, or otherwise
destroyed or passed upon, but only by due and lawful Process, Indictment, and
the lawful Trial, Verdict, and Judgment of his Peers, according to the good
old Law of the Land, in some usual Court of public Justice; not by and in new
illegal Military, or other Arbitrary Judicatories, Committees, or Courts of
High Justice, unknown to our Ancestors.

3 That the ordinary See the Laws of Edward the Confessor, and William, the
Conqueror, Lex. 35. 55, 56, 58. Ras^^als Abridgement. Tit. Armor. 35 E. 3. c.
8. Rot. Parl. N. 23* The Statures for impressing Soldiers, 16 and 1^ Caroli.
standing Militia, Force, and Arms of the Kingdom, ought to reside in the
Nobility, Gentry, Freeholders, and Trained Bands of the Kingdom, not in
Mercenary Officers and Soldiers, receiving pay, and Contributions from the
people; more apt to oppress, inslave, betray, than protect their Laws,
Liberties, and to protract than end their Wars and Taxes. That no Freemen of
England, unless it be by special Grant and Act of Parliament, (...) E. 3.
Stat. 2. c 5. 4 H. 4. c. 13. Exact collection, p. 878, 879.
may or ought to be compelled, enforced, pressed, or arrayed to go forth of his
own County (much less out of the Realm into foreign parts) against his will,
in times of War or Peace; or except he be specially obliged thereto by
ancient Tenures and Charters, save only upon the sudden coming of strange
enemies into the Realm; and then he is to array himself only in such sort, as
he is bonnd to do by the ancient Laws and Customs of the Kingdom still in force.

4 That no See Magna Char. c. 29. 5 E. 3. c. 9. 15 E. 3. c. 1, 2 21 E. 3. Rot.
Parl. N. 28. 1^ E. 3. N 35, 36, 37. ^5 E. 3. c. 4 Rot. Parl. N. 16. 28 E. 3. c.
3. 37 E. 3. c. ^8. 42. E. 3. c. 1. 3. 2 R. 2. Parl. 2. c. 2. 7 R. 3. c. 4. 2 H
4. Rot. Parl. N. 60. 69. 15 H. 6. c. 4. The Petition of Right, 3 Car. and the
Statutes against Ship Money, Knighthood, Tonnage and Poundage, 16, and 17
Caroli.
Freeman of England may, or ought to be disinherited, disseised, dispossessed,
or deprived of any Inheritance, Freehold, Office, Liberty, Custom, Franchise,
Chattles, Goods, whatsoever, without his own Gift, Grant, or free Consent,
unless it be by lawful Process, Trial, and Judgment of his Peers, or special
Grant by Act of Parliament; nor to be denied or delayed common Right or Justice
in any case.

5 That the old received Government, Laws, Statutes, Customs, Privileges,
Courts of Justice, legal Process of the Kingdom, and Crown, ought not to be
altered, repealed, suppressed in any sort; nor any new form of Government, Law,
Statute, Ordinance, Court of Judicatury, Writ^, or legal proceedings,
instituted, or imposed on all, or any of the Freemen of England, by any person
or persons, but only in and by the Sea 1 Samuel 7. 4, to the end. c. 11. 14, 15.
c. 12. 1. 2 Samuel 5. 1, 2, 3. c. 16. 18. 1 King. 12. 3. to 21. c. 16. 1^. c. 20.
7, 8. 2. King. 11. 1. to 21. c. 21. 24. c. 23. 30.
Kingdoms, peoples free and full precedent consent in a lawful Parliament,
wherein the Legislative power solely resides.

6 That Parliaments ought to be duly summoned, and held, for the good and
safety of the Kingdom, every year, or every three years at least, or so soon as
there is just occasion. That the Election of all Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, to sit and serve in Parliament (and so of all other Elective
Officers) ought to be free. That King John's Magna Cha^ta, Matthew. Paris, p. 247.
5 R. 2. c. 4. cook^ 4. Instit c. 1. My Plea for the Lords, My Ardua Regui, The
Levellers levelled* and Epistle before my Speech in Parliament. 4 E. 3. c. 14.
36 E. 3. c. 10. 50 E. 3. N. 151. 1 R. 2. N. 95. 2 R. 2. N. 4, 5.
all Members of Parliament Hereditary or Elective, ought to be present, and
there freely to speak and vote according to their Judgments and Consciences,
without any over-awing Guards to terrify them; and none to be forced,
sequestered, or secluded thence by force or fraud. That all Parliaments not
thus duly and freely summoned, elected, freely held, but unduly packed, without
due Elections, or by forcible secluding, securing any of the Members, or not
summoning all of them to the Parliament, and all Acts of Parliament
fraudulently, or forcibly procured by indirect means See 39 H. 6. c. 1. 17. E.
4. c. 7. ^ H. 4. N. 21, 22. 48. 1 H. 4. c 3.
, ought to be nulled, repealed, reputed void, and of dangerous president.

7 That neither the Sea Rastals Abridgement of Statutes, Title, Provision^
Praemunire, and Rome.
Kings, nor any Subjects of the Kingdom of England, may or ought to be summoned
before any Foreign Powers or Jurisdictions whatsoever out of the Realm, or
within the same, for any manner of Right, Inheritance, Thing belonging to them,
or Offense done by them within the Realm, nor tried, nor judged by them.

8 That all Subjects of the Realm are Leges Edwardi Regis, c. 35, Lambards
Arch. F. 135, 136. Cooks 7. Report, Calvin's Case, f. 6, 7. Leges Willielm^
Regis Lex. 58, 59. Seldens Notae ad Eadmerum, p. 191. 11 H. 7. c. 1. 18, 19, H.
7. c. 1. 25 H. 8. c. 22. 26 H. 8. c. 3. 28 H. 8. c. 7. 1 Eliz. c. 1. 3. 5. 5
Eliz. 2. c. 1. 1 Jac. c. 1, 2. 3. Jac. c. 1, 2, 4, 5. 7 Jac. c. 6. The
Protestation, League and Covenant, and the ancient Oaths of Fealty, Homage,
Mayers, Sheriffs, Freemen.
obliged by Allegiance, Oaths, and duty to defend their lawful Kings Persons,
Crowns, the Laws, Rights, and Privileges of the Realm, and of Parliament,
against all Usurpers, Traitors, Violence, and Conspiracies. And that no Subject
of this Realm, who according to his Duty, and Allegiance, shall serve his King
in his Wars, for the just defense of him and the Land, against Foreign
Enemies or Rebels, shall lose or forfeit any thing for doing his true duty,
service, and allegiance to him therein; but utterly be discharged of all
vexation, trouble, or loss.

9 That no public War by Land or Sea ought to be made or leavied, with, or
against any Foreign Nation: nor any public Truce or League entered into with
Foreign Realms or States, to bind the Nation, without their common advice and
consent in Parliament.

10 That the Kings of England, or others, cannot grant away, alien, or subject
the Crown, Kingdom, or ancient Crown Lands of England to any other, without
their Nobles and Kingdoms full and free consent in Parliament. That the ancient
Honors, Manors, Lands, Rents, Revenues, Inheritances, Rights, and Perquisits
of the Crown of England, originally settled thereon for the ^ase and exemption
of the people from all kind of Taxes, payments whatsoever (unless in case of
extraordinary necessity) and for defraying all the constant, ordinary expenses
of the Kingdom (as the expenses of the Kings household, Court, Officers,
Judges, Ambassadors, Guard, Garrisons, Navy and the like) ought not to be sold,
alienated, given away or granted from it, to the prejudice of the Crown, and
burdenning of the people. And that all Sales, Alienations, Gifts, or Grants
thereof, to the empairing of the public Revenue, or prejudice of the Crown
and people, are void in Law, and ought to be resumed, and repealed by our
Parliaments and Kings, as they have Daniels History p. 78 79. 80. 123. 10. 12
n. 2. r. 8. H 5. r. 9 1. 1. 6. n. 53. 31. H. 6. r. 7. 1. R. 2. n. 14^. 1. H. 4.
n. 100. 6 H 4. n. 4. 15. 8. H. 4. n. 12. 33. H. 6. n. 47. 4. G. n. 3^. 12 E. 4,
n. 6.
freqeuntly been in all former ages.

For the Readers fuller satisfaction in each of these propositions (some of
which I must in the ensuing Chapter but briefly touch for brevity sake, having
elsewhere fully debated them in print,) I shall especially recommend unto him
the perusal of such Tractates, and Arguments formerly published, wherein each
of them has been fully discussed, which he may peruse at his best leisure.

The First of these Fundamentalls, (which I intend principally to insist on) is
fully asserted, debated, confirmed by 13. H. 4. f. 14. By Fortescue Lord Chief
Justice, and Chancellor of England, de Laudibus Legum Angliae, dedicated by him
to King Henry the 6. f. 25. c. 36. By a Learned and necessary Argument against
Impositions in the Parliament of 7. Jacobi: by a late reverend Judge, Printed
at London 1641. By Mr. William Hakewell, in his Liberty of the Subject against
Impositions, maintained in an Argument in the Parliament of 7 Jacobi, Printed
at London 1641. By Judge Crooks and Judge Huttons. Arguments concerning
Ship-mony, both Printed at London 1641. By the Case of Ship-mony briefly
discussed. London 1640. By M. St. John's Argument and Speech against Ship-mony,
Printed at London 1641. By Sir Edward Cook in his 2 Institutes p. 46. and 57.
to 64. and 528 to 537. By the first and second Remonstrance of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament. against the Commission of Array. Exact Collection p.
386. to 398. and 850. to 890. and by my own Humble Remonstrance against
Ship-mony, London 1643. The Fourth part of the Sovereign Power of Parliaments
and Kingdoms, p. 14. to 26. my Legal Vindication of the Liberties of England,
against Illegal Taxes etc. London 1649. and by the Records and Statutes cited
in the ensuing Chapter, referring for the most part to the first Proposition.

The second, third, and fourth of them, are largely debated and confirmed by a
Conference desired by the Lords, and had by a Committee of both Houses,
concerning the Rights and Privileges of the Subject, 3 Aprilis 4 Caroli,
Printed at London 1642. By Sir Edward Cook in his Institutes on Magna charta,
c. 29. p. 45. to 57. By the first and second Remonstrance of the Lords and
Commons against the Commission of Array, Exact Collection p. 386. and 850. to
890. By Judge Crooks, and Judge Huttons Arguments against Ship-mony. By Sir
Robert Cotton his Posthuma p. 222. to 269. By my Breviate of the Prelates
Encroachments on the Kings Prerogative, and the Subjects Liberties, p. 138. my
New Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny, p. 137. to 183. and some of the ensuing
Statutes, and records, chapter 3. See 1 H. 4. rot Parl. n. 22, 23, 24, 26, 28, 43,
44* 47.

The Fifth and Sixth of them, are fully cleared, vindicated in and by the
Prologues of all our Councills, Statutes, Laws, before and since the Conquest.
By 1. H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 33, 34, 36. (an excellent full president.) Sir Edward
Cooks 4 Institutes, chapter 1. Mr. Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, Title High
Court of Parliament. Mr. St. John's speech against the Shipmony Judges, p. 32,
33. my Plea for the Lords; my Levellers levelled; my Ardua Regni; my Epistle
before my Speech in Parliament; my Memento, my Sovereign Power of Parliaments
and Kingdoms, part. 1, 2, 3, 4. my Legal Vindication against illegal Taxes,
and pretended Acts of Parliament, London 1649. Prynnethe Member, reconciled to
Prynne the Bar^ester, Printed the same year. My Historical Collection of the
Ancient great Councils and Parliaments of England, London 1649. My Truth
triumphing over Falsehood, Antiquity over Novel^y, London 1645. 3 E. 1. c. 5, 4
E. 3. c. 14. 36 E. 3. c. 10. 1 H. 4. c. 3, 4. 5 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 4. Rastal
tit. Parliament. 1 H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 21. 22. 48. 70. 31 H. 6. c. 1. 39 H. 6.
c. 1. Rot. Parl. n. 8. 17 E. 4. c. 7. express in point, and some of the
Records hereafter transcribed. In this I shall be more sparing, because so
fully confirmed in these and other Treatises.

The Seventh, is ratified by Sir Edward Cooks 1. Institutes p. 97* 98. 4
Institutes p. 89. and 5. report Cawdries case, of the Kings Ecclesiastical
Laws, Rastals Abridgement of Statutes, Tit, Provisors, Praemunire, Rome, and
other Records and Statutes in the ensuing Chapter.

The Eight, is verified by the Statutes quoted in the Margin to it, and by
other Records in the third Chapter.

The Ninth and Tenth, are fully debated in my Sovereign Power of Parliaments
and Kingdoms, par. 2. p. 3. to 34. part. 4. p. 1. to 13. and 162. to 170.
touched in Sir Robert Cottons Posthuma, p. 174. 179. confirmed by sundry
Presidents in the next Chapter. and by 1 H. 4. Rot. Parl. n 32.

How all and every of these Fundamental Liberties, Rights, Franchises, Laws,
have been unparalledly violated, subverted, in all and every particular, of
late years, beyond all Presidents in the worst of former ages, even by their
greatest pretended Propugners, their own Printed Edicts, Instruments,
Ordinances, Papers, together with their illegal Oppressions, Taxes, Excises,
Imposts, Sequestrations, Rapines, Violences, unjust Proceedings of all kinds,
will sufficiently evidence, if compared with the premised Propositions. Not to
insist on any fore-past illegal Imposts, Taxes, Excises, under which the
nation lately groaned, imposed on us by unparliamentary Junctoes, or the Army
Officers alone from Anno 1648 to 1653. without any real Parliament by their own
armed Jurisdiction. I shall here instance onyl in 3. or 4 particulars, relating
wholly to the First Proposition, being of most general, greatest present and
future concernment of all other to the whole English Nation, at this very
instant most intollerably oppressed, grieved by them; directly sweeping away
all their Fundamental Right of Property, and consequentially all their Liberty
of person, Laws, Charters, at once, and that in perpetuity, beyond all hopes of
Future redemption, if not timely prevented by the Universality, Body of the
Realm, or their Trustees.

The first of them is, the present imposition, and continuance of the strange,
oppressive, monstrous, general high Tax of EXCISE, imposed on most native and
foreign Commodities throughout England, and its Dominions; which as it was a
mere Stranger to all our Ancestors, and those now living, till within these few
years; so it was no sooner projected by some evil Malignant Jesuited
Counselors about the late King, but it was See my Declaration and Protestation
against the illegal, detestable, oft-condemned new Tax, and Extortion of
Excise, 1654. Exact collection, p. 885. Mr. St. John's Speech concerning
Ship Money. p. 15, 16.
presently condemned, and crushed in the very shell, when first intended to be
set on foot in England by King Charles, (with the advice and consent of his
privy Council at White Hall) by a Commission under the Great Seal of England,
dated the last of February, 3 Caroli, issued to thirty three Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Council and others: which authorized, commanded them to raise
moneys BY IMPOSITIONS OR OTHERWISE, as they in their wisdoms should find most
convenient; and that only for these public uses, THE DEFENSE OF THE KING,
KINGDOM, PEOPLE, and of the Kings Friends and Allies beyond the Seas, then in
such imminent danger, that WITHOUT EXTREMEST HAZARD OF THE KING, KINGDOM,
PEOPLE, KINGS Friends and Allies, it could admit of no longer delay. In which
INEVITABLE NECESSITY, form and circumstance must rather be dispensed with than
the substance lost. The Commissioners being thereupon specially enjoined, to be
diligent in the Service, and not fail therein, as they tender his Majesty's
Honor, and THE SAFETY OF THE KING and PEOPLE. This Commission was no sooner
discovered, but it was presently complained of by the whole Commons House, in
the Parliament, of 3 Caroli, and upon Conference with the Lords it was
immediately Voted, adjudged by both Houses, without one dissenting voice, TO
BE (EX DIAMETHRO) AGAINST LAW, and CONTRARY TO THE PETITION OF RIGHT; after
which, it was cancelled as such in the Kings own presence, by his consent,
order, and then sent cancelled to both Houses, for their satisfaction, before
ever it was put in execution, and all Warrants for, and memorials of it
cancelled, damned, destroyed; the Commons further urging, That the Projector
thereof might be found out by strict inquiry, and EXEMPLARILY PVNISHED (as the
Parliament Journal attests) notwithstanding all the specious pretenses, of
inevitable necessity, imminent danger, and the defense, safety of the whole
Kingdom, People, King, and his foreign Protestant Friends and Allies (then in
greater real danger, than any now appearing) This Original Parliamentary Doom,
Judgment against that New Monster of Excise, was ratified, approved, pressed
by both Houses of Parliament, in the Cases of Ship Money, and the Commission of
Array, as you may read at large in Mr. Oliver St. John's Speech and Declaration,
delivered at a Conference of both Houses concerning Ship Money, 14 January,
1640. (printed by the Commons Order) p. 13. to 20. and, The Lords and Commons
second Declaration against the Commission of Array. Exact collection, p. 884,
885. from which they then drew this positive conclusion (fit to be now
considered by our New Governors, and the whole Nation) Exact Collection, p.
886. Nota.
THAT TO DEFEND THE KINGDOM IN TIME OF IMMINENT DANGER, IS NO SUFFICIENT CAUSE
(for the King and his Council, much less then for those who condemned,
suppressed them for Tyrants, and Oppressors of the People) TO LAY ANY TAX OR
CHARGE UPON THE SUBJECTS WITHOUT THEIR CONSENT IN PARLIAMENT. Yea the whole
House of Commons was so zealous against this Dutch Devil of Excise, that in
their Remonstrance of the state of the Kingdom, 15 December, 1641. Exact
Collection, p. 3 4, 6. they expressly brand, censure, the first Attempts to
introduce it, for A MALIGNANT and PERNI^IOUS DESIGN, TO SUBVERT THE FUNDAMENTAL
LAWS and PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENT, upon which the JUSTICE OF THIS KINGDOM WAS
FORMERLY ESTABLISHED; as proceeding from JESUITED COVNSELS, Nota.
BEING MOST ACTIVE and PREVAILING; yea, for AN UNJUST and PERNICIOVS ATTEMPT,
TO EXTORT GREAT PAYMENTS FROM THE SUBJECTS. Which was to be accompanied (as now
it is) with Billited Soldiers in all parts of the Kingdom, and the concomitant
of German (as now of English) HORSE, That the And is not this its present sad
slavish condition?
LAND MIGHT EITHER SUBJECT WITH FEAR, or BE ENFORCED WITH RIGOVR TO SUCH
ARBITRARY CONTRIBUTIONS AS SHOULD BE REQVIRED OF THEM. And when some rumors
were first spread abroad, that the COMMONS HOUSE INTENDED TO LAY EXCISE UPON
PEW^ER AND OTHER COMMODITIES; they were so sensible of the injustice and
odiousness thereof, that they thereupon published a special Declaration,
printed 8 October. 1642. Exact Collection, p. 638. wherein they not only
disclaim, renounce any such intention, but branded those Reports and Rumors,
for FALSE and SCANDALOVS ASPERSIONS, raised and cast upon the House BY
MALIGNANT and ILL-AFFECTED PERSONS, TENDING MUCH TO THE DISSERVICE OF THE
PARLIAMENT: and Ordered, That the AVTHORS OF THEM should be inquired after,
apprehended, and brought to the House TO RECEIVE CONDIGN PUNISHMENT. After
which this Excise being notwithstanding this Disclaimer, and much public,
private opposition against it, set on foot by some swaying Members (upon a
pretense of necessity for support of the Army) to the great Oppression, and
Discontent of the People; The General and general Council of Officers and
Soldiers of THE ARMY themselves, were so sensible of this illegal
oft-condemned New grievance, that in the Heads of their Proposals, and
particulars of their Desires, in order to the clearing and securing of the
Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom, tendered to the Commissioners of Parliament
residing with the Army, the first of August, 1647. (printed in their Book of
Declarations, p. 118, and. published by their own, and the Lords House special
Order) they ^ade this one principal Desire to the Parliament; That the EXCISE
may be taken off from such Commodities, whereof the poor of the Land do
ordinarily Do they not so on Beer, Salt, and other Manufactures, for which
they* now pay Excise?
live, and A CERTAIN TIME TO BE LIMITED FOR TAKING OFF THE WHOLE. Yet
notwithstanding all these Judgments and Outcryes against it; some of those
very persons who thus publicly branded it, both in the Parliament House and
Army; by irregular paper Ordinances (as they entitle them) dated 24 December,
1653. March 17. 1653. and May 4. 1654. have by their own Self-derived
supertranscendent Authority, without, yea against the Peoples consents, or any
Authority from Parliament, imposed, continued Excise upon our own Inland, and
Foreign Commodities, in very high proportions, from the twenty fourth of March
1654. till the twenty fourth of March 1655. And (which is most observable)
prescribed it to be levied, by putting the Parties to an (EX OFFICIO) OATH
against themselves; by Fines, Forfeitures, SEQVESTRATIONS, and SALES OF THE
REFUSERS, OPPOSERS, PERSONAL and REAL ESTATES, DISSTRESSES, BREAKING UP OF THE
PARTIES HOUSES, SEISVRES OF THEIR GOODS, IMPRISONMENT OF THE PERSONS OF ALL
SUCH WHO SHALL HINDER OR OPPOSE THE MINISTERS, OR OFFICERS EMPLOYED IN LEVYING,
or distraining for the same, BY LOCKING UP THE DOORS, or OTHERWISE. And by
these their unparalleld Edicts they further order, That the Officers of Excise,
BOTH DAY AND NIGHT, shall be permitted free entrance into ALL ROOMS and PLACES
WHATSOEVER THEY SHALL DEMAND, in Brewers, Sope-boylers, and others Houses,
under pain of forfeiture of fifty pounds for every refusal (by color whereof
all men's Houses may be robbed, plundered, and their throats cut by Thieves and
Robbers, pretending themselves Excise-men, Soldiers, authorized to make such
Searches, as many of late have been.) And they with all their assistants shall
be kept indenspnified in ALL CAUSES RELATING TO THE EXCISE, from time to time,
against all Suits or Actions brought, or other molestations, against them by
the Parties grieved; who are Witness Mr. ^ony amongst others.
usually Fined, Imprisoned, enforced to pay Costs of Suit, only for suing for
relief) yea (which I cannot think of without horror and amazement) ALL COURTS
OF JUSTICE OF THIS COMMONWEALTH, and ALL JUDGES and JUSTICES OF THE SAME, Nota.
SHERIFS, COVNSELLORS, ATTURNIES, SOLICITORS, and ALL OTHER PERSONS, are
thereby expressly required, to conform themselves accordingly, (in all things)
WITHOUT ANY OPPOSITION OR DISPVTE WHATSOEVER; as the precise words of their
Ordinance of 17 March, 1653. proclaim to all the Nation. Which declares
further, That IT IS NECESSARY to provide A CONTINVAL SVPPLY for the carrying on
the weighty Affairs of this Commonwealth OVT OF THIS REVENVE OF EXCISE. And do
not these Clauses, (compared with the 27. and 29. Articles of their
Instrument,) clearly discover, a fixed Resolution in these new Legislators, to
continue, and perpetuate upon the whole Nation, this importable Grievance of
Excise, from year to year, without intermission or end, to be leavied by the
means aforesaid? to hinder all and every the Freemen of England, from
endeavoring to free or exempt themselves, or their Posterities from it
hereafter, by any Suit, Action, Habeas Corpus, or other legal remedy in any
Court of Justice whatsoever? yea peremptorily, positively to prohibit, enjoin
all Courts of Justice, Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Counselors, Atturnies,
Solicitors, with all other persons of this Commonwealth, both for the present
and future Ages, to give them the least legal assistance, advice, or relief
against the same, or against any Officers, or Assistants which shall forcibly
l^a^ie it by distress, Fines, Imprisonnents, Confiscation of Goods,
Sequestrations, Sales of their personal or real Estates, or otherwise?

I appeal then (in the behalf of all the Freeborn People of England) the Souls
and Consciences of these new Ordinance-makers, with all the Executioners of
them in any kind, before all the Tribunals of Heaven and Earth, whether they
have not by these their Dismal Ordinances, more desperately, irrecoverably,
totally, finally (as much as in them lies) undermined, subverted; and quite
blown up at once, all the Foundations of our hereditary Fundamental
Properties, Liberties, Laws for eternity, and levelled them to the dust, then
the worst of all our Kings or former Councill-tables ever did? Deprived the
whole Nation, and every particular Freeman in it, of all future benefit of our
Laws, Statutes and Courts of Justice, for their just relief against this
intolerable Oppression; and thereby reduced us to the condition of the most
slavish, captivated, fettered Bondslaves and conquered Vassals under heaven,
without any visible means or hopes of future enfranchisement, under a pretext
of fighting for, maintaining, protecting, enlargeing our former properties and
freedoms and to a more miserable, sordid, servile condition, than either we or
our Ancestors sustained under the worst of al our Kings and their most
pernicious Counselors; who never in any age attempted, tither to make or
impose such Extravagant enslaving Ordinances or Excises, with such strange
penalties, Forfeitures, Imprisonments, Sequestrations, sales, and most
unrighteous Monstrous Inhibitions of all legal suites, and means for
cheirrelief in Courts of Justice, as they have done: King Charles himself
(though condemned, beheaded by them for the worst of Tyrants and Oppressors)
permitting his Subjects free Liberty, to dispute the Legality of Fines for
Knighthood, See the Arguments concerning them in Mr. Hambdins and others cases.
Ship money, Tonnage, Poundage, Loanes, Excise and other Impositions not -- only
in his Parliaments, (where they were fully debated without restraint, and Laws
passed against them afterward by his own Royal assent thereto) but likewise
in all his other Courts, where they were first brought in question. Yet now in
our N^w Free State, under these greatest pretended Patrons of our Laws and
Liberties, all Courts, Judges, Justices, and other Officers must conform to
these illegal Impositions, and their tyrannical ways of inforcement, without
any opposition or dispute whatsoever; and all Counselors, Attorneys,
Solicitors and others, must neither argue, nor advise, nor act. in any kind
against them. And is this the glorious old ancient English Liberty, Freedom,
Property, Law, and free course of Justice, we have spent so many millions of
Treasure, so many years of public Consultations, wars, Prayers, Fasts,
Tears, and such Oceans of precious christian Protestant English blood,
inviolably to maintain and perpetuate to posterity? If any Freeborn English
men whatsoever dare publicly aver it, let them do it at the peril of their
infamy, execration in all future ages, yea of their own heads and Souls. If
they cannot but now absolutely disavow it, let them with shame and indignation
disclaim, renounce such illegal Ordinances, Excises, as most detestable both
to God and all true-born English free men. 2.


The 2 is, The present continuing Impositions of Customs Tonnage and Poundage
upon Goods, Merchandises imported and exported, without any grant thereof by
Parliament, by a new Printed Paper, entitled, an Ordinance of March, 23 1653.
thus peremptorily imposing them without any Prologue or Inducement to satisfy
the people either in Equity or Justice, much less in their Legality in respect
of those who thus impose them for sundry years yet to come. Be it ordained by
his highness, the Lord Protector, with the advice and consent of the Council,
that one Act of Parliament (though no See Cook; 4. Justi. c. 1. Brooks
Parliament 4. 76 42. 107. and my Plea for the Lords.
Act at all by any known Laws, Statutes, Law Books, Records, Customs or
Constitutions of the Realm, bu^ a mere Nullity) entitled, an Act for the
Continuation of the Customs, until the 26 of March, 1653, and all clauses and
powers therein contained are, and ARE HEREBY CONTINUED, and SHALL and DO STAND
IN FULL FORCE UNTIL THE 26 DAY OF MARCH in the year of our Lord 1658. etc. By
which these New Legislators, by their own inherent Superlative Power, presume
to impose this Tax upon the whole Nation, (without any grant in Parliament) for
full 5 years space, not only contrary to the Sea Cooks 4. Justit. c. 1. and
Rastal. Taxes.
Presidents in all former Kings raigns, who never claimed nor received it, but
by special grant in Parliament; but likewise contrary to this memorable
Remonstrance, made by the whole House of Commons in the Parliament of 3 Caroli,
(never yet Printed to my knowledge.)

Most gracious Sovereign, your Majesty's most loyal and dutiful Subjects,
(the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled,) being in nothing more
careful than of the Honor and Prosperity, of your Majesty and the Kingdom,)
which they know does much depend upon that union and relation betwixt your
Majesty and your people) do with much sorrow apprehend, that by reason of the
incertainty of their continuance together, the unexpected interruptions which
have been cast upon them, and the shortness of time in which your Majesty has
determined to end this Session; they cannot bring to maturity and perfection
diverse businesses of weight, which they have taken into their consideration and
resolution, as most important for the common good.

Amongst other things, they have taken into especial care the preparing of a
Bill for the granting to your Majesty such a Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage,
as might uphold your Profit and Revenue, in as ample manner as their just care
and respect of Trade (wherein not only the prosperity, but even the life of the
Kingdom does consist) would permit. But being a work which will require much
time and preparation, by Conference with your Majesty's Officers, and with the
Merchants, not only of London, but of other remote parts; they find it not
possible to be accomplished at this time; wherefore considering it will be
much more prejudicial to the Right of the Subject, Nota.
if your Majesty should continue to receive the same without Authority of Law,
after the determination of a Session, then if there had been a recess by
Adjournment only ( in which case that intended Grant would have related to the
first day of the Parliament) and assuring themselves, That your Majesty is
resolved to observe that your royal Answer, which you have made to the Petition
of Right of both Houses of Parliament; yet doubting lest your Majesty may be
misinformed concerning this particular case, as if you might continue to take
those Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage, and other Impositions of Merchants
without breaking that Answer; they are forced, by that duty which they owe to
your Majesty, and to those whom they represent, to declare, THAT THERE OUGHT
NOT ANY IMPOSITION TO BE LAID UPON THE GOODS OF MERCHANTS EXPORTED OR IMPORTED
WITHOUT COMMON CONSENT BY ACT OF PARLIAMENT, Nota.
WHICH IS THE RIGHT AND INHERITANCE OF YOUR SVBJECTS, FOVNDED NOT ONLY UPON THE
MOST ANCIENT AND ORIGINAL CONSTITVTION OF THIS KINGDOM, BUT OFTEN CONFIRMED AND
DECLARED IN DIVERSE STA^VTE LAWS? And for the better manifestation thereof, may
it please your Majesty to understand, That although your royal Predecessors,
the Kings of this Realm have often had such Subsidies, and Impositions granted
unto them upon diverse occasions, especially for the guarding of the Seas, and
safeguard of Merchants, Nota.
yet the Subjects have been ever careful to use such Cautions and limitations
in those Grants, as might prevent any Claim to be made, that such Subsidies do
proceed from duty, and not from the free gift of the Subject, and that they
have heretofore limited a time in such Grants, and for the most part but short,
as for a year, or two; and if it were continued longer, they have sometimes
directed a certain space of resensation or intermission, that so the Right of
the Subject might be more evident. At other times it has been granted upon
occasion of War for certain numbers of years, with Proviso, that if the War
were ended in the mean time, then the grant should cease. And of course it has
been sequestered into the hands of some Subjects to be employed for guarding of
the Coasts; and it is acknowledged by the ordinary Answers of your Majesty's
Predecessors, in their assents to the Bills of Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage,
that it is of the nature of other Subsidies, proceeding from the good will of
the Subject. Very few of your Predecessors had it for life, until the reign of
Henry 7. Though he came in by the Sword, as a kind of Conqueror.
who was so far from conceiving he had any right thereunto, that although he
granted Commissions for collecting certain Duties and Customs due by Law, yet
he made no Commission for receiving the Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage, until
the same was granted to him in Parliament.

Since his time, all the Kings and Queens of this Realm have had the like
Grants for life, by the free love and good will of the Subject; and whenever
the people have been grieved by laying any Impositions or other Charges upon
their Goods and Merchandises without authority of Law, ( which has been very
seldom) yet upon complaint in Parliament they have been forthwith releeved,
Nota.
saving in the time of your royal Father, who having through ill counsel
raised the Rates of Merchandises to that height at which they now are, yet he
was pleased so far to yee^d to the complaint of his people, Nota.
as to offer, that if the value of these Impositions which he had set, might be
made good unto him, he would bind himself, and his Heirs by Act of Parliament,
never to lay any other; which offer the Commons at that time, in regard of the
great burden, did not think fit to yield unto.

Nevertheless your loyal Commons in this Parliament, out of their especial zeal
to your Service, and special regard of your pressing occasions, have taken into
their considerations; so to frame a Grant of Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage to
your Majesty, that both you might have been better enabled for the defense of
your Realm, and your Subjects by being secure from all undue Charges, be the
more encouraged cheerfully to proceed in their course of Trade; by the increase
whereof your Majesty's profit, and likewise the strength of the Kingdom would
be very much augmented. But not being now able to accomplish this their desire,
there is no And are not all the Commons Merchants, Freemen of England bound to
use the same course, and make the some Declaration now?
course left unto them without manifest breach of their Duty, both to your
Majesty and their Country, save only to make this humble Declaration, THAT THE
RECEIVING OF TONNAGE and POVNDAGE, and OTHER IMPOSITIONS NOT GRANTED BY
PARLIAMENT, Nota.
IS A BREACH OF THE FVNDAMENTAL LIBERTIES OF THIS KINGDOM, and CONTRARY TO YOUR
MAJESTY'S ROYAL ANSWER TO THE SAID PETITION OF RIGHT; And therefore they do
most humbly beseech your Majesty to forbear any further receiving of the same,
And can our p^esent Grandees take it in ill part if we refuse to pay them now,
being demand^d without Warrant of a Law, and the receivers of them in a
Praemunire by express Act of Parliamen of 16 Caroli, made since this
Remonstrance.
and not to take it in ill part from those of your Majesty's loving Subjects,
WHO SHALL REFVSE TO MAKE PAYMENT OF ANY SVCH CHARGES WITHOUT WARRANT OF LAW
DEMANDED. And as by this forbearance, your most excellent Majesty shall
manifest unto the World your ROYAL JUSTICE IN THE OBSERVATION OF YOUR LAWS; so
they doubt not hereafter, at the time appointed for their coming again, they
shall have occasion to express their great desire to advance your Majesty's
HONOR and PROFIT,

The King dissolving this Parliament on a sudden, and continuing to take
Tonnage and Poundage by his Royal Prerogative without any Act of Parliament,
sundry Alderman Chambers, Mr. Rolls, and others.
Merchants upon the Commons Remonstrance, refused to pay the same; whereupon
their Goods were seized: of which they complaining in Parliament, 16 Caroli,
were Voted full Reparations against the Customers, with Damages for the same.
And to prevent the Kings Claim thereunto by right; with all future Demands and
Collections thereof from the Subject without grant in Parliament, they Declared
and Enacted by three special Acts of Parliament 16, and 17, Caroli, That IT IS
and HAS BEEN THE ANCIENT RIGHT OF THE SVBJECTS OF THIS REALM; Nota.
That NO SUBSIDY, CUSTOM, IMPOST, OR OTHER CHARGES WHATSOEVER OUGHT OR MAY BE
LAID OR IMPOSED UPON ANY MERCHANDISE EXPORTED OR IMPORTED BY SUBJECTS, DENIZENS
OR ALIENS, WITHOUT COMMON CONSENT IN PARLIAMENT, and that if any Customer,
Controller, or any other Officer, or Person, should take or receive, or cause
to be taken or received the said Subsidy, or any other Impost upon any
Merchandise whatsoever, exported or imported, except the same be due, by Grant
IN PARLIAMENT, shall incur the penalties and forfeitures OF A PREMVNIRE, to the
which the King gave his Royal Assent. And to prevent any future prescription
thereunto by the King, they discontinued it for some time, and then granted it
specially from Month to Month, or some short space with sundry limitations, and
the penalty of A PREMVNIRE if otherwise received, by several New Acts of
Parliament, to which the King gave his assent. These Acts the King himself in
his Proclamation of the sixteenth of December, in the eighteenth year of his
reign, styles, THE FENCES OF THE SVBJECTS PROPERTY, received from Us, and
understood by Us, as one of THE GREATEST GRACES THE CROWN EVER CONFERRED ON THE
SVBJECT; And by that Proclamation, he prohibited all his Subjects, both the
payment and receipt of any Moneys for Customs, or other Maritine Duties,
contrary to this Act, by any Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament; under pain
of a PRAEMUNIRE, and of being likewise proceeded against as ill-affected persons
to the Peace of the Kingdom.

Whereupon the Lords and Commons in their answer to this Proclamation; though
they declared; that the intent and meaning of that penal Clause of a
PRAEMVNIRE and other Forfeitures (in these new statutes, which likewise disable
every person, Customer, Officers who should take or receive, or cause to be
taken or received any such subsidy or imposition upon any Merchandise, during
his life, to sue or implead any persons, in any action real, mixed or personal
in any Court whatsoever,) was only to restrain the Crown, from imposing any
duty or payment on the Subjects, without their consent in Parliament: and that
it was not intended to extend to any case whereunto the LORDS and COMMONS GIVE
THEIR ASSENT IN PARLIAMENT (which they never did to this New White Hall
Ordinance, nor the pretended Act recited in it, therefore the imposers and
receivers of it by virtue thereof, without such assent in Parliament, are
within the penalties of the aforesaid Statutes:) Yet to avoid the danger of a
Praemunire in their Officers, by exacting it only by an Ordinance of both
Houses, without a special Act of Parliament; they did by their first Exact
Collection p. 790. to 797.
Ordinances, impose and demand Customs, Tonnage Poundage and new Imposts, not
as a Legal Duty, but only BY WAY OF LOAN, til the Act of Parliament for their
future continuance should be assented to by the King: as their Declaration of
31 December 1642. and their Ordinance of the same date, concerning the subsidy
of Tonnage and Poundage attest. By what coulor of Law, Justice, Right, this
ancient birthright of all English Subjects, so lately declared by three Acts
of Parliament, to which most of our late and present White Hall Grandees were
parties, comes to be lost and forfeited by our contests to preserve it; or how
the Customs, Imposts of Tonnage, and Poundage, can be now imposed, continued
on, or exacted from the Subjects by any Powers, Officers, or persons
Whatsoever, and levied by severest penalties, Forfeitures, Imprisonments,
Seisures, by pretext of this White-hal Ordinance, ( though no ways granted by
common consent and Act of Parliament,) without incurring a Praemunire; and
forementioned penalties, disabilities; or without subverting the Fundamental
Liberty, Property, Franchises, Laws, Statutes of the whole English Nation, in a
far higher degree then ever in former ages, I cannot yet discern; and all our
New Governors, Merchants, Customers, Officers and other persons, who have any
Cordial affection, Love, Zeal to their own or the peoples hereditary Rights and
Privileges, may do well to demurre in Law upon it, till they can satisfy their
own and other men's consciences therein, to prevent the dangerous consequences
of such an ill president to posterity. In the Parliament of 1 H. 4. rot. Parl.
n. 32, 33, 34, 36. These were the principal Articles of impreachment exhibited
against King Richard the Second; for which he was forced to depose himself, as
unfit to Govern, and resign up his Crown to King Henry the Fourth. See
Historiae Anglicanae Londini. 1652. Col. 2750, 2751. Halls Chronicle f. 7, 8.
John Trussel in. 23. R. 2. p 46. Grafton p. 401.
That whereas the King of England out of the profits of the Realm, and the
Patrimony belonging to his Crown, might live honestly without oppression of his
people, so as the Kingdom were not burdened with the extraordinary expenses of
war, that this King during the Truces between the Realm and the Adversaries
thereof; gave and squandered away a great part of the Crown Lands to unworthy
persons, and thereupon exacted almost every year, so many Taxes and Grants of
Aid from his Subjects of the Realm, that he thereby GREATLY and TOO
EXCESSIVELY OPPRESSED HIS PEOPLE, TO THE IMPOVERISHING OF HIS REALM. That the
same King being unwilling to keep and defend the just Laws and Customs of his
Realm, and to do according to his pleasure, whatsoever should suite with his
desires, frequently when the Laws of his Realm were expounded and declared to
him by the Justices and others of his Council, who requested him to administer
Justice according to those Laws, said expressly with an austere and frownning
Countenance, THAT THE LAWS WERE HIS more suo, AFTER his own MANNER; and
sometimes, THAT THEY WERE IN HIS OWN BREAST, and THAT HE ALONE COULD ALTER and
MAKE THE LAWS OF HIS REALM, And being seduced with this opinion, he permitted
not Justice to be done to very many of his Liege people, but compelled very
many to cease from the prosecution of common Justice. That when as afterward
in his Parliament certain Statutes were made, which might always bind, till
they were specially repealed by another Parliament, the same King desiring to
enjoy so great Liberty, that none of these Statutes might so bind him, but
that he might execute and do according to the pleasure of his own Will, which
he could not do of right; subtly procured such a Petition to be presented to
him in his Parliament, in the behalf of the Commons of his Realm, and to be
granted to him in the general; THAT HE MIGHT BE SO FREE AS ANY OF HIS
PROGENITORS WERE BEFORE HIM. By color of which Petition and Grant, he
frequently did, and commanded to be done, MANY THINGS CONTRARY TO THE SAID
STATVTES NOT REPEALED, GOING AGAINST THEM EXPRESSLY, and WITTINGLY, AGAINST HIS
OATH AT HIS CORONATION. That although by the Statutes and Customs of his Realm,
in the summoning of every Parliament, his people in every County of the Realm
ought to be free, to elect and depute Knights for the said Counties to sit
(...) Parliament, both TO RECEIVE their GRIEVANCES, and TO PROSECVTE REMEDIES
THEREUPON, AS IT SHALL SEEM EXPEDIENT TO THEM; yet the said King, that he might
in his Parliament be able to obtain the effect of his rash Will, frequently
directed his Mandates to his Sheriffs, that they should cause to come to his
Parliament CERTAIN PERSONS NAMED BY THE KING HIMSELF, AS KNIGHTS OF THE SHIRE;
Which Knights verily favoring the said King, he might easily enduce, as he
frequently did, sometimes by diverse threats and terrors, and sometimes by
gifts, TO CONSENT TO THOSE THINGS WHICH WERE VERY PREJVDICIAL TO THE REALM, and
VERY BVRDENSOME TO THE PEOPLE; Nota.
and specially, TO GRANT TO THE SAID KING A SUBSIDY FOR CERTAIN YEARS, TO THE
OPPRESSING OF His People overmuch. That although the Lands and Tenements, Goods
and Chattels of every Freeman, by the Laws of the Realm used in all former ages
past, ought not to be seized, unless they had forfeited; Yet notwithstanding,
the said King purposing and endeavoring to enervate these Laws, in the
presence of very many of the Lords and Commons of this Realm frequently said
and affirmed, That the Life, Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattles of every one
of his Subjects, are at his will and pleasure, without any Forfeiture (by the
known Laws) which is altogether contrary to the Laws and customs of the Realm
aforesaid. Whether all these high Misdemeanors charged against King Richard,
have not been revived, and acted over and over both by words and deeds in a
far higher degree than ever he was guilty of them, by some late, present
Whitehall Grandees, Army Officers, New Instrument-makers, Legitors, and
Imposers of Excises, Customs, Imposts, Tonnage, Poundage, Contributions for
many years yet to come; and of that constant Annual Revenue projected, intended
by them in their 27 Article: I remit to their own judgments, consciences, and
our whole Kingdom to resolve, and what they demerit for such extravagant high
offenses, for which he lost Crown and Regal power, let others determine.

The 3. particular, is their late incumbent Imposition of 6. Months new
Contribution, by a mere Self-enacted Whitchall Jurisdiction, without any
consent, grant, in or by the People in Parliament, by that they entitle, An
Ordinance of the 8. of ^une 1654. beginning thus (in a most imperial Style,
transcending all former Acts of Parliament, granting or imposing any Subsidies)
without any Prologue to sweeten it, or court the people to its ready payment.

Be it Ordained and Enacted by his Highness the Lord Protector* with the
consent of his Council, and it is hereby Ordained, That toward the maintenance
of the Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth An Assessement of one Hundred and
Twenty Thousand Pounds per Mensem for Three Monethe, commencing the 24 of June,
1654 and ending the 29 of Sept. following, shall be Taxed, Levied, Collected
and Paid in England and Wales in such sort as is hereafter expressed. The full
sum of the said Three Months Assessment of One hundred and twenty thousand
pounds by the Month, to be at once wholly collected and paid in to the
Receivers General at or before the tenth day of October next, etc. The Levying
thereof upon the refusers has been by distress of Goods by Soldiers,
Troopers, and quartering them on the refusers till payment, and double the
value many times paid to, and exacted by the Soldiers for their pains;
adjudged (even by some of our New Grandees Votes who prescribe such Taxes and
ways of levying them) to be No less then High Treason, and levying War in
See Mr. St. John's Argument at his Attainder. p. 36. to 52.
Straffords case, for which principally he was condemned, and lost his head on
Tower Hill, as a Traitor.

In this New Whitehall Tax without a Parliament (intended as a leading
President to bind the whole Nation in perpetuity, if now submitted to, as the
27 Article intimates) there is a double violation, subversion of the
Fundamental Laws and Properties of the Nation in the Highest degree. The first,
is by the reviving, imposing of See Judge Crooks, and Judge Huttons printed
Arguments, and my Humble Remonstrance against the Illegal Tax of Shipmony.
Ship-mony on the whole Realm, and all Inland Counties, as well as Maritine,
for the Maintenance of the Navies by Sea, (which should be maintained only by
the Customs) and that in a far higher proportion than the Shipmony imposed by
Writs by our late beheaded King; amounting to no less than Forty thousand
pounds per Mensem at last, by way of Contribution alone, besides the Customs,
Tonnage, Poundage and Excise paid toward it.

This Imposition of Shipmony, by the late King, (though ratified with the advice and consent of his Council, many colorable Presidents, Records in all
former ages, and the precedent Resolution of all his Judges, under their hands,
as just, and legally imposed in case of Necessity and Public danger only,
without consent in Parliament) together with the Judgment and Proceedings of
the Judges in the Eschequer Chamber in justification thereof, were in the last
Parliament, after solemn debate, by the Printed at the end of Judge Huttoes
A^gument, and amongst the sta^utes of 16 Caroli.
Votes and Judgments of both Houses, on the 20. Ian. and 26 February, resolved
(Nemine contradicent^) To be contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm,
contrary to the Rights and Properties of the Subjects of this Realm, contrary
to former Judgments in Parliament, contrary to the great Charter and to the
Petition of Right: and voted to be so declared by the Judges at the Assizes in
the several Counties; the same to be entered and enrolled in the several
Counties by the Clerks of the Assizes. After which, it was for ever damned by a
special Act of Parliament, to which the King himself gave his Royal assent,
(afterward cited and enforced by both Houses. Exact Collection p. 886. 887. in
the case of the Array.) And those Judges who argued, That the King might
lawfully impose Shipmony on the Subjects, without a Parliament in cases of
Danger and Necessity, of which they affirmed him to be the sole Judge; were by
all impeached by the House of Commons of High Treason, for these Opinions of
theirs; whereby they traitorously and wickedly endeavored to subvert The
Fundamental Laws and established Government of the Realm of England, and
instead thereof to set up an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government against Law;
of which at large Chap 1. p. Diurnal Occurences and Speeches, p. 191. to 265.
before. How any present Powers or Persons then, can either impose, justify,
levy, enforce it upon any Pretext of Necessity, or public Danger, on the
whole Nation, after all these late Resolutions, Judgments, Votes,
Impeachments, and a special Act of Parliament so fresh in memory (especially
such who were parties to them) without incurring the self-same Impeachments and
guilt, as these Shipmony Judges did, or a severer Censure then they sustained,
let their own Conscsences, and those who may on^ day prove their Judges,
resolve them at leisure, being past my skill to do it?

The 2. is, By the imposing of a direct heavy Tax, Tallage, and Monthly
contr^bution, and that only ( for the Maintenance of such a Land Army, which
has offered force unto the Members of both Houses, subverted, destroyed that
Parliament, Government, Laws, Liberty, for whose preservation they were
specially raised, Commissioned, engaged) without, yea against the Peoples
assent in Parliament: which no King of England, with the advice and consent of
his Council, had ever any Right or Power to do, or audacity enough to attempt,
no not William the Conqueror, C^nute, Henry the 4th. Edward the 4th. or Henry
the 7th, who came principally by power of the Sword, to their Sovereign Regal
Authorities. By what Justice, Power, Legal Right, any other person or persons
whatsoever, who are neither rightful Kings, nor Parliaments of England in
their own or others repute, can either impose, levy, exact such extravagant
Heavy Taxes, Contributions, from the exhausted Freeborn People of England,
(especially being now pretended new Free State,) against all our Fundamental
Laws, Statutes, Franchises, Charters, Properties, Liberties, Records,
Parliamentary Judgments, their own late Remonstrances, Declarations, Votes,
the Presidents of all former ages, yea of all our Kings coming in by the Sword
to their Thrones, let the Imposers of them seriously advise, as they will
answer it at their utmost peril to God, Men, and the whole English Nation; who
expected better things from them, even a total final exemption from all such
illegal Burdens, after all their late Wars, Agonies, Expenses, to redeem and
preserve their Laws, Liberties, Estates, Properties, Posterities, from such
exorbitant Oppressions, diametrically contrary to all the forecited Judgments.
Resolutions, Remonstrances, Statutes, Votes, Presidents, and sundry others,
which I shall hereafter insist on in the third Chapter of this Treatise to
which I must refer you: And shall we not then adventure a distress, a Prison,
quartering upon, or any other Duresse, yea Death it self, rather than
volutarily submit our selves and Posterities backs thereto, when as we spend
our Bloods, Lives, Treasures, against lesser, easier, Royal Impositions? How
shall we answer it to God, Men, or our enslaved Posterities, if we now most
safely, unworthily submit thereto in perpe^uity, without the least legal,
strenuous, public oppression or debate of its legality.

If any here allege (as some men do) in Justification of these three, Objection.
(or rather four) forecited kinds of illegal universal Taxes, imposed, levied,
on the whole Nation, without consent of Parliament; That they are all warranted
by the Instrument of the new Gevernment, Article 27, 28, 29. That a constant
yearly revenue shall be raised, settled and established, for maintaining Ten
Thousand Horse and Dragoons, and Twenty Thousand Foot in England, Scotland, and
Ireland for the Defense and security thereof, and also for a convenient number
of Ships for guarding the Seas, besides two hundred thousand pounds per annum,
for defraying other necessary charges, for Administration of Justice, and other
expenses of the Government, which Revenue shall be raised by the Customs, and
such other ways and means which shall be agreed u^o^. By the Lord Protector and
Council; and shall not be taken away, or diminished, nor the way agreed upon
for the raising of the same altered, but by consent of the Lord Protector and
the Parliament. That the said yearly Revenue shall be paid into the public
Treasury, and issued out for the uses aforesaid. That in case there shall not
because hereafter to keep up so great a Defense at Land or Sea, but that there
be an abatement made thereof; The Money which shall be saved thereby, shall
remain in bank for the Public service, etc. All which they, in the True state
of the Case of the Commonwealth, p. 43, 44, commend, for a most excellent
Provision, A constant Revenue, A Public Bank or Treasury upon all occasions,
etc. which they intend to perpetuate on the whole Kingdom, without end or
abatement, as well in times of peace, safety, as of war and danger. Therefore
the Protector and his Counsel at Whitehall in pursuance hereof, may lawfully
impose (by virtue of these Articles) both Excise, Customs, Tonnage, Poundage,
Ship Money and contributions, for these ends upon our three whole Kingdoms and
all the Freeborn English by printed Ordinances of their own, in what
Proportions, and for what time they please (yea and for perpetuity) without
consent or grant in Parliaments, and restrain all future Parliaments, both from
taking away, or diminishing them, or altering the way agreed on for their
raising, without their Protectors consent thereto; (as the express words run,
and their practice yet expounds them:) notwithstanding all former Laws,
Statutes, Charters, Resolutions, Judgments, Remonstrances, Oaths, Vows,
Declarations, Presidents) either in or out of Parliament) to the contrary.

To this I answer, Answer.
first, that I cannot but stand amazed to hear any Army Officers, Soldiers,
Lawyers, or persons in present trust or power, who bear the name or hearts of
English Freemen, Saints, Christians, Lovers, Patriots or Protectors of their
Native Country of England, its Parliaments, Laws, and Liberties, to make such a
stupendous irrational objection, as this, which justifies all the exorbitant
Opinions, Proceedings, Taxes, Oppressions, Impositions, of our late beheaded
King, Strafford, Canterbury, the Ship Money Judges, old Whitehall Council
Table, yea all our other former Kings, and their evil Counselors most
irregular Exaction of money in all ages from Brute till now; and will render the
very worst of all our Kings, if compared with our late and present Tax-masters,
and pretended Assertors of our Liberties, rather good, gracious, just,
righteous, Princes, Benefactors, than Tyrants or Oppressors, for the future,
seeing they never out of Parliament imposed, enforced on their subjects any
such heavy, various, perpetual Taxes, Imposts, Excises, Ordinances, or new
Articles of the Government^, as these forecited.

2ly. This Objection (if admitted just or solid) gives a private Cabinet
^uncto, of obscure persons (yet unknown by name unto our Nation) a Superlative,
Super-Parliamentall Authority, to contrive and set on foot, a new devised
Instrument, to undermine and blow up all our former fundamental Laws, Customs,
great Charters, Liberties, Franchises, Properties, Parliaments, former frame of
Government at one crake, after all our late bloody, costly contestations for
their preservation, both in the Supreme Courts of Public Justice, and fields
of War, without our privities or consents thereto, either in or out of
Parliament, contrary to all their and our Protestations, Oaths, Covenants,
Commissions, Trusts, Promises, Pretenses; And instead of English Freemen (as we
were before these contests and wars) to strip us quite naked of all our former
Freedoms, Liberties, Properties, Customs, Rights, derived to us from our Noble
Ancestors, as the purchase of their dearest blood and render us and our
Posterities for the future, the most absolute Issachars, Vassals, slaves under
Heaven, inthralled to all sorts of intolerable, illegal, unpresidented,
incessant, endless Taxes of all kinds, without hopes of alteration or
mitigation by any future Parliaments, (without their Protectors or his
Successors voluntary consents, which they cannot expect) and to a constant
standing Mercenary Army of Horse and Foot, by Land, and Navies of Hirelings by
Sea, to keep us and ours in perpetual Bondage under such New irregular
Successive Tax-Masters; who must elect their successors like themselves.

3ly. All our former ancient Laws, Statutes, Parliaments till now, in all
changes, Revolutions of State or Government, ever constantly asserted,
maintained, provided, See p. 12 to 20 before the 1 Proposition, and Statutes,
Arguments thereunto: specially 23 E. 1. c. 5. 6. 34. E. 1. c. 1, 2, 3. 14 E. 3.
c. 21, and Stat. 2. c. 1. 3 Caroli The Petition of Right.
That no Tax, Tallage, Custom, Contribution, Impost, Subsidy, Charge, Excise,
Loan or Payment whatsoever, should be imposed on the Freemen of England,
without their common consent and grant, in full, free, lawful English
Parliaments; and if any were imposed otherwise by any Power or Pretext
whatsoever out of Parliament, that it was Null, and void to all intents, to
bind the people. But these Monstrous Articles quite turn the scales; impowring
a few private persons (neither elected nor intru^ted by the people for such
ends) by color of this ill tuned Instrument (contrived privately by themselves
alone, as most conjecture, for their own self-interests) to impose perpetual
Imposts, Excises, Customs, Contributions of all kinds, on our whole three
Kingdoms and Nations, which neither they, nor their Parliaments (though never
so grievous, extravagant, unreasonable or oppressive) shall have power to take
away, diminish, alter, or regulate in the forecited illegal, oppressing,
violent ways of levying them, unless their Grand Sovereign Lord Protector,
shall first give his consent thereto; (which they cannot expect, nor enforce,)
and in cale of his refusal, they are utterly left remediless; he having Thirty
thousand armed Mercenary Horse and Foot in several Quarters by Land, and a
strong numerous. Navy by Sea at his command, to keep them under endless
Tributes to him and his Successors for ever. O England, England, (to omit
Scotland and Ireland) consider seriously, and timely, to what a blessed
Liberty, and long-expected freedom, this New invented Instrument and the Irish
Harp, lately quartered with the English bloody Cross, as our Free State Arms,
has now at last reduced thee, if these objected Articles must remain
inviolable, maugre all our Laws, Statutes, etc. to the contrary; as our New
Tax-masters and their Instruments, both literally and practically conclude,
unless you use your uttermost, lawful, present, diligent, joint Endeavors to
prevent it (...)

4ly, The whole House of Commons, yea some who were parties to this Instrument,
lately impeached and with the Lords ^ouse, by judgment of Parliament
condemned, beheaded the Sea their Impeachments and printed trials, and Mr. St.
John's Argument at Law against Strafford, p. 34, 35.
Earl of Strafford, and Archbishop of Canterbury, as guilty of High Treason; in
subverting our Fundamental Laws, Liberties, and setting up an arbitrary
Tyrannical Government; for resolving at the Council Table, beforehand, To
assist the King to raise Moneys on the Subjects to carry on the Wars against
the Scots, by extraordinary ways, in case the Parliament should prove peevish,
and refuse to grant such Subsidies as they demanded of them. And for Straffords
affirming, That Ireland was a Conquered Nation, and that the King might do with
them what he pleased: That they were a Conquered Nation, and were to expect
Laws as from a Conqueror. And that he would make an Act of Council board in
that Kingdom of Ireland, as binding as an Act of Parliament. And do not the
Objectors, Contrivers of this New Instrument Articles, and those who now
vigorously put it in execution in any kind (as too many do;) speak out, and do
as much, as bad, as they in each of these particulars; nay far more and
worse? Do not they (after the late violent breaches of our former Parliaments,
and their own Junctoes by the Army) raise moneys in more vast proportions, by
more irregular, violent, extraordinary ways, by longer continued Taxes,
Excises, Impositions, and constant yearly Revenues, then they ever did or
designed, quite out of Parliament, by their own arrogated Legislative
Tax-imposing Power? Do not they by this very Instrument, proclaim to all the
world, that not only Ireland and Scotland, but England it self, is now a mere
Conquered Nation? that thereupon they may do with us what they please; and we
must not only expect, but receive Laws from them as Conquerors; having already
published whole Volumes of New-Laws and Ordinances of all sorts at their
New-erected Council board (which the Old never did) and made them as binding,
not only to Ireland, but England and Scotland too, as an Act of Parliament? yea
far more binding than any Parliament Acts, by binding the hands, power of
future Parliaments themselves, and our three whole Nations (as aforesaid) and
that in Perpetuity (which no Cook 4 Inst. p. 42. 11 R. 2. c. 4. 1 H. 4. rot,
Parl. n. 143. 2 H. 4. c. 22. 21 R. 2. c. 4, 5, 6. 1 H. 4. c 7. rot. Parl. n 48.
60. 68.
Parliaments, nor Acts of Parliament can do) and by repealing, nulling all our
former Fundamental Laws, Charters, Liberties, Free Government made by
Parliaments, with our very Parliaments themselves? And if so, let the Objectors
now seriously consider both the Treasonableness, unparliamentalness, sad
Consequences of this Objection, and what ill effects it may produce in present
or future ages.

5ly, The Statutes of 25 E. 1. c. 2. and 42 E. 3. c: 2. yet in force, declare
All judgments given or to be given by the Justices, or any other, contrary to
the points of the Great Charter, to See Sir Edw. Cooks Preface to his 2.
Institutes.
be void and holden for Naught: and if any Statute be made to the contrary, it
shall be holden for none. Therefore these Instrument Articles, and Paper
Ordinances made by color of them, in direct opposition to, and subversion of
the points of the Great Charter, and all other Acts for their confirmation,
must needs be holden for naught and void to all intents, to bind this whole
Freeborn Nation, or any one Freeman of England in particular.

6. If these Articles and Instrument (for the premised reasons, and defect of
Legal power in the yet unknown Instrument-makers) be not void in Law, to all
intents and purposes, as all wise men repute them; yet other clauses, and
Articles of this very Instrument, (admit it valid and obligatory to our
Nations) give a fatal blow to all the forementioned Excises, Impositions,
Contributions by color thereof, and to the Objected Articles.

First the Prologue to the Oath, at the close thereof, proclaims the Government
settled by it, to be such, as by the blessing of God might be lasting, secure
Property, and answer The Great Ends of Religion and Liberty, so long Contended
for: But these Articles (as the Objection and premises evidence) do no ways
secure, but utterly subvert all Property, in the highest degree; and answer
not, but eternally frustrate, abolish, the Great ends of our Religion
(condemning all illegal, unrighteous Taxes and Jer. 21. 12. c. 22. 3, 4, 5. Ps.
12. 5 Ezech. 18. 5. to 14. c. 22. 12, 13, 27, 29, 30. c. 45. 7. to 10. c. 46.
18. Mich. 3. 1. to 5. c. 2. 1, 2, 3. c. 7. 2. Isa 58. 6.
Tyrannical, Usurping, Oppressing arbitrary Powers) but especially of our
Liberties, so long contended for; and are rather likely to raise new troubles
and unsettlements, than make the Government lasting (as many late Presidents,
with those ancient ones in Dr. Beard his Theater of Gods Judgments, l. 2. c.
36. to 42. may persuade us:) Therefore it must be exploded, as repugnant to the
whole scope of the Instrument.

2. The 6. Article of it is fatal and destructive to the objected Articles;
viz: That the Laws shall not be altered, suspended, abrogated, or repealed, nor
any New Law made, Nor any Tax, Charge, or Imposition laid upon the People, but
by common consent in Parliament. Save Only, as is expressed in the 30th Article
(not 27.) Now these objected 27, 28, 29 Articles, being diametrically contrary
to every word, clause of this 6 Article, and agreeable to our Fundamental Laws
(which the last clause of the Oath obliges their Protector and his Successors
to maintain, and to govern the People by) which Laws must be all See True, etc.
p. 17, 18.
altered, suspended, abrogated, repealed by these Articles alone, if reputed
valid; in giving Power to them, to impose any Tax, Charge, Imposition upon the
People, without common consent in Parliament; and being not within the saving
of this, or the 30th Article, must needs be void and repealed by this very sixth
Article, and the Oath it self.

3. The 30th Article following them, diametrically contradicts, repeals them in
these words. That the raising of Money for defraying the charges of present
extraordinary Forces both by Land and Sea, in respect of the present wars,
shall be by consent of Parliament: Save only, that the Lord Protector, with the
consent of the Major part of the Council, for preventing the disorders and
dangers which may otherwise fall out both at Sea and Land, shall have power
until the Meeting of the first Parliament (on the 3. September 1654.) to raise
Moneys for the purposes aforesaid. The former part of this Article is consonant
to, and expounded by the 6. forecited, which is more general: and the plain
sense thereof is this. That all moneys raised for defraying the Extraordinary
Forces both by Land and Sea (exceeding the ancient standing Garrisons, Guards
maintained by the old constant Revenues of the Crown, without any Tax upon the
People) shall be by consent of parliament. Therefore a fortiori; all perpetual
standing Taxes, Excises, Contributions to maintain the ordinary and
extraordinary Forces by Land or Sea, and ordinary expenses of the Government
(which, in respect of their constancy, permanency, are far more grievous,
dangerous to the Subject than rare extraordinary ones upon emergent occasions)
must and ought not to be imposed by their new created Power out of Parliament,
after the 3 of September.

It any here object; Objection.
That the latter clause of the 30 Article Save only, etc. Authorized those at
Whitehall, without a Parliament, to impose Excises, Taxes, Customs,
(Impositions, Contributions forementioned, and any other constant annual
Revenue they shall settle, according to the 27 Article; so as it be done before
September 3. 1654. Therefore they are all lawful, because imposed before that
time by their printed Ordinances forecited.

I Answer, Answer.
1. That this saving, is utterly void in law, to all intents, 1. Because it is
not only contrary to all our Fundamental Laws, Great Charters, Statutes, but
repugnant to the body of the 6 Article, and first part of the 30* to which it
is annexed. 2. Because it assigns the Legislative Tax-imposing Power (the
inseparable incommunicable Jurisdiction of our Parliaments alone) to a new
Whitehall Council, by a void instrument made out of Parliament for a certain
time, which biggest Sovereign power, the Parliament it self neither legally
may, nor can, nor ought to transfer by any Ordinance or. Act of Parliament to
any Committee of their own Members, no not for a moment, as is both resolved
and declared by Act of Parliament. 1 H. 4. c. 3. and Rot. Parl. 1 H. 4. n. 26,
48, 6 6, 70. 31 H. 8. c. 8. 34 H. 8. c. 23. and 1. E. 6. c. 12. it being
derogatory and destructive to the free State power, Rights of Parliaments,
tending to the great incommodity of the whole Realm, and of pernicious example
to Posterity, as the whole Parliament of 1. H. 4 long since resolved in
positive terms.

2ly. This saving is just like the Popes old Math. Paris Hist. Angliae London.
1640. p. 810. 818, 854 875.
Detestable Non Obstante, at the close of their Bulls; quae omnem subvertit
praehabitam Justitiam, which subverted all the Justice and Privileges granted
before to any in the Body of those Bulls; and as pernicious as that See M^. Sr.
John's Speech against the ship money Judges, p. 16, 17* 18, 19. Exact. Collect.
p. 885.
Proviso, which the House of Lords desired at first, to have inserted into the
Petition of Right, which would have made it Felo de se, because it insinuated
that the King by his Sovereign power where with the Law had entrusted him, for
the protection, safety, and happiness of his People might impose any Aid, Tax,
Tallage, or charge upon his People without a Parliament, though by his ordinary
power he could not do it. which had left the Subjects in worse case than it
found them, and wholly destructive to it self in all the parts thereof:
whereupon after a conference had concerning it by the Commons, it was totally
rejected by both Houses; as this Salvo must be for the self same reason.

3ly. Admit it valid; yet it gives power to them to raise moneys for the
maintenance by Land and Sea, only until September 3. 1654. and no longer; as is
evident by the very words themselves; and the Confession, Exposition, (of those
who made the Instrument, as most suppose) in their, True State of the Case of
the Commonwealth of England, etc. 1654. p. 39. 40. in these words This power is
to continue only til the sitting of the next Parliament. Yea George Smith in
his new Treatise, entitled, Gods unchangeablenesse, etc. (in justification of
the present Governor and Government) p. 54. writes thus; And for his seeking
to have power to make Laws, and raise mon^ys, it is mere calumniation. He seeks
it not, He claims it not, but leaves it to the wisdom of Parliament, as
appears in Artiole 6. (as is thus excepted) for and in Cases of safety and
necessity, till the time that this present Parliament was assembled, and yet to
be done by him with the advice of his Council, so then he seeks not the
strength nor treasure of the Nation, nor to have it in his own power. Therefore
they can impose no Taxes, Excises, nor Contributions by their printed
Ordinances to continue after its beginning; nor by any future Ordinances (as
they term them) after that time. Now the first Tax of Excise, forementioned, is
imposed till the 26 of March 1655 which is 7 months after the 3 of September
1654. The 2 of Customs, Tonnage and Poundage, is continued til the 26 of March
1658, which is 3 years and 7 months after this 3 of September. And the 3 for
the 6 Months Contribution reaches till the 29 of December 1654, which is near
full 4 Months after the first sitting of that their next Parliament: And any
constant yearly Revenue settled by them, will far exceed this limited time, and
all former Taxes: Therefore all these premised, and all other future Excises,
Customs, Impost, Contributions by pretended Ordinances for their levying after
the 3 of September, exceeding the power and time limited by this Saving, must
be void, and no ways warranted by the very Saving it self, and to be opposed as
such.

4ly. To say, That although these several impositions continue after the 3 of
September 1654, yet they were imposed by their Printed Ordinances before it;
therefore within this Saving is a most absurd excuse and shift, repugnant to
the words, yea wholly destructive to the 6 Article, and first part of the 30,
For by this reason had their forecited Ordinances (or any other dormant or
future Antedated ones yet unpublished) imposed Excises, Customs, Tonnage,
Poundage, Contributions on us for twenty, fifty, an hundred, or a thousand
years yet to come, before the 3. of September, they must have been binding to
us and our Posterities, during all that space, and unavoidable by the people,
or future Parliaments, by this Saving and exposition of it. But the words of
this Saving, giving only Power to raise Moneys until the Meeting of the first
Parliament; not to make New Edicts any time before it to impose and continue
Taxes for any time or years after it, (which would have forestalled, affronted
the next and all future Parliaments in their proper work, of granting,
regulating all future Taxes (according to the 6. and 30. Articles) and made
them mere Ciphers:) clearly takes away this evasion; with all their former and
future Whitehall Impositions after the 3 of September; as contrary both to
their Instrument and Oath.

5ly, The words of the 30th Article whereto this Saving refers, are observable,
That they shall have power until the meeting of the first Parliament, to raise
Moneys for defraying the Charges of the Extraordinary Forces both at Land and
Sea, In respect of the present Wars: To which, for the purposes aforesaid, in
the Saving relates. But the present Wars being many Months since ended, both
by Land and Sea, by the Peace concluded with Foreign Nations: and so no need,
nor use of Extraordinary Forces to be still continued by Land or Sea; the
ancient Trained Bands and Militia of the Realm, being now well able to defend,
secure us at their own cost, without any Mercenary Forces, Excises or
Contributions, only to pay them; the power of raising Moneys in this Saving,
with the grounds thereof, are now at an end, as well as our Wars; and the
whole 27 Article too: Since the old standing Militia, and Trained Bands of the
3. Nations, will be a sufficient Safeguard to them, without our Mercenary Army
or Forces; which See Heylyns Microcosme. p. 756, 757, 758, 395, 412. 507. 577.
578. 642. 672. 704.
usually prove Treacherous Supplanters, Usurpers; Oppressors to all who rely
(...) them; whereupon our prudent Ancesters, since (...)gernes usurpation,
Exact Coll. p. 7. 575. 639, 640, 641. 807. 836. 850. to 890.
entrusted their Militia and Defense of the Realm, only in the hands of the
Nobility, Gentry, Freeholders, and persons of best ability and estates, not in
Mercenary Armies (which supplanted the Britons:) And our Wars now ceasing,
the ancient Revenues, Lands, Customs of the Crown, and Perquisits of the
Courts of Justice, will be sufficient to defray all the Ordinary expenses of
the Government, Navy, old standing Garrisons, (if continued, though useless)
Officers of State and Justice, as they did in See the Act of Resumption, 28 ^.
6. 11. 53.
all former ages, and still ought to do, for the peoples ease and benefit.

6ly, It has been the special policy, care of our prudent Forefathers and
wise See Cooks 4 Inst^t. c. 1. p. 33. Regal Taxes, and here chapter 3. sect. 4, 5,
6.
Parliaments, never to grant any annual Tax or Charge (except Tonnage ^and
Poundage in some cases for a limited time) for Public Defense, unto their
Kings and Governors; nor usually to give them above Subsidy, or one or two
Fifteens, or a single Escuage, and sometimes not so much, in any one
Parliament, upon any extraordinary occasion or necessity, and that upon these
Grounds. 1. Because See 14 E. 3. c. 21. and stat. 2. c. 1. 5. R. 2. stat. 2. c.
2, 3, and all Acts for (...).
extraordinary Aids, ought to be granted only for, and proportioned to
extraordinary, present, emergent Necessities, visibly appearing; which being
not lasting, but momentany and various one from another, no standing certain
Contribution can or ought to be allotted for them, but only a temporary and
mutable; the ordinary settled Crown Revenues being sufficient to defray all
ordinary expenses, without other Aids. 2ly, To keep a perpetual tie upon their
Kings and Governors, to summon frequent Parliaments, and redre^s all their
Grievances in them, before they should receive any Grant of new Ayds or
Subsidies from them, to supply their public Necessities; to preserve a Power
and Right in Parliaments to examine the grounds and present necessity of all
Taxes demanded: and to See Henry de Knyghton, de Eventibus Angliae, l. 5. col.
2681. to 2690. 2 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 20, 21, 24.
take an Account how former Taxes, and the Kings Revenues had been disbursed,
before they granted new ones: All which the granting of standing annual Aids
for public Defense would frust^^e. 3ly, To prevent the encroaching of a
constant Charge and Revenue on the People, which if granted but for years,
life; or but twice or thrice in the same kind and proportion, without
alteration, though but as a free gift in Parliament, would thereupon be
claimed, exacted from them afterward, as a mere just annual Right and Revenue,
without their future grants, as Danegeld, was by some of our Kings of old;
Imposts once granted, by Edward the 3. and other Kings heretofore; and the
Customs of Tonnage and Poundage by King Charles of late. 4ly, To avoid all
unjust Oppressions of the people by imposing on them more Taxes at once than
the present urgent necessities required. 5ly, To prevent the inhaunsing,
doubling of Taxes by any new dangerous Presidents; Sir Edward Co^k observes in
his 4 Institutes, p. 33. That the Commons never used to give above one
Temporary Subsidy, and two Fifteens, in any one Parliament, and sometimes
less; till the Parliament of 31 Eliz. which gave 2. Subsidies, and 4 Fifteens;
upon which first breach of this old circle and usage, their Taxes still
increased afterward by degrees; for in 35, and 39 Eliz. they rose to 3.
Subsidies, and 6 Fifteens: in 43 Eliz. to 4 Subsidies and 8 Fifteens: in 21
Jacobi to 3 Subsidies, and 6 Fifteens, in shorter time then had been before: in
3 Caroli, to 5 Subsidies in shortest time of all: and now of late, to constant
annual Imposts, Excises, and endless Monthly Contributions, amounting to at
least 3 Subsidies every Month. 6ly, Because a standing extraordinary Tax
(especially for years or life) when once claimed or received as part of the
public Revenue, would be hardly relinquished, or discontinued, without much
contest, and danger; as appears by Danegeld of old, and Tonnage, Poundage,
Excise, Monthly Contributions of late imposed as of right upon us, by every new
upstart Power; and when once customarily claimed, collected as a Duty, will no
ways ease nor exempt the people from new Extraordinary Aids and Taxes. This is
evident by that memorable President concerning Abby-Lands, in King Henry the 8
his reign, settled on him as a large annual standing Revenue, of purpose to
defend the Realm, and ease the People from all future Aids, by the Parliaments
of 27 H. 8. c. 28. 31 H. 8. c. 13. 32 H. 8. c. 14. Yet were these Lands no
sooner settled on the Crown for these ends, but in the same Parliament of 32 H.
8. the King demanded and ^ad of his Subjects, one extraordinary Subsidy both of
the Clergy and Laity; and 34 H 8. c. 16, 17. and 37 H. 8. c. 24. he demanded
and had the like Subsidy of them again: and his Successors the like and greater
Subsidies every Parliament since. The like we see in the Case of Tonnage and
Poundage, granted only for the Defense of the Seas and Realm against Foreign
Enemies and Pirates: Which no sooner taken by the late King, as a standing
Revenue of the Crown, but he exacted and levied against Law, a New annual Tax
of Shipmony, to guard the Seas, for which very use he received Tonnage,
Poundage, and the ancient Customs; as our late Governors did, and present do;
together with new Imposts and Excises; and yet impose Land rates of Forty
thousand pounds a Month besides, to Maintain the Navy. To instance in one
particular more: Our late new Governors made sale of all Archbishops, Bishops,
Deanes, Chapters, Delinquents, Kings, Queens, Princes, and Sequestered Lands and
Goods, both in England, Scotland, and Ireland, one after another; under
pretext, to ease the People in, and of their heavy Taxes: But what was the
issue? all their Taxes, Excises, and other Impositions were still continuep on
them, without any intermission or diminution, nay advanced higher than ever, to
120 thousand pounds Contribution by the Month for England, besides Scotland and
Ireland, even whiles all these Lands and Goods were selling; the Lands and
Goods sold, consumed, without any public Account yet given of the Moneys, or
their disposal; or any present ease to the oppressed people: and the ordinary
standing Revenues of the Realm being now by this means decayed, dissipated,
and almost brought to nothing; these New Projectors and Dissipators of this
vast public Revenue; instead of easing, by color of this Instrument, resolve
to impose upon the undone, long-oppressed Peoples gauled, broken backs and
Estates, such perpetual constant, annual Taxes, Excises, Imposts, Revenues as
you have heard, for the Maintenance both of the Army, Navy, Administration of
Justice, and other ordinary expenses of the Government; which no Kings of
England ever yet received, or pretended to. Which if any future Parliaments
shall be so mad, or improvident once to settle, or the Kingdom not unanimously
to oppugn; if settled by them without a Parliament, instead of easing of the
People of their long insupportable Taxes, now their wars are ended; in all
succeeding Parliaments, they shall still be burdened with new extraordinary
Taxes, upon new pretended extraordinary occasions, and Forces raised (as the
words of the 30 Article, compared with the 27 and 29, declare) as if this new
constant revenue had never been settled; and if our Parliaments refuse to grant
them, these New Projecting Tax-Masters (who must dispose of all the moneys in
the intervals of Parliaments) will impose and levy them at their pleasure, by
their Supertranscendent usurped Tyrannical Power and Sword men, and dispose of
them as they please without a Parliament, as they have already done, without
rendering any other public Account to the people thereof, than has hitherto
been given to them of all the many millions of Treasure already extorted from
them of late years, to no other end (as appears by these Articles of our New
Government) but now at last, to bring and keep them under perpetual endless
Taxes of all sorts, and the intolerable, worse than Turkish Slavery of a
perpetual domineering Mercenary Army, Navy, instead of long promised Liberty,
ease and exemption from them, till they are all brought to a morsel of bread,
and till their private estates be utterly consumed, as well as the public
Crown and Church Revenues, yet remaining.

The lad and serious consideration of all which Premises, I humbly submit to
the Impartial Judgments, Consciences of our present Governors, Army Officers,
Soldiers themselves, how discrepant they are from all their former printed
Deolarations; Protestations, Promises, Vows, Engagements to the People, and
what they expected from them; It was the Speech of the Scythian Ambassadors,
to Alexander the Grand Conqueror of the world, Q^. Curtius, Hist. l. 7. p. 831.
Nec Servire ulli possumus, nec regnare desideramus. Si Deus es, tribuere
mortalibus b^nificia debes, non sua eripere, sic Homo^es, id qu^d es semper
esse te cogita, Stultum est eorum memintsse propter quae tui oblivisceris: Let
it be all Heroic English Freemens to our pretended Conquerors; who may do well
to remember that Hermolaus and other Officers, and Soldiers of Alexanders own
Guard, conspired his destruction, after all his Persian Conquests, for this
very reason, which they justified to his face, Qu. Curtius, Hist. l. 8.
Quia non ut ingenuis imperare caepisti, Sed quati in mancipia dominaris;
because he had begun not to reign over them as Freemen, but to domineer over
them like Slaves; and because Revelaetions in this age, may be more prevalent
with some Men than Gods own Oracles, or our Laws; I shall inform our
Tax-imposing Governors; that St. Bridget of Sweden in the 8 Book of her
Printed at Nu^^mbergh, 1521.
Revelations of the Heavenly Emperor unto Kings, cap. 6 records; That she had
this Revelation from the Son of God, That Kings and Governors ought to love
the People and Commonalty of their Realms: That they then show they truly love
them, when they permit them to enjoy their approved Laws and Liberties; when
cruel Exactors and Collectors domineer not over them; if they burden them not
with new Inventions of Impost, Taxes, and Tributes, nor with grievous and
unaccustomed Hospitality, Permanencies or Freequarter; For although for the
resisting of Infidels they may humiliter petere auxilium a Populo; humbly
request an aid from the People and Commons of their Realms (not imperiously
impose it) when there is a necessity; yet let them beware quod necessitas illa
non veniat in consuetudinem and legem, that the necessity comes not into a
custom and law: See Revelationum l. 4. c. 104, 105. l. 7. c. 16. l. 8. c. 48.
and Rev^lationes extravagantes. c. 73, 80.
For that King (or Ruler) who lays not aside his unjust Exactions, and
Fraudulent Inventions to raise moneys, and oppress his People, making his
reigns and Kingdoms mere robberies and rapines, as most then did, and n^w too)
let him know for certain he shall not prosper in his doings, but shall lead and
end his life in grief, dismiss his Kingdoms in tribulations; his Son and
Posterity shall be in such hatred, reproach and confusion, that all men shall
wonder thereat; and his Soul shall be tormented by the Devils in Hell: which
she manifests by the Revelationum l. 8. c. 48.
example of an unjust Tax-imposing King, damned to Hell, and there tormented by
the Devils: For that to retain the Kingdom to himself, and defend it from
Invasions, he petended the ancient Revenues of his Eschequer would not defray
the Expenses of the Government, and Realms defense; whereupon he devised
certain new Inventions, and fraudulent Exactions of Imposts, Tributes, Taxes,
and imposed them on his Kingdom, to the damage of the Natives, and oppression
of innocent Merchants and Strangers; although his conscience dictated to him,
Quod ista erant contra Deum, et omnem Iustitiam, et Publicam Honestatem: that
these things were against God, and all Justice, and Common Honesty; as our
forementioned Excises, Imposts, Taxes are now. Let those who are now guilty of
this sin in the highest degree, beware they incur not the self-same
temporal and infernal punishments, thus threatened to and inflicted upon others.
And let our whole English Nation and their Trustees, upon serious consideration
of all the premises, beware how they in any kind, through fear or cowardice,
submit their necks or backs to the forementioned illegal Yokes and Burdens, of
perpetual standing Excises, Imposts, Contributions, and Taxes, to enslave
themselves and their Posterities for ever to an oppressing Military New
Government, and perpetual Army: For which end I shall only recommend unto their
meditation and practice, this observation and policy of our prudent Ancesters,
Math: Paris Hist. Angl. p. 517.
Binus actus inducit Consuetudinem; that a double general submission to, and
payment of such exorbitant illegal Taxes, will introduce a customary, future
exaction and payment of them; which made them always (as we have greatest
reason now to do) peremptorily to withstand the firs, to prevent a second
customary, future exaction and payment in like kind; pursuing the Poet Ovids
old sage Counsel, wherewith I shall conclude this point.

De Remedio Amo^s, l. 2.
Principiis obsta: sero medicina paratur
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras,
How transcendently all the other Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights of our
English Freeborn Nation have by late and present Governors and their
Instruments been infringed, subverted in an higher avowed degree than ever in
former ages, by forcible tyrannical Proceedings of all kinds, in breaking open
men's Houses, by armed Soldiers, and other unsworn illegal Officers, Excisemen,
Sequestrators, both by day and night; seizing their Persons, Horses, Arms,
Papers, Writings; ransacking their Studies, Truncks, Cabinets, upon false
surmises, suspicions; close imprisoning their persons ( by multitudes) without,
before any examination, particular accusation, hearing, trial, in unusual
places; and some of them in remetest Isles, Garrisons under Soldiers: Their
pressing of men for Land and Sea service, and carrying them away perforce by
Soldiers, Troopers, Officers, Mariners, ( like so many Prisoners) out of their
own Counties and the Realm, to unnatural, unchristian Wars, against their
Wills and Consciences: Their disinheriting many Thousands of English Freemen of
all sorts, of their Freeholds, Lands, Offices, Fra^chises, Honors, Authorities;
spoiling them and theirs of theirs Goods, Chattles, Estates, Lives, in and by
Arbitrary Committees, Martial, and other extravagant Courts of highest
Injustice: Subverting, Changing our ancient Fundamental Laws, Statutes, and
enacting New without the Peoples free consents in Lawful, English Parliaments:
altering the whole Frame and Constitution of our Monarchy, Government, and
Parliaments themselves: Depriving the people of the Free election of their
Parliament Members, and other Elective Officers, contrary to our Laws,
Charters, Usages; securing, secluding the Members of Parliament themselves, by
armed Force; dissolving Parliaments by the Sword alone, without Writ or legal
power, contrary to Acts and Privileges of Parliament; by erecting New
Legislative, Tax-imposing, Self-created Powers, (not elected by the People) at
Whitehall and elsewhere, not to be paralleld in any age. By creating
New-Treasons contrary to the old ones, and the Statute of 25 E. 3. and
condemning, sequestring, imprisoning, executing English Peers and Freemen, only
for their loyalty, Duty to their lawful Sovereigns, and defense of the Rights,
Privileges, Liberties, Laws of the Kingdom, Parliament, Nation, according to
their Oaths, Protestations, League, Covenant, and Gods own Precepts, against
the public Enemies, Oppugners, Underminers, Subvertors of, and Conspirators
against them. By making public wars at Land and Sea with our Christian
Protestant Brethren, and other Nations; and concluding Leagues, Truces without
common consent or advice in Parliament. By alienating, selling, giving,
squandring away the ancient Demesnes, Lands, Honors, Rents, Revenues, Rights,
Inheritances of the Crown of England, (yea of Scotland and Ireland likewise) to
Officers, Soldiers of the Army, and others, for pretended Arrears, Services,
or inconsiderable values; which should defray all the constant ordinary
Expenses of the Government, public, State Officers, Ambassadors, Garrisons,
Navy, Courts of the Kingdom, and ease the People from all kind of Taxes,
Payments, Contributions whatsoever toward them (except in extraordinary
emergent cases and necessities in times of war, requiring extraordinary
expenses for their public safety supplied by Aids and Subsidies granted only
by common consent in Parliament only, and not otherwise) which now must be
wholly, or for the greatest part defrayed by the People alone, out of their own
exhausted private estates, by endless Taxes, Excises, Contributions ( as
appears by the 27, 28, 29, 30. Articles of their New ill sounding Instrument
foreinsisted on) whiles others, without right or legal Title, enjoy the old
standing Demesnes, Lands, Rents, Revenues and Perquisites of the Crown for
their private advantage without any Acts of Resumption ( See Mat. Pa^^s p. 306.
308. Grafton, p. 90. 149. Daniel, p. 78, 79, 83, 123. 1 R. 2. Rot. Parl. to
148. 1 H. 4. n. 100. 6 H. 4. n. 14, 15. 8 H. 4. n. 52. 1 H. 5. c. 6. 28 H. 6.
rot Parl. n. 53. 31 H. 6. c. 7. 33. H. 6. n. 47. 4 E. 4. n. 39. 12. E. 4. n. 6.
usual in all former ages) to keep the Kingdom, Nation from becoming Bankrupts,
and people from oppression) which should ease the people of those intolerable
constant burdens lately laid upon them, against all Justice, Law, Conscience,
and make insufferable wastes, and spoils of the stately Houses, Timber, Wood^,
Mines, Forests, Parkes of the Crown, without restraint, to the Kingdoms
extraordinary prejudice; for which they ought to give an Account and make full
reparations, if the Earl of Devonshires case, Cook 11 Reports f. 89* 90, 91 be
Law. And by sundry other particulars (requiring whole Baronian volumes, to
recite and specify to the full;) is so well known by daily experience, and
multitude of Presidents fresh in memory, to our whole three Nations, that I
shall here no further insist upon them. all which experimentally confirm the
truth of our Saviors own words. John 10, 1, 10. Verily, verily I say unto you,
He that enters not by the Do^r into the Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other
way, the same is a Thief and a Robber; The Thief comes not but steal and to
kill, and to destroy, Whatever his pretenses be to the contrary. And this rule
of Johannes Angelius Wenderhagen: Politiae Synopticae, lib. 3. c. 9. sect. 11.
p. 3. 10. Hinc Regulae loco notandum. Quod omne Regnum vi Armata acquisitum in
effectis Subditos Semper in durior is Servatutis conditiones arripiat, licet a
principio Dulcedinem prurientibus spirare videatur; ( which we now find most
true, by sad, sensible experience) Ide^ cunctis hoc cavendum, Ne temere se
seduci patiantur.

FINIS.

