

PROVERBS 11. 8. The Righteous is delivered out of Trouble, and the wicked
comes in his stead.

A. The Archbishop of Canterbury.

B. The Gentleman Usher with his Black-Rod.

C. The Lieutenant of the Tower. D. The Bishops Council.

E. The Clarke that reads the Evidence.

F. The Table where the Books and Papers given in evidence lay.

G. The Members of the House of Commons, and Mr. Prynne standing in the midst
of them. H. Mr. Henry Burton.

I. I. I. The Witnesses, Mistress Bastwick. Mr. Baker the Messenger.

K. K. K. The People and Auditors, within and without the Bar.

L. L. The LORDS. M. M. The Judges and Assistants.

N. The Speaker of the Lords House. T. The Hangings of 88. S. Mich. Spark.

HIDDEN WORKS OF DARKNESS Brought to Public Light, OR, A NECESSARY
INTRODVCTION TO THE HISTORY OF THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBVRIE'S TRIAL.

Discovering to the WORLD the several secret dangerous Plots, Practices,
Proceedings of the POPE and his Confederates, both at Home and in Foreign
Parts, to undermine the Protestant Religion, usher the whole Body of Popery
into our Church, and reduce all our REALMS to their ancient Vassalage to the
Sea of Rome, by insensible steps and degrees; from the first Marriage Treaty
with Spain, Anno 1617. till this present. Together with the true Originals of
the late Scottish Troubles, Irish Rebellion and English civil Wars:
Manifested by sundry Instructions, Articles, Letters, Intelligences, Warrants,
Bulls of Popes, Petitions of Parliament, Proclamations, Examinations, and other
Papers, found among Secretary Windebankes, Master Thomas Windebankes, the Lord
Cottingtons and Archbishop of Canterburies Writings, and some late intercepted
Letters from Foreign Parts.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE of Lincolnes-Inne, Esquire.

DAN. 2. 22, 23, 28. There is a God in Heaven that reveals secrets; he
reveals the deep and secret things; he knows what is in the darkness, and
the light dwells with him: I thank thee and praise thee O thou God of my
Fathers, who have given me wisdom and might, and have made known unto me what
we desired of thee; for thou have made known unto us the Kings matter.

It is Ordered by the Committee of the house of Commons concerning printing,
that this Book, entitled ( Hidden works of Darkness brought to public
light) be printed by Michael Spark senior. JOHN WHITE.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Brudenell for Michael Spark senior, dwelling in
Green-Arbour in the Old-bailey, at the sign of the blew Bible. 1645.

TO THE HIGH AND HONORABLE COURT OF PARLIAMENT.
HAVING not long since presented your Honorable Assembly with A Breviate of
the Archbishop of Canterburie's Life, extracted out of his own Diary and
Writings: I have been since much importuned by diverse Members of both Houses,
to set forth a complete History of his Crimes and Trial, with all needful
Ingredients thereunto. Whereupon, I deemed it very expedient (by way of
Prologue, or necessary Introduction to that Work) first, to compile and publish
this following Piece (which here I humbly tender to your honorable Patronage)
the materials whereof could not be conveniently inserted into the Passages of
his Trial, though much conducing to the clearing of your Exemplary Justice in
your equitable Proceedings and righteous Judgment against him, newly executed
on his person.

Your Honors, in these my rude Collections (faithfully extracted out of many
thousand scattered papers, the perusal and digesting whereof into order has
cost me no little pains) may behold as in a Mirror, many hidden, or forgotten
Romish Plots of darkness brought to Public Light and Memory (from the first
Marriage Treaty with Spain, in the year 1617. till this present) to undermine
our Protestant Religion, reduce both us and all our Dominions back to Rome by
insensible degrees; together with the several Policy, A^^ifices,
Negotiations, Conspiracies used, and Instruments employed between the Pope, his
Confederates and Us, to accomplish this long-agitated Design; and hereby
clearly discover the true Originals, the Principal Contrivers of all the late
unhappy Commotions, Wars, Massacres, Desolations within our three distracted
Kingdoms, now weltring in their own blood; with those mutual Negotiations we
have held with Rome, not only of late years, but continued till this very
instant even for Cardinals Cap^ and such like Pontifician Wares.

His Majesty and your Honorable Assembly are (blessed be God) now at last
(after three years bloody intestine Wars) upon a desirable Treaty of Peace,
which I shall cordially implore the Heb. 13. 20.
God of Peace effectually to crown with a most happy issue: toward the real
achievement whereof, I humbly conceive these seasonable Collections may
contribute some assistance; One of the nearest ways to procure a settled,
lasting Peace on Earth, being first (by sincere Repentance and Reformation) to
make our peace with Heaven, and then to provide effectual Remedies against the
various Treacheries, Conspiracies, Policies of the common Enemies of our Peace
on Earth, and principal Contrivers of all our present Combustions; (to wit,
the Pope and his Confederates) which I have here apparently detected, to the
end they may with more facility be prevented by your honorable Vigilance for
the future.

As we must have See Bishop Hals, No peace with Rome.
no peace with Rome, so we cannot possibly expect any peace from her: Yea, the
more we endeavor Reconciliation with this Babylonish S^rumpet (the grand
Design of many late past years, and now) the remoter shall we be from any
real Peace and Unity among our selves, as we have seen by dear-bought
experience: and it must necessarily be so, since 2 Cor. 6. 14 15, 16.
Light and Darkness, Truth and Error, Christ and Antichrist, the Sons of
God and Children of Belial, can never be cordially reconciled by all the
Policies or Contrivements of men; Genesis 3. 15. Gal. 4. 29. Prove. 29. 27.
God himself having put an everlasting irreconcilable Enmity, Antipathy
between them.

If therefore your Honors ever hope to enjoy a sincere, solid, durable Peace
in our Churches or Realms, you must now use all extraordinary Care and
Vigilance to provide sufficient remedies against all the Popes and his
Confsederates Devices, stratagems, Engines, Instruments, who else will
perpetually embroile us with fresh Conspiracies, Treasons, Rebellions,
Powderplors, Wars, till they have wrought their own or our utter ruin, as
many late Experiments (under which our whole three Kingdoms now bleed and
languish) abundantly demonstrate. It therefore much concerns your Honors and
our Realms in your intended Treaty, as much as in You lies, to provide the
surest and most effectual Remedies against this viperous Generation of Romish
Incendiaries, without which we can neither expect any substantial Peace for
the present, nor en^oy any lasting Tranquillity for the future; and, blessed be
God, who has long since put it into your zealous, pious hearts, to endeavor
to effect it.

It may be some Court-Sycophants, Object
may deem these Discoveries very unseasonable, yea perchance dishonorable (in
some particulars) to his Majesty in his fore-past Proceedings, and suggest so
much to his Highness, or your Honors.

To which I answer; Answer
that the Discovery of all Plots, Dangers is then most seasonable, most
advantageous, when we are by special Laws or Treaties to establish future
Remedies against them. It is over b^st searching festred wounds to the very
bottom, and letting out all their corruption, when we are ready to incarne or
glutinate them; else, if we citatrize before we sound them to the bottom, they
will soon fester or break out again with greater pain and danger then
before: As for the pretended wounding of his Majesty's honor, or his former
proceedings by this Discovery, as it was most remote from my loyal heart and
intentions in its Collection and Publication, so I hope his gracious Majesty
and all faithful Councillors about him (who bear any real affection to his
Highness, Religion, our bleeding Kingdoms, or really intend to close up their
wounds by the approaching Treaty) will be so far from resenting these
Detections to be any real eclipse of his Majesty's honor (purposely compiled
to discover bona fide to his Highness and others, by what Romish Stratagems,
Policies, Councels, Instruments they have been for sundry bypast years
seduced, circumvented, abused, miscounselled, to the Kingdoms, Churches,
Religions almost utter desolation, and ingul^ed in those bloody Civil Wars,
Massacres, which have turned most of our pleasant Fields into Acheldama's and
Golgotha's) that they will interpret these timely Discoveries of them (of
which, perchance they have bin hitherto ignorant or unobservant) the Sea here
p. 91.
highest expression both of my Duty, Loyalty to his Majesty, and my dearest
Country, or at least a faithful impartial discharge of that solemn Covenant
and Protestation We all have taken by your Honors Injunctions, which oblige me
in point of Conscience, of Fidelity to bring them unto public knowledge; yea,
I should in truth have violated both my Alleagiance and Covenant, had I
concealed them at such a time as this, when Gods admirable Providence had
unexpectedly brought them to my hands: Since therefore the wisest King that
ever reigned, yea, the King of Kings himself has assured me, Pro. 16. 13.
That righteous lips are the delight of Kings, and they love him that speaks
right; I doubt not but his Majesty and all true-hearted Protestants about him,
together with your Honors, will deem this Publication a special Act of my
Loyallest, Sincerest Service to his Majesty and all his Realms, which through
Gods effectual bssileng on them, may much conduce to their future Tranquillity,
Felicity, the things here principally aimed at.

I shall therefore become an humble Suitor to your Honors, to accept of these
Collections (which I have with no small labor extracted, digested into method,
whiles others have been taking their natural rests) as a pledge of my reallest
Affection to my Country, his Majesty, Religion, Parliaments: yea, as a
seasonable Preparative (not to be slightly read over as matter of mere News,
but seriously perused, as a Discovery of highest consequence) to your intended
much efflagitated Treaty of Peace: and as a necessary Introduction to the
History of your Patient, upright, unparalelled Trial of, and righteous
Judgment against that Arch-Incendiary and Enemy of our Peace, Religion, Laws,
Parliaments (some of whose Seditious Popish practices are here lightly glanced
at, others more fully detected, the rest reserved for their proper Place) who
has received with much Mercy and Moderation the due reward of his treasonable,
violent, bloody, Romish Councels and Actions. I shall daily supplicate the God
of Recompense that the effusion of his most Nocent blood by the AXE of Justice
may put a speedy period to the spilling of any more Protestant blood by that
sword of civil War, which his Councels, Innovations, Oppressions first
unsheathed, and his seconds, the Romanists, have since kept drawn and
brandished among us, almost to the depopulation of our whole three Kingdoms.

Heb. 13 20, 21.
Now the God of Peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which
is wel-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, and Luke 1. 79.
guide all your feet aright in the way of Peace, you are now entering into; that
the end of it may be Peace indeed, and Isa. 32. 17, 18.
the effect of it, quietness and assurance for ever, that so we may henceforth
dwell in sure dwellings, and rest in quiet and peaceable Habitations; which is,
and shall be the Prayer,

Of your Honors daily Orator and Servant WILLIAM PRYNNE.

To the READER.
COURTEOUS READER, I here present thee with a new Discovery of sundry Plots and
Works of Darkness, as a necessary Introduction to the Relation of the
Archbishop of Canterburies Trial; collected out of several Instructions,
Articles, Letters, Petitions, Intelli^ences, and many thousand scattered
Papers, which Gods Providence brought unto my view; most of which never saw the
public Light before; and will give thee true information of many Passages,
Policy, Negotiations with Rome, to Usher Popery into all our Dominions by
inperceptible steps, undermine our Protestant Religion, and ingulfe (...) in
those Wars, Miseries, under which our whole three Kingdoms now smart and
languish almost unto death. I presented thee formerly with some Collections and
Discoverie^ of this nature in my Romes Masterpiece and Royal Popish
Favorite, which will add some light and luster unto these; but these far
more illustration unto them, and will give a satisfactory Answer to that
namelesse Answerer of my Royal Popish Favorite, who (in his Loyal
Vindication) confesses all the matters of Fact, Letters, Warrants, discharges
of Priests, Jesuits, and suspensions of Laws against Recusants, therein
comprised, not ^inding me tardy so much as in one of them, (the recital
whereof is the far greatest part of his Book) but only shifting them off
with poor slight Evasions, not worth the answering, which are here refuted by
real, undeniable Evidence^, out of Original Letters, Records, Warrants, or
faithful Transcripts belonging to such Counselors or Secretaries of State,
as were employed in, or privy to the Negotiations herein recorded, so as none
can justly question, suspect their Reality or Verity.

For my self, I can with good conscience protest, I have neither feigned nor
al^ered ought in any the Papers herein published, but presented the full and
naked truth of all things to thee, as I found them, without the least
Sophistication. If the Republike, Church, Religion, or thou ( Courteous Reader)
shall reap any advantage, useful Information, or God any glory by these
Publications (as I trust they will) I have all I aim at; If any thing be not
so methodically digested, connected, or so polite as thou could desire, I
hope my daily public Avocations, interloping occasions, distractions in the
contexture of them, (collected for the most part when I should have been taking
my natural rest) will be a sufficient Apology to gain thy Pardon. As for the
particular Articles, Treasons and other high Crimes charged against the
Archbishop (for which he was justly executed with far more mercy, favor,
indulgence, then himself ever showed to any pious Christian that came under his
heavy hands) thou must expect an account of most of them hereafter in the
History of his Trial* yet here thou may scatteringly behold such evidences
of his guilt (especially in the Scottish business and Popish Alterations in
their Liturgy) as will sufficiently re^ute the bold pretenses of his Innocence
on the Scaffold at his death, apparently contradicted by sundry pregnant
evidences at the Lords (...) d^ring his Trial, and by the whole tenor of his
persecuting, oppressing, turbulent Life, especially since his greatness: And
so without further preface, I humbly submit these Lucubrations to thy perusal
and most serious consideration,

FAREWELL.
A necessary Introduction to the History of the Archbishop of CANTERBVRY his
Trial.
BEFORE I enter upon the History of the Archbishop of Canterburies Trial, one
grand part of his charge impeaching him; Arti. 7. 10.
That he had traitorously endeavored to alter and subvert Gods true Religion,
by law established in this Realm, and instead thereof to set up Popish
Superstition and Idolatry, and that he has traitorously and wickedly
endeavored to reconcile the Church of England with the Church of Rome; it will
be necessary (by way of Introduction) to manifest to the World that there has
been for many years past, a secret plotted Conspiracy and serious endeavor,
between sundry pretended Members of the Church of England, and Real Sons of
the Church of Rome, to extirpate the Protestant Religion settled amongst us, and
reduce our Dominions unto their ancient Vassalage to the Superstitions and
Power of the Roman Sea; as likewise to demonstrate the principal means and
policies exercised by them to accomplish this design; which (for brevity
sake) could not be conveniently produced by way of evidence at the Trial.

The reality of this Conspiracy, (as ancient as the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign) is so experimentally visible to all men, especially in these
present times; so fully rati^ied by all 1 Eliz. c. 1* 5 Eliz. c. 1. 13 Eliz. c.
2. 23 Eliz. c. 1. 28 Eliz. c. 6. 35 Eliz. c. 2. 1 Jac. c. 4. 3 Jac. c. 1, 2, 4,
5. 7 Jac. c. 6. 3 Car. c. 2.
Acts, Proclamations, Petitions in Parliament against Jesuits, Seminary Priests
and Popish Recus^nts, from the first of Queen Elizabeth till this instant; so
abundantly manifested by our Histories, Writers of all sorts, and so apparent
by the Policies used to effect this hellish Plot, that to spend time in proving
it, would be but to add light to the Sun; I shall therefore confine my self
wholly to the Arts and Instruments principally employed to bring it to
perfection.

In the inchoations of the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James, the
Roman Party both abroad and at home endeavored first by Flatteries, Treaties,
Insinuations; and when those prevailed not, then by several horrid
Conspiracies, Treasons, Invasions, Rebellions and open hostility to erect their
Romish Babel among us. But all these (through Gods great mercy) proving
abortive, they fixed at last of latter times upon a more prevalent and
successful means then any of the former; to wit a project of marrying us to
the Whore of Rome, by matching the heir of the Crown of England to a
Romanist: They found many Genesis 6. 2. to 9. c. 24. 3, 4. c. 26. 34, 35. c. 27.
46. c. 26. 1, 2. Number. 25. 1. to 10. Deuteronomy. 7. 1. to 7. 1 Kin. 11. 1. to 15. Ex.
34. 16 1 Kin. 16. 31, 32, 33. c. 21. 25, 26. 2 Kin. 8. 18. 27. ^ Chron. 21. 6.
Jud. 3. 5. to 9. c. 14. 7. 15. Josh. 23. 12, 13, Ezra c. 9. and 10. Neh. 13.
23. to 39.
Presidents, Texts in Scripture, and Ecclesiastical story ascertaining them,
That Idolatrous Queens and Wives, were a most infallible prevailing means to
draw Kings and whole Kingdoms to Idolatry: For which very reason, God expressly
enjoined the Israelites Deuteronomy. 7. 1, 2, 3, 4. Josh. 23. 12, 13. Exodus 34. 16. 2
Kin. 11. 2.
to make no marriages with the Canaanites, nor other Idolatrous Nations, nor to
match their sons to their daughters: For surely they will turn away thy sons
from following me that they may serve other Gods; so will the anger of the Lord
be kindled against you and destroy you suddenly.

Hereupon they projected, solicited a Marriage between our Sovereign Lord
King CHARLES (then Prince of Wales,) and the Infanta of Spain; which after some
remote preparatory Conferences between the Ministers of both Crowns in the
years 1615. and 1616. was the year following ^ipened to a Nuptial Treaty on
King James his part, as these ensuing Instructions to Sir John Digby, (now
Earl of Bristoll) then Ambassdour in Spain (found among the Lord Cottingtons
Papers, an Agent in this Treaty) manifest: of which I shall insert such only
as concern Religion.

Instructions for our trusty and welbeloved Counselor Sir John Digby Knight,
sent by Us, Ambassador Extraordinary to the King of Spain.
NO man can better inform you, then your self do know (having been long Out
Ambassador Resident with the King of Spain) that both informer times, and of
late, speeches have passed between you and some Ministers of his, concerning a
Marriage of our Dear son the Prince, and the Infanta or Lady Mary, second
daughter of the said King; for the better assurance and strengthening of the
Amity, which being begun, immediately after our succession to the Crown of
England, has ever since continued: Which speeches, although they have bin so
providently carried by your discretion all the time you were Ambassador there,
as that you never appeared therein as a public Minister, but only in quality
of a private Gentleman, and welwisher to the continuance and increase of
friendship between the King and Us: Yet since your return, and being of our
Council, the same speeches have so far proceeded between you and the
Ambassador of the King of Spain resident here, not without Our privity, as
that we thought fit to acquaint a select number of our Council therewith; who
having heard the report of the former proceedings* have delivered to Us their
Opinion; that they find very probable ground for Us to enter into a public
Treaty thereof, with as much assurance of good success, as in such a case may
be had.

Whereupon we have given you A Commission under our great Seal, in due form
of Law, Authorizing you to Treat and Conclude for a Marriage to be had and made
between Our said Dearest son Charles the Prince, and the said Lady Mary,
second daughter to the said King of Spain, as you shall perceive by the tenor
thereof: And for your better directions in a matter of so great Moment, We
have thought good to accompany the said Commission with these Instructions.

Wherein, first, we think good to let you know, that if at your arivall at the
Court, you shall find by good probability and other Circumstances, that there
is in the said King and his Ministers as ready a disposition as formerly you
have found to proceed further in such a Treaty; you may open unto them, that
you are come accompanied and Authorized with power sufficient on Our part to
Treat and Conclude. But if you do discern any alteration or coldness from
the former demonstration, not only of a sincere meaning, but of a very great
desire to give us satisfaction; you may then forbear to make use of your
Commission (which we must refer to your discretion) and advertise us what you
perceive,

If you shall find things in such Case as you shall have cause to fall to
Treaty of particulars, then for your direction therein, you shall understand.

That this business does consist of two principal parts; The one concerning
matter of Religion, and the other of civil considerations, matter of Portion,
and other charges on their part; and Dower, and assurance of Dower on our part.

The matter of Religion is to Us of most pri^cipall consideration; for nothing
can be to Us dearer, then the honor and safety of the Religion which we
profess. And therefore, seeing that this Marriage and Alliance ( if it shall
take place) is to be with a Lady of a different Religion from Us; It becomes
Us to be tender, as on the one part to give them all satisfaction convenient,
so on the other, to admit nothing that may blemish our Conscience, or detract
from the Religion here established. And although We cannot for the present give
you precise and particular direction and warrant for all points that will come
in question in this subject of Religion, yet in general, we have thought good
thus far to authorize you: that whereas while you were in Spain, certain
Articles for matter of Religion, after a Consultation had by some of their
Divines were delivered to you, as points they were like to insist upon; which
seeming to you unworthy to be by Us hearkened unto, you did utterly reject and
refuse; yet afterward upon a private conference between you and some others, to
whom that cause had been committed, there was between you a qualification
conceived therein, though never delivered as a matter approved there.

We have perused those Articles, and added something to them by way of
explanation, for Our clearer satisfaction; and have signed them with our own
hand in a Schedule hereunto annexed: And do let you know, that if they shall
be admitted there as we have signed them, and no further matter in point of
Religion urged, We can be content you proceed and express your liking, and
that you hope it will give Us satisfaction: And that you will speedily
advertise Us; but you shall not so far consent or conclude at to bind Us,
until you have advertised Us, and received Our express pleasure and assent.

But if you find any haesitation or doubt made upon them, or any new matter
added to any of those points, which you shall find to vary from the true sense
of them, you shall suspend your proceeding to the approving of any such
Alteration, and advertise Us thereof, and attend Our further direction and
pleasure, etc.

Given at Lincoln the 14. day of April 1617. Tho. Lake.


The Articles for Religion (specified in these Instructions:)
THat for the taking away of all scruples, NOTA.
and the better Justification of the Match, The Dispensation of the Pope is to
be procured, but thereof His Majesty need to take no kind of notice, but to be
the mere Act of the King of Spain.

That the Children of this Marriage shall no way be compelled or constrained in
point of Conscience of Religion, wherefore there is no doubt that their Title
shall be prejudiced, NOTA.
in case it should please God that they should prove Catholics.

That the Family which the Infanta shall bring with her (being strangers) may
be Catholics, and that the Nurses which shall give milk unto the Children,
shall be chosen with her consent, and shall be accounted of her Family.

That the place which shall be appointed for Divine service shall be Decent,
Capable, Free and public for all those of her Family, and that there shall be
Administered in it the Sacraments and Divine service, according to the Use and
Ceremonies of the Church of Rome.

That in case the Infanta her self shall only have a secret and particular
Oratory: There, shall be appointed for her Family a settled Chapel for the
Administering of the Sacraments, and for the burying of the dead of the said
Family; and that this public Exercise of Religion begin from her first
entrance into England.

That it shall be lawful for the Ecclesiastical and Religious persons of her
Family, to wear their own Habit.

That after the Dispensation granted by the Pope, the Marriage shall be
celebrated in Spain, per verba de praesenti, by a Procurator, according to the
Instruction of the Council of Trent.

And that the years and ages ^e without supplement, waiting the ten days; and
the Infanta receiving the Nuptial Benediction: But that within certain days
to be Limited after her arrival in England, there shall be ( infacie
Ecclesiae) used such a solemnization, as by the Laws of England shall make the
Marriage valid, and takeaway all scruple touching the Legitimation of the Issue.

That she shall have a competent number of Chaplains, and a Confessor, being
Strangers; and that amongst them shall be one that shall have power and
authority for the government of the rest of her said Family, in matters
concerning Catholic Religion.

That there be sitting Assurances given for performance of the said Conditions.

Given at Lincoln the 4. of April 1617. Tho. Lake.


KIng James being so far wrought upon by the Popish Faction, as thus
publicly to engage himself in this Marriage Treaty with one of the Romish
Religion, wherein the Popes own Dispensation must necessarily be first
procured, ere the Match could finally be accomplished; they then begin to play
their game to the best advantage, and by tedious delays and new demands, gain
more and more ground upon the King in favor of the Roman Catholics, and
their Antichristian Religion.

First, the Commissioners designed for this Treaty, multiply and enlarge the
former Articles touching Religion, in reference to the Infanta and her Family;
which after two years debate, were fully concluded on by the Commissioners, and
both Kings: But their agreements were to little purpose; the consent of the
Roman Pontife (the Archcontriver and Directer of this Plot for the best
advantage of the Catholic Cause) must be likewise procured and super-added to
complete the Articles; without which they were but Nullities, and no
Dispensation could be expected from him; which is first of all provided for in
the Conditions.

Hereupon the Articles were sent to Rome, to Pope Gregory the xv. who then held
that Chair of Pestilence; who after many tedious consultations, alters and
enlarges diverse of the Articles (by the advice of his Conclave) for the
furtherance of the Roman Catholic Religion; and unless our King and Prince
would condescend to those alterations, there was no possibility of any Match or
Dispensation.

The answers and alterations of the Pope to each particular Article, you may
read at large in the Tom. 9. Anno 1623. ^. 517. to 522.
French Mercury in that language; but I shall represent you with the Articles,
the Popes alterations of them and some additionals from Spain to them, with
King James his answer thereto after their return from Rome and Spain, in
Latin, found amongst the Lord Cottingtons Papers with this Indorsment.

Responsio Sanctissimi Domini PP. Gregorii xv. ad Articul^s Matrimonij
Britannic^ ^actenus inter Reges conclusos.

Conditiones oblatae ex Anglia.
1 QUod Matrimonium perficiendum est per Dispensationem Papa, sed haec
procuranda est per operam Regis Hispaniae, qui super verbo Regis ^idem daturus
est, Regi Magnae Britanniae se facturum, quod possibile est, ut Dispensatio
Papae procuretur.

2. Quod Matrimonium celebrandum est in Hispani^ and in Anglia; in Hispania,
per Procuratore^ secundum formam Ecclesiae Romanae, and in Anglia, secundum
omnes ceremonias, quae Regi Magnae Britanniae convenientes videbuntur, modo
nullae sint quae contradicant Religioni Dominae Infanta, sed de hoc statuenda
est formula quomode sit hic, and ^llic, perficiendum.

3. Quod serenissima D. Infanta servos and familia^ secum hinc habitura est,
per electionem and nominationem fratris sui serenissimi Regis Hispaniae, modo
Rex nullum servum nominaverit qui fuerit vassallus Regis magnae Britanniae sine
sua voluntate and consensu.

4. Quod serenissima D. Infanta habebit and habitura erit liberum usum, and
publicum exercitium Religionis Catholicae in modo and forma prout infra
capitulatum est.

5. Quod habebit decens oratorium in suo Palatio, ubi missae celebrari possint,
pro libito serenissimae D. Infantae, and quod hoc oratorium est adornandum cum
tali decentia, quae serenissimae D. conveniens videbitur: In dicto oratorio vel
capella, quod sacerdotibusejus licebit exercere liberum usum sui sacerdotii
prout dicta serenissima D. ordinaverit.

6. Quod servi and servae serenissimae D. Infantae, and servi servorum and
omnes pertinentes ad familiam suam poterunt esse Catholici liberi; quod non
tamen intelligendum est ut quicunque fuerit servus obligetur ut servus esse
Catholicus.

7. Quod servi supradicti qui fuerint Catholici, possint it a libere esse in
forma sequenti.

8. Quod serenissima D. Infanta habebit in, vel contiguam Palatio, unam
capellam tam capacem, ut dicti servi Catholici possint intrare and commorari in
illa; in qua una sit porta publica and ordinaria per quam dicti servi possint
intrare, and altera porta interior de Palatio per quam serenissima D. Infanta
possit intrare in dictam capellam audire and celebrare officia.

9. Quod ista capella ornetur cum decenti ornatu altarium, ornamentorum and
altarum rerum necessariarum pro cultu divino qui in ea celebrandus est,
secundum usum S. R. E. and quod dictis servis li^ebit se confer addictam
capellam omnibus horis prout videbitur.

10. Quod cura and custodia dictae capellae erit in manibus capellanorum
sereuissimae D. Infantae, and ad hoc licebit constituere servum, vel servos,
nequis possit intrare ad faciendum quid indecorum in ea.

11. Quod ad administrandum Sacramenta and serviendum in capella, erit numerus
Ministrorum qui conveniens videbitur serenissimae D. Infantae, modo talem
numerum non excedat; and isti ministri nominabuntur per dictam serenissimam
Dominam, modo non sint vassalli Regis magnae Britanniae; aut si f^erint, sint
cum sua voluntate and licentia.

12. Quod sit unus Minister superior cum authoritate necessaria ad omnes casus
qui acciderint spectantes ad Religionem Catholicam.

13. Quod iste Minister superior poterit corrigere, emendare and castigare
Catholicos qui deliquerint; poterit autem serenissima D. illos de suo serv^tio
abdicare.

14. Quod licebit serenissimae D. Insantae and servis Catholicis adquirere
Romae dispensationes, indulgentias, Iubileos, and in his qu^^ videbitur
conscientijs suis competere.

15. Quod Catholici qui in Angliam migrabunt suscipient juramentum fidelitatis
Regi magnae Britanniae cum omnibus clausulis and cautionibus quae S. Majestas
mandaverit, NOTA.
mode nulla sit clausula neque verbum in dicto juramento quod contradicat
Religioni Catholicae, neque conscientiis Catholicorum, quem ad finem forma
dicti juramenti concipienda est.

16. Quod leges quae sunt in Anglia spectantes ad Religionem, dictos servos
Catholicos non attingent, qui cum legibus, tum poenis contra transgressores
earum impositis erunt exempti, in quo opus erit videre quemode se res habeat.

17. Quod liberi ex hoc matrim^nio er^^ndi non cogentur neque compellentur in
causa Religionis vel conscientiae, neque leges contra Catholicos attingent
illos, NOTA.
and in casu siquis eorum fuerit Catholicus, non ob hoc perdet jus successionis
in Regna and Dominia magnae Britanniae.

18. Quod personae ecclesiasticae and Religiosae in familia D. Infantae
poterunt retinere suum vestitum and habitum.

19. Quod nutrices quae lactabunt liber^s serenissimae D. Infantae eligentur
and admittentur cum consensu dictae serenissimae Infantae, and familiae suae
annumerabuntur.

20. Quod poterit castigare illos cum poenis et censuris ecclesiasticis, sed
non cum poenis temporalibus: poterit autem serenissima D. illos de suo servitio
abdicare*

Responsio Papae.
The French Mercury, p. 518.
Les deux parties sont d'accord sur ce poinct

This is in the Fr^^ch, not in the Latin Copy; but only by implication.

2. Matrimonium semel tantum celebrandum est in Hispania: verum si aliquae
solennitates in Anglia faciendae sint ab declaritur formula solennizationis
faciendae in Anglia, quae Religion^ Catholicae and Romanae non contradicat.

Cest Article est aussi accord^.

Cest Article est aussi accord^.

5. Habeat etiam ecclesiam publicam Londini, NOT^.
and u^i serenissima Infanta morabitur, and utrobique omnia officia divine
public celebrentur, verbum Dei praedicetur and Sacramenta ministrentur.

6. Quod servi and servae serenissimae D. Infantae, and servi servorum eorumque
filii et descendentes ac familiares omnes quomodocunque inservientes debeant
omnino esse Catholics and libere.

7. Quod servi et familiares supradicti debeant libere esse Catholici in forma
sequent^.

8. Quod serenissima D. Infanta habeat in Palatio unam capellam tam capacem, ut
dicti servi et familiares ut supra possint intrare et commorari in illa. In qu^
una sit porta publica et ordinaria per quam dicti possint intrare, et altera
interior per quam serenissima D. Infanta habeat ingressum in dictam capellam,
ubi ipsa et alij ut supra divinis officiis interesse possint.

9. Quod ista Capella et Ecclesia publiea ornentur cum decenti ornatu altarium
et aliarum rerum quae necessariae sunt pro cultu divino, qui in illis
celebrandus est secundum ritum S. R. E. et quod dictis servis et aliis ut supra
licebit se confer ad dictas cappellam et ecclesiam omnibus horis prout illis
videbitur.

10. Quod curavel custodia dictarum Capellae et Ecclesiae erit penes cos qui
deputabuntur a serenissima D. Infanta; cui licebit constituere custodes, ne
quis possit intrare ad faciendum quid indecorum.

11. Quod ad administrandum Sacramenta, et serviendum in capella et ecclesia
praedictis, erit numerus ministrorum qui conveniens videbitur serenissimae D.
Infantae; and isti nominabuntur per dictam serenissimam D. mode non sint
Vassalli Regi^, modo sint vassali Regis Magnae Britanniae; aut si fuerint, sint
cum voluntate et licentia sua.

12. Quod sit unus Minister in ordine Episcopali constitutus superior, cum
authoritate necessaria ad omnes casus qui acciderint spectantes ad Religionem;
it Episcopo dificiente illius Vicarius.

13. Quod iste Minister superior poterit corrigere, emendare, castigare
Catholicos qui deliquerint, et in illos omnem juris ditionem ecclesiasticam
exercere, et ultra hoc poterit etiam serenissima D. illos de suo servitio
abdicare.

14. Quod licebit serenissimae D. Infantae et servis ut supra, adquirere Romae
dispensationes, indulgentias, Iubileos, et ea omnia quae videbuntur
conscientiis suis competere.

15. Quod servi et familiares ut supra serenissimae D. Infantae qui in Angliam
migrabunt, suscipient juramentum fidelitatis Regi Magnae Britanniae modo nulla
sit clausula neque verbum quod contradicat Religioni et conscientiis
Catholicorum; atque ideo forma dicti juramenti concipiatur per sedem
Apostolicam approbanda; et si forte sint vassalli Regis Britanniae, idem
juramentum suscipiant quod Hispani.

16. Quod leges quae sunt vel orunt in Anglia spectantes ad Religionem,
dictosservos et alios ut supra laicos non attingent, qui tum legibus, tum
poenis contra tra^sgressores earum impositis erunt exempti, NOTA.
Ecclesiastici vero nullis legibus subjaceant, nisi suorum superiorum
Ecclesiasticorum.

17. Quod leges contra Catholicos latae vel ferendae non attingent liberos ex
hoc Matrimonio oriundos, et libere jure sucessionis in Regnis et dominus Magnae
^ritanniae fruantur.

18. Quod Episcopus, personae Ecclesiasticae et Religiosae in samilia D.
Infantae poterunt retinere vestitum et habitum dignitatis et professionis more
Romano.

19. Quod nu^^ices quae lactabunt liberos serenissimae D. Infantae omnino sint
Catholicae, et ab ipsa serenissima D. Infanta eligantur, et familiae suae
adnumerentur.

20. Quod Superior in ordine episcopali constitutus, velejus vicarius poterit
servos et alios ut supra ecclesiasticos pun^re juxta leges et poenas
ecclesiasticas, et illos etiam serenissima D. Infanta a suo servitio abdicare.

Ex Anglia.
1. Pro securitate quod non dissolvatur Matrimonium ^irmtores obligationes
excogitari non possunt quam re ipsa sunt Religio et lex Regni, cum repudium
utrique vel maxim contradicat, neque aliud adhiberi potest vinculum quam illud
honoris: fiet enim omne quod decenter et commode fieri potest.

2. Ad ^am aetatem ad quam in usu est liberos Regum Magnae Britanniae permanere
sub regimine et cura mulie^um, et hoc pro temperamento et valetudine liberorum
brevius aut longius durabit.

3. Servi qui ex Hispania venerint nommabuntur per Regem Catholicum
quotiescunque loci vacaverint.

4. Pro securitate quod totum ut^ capitulatum est compleatur, Rex Magnae
Britanniae et Princeps Walliae juramento obstringendi sunt: Consiliarij Regis
tract tatum chirographo firmare debenti Rex et Princeps Walliae verbo Regio
fidem daturi, sint se facturos quod possibile est, ut onmia capitulata per
Parliamentum stabiliantur, and quoniam nullam recusat cautionem cui praestandi
animus est, si Rex Hispaniarumquid aluid addiderit vel proposuerit quod congrue
and cum honor fieri possit, illud Rex magnae Britanniae perlubens faciet.

5. Praesupponitur quod dispensatio Papae procuranda est antequam quid fiat uti
capitulatum est in primo articulo.

Conditiones additae ex Hispania.
1. Quod declarandum est per sere^ssimum Regem magnae Britanniae, quae
securitas detur quod in ^^llo casu Matrimonium semel factum possit dissolvt.

2. Quod declaretur ad quam aetatem sererenissima D. Infanta habeat educationem
liberorum ex hoc Matrimonio oriundorum.

3. Quod declaretur quod quandocunque loci servorum and servarum quos
serenissima D. secum attulerit nominari per Regem Catholicum fratrem suum
vacare contigerit, dictus serenissimus Rex Catholicus nominabit ali^s in loco
aliorum quomodocunque vacaverint; sive moriantur, sive abdicantur servitio,
sive sua sponte inde venerint.

4. Quod serenissimus Rex magnae Britanniae declaret securitatem quani potest
dare; quod totum (ut capitulatum est) inviolabiliter compleatur.

5. Quod praesupponitur prius quam assentiatur and capituletur ill^d quod visum
fuerit circa hoc matrimonium quod satisfi^ri and contentari debet P^pae. NOTA.


Ex Papa.
1. Quia experientia docuit aliqua repudia evenisse in Anglia, majora vincula
quam oblata requirere videntur quae Serenissima^s Infantam per totum tempus
vitae Serenissi^^i Princip^s Walliae securam a repudio redd^nt.

2. Educentur liber^ in Religione Catholica Romana penes Matrem: faeminae usque
ad duodeci^ annos; mares usque ad quaturdecim, and libere juresuccessionis
Regni fruantur.

3. Subrogentur per Regem Hispaniae quomodocunque vacaverint sive moriantur,
sive abdicentur servitio, sive sua sponte discesserint omnes servi and
familiares Infantae.

4. Quae petenda sunt pro majori securitate, seren^ssimus Rex Hispaniae
proponat Sanctissimo D. N. ut probari possint.

Quoniam praescriptae conditiones a Rege Britanniae oblatae videntur
securitatem tantum Religionis and conscientiae Serenissimae Infantae and ejus
familiae respicere, ad concedend^m vero Dispensationem petitam alia requirantur
ad utilitatem, augmentum, and magnum aliquod bonum Catholicae and Romanae
Religioni^ spectantia. Haec proponenda erunt a Rege magnae Britanniae ut S. D.
N. deliberare possit, an sint talia quae Dispensationem suadeant and Mereantur.
NOTA.


THese Articles, with the Popes exceptions, alterations, and the King of
Spaines five last demands being sent into England to King James, in the year
1620. who answered these dema^ds as aforesaid; the King of Spain by his
Ambassador Count Gondomar, moved King James in behalf of the English Papists,
Priests and Jesuits, that all laws against them might be suspended and
rescinded: To which the King gave this answer; That in the Word of a King, no
Romish Priest or catholic should from thenceforth be condemned or proceeded
against upon any capital law; that though he could not for the present repeal
or rescind the laws inflicting only percu^^ary mulcts upon Roman Catholics,
yet he would so mittigate them, as should please and oblige his Catholic
Subjects to him; and if the Marriage proceeded, his Daughter-in-law should find
him ready to indulge all favors that she should request of him in the behalf
of these of her Religion; signifying likewise, that he had goven his Answer to
the former Articles and demands of the King of Spain; as appears by this
following Letter of King James to the Spanish King, found among the Lord
Cottingtons papers.

A Letter of His Majesty's (King James) to the King of Spain.
JACOBUS Dei gratia Magnae Britanniae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei
Defensor, etc. Serenissimo and potentissimo Principi Domino Phillippo eadem
gratia Hispaniarum, Siciliae, etc. Regi, Archiduci Austriae, Duci Burgundiae
Mediolani etc. Comiti Habspurgi and Tirolis* etc. F^atri Consanguineo, and
Amico nostro Charissimo salutem, and faelicitatem. Serenissime and potentissime
Princeps, Frater, Consanguinee and Amice Charissime literas Serenitatis Vestrae
seprimo Augusti data^ reddidit tandem Comes de Gondomar, expectatas ille quidem
and pergratas mihi cui Ego pro litera^um vestrarum authoritate quae in mandatis
acceperat uberius exponen^^, fidem hab^^ non invitus. Ad Articulos viginti
illos de quibus in Hispania jam ante cum Oratore nostro Barone Digbeio
disceptatum suerat, before and liquidius respondi* quotquot ex ijs Gondomarius
clarius and accuratius enucleandos censuit. Ad quinque porro capita quae
postmodum sunt adjecta, sen^um animi mei sie exprompsi ut Serenitati vestrae
cumula^e satisfactum iri non dubitem. Quod autem de re Religionis alia quaedam
ad subditos meos spectantia, Comes ille Vestro mihi nomine proposuit ac
commendavit equidem Candorem illum vere Regium optime (uti par est)
interpretari de^eo, quod subditis nostris gratiam and indulgentiam hanc omnem
qualis ea cunque futura sit, alteri nemini cuiquam Principi nisi nobis metipsis
debendam existimet; Ut quicquid eorum quieti atque commodo tributum fuerit,
Nostraeid benignitati ac clementiae f^rant acceptum, meritoque id adeo ac
benignitate Nostra non minus quam fide and officio astr^ng^ se nobis agnoscant
and devinciri. Quo certe exploratius Serenitati hoc vestrae constare pervelim
quum Ego cum vestro hoc rogatu ac desiderio, tum meo imprimis Assinitatis
istius persiciendae studio (quam utrinque mutuo exoptatam non diffido) totus
afficiar atque commovear. Sane Romanorum apud nos Catholicorum incolumitati and
vot is quantum etiam nunc indulserimus significabit Comes Gondomarius and vero
quantum pro temporis ratione commode ac decenter hactenus facere potuimus,
factum haud dubie significabit: Ubi vero Nuptiae (favente numine) inter
liberosnostros ex animi nostri sententia coalverint, prorsus aequum censeo
atque statuo, propter istam quae intercedit illis Religionis discrepantiam,
lirum ut Infantae suaeque toli familiae immune suae Religionis exercitium
seorsim in^ra parietes domesticos in Principis aula permittatur. Nec vero
aliunde, quantum hoc quidem provideri p^terit, quicquam ipsi Religionis nomine
gravius ailt molestius (...) oboriri, Sancti insuper and verbo Regio pollicemur
Catholicum aut Sacerdotem Romanum neminem Religious aut Sacerdotij causa dehinc
capitis damnatum; Neminem Iuramentis ad rem Religionis attin^ntibus (quibus in
capitis discrimen vocari poterint) dehinc in posterum adactum aut irretitum
iri. Quamvis enim abunde jam pridem orbi i^notuerit graviter nos hominum male
conciliatorum inauditis machinationibus Religionis praetextu susceptis and
obtectis non semel ad ea remedia provocatos, quae facilitati and insit^^
Clementiae Nostrae minu^ erant cordi, procul tamen ab ingenio ac motibus
Nostris abfuisse semper illam animi duritiem and severitatem presertim in causa
Religionis, cum reliqua vitae consuetudo, tum seripta nostra public typis
divulgata satis testatum reddiderunt. Alias vero leges nostrates quae mulctam
Catholici^ Romany, non mortemirrogant, aboleri aut rescindi a nobis seorsim
non posse, leniri it a posse cum erit us^^, exploratum habebit Serenitas
Vestra, omnibus ut dictorum Catholicorum Romanorum animis mansuetudine ac
lenitate Nestra conciliatis, non solum in officio jam illi ac fide permanere,
quin omni in Nos studio, amore ac pietate cum caeter^s subditis dece^^are
tenebuntur. Extremum illud addam and in me recipiam; sicubi Deo optimo maximo
visum erit filiolam hanc Vestram mihi Nuram, Filio meo Conjugem dicare, Socerum
experturam non difficilem, qui quod abs ipsa utique suorum in gratiam, quibus
consultum velit, ex aequo et bono postulatumfuerit, pronis auribus sit
accpeturus, Atque haec ego fusius meapte sponte profiteri volui planius and
penitius; ut intelligeretis, neque studium satis Se^enltati Vestrae faciendi,
neque in instituto hoc negotio serio and ingenue procedendi animum mihi
defuturum, unde and Liberi nostri connubio felicissimo and nos arctissimo
amoris fraterni vinculo uniamur and Subditi utriusque Nostri pace and amicitia
perpetua perfruantur: quoe ego prae clara scilicet and eximia bona in
istiusmodi Principum Christianorum aff^itatibus contrahendis precipue semper
spectanda existimavi. Unum hoc superest ut a Vobis petam atque contendam,
libere ac liberaliter in re proposita uti agatis Mecum proinde atqu^ Ego in
rebus Vestris omnibus vicem rependam, and ex amimo sum prestiturus. Ex
multiplice Prole mascula superstitem nobis Haeredem unicum dedit Deus, filium
nostrum Principem Carolum virili jam aetate, qui vigessimum Annum prope jam
compleverit. Nec est in rebus humanis quod tantopere desideremus (Ipsi
provectiores jam ^acti) quam ut illum in illustri and idoneo Matrimonio quam
primum collocemus, Regnaque quae Deus indulsit Nobis, in ipsius Progeny quasi
constabilita ad posteros propaganda transmittamus. Rogamus itaque majorem in
modum statuat taudem ac dece^nat Serenita^ Vestra, ut negotium hoc omne ea
celeritate conficiat, quanta res tanta confici potuerit: Erit hoc aequitatis
and prudentiae Vestrae cogita^e quanti hoc Nostra intersit (qui filium habeamus
hunc unicum) quantum porro conditio in hoc Nostra abs Vestra discrepet, quem
Deus sobole tam multa and copiosa locupletavit. Quem and Vos Vestrosque omnes
diu incolumes and volentes velit, etiam, atque etiam obtestamur.

Dat. ex aedibus Nostris Theobaldinis, 27. Aprilis 1620.

UPon this Letter and Liberty indulged by it, the Jesuits, Priests, Recusants
in England, grew very bold, insolent, daring and multiplied exceedingly;
insomuch that the King assembling a Parliament at London, Anno 1621. the
Commons House taking notice of their formidable dangerous increase, and
desperate designs to extirpate the Protestant Religion both at home and
abroad, under pretext of this Nuptial Treaty, drew up this ensuing memorable
Petition and Remonstrance, with an intention to present it to King James.

The Petition and Remonstrance intended to be sent to King James by the house
of Commons in December, 1621.
Most gracious and dread Sovereign,
WE Your Majesty's most humble and loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, now assembled in Parliament, who represent the Commons of your
Realm; full of hearty sorrow to be deprived of the Comfort of Your royal
presence; the rather for that it proceeds from want of your health, wherein we
all unfainedly do suffer: In all humble manner calling to mind your gracious
Answer to our former Petition concerning Religion; which notwithstanding your
Majesty's pious and princely Intentions, has not produced that good effect
which the danger of these times does seem to us to require. And finding how ill
your Majesty's goodness has been requited by Princes of different Religion,
who even in time of Treaty have taken opportunity to advance their own ends,
tending to the subversion of Religion, and disadvantage of your affairs, and
the estate of your Children: By reason whereof your ill affected Subjects at
home, the Popish Recusants, have taken too much encouragement, and are
dangerously increased in their number, and in their insolences; we cannot but
be sensible thereof: and therefore humbly represent what we conceive to be the
causes of so great and growing mischiefs; and what may be the remedies.

1 The vigilance and ambition of the Pope of Rome and his dearest Son, The
Causes.
the one aiming at as large a temporal Monarchy, as the other at a spiritual
Suptemacy.

2 The devilish positions and doctrines whereon Popery is built and taught
without authority to their followers, for advancement of their temporal ends.

3, The distressed and miserable estate of the Professors of true Religion in
foreign parts.

4. The disastrous accidents to your Majesty's Children abroad, expressed with
rejoicing and even with contempt to their Persons.

5. The strange confederacy of the Princes of the Popish Religion, aiming
mainly at the advancement of theirs and subverting ours, and taking the
advantages conducing to that end, upon all occasions.

6. The great and many Armies raised and maintained at the charge of the King
of Spain, the chief of that league.

7. The expectation of the Popish Recusants of the Match with Spain, and
feeding themselves with great hopes of the consequences thereof.

8. The interposing of foreign Princes and their agents, in the behalf of
Popish Recusants, for connivence and favor unto them.

9. Their open and usual resort to the Houses, and which is worse, to the
Chapels of foreign Ambassadors.

10. Their more then usual concourse to the City, and their frequent
Conventicles and Conferences there.

11. The education of their Children in many several Seminaries and houses of
their Religion in foreign parts, appropriated only to the English Fugitives.

12. The grants of their just forfeitures intended by your Majesty, as a reward
of service to the Grantees, but beyond your Majesty's intention, transferred or
compounded for, at such mean rates as will amount to little less then a
toleration.

13. The licentious printing and dispersing of Popish and seditious Books, even
in the time of Parliament.

14. The swarm of Priests and Jesuits, the common Incendiaries of all
Christendom, dispersed in all parts of your Kingdom.

And from these causes as bitter roots, The Effects.
We humbly offer to your Majesty, that we foresee and fear there will
necessarily follow very dangerous effects both to Church and State: For,

1. The Popish Religion is incompatible with ours in respect of their
positions. The Effects.


2. It draws with it an unavoydable Dependency on foreign Princes.

3. It opens too wide a gap for popularity, to any who shall draw to great a
party.

4. It has a restless spirit, and will strive by these gradations: If it once
get but a connivence, it will press for a toleration; if that should be
obtained, they must have an equality; from thence they will aspire to
superiority; and will never rest till they get a subversion of the true
Religion.

The remedies against these growing evils, which in all humbleness we offer to
your most Excellent Majesty, are these:

1. That seeing this inevitable necessity is fallen upon your Majesty, The
Remedies.
which no wisdom or providence of a pious and peaceable King can avoid, your
Majesty would not omit this just occasion speedily and effectually to take your
sword into your hand.

2. That once undertaken upon so honorable and just grounds, your Majesty
would resolve to pursue, and more publicly to avow the aiding of those of our
Religion in foreign parts, which doubtless would reunite the Princes and
States of the Union, by these disasters disheartened and disbanded.

3. That your Majesty would propose to your self to manage this War with
the best advantage, by a diversion or otherwise, as in your d^ep judgment shall
be found fittest, and not to rest upon a War in these parts only, which will
consume your treasure and discourage your people.

4. That the bent of this War, and point of your sword, may be against that
Prince (what soever opinion of potency he has) whose Armies and treasure have
first diverted, and since maintained the War in the Palatinate.

5. That for the securing of our peace at home, your Majesty will be pleased to
review the parts of our humble Petition, formerly delivered unto your Majesty,
and hereunto annexed, and to put in execution by the care of choice
Commissioners to be thereunto especially appointed, the laws already and
hereafter to be made for the preventing of dangers by Popish Recusants, and
their wonted evasions.

6. That to frustrate their hopes for a future age, our most Noble Prince may
be timely and happily married to one of our own Religion.

7. That the Children of the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, and of
others ill affected, and suspected in their Religion, now beyond the Seas, may
be forthwith called home by your means, and at the charge of their Parents or
Governors.

8. That the Children of Popish Recusants, or such whose Wives are Popish
Recusants, be brought up during their minority with Protestant Schoolmasters
and Teachers, who may sow in their tender years the seed of true Religion.

9. That your Majesty will be pleased speedily to revoke all former licenses
for such Children and Youth to travail beyond the Seas, and not grant any such
license hereafter.

10. That your Majesty's learned Council may receive commandment from your
Highness, carefully to look into former grants of Recusants lands, and to
avoid them if by law they can; and that your Majesty will stay your hand from
passing any such grants hereafter.

This is the sum and effect of our humble Declaration, which We (no ways
intending to press upon your Majesty's undoubted and regal Prerogative) do
with the fullness of our duty and obedience, humbly submit to your most
Princely consideration. The glory of God, whose Cause it is, the Zeal of our
true Keligion, in which we have been borne, and wherein by Gods grace we are
resolved to dye; the safety of your Majesty's person, who is the very life of
your people, the happiness of your Children and Posterity, the honor and good
of the Church and State, dearer unto us then our own lives, having kindled
these affections truly devoted to your Majesty: And seeing out of our duty to
your Majesty, We have already resolved to give at the end of this Session, one
entire Subsidy for the present relief of Palatmate only, to be paid in the
end of February next, which cannot well be effected, but by passing a Bill in a
Parliamentary course before Christmas; We most humbly beseech your Majesty (as
our assured hope is) that you will then also vouchsafe to give life by your
royal assent to such Bills as before that time shall be prepared for your
Majesty's honor and the general good of your people; and that such Bills may
be also accompanied (as has been accustomed) with your Majesty's gracious
pardon: Which proceeding from your own mere grace, may by your Highness
direction be drawn to that latitude and extent as may best sort with your
Majesty's bounty and goodness; and that not only (...) and criminal
offenders may take benefit thereof, but that your good Subjects may receive
case thereby; and if it shall so stand with your good pleasure, that it may
extend to the relief of the old debts and duties to the Crown, before the
first year of your Majesty's reign; to the discharge of Allienations without
license, and mis-sueing of Liveries and Oustrelemaine, before the first Summons
of this Parliament; and o^ concealed Wardships, and not suing of Liveries and
Oustrelemains before the twelfth year of your Majesty's reign, which gracious
favor would much comfort your good Subjects, and ease them from vexition with
little loss or prejudice to your own profit.

And we by our daily and devont prayers to the Almighty, the great King of
Kings shall contend for a blessing upon our endeavors, and for your Majesty's
long and happ^ reign over us, and for your Childrens Children after you for
many and many Generations.

KIng James having private intelligence, and a Copy of this Petition and
Remonstrance sent him to New Market, endeavored to suppress it in the birth;
an^ thereupon sent a Letter to Sir Thomas Richardson Speaker of the Commons
House dated December. 3. 1621. to prohibit the House, That none therein should
from thenceforth persume to meddle with any Mysteries of State; and namely not
to speak (...) his dearest Sons Match with the Daughter of Spain, nor to
touch the honor of th^^ King: And to inform them, that if they had already
touched any of those forbi^^^^ points, in any Petition of theirs to be sent
unto him, except they reformed it herein before it came into his hands, he
would not daigne the hearing nor answering of it. The C^mmons conceiving this a
great infringement of their Privileges, drew a Petition to the King in answer
of this Letter, justifying their former Petition and Remonstrance; and assuring
him; That the miserable estate of those of the Religion abroad obliged them in
part of duty, not only to turn their eyes on a War abroad, but also to take
care for the securing of our peace at home, which the dangerous increase and
insolency of Popish Recusants, apparently visible and sensible, did lead them
unto, and necessarily drew them to present to his Majesty. Complaining withal,
of the abridgement of their undoubted ancient Privileges and Liberty of
Parliament, by his Majesty's letter to the Speaker. Which Petition, together
with the former, they sent by some Member to King James to New Market. The King
wholly rejects the first Petition and would not receive it, but returns a long
and sharp answer to the latter: NOTE.
Wherein he protests, That he knew not of any fit Match for his dearest Son
among any Protestant Princes; ^rofessing that he was so far engaged in that
Match, that he could not go back in honor, unless the King of Spain
performed not such things as he expected at his hands; and that they might rest
secure, he would never be weary to do all he could for the propagation of our
Religion, and repressing of Popery in the general: But the manner and form of
doing it they must remit to his Care and Providence, who could best consider of
times and seasons: And that his care of Religion must be such, that he must not
by the persecution of Recusants here at home, irritate foreign Princes of
contrary religion, and teach them the way to plague the Protestants in their
Dominions: Severely checking the House for meddling thus busily with religion
and the Spanish Match. This Answer bare date at New Market December 11. The
House of Commons much discontented at this harsh answer, drew up and made this
notable Protestation, in vindication of their Parliameniary Rights and
Privileges; entered in their Journall and Voted in the House, December. 19. 1621.

THe Commons now assembled in Parliament, being justly occasioned thereunto*
concerning sundry Liberties Franchises and Pr^viledges of Parliament amongst
others here mentioned, do make this Protestation following: That the
Liberties, Franchises, Privileges and Jurisdictions of Parliament, are the
ancient and undoubted birthright and inheritance of the Subjects of England,
and that the Arduous and urgent affairs concerning the King, State and defense
of the Realm, and of the Church of England, and the maintenance and making of
Laws, and redress of mischiefs and grievances which daily happen within this
Realm, are proper Subjects and matter of Council and debate in Parliament:
and that in the handling and proceeding of those businesses, every Member of
the House of Parliament has, and of right ought to have freedom of speech to
propound, treat, reason, and bring to conclusion the same; and that the Commons
in Parliament have like Liberty and freedom to treat of these matters, in such
order as in their judgments shall seem fittest. And that every Member of the
said House has like freedom from all impeachment, imprisonment, and
molestation (other then by censure of the House it self) for or concerning any
speaking, reasoning, or declaring of any matter or matters, touching the
Parliament or Parliament business. And that if any of the said Members be
complained of, and questioned for any thing done, or said in Parliament, the
same is to be showed to the King by the advice and assent of all the Commons
assembled in Parliament; before the King give credence to any private
information.

The King hereby discerning the Commons resolution against Popery, and the
Spanish Match, chose rather to break off the Parliament, then this Marriage
Treaty: And upon the sixth of January following, dissolved the Parliament by
proclaimation without a Session, to the Commons great distaste, and then pursued
this Match more eagerly then before. The chief remora whereof being at Rome, to
wit, the Popes demurring to grant^ Dispensation till all his, and his Conclaves
demands in favor of all our Roman Catholics were condescended to by King
James, a Letter was thereupon sent from the King of Spain to Rome, to quicken
the Pope and expedite the Dispensation; what effects it produced (at least in
show, though not in substance) will appear by this passage of Francis (now
Lord) Cottingtons Letter to Secretary Calvert from Madrid, July 7. 1622. Our
English Agent at Rome.
Master Gage writes from Rome, so does the Friar, that a late Letter come
thither from this King, has put the business in such terms as they were
hourly expecting the Friars dispatch; and I can assure you, that here they
speak loud when any danger is mentioned of the Popes denial. My Lord Digby
hastens the business bravely and seems very impatient of any delay at all. But
these fair pomises were only to circumvent King James, who in the mean time
to ingratiate himself with the Pope, releaseth diverse thousands of Popish
Recusants out of prison.

The number of Priests and popish Recusants then enlarged out of duresse by
King James throughout his Dominions, if we may believe Gondomar's Letter from
hence to the King of Spain; or the Letter of Sirica Secretary to the Spanish
King to Mr. Cottington, dated at Madrid, Julij 7. 1622. was no less then 4000.
which the Spaniards, professed, to be a great demonstration of King James his
sincere affection to confirm the correspondency and Amity between both
Crowns; but in the mean time, we hear not of one of our Protestants released
out of the Spanish or Romish Inquisition. And that this enlargement of theirs
might be more expeditious, notorious, and less chargeable to Recusants; the
King directed this ensuing Letter to the Lord Keeper Williams, Bishop of
Lincoln, under the privy Signet, to issue forth Writs for their release.

TRusty and Welbeloved, We greet you well; whereas we have given you a former
warrant and direction for the making of two several Writs for the enlargement
of such Recusants as are in prison at this time, either for matters of
Recusancy in general, or for denying the taking the Oath of Supremacy,
according to the Statute, by removing them from the general Goales of this
Kingdom, to be bailed before the Justices of our Bench; finding by experience,
that this course will be very troublesome to the poorer sort of Recu^ants; and
very chargeable unto Us, who out of our Princely clemen^y, and by the mediation
of foreign Princes were desired to bear out the same. We will and require
you to make and issue forth two other Writs in nature and substance answerable
with the former, to be directed to our Justices of Assizes; enabling and
requiring them and every of them to enlarge such Recusants; as they shall find
in their several Goales, upon such sureties and recognizance, and other
conditions as they were enlarged by the Judges of our Bench. And this shall be
your warrant so to do.

Dated at Westminster, July 25. 1622.

Hereupon this Lord Keeper (though a Bishop) not only issued out these Writs,
but likewise writ this Letter to the Judges.

AFter my hearty Commendations to you: His Majesty having resolved (out of
deep reasons of State, and in expectation of like correspondence from foreign
Princes to the professors of our Religion) to grant some grace and convenience
to the imprisoned Papists of this Kingdom, has commanded me to pass some
Writs under the broad Seal for that purpose, requiring the Judges of every
Circuit, to enlarge the said prisoners according to the tenor and effect of the
same.

I am to give you to understand (for His Majesty) how His Majesty's royal
pleasure it, that upon receipt of these Writs, you shall make no niceness or
difficulty to extend that his Princely favor to all such Papists as you shall
find prisoners in the Goales of your Circuits, for any Church recusancy
whatsoever, or refusing the Oath of Supremacy, or dispersing Popish books, or
hearing saying of Mass, or any other poy^t of recusancy which does touch or
concern Religion only, and not matters of State, which shall appear into
you, to be totally civil and political: And so I bid you heartily farewell.

Your loving friend John Lincoln.
Westminster College, August 2. 1622.

This enlarging of all Recusants (with many Priests and Jesuits by color of
those Writs) throughout all the Kings Dominions, was deemed by King James and
others; a most prevailing means to induce the Pope to grant a Dispensation for
this much^ desired Marriage, without any further procrastination, and to draw
on the King of Spain to expedite and consummate it without more
tergiversations. But they on the contrary feeding King James only with good
words and promises, protracted the Match and Dispensation underhand, with much
art and policy, all they might. The Spaniard under pretext of this Treaty
seizing all the Palatinate, extirpating the Protestant Religion abroad, and
propagating popery, multiplying the number of Roman Catholics at home:
Whereupon the King to prevent all further excuses, and accomplish the Match;
returns his resolution to the Popes forecited Exceptions and Answers to the
Articles concerning the Marriage, in form following:

Resolutions upon the Answers given by the Pope unto the several Articles
agreed on betwixt the late King of Spain and Us, Found among the Lord
Cottingtons papers.
concerning the Marriage of Our dear Son the Prince, with the Infanta Donna
Maria.
TO the second Article. We mervaile that there has been so necessary a point
omitted, when the Articles were sent to Rome by the King of Spain, to procure
the Dispensation, that the form agreed upon for the celebration of the
Marriage, and the Oath of fidelity for the Infanta's Servants were not also
sent thither with the rest, being (as they were) agreed on, and so essential
to the business. We have now delivered Copies of them both to Gage, to make
such use thereof as shall be requisite for the furtherance of the business of
himself, since he is a person trusted by the Court of Rome in this affair,
but not as from Us, who having nothing to do with the Pope, treated not with
him, NOTE.
but with the King of Spain only.

To the fifth Article concerning the public Church, besides the Chapel* We
are verily persuaded that this would not have been demanded if they had been
well informed, it being more then either We Our Self have or the Prince Our
Son. And if there be no other reason for the demand of such a Church, then
that the World may take notice of the Religion she professes in a public
manner, that may be as well in the Chapel assigned for her and her Family, to
which she and they may publicly and openly resort in the sight of all
whosoever shall desire to behold it, it being in effect a Church with a
Churchyard belonging unto it, and not simply a private Oratory.

To the sixth Article, where it is said that her Servants, etc. ought in any
case to be Catholics; that concerns not us, but the King of Spain, who is
to appoint them.

To the twelfth Article, where it is required, that the superior Minister
having ecclesiastical authority over her Family, should be in ordine
Episcopali. We are well contented to leave that to the King of Spain, to
allow of it if he think fit.

To the sixteenth Article, NOTE.
where it is required by the Pope, quod Ecclesiastici nullis legibus subjaceant
nisi suorum superiorum Ecclesiasticorum. Our answer is, that the exemption
seems strange, and as we verily believe is not allowed them in all States and
Countries that are Roman Catholics; We hope that the Clergymen, who shall
come hither to attend the Infanta, will give no cause for the Civil Magistrate
to proceed against them in that manner, except it be for great and heinous
causes and that for faults merely civil.

To the nineteenth concerning the Nurses, it belongs unto the Infanta, and she
may do in it as she pleases.

Resolutions upon the other five Articles brought out of Spain by the Count of
Gondomar, and answered by Us.
TO the first, concerning security against Divorce, the doubt which the Pope
makes is very needless, and the answer which we gave unto the King of Spain,
is so full, as more cannot be offered nor said.

To the second, touching the education of the Children; we consider that these
Articles now to be agreed on, will hereafter become public, and that for Us
to declare unto the World, NOTE.
that we have engaged Our Self, to have our Grandchildren brought up usque ad
annos Nubiles, in a Religion which we profess not, not is publicly professed
in Our Kingdom; We leave it unto the King of Spaine's wisdom to consider
indifferently and u^partially, how unfit it is for us in many respects to yield
unto it. And therefore further then you have already assented unto in that
Article in the general, which leaves the Children under the tuition and care
of the Mother, longer or shorter, according to their constitutions and healths
(which may possibly reach unto the time required by the Pope) we can by no
means condescend, unless the King of Spain think fit to limit the time to a
certainty for the Mother to have the ear of the Children, so as it exceed not
seven years old which We can be contented to yield unto.

Thus far concerning the demands made by the Pope particularly unto several
Articles.

For the close of all, wherein it seems he expects some offer to be made by Us
for the general good of the Roman Church; the same is explicated more plainly
in a discourse held by the Cardinal Bandino with George Gage; whereof a Copy
is sent with these Articles. King James his Agent at Rome.
But for that matter, you are to put the King of Spain in remembrance, that we
treat with him, and not with the Pope: That the Articles concerning Religion
agreed upon betwixt his Father and Us, were such and so full to the
satisfaction of that Church, in the opinions of the learned and greatest
Clergy of Spain, as we have bin often told, that they have been ever of
opinion, the Pope could not upon those Articles, nor ought to refuse the
Dispensation. The Cardinal acknowledges as it seems in that discourse, that
the Pope is satisfied with the reasons given both by the Padre Maestro and
Gage, that We of Our own authority cannot give a general and free liberty of
exercising the Roman Religion. What is it then they would have? Setting that
aside, We have in a manner already done that which is desired, NOTE.
as all the Roman Catholics have found, out of Our gracious clemency toward
them, especially of late, and will no doubt acknowledge. Which if the Pope had
known when these answers were given by him to the Articles, it is to be
presumed, he would not so much have insisted upon that point. But for
whatsoever may concern that business, We have so fully declared Our Self
unto the late King of Spain by Our Letter of the 27. of April 1620. under Our
hand and Seal, as We hope the King of Spain rests satisfied, both with the
extent of Our promise in that behalf, and with the assurance of performance;
which is as much as in honor can be required at Our hands, or as We can grant,
considering the ^^ate of Our affairs and government. And therefore since
whatsoever is already agreed unto, either in the Articles or by that letter, We
intend sincerely and religiously to perform, and can go no further for no
respects, without notable prejudice or inconvenience.

We desire to know whether the King of Spain will resolve to conclude the Match
upon those terms* or not, that there may be no time lost for us to provide
some other Match for Our Son, if that shall not succeed; and so to press a
present resolution, without sending too and fro, betwixt Rome and Spain, which
spends time, and may serve still for a color, to draw the Treaty in infinitum.
Nevertheless, if you find that it is a thing impossible for them to resolve
without a reply to Rome, and that they do earnestly desire it, We are
contented that you shall yield them two months time after your audience, and
no longer, so as before Christmas at the furthest, We may be advertised
finally, what we are to trust unto; beyond which time, we can expect no longer.

Thus you may observe how far We are pleased to express Our Self, as well to
manifest Our desire and intention to continue for ever on Our part, the strict
amity betwixt Us and Spain; as also to take away all just exception that may
hinder the speedy conclusion of the Match, as We have been contented now to
enlarge Our Self further in diverse particulars, then was before agreed on or
desired; as namely in condescending that the superior Minister may be in ordine
Episcopali, that the limitation of the time for the education of the Children
be for six or seven years, and in other points as you will find in this answer.
Of all which we require you to give special notice to that King, that he may
thereupon take into his Consideration the sincerity of of Our affection, who
have so roundly and really proceeded in this business, so as in all reason We
may and do justly expect the like dealing from him, which cannot better
appear, then in the speedy dispatch thereof.

These resolutions he sent post into Spain to the Lord Digby by Gresly,
enclosing in this Letter, the Copy whereof (with other ensuing papers) were
seized on by the sequestrators of the Lord Cottingtons goods and writings.

RIght trusty, etc. Your dispatch of the ninth of August gave us so much
contentment, and so great hopes of satisfaction in all those businesses which
you have there to treat with that King, as we could not expect any further
difficulties. Notwithstanding by that which has come unto Our hands
immediately after, NOTE.
as well by George Gage from Rome, as from Our Ambassador Sir Richard Weston at
Bruxelles, and our Ministers in the Palatinate; We find that neither the
Dispensation is granted for the march, nor the treaty of Cessation so near a
Conclusion as we conceived it would have been, now that the Auxiliaries and all
other Obstacles are removed: But on the contrary side, that new delays and
excuses are invented, our Garrisons in the Palatinate in the mean time blocked
up, and Heidelberg it self actually besieged. Which proceeding though our
Ambassador has expostulated with the Infanta and the Commissioners as
injurious to Us, and ill-beseeming their professions hitherto, yet is there not
that readiness showed to give Us such contentment therein as we might justly
expect, but answers still protracted and put off for advantage, whilst our
Forces there remain in great distress, and the Town and Castle of Heidelberg
likely in a few days to be lost, for it cannot hold out longer as we are
informed. This dealing seems the more strange unto Us, for that the late
dispatch of the King of Spain was (before the news of this siege, and that
our Ambassador had propounded any thing concerning it) come unto the Infanta:
But because you shall be particularly informed of the ^hole carriage of the
business, We have given order that Copies shall be sent you (...) all the
dispatch, and then you shall see how these proceedings agree with the hopes and
promises which are given Us, from thence. Hereupon therefore Our pleasure is*
that you shall immediately and with as much speed as you may, crave audience of
that King, and represent unto him the merit which We may justly challenge unto
Our Self for Our sincere proceedings with the Emperor and Him, in all the
course of this business, notwithstanding the many invitations and temptations
which We have had to engage Our Self on Our Son in laws part: That We have
had both from the Emperor and Him hopes given us from time to time of
extraordinary respect, howsoever Our Sonne-in-law had deserved, which We have
attended and expected even to the very last with much patience, and in despite
as it were of all the opposition that has been made to shake Our resolution
in that behalf, If now when all impediments are removed, and that the way is
so prepared, as that the Emperor may give an end unto the War, and make some
present demonstration of his respects toward Us, in leaving Us the honor of
holding those poor places which yet remain quietly and peaceably until the
general accommodation, the same shall nevertheless be violently taken from
Us; what can we look for when the whole shall be in his hands and possession?
Who am^sing Us with a treaty of cessation, and protracting it industriously as
We have reason to believe, does in the mean time seize himself of the whole
Country; which being done Our Ambassador shall return with scorn, and we
remain with dishonor. I shall not need to furnish you with Arguments for the
unfolding and laying open this unfriendly dealing more plainly unto them, your
own reason and observation will find enough out of the dispatches whereof
Copies are sent unto you, as namely, the withdrawing of the Spanish Forces, and
leaving the business wholly in the hands of the Emperor and the Duke of
Bava^ia; the style of the In^anta in answering Our Ambassador with
recriminations, which was not her manner heretofore; the slight and frivolous
answer given by the Marquess of Bedmar unto Our Ambassador when he acquainted
him with the siege of Heidelberg: The quarrellous occasion taken by the
Emperor for calling the diet at Ratisbone contrary to his own promise, which
in his Dispatch to Us he confesses to have broken, as you will see by the
Copy. All which and many more which your own judgment in the perusal of the
dispatches, will suggest unto you, do minister unto Us cause sufficient of
jealousy on the Emperors part, as you shall, plainly tell that King, although
We will not do him that wrong as to mistrust that he gives the least consent
unto it: In this confidence with must earnestness We shall still solicit Him,
that for the affection He bears Us, and the desire which We suppose he has,
that there may continue for ever a perfect Amity betwixt Us and the whole House
of Austria, he will not cease to do all good office* herein; letting him know
directly that in these terms We cannot stand with the Emperor, but that if
Heidelberg be won, and the siege continue, or the Cessation be longer
unnecessarily delayed, We must recall Our Ambassador from Bruxelles and treat
no more, as We have already given order, hoping that whatsoever unkindnesse We
shall conceive against the Emperor upon these occasions, it shall not be
interpreted to re^lect in any sort upon the entire affection that is at this
present, and as We hope shall always continue betwixt Us and the Crown of
Spain, And therefore as We have sundry times heretofore promised, in testimony
of the sincerity of Our proceedings, and of Our great desire to preserve the
Amity inviolable between Us and the whole house of Austria; NOTE.
that in case our Sonne-in-law would not be governed by Us, that then We would
not only forsake him, but take part and join Our Forces with the Emperors
against him; so you may fairly represent unto that King, that in like manner We
have reason to expect the same measu^e from him that (upon the Emperors
averseness to a cessation and accommodation) He will likewise actually assist
Us for the recovery of the Palatmate and Electorall dignity unto Our
Sonne-in-law, as it has been oftentimes intimated from Spain. To conclude,
We shall not need to say any more unto you touching this point, but to let you
see, that Our meaning is to carry all things fa^re with that King, and not to
give him any cause of distrust or jealousy, if you perceive that they intend
to go really and roundly on with the Match. Wherein nevertheless We must tell
you, that We have no great cause to be well pleased with the diligences used on
that part, when We observe that after so long an expectance of the
Dispensation, upon which the whole business (as they will have it) depends,
there is nothing yet returned but Queres and Objections. Yet because We will
not give over Our patience a while longer, until We understand more certainly
what the effect thereof is like to be, wherein We require you to be very wary
and watchful, considering how Our honor is therein engaged; We have thought
^it to let you know how far We are pleased to enlarge Our Self, concerning
those points demanded by the Pope* and set down by way of Postill unto the
Articles agreed upon betwixt Spain and Us, as you will see by the power which
Gage brought Us from Rome, whereof We have sent you a Copy, and Our
Resolutions thereupon signed with Our own hand, for your warrant and
instruction. And further then that, since We cannot go without much
prejudice, inconvenience and dishonor to Our Self and Our Son, We hope and
expect the King of Spain will bring it instantly to an issue without further
delay, which you are to press with all diligence and earnestnesle, that you
may presently know Their final resolution and what We may expect thereupon.
But if any respit of time be earnestly demanded, and that you perceive it not
possible for them to resolve until an answer come from Rome, We then think
it fit that you give them two months time after your audience, that We may
understand that King's final resolution before Christmas next at the furthest.

September 9. 1622. from VVansted.

By this letter the whole world may discern, how grossly King James was abused,
and how much the Palsgrave and other Protestant Princes suffered in for^eigne
parts without any assistance from England, under pretext of this Nuptial
Treaty.

Upon these Letters, the Lord Digby presented this ensuing Memorial to the
King of Spain, the 3. of October 1622. truly translated out of the Spanish
Copy.

SIR, the Baron Digby Ambassador Extraordinary of the King of great Britain
says, that it is near six months since they had treated to make a Marriage
between the Prince of Wales, and the Infanta Donna Maria sister to your Majesty.

That it is five months since they settled in Spain the Articles in matter of
Religion, His Majesty (now in glory) having first asked the opinions of many
learned men, which were joined to consult upon this business.

That the King of great Britain dealt clearly in all the Articles, and
therein has complied in all things, and has promised by his word and in a
letter written the sixth of April 1620. particularly declared, what he would
do in favor of the Catholics.

That it appeared the business was then well founded to ask the Popes
Dispensation, and thereupon they dispatched Father Diego de Fuente. for to
solicit it in Rome; but now at the end very near of two years, his Holiness
(without reply hither) has sent directly for England, NOTE.
propounding to the King, not only many alterations in the said Capitulations,
but something new, which the King would by no means yield unto. NOTE.


That this to the King his Master seemed much different from that which he
expected.

First, for that having Capitul^ted the Dispensation should only move from
this place, and the King having not treated at all with the Pope, therefore he
expected what the Pope would reply, should be sent unto your Majesty, from
whence came the demand of the Dispensation.

Secondly, for that he thought, that with the Agreement and the rest perused,
all things concerning Religion had been settled and that the learned men did
think, that upon these conditions they might, and that his Holiness ought to
consent to the Dispensation, and now they demand new things and impossible,
which seems very strange.

Wherefore the King his Master desiring that in this business he make short
expedition (for that it imports Him and His Kingdom very much that they marry
the Prince His only Son presently, going upon 23. years, having fo^borne to
marry for six years past only in respect of this Treaty.) He is commanded to
declare plainly to your Majesty, how far he may condescend in matter of
Religion, and if with this your Majesty be content, to proceed to a conclusion
of the Marriage, without more delays; and if this be not enough to give
satisfaction to your Majesty, as he hopes it will seeing he has yielded to
much more then what was capitulated in the time of the King. Father to your
Majesty, now in glory, your Majesty also would be pleased to declare on the
part of your Majesty, that without loss of more time his Majesty may dispose
of the Prince his son, and your Majesty of the Infanta, as you best please.

The same day ( October. 3. 1622.) King James discerning the Emperors and
Spaniards strange proceedings in the Palatinate, to gain the total possession
of (...) under color of this Teaty, dspa^ched this ensuing Letter into Spain
to the Lord Digby, and the next day after, this Minute of second Instructions,
sent by Master Porter.

RIght Trusty, etc. There is none knows better then your self, how We have
labored ever since the begin^g of these unfortunate troubles of the Empire,
notwithstanding all opposition to the contrary, to merit well of Our good
Brother the King of Spain, and the whole house of Austria, by a long and
lingering patience, grounded still upon his friendship and promises, that Care
should be had of Our Honor, and of Our Childrens Patrimony and Inheritance. We
have acquainted you also from time to time since the beginning of the Treaty at
Bruxelles how crosly all things have there proceeded, notwithstanding all the
fair professions made unto Us, both by the King of Spain, and the Infanta and
all his Ministers, and the Letters written by him unto the Emperor, and them
effectually (at the least, as they endeavored to make Us believe.) But what
fruits have We of all these, other then dishonor and scorn? Whilst We are
treating* the Town and Castle of Heidelberg are taken by force, Our Garrison
put to the sword, Manheim besieged, and all the hostility used that is within
the power of an enemy, as you will see by the Relation which We have commanded
Our Secretary to send you. Our pleasure therefore is that you immediately as
soon as you can get audience, let that King understand how sensible We are of
these proceedings of the Emperors toward Us, and withal are not a little
troubled to see, that the Infanta having an absolute Commission to conclude a
Cessation and suspension of Arms, should now at last when all Objections were
answered, and the former (solely) pretended Obstacles removed, not only delay
the conclusion of the Treaty, but refuse to lay her command upon the Emperors
Generals, for abstaining from the siege of Our Garrisons during the Treaty,
upon a pretext of want of authority: So as for avoiding of further dishonor,
We have been forced to recall both Our Ambassadors, as well the Chancelour of
our Exchequer, who is already returned to Our presence, as also the Lord
Chichester, whom We intended to have sent unto the Emperor to the Diet at
Ratisbone. Seeing therefore that merely out of Our extraordinary respect to the
King of Spain, and the firm confidence We ever put in the hopes and promises
which he did give Us (desiring nothing more then for his cause principally to
avoid all occasions that might put Us into ill understanding with any of the
house of Austria) We have hitherto proceeded with a steadfast patience trusting
to the Treaties, and neglecting all other Means which probably might have
secured the remainder of Our Childrens Inheritance (those Garrisons which We
maintained in the Palatinate being rather for honors sake to keep a footing
until the general accommodation, then that We did rely so much upon their
strength as upon his friendship) and by this confidence and security of Our^,
are thus exposed to dishonor and reproach: You shall tell that King, that
seeing all those endeavors and good Offices which He has used toward the
Emperor in this business, on the behalf of Our Sonne-in-law (upon confidence
whereof that security of Ours depended, which he continually by his Letters and
Ministers here labored to beget and confirm in Us) have not sorted to any
other issue, then to a plain abuse both of His trust and Ours, whereby We are
both of Us highly injured in Our Honor, though in a different degree. We hope
and desire that out of a true sense of this wrong offered unto Us, he will as
Our dear and loving Brother, faithfully promise and undertake upon his Honor,
confirming the same also under his hand and seal, either that the Town and
Castle of Heidelberg shall within threescore and ten days after your audience
and demand made, be rendered into Our hands, with all things therein belonging
to Our Sonne-in-law or Our Daughter (as near as may be in the state they were
when they were taken) and the like for Manheim and Frankendale, if both or
either of them shall be taken by the enemy whilst these things are in
treating; As also, that there shall be within the said term of 70. days a
Cessation and Suspension of Arms in the Palatinate for the future, upon the
several Articles and Conditions last propounded by Our Ambassador Sir Richard
Weston; and that the general Treaty shall be set on foot again upon such
honorable terms and conditions as We propounded unto the Emperor in a Letter
written unto him in November last, and with which the King of Spain then (as
We understood) seemed satisfied. Or else in case all these particulars be not
yielded unto and performed by the Emperor, as is here propounded, but be
refused or delayed beyond the time aforementioned, that then the King of Spain
do join his Forces with Ours for the recovery of Our Childrens honors and
Patrimony, which upon this trust has been thus lost: Or if so be his Forces at
this present be otherwise so employed, as that they cannot give Us that
assistance which We here desire, and (as We think) have deserved, yet that
at the least he will permit Us a free and friendly passage through his
Territories and Dominions, for such Forces as We shall send and employ into
Germany for this service. Of all which distinctively if you receive not from
the King of Spain within ten days at the furthest after your audience and
proposition made, a direct assurance under his hand and seal, without delay or
putting Us off to further Treaties and Conferences; that is to say, of such
restitution, Cessation of Arms, and proceeding to a general Treaty, as is
before mentioned; or else of assistance and joining His Forces with Ours
against the Emperors, or at least permission of passage for Our Forces through
His the said Kings Dominions; that then you take your leave and return to Our
presence without further stay; otherwise, to proceed in the Negotiation for the
Marriage of Our Son according to the Instructions We have given you. Given,
etc.

Hampton Court, October. 3. 1622.

RIght Trusty, etc. We have given you certain Insturctions signed with Our
hand, to direct you how to express unto the King of Spain, the feeling We
have of the dishonor put upon Us by the Emperor, through Our trust and
confidence in that Kings promises, wherein you have order to come away without
further delay, in case you receive not satisfaction to your demands, in such
sort as We have commanded you to propound them. Nevertheless We are to put you
in remembrance of that which We have heretofore told you, in case a Rupture
happen between the King of Spain and Us, that We would be glad to manage it at
Our best advantage. And therefore howsoever you do not find the satisfaction
which We in those Instructions crave from the King of Spain, and have reason
to expect, yet would We not have you instantly come away upon it, but advertise
Us first, letting Us know privately (if you find such cause) that there is no
good to be done, nor no satisfaction as you judge intended Us, Note this*
though publicly and outwardly you give out the contrary, that We may make
use thereof with Our People in Parliament, as We shall hold best for Our
service. And this see you do notwithstanding any thing in your other
Instructio^^ to the contrary.

October. 4* 1622.

The Pope and Spaniard upon these Letters and new Instructions, seemde very
desirous to proceed to the accomplishment of this Match; but their chief
design being to advance the Romish Catholic Religion, and reduce England by
degrees thereto; the Pope to make sure work, NOTE.
insisted stiffely on this Article; that the Children of this Marriage SHOULD
BE BROVGHT UP CATHOLIQVES UNDER THE MOTHER UNTIL THEY WERE 12. OR 14. YEARS
OLD. He well knew the verity of the ancient Proverb, Quo semel est imbuta
recens servabit odor^m
Testa diu: --
Horace. That if they were bred up Papists in their infancy, they would
questionless continue such, and not turn zealous Protestants in their riper
years: No wonder then he stood so much upon this point.

King James to show his willingness to consummate the March, though he refused
totally to condescend to this Article in open show, to preserve his Honor, yet
he was contented privately to oblige himself, that the Mother should have
their education till they were nine years old, as is evident by this ensuing
Letter of Master Secretary Calvert to the Earl of Bristoll, sent by Vaccan^a^y.

My very good Lord,
BEcause I would not omit any thing that should conduce to the accomplishment
of that work which your Lordship has in hand, and which His Majesty desires
so much to bring to an issue. Although I conceive Master Porter had directions
to tell your Lordship (which he will transmit unto you by Letter, now he cannot
go him^ self) that whereas it is insisted upon by the Pope, that the Children
of this Marriage should be brought up Catholics under the Mother until they
be twelve or fourteen years of age, His Majesty having limited their
education under the Mother only to seven years; NOTE.
His Majesty is contented to yield thus much farther, that howbeit in the
public Articles (which in that point he desires not to be altered) he mention
but seven years, he will oblige himself privately by a Letter to the King of
Spain, that they shall be brought up sub Regimine Mairis, for two years
longer, that is, until the age of nine years, if that will give any
satisfaction: which your Lordship may manage as you see best for His Majesty's
service: And so I rest*

Saint Martens-lane, October. 14. 1622.

After this about the 25. of October, King James writ a private Letter with his
own hand to the Earl of Bristoll, which Secretary Calvert sent away with all
speed and secrecy by Master Gage, to limit the Spaniard unto two months to
gain the Popes Resolution and Dispensation from Rome, as is evident by the
Copy of this Secretaries Letter to the Earl from St. Martens-lane, October. 26.
1622.

The King of Spain hereupon deludes King James with fair dilatory promises,
as if he intended the hastening of the Marriage; but how far he was from any
such real intention, is evident by this Letter of his to his grand favorite,
Conde of Olivares, dated the fifth of November. 1622. found among the Lord
Cottingtons papers.

THe King my Father declared at his death, that his intent never was to marry
my Sister the Infanta Donna Maria with the Prince of Wales, NOTE.
which your Uncle Don Baltazar understood, and so treated this March ever with
intention to delay it; notwithstanding it is now so far advanced, that
considering all the averseness unto it of the Infanta, it is time to seek some
means to divert the Treaty, which I would have you find out, and I will make
it good whatsoever it be: but in all other things procure the satisfaction of
the King of Great Britain (who has deserved much) and it shall content me,
so that it be not in the Ma^ch.

To color the matter the better, he pretended no Dispensation would be granted
at Rome, unless the Pope received further satisfaction in the time of the
Childrens education by the Mother, and point of Ecclesiastical persons
exemption from all secular jurisdiction; to remove with obstructions, King
James was content to comply in these particulars further then he had done
before, as His ensuing Letter to the Earl of Bristoll clearly demonstrates;
which Letter was drawn and written for his Majesty's signature by Master (now
Lord) Cottington, theu Secretary to the Prince.

To the Earl of Bristoll.
RIght Trusty, etc. We have seen your Letters of the 21. October. both those
directed unto Our Self, as also to Our Secretary Sir George Calvert, and in
them do observe your discreet proceeding, both in the business concerning the
restoration which We expect to be made to the Prince Palatine Our
Sonne-in-law, as also in the Treaty of the Marriage of Our dear Son the
Prince of Wales. Touching the first, We perceive what professions the King and
his Ministers have again made unto you, of a resolution to assist Us with his
Arms, in case by a fair Mediation and Treaty the restitution may not be
obtained, and how much in that kind he has engaged his Honor and his word
unto you, And howsoever the order given to the Infanta for the relief of
Manheim, arrived so late, and after the Town was yielded into the hands of
Tilly, yet must We acknowledge it to be a good effect of your Negotiation, and
an Argument of that Kings sincere and sound intention. By what We have now
given in charge unto Our Secretary to advertise you in his Letters, you will
understand the present estate of this business, and how constantly We do
still expect the performance of that engagement from the King of Spain,
without giving way to any thing that on Our behalf may any way disturb it:
And therefore you shall now do well (in Our name) to press him to a final
and effective resolution, representing to him and to hi^ Ministers how much it
concerns Us in honor and in reputation (besides the interest of Our
Sonne-in-law) not to admit any further delay.

And as touching the two points in the Treaty of the Marriage, wherein you
desire Our further direction and resolution, you have by this time understood
by the dispatch which George Gag^ carried you, NOTE.
how We were contented to permit the breeding and education of the Children
under the government of their Mother until the age of nine years, which We
doubt not will give good satisfaction, seeing their demand is but until ten;
yet seeing it is but one year more, in case you shall not be able to draw them
to be contented with nine, We will not sticks at it. And for the other point
which concerns the exemption of the Ecclesiasticke from secular jurisdiction,
We shall be contented, that the Ecclesiastical Superior do first take notice
of the offense that shall be committed, and ^^^cording to the merit therenf,
either deliver him by degradation to the secular Justice, or banish him the
Kingdom, according to the quality of the delict: which We conceive to be the
same that is practiced in Spain and other parts. Your dispatches are in all
points so full, and in them We receive so good satisfaction, as in this We
shall need nor to enlarge any further, but only to tell you that We are well
pleased with the diligence and discreet employing of your endeavors in all
that concern^s Our service, and so are We likewise with the whole proceedings
of Our Ambassador Sir Walter Aston: Thus We bid you heartily farewell.

From New Market, 24. November. 1622.

The King of Spain after many delatories and much pressing by King James and
his Ambassador for a final answer to his demands, touching the Pala^mate and
Match, on the 12. of December. 1622. returned this Answer in writing.

The Answer appointed by his Majesty to be given unto the Earl of Bristoll,
Extraordinary Ambassador from the King of Great Britain, touching those
things which he has represented from the said King unto his Majesty,
concerning the Marriage now in Treaty, and the business of the Palatin^te, is
this which follows.

Touching the Marriage.
THat his Majesty has given order that his resolution be delivered unto him in
writing and therein (as the Earl of Bristoll himself has seen) has
endeavored what he may to conform himself with that which the King of Great
Britain has answered unto the Popes propositions; so desirous has his
Majesty been from the beginning to overcome all difficulties that might hinder
this Union; that both here and at Rome he has not slacked to use all possible
care to facilitate it, and will so continue until the conclusion; and at this
present according to what is agreed with the foresaid Earl, a Post (to go and
return with speed) is dispatched unto Rome* to the end, that his Holiness
judgeing what is agreed upon sufficient (as here it is held to be) do grant
the Dispensation; and in the interim whilst the Pope sends it, the which his
Majesty will procure shall be done before the end of March or of April at the
furthest; the remaining temporal Articles shall be treated and concluded, to
the end that no time be lost, but the Infanta may immediately after the granting
of the Dispensation, be delivered the next spring, as is the intention of his
Majesty.

Touching the Palatinate.

THe forenamed Ambassador well knows what his Majesty has done therein
already to the end it may appear to the world how much he esteems the
friendship of his dear Brother the King of Great Britain, and how just he
acknowledges it to be to give him content in all things, and particularly, in
those which concern the convenience of both Crowns; his Majesty hops that
by his late dispatches into Flanders, there has been taken such course to
settle all things as can be desired, and those orders are now again renewed
and reinforced, to the end, that all may be accommodated to the satisfaction
of his Majesty of Great Britain, the which orders shall be showed to the
foresaid Conde* that he may rest satisfied of the reallity and sincerity
wherewith his Catholic Majesty does proceed in this business; but until it
be known what effect these dispatches have taken, and what the Emperor will
reply, no answer can be well given in writing to the particulars contained in
the memorial of the foresaid Conde, for the reasons which have been delivered
unto him by word of mouth, and shall be represented unto his Majesty of Great
Britain, by Don Carl^s Coloma, his Catholic Majesty's Ambassador.

Madrid, December. 12. 1622.

Soon after this, the King of Spain sent a draught of such Articles touching
Religion, as he insisted on to King James, who together with the Prince to
(hasten the Dispensation) accommodated them in the ensuing manner, and then
readily signed them.

The Accommodation of the differences in Religion.
All those Articles which came from Rome, to which his Majesty took no
exception in his directions to the Earl of Bristoll under his hand of the
ninth of September, passed as not disallowed by his Majesty; those wherein
there remained any difference are accommodated in the form following.

THe form of the Celebration is allowed in such sort as it was agreed of in
England, so likewise the oath to be taken by the Infanta's Servants.

The Article for the Church is thus to be understood, that at one standing
house Saint James, or where the household is to remain, there must be a Church
for bu^ying and marrying, and christening* etc. it being altogether unfit that
all mean people, belonging to her service should be married or christened in
her Chapel within lier Palace, but this is not understood of any Church in
London, but one to be built adjoining to the Palace.

Whereas it is said, that her Servants are precisely to be Catholics, for
that it seemed not sitting to capitulate any thing that might be exclusive to
the Protestants, it is le^t indifferent that her Servants may be Catholics.

Where it is required by the Pope, quod Ecclesiastici nullis legibus subjaceant
nisi suorum superiorum Ecclesiasticorum. The Divines unanimously delivered
their opinion, that this King cannot by capitulation subject the Clergy to the
Civil Magistrate* neither has he that power himself in Spain, and they
presuppose that those of the Infanta's Family are to have the same immunity as
in Spain, but they have qualified the Article what is possible, and they say
some such course may be settled therein as may give his Majesty, satisfaction
either by banishing them, or sending them with their process into Spain, or
some other course which may be agreed upon, and it will be in his Majesty's
power in any foul case, to do that by way of fact which they cannot
capitulate; howsoever, it was not held fit to break so great a business upon
the dispute of a case which is like never to happen.

Concerning the Nurses it is left indifferently without any exclusion of the
Protestants as in the sixth Article.

Touching the Articles brought out of Spain.
COncerning the security against the Divorce, they are to rely on the Kings
and Princes word of honor.

Touching the education of the Children, quod educentur in Religione Catholica,
is absolutely omitted; and whereas the Pope requires they should be in the
government of the Mother, the Sons until fourteen, the Daughters until
twelve, the Article is only till seven, with a private Promise until nine,
and this King pressing it may be until ten.

As for the bonum publicum required by the Pope, all particulars which were
propounded, as the suspending the poenall Laws, etc. are now omitted, only
that the Catholics may live without persecution, not giving scandal, and
this to be done by his Majesty's own Grace and Clemency, without any public
Capitulation; only the King and Prince to promise it unto the King of Spain
by their private Letters.

The Articles of Religion being thus accommodated between the two Kings, King
James who had formerly by his Agent Gage sent Letters to Rome to the Pope
(wherein he styled him, most holy Father) and likewise to some great Cardinals,
to speed the Dispensation, with private instructions not to deliver them,
unless he saw a present likelihood of granting the Dispensation, sends now two
express Letters to Gage unto Rome (the one from himself, the other from
Calvert his principal Secretary, dated the 5. of Ian. 1622.) to present t^ose
Letters to the Pope and Cardinals, assuring himself, that since he had
ratified all the Articles concerning Religion without any alteration, the Pope
could not in justice but speedily grant the long-^ought-for Dispensation. The
Copy of these two Letters (sent by Master Lawson) here follow in order.

TRusty, etc. By Letters which We have lately received from Our right Trusty
and right worthy Cosen and Counselor the Earl of Bristoll, We understand
how dutifully and discreetly you have carried your self in the furthering Our
service, whilst you remained in the Court of Spain, for which We return you
Our gracious thanks. He has also acquainted Us with the directions which he
gave you, touching the delivery of the Letters you carried from hence; that if
you saw a likelihood of present granting the Dispensation upon the Articles now
agreed on, you should deliver them, unless you received order from Us to the
contrary. We would therefore now have you understand, that there is no cause
why you should forbear the delivery of any of them, if you find the
Dispensation will certainly be granted: And thereof We hope there shall be now
no doubt, considering that We have condescended unto, approved and ratified all
and every the Articles concerning Religion, without changeing or altering any
one word, as they are agreed upon and concluded between the King of Spaines
Commissioners and Our Ambassador at Madrid in December last: which being
transmitted unto Us, both Our Self and Our Son the Prince have subscribed
the same, and so have sent them back again unto Our said Abassadour for a
final conclusion of all things concerning matter of Religion or conscience,
although the formality needed not, Our Ambassadors having obliged Us before
sufficiently according to the large power given them by their Commission. And
thus much We have thought sit to let you know that if any further scruple
should remain there touching Our absolute consent, you may be able to remove
it.

Dated 5. Ian. 1622.

SIR,
MAster Porter is safely here arrived the second of this Month, with the
conclusion of all those difficult Articles that hitherto have retarded the
proceeding of the Match. He was long looked for, and a welcome man when he came
both to his Majesty and the Prince; insomuch, as I must tell you, I have no
rest since with our young Master, for being called upon early and late to hasten
away the dispatch of all to your self and my Lord of Bristoll, which I have
done with as much diligence as possibly I could.

His Majesty and the Prince have both of them subscribed all the Articles as
they were sent hither from my Lord of Bristoll, in this manner; Hos supra
memorat^s Articulos omnes ac singulos approbamus, and quicquam in its ex nostra
part seu nostr^ nomine conventum est, ratum atque gratum Habe^^,

Iacobus Rex. Carolus Pr.



And in the full performance of whatsoever was agreed upon concerning the Bonu^
Publicum, his Majesty and the Prince likewise have written their several
letters unto the King of Spain, faithfully promising in the words of a King
and of a Prince, to cause the same to be observed inviolably in the very same
Terms verbatim, as it is set down in the last Article of all sent hither from
my Lord of Bristoll, which I am (...) you have seen and remembered, viz. Quodea
omnia prestituri sint quae ministris Regis Hispaniae ante hac verbotenus R. M.
Britt. pollicitus est, NOTE.
Hoc est, quod regnorum suorum Romano-Catholics persecutionem nullam patientur,
molestiave afficientur Religionis suae causa, vel ob exercitium ullorum ejusdem
Sacramentorum mode us utantur absque scandale (quod intelligi debet intra
privatos parietes) nec juramentis a^t sub alio pretextu qualicunque ordinem
religionis spect ante vexabuntur.

With these dispatches M. S. Digby (who is within these four or five days
returned out of Germany) is to be sent away to morrow for Spain with all
possible speed. Don Carlos has advertized to the Duke of Alberquerque, the
Padre Maestro, and your self as much as I do. Now you know all that is done
both in Spain and here concerning this point; I must leave you to such
directions as you have received from the Earl of Bristoll, how much of this to
silence, and how long to silence, and what to discover, as his letter and you
have there thought fittest for the good of his Majesty's service.

For the token which I send to Aristides, I pary you be sure that he deserve it
well, for I do not mean to be at that cost with him, unless you be sure he
do me that curtisie which I expect, and as he has often made me believe. It
is an hundred to one but you shall find him at Alexandria if you miss him
elsewhere. NOTE.
Aeneas recommends unto you again secrecy in this business above all things,
and that you be certain of speeding before you deliver the letter to Padre
Maestro.

POSTSCRIPT.
From White Hall, 5. Ian. 1622
I Need not tell you how graciously his Majesty accepts of the good service you
have done since it has pleased him to acknowledge it under his own hand, and I
must not forget one charge more that I have received from him, which is, that I
should will you in his name to salute the Padre Maestro affectionately from
him, and to let him know also how sensible and thankful his Majesty is for
those singular good offices and diligent endeavors which he has used from the
beginning of this business until now, and still continues them, as his
Majesty understands particularly from Don Carlos (...), I pray you also commend
my service unto him.

I have order for a Privy Seal of 300. li. more, which the Earl of Bristoll
delivered you in Madrid, to be paid to Master Wake at Antwerpe.

What Gage did at Rome in pursuance of these two Letters, and what opinion the
Pope and Cardinals held of King James, will appear by this ensuing L^tter of
Ma^te^ Gage sent to his Majesty from Rome, and thence dated the 24. of April
1623.


SIR,
IT may please your Majesty to understand that in a Congregation held the 22.
of March, stilo novo, the Dispensation was finally resolved, and order taken,
that the Cardinal Bandino should draw the Articles in form, the Cardinal la
Susanna make the Breve, and Monsignor Aquas the Popes Secretary (who was
present at the two last Sessions) draw some Instructions for Monsignor de
Massini the Nun^io* now resident in the Court of Spain. And in the following
Congregation held the 29. these things were seen and allowed* and the next day
presented to the Pope, and allowed by him. Concerning the particulars of the
proceeding here, of diffi^ulties overcome and of wh^^ yet remains to be done.
I have given a large account to Master Secretary Calvert; by which if your
Majesty receive not that entire satisfaction which we, who have labored
therein, have most earnestly desired. I shall most humbly beseech your Majesty
to believe; first, that we have left no diligence undone by which we could hope
to remove impediments; and secondly, that such difficulties as are either spent
or yet to be admitted have been laid hold by the Cardinals, neither to
frustrate or prolong this Treaty, but out of an opinion that they could not
otherwise secure their Conscience, proceed upon a just and valuable ground, and
satisfy the judgment of such discreet persons as may in times ensuing
understand the passages of this great business. And this point I am the ^older
to represent to your Majesty's gracious consideration, because jointly with all
their protestations to this effect, their actions have concurred also to give
good testimony thereof. They hold most honorable language of your Majesty,
NOTE.
they profess a great desire to have occasions of doing you all humble
service; they have a ^ume opinion that the former rigours used toward your
Catholic Subjects have risen from others but the graces then given from your
Self; and they are confident that your Majesty, now that so potent
intercessions have been used with you and all grounds of civil jealousies
removed, will not only command a real performance of what you are pleased to
promise in their favor, but sutably to your own royal heart enlarge the
benefit of your Princely goodness. I have therefore (Sir) ^inding them thus
affected thought it suitable to your service to let them understand, that since
they expect these things from a Prince who yields to no man, either in
esteeming or returning a Benefit* they may safely promise themselves all good
success and give way to their own good dispositions of respect and affection
toward your Majesty; and the rather I have done so, because I persuaded my
self that your Majesty is of the same opinion with him, who speaking of the
Romans to King Bocchus, said Licet P^^entes abunde habeamus, Amicorum neque
Nobis, neque cuiquam morta^um satis fuit.

I send your Majesty Letters from the Cardinals Bandino and Lodevisio, NOTE.
which they writ in answer of your Majesty's to to them, who above all others
sought to oblige your Majesty, as by Letter to Master Secretary you will
perceive. After the Easter-Holydayes I shall begin my journey toward Florence
and Parma to perform your Majesty's commands there whereof I will give your
Majesty account in due time. It will be the end of May before I shall get out
of Italy during which time I shall with de^otion expect your Majesty's orders
if in any thing further you shall be pleased to command my service. So I humbly
pray the divine goodness to give your Majesty many fair years of life
thereby, to enjoy the fruits of this noble alliance, and to make happy your
Subjects by your gracious government.

Your Majesty's most humbble and loyal Subject, George Gage


After which, on the 7. of January these two Letters from King James and
Secretary Calvert, were sent into Spain by Master Digby to the Earl of
Bristoll.

RIght Trusty, etc. The dispatches which We have received from you by Endimion
Porter, do give Us sufficient assurance that there has not wanted in you nor
in Our ordinary Ambassador Sir Walter Aston, that faithful endeavor and
diligence, to expedite those great businesses you have in charge, which We
could expect or require at your hands, for which We are pleased to return you
both Our gracious acceptance and thanks. You will see by that which We have
subscribed unto the Article^ you sent Us, and by the Letters which We and Our
Son have both written unto Our Brother the King of Spain, how well We
approve of what hitherto has been done, and what you have promised and
undertaken in your name; which being, as We hope the period of all their
demands in that kind, We wish you to proceed unto the temporal Articles, and
to conclude and consummate the whole business now, according to the
Commissions you have, as soon as possibly you may, that there may be no
further delay. Concerning that other unfortunate knotty affair of the
Palat^^ate, to say the truth, as things stand, We cannot tell what you could
have done more then you have already. And whereas you write that the King of
Spain and his principal Ministers there, did find Our last Propositions
somewhat strange, you shall understand that the cause why We sent you such
strict and peremptory Instructions was, for that the Chancelour of Our
Exchequer found nothing but palpable and gross delays at Br^^^llet, whilst
in the mean time Heidelberg was besieged, and afterward taken Manheim
beleaguer^d* and all hostility used that might be. Besides, Gage coming from
Rome about the same time, instead of bringing the news which was expected of
the Dispensation granted, NOTE*
presents Us certain exceptions taken against the Articles by the Pope, with
an intention as it seems, to engage Us in a Treaty, or dispute with him about
the said Articles, which was never the meaning, but that the King of Spain
should have undertaken that business himself. This was the reason that moved
Us at the earnest instance and persuasion of Our Council to urge the matter,
so as to bring it to a speedy point; not but that the very precisest of them,
were always of opinion, that if the March were once concluded, the other
business would be accommodated to Our satisfaction. Nevertheless these doubts
and causes of jealousy, occurring, they did all una voce represent unto Us,
how highly and importunately it concerned Our estate and service to be at some
certainty, and to know what to trust to; neither is the usage and respect We
yet find from the Infanta at Bruxelles and that Kings Ministers any thing at
all amended, notwithstanding all the great demonstrations We have made of Our
confidence and good correspondency with them, and the means We have always
sought to oblige them, as no doubt you have understood by sundry late
dispatches from Our Secretary. And now lastly, when We out of Our especial
trust in the Infanta, had made an offer of late to ^equester the Town of
Fran^endale into her hands, upon no other assurance then she her self had
offered Us before Manheim was lost, by Don Carlos Coloma, which was to restore
it, and those other places again which were at that time also required, either
upon the conclusion of the peace with the Emperor, or upon a ruptur^ in case
that proceeded not; the same propositi^^ being now again revived by Us, she
is fallen away from the conditions first propounded by Our Self, offering
only to accept it upon trust if We will put it into her her hands, without
obliging her self to restore it again; which We take to be a great
disrespect, if not a scorn. And therefore being resolved not to treat with her
any more about it, it is Our pleasure that you shall presently deal with the
King of Spain to the same purpose, and to make him an offer of Frankendale
from Us by way of sequestration, upon the condition aforesaid, of restitution
in the State as it now stands, whether the peace with the Emperor succeed or
not; and if he accept it, that he will signify so much to Us under his hand,
and give order for the present receiving it accordingly, for the case will not
admit any long time of treaty.

In your last dispatch you advertise Us, that the King of Spain has written
again very effectually unto the Emperor about these affairs of the
Palatinate. We do much desire to know what the particulars of that Letter
were, and to what effect, and what other endeavors that King intends to use
for procuring Us satisfaction therein, whereof We require you to inform Us as
particularly as you may, because you know it concerns Us much to have that
business at a point. There are some other matters concerning Our service which
We have commanded Our Secretary to impart unto you, and therefore will hold
you no longer now, but wish you health and a good success in your affairs.

White Hall, 7. Ian. 1622.

My very good Lord,
BEcause I know you will with much longing expect an answer to the dispatch
^rought by Master Porter, and his Majesty's service requires it; this Bearer
Master Digby is sent to you with all speed that may be, being specially chosen
by his Majesty, both out of the former experience he has had of his diligence,
and for that he is best able to inform you how all things have passed in
Germany; for Frankendale your Lordship will understand by ^is Majesty's own
Letter in what state it now remains, and this morning I have received a Letter
from Cap^aine Burgh who is the Governor, that they have not above four
months Bread and Wine, beginning to reckon from the 24. of November, which
was the time that T^lly departed from thence: since that time Colonel
Papenheim blocks us the Town with twelve Companies of Horse and some few of
Foot, to whom are since joined two Regiments more of the Dukes of Saxen and
Holsten, which makes 2000. Horse come out of Brabant, which have girt them up
so close as there is no further means left to relieve them. He writes to me
further, that they have it from many places, how the Imperiali^^s do laugh to
think, that we had any hope out of that Letter from the King of Spain to the
Infanta, saying, that they know that those of Frankendale must seek to them
before Summer, and entreat them to take the Town. It will therefore much
import his Majesty's service that your Lordship do procure some answer and
resolution from the King of Spain concerning that Town, and that with all
speed.

To leave those businesses of the Palatmate of which I have no more to say,
saying only this, which his Majesty commanded me the other day to write unto
you, that your Lordship should use all the means possible to stir up that
King for diverting the Translation of the Electorate at this Diet.

Your Lordship shall understand, that there has been no want of care here to
make all things sure, which you have promised there on his Majesty's behalf;
and therefore as your Lordship shall receive a confirmation of all under his
Majesty's and the Princes hands, subscribed to the paper it self, which you
sent hither, so you may please also to know, that least it should be
discovered, that the assent you gave there unto the Propositions was but
conditional, and to re^ard the proceedings at Rome; his Majesty has likewise
dispatched an Extraordinary* who is this day already gone with much diligence
to find our Master Gage at Rome or elsewhere, NOTE.
to whom his Majesty has been pleased to write himself, taking notice of the
report your Lordship made of his good service at Madrid, and requiring him now,
if he saw that the Dispensation would certainly be granted, to deliver his
Letters, thereof to be first sure and secret. I have written unto him also, and
told him all that is done here, how his Majesty and the Prince have confirmed
the Articles, and to that purpose they have both written unto the King of
Spain, promising favor to the Catholics; NOTE.
and Don Carlos Coloma has written the like unto the Duke of Alberquerque, and
to Padre Maestro, so as there needs be no scruple now, nor color of deferring
the Dispensation.

For the 300. li. which your Lordship has laid out to Master Gage, I shall
take order for a privy Seal here to repay it unto Master Lyonell Wake of
Antwerpe upon whom it is to be charged, as I understand from Master Secretury
Cottington; I shall not need to remember your Lordship, were it not that his
Majesty has commanded me, because I perceive by your Letters you are careful
enough of it your self, no^ to deliver those private Letters of his and the
Princes, concerning the favor intended to the Catholics until the
Dispensation ^e granted and the Match fully concluded. NOTE.
His Majesty has further commanded me to put your Lordship in mind of that
which must necessarily be thought on before the solemnization of the Marriage,
and that is, what person of that Court is fittest to be deputed by his
Highness for that office, and to send him word of it betimes, that he may
dispatch away his Commission to him for that purpose: and if your Lordship
please to cause the form thereof to be drawn there, such a one as will give
them contentme^t and is fitting for his Highness to sign, I should think it
were not amiss.

Your Lordship will not forget also to send Us word when it is time for his
Highness to send Love Letters and tokens to his Mistress. I hope your next
dispatch will in^orme Us of all these things, in the mean time, etc.

White Hall, 7. Ian. 1622.

After this, Secretary Calvert writ this ensuing Letter to the said Earl
having some relation to the Match, and the use the Spaniards made of it.

My very good Lord,
YOu will understand before these come to your hands by Master Secretary Digby
who was dispatched away from hence with much Diligence, that Master Porter was
safely arrived here, and to the dispatch which he brought with him, your
Lordship by Master Digby receives full and particular answer to all points that
required it; nevertheless upon the hazard of one man's person, I have sent your
Lordship herewithall by the Ordinary, Duplicats of that dispatch.

Yours of the 20. of the last month old style, came safely into my hands, and
for the matter of Orm^^, his Majesty has commanded me to tell you, that he had
heard of it before by a flying report, but never the certainty thereof till
now, wherefore his Majesty would have your Lordship to let the King of Spain
understand, that he is very sensible of the accident, desiring him to rest
assured, that he will do his utmost endeavor to discover the verity of the
fact, and upon the discovery thereof will afterward proceed as a just Prince
ought to do, and as a faithful friend to that King.

Within these few days here has happened an accident that has put Us into
some disorder: The Prince taking notice of two of his Musicians Angelo, an
Italian, and Drew an English man, that were at the Spanish Ambassadors on
Christmas-Eve assisting with their voices and music at the midnight Mass; (at
which his Majesty and his Highness were much displeased) turned them both out
of his service: The Spanish Ambassador mediated for them by an earnest Letter
which he writ unto his Highness, but could not at first prevail, though
since, as I understand, he has obtained remission for them; it was not well
done of them to go, and an ill fortune I doubt that so much notice is taken of
it.

Upon a complaint of the said Ambassador in his Majesty's name of certain
spoils and depredations, as he terms them committed by his Majesty's Subjects
trading into the East Indies, upon the Portuguesses there, and thereupon
demanding justice; he obtained a Commission directed to some seven or eight of
the Counsel under the great Seal of England, to examine upon oath the verity
of the accusation, and informing his Majesty thereof, a legal course
afterward to be directed for the further proceeding and sentencing the fact.
Of this Commission amongst diverse others of the Board I am one, and we have met
once or twice about it: Yesterday my Lord Admiral representing unto his
Majesty how derogatory this course of commissioning was to the Jurisdiction of
his Court of Admiralty, as in truth I think it be, his Majesty has given
order, that there shall be no further proceeding upon it, but the business
left to a legal trial in that Court to which it appertains, and I am
commanded to speak with the Spanish Ambassador to that purpose; I pray God I
may give him satisfaction, howsoever I shall do my best; and so kissing your
Lordships hands I rest.

White Hall, 14. Ian, 1622.

The Articles concerning Religion being thus concluded and signed by the King
and Prince; the Laws against Jesuits, popish Priests and Recusanis by promise
suspended for the future, all imprisoned Roman Catholics of all sorts
enlarged throughout his Majesty's Dominions, the free exercise of their
Religion without molestation, promised in express terms, and the Marquess of
Buckingham hereupon then writing into Spain (as the Tom. 9. An. 1624. page 29.
French Mercury informs us) That our Informers, Pursevants, Prisons, should
from thenceforth serve no more but for our own Ministers and other persons
zealous of our Religion, (which has ever since experimentally proved most
true) King James made no doubt at all, NOTE.
but that the Pope would presently grant the Dispensation, and the Spaniard
without more delays consummate the marriage. To hasten which King James (as
the same Tom. 9. p. 485. etc.
Mercury records, and I have credibly heard the same from others) assembling
his Privy Counsel together, Febr. 25. 1622. made a long Oration to them (which
he recites at large) the sum whereof was this: That the Roman Catholics in
England had sustained great and intolerable surcharges, NOTE.
imposed upon their goods, bodies, consciences, during Queen Elizabeth's reign,
of which they hoped to be relieved in his; that his Mother suffered martyrdom
in this Realm for the profession of the said Catholic Religion; a Religion
which had been publicly professed for many ages in this Realm, confirmed by
many great and excellent Emperors, and famous in all Ecclesiastical^
Histories, by an infinite number of Martyrs, who had sealed it with their
blood: That the Catholics well knew that there was ^n him a grand affection
to the Catholic Religion, insomuch that they believed at Rome that he did but
dissemble his Religion to obtain the Crown of England. That now he had
maturely considered the penury and calamities of the Roman Catholics, who
were in the number of his faithful Subjects, and was resolved to relieve them;
and therefore did from thenceforth take all his Roman Catholic Subjects into
his protection, permitting them the liberty and entire exercise of their
Religion, and liberty to celebrate the mass, with other divine offices of
their Religion without any inquisition, process, or molestation from that day
forwards; and likewise will and ordain that they shall be restored to all
their estates, lands, fees and cignor^es and re-established in them; commanding
all his Magistrates, Instices, and other Officers whatsoever in this behalf to
hold their hands; and for what cause soever it be, not to attempt hereafter, to
grieve or molest the said Catholics, neither in public nor private, in the
liberty of the exercise of their Religion, upon pain^ of being reputed guilty
of high treason, and disturbers of the Kingdoms peace and repose; this being
his will and definitive sentence.

But notwithstanding all these compliance^ and favors to the Roman
Catholics, those crafty Machiavillians had a further deeper plot, both upon
King James, the Prince, the old and young Prince Palatine* and Protestant
Religion, which they must effect by delays; namely, to betray the Prince into
the Spaniards power, by engaging him in a private journey into Spain, upon
pretense to expedite the Match; and there by force or slattery to pervert him
in his Religion, and induce him publicly to profess himself a Roman
Catholic, and likewise to put the young Prince Palatine into the Emperors
hands, under pretext of a match with his Daughter, and to train him up in his
Court in the popish Religion, and by this hellish policy to scrue up King
James, and the old Prince Palatine to whatever conditions the Pope, Spaniard,
or Emperor should propose unto them, for the advancement of Popery, or of
their own temporal greatness.

In pursuance of this infernal design, the Mercure ^^ancius, Tom 9. p. 471,
472, etc.
Prince and the Marquess of Buckingham accompanied with Cottington and Porter,
on the 17. day of Febr. 1622. departed privately from the Court disguised to
Dover, and posted through France into Spain: to what desperate purposes and by
whose procurement, The B^eviate of the Arch. bishops li^e, page 3.
these ensuing Articles of the Earl of Bristoll exhibited to the Lords against
the Duke of Buckingham (whom he accused of high treason upon them in open
Parliament) May 1. 1626. with the cross Articles exhibited against the Earl
of Bristoll in Parliament, by Sir Robert Heath the Kings Attorney general, by
his Majesty's special command, May 6. 1626. (both of which you may find
recorded in the Lords Parchment Journall of that Parliament) will most clearly
discover to all the world, to the deserved infamy of these detestable
Projectors.

Articles of the Earl of Bristoll, wherewith he charge the Duke of
Buckingham, May 1. 1626.
THat the Duke of Bukingham did secretly combine and conspire with Conde
Gondomar, Spain, before the said last Ambassadors return into Spain in the
Summer 1622. NOTE.
to carry his Majesty (the Prince) into Spain, to the end, that he might be
informed and instructed in the Roman Religion, and therely have perverted the
Prince, and subverted the true Religion established in England: from which
misery this Kingdom, next under God's mercy, has by the wise, religious and
constant carriage of his Majesty, been almost miraculously delrvered,
considering the many bold and subtle attempts of the said Duke in that kind.

That Master Porter was made acquainted therewith, and sent into Spain, and
such Porter, which was about the end of December 1622. whereas the said Duke
had plotted it many months before.

That the Duke at his arrival in Spain nourished the Spanish Ministers, not
only in Bristols house and frequented by all other Protestants English, and by
conforming himself to please the Spaniard to diverse rites of their Religion
(even so far as to kneel and adore their Sacrament from time to time) gave
the Spaniard hope of the Princes conversion; NOTE.
the which conversion he endeavored to procured by all means possible, and
thereby caused the Spanish Ministers to propound far worse conditions for
Religion, then had been formerly by the Earl of Bristoll and Sir Walter Ashton
settled, and signed under his Majesty's hand, with a clause in the King of
Spaines answer of the 12. of December 1622. that they held the Articles agreed
upon sufficient, and such as ought to induce the Pope to the granting of the
Dispensation.

That the Duke having several times in the presence of the Earl of Bristoll,
moved Conde Gondomar, to write a Letter to the Pope, and to that purpose having
once brought a Letter ready drawn, wherewith the Earl of Bristoll being by
his Majesty made acquainted, did so strongly oppose the writing of any such
Letter, that during the abode of the said Earl of Bristoll in England, the
said Duke could not obtain it: Yet not long after the said Earl was gone, he
procured such a Letter to be written from his late Majesty unto the Pope, NOTE.
and have him styled therein Sanctissime Pater.

That the Pope being informed of the Duke of Buckinham his inclination and
intention in point of Religion, NOTE.
sent unto the said Duke a particular Bull in Parchment for to persuade and
encourage him in the pervertion of his Majesty then Prince, etc. NOTE.


Bristoll did reveal unto his Majesty, both by word and Letter, in what sort
the Duke had deceived him and abused his trust, and that the King by several
ways sent him word, that he should rest assured that he would hear him, but
that he should leave it to him to take his own time; and thereupon few days
before his sickness the sent the Earl word, that he would hear him against
the Duke, as well as he had heard the Duke against him, which the Duke himself
heard; and not long after, his blessed Majesty sickned and dyed, having in the
interim been much vexed and pressed by the said Duke.

All these Articles with six others of like nature, the Earl of Bristoll
preferred to make good against the Duke by Letters and Witnesses; but the Duke
by his overswaying potency and instruments (whereof Bishop Laud was chief)
dissolved the Parliament before any answer given to them.

The Articles exhibited to the House of Peers against the Earl through the
Dukes procurement, by way of recrimination, were many, I shall only recite the
most pertinent to the present business of Religion.

In the Lords Parchment Journall May 6. 1626. page 150, 151, 152, etc.
Articles of several High-treasons and other great and enormious Crimes
Offenses and Contempts, committed by John Earl of Bristoll, against Our late
Sovereigne Lord King James of blessed memory decreased, and Our Sovereigne Lord
the Kings Majesty which now is, wherewith the said Earl is charged by his
Majesty's Attorney general on his Majesty's behalf, in the most high and
honorable Court of Parliament, before the King and his Lords.

Spain, he the said Earl contrary to his faith and duty to God, the true
Religion professed by the Church of England and the peace of this Church and
State, did intend and resolve, that if the said marriage so treated of as
aforesaid, should by his ministry be effected, that thereby the Romish Religion
and the professors thereof should be advanced within this Realm, NOTE.
and other his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, and the true Religion and the
professors thereof discouraged and discountenanced: And to that end and purpose
the said Earl, during the time aforesaid by Letters unto his late Majesty and
otherwise, often counseled and persuaded the said late Kings Majesty, to set
at liberty the Jesuits, and Priests of the Roman Religion, which according to
the good, religions and politic Laws of this Realm were imprisoned or
restrained, and to grant and allow unto the Papists and professors of the
Romish Religion a free toleration, and silencing of the laws made and standing
in force against them.

Spain, during the time aforesaid, the said Earl of Bristoll, cunningly
falsely, and traitorously moved and persuaded the Prince (being then in the
power of a foreign King of the Romish Religion) to change his Religion; NOTE.
which was done in this manner: At the Princes first coming to the said Earl,
he asked the Prince, for what he came thither? The Prince at first not
conceiving the Earls meaning answered you know as well as I: the Earl
replied, Sir, servants can never serve their Master industriously, although
they may do it faithfully, unless they know their meanings fully; give me
leave therefore to tell you what they say in the Town is the cause of your
coming, THAT YOU MEAN TO CHANGE YOUR RELIGION, AND TO DECLARE IT HERE: and
yet cunningly to disguise it, the Earl added further; Sir, I do not speak
this that I will persuade you to do it, or that I will promise you that I will
follow your example, though you will do it, but as your faithful servant, if
you will trust me with so great a secret, I will endeavor to carry it the
discreetest way I can. The Prince being moved with this unexpected motion,
again said unto him; I wonder what you have ever found in me, that you should
conceive I would be so base or unworthy, as for a Wife to change my Religion?
The said Earl replying, desired the Prince to pardon him, if he had offended
him, it was but out of his desire to serve him: which persuasion of the said
Earl was the more dangerous, because the more subtle: Whereas it had been
the duty of a faithful servant, to God and his Master, if he had found the
Prince staggering in his Religion to have prevented so great an Error, and to
have persuaded against it, so to have avoided the dangerous consequences
thereof, to the true Religion and to this state, if such a thing should have
happened.

8. That afterward during the Princes being in Spain, the said Earl having
conference with the said Prince about the Romish Religion, he endeavored
falsely and traitorously to persuade the Prince to change his Religion as
aforesaid, AND BECOME A ROMISH CATHOLIC, NOTE.
and to Become OBEDIENT TO THE VSVRPED AVTHORITY OF THE POPE OF ROME: And to
that end and purpose the said Earl traitorously used these words unto the said
Prince; That the State of England did never any great thing, but when they were
under the obedience of the Pope of Rome, and that it was impossible they could
do any thing of note otherwise.

9. That during the time of the Princes being in Spain as aforesaid, the
Prince consulting, and advising with the said Earl and others, about a new
offer made by the King of Spain touching the Palatinate, which was, that the
eldest Son of the Prince Palatine, should marry with the Emperors Daughter,
but must be bread up in the Emperors Court: The said Earl delivered his
opinion, that the Proposition was reasonable; whereat when Sir Walter Ashton
then present falling into some passion said; that he durst not for his head
consent unto it: The Earl of Bristoll replied, that he saw no such great
inconvenience in it, for that he might be there bred up in the Emperors Court
in our Religion. But when the extreme danger, and in a manner the
impossibility thereof was pressed unto the said Earl, he said again, That
without some such great action the peace of Christendom would never be had.
Which was so dangerous and desperate a council that one so near to the Crown
of England should be poisoned in his Religion, and put into the power of a
Foraigne Prince, Enemy to our Religion, and an unfreind to our state, that the
consequence thereof both for the present and future times were infinitely
dangerous, and yet hereunto did his disaffection to our Religion, the
blindness in his judgment, caused by sinister respects, and the too much
regard he had to the House of Austria, lead him, etc. To. Heath

These Articles were exhibited against the Earl by the Kings own special
direction, and perused, corrected by him before they were put in, as appears
by the Lords Iournall, the Kings Atturny averring it openly in the House of
Peers. It seems therefore a great Wonder to many observing men, that he who was
thus impeached by his Majesty's special command, as the worst of Counselors,
and a strong perswader of him to become a professed Roman Catholic, an advancer
of Popery and Papists then, should become his principle Cabinet Councellor to
advise him to side with the Popish party in England, Ireland, Scotland, against
his Parliament, and Protestant subjects, now.

But to pretermit his present Counsels, which seem to justify the former
Articles, the Earl of Bristoll himself in his answer In the Lords Parchment
Iournall P. 249. etc.
to the 7th. Article, confesses, that there was a general received opinion in
the Spanish Court, that his Majesty's coming thither was with intention to
become a Roman Catholic, and that the Conde Gundimar, that very morning
pressed the Earl, not to hinder so pious a work (for so he termed it) of his
Majesty's conversion, and seemed to be assured of the Duke of Buckinghams
assistance therein: whereupon he told his Majesty; That the General opinion in
that Court was, that his Majestyes coming thither was, WITH INTENTION TO BE A
ROMAN CATHOLIC AND THERE TO DECLARE IT, etc. Whereupon he entreated him not to
suffer his business to be overthrown by permitting that conceit of his
conversion any longer to remain with the Spaniards, not to do any thing that
might give them hope therein; alleging, that it was impossible the Marriage
could be without a dispensation. And so long as the Spaniard, who were to
procure the dispensation, should have hope of his Majesty's conversion, they
would rather clogge the Dispensation then hasten it, for whiles they should
have hope of all by his convertion, they would never content themselves with a
part, to which they were tied by the Articles agreed upon; At which time his
Majesty was pleased to aprove of his opinion, and said, he would expect the
dispensatory, and did thereupon, afterward send Master Andrews to Rome to
hasten it.

By all these Articles and passages* it is most perspicuous that there was a
professed design in the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Bristoll, Secretary
Calvert, Cottington, Porter, Gage, and other instruments, who contrived the
Princes dangerous Journey into Spain, to pervert the Prince in his Religion,
to make him and all his Children professed Roman Catholics, and the Prince
Palatine too, and by this means to set up Popery in their Dominions, to
suppress the Protestant Religion, and Professors of it in all places, that so
the Pope might become Lord Paramount over them and all their Subjects, and they
his sworn Vassalls. How far the Archbishop was privy and assistant to this
design, you may partly read in the Breviat of his life, P. 3. 14. and shall
hear more heareafter in its proper place.

What the aims of the Pope and Spaniard were in contriving the Princes
progress into Spain, appears, First, by the forementioned common report in
the Spanish Court, that it was to become a professed Roman Catholic, etc.

Secondly by this notable Letter of the Pope to the Bishop of Conchen (one
Copy whereof I found in the Archbishop of Canterburies Study, indorsed with
his own hand, and another among Secretary Windebankes and the Lord Cottingtons
sequestered Papers) exhorting him to take this happy opportunity, to convert,
subject and reconcile the Prince and his Dominious to the Sea of Rome.

Greg. P p: 15us. Venerabili Fratri Episcopo Conchen in Hispaniarum Regnis
Inquisitori generali.
VEnerabile Frater, salutem et Apostolicam benedictionem, Orthodoxae
Religionis, tutelam fae^citer existimamus in amplissimis Hispaniae Reg^^s
commendatam esse Fraternitati tuae: scimus enim quam vigilanter excubant in
illustri ista statione, Caveas ne ulla impiorum D^gmatum monstra in
ecclesiasticae vineae sepes irrepant. Verum occasio tibi hoc tempore divinitus
oblata est, per quam pictatis tuae beneficia e regnorum istorum sinibus
educere, et ad exteras Nationes proferre possi^. Accepimus istuc nuper
appulisse Walliae principem, Brittaniae R^gis silium spe ductum Catholici
Matrimonij. Cupimus eum non frustra commorari in illorum Regum aedibus, quibus
illustre Catholici Cognomentum, Ponti^icae Authoritatis defensio, et Religionis
proferendae studium, peperit. Quare, NOTE.
Apostolicis litteris horramur Catholicam Majst^tem, ut eum Principem redigere
suaviter cone^ur sub Romanae Ecclesiae ditionem, cui veteres magnae Brittaniae
Domini, Coronatum Caput, et Imperij fasces (Caelo plaudente) submi^erunt. Ad
hanc autem victoriam comparandam, quae victis aeternos caelestis beatitudinis
pollicetur triumphos atque principatus, non Regalis Ae^arij vis^era
exhauriend^, non saevientium militum legiones conscribendae sunt, sed Arma
lucis e Caelo petenda, quae divini luminis splendore ejus Principis oculos
alliciant, atque ex illius animo errores omnes mansuetudine prostigent. In ijs
vero tractandis quae sit vis, et ars Fraternitatis tuae, jampridem accepimus.
NOTE.
Quare^e monemus, ut ad Catholicum Regem Religiosus consiliarius accedas,
easque rations dispicias, quibus insigne aliquod beneficium Brittaniae Regnis,
et Romanae Ecclesiae, in presenti rerum opportunitate comparetur. Re^ ipsa
magna, atque gravissima est, quare eam verbis amplificate non debemus, Regnum
Caelorum Britaniae Principi patefacere, Regnum Brittaniae sedi Apostolicae
restituere incipiet, qui Regijistius Adolescentis animum, Catholicae Religionis
studio instamaver^t, a^que haereticae impietatis odio impleverit. In tantae
Gl^riae possessionem nomen dubitamus, ut gladio Charitatis armata pervenire
cupiet fraternitas tua, cum qua uberius hac de re disseret, venerabilis frater,
Innocentius Episcopus Britonorirensis, Nuncius Apostolicus, cui fidem habere
poteris, Nos autem accuratisimis precibut divina auxilia parere conabimur
fraternitati tuae, cui Apostolicam benedictionem peramanter impertimur. Dat.
Romae apud S. Petrum sub Annulo Piscatoris. Die 19. Ap^ilis. 1633. Pontificatus
Nostri Anno tertio.


Thirdly by this following Latin Oration of a Jesuit made to the Prince in
Spain to pervert him in his Religion, and reduce him and our Dominions into
the bosom of the Roman Church, one copy whereof was found among Secretary
Windebankes Writings.

SIquid mortalibus unquam oculis hilarem and gratum aperuit diem; Si quid
peramantibus subditorum tuorum animis gaudium attulit, peperitue laetitiam; Si
quid salutem Patriae, faelicitatem civium, securitatem imperij, Christianae
Reipublicae pacem and incolumitatem promisit n^bis unquam, nobis unquam
spospondit (Clarissime et Serenissime Princeps) faelicem pr^^cto, Tuum ad
Hesperias oras accessum, faelicem in Hispaniam adventum, novum (...) and
inauditum promisisse peperisse, attulisse fatemur. Aurea mihi optarem verb^
(...) Ciceronis Eloquentiam, os alterum Chrysostomi, Nazianzeni animum ut
cloqu^^,(...) patefacerem tibi, quam in animis de te spem concepimus, quem in
animis ergate amorem gerimus, quas ex intimis animis pro te preces ad D^um
quotidie fundimus, quam libenter denique non unius alicujui^sed omnes omnium
animas pro animae tuae salute, pro sospitate Septri, pro presenti et futura,
pro occidua hac aeterna tuafaelicitate, gloria and honor in hostias and
holocusta damus, consecramus, devovemus. Ausim dicere (florentissime Princeps)
neminem non dico Religiosum, Saoerdotem, Collegam out Consodalem, sed nec
Catholicum quidem existere, qui amplissimo Britaniae subjacet imperio, qui ut
animae tuae servire, animam tuam bear possit, animam suam ammo cupient non
perdat, vitam, inquam, ad pedes tuos non deponat, eamqne lacerato corpore,
cenfosso pectore, exhansto sanguine lubens g^udensque non profundat. Sedet
profecto, sedet (clarissime Princeps) laetissima facies tua, amabilis vultus,
jucundissimus and humanissimus aspectus in omnium tuorum Civium et subditorum
ore, oculis and animis, suavitatem tuam, humanitatem, moderationem, et
benignitatem nemo est qui non miret^r, and cum mi^atur, non admiretur, et
admirando, non veneretur. O faeliccm et fortunatam Britaniae magnae Insulam,
quae talem and tam illustrem procreasti Principe^; Cujus splendoris
immensitatem proprijs tuis metiri terminis ne cogites, major est quam ut tuis
cingatur maenijs, aut quae Britannico tantum affulgeat hemisphaerio. In exteras
ecce se diffundit oras, in novos irrumpio horizontes, foris lucere, gaudet and
effulgere, foris suae gloriae ejaculari radios, qui quidem et si ad plenissimos
fulgurantum Imperatorum accedant splendores, ea tamen luce, ea claritate
coruscabunt, ut si pre modestia superare recusaverint, tamen, licet quantum
velint dissimulaverint, non maximos fulgores assequi and adequare. Testesmihi,
O Hispania, Caesaris, tui Majestas angustissima, testes Heroum tuorum nobilitas
luoidissima, testes Magistratum gravitas, concursus cujus, Plebis universus
applausus, quiquidem ijsdem te (Prelucentissimus Princeps) quibus preprium et
potentissimum Monarcham suum obsequijs, Officijs, honoribus prosequuntur. Sed
quid? Annon eitam muta et anima carentia gloriam et fulgorem tuum persentiseere
videntur? Admove, silubet, occulos, advirte compita, platcas tircumspice,
universum Madritum diligentius intuere; agnosces profecto non exiguo persundi
gandio non mediocriter letari quod honoris and glory tue effectum. sit
Thratrum, quod Te praesente. Te cornscante intrat, resplendeat, fulgeat,
frequentetur Et si Augustum Philippi Basilicam attentius contemper^s, gloriari
quodamodo et super^ire dixeris, quod duorum incipiat Principum esse Regia, quae
unumsensiper hactauni non plures pariter agnovit Dominos. Sed quo me divexet
oratro? quo me (Dij boni modo me a me ipso abr uit? Perdidi me fateor, (...)
merosa, exultantium iurba, et fascinavit me (ut ita l^quar) insolia hilaritatis
solemnitas. Sed da veniam perbeingnissime Princeps) canam receptui: vertam jam
tandem vela, and in proprium portum remeare conabor. Ad valles aletanum
contendo Collegium, ad diui Albani, primi Britanniae Martyris Seminarium.
Salutarunt Te Caefares, salutarunt Te Principes, salutarunt Te Heroes,
salutanunt Te Consules, Praetores, Senatores, omnes adventum Tuum approbarunt,
acclamacunt, honorarunt, imo quasi cael^^us te missum receperunt. Et quid? An
demus nostra vallis^ oletana seminarium nostrum, Collegium nostrum, nostrum?
quid dico? Domus, inquam, Tua, seminarium T^um Tibi congratulari, manum Tuam
sacram deosculari, animorum nostrorum gaudia pectorum laetitiam, jubilium
cordium explicare praetermittat? Procul hinc, procul ite prof^^i, ne istam
nobis appi^gite, i^^rite notam. Quod ser o accessi^us quod ultimi acc^ssimus,
qui prin^^ fuisse debuimus, non officii fecit ignorantia, non affectus ign^via,
non defectus voluntatis, aut desiderii tepiditas, verecunda, fateor and
m^d^stareverentia praesumere nos vetuit ad Te (Princeps potentissime) ad Te,
inquam, accedere, priusquam Celsitudinis Tuae benevola and perbenigna gratia
viam nobis sternere dignata fuerit, aditumque res^rare. Accipe igitur
(Screnissime Princeps) accipe communem om^iu^ laetitiam, commune ^audium,
gratulationem communem* acclamationem commu^^m, accipe singulorum obsequium,
singulorum amorem, pium and constantem singulorum affectum, omni qua possumus
laetitia, gaudio, ^ongratulatione, ^^^^lamat^one sospitem tuu^ and faelicem
congra^ulamur Tibi adventum, maximo, quo (...) obsequio, amore, affectu o^nia
Tibi nostra and nosmetipso^ tradimus. Si quid studi^ (...) ^cubrationes
nostrae, si quid preces and vota, si quid ulla pietatis officia apud supremam
(...) statem, immortalem Regeni Regum, communem omnium Patrem ac Domi^^^ valor
(...) and obtinere; hac omnia and singula (auspicatissme Princeps)
observantissimis animis, devotissimis affectibus, venerabundis obsequiis ad
laetas and Augustas Tuas fortunas, ad prosperos and faelices auspitiorum ^uorum
successus, ad beatas and optatas Tuorum amorum messes, ad salutem tuam
immortalem, faelicitatem perpetuam, immarcessibilem honorem dirigimus. Macte
gloria (invictissime Princeps) prospere procedas and regnes: Nescio enim
profecto an gl^riosius Tuo viderit unquam, universus orbis imperium. Relege, si
libet, titulos, dignitatem agnosce. Quid Anglia? Primogenita Ecclesiae, Dos
Mariae, Regnum Dei, quo ^erax fructu? NOTE.
Qua faecunda sobole? Duodetriginta Reges, Reginae Duae-deviginti,
antegenitores Tui in caelestem Sanctorum senatum relati numerantur, and
conscripti. Episcoporum sanctorum turba trigesimum supra centesimum transcendat
^umerum. Archimandritas and Caenobia^chas sexaginta octo in cives acceperunt
caeli. Martyrum si palmas, si Confessotum numerarem coronas, nec lingua sane,
nec latera suo satissacerent officio. Se^ eheu? quo jam exulat avita pietas?
ubi jacet pia Religio? ubi delit^scit religiosa pie^as? Per Te (serenissime
Princeps) pro te and sub Te confidimus, NOTE.
and spiritum aliquando* and sanguinem, and vitam, and patriam recipient [quae
-- horum temporum improbitas exiliis punivit, and relegavit. In simum Tuum
consugit labefacta Resp: dilacetata Patria; carceres and rapinas, mortes and
exilia, passa and perpes^a diu fides and Religio Catholica] * Tu nobis a Deo
datus* Tu nobis natus (dulcissime Princeps) ad patriam nostram sublevandam, ad
pacem and pietatem restaurandam, ad imperium Christi dilatandum, ad Regiam
proginiem amplissima serie propagandam, ad mundum universum ^aelicibus Tuis
Hymenaeis perbeandum. Vive igitur (Augusta Caesarum Prosapia) vive, and vive ad
Nestoris annos, Regia Tua gaude, and triumpha compare.

Fourthly by the Popes own Letter to the Prince during his residence in
Spain, and the Princes answer thereunto, printed in diverse languages and
Authors, which I Me^cure Francois. Tom. 9. Anno 1623. p. 509. 510. etc.
shall here once more present unto you only in English, truly translated out
of the French Copy.

The Popes Letter to the King when Prince of Wales, and in Spain.
MOst noble PRINCE, health and light of the divine grace: Forasmuch as great
Britain has always been fruitful in Virtues, and in men of great worth,
having filled the one and the other world with the glory of her renown; She
does also very often draw the thoughts of the holy Apostolical Chair* to the
consideration of her praises. And indeed the Church was but then in her
infancy, when the King of Kings did choose her for his inheritance, and so
affectionately, that we believe the Roman Eagles have hardly out-pa^^^d the
Banner of the Cross. Besides that many of her Kings, instructed in the
knowledge of the true salvation, have preferred the Cross before the royal
Scepter, and the discipline of Religion before covetousness, leaving examples
of piety to other Nations, and to the ages yet to come. So that having merited
the Principalities and first places of blessedness in heaven, they have
obtained on earth the triumphant ornaments of holiness. And although now the
s^ate of the English Church is altered, we see nevertheless the Court of great
Britain, adorned and furnished with moral Virtues, which might serve to
support the charity that we beat unto her, and be an or^^ment to the name of
Christianity, if withal she could have for her defense and protection the
orthodox and catholic truth; Therefore by how much the more the Glory of your
most noble Father, and the apprehension of your Royal inclination delights us,
with so much more zeal we desire that the gates of the kingdom of Heaven
might be opened unto you, and that you might purchase to your self the love of
the universal Church. Moreover, it being certain that Gregory the great, of
most blessed memory, has introduced to the English people, and taught to their
Kings the Law of the Gospel, and the respect of Apostolical authority, We, as
inferior to him in holiness and virtue, but equal in name and degree of
dignity, it is very reasonable that we, following his blessed footsteps,
should endeavor the salvation of those Provinces, Note.
especially at this time, when your design (most noble Prince) elevates us to
the hope of an extraordinary advantage: Therefore as you have directed your
journey to Spain, toward the catholic King, with desire to ally your self to
the house of Austria, we do commend your design, and indeed do testify
openly in this present business, that you are he that takes principal care of
our Prelacy. For seeing that you desire to take in marriage the daughter of
Spain, from thence we may easily conjecture that the ancient seeds of
Christian piety, which have so happily flourished in the hearts of the Kings*
of great Britain, may (God prospering them) revive again in your soul. And
indeed it is not to be believed, that the same man should love such an
alliance, that hates the Catholic Religion, Note.
and should take delight to oppress the holy Chair. To that purpose we have
commanded to make continually most humble prayers to the Father of lights, that
he would be pleased to put you as a fair flower of Christendom, and the only
hope of great Britain, in possession of that most noble heritage, that your
Ancestors have purchased for you, to defend the authority of the Sovereign
High Priest, and to fight against the monsters of heresy. Remember the days
of old, enquire of your Fathers, and they will tell you the way that leads to
heaven, and what way the temporal Princes have taken to attain to the
everlasting Kingdom. Behold the gates of heaven opened, the most holy Kings of
England, who came from England to Rome accompanied with Angels, did come to
honor and do homage to the Lord of Lords, and to the Prince of the Apostles
in the Apostolical chair; their actions and their examples being as so many
voices of God, speaking and exhorting you to follow the course of the lives of
those to whose Empire you shall one day attain.

It is possible that you can suffer that the Heretics should hold them for
impious, and condemn those whom the Faith of the Church testifies to reign in
the heavens with Jesus Christ, and have command and authority over all
Principalities and Empires of the Earth? Behold how they tender you the hand of
this truly happy inheritance, to conduct you safe and sound to the Court of
the Catholic King, Note.
and who desire to bring you back again into the lap of the Roman Church:
Beseeching with unpeakable sighs and groans the God of all mercy for your
Salvation, and do streteh out to you the Arms of the Apostolical Charity, to
embrace you with all Christian affection; Even you that are her desired Son,
in showing you the happy hope of the Kingdom of Heaven. Note.
And indeed you cannot give a greater consolation to all the people of the
Christian Estates, then to put the Prince of the Apostles in possession of your
most Noble Island, whose authority has been held so long in the Kingdom of
Britain, for the defense of Kingdoms, and for a devine Oracle; the which will
easiely arrive, and that without difficulty, if you open your heart to the Lord
that knocks, upon which depends all the happiness of that Kingdom. It is from
this our great Charity that we cherish the praises of the Royal Name; NOTE.
and that which makes us desire that you and your Royal Father might be styled
with the names of Deliverers and Restorers of the ancient and paternall
Religion of Great Britain. This is it we hope for trusting in the goodness of
God, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings, and who causes the people of the
Earth to receive healing, to whom we will always labout with all our power to
render you gracious and favorable; In the interim take notice by these Letters
of the care of our Charity, which is none other then to procure your
happiness; and it will never grieve us to have written them, if the reading of
them stir but the least spark of the Catholic Faith in the heart of so
great a Prince, whom we wish to be ^illed with long countinuance of joy* and
flourishing in the glory of all virtues*

Given (...) Rome in the Palace of S. Peter the 20. of April, 1623. in the
Third year of o^r Popedom.

The Prince of Wales having received this Letter, made this following answer,
which was after published in print.

MOst Holy Father, I received the dispatch from your Holiness with great
content, and with that respect which the piety and care wherewith your
Holiness writes, does require: It was an unspeakeable pleasure to me to read
the generous exploits of the Kings my Predecessors* to whose memory, posterity
has not given those p^aises and Elogies of honor, as were due to them: I do
(...) that your Holiness has set their examples before my eyes, to the end that
I might imitate them in all my actions, for in truth they have often exposed
their estates and lives for the exaltation of the holy Chair; And the courage
with which they have assaulted the enemies of the Cross of Jesus Christ, has
not been less than the care and thought which I have, to the end that the
peace and Intelligence which has hitherto been wanting in Christendom, might
be bound with the bond of a true concord: for like as the common Enemy of
peace, watches always to put hatred and dissension between the Christian
Princes^, so I believe that the glory of God requires that we should endeavor
to unite them; NOTE.
And I do not esteem it a greater honor to be descended from so great
Princes, than to imitate them in the zeal of their piety. In which it helps me
very much to have known the mind and will of our thrice honored Lord and
Father, and the holy intentions of his Catholic Majesty to give a happy
corcurrence to so laudabl^ a design: For it grieves him extremely to see the
great evil that grows from the division of Christian Princes, which the
wisdom of Your Holiness foresaw, when it judged the Marriage which you
pleased to design, between the Infanta of Spain^ and my self, to be
necessary to procure so great a good; for it is very certain, that I shall
never be so extremely affectionate to any thing in the world as to endeavor
alliance with a Prince that has the same apprehension of the true Religion
with my self: Therefore I entreat Your ^olinesse to believe, that I have been
always very far* NOTE.
from encouraging Novelties* or to be a partisan of any Faction against the
Catholic, Apostolic Roman Religion: But on the contrary, I have ^ought all
occasions to take away the suspicion that might rest upon me, and that I will
employ my self for the time to come* to have but one* Religion and one Faith,
seeing that we all believe in one Jesus Christ. Having resolved in my self* to
spare not^ing that I have in the world, and to suffer all manner of
discommodities, even to the hazarding of my estate and life, for a thing so
pleasing unto God: It rests only that I thank Your Holiness, for the
permission which you have been pleased to afford me, and that I pray God to
give you a blessed health, and his glory, after so much travel which Your
Holiness takes within his Church.

Signed, CHARLES STEWARD.


Fifthly by dedicating and writing Books unto his Highness, to seduce him to
the Romish Religion, by inviting him to behold their Mercure Francois, Tom. 9.
Anno 1623. p. to 539. 535 to 539. 562.
solmne Processions, to induce him to reverence and adore their ambularitie
Hostia, or Breaden God* carrying him to their most religious places, persons
(famous for pretended miracles) especially to the holy Nun of Carrion, to whom
the Popes Nuncio sent a special dispensation, to entertain the Prince, and to
discourse with him, as a thing necessary for the good of the Catholic Church.

Sixthly by presenting him with Popish Pictures, as Ibid. p. 556
with the beautiful Pictures of our Lady, of Saint Joseph, and of sweet Jesus,
to omit all other Artifices.

Some Months after the Princes arivall in Spain, the long expected
dispensation for the marriage came from Pope Gregory the 15. to the Spanish
Court, before which time the Prince was not admitted to speak with the Infanta
in quality of a Suitor, but of a Prince: The Vocal Forest. p. 125. 126. 127.
Mercur^ Francois.
but it came clogged with an unhappie unexpected clause, thrust in of purpose
to retard the proceedings: Namely, That whereas there were certain Articles
condiscended to by King James, in favor of the Roman Catholics in England,
and other his Majesty's dominions, the Pope demanded caution from the King and
Prince for performance of them, before the Marriage consummate: To which the
King answered; That he could give no other caution but his own, and the
Princes Royal words and Oaths, confirmed by his Council of State, and
exemplified under the great Seal of England: which security was tendered; but
this would not satisfy, unless some Sovereign Catholic Prince would engage
himself for them. Thereupon all matters were like to go off the hinges; and a
brute went abroad, that the Prince intended to get away covertly: At last
Conde Olivares propounded three ways of accommodation; The first was* that
Prince Charles should become a Papist. The second, that the Infanta should be
delivered to him upon the former security, without further condition. The third
was, to bind him as fast as they could, and not trust him with any thing.

Whiles matters were thus canvasing and gathering ill blood; the King of Spain
proffered to engage himself by Oath for the Kings and Princes performance of
the Articles, to satisfy the Pope, provided he must first consult with his
Ghostly Fathers, whether he might do it with safe Conscience, or no.

Whereupon the business was referred to a Committee of Learned Divines;
Whether the King of Spain might with safety of Conseience take an Oath in the
behalf^ of the King of England, and Prince Charles, for performance of such and
such Articles as were in favor of the Pap^sts throughout the Kings Dominions?
who after a long demurre and protraction of time, concluded at last
affirmatively, that he might: and in case they faild to ^xecute what was
Capitulated, the King of Spain was to vindicate his Oath, and right himself
by the sword.

While things were thus agitating in Spain, diverse well affected persons
stiffly opposed the match in England, and writ against it; Among others Mercure
Francois. Tom. 9. p. 497. to 505.
Doctor George Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury made this Remonstrance to His
Majesty against the match, and toleration indulged to the Roman Catholics, one
transcript whereof was among Windebanks Papers; agreeing with that recorded in
the French Mercur^e.

May it please your Majesty,
I Have been too long silent, and am afraid by my silence, I have neglected
the duty of the place, it has pleased God to call me unto, and your Majesty
to place me^n. And now I humbly crave leave, I may discharge my Conscience
toward God, and my duty toward Your Majesty. And therefore I beseech you (Sir)
to give me leave freely to deliver my self, and then let Your Majesty do what
you please with me. Your Majesty has propounded a toleration of Religion: I
beseech you (Sir) take it into your con^ideration, what your Act is, what the
consequence may be. By Your Act you labor to set up that most damnable and
heretical doctrine of the Church of Rome, the Whore of Babylon* How hateful
will it be to God, and grievous unto your good Subjects, the true pro^essors of
the Gospel, that your Majesty who has often disputed and learnedly written
against those wicked heresies, should now show your self* a Patron of those
doctrines which your pen has told the world, and your Conscience tells your
self are superstitious, idolatrous, and detestable. Add hereunto, what you
have done in sending the Prince into Spain without the consent of your
Counsel, the privitie and approbation of your people. And though you have a
larger interest in the Prince, as the Son of your flesh, ye^ have the people
a greater, as the Son of the Kingdom, upon whom next after Your Majesty,
their eyes are fixed, and welfare depends. And so tenderly is this going
apprehended, as believe it (Sir) howsoever his return may besafe, yet the
drawe^s of him to that action so dangerous to himself; so desperate to the
Kingdom, will not pass away unquestioned, unpunished, Besides, this
toleration which you endeavor to set up by your Proclamation, it cannot be
done without a Parliament, unless Your Majesty will let your subjects see,
that you will take unto your self a liberty to throw down the Laws of the
Land at your pleasure. What dreadf^ll consequence (Sir) these things may draw
after, I beseech Your MAJESTY to consider, and above all, least by this
tolleration and discontinuance of the true profession of the Gospel, wherewith
God has blessed us, and under which this Kingdom has these many years
^lourished, Your Majesty do not draw upon the Kingdom in General, and your
self in particular, Gods heavy wrath and indignation. Thus in discharge of my
duty toward God, to Your Majesty, and the place of my calling* I have taken
humble boldness, to deliver my Conscience. And now (Sir) do with me what you
please.


This Remonstrance of his was seconded by Vox Populi, Doctor Hackwell and
others; But all in vain the King being so resolutely bent upon it, that he
would permit none to contradict it, and Mercure Francois. Tom. p. 1624. p. 29.
committed the Earl of Oxford prisoner to the Tower for some ^peeches against
it.

At last the difficulties in Spain and Rome being surmounted and the Pope
satisfied by the King of Spaines engagement for the performance of the
Articles, and Propositions Mercure Franc. Anno 1623. p. 522. 523.
( for the ^ight* augmentation, and Weal of the Roman Catholic Religion: as
the Cardinals for the propagation of the Faith, styled them) there was
exceeding great joy, and all the Capitulations were thereupon soon after
engrossed, sealed, subscribed, and solemnly sworn to by both the Kings, the
Prince, and Privy Council: the Copy of which Articles both concerning the
Infanta, her family, and the Papists in general, I shall here insert in
Latin, as I find them printed in the Tom. 9. An. 1624. p. 11. ^8.
French Mercury, and in written Copies belonging to the Lord Cottington and
Secretary Windebancke agreeing with it.

NOS Iacobus Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Galliae, Hiberniae etc. Rex:
Relation^ atque notitia hujus Instrumenti atque scripturae Obligationis*
Approbationis* Confirmationis, Ratificationis et novi contractus, atque ad
perpetuam ejus memoriam, Notum facimus, et manifestum omnibus Regibus,
Principibus, Potentatibus, Rebuspublicis, Communitatibus Vniversitatibus, et
Privatis Personis cujuscunque status et conditionis sint et inpertuum fuerint.
Quemadmodum ad gloriam et honorem Dei cum maxim optaremus, ut novis
strictioribusque Ami^itiae nexibus consanguinitatis et a^^initatis vincula quae
Nos et s^renissimum Carolum Walliae Principem, nostrum charissimum atque
am^ntissimum Filium Vnicum cum Serenissimo Principe Phillippo quarto Catholico*
Hispa ni^^, Neapolis* Siciliae, Jerusalem, Indiarum Orientalium et
Occidentalium, Insularum et continentis Maris Oceani R^ge, Archiduci, A^striae
conjungunt, constringantur arctius, et con^irmentur atque ut in Nobis,
Successoribusq^e Nostris fraternitatis coneordia, (...) inter utramque Coro^am
mutua Benevolentia ad majus utriusque bonum et felicitatem concilietur
stabili^tur atque p^^maneat. Actum est, et agitur de Matrimonio contrahendo
inter predictum Serenissimum Walliae Principem, and Sereniss^mam Infantem
Mariam, Catholicae Serenitatis sororem. Ad cujus ^ei tractatum and
conclusionem, predictum Serenissimum Principem ^ilium Nostrum, ad Regem
Hispaniarum and Regiam missimus, ^bi nunc reperitur, Inter quem, pro Se and pro
Nobis and Nostro nomine, una cum Georgio Vilersio Buckinghamiae Duce, Maris
Anglicani Praesecto, Garterij ordinis periscelidi insign^, a Concilio Nostri
status, and Nostri Equitis Praeposito^tum etiam Joanne Digbeio Bristoliae
Comice, Vice-camerario Hospitij Nostri and Nostri status conciliario, and
Gualtero Astone. Nostris a^ud Catholicam Serenitatem Ora^oribus, ordinario and
extraordin^rio, Francisco adhuc Cotintone Baranetto, praefati ^ilij Nostri
Secretar^o; ut virtute praes^ripti atque Instructionis quam a nobis habuerunt
and habent, ^t omnibus necess^riis ad dictum Matrimonium tractandum and
conficiendum in^^rsint. Et exaltera part, inter Ser^nitatem Catholicam, pro
se, ac tanquam fratre and legittimo administratore praedictae Serenissimae
Infantis Mariae, and de ejusdem voluntate et conse^su, Commiss^on^rios ^tiam ad
id ipsum designtos. Joannem Mendozium and Lunam, Marchionem Montium Clarorum,
and Castelli Barbellae Marchionem, a consiliis status and Belli S^renitatis
Catholicae, and Didacum Sarmiento de Acuna Comitem Gondomarij a praedictis
consiliis, unacum Joanne de Cirica sanctioris Consilij Seorei^rio, and Liberae
commendatar^a Praefectura insignito, Praemiss^^t praemissae fuerunt, fa^^ltate
et Dispensationibus suae Sanctitatis, and alijs quae necessaria requiraban^^r.
Postquam magna and matura deliberatione, vl^ro, citroque propter ea ratio^^m
momenta q^ae retulimus, quaeque hujus Matrimonij convenientia and commoda certo
suadent, and ostendunt, and re^ gravissima^ discep^arunt. Hi omnes communi
consens^ atque judicio in aliquot captulationes, and conditiones, ad rem
terminandam and absolvendam accomodata, quae sic se habent, convenerunt.

1. Quod Matrimonium perficiendum est per Dispensatinem Sanctissimi Domini
Papae, sed haec per operam Catholici Regis habenda est.

2. Quod Matrimonium semel et^am celebrandum est in Hispania* and in Anglia
raratificari debet in forma sequenti. Mane postquam Serenissima Domina Infans
dev^tiones suas in capella abselverit; Ipsa and Serenissimus Princeps Carolus,
in capella Regia, seu in aliqua Palatij Aula, ubi magis expedire visum fuerit,
conve^iant, ibique procurationos omnes quarum virtute, Matrimonium in Hispan^a
fuerit celebratum, legantur, et tam Serenissimus Princeps, quam Serenissima
Infans, praefatum M^^rimonium in Hispania celebratum, ratum h^beant, cum omni
solemnitate, ad hujusm^di actum necessaria, NOTE.
modo enim nulla Ceremonia seu res aliqua interveni^t, quae Religi^ni
Catholicae Apostolicae Romanae contradicat.

3. Quod Serenissima Infans, s^rvos et familiam pro suo servitio convenientem
secum deferat; quam familiam et personas omnes ad illam attin^ntes elig^t et
nominabit C^tholica Serenitas, modo nullum servum nominaverit qui sit vassallus
Regis magnae Brittanniae sine s^a voluntate et consensu.

4. Quod tam Serenissima Domina Infans quam servi et univers^ ejus familia
habebunt liberum usum, et publicum exercitium Religionis Catholicae in modo et
forma, pr^ut infra capitulatum est.

5. Quod habebit Oratorium et Cap^llam decente^ in suo Palatio, ubi Missae pro
libito Serenissimae Infantis celebrari possint, et similiter Londini, et
ubicunque morabitur, Ecclesiam publicam et capacem habebit prope Palatium, ubi
omnia offic^a solenniter celebrentur, cum cemiterio, et omnibus alus
^ecessariis pro publica verb^ Dei praedicatione, et omnium Sacramentorum
Ecclesiae Catholicae Romanae celebratione and Administratione; proque
sepeliendis Mortuis and ^aptizandis Parvulis: and quod praefatum Oratorium,
Capella and Ecclesiae cum tali dec^ntia ornabuntu^, qu^ Ser. Infants conveniens
videbitur.

6. Quod servi and servae Seren^ssimae Infantis, and servi servoruns, eorumque
filij and descendentes, ac familiares omnes quomodocunque suae Celsitudini
inservientes, valea^t Catholici esse libere and public.

7. Quod Serenissimae Infantis servi and familiares praedicti valiant Catholic^
esse in forma sequenti.

8. Quod Serenissi^a Insans h^beat in Palatio suum Oratorium and Capellam (...)
c^pacem ut Dicti servi and familiares (ut supra) possint intrare, and commorari
in ill^. In qua una sit porta publica and ordinaria ^ro illis, and altera
interior per quam Sere^ssima Domina Infans habeat ingressum in dictam Capellam,
ubi ipsa, and alij, ut supra, divinis offi^^s interesse possint.

9. Quod Oratorium, Capella and Ecclesia publica ornentur cum decentiornatu
Altarum and al^arum rerum quae necessariae sunt pro cultu divine, qui in illis
secundum ritum S. R. Eccl. celebrandus est, and quod dictis servis, and aliis
((...) supra) licebit se confer ad dictas Capellam and Ecclesiam omnibus
horis prout illis videbitur.

10. Quod cura et custodia dictarum capellae et Ecclesiae erit p^nes eos qui
deputabuntur a Seren^ssima Domina Infanta, cui licebit constituere custodes, ne
quis possit intrare ad f^ciendum quid indecorum.

11. Quod ad administrandum Sacramenta, et serviendum in Capella et Ecclesia
praedictis viginti-quatuor Sacerdotes et Assistentes nominabuntur, qui per
Hebd^mada aut menses, prout Ser. Infanti visum fuerit inservient, et eorum
electio ad praefatum Serenissimum Regem Catholicum et Serenissimam Infantem
attinebit, mod^ non sint vassalli Regis magnae Brittanniae, aut si fuerint,
ejus voluntas et consensus prae^edat.

12. Quod sit unus Minister in ordine Episcopal^ constitutus superior, cum
authoritate necessaria, ad omnes casus qui acciderint spectantes ad Religionem;
et Episcopo de^icient^ illius Vicarius ^andem habeat authoritatem et
Iurisdictionem.

13. Quod iste Episcopus et Minister superior poterit corrigere, emendare et
castigate Ca^holicos qui deliquerint, et in illis omnem Iurisdictionem
Ecclesiasticam exercere; et ultra hoc, poterit etiam Serenissima Infans illos
de servitio su^ abdicare quando illi visum suerit.

14. Quod dictus Superior in ordine Episcopali constitutus, vel ejus Vicarius,
poterit servos et alios (ut supra) Ecclesiasticos punire juxta leges et poenas
ecclesiasticas, et illos etiam Serenissi^a Domina Infans a suo servitio
abdicare.

15. Quod licebit Serenissimae Dominae Infanti et servis (vt supra) adquirere
Romae Dispensationes, Indulgentias, Iubileos, et omnes gratias quae videbuntur
Religioni et conf^ientiis suis competere, ^t undecunque libros qu^stibet
Catholicos sibi comparare.

16. Quod servi et familiares Serenissimae Dominae Infantis qui in Angliam
migrabunt, suscipient juramentum fidelitatis Reg^ magnae Brittanniae, NOTE.
modo nulla sit clausula neque verbum quod contradicat Religioni Ro^anae, et
conscientiis Catholicorum, et si forte sint vassalli Regis magnae Brittanniae,
idem juramentum suscipient quod Hispani, utrique in sequ^nti forma.

Ego N. juro et promitto fidelitatem Serenissimo Iacobo magnae Brittanniae
Regi, et Serenissimo Carolo Principi Walliae, et Mariae Hispaniarum Infanti,
quam firmiter et fideliter observabo: et si quid contra personas, Honorem, et
dignitatem Regiam praefactorum Regis et Principum, statumve et commune bonum
Regn^rum intent^ri cognover^, sta^^^ renunciabo dictis Domino Regi, et
Principibus aut Ministris ad id constitutis.

17. Quod leges quae sunt vel erunt in Anglia et aliis Regnis, spectantes ad
Religionem, dictos serv^s, et alios (ut supra) laicos non attingent: qui tum
legibus tum poenis contra transgressores earum impositis erunt exempti. NOTE.
Et contra Ecclesiasticos solummedo eorum Superior ecclesiasticus Catholicus
procedere valeat, prout apud Catholicos fieri cons^evit: quod si Iudex aliquis
secularis, ecclesiasticum virum compre^ender it propter aliquod delictum, ad
hoc ^nim faciet ut praedicto suo Superiori eccles^astico statim tradat and
remittat, qui contra illum juxta canones et regulas juris procedat.

18. Quod leges contra Cat^olicos latae, vel f^rendae in Anglia et aliis Regnis
Regis magnae Brittanniae subjectis, non attingent liberos ex hoc Matrimonio
ori^ndos, et libere jure su^cessionis in Regnis et Dominis Mag. Brit. fruantur.

19. Quod Nutrices quae lactabunt liberos Ser. Dom. Infantis Catholicae valiant
esse, carumque electio ad praefatam Dominam Infantem spectet, sive sint ex
natione, Anglicana, sive ex alia quacunque, prout Ser. Infanti placuer it, et
sa^iliae suae annumerentur, ejusque privilegijs gaudeant et potiantur

20. Quod Episcopus, personae ecclesiasticae et religiosae ex familia Dom.
Infanti^ poterunt retinere vest^tum et habitum suae Dignitatis, professionis,
Religionis more Romano.

21. Pro securitate quod dictum Matrimonium nulla^enus aliqua ex causa
dissolvetur, Rex Mag. Brit. et Carolus Princeps verbo Regi^ pariter et honor
astringendi sunt, Prestabu^t insuper quicquid a Rege Catholico propositum
fuerit, si enim decenter et commode fieri possit.

22. Quod filij et filiae qui ex hoc Matrimon^o nascentur penes, Seren^ssimam
Infantem, ut minmum usque ad decennium educentur, et libere jure successionis
in praedictis Regnis (ut dictum est) fruantur.

23. Quod quomodocunque loci servorum et servarum, quos Serenissima Domina
Infans secum attulerit, nominatos per Regem Catholicum fr^trem (...), v^^^re
contigerit, sive pe^ mortem, sive per absemiam, sive ex aliqua alia (...)
accidenet, subrogentur per dictum Regem Catholicum omnes servi and familiares,
ut supra.

24. Pro s^^^ritate quod totum ut capitulatum est compleatur: Rex mag. Brit.
and serenissimus Carolus Pr. juramento obstringendi sunt, ut omnes Consiliarij
Regis, tractatum Chyrographo firmare debent: insuper quod praedicti Rex and
Princeps, verbo Regio sidem (...) sunt, se factucos quod possibile est, ut
omnia supra capitulata per Parliamentum siabiliantur.

25, Quod conformiter ad ea quae tractata sunt, NOTE.
^mnia ista proponenda and exponenda sunt Sanctissimo Domino Papae, quatenus ea
approbare, Apostoliamque Benedictionem, (...) necessariam Dispensationem ad
effectum Matrimonij con^^dere dignetur.

Nos tractatum praedictum ac omnia and singula capitulata in eodem comenta ac
spectificata rata and grata habentes, ea omnia and singula ex certa scientia
Nostra quatenus Nos, Haredes, vel Successores Nostros concernunt, approbamus,
landamus, confirmamus, ae rati^icamus: Et inviolabiliter, firmiter, been and
fideliter, tenere, observare, perimplere, tenerique, observari and perimpleri
sacere cum effectu, bona fide, in verbo Regio promittimus per praesentes, omni
exceptione, seu contradictione cessante: Eademque in praesentia illustrium and
nobilium virorum Ioannis de Mendoza, and Caroli a Coloma serenissimi Regis
Catholici Oratorum in curia Nostra residentium, sacrosanctis Ev angelijs per
nos tactis, jurejurando firmanus, n^n obstantibus quibuscunque opinionibus,
sententiis aut legibus in contrarium. In quorum omnium and singulorum
praemiss^rum fidem ae testim^nium ^is^e Arti^ulis manu Nostra subscriptis,
magnum sigillum Nostrum apponi ^e^imus, praesentibus R^ver^ndissimo in Christo
patre Georgio Archiepiscopo Canturiensi totius Angliae primate, Reverendissimo
in Christo patre Ioanne Episcopo Linco^niensi, magni sigilli Angliae custode,
and predictis cons^nguineis Nostris Lionello Comite Middlesexiae, summo
Thesauraio Nostro Angliae, Henrici Vice-Comite de Maundevill in Consilio Nostri
status praesidente, Edvardo Comite Wig rniensi, privati sigilli Nostri custode,
Ludovico Du^ae Richmondiae and Lenoxiae, Hospitij Nostri Seneschallo suprema,
Jacobo Marchione Hamiltoniae, Jacobo Comite Carlionensi, Thoma Comite de
K^lleij, Oliverio Vice comite Grandis^n, and Reverendissimo in Christo patre
Lanceloto Epis^^pa Wintoniens^, Sacelli Noctri Regij Decano, and praedilectis,
and fidelibus Nostris Georgio Barone Caresse de Clopino rei Nost^^ tormentariae
majoris in Anglia praefecto, Arthuro Barone Chichister de Belfart, Regni Nostri
Hiberniae summo Thesaurario, Thoma Edmonds milite, es^sdem Nostri Hospitij
Regij Thes^^^^rio, Joanne Suckling Milite ejusdem Nostri Hospitij
Contrarotulatore, Georgio Calvert Milite uno^e Secretarijs Nostris pri^^anrijs,
Edvardo Conwei^ Milit^ altero e Secretarijs Nostris prim^^ijs, Richardo Weston
Mili^e, Seactarij Nostri Ca^^ellario and sub Thesa^eario, and Julio Caesare
Milite, Archiverum Nostrorum praefecto, omnibusque a Consilijs Nostris
Sanctioribus. Dat. apud Palatium Nostrum Westmonasterijs, 20. die Julij, Anno
Regni Nostri magnae Brittanniae, etc. 21.

S. S. Iacobus Rex.

The solemnity observed in swearing these Articles of the Match in England by
King James, you may read at large in the Tom. 9. Anno 1624. p. 9. to ^8*
French Mercury, who likewise informs us, That there arose these two
difficulties between King James and the Spanish Ambassadors* about the taking
of this Oath. The first was about this title of the Pope MOST HOLY; which King
Iatmes refused to give (openly) to the Pope, in the Oath which he was to
prononnce in the Chapel ( at White shall) alleging the repugnancy thereof to
his Religion, and that this would be a reproach, and by consequence pre^ud^^all
to him for the future: but the Amb^ssadours refused to proceed further, if his
Ma^^sty would not consens to give kiss the for said title, to which at last he
consen^ed. The second difficulty was, that some reported to the Ambassa^ours
that they should have such prayers in the Kings Chapel when they came to see
the Articles sealed and sworn to by the King, and such ^^nging as were used in
the Protestant Church and Kings Chapel. NOTE.
, at which prayers they could not be present, since they came thither to (...)
other end^ but to a^^ure, maintain and warrant the Catholic Aposto^icall and
Roman Church: whereupon the King commanded that nothing should be there sung
but what was chau^^ed w^^n the Constable of Castile took his Oath there, to
swear the peace betwe^n the two Crowns, which was an hymn of joy in praise
of peace; and ^o out all (...) the King c^used the Register of his Chapel to
carry the hymn to the (...) ^ peruse, and so all difficulties were removed:
the King yielding to these Popish ^^bass^do^rs, to grati^ie the Pope in his
Antichristian title, but they not (...) one (...) bred^h to him in honor or
approbation of our Prayers P^almes^ or Prot^stant Religion, which must give
place to their Catholic plea^ures.

The Articles being solemnly sworn in the forenoone* the King made an
extraordinary Feast to the Ambassadors: Which ended, the King and they went to
the Council Chamber, where all the Lords of the Council sealed an^ subscribed
the ge^erall Articles of the Marriage; which done the Ambassadors came ^o the
King, who took this solemn Oath and swore these Mereauty (...), Tom^^ Anno
1624. p. 25, 26^ 27.
private Articles to them in fa^our of Papists and advancement of the Romish
Religion; which I shall here truly set ^^wne both in Latin and English.

JACOBUS D^i gratia magnae Britannis, etc. Rex, ^ides defensor, etc. Omnibus ad
quos hoc praes^n^ scriptum per^encrit salutem. In quantum inter mult^ (...) q^c
in tract^^^ de Matrimonio, inter Charissimuns Filium Nostrum Carolum Wal^^ae
Principem, and Serenissima^ D^minam Donnam Matiam, Screnissi^^ Prin^^pis and
per-d^l^ct^ sratris nostri Phillippi quarti Regis H^spaniarum Sororem
contin^ntur, conventum est, quod Nos juramento N^stro approbar^mus, r^t^sque
^aceremus Articulos infra ad verbum expressos.

1. Quod nulla lex particularis contr^ Catholicos Romanos lat^. sub qua alij
Regn^rum Nostrorum Vassalli non compraehenduntur, and ad cujus observationem
omnes ge^^ralit^r non ^bligantur* ne^non leges gen^ral^s sub quibus omnes ex
aequo compraehenduntur, modo ejusmodi sint quae Religioni Romanae repugnent,
^llo unquam tempore ^llo omnino modo, aut casi^ direct, vel indirecte, quoad
dictos Catholicos Romanos ex^cutioni mandabitur; and essiciemus ut Consiliarij
nostri idem praestent juramentum, quantum ad illos perti^et, and (...) ad
exe^utionem quae per manus eorum and ministrorum s^^orum solet exerceri.

2. Quod nullae aliae leges imposterum de integro f^rentur contra dictos
Catholicos R^m^no* sed tolerat^o perpetua exercij Rel^gio^^s Catholicae Rom^n^
inter privatos p^rictes per ^mnia nostra Regna and Dom^n^^ quod int^lligi
volum^s tam in Regnis nostris Scotiae and Hibe^ae quam in Anglia, ijs
concedetur modo and ^orma prout c^pitulatum, declaratum and concessum est in
Articulis tractatus de Matrimonio.

3. Quod n^^ per Nos, nec per al^am ullam interp^sitam personam direct^ vel
indire^^^ privatim vel public rem ullam cum S^r^uissima Domina I^f^nta Donna
Ma^ia tractabimus, quae repugnet Religioni Catholicae Romanae: illique
nequaquam p^^s^^d^bimus, ut in substanti^ vel form^ ^idem unquam renunciet, aut
delinquat, aut ut agat aliquid ijs quae continentur in trac^atu de Matrimonio
rep^gnans a^t contrarium.

4. Quod authori^atem Nostram interpone^us, f^ciemusque quantum in Nobis erit,
Parliamentum omnes and singulo A^ticulos ra^^one hujus Matrimo^ij in ^^vorem
Catholicorum Romanorum inter Serenissi^os Reges capitulatos approbet,
con^i^met, ratosque ^aciat, and ut dictum Parliamentum revocet abrogetque leges
particul^res contra dictos Catholicos Romanos latas, ad ^ujus observationem
reliqui item subditi, and vess^lli non obligantur, n^cnon leges etiam
generales, sub quibus omnes ex aequo compraebenduntur, nimium quoad Catholicos
Romanos, modo ejusmodi sint, uti dictum est, quae Religioni Cathocae Romanae
repugnent, and quod imposterum non consent^emus ut dictum Parliamentum ul^o
u^quam tempore alias de integro contra Catholicos Romanos sanciat aut
conscribat,

Nos omnia and singula capitula praecedentia rata and grat^ habentes* ex certa
s^ientia Nostra quate^is Nos, Haeredes vel Success^res nostros concernunt
approb^mus, ratify amus, landamus, and inviolabiliter, sirmiter, been, and
fideluer tenere, observare, and perimplere, tenerique, observari and perimpleri
facere cum effectu, bona ^ide, and verbo Regio promittimus per praescntes, omni
exceptione, seu ^ontradictione cessante, cademque sacris Evangeliis per Nos
tactis ^irm^mus, non obstantibus quibuscunque* opinio^bu^, sententiis, au^
legibus in contrarium: in praesentia illustrissimorum Dominorum D. Jonnis de
Mendoza Marchionis de Inoiosa and D. Caroli Coloma Regis Catholici Legatorum
extraordinariorum, Georgij Calvert Militis, unius Secretariorum nostrorum
^rim^riorum, Edwardi Conway Militis alterius Secretariorum nostrorum
primariorum, Francisci Cottington Baronetti, Filio nostro Principi a Secretis,
Francisci de Carondelet prothonotarii Apostolici and Archidiaconi Cameracensi.
Dat in Palatio nostro Westmonasteriensi 20. die Julij, Anno Domini millessimo
sex centessimo vigessimotertio, stilo Angliae.

Copi^ collata and vera. Jacobus Rex.

JAMES by the grace of God of great Britain* etc. King defender of the Faith.
etc. To all to whom this present Writing shall come* greeting. In ^s much as
among many other things w^^ch are contained within the treaty of Marriage
between Our most dea^e Son Charles Prince o^ Wales, and the m^st renowned
^ady Donna M^r^a. Sister of the most re^^un^d Prince and Our welbeloved ^roth^r
Phillip (...) King of Spain; it is agreed that W^ by Out Oath shall approve
the Articles under expresse^ to a word.

1. That part^cular laws made against Roman ^atho^iques, NOTE.
under which other vassals of Our Rea^mes are not compreh^nd^d, and to whose
obse^vation all generally are nor obliged* as likewise general la^s under
which all are equally comprize^* it so ^e they ar^ such which are repugnant to
the Romish Religion shall not at any time hereafter by any mean^s or chance
whatsoever directly, or indirectly, be commanded to be ^ut in execution against
the said Ro^an Catholics; and We will cause that Our Coun^ell shall take the
same Oath, as far as it pe^^aines to them and belongs to the execution, which
by the hands of them and their Ministe^s is to to be exercised.

2. That no other laws shall hereafter NOTE.
be made anew against the said Roman Catholics, but that there shall be a
perpetual toleration of the Roman Catholic Religion within private houses
throughout all Our Realms and Dominions, which We will have to be understood,
as well of Our Kingdom of Scotland and Ireland, as in England, which shall be
granted to them in manner and form as is capitulated, decreed and granted in
the Articles of the Treaty concerning the Marriage.

3. That neither by Us^ nor by any other NOTE.
interposed person whatsoever, directly or indirectly, privately or publicly,
will We treat (or attempt) any thing with the most Renouned Lady Infanta Donna
Maria, which shall be repugnant to the Romish Catholic Religion* neither will
We by any means persuade her that she should ever renounce or relinquish the
same in substance or form, or that she should do any thing repugnant or
contrary to those things which are containe^ in the treaty of Matrimony.

4. That We will interpose O^r authority and will do as much as in Us ^^all
lie, NOTE.
that the Parliament shall approve confirm and ratisie all and singular
Articles in favor of the Roman C^tholiques capi^ulated between the most
renowned Kings, by reason of this Marriage; and that the said Parliament shall
revoke and abrogate the particular laws made against the said Roman Catholics
to whose observance also the rest of Our Subjects and Vassals are not obliged;
as likewise the general laws under which all are equally comprehended, to wit,
as to the Roman Catholics, if they be such as is aforesaid which are
repugnant to the Roman Catholic Religion: and that hereafter We will not
consent, that the said Parliament should ever at any time enact or write any
other new laws against Roman Catholiqu^s.

We accounting all and singular the preceding Articles, ratified and accepted*
out of Our certain knowledge* as ^^rre as they concern Us, Our Heirs or
Successors, approve, ratify, applaud, and promise bona fide, and in the word
of a King by these presents, inviolably, firmly, well and faithfully to keep,
observe, and fulfill the same, and to cause them to be kept, observed and
fulfilled without any exception or contradiction, and do confirm the same by
Oath upon the holy Evangelists, notwithstanding any opinions, sentences or
laws whatsoever to the contrary; in the presence of the most illustrious Don
John de Mendoza, Marquess of Inojosa, and Don Charles Coloma, Extraordinary
Ambassadors of the Catholic King of George Calvert Knight. one of Our chief
Secretaries, of Edward Conway Knight, another of Our chief Secretaries, of
Francis Cottington Baronet, of the Privy Counsel to Our Son the Prince, of
Francis de Corondelet, Apostolical (or the Popes) Protho^^tory, and
Archdeacon of Cambray.

Dated at Our Palace at Westminster the ^0. day of July, An. Dom. 1623. in the
English style. Iacobus Rex.
A compared and true Copy. George Calvert, then chief Secretary.

The form of the Oath which the Lords of the Counsel took to the former
Articles (...) this which follows, (found among the Lord Cottingtons papers.)

Formula Juramenti a Consiliarijs Praestandi.
FGO^N jur^ me debite pleneque observ^^^^^m, qu^ntum ad me spect^t, (...)
Carolum, Walliae (...), et serenissim^m Domin un Donnam Mariam Hispaniarum
(...). Iuro etiam quod neque per me, nec per Minis^^^ aliquem inferiorem mihi
(...), lege (...) contra (...).

These things thus acted in England by the King. I shall next inform you what
was acted in Spain by the Prince, Mercu^e francois Tom. 9. An. 1624. p. 8. 9.
Pope Gregory the 15. before his death and granting of the Dispen^ation, had
obliged and charged the conscience of his Catholic Majesty, to see the
execution and accomplishment of all the conditions required by his Holiness in
favor of the Catholics of England, Ireland and Scotland, Popes know how to
make good ^argaines.
for the Di^pensation to which he had assented: His Majesty hereupon called an
Assembly of Divines to consult with, what he ought to do fot the discharge of
his conscience in this regard. Their resolution was, First, that the Prince of
(...) promise upon his Oath for to perform the conditions, (...) should do
the like. Secondly, that the promis* (...) should be presently made between
the Prince of Wales and the most (...); but that the consummation of the
Marriage and delivery of the (...) should not (...) all be execu^ed until the
month of May in the following year 1624. to the end that they might
experimentally see during this time, if the fore said conditions required by
his Holiness should be faithfully accomplished. This last condition seemed
very rigorous to the Prince, but the King of Spain promised him to procure
that the time should be abridged. As to the first, the Prince of Wales took an
Oath to his Majesty to observe the foresaid conditions, and signed them with
his hand: and he likewise swore and signed this by way of overplus, NOTE.
To permit at all times, that any should freely propose to him the arguments of
the Catholic Religion without giving any impediment; and that he would never
directly nor indirectly permit any to speak to the Infanta against the same. A
very strange, dishonorable, ensnaring Oath, exposing the Prince to all
seducements and seducers from our Religion without the least impeachment on the
one hand; and debarring his Highness and all others* so much as once to open
their lips to speak against Popery, or to attempt the conversion of the
Infanta to our Religion on the other hand.

These later strange Articles in favor of the Roman Catholics (originally
contrived by the Pope himself and his Cardinals) being thus sworn and signed
by the King and Prince gave great distaste to those of the Protestant party in
England who had notice of them; whereupon King James soon after perceiving the
Spaniards juggling with him* and that this Match notwithstanding all the former
Articles sworn and sealed, might receive a rupture (though at first he was so
confident of it, that he said openly in Court; The V^cal^ forest, p. 126. 127.
That now all the devils in hell could not hinder the Match) thereupon made this
Protestation (sent to Salisbury) by way of explanation of the latter Articles
(found among Secretary Windebanks and Cottingtons papers) sufficiently
ma^ifesting the verity of the said Articles* printed long since, Cum
Privilegio, in the French Mercury (one of the truest Histories in this latter
age, how ever the Author of Page 34. 44, 45.
A Royal Vindication, in answer to the Royal Popish Favorite* lights it as
most false, fabulous) and making a kind of Commentary on them.

Whereas his Majesty obliges himself by oath, that no particular Law now in
force against the Roman Catholics* King James his Protestation.
to which the rest of his Subjects generally are not liable, nor any general
Laws which may concern all his Subjects equally and indifferently, being such
nevertheless as are repugnant to the Roman religion, shall be executed at any
time, as to the said Roman Catholics in any ^anner or case whatsoever,
directly or indirectly: And that his Majesty shall cause the Lords of his Pivy
Council to take the same oath in so much as concerns them, or the execution
of the Laws before mentioned, so far forth as the same appertains unto them,
or any officers or Ministers under them.

And whereas further his Majesty obliges himself by the oath, that no other
Law^ shall hereafter be enacted against the said Roman Catholics, but that a
perpetual toleration to exercise the Roman Catholic Religion within their
private houses shall be allowed unto them; throughout all his Majesty's
Kingdoms and Dominion^; NOTE.
that is to say, as well within his Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland as of
England, in manner and form as is capi^ulated, declared, and granted in the
Articles concerning the Marriage.

His Majesty intends really and effectually to perform what he has promised
touching suspention of Laws against his Roman Catholic Subjects, but with
this protestation: That if they shall insolently abuse this his Majesty's high
grace and favor to the danger of imbroyling his State and government, the
safety of the Commonwealth is in this case suprema Lex, and his Majesty must
notwithstanding his said oath, proceed against the offenders, yet so, as that
before he do it, the King of Spain^ and all the world shall see he has just
cause.

And whereas also his Majesty obliges himself by the like oath, that he will
use his power and authority, and procure as much as in him lies, that the
Parliament shall approve, confirm, and ratify all and singular the Articles
agreed upon betwixt the two Kings in favor of the Roman Catholics, by reason
of this Match, and that the said Parliament shall revoke and abrogate all
particular laws made against the said Catholics, whereunto the rest of his
Majesty's Subjects are not liable. As also all other general laws, as to the
said Roman Catholics, which concern them, together with the rest of his
Majesty's Subjects, and be repugnant to the Roman Catholic Religion: and that
hereafter his Majesty shall not give his royal assent at any time unto any new
laws that shall be made against the said Roman Catholics. His Majesty has
ever protested and does protest, that it is an impossibity which is required at
his hands, NOTE.
and that he may safely and well swear it, for he is sure that he is never
able to do it.

And last of all, his Majesty protests, that this which he now undertakes to
do and is sworn, is merely in respect and favor of the Marriage intended
betwixt his Son and the Infanta, and unless the same do proceed, he does
hold himself, and so declares by this Protestation, acquitted and discharged
in conscience of every part of his Oath now taken, and that he is at full
liberty to deal with his Roman Catholic Subjects, according to his own
natural lenity and clemency, and as their dutiful loyalty and behavior
toward his Majesty shall deserve.

These Articles being thus sealed and sworn Mercure Francois, An. 1624. page
29, 30.
Don Carlos Coloma the Spanish Ambassador laid the first stone for a Chapel
which was to be built for the Infanta at the Princes Palace at Saint James,
which building was advanced with all expedition, to the great regreet of many
Protestants, and to the contentment of most Roman Catholics, to see a
Catholic Church built in the Metropoliticall City of the Realm by public
authority, after one hundred years space, during which, they did nothing else
but destroy such Churches. All Catholics that were Prisoners throughout
England, Ireland and Scotland were released, all Pursevants and Informers
established to search for, apprehend, and prosecute the Catholics, were
prohibited to attempt any thing against them: They had all free ingresse into,
and egresse out of the Realm without taking the Oath of Supremacy, having
only a passe-port: They resorted freely to hear Mass at the Spanish
Ambassadors Chapel in so great number, and so publicly that they were
sometimes two or three thousand persons, so the French Mercury truly records.
Besides, the Papists grew so insolent, that they had open Masses and Sermons in
diverse private houses about London and elsewhere. Among others their See M. Gee
his foot out of the Snare.
meeting at Blackfriars in a large chamber at a Sermon on the fifth of their
November is most remarkable, where Drury the Priest that preached, and neeere
an hundred Roman Catholics were slain and smothered with the fall of the
floor of the chamber (which they over-burthened with the multitude of people)
and many sore hurt and bruised, to their great astonishment.

Mercure Francois, ibid. p. 30, 31.
The Marriage was now thought to be completed; the greatest enemies of this
alliance submitted themselves to the Kings will* you could see nothing but the
picture of the Infanta within men's houses and in the streets. A Fleet was
prepared to go to attend the Prince and Infanta at the Port of Saint Andrew in
Biscay: His Majesty had also assigned the Dower of his fair future Daughter,
and had sent to the Marquess of Buckingham the title of Duke of Buckingham;
and to the Duke of Lenox, the title of the Duke of Richmont. In fine, all
seemed to be done in England, but things went as slow as Le^d at Rome and in
Spain.

But here comes in the new Page 43, 44
anti-dated Loyal Vindication of the King, and demands this silly question by
way of objection; If King James and the Prince had really condescended ane
sworn both to the general Articles of the Marriage (being such as the Pope
with his Cardinals of the Conclave had approved) and likewise to those private
Articles (being so infinitely advantageous and for the weal of the Roman
Catholic Religion) how could the match (being fully concluded on all parts) be
broken off?

Had this Objector well remembered that of the Poet; Multa cadunt inter calicem
Supremaque labra: he would never have demanded so frivolous a question, to
evade such a palpable matter of fact* as the sealing and swearing of these
Articles, so publicly known in the Courts of England and Spa^ne. But to give
him a full answer, as the Spaniard never really intended this match; but to
work his own mischievous designs by confirming and protracting the treaty
about it, ^o ^e took this occa^ion to interrupt it:

Mercure Francois, p. 539.
Pope Gregory the 15. soon after the dispensation granted, departed this life,
which the Spaniards promised should be no remora to the match, as is evident by
this letter of the Earl of Bristoll to Mr. Francis Cottington* then Secretary
to the Prince.

GOOD Mr: Secretary, yesterday Master Clerk went from hence, but I wrote not
by him, neither have I now much to tell you: Especially ^or that I am in doubt
whether these letters will find you in England or not* Yesterday we had the
^^wes of the Popes death, but this King out of his ow^e mouth, and the Co^de de
Olivares, and the Nuntio do assure the Prince, that this accident will neither
mak^ alteration, ^or delay in his ^usines, they being all of Opinion that it
will be dispatched by the Dean of the Cardinals and the Conclave. The Insanta
is now by all the Court* and by this Kings approbation called la Princessa d^
Inglaterra, and she m^kes not nice to take it upon he^. She now comes
Pu^liquely to the Commody, and ^^^teth by the Queen* and I am told, that as
soon as two papers, which are already drawn, are signed by the King and
Prince, they will give her the right hand of the Queen, com a knefreda, which
I conceive the Prince will not be displeased withal, for by that means it
will ^all out that the Prince and his Mistress will ever sit together. This
day Don Fernando de Giron invited my Lord Duke, my self and Sir Walter Ashton
to di^ner, where we were accompanied by Don Augustine ^exa, the Marquess of
Montes Cla^os, and the Conde de Gund^mar, and conceive we shall again fall to
good ^ell^wship. You have heard that the Marquess of Montesclaros, is made
President (...) Hasi^nda, the other in the ^unta began to speak invectively,
and against the match, thereupon the King the same night discharged him of that
place, and bestowed it upon Montesclaros

For ^ine own particular, I protest unto you the rate that I am forced to live
at is such, and the necessity of those preparations, that I must make at the
disposorios, for that our Nationbeginneth to loose much reputation for the
^anner they l^ve in without Liveries or Coaches, or ^orses, so that I am ^orced
to bolner por la honra, de la nation, and will make the best Lyvery in Spain,
and if his Majesty take not consideration of me I am undone. I l^ave all to the
negotiation, and if you settle not somewhat for me, I will despair of any good.

I hope we shall shortly see you, for I never longed more for any thing. God
bless yo^ and send you as much happiness as I wish unto you, and so I rest.

Man: Saint James (...) day, S^ilo Novo 1623. Your faithful friend to s^rve
you BRISTOLL.


Yet notwithstanding the Spanish Machiavils to puzzle the business pretended
that the dispensation, The vocal Forest p. 126. 127. Mercure Francois An.
1623. p. 539. An. 1624. p. 8. 9. 30. 31. 32. to 39.
which the Pops Nuntio had in his hands at Madrid was suspended by the Popes
death; and that there was a necessity to attend the election of a new Pope, who
ought to ratify it. Moreover the Spanish Divins firmly insisted, that the
espousals and consummation of the marriage ought to be deferred till the
following year, proposing so many dificulties, that it was impossible for his
Highness to condescend unto them. Besides the King of Spain demanded certain
Ports and Fortresses in England ^or further security of performing those
Articles, then what was formerly given, which seemed very unreasonable.
Further; the extraordinary Ambassadors of the Emperor and of the King of Poland
proffered a marriage with the Infanta for the sons of their Masters, which
gave some retarding to this affair. The Conde of Olivares (the grand favorite
of Spain) and the Duke of Buckingham (I need not mention the occasion so well
known, embraceing Nubem pro Iunone) entered into ill intelligence one with
another: The Prote^tant party and Parliament in England, disliking the match,
opposed it all they could here; and some of the Princesfollowers, who were
Zealous Protestants, did the like in Spain: Sir Edmond Vernie struck an
English Sorbon Doctor, called Maillard, a blow under the ear, ^or visiting one
of the Princes Pages, sick of a mortal ^eaver whereof he died, and laboring
to pervert him: which gave great offense, insomuch that they had much ado to
keep him out of the Spanish Inquisition: Other of the English derided and
mocked the Catholic Ceremonies and fashions of the Spaniard; which much
retarded the business, and helped forward to dissolve the match; Besides, the
Secretary of the Prince Palatine a^iving at Madrid under pretense of praying
the Duke to be Godfather to one of his Highness Children, labored to engage
the Duke (disgusted* ^ormerly by Olivares) against the marriage, to promote the
Palatines affairs. In fine, the Prince himself discovers that the Spaniard
really intended nothing else but to abuse and tire him out with delays,
without hopes of any success at last; whereupon he contrived how to get
himself fairly off and return for England with convenient speed Mercure
F^ancois An. 1623. p. 524 to 564*
The Spaniards pressed the Prince to espouse the Infanta presently, but to
delay the consummation of the marriage and the carrying of her over into England
till some further time the ensuing year. The Prince on the contrary was
advised, not to espouse her at all unless the marriage were presently
consummated, and he might instantly transport her into England: which the
Spainards not yielding unto, King James dispatched two Posts one after another
to the Prince to hasten his return into England, upon just and necessary
reason with which the King of Spain and his Council being acquainted, after
some debate, condescended that the Prince should depart t^ence the ninetenth of
September following upon oath first given, as well by his Catholic Majesty as
by the Prince, to accomplish the marriage, and to make the espousals ten days
after the receipt of the dispensation from his holiness ( Urban the 8.) elected
Pope, after many divisions then new among the Cardinals about his election, to
which end the Prince made a Pro^uration to the King of Spain* and Done C^los
his brother to make the espousalls accordingly, which we left in the Earl of
Bristolls hands, the Copy whereof I shall here insert.

IN nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti etc. Relatione and notitia
hujus Instrumenti, omnibus cujuscunque gradus, et dignitaris Personis notum sit
et manifestum, quod Regali Caenobio, Dino Laurentio sacrato, sito apud
Escurialem, Serinissimus Dominus Carolus Walliae Princeps, Majestatis Iacobi
hujus nominis primi Mag: Britanniae Regis, Serinissi^i silius unicus notum
fecit. Q^od cum ad gloriam et honorem Dei quo mgnis, consanguinitatis et
a^^ini^atis vi^cula, quae illum et Iacobum M: Brit: Regem, Patrem suum
colendissimum, cum S^rm^: Prin^^pe Philippo 4. Hispanie Rege Catholico
conjungunt, co^stringantur arctius et confirmentur, in ipsisque successioribus
suis amoris pignora, and m^t^a inter u^ramque coronam benevolentia ad commune,
majusque vtriusque bonum and felicitatem, concilientur, stabiliantur, and
permaneant; Actum, conventum, and conclusum est inter praefatos Sereniss.
Philippum Regem Catho. and Carolum Walliae Principem, accedentibus consensu and
voluntate expressis Maj: Iacobi Mag: Brit: Regis, pro^t latius constat ex
Scripturis acceptationis, ratificationis, and confirmationis ej^sdem in ^am
causam habitis (quae paenes me infra scriptum Notarium extant) (quod attestor)
de celebrando jucundoque Matrimonio, inter memoratum Seren: Carolum Walliae
Principem, and Sereniss: D^minam Mariam, Hispa^iarum Infantem, Regis Catholici
Sororem, juxta id quod in praedicto Tractatu Matrimoni^^ praescriptum and
capitu^atum est, and in ejus executionem, and effectum; quoniamque aliqu^ magni
ponderis and momenti se obtulerunt Negotia Regiam Majestatem Britanniae P^trem
suum spectanti^, and in ejus commodum and Subditorum suorum utilitatem cessura,
quae si praesentia sua non foveret, magnum posset prejudicium irrogari, nec
amplius ob id immorari permittant. Quamobrem per semetipsum praedictas Nuptias
and Matrimonium c^lebrare non p^terit; Sed legitimo Commissario and Procuratore
interveniente; propria personal^ ex post facto ratihabit^one subsecuta
approbans, laudans, and ratum babens, prout se laudare, approbare, ratum,
gratumque habere professus est omnia and singula in praedicto Tractatu
Matrimoniali inter Ipsum and Majestatem Catholicam 4. die Augusti habito and
celebrato, ^ontenta illumque denu^ in omnibus ex certa scientia, grata and
spo^tanea voluntate acceptans and confirm^ns, satis superque certior and
securus utilitatis inde provenient^is and rationum hujus Matrimonii
convenientia and commoda cer^o su ident and ostendunt, item vim ac substantia^
Matrimonii ag^oscens, perpetuamque ejus naturam, and indissolubile vinculum,
Personam nominaturus magnitudine rei, ita praeexcelsae, parem, and quae nomine
suo, seque ipsum repr^sentando, qua par est dignitate and authoritate actui
adeo solenni, honorifico and summo possit satisfacere, and praedictum
Matrimonium celebrare and ad exitum perducere; Serenissimi Regis Catholici
Philippi 4. Majestatem eligit, item and Carolum Hispaniarum Infantem ejus
f^a^rem, unicuique little in solidum vices^ suas committendo prout de facto and
cum effect^, and melioribus via and forma commisit and dedit, and utrumquem q^e
eorum facit and constituit suum verum and legitimum and indubitabilem
Procuratorem, concedens unicuique plenam, tenore praesentium, potestatem,
authoritatem and mandatum, cum plenissima generali and speciali facultate, and
^aom^ quae jure necessaria esse possit and debeat, ut pro dicto Serenissimo
Carolo ^alliae Principe, and ejusnomine, propriamque illius Personam referendo,
representando, Nuptias and Matrimonium contrahat, per verba formalia and
expressa quae verum and legitimum Matrimonium de praesenti faciant and
constituant cum praedicta Serenissima Domina Maria Hispaniorum Infant and
praedictorum verborum virtue ac potestate eam in propriam and legitimam
praedicti Serenissimi Caroli Walliae Principis uxorem accipiet, and eum
Serenissimae Infantis Mariae verum and legitimum Sponsum and Maritum constituat
prout ex nunc pro tune Serenissimus Prin-ceps talem se dat and constituit, and
ut illum possit obligare and obliget; Quod Dominam Seremssimam Infantem uti
suam talem Sponsam and uxorem legitimam accipiet, and quod ratum habebit, and
denuo per semet-ipsum approbabit and confirmabit praedictas Nuptias and
Matrimonium hu^us Mandati and facultatis vigore, nomine suo per dictos
Seremssimum Philippum 4. Regem Catholicum vel per Serenissimum Carolum,
Hispaniarum Infan-tem fratrem suum, celebratum and contractum; and quod in eo
perpetuo and individue dural it and permanebit, and si necessarium fuerit,
illud denuo per semetipsum contrahet, and celebrare, iuxta forma^u in praedicto
Tractatu Matrimoniali inter ipsum, and Majestatem Catholicam habito
praescriptam, verboque and side principalibus promisit se approbaturum,
confirmaturum and ratificaturum, gratum ratumque habiturum, and inviolabiliter,
firmiterque been and sideliter observaturum cum effectu and bona side, omni
exceptione and contradictione and causa cessante, quicquid hujus facult^tis
virtute modo and forma expressis, factum fuerit, non obstantibus quibuscunque
rationibus, causis, legibus, and opinionibus in contrarium; and quod hujusmodi
mandatum nec in toto aut in part nusquam revocabit, neque in aliquo detrahet
aut derogabit, sed in omnibus sirmiter and inviolabiliter observabit, and
tandem declarabit suae esse voluntatis, ut praedictus ^erenissimus Rex
Catholicus, vel Carolus ejus frater hoc mandato uti possint, usque in diem
Nativitatis Dominieae proxime venturum, nec in longius tempus protrahi, aut
extendi permittet. Quod totum actum fuit praesentibus Testibus ad id vocatis
Georgio Viller sio Buckingamiae Duce, Maris Anglicani Praefecte, Garterii
Ordinis Equite, Magnae Britanniae Regi a Consiliis Secretioribus and Equitis
sui Praeposito; juncto Iohanne Digbeio Bristolensi Comite, and de Secretioribus
Regis Magnae Britanniae Consiliis, and in Aula Catholicae Majestatis Legato
extraordinario; Gualtero Aston Equite Baronetto Balnii, Regis Magnae Britanniae
Cubiculario intimo, and ejusdem in Aula Majestatis Catholicae Oratore
ordinario, Emmanuele de Fonseca y Azuedo, Comite de Monterey and de Fuentes,
Supremi Italiae Senatus Praeside, and Majestati Catholicae a consiliis; Didaco
Sarmento de Acunia Comite de Gondomar, a secretioribus ejusdem Majestatis
Consiliis, and Aulae Praefecto; Didaco Capato Comite de Barajas, Commendatariae
de Montealegre, Ordinis Divi Iacobi Praefecturae insignito, and Aulae
Praefecto; Et manu propria subscripsit praedictus Serenis simus Princeps, and
suo sigillo munivit.

Carolus P.
Et eg^ Ioannes de Cirica publicus Majestatis Catholicae Notarius in omnibus
suis Regnis and Dominiis supradictis omnibus intersui, una cum Serenissimo
Carolo Walliae Principe, quem me cognoscere testor, and testibus
supramemoratis, and omnium fidem facio in eorum testimonium subscripsi and
signavi.

Joannes de Citica.




The King of Spain likewise promised to the Prince to consummate the Marriage
at Christmas, if the Prince would stay so long, as this Instrument manifests.

PHILIPPUS DEI GRATIA Hispaniarum, utriusque Siciliae, Jerusalem, Indiarum
Orientalium and Occidentalium, Insularum and continentis Maris Oceani, etc. Rex
Catholicus, Archi-Dux Austriae, Dux Burgundiae, Mediolani, etc. Comes Abspurgi,
Flandriae, Tirolis, etc.

Postquam Instrumento nuper transacto and concordato super futuro Matrimonio
inter Serenissimum Carolum eadem Divina Providentia Magnae Britanniae,
Franciae, Scotiae, and Hiber^ia Principem, and Serenissimam Mariam Infantem
Hispaniarum Sororem meam charissimam conventum and stipulatum fuisset, ut
ea^dem Sororem meam praefato Principi, vel ejus Procuratori seu Procuratoribus
ad id delegandis in manus tradere tene^^ tempore pri^ veris Anni proxime
sequentis Millesimi Sexcentesimi Vigesimi qua^^. Idem Serenissimus Carolus
Walliae Princeps a me instanter petiit, ut propter quasdam rations and
considerationes, Termini seu Temporis praememorati compendium facerem: Itaque
desiderio Ipsius quantum in me est satisfacere exoptans, indulsi and consensi,
ut si Ipse proximis Festis Natalitiis hic Madriti fuerit, tum Ma^imonium per
verba de praesenti pri^s contractum, consummare and ad desideratum sinem possit
perducere. Quae autem de traeditione Serenissimae Sororis meae praefato
Instrumento capitulata sunt, immutata and firma, uti concordata sunt, remanent,
quemadmodum extera omnia. In quorum fidem, hoc praesens Scriptum manu mea
subsignavi, and Sigillo meo communiri feci. Datum Ma^riti Anno Domini Mill
si^o Sexcentessi^o Vigesimo tertio, Mensis Augusti, die 8.

Philippus. Ioannes de Cirica


This being done, the Prince prepares for his return into England, what the
solemnities and manner of his departure were, and what presents were given on
both sides, you may read at large in the Page 554 to 560.
French Mercury, What jewels the Prince there gave away, appears by these two
Warrants, extracted out of the originals in parchment under the Princes own
hand and Seal. found among the Lord Cor^^ingtons writing^.

Charles P.

WE will and Command you to present in our name these our Jewels and precious
stones herein mentioned, unto such several persons as are in this our warrant,
nominated and particularly appointed, (that is to say^) To the Kings Majesty of
Spain the rich Sword that was lately our dear Brother Prince Henry's
garnished with Diamonds of several bignesses. To the Queen of Spain, the Eye
Diamond with a fair pear Pearl at it. To Don Carlos, A Ring made of a great
pointed Diamond that was in the Collar of Roses and Ciphers, weighing fourteen
Carrats, To the Infanta Cardinal, A Cross of six Table Diamonds, the middle
stone being the greatest in our round Jewel, which was broken to supply many
others herein mentioned: the other five stones were taken out of the Jewel of
twelve stones bought of Sir Peter Van Lore, and broken for the same use, and
one of the round Pearls of the head attire hanging to it; To the Infanta Donna
Maria the Chain of great round Pearls, to the number of two hundred
threescore and sixteen weighing nine ounces, the two Pendant Diamonds being
the two lesser of the three, were taken from a Necklace, A pair of pendant
Pearls of the fairest. The great Table Diamond set open without foil with a
pendant Jewel in form of an Ancor, made of two long sancet Diamonds without
foil, with a fair Diamond pendant. To the Conde de Olivares a great table
Diamond weighing eighteen Carrats which was the Duke of Buckinghams, set in a
Collar with one of the fairest pendant Pearls. To the Countess of Olivares,
the Jewel in form of the letter I, set with two large table Diamonds, and a
Diamond cut in faucets, with a small table Diamond and a fair pear Pearl
pendant. To the Conde de Olivares his Daughter, A Ring with a fair pointed
Diamond taken out of the Rose Collar. To the Duchess of Gandia, a Cross of
seven table Diamonds, the middle stone belonged to the Dukes Jewels; the rest
were taken out of the said Jewel of twelve stones, and one of the round
Pearls of the head attire hanging at it, To Don Maria De Land, a Cross of
ten thick table Diamonds bought of our servant Sir Edmond Varney. To the Ladies
of the Infanta's side these sixteen Jewels following: viz. the picture case
wherein the Pictures of our dear Parents the King and Queen were, and a
little Pendelock of six small Diamonds, and two great furnished by our Jeweller.
A pair of Pearl Bracelets, to which is added one small Rubie furnished by our
Jeweller. The Jewel of Diamonds in form of a Pelican, with a pendant Diamond
(furnished by our Ieweller) added to it, The Jewel of Diamonds in form of a
Phoenix with a Pear pendant Diamond, fellow to that on the Pelican, and one
other lesser pendant Diomond, both furnish by our Ieweller. A pair of Diamond
bracelets made of the eighteen pieces of Rose Diamonds heretofore in the Dukes
Hasband, A watch furnished by our Ieweller garnisht with Diamonds, to which
hangs one of the round Pearls, taken from the head attire. A Jewel furnish by
out Ieweller in form of a burning heart, with a large table Diamond in the
midst three faucet Diamonds on the top, and garnisht about with small
Diamonds, with one of our pendant Pearls hanging at it. A Jewel furnished by
our Ieweller in form of a blew Lilly, all Garnisht with Diamonds of several
sizes. A Jewel of a branch of Roses set all with Diamonds (furnished by our
Ieweller) to which is added a large faucet Diamond taken out of our round
Jewel, which was broken as a foresaid. A pair of Diamond Braceletts furnished
by our Ieweller with two table Diamonds, taken out of the Rose collar, A Cross
of thick Table Diamonds, bought here with a round Pearl taken from the head
attire. A Ring with four great faucet Diamonds and sundry smaller table
Diamonds set after the Spanish fashion and bought here, A Jewel in form of a
Cross with sixteen large table Diamonds and diverse small ones bought here, A
head-Lace of Diamonds with a large Rose of Diamonds in the midst bought here, A
another head-lace or a Pretadoz of Diamonds with a large Rose of Diamonds in the
midst, bought here, A pair of pendants for the Ears, all set with Diamonds,
bought here.

To the Duke of Infantado a Ring with a thick Table Diamond, that was in the
Duke of Buckinghams Jewel. To the Matquesse of Montesclaro, a Ring of three
large table Diamonds that were the Dukes: To the Marquess of Modejar a Ring of
two table Diamonds taken out of our round Jewel, and two square Table Diamonds
furnished by our Iewellet, To the Admiral of Castile, a Ring with a large thin
Table Diamond, that was the Dukes, To the Marquess of Castile Rodrigo, a Ring
with a large Diamond, and two Diamonds of a lesser sizetaken out of our round
Jewel. To Don Iaime de Cardenas, a Ring of a large faucet Diamond taken out of
our round Jewel and two table Diamonds furnished by our Ieweller. To the Duke
of Ijar a Ring with a larger thick table Diamond that was the Dukes and two
Diamonds furnished by our Ieweller. To the Duke of Zea, a Ring with a square
Table Diamond, taken out of our round Jewel, and two Diamonds furnished by our
Ieweller; To the Marquess of Carpio a Ring with a large table Diamond, and two
lesser, taken from our round Jewel. To the Marquess of Itona, a Ring with a
long table Diamond that was the Dukes. To Secretary Cerica, a Ring with three
faucet table Diamonds, whereof one was the Dukes, the other two were taken from
the Rose Collar. To the Conde de St. Estephen a Ring with a long table Diamond,
and two lesser taken out of our round Jewel. To Don Lewis de Haro a Ring with
a Square Table Diamond, and two lesser taken out of our round Jewel. To the
Conde de Portalegre, a Ring with a large Table Diamond that was the Dukes, and
two lesser Diamonds furnished by our Ieweller. To the Marquess of Vtlada, a
Ring with two long thick table Diamonds that were the Dukes, and two lesser
square Diamonds taken from our round Jewel, To the two Secretaries Alvis and
Antonio de Aloca, two Rings, one with a great faucet heart Diamond, taken out of
the Hatband of great Diamonds, the other with a large thick Table Diamond
furnished by our Ieweller. To the Conde de Buena vente, a Ring with a great
pointed Diamond taken out of the Rose Collar. To the Conde de Monteriey the
great Diamond Ring that was the Earl of Bristolls. To the Conde de Gondomar,
the Ring with a large pointed Diamond cut in faucets without foil brought out
of England. To the Conde de Barajas, A Ring with two long table Diamonds, that
were the Dukes, and two other Diamonds taken out of our round Jewel. To the
Bishop of Palencia; a Ring in form of a Crowned heart, with large faucet
Diamond, and set round with Diamonds, all furnished by our Jeweller. To the
Conde de Chinchone, a Ring with many Diamonds, set after the Spanish fashion,
bought of our servant Thomas Washington.

To the Cardinal Zapata the Cross of Gold having four large Diamonds cut in
fancets, and twelve small triangle Diamonds and a table Diamonds for the middle
stone, supplied out of the broken Collar. To the Kings Confessor the old Cross
with four Diamonds cut in faucets, and three Pearls pendant. To Don Farnando
Giron, A Cross with seven large table Diamonds, two of them were taken out of
out round Jewel, and five of them were the Dukes, with a Pendelock of a faucet
Diamond, furnished by our Jeweller. To the Bishop of Segovia, the Cross of five
large Diamonds cut in saucets, with a pendant Pearl newly added to it. To Don
Augustine Mexia, a fair Brooche of Gould, set full of Diamonds of several
siezes, and bought of Sir Peter Van Lore, in the midest whereof is a large
table Diamond that was the Dukes. To the Marquess De Flores, A great thin
table Diamond set in a Collet, heretofore belonging to the Duke. To the Conde
de la Puebla, the chain of Gold of eight and forty pieces, whereof four and
twenty are great, and four and twenty are small, Garnished with Diamonds, and
a picture Case furnished by our Jeweller, garnisht with Diamonds, having our
picture and a Cipher of our name. And these our letters shall be your
sufficient Warrant for the same. Signed with our own hand, and given under our
Signet at Madrid, the six and twentieth day of August, In the one and twentieth
year of the Reign of our dear Lord and Father, James by the grace of God
King of England, France, and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, etc. And of
Scotland the seven and fiftieth, 1623.

To Our Right trusty and welbeloved Spencer Lord Compton, Mr. of our Wardrobe
and Robes.

Charles P.

WE will and Command you; That you deliver to our use and service unto the
hands and Custody of the Right honorable John Earl of Bristoll, Lord
Ambassador extraordina^ie for his Majesty of great Britain our dear Father
to the King of Spain, such Jewels and precious stones as are mentioned in
this our Warrant, (That is to say) A Collar of Gold containing thirteen great
Ballaces, and thirteen pieces of Gold, with thirteen Cinque of Pearl betwixt
them, A long Chain of two large Ropes of fair round Pearls weighing ten
ounces and an half, and two penny weight, containing in number seven hundred
three score and five. A looking Glass set in Gold, the backside richly
garnisht with fair Diamonds and six pieces of Chain to hang at, garnisht with
Diamonds on both sides. One and twenty Buttons of gold, each one having a fair
Table Diamond; The Remainder of a neck-lace of Queen Annes, having in the
midst thereof a large Triangle Diamond, with a small Diamond pendant at the
same, also thirteen small pendent Diamonds, and seaventeene great round
Pearls. A Collar of Gold containing thirty pieces, whereof fifteen are
Roses, in each was a great pointed Diamond, and fifteen Crowns. Ciphers of
the King and Queens names, having in each a Table Diamond heretofore, out of
which was taken for our use four of the pointed, and six of the Table
Diamonds, So there are to be delivered to the said Earl of Bristall eleaven
pointed and nine Table Diamonds with the Collar, five great Emeraldes, and five
round Pearls that were taken out of a head attire. And this our letters shall
be your sufficient warrant for the same. Signed with our hand, and given under
our Signet at Madrid the eight and twentieth day of August; In the one and
twentieth year of the Reign of our Dear Lord and Father James by the Grace
of God King of England, France, and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc. And of
Scotland the seven and fiftieth. 1623.

To our right Trusty and welbeloved Spencer Lord Compton Mr. of our Wardrobe
and Robes.

THe ( M^rcure Franc. p. 560. to 571.
) 12. of September, 1623. After dinner the Prince took his solemno leave of
the King, and Court of Spain, and departed from Madrid toward Saint Andrews,
where the 24. of September he feasted all the Spanish Dons who accompanied him
aboard his ship, and then ^et sail for England; where he arrived at Portsmouth,
Octo. 5. and came thence into London, Octo. 6. to the great rejoicing of all
socts of people, signified by their bonefires, ringing of bells, with other
external expressions of joy. Upon his return thence Doctor Andrews made these
Latin verses.

ANglus connubium, connubia tractat Iberus,
Sic Mora producit, quod properavit Amor.
Pro nupta, nebula est, sponsam responsa retardant,
Pro taedis Caroliis taedia longa tulit.
Rumpe Moras Princeps, nebulam dispelle serenus,
Sitque serena tuis, te redeunte, dies.
Vel quoniam Angligenis nupsit Caterina duobus,
Tu Carole Austriacas (dum mora) sum duas.
AV^^riacam Carolus desict at amare puellam
V^ qui operam terra luserit atque mar^.
Gausa est quod tantos serus tentaverit ignes
Debuit Infantem sollicitasse Puer.
Sunt in amore morae, longum est percurrere gentis
Conjugii, mer^ic, religionis opus
At Carole exultes, peperit Regina Madriti,
Iam nova foelicis concipe vota proci.
I, propera, fidis defer mandata ministris,
Expedias naves, ingere calcar equis
Infant iun o^nis agi^a, ut potiaris adulta
Mat^ram sivis poscere, nubet a^us.
The Prince upon his departure commanded the Earl of Bristoll not to deliver
the Procuration left in his custody, until he received further order from him:
And upon his arrival in England the Duke of Buckingham, and Lords of the
Council, testifying their dislike of the match, endeavored to engage King
James to break it off by degrees; to which end they persuaded him to demand
restitution of the Palatinate and Electorship to the Pal^grave from the King of
Spain, to write to this purpose to the Earl of Bristoll, to that end and
likewise to delay the Disposorios till Christmas, To which Leettters the Earl
returned this answer. to Mr. Secretary Calvert.

GOOD Mr. Secretary Calvert, I have not presumed in my present letter unto his
Majesty, to write any thing in answer to his letters of the thirtieth of
December, but only in that point which touches my obedience to his
Commandment for my present return, for the rest I entreat you to present unto
his Majesty this my humble Answer; Whereas his Majesty is pleased to say, that
having seen the Answer to our third Memorial, he does not a little wonder,
that I then took his affairs to have been in so good a condition that I would
have proceeded to the disposories of the Prince contrary to his order given; It
is true his Majesty has just cause to wonder, if he look upon that Memorial
without the letter that accompanied it, or if he consider the estate of the
affairs as they stood when the letter bore Date, which was the sixth of
December; for then they stood by the infringing of the capitulation, as they
here do understand it, all disordered and imbroyled, in such sort as I had
foreseen and advertized his Majesty. But the estate of affairs ten or
fiveteene days before, when I intended to have passed to the disposotios, I
confess I supposed to be such, that I wish I had suffered much that they were
again upon the same term, if his Majesty have a desire to proceed with this
Alliance and to settle the business of the Palatinate, by this Kings help and
mediation.

First for the business of the Match, against which it has been the maine
objection that it was never really meant, but only held in Treaty to abuse and
entertain the King, it was now certainly to have taken effect within three
days, viz. on the twentieth of November, had not the restraint arryved here on
the 26th: and all things would have been most exectly and punctually performed
according to the capitulation, and here was no thought of any thing but of
providing Presents for the King and Prince, and settling of the Princesses
Family, and preparations for the journey the first day of March, and the
Princess had begun to draw the letters which she intended to have written the
day of the desposories to the Prince her Husband, and the King her Father in
law.

For the business of the Palatinate, as it will appear by the joint dispatch
which: Sir Walter Aston, and my self wrote of the 23. of November, that we
were assured not by the Conde of Olivares only in this Kings name, but
severally by all the Counselors, that a settled resolution was taken in
Council on the 16. of November That this King should procure his Majesty's
entire satisfaction, and hereof the Cardinal Capata and diverse other
Counselors that professed themselves particularly affected to the King and
Princes service, came to give Sir Walter Ashton and my self the Parabien.

The Conde of Olivares entreated us both in this Kings name, to assure his
Majesty thereof upon our honors, and upon our lives if need were and thus much
was to have been delivered unto us in writing before we would have passed to
the Disposorios as will plainly apeare by this above mentioned dispatch of the
23. of November.

Besides the Princes had now made this business her own, and had therein most
earnestly moved the King her Brother, and written unto the Conde of Olivares,
and had set her heart upon the making of her self grateful and welcome to the
King and Kingdom by overcomming this business: further, I conceive it has
been and is the general opinion of wise men, that his Majesty could have no
such assurance of this Kings real intention of giving his Majesty
satisfaction, in the business of the Palatinate as that he proceeded really to
the performance of the Match, and that this was the opinion of his Majesty, and
all my Lords, and the ground whereupon I was to frame all my Negotiation in
this particular; I shall procure very authentical proof, and if I had but
half so clear a warrant for the hazarding of the Match by the deferring of
the Disposorios as I have for the making of the concluding of the match, the
rule for my proceeding in the business of the Palatinate, I should not have
replied for a further explanation of his Majesty's pleasure, nor have been
questionable for an intention of going against my Order.

For the point of the Portion, it was agreed that I should have had three
hundred thousand Crowns paid at Twelfe-tide the other 30000. which were
formerly spoken of to have been carried in Jewels with the Infanta, they were
content that the Princes should have carried 20000. Crowns in ready money, and
only 10000. in Jewels: for the rest, if the manner of payment that was
propounded had not liked his Majesty, they were resolved to have given his
Majesty other satisfaction at reasonable days, as should be agreed of,
although I must here crave leave to let his Majesty know, that having two
Months before advertized this offer, I never understood of his Majesty's
dislike or rejection of it by his letters of the thirteenth of November, which
likewise commanded the putting off of the disposorios.

And this was the true estate of his Majesty's affairs, as it appeared unto me
and those with whom I was to communicate his Majesty's business, when I
intended to have proceeded to the disposorios if in the interim I should not
receive his Majesteis directions to the contrary, which I was most assured of
in case his Majesty should not like of that intention.

As for the other point, that I should have intended to have passed the
disposorios contrary to the order given me, certainly I erred not with any
malice or intention of having stolen a Marriage upon my Master against his will,
for if I had, supposing I wanted sufficient warrant to have stayed the
Disposorios, I would have concealed it, and so passed on, and not have, sent
with so much diligence to have a clear u^derstanding of his Majesty's
pleasure, neither would I with so great industry and great displeasure have
prolonged the twenty four to thirty days, and then so exactly and readily
obeyed, when I had a cle^e understanding of my Masters will: for the first
thing I did, was instantly within few hours to send back Peter Killigrew to
let his Majesty know, that his orders should be most punctually obeyed, and so
they should have been before, if I had not understood that the nomination of a
holy day in Christmas (whereof I wonder how his Majesty could want due
information of the expyring of the the Powers) had not overthrown all his
Majesty's intention^ and desires in his very letter expressed, and hereof by
due obedience unto the Prince his order formerly, upon the scruple of the
Infantaes entering into Religion, may be a sufficient argument.

I will not trouble you with any further Apology, only I shall humbly offer
unto his Majesty and my Lords consideration: First, that I understood the
Infanta to be my young Masters Wife, or spouse at least, for such was now her
style, and as such was I enjoynd to serve her, and as such my Lord Duke and my
self, and all the English kissed her hands, as her servants and Vassalls.

Secondly the Powers were drawn by the intervention of both parties, The King
of Spain accepting the substitution, and the Prince delivering of them legally
to the King of Spain and his Brothers use.

These powers were deposited in my hands upon trust as Ambassador of the King
of great Britain, with public Declaration, how and when I was to deliver
them, and this drawn into an Instrument by Iuan de Cirica as public Notarie;
and this point is here much pressed, and I conceive many Pens will be employed
about the case.

Thirdly I ever understood, that my Master infinitely desired the Match, and the
Prince in his letters at the very same time expresses, that he much desires
it: besides the engagements that have here passed recyprocally, are public to
the world.

I shall willingly now submit my self to any censure, which, whether were the
honester, dutifuller, or more prudent way upon inference and collections to
have put a disgrace and disrespect upon so great and worthy a Princess that
was to be his Masters wife, to have no way insisted for the making good of the
public trust reposed in him, by two so great Monarchs, when the powers were
deposited in his hands, but to have put a great scorn upon the King of Spain
by nominating a day for the Marriage when the powers should be expired, to have
hazzarded the overthrowing of so great and important a business (for to that
issue it was brought, and I required to take or leave, either to proceed
according to their capitulations, or that this King would hold himself freed
of them, and the issue now shows the truth thereof (or on the other side) to
have represented unto his Mastjesty with truth and syncerity the true estate of
all things, with his humble opinion the wrong and disgrace that the putting off
the Marriage will be esteemed to the person of the Infanta, the scorn that
would be judged to be put upon the King of Spain, by the nominating of a day
when the powers were expired. The hard construction that would be made upon the
detention of the powers without some new and immergent cause. The danger that
the Marriage would be in if hereby it should be disordered; The likelihood that
the Match would be the greatest security for the restitution of the Palatinate,
and i^ case these reasons should not be able to persuade his Majesty to
proceed, then there was intimated, that there wanted sufficient warrant for the
detaining of the powers, which was desired might be clearly sent unto him. In
this interim all the above^ said inconveniences were deferred, and that business
held up upon fair terms, that his Majesty might have his way and choice
unsoild before him, until his Majesty was pleased clearly and positively to
declare his pleasure in the point, whereunto there was ready and exact
obedience given: so that I shall willingly submit my self to the censure of
the world, whether an inintention so well and honestly grounded, seconded with
so exact and ready an obedience shall make me blame worthy, I must confess
that if with out clear and sufficient warrant, I had so much disordered the
affairs of his Majesty as I now conceive them to be, I should have had a heavy
and sad heart, which I thank God I now have not; but confident of mine own
innocence, I can be no ways diffident of my Masters accustomed Grace and
favor. And so earnestly entreating you to present this my humble Answer to
his Majesty and my Lords the Commissioners, I remember my service affectionatly
unto you, and leave you to Gods holy protection.

Mad. the 28. Octb. 1623. Your affectionat friend to do you service. BRISTOLL.


To this Letter the King returned this ensuing Answer.

WE have read your Letters of the 28. of October and the copy of that power
which was left by Our dear Son, We have examined and approved your reasons,
and we do assure you^ that if we had seen the power left by our son before
our last Letters, we had not written to you in the form we did in ours of
October the ninth, touching the time of Christmas. For we are so far from
having affection to defer the Desposorios, or make them fruitless, as we
desire to hasten them to a speedy good conclusion, being of the like affection
with our dear brother of Spain, with one act to make a match, and an entire
friendship according to the Count, of Olivares his ground formerly delivered to
our Son and Buckingham, and mentioned in your own letter, for the real
effecting of which we have thought good to command our dear Son to defer
the present execution of the powers left, and to renew the power by another
herewith sent, that there may be no fault in us not in our Son, if that King
cannot give us satisfaction in the just things we desire, (which will contain
the maine ground of our friendship) in so short a time in which the first power
should become inualid.

And yet we must tell you, we have almost with astonishment observed one action
of so great Checque and contradiction of our hope of the restitution of the
Palatinate, as we know not what construction to make of it. The Berkstrot in
the Palatinate (the prime flower of our son in Laws Revenue which is the
maine motive that causes us thus carefully and speedily to seek satisfaction,
and urge so earnestly till we may receive it) and which was taken by the Arms
and assistance of Spain, and as we are informed in the possession of the
Spanish Garrison, or under their command, the Country or the revenue thereof
(which is a fortifying of their ancient claim) freshly delivered into the
hands of the Bishop of Mentz, contrary to the last contract between his
Majesty and the Infanta at Bruxelles, and that without form of justice, upon
an old pretense which must imbroyle it the more, especially being to another
person then any of these to whom interest or mediation has been formerly
thought of; These being only the Emperor, Spain, and the Duke of Bavaria. The
consideration of which new difficulties done in the presence, or without the
contradiction either of Verdugo, or any other Officer or Minister of the
Infanta's, or knowledge given to us, gives us infinitely to think, and to
find it requisite to deal clearly and plainly with you, and to charge and
require you to deal as plainly with our dear Brother, that we are so much
bound in honor, natural affection, and interest to see our Sonne-in-Law have
restitution of his estate and honor; without which effect, we cannot rest
satisfied, as you have often heard the Declaration of our mind in that point:
the rather, because it would be a great discouragement to our Son-in-Law
(without whom we can do nothing) and a great disproportion to receive one
daughter in joy and contentment, and leave another in toares and sighs. And to
the end we may be assured of the effects, we require you (before you deliver
our dear Sons power, or move to any contracting of him) that you procure
from that King by act, or answer to you under his hand, or by Letters to us,
that he will help us to the restitution of the Palatinate and dignity by
meditation, or other wise assist us, if mediation fail, and within what time
the mediation shall determine, and the assistance of arms begin.

The honorable conditions of restitution (we hope) remain with you. And to
show you how we desire to comply with our dear Brother of Spain: We shall be
ready to propound good ways to satisfy the D. of Bavaria, in point of title
and honor, and to continue our negotiation for the match of Our Grandchild
(the eldest son of our Sonne-in-Law) with the Daughter of the Emperor.

Our Sonne-in-Laws Letters we send you herewith, and because we know his
averseness to our Grand-Childs breeding with the Emperor, as we do the other
parts disaffection to have him bred at the Hagh, (which we cannot wonder at)
our own care considered for his breeding in Religion, which cannot well be
provided for there, NOTE.
we shall be ready to proceed to the conclusion of that Treaty: And so soon as
the Infanta shall be arrived in our Court, to bring our Grandchild to be bred
with our Son and her, and in her presence.

And for the temporal articles which are so meanly presented in those heads
you sent us, we forheare to tell you what we think of the offers.

And concerning the portion, we absolutely reject both Jewels or yearly
revenue (as contrary to the first agreement) and expect the total sum in
Specie, according to such reasonable times as shall be agreed upon. So as we
likewise require you punctually to conclude the Temporal Articles before you
deliver the power.

At Westminster 13. Novem. 1623. Edw. Conwey.


To this Letter the Earl of Bristoll returns this answer.

May it please your most Excellent Majesty;
I Have received Your Majesty's Letters of the 8. of October, on the 21, of the
same month, some hours within night, and have thought fit to dispath back
un-Your Majesty with all possible speed, referring the answer to what Your
Majesty has by Letters commanded me, to a Post, that I shall purposely
dispatch when I shall have negotiated the particulers with this King and his
Ministers, wherein God willing all possible diligence shall be used.

But for as much as I find both by Your Majesty's said Letters, as likewise by
Letters which I have received from the Prince His High^esse, that you continue
your desires of having the match proceeded in, I held it my duty, that Your
Majesty should be informed, that although I am set free in as much as
concerns the doubt of the Infantaes entering into Religion, for the delivering
of the powers left with me by his Highness, yet by this new direction I now
receive from your Majesty, that the Desposorios should be deferred until
Christmasse, the said powers are made thereby altogether useless and invalid,
it being a clause in the body of the said powers, that they shall only remain
in force until Christmas and no longer; as Your Majesty will see by the Copy
of them, which I send here enclosed: Your Majesty, I conceive, will be of
opinion, that the suspending of the execution of the powers, until the force
and validity of them be expired is a direct and effectual revoking of them,
which not to do how fa^re his Highness is in Honor engaged, Your Majesty
will be best able to judge by viewing the powers themselves.

Further if the Date of these Powers do expire (besides the breach of the
Capitulations) although the Match it self should not by jealousies and
mistrusts be hazarded, yet the Princesses coming at the spring into England
will be almost impossible; for by that time new Commissions and Powers shall be
(after Christmas) granted to the Prince, which must be to the satisfaction of
both parties, I conceive so much of the year will be spent, that it will be
impossible for the Fleets and other preparations to be in a readiness against
the Spring; for it is not to be imagined that they will here proceed
effectually with their preparations, until they shall be assured of the
Desposorios, especially when they shall have seen them several times deferred
on the Princes part, and that upon pretexts that are not new nor grown since
the granting of the Powers, but were before in being, and often under debate,
and yet were never insisted upon to make stay of the business, So that it will
seem, that they might better have hindered the granting of them then, then the
execution of them now, if there were no staggering in former Resolutions: which
although really there is not, yet cannot it but be suspected, and the cleating
of it between Spain and England will cost much time, I most humbly crave your
Majesty's pardon if I write unto you with the plainness of a true-hearted and
faithful servant, who ever have co-operated honestly unto your Majesty's ends,
if I knew them. I know your Majesty has long been of opinion, that the
greatest assurance you could get that the King of Spain would effectually
labor the entire restitution of the Prince Palatine, was, that he really
proceeded to the effecting of the March, and my Instructions under your
Majesty's hand were to insist upon the restoring of the Prince Palatine, but
not so to annex it to the treaty of the Match, as that thereby the Match should
be hazarded, for that your Majesty seemed confident, they here would never
grow to a perfect conclusion of the Match, without a settled resolution to give
your Majesty satisfaction in the business of the Palatinate; the same course I
observed in the carriage of business by his Highness, and my L. Duke at their
being here, who though they insisted upon the business of the Palatinate, yet
they held it fit to treat of them distinctly, and that the Marriage should
preceed as a good pawn for the other. Since-their departure my Lord
Ambassador, Sir Walter Aston, and my self have much pressed to have this Kings
resolution in writing concerning the Palatinate, and the dispatches which your
Majesty will receive herewith concerning that business were written before the
receipt of these your Majesty's Letters, and doubtless it is now a great part
of their care that that business may be well ended before the Infantaes,
coming into England; And his Highness will well remember that the Conde de
Olivares often protested the necessity of having this business compounded and
settled before the Marriage, saying; otherwise, they might give a Daughter and
have a War within three months after, if this ground and subject of Quarrel
should be still left on foot, The same language he has ever since held with
Sir Walter Aston and my self, and that it was a firm peace and amity, as much
as an alliance which they sought with his Majesty, so that it is not to be
doubted, but that this King concluding the Match, resolves to employ his
utmost power for the satisfaction in the restitution of the Prince Palatine.

The question now will be, whether the Prince Palatine, having Relation to many
great Princes that are interessed therein (living at a great distance) and
being indeed for the condition and nature of the business it self impossible
to be ended, but by a formal Treaty (which of necessity will require great
length) whether the conclusion of the Match shall any way depend upon the issue
of this business, which I conceive to be lat from your Majesty's Intention,
for so the Prince might be long kept unbestowed, by any averseness of those
that might have particular Interest in the Princes remaining unmarried, or
dislike of his Matching with Spain: But that which I understand to be your
Majesty's aim, is only to have the conclusion of this Match accompanied with
as strong engagements as can be procured from this King, for the joining with
your Majesty, not only in all good offices for the entire Restitution of the
Prince Palatine, but otherwise if need require, of his Majesty's assistance.
Herein I have these days past labored with all earnestness, and procured
this Kings public answer, which I am told is resolved of, and I shall within
few days have it to send unto Your Majesty, as likewise a private proposition
which will be put into your hand, and shall not fail further to pursue Your
Majesty's present directions of procuring this Kings declaration in what sort
your Majesty may rely upon this Kings assistance in case the Emperor or the
Duke of Bavaria shall oppose the entire restitution of the Prince Palatine; But
I conceive it to be Your Majesty's intention, that I should procure here first
this Kings peremptory answer, in the whole business, and how he will be
assistant unto your Majesty, in case of the Emperors, or Duke of Bavaria's
averseness, and that I should send it unto your Majesty, and receive again
your answer, before I deliver the powers for the Desposorios, the match would
thereby if not be hazarded, yet I conceive the Infanta's going at Spring would
be rendered altogether impossible; for if upon the artivall of the Popes
approbation, which is hourly expected, the Powers be demanded of me, according
to the Princes public Declaration, and the agreement in the Temporal
Articles, by which the Desposorios, are to be within 10. days after the
coming of the said approbation, I cannot refuse them but upon some ground^ If
I allege you Majesty's desire of having the Desposorios deferred until
Christmas, they know as well as my self, that his Highness Proxy is then out
of dare (besides the infringing of the Capitulations) and they will judge it as
a great scorn put upon this King, (who ever since the Princes granting of his
Powers, has called himself the Infanta's Desposado, and to that effect the
Prince has written unto him in some of his Letters:) besides it will be here
held a point of great dishonor unto the Infanta, if the powers called for by
her friends they should be deteyned by the Princes part, and whosoever else may
have deserved ill, she certainly has deserved neither disrespect nor
discomforts: Further, upon my refusal to deliver the powers, all preparations
which now go on cheerfully and apace, will be stayed, and there will enter in
so much distrust and so many jealousies, that if the maine business run not
hazard by them, at least much time will be to clear them.

I must therefore in discharge of my duty, tell Your Majesty, that all your
businesses here are in a fair way. The match and all that is capitulated
therein, they profess punctually to perform: in the business of the
Palatinate, they protest that they infinitely desire and will to the utmost of
their powers, endeavor to procure His Majesty's satisfa^tion. The Prince is
like to have a most worthy and virtuous Lady, and who much ^oveth him, and all
things else depending on this match are in a good and a hopeful way.

This is now the present estate of your Majesty's affairs as it appears unto
me and to Sir Walter Aston, with whom I have communicated this dispatch, as I
do all things else concerning your Majesty's service: And I must clearly let
your Majesty understand, that I conceave by reteyning of the powers when their
King shall call for them, and offering to defer the Desposorios until
Christmas, that your Majesty's businesses will run a great hazard, what by
the distasts and distrusts that will be raised here, and what by the art and
industry of those which are enemies to the Match, whereof every Court of
Christendom has plenty; That therefore which I presume with all humility to
offer unto your Majesty is, that you would be pleased to give me order with
all possible speed, That when the business shall come cleared from Rome, and
that the powers for the Marriage shall be demanded of me on the behalf of
this King, that I may deliver them, and no ways seek to interrupt or suspend
the Desposorios, but assist and help to a perfect conclusion of the match. And
that for the business of the Palatinate, I continue my earnest and faithful
endeavors to engage this King as far as shall be possible, both for the
doing of all good Offices for the Prince Palatines entire restitution, as
likewise for this Kings Declaration of assistance in case the Emperor or Duke
of Bavaria shall oppose the said restitution. Herein I will not fail to use
all possible means, and I conceive the dispatch of the match will be a good
pawn in the business, and the help and assistance which the Princes being once
betroathed would be able to give in this Court to all Your Majesty's
businesses, would be of good consideration. So fearing I have already too far
presumed upon Your Majesty's patience, I humbly crave Your Majesty's pardon,
and recommend you to the holy protection of God, Resting

Your Majesty's most humble Subject, and Servant, BRISTOLL,
Madrid: 24. Octo. 1623.

About the beginning of December the Dispensation from the new Pope arrived at
Madrid from Rome; Mercur Fran. Tom 9. An. 1624. p. 34, 35, 36, 37.
whereupon the King of Spain to satisfy his Oath made to the Prince of Wales
before his departure, (to make the espousalls within ten days after the
arrival of the dispensation, caused Bonfiers of joy to be made throughout all
Spain on the 9th of December. intending that on this day the assiances should be
made at Madrid, with the magnificence of the Court there. All things seemed
then disposed to a conclusion of this great business which had been in treaty
eight or nine years. But the Princes forementioned) suspention of the
procuration, and the demand of those new conditions arriving in Spain, the
news of them seemed very strange and unseasonable. To which the King of
Spain, promising to give a resolution in due time, signified to the Earl of
Bristoll, that he should in the mean time present no more Letters to the
Infanta, nor demand any more audience, and that from thenceforth, none should
style the Infanta, Princess of England, or Wales. Upon this there was a
resolution taken by our Lords of the Council to break both the Match and
Treaty with Spain, and to gain the Palatinate and Electorship by force of
Arms; to which end a Parliament was summoned at London to begin, Feb. 12^
1623. but put off till Febr. 16. On Febr. 24. The Lord Duke of Buckingham made
a large Relation of the whole Negotiation with Spain about the Princes Marriage,
to both Houses of Parliament, recorded in the Lords Iournall and enrolled in
the Prima pars Pet: 21. Iac: n: 21:
Rolls; wherein most of the premises are related to the full, and some of them
concealed: which the dishdent Author of the Answer to the Royal Popish
Favorite, (who so much Page 34, 44.
undervalues the French Mercury, and other histories, who have written any
thing of this Match,) may peruse at his leisure, to satisfy his judgment,
Conscience in the verity of the premises, and of this Mercury to.

The Parliament upon this relai^on ad^vised the King to break off the Spanish
treaty and to proclaim an open war with Spain for recovery of the
Palatinate and defense of the protestant Religion: Se the Lords Iournall, And
Archbishops Diary March 23.
whereupon the King on the 23 of February; declared to a Committee of
Parliament appointed for that purpose; That he would send a Messenger presently
into Spain, to signify to that King, that his Parliament advised him to
break of the Treaties of the Match and the Palatinat, and to give his reasons
of it, and so proceed to recover the Palatinate as he might. Hereupon Bonefires
were made in the City by the forwardness of the people, for joy that we should
break with Spain.

In this Parliament to maintain the war in which they had engaged the King,
See 21, Iac. c. 32. 33.
the Clergy granted him four entire Subsidies of four shillings the pound: and
the Temporalty three entire Subsidies, and three fifteens and tenthes; The end
of granting them is expressed in the Prologue of the Temporalities Act of Grant.

MOST 21. lac c. 33
Gracious Sovereign, we your Majesty's most humble, faithful and loving
Subjects, by your Royal Authority now Assembled in your High Court of
Parliament, having entered into serious and due consideration of the weighty and
most important causes, which at this time more then at any other time
heretofore, do press your Majesty to a much greater expense and charge then
your own Treasure alone can at this present support and maintain, and
likewise of the injuries and indignities, which have been lately offered to
your Majesty and your Children, under color, and during the time of the
Treaties for the Marriage with Spain, and the restitution of the Palatinate,
which in this Parliament have been clearly discovered and laid open unto us;
and withal what humble advice with one consent and voice, we have given unto
your Majesty to dissolve those Treaties, which your Majesty has been
graciously pleased (to our exceeding joy and comfort) fully to yield unto, and
accordingly have made your public declaration for the real and utter
dissolution of them, by means whereof your Majesty may happily be engaged in a
sudden War. We in all humbleness most ready and willing to give unto your
Majesty and the whole world an ample testimony of our dutiful affections, and
sinceere intentions to assist You therein, for the maintenance of that War
that may hereafter ensue, and more particularly for the defense of this your
Realm of England, the securing of your Kingdom of Ireland, the assistance of
your Neighbors, the States of the united Provinces, and other your Majesty's
Friends, and Allies, and for the setting forth of your Royal Navy, we have
resolved to give for the present the greatest aid which ever was granted in
Parliament, to be levied in so short a time, etc.

In this Parliament the Commons presented a sharp Petition to the Lords
against Popish, NOTE.
Recusants, desiring the Lords to join with them in it to the King; of which
King James having notice, writ with his own hand this following letter to
Secretary Conway, which I have truly extracted out of the very original.

I doubt not but you have heard what a stinging Petition against the Papists,
the lower House have sent to the higher House this day, that they might jointly
present it unto me: ye know my firm resolution, not to make this a War of
Religion. And seeing I would be loath to be Connycatched by my people, I pray
you stay the Post that is going to Spain, till I meet with my Son, who will be
here to morrow morning, do it upon pretext of some more letters ye are to send
by him and if he should be gone, hasten after him to stay him upon some such
pretext, and let none living know of this, as ye love me: and before two in the
afternoon to morrow you shall with out sail hear from me: Farewell.

James R.


This Petition was sent up to the Lords (as appears by their 3 Apr^^^ 1624.
Iournall Book) upon the 3. of April 1624. the Copy whereof is therein
recorded in form following.

Die Lunae quinto Aprilis 1624. The Petion against Popish Recusaurs which the
Commons desire to be presented unto his Majesty, and that the Lords join with
them therein.
May it please your most Excellent Majesty.
WE your Majesty's most humble and loyal Subjects the Lords and Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, having to our singular comfort received your
Princely resolution upon our humble Petition to disolve the two treaties of the
Match and of the Pallatinate, and having on our parts with all alacrity and
readiness humbly offered our assistance to your Majesty to maintain the
War, which may ensue there upon, yet with all sencibly finding what seditious
and Traitorous positions those Incendiaries of Rome, and professed Engines of
Spain, the Priests and Jesuits, infuse into your natural borne Subjects, what
numbers they have seduced, and do daily seduce to make their dependence on the
Pope of Rome, and King of Spain, contrary to their Allegiance to your Majesty
their Liege Lord: what daily resort of Priests and Jesuits into your
Kingdoms, what concourse of Popish Recusants much more then usual is now in
and about the City of London, NOTE.
what boldness, yea what insolency they have discovered, out of the opinion
conceived of their foreign patronage, what public resort to Masses and
other exercises of the Popish Religion in the Houses of foreign Ambassadors,
there is daily, to the great grief and offense of your good Subjects; what
great preparations are made in Spain fit for an Invasion; the bent whereof is
as probable to be upon some part of Your Majesty's Dominions, as upon any
other place; what encouragement that may be to your Enemies, and the Enemies
of Your Crown to have a party, or but the opinion of a party within Your
Kingdoms, who do daily increase and combine themselves together for that
purpose; What dishartning of your good and loving Subjects, when they shall see
more cause of fear from their false hearted Countrymen at home, then from
their professed adversaries abroad, what apparent dangers by Gods providence
and Your Majesty's wisdom and goodness they have very lately escaped, which
the longer continuance of those treaties upon such unfitting conditions,
fomented by your own ill affected Subjects, NOTE.
would surely have drawn upon Your Majesty and Your State; do in all
humbleness offer to your sacred Majesty these their humble petitions
following.

1. That all Jesuits and Semminary Priests, and all others having taken Orders
by any authority derived from the Sea of Rome, may by Your Majesty's
Proclamation be commanded forthwith to depart out of this Realm, and all other
Your Highness Dominions, and neither they nor any other to return or come
hither again upon perrill of the severest penalty of the Laws now in force
against them; And that all your Majesty's Subjects may hereby also be
admonished, not to receive, entertain comfort or conceal any of that viperous
brood upon the penalties and forfeitures which by the Laws may be imposed upon
them.

2. That your Majesty would be pleased to give straight and speedy charge to
the Justices of Peace in all parts of this Kingdom, that (according to the
Laws in that behalf made, and the orders taken by Your Majesty's Privy
Council heretofore for policy of State) they do take from all Popish
Recusants legally convicted, or justly suspected; All such Armor, Gunpowder,
and Munition of any kind, as any of them have either in their own hands, or
in the hands of any other for them, and to see the same safely kept, and
disposed according to the Law, leaving for the necessary defense of their House
and persons, so much as by the Law is prescribed.

3. That Your Majesty will please to command all popish Recusants, and all
others, who by any Law or Statute are prohibited to come to the Kings Court,
forthwith under pain of your heavy displeasure, and severe execution of your
Laws against them, to retire themselves, their wives and families from or
about London, to their several dwellings or places, by your Laws appointed,
and there to remain confined within five miles of their dwelling places,
according to the Laws of this your Realm, And for that purpose to discharge
all bypast Lycences granted unto them for their repair hither. And that they
presume not any time hereafter to repair to London, or within ten miles of
London, or to the Kings Court, or to the Princes Court wheresoever.

4. That Your Majesty would forbid and restrain the great resort and concourse
of your own Subjects for the hearing of Mass, or other exercise of the Romish
Religion to the houses of Foreign Ambassadors, or Agents residing here, for
the service of their several Princes or States.

5. That where of late in several Counties in this Realm, some have bin
trusted in the places of Lord Leiutenants, deputies Leiutenants, Commissioners
of Oyer and Terminer, Justices of Peace, and Captains in their Countries,
which are either popish Recusants or non-Communicants by the space of a year
now last past, or which do not usually resort to the Church to Divine service,
and can bring no good certificat thereof, that your Majesty would be pleased to
discharge them from those places of trust, by which they have that power in the
Country where they live, as is not fit to be put into the hands of persons so
affected.

6. That your Majesty would be pleased generally to put the Laws in due
execution which are made and stand in force against Popish Recusants, and that
all your Judges, Justices and Miniisters of Justice to whose care these things
are Committed may by your Majestyes Proclamation be Commanded to do their duty
therein.

7. That seeing we are thus happily delivered from that danger which those
Treaties now dissolved, and that use which your NOTE.
ill affected Subjects made thereof, would certainly have drawn upon us, and
cannot but foresee and fear, least the like may heareafter happen, which would
unevitably, bring such peril to your Majesty's Kingdoms. We are most humble
suitors to your Gracious Majesty to secure the hearts of your good Subjects by
the engagement of your Royal word unto them, that upon no occasion of
Marriage, or Treaty, or other request in that behalf from any foraign Prince
or state whatsoever, you will take off, or slacken the execution of your Laws
against the Popish Recusants.

To which our humble Perions proceeding from our most Loyal and dutiful
affections toward your Majesty our care of our Countries good, and our
confident perswation; that this will much advance the Glory of Almighty God,
the everlasting honor of your Majesty, the safety of your Kingdom, and the
encouragment of all your good Subjects: We do most humbly beseech your Majesty
to vouchsafe a gracious Answer.


This Petition of the Commons after some debate and Conference between both
Houses was reduced to this ensuing form, and so presented to King ^ James.

See the Lords parchment Iournall on this day.
Die Sabbathi (viz) decimo die Aprilis 1624. May it please your most excellent
Majesty
IT having pleased you, upon our humble suit and advise, to dissolve both the
Treaties to our great joy and comfort.

We your Majesty's most faithful and Loyal Subjects the Lords and Commons
Assembled in Parliament, do in all humbleness offer unto your sacred Majesty
these two Petitions following.

1. That for the more safety of your Realms, and better keeping your Subjects
in their due obedience, and other important reasons of state, your Majesty
would be pleased by some such course as your Majesty shall think fit, to give
present order, that all the Laws be put in due execution, which have been
made, and do stand in force against Jesuits, Semenary Priests, and all others
having taken orders by Authority derived from the Sea of Rome, and generally
against all Popish Recusants. And as for disarming, that it may be according to
the Laws, and according to former Acts and directions of state in that Case,
and yet that it may appear to all the world, the favor and clemency your
Majesty uses toward all your Subjects of what condition whatsoever. And to
the intent the Jesuits and Priests now in the Realm may not pretend to be
surprised; That a speedy and certain day may be perfixed by your Majesty's
Proclamation, before which day they shall depart out of this Realm, and all
other your highness Dominions, and neither they nor any other to return or
come hither again, upon peril of the severest penalties of the laws now in
force against them. And that all your Majesty's Subjects may thereby also be
admonished, not to receive, entertain, comfort, conceal any of them, upon the
penalties and forfeitures which by the laws may be imposed on them.

Secondly, seeing we are thus happily delivered from that danger which those
Treaties now dissolved, and that use which your ill affected Subjects made
thereof, would certainly have drawn upon us; and yet cannot but foresee and
fear, least the like may hereafter happen, which would inevitably bring such
peril upon your Majesty's Kingdoms: We are most humble Suitors to your
gracious Majesty, to secure the hearts of your good Subjects by the engagement
of your royal word unto them, that upon no occasion of marriage or treaty, or
other request in that behalf from any foreign Prince or State whatsoever,
you will take away or slacken the execution of your laws against Jesuits,
Priests and popish Recusants.

To which our humble Petitions, proceeding from our most loyal and dutiful
affections toward your Majesty, our care of our Countries good, and our own
confident persuasion, that these will much advance the glory of Almighty God,
the everlasting honor of your Majesty, the safety of your Kingdoms, and the
encouragement of all your good Subjects; we do most humbly beseech your
Majesty to vouchsafe a gracious answer.


This Petition being presented to the King by a Committee of both Houses; the
King after some deliberation, gave this Answer to it; That the laws against
Jesuits, and popish Recusants, should be put in^due execution from thenceforth,
etc. Whereupon the Commons soon after sent another Petition to the Lords
(desiring their concurrence with them in presenting it to his Majesty) for
removing popish Recusants, and those whose Wives were Papists, from offices of
trust which by law they were disabled to execute, which the Lords taking into
consideration. It was after reported to the Lords, and entered in their Journall
in this manner.

Die Iovis (viz) vicessimo die Maij, 1624.
The Lord Archbishop of Canterbury reported, that at the meeting this day with
the Commons, they presented an humble Petition to the King, desiring this House
to join with them (therein as heretofore.)

The which Petition was read in haec verba, viz.

WE your Majesty's loyal and faithful Subjects, the Commons (by your royal
Authority and commandment called to, and Assembled in this present Parliament,
out of all the parts of your Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales) do in
all humility give your Majesty most humble thanks, that you have so religiously
and openly published, that your laws and acts of State against popish
Recusants shall be put in due execution; and now we hold it our bounden duty
(amongst other important affairs of your Realm) to inform your Majesty of
the growth of this dangerous sort of people in this your Kingdom, and of their
insolency and boldness in all the parts thereof, insomuch as many of them
(unknown to your Majesty) have crept into offices and places of government and
authority under you, to the disheartning of you good Subjects, and contrary to
your Majesty's laws and acts of State, whose names (in discharge of our
allegiance and duty without respect of persons) we in all humbleness present
to your Majesty, etc.

Now in consideration of the great countenance hereby given unto popery, the
great grief and offense to all your best affected, and true and loving
subjects, the apparent danger of the whole Kingdom, by putting the power of
Arms into such men's hands, as by former acts of your Majesty's counsel, are
adjudged persons justly to be suspected^ and fit themselves to be disarmed;
your said royal and faithful subjects do most humbly beseech your Majesty,
graciously to vouchsafe, that the said Lords and Gentlemen hereunder named for
this important reason, and for the greater safety of your Majesty, and of this
your Realm, and dominion, may be removed from all your Majesty's commissions
of great charge and trust, commissions of Lieutenancy, Oyer and Terminer, and
of the peace, and from all other offices and places of trust:

The names of all such persons as are certified to have places of charge or
trust in their several Counties, and are themselves Popish Recusants or
Non-communicants, that have given over suspicion of their ill affection in
Religion, or that are reported or suspected so to be.
THe right Honorable Francis Earl of Rutland, is certified to be Lord
Lieutenant in the County of Lincoln, and a Commissione^ of the peace, and
Custos Rotulorum in the County of Northampton, and a Commissioner of the peace,
and of Oyer and Terminer in Yorkshire, and in other counties, and that he and
his wife are suspected to be popish recusants.

The right honorable, the Earl of Castlehaven is certified to be a
Commissioner of the peace, and of Oyer and Terminer in Wiltshire, and to be
suspected to be ill affected in religion, and that some of his family either
are or lately were recusauts.

Sir Thomas Compton Knight, is certified to be a Commissioner of the peace, and
of Oyer and Terminer in Warwickeshire, and he and the Countess his wife are
certified by same, to be suspected to be popish recusants.

The right honorable Henry Lord Herbert is certified to be a Commissioner of
the peace in Monmouthshire, and to favor the popish religion, and to forbear
the Church.

The right honorable the Lord Viscount Colchester is certified to be a
Commissioner of the peace in Essex, and (by report) that he comes not to the
Church, nor receives the communion.

The right honorable the Lord Peter is certified to be a commissioner of the
peace in Essex, and (by report) that he comes not to the church, nor
receives the communion, and that his wife and family are generally suspected
to be popish recusants.

The right honorable Henry Lord Morlay, is certified to be a commissioner of
the peace in Lancashire, and to be suspected to be a popish recusant.

The right honorable the Lord Windsor is certified to be a commissioner of the
peace in Buckinghamshire, and (by common fame) to be a popish recusant.

The right honorable William Lord Evre is certified to be a Justice of the
peace in the county of Durham, and to be a popish recusant convicted.

The right honorable the Lord Wooten is certified to be in place of authority
in Kent, and that he and his wife do forbear the church, and are justly
suspected to affect the Roman religion.

The right honorable the Lord Teynhani is certified to be a commissioner of
the peace in Kent, and (by common report) to be a popish recusant.

The right honorable the Lord Scroope is certified to be a Lord Lieutenant of
the Counties of York, of the City of York, and of Kingston upon Hull, and to
be a Commissioner of the peace, and of Oyer and Terminer in the said Counties,
and in sundry other Counties, and that his Lordship has not received the
Communion once every year in the last three or four years, and that his
Lordship has given overt suspicion of his ill affection in Religion, by his
departure from the Communion on sundry days, when his Majesty's Counsel there
resident, and others of the Congregation staid behind to receive the same,
sometimes on Easter Day, and sometimes on the fifth day of November; and it is
testified by witness, that the Lord Archbishops grace of York, and others of
his Majesty's Counsel there resident were present, did receive the Communion
once when his Lordship went away; and that his Lordship does rarely repair to
the Church on Sundays and Holy Days in the forenoon, and not above twice to
the afternoon Sermons (whereunto former Lord Presidents with his Majesty's
Counsel there residing, have frequently repaired, and whereunto the Counsel
now there resident do ordinarily repair) since he was made Lord President;
whereof notice is taken by all his Majesty's Subjects in those parts, to the
great grief of such as are truly affected in Religion.

Sir William Courtney Knight, is certified to be a Commissioner of the peace,
and a Deputy Lieutenant in D^^onshire, and is a Colonel of a thousand trained
Soldiers of that Country, and is Vice-Warden of the S^^^neries, and that he is
suspected to be: popish Recusant, and that he has not received the Communion
in many years last past.

Sir Thomas Brudenell Knight, is certified to be a Commissioner of the peace,
and a deputy Lieutenant in Northamptonshire, and that he is a suspected
Recusant.

Sir Thomas Somerset is certified to be a Commissioner, of Oyer, and Termi^et
in Glocestershire, and that he is reported to be a Popish Recusant.

Sir Gilbert Ireland Knight, and Richard Sherborne and John ^leming Esquires,
are certified to be Commissioners of the peace in Lancashire, and that they are
suspected to be Popish Recusants.

Sir Francis Stoners Knight, is certified to be a Justice of the peace, or a
Deputy Lieutenant, or both, in Oxfordshire, and to be a Popish Recusant.

Sir An^hony Brown Knight, is certified to be a Commissioner of the peace in
the County of Norfolk, and that he is reported to be a popish Recusant.

Sir Francis Howard Knight, is certified to be a Justice of the peace, and
Custos Rotulorum in Surre^ and is suspected to be ill affected in Religion.

Sir William Powell Knight, is certified to be a Justice of the peace in
Staffordshire, and to be a Non-communicant, and that his Wife comes not to
Church.

Sir Francis Lacon Knight, is certified to be a Justice of the peace in
Shropshire, and that he is suspected to be a popish Recusant.

Sir Lewis ^ewkner Knight, is certified to be a Commissioner of the peace in
Middlesex, and that he and his Wife are justly suspected to be popish Recusants.

Sir William Awbercy Knight, is certified to be a Commissioner of the peace in
Breck^ nockeshire, and that he is reported to be a popish Recusant.

William Ie^^son Esquire, is certified to be a Commissioner of the peace in
Newcastle upon Tyne, and that he is suspected to be popish and backwasd in
Religion.

Sir John Gage and Sir John Shelley Baronets, and John Thecher Esquire, are
certified to be Commissioners of the Sewers in the County of Sussex; and to be
known Papists.

Sir Henry Carvell is certified to be a Captain of a Foot-band in the County
of Norfalke, and to be a Commissioner of Sewers, and that he is reported to be
a popish Recusant.

Sir Thomas Wiseman Knight, son of Sir Thomas Wiseman Knight, that is a
Justice of peace, is certified to be a Captain of a Foot-band in Essex, and to
be a professed Papist.

Sir Thomas Gerard Knight, is certified to be a Captain of a Company of the
Freehold-band in Lancashire, and that he is suspected to be a popish Recusant.

Sir John Philpot Knight, is certified to be a Captain of a foot Company in
Hampshire, and that he, and his wife, and his Children are Papists.

Sir Thomas Russell Knight, is one of the Deputy Lieutenants, and a Justice of
the peace within the County of Worcester, and is justly suspected to be a
Papist.

The names of all such Persons as are cercified to be in places of charge or
trust in their several Counties, and that have Wives, Children or Servants
that are popish Recusants or Non-communicants, or that are suspected so to be.
SIr Henry Bedding field Knight, is certified to ^e a Commissioner of the
peace, and Deputy Lieutenant in Norfolk, and Captain of the Lances there, and
that his Wife and children are reported to be popish Recusants.

Sir William VVrey Knight, is certified to be a Deputy Lieutenant in Cornwall,
and that his wife is a Recusant.

Sir John Conway Knight, is certified to be a Commissioner of the peace, and
one of the Deputy Lieutenants in Flintshire, and that his wife is held to be a
popish Recusant.

Sir Charles Jones Knight, and William Jones Esquire, are certified to be
Commissioners of the peace, and two Deputy Lieutenants in Monmouthshire, and
that their wives are popish recusants.

Sir Ralph Conyers Knight, is certified to be a Commissioner of the peace, and
a Deputy Lieutenant in the Bishopric of Durham, and that his wife is generally
reported to be a popish recusant.

Sir Thomas Lamplough Knight, is certified to be a Commissioner of the peace in
Cumberland, and that his wife is a recusant.

Sir Thomas Savage Knight and Baronet, is certified to ^e a Commissioner of the
peace in Cheshire, and that his wife is suspected to be a recusant; and by
common same is reported that the said Sir Thomas Savage is a Deputy Lieutenant
there, and that he is suspected to be a Non-communicant, and his children are
suspected to be recusants.

Sir William Mossey Knight is certified to be a Commissioner of the peace in
Cheshire, and that his wife is a recosant.

Sir Hugh Biston Knight, is certified to be a Commissioner of the peace in
Cheshire and that his daughter and hei^e apparent is a recu^ant.

Sir Thomas Riddall Knight, is certified to be a Commissioner of the peace in
the Bishopric of Durham, and that his wife is a popish recusant.

Master Thomas Petre Esqu-brother of the Lord Petre, is certified to be a
Commissioner of the peace in Essex, and that his wife and family are suspected
to be recusants.

Sir Mar^aduke Wyvell Knight and Baronet, is certified to be a Commissioner of
Oyer and Terminer, and lately made one of his Majesty's Counsel in the North,
and that his wife is a popish recusant convicted.

Sir John Townshend Knight, is certified to be a Commissioner of the peace in
the County of Hereford, and that his wife is reported to be a Papist.

Sir William Norris Knight, is certified to be a Justice of the peace in
Lancashire, and that he has a daughter that is a recusant, and that he has
two sons that do serve under the Arch-dutchesse.

James Anderson Esquire, is certified to be a Justice of the peace in
Lancashire, and that his wife and his eldest son and Heir apparent are
recusants.

Edward Morgan and George Wilbourne Esquires, are certified to be Commissioners
of the peace in Munmouthshire, and that their wives are recusants.

Sir Phillip Knevit Baronet, is certified to be a Justice of the peace in
Norfolke^ and that his wife is a recusant.

Sir John Tasbrough Knight, and Anthony Hubbard Esquire, are certified to be
Commissioners of the peace in Norfolk, and that their wives are reported to be
recusants, and Master Hubbards children are popishly educated.

Sir William Selby Knight, and Cutbert Heron Esquire, are certified to be
commissioners of the peace in Northumberland, and that their wives are
recusants.

Sir Richard Tichborne Knight, is certified to be a commissioner of the peace
in Hampshire, and that his wife is of the popish religion.

Sir John Hall Knight, is certified to be a commissioner of the peace in
Hampshire, and that his wife and her daughter are Papists.

Sir George Perkins Knight, Robert Pearpoint, and Fulke Cartwright Esquires,
are certified to be commissioners of the peace in the county of Nottingham, and
that their wives are thought to be recusants.

Thomas Oatly Esquire, is certified to be a commissioner of the peace in
Shropshire, and Richard Gibbins Gent. to be crowner there, and that their wives
be recusants.

Rice Williams esquire, is certified to be a commissioner of the peace in
Carwarthenshire, and that his wife is a popish recusant convicted.

Sir Thomas Penrodduck ^night, is certified to be a commissioner of the peace
in Middlesex, and that his wife is a recusant.

Valentine Sanders esquire, is certified to be a commissioner of the peace in
Middlesex and that his eldest son is a recusant.

Thomas Rookell esquire, is certified to be a commissioner of the peace in
Saint Edmunds Berry in Suffolk, and that his eldest son is reported to be a
popish recusant.

Anthony Thorold Esquire, is certified to be a commissioner of the peace in
Lincolnshire, and that he has a son that is suspected to be a popish
recusant.

Sir Nicholas Sanders Knight, is certified to be a commissioner of the peace in
Surrey and his wife is suspected to be a popish recusant.

Which Petition being read, the House did defere the debate thereof at this
time, for that the day was far spent.

And answer was given to the commons (who attended for the same in the painted
chamber) that the Lords will send them an answer of this Petition hereafter,
when they are resolved thereof.

Whether any of these were displaced upon this Petition, I find not in any
Memorials, it being certain some of them were not, but continued still in these
offices of trust.

And thus I have given the World a full account of the unhappy, tedious Spanish
Treaty, of the advantages the Pope and Papists made thereof, and its final
rupture in and by the Parliament. I shall now proceed to the French which was
short and more succesfull.

THe Spanish match being thus at last dissoved (after so long a treaty) in
discontent and war, the popish party here and beyond the seas, endeavoring
to make good the ground, liberty and immunities they had gotten by the former
treaty of Marriage, and to carry on their forementioned design, by the same
prevailing means, engaged the King and Prince in a new marriage-parley with
France, to the Lady Henrette Maria Sister to the French King, a Princess of
the Roman Religion. To what end this Marriage was propounded by the Roman
party, is evident by this observable passage of le Maistre, (a French Author
and Sot^on Priest) in his Instauratio antiqui Episcoporum Principatus, printed
at Paris, Cum Privilegio, Anno 1633. and dedicated to Cardinal Richelltus, l.
2. c. 15. p. 273, 274. where thus he writes with reference to the English Roman
affairs, anno 1624. What then forbids the same things, and others which are of
greater pompo in England, especially where the heat of persecutions has
ceased, through the dignity of a Magnanimous King, and most invincible Prince,
NOTE. Roll. Tractationis and Ratifi^ati^nis Matrimonii inter, Dom. Carolum Regum
and D^m. Henret Marium Sororem Regis Franc. 1. Car^
by the Borbonian Star which hangs over these countries in a most dear Wife:
by which Stars, as by the Dioscury, peradventure the tempest of persecution
will in time be appeased, and the generous Prince may acknowledge the same
Christ, under whom his Ancestors have so gloriously triumphed, etc.

This Match was soon concluded in the life of King James, the Articles
concerning Religion being the same almost verbatim with those formerly agreed
on in the Spanish treaty, and so easily condescended to without much debate; I
shall give you the principle of them relating only to Religion, out of the
Record it self, the printed (...)
French Mercury, and Manuscript Copies as they were subscribed and signed by
the Earls of Carlisle and Holland, extraordinary Ambassadors and Commissioners
for the King and Prince on the one side, and by the French Commissioners on the
other side; and after that signed, sealed, and sworn to by King James, Prince
Charles, and the French King, the 10. of November. 1624. and upon King James his
death re-signed, resealed, and re-swore to by King Charles and the French King,
the 8. of May 162^. after the French account.

1 That the above named the Lords Ambassadors have promised, and do promise
for and on the behalf of his Majesty of great Britain now reigning, (...) he
shall tak^ to Marriage, for his dear Consort and Wise, the Lady Henretta Maria
Daughter of France, and sister to his foresaid most Excellent Majesty, in
person, or otherwise by Proxy, so soon as conveniently the same may be done,
and that also the foresaid Lady at the good pleasure and consent of his
foresaid Christian Majesty, and of the Queen her Mother, after his FORESAID
MAJESTY HAS OBTAINED A (...)
DISPENSATION FROM THE POPE, does promise to take for her dear Consort and
Husband, Charles the first, King of great Britain, and according to the
foresaid reciprocal promise, he shall be assianced and contracted after the
manner accustomed in the CATHOLIC AND ROMISH CHURCH.

^7. It is likewise agreed upon, that the said Lady and all her Followers, as
also the Children which shall be borne to her Officers, shall have free
exercise of the Catholic Apostolical and Roman Religion; and to that end the
foresaid Lady shall have a Chapel in each of the Kings Palaces or Houses, or
in any other place of his Majesty of great Britain, where he shall chance to
come and continue; and that the foresaid Chapel shall be adorned and decked
as it is sitting; and that the keeping thereof shall be committed to whom it
shall please the said Lady to appoint; in which the preaching of Gods Word, and
the Administration of the Sacraments, the MASS and all other Offices shall be
freely and solemnly done, according to the use of the Romish Church; yea, all
Indulgences and Jubilees which the said Lady shall obtain or get from THE
POPE, may be done and executed there. There shall be also one Churchyard in
the City of London, given and appointed to interre and bury such of her said
Ladyships followers, as shall chance to depart this life, according to the
manner and form of the Church of Rome; and that shall be modestly done the
which Churchyard shall be in such sort enclosed or walled about, that no
person shall come therein to profane the same.

8. It is also agreed upon, that the said LADY SHALL HAVE A BISHOP FOR HER
GREAT ALMONER, who shall have all Jurisdiction and necessary authority for all
matters and causes concerning Religion, and who shall proceed against the
Ecclesiastical persons which shall be under his charge, according to the
Canons constituted and appointed.

9. And if it shall at any time happen, that any secular Court shall take any
of the foresaid Priests into their power, by reason of any crime or offense
against the State by him commiited or done, and do find him to be guilty
thereof, yet shall the said Court send him back to the said Bishop, with the
Informations which they find by him. because the said Priest is privileged
from their power; NOTE.
and the said Bishop when he shall understand and know so much, shall degrade
the said Priest, and afterward send him back unto the foresaid secular Court
to do justice upon him. And for all kind of other faults, the aforesaid Priests
shall be sent to the Bishop, to the end that he may proceed against them
according to the Canons in that case provided, and in the absence or sickness
of the said Bishop, the Priest which is by him appointed to be his great Vicar,
shall have the same power and authority.

10. It is likewise agreed upon, that the said Lady shall have 28 PRIESTS, or
Ecclesiastical persons in her house, comprehending therein her Almoner and
Chaplains, to serve and keep the foresaid Chapel according ^ they are
appointed: and if any of them be a regular or canonical person, living under
more prescript rules then the rest, yet he may hold and keep his habit.

Also the KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, Ergo, there is little hopes of her
conversion to our Relig^on; She taking no such oath on the contrary part, not
to endeavor to seduce the King.
is by OATH BOUND NOT TO ENDEAVOR, BY ANY MEANS AT ALL TO HAVE HIS SAID QUEEN
TO RENOUNCE THE CATHOLIC APOSTOLIC AND ROMISH RELIGION, NOR COMPEL HER TO
DO ANY THING WHATSOEVER THAT IS CONTRARY TO THE SAME RELIGION.

11. The said Queens house shall be maintained with so much Dignity, and with
so great a number of Officers as ever any had that was Queen of England; all
the household servants which the said Lady shall carry into England, shall be
Priests, catholics, and French by birth, and chosen and appointed by his most
christian Majesty; And if it happen that any of them dye, or that the foresaid
Lady shall be willing to change her said servants, then She will take in their
steads other Papists catholics, French or English; always provided that his
Majesty of great Britain consent thereunto.

16. The children which shall by reason of the said inter-marriage, be born and
live, shall be nursed and brought up near unto the said Lady and Queen, from
the time of their birth, until they come to the age of fourteen years.

Besides these general Articles of the Match, the French Mercury informs us
of these particular ones, concluded and agreed on in favor of the Roman
Catholics; the same in substance with those of Spain, forementioned (as (...)
nence of Parliaments, Tom. 10. p. ^ 487,
Master James Howell himself confesses) the heads whereof were three.

1. The first touching the Catholics, as well Ecclesiastics as secular,
imprisoned since the last Proclamation ( upon the Parliaments forementioned
Petition and breach with Spain) that they should all be set at liberty.

2. The second to this effect, That the English Catholics should be no more
searched after (or molested) for their Religion.

3. The third, that the goods of the Catholics as well Ecclesiastics as
secular, that were seized on since the last Proclamation published against
them, should be restored to them.

Upon the 1. of May 1625. after our English computation, the marriage between
the King and Queen was celebrated at Paris. The 4. of May (but three days
after the marriage, and scarce six weeks after the descent of the Crown to his
Majesty) the King in pursuance of these Articles, granted this special pardon
to no less then twenty several Priests and Jesuits therein named, of all
offenses by them committed against any laws and statutes then in force against
any Priests, Jesuits, or popish recusants; on which I desire the namelesse,
incredulous Page (...) 46, 47.
Author of the Answer to the Royal Popish Favorite (who will neither credit
the French Mercury, nor the Records themselves, that there were any such
Articles as are fore mentioned, but rejects them as Forgeries, without any
color or ground of reason, but a pretended royal prosecution against Papists,
at the Parliaments importunity only, which was never real or cordial) to
chew the cudde upon; which, because he shall not deny, he may peruse and view
at his leisure in the Records at the Rolls, Patent. 4. pars. 10. Caroli Regis
Numero 12.

REX omnibus ad quos, NOTE.
etc. Salutem. Sciatis quod Nos pietate moti, de Gracia Nostra speciali ac ex
certa scientia and mero motu Nostris, pardonavinimus, remissimus and
Relaxavimus, ac per praesentes pro Nobis, haeredibus and Successoribus Nostris
pardonamus, remittimus and Relaxamus Joanni Piercy Clerico. Henrico Hopkins
Rico. Bapthorpe Clerico. Benjam. Medcalfe Clerico. Thomae Mushe, Thomae
Cudworth, Christophero Ibotson, Willielmo Brooksby Clerico. Christophero
Clough, Tobie Clay, Rico, Robinson Clerico. Edwardo Ditchfield Clerico. Joanni
Melling, Willielmo Nayler, Jacobo Eckersall, Richardo Whaley, Laurencio
Lanshaw, Rico, Sharrocke, Rico. Gill and Willielmo Berrey, quocunque nomine vel
cognomine aut additione nominis vel cognominis, dignitatis, Artis professions,
misterij, Loci vel Locorum idem Joannes Piercy, Henricus Hopkins Ricus,
Bapthorpe, Brianus, Medcalse, Thomas Mush, Thomas Cudworth, Christopherus
Ibotson, Willielmus Brooksby, Christopherus Clough, Tobias Clay, Richardus
Robinson, Edwardus Ditchfield, Joannes Melling, Willielmus Nayler, Jacobus
Eckersall, Richardus Whaley, Laurencius Lanshaw, Richardus Sharrocke, Richardus
Gill and Willielmus Berry sciantur, cenceantur aut huncupantur, aut nuper
sciebantur, censebantur aut nuncupabantur, aut eorum aliquis, Sciatur,
censeatur aut nuncupatur, aut nuper sciebatur, censebatur aut nuncupabitur, ac
eorum cuilibet omnes and singulas proditiones, proditorias offensiones
misprisiones proditionum, felonias and offensiones and Malefacta Felonica
quaecunque per ipsos aut eorum aliquem sive aliquos per se solum, sive cum
aliqua alia persona, sive aliquibus alijs personis quibuscunque, contra forman
Statuti in Parliamento Dominae Elizabethae nuper Reginae Angliae anno Regni sui
vicessimo rertio fact. and edit; intitulat, An act to retain the Queens
Majesty's Subjects in their due obedience: Seu contra formam Statuti
Parliamenti Dominae nuper Reginae Anno regui sui vicessimo septimo fact. and
edit, intitulat. An Act against Jesuits, Seminary-priests and such otherlike
disobedient persons; seu contra formam Statuti in Parliamento praecharissimi
nuper patris Nostri Iacobi nuper. Regis Angliae anno regni sui tertio fact. and
edit. intitulati: An Act for the better discovering and repressing of popish
Recusants, seu contra formam alicuus alterius legis sive Statuti ante hac fact.
concernen. Iesuitas, Sacerdotes Presbiter, Seminar. seu allos Presbiteros,
Sacerdotes Diaconos, aut personas religiosas seu ecclesiastic. sact. and
ordinat. seu provis: per aliquam authoritatem sive jurisdictionem derivat,
calumniat. aut pretens. a sede Romana, aut concernen. reconcilitionem alicujus
subditi sive aliquorum subditorum hujus regni Angliae, Episcopo, Sedi auc
Eccleliae Romanae adhuc fact. Commiss. sive perpeirat. ac omnia and singula
ostens. and Malefacta de Premuniresen cog^lt. per nomen de Praemunire contra
formam Statuti predicti anno regni prefat. nuper Patris Nostri precharissimi
tertio edit; aut alicuus alteri act. sive Statuti Comiss. in recusando vel non
recipiendo Sacrament, devisat and provis. in Statuto predicto anno Regni Domini
nuper Patris Nostri precharissimi Angliae tertio edit. ac omnia and singula
alia offenss. and delict. quaecunque in recusando vel non recipiendo Sacrament.
praedict. ac omnia imprisonamenta ratione praemissorum seu eorum alicujus, aut
ratione recusanciae in non accedendo ad aliquam Ecclesiam, Capellam seu usual.
loc, com. Precationis juxta leges et Statuta in ea part ^^abilita, aut ratione
alicujus offens. contra formam alicujus Statuti sive aliquorum Statutorum
contra papales Recusantes stabilit, ac fugam and fugas superinde fact. li^t
idem Ioannes Piercy, Henricus Hopkins, Richardus Babthorpe, Brian Medcalfe,
Thomas Mush, Thomas Cudworth, Christopherus Iborson, Gulielmus Brooksby,
Christopherus Clough, Tobias Clay, Richardus Robinson, Edwardus Ditchfield,
Ioannes Melling, Willielmus Nayler, Iacobus Eckersall, Richardus Whaley,
Laurentius Lanshaw, Richardus Sharrock, Richerdus Gill et Willielmus Berry, de
eisdem proditione, misprisione proditionum, feloniorum offenss, et malefact.
sive de eorum aliquibus vel aliquo indictat. imperit. appellat. rectat. ut
lagat. condemnat. convinct. attinst. sive adjudicar, existunt vel non existunt,
vel ^orum aliquis existit, vel non existit, aut inde indictari, impetiri,
appellati, rectari utlagari condempnari, convinciri attingi sive adjudicari
contigerint vel eorum aliquis vel aliqui contiger. in sutur. Ac omnes and
singulos si quae utlagar. versus ipsos vel eorum aliquem vel aliquos ratione
premissorrum, seu eorum alicujus promulgat. fuerunt sive imposterum erint
promulgand. ac etiam judicium et iudicia pro premiss, seu aliquo premissorum
versus ipsos seu eorum aliquem vel aliquos habit. fact. reddit sive adjudicat,
aut imposterum habend. siend. reddend. sive adiudicand. ac executionem et
executiones hujusmodi iudicii et judicionum versus ipsos vel eorum aliquem vel
aliquos pro premiss. vel aliquo premissorum habend. fiend. vel exequend, nec
non omnes^et singulas paenas mortis, paenas corporales, forisfacturas, ^ines et
executiones quascunque quae Nos versus prefat, Jo^net^ Piercy, Henricum
Hopkins, Richardum Bapthorpe, Btianum Medcalfe, Thomam Mush, Thomam Cudworth,
Christopherum Ibotson, Willielmum Brooksby, Christopherum Clough Tobiam Clay,
Richardum Robinson, Edwardum Ditchfield, Joannem Melling, Willielmum Naylor.
Jacobum Eckersall, Richardum Whaley, Laurencium Langshaw, Richardum Sharrocke,
Richardum Gill and Willielmum Berry, seu versus eorum aliquem vel aliquos
ratione vel occasion premissorum, aut eorum alicujus habuimus, habeamus seu in
futur, habere poteritrius, aut haered. vel successor Nostri habere poteri^^ in
futur. sectamque pacis Nostrae quae ad Nos haered. and successores nostros
versus ipsos vel eorum aliquem vel aliquos pertinere poterit. Et s^mam pacem
Nostram and hanc perdonacionem Nostram ejs and eorum Cuilibet inde damus and
concedimus per praesentes. Mandamus etiam ac pro Nobis, haeredibus and
successoribus Nostris sumiter injuugendo precipimus omnibus and singulis
Commissionarijs pro causis ecclesiasticis, Justiciarijs, Vice-comitibus,
Escaetoribus Ballivis, Custod. prison. and alijs officiarijs et Ministris
Nostris haeredum et Successorum Nostrore quibuscunque. Quod si praefat. Joannes
Piercy, Henticus Hopkins, Richardus Bapthorpe, Brianus Medcalse, Thomas Mush,
Thomas Cudworth, Christopherus Ibotson, Willielmus Brooksby, Christopherus
Clough, Tobias Clay, Richardus Robinson, Edwardus Di^chfield, Joannes Melling,
Willielmus Naylor, Jacobus Eckersall, Richardus Whaley, Laurencius Lanshaw,
Richardus Sharrocke, Richardus Gill et Willielmus Berry, vel eorum aliquis vel
aliqui ratione premissorum per praesentes pardonari seu mentionati fore
perdonari, incarcerati vel imprisonati existunt vel existit; Quod ipse, et
eorum quilibet super solam demonstrationem praesentium inde deliberentur, et
eorum aliquis deliberetur absque ulteriori warranto, proinde a Nobis,
haeredibus et successoribus Nostris obtinendo seu prosequendo. Nolentes quod
ipsi per Justiciar. Vice-com. Escaetores, Ballivas seu aliquos alios Ministros
Nostros haeredum vel successorum Nostrorum occationibus praedict. sen eorum
aliquis molestentur, perturbentur, seu in aliquo graventur, licet ipse bonam et
sufficientem securitatem non inveniat, aut eorum aliquis inveniat secundum
formam and effectum Statuti Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae tertii,
progenitoris Nostri, Anno regni sui decimo apud Westnionasterium, tent. edit,
de Se bene-gerend, extunc. erga Nos, haered. et Successor. nostros et cunctum
populum nostrum. Et ulterius de uberiori gratia Nostra, certa scientia et mero
motu nostris concessimus, ac per praesentes pro Nobis Haeredibus et
Successoribus Nostris concedimus prefat. Joanni Piercy, Henrico Hopkins,
Richardo Bapthorpe Briano Medcalfe, Tho^^ae Mush, Thomae Cudworth, Christophero
Ibotson, Willielmo Brooksby, Christophero Clough, Tobiae Clay, Richardo
Robinson, Edwardo Ditchfield, Joanne Melling, Willielmo Naylor, Jacobo
Eckersall, Richardo Whaley, Laurentio Lanshaw, Richardo Sharrocke, Richardo
Gill et Willielmo Berry, quod hae literae Nostrae Patentes favourabiliter, et
in maximum ipsorum et eorum eujus^bet, commodum et beneficium, construentur,
capientur et acceptabuntue, et stabunt et existent ^irmae, validae et
effectuales lege, erga, versus et contra Nos, Haeredes et Successores Nostros
secundum veram intentionem earundem; statutis praedictis aut eorum aliquo, aut
aliquo alio statuto, Actu, Proclamatione, provisione, vel restrictione^ aut
aliqua alia re, causa vel materia quacunque in contrarium, inde in aliquo non
obstante. In cujus rei testimonium, etc. test Rege apud Westmonasterium,
quarto die Maii anno primo Caroliregis.

Convenit cum recordo et examinatur per me Joannem Claydon. Per ipsum Regem.


After this, May 11. the Duke of Buckingham was sent into France to meet the
Queen, and conduct her into England: The now Archbishop of Canterbury to show
his good affection to promote this match, sent letters after him the selfsame
day. The 19. of May he writ second letters to the Duke, then staying at Paris:
and May 29. he sent other letters to him by the hands of the Bishop of Durham,
to be delivered to him at his first arrival in England: June 5. this Bishop
received letters from the (...) out of France being Whitsunday, as he was going
to divine service, to which he returned an answer the next morning early. June
12. the Queen arrived in England; and June 16. the King and Queen came both to
London, where a new Chapel was f^^one after built for her and her Family at
Somerset House to say Mass in: with a Mo^astery thereto adjoining for Capuchin
Friars, who were therein placed, and walked abroad in their Fryars-habits,
seducing his Majesty's Subjects.

Hereupon the Papists (though formerly much daunted by the dissolution of the
Spanish Match) began to lift up their heads, elevated their hopes, and resorted
openly to Mass in great multitudes; Seminary Priests and Jesuits repaired into
the Realm from all foreign parts without restraint, and grew very numerous
and bold: which the Parliament then sitting, taking into their pious and
serious consideration, in the beginning of August 1625. both Houses presented
the King at Oxford (whither the Parliament was then adjourned by reason of the
plague) with this ensuing Petition aginst Recusants, Priests and Jesuits;
whereunto I have annexed his Majesty's Answer to each branch thereof, which was
very plausible (to ingratiate himself with his people in the beginning of his
reign) had it been really performed.

To the KINGS most excellent Majesty.
Most gracious Sovereign:
IT being infalliby true, that nothing can more establish the Throne and assure
the peace and prosperity of your people, then the unity and sincerity of
Religion; We your most humble and loyal Subjects, the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and Commons of this present Parliament assembled, hold our selves
bound in conscience and duty to represent the same to your sacred Majesty,
together with the dangerous consequences, and what we conceive to be the
principal causes thereof, and what may be the remadies.

The dangers appear in these Particulars.
1. First, in their desperate ends, being both the subversion of Church and
State, and the restlesnesse of their spirits to attain these ends; the
doctrine of their Teachers and Leaders persuading them, that therein they do
God good service. 2. Secondly, their evident and strict dependency upon such
foreign Princes, as no way affect the good of your Majesty and this State. 3.
Thirdly, the opening a way of popularity to the ambition of any, who shall
adventure to make himself head of so great a party.
The principal cause of the increase of Papists.
1. First, the want of due execution of laws against Jesuits, Seminary-priests
and Papist Recusants, occasioned partly by the connivency of the State, partly
by defects in the laws themselves, and partly by the manifold abuse of
Officers. 2. Secondly, the interposing of foreign Princes by their
Ambassadors and Agents, in favor of them. 3. Thirdly, their great concourse
to the City, and frequent conferences and Con^^nticles there. 4. Fourthly, the
open and usual resort to the houses and Chapels of Foreign Ambassadors. 5.
Fifthly, the education of their children in Seminaries, and houses of their
Religion in foreign parts, which of late have been greatly multiplied and
enlarged for entertaining of the English. 6. Sixthly, that in some places of
your Realm, your people be not sufficiently instructed in the knowledge of
true Religion. 7. Seventhly, the licentious printing and dispersin of popish
and seditious books. 8. Eighthly, the employment of men ill affected in
Religion, in places of government, who do, shall, or may countenance the
popish party.
The Remedies against this outrageous and dangerous disease we conceive to be
these ensuing.
1^ That the youth of this Realm be carefully educated by able and religious
Schoolmasters, and they to be enjoined to catechize and instruct their
Scholars in the grounds and principles of true Religion; and whereas by many
complaints from diverse parts of the Kingdom, it does plainly appear that
sundry popish Scholars dissembling their Religion, have craftily crept in, and
obtained the places of teaching in diverse Countries, and thereby infected and
perverted their Scholars and so fitted them to be transported to the popish
Seminaries beyond the seas: that therefore there be great care in choice and
admitting Schoolmasters, and that the ordinaries make diligent inquiries of
their demeanours, and proceed to the removing of such as shall be faulty, or
justly suspected.

His Majesty's Answer. This is well allowed of, and for the better performance
of what is desired, letters shall be written to the two Archbishops, and from
them letters to go to all the ordinaries of their several Provinces to see
this done; the several ordinaries to give account of their doings herein to
the Archbishops respectively, and they to give account to his Majesty of their
proceedings herein.

2. That the ancient discipline of the Universities be restored, being the
famous Nurses of literature and virtue.

Answ. This is approved by his Majesty, and the Chancelour of each University
shall be required to cause due execution of it.

3. That special care be taken to enlarge the word of God through all the
parts of your Majesty's Dominions, as being the most powerful means for
planting of true Religion, and rooting out of the contrary; to which end among
other things, let it please your Majesty to advise your Bishops by fatherly
entreaty and tender usage, to reduce to the peaceable and orderly service of
the Church, such able Ministers as have been formerly silenced, that there may
be a profitable use of their ministry in these needful and dangerous times;
and that Non-residency, Pluralities and Commendams, may be moderated; where we
cannot forbear most humbly to thank your Majesty for deminishing the number
of your own Chaplains, nothing doubting of the like princely care for the
well bestowing of the rest of your Benefices, both to the comfort of the
people, and the encouragement of the Universities, being full of grave and able
Ministers unfurnisht of livings.

Answ. This his Majesty likes well so as it be applied to such Ministers as are
peaceable orderly and conformable to the Church Government; for pluralities and
Non-residencies, those are now so moderated, that the Archbishops affirm,
there be now no Dispensutions for pluralities granted, not no man now has
allowed above two Benefices, and those not above thirty miles distant: and for
avoiding Non-residence, the Canon in that case provided shall be duly put in
execution; for commendams they shall be sparingly granted, only in such case
where the exility and smalnesse of the Bishopric requires. Also his Majesty
will cause that the Benefices belonging to him shall be well bestowed, and for
the better propagating of Religion, his Majesty recommendeth to the House of
Parliament, that care may be taken and provision made, that every parish shall
allow a competent maintenance for an able Minister, and that the owners of
personages impropriate, would allow to the Vicars, Curates and Ministers in
Villages and places belonging to their personage, sufficient stipend and
allowance for preaching Ministers.

4. That there may be straight provision against transporting of English
children to the Seminaries beyond the seas and for the recalling of them who
are already there placed, and for the punishment of such your Subjects as are
maintainers of those Seminaries, or of the Scollers, considering that besides
the seducing of your people, great sums of money are yearly expended upon
them, to the impoverishing of this Kingdom.

Answ. The law in this case shall be put in execution, and further, there shall
be letters written to the Lord Ireamrer, and also to the Lord Admiral that all
the P^rts of this Realm and the creeks and members thereof be strictly kept,
and ^^eight (...) made to this end: a Proclamation shall be to recall both the
children of Noble men and the children of any other men, and they to return by
a day: also (...) of Seminaries, or Scholars there, shall be punished
according to the law.

^ That no popish Rec^san^ be permitted to come within the Court, unless your
Majesty be pleased to call him upon special occasion, agreeable to the Stature
of (...) 5. And whereas your Majesty for the preventing of any apparent
mischiefs both to your Majesty and the State, have in your princely wisdom
taken order (...) none of your natural borne Subjects, not professing the true
Religion, and by law established, be admitted into the service of your royal
Consort the Queen, we give your Majesty most humble thanks, and desire that
your order herein may be observed.

Answ. If his Majesty shall find or be informed of any concourse of Recusants
to the Court, the law shall be strictly followed; and his Majesty is pleased^
that by proclamation the British and the Irish Subjects shall be put in the
same case: and as his Majesty has provided in his treaty with France so his
purpose is to keep it, that (...)
(...) of his Subjects shall be admitted into his service, or into the service
of his royal (...) sort the Queen, that are popish Recusants.

6. That all the laws now standing in force against Jesuits, Seminary-priests
and others, having taken orders by authority derived from the Sea of Rome, be
put in due ex^^^ion; and to the intent they may not pretend to be surprised,
that a speedy and certain day be prefixed by your Majesty's Proclamation for
their departure out of this Realm, and all other your Dominions and not to
return, upon the severest penalties of the law now in force against them, and
that all his Majesty's Subjects may be thereby admonished, not to receive^
comfort, entertain or conceal any of them, upon the penalties which may be
lawfully inflicted and that all such Papists, ^esuits and Recusants, who are
and shall be imprisoned for recusancy or any other cause may be so strictly
restrained, as that ^one shall have conference with them; thereby to avoid the
contagion of their corrupt Religion, and that no man who shall be suspected of
(...) be suffered to be keeper of any your Majesty's prisons.

Answ. The law in this case shall be put in execution, and a Proclamation shall
be to the (...), desired and such restraint shall be made as is desired, and no
man that is justly suspected of popery shall be suffered to be keeper of any of
his Majesty's prisons.

7. That your Majesty be pleased to take such order as to your Princely
wisdom shall be expedient that no natural borne Subject, or strange Bishops,
nor any other by authority from the Sea of Rome, confe^^e any ecclesisticall
orders, or exercise any ecclesiastical Function whatsoever, toward or upon
your Majesty's natural Subjects, within your Dominions.

Answ. This is (...) to be ordered, according as it is provided, and it shall
be so published by Proclamation.

1. That your Majesty's learned Counsel may receive order and commandment to
consider of all former grants of Recusants lands, that such of them may be
avoided as are made to the Recusants use or interest, our of which the recusant
receives any benefit, which are either void or voydable by the law.

Answ. The King will give order to his learned Counsel to consider of the
grants, and will ^^e according as is desired.

9. That your Majesty will be likewise pleased strictly to command all your
Judges and ^inisters of justice ecclesiastical and temporal to see the laws
of this realm against Papist recusants to be duly executed; and namely that
the censure of exc^mmun^^ (...) declared and certified against them, and that
they be not absolved but (...) satisfaction by yielding to con^ormity.

(...) leaves the laws to their course, and will give order in the point (...)
as is desired.

(...) your Majesty will be pleased to remove from all places of authority and
government, all such persons as are either popish Recusants, or according to
direction of former act of State, to be justly suspected.

Answ. This his Majesty thinks fit, and will give order for it.

11. That present order be taken for disarming all popish Recusants, legally
convicted or justly suspected, according to the laws in that behalf, and the
orders taken by his late Majesty's privy Counsel, upon reason of State.

Answ. The laws and acts in this case, shall be followed and put in due
execution,

12. That your Majesty be also pleased, in respect of the great resort of
Recusants to and about London, to command forthwith, upon pain of your
indignation and severe execution of the laws, that at they retire themselves
to their several Countries, there to remain confined within five miles of
their places.

Answ. For this, the laws in sorce shall be forthwith executed.

13. And whereas your Majesty has strictly commanded and taken order, that
none of the natural borne Subjects repair to the hearing of Masses, or other
superstitious service at the Chapels or houses of foreign Ambassadors or in
any other places whatsoever; We give your Majesty most humble thanks, and
desire that your Order and commandment therein may be continued and observed,
and that the offenders herein may be punished according to the laws.

Answ. The King gives assent thereto, and will see that observed which herein
has been commanded by him.

14. That all such insolences as any popishly affected have lately committed,
or shall hereafter commit, to the dishonor of our Religion, or to the wrong of
the true professors thereof, be exemplarily punished.

Answ. This shall be done as is desired.

15. That the Statute of 1. Eliz. for the payment of 12. d. every Sunday, by
such as shall ^be absent from divine service in the Church without a lawful
excuse, may be put in due execution, the rather for that the penalty by law is
given to the poor, and therefore not to be dispenst withal.

Answ. It is fit that this Statute be executed, and the penalties shall not be
dispenst withal.

16. Lastly, that your Majesty would be pleased to extend your Princely care
also over the Kingdom of Ireland, that the like courses may be there taken for
the restoring and establishing of true Religion.

Answ. His Majesty's cares are and shall be extended over the Kingdom of
Ireland, and will do all that a religious King should do for the restoring
and establishing of true Religion there. NOTE.


And thus (most gracious Sovereign) according to our duty and zeal to God and
Religion, to your Majesty and your safe^y, to the Church and Commonwealth, and
their peace and prosperity, we have made a faithful declaration of the present
estate, the causes and remedies of this increasing disease of Popery, humbly
offering the same to your Princely care and wisdom. The answer of your
Majesty's Father our late Sovereign of famous memory, upon the like Petition
did give us great comfort of Reformation, but your Majesty's most gracious
promises made in that kind, do give us confidence and assurance of the
continual performance thereof; in which comfort and confidence reposing our
selves, we most humbly pray for your Majesty's long continuance in all Princely
felicity.

This Petition (as I find by the Commons Iournall) was ordered to be drawn up
by a special Committee upon a complaint made in that House, of the liberty of
Priests and Jesuits, 21. Iun^^ 1. Car. On the 7. of July following it was voted
in the House, answered by the King the 7. of August, and the Answer thereunto
reported Aug. 8.

But this Parliament being unhappily dissolved in discontent, the twelfth of
that August, these plausible answers vanished into smoke; and notwithstanding
them the execution of Priests and Jesuits apprehended during and after the
Parliament, and the proceedings against Recusants by well affected Justices and
people, were stayed in some places by warrants under the privy Signet, and
other underhand means.

Yet in December following, the King being necessitated to summon a new
Parliament, to prevent clamours and complaints, in not making good his Answers
to the foresaid Petition, caused a Commission to be awarded under the great
Seal, for executing the laws against Recusants which was read in all the
Courts of Justice at Redding, and withal sent this Letter to the then
Archbishop of Canterbury, Abbot, to be by him conveyed to all the Bishops of
his Province, to present and excommunicate all Recusants within their Duresse;
as will appear by this Letter of the said Archbishop to Doctor Land, then
Bishop of Saint David's, and his Letters to his Officials in pursuance of it,
the Original whereof is in my custody.

AFter my hearty commendations, etc. It will appear by the several Copies
under written, from his royal Majesty to the Lords Grace of Canterbury, and
from my Lords Grace to me, what care his Majesty has for the preservation of
true Religion, settled and established in this Kingdom; the tenor of these
Letters are as follows,

Right Reverend Father in God, my very good Lord, I have received from the
Kings Majesty a Letter, the Tenor whereof here follows,
MOst Reverend Father in God, Right trusty, and Right Well beloved Counselor,
We greet you well. Whereas upon sundry weighty considerations, Us especially
moving, We lately awarded Our Commission under Our great Seal of England, for
the due and effectual putting in execution of the several lawe^, and statute^
remaining in force against popish Recusants, and did cause Our said Commission
to be publicly read in Our several Courts, holden the last term at Redding.
That all Our loving Subjects might take notice of Our princely care and
special charge for the advancement of true Religion, and suppression of
Su^erstition and Popery. We have now thought fit out of the same care, to add
a further charge to you, and all others having Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
under Us; that no good means be neglected on Our part, for discovering,
finding out, and apprehending of Jesuits, Seminary-priests, and other Seducers
of Our people to the Romish Religion; or for repressing popish Recusants and
Delinquents of that sort: against whom you are to proceed by Excommunication
and other censures of the Church, not omitting any other lawful means to
bring them forth to public justice. And as Our pleasure is, that due and
strict proceeding be used against such as are open and professed Papists, of
whom Ou^ temporal laws will more easily take hold: So We do recommend to the
vigilan^ care of you, and the rest of Our Clergy, for the repressing of those,
who being ill affected to the true Religion here established, do keep more
close and secret, their ill and dongerous affections that way, and as well by
their example, as by secret and underhand slights and means, do much
encourage and increase the growth of popery and Superstition in sundry parts of
this Kingdom. And therefore We do not only require, that none of them may
have any manner of cover protection, countenance or connivance from you, or any
of the rest, as you tender Our royal commandment in that behalf; but that
all possible diligence be used, as well to un^^ske the false shadows and
pretenses of those, who may possibly be won to conformity; letting all men
know that We cannot think well of any that having place and authority in the
Church, do permit such persons to pass with impunity, much less if they give
them any countenance to the imboldning of them or their Adherents: and because
We understand that the number of Recusants is much more increased in some
Dio^esses then in others, We shall impute the same to the negligence of those
Bishops, who have the same means and power of restraint, unless they can show
Us some particular reason by which that contagion is become greater under them
then others, and not by their defaults: and We do hereby require you to send
transcripts of these Our Letters to all the Bishops and Ordinaries within your
province, for the present execution of this^ Our general direction: and also
to transmit the same our Letters to the Lord Archbishop of York, that he may
take the like course within his Charge and Jurisdiction.

Given under Our Signet at Our Castle of Windsor the fifteenth day of December,
in the first year of Our Reign.

By this you see the Royal and Christian care which his Majesty has, for the
advancement of true Religion within this Kingdom and the suppressing of the
contrary; I doubt not but your Lordship will take it into serious
consideration, and by your Officers and Ministers, give execution thereunto; so
that presentiments be duly made and excommunication against the obstinate be
issued forth, as: some few years past was accustomed: and his Majesty does
expect, that to show your diligence and zeal therein, yout Lordship soon
after Easter return unto me the list and number of all Recusant Papists within
your Diocese, which without fail I do expect: and so I leave you to the
Almighty, and remain

Your Lordships loving brother, G. Cant.
Croydon, the 21. of December. 1625.

These are therefore to will and require you and every of you, through the
several Arch-deaconries within my Diocesses, that there be all possible care
taken of such as are any way backward in points of Religion, and more
especially of known and professed Recusants: that they may be carefully
presented, and proceedings had against them to excommunication, according to
form and order of Law; and that there be a true List and Catalogue after every
Easter yearly sent unto me, that according to the order of these Letters I may
be able to have it ready, and deliver it up to my Lord of Canterbury; and for
the better effecting of this, I must and do further require, that the Register
do write out several Copies of these Letters, and issue them into the
several Arch-deaconries, that none may plead ignorance of their duty in this
behalf, as you must look to answer it further if fault be found to rest upon
you: Thus not doubting of your religious care and duty to the Church and State,
I leave you all to the grace of God, and rest

Your loving Friend and Diocesian, Gul. Menevensis.
Westmin. Ian. 14. 1625.

To the right Worshipful, my very loving Friends, Doctor Aubrey, Chancellor
of the Diocesses of Saint David's, and all his Surrogates and Deputies within
the several Arch-deaconries, these be delivered.
Upon this, the names of some few Recusants were certified to the Bishop, out
of Carmarthen and Pembrokeshire in June following, but what other proceedings
were used against them, I am yet to seek.

After this a new Parliament being assembled at Westminster in February 1625,
they appointed a special Committee for Religion, to examine the forementioned
abuse of stopping proceedings against popish Recusants, Priests and Jesuits, by
Letters under the privy Signet; who issued out this ensuing Warrant to the
Signet-Office, found among Secretary Windebanks papers.

Lunae, 6. of March 1625. at the Committee for Religion M. Moore. M. Will.
Whitaker. M. L^u. Whitaker. M. Nubery.



THese Sub-committees are appointed to search at the Signet-Office what
warrants have passed for the stay of the execution of Priests and Jesuits, or
of any other legal proceedings against popish Recusants, since his Majesty's
gracious Answer to both Houses of Parliament, delivered at Oxford in August,
and they are to bring Copies of all such Warrants, or of the Dockets to that
Commitee at their sitting upon Thursday next.

John Pym.


This is a true Copy of the Order delivered at the Signet-Office by Master
Mo^re, Master Lau. Whitaker and Master Newbery, examined with the Order it
self the tenth of this instant March, 1625.

John Grymesdyche.


What the ground of this warrant was, appears by the report of Master Pym, in
the Commons Iournall of that Parliament.

Iovis 23. Mart^, 3. Car. Regi^.
MAster Pym reports from the Committee for religion, a Letter written to the
Major of Yorks, for repriving of some Iesuit^, Priesis, and other Recusants;
there being doubt made of the Letter, being under the Signe^ a Sub-committee
was appointed by the Committee of religion to examine this Letter, with the
Original at the Signet-Office, they going thither an Answer was returned by
(...)
Mr. Windebanke, the then Clarke there, that he cannot show them that they
desire without order from the King.

After which this Order was made in the Commons House. Sab. 29. Apr. 2. Car.
Regis.

THe Committee for Religion is to have power to make Sub-committees to go and
examine any that be sick, or in prison, or have other lawful impediment,
concerning saying of Mass, or printing of popish books, or other things in
that nature.

In the month of May following, the House took diverse Examinations concerning
popish Schoolmasters, and re^^sants that were in office, and particularly of a
Jesuit that had a lodging, and was in Commons in Graye-Inne; and at last they
agreed upon a Petition against recusants in office, and to present their nature
therewith to the King, to the end they might be removed.

Martis 6. Iunij. 3. Car. Regis.
THe Petition against Recusants in authority, was ^grossed, read and allowed
to'be presented to his Majesty, and this to be done by the Privy Counsel of
the House, and Sir John Fulleston, which was done accordingly: but with what
real success, I can give no exact account.

In this Parliement these ensuing articles against Popish Recusants were
consulted of in the Common House, with an intent to draw them into an act.

Articles consulted upon in Parliament for a Law against Recusants.
1. THat where by former Statutes the King was to have 20. li. a month from
Recusants, hereafter his Majesty shall take two parts of the lands of every
Recusant. 2. Churchwardens monthly to present the names, quality and ability
of every person in their parish absenting from Church to Justices of peace. 3.
A new Oath with more additions to be taken concerning the Supremacy. 4. His
former Law to be explained and confirmed, that the Husband shall pay for the
recusancy of his Wife. 5. That Recusants shall not keep any weapons in their
houses, but what shall be allowed by Justices of the peace, and shall
nevertheless be assessed for provision of Arms. 6. All papisticall books to
be prohibited from coming over from beyond the fear, o^ here received upon a
great pain. 7. If any shall discover a Papist, or any other at Mass, whereby
they may be apprehended, he shall have the third part of their Lands and Goods
for his pains and inteligence. 8. Every Recusant shall cause his child to be
baptized in his parish Church, within a month after birth, upon great pain.
9. No Recusant to bear office of Justice of peace or otherwise, or any man
whose wife shall be a Recusant, or practice law common or civil, or physic
nor have command in war; and no Recusant being Patron of any Benefice, shall
have power to present unto it; but both Vniversityes shall present unto it
alternis vicibus. 10. All persons convicted of recusancy shall stand
excommunicated (ipso facto) No Recusants shall hold any lands or Tenements by
curtine; no woman recusant shall have dower or thirds of her Husbands lands or
goods by any custom or usage of place. 11. That the children of Recusants
above the age of five years shall be taken from their Parents, and placed for
education by Justices or peace in every parish, and to be maintained at their
Parents charge, and they not to have power to dis-inherit them. 12. No Recusant
shall be Guardian in Socage; Chivalry, or pour-nature to any person, etc. 13.
That no person shall go beyond the seas without taking the new Oath, unless
by warrant from the King, or ^ix of the privy Counsel. 14. If any of the Kings
Subjects shall be reconciled to the Pope in any part beyond the ^eas, and
return to any of the Kings Dominions, it shall be treason, as if it had been
done in England.
Pope Urban the eighth having intelligence of this Parliament^ strict
proceedings against popish Priests and Recusants in England, sent this enming
consolatory Bull unto them (found among Secretary Windebankes papers) at the
end whereof I find the torme of an Oath which the English Priests take, before
they be admitted into any Ecclesiastical Office in the Church of Rome; both
which I shall here subjoyne.

Urbanus P P. Octavns.
DILECTI FILII Salutem and Apostolicam Re^edictionem. Non semper terrena
faelicitas est beneficium coeli and patrimonium p^^tatis, pacemenim cum p^etate
v^olens ecclesia, non rare experta est potentiam mortalium esse stipendium
sceleris; quare Catenas martyrum anteferimus Coronis triumphantium, and Deus
sempiter^^^ principatus coelestes policetur, non (...) qui superbo pede jura
proterunt, sed qui p^rsecutionem pati^ntur propter justitiam, Veritatem hance
thesa^ris divinitatis delatam in terris contemplans Apostel^^, non modo animam
non despondebat, sed superabundabat gaudio in omni tribulatione fideli^^^. Qui
enim digm habentur pro nomine Jesus contu^^liam pats, ij toss^ram divine (...)
videntur possidere and eo pretio abundant, quo sunt venalia diademata
ater^tatis. Mallemus ^quidem human^ imbecilitatis memores gloriam and divitias
esse in Tabernaculis ^^storum, (...) onim eum Vestras miserius contemplantur^
Dilect: Filij, tantups Vestre virtut^ and Christo propugnants fidimus ^t Vobis
audeamus gratulari segetem triumphorum. NOTE.
Speravit quidem Ecclesia fore, ut potentissims Regis animus, qui e Catholica
Conjuge procreare optavit, haredes patr^s Rega^s imperaturos, delmitus
suspir^^s ^^^ori^ pietatis, pateretur Regalis connubit dotem, esse libertatem
side^. Nunc autem formidantur vota and consilia ^nimicorum Vestrorum: Et cum
Religio Orthodoxa Regali diademate in optima Reg^a coronetur, ^stic tamen non
desunt qui F^lus Nostris andeant Careerem and supplicia (...). ^redimus esse
inter Vos qui mortificationem Jesus Christi proprio corpore circumferre cupiant,
and blanditias vol^ptatis atque ambition^s titulos posthab^ant lamenae
carnisicum ac vinculorum cont^meli^s: si qui tamen istic sunt quos praesent
setiam prosperitatis defiderium teneat, eos certiores fieri cupi^^s de illoru^^
salute (...) fice solicitam esse Pontificiam charitatem. NOTE.
Nullum a Nobis relinquitur officium quod minacem ingruentis tempestatis
caliginem possit in optatam consolationes auram co^vertere. Tamen sid^latet
Infernus o^ (...) and Martyrum sangume^ fittat impacata erudelitas, armari
debetis scuto inexpugnabili bonae voluntatis, and coelum in curcere, coronam in
equ^lco, immortalitatem in morte cogitare. Inter Britann^cos naafraganti^
religionis scopulos (...) Christi suit tabula quae Nos perduxit (...) portum
bon^ voluntatis Vestrae. H^ Copus est amplexari (...) praesentia, cujus virtute
dalcesect amari (...), Cogitate dilect^ filij in qua slatione commormint and
quorum (...) fitis spectaculum. Vos Angelicae legiones circumvolitant que
ph^alis (...) desideria (...) excipiunt, and ad sanctuarum serunt misericordia
(...). Patefactis coeli sori^^^, spectator Idem and muncrator Christus, Vebis
sacros civ^um Vestroram (...) o^^endit, quos Anglia proprio sangume intulit
coeluum con^th^s. Anxia pre^es suspirantis Ecclesia Vobis a Deo petunt
spirituns charitattis and fortitudons. Vestram salutem jurant concilia Sonatus
Apostolici and vota Christianitatis. In tanto Coeli Terrarumque Theatro quem
Vobis conscientiae victricis vigorem, quam animi trumphantis sublimitatem
inesse d^oet? Fuerunt in consimili diserimine consilia majorum Vestrorum,
lumina spiritus Saacti and arma Iucis sint verba vestra oracula sapientiae,
sint actiones vestrae exempla fortitudinis: quos si eo usque vis progrediatur,
ut Vos ad Nox^^m iliud and illicitum Anglicanae sidelitatis juramentum adigat,
mementote nationem Vestram ab universo Angelorum spectantium concessu audiri,
and adhaertat lingua Vestra faucibus Vestris, priusquam authoritatem Beati
Petri, eajurisjurands formula (...) eatis. Noa e^^s ^b^^d solum agitur, uti
fides Regi servetur, sed ut fa^rum ^^versa ecclesiae sceptrum eripiatur Vicaijs
Dei omnipotents; quod fa^licis recorda^^^nis Paulus quintus predecessor Noster
(...) tam gravi deliberatione decrevit, id omnino (...) veritatis servive
debetis, dilectis filij. Tributunt hoc Principi Apostoiorum debitum nullae
h^minius minae a^t blindesiae unquam a Vobis extorqueaut: qui vero suadent ij
visionem mendacem and divinationem frauduleutam prophetaat (...) enim viro
Christiano debet patcutium gladius vitam eripere quam sidem. Quod si Angelus
(...) de Caelo descendeus, Vos aliter quam veritas Apostolica doceat. (...)
sit. Nos interea Pairem luminum orabimus, ne exaecari (...) cor (...) Regts qui
certs discero debeb^t, quanta in ijs quae policers potesbis sides habendajis
(...) sub^^t^s, qui ne se perjurij aligent, (...) spiritum emitteri quam (...)
vir^^s Vestra (...) prae^osior auro, qued igne prob tur, docete Regaum (...)
tantum non mess (...) hostium saevitia, ut in cordibus Vestris possit aeternum
(...) ignem extiaguere.

O ate pro persequentibus Vos: humilitas, patientia concordia, (...) oration
^rmae sunt, que intam saecadimicatione debetis distriagere. ut (...)
caelestis^m triumphorn* ^lorsant (...) mambus vestris. ^um enim ipsius etiam
Christi Carnisices vetatis sic beatus Petrus gladio vnluerate, hortansur vos
praesens ecclesi^ bonum prae oculis habeutes, ut cogitetis ^^rea cogitationes
pacis, and Reg^ etiam dum mortalem vitam adimit, (...) vitam exoptetis. Ita
belligerare fas est milites Christ sub vexillo Crucis: Confundantur ora
loquentum iniqua, cum odisse etiam nesciatis, qui vos exeructant, Caeterum
Dominus qui potest tristitiam Vestram in gaudium convertere, erit a dextris
Vestris ne commoveamini, and illius testamenti nunquam obliviscetur quo
haereditatem Regni ^^elestis imitatoribus suis legavit. Compiectimur Vos
Apostolicae charitatis brachijs, dilecti filij, quibus pateruum patrocin^um
pollicemur, and benedictionem Nostram perma^enter impartimur.

Datum Romae apud Sanctum Petrum sub annulo Piscatoris die 5. Maij 1626.
Pontisicatu^ Nostri tertio. A tergo; Dilectis Filijs Catholicis Anglicanis
Ionnes Campholus.

Fo^ma Juramenti quod praestant Sacerdotes Angli qui ad aliquod ossicinum
Ecclesiasticum assumuntur.
(...) Preshiter in verbo sacerdotis Iuro and pro^^^ quod ab hac hora fidelis
Re^e^^^dissima Domino R. Episcopo Chalced; O^^, Angli^ and Scotia Successorum
ejus parebo mandatis. Clero em Anglieano seculari cujus sincerum membrum me
esse prositeor, fidelis and devotus semper existam, Illiusque dignitatem tuebor
ac bonum ejus tam spirituale tam temporale pro posse meo and essicaciter
procurabo: N^hil in ejusdem Cleri damnum aut projudicium sciens and volens
faciam, aut attentabo, vel ab alijs siert aut attentari permittam, neque sciam
qued non revelabo praefato Domino ordin arto meo and ejus successoribus vel
saltem per quem possit ad ejus and successorum ejus notitiam sine fraud and
dolo aperto celeriter pervenire itame Deus adjuvet.

Haec forma Juramenti nemini ostendatur nisi illis ad quos spectat.

This Parliament dissolving in discontent, on the 15. of June 1626. not long
after this Bull; the popish Recusants were so far from being in danger of any
open persecution against them within our Realms, needing such a Cordial as
this from Rome, that on the contrary, this very year, even when the Parliament
was sitting, they were upon the point of gaining a public Toleration of their
Religion in Ireland, where they plotted first openly to erect the same (being
furthest out of the Parliaments and peoples view) and then to set it up openly
by degrees nearer home.

This Toleration there, by their powerful Court-friends and purses, was so
far resolved on and proceeded in, that the Protestant Bishops of Ireland knew
of no other meants to prevent it, but by joining in a public Protestation
against it; the Copy, occasion and manner whereof I shall here present you
with, as I found them in the Archbishop of Canterburies Study, sent (as it
seems) to the then Archbishop out of Ireland.

The judgment of the Archbishops and Bishops of Ireland concerning a
Toleration of the popish Religion, by public Protestation.
THE Religion of Papists is superstitious and idolarous, their faith and
doctrine erroneous and heretical, their Church (in respect of both)
Apostolical; to give them therefore a Toleration of Religion, or to consent
that they may freely exercise their Religion, and profess their Faith and
Doctrine is a grievous sin, and that in two respects. First, it is to make
our selves accessory not only to their superstitious Idolatries; Heresies, and
in a word, to all the abominations of Popery; but also (which is a consequent
of the former) to the perdition of the seduced people, which perish in the
deluge of the Catholic Apostasy. Secondly, to grant them a Toleration in
respect of any money to be given, or contribution to be made by them, is to set
Religion to sale, and with it tho souls of the peoples, whom Christ our
Savior has redeemed with his blood. And as it is a great sin, so it is a
matter of most dangerous consequence, the consideracion whereof we leave to the
Wife and Judicious, beseeching the Zealous God of Truth, to make those who are
in authority Zealous of God glory and of the advancement of true Religion,
zealous, resolute and conragious against all popery, superstition and idolatry.

There were likely to be granted unto the Papists in Ireland many privileges,
and withal a Toleration for their Religion, in the consideration of the
payment of a great sum of money. This Easter^ term 1626. there was a great
meeting of all the chiefest of the whole Kingdom, and the Archbishops and
Bishops, etc. and it was likely to be concluded: Doctor Dowman Bishop of
London-derrey April II. preached at Dublin before the Lord Deputy and the
whole State; his Text was Luke I. at the 79. In the midst of his Sermon he
openly read this Protestation above written, subscribed by the Archbishops and
Bishops of Ireland, and at the end he boldly said, and let all the people say,
Amen. And suddenly all the whole Church almost shook with the sound, that
their Amen made, etc. the Lord Deputy called from the Bishop of Derry a copy
both of his Sermon and Protestation to send to the King; the learned and
courageous Bishop gave this answer, that there was nothing he either spoke or
read in the Pulpit but he would willingly justify it before his Majesty, and
feared not who read or saw it. So now by Gods mercy nothing may yet be done, or
will be till the Lord Deputy hear from the King.

The Bishop hereupon was sent for into England, and after some attendance here,
returned back into Ireland, where he dyed at his Bishopric.

How bold the popish Titular Bishops were in Ireland, and how they there
ordained Mass Priests, by authority from the sea of Rome before this
Protestation, will appear by these ensuing Letters of Orders, conferred by
Thomas Bishop of Mead; which I found in the Archbishop of Canterburies Study,
thus indorced with his own hand, May 27. 1637.

The form of an Ordination by the Bishop of Mead in Ireland, according to the
form of the Sea of Rome.
THOMAS, Deiet Apostolica gratia Medensis Episcopus, Universis singulis
praesentes Nostras literas visuris salutem, in eo qui est vera salus. Notum
facimus quod Nos Ordines in Cameris privatis Hereticae persecutionis metu
celebrantes. Dilectum Nobis Nolanum Feranan, Dereusis diaecesios Diaconum,
ideoneum repertum and Sacrum Presbyteratus ordinem, Sabatho sancto die 5.
Aprilis, Anne 1625. juxta (...) Calendarij computum, promovendum duximus, et
promouemus, rite in Domino (...) Messarum solemnia, virtute dinissorialum sui
Ordinarij. Datum in loco Mansionis Nostrae die and Anno praedictis.

Signed Thomas Medensis, and sealed with his Episcopal Seal.
A Copy of the Certificate for the order of Priesthood. This is a true Copy of
that Copy of the Certificate, which was this 27. of May 1635. sent in unto the
Counsell-board.

Sir E. Nicholas.




How popery and Papists have since increased in that Kingdom, notwithstanding
this Protestation, and what open Toleration of popish Bishops, Priests, Mass,
Monasteries, Nunneries, and a College of Jesuits, etc. has been in that
Realm, you shall hear anon, in the continued seris of this Design, which
transports me into France for a time, from whence it had its second birth.

Not long after the Kings Match with France, there was a design in that Realm
to extirpate the Protestants, and surprise all their fortified Towns in that
Kingdom, whereof Rochell was the principal; which being a maritane Town,
furnished with a good Fleet of Ships, able to make good their Harbor, and
furnish themselves with provisions and supplies from all their Protestant
friends, maugre all the Sea-forces of the French King; thereupon the French
Cardinal Richelieu and his confederates taking the advantage of their new
interest in the King of England, by reason of this marriage; importuned him to
lend his Brother of France the Vaunt-guard, one of the Vessels of his royal
Navy, and seven Merchantmen of War, to be employed in his service by sea:
which the King condescending to, sent the said Ships under the command of
Captain Pennington into France, to be employed as the French King and his
Counsel should prescribe. Who designing them for service against Rochell, to
surprise their Ships, block up their Haven, and intercept their trade and
relief, contrary to their expectation; the Captains, Masters and Mariners of
the Ships were so much discontented, that they were designed against the
Rochelers, who were not only their friends, but the chief professors and
mainta^iners of the Protestant Religion in those parts, and that they should be
made the instruments of their ruin, and draw the guilt of their innocent
Protestant blood upon their souls, that they all unanimously resolved, they
would rather dye, sink, or be hanged up at the Masts of their Ships, then
stir one jot, or weigh anchor for such an unchristian detestable employment.
Captain Pennington their Admiral, and the French used all the rhetoric and
persuasions they could to alter this their heroic and most Christian
resolution; but they continued inflexible, and would neither by allurements,
rewards, nor threats be drawn to such an unworthy action, resolving rather to
sink then stir therein. Whereupon Captain Pennington acquainted his Majesty
and the Duke of Buckingham by Letters with this their peremptory resolution,
and desires their direction herein; the King (I know not by whose ill advice)
returns him this answer both by word of mouth and this ensuing Warrant (the
copy whereof was found among Windebankes and the Lord Cottingtons Papers.)

CHARLES R.

Pennington:
THese are to charge and require you, immediately upon sight hereof; that
without all difficulty and delay, you put Our former commandment in execution,
for the consigning of the Ship under your charge, called the Vaunt-guard, into
the hands of the Marquess de Effort, with all her Equipage, Artillery and
Ammunition, assuring the Officers of the said Ship whom it may concern, that
we will provide for their indemnity: and We further charge and command you,
that you also require the seven Merchants Ships in Our name, to put themselves
into the service of Our dear Brother the French King, according to the promise
made unto him: and in case of backwardness or refusal, We command you to use
all forcible means in your power, to compel them thereunto, even to their
sinking: NOTE.
and in these several charges, see you fail not, as you will answer the
contrary at your utmost peril; and this shall be your sufficient Warrant.

Given as Our Court at Richmond the 28. of July 1625. To Our Trusty and
welbeloved, John Pennington, Captain of Our Ship called the Vaunt-guard.

Upon receipt of this Warrant Captain Pennington (as I have been certainly
informed from very credible persons of note, privy to the transactions of this
business). threatened to shoot and sink the Ships, and hang up the Mariners
that refused to yield obedience, and serve against Rochell; but they all
unanimously declined the service, bidding him do his pleasure with them; for
go against the Rochelers they would never; but if they were commanded upon any
other service not against the Protestants, they would obey: Whereupon those who
refused to serve in this expedition, were commanded to quit the Ships and
return into England; which all did but two, (who soon after came to desperate
ends, the one being blown up with Gunpowder, the the other drowned or
slain.) Upon this, the English Ships were according to this direction,
delivered to the French, manned with Frenchmen and other Foreigners, and
joining with some more Vessels of the French King, destroyed the Rochell Fleet,
blocked up their Haven, and ruined that famous Protestant City, with most of
the Protestants in it; which after a long and sharp siege by sea and land, was
through famine surrendered into the Papist hands, the loss whereof was
generally, if not justly imputed to our ill Counselors; who after they had
been instruments to destroy their Ships, the principal means of their safety,
support, and preservation, by an unfortunate voyage of the Duke of Buckingham
to the Isle of Ree (to what end but to ruin Rochell and the Protestant party
in France, or to revenge the disappointment of his lust, as many muttered, is
yet unknown to the world) exhausted their Ammunition, Victuals, provisions,
men to supply our necessities at Ree, and after our departure thence, left our
sick and mai^ed soldiers there to help devour the residue of their emptied
stores, and then suffered them to be totally blocked up at sea: when we had
thus engaged them on our behalf, neglecting to send them timely supplies of
Victual, Ammunition, shipping, men (which was strangely delaid from time to
time contrary to promise) and when our ships went at last, they gave over the
design of relieving is as desperate, before ever they assayed whether it was
feasible ((...) Master Henry now Lord Iermin, and some others in that
unfortunate expedition informed me) and then making only a Bravado toward the
Barracado, as if they meant to force it with their fireships, and engines made
with great stones (brought to London to repair Paul's, and so unlikely to do
any good service for Rochell) they discharged their Ordnance very valiantly
above a league or two from the Works they were to force, and without
adventuring nearer or attempting to force the Bar, returned presently with
infinite dishonor for England, leaving all their fireships and Engines in them
to the French in a most unwarlike manner: but in their return homewards many
of these Ships were wrecked drowned in a tempest, who would not adventure
sinking in a fight, and the whole Navy shattered. Soon after which, poor
Rochell (thus deferred and betrayed) was surrendered into the French Kings and
Cardinals possession, and all the Protestant Towns in France surprised, yeeded,
pillaged, dismantled; so as they have since no Town or Fort of strength to
retire unto, to preserve themselves from the force or massacres of their bloody
Adversaries to whose merciless cruelties they are now wholly exposed upon all
occasions by our means. I pray God this (...) against them, and the blood of
those many thousand Protestants then shed in France by our occasion, be not one
principal cause why God (by way of retaliation) has permitted the Papists in
Ireland and England to shed so much Protestant blood in these Realms as they
have done of late, lot our refusing or neglecting to avenge their blood upon
those romanized Conspirators, who were the occasion of this their irreperable
loss and bloodshed.

But to return home again from this deplorable action; the second Parliament
in King Charles his Reign being dissolved suddenly in disgusts, as you have
heard, there was a desperate plot laid to blow up our Religion, Liberties,
Properties, all at once by the Jesui^^call, Arminian and Prelatical Faction.

To effect this, they set on foot an enforced Loan or Benevolence to the King,
to which every man must be summoned and compelled to lend money according to his
ability: to which end there were Commissions and Instructions, together with
special Commissioners senc into every County, to summon all Freeholders and
men of estate to lend what the Commissioners should asse^^e them: and to
prepare the people the better to contribute, Doctor Manwaing preached two
Sermons before the King and his Court at White Hall, and Doctor Sibthorpe
another Sermon at the Assis^^at Northampton (by the now Archbishop of
Canterbury his instigation, who perused, and caused these Sermons to be
printed, by the Kings special Command, with some additions and purgations of
his own) to preach the people out of their just rights in point of Conscience;
and the Judges were likewise enjoyed in their charges and circuits, to declare
the legallity of them (and so inthrall the Subjects to this and all other
arbitrary taxes) in point of Law. And that this malevolent enforced Benevolence
might pass more currently and plausibly among the people, the aiding of our
Protestant Allies in Germany, Denmark, France (and particularly the relief of
Rochell, then besieged) against the Papists and their potent enemies was made
the principal end thereof, and a Parliament was promised to be summoned if
this loan succeeded, otherwise not, though the issue proved, a Parliament was
rather pretended, then really intended by the chief Advisers and Promoters of
it, to wit, the Duke of Buckingham, Bishop Laud and their Confederates.

The total sum designed to be levied proportionably upon all Counties by
this loan (as appears by Secretary Windebanks memorials concerning it) was
173411. li. His Majesty's Letter, to the several Counties to draw on this
Contribution (as Secretary Windebanks own Copy manifests) were as follows,
being all dated in February 1627.

CHARLES REX.

IT is now known to all men, that Our dear Uncle the King of Denmark, is
brought into great distress, that without present succor the Sound will be
lost, Our Garrison in Stoad broken by the Emperors Foroes, which now
straightly besiege it, Our Eastland Trade (which maintains Our Shipping) and
the Staple of Hamborough (which vents Our Cloth) both gotten from Us: Besides,
it is known likewise, NOTE.
that two great Kings of Spain and France, and the Pope with them are joined
to root out Our Religion; that their Admirals the Duke of Guise and Don
Frederick de Toledo, are at this present before Rochell and endeavoring to
block it up: that they have store of Land-men ready upon the coast of Britain,
with them and other forces ready to invade us.

Of these imminent dangers to true Religion, to Our Allies, Our Countries, and
the Trade of Our people, We assure Our selves every well-affected Subject will
be very sensible, as We are; and certainly there is a necessity come upon Us,
not so much of debating as acting Our defense; and unless there be a present
means found to set a Fleet to Sea to disband them that lie before Rochell,
that Town and Our Religion in those parts are sure to be ruined.

We have (beyond the custom of Our royal Progenitors) spared neither Our
Jewels nor Plate, nor Our Lands, to supply public occasions; We now expect
speedy and proportionable supply for this service from the love and duty of Our
People, whence that charge for their own preservation should ever come.

We find further in the debate of this business with Our privy Counsel, that
it is not possible this I lect of Ours now to be set forth, can stay safely
till a Parliament be assembled; and We think it neither wise nor safe for Our
Selve or you to be taken sitting, in a Parliament, and so proclaim to the
world that We consult too late; therefore though We are issuing out Our Writs
for a present Parliament, yet because We find the business cannot stay so long
(since that must have the ordinary course of Summons) We expect your present
performance of this service, not doubting but that the Parliament when it comes
will consider the urgency of the thing, and the have of the time ^and give Us
thanks for this timely provision. NOTE.


Now this We must let you know, that if you make this present supply, We will
then go on with Our Parliament, if not, then We must think of a more speedy
way: and yet it is not We that put this condition upon you but the moere
necessity of the time and the service; which if you neglect, then it is not Our
fault but your own that ye have not a Parliament; for We must put you in
mind, that it is not possible the affairs of Christendom should receive a
turn to Our advantage, but only by Gods blessing and Our speed; and we assure
you that your making us and your selves by this present aid to sit safe in
Parliament, nothing shall then divert us from meeting you at our day prefixed.

And since all men see that it is not safe to set down now without this Fleet
to back us, it will be less sit then when the year is further advanced, and
though this may seem to you a great charge, yet we have been so careful in
ordering and proportioning the business, that we have laid a greater sum
upon Our Self then upon You.

And we further recommend upto you, that Our former distractions (the only
causes of Our disadvantage abroad) may be laid down, that so God's blessing
may come in to Our success: that as Our last devisions did us more harm then
the common enemy, so our present union testified in this foregoing sign of
preparing this Fleet (which is of greater consequence and will add more credit
then the money it self) may be the happy forerunner of a future happiness.

And last of all, since this great business of setting out Ships used to be
chaged upon the port Towns and neighboring Ships, is too heavy for them to
bear alone in this great proportion; therefore we have thought sit, with the
advice of Our privy Counsel, and agreeable to the presidents of former times,
to cause the whole charge of this Fleet to be cast up and distributed among all
the Counties at a proportionable rate, according to which proportion the sum
to be raised in.

And because we are confident of your forwardness and zeal to the service so
deeply concerning the interest and safety of you all; we give you the power,
but commit the trust for the manner of levying thereof to your care; yet in
such sort, that you will not make the uneven rate of Subsidy your only rule of
proportion, but proceed according to the true worth of mens-lands and estates
within the County, that so the poorer may be eased, and yet the business be
done.

The time assigned for Our said Fleet to beat sea, is the first of March next;
and (...) fore you are presently upon receipt of these Our Letters to assemble
your selves, and to apportion the several sums to each devision or hundred,
and within three days after to repair to the said several places, and to take
order for the settling of Collectors, which you are with all speed to (...) to
Our Counsel, and to take order or the return of the montes before the said
first of March.

What further instructions shall be thought necessary, you shall receive from
Our Counsel; but thus much We are pleased to signify under Our own hand that
you and all men may know, that the necessary preservation of the Church and
Commonwealth presieh Us to this have, and that We for Our part will not be
wanting to Our duty of protection; and We are confident our Subjects will not
desert either Us or themselves, the Church or Common wealth; neither doubt We
but that Gods blessing will be upon our mutual accord and endeavors, which We
hope the present ensuing Parliament will (to our great comfort) manifest to the
World.


How illegal this Loan was, and what an unlawful Oath and instructions
followed this Letter, you may read in the Petition of Right, 3. Caro^^.

The Papists were very forwards to advance this ^oane, since it made much to
promote their designs, and would have been a means to keep off a Parliament,
the only obstacle to their proceedings growth and intentions; insomuch that
Doctor (...) in his Sermon, page, 30, 31, 32, urg^th their example, to periwade
submission to this loan; and Doctor S^bthorte in his Sermon entitled (...) P.
20, 21.
Apostoticall Obedience, has this passage to induce Protestants to contribute
cheerfully and largely to this Loan. The Papists lie at wait, it they could
find a rent between our Sovereign and his Subjects to reduce Superstition unto
England: I speak no more then (...) from themselves; whiles I have observed
their forwardness TO OFFER DOUBLE, according to the current of a later law;
yea to profess, that THEY WOULD DEPART WITH THE HALF OF THEIR GOODS: And how
or why can this FORWARDNESS be in them, but in hop to cast the (...) of
Frowardness upon us, and to seem that (which the Jesuits will not suffer
(...) to be) loving and loyal Subjects, ando. You may guess at the end of
this projcst by the Papists forwardness to advance it.

But notwithstanding this forwardness of the Papists and others to promote
this Benevolence the best affected Gentlemen to Religion, Parliament ^and the
common Liberty in all Counties, considering the danger thereof strenuously
(...) it; for which di^^ of them were enforced to dance attendance on the
Counsel and others imprisoned; by whose examples, this project was in a great
in cause frustrated and a new Parliament resolved to be summoned by the Major
Vote of the Counsel Table. Ian. ^9. 1627. though the now Archbishop with some
others opposed it, and accordingly a Parliament was summoned and assembled in
March following.

A little before the beginning of this Parliament, a College of Jesuits who
kept to other in Commons, and had their officers and books of account duly
kept, was discovered in (...)- well, near the Church; their Books. Vestments,
Relics, were seized on, and some of their persons (hid in private owners of
their College) (...) ended by Justice Long, and sent to Newgate: But when they
were to be (...) they were by their powerful friends at Court (I know not by
what War^^^^ and special commands) ^^^cased upon bail, and conveyed out of
harms way, (...) great offense and discontent both of the people and
Parliament, which examined this ^rand abuse, but could not apprehend the
Jesuits to do exemplary justice on them to potent were their Patrons. Among
their papers there was found the copy of (...) newly directed by them to their
Father Rector at Braxels; the extract whereof; I met with in the now
Archbishops Study, thus indorsed with his own hand.

March 1628. A Jesuits Letter sent to the Recter at Bruxels, about the ensuing
Parliament.
Wherein there are these memorable passages, not fit to be concealed.
FATHER RECTOR, let not the damp of astonishment seize upon your Ardent and
Zealous Soul in apprehending the sudden and unexpected calling of a
Parliament: We have not opposed, but rather furthered it, so that we hope as
much in this Parliament, as ever we feared any in Queen Elizabeth's days. NOTE.
You must know, the Counsel is engaged to assist the King by way of
Perogative, in case the Parliamentary way should fail; you shall see this
Parliament will resemble the Pelican, which takes a pleasure to dig out with
her beak her own bowels.

The election of the Knights and Burgesses has been in such confusion of
apparent faction, as that which we were wont to procure heretofore with much
art and industry (when the Spanish match was in treaty) now breaks out
naturally as a both or boil, and spets, and spues out its own rankor and
venom.

You remember how that most famous and immortal Statesman, the Count of
Gondamare, fed King James his fancy, and rocked him asleep with the soft and
sweet sound of peace, to keep up the Spanish treaty. Likewise we were much
bound to some Statesmen of our own Country, to gain time in procuring these
most advantageous cessations of Arms in the Palatinate, and advancing the
honor and integrity of the Spanish Nation, and villifying the Hollanders,
remonstrating to King James, that that State was most ungrateful both to his
predecessors (Queen Elizabeth) and his sacred Majesty; that the States were
more obnoxious then the Turk, and perpetually injured his Majesty's loving
Subjects in the East Indies; and likewise they have usurped from his Majesty,
the regality and unvaluable profit of the narrow Seas, in fishing upon the
English coast, etc.

This great Statesman had but one principal means to further their great and
good designs, which was to set on King James, NOTE.
that none but the Puritan Faction which plotted nothing but Anarchy and his
confusion, were averse to this most happy Union. We steered on the same course,
and have made great use of this anarchicall election, and have prejudicated and
anticipated the great one, that none but the Kings enemies and his are chosen
of this Parliament, etc.

We have now many strings to our Bow, and have strongly fortified our faction,
and have added two Bulwarks more; for when King James lived (you know) he was
very violent against Armininisme, and interrupted (with his pestilent wit and
deep learning) out strong designs in Holland, and was a great friend to that
old Rebel and Heretic the Prince of Orange.

Now we have planted that sovereign Drugge Armintanisme, NOTE.
which we hope will purge the Pretestants from their Heresy, and it
flourishes and (...) fruit in due season.

The materials which build up our other Bulwark, are the projectors and
beggars of all ranks and qualities whatsoever. Both these Factions cooperate to
destroy the Parliament, and introduce a new species and form of government,
which is Olligarchy.

These serve as direct mediums and instruments to our end, which is the
universal Catholic Monarchy: Our foundation must be mutation, this mutation
will cause a relaxation, which will serve as so many violent diseases, as the
Stone, Gout, etc. to the speedy destruction of our perpetual and insufferable
anguish of the body, which is worse then death it self.

We proceed now by counsel and mature deliberation, how and when to work upon
the Dukes jealousy and revenge, and in this we give the honor to those which
merit it, which are the Church Catholics.

There is another matter of consequence which we take much into our
consideration and tendor care, which is to stave off the Puritanes, that they
hang not in the Dukes ears, they are impudent subtle people.

And it is to be feared left they should negotiate a reconciliation between the
Duke and the Parliament; it is certain the Duke would gladly have reconciled
himself to the Parliament at Oxford and Westminster; but now we assure our
selves we have so handled the matter, that both Duke and Parliament are
irreconcilable.

For the better prevention of the Puritanes, the Arminians have already locked
up the Dukes cares, and we have those of our own Religion which stand
continually at the Dukes chamber, to see who goes in and out; we cannot be too
circumspect and careful in this regard. I cannot choose but laugh to see, how
some of our own coat have re-incountred themselves, you would scarce know them
if you saw them: and it is admirable how in speech and gesture they act the
Puritanes. The Cambrige Scholars to their woeful experience shall see, we can
act the Puritanes a little better then they have done the Jesuits; they have
abused our sacred patron Saint Ignatius in jest, but we will make them smart
for it in earnest. I hope you will excuse my merry digression, for I confess
unto you, I am at this time transported with joy, to see how happily all
Iustruments and means, as well great as lesser, cooperate unto our purposes:
But to return unto the name fabric: our fouaedation is Arminianisme, NOTE.
the Arminians and Projectors, as it appears in the Premises, affect mutation:
this we second and enforce by probable arguments. In the first place, we take
into consideration the Kings honor and present necessity, and we show how the
King may free himself of his ward, as Lewis the XI. did, and for his great
splendour and luster, he may raise a vast revenue, and not be beholding to his
Subjects, (...)
which is by way of imposition of Excise: Then our Church Catholics proceed to
show the means how to settle this excise, which must be by a mercenary army of
Horse and Foot: for the Horse, we have made that sure, they shall be
Foreigners and Germans, who will eat up the Kings Revenues, and spoil the
Country whenever they come, though they should be well paid; what havocke
will they make there when they get no pay, or are not duly paid? they will do
more mischief then we hope the army will do.

We are provident and careful that this Mercenary army of 2000. Horse and
20000, Foot shall be taken on and in pay before the excise be settled: in
forming the excise, the Country is most likely to rise; if the mercenary army
subjugate the Country, then the Soldiers and projectors shall be paid out of
the confiscations; if the Country be too hard for the Soldiers, then they must
consequently mutiny, which is equally advantageous unto us. Our superlative
design is to work the Protestants as well as the Catholics to welcome in a
Conqueror, and that is by this means. We hope instantly to dissolve trades,
and hinder the building of Shipping, in devising probable designs, and putting
out the State upon Expeditions, as that of Cales, in taking away the Merchants
Ships, that so they might not easily catch and light upon the West India Fleet,
etc.


By this Letter we see how Jesuits were the first planters of Arminianisme
among us how they haunted the Dukes lodgings, and projected the bringing in of
the Germane Horse and Excise, the Commissions for both which were realities,
not fancies afterward discovered, read and cancelled in Parliament.

In this Parliament the now Archbishop Doctor La^d was questioned for licencing
Doctor (...) and Sibthorps Sermons, concerning the Loan, for maintaining,
favoring Arminians and persons disaffected to our Religion; and this ensuing
Complaint and Remonstrance drawn and presented by the House of Commons to the
King, concerning the excessive growth of Popery and Arminianisme in England and
Ireland, and the suppression of the Protestant Religion preaching godly
Ministers, Books etc. notwithstanding all former Royal promises, answers and
Protestations to the contrary, made the last Parliament, which proved in event
but pious frauds or policies to delude the impoliticke vulgar.

The Remonstrance delivered by the House of Commons to the King June 11. 1628.
Most dread Sovereign:
AS with all humble thankfulness we (your dutiful Commons now in Parliament
assembled) do acknowledge the great comfort which we have in the assurance of
your Majesty's pious disposition ^ so we think it a most necessary duty (being
called by your Majesty to consult and advise of the great and urgent affairs
of this Church and Commonwealth, finding them at this time in apparent danger
of destruction) faithfully and dutifully to inform your Majesty thereof, (and
with bleeding heart and bonded knee) to crave such speedy redress therein, as
to your own wisdom (unto which we humbly submit our selves and our desires)
shall seem most (...) and convenient.

What a multitude and potency of your Majesty's enemies are abroad; what be
their ambitious and malicious ends, and how vigilant and constantly industrous
they are in pursuing the same, it is well known to your Majesty, together with
the dangers threatened thereby to your sacred person and your Kingdoms, and the
calamities which have already fallen, and has daily increased upon your
Friends and Allies; of all which we are well assured your Majesty is most
sensible, and will accordingly (in your great wisdom, and with the gravest and
most mature Counsels according to the exegency of the times and occasions)
provide (by all good means) to prevent and help the same. To which end, we
most humbly entreat your Majesty first especially to cast your eyes upon the
miserable condition of this your own Kingdom, of late so strangely weakened,
impoverished, dishonored and dejected, that unless (through your Majesty's
most gracious wisdom, goodness and justice) it be speedily raised to a better
condition, it is in no little danger to become a sudden pray to the enemies
thereof; and of the most happy and flourishing, NOTE.
to be the most miserable and contemptible Nation in the world.

In the discovery of which dangerous, mischiefs and inconveniences lying upon
us we do freely protest, that it is far from out thoughts to lay the least
imputation upon your Majesty's sacred person, or the least scandal on your
government: For we do in all sincerity, and with joyfulnesse of our hearts
(not only for our selves, but in the name of all the Commons in your Realm,
whom we represent) ascribe as much honor to your Majesty and acknowledgement
of duty, as a most loyal and affectionate people can give unto the best King,
for so you are, and so you have been pleased abundantly to express your self
this present Parliament, by your Majesty's clear and satisfactory answer to
our Petition of Right; for which both our selves and our Posterities shall
bless God, and ever preserve a thankful memory of your great goodness and
justice therein; and we do verily believe, that all, or most of all those
things, which we shall now present unto your Majesty, are either altogether
unknown to you, or else by some of your Majesty's Ministers offered under such
specious pretenses, as may hide their own bad intentions and ill consequence
of them from your Majesty: But we assure our selves that according to the good
example of your noble Predecessors, nothing can make your Majesty (being a wise
and Judicious Prince, and above all things desirous of the welfare of your
people) more in love, with Parliaments then this (which is one of the
principal ends of calling them) that therein you may be truly informed of the
State of all the several parts of your Kingdom, and how your Officers and
Ministers do behave themselves in the charge and trust reposed in them by your
Majesty, which is scarce possible to be made known to you but in Parliament,
as was declared by your blessed Father, when he was pleased to put the Commons
in mind, that it would be the greatest unfaithfulness and breach of duty to
his Majesty, and of the trust committed to them by their Country that could be;
if in setting forth the grievances of the people, and the condition of all the
parts of this Kingdom from whence they came, they did not dealt clearly with
him (without sparing any how dear or near soever they were unto him) if they
were hurtful unto all the Commonwealth.

In confidence therefore of your Majesty's most ready and gracious acceptance
in a matter of so high importance; in faithful discharge of our duties, we do
(first of all) most humbly beseech your Majesty to take notice, that howsoever
we know your Majesty does from your soul abhor that any such should be imagined
or attempted yet there is a general fear conceived in your people of some
secret working and combination to introduce into this Kingdom Innovation and
change of holy Religion (more precious to us then our lives and whatever the
world can afford.) Our fears and jealousies herein are not merely
conjecturall, but arising out of such certain and visible effects, as may
demonstrate a true and real cause, for notwithstanding the many good and
wholesome laws made to prevent the increase of Popery within this Kingdom, and
notwithstanding your Majesty's most gracious and satisfactory answer to the
Petition of both Houses on that behalf, NOTE.
presented to your Majesty at Oxford, we find there has followed no good
execution or effect; but on the contrary (at which your Majesty out of the
quick sense of your own Religious heart, cannot but be in the highest measure
displeased) those of that Religion do find extraordinary favors and respects
in Court from persons of great quality and power there, unto whom they
continually tesort; and in particular to the Countess of Buckingham's, who her
self openly professing that Religion, is a known favourer and supporter of
them that do the same; which we well hoped (upon your Majesty's Answer to the
aforesaid Petitition of Oxford) should not have been permitted, NOTE.
nor that any of your Majesty's Subjects of that Religion, or justly to be
suspected, should be entertained in the service of your Majesty, or of your
Royal Consort the Queen: Some likewise of that Religion have had Honors,
Offices, and places of command and authority lately conferred upon them.

But that which strikes the greatest terror into the hearts of your loyal
Subjects concerning this point is, NOTE.
that letters for stay of legal proceedings against them have been procured
from your Majesty (by what indirect means we know not) and Commission under
the great Seal granted and executed for composition to be made with popish
Reculants: inhibitions also and restraints both to the Ecclesiastical and
Temporal Courts, and Officers to intermeddle with them; which is conceived to
amount to no less then a Toleration, odions to God, full of dishonor and
extreme disprofit to your Majesty, of great scandal and grief to your good
people, and of apparent dangers of the present estate of your Majesty and this
Kingdom; and in special about London and the Suburbs thereof, where exceeding
many Families of them do make their abode, frequent Mass at Denmark-house and
other places; and by their often meetings and conferences, have unhappy
opportunities of combining their councels and strengths together, to the hazard
of your Majesty's safety, and the State; and most especially in these doubtful
and calamitous times. As our fear concerning change or subversion of Religion
is grounded upon the daily increase of Papists, the only and professed enemies
thereof, for the reasons formerly mentioned; so are the hearts of your Subjects
no less perplexed when with sorrow they behold a daily growth and spreading of
the Faction of the Arminians; that being (as your Majesty well knows) but a
cunning way to bring in Popery, and the professors of those opinions the common
disturbers of the Protestant Churches and incendiaries of those States, wherein
they have gotten any head being Protestants in show, but J^sutes in opinion and
practice; which caused your royal Father (with so much pi^us wisdom and
ardent zeal) to endeavor the suppressing of them, as well at (...) as in the
neighbor Countries: and your gracious Majesty imitating his most worthy
example, have openly and by your Proclamations declared your mislike of those
persons and of their opinions; who (notwithstanding) are much favored and
advanced, not wanting friends even of the Clergy, near to your Majesty;
namely, Doctor Neale Bishop of Winchester, NOTE.
and Doctor Land Bishop of Bath and Wels, who are justly suspected to be
unsound in their opinions that way; And it being now generally the way to
preferment and promotion in the Church, many Scholars do bend their S^ndias
to maintain those Errors: their Books and opinions are suffered to be printed
and published; and on the other side, the impressions of such as are written
against the^, and in defense of the Orthodox Religion, are hindered and
prohibited; and (which is a boldness most incredible) this restraint of
Orthodox Books, is made under color of your Majesty's (formerly mentioned)
Proclamation: The intent and meaning whereof, we know was quite contrary. And
further to increase our fears (concerning innovation in Religion) we find that
there has been no small laboring to remove that, which is the most powerful
means to strengthen and increase our own Religion, and to oppose the contrary,
which is the diligent teaching and instructing the people in the true knowledge
and worship of Almighty God; and therefore means has been sought out to
disparage and discountenance pious, painful, and Orthodox Preachers, and how
conformable soever, and peaceable in their dispositions and carriage they be;
yet the preferment of such is opposed, and instead of being encouraged, they
are molested by vexatious courses and pursuits, and hardly permitted to
Lecture, even in those places where are no constant preaching Ministers:
whereby many of your good people (whose souls in this case we desire your
Majesty to commiserate) are kept in ignorance, and are apt to be easily seduced
into errors and superstition. It does not a little also increase our dangers
and fears this way, to understand the miserable condition of your Kingdom of
Ireland, where without control the popish Religion is openly professed and
practiced in every part thereof, NOTE.
Popish jurisdiction being generally exercised and avowed; Monasteries,
Nunneries and other superstitions houses newly erected, re-edified, replenished
with men and women of several orders, and in a plentiful manner maintained in
Dublin, and most of the great Towns and diverse other places of that Kingdom,
which of Note this.
what ill consequence it may prove, if not seasonably repressed, we leave to
your Majesty's wisdom to judge: But most humbly beseech you (as we assure our
selves you do) to lay the serious consideration thereof to your Royal and
pious heart, and that some timely course may be taken for redress therein.

And now if to all these your Majesty will be pleased to add, the
consideration of the circumstance of time, wherein these courses tending to the
destruction of true Religion, within these your Kingdoms have been taken; even
at such times, when the same is with open force and violence persecuted in
other Countries, NOTE.
and all the reformed Churches of Christendom either depressed or miserably
distressed; we do humbly appeal to your Majesty's Princely judgment, whether
there be not a just ground of fear, that there is some secret and strange
cooperating here with the enemies of our Religion abroad, for the utter
extirpation thereof; and whither if these courses be not speedily redrest, and
the profession of true Religion encouraged we can expect any other but misery
and ruin speedily to fall upon us; especially, if besides the visible and
apparent dangers, whereby we are encompassed round about, you would be pleased
piously to remember the displeasure of Almighty God always bent against the
neglect of his holy Religion; the strokes of whole divine justice we have
already felt, and do still feel (with smart and sorrow) in great measure, etc.


This memorable Petition and Remonstrance predicting (and if then cordially
embruced, pursued, preventing) all those bloody wars and miseries which since
have justly befallen us by the growing Popish party both in England and
Ireland, being presented to his Majesty by the Commons House, was not only
slighted, disregarded, and taken very ill by his Majesty and his Privy
Counselors, but likewise called in and suppressed, and Bishop Land in the
Kings name (by his special command as he pretends) returned this p^remptory
answer to it in writing (the original whereof was found in his Study, under
his own hand) contrary both to his knowledge and conscience.

A Preface first, and then as follows.

AND although We are not bound to give an account of Our Actions but to God
only, out of the honor and integrity of Our Grace, the love and care of Our
people, the great and hearty desire We have to take off all fears and
jealousies from Our loyal and loving Subjects; We have thought fit to declare
these reasons following, why We have called in this Remonstrance, which yet We
presume and constantly believe (...) framed and delivered up unto Us with good
intentions, though by amisguised Zeal.

For first that Remonstrance begins at Religion, and fears innovation of it,
innovation by Popery: But We would have Our Subjects of all sorts to call to
mind what difficulties and dangers We endured not many years since for
Religions sake; that We are the same still, and our holy Religion is as
precious to Us, as it is or can be to any of them; and we will no more admit
innovation therein, then they that think they have done well in fearing it so
much.

It Is ^ue that all effects expected have not followed upon the Petition
delivered at Oxford; but We are in least fault for that: for supply being not
afforded Us, di^inabled Us to execute all that was desired, and caused the stay
of those legal proceedings which have helped to swell up this Remonstrance:
Yet let all the County: of England be examined, and London and the Suburbs
with them, neither is there such a noted increase of Papists, nor such cause of
fear as is made, nor has any a^nounted to such an odious Tolerating as is
charged upon it, nor near any such.

For that Commission so much complained of, both the Matter and (...) of it are
utterly mistaken; for it does not dispense with any Penalty or any course to be
taken with any Papist for the exercise of their Religion; no nor with the (...)
or not conformity to Ours; It was advised for the increase of Our profit, and
the returning of that into Our purse, which abuse or connivency of in^eriour
Ministers might perhaps divert another way: If that or any other shall be
abused in the execution, We will be ready to punish upon any just complaint.

The next fear is the daily growth and spreading of the Arminian Faction,
called a cunning way to bring in Popery: But We hold this charge as great a
wrong to Our Self and Our Government, as the former; for Our People must not
be taught by^ Parliament Remonstrance or any other way, NOTE.
that We are so ignorant of Truth, or so careless of the profession of it,
that any Opinion, or Faction, or whatever it be called, should thrust it self
so far and so fast into Our Kingdoms without Our knowledge of it; this is a
mere dream of them that wake, and would make Our loyal and loving People
think, We sleep the while.

In this charge there is great wrong done to two eminent Prelates that attend
Our, Person, for they are accused without producing any the least show or
shadow or proof against them; and should they, or any other attempt innovation
of Religion, either by that open or any cunning way, We should quickly take
other order with them, and not stay for your Remonstrance.

To help on this, Our people are made believe there is a restraint of Books
Orthodoxall: But We are sure since the late Parliament began, some whom the
Remonstrance calls Orthodox, have assumed to themselves an unsufferable liberty
in printing. Our Proclamation commanded a restraint on both sides till the
passions of men might subside and calm; and had this been obeyed as it ought,
We had not now been tossed in this tempest: and for any distressing or
discountenancing of good Preachers, We know there is none, if they be, as they
are called, Good: But Our good people shall never want that spiritual comfort
which is due unto them. And for the preferments which We bestow. We have ever
made it Our great Care to give them as rewards of desert and pains; but as the
preferments are Outs, so will We be Judge of the desert Our Self, and not be
taught by a Remonstrance.

For Ireland We think in Case of Religion, it is not worse then Queen Elizabeth
left it; and for other affairs it is as good as We found it, nay, perhaps
better: and We take it for a great disparagement of Our Government that it
should be voyced, that new Monasteries, NOTE.
Nunneries, and other Superstitious Houses are erected and replenished in
Dublin and other great Towns of that Our Kingdom: for We assure Our Self,
Our Deputy and Counsel there will not suffer God and Our Government so to be
dishonored, but We should have had some account of it from them; and We may
not endure to have Our good people thus missed They are (...) into bloody (...)
with shows:

There is likewise somewhat considerable in the time, when these practices to
undermine true Religion in Our Kingdoms are set on foot. The Remonstrance
(...) Us, it is now when Religion is opposed by open force in all other parts.
But We must tell Our people, there is no undermining Practices at home against
it, If they practice not against it, that seem most to labor for it; for
while Religion seems to be contended for in such a factious way which cannot be
Gods way, the heat of that does often melt away that, which it labors
earnestly but perhaps not wisely, to preserve; And for Gods judgments which We
and Our people have felt, and have cause to fear, We shall prevent them best
by a true and religious Remonstrance of the amendment of Our lives, etc.

This Answer to the Parliaments Remonstrance, and the public calling of it in
gave great offense to the House, and all true Protestants; but infinitely
imboldned, augmented the Popish and Arminien Faction; and so much disgusted the
common people, (being seconded with a sudden prorogation of the Parliament,
June 26. 1628
to prevent the Remonstrance of the House of Commons, against the illegality of
taking Tonnage and Poundage without grant in Parliament; as appears by the
Kings own Speech at the adjournment on this occasion, printed after his royal
Answer to the Petition of Right) that the King to give the people some seeming
satisfaction (who were then speedily to pay in the greatest Subsidy ever
granted and collected in so short a time) published a Proclamation bearing date
the 7. of July 1628. entitled, A Proclamation, declaring his Majesty's
pleasure concerning the proceedings had and to be had against Popish Recusants
according to the Laws, and for directions to his Majesty's Commissioners for
that service both in the Southern and Northern parts, for making compositions
with Recusants. Which Proclamation though it appeared in show to be against the
Papists, yet really, it was in favor of them, to compound at great undervalues
for the Kings two parts of their Lands; which Compositions came to little or
nothing in the Southern parts, as I have manifested in my P. 15. to 19.
Royal Popish Favorite; and not to much in the North; as appears by this
note of Compositions made with Recusants in the North, with an Estimate of
their estates, sound among Windebankes papers,

Compositions made by the Viscount Wentworth with Recusants,
Staffordshire. li. s. d. li. s. d. FRancis Ha^ecourt of Ranton Esquire. per an. 25
0 0 worth per an. 200 0 0. Philip Gifford of Hyon Widow, per an. 20 0 0 worth
per an. 200 0 9. Walter Brook of Lapley Esquire. per an. 30 0 0 worth per an. 400
0 0. Dorothy Fowler of St. Thomas Widow, per on. 13 6 8 worth per an. 200 0 0.
Lancashire. Richard Massey of Rixton Esquire. per an. 40 0 0 worth per an. 400 0 0.
Abraham Laugton of Low Esquire. per an. 10 0 0 worth per an. 150 0 0. Anne
Shrburne of Laithgryme Wid. per an. 24 0 0 worth per an. 200 0 0. Sir Cuthbort
Clifton Knight. Thomas Clifton Esquire. and Mistress Jane Stanley
of Lytham, per an. 100 0 0 worth per an. 1500 0 0 Isabell Anderton and Hugh
Anderton her Son, of Euxton, per an. 8 0 0 worth per an. 150 0 0 Sir William
Norres of Speak Knight, per an. 60 0 0 worth per an. 500 0 0. Thomas Hesketh
of Poulton Esquire. per an. 15 0 0 worth per an. 200 0 0. William Anderton of
Anderton Esquire. per an. 20 0 0 worth per an. 250 0 0. Roger Anderton of Birchley
Esquire. per an. 21 12 3 worth per an. 300 0 0. Thomas Dolton of Thurnbam Esquire. per
an. 15 0 0 worth per an. 200 0 0. Sir William Gerrerd of Bryn Baronet, per an.
66 13 4 worth per an. 800 0 0. James Anderton of Clayton Esquire. per an. 40 0 0
worth per an. 500 0 0. John Preston of Manor Esquire. per an. 80 0 0 worth per
an. 1500 0 0. Derbyshire. Sir Henry Merry of Bar^on Knight. per an. 66 13 8 worth
per an. 600 0 0. George Poole of Sprinkehill Esquire. per an. 20 0 0 worth per an.
250 0 0. Nottinghamshire. George Markham and Mary Markham his Mother of
Ollert^n, per an. 15 0 0 worth per an. 800 0 0 Lincolnshire. Sir John Thymbleby
of ^rnhan Knight. per an. 1^0 0 0 worth per an. 1500 0 0. Anthony Munson of
Lincoln Esquire. per an. 25 0 0 worth per an. 400 0 0. Richard Townley of Norton
Esquire. per an. 150 0 0 worth per an. 1500 0 0. there and in Lancashire.
Northumberland. Roger Widdrington of Cartington Esquire. per an. 60 0 0 worth per
an. 500 0 0. Mark Errington of Po^t-Island Esquire. per an. 45 0 0 worth per an.
400 0 0. Thomas Haggerston of Haggerston Esquire. per an. 20 0 0 worth per an. 250
0 0 there and in Lancashire. Yorkshire. George Want of Laborne Gent. per an. 10
0 0 worth per an. 150 0 0. Marmaduke Holtlie of Scackleton Esquire. per an. ^0 0 0
worth per an. 150 0 0. Allen Aiscough of Gre^^hobottom Esquire. per an. 22 0 0
worth per an. 600 0 0. Sir Ralph Ellerker of Riesby Knight, per an. 50 0 0
worth per an. 600 0 0.

By the Laws of this Realm, the King was to have two parts of Recusants Lands
and Estates divided into three, and 40. l. out of 60. l. per annum 200. l. out
of 360. l. per annum: But after the rate of these Compositions at undervalues
(one part of the Commons grievance in their forecited Remonstrance and
Petition) the King instead of his two parts of three, had not above one part of
10. or 15. in the North, where Compositions were highest, and for ought I find,
not really and duly paid when made. Now because the Fees in passing these
Compositions were somewhat high the Recusants prefered this Petition to the
King to mittigate them, indorsed with Secretary Windebanks own hand in this
manner; Poor Recusants for moderation offices.

To the KINGS most excellent Majesty.
The humble PETITION of the poor Recusants of the Southern and Northern
parts of this your Highness Realm of England
Humbly shows:
THat whereas your sacred Majesty has been pleased to accept such of your
Petitioners into Grace, as should submit themselves by way of Composition to
your Majesty, which your Petitioners most willingly embraced, and with all
thankfulness have submitted themselves thereunto.

But so it is, may it please your most excellent Majesty, that the great and
excessive rate and charge of passing their grants and other discharges, is
such, that without your Majesty be further pleased to extend your mercy toward
them, your poor Petitioners (although they have used the uttermost of their
mean endeavors) can reap no benefit of your Majesty's gracious favor
vouchsafed unto them.

They therefore most humbly beseech your Majesty to be pleased to refer the
settlement and establishing of the said Fees to the Lord Treasurer and the Lord
Cottington, who calling unto them your Majesty's Vice-Presidents of the North,
may direct such moderate fees and means to pass the said grants and other
discharges, as your Petitioners mean ability may be able to undergo.

And your Petitioners (as in duty bound) shall ever pray for your Majesty's
long and prosperous reign over us.

But this Proclamation rather displeasing then satisfying, it was thus seconded
with the ensuing ogive more content.

By the KING. A Proclamation declaring His Majesty's Royal Pleasure and
Command, for putting the Laws and Statutes made against Jesuits, Priests, and
Popish Recusants in due execution.
WHereas We have found by experience, that notwithstanding the strict and
severe Laws made and standing in force against Jesuits, Priests, and others
having taken Orders by authority derived, or pretended to be derived from the
Sea of Rome; and notwithstanding Our former restraints and prohibition, by
Proclamation and otherwise many of them have presumed to resort and remain
within this Our Realm and other parts of Our Dominions, and there do daily
endeavor to withdraw and seduce Our Subjects from the true Religion of
Almighty God, and from there due Allegiance and Obedience toward Us their
Liege Lord, and that many of Our Subjects missed by them, have adventured to
receive, harbor and maintain them and thereby have incurred the danger of Our
Laws.

And therefore not finding that good effect which We did, and might justly
expect of any former course taken in that behalf, We have thought fit, NOTE.
and do hereby publish Our royal pleasure and Command, that careful and
diligent search be made by all Our Officers and Ministers, and by all others to
whom it may appertain, for all Jesuits, Priests, and others having taken
Orders by authority, derived or pretended to be derived from the Sea of Rome,
and that wheresoever, and whenever they shall be found, they be apprehended,
and committed to the common Goal of that County where they shall be found,
there to remain without Bail or Mainprize, until by due course of Law they
be tried, Qu^re, whether it were so done^
and proceeded with according to Law; which We will shall be done with all
convenient expedition: And if upon their trial and Conviction there shall be
cause to respire the execution of any of them, yet We are resolved not to let
them lie in those common Goales, much less to wander about at large, but
according to the example of former times, to send them to the Cattle of
Westbich, or some other safe Prison where they shall remain under strait and
close custody, and be wholly restrained from exercising their Functions, or
spreading their superstitious and dangerous Doctrine.

And We are also resolved, whereof We do hereby give notice to all, whom it
may concern at their utmost perils, That the Harbourers, Receivers and
Maintainers of Jesuits, Priests and all such others as have received or shall
receive Orders as aforesaid, shall be left to the due and ordinary course of
Law.

And We do further will and command that all Our Judges, Justices and
Ministers of Justice in their several places, not only do observe Our will
and pleasure before expressed, in all and every the premises, but also do put
all other Out Laws in due execution against Popish Recusants, and that Our
Judges of Assise at their return out of their Circuits do from time to time
hereafter give a strict account of their proceedings therein unto Our Lord
Keeper of the great Seal, and Our Lord Keeper do present the same unto Us.

And whereas We heretofore granted several Commissions, for Leasing and
demising of the Lands of Recusants liable to their forfeitures, with
Instructions for the direction of Our Commissioners in that service, NOTE.
We, minding a due reformation of the manifold neglects and abuses of our
inferior officers and others whereby that part of our Revenue has been
extremely lessened, and those who were backward in Religion have been
encouraged to persist in their obstinacy and blindness have caused those
Commissions and Instructions to be revived, and many parts altered, for our
better service and profit; And We do hereby declare the same, to the intent
that such as shall be willing to contract with Us, or to further our service,
or advance our profit in that behalf, may attend our said Commissioners.

And whereas We are informed, that diverse have contracted for Leases of
Recusants Lands, who do not sue out their Leases, to our great hinderance, our
will and pleasure is, That all such as have already contracted with our
Commissioners for Leases of Recusants Lands shall pass them under our Seals
before the end of Michaelm^^ Term next; and such as shall hereafter contract
for any such Leases, shall pass ther^ under our Seals, before the end of the
Term then next following after such contracts made, or else their Contracts to
be utterly void.

And We do straightly charge all our said Commissioners, that they be careful
to advance our profit herein, according to the true intent of our Commissions
and Instructions; and that they use all diligence to discover and avoid all
abuses which may tend to the diminution of our profit, or to the increase of
Popery, and backsliding from the true Religion established in the Church of
England.

Given at Our Court at Southwicke, the third day of August in the fourth year
of Our reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
A little before the next Session of Parliament, and during the Session it
self, the King likewise issued out these successive Proclamations following,
against Doctor Smith Bishop of Calcedon.

By the KING. A Proclamation for the apprehension of Richard Smith a Popish
Priest, styled, and calling himself the Bishop of Calcedon.
FOrasmuch as We certainly understand that Richard Smith, an English man borne,
by profession a Popish Priest, now is, and for some years past has been in
this Realm, and here not only (...) our Subjects in their Religion, but both
also both by his writings in print and otherwise, and by his (...) practice,
persuade those our Subjects to whom he has access, from their Allegiance to
Us their Liege Lord, and usurpeth to himself Episcopal Jurisdiction from the
Sea of Rome, and exercises the same within this Kingdom, and holds
continual Intelligence with our Enemies whereby, according to the just Laws
of this Realm, he has committed the offense of high treason: And yet
nevertheless diverse of our Subjects seduced by him, do receive, harbor and
entertain him, contrary to our Laws, and have thereby incurred, and do
incur the penalty of those Laws which are capital to the ostenders. We
therefore being justly provoked by the boldness of the said Smith, do hereby
straightly command all out loving Subjects, of whatsoever condition, quality or
degree, that none of them directly or indirectly do permit or suffer him to be
concealed or harbored, but that forthwith they arrest and apprehend his body,
and bring him before the next Justice of Peace, to the place where he shall be
apprehended, whom We straightly command to commit him to prison without bail or
mainprize, and presently thereupon inform Us, or our Privy Counsel of his
apprehension.

And We do further declare hereby, that if any person shall hereafter directly
or indirectly harbor or conceal the said Smith, or use, or connive at any
means, whereby the said Smith may escape from being apprehended or (...) it at
then We shall extend the uttermost severity of our Laws against every such
offender. And We further charge and command all and singular our Judges,
Justices of Peace, Majors, Sheri^fs, Constables and all other our Officers,
Ministers and loving Subjects, that if they shall find any person offending
herein hereafter that then they and every of them proceed with all diligence
and roundnesse, not only against the said Smith, but also against all such as
shall harbor, conceal or connive at his concealment, or shall not me their
best endeavors for his discovery and apprehension, according to the uttermost
extent of our Laws.

Given at Our Court at White Hall the 11. day of December, in the fourth year
of Our reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
By the KING. A second Proclamation for the aprrension of Richard Smith a
Popish Priest, styled, and calling himself, the Bishop of Calcedon
WHereas by our Proclamation, bearing date the eleventh eay of December last
past, (for the reasons in that our Proclamation expressed) We did straightly
command, that none of our Subjects should harbor or conceal the said Smith,
but that forthwith they should arrest and apprehend his body, and bring him
before the next Justice of Peace, to the place where he should be apprehended,
whom We thereby commanded to commit him to prison without bail or mainprize,
and presently to inform Us or our privy Counsel of his apprehension: And We
did thereby declare, That if any person should then after, directly or
indirectly, harbor or conceal the said Smith, or use, or connive at any
means, whereby the said Smith might escape from being apprehended or arrested,
that We should extend the uttermost feverity of our Laws against every such
offender, as by our Proclamation at large appeareareth; which our Proclamation
has not yet wrought that good effect which We expected, the said Smith being
still hidden and harbored by those, who being insected and blinded with popish
Superstition, prefer their respects to him, before their duty to Us, and the
fear of Our high displeasure, and the consequence thereof; We therefore by
the advice of our privy Counsel, have thought sit by this our second
Proclamation to renew our former command in that behalf.

And to the end that none of our Subjects may hereafter excuse themselves by a
pretended ignorance of the danger they shall fall into, if they shall harbor
or conceal him; We do hereby publish and declare, that the said Smith is not
only a popish Priest, and with a high presumption takes upon him to exercise
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, pretended to be derived from the Sea of Rome,
within this our Realm, and endeuvoureth to seduce our Subjects from the true
Religion established in the Church of England (which by Gods assistance We
shall ever constantly maintain) but does also seditiously and traitorously
hold correspondence with our enemies, rending to the destruction of our State.

And therefore We do now again renew our former command for his
apprehension, Qu^r^, what Priests or Hurlirers of them has since suffered in
this kind?
and do hereby further signify. That whosoever shall lodge, harbor or
relieve the said Smith, or any other Priest, Jesuit, or other^ having taken
orders by authority pretended to be derived from the Sea of Rome, shall incur
the danger of our Laws made against the harbourers, lodgers and relievers of
Priests, to the full extent thereof, which by the Statutes of this our Realm
is Felony.

And We do further hereby declare, (which We shall really perform) That
whosoever shall discover the said Smith, and cause him to be apprehended, as
asoresaid, shall have a reward of one hundred pounds in money to be presently
paid unto him by Us, and shall also have the benefit of all such penalties and
forfeitures, which shall or may accrue unto Us, and be forfeited by that
person, in whose house the said Smith shall be found to have been harbored or
concealed.

And We further charge and command hereby (as by our former Proclamation We
did) all and singular our Judges. Justices of Peace, Majors, Sherieffs,
Constables, and all other our Officers Ministers and loving Subjects, that if
they shall find any person offending, herein, that then they, and every of them
proceed with all diligence and readiness, not only against the said Smith,
but also against all such as shall harbor, conceal or connive at his
concealment, or shall not use their best endeavors for his discovery and
apprehension, according to the uttermost extent of our Laws.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, the 24. day of March, in the fourth year of
Our reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
These Proclamations against the Bishop of Calcedo^, at the first view, seem to
carry and express abundance of royal zeal against Popery, and to proceed
only (...) some zealous Protestants of the Kings Council, out of a
conscientious care of (...) preservation of our established Religion, and
detestation of Smith^ audatiousness to confer orders and exercise Episcopal
Jurisdiction within his Majesty's Dominions, by a Foreign authority from the
Sea of Rome, which is no less then high Treason, by the Statutes of 23. Eliz.
c. 1. But if our English popish Priests, Monks and pa^ties themselves (who are
able to give us best and truest information in this particular or this Bishops
best friends in foreign parts may be credited; or the Primate of Armagh
himself (Doctor Usher) in one of his (...) 17 16^^
Letters to the now Archbishop of Canterbury; these Proclamations against the
Bishop of Calcedon were not procured at the motion of any Protestants, or out
of any love to our Religion, or opposition to popery; but at the earnest
solicitation of the regular Priests and Munks in England and Ireland; who
violently opposed Doctor Smiths election and Episcopal Jurisdiction, to which
they would by no means submit; pretending themselves exempted from it by their
orders, and writing bitterly against the having of any Bishop in England, which
would eclipse the Regulars power, and exten^^re their gains, (...)
Daniel a Jesus, Horuran Lomelus (Lo^ly) Nicholas Smith, and others, writing
express books against his Episcopacy, which were by Smith and his Pertisans
means, censured by the F^^^y of Paris, Anno 1630. Upon their opposition only,
and by their means and power alone (being then the stronger party, and
over-mastering the Bishops faction this Bishop of C^cedon was by these
Proclamations, and their popish Instruments, forced to deserts the Realm, and
flee for succor into France, to Cardinal Richelieu, who courteously
entertained him; as you may read at large in N. le Maistre (a Sorbon Priest,
his, Instaurat^^ antiqus Episcoporum Principatus, printed at Paris 1639. Cum
privilegio Regis and approbatisne Doctorum; and dedicated to the Cardinal
himself lib. 3. c. 15. entitled. Corolarium libri secunds; ubi nonnulla de
persecutione Episcoperum, and de illustrissimo ANTISTITE CALCEDONENSI; where he
largely justifies the Bishop of Calcedou, against the regular Priests in
England his opposers and persecuters, who had expolled and banished him thence;
severely censuring them for this their persecution against him, and pers^ading
his restu^tion and reception again among them in this Realm. Which mystery
and devision of theirs occasioning these two Proclamations^ I thought fit to
discover to prevent mistakes.

You have formerly heard the Complaint of the Commons in Parliament in their
Remonstance and Petition to the King of the great liberty and increase of
popish Prelates, Priests, Monks Monasteries within the Kingdom of Ireland and
the open profession of their Romish Religion there together with Bishop L^uds
peremptory denial of it, in his answer to that Remonstrance in the Kings own
name: but no sooner was that Parliament dissolved in discontent, but the verity
of the Commons Complaint was sufficiently justified, by this ensuing
Proclamation of the Lord Deputy and Council of that Realm, found among the
Bishops own papers who could not be ignorant of it, being thus indorsed with
his own hand, A Proclamation Concerning the growth of Popery in Ireland.

By the Lord DEPVTY and COVNSELE. Henry Falkland:
FOrasmuch as We cannot but take notice that the late intermission of legal
proceedings against popish pretended or Titulary Archbishops, Bishops, Abbo
Deanes, Vicars^generall Jesuits, Friars, and others of that sort, that derive
their pretended authority and orders from the Sea of Rome, has bred such an
extraordinary insolence and presumption in them, as that they have dared here
of late not only to assemble themselves in public places to celebrate their
superstitious Services in all parts of this Kingdom, but also have erected
houses and buildings called public Oratories, Colleges Mass houses, and
Convents of Friars, NOTE.
Munks and Nuns in the eye and open view of the State and elsewhere, and do
frequently exercise jurisdiction against his Majesty's Subjects by authority
derived from the Sea of Rome, and (by color of teaching and keeping Schools in
their pretended Monasteries and Colleges) do train up the youth of this
Kingdom in their superstitious Religion, to the great derogation and contempt
of his Majesty's regal power and authority, and great offense of many of his
Majesty's good Subjects, contrary to the Laws and Ecclesiastical government
of this Kingdom, and the impoverishment of his Majesty's Subjects in the same.

These are therefore to will and require, and in his Majesty's name, straightly
to charge and command all, and all manner such pretended or Titulary
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes Vicars-generall, Archdeacons and others, deriving
any pretended authority, power or jurisdiction from the Sea of Rome, that they
and every of them, forbear from henceforth to exercise any such power,
jurisdiction or authority within th^^ Kingdom, and that all such Abbots,
Pryors, Jesuits, Friars, Munks, Nuns and others of that sort as aforesaid,
do forthwith break up their Convents and Assemblies in all houses of Friars
Colleges, Monasteries and other places wheresoever they are or shall be
Conventually or Collegiatly assembled together within this Kingdom, and to
relinquish the same and to disperse and separate themselves.

And that all and every of the orders before named and other Priests whatsoever
do from henceforth forbear to preach, teach or celebrate their Service in any
Church Chapel or other public Oratory, or place, or to teach any School in
any place or places whatsoever within this Kingdom.

And We do further charge and command all and sigular the owners of such
houses of Friars, Colleges, Monasteries, Schools, Oratories, Masse-houses and
Numeries, that they and every of them respectively in default of the persons
before named their voluntary relinquishing of the said houses of Friars,
Colleges, monasteries Schools, oratories masse-houses and Numeries do
forthwith expel, and thrust forth all and singular such Fryars^ Jesuits, and
other Monastical persons out of the same, and to convert the same to other
more lawful uses, upon pain to have their said houses seized to his Majesty's
use, and both the one and the other to be proceeded against for their unlawful
assemblies, and maintenance of such unlawful Conventieles and corrupt nurture
of Children in the severest manner that by the Laws and Statutes of this
Kingdom and Ecclesiastical Government of the same may be had or extended,
whereof they and every of them are to take notice, and to yield due obedience
thereunto, as they and every of them will avoid his Majesty's high indignation,
and the consequence thereof.

Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 1. day of April, 1629. Adam Lofius
Canc. T. Baltinglasse. Will. Parsons. Ia. Armachantus. R. Dillon. Rich. B^lton.
Hen. Valentia. Anth. Midensis. Dud. Norton. Moore. Hen. Doewra. Ad. Loftus.



By this Proclamation the whole passage in the Commons Remonstance touching the
increase of Popery in Ireland is confessed to be true, and far more then is
therein expressed.

How little effect this Proclamation produced in Ireland, will appear by this
en^ suing Letter of Doctor William Bedley Bishop of Kilmore and Ardivagh about
the (...) of the Church in his Drocesse, and the Papists in Ireland, to Bishop
Land, thus superscribed.

To the right reverend Father in God, William, Lord Bishop of London, my
honorable good Lord, deliver these.
Right reverend Father, my honorable good Lord:
SInce my coming to this place, which was a little before Michaelmas (till
which time the settling the State of the College, and my Lord Primates
visitation deferred my Consecration) I have not been unmingfull of your
^ordships commands, to advertise you, as my experience should inform, of the
estate of this Church; which I shall now the better do, because I have been
about my Diocesses, and can set down out of my knowledge and view, what I shall
relate; and shortly, to speak much ill matter in a few words, it is very
miserable every way: The Cathedral Church of Ardagh one of the most ancient in
Ireland, and said to be built by Saint Patrick; together with the Bishops house
there, down to the ground; the Church here built, but without Bell or Steeple,
Font or Chalice: The parish Churches all in a manner ruined or unroofed and
unrepaired; the people, saving a few British Planters here and there (which are
not the tenth part of the remnant) obstinate Recusants; a popish Clergy more
numerous by far then we, NOTE.
and in the fall exercise of all Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, by their
Vicars-generall and Officials, who are so confident, as they excommunicate
those that come to our Courts, even in Matrimonial causes, which affron^ has
been offered my self by the popish Primates Vicar-generall, for which I have
begun a process against him: The Primate himself lives in my Parish within
two mile of my house, the Bishop in another part of my Diocese further off:
every parish has his Priest, and some two or three apeec^, and so their
Masse-houses also; in some places Mass is said in the Churches. Frieries there
are in diverse places, who go about, though not in their habits, NOTE.
and by their importunate begging impoverish the people: Who indeed are
generally very poor, as from that cause, so from their paying doubt^ Tithes to
their own Clergy and ours from the dearth of Corn, and death of ther^ Cattle
these late years, with the contributions to their Soldiers and their Agents
and which they forget not to reckon among other causes, the oppressions of the
Cour^ Ecclesiastical, which in very truth my Lord I cannot excuse, and do
seek to reform.

For our own, there are some seven or eight Ministers in each Diocese of 'good
sufficiency, and (which is no small cause of the continuance of the people in
Popery still) English which have not the tongue of the people, nor can perform
divine offices, or converse with them, and which hold many of them two, three,
four, or more Vicarages apeece; Even the Clerkships themselves are in like
manner conferred upon the English, NOTE.
and sometimes two or three or more upon one man, and ordinarily bought and
sold, or let to farm etc. His Majesty is now with the greatest part of this
Country, as to their hearts, consciences, King, but at the Popes discretion,
etc.

Your Lordships most obliged* servant in Christ Ios^, Will. Kilmoren and (...)
Kilmere this 1. of April, 1630.

This was the condition and state of the Papists in Ireland then; who the very
same year November. 22. 1630. presented this Petition to the Lords Justices and
Counsel thus indorsed with Bishop La^d^ own hand, The Petition of the
Recusants in Ireland to the Lords Justices, and in some things concerning the
Church.

To the right honorable the Lords Justices and Counsel.
The humble Petition of the Lords, Knights and Gentlemen here attending, in the
behalf of themselves, and the rest of his Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom,
November. 22, 1630.
Most humbly making Petition;
THat whereas the late employed Agents did humbly offer to his Highness three
Subsidies to be granted and confirmed by Parliament in this Kingdom, and for
that the said Parliament was not called accordingly, yet the Inhabitants of the
Country are compelled to go on forward with the payment of the same, with
which if others that have employments, NOTE.
and are of greatest means in this Kingdom had been ^axed, or had borne
according as they would have been by the authority of Parliament, the said
three Subsidies, and the sums whereat they were estimated, would have been
long since levied: and whereas his most gracious Majesty in compassion of his
Subjects did grant diverse Favors, Graces and Benefits to them, and did
manifest his princely care of them, that they should have favors and graces,
in regard of the great burden they did and do bear in payment of so great
sums. Your Suppliants humbly beseech your Honors, to consider of the humble
request of your Suppliants underwritten, being some of these particulars:
wherein they conceive the Country and people are over-heavily burdened: which
does not only discourage, but also disable them to bear the charges which
they do; and that your honors will be pleased to take such order for their
ease and relief in the same, as shall stand with Justice, Equity, and the
intimated favors, which your Suppliants well hope and conceive his Highness
of his own royal disposition and gracious inclination, is willing shall be
conferred upon them.

And your Suppliants shall ever pray, etc.

That in regard his Majesty signified his pleasure in his Instructions, that an
Act should pass in Parliament, that no Tithes should be inquired of above lx.
yeer^ past; that your Lordships will give order, that all Commissioners and
Officers shall forbear inquiring of Tithes for his Majesty before that time,
and that Plantations grounded upon such Tithes may be forborne, and that the
holding of the Parliament may be certained.

That your Lordships may direct a course that the Clergy do not proceed with
the great burden and charge they do lay upon the poor people for clandestine
Matriages, Christnings and Burials, etc.

That your Lordships likewise will direct a course to ease the poor Subjects
of the unreasonable fines imposed by the Clerks of the Market, and also to ease
them of the intolerable charges they bear by means of the suing forth
Recogniza^ces for building of Churches, fines for Bridges and Highways.

The Commissions that are issued to examine what payments are made of the
Subsidies, to be renewed.

That there may be free liberty for transporting all Commodities of the
Kingdom that may be spared, without paying any thing for Licenses.

Tha^ (...) advantage be taken for not inrolling the Surrenders of Connaught,
according to (...) Majesty's Instructions and former Grace^.

The Complaints of the Commonwealth to be annexed to the former Petition,
delivered by the Noblemen and Gentlemen of the Country to the Lords Justices
and Counsel. December 6. 1630.
That the Bishops Court shall hold no longer then one day at a sitting.

That the Inquisitors coming to do service to the same Court shall not pay
for their entrance.

The Subsidy of the Bishops and Clergy, if they have paid the same, no ease
done to the Country thereby.

That no E^cheator shall bring paroels of Records into the Country to be found
by a Jury, but that the whole Record, or a true Copy thereof be brought, and
the same to be testified by the Officer of the Court.

That your Lordships lay down a rate for the issues for respit of homage,
according each term or year, for which the said respit of homage shall happen
to be in arreare, proportionably to the respit of homage it self.

That the King at Arms or any of his shall demand no fees or duty belonging to
him by color of his Office of any Nobleman or Gentleman, unless he be sent
for.

That Schoolmasters shall not be disturbed from teaching, so they ^each
nothing concerning Religion.

That the houses may be restored to the In^er^tors, which were seized on by
virtue of a Proclamation, (to wit, that forementioned.)

How this Petition came to the Bishops hands, appears by this Letter, thus
indorsed by him, Feb. 10. 1630. My Lord Primate of Armagh, about the Recusants
Pe^^tion to the Lords Justices, etc.

To the right Reverend Father in God, my singular good Lord, the Lord Bishop of
London, one of his Majesty's most hono^rable privy Counsel.
My very good Lord;
SInce I wro^e unto your Lordship concerning the business of Sir John Wishart
and Master Elphe^sion; all the Bishops Cha^cellours is ^he Kingdom were sent
for to Dublin by the Lords Justices, to answer such things as are objected
against the exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in a Petition exhibited
unto them by the Recusa^t Lords of the Country: Which being a matter of no
small importance, I thought it my duty to impart unto your Lordship the true
Copi^s both of the Petition of the one and of the Answer of the other, that you
may be the better prepared to speak therein if the matter shall be brought
over into England; and give us direction here how we are to follow the
business for I fear all the Bishops are to appear about the beginning of
Easter Term to declare their resolutions touching the same propositions.

I ^end likewise unto your Lordship a short Letter which I received even now
from the Bishop o^ Kilf^nora. The Bishopric of Killalow is contig^ous unto
his, and both being conjoined together by a perpetual union, would make an
indifferent good competency for one Bishop: for that of K^lfenora is otherwise
in it self, so poor, and so far from any good Benefice that might be
annexed unto it, that there is little hope it will ever be made fit for any man
of worth.

I humbly thank your Lordship for the tender regard you had of my reputation,
in stopping the publishing of my book there, before the faults committed in the
reprinting thereof should be corrected: for which and those other high favors
which I do daily receive at your hands, I must always profess my self to
rest

Drogheda February 10. 1630. Your Lordships faithful Servant in all duty ready
to be commanded. Ja. Armachanus.


What answer was given to this Petition of the Recusants by the Bishops and
their Chancellours, will appear by this ensuing paper thus (...) by Bishop
Laud, The Answer of the Lords Bishops and Chancellours to such Articles of the
Recusants Pe^ition as concern the Church.

An Abstract of those things which concern the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in
the Petition exhibited to the Lords Justices.
1. THat your Lordships may direct a course that the Clergy do not proceed
with the great burden and charge they do lay upon the poor people for
clandestine Marriages, Christnings and Burials etc. 2. That the the Bishops
Courts should hold no longer then one day at a sitting. 3. That the
l^x^uisitors coming to do service to the said Court shall not pay for their
entrance. 4. The Subsidy of the Bishops and Clergy, if they have paid the same,
no ease done to the Country ther^by. 5. That School masters shall not be
disturbed from teaching, so they teach nothing concerning Religion.
The Answers of the Lords Bishops and Chancellours that are now present, to the
Articles of grievance lately by your Lordships imparted to them.
Right honorable our good Lords:
AS to the imputation cast upon us to burden and charge the poor people for
clandestine Marriages, Christnings, etc.

We humbly propose to your Lordships consideration.

1. That the cognizance of these causes does by the Laws of this Realm belong
to the Judicature Ecclesiastical, with a very severe charge in Gods name to
see to the due execution thereof, as in the Statute of 2. Eliz. cap. 2. may
appear.

2. That the res^act^rines of the people in not resorting to Church, and being
conformable to divine service and administration of Sacraments, and other Rites
according to the form of the book of Common Prayer, is no way to be cherished
or fomented, especially in the apparent endeavors which is now used by the
popish faction, NOTE.
to draw them away from the obedience of his Majesty to that of the Pope.

3. That if it be permitted to them to marry and baptize without control, all
other S^ismaticks, as A^abaptists, Brownists, etc. may claim the like.

4. That they are in no worse condition then those of our own; and his Majesty
in those very graces which their very Agents obtained, and to which they have
reference in their Petition, did refer the Delinquents in these particulars
to be proceeded against, according to the ordinary course of Law, Art. 49.

5. That if this proceeding he stopped, these inconveniences will arise: The
Bishops and Ordinaries are not able to answer the Kings writs, which are by the
common Law to be directed unto them, as in cause of Bastardy, and Certificate
of marriage, and the like; as also the whole Commonwealth will swarm with
Incest, Adultery, Whoredom, etc. if it be lawful for popish Vicars to
dispense and divorce at pleasure, and void new marriages upon pretext they were
not solemnized by the parish Priest according to the Trent Reformation, and
other like frivolous pretexts, contrary to the law of God.

6. As to the burden of the poor people, we do humbly desire, that the
Delinquents may be informed against* and upon conviction severely punished.

7. And if it seem to your Lordships, that the fees of the Ecclesiastical
Courts be over-burthenous, that the Commission for regulating them may be
speedily executed.

2. Touching the continuance of the Courts longer then one day at a sitting. We
conceive the same to be for the ease of the people, and expediting of causes,
and the hindering of chamber-justice; but if it shall appear otherwise to your
Lordships, we desire your Lordships to set down what order you shall think
most fit for the ease of the people, and due performance of that service.

3. Concerning Inquisitors fees for their entrance. We do deny that ever any
such thing was done, and if any can be justly charged therewith, let him be
punished.

4. Touching our Subsidy. We do think it is not unknown to your Lordships,
how cheerfully we have strained our selves for the safety of the Country, some
of us having besides contributed to the Soldiers as deeply as they, even of
our mensall lands which we hold in our own hands.

5. Touching Schoolmasters* We humbly desire your Lordships to consider:

1. How much it concerns the Reformation of the manners of the people, that
Schoolmasters be well-affected to Religion and to the present Government.

2. That popish Schoolmasters do breed up and prepare the youth of this
Realm to be Priests, and contrary to the Privileges of his Majesty's
Progenitors, to the University of Dublin, do teach them Logic and Philosophy.

3. That under the name of Schoolmasters, diverse dangerous and seditious
persons may be nourished in private Families, to the corrupting and seducing
the youth of this Realm, and withdrawing them from his Majesty's alleagiance.

4. That wherea^ if such be put down* the parents would out of necessity send
their Children to the Ministers and Curates or Free-schools in every County,
and the Colleges at Dublin; by the allowing them, they will be still nouzeled
in Superstition and Barbarism.

Lastly, whereas your Lordships lately desire us to certify you, who are the
chief abettors of the popish titular Clergy, your Lordships have them now
showing themselves in their presenting this Petition, which we hope you will be
sensible of for the public good, the good of his Majesty and the glory of God*
to whose blessing and protection we humbly leave you.


The return upon Command, to advise upon some moderate course in the exercise
of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
Right honorable Our good Lords:
IN obedience to your Lordships commands, We the Bishops and Chancellours
present in the City, have considered of the ways for the moderating and easing
the pretended burden, whereof the Petitioners complain, in the matter of
clandestine Christnings, Marriages and Burials.

And do find, that we that are present cannot resolve of any other course then
to refer our selves to our former answer, and the laws now in force: and
according to our duties to God and the charge laid upon us in the Act 2. Eliz.
c. 2. do humbly desire your Lordships that the said Act for the uniformity of
Common Prayer and Service in the Church, and the administration of the
Sacraments, may be duly and truly executed.

Also the laws concerning the restoring to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction
over the State Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolishing all foreign
power repugnant to the same, may be effectually and fully put in use.

And that all Schoolmasters be bound to teach the Scholars for their first
book the grounds of Christian Religion, and to use in their Schools, the
prayer appointed in the beginning of the Grammar, set forth by his Majesty's
authority, with such other books as shall be appointed by the Bishops of this
Kingdom; and that idle and unprofitable books, such as Gesta Romanoru^, which
is now upon the Press in this City for the use of their Schools, which do but
teach them to attend to Fables, and lying legends, may be banished from the
same.

And forasmuch as sundry of us having no other occasion of coming to this
place but your Lordships commands, have been now fourteen days in Town, and
do lie here at charges, and are withheld from performance of our duties at
home; we humbly entreat your Lordships to license us to depart.


What the issue of this business was I cannot certainly learn; but I find,
that this very year 1630. among other things there fell out a great difference
between the Regulars and Secular Priests and popish Titulary Bishops in
Ireland, which grew to a very great highth, as I have formerly touched in the
Bishop of Calcedons business.

How far these differences between them there proceeded in, I shall give you
a short account out of the Archbishop of Armagh his Letter to Bishop Laud, who
writ thus to him among other things.

My very good Lord:
THere came into my hands certain propositions of our Irish Regulars against
the Seculars, censured at Paris, 15. January After the French account who begun
the year with January as our Almanacks do: But 1630. after our ordinary
computation.
1631. by sixty Doctors of the Sorbon, one whereof is this, Superiores
Regularium digmores sunt Episcopis: siquidem dignitas pastoris petend^ est ex
condition sui gregis quemadmodum oplio, dignior est subulco; Another, In
partibus haereticorum non tenetur populus Christianus necessariam
sus^entationem suo Paracho sub ministrate* quia bona Ecclesiastica ab
haereticis possidentur. Together with them I received the Archbishop of Paris
his condemnation of two English Books, published January 30. 1631. the one, an
Answer to certain assertions of Doctor Kellison in his Treatise of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, written by Nicholas Smith: the other, an Apology for
the Popes manner of proceeding in governing the Catholics in England during
the time of persecution; Author, Daniel a Jesus: It may somewhat concern us
here, to be made acquainted with the Argument of these Books, and therefore I
make bold to entreat your Lordship, that you would give order to one of your
Chaplains to communicate the same unto this bearer, who will speedily inform
me thereof.

Your Lordships in all service, Ia. Armachanus.
Drogheda March 17. 1631.

The year following, these differences in Ireland between the Priests and
Archbishop of Dublin, Thomas Fleming proceeded to a public Protestation and
contestation even inprint, as appears by this notable paper of the Priests
against him printed at Rhoan both in Latin and English to make it more
notorious, I shall only trouble you with the English Copy; found in the
Archbishops Study, indorsed with Master Dels hand thus* May 3, 1632.
Protestations of the secular Priests in Ireland, against Thomas Fleming
Archbishop of Dublin.

To all the most Illustrious Archbishops and Bishops of Ireland, but more
particularly to those of the Province of Dublin their honorable Lords, David
Bishop of Osory, John of Perues, Ross of Kildare, and Matthew Vicar
Apostolical of Laghlem
1 MOST Illustrious Lords and Reverend Bishops, the Priests of Dublin make
their complaint before you, that the most Illustrious Archbishop of Dublin,
Thomas Flemming, of the order of Saint Francis, without alleging any cause
against them, only for his will, and as his pleasure, us^th to exile and
banish Priests out of his Diocese. And they protest that in so doing he
exercises a (...) over the Clergy, contrary to the Canons of Holy Church, and
the laws and Statutes of this Kingdom.

2. Most Illustrous Lords and reverend Fathers in Christ, the aforesaid Priests
do make their complaint, that the same most illustrious Archbishop of Dublin*
Thomas Flemming of the order of Saint Francis, though humbly sought unto and
desired, does refuse to do them justice in their causes, neither yet will ^e
permit the Clergy to follow their actions merely civil before the Magistrate,
contrary unto the ^eceived custom of this Kingdom* from the first conversion
of this Nation. And they protest that in so doing, he exercises a tyranny over
the Clergy, NOTE.
contrary unto the Canons of the Church, and the laws and statutes of this
Kingdom.

3. Most Illustrious Lords and Reverend Fathers in Christ, the aforesaid
Priests do make their complaint, that the most Illustrious Archbishop Thomas
Flemming* of the order of Saint Francis, in inflicting his Ecclesiastical
censures, observes no canonical preceding at all omitting not only the
solemnities of the law, but those things also that are necessary and essential
in all proceedings thereof* namely, citations and proof of causes. And they
protest that in so doing* he exercises a tyranny over the Clergy, contrary
unto the Canons of Holy Church, and the laws and statutes of this Kingdom.

4. Most Illustrious Lords and Reverend Fathers in Christ, the aforesaid
Priests do complain, that the most Illustrious Archbishop Thoms Flemming, of
the order of Saint Francis, refused to hear all proofs against the Regulars
in the matter of the eleven propositions condemned at Paris, which testimonies
or proofs two venerable Priests presented unto him the 15. of November, in the
year of our Lord 1631. in Dublin. And moreover, the aforesaid Priests do
profess, that the same Illustrious Archbishop is a favourer and a Patron of
certai^e new and never heard of Heresies, published by the Friars of his Order,
and others; of the which heresies, or rather blasphemies, being advertised by a
Petition, he utterly refused to hear the Accusers and Witnesses. And they
pr^^est that in so doing he exere^seth a tyranny in the Church of God, contrary
unto the canons of holy Church, and the laws and statutes of this Kingdom.

5. Most illus^rious Lords and reverend Fathers ^n Christ, the aforesaid
Priests d^e complain, that the same most illustrious Archbishop Thomas
Flemming of the order of Saint Francis, did not suppress, extinguish or
correct (according to the canons of the Church, and as the laws of Princes do
command) a certain infamous L^bell made, pr^^ted and published, under the
false and fa^^ed name of Edmund U^sulan, against the good name, fame and
reputation of certain venerable Priests of the Clergy* who in the aforesaid
libell are expressly and by name mentioned; but on the contrary, the same
Archbishop reads, commends, publishes, and defends the same, to their
irrep^rable dishonor and inf^^y, by whose example also others, especially of
the Regulars of this Kingdom, are in^ited, provoked and animated to do the
like. And they protest that in so doing, he ex^rciseth a tyranny over the
Clergy, contrary to the canons of holy Church, and the laws and statutes of
this Kingdom.

6. Most illustrious Lords and reverend Fathers in Christ, the aforesaid Pr^s^s
do complain, that the same most illustrious Archbishop of Dublin, Thomas
Flemming* of the order of Saint Francis, being given to understand by way of
petition, on the behalf of the Clergy of Dublin, that a certain parish
Priest, by name Patricke Brangan, with his assistant James Quin, NOTE.
but a few moneth^ ago, through extreme negligence had l^st the blessed
Sacrament consecrated in many hos^s, Papists may lose their God irrecilably.
and that without hope of recovery; Our aforesaid Archbishop making small or
no account of so great a sacrilege, permits notwithstanding the aforesaid
Priests, whereof the one i^ most unlearned, the other (...) to execute all
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, by whose ministry he daily exposes the
Sacraments of the Church to profanation and abuse. And in so doing, they
protess that he offends against the divine Majesty and the sacred canons of the
Church. They profess also that in these aforesaid excesses he has the
Regulars his Counselors, orders and abettours, especially one John Preston, a
Friar of his order, a most seditio^s and a turbulent fellow, to the ruin of
the Clergy, and disturbance of the Christian Commonwealth.

7. Most illus^rious Lords and reverend Fathers in Christ, the aforesaid
Pri^s^s die complain, that the most illustrious Archbishop of Dublin, Thomas
Flemming, of the order of Saint Francis, does make parish Priests, young men,
unlearned and unbred; others famous for their learning, gravity and virtue,
being neglected; and m^re it is to be lamented, for that such are the times and
state of things as if we had Augustines, Ambroses and Hieroms, it were meet to
prefer them unto the past^rall office (others omitted.) But what may we
expect of this our Prelat? who has ordinarily in his mouth* To what end should
parrish Priests be learned? or Preachers? for as much as these matters belong
unto Regulars. Moreover the aforesaid Priests due complain, that the most
illustrious Archbishop Thomas Flemming of the order of Saint Francis, a^ the
coming unto his Prelature, found within the walls of Dublin five parish
Priests, men of learning, ripe years and incorrupt conversation, in place of
whom eith^r taken away by death or exile, he has placed only two, and such as
we are not willing to speak of what condition: so as it seems he desires
nothing more, then by this ext^rpation of the Clergy, a more easy and
compendious way may be made unto those armies of Monks and begging Friars, who
in this Kingdom (observing no Regular discipline) do labor to create a
Monarchy unto themselves, as already they have done under this Bishop, to the
destruction of the Church, the impoverishing of the Iuhab^tants, and no small
detriment ^o the Commonwealth. NOTE.
And they protest that in so doing, he exercises a tyranny over the Clergy
contrary unto the canons of holy Church, and the l^^wes and statutes of this
Kingdom.

8. Most illustrious Lords and reverend Fathers in Christ, the aforesaid
Priests do complain, that the illustrious Archbishop of Dublin, Thomas
Flemming of the order of Saint Francis, is accustomed to answer the Clergy
complaining of their grievances unto him; if I do you wrong, you may go to
Rome to complain: In the mean time reporting himself to be so powerful in
the Court of Rome, that he fears no Adversary. And of this that Reverend
Priest Father Patrick Cahill, Doctor of Divinity had experience, who for a
year treating of his injuries and grievances done unto him by the Archbishop
of Dublin, There i^ then small (...) to be had at Rome.
could by no means prevail once to be admitted unto the presence and audience
of the most eminent Cardinal Ludovisiu^, Vice Chancellor of Rome. Which
Cardinal notwithstanding is g^ven by his Holiness unto the Irish, as the
only (...) and protector of the Irish Nation. These things we may remember
with grief but amend them we ca^ not. But we profess before Almighty God, his
Holiness, and all faithful people, that this is nothing else but to tyrannize
over the Clergy, to the dishonor of the Church, and no small contempt to the Sea Apostolick^.

For which and other causes besides to be alleged, and in their due time and
place to be proved against the abovenamed Thomas Flemming, of the order of
Saint Francis, we the aforesaid Priests, and hereafter to be named, do set
before your eyes most illustrious and Reverend Lords these our grievances, as
meet and honorable witnesses of this our deed, writing and public Instrument,
and as far as is possible and lawful for us by the Canons of holy Church,
declining the Jurisdiction of our aforesaid Ordinary by this our present
writing; and from this time f^rth we appeal unto the Sea Apostolic, from all
Ecclesiastical censures hereafter to be inflicted upon us by the same
illustrious Archbishop Thomas Flemming, of the order of Saint Francis. And in
the mean time providing for our innocence and safety (according to the example
of Saint Paul and Saint Athauasius) we do invocate the aid of the secular arm
for our present remedy, against the aforesaid illustrious Arch bishop Thomas
Flemming of the order of Saint Franci^, and all Regulars of what order soever,
as well Monks as begging Friars, Abettors counselors and participants with
him in the promises, as Violators and contemners of all laws divine and
humane, and ^on by the law excommunicate. Humbly beseeching your Lord^hips in
the bowels of the crucified, that you would be pleased to intimate with as much
speed as may be, this our protestation and appeal unto the Sea Apostolik; and
the God of peace and love, long preserve your Reverend Lordships in safety.

Dated at Dublin May 3. in the year of our Lord, 1632. Peter Caddell Doctor of
Divinity. Paul Harris pr. D^^e.
Deacon of the University of Dublin.


From which Protestation I shall observe these considerable particulars.

1. First, that the papists in Ireland had their own popish Archbishops,
Bishops, and a Vi^at Apostolical residing then amongst them, as the Title and
body of this Protestation manifest.

Secondly, that their Archbishop Flemming had a popish Clergy under him in his
Province, and did exceedingly tyrannize over them, usurping jurisdiction even
in temporal ca^ses, and over the Kings own Courts among the Catholics of
Ireland.

Thirdly, that the popish Bishops in Ireland, did usually confer orders, and
exercise all Episcopal jurisdiction there.

Fourthly, NOTE.
that they had a special Cardinal at Rome (Ludovisius) given by the Pope unto
the Irish, as the only patron and protector of the Irish Nation.

Fifthly, That the secular Priests were exceedingly jealous, least the Monks and
regulars in Ireland should overtop Lord it, and usurp a Monarchy over them,
and thereupon appealed to the Pope against them and their Franciscan
Archbishop.

Sixthly, that they were grown extraordinary bold and insolemthere, so as they
openly published this their protestation and appeal in print both in Latin and
English to all the world, and avowed it under their hands, subscribed to it.

Seventhly, That they had then erected a popish University in Dublin it self*
of which Paul Harris professes himself Deacon (or Deane, as Bishop Bedle
styles him) even in print, of which more hereafter in the Bishop of Kilmores
letters.

This very year 1632* the Papists in Ireland, upon a false suggession,
procured a discharge for paying 12. d. for their absence from Church every
Sunday toward the maintenance of the army, and put the greatest charge of it
upon the Protestants, to their great grievance; as appears by this passage of
the Primate of Armagh his letter to Bishop La^d, who thus indorsed it, March 1.
1632, Lord Primate of Armagh, The general grievance of the protestant party in
Ireland.

My very good Lord:
IF you shall think it expedient that I may meet your Lordship this summer in
Scotland, to do my service there unto his Majesty, I shall have opportunity
(God willing) more freely to deliver my mind unto you both touching this
particular, and the general grievance which the Protestant ^arty here has
taken, upon the unhappy stop of the execution of the statu^e of 12. d. against
Recusants, grounded upon a most untrue suggestion made unto his Majesty, that
Writs were issued out for the levying of those moneys before the time of the
contribution granted by the Country for the maintenance of the army was
expired: after which the next news here expected is, that the Earl of
Westmeath should bring over directions for the abridging of our Episcopal
Jurisdiction, that so the popish Bishops may keep their Courts more freely then
we shall be permitted to do; quod dirum omen over^at a nobis De^^, etc.

Your Lordships in all observance Ja. Aramachanus.
Dublin March 1. 1632*

Hereupon the Protestants within the county of Cavan, both Clergy and Laity;
being oppressed by laying the charge of the Soldiers upon them* in ease of the
papists, and exceedingly injured by a popish Sheriff (a great enemy to the
English Protestants) by unequal assessements on them, drew up this ensuing
Petition, and presented it to the Lords Justices and Counsel of Ireland
whereby the power of and favo^rs showed to the Papists there, to the great
grievance of the Protestants, is fully laid open.

To the right Honorable the Lords Justices and Counsel.
The humble Petition of the Protestant Inhabitants both Clergy and L^ity within
the county of Cavan.
In all humble manner shows unto your Lordships:
WHereas your Lordships were pleased to send directions unto the Sheriff of
this Country, bearing date the 12. of February last 1632. stilo Anglia, etc.
for the levying of certain sums of money toward the maintenance of the
Army or contribution for the last three months ending the last day of March
last; and that your Lordships directions were grounded upon the signification
of his Majesty's pleasure, which sums were plotted and collected by the
Collectors without the consent of the Protestants in this County, and partly by
force, by laying of soldiers upon the County by the Sub-Sheriffs warrant being
a Recusant* without any warrant from your Honors to that effect. NOTE.
We do humbly pray your Lordships, that this money so collected and now paid
in according to your Lordships directions, it may not be prejudicial unto us
and our posterity and successors in time to come; and that your Lordships will
be pleased favorably to forbear any further imposition of any such burden
upon us* until your Lordships shall represent these humble Remonstrances unto
his Majesty, at whose hands we have full confidence, out of his accustomed
elemency, to find relief.

1. That whereas about four years last past, Sir Andrew Steward and Sir Arthur
T^rbosse deceased, Knights and Barone^s, were appointed Agents to treat with
his Majesty for the easing of this Province of Ulster, of the burden of the
Army, which was then imposed; the said Agents exceeding their authority did
condescend with the Recusant Agents to the imposition of six score thousand
pounds sterling, upon this Kingdom to be paid within this Kingdom.

2. That the said sum, though heavily pressing the conformable Subjects,
especially the Plantators and poor Clergy, was by them satisfied and paid
according to his Majesty's directions, with hope that thereupon they should not
be further charged with the like impositions.

3. That since that time the undertakers and plantators have renewed their
Patents, paid great fines, and doubled their rents to his Majesty, to their
great charg^ especially in the dear years that have been by the murren of
Cattle, and unseasonablenesse of the times.

4. That the Country has been and a^e still at excessive charges, in building
of Castles and Bawenes, Goale-houses, Shire-houses, Bridges and Highways, and
now are called upon to re-edifie their Churches, which are for the most part
altogether r^ined.

5. That where the Plantators are lately by direction from his Majesty to be
trained in Bands under Captains and other Officers by Sir William Grahayme,
twice a year, for which be receives due entertainment from them, they conceive
that not only they shall be able to serve his Majesty in his and their own
defense, but to approve their ^idelities against any other if occasion of
trouble should be.

6. That if any be feared, it seems hard that others no way doubted of, NOTE.
should be in worse condition by reason of their dangerousnesse.

7. That whereas your Lordships do intimate a proffer made by a great number
of Noblemen of this Kingdom, to continue their contributions; We humbly
desire, that it may be considered, that though they be many in themselves, yet
are they but few, being compared with the rest, and that their proffers seem
probable to be for their own ends, which will be a means to weary the
Plantators.

8. That those who now make these propositions were the chief opposer^ of the
payment of the late contribution into the Exchequer, least it should grow to be
esteemed a revenue of the Crown, and be required of Posterity: whereby it may
appear it is for their own ends.

9. That as in the former contribution his Majesty's graces did solely redound
unto the Recusants, so it is now sought in like manner, NOTE.
that they may have all the ease and thanks, though the burden lie as heavy on
others as on them: All which much tending to the disheartning of good and
conformable Subjects, we desire your Honors by your mediation to his Majesty
to prohibit.

Doctor Bedle Bishop of Kilmore (with two more Bishops) among others subscribed
this Petition at the request of the Gent* of that County, and (as appears by
his Letters to the Lord Dated November. 5. 1633.
Deputy and Archbishop of Canterbury) did very much qualify the complaints
and grievances therein contained by altering the first draught presented to
him, from a smart Letter unto an humble Petition; yet notwithstanding he was
specially complained of to the King, for setting his hand to this Petition, and
opposing his Majesty's service in Ireland, touching the levy of moneys upon
Recusants and others to maintain the Army; The like accusation of him came to
the now Archbishop of Canterbury, who thereupon writ a sharp Letter of
reproof to him concerning it, dated October 13. 1633. to which this Bishop
returned an answer on the 5. of November following relating the truth of the
fact, and justifying his action; and withal he writ another Letter of the same
date to the Lord Deputy of Ireland (a ^opy whereof he sent the Archbishop
enclosed in his Letter to him) to excuse, and justify what he herein did; in
which Letter there are these memorable passages, touching the extraordinary
increase and boldness of the popish Bishops, Priests, Monks, Recusants, in
Ireland at that time; the copy of which Letter under this Bishops own hand and
Seal, I found in the Archbishops Study, thus indorsed with Master Dells own
hand; Rece^^. December 24. 1633. The Lord Bishop of Kilmore, William Bedle, his
letter to the Lord Wentworth, Lord Deputy of Ireland, about the maintenance of
the Army and the Cavan Petition.

Right Honorable my good Lord, etc.
IN the midst of the midst of these thoughts I have been advertised from an
honorable friend in England, that I am accused to his Majesty to have opposed
his service, and that my hand with two other Bishops only, was to a writing,
touching the moneys to be levied on the Papists here, for maintenance of the
men of war, etc. Indeed if I should have had such an intention, this had been
not only to oppose the service of his Majesty, but to expose with the public
peace mine own neck to the sc^ans of the Romish Cutthroats: I that know that
in this Kingdom of his Majesty, NOTE.
the Pope has another Kingdom far greater in number, and as I have
heretofore signified to the Lords Justices and Counsel (which is also since
justified by themselves in print) constantly guided and directed by the order
of the new Congregation, de propagand^ ^ide, lately ^rected at Rome,
transmitted by the means of the Popes Nuntioes, residing at Bruxels or Paris
that the Pope has here a Clergy if I may guess by mine own Diocese, double
in number to us, the heads whereof are by corporal Oath bound to him, to
maintain him and his Regalities, contra omnem hominem, and to execute his
Mandates to their uttermost forces; which accordingly they do, stiling
themselves in print, Ego N. Dei, etc. Apostoli^ae Sedis gratia Episcopus
Fermien, O^^orien, etc. I that know there is in this Kingdom, for the moulding
of the people to the Popes obedience, a rabble of irregular Regulars, commonly
younger brothers of good houses, who are grown to that insolency, as to
advance themselves to be Members of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy in better
ranks then Priests; insomuch, as the censure of the Sorbon is feign to be
implored to curb them: which yet is called in again, so tender as the Pope of
these his own creatures: I that kn^w that his Holiness has erected a new
University at Dublin, NOTE.
to confront his Majesty's College there, and to breed up the youth of this
Kingdom to his devotion; of which University one Paul Harris, the Author of
that infamous libell, which was put forth in print against the Lord Primates
Wa^sted Sermon, styles himself in print to be Deane: I that know and have
given advertisement to the State, NOTE.
that these Regulars dare erect new ^r^er^es in the Country, since the
dissolving of those in the City, that they have brought the people to such a
sottish senslesnesse, as they care not to learn the Commandments, as God
himself spoke and writ them, but they ^lock in great numbers to the preaching
of new superstitious and detestable doctrines, such as their own Priests are
ashamed of, and as these they levy collections, three, four, five, six pound
at a Sermon: shortly, I that know that this Clergy and these Regulars have at a
general meeting like to a Synod, as themselves style it, NOTE.
holden at Drogheda decreed, that it is not lawful to take the Oath of
Alleagiance, and if they be constant to their own doctrine, do account his
Majesty in their hearts to be King, but at the Popes discretion. In this estate
of this Kingdom, to think the bridle of the Army may be take^away, it should
be the thought not of a brainsick, but of a brainlesse man.

But though I think strong for the establishment of the Army, perhaps I would
have had it maintained only by the Recusants sines, and mistake that they are
gratified by the not exacting of them; NOTE.
let my letters of the 23. of March 1629. to the Lords Justices commanding me
to give them ample advertisements in any particular that might further the
establishment of true Religion in this Kingdom: Let those Letters I say of
mine be seen, it will be found that I use these formal words; Forasmuch as the
people are generally very poor and therefore discontented, very ignorant and
strongly persuaded by their Priests in their own way, and the Recusants for
their number far exceeding the better part. I leave it to the Lords wisdom
to consider, how safe it may be to urge them to come to Church at once by
exacting the fines for Recusancy, unless something do sound there first,
which they themselves do^ conceive they do not well to refuse to hear etc.
And to an honorable friend of mine in England not long after, touching this
very point, that unless impediments were first removed, and the matter better
disposed, to impresse the form presently by the pec^niary mu^cts, would but
breed a Monster: And let the Cavan Petition b^ but perused, to see if there be
ever a word for or against the Recusants fines, whereby without further ado, I
and all that joined therein are justified from the imputation of opposing in
that ipart^cular touching the monys to be levied upon the Papists.

Yea, but at least I joined to oppose the applotment of Contributions upon
Protestants. Nor that neither; For it was both applotted and paid. But to
petition that the Lords Justices and Council, would forbear any further
imposition till they should represent to his Majesty, etc. herein only I
joined.

My Lord, as I have never esteemed it to become me or any Subject, to take upon
and to be the Auditor of the public Accounts, as being a matter to be left in
the wisdom and providence of the Kings Majesty, the Father of the public
family: so I have yet thought, the way ought not to be foreclosed to the
subjects to have recourse (in humble and dutiful sort) to his Majesty's
goodness to declare their grievances, this serving to evaporate their
discontents (a good mean to keep them from fastering inwardly) and so to help
to cure them: How much less is this to be denied to the dutiful and
obedient; who had not opposed the applotment made upon them, though levied
disorderly, by laying on the Soldiers without Commission, by an Irish Recusant
sub-Sheriffe, Note.
the most odious man to the English in all the County. For which cause there
was a deliberation of the Assizes, to have indjcted him of High Treason, though
(as I think) by the wisdom of the Lord chief Justice it was put by. The
petitioners therefore having before paid the money imposed, and harshly
imposed; this very thing to petition, that they might not be charged aga^ne,
till his Majesty were informed, seems not to be worthy such blame. In wish
and hearty desire I rest

The day of our deliverance from the Popish Powder Plot. Your Lordships in all
duty, JOHN KILMORE.


By this Bishops Letter, you may clearly discern the potency and boldness of
the Popish party in Ireland at that time, who built a new College in Dublin
stored with Jesuits, and young Students, to be trained up in that
pragmaticall dangerous Order. I shall add to this a Certificate of Boethius
Egan, the Popish Bishop of Elphin in Ireland, in the behalf of one Philip O
Conor a young Popish Student (the original whereof was found among Secretary
Windebanks papers) which will somewhat illustrate the Premises.

NOs Fr. Boethius Eganus Dei and Apostolicae sedis gratia Elphin Episcopus;
Omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint. Notum facimus praesentium
latorem Philippum O Conor Hybernum nostrae antedictae Dioecesis adolescentem,
esse virum integrum, conversationis laud^bilis, bonae indolis and esse
nobilissimis hujus regni Catholicis parentibus legitim^ oriundum, modo ultra
marinos parts proficiscentem studendi causa, eo quod in hoc nostro afflicto
regno, nec ei, nec aliis similibus orthodoxae fidei cultoribus incumber^
literis permitti^ur, ob grassantem apud nos haeresim. Quare eundem Philippum
omnibus Christi fidelibus, potissimum in Ecclesiasticae dignitatis fastigio
constitutis, nec non Gymnasiorum rectoribus plurimum in visceribus Salvator is
commendamus, eos obnixe rogantes, ut eidem consilio, savore, and auxilio,
quoties opus ^uerit, subvenire non dedignentur, mercedem ab eodem recepturi in
cujus vinea laborare and insudare intendit post suum (Deo ^^nuente) reditum in
ban^ suam afflictam patriam. In quorum omnium fid^mbis subscripsimus and
sigillum parvum, quo ad talia utimur, apponi curavimus.

Julii, 1633. Fr. Boethius Elphyn Episcopus.

What good use was made of this increase of the Popish Party in Ireland, and
how they were connived at, out of a mere design to balance the Protestants
there, (by the Infernal policy of the then Lord Deputy) to the end he might
compound a lower house of Parliament there, so, as that neither the Recusant
nor the Protestant should appear considerably one more then the other, holding
them as much as might ^ee upon an equal balance, that so they might prove the
more easy to govern, them if e^^^er party were absolute; and that by this
policy, the King might by a packed Parliament without charge in a short time
make a more absolute Conquest of that Nation and Kingdom by wisdom, then all
his Royal Progenitors have been able to accomplish by Arms, Note
and vast expense of Treasure and blood: will most evidently appear, by this
Duplicate of the Lord Deputies dispatch to his Majesty, 22 Jan. 1633.
superscribed, For my Lords Grace of Canterbury; found in Canterburies private
Study, and this indorsed with his own hand Rec. Mar. 2. 1633. Com. Ang.
Reasons for the present calling of a Parliament in Ireland. Which being a
pernicious piece against the freedom and power of Parliaments, laying down
most desperate Policies how to overreach Parliaments, and make them
instruments to erect a mere Arbitrary Government, and enslave themselves; to
what good use was to be made of the Popish Party in Irish Parliaments, I shall
here insert out of the Original.

May it please your Sacred MAJESTY.
Considerations tending to the better Government of the Church and Clergy in
this Kingdom, I offer in a Letter herewith sent to my Lords Grace of Canterbury.

The present mean condition of this Army, and the necessary course to be held
in the speedy reformation thereof, I fully now set forth in my dispatch to Mr.
Secretary Coke.

The state of your Majesty's Revenue; The, annual Issues of your Treasure, and
the debt charged upon this Crown upon my coming to the Government; The
Propositions humbly offered by me, for the bettering your Majesty's affairs
in this particular: Together, with a way of raising a constant great Rent ^orth
of the Salt; I have at this time als^ transmitted to my Lord Treasurer; of all
which, I beseech your Majesty at your best leisure be pleased to take a
summary Account.

Now I trust, the importance and weight of this enclosed Discourse, will
recompense for the length thereof, and obtain my pardon: Albeit I presume thus
to present it immediately to your Sacred Hands. For indeed, I take it to be no
less then the ground-plot, whereupon to set and raise safety and quiet to this
Kingdom, as it stands in relation within it self, security and profit, as it
is in dependence to the Crown of England.

And therefore I do most humbly beseech your Majesty's quickening Spirit may
move upon these Waters: That we may from your directions receive life, and
from your Wisdom borrow light to guide and conduct us along in the way we are
to take, toward the accomplishment of so happy a Work.

God Almighty assist you in these, and all other your Counsels, and long
preserve your Majesty in full Power and Greatness, etc.

Dublin Castle, 22 of Ian. 1633.

My humble Opinion concerning a Parliament, in this your Majesty's Kingdom of
IRELAND.
ALbeit the calling of a Parliament in this Kingdom, is at no time of so much
hazard (where nothing is propounded as a Law, before it first borrow motion
from your Majesty's immediate allowance under your Great Seale^) Note.
as it is in England, where there is a Liberty assumed to offer every thing in
their own time and Order: And this Subordination whereunto they have been led
by the Wisdom of former times, is ever to be held as a sacred Prerogative not
to be departed from, in no piece to be broken or infringed; yet is the
Proposition always weighty, very necessary to be considered with great
deliberation, whether the present conjuncture of Affairs does now advise a
Parliament, or no? And after a serious discourse with my self, my reason
persuades me for the Assembling thereof.

For the contribution from the County toward the Army ending in December next,
your Majesty's Revenue falls short twenty thousand Pounds sterling by year, of
the present charge it is burdened withal; besides the vast debt of fourscore
thousand pounds Irish upon the Crown, which yearly payments alone, are
impossible by any other ordinary way to be in time supplied, but by the Subject
in Parliament. And to pass to the extraordina^y, before there be at least an
attempt first to effect it with ease, were to love difficulties too well;
rather voluntarily to seek them, then unwillingly to meet them. And might seem
as well vanity in the first respect, so to affect them, as faintness to bow
under them, when they are not to be avoided.

The next inclination thereunto arises in me from the conditions of this
Country, grown very much more civil and rich, since the access of your
Royal Father of blessed memory, and your Majesty to the Crown; That all you
have here, is issued out again amongst them for their protection and safety,
without any considerable reservation for other the great affairs and expenses
abroad: That this great charge is sustained, and this great debt contracted,
thorough employments for a public good, whereof the benefit hitherto has been
entirely theirs. That there has been but one Subsidy granted in all this
time, nor any other Supply but this Contribution; in exchange whereof your
Princely Bounty returned them Graces as beneficial to this Subject as their
Money was to your Majesty; so as their substance having been so increased,
under the guard of your Wisdom and Justice; So little issued hence from them;
The Crown so pressed only for their good; And so modest a calling upon them
now for a supply, which in all Wisdom, good Nature and Conscience, they are
not to deny; should they not conform themselves to your Gracious will, their
unthankfulness to God, and the best of Kings would become inexcusable before
all the World, and the Regal Power more warrantably to be at after extended
for redeeming and recovering your Majesty's Revenews thus lost, and justly to
punish so great a forfeit as this must needs be judged to be in them.

Next, the frightfull apprehensions which at this time makes their hearts beat,
le^t the Quarterly Payments toward the Army, continued now almost ten years,
might in fine turn to an Hereditary Charge upon their Lands, inclines them to
give any reasonable thing in present to secure themselves of that fear for the
future; And therefore according to the wholesome Counsel of the Physician, Note.
Dum dolet accipe.

And lastly, if they should meanly cast from them these mighty obligations,
which indeed I cannot fear: Your Majesty's affairs can never suffer less by
their starting aside, when the general Peace abroad admits more united Power
in your Majesty, Note.
and less distracted thoughts in your Ministers to chastise such a
forgetfulness to call to their remembrance, and to enforce from them other and
better duties then these.

In the second place, the time your Majesty shall in your Wisdom appoint for
this meeting imports very much, which, with all submission, I should advise
might not be longer put off, then Easter or Trinity Term at furthest; And I
shall crave leave to offer my reasons.

The improvements mentioned in my dispatch to the Lord Treasurer, (from which I
no ways recede) would not be fore slowed, wherein we lose much by deferring
this Meeting. A circumstance very considerable in these straits, wherein if
surprised, might be of much disadvantage, in case the Parliament answer not
expectation. And to enter upon that work before, would be an Argument for
them to scant their supply to your Majesty.

Again, a breach of a Parliament would prejudice less thus, then in winter,
having at the worst six months to turn our eyes about, and many helps to be
gained in that space; where in the other case the Contribution ending in
December next, we should be put upon an instant of time, to read our lesson at
the first sight.

Then the calling of a Parliament, and determining of the quarterly payments,
falling out much upon one, might make them apprehend there were a necessity
enforcing a present agreement, if not the good one we would, yet the best we
could get: And so imbolden them to make, and flatter themselves to gain their
own Conditions; and Conditions are not to be admitted with any Subjects,
less with this People, where your Majesty's absolute Sovereignty goes much
higher, then it is taken, perhaps, to do in England.

And lastly, there being some of your Majesty's Graces, which being passed into
Laws, might be of great prejudice to the Crown: and yet it being to be
feared they will press for them all; and uncertain what humor the denying
any of them might move in their minds; I conceive, under favor, it would be
much better to make two Sessions of it, one in Summer, the other in Winter. In
the former to settle your Majesty's supply, and in the latter, to enact so many
of those Graces, as in Honor and Wisdom should be Judged equal; when the
putting aside of the rest might be of no ill consequence to other your Royal
purposes.

All the Objections I am able to suggest unto my self, are two. That it might
render fruitless the intended improvement upon the concealments, and prejudice
the Plantations of Conn^gh and Ormond. The firster, may easily be helped, by a
short Law propounded in my dispatch to my Lord Treasurer. And, posito, that
there no other Law pass the first Session; the second, is likewise
sufficiently secured.

Then it is to be foreseen what your Majesty will demand, how to induce and
pursue the same, for the happy settlement of the Regal Rights and Powers in
this more subordinate Kingdom.

My humble advice is, to declare at the first opening of the meeting, that your
Majesty intends and promises two Sessions. This former for your self* that
latter in Michaelmas Term next, for them. This, to ascertaine the payments of
your Army, and to strike off the Debts of your Crown; that, for the enacting
of all such profitable and wholesome Laws, as a moderate and good people may
expect from a Wise and Gracious King.

That this being the order of Nature, Reason, and Civility, your Majesty
expects it should be entirely observed, and your self wholly entrusted by
them; which they are not only to grant to be fit in the general case of King
and Subjects, but ought indeed to acknowledge it with thankfulness due to your
Majesty in particular, when they look back, and call to mind, how, for their
ease, you were content to take six score thousand pounds (which their Agents
gave to be paid in three) in six years: and not barely so neither: but to
double your Graces toward them the whilst, which they'have enjoyed
accordingly, much to their advantage, and greatly to the loss of the Crown.

And that considering the Army has been represented over to your Majesty from
this Counsel, and in a manner, from the body of this whole Kingdom, to be of
absolute necessity to give comfort to the quiet minds in their honest labors,
to contain the licentious Spirits within the modest bounds of sobriety; it
consists not with your Majesty's Wisdom to give unto the World, no not the
appearance of so much improvidence in your own Counsels, of so much
forgetfulness in a case of their safety; as to leave that Pillar of your
Auctority and their Peace, unse^ for continuance, at least, one six months
before the wearing forth of their Contribution.

Therefore your Majesty was well assured, in conformity to the rules of Reason
and Judgment, they would presently grant three Subsidies to be paid in three
years, to disengage the Crown of fourscore thousand pounds debt: and continue
their Quarterly payments toward the Army four years longer: in which time it
was hopeful, (suitable to your Gracious intentions) some other expedient might
be found out to maintain the Army, without further charge to them at all.
Which Law passed, they should have as much leisure to inact for themselves at
after as they could desire, either now or in winter: Nay, your Majesty (...) be
graciously pleased with the assistance of your Counsel to advise seriously
with them, that nothing might remain either unthought of, or denied, conducing
to the public good of this Kingdom. But if they made difficulty to proceed
with your Majesty in this manner, other Counsels must be thought of, and little
to be relied or expected for from them.

I am not to flatter your Majesty so far, as to raise any hope on that side
that all this should be granted, but by pressing both, and especially the
continuance of the quarterly payments to the Army, which they dread above any
earthly thing: I conceive it probable, that to determine and lay asleep (as
they think) the contribution; and in acknowledgement of your Majesty's happy
access to the Crown, they may be drawn to a present Gift of three Subsidies
payable in three years, which alone would keep the Army on foot during that
time; and if my calculation hold, almost discharge the debt of the Crown
besides.

For thus I make my Estimate, the contribution from the Country is now but
twenty thousand pounds sterling by the year, whereas I have good reason to
trust each Subsidy will raise thirty thousand pounds sterling. And so there
will be ten thousand pounds for three years over and above the establishment,
which thirty thousand pounds sterling, well and profitably issued, will I
trust, with Honor to your Majesty, and moderate satisfaction to the parties,
strike off the whole fourscore thousand pounds Irish, which in present presses
so sore upon this Crown.

And then Sir, after that, in Michaelmas Term, all beneficial Acts for the
Subject be thought of, as many, no fewer, nor no more inacted, then were fit in
honor and wisdom to be granted: If for a conclusion to this Parliament, we
could gain from them other two Subsidies, to buy in Rents and Pensions to ten
thousand pounds yearly value; (a thing they are inclinable unto, as is
mentioned in my dispatch to the Lord Treasurer) I judge there were a happy
issue of this Meeting; and that it should through Gods blessing appear to the
world in a few years, Note.
you had without charge made a more absolute Conquest of this Nation by your
wisdom, then all your Royal Progenitors have been able to accomplish by their
Armies, and vast expense of Treasure and Blood.

These being the ends, in my poor Opinion, which are to be desired and
attained; the best means to dispose and fit all concurring causes thereunto,
are not to be forgotten: and therefore as preparatives, I make bold to offer
these ensuing particulars.

It seems to me very convenient, a Committee be forthwith appointed of some
few of us here, to take into consideration all the Bills intended when there was
a Parliament to have been called in the time of my Lord Falkland; such as shall
be judged beneficial, to make them ready; such as may be of too much prejudice
to the Crown, to lay them aside; and to draw up others which may chance to have
been then omitted: this work may be by the Committees either quickened or
fore-slowen, as the Parliament proceeds warmer or cooler in your Majesty's
Supplies.

Next, that your Majesty's Acts of Grace directed to my Lord Falkland the four
and twentyeth of May, 1628* may be considered by such of your Counsel in
England, as shall please your Majesty to appoint, there being many matters
therein contained, which in a Law would not futurely so well sort with the
Power requisite to be upheld in this Kingdom, nor yet with your Majesty's
present pro^^t, which has persuaded me to except against such, as I hold best
to be silently passed over; and to transmit a Paper thereof to my Lord
Treasurer.

It is to be feared, the meane^ sort of Subjects here, live under the pressures
of the great (...); and there is a general complaint, that Officers exact much
larger Fees, then o^ right they ought to do: To help the forme^, if it be
possible, I will find out two or three to make examples of. And to remedy the
latter, grant out a Commission for examining, regulating, and setting down
Tables of Fees, in all your Courts, so a^ they shall find your Majesty's
goodness and justice watching and caring for their protection and ease both in
private and public respects.

I shall endeavor the lower House may be so composed, Note.
as that neither the Recusants, nor yet the Protestants shall appear
considerably more one then the other, holding them as much as may be, upon an
equal Balance, for they will prove thus easier to govern, Note.
then if either party were absolute. Then would I in private discourse, show
the Recusant, that the contribution ending in December next, if your Majesty's
Army were not supplied some other way before, the twelve pence a Sunday must of
necessity be exacted upon them: Show the Protestant, that your Majesty must
not let go the twenty thousand pounds contribution: nor yet discontent the
other in matter of Religion, till the Army were some way else certainly
provided for: and convince them both, that the present quarterly payments are
not so burdensome as they pretended them to be. And that by the graces they
have had already more benefit then their money came to: thus poysing one by the
other, which single might perchance prove more unhappy to deal with.

I will labor to make as many Captains and Officers Burgesses, Note.
as possibly I can, who having immediate dependence upon the Crown, may almost
sway the business betwixt the two parties which way they please.

In the higher House, Note.
your Majesty will have, I trust, the Bishops wholly for you: The titular
Lords, rather then come over themselves, will put their Proxies into such safe
hands, as may be thought of on this side: and in the rest your Majesty has
such interest, what out of duty to the Crown, and obnoxiousnesse in themselves,
as I do not apprehend much, any difficulty amongst them.

To these, or to any thing else directed by your Majesty, I will with all
possible diligence apply my self, so soon as I shall understand your pleasure
therein. Most humbly bes^^ching you will take it into your gracious Memory, how
much your Majesty's speedy resolution in this great business, imports the
prosperity of your affairs in this place; and in that respect vouchsafe to
hasten it as much as conveniently may be.

Upon these Reasons a Parliament was accordingly summoned in Ireland the year
following, the Lord Deputy recommending by his Letters Burgesses of his own
nomination to most Towns, who had little or no courage to deny any Burgesses
of his recommendation. Among others, he recommended one of Secretary
Windebancks Sonne^ (then waiting on him in Ireland) to be a Burgess there; as
is evident by this Copy of his Letters of recommendation, found among
Windebancks papers, who (as appears by Secretary Windebancks to his Son from
Hampton Count, 27 October. 1634. Wherein thus he writes. Now you are become a
Parliament men, I hope you will in acknowledgement of the great Honor my Lord
Deputy has done you, endeavor ^o do his Majesty the best service you can*
other Letters) was accordingly elected.

AFter our hearty commendations. Whereas by order of the Commons House of
Parliament that corporation of I^^ishe by reason of a double election of the
person chosen there, is now to proceed to a new election of a Burgess to serve
at the next Session of Parliament to commence the fourth of November next. And
for as much as Francis Windebanke Esquire, is one well known unto us to be
able to serve you therein, as a person well affected to his Majesty's service,
and the welfare of his people, we have thought fit to recommend him to you to
be elected by you for one of the Burgesses upon this occasion: wherein as you
shall gain advantage and benefit to your Corporation in such a choice, he
being one that will serve you therein without expecting any recompense toward
his charges; so we, for our part will take it in good part at your hands, as a
testimony of the due regard you have to one recommended unto you from us, which
we shall take an opportunity in fit time to let you know for your advantage;
And so expecting your due performance hereof, we bid you farewell. From his
Majesty's Castle of Dublin this 26* of September, 1634.

Copia vero ex^m. Your loving Friend (...)


That this Parliament was equally balanced with Protestants, and Papists, and
how far the said Deputy pursued, obtained his forementioned designs thereby
to inslave that Realm, is so well known to most, that I shall not insist upon
it: only I shall observe that this connivence and underhand fomenting of that
faction made them grow so insolent, that they raised a strong mutiny even in
Dublin it self* against the Archbishop, the Mayor and Justices, and rescued
two Priests from them, which they had taken in a religious house saying open
Mass, and were like to stone them to death, so as they were enforced to retire
to the Castle for Sanctuary, as appears by this extract out of Sir Thomas
Duttens Letter among Windebanks papers.

I presume you will hear at large the relation of our battill of stones at
Dublin, where the Archbishop of that town, and the Major and Captain Carry,
and the Sergeant at Arms, and the two pursevants escaped narrowly to have
been stoned to death on Saint Stephens day last: for the two Justices sent
them in a peaceable manner to surprise certain Priests at Mass in a Religious
house in Cock street, Note.
where they took away their habits and pictures in peaceable manner, and then
laid hold of two of the Priests to bring them to the Justices to answer their
exercising of Popery in so public a manner, contrary to the Kings
Proclamation; they were no sooner come out into the street, but all the
multitude of mechanics and common people fell upon them, and took away the
two Priests from them by force, and followed the Mayor and the Archbiship, and
the rest so fast with stones all along the high street, as they were forced to
house themselves in Skinners Row, till the Justices and we all came from
Church and rescued them, and so orderly we all went through the multitude to
the Castle, and in our passage there was but one stone call out of a window,
which lighted between the two Justices. We presently made Proclamation for
all people to keep the Kings peace and their own Houses; and since, have
committed to prison some of the Aldermen and their Deputies and Constables for
not doing their duties, and many other ordinary persons whom we found to be
Actors in this Riot, wherein many were hurt, but God be thanked none were
slain.

But to leave Ireland for a time, and return to England, you have seen before
in the Articles of the marriage, that the Queen was to have a Bishop, and 28.
Priests in her house as her Chaplains, and that this Bishop should have and
exercise all Epis^^pall jurisdiction in matters of Religion. After those
Priests and the Bishop were accordingly come over and settled here; Father
Philips the Queens Confessor, and others of them grew so insolent that they
began to practice and ^each, Note.
That the Pope upon the Treaty of marriage resumed to his own or his Delegates
jurisdiction, the Queens whole Family, especially the institution and
destitution of the Ecclesiastics: That the King of England ^ad no power to
intermeddle therein; for that he was an heretic; the Pope threatening to
declare all Apostates who should seek their establishment from the King. They
likewise maintained the lawfulness of deposing Kings that were heretics; and
concluded to excommunicate all such a^ should oppose this doctrine, or take the
oath of allegiance; in which action one Muske^ a Priest, and Trollop the Popish
Viear in the North were very active, which caused some combustions in the Court
even among the Roman Catholics, and the business grew so high, that some
private advises were given to his Majesty concerning these particulars,
expressed in these three ensuing Papers (seized among Windebankes writings, who
was privy to all their counsels^ as you shall hear anon.)

Advises upon the present state of English Catholics* as well of the Queens
House, as of his Majesty's Dominions.
THe constant report approved by Father Philips the Queens Confessor is, Note.
That the Pope upon the Treaty of Marriage reserved to his own or Delegates
Jurisdiction the Queen of Englands whole family, principally the institution
and destitution of her Ecelesiastiques. Testify the confession of the Bishop
of Menda, who contrary to his opinion and certain knowledge was forced to
advance and defend joint with the pretended Bishop of England, the pernicious
Paradox, for the deposition of Princes, saying to A. B. for his justification,
that although upon that subject he had written against Baronius and Bellarmine
for the contrary, nevertheless for the present his hands were bound. Tes^ifie
the unity of maxims, councels and daily practices which he held with the
foresaid pretended Bishop. Testify the negotiations held at this present in
Rome and England for the procuring of Excommunications and suspension against
all those Catholics, Note.
Priests, or others which shall stand for the Kings authority against that
damnable doctrine brought already into his Majesty's, Kingdoms, as their
favorites boast, and to be executed by the Bishops agents; particularly, by
Mr. Musket a Priest living in London. Testify the Popes Letters to the King of
France, now in the Catholics hands, wherein he complains to have been
abused, Note.
in that (contrary to the King of France his promise) neither Toleration was
granted in England, nor the oath of Allegiance suspended.

All which duly considered directly tends to a manifest sedition, and division
of the Kings authority and state, and that not in quality or propriety of
Religion, but in particular manner and condition of duty, obedience, and
natural Allegiance, withdrawn from their true Prince and Sovereign.

In remedy of which pernicious opinions and practices, pleases his Majesty,
in imitation of his predecessors, as well to continue the real defense of his
own right and authority, as the Pope does his pretended and usurped, which two
ways may easily be done.

The first, by lively pressing his natural subjects to take the oath of
Allegiance, in as much as it concerns the abjuration of the Popes authority
for the deposition of Princes, as of late the State of France has proceeded
against the Jesuits without any respect to matter of Religion or Priesthood:
for the obligation of a Subject to his lawful Prince being founded in the Law
of Nations, Nature and God, the denial thereof is crimen laesae Majestatis,
and so may be ordained by act of Parliament or otherwise, and so those who
shall be punished by death for refusing thereof, cannot pretend cause of
Religion, the oath being propounded in form as it is now styled, or the form
altered in substance only reserved, as prudent men shall define.

The second by constrayning all French servants to King or Queen, to disavow
or detest (according to the late ordinances of State Parliaments, Universities
of France, namely of Sorbon, that damnable and erroneous doctrine for the
deposition of Princes) against the Jesuits.

And that it may please his Majesty not to admit any Catholic servant which
shall refuse either of the foresaid manners of oaths or detestations.

Besides, that diligent search and punishment be used against all Agents and
Negotiators, which in these Realms advance the contrary error to the
prejudice of his Majesty's authority and peace of his State.

For the reservation of the Queens house to the Pope, it is evident in all
antiquity, and now practiced in all Christian Nations, that the institution and
destitution of Ecclesiastiques (in regard of their persons and as members of
the State) depends of the Prince, or of his Subjects by his consent, although
their spiritual faculties or internal jurisdiction may be derived from a
superior Prelate, Patriarck, or Pope, but all by equity, justice and Canon,
whereby the King of England propounding such his Subjects Ecclesiastiques as
he thinks fit for the Queens service, cannot be refused by the Pope or
other, until they have showed and proved sufficient cause of refuse.

Finally, how dangerous, prejudicial and dishonorable such reservation is to
the Kings authority, Note.
State and posterity, upon what end or color soever, every man of smaller
judgment cannot but see.

An Answer to the Principles pretended against his Majesty's establishment of
Ecclesiastics in the Queens house.
TWO be the Principles upon which the F. C. pretends the establishment of the
Ecclesiastics in the Queens home to belong unto the King of France.

The first is, That the King of great Britain has not power, because as he
says, He is an Heretic. Which ground is false, NOTE.
because the King of great Britain neither by Council national not
general, nor by any Act authentic, or legal of Prelates having authority to
do the same, has been defined or declared such: besides, heresy deprives no
man of his temporal right, such as is the collation of temporal Bene^tees,
giving of domestical charges and offices; yea, no Prelate of the Greek Church
living under the Turk can exercise his function, but with civil dependence
and approbation of that Prince.

The second Principle it, That all established by the King of great Brittaine's
authority, are by him threatened to be forthwith by the Pope declared Apostates.
NOTE.
In answer, whereof it is evident, that such royal establishment is neither
Heresy nor Apostasy, and when the Pope should undertake such a matter, he
should grossly abuse his authority against the Commons and Common law of the
Church; yea, Ecclesiastics by the King, will and may by Catholic laws and
right defend their establishment to be good, as the contrary to be erroneous,
to wit, to seek to deprive our King of his right and a^thority therein.

SUpposed that the King of great Britain for avoiding for greater
inconvenience^ condescendeth to the reception of some French in the Queens
house at the instance of the King of France, or choice of the Queen of England,
some conditions are necessarily to be observed. First, that albeit (salvo jure
propr^o Regis magnae Britanniae) the choice be in the Queen of England, yet the
confirmation and approbation of all and every one be in the King of great
Britain, according to the last clause of the eleventh Article of the Treaty.
Secondly, that concerning the French Bishops and Priests sent into England by
the Popes authority, two things are to be considered; the first is the
spirituals power, Catholic Religion and Jurisdiction, as well in the head as
members; the second is the exaltation of the Popes temporal power in prejudice
of the Kings sovereigue authority, under pretext of Catholic Religion, by
obtruding as matter of faith, the Popes power for deposition of Princes.
Howbeit then the King of great Britain permits the full exercise of
Catholic Religion and spiritual power to the Queens Clergy and Catholic
domestiques, notwithstanding the laws and statutes made to the contrary in this
Realm since Henry the eighth; so is it necessary for the preservation of his
sovereign authority and peace of his State, that he prevents the intrusion of
the Popes temporal power under pretext of Religion in prejudice of his own;
which he may in this concurrence most conveniently do, by using the same
remedies against these French Ecclesiastics and Domestiks; which the State of
France, but particularly the Parliament and University of Paris, assembled in
their College of Sorbon procured against the Jesuits, this same year 1626.
the one by arrest the 17 of March this year 1626. the other by censure of the
first of April 1626. in condemning the per^itious doctrine of Santarelli
Jesuit, for deposition of Princes, ^s false, erroneous new, contrary to the
Word of God, derogating from the authority of Princes, provoking to Factions,
Rebellions, Seditions, and murders of Princes, and constraining sixteen
principal Jesuits, as Mercury relates, to subscribe to the said arrest of the
17. of March 1626. with promise to subscribe to the censure of the Sorbon which
should afterward be made, in which their subscription they dis-avowed and
detested, the foresaid damnable doctrine of Santarellus their compainon:
According to which may it please the King to compel all these Ecclesiastiques
of the Queens house to subscribe to the foresaid arrest and censure, disadvow
and detest the foresaid new doctrine, as new, false, erroneous, contrary to the
Word of God, and as their Parliament of Paris and Sorbon has defined; which if
they refuse to do, it is most evident that it is not the preservation of the
Queen in the Catholic Religion, not the exercise of spiritual power and true
piety that they intend, but under this pretext an introduction of popish
domination in prejudice of the Kings authority, NOTE.
an insertion of venomous plants of ^actions and Seditions; and why should they
refuse the doctrine and practice of their own State, whereby the King shall
effectnate two principal works; the one, that his sovereign authority, with
exclusion of the Popes pretended power in temporals, intended in the Oath of
Alleagiance, shall be to his Subjects manifestly approved and consumed by the
doctrine and practice of the State of Fr^^ce; the other is, that whereas the
Pope by means of the Queen^ house, aimed at the establishment of his temporal
power and greatness in this Kingdom (as is manifest by the doctrine and
practice of the Bishops and English Priests since the marriage) and
consequently made a Kingdom a part within this Realm; NOTE.
by the subscription and disadvow of their Ecclesiastics of this damnable
doctrine, the clean contrary will follow that in example of the Queens house,
all English Catholics will conform themselves in doctrine and practice, and
in this point the King shall receive full duty and obedience of his Catholic
Subjects, and the Pope shall be content with his spiritual power, limited as
in France for the Queens house, so long as it shall please the King to permit
it.

That the Bishop of M^rdes and all Bishops sent into England from the Pope,
have their Bulls, papale^ expressly prohibited by the laws and rights of this
Realm, it is mani^est.

By these papers you may plainly discern, the dangerousnesse of these Romish
Agents, their high and bold attempts against his Majesty's Pre^ogative royal,
and the safety of his person, and their policies, by which presently upon the
marriage (...) endeavored to set up the Popes both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal jurisdiction to oververtop the Kings. How this controversy was ended
I have no certain intelligenc^; As ^or other Priests and Jesuits, you have
already seen what Proclamations were published against them, between, and
during the two Sessions of Parliament in the yeer^ 1628 by reason of the
frequent complaints of the Commons and for the forenamed ends: Upon which
Proclamations diverse Priests and Jesuits were apprehended, and some R^cus^nts
ind^^ed by Officers and Justices of peace, well affected to our Religi^n; but
how, notwithstanding all these Proclamations, royal promises, Priests and
Jesuits were released from time to time by warrants, sometimes under his
Majesty's own hand; sometimes under the hands of his privy Counsel, but most
times by warants from Secretary Windebank alone; and how John Gray with other
Messengers, and ^o^e Harwood, were reviled, threa^ned to be whipped, and
committed to Prison by Windebanke, for apprehending Priests and Jesuits
according to their duty, till they should (...) bond, with sureties to him.
NEVER TO PERSECVTE PRIESTS OR POPISH RECVSANTS MORE, with other particulars of
this nature, I have manifested at large in my Royal Popish Favorite; to which
I reser^e the Reader; only I shall give you a short touch of some Priests and
Jesuits released after these Proclamations, as likewise by whom and whence.

(...)
11. April^s 6. Caroli, there were 16 Priests released one of the Clinke by one
Warrant ^^^ler his Majesty's own Sign Man^^l, at the Instance of the Queen,
notwithstanding a^y former order against such releases: 26. Iul^y 6. Carols, by
like Warrant and Instance there were six Priests and Jesuits more released out
of the same prison: 18. November and 20 I^nuary 7. Caroli two priests more were
thance discharged by like Warrant: 15. June 1632. and 18. December. 1633. there
were two priests more discharged out of the Clink by a Warrant of the Lords of
the Counsel, upon the (...)

On the 15. of June 1632. Windebanke was made one of the principal Secretaries
of State by Archbishop La^d's procurement, as appears by this passage in his
(...)
Diary: June 15. Master Francis Windebanke MY OLD FRIEND, was swor^e Secretary
of State, which place I OBTAINED FOR HIM of my gracious M^ster King CHARLES. To
what end this Instrument was advanced to this place of trust by Canterbury, and
what good service he did the Priests Jesuits, Nuncio Papists, Pope and his
Nuncioes therein, will appear in the sequel of this Narration. No sooner was
he settled in his place, but within few months after he falls to release and
protect Priests, Jesuits, Recusants, more then any of his predecessors, and all
the Counsel besides, becoming their special pa^^on, insomuch that in the
year 1634. he received this special letter of thanks from Father Joseph for
it, (written by the French Kings special command) faithfully translated out of
the original, indicted in (...), sound among his papers.

Most excellent Sir, my Patron most Worshipful:
I should be too much wanting to my duty, NOTE.
if I did not render my most humble thanks to your Excellence, having after so
many other favors conferred upon our Mission, received for a comple^^ height,
the singular proof of your ^ffection in the delivery of our Fathers; I knowing
with what love and care you were pleased to comply your self in this work,
the which besides the (...) of charity, has been most gra^efull to his most
(...), who in this (...) with great satisfaction acknowledge the good will of
his Majesty of great Britain in the person of his Minister in these
occurrences which he (...) resists. If in any occasion I can serve (...)*
Excellence you shall find me most ready to render you pro^ss of my devotion and
observance, beseeching you to (...) the favorable effects of your ^e^^gnity
toward our ^athers; and with this I end, (...) to you all complete felicity,

Your Excellencies most devout and most humble servant in Christ, ^ryar Joseph
of Paris, Cap^cine.
From Paris the 23. of November. 1634.

Besides, Panz^^ni the Popes Nancio in England, after his return hence, writ
him a letter of thanks (...) Ro^^e, for the daily favors he received from him
in behalf of the Roman Catholics whiles he continued Nuncio here, of which
more in due place.

This trade of releasing protecting Priests, Jesuits and Papists, this
Secretary continued all his time, till his slight into France: upon his
questioning in the Commons House for this offense. What Priests and Jesuits he
bailed and discharged, will appear by Master Glyns report to the House
concerning it, in the Commo^s Iournall 1. (...) ^^40. and by this Catalogue of
Priests discharged by him under his own and Master Reads (his Secretaries)
hands, written since his questioning in the house of Commons and found among
his other writings.

1. THomas Woodward in 300. l. with two sureties to appear upon 20 days
warning. bond. dat. 19. Oct. ^632.

2. Henry More with two (...). in 400. l. to appear upon 20 days warning,
(...). 1. Dec. 1633.

3. Edward (...) with two sureties, in 400. l. to appear upon 20 days
warning, bond dat. 6. Dec. 1633.

4. Thomas Leake with two sureties, Deads
in 400. l. to appear upon 12 days warning bond dat. 1. March 1633.

5. Thomas Holmes with two sureties, in 300. l. to appear upon 40 days
warning, bond dat. 9. May 1634.

6. Francis Harris with two sureties, in 300. l. to appear upon 20 days
warning, bond dat. 4. Iunij 1634.

7. Peter Curtis with two sureties, in 300. l. to appear upon 40 days
warning, bond dat. 12. June 1634.

^. 8. Henry Oven with two sureties, in 300. l* to appear upon 20 days
warning, bond dat. 11. of ^uly 1634.

9. Thomas Renolds with two sureties, in 300. l. to appear upon 20 days
warning, bond dat. 6. August 1634.

10. John (...) with two sureties, in 300. l. to appear upon 20 days warning,
bond dat. 3. November. 1634.

11. Humphry T^rbervill with two sureties, in 200. l. to appear upon 30 days
warning, bond dat. 1. Dec. 1634.

12. Daniel Chambers with two sureties, in 300. l. to appear upon 40 days
warning, bond dat. 3. Dec. 1634.

13. William Drury with two sureties, in 300. l. to appear upon 20 days
warning bond dat. 19. Febr. 1634.

14. Edward More with two sureties, 300. l. to appear upon 20 days warning,
bond dat. 24. March 16^4.

15. ^onh^m^e Cook with two sureties, in 300. l. to appear upon 10 days
warning, bond dat. 19. March 1634.

16. Peter Wilford with two sureties, in 500. l. to appear upon 20 days
warning, bond dat. 23. March 1634.

17. John Rivers with two sureties, in 300. l. to appear upon 30 days
warning, bond dat. 13. A^r. 1635.

18. John Hawkeshee with two sureties in 500. l. to appear upon 20 days
warning, bond dat. 27. (...) 1635.

19. John Bawles with two sureties, in 300. l. to appear upon 20 days
warning, bond dat. 7. ^ug. 1635.

20. John Piers alias Fisher with two sureties in 500. l. to appear upon 20
days warning bond dat. 12. August 1635.

21. H^nry G^fford with two sureties, in 500. l. to appear upon 20 days
warning, bond dat. 21. Aug. 16^5.

22. William Valentine with two sureties in 200. l. to appear upon six days
warning, bond dat. 25. May 16^6.

23. Edward Co^rtney with two sureties, in 20000. l. to appear upon 10 days
warning bond dat. 22. July 16^6.

24. Thomas Preston with 2 sureties, in 1000. l. to appear upon 10 days
warning, bond dat. 24. Apr. 2627.

25. Hen^y Morte with five sureties, in 5000. l. to appear upon 20 days
warning, bond dat. 16. ^une 16^7.

26. John Goodman with two sureties, in 500. l. to appear upon 20 days
warning, bond dat. 17. Sept. 1639.

27. John Southworth, July 1640.

This Catalogue was enclosed in this ensuing paper written with Windebankes or
his Secretary R^ads own hand (which are very^^^) and thus indorsed:

The Kings discharge to Secretary Windebanke for releasing of Priests.

WHereas diverse Roman Catholics as well priests as others, have been at
several (...) enlarged our of diverse prisons, to which they had formerly been
committed, they first entering into bond with sureties to appear before the
^ords of our privy Counsel upon warning given to them to that purpose: which
bonds have been taken by our Trusty and right welbeloved Counselor Sir
Francis W^^debanke, and one of our principal Secretaries of State and remain
with him.

And whereas we have also thought sit upon diverse occasions to give special
commands and directions in favor of some particular persons of the Roman
Catholic Religion, wherein we have used his service; We do hereby acknowledge
and declare that the enlargement of the said Roman Catholics and those other
acts done in favor of those of that religion by our said Secretary, NOTE.
have been performed by our special command and order given to him in that
behalf, without any advice or original motion of (...), who has only moved
herein as he has been from time commanded by Us, and for which We had good
grounds and reasons of State, such as We shall Our Self declare when We
shall find cause: We do therefore hereby fully and absolutely acquit,
discharge and save harmless the said Sir Francis Windebanke from any trouble
or question, to which he may be subject for or concerning the execution of our
said commands, and from all penalties that he may incur by reason thereof,
any Law, Act, Statue, proclamation, or any other matter or thing whatsoever to
the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding: and of thus all our Officers,
Ministers and Subjects whom it does or may concern are to take notice.

This discharge I find not signed by the King, which makes me think it to be a
draught prepared for his royal Signature by Windebanke since his questioning
in parliament* to lay all the blame of his Actions upon the King himself; who
(as it seems by his following letter) gave him a pas^e when he fled from the
parliaments justice into France, but his Secretary Master Read fearing the
first pass not to be sufficient, sent this ensuing pass out of France, found
among Mr. Thomas VVindebankes papers.

WHereas Our ^ight trusty and welbeloved Counselor Sir Francis VVindebanke
Knight, one of our principal Secretaries of state, is to make his repair into
foreign parts; We do hereby license him to pass, and straightly charge and
command you and every of you, to suffer him to go quietly by you, and to
embarque himself at any of Our ports most convenient for his passage, and to
take with him* his Nephew Robert Read* and two other in his company, together
with his and their carriages, without any manner of search, stay, or other
interruption whatsoever; and this shall be as well to the said Sir Francis
VVindebanke, Robert Read and the rest, for passing as to you and every of you,
for suffering them to pass, as aforesaid, sufficient warrant and discharge,
Given at Our Court at White Hall the second day of December 1640.

To all Admirals Vice-admirals, Captains of Our Forces, Castles and Ships, and
to all Justices of peace, Mayors Sheriffs Bailiffs, Constables, Customers,
Comptrollers, and Searche^s, and to all other Our Officers and Ministers, whom
it does or may concern, and to every of them.

This countersei^ed anti-dated pass was sent to Master Thomas VVindebanke into
England out of France, to procure his Majesty's hand and Signet to it; and if
any difficulty or scruple were made by the King to sign it, the Queens
omnipotent mediation must he used to obtainits Signature, as this letter of Mr.
Reads to Mr. Thomas Windebanke wherein it was enclosed, will sufficiently
manifest, and likewise discover to the world how grossly his Majesty has been
abused by this Secretary, the Archbishop and others of his Ministers by
procuring his hand to such forged, anti-dated warrants, to excuse themselves
and lay all the blame of their Actions upon him, which should cause his Majesty
to look better to them hereafter in this kind.

Sir,
MY Uncle has acquainted me with a letter he has written to my (...). of
Arundell and with the directions he has given you about it, I put him in mind
of some addition fit to be made to it, which he likes very well, and has
commanded me to write to you. That if her Ladyship or any other with whom she
shall please to advise, can think upon any way to prevent any proclamation
against him, or at least to sweeten any rigorous course that may be intended
against him, as probably such means may be found, now that their M. M.
(Majesty's) and the Parliament seem to be upon better terms, her Ladyship
will be pleased to advance it with all her power: And really I am of opinion,
if the King did know how much dishonor he ha^ abroad by this question of the
Secretary, and had a true sense of master Secretaries condition both his
Majesty and the Queen would be hearty in his business, which could not but
produce good effects. Sir, I have considered that when they fall upon our
business, they will go near to (...) comfort in mine absence, for which God
will bless you, and move the Kings heart to take you into his princely
consideration; which I shall be as well contented with, as if I had continued
in my prosperity; The being deprived of the light of my Sovereign Lord and
Masters countenance is the greatest and most bitter of my afflictions, to which
God will return me if he finds it fit, if otherwise, I hope he will arm me
with patience; You will present my most humble service to my Lord Duke of
Lenox, the Lord Marquess Hamilton, the Earl of Manchester and his Lady, with
the Lord Chamberlain, Lord Goring and Lord Cottington, the like to the LORD
ARCHBISHOP, and Lord TREASURER, and any other that shall enquire of me: God
bless you and send us a happy meeting, so I rest,

YOURS, etc. FRAN. VVINDEBANKE.
Calis 6. December 1640.

TOM. I writ to you this afternoon already, immediately upon my arrival here
and gave you account of my passage into these parts, and this was by the Master
of the boat that brought me hither; since, understanding that the Pacquet-boat
is to part away from hence to morrow, I thought fit to take that occasion to
communicate some thoughts of mine concerning my unfortunate business in
Parliament.

It is not unlikely but that the House of Commons will, notwithstanding mine
absence (or the rather for it, as taking my retreat for a confession of the
charge) proceed to present me to the Upper House for a Delinquent of so high a
nature, as never came so much as into my thoughts to be guilty of: In this case
you shall do well to consider whether it will not be fit for you, most humbly
to move his Majesty in favor of me, to deal with some of the Lords best
inclined to me, namely, the Lord Duke of Lenox, the Lord Marquess Hamilton,
the Earl Marshall, Lord Goring, Lord Cottington, and others, not leaving out
the Lord Chamberlain, that my charge may be set down in writing, and that I
may be permitted to make my answer to it; if this may be granted, the next
particular that will fall into consideration will be, how far his Majesty
will please to advow me in the two great parts of the charge, namely, the
enlarging of Priests, and the procuring of bills of grace from his Majesty for
stay of the conviction of Recusants, and likewise for such letters as my self
have written upon his Majesty's commandment, for stay of such indi^ements: For
the first of these there are 27. or 28. Bonds taken of such Priests as I have
set at liberty, which Bonds you shall do well to show his Majesty, being all
taken by his special direction, and I do not remember that any have been
delivered out of prison but such as are so bound, unless perhaps some may have
been taken out of the hands of those two Hell Hounds Gray and Newton, that were
disabled by the Lords from prosecuting Recusants, and this at the instance of
the Queen to his Majesty: NOTE.
For the second namely, the stay of convictions by Bills of grace and otherwise,
they were all entirely moved and procured by the Queens Majesty and some of her
servants, and likewise of those near his Majesty, who had no small benefit by
them, and I had nothing at all to do with them, but in the dispatch of some of
those Bills which belonged to me as Secretary, and his Majesty may please to
remember, that before those Bills passed my hands, some of them were made during
life, which upon my motion to his Majesty and the representation I made of that
inconveniency, was altered, and they were granted but during pleasure, and so
became revokable wh^^soever his Majesty should command: His Majesty may
likewise further please to remember, that of late I did humbly represent to him
the prejudice to his revenue by these bills of grace, and besought him there
might be a stop of them, and I do not remember that any have been granted
these two or three years; howsoever, I do religiously profess I never moved
in them, NOTE.
nor any other business of Recusants, originally, nor without his Majesty's
special commandment, and therefore if I should not be advowed in all, my
condition must be very hard: Nevertheless rather that his Majesty or his
affairs shall suffer, I desire the whole burden may be laid upon me, and
though I have his Majesty's hand for most of them and commandment for all, yet
I will rather perish then produce either to his prejudice without his
permission; if his Majesty shall please to appear to the Lords above^
mentioned in my behalf, you are not to leave them unsolicited, and you must
specially wait upon my brother Secretary, and present my humble service to him.
Since my arrival here, I have presented my self to the Governor (...) who
has offered me great civilities, inviting me to sup with him, and desiring me
to make use of his Coach to Paris, but I have thought sit to excuse my self as
handsomely as I could of both; you shall do well to present my most humble
thanks and services to the Queen for these honors, NOTE.
which I have reason to acknow^edge are done me in contemplation of her
Majesty's favor to me, so as though in mine own Country it be accounted a
crime to me to be her Majesty's servant, yet here I shall have reputation and
receive much honor by it.

At my first dis-embarquing here, in my red surred cap. I was taken for my
Lords Grace of Canterbury, and the noise was generally spread through the Town
that it was he: by which it apppeares this people can judge well of colors,
unless they had thought him a Cardinal.

Comfort your poor afflicted Mother in mine absence* who if she should fall
into any distemper of sickness for this disaster upon me and my Family, there
could be nothing added to my misery in this world.

God bless you, and make you more happy in your own person then you are in
that of

Your most distressed, but affectionate Father Francis VVindebanke.
(...), ^6. December 1640. A POST^SRIPT*
Co^^m^nd my dearest love to your Mother, and let your brother and sisters know
I send them my blessing.

You shall do well to acquaint the Queens Majesty with the particulars of my
travels, NOTE.
and most humbly to unplore the continuance of her favor to me and my poor
^uined Family, and withal ^orget not to represent to her Majesty the singular
favor she vouch^a^ed me in the company of Monseiur (...), who has been a
most (...) and t^nder friend to me.




^ NOTE.
NOTE.


(...) NOTE.
of those that have the charge of the letters, and that they are all sent.

For mine own most unfortunate business in Parliament, I long to hear what
effect my coming from England has produced, though I expect little good, but
to be kept from extremities.

Concerning mine own domestique affairs, the chiefest that I shall recommend
to you is the care of your poor mother, upon whose living and comfort depends
mine; next I wish you to procure me a bill of credit, to which purpose Robin
has writ to master Burlamachi, for I find my charge here will be very high,
and if his Majesty shall not relieve me I shall not be able by mine own
revenue to subsist: This I have represented to the Lord Treasurer and Lord
Cottington, and desired them to give order for payment of such moneys as are
due to me in the Exchequer, which are at Michael was last 800. l. you shall do
well likewise to solicit these Lords for the payment of the moneys, for which I
stand engaged to master Richaut for the King, and not to forget my board* wages
nor the moneys in the hands of the Earl of New Castle.

The l^tters that go herewith, you will deliver with the remembrance of my
humble services to these Lords, to whom I have written, to assist you as
occasion shall be presented. That to my Lord Chamberlain is more large and
particular then the rest, and I have left it open purposely, NOTE.
to the end, you may show it to his Majesty, and if his Majesty like it, to
deliver it, otherwise not.

I shall want linen and apparel at Paris, and A^bert tells me, I may have a
Trunk conveyed by the pacquet-boat hither, and from hence to Paris, with a
small charge; and therefore I wish there were two suits put up, one of plain
Velvet and I never yet wore, and another of the little wrought V^lvet diamond
work, and linn^n of all sorts but ^ands, with three or four pair of warm
woollen stockings, and two pa^re of black silk ones.

The Ship in which we should have passed and was bound for Roven, was within
24. hours after we left it, pillaged by the Dunkerks, but rescued from them
after by the French, and brought in hither as lawful prize, where she now is,
so that it was happy we forsook her and passed in a Shallop, and though our
passages were full of hazard, yet we avoided a greater danger by it.

God bless you, and put a happy end to all our sufferings, which I wish might
all fall upon my self, so your mother and you who are most innocent, were
free; in all conditions I shall be

Your most affecti^oate Father FRAN. VVINDEBANKE.
Calis 13. December 1640.

TOM* NOTE.
Your letter of the 17. of December came fitly to welcome me hither to Paris,
and gave me infinite comfort in the expressions you make of their Majesty's
favour^ to me and mine in our present distressed condition, the like I
understand by master Treasurer, and you are herewith to receive letters to them
all, in acknowledgement of their goodness: You writ nothing concerning the
(...) Bonds, which I desired you to show to his Majesty. I desire you to let me
know by your next what you have done therein.

Your most affectionate Father FRAN. WINDEBANKE.
Paris 4. January 1641.

Master Read, his Secretary, by a letter of the same date to master Thomas
Windebank (then a Gentleman of the privy Chamber to his Majesty in Ordinary)
written thus.

Sir,
I Am of opinion with you, that our business in Parliament will not sleep, yet
I like it never the worse that it goes on no faster, for in all probability, if
they may have their will of the great ones, NOTE.
as I believe they will, we may escape the better, especially since they cannot
choose but know that the King continues his favor to master Secretary, which I
hope will somewhat take off from their siercenesse against him.

Your most affectionate cozen and humble servant TO. READ*
Paris 4. Jan. 1641.

TOm. I writ to your mother and your self the last week by the ordinary; but
this extraordinary occasion of Sir John Fortes^ues return into England
presenting it self, I could not but make use of it, that you may understand
the state of my health as often as may be, which continuing good, I am
confident will be some comfort to you all in the midst of your afflictions.

I have not been able to put my self in order, to go out of my lodging until
this day, but now my first appearing abroad has been to present my self to my
Lord of Le^^cester, who has received me with great respects and professions;
which honor his Lordship having vouchsafed me for her Majesty's sake, NOTE.
and in virtue of her gracious letters of recommendation in favor of me: you
are with all humility to acknowledge it to her Majesty in my name, and to
present unto her my most humble thanks.

In my letters of the last week to his Majesty, I presumed to represent the
necessity (as I conceived) of my attending the ministers here; first, Monseiur
de Chavig^y, and then the Cardinal, as well in acknowledgement of the honor
they did to you, when you were employed here, NOTE.
as for the order they gave to the Governor of Calis to treat me with all
respect, as soon as they had notice of my arrival there.

Your very loving Father Francis Windebanke.
Paris 7. January 1641.

TOm. If you understand any thing of the disposal of the Secretaries place, I
wish some considerable sum might be thought upon to be given to me by him
that shall succeed, which would be of more advantage, and give me better
satisfaction then any pension that his Majesty shall confer upon me, and will
be of less charge to his Majesty; NOTE.
you shall do well to be attentive upon this, and immediately after the first
notice of, to make earnest means to the Queen to procure this for me.

My Lord Ambassador h^th done me the nonour to give me a visit at my lodging.

Your very loving Father Francis Windebanke.
Paris 11. January 1641.

TOm. your letters of the 31. of December that came this week, were brought too
late, and so long after the delivery of all others, that I was in great pain
and apprehension I should not have been made happy with the knowledge of the
estate of my poor Family this week, which would have added much to my sad
thoughts: I have now, I thank God, received full satisfaction in that which I
so much longed for, and hope* whatsoever my other afflictions may be that I
shall receive no other news of your healths during my absence from you:

There is little in your letters that requires answer; that only concerning my
charge when it shall be made, is of consideration, which will require little
answer, if his Majesty shall please to avow me in the business of Recusants,
as I doubt not but in honor and justice he will; what else can be objected to
me of moment, I do no^ apprehend; nevertheless, NOTE.
if his Majesty think fit that you shall petition the Lords for permission to
me to make my answer, you may do it, though I could be contented you should
first see the particulars of the charge, whether there be any thing in it
besides that of the Re^^sants; and howsoever you must acquaint his Majesty with
your petition before you exhibit it.

I was upon Sunday last at Service and Sermon at my Lord Ambassadors house,
where my Lord did me very much honor, otherwise I have kept my lodging.

Your most affectionate Father Francis Windebanke.
Paris 18. January 1641.

TOM. I shall be glad that the Trunk of secret papers may fall into so good a
hand as that of my Lord Cottington. I am very sorry to hear that his Majesty's
intentions of an an^ity or yearly allowance to me begins already to cool;
considering the charge I must lie at while I am in these parts, or any other,
and the uncertainties of the benefit of the Post Office, and of the boord-wages
for the Secretaries diet, which you shall do well to take some time to
represent at large to the Queen, NOTE.
and to implore her favor for the continuance of that his Majesty's gracious
purpose to me, without which I and mine are in danger to be exposed to want and
misery.

Your very loving Father, Francis Windebanke.
Paris 25. Ian. 1641.

^

^

Your, etc. Fran: Windebanke.
Paris 7 Feb. 1641.

^

Your etc. Fran: Windebank.
Paris 7 Feb. 1641.

TOM, etc. I have thought fit to let you know the particulars, that you way
represent them to their M. M. (Majesty's) for whose service merely I am thus
persecuted, NOTE.
and to whose wisdom, next after my (...) in God, I most entirely submit my
self, my fortune, and whatsoever else is (...); all which is now in extreme
peril, for my faithfulness and obedience to their Commandments. (The rest of
this letter being three folio Pages is writ in Caracters, and contains some
mysteries locked up in these unknown Ciphers, not yet discovered,

Your, etc. Fran: Windebank.
Paris, 1 March 1640.

TOm, etc. I have been this afternoon with the Cardmall, by the introduction
of (...), and received very great (...) and professions from him; he brought me
out of his chamber into the next, giving (...) the upper hand, and holding me
by the hands, (There follow three lines of ^^aracters.)

Your, etc. Fran: Windebanke.
Paris March 12. 1640.

Master Read, Secretary to Windebanke, march 29. 1611. writ a letter (for the
most part in Characters to master Thomas Windebanke, wherein there are these
passages at large:

SIR*
Yours of the fourth and eleventh current have brought me double comfort this
week, which was no more then I needed after such a va^^ation; I perceive my
fears of the miscarriage of the first were not altogether vain, since they
were so near a danger; their redemption from which, I assure you, was a great
work, and shows a great deal of goodness in those friends which you (...);
and I am willing to take it for a sign that the Parliament owes us not so^ll
(...) as was feared. The Answer of their Majesty's is very gracious, NOTE.
and I thank God has much revived Master Secretary, etc.

I cannot but wonder that the House should be scandalized at the style you gave
my (...) I am sure it is not in the power of any to take th^^ Title from (...)
but the King, and (...) Majesty having (...) yet done it, I know not but why he
should enjoy it till his Majesty shall please otherwise to dispose of the
place.

Master (...) and Master Withering have sufficiently showed their malicious
(...), God reward them for it, etc.

Your, etc. Robert Read.
Paris, Goodfriday 29 march, 1641.

After this followed these ensuing letters from (...) and his Secretary Read to
his Son Thomas (...), all writ from Paris.

^

My Lord Ambassador continues still his favoures to me and has been this
week with me at my lodging, which is a very great honor to me.

Your, etc. (...)
Paris 19 April 1641

(...)
(...) NOTE.
the heavier for some expressions delivered him from their Majesty's by Master
Mountague, NOTE.
who arrived here on Saturday last: He comforts himself that he shall have all
the favor his Majesty and the Queen are able to do him, etc.

Sir, your most affectionate Couzin and obliged Servant, To. Read.
Paris 16. April 1641.

SIR, etc.
IT is likely now my Lord of Strafford is dispatched that businesses will go
faster on then formerly, and that amongst them, my Uncles will have its turn:
What course will be taken in it I cannot judge; but I doubt not, if they make a
charge, such things will be contained in it, as cannot be foreseen, and I fear
if sombody be not there present to make a defense or disprove them, they may be
taken por confesso, which may be a ruin to us all; I know no body is able to
answer but my ^nckle and my ^^^selfe: For (...), NOTE.
there is no thought of his going thither; for my self, I know no reason why I
should not be there, if his Majesty please to avow my ^nckle, I think there
will be no need of other answer, but if he shall please to say, he will first
see the charge, there will be ^n^cessity of somebodies being there, to bring to
his Majesty's remembrance the grounds and reasons upon which diverse things were
done, which must be needs slipped cut of his Majesty's memory; and besides, there
are diverse papers and warran^s to be searched out for my Unckles justification;
if his Majesty please to cause the charge to be sent hither, then there will be
no need of me till the answer go back, which will be the best way of all. I
beseech you consider seriously of it, and as soon as the business shall be
spoken of, it would not be amiss to know his Majesty's pleasure in all these
particulars; and in the mean time be pleased to let me know your own^ opinion
of them, etc.

Sir, Your, etc. R. Read.
Paris 31. May 1641.

TOm. etc. my letters were sent from hence under my Lord Ambassadors cover,
directed to master Secretary Vane, which I have hitherto sound the surest way,
etc. I remember well I then sent you a letter for the Queen, in acknowledgement
of the graci^us remembrance her Majesty vouchsafed me by Master Mountague, NOTE.
etc. The last week I sent by the same way a letter to his Majesty, with a
Duplicate of it to you, concer^ing the business wherein you had signified his
Majesty's pleasure to me. I hope if that have fallen into other lands, they
will not dare to keep back that which was directed to his Majesty whatsoever
became of the rest, and I rather wish you to make your address to my Lady of
Arundell, and humbly desire her Ladyship to mediate for me to my Lord.

Your, etc. Francis Windebanke.
Paris 3. May 1641.

TOM. etc. You must not fail to attend my Lord of Leices^er as soon as you
may, and to acknowledge his great honors and favors to me; you shall do well
likewise, to be an humble suter to the Queen in my name, NOTE.
that she will be pleased to take notice to my Lord, of the fair and noble
treatment I have received from his Lordship for her Majesty's sake, and upon
her recommendation, and this you may do at some time when my Lord may be
present, and that you may be sure it may not be forgotten, etc.

Your, etc. FRAN. WINDEBANKE.
Paris 6, May 1642.

TOM, etc. You are now to receive a letter from Robert Read, concerning a
business which has been lately examined in Parliament, you shall do well to
acquaint his Majesty with it, and most humbly to crave his direction, in case
it shall come to a stricter inquisition, as I have reason to conceive it will;
considering what I have formerly written to you upon this subject, to be
represented to his Majesty, and under what malice and danger I lie for that
business. None understands mine innocence herein better th^^ his Majesty, nor
can better clear me, to whose Princely wisdom I (...) it, and shall govern
my self both in this and any thing else concerning his service wholly
according to his pleasure.

You^s, etc. FRAN. WINDEBANKE. (...) 1641.


(...) upon the particular place you writ of, you may easily procure upon these
grounds, or at least know by either of these, to whom you are addressed, how
far her Majesty stand engaged,

Sir, Yours, etc. Robert Read.
Paris 28, June 1641.

About this time Secretary Windebankes Lady and Family resolved to go over to
him into France, whereupon he writ this letter to his Son.

TOM. etc. You must procure a Pass from his Majesty for them all, and if I may
know the time of her coming, I will meet her at D^epe: If his Majesty shall
make difficulty at the Pass, NOTE.
you must beseech the Queens interposition to let them know, that the little
appearance of the end of my business has (...) both upon this resolution; you
will be her guide, and I beseech God to bless you, and let and bring us
happily together.

Your, etc. Francis Windebanke.
Paris. 5. July 1641.

To August following, Secretary Windebanke had a mind to Petition the House,
whose royal advice and assistance he craved and had in it, these ensuing
letters manifest.

TOm, etc. With them I sent you a Petition to the House of Commons in my name,
but referred the proceeding in it to his Majesty's pleasure, NOTE.
and to such advice as you might take from some trusty friend. I wish some care
be taken, that the Secretariet place being disposed of, (which if his Majesty
be not good to me, must be mine utter rain) I may not be excluded from the
general pardon, which it is likely will be granted at the end of this Session:
I hope you will put both their Majesty's in mind hereof, NOTE.
with some earnestness.

Your, etc. Francis Wind^banke.
Paris 16. Aug. 1641.

TOm, etc. I now send you a Petition which I have framed to be presented to the
lower House in my name, if his Majesty shall think fit, to whose wisdom I do
most humbly submit it, NOTE.
either to be suppressed, altered or disposed of as his Majesty shall please.
That which has moved me to fall upon this way, is the apprehension that the
House will adjourne without coming to any resolution concerning me, which
would be a greater punishment then otherwise in reason I can expect,
considering my sufferings already: Howsoever, by this I may perhaps make a
discovery of the inclinations of the House, and what ply my business is likely
to take: I wish you could communicate this to some discreet trusty and secret
friend before his Majesty be acqua^hnted with it, and take deliberate advice
upon it: In Cas^his Majesty approve this course, you shall then beseech him to
deliver the Petition to master Treasurer, and Master Comptroller, and to give
them order to recommend it to the House from him; with further intimation, that
his Majesty will take it will if the House shall grant it: You are likewise to
beseech the Queen to second his Majesty herein, and to recommend it to Master
Treasurer and Master Comptroller, NOTE.
and any other in the House in whom her Majesty has interest. I do not
conceive that such a Petition can do harm, and perhaps the House does expect
some such submission, and will be mollified or quickened by it; nevertheless, I
submit it to better judgment, and the life and death of it are indifferent to
me, and therefore I leave it entirely to your ordering.

I fear my arrears in the Exchequer, and the household will be slowly paid,
having heard that the House of Commons have ordered, that his Majesty shall be
moved for the stopping of pensions due to Master Jerma^e, Sir John Sucklin, or
my self, but Gods will be done.

Your, etc. Francis Windebanke.
Paris 2. Aug. 1641.

SIR, etc.
YOU say nothing of the motion made in the House of Commons, that the King
should be moved to withold the moneys he is pleased to allow Master
Secretary: You will receive from my Uncle a Petition, which I cannot but hope
will produce some good effect, NOTE.
if it be accompanied with some hearty recommendation, from the King, which
must be done one of th^se four ways; either by his Majesty's going to the
House, sending for the House to him, sending for the Speaker alone, or by
commanding the Counselors of the House to recommend it in his name; each of
these four ways as they stand, being more effectual then the other, but the
latter must be done of necessity, though any of the former ways be taken; for
their effectual speaking in the business will be of good use. I do not
understand what there can be objected against the delivery of the Petition
being so modest, since if it do not succeed so well as to obtain an absolute
end of the business, yet this benefit we cannot sail of by it, that he will
discover so much of their inclination as to give a judgment thereupon, what we
are like to trust to: NOTE.
I am confident you will find all assistance from the Queen, and so God speed
it: when once it is delivered, it must be solicited as heartily as recommended,
for the least flacknesse in the solicitation of it will much prejudice the
business; his Majesty appearing in it only at the delivery of the Petition
will not be sufficient, but ^e must be pleased to continue his favor till it
be brought to some resolution, etc.

Sir, Your, etc. To. Read.
Paris 2. Aug. 1641.

SIR,
I Persuade my self the conjuncture is now proper for it (the Petition) since
this late occasion has begotten so good an intelligence between the Queen and
both Houses; NOTE.
and besides, it is said they are upon Counsels in favor of the Roman
Cath^liques, etc.

Sir, your, etc. To. Read
Paris 9. Aug. 1641.

TOm. etc. I returned you the Petition altered, though not altogether in those
words that his Majesty directed, NOTE.
being of opinion (with submission nevertheless to better judgment) that the
House will never be a means for any pardon or abolition, but if they will give
way to it, I can expect no more, and I have reason to believe there will be n^
impediment. And for that which was formerly inserted, that I desired it of
them, it could not well bear other sense, then that I ^^aved their consents,
or what was in them to grant, without which I knew it could not be, and with
which it was probable there would be no difficulty, it being likewise to be
pres^^^ed, I could not be so ignorant in a business so public and obvio^s, as
to think the power of abolition could rest only in them, but only that their
liking was necessarily to be precedent to others: Howsoever, I am exceeding
glad the Petition was not presented, and do bold his Majesty's opinion full of
wisdom^ and favor to me, NOTE.
in stirring the business as little as may be, and therefore though I send
back the Petition; I wish it should be laid by and not made use of at all
until express order from me. For the Motion you intended to make for To (...)
a Ship, I wish it had been forborne: such a favor from his Majesty (if he
should have granted it) being likely to have raised more noise, and brought
more prejudice upon his Majesty.

Yours, etc. Francis Windebanke.
Paris 23. Aug. 1641.

The Petition intended to be (...) to the House mentioned in this Letter, is
this following.

To the Right Honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses assembled now in
Parliament.
The humble Petition of Francis Windebanke, Knight.
Shows:
THat whereas the Petitioner is charged, that he has caused to be (...) and
delivered out of prison sundry Romish Priests, and done other things (...) the
Roman Party, of which there is none that better understands how far he is
(...) then the Kings Majesty. NOTE.
And whereas among his many grievous sufferings since this his misfortune,
there is (...) that afflicts him so much as, That this honorable House has
taken offense at this, or any thing else that has passed on his Minstry wh^le
he had the honor to be (...) his Majesty.

He most humbly bese^^heth this honorable House, in regard that his late
Father and himself have served the Crown of England near these fourscore
years, and have had the honor to be employed by the late Queen Elizabeth, King
James, and his now Majesty, in businesses of great trust, they will be pleased
to make the most favorable construction of his services, seeing he had no ill
intention, nor has offended willingly or maliciously; and so to take him and
his poor innocent Wife and Children into their commisseration, that he may not
con^^^e in foreign parts that little fortune which was left him by his
Father, and to which he has made so small and inconsiderable an addition that
he and they must perish, if he continue to languish in exile out of his own
Country. And further, most humbly desires, that this honorable House would be
a means that he may have an abolition and pardon for whatsoever is past, and
permission to return to safety into England, to pass that little time which
(...) of his life privately in peace, and in the Church of England, whereof he
will in life and death continue a true Member, and in which he desires to
bestow the rest of his time in devotion for the prosperity thereof, for the
good of the State and for happiness to attend the Councels, and resolutions of
this honorable House.

This Petition being sent into England and here approved, was sent enclosed in
a letter from Mr. Tho. Windebanke to Master Basely, to be presented to the
House when ever they should fall on his business; of which his Secretary Read
writ over his opinion in this confident manner to Master Tho, Windebanke.

SIR, etc.
I Being confident that there is no man (...) England but will be satisfied in
his conscience that nine months banishment and the loss of the Secretaries
place, is a far greater punishment then any thing my Uncle has done can
deserve, NOTE.
considering all has been done upon command.

Sir, your, etc. To. Read.
Paris. 16. Aug. 2641.

This Petition (it seems) was not presented, whereupon Master Read writ thus
(...) Master Tho. Windebanke.

SIR,
SInce this opportunity of setting our business on foot is (...), there is no
more to be done, but to hope that it will not be called upon till the Kings
return; in the (...) it is a great comfort to my Uncle to see the continuance
of his Majesty's (...) himetc. NOTE.


Sir Yours, etc. To, Read.
Paris 23. Aug. 1641

After this, Secretary Windebanks Lady and his Son arrived in France and
lived in Paris, but his Son returning shortly after (...) to Court, he writ
thus to him, concerning the English Fugitives, not Parliament proof here, and
the general favor there indulged to him.

TOM, etc. Since your departure hence, the Cardinal has been moved by
Monseiur de ^eneterre, at the solicitation of Master Foster, that The English
now here, and fled hither to avoid the storm in England, might be freed from
that law of confiscation of their Estates, in case they come to dys here, which
we and other strangers are liable unto here, and has left it to those of the
Nation, to settle by what me^^es themselves shall think best, NOTE.
assuring that the King shall grant it in any ample manner, a^dwithall the
advantageous and firm conditions that can be desired: This is a very gre^s
privilege to the Nation, and has been granted with so much cheerfulness and
expression of resentment of our condition, that I wish her Majesty will be
pleased in those letters which she will vouchsafe to honor me to the King her
^rother, to take notice of it, and to acknowledge it; and if her Majesty shall
likewise please in a word or two to Monseiur de Seneterre to give him thanks
for his readiness in it, and to honor me with the Commission of delivering
it, I shall hold it a very great favor, and it will be a powerful motive to
him to (...) his good Offices to the Nation, which I assure you are very much
to be valued considering his interest in the Cardinal. What else her Majesty
shall please to add to him concerning my self, NOTE.
I most humbly subm^t to her wisdom and goodness: If you shall have delivered
my letters to her Majesty before these come to your hands you may take some
occasion to wait upon her Majesty again, and with presentation of my most
humble services so acquaint her Majesty herewith.

YOURS, etc. Francis VVind^banke.
Paris 8. November 1641.

TOM. etc. Before his departure, I made means to M^^seiur de Chavig^y (for
Monseiur Seneterre is not yet returned) to be presented to the King, and to
deliver her Majesty's letters; NOTE.
he seemed to entertain the motion with extraordinary readiness and desire to
^^rve the Queen, and to do me that honor, etc. But I do make account to take
some time to wait upon the Queen here at Saint Germans and deliver the letter
into her own hands: This you may make known to her Majesty there, when
occasion shall be presented.

YOURS, etc. FRAN. WINDEBANKE.
Paris 31. January 1642.

Many such passages I find in Secretary Windebanks and Reads letters to his
Son at Court, (over-tedious to recite) conveied hither for the most part
under the Earl of Leicesters and Burlamachies cover, and some others; but by
these forementioned, you may discern what favor and respect this Secretary
has found both abroad and at home for his releasing, protecting Priests,
Jesuits, Papists, and by whose commands he justifies he did it, who have bin
very indulgent to him for it, if those Letters under his own hand may be
credited: And thus much for the releasing only of Priests and Jesuits, charged
in Parliament on this Secretary; whose correspondency with Rome and the Popes
N^^e^oes you shall hear of further ere long.

How many letters of grace were granted to the most noted Recusants to stay all
prosecutions and proceedings against them before and after their Inditements,
you may read in my Royal Popish Favorite, where many of them are recorded,
and in Master Glins report 1 Dec. 1640. in the Commons Journall, who reported
to the Commons House from the Committee concerning Secretary Windebanke, that
there were 64 Letters of grace to stay prosecution against Papists, directed to
several Officers and Judges, short entries whereof were made in the
Signet-Office, and that his house was the place of resort for Priests and
Jesuits: Many of these letters of grace and discharges of Priests were gained
upon petitions to the King or Queen, presented to them by this Secretary, in
whose Trunks they have since been found. Among others, I find a petition of the
Lord Viscount Mountgarret (now one of the principal Rebels in Ireland) and of
his Ladies, with a draught of a letter of grace enclosed therein for the
discharge of all proceedings against them upon an indictment for Recusancy,
found against them both at Coventry, with other petitions of Recusants; as
namely, of Master Richard Foster, Master Tankred and others, for the abatement
of their compositions made with the King for Recusancy in the North, where the
compositions of the Lord Viscount Dunbarr, Master Anthony Metcalfe and William
Green had formerly been abated; Besides, those Recusants who compounded at low
rates in the North (as you have seen) got them abated lower afterward, and
obtained special protections from the Commissioners against all future
prosecutions, of which I shall give you but one president at large, in the case
of Sir Henry Merry.

^OM. DERBY,
WHereas Sir Henry Merry of Barton in the Country of Derby Knight, being a
convicted Recusant, has personally appeared before his Majesty's
Commissioners, authorized to compound for the forfeitures of the lands and
goods of Recusants, convicted within this and other Counties; at the Manor of
Saint Mary, near the walls of York, the 15. day of August instant, and has
made composition for an annual rent, to be paid unto his Majesty for all his
Mannours, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances within the
several Counties of Derby and Leicester, and for all arrerages due for the
same; and therefore by his Majesty's instructions is no further to be
disquieted or troubled with vexatio^s informations upon any laws made against
Recusants for his Recusancy only, so long as he shall duly pay unto his
Majesty the rent so compounded for; therefore his Majesty's said Commissioners
by force of the said composition aforesaid, do herby require you to take
notice of the composition aforesaid, and of his Majesty's pleasure in that
behalf.

Dated at the Manor aforesaid, the said 15. day of August 1634. per Warrant
Commissionar. Cha. Radcliffe Clericus Commiss.


To the Sheriffs of the County of Derby and Leicester, and to his Majesty's
Commissioners of inquiry of lands and goods of Recusants convicted within these
Count^es and to all other his Majesty's Officers and Ministers whom the premses
may concern, and to every of them.

For staying proceedings upon inditements, I shall give you but two or three
instances here (omitted in my Popish Royal Favorite) to wit, the Lord chief
Justice Richardsons Warrant to the Clerk of the Crown in the King's Bench, for
stay of an Indictment against the Lady Parkins, and John Gibbons, for sending
her Daughter beyond sea to be a Nun, the Copy whereof was sent to Windebanke,
who procured it.

Mr. Fanshaw and Mr. Keeling.
ACcording to his Majesty's gracious command to me, NOTE.
signified by Master Secretary Windebanke, that no further proceedings shall be
had upon an indictment against Dame Mary Parkins and John Gibbons, in
Michaelmas Term last, for sending or carrying Mistress Penelope Parkins, the
said Dame Mary Parkins Daughter beyond seas to be a Nun, contrary to the
Statute. These are to will and require you to make the Roll of the Record
thereof, and to enter a Cesset processus thereupon, that no further proceedings
be had upon the said Indictment accordingly, for which this shall be your
warrant, and so I rest

Your loving friend, Thomas (...).
From (...)-Inn this 13. of May

To this I shall add the same chief Justice his letter to Secretary
Windebanke, concerning his staying of Process against one Lovet.

May it please your Honor;
IT is most true that the business concerning Lovet was recommended to my
care, NOTE.
I have done therein whatsoever was in my power to perform and there has not
been wanting in me the lest duty to either of their Majesty's commands; but he
being indicted of felony for receiving and harboring of a Priest (and the
Priest himself) of treason in the same indictment; I cannot discharge him
thereof but in a legal way, which is, either by exception to the indictment
for insufficiency, or by a legal trial, or by his Majesty's gracious pardon;
that which was in my power (being only to stay Process and proceedings) I
have done, and all his goods which were seized and taken from him, I have long
since caused to be restored unto him again, but nothing will please him,
unles^e he may be actually freed and discharged of the indictment, which is not
in my power to do; I have directed him the best course I can, but he will take
no way but his own, and that is to overthrow his indictment by exception to
the sufficiency of it in point of law; to which end he has moved me to have a
copy of it, which I have been willing and ready with all my heart to grant him,
but I could not do it without the consent of master Attorney General, it being
in a cause nearly concerning the King for felony and treason; I moved master
Attorney General for him in his own presence, who wished him to attend him
at his Chamber, but whether he has done so or no, I know not, for he never
comes at me, but as it seems, deals maliciously with me under hand, I being
as desirous to do him all the good I honestly and justly may, as ever I was
to do any man in my life; for besides my humble duty and service to both their
Majestyes, he is a man for some reasons I do particularly love and affect.
This is all that I can write, and therefore with most humble thanks to your
Honor for your favor, NOTE.
which I shall never cease to acknowledge and with remembrance of my most
humble duty and service, I humbly take my leave and rest

Your Honors most humble and faithful Servant to becommanded Thomas
Richard^^^.
Ba^king 30. May 1634.

Mich. xiij. Caroli Regis. Brownlow,
Ordinat. ^st per Cur. Farrington querens, etc. versus Ant. Ingle^ield Ar.
quatuordecem die Octobris quod cesset omnis prosecutio inter dictas parts
super omnibus Informationibus and actionibus debiti quibuscunque concernentibus
Recusantiam ^psius Ant.

per Cur.


This year we began to have more intimate public correspondency and trading
with Rome then formerly, and on Aug. 7. Bishop Laud being nominated Archbishop
of Canterbury by the King, upon the death of Dr. George Abbot, had a serious
offer made to him by one who avowed ability to perform it (and therefore
doubtless a special Agent from the Pope) to be A CARDINAL, and a second
serious offer of this dignity. August 17. as appears by his own See the
Breviate of life, p. 1^.
Diary. About which time Master Walter Mountague, under pretense of some
disgust taken at Court, departed hence privately into France, and from thence
toward Rome; by the way he professed himself a Papist, and let fall some
words, that his design was for Rome, to reconcile us to it upon the best and
fairest terms: As soon as he entered Italy* he was most honorably
entertained, presented, feasted, and brought on his way toward Rome in very
great state and solemnity by all the Italian Princes and States near whom he
passed, and arriving at Rome, was there magnificently received by the Pope and
his Cardinals* with whom he had private conferences sundry hours together,
taking place of all the English then in Rome, as a kind of extraordinary
Ambassador sent from hence; he was daily courted, visited, feasted with much
respect by the Pope and Cardinals, and having dispatched his negotiation there,
he was sent for thence to the Court, under pretense of being Vicechamberlin to
the Queen, which place was then void by death; but soon after he went into
France, and there entered into a Monastery for a time (as did then Sir Kenelm
Digby) to make himself more capable of a Cardinals Cap; of which it was then
voyced he had a promise. The Pope upon his Negotiation at Rome, Oct. 10. 1634.
sent over a special Nuncio into England, called Signior Gregorio Panzani, to
labor a reduction of us to the vassalage of the Church of Rome, who As the
Book entitled The Popes Nuntio, wri^ by the Ve^tian Emb^ssadou^, rel^tes p. 7.
arrived here at London Dec. 25. 1634. He saluted first the Queen, after that
the King, who received and treated him with much kindness telling him that he
was very welcome, his Majesty remaining uncovered during all the discourse and
entertainment; he was entertained, treated with, under the Notion of a Nuncio,
residing in and about London, he had frequent access to the Court and great
persons, to seduce and work them to his ends; how far he preceeded in this
design, you may read in the late printed Books entitled, The Popes Nuncio,
and The English Pope; what recourse he had to Secretary Windebanke, and what
favors he obtained from him in behalf of the Roman Catholics, will best
appear by his own gratulatory letter sent to this Secretary from Rome, after
his departure hence, the original whereof written by the Nuncio himself in
Italian (thus indorsed with Windebanke own hand, ^1. May 1637. Seignior
Gregorio Panzani from Rome, rec. 22 June, our style.) I found among his papers,
and have here faithfully exhibited to public view in English as worthy to be
known, as it was afterward englished and given in evidence upon Oath at the
Archbishops trial.

Most excellent Sir, Patron most honored.
I Would have retained my self from writing to your most illustrious Lordship,
for fear of being to you some impediment, I knowing your many occupations; but
I having heard from many persons, and in particular by letters of Seignior
Francisco, sometimes my Secretary, the honorable mention that otherwhiles your
most illustrious Lordship is wont to make of my person; NOTE.
and having also oftentimes understood from the most famous Seignior Cavaliere
Hamilton, and from Father John the Benedictin, how much your most illustrious
Lordship straineth himself in favoring of me, I have been forced to commit
this rude civility, taking in hand my pen to give you trouble; NOTE.
I assure your most famous Lordship that I live so much obliged unto you, th^^
I shall never be able to pretend to satisfy to one and the least particle of
that which I owe, seeing that during my abode in London, most rare were those
days, in which I did not receive from your most illustrious Lordship some
grace in the behalf and favor of the poor Catholics.. I must also
congratulare my self with your most famous Lordship, concerning the most noble
manners and behaviors of your Lordships Sons, the which with their singular
modesty, and other most laudable virtues have gained such an opinion, amongst
them that have known them in this Court, that I could never be able to
express it, NOTE.
and the Lord Cardinal Barberino in particular cannot satiate himself in
praising them. It grieves me, not to have had the fortune to meet with them in
this City, because willingly I would have attested my devotion toward your
most famous Lordship; to the which, and to all your most illustrious family, I
rest, desiring eternal felicity from Heaven. In the mean while, I humbly
entreat you to favor me with some commandment, and I kiss your hands.

Your most illustrious Lordships most devout and most obliged Servant, Greg.
Panzani.
From Rome the 31. of May 1637.

By this letter you may discern what intimacy Windebanke had with, and what
daily favors he bestowed upon this Nuncio during his abode in London, what
curtisies he did for the papists here, what correspondency he kept with
Romanists abroad, and what entertainment respect his sons then received in
the Popes Court from his Creatures for his sake; of which more in due place.

Among the Archbishop of Canterbury his papers, I found the copy of a letter
said to be written to the Pope, thus indorsed with his own hand:

Rece. October. 15. 1635. A copy of the letter which is reported King Charles did
write to Pope Urban the eighth, about the restitution of the Duke of Loraigne.

Rex magnae Britanniae, etc. Sanctitatisu^ Vrbano octavo salutem, etc. Anno
1634.

Maxim Pontifex;
DOmus Lotharingiae, Olim, and modo Principum Regumque matter vinculatrahit
dura, as in captivitatem ducitur, orb spectante and (...): Sanguis mihi
(optime Pontifex) in venis salit, quem a domo Letharingiae hausi, pulsantque
mihi violentes motu^ praecordia, dum consanguineos meos Duces, pa^riae sedibus
spoljatos (...), and hostili^ graviter pass^s; sanguis cum in Nobis idem sit,
and atiam amor, distrahor tamen affectibus, hinc cognati Lotharingiae oppressi
jacent, inde frater men's triumphator; sed^ ut eorum calamitates violenta manu,
foveam necesse erit ut hunc (...): Itaque pressus utrinque amore, c^gor ad
mediationes aliorum Principum confugere, ut amicitiam inter bos mihi caros
concilie^, bella amore extinguens, non aliter sane extinguenda nisi faed^
sanguinis Christiani effusione. Ad te ergo ( Urbane Pontifex) quem omni
humanitatis cultu, u^^ optimum Principem existimavi, revertor; cum hi Principes
potestatem tuam (...) agnoscere videantur, se oves, teque Pastorem suum; ^^pera
igitur (Sanctitatem suam ita obiestor) hisce this Filijs, Patris ut suam vocem
andientes, armis sepos^^^s pace^ Christianam meant, exterisque Principibus
authoruate^ tuam agnoscentibus obedient^^ exempla sint^ Deponatur, te sedente,
quodcunque inter illos violentum, sedatique redd^ntur hereditate su^ cegnati
Duces, caeterique Lotharingiae domus Principes reponantur in avita^ sedis. Hoc
incumbit tuae in illos potentiae. Curabit preculdabio paterna manus filiorum
suorum vulnera, praedicabitque Christianus orbis Urbano ^ontfice Roman^ domn^^
Lotharingiam ex qua fere omnes Christiani Principes ^lori do^ari, pr^stinae and
vitaerestitui. Tot vero inter Reges and Principes, qui hanc Christianissimans
domum matrem agnoscunt, Ego V^bano principi optimo, una (...) illis gratias
immortales agam, quodque huic domus Parent^ meae a Sanctitate sua^prestabitur,
tanquam mihimet meisque Coronis praestitum, grato animo agnoscam. Eterim
fatendum est, nihil mihi Contigisse gravius quam optimae illius domus mihi
conjunctissimae contemplar^ ruinam.


This letter perchance was but a civil complement for a civil end.

About this time Secretary Windebanks (as I conceive) or some other great
person, desired to be resolved from Rome of the Popes good affection to the
King, which some here questioned: to which be received this answer thence in
Italian (sound among Windebanke papers) and it seem^ to be written by Cardinal
Barberino, with whom this Secretary held intelligence.

Concerning the demand made to your Lordship, if the Pope loves the King? I
answer, That his Holiness loves his Majesty better th^n any thing in this
world: better then any N^phewes, NOTE.
then all my whole Family, and better then any whatsoever thing or Family
belonging to his Beatitude, or any Potentate that is: And this is a love not
only proceeding from a Sovereign Bishop, but proper to his Holiness; A good
counter-sign^ or testimony hereof your Lordship may see, in those sine verses
made by his Holiness upon the death of the Queen, Grandmother of this King.
(...)
I have seen, and shall see oftentimes testimonies, to wit, the tears which
his Holiness many times has shed for the reunion of (...) person to our holy
Religion, the which our Lord sheddeth every time that I relate unto him, what
your Lordship writes to me.

Upon this forenamed intercourse with Rome by mutual Agents, they began at
Rome to have very good opinion of our favorable inelinations toward them; as
may appear by these passages written from Venice by Master William Middleton
(Chaplain to the Lord Fielding then English Ambassador there) to Doctor Loud
Archbishop of Canterbury, in whose Study the original was seized.

Right Honorable and most Reverend, etc.
WHiles I was writing, there came a franciscan Friar to my self, his business
was this: A mind, he told me he had to leave these parts, and with them the
Religion herein used; that I should do him a great favor would! procure him a
passage for England either by sea or by land, etc. NOTE.
I fell to question him, whether, and when he had been at Rome? he told me, in
June and July last past; I asked him how the affairs ^ent there? he told me,
Their opinion of us was, that his sacred Majesty was favorable to the
Catholics, that SOME GREAT ONES ABOUT HIM, were so to, or IN HEART MORE; The
Archbishop himself.
ONE he names, concerning whom as at home, so abroad (as of old of the best of
men) there was much (...) among the people; for some said he was a good man,
others said nay, he deceives the people, etc. There is, as I am informed by a
discreet Gentleman at Florence, a Jesuit lately returned from England to Rome,
who pretend^ to have made a strict discovery of the state of England as it
stands for Religion: how King is disposed, how Queen, what Lords are of the
Puritan faction, what not^ but by name, his honor o^ Dorset and Pembroke are
strong for Precisians. He says that the Puritan^ are shrendfellowe^, NOTE.
but those which are counted good Protestants are fair conditioned honest men,
and think they may be saved in any Religion; I am promised the relation
written; if it come to my hands, and there be any thing in it worthy your
Graces view, I shall hereafter humbly present it to you, as now my self,

Your (...) most humble and most obedient Servant William (...).
The letter is thus indorsed with Master Dels hand, Recepi. October. 9. 1635.

Soon after this I find a paper of intelligence written to Secretary
Windebanke from Rome the 29. of December 1635. wherein there is this passage;
There is a ^ew Ambassador from England arrived in this Court (Major Bret as I
conceive) for whom there was a special lodging provided and entertainment at
the public cost.

What his business was, but to negotiate a reconciliation I know not; which
proceeded so far that it was generally reported at Rome, we should have an
English Cardinal, and it was conceived by some Roman Catholic that the
Archbishop had a hand in sending Bret to Rome, as is evident by this letter of
Master Middleton, from Venice, to the Archbishop himself informing him hereof.

Right honorable and most reverend etc.
IN Rome there is great talk of an English Cardinal; and the man who is
already (...) Catholic must be the man, NOTE.
Mr. Mountague. Your Lordship I know will (...) if not at this yet at that I
shall now write. A Catholic discoursing with me let a word fall and this it
was; That within this twelve month the Pope did wish, that his sacred Majesty
of England were, at once his trusty s^nne for thou he would not be used a^ he
(...) by French or Spaniard; the same party did not ask the question but only
thus, I wonder whether my Lord of Canterbury have any hand in the sending of
Sergeant Major Bret to Rome? I answered because (I saw he was fishing) surely
no, because, NOTE.
as you know, it is written he comes from the Queen, and in her name; Rome is
very kind to our English Gentlemen; I humbly entreat your Graces pardon, if in
a desire to let nothing I hear escape your knowledge, I must lowly offer unto
you such things as will make you lose so much time as you shall read the
Letter: but though your Lordship lose a little time, let not me, I beseech you,
loose that good opinion which I hope you have conceived of

Your Graces most really devoted and obedient Servant William Middleton.
December 21. 1635.


In these two letters there are some clauses concerning Francis^us de Sa^ta
Clara his book* entitled, Deus. Natura and Gratia, written purposely and
printed in England to reconcile us to Rome, and afterward licensed and printed
at Rome it self, to this end; though the Jesuits did some of them dislike it,
as over-moderate, of which more in its due place.

In the year 1636. Signior Gregorio Panzani the Popes Nuncio in England, and
Major Bret, our English Agent at Rome, being discharged of their negotiations,
Signior (...) a Scot) was appointed by the Pope to succeed Panzani at his
Nunciog^rio* and Sir William Hamilton (a Scot too) sent hence Ledger to Rome;
what letters* present^, pictures he carried with him from hence and from whom
is worthy inquiry. That Windebanke (...) were privy to this succession and
negotiation, will appear by this letter of (...) Phi^lips (the Queen^
Confessor) to him, the original whereof found among his (...), is ready to be
produced thus indorsed with Windebanks own hand, 9 June 1636. Father Phillips
rec. 10.

Right honorable;
YEster night after your honors departing from Hampton Court, I received this
enclosed: the Gentleman who sent it to me from Paris writes, that Sir William
Hamilton departed from thence the 3. of June, NOTE.
that is our 24. of May, so that now he must be here unto Rome: He writes
also, that Seignior Georgio Conco, whom the Pope does send to the Queen, was to
depart from Rome, about the ^0. of May; if he have heard of Sir Williams hasty
going, it may be he will stay till his arrival which I could wish, because he
both can and would help him better at the beginning then any other I know; I
rest ever

Your Honors most humble and devoted Servant, R. Phillips.
From Ha^pton-Cou^t the 9. of June 1636.

Sir William Hamilton soon after arrived at Rome as English agent there, where
he had special lodgings provided for him, and a pension of 500. l. per annum
granted to him in another Hamiltons name, out of the Exchequer here for his
service there. Before this time the Congregation of propagating the Faith at
^ome, having good hopes of the conversion and reduction of England to their
obedience, constituted Cardinal Barbarino Nephew and Vice Chancellor to the
late deceased Pope, ^a^ron and Protector of the English and Scottish Nation, as
Cardinal See p. ^09.
^^dovisius was of the Irish, who to facilitate their design erected a
special society of four orders or Jesuits in England, whereof the Popes Legate
for the time being residing in England was the chief Patron, and Cardinal
Barbarin^ the principal Superintendent, as you may read more at large in my
Page ^3, See.
Romes Masterpiece, from one who was privy to the plot, and sent over hither
by Cardinal Barbarino to assist Con; this Cardinal held intimate
correspondence wi^h Windebanke, as is apparent by the forementioned letter of
Panzani, and by these ensuing passages in Master Thomas VVindebankes letter to
him from Rome, wherein he thus expresses his entertainment at Rome by Sir
William Hamilton and this Cardinal, to his Father.

Sir,
MY most humble duty remembered, etc. Sir William Hamilton has been pleased to
put so great an obligation upon me as to invite me to his house, for the time
that I am in Rome: I would very willingly have avoided the putting him to such
an inconvenience, but he pressed it so far, that I could not refuse the
receiving of that favor; the Cardinal Barbarino, I understand, HAS LONG
EXPECTED ME HERE, having had notice of my being in Italy; and I am afraid THAT
OUT OF RESPECT TO YOU, he will put some honor upon me, but I will avoid all
engagements as much as with civility I may, etc.

Your most obedient Son Thomas Windebanke.
Rome the 6. September. stilo novo 1636.

The original letter is thus indorsed, with Secretary Windebanks own hand, 6
Sept. 1636, Tom. from Rome receiv. 22 our style. Answ. 23. directed to Sir John
Borough^ at Ratisbone. This Letter was seconded with another, thus endorsed by
him, 10. Sept. 1636. Tom. from Rome, rec. 30. Sept. our style.

SIR,
MY most humble duty remembered: in my last of the 6. of this present, I have
given an account of my arrival at Rome, and of the favor Sir William Hamilton
was pleased to do me, to invite me to his house; this note, he did it with so
much earnestness, that I could not avoid the receiving of the honor. I have
been to visit the Cardinal Barbarino, who having had notice of my arrival
here, sort to visit me first. He is so obliging and courteous to all our Nation
that I the less wonder as the honor he does me, NOTE.
to take notice of me; but I hope his favors will stay there; I see no reason
I should think otherwise, etc.

Your most obedient Son, Tho. VVindebanke.
Rome the 10 of Sept. stilo novo, 1636.

About this time the same year an English Friar then residing in Rome, Reader
of Divinity in the Covent of Saint Mary de Ara Caeli, stiling himself,
Ludovicus a Sancta Maria, published certain Theological conc^usions in print,
to be there publicly disputed, dedicated to Cardinal Barberino, with his
arms in Copper, and a Cardinals Cap, over them for a crest; and Roman
antiques supporting them: on the left hand were the arms of the King of
England standing lower then the Cardinals, supported in like manner, cut in
Copper and standing over the conclusions, to which there was this title in
Capitals, Eminentissime et reverendissimo Principi, Francisco Cardinali
Barberino, sanctae Romanae ecclesiae Vice-Cancellario, R R. ANGLIAE, SCOTIAE,
nec non Seraphiae Religionis PROTECTORI, VIGILANTISSIMO. Fra^er Ludovicus a
sancta Maria ANGL US. D, D. D. Then follows a short dedication of these
Conclusions to him, which begins thus; MAGNAE BRITANIAE PATRONO MAXIMO, et
Britanicae Nationis, and Minorum Familiae minimus, Theologiam devovet suam,
etc. CONCLVSIONES THEOLOGICAE, etc. ROMAE, ex Typographia Ludovici Grignani,
1636. Superiorum permissu, By which glorius printed paper it is evident, that
they were now so bold with us at Rome, as to proclaim this Cardinal; The
greatest Patron and most vigilant Protector of the English and Scottish Nation,
and Realm of England, and to place his Arms above the Kings. This Friar,
whose right name was Kerton, alias Morton, soon after this came over into
England, where notwithstanding his vowed chastity, he was so excessively given
to the flesh, defiling not only Maids, but married Women, that he was enforced
to leave the Realm, as appears by this Minute of Instructions, written with
Secretary Windebankes own hand, for his Son Mr. Tho. Windebanke when he went
into France to negotiate the Palsgraves enlargement.

To specify, that Master Kerton, here called Morton, in his order called
Ludovicus a sancta Maria, did live so most wickedly in England since his being
Priest, in drawing married Women and others to sin carnally, NOTE.
and committed such horrible A^ts in prosecuting his lust, that if he comes
hither again, he will assuredly be publicly punished according to the Laws,
to the great scandal of his Religion; therefore let them be told there that
they prevent his return. If you hear Father Francis his Book or person
touched, let them know, that we understand assuredly, that it proceeds from
the Jesuits, who employ others in it, as they did against Father Leander* till
it cost him his life; and if that upon their Informations, they proceed against
such persons who though in all things Catholic, yet are more discreet and
temperat, and not intermedling with matters of State, NOTE.
THAT THE KING WILL BE MVCH OFFENDED. Write to Mr. Secretary Cook any thing
that is good, except the most secret Passages.

By this Minute of Instructions, you may clearly discern, not only the
Le^dnes of this Leacherous Friar, but that this Secretary held corespondency
with those of his order in foraigne parts, advising them not to permit him to
come over again into England, to prevent punishment and scandal to their
Religion: That he was a great Patriot of Franciscus a Sancta Clara his Book
(writ purposly to reconcile us to Rome) and that the Jesuits prosecution of
him for it, would be very displeasing to himself and the King to, and to
inform the Roman party so much at Paris.

But to return to Rome, Mr. Thomas Windebanke at his being there received a
Trunk with sundry things in it sent from Cardinal Barberino to Con, the Popes
Nuntio, which must be conveyed to Secretary Windebankes Agent Richant, to avoid
search, the truth whereof is manifest by his Sons own Letter thus endorsed by
him: 26. March, 1637. Tom from Padua, Re. 8. April our style.

SIR.
I Gave advise in some of my former of a Trunk I sent from Livorno into
England unto Mr. Richant to be delivered unto you, but have not as yet received
any News of the arrival of it: I sent not the Keys, as not desirous it
should be opened until my coming home, NOTE.
because few of the things in it are mine, but the CARDINAL BARBERINES TO
MASTER CON: he told me there was no have in the delivery of them so that I
might do it my self, etc.

Your most obedient Son, Thomas Windebanke.
Padoa the 26. March, Stilo no. 1637.

IN June following this Cardinal sent a statue from Rome into England for this
Secretary or some See Romes Masterpiece. page 16.
greater persons use, of which the Lord Scudamoore then Leget Ambassador at
Paris gave him this advertisement in a Letter written with his own hand,
(endorsed with Windebanks, when received.)

Right Honorable, here is come to Paris one Mr. Chambers with the statue from
Cardinal Barberine, another, the servant of him that made the Statue coming
along in company to take it forth, but no where upon any terms till it be in
England: upon Monday next, Mr. Chambers purposes to set forward for Deep, etc.

Your Honors to Command I. Scudamoore.
Paris June 16. 1637.

In April 1639. Another of Secretary Windebankes sons being at Rome, writ
thus from thence in an Italian Letter to him, (manifesting what respect and
corespondency he had there among the Roman Catholics:) Most dear Father, I
salute you, etc. Especialy not being in any place my self, where I am not
looked upon by all those that profess themselves SERVANTS, of your most
Illustrious Honor: HERE IN ROME your most illustrious Lordship has many,
amongst the which, Sir Will. Hamilton, Signior Gregoria Panzani, Note.
(the Popes first Nuncio in England) and Father John (agent for the English
Bernedictines) kiss yor hands, etc.

From Rome the 15th, of April: 1639. Your most observant Son. Christopher
Windebanke.


By all these Passages and Letters, it is very evident, what Intelligence this
Secretary held with the Catholic party in Rome, what respect he and his
received from them, and what a friend he was to their agents and friends here.

On the first of I^n. 1637. one M. Foster a Papist, delivered this Secretary, A
discourse concerning the Impediments of the peace of Christendom, together
with the remedies; (endorsed with Windebankes own hand,) wherein there is this
passage among other, manifesting an endeavor of reconciliation between
Papists and Protestants by their coming over to the Popish Tenants. The 4th.
Impediment is, that without an union in Religion, no stable or certain Peace
amongst Christian Princes can be established: for that thereby occasion will be
given for the house of Austrea, either to advance or defend the Catholic
Religion, etc. Neither is this impediment without GOOD HOPE TO BETAKEN AWAY^
because now none but the confused Rabble of Anabaptists, Note.
and Brownists, and some small Troops of Separatists, with a few Calvenists,
and rigid Lutherans do insist upon the Doctrine, of Justification by says
only, ( whereupon has depended the principle controversy between the
Catholics and Protestants:) It will therefore be more easily removed, if
learned men who have moderat spirits shall be employed in the great business,
concerning the procuring of an happy unity of Faith and Religion in our
Western Churches. Note.


About this season Richard Mountague Bish. of Chichester, (a great confident of
the Archbishops, See the Pops Nuncio, page ^1. 14, 16.
intimate with Pauzani the Popes Legate, and one who very passionatly desired a
reconciliation with the Church of ROME) who first disturbed the peace of our
Church with his Popish and Arminian Tenants, for which he was questioned, and
his Books called in and censured by the Parliament, though afterward advanced
to a Bishoppricke (for a Pass for his Son to travel to Rome) extant under
his hand and Seal.

Right Honorable.
MY humble service premised, I make bold to trouble your Honor in a Mediation
for a small matter, I suppose, to his Majesty, It is that he would be pleased
to grant my Son leave to go see Rome in his Travill, NOTE.
which he is desirous to do, and I am desirous he should; It is a clause
restreyned in his License, I think of ordinary course, howsoever I humbly
desire your Honors favor therein, I do not use my Lo. Grace because he
meddles not that way, and especially, because his good friends and mine would
give it out, that we had sent my son to Rome to be a Priest or Jesuit; but if
you please to acquaint him therewith and remember my duty to his Grace, I shall
thank you, and ever rest at your Honors service.

Your poor Beadsman, R. C.
Aldingbo^^e, January 26.

To which, for explanation sake, I shall subjoyne a passage out of the Letter
of Godfrey Goodman, Bishop of Gloucester, written to Canterbury in the Tower,
concerning his dissent from the new Canons Aug. 30 1642. the original whereof
is in my hands.

Most Reverend, etc. Bishop Mountague of Norwich did privately encourage me to
dissent (though I confess I was little moved with his words, for I never had
an opinion of that man) yet in public to please Your Grace, he pressed my
deprivation, falsely quoting some Counsels (God forgive him as I do) At that
instant I could have proved, NOTE.
How that in His Person He did Uisit and held correspondency with the Popes
Agent, and reco^ved his Letters in behalf of his son who was then traveling
to Rome, and by his Letters he had extraordinary entertainment there. This,
Bishop Mountague would ascribe to the fame and credit which he had gotten by
his writings, which in truth I think are not worth the Reading, etc. Lo here
one Bishop impeaching another, for holding correspondency with the Popes Agent,
with whom in verity both these Popish Bishops and many others held strict
Intelligence.


But to return to the Popes 2d. Nuncio, Con, and his proceedings here. Upon
his arivall in England, (if we believe his Companion and assistant in a
discovery made to the Archbishop and King Himself, even out of Conscience,
which you may read at large in my Page 13. (...) 26.
Romes Masterpiece) he was entertained and settled at London by the Popes and
Cardinal Barbarinoes mediation, as a Nuncio; that so he might the more easily
and safely work both upon the King and Kingdom. Where first he sets upon the
chief men at Court, leaving nothing unattempted to corrupt and incline them
all to the Roman party; he attempted (writes he) to seduce the King himself
with Pictures, Antiquities, Images and other vanities brought from Rome,
entering into familiarity with his Majesty, who often requested him at London, and
Hampton Court to mediate the restitution of the Palsegrave to the Palatinate;
which he promised in words, but advised the contrary, least the Pope should
seem to partonize an Haereticall Prince: He was very intimate with Sir Toby
Matthew, Captain Read, the Countess of Arund^ll, Endymion Porter, and his
Wife, but especially with Secretary Windebanke, who revealed all the Kings
secrets to him, communicated Counsels to and with him, the better to advance
his designs, meeting with him at Night-conventicles, at least thrice every
week; for which end he took an house near to his lodging, to which be
frequently resorted through a Garden door. Besides this Nuncioes with his
confederates at Court, and conjured society of Jesuits in London, held
constant weekly meetings, Counsels at Capt. Reeds House in Long-Acre and
elsewhere* sent and received weekly intelligences, dispatches to, and from
Rome; and proceeded so far, as to Erect a College of Jesuits in
Queene-street, which they purchased, and a Nunnery in the Lord Gages house
there, who was General of the Jesuits, and another Nunnery at Greenwitch; he
erected, established a Popish Hierarchy throughout the Realm of England,
having Officialls, Vicars-Generall, Provincialls, Archdeacons, etc. in every
County almost, as there you may read at large, and in the Popes Brief, lately
published by special order of Parliament. He had Commission to profer a
Cardinals Cap to the Archbishop, and fed others, with hopes and promises of
vacant Cardinals Hats and other Dignities, to make them more industriously
zealous to drive on his designs. By the Archbishop of Canterburies, the
Nuncioes and these Jesuits means the Scottish Troubles, Wars were first
raised, and revived again, when pacified without bloodshed.

What influence the Popes Nuncio, Jesuits, Priests, Papists, in and about
London had in the raising, fomenting, maintaining, driving on the Scottish
differences, and Wars, you may read at large in Rimes Masterpiece, and the
Popish Royal Favorite, to which for brevity I refer you, and shall add some
new evidences of it in due place: What an Arch-Stickler and Incendiary the
Archbishop was therein, what methods, instruments, policies and counsels he
used to foment and promote the same you may read in the Articles exhibited
against him in Parliament by the Scottish Commissioners, and I shall here give
you a summary account thereof out of such Authentic Letters, Papers which Gods
providence has brought unto my hands.

The Archbishop of Canterbury having made a very large successful progress
in the introduction, advance of many Popish Doctrines, Superstitions,
Ceremonies, Innovations in our Church of Engl: by sundry secret policies and
open violent persecutions (reserved for their proper place, and therefore
omitted in this Introduction to his trial,) had a design to introduce the
same not only into Ireland, where he was Dominus fac totum, whiles he was
Bishop of London, having the Lord Deputy, Council, Bishops, and Clergy there
at his own beck, and devotion (as appears by sundry Letters thence;) but
likewise into the Church of Scotland, where the Bishops and Court-Clergy were
exceeding prone, but the other Ministers and people very averse to entertain
them. Whereupon he was no sooner warm in his Archbishopric, but he begins to
set on foot his designs upon the Church of Scotland: to which end he first
practiced to bring certain new orders, and Ceremonies into his Majesty's
Chapel there, to make that the only pattern by degrees to which all other
Churches there should conform, as he made the Sea the Cole from the Altar, and
Order of Council Table concerning Saint Gregori^s.
Kings Chapel here in Engl. the only rule, and Canon which all Cathedralls,
Chapells, and parish Churches were to be regulated by. To this end the draws
up certain Articles concerning his Majesty's Chapel in Scotland, with a
Letter to command Obedience to them: A Coppie whereof, I found in his study
thus indorsed with his own hand.

October 8. 1633. His Majesty's Articles concerning His Chapel in Scotland.
And his Letter to Command Obedience.
Charles R.

OUr express Will and pleasure is, That the Deane of Our Chapel that now is,
and his Successors shall be assistant to the Right Reverend Father in God, the
Archbishop of Saint Andrews, at the Coronation, so often as it shall happen.

That the Book of the form of Our Coronation lately used, be put in a little
Box, and laid into a Standard, and committed to the care of the Deane of the
Chapel successively.

That there be prayers twice a day with the Quire as well in Our absence as
otherwise, according to the English Lyturgie, till some course be taken for
making one that may fit the customs and constitutions of that Church.

That the Deane of the Chapel lock carefully, that all that receive the
blissed Sacrament there receive it kneeling, and that there be a Communion held
in that Our Chapel the first Sunday of every month.

That the Deane of Our Chapel that now is, and so successively come duly
thither to prayers upon Sundays, and such Holy Days as that Church observes,
in his whites, and preach so, when ever he preaches there. And that he be not
absent from thence, but upon necessary occasion of his Diocese, or otherwise,
according to the course of his preferment.

That these orders shall be Our warrant to the Deane of Our Chapel, that the
Lords of our Privy Council, the Lords of the Session, the Advocate, Clerks,
Writers to the Sgnett and Members of Our College of Justice, be Commanded to
receive the holy Communion once every year, at the least in that Our Chapel
Royal, and kneeling, for example sake to the Kingdom, And we likewise command
the Deane aforesaid to make report yearly to us, how we are obeyed therein,
and by whom, as also if any man shall refuse, in what manner he does so and why.

That the Copes which are Note.
consecrated to Our use be delivered to the Deane to be kept upon Inventory by
him, and in a Standard provided for that purpose, and to be used at the
Celebration of the Sacrament in Our Chapel Royal.

To these Orders we shall here after add others, if we find others more
necessary for the regulating of the Service of God there: At White Hall the
eight day of October 1633. Sic subscribitur.

STERLING. Superscribed by His Majesty.


Charles R.

REverend Father in God, trusty and well beloved Counselor, We Greet you
well, we have thought good; for better ordering of Divine Service, to be
performed in Our Chapel Royal there, to set down some Articles under our own
hand to be observed therein, which we send you here enclosed, And it is Our
special pleasure, that you see every thing carefully performed, according as
we have directed, by these our enclosed Articles, And likewise that you
certify, to the Lords of Our privy Council, If any of those appointed by Our
former Letters to them to Communicate in Our Chapel Royal, shall not
accordingly perform the same, to the effect such order may be taken by our
Council therein, as by our said former Letters to them, we did appoint,
wherein expecting your diligence and care, We bid you Farewell,

From Our Court at White Hall, the 8th day of Octo. 1633.

To set on this design the better, the Archbishop procured this warrant from
the King to himself (written with his own Secretaries hand Master Dell, and I
doubt not but procured since the Scottish troubles to help him at a dead lift,
if questioned) to hold correspondency with the Bishop of Dunblane in Scotland:
he had caused the King to sign the former instructions for his Chapel there,
and now he will be sure ex post facto, to get a warrant for it though dated
four days after them.

Charles R.

CAnterbury, I require you to hold a correspondency with the Bishop of
Dunblane, the present Deane of Our Chapel Royal in Edinburgh, that so from
time to time, he may receive Our Directions by you for the ordering of such
things as concern Our service in the said Chapel.

October 12. 1633,

After this the Archbishop writ diverse Letters to Bishop Balentine to promote
this design of his: as namely one dated, Ian. 13. 1633. To let His Majesty
receive a Note who those be that conformed, and who not, for I see His Majesty
is resolved to go on constantly, Another May 6. 1633. informing him of his
missing the Bishopric of Edinburgh, for his omission of prayers in the
Chapel according to the English Lyturgy, etc and exhorting him to be careful,
for the future. Another in July 1634. Wherein he tells this Bishop, that his
excuse for not reading prayers (as aforesaid) was not satisfactory; to wit,
that the singing men could not come for debt for that the prayers might have
been read by his Lordships Chaplain: That he did well to acquaint the Lords
with His Majesty's resolution concerning the Communion there. Another Octo. 4.
1634. To like purpose, and concerning the payment of the Singing men's wages.
Another Ian. 12. 1634. Giving him thanks for his Resolution about ordering the
Kings Chapel, and wearing his Whites, etc. and promising to speak to my Lord
Traquair, about Edward Helly. Another Febr. 28. 1634. Containing, Thanks from
the King for the solemnity of the late Communion, and expressing his hopes,
that the other Bishops were in their Whites as well as he, that the envy of the
uulgar might not fall only on him. That he had showed His Majesty the paper of
those of the Session as did not conform at the Communion. That he had done
what he could for the Gentlemen of the Chapel, but the times required
patience, etc.

On the 28. of September. 1634. The Archbishop caused the King to sign a common
prayer Book, for the use of the Church of Scotland; and gave order to the
Bishops of Scotland, to compile certain Canons for the Government of the
Church of Scotland, which Lyturgie and Canons were to be imposed on that Church
by Regal and Episcopal Authority, without consent of Parliament, or of a
general Assembly; the Bishops of Scotland, not long after, gave him a
particular account of their proceedings herein (with thanks for his many
favors to them and assistance of them) in this ensuing Letter, thus endorsed
with his own hand.

Recep. April 12. 1635.

From my Lord of Saint Andrews, and other Bishops about the Scottish Liturgy
and CANONS.
May it please Your Grace;
WE have put our Brother the Bishop of Rosse to the pains of a wet journey
for ayding the Lyturgie, and Canons of the Church, and as we have found Your
Graces favor, both to our Church in General, and our selves in diverse
particulars, for which we are Your Graces debtors, so we are to entreat the
continuance thereof in this, and our common affairs. We all wish a full
conformity in the Churches; but Your Grace knows, that this must be the work
of time. We have made, blessed be God, a further progress, then all have here
expected in many years, by His Majesty's favor, and Your Graces help: and
hope still to go further, if it shall please God, to continue Your Grace in
health and life, for which we pray continually. And so remitting all things to
our Brothers relation, we take Our leave,

Your Graces affectionate Brothers and Servants, Saint Andrew: Glasgow. 10: B.
of Moray. Ad: B. of Dublane. Tho: Brochine.
Dated 2. April 1635.

On May 19. 1635. The Archbishop writ a Letter of thanks to Bishop Balentine
for his forwardness in this service: informing him; That the King was well
pleased with the conformity at the last reception of the Sacrament: That he was
glad the Church business there, was in so fair a way, etc. That His Majesty
had given him the Bishopric of Aberdeen, and expected his Residence there;
and care of that University: August 7. 1635. He writ to him, that the King is
well pleased, with the solemnity of the Sacrament, and that the Bishops were in
form. That he expects that all that receive there, do it kneeling, and in
form; and that every one of the Session do it once a year at least, and that
therefore he and his Successor make a list of the names which perform, or not,
etc. After this he writ a Letter into Scotland to the Archbishop of Saint
Andrews, dated November, 10th. 1635. which I find thus indorsed with his own
hand.

A Copy of my Letters sent by the Kings command into Scotland, concerning
Church-businesse there to be agitated between my Lord of Saint Andrews and
the Earl of TRAQUARE.
My very good Lord; S. in Christo.
FOr the particulars entrusted by the Church to the Lord Bishop of Brehen, and
namely about the Abbacy of Lindores, you must expect them, from the Lord Bishop
himself, and from such relations as you will receive by my Lord, and the Earl
of Traqu^re; Note.
now at this time you shall receive nothing but that which is commanded me by
the King, and must be my part to act in the present and future business for
the Church of Scotland.

My Lord, for the present the King is resolved upon some great reasons of State
which have prevailed with him, not to meddle with the Abbacy of Lindores, of
any other of that nature, as yet, but to leave them in that State, in which
they now are, till such time as he may consider the decrees and the Act or Acts
of Parliament which concern them, And till he can find a way to Order them
better, both for his own profit, and the contentment of his people there,
Assuring you in the mean time that both in this, and all other business, he
will be very careful both of the credit and of the maintenance of the Church,
whereof if your self or any other Bishop or Clergy Men, shall make doubt, I
am commanded to tell you that therein, you will not only do His Majesty
wrong, but hurt your selves, and the Church which you seek to benefit, And in
this very particular, you are to know, and make known to others, that it is
not, the dislike of any person or persons, or of the thing it self, that
causes this present stay, but reason of State only, and the care which the King
has, all proceedings may go on, according to Law: As for the Bishoprics his
Majesty will take their wants into as provident care as he can, and has
settled Arbroth, upon the Bishopric of Brehen, but in what form, I am not
able to tell you, as not being so well acquainted with the customs and
constitutions of that Kingdom, and therefore lest I should mistake in any
circumstance, I leave that wholly to the Bishops own relation.

For all the business of that Church in future, which must come to the
Exchequer or any other public audience, or any other business that may
reflect upon the Church, or any thing that belongs to the Kings service, in
which Churchmen are trusted, you are immutably to hold this Rule, and that by
his Majesty's strict and most special Command; Namely, that your self, or the
Lord Rosse, or both of you together do privately acquaint the Earl of Traquare
with it, before it be proposed in public, either at the Council Table, Note.
or the Exchequor, or else where, and the Earl has assumed to the King in my
presence, that he will strictly observe and hold the same corespendency, and
course with you, and further, that he will very redily and faithfully do all
good Offices for the Church, that come within his power according to all such
Commands, as he shall receive either immediately from the King, or otherwise by
direction of his Majesty from my self; Note.
and if at any time your Lordships, and my L. Traquare shall upon any of the
aforenamed business so differ in judgment that you cannot accord it among
yourselves, you are to let it rest, and write up either to his Majesty or to my
self, to move his Majesty for further direction, which once received, you are
all to obey. That so this little unhapy difference which lately aros^ about
Lindores may be laid a sleep, and that no other may hereafter rise up in the
place of it, to disturb either the Kings or the Churches service, or disorder
any of your selves, who are known to be such car^ull and direct servants to
both. And to the end this may go on with the better success, his Majesty
precisely Commands, that this mutual relation between the Earl of Traquare
and you, Note.
be kept very secret, and made known to no other person, either Clergy or Lay,
for the divulging of these things cannot but breed jealousies amongst men and
disservices in regard of the things themselves. And therefore the King bids me
tell you, that he shall take it very ill at his hand, who ever he be, that
shall not strictly observe these his directions. This is all which I had in
Command to deliver to you, and I shall not mingle with it any particulars of my
own; therefore wishing you all health and happiness, and good speed in your
great affairs, I leave you to Gods blessed protection, and rest.

Your Graces very loving friend and Brother. W. Cant.


On December 1. 1635. Canterbury writ this en^uing Letter to the Archbishop of
Saint Andrews, concerning Fasts on the Lords day, and their Book of Canons.
The Copy whereof I found in his Chamber at the Tower, thus indorsed with his
Secretaries hand.

A Copy of my Letters to the Lord Archbishop of Saint A^drewes, for the
prohibiting of all Fasts on the Lords day throughout the Kingdom.
My very good Lord, S. in Christo.
I Have but one thing at this present to trouble you with* but that has much
displeased the King and not without very just Cause. For now while the King is
settling that Church against all things that were defective in it, and against
the continuance of all unwarrantable customs, ^nknowne to, or opposed by the
ancient Church of Christ, the new Bishop of Aberdene has given w^y to, and
allowed, a public Fast through out his Diocese to be kept upon the Lords Day,
contrary to the rules of Christianity, and all the ancient Canons of the
Church. I was in good hope that Church had quite laid down that ill Custom,
but since it appears, the now Bishop of Aberdene has continued it, and
perhaps others may follow his example, if this pass without a check,
Therefore his Majesty's expres will and command to your Grace is, that you, and
my Lord of Glascowe take order with all the Bishopps in your several Provinces
respectively, that no man presume, to command or suffer any Fast to be upon
that day, or indeed any public Fast upon any other day, without the special
leave and command of the King, to whose power it belongs, and not to them. And
further, his Majesty's will and pleasure is, that if the Canons be not already
printed, as I presume they are not, that you make a Canon purposely against
this unworthy custom, and see it printed with the re^t. And that you write a
short letter to the Bishop of Aberdene* to let him understand how he has
over-shot himself, which letter you may send together with these of mine, if
you so please. This is all which for the present I have to trouble you with:
therefore leaving you to Gods blessed protection, I rest.

Your Graces very loving friend and Brother. W. Cant.


And to justify himself if questioned, he procured this Warrant writ with his
own Secretaries hand, Master Dell, without any date at all, to be signed by
his Majesty, I doubt since his late questioning) thus endorsed with his own
hand.

Warrant for the Scotch Canons.
Charles R.

CAnterbury, I would have you and the Bishop of London peruse the Canons which
are sent from the Bishops of Scotland* and to your best skill, see that they be
w^ll sitted for Church Government, and as near as conveniently may be to the
Canons of the Church of England. And to that end you or either of you may alter
what you shall find fitting. NOTE.
And this shall be your Warrant.


April. 20. 1636. the Archbishop writ this Letter to the Bishop of Dunblane,
concerning the Communion in the Chapel royal, the Book of Ord^nation, and
the Lit^rgy, the Copy whereof is indorsed with his own hand.
I Have received other Letters from you, by which I find you have written to
his Majesty about the Communion in the Chapel Royal, concerning which the
King holds his former resolution; That he would be very glad there should be a
full Communion at all solemn times as is appointed. But because men do not
always fit themselves as they ought for that great and holy work, therefore
his Majesty will be satisfied if every one that is required to Communicate
there, do solemnly, and conformably perform that action once a year at
least, And in con^ormity to this, you are to signify once a year, NOTE.
unto his sacred Majesty, who have communicated within the compass of that
year, and who not: And of this you must not sail.

By these last Letters of yours, I find that you are consecrated; God give you
joy. And whereas you desire a Copy of our Book of Ordination, I have here
s^nt you one. And I have acquainted his Majesty with the two great reasons that
you give, why the Book which you had in K. James his time is short and
insufficient. As first, that the Andrews, and my Lord Rosse with this express
Command of his Majesty.

I received likewise from you at the same time certain notes to be considered
of, that all, or at least so many of them, as his Majesty should approve, might
be made use of in your Liturgy, which is now in printing. And though my
business has of late lain very heavy upon me, yet I presently acquainted his
Majesty with what you had written. After this, I and Bishop Wren (my Lord
Treasurer being now otherwise busied) by his Majesty's appointment sat down
seriously, and considered of them all, and then I tendered them again to the
King without out animadversio^^ upon them, and his Majesty had the patience to
weigh and consider them all again* This done, so many of them, as his Majesty
approved, I have written into a service book of ours, and sent you the book
with his Majesties-hand to it, to warrant all your alterations made therein. So
in the printing of your Liturgy, you are to follow the Book which my Lord
Rosse brought and the additions which are made to the Book I now sent. But if
you find the Book of my Lord Rosses, and this to differ in any thing that is
material, there you are to follow this later Book, I now send, as expressing
somethings more fully.

And now that your Lordship sees all of your animadversions, which the Kings
approved written into this book, I shall not need to write largely to you,
what the reasons were, why all of yours were not admitted, for your judgment,
and modesty is such, that you will easily conceive some reason was apprehended
for it. Yet because it is necessary, that you know some what more distinctly, I
shall here give you a particular account of some things which are of most
moment, and which otherwise perhaps might breed a doubtfullnesse in you.

And first, I thought you could not have doubted but that the Magnificat, etc.
was to be printed according to the Translation of King James, for that was
named once for all. And that translation is to be followed in the Epistles and
Gospells, as well as in the Psalms. Where I pray observe in the Title Page of
the Psalms in the book I now send an alteration which I think my Lord Rosses
book had not. And if you have not printed those Psalms, with a Colon in the
middle of every verse, NOTE.
as it is with ours ordinarily in the English, it is impossible those Psalms
should ever be well sung to the Organ. And if this error be run into, it must
be mended by a painful way, by a pen for all such Books as the Chapel
Royal uses, and then by one of them the next impression of your Liturgy may
be mended wholly.

Secondly in the Creed of Saint Athanasius. We can agree to no more
emendations, no not according to our best Greek Copies, then you shall find
amended in this Book.

Thirdly though the Bishops there were willed to consider of the Holy Days,
yet it was never intended but that the Office appointed for every of them,
should be kept in the Liturgy, and the consideration, was on^y to be of the
observation of them.

Fourthly for the sentences at the Offettorie. We admit of all yours, but We
think with all that diverse which are in our Book would be retained together
with yours. As namely the 2d. 4th. 6th. 7, 8. 9. 10. 13. 14. 15.

Fifthly, I would have every Prayer or other Action through the whole Communion
named in the Rubric before it, NOTE.
that it may be known to the people what it is, as I have begun to do in the
Prayer of Consecration, and in the memorial or Prayer of oblation. Fac
similiter.

Sixthly, We do fully approve the Collect of Consecration and Oblation should
preceed, and the Lords Prayer follow next, and be said before the Communion, in
that order which you have expressed, but for the Invitation, Cons^ssion,
Absolution, Sentences, Preface, and Doxologie, We think they stand best as
they are now placed in our Liturgy, and as for the Prayer of humble access to
the holy Communion, that will stand very well, next before the Participation.

Seaventhly, I have ordered a Rubric in the Margin of this Book according as
you desire, to direct him that celebrates when to take the Sacrament into his
hand. Namely to take, and break, and lay hands on the Chalice* as he speaks
the words. For certai^ly the practice of the Church of England therein is very
right. And for the objection, that we should not do it till we express our
Warrant so to do, which you conceive is in these words, Do this, etc. I
Answer, 1. That those words, Do this, etc: are rather our Warrant for the
Participation, or Communication, then the Consecration, 2. That our repeating
what Christ did, is our Warrant to do the same, being there to commanded, 3.
That the whole Action is Astus continuus, and therefore though in our saying (
Do this) follows after, yet it does, and must be intended to that which We did
before; and comes last to seal and confi^me our Warrant for doing so. And so
it is in the other Sacrament of Baptism, where we take the Child first, and
Baptize it, and then afterward We say, We receive this Child, etc. Which in
Actu continu^ must needs relate to the preceding act, for the Child was
actually received into the Church by the very act of Baptism it self. And
this is but our Declaration of that Reception.

And Whereas you write, that much more might have been done, if the times
would have borne it; I make noe doubt but there might have been a fuller
Addition. But God be thanked this will do very well, and I hope breed up a
great deal of devout, and religious piety in that Kingdom. Yet I pray for my
Farther satisfaction, at your best leisure ^^aw up all those particulers, which
you think might make the Liturgy perf^ct, whether the times will bear them or
not, And send them safe to me, and I will not fail to give you my judgment o^
them, Note.
and perhaps, put some of them to further use, at least in my own particular.

One thing more, and then I have done. In his Majesty's authourising of the
notes in this book pre^ixed at the beginning of it* though he leave a liberty to
my Lords the Archbishops of St. Andrews and Brethren the Bishops who are upon
the pl^ce, upon apparent reason to vary some things; Yet you must know, and
in^orme them, that his Majesty having viewed all these additions hopes there
will be no need of change of any thing, and will be best pleased, with little or
rather no alteration. So wishing all prosperity to that Church, and a happy
finishing of your Liturgy, and health to my Brethren the Bishops, I leave you
to the Grace of God, and rest.

Lambeth April 20. 1636. Your Lordships very loving Friend and Brother. W.
Cant.


This Letter gives us very much light concerning the proceedings of the
Archbishop in the Scottish Liturgy, the Scottish Bishops sending all their
Notes and alteratio^s of it and doubts concerning it to him from time to time,
as to their only O^icle, (all which I have at large, but pre^ermit in silence)
and receiving his directions which were punctually observed. By which it
appears how vain and false this excuse of his concerning this business is,
which he drew up with his own hand since his imprisonment in the Tower, where
I found it thus indorsed and superscribed by him.

The But his own Letters and the subsequent passages, manifest it to be^ false.
true Narrative concerning the Scottish Service Book
Doctor John Maxwell the late Bishop of Rosse came to me from his Majesty. It
was during the time of a great sickness which I had, Anno 1629, (which is 11.
years since) The cause of his coming was to speak with me about a Lyturgie
for Scotland. At this time I was so extreme ill that I saw him not. And had
death (which I then expected daily) seized on me, I had not seen this heavy
day.

After this* when I was able to sit up, he came to me again, and told me, It
was his Majesty's pleasure that I should receive some instructions from some
Bishops of Scotland concerning a Lyturgie, that he was employed about it, I
told him I was clear of opinion, that if His Majesty would have a Lyturgi^
settled there different from what they had already, it was best to take the
English Lyturgie without any va^iation, that so the same Service book might
pass through all His Majesty's Dominions. To thi^ he replied, that he was of
a contrary opin^on, and that not he only, but the Bishops there, thought their
Countriemen would be much better satisfied, if a Ly^urgie were made by their
own Bishops, but withal that it might be according to the form of our
English Book, I added if this were the resolution, I would do nothing till I
might by Gods blessing have health and opportunity to wait upon the King.

And hear give me leave (I humbly beseech you) to tell your Lordships, that
this was no new conceit of His Majesty to have a Lyturgie framed, and Canons
made for the Church of Scotland: For he followed the example and care in the
business of his Royal Father King Iam^s of blessed memory, who took Order
for both at the Assembly held at Perth, Anno 1618. As appears in the Acts of
that General Assembly, and the Sermon which the late Reverend Archbishop of
Saint Andrews preached before it, page 40. and* 68.

When I was able to go abroad, and came to His Majesty, I represented all that
passed. His Majesty avoided the sending of Doctor Maxwell to me, and the
business, but then agreed to my opinion to have the English without alteration.
And in this case I held the busin^ss^ for two if not three year at least,
Afterward the Scottish Bishops still pressing His Majesty that a Lyturgie
made by themselves, and in some things different from the English service would
relish better with their Countrymen, they prevailed with His Majesty at last
to have it so, notwithstanding all I could say or do to the contrary.

Then His Majesty commanded me to give the Bishops of Scotland the best
assistance I could in this way and work. I delayed as much as I could with my
Obedience. When nothing would serve but it must go on, I did not only acquaint
His Majesty with it, but writ down most of the amendment or alterations in His
Masties presence. And do hope there is no one thing in that Book which may not
stand with the Conscience of a right good Protestant. Note.
Sure I am his Majesty approved them all, and I have his warrant under his
Royal hand for all that I did about that Book.

As for the way of introducing it, I ever advised the Bishops both in his
Majesty's presence, and at other times, that they would look carefully to it,
and be sure to do nothing in any kind but what should be agreeable to the
Laws of that Kingdom. And that they should at all times as they saw cause,
be sure to take the advice of the Lords of his Majesty's Council in that
Kingdom, and govern themselves accordingly. Which course if they have not
followed that can no way (as I conceive) reflect upon me. And I am able to
prove by other particulars as well as this, that for any thing concerning that
Nation, I have been as careful their Laws might be observed, as any man that
is a stranger to them might be.

The 18. of October 1635* the Archbishop procured this Warrant of Instructions
from the Kings Majesty, to this Scottish Prelates touching the Service Book,
and other p^^ticula^s.

Charles R.

Instructions from his Sacred Majesty, to the Archbishops, and Bishop^ of
Scotland.

THat you advert, that the Proclamation for authorizing the Service Book, ^t
derrogate nothing from Our Prerogative Royal.

That in the Calendar you keep such Catholic Saints as are in the English,
that you pester it not with too many, Note.
but such as you insert of the peculiar Saints of that (...) Kingdom, that
they be of the most approved, and here to have regard to those of the blood
Royal, and such Holy Bishops in every Sea most renowned. But in no case (...)
Saint George and Patrick.

That in your Book of Orders, in giving Orders to Presbyters, you keep the
words of the English Book without change, Receive the Holy Ghost, etc.

That you insert amongst the Lessons ordinarily to be r^ad in the S^rvice, Note.
out of the Book of Wisdom, the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, Chapters, and out of the
Book of Eccl^siasticus, the 1, 2, 5, 8, 35, and 49, Chapters.

That every Bishop within his own Family, twice a day cause the Service to be
done. Note.
And that all Archbishops and Bishops make all Universities and Colleges
within their Diocesses, to use daily twice a day the Service.

That the Preface to the Book of Comm^^ Prayer signed by Our hand, and the
Proclamation authorizing the same, be printed and inserted in the Book of
Common Prayer.

Given at New Market the Eighteen day of October 1636, and of Our Reign the
11.

The original Book of Common Prayer imposed on the Church of Scotland, (one
principal cause of the late Commotions there) I found in the Archbishops
Chamber in the Tower (when I was enjoined by Authority to search it May 30.
1642.) with all the Additions and Alteratio^s wherein it varies from the
English, written, made, and inse^ted with the Archbishops own hand, as it was
afterward printed and published in Scotland, Anno 1637. conce^ning which I
shall give you some brief material observations.

First, That to countenance these Alterations, he caused this Warrant in the
Kings Name written with his own Secretaries (Mr. Dels) hand, to be inserted
into the Book just (after the Table for the Psalms and Chapters, and before
the beginning of the Common Prayers;) which Warrant without doubt (as appears by
the Con^ents of it) was procured long after the date thereof, and I presume
counterfeited* Charles R. being not the King: own hand (though somewhat like
it) but Master Dels as I conceive, who writ the Warrant, which runs thus

Charles R.

I Gave the Archbishop of Canterbury command to make the Alterations expressed
in this Book, Note.
and to sit a Liturgy for the Church of Scotland. And wheresoever they shall
differ from another Book signed by ^s at Hampton Court, September 28* 1634.
Our pleasure is, to have these followed rather than the former, un^esse the
Archbishop of St. Andrews, and his Brethren who are upon the place, shall see
appar^nt reason to the contrary. At Whitehall, April 19, 1636.


This Warrant, and that for the Canons were both writ by his Secretary Dell,
this having a Date (or rather Antedate) but the other none at all, that it
might (...) with any time if questioned.

Secondly, That these Alter^tions are of different natures; and may be reduced
to these Heads. First* such as tend to advance the power of the Prelates; Such
is that in the Preface of the Book which in the English Common Prayer Book run^
thus. All Priests and D^acons shall be bound to say daily the Morning and
Evening Prayer, either privately or openly,, except they be let by Preaching,
studying of Divinity, or some other urgent cause; which latter clauses by
Preaching, studying of Divinity, are obliterated; and this added: or hindered by
some urgent cause: Of which cause if (...) be freque^tly pretended, they are to
make the Bishop of the Dio^esse, or the Archbishop of the Province, the IVDGE
and ALOWER.

Secondly, Such as savor of Popery, of tend toward it, or are directly
Popish, taken ^^t of the very Roman Masse-Book Ceremo^ial and Pontifical, or
made conformable th^^eunto. As first, his adding of two new Saint^ ^ayes,
namely, the Feasts of the Conversion of St. Paul, and of St. Barnabas, nor in
the English Bo^ke, or Statute, which (...) thus. These to be observed for
Holy Days, AND NO OTHER, etc. of which these two new Holy Days are none* but
now add^d to the Catalogue of Holy Days with the Archbishops own hand.
Secondly, his Introduction and Addition of New Ceremonies, with Rubricks to
command their use, not in the English; as First, standing up when ever Gloria
Patri is said, [ See Georgii Cassandri Ordo Roma^^s, p. 91
] (borrowed from Ordo Romanus de Officio M^ssae,) for which there are many
Rubricks in the Order for Morning and also for Evening Prayer: as, Then all of
them standing up, the Presbyter shall say or ^ing* Glory be to the Father, etc.
As at the end of the Venite, so also at the end of every Psalm throughout the
year, and likewise in the end of Benedictus, Magnificat, and Nunc Dimittis,
shall be rep^a^ed, Glory be to the Father, etc. And the people shall answer, As
it was in the beginning, etc. STANDING UP AT THE SAME. As it was in the
beginning, etc. ALL OF THEM. STANDING UP AS OFTEN AS IT IS REPEATED, etc. 2ly. The
Standing up at Athanasius or the Nicen^ Creed, not formerly enjoined in the
English, by this new Addition of his to the Rubric before it: shall be said,
etc. this Confession of the Christian faith [ This is added
] (The Presbyter and ALL THE PEOPLE STANDING. 3ly. Singing or Chanting the
Lords Prayer, Creed, Te Deum Laudamus, Benodictus, and other parts of public
service, after the [ See Or^^ Romanus apud Georgij-Cassa^dri Opera, p. 100.
] Popish manner, by adding this new clause (said OR SUNG) to their Rubricks,
which were said (not sung) before. 4ly. Standing up at the reading of the
Gospel. For which he added this new Rubricke. And the Epistle ended, the Gospel
shall be read by the Presbyter, saying, The holy Gospel is written in the etc.
And then the people ALL STANDING UP, shall say, Glory be to thee O Lord: At the
(...) of the Gospel the Presbyter shall say, (so ends the holy Gospel) And
the people shall answer, Thanks be thee O Lord. D^rectly taken out of Missale
Ro^an^m ex* Decreto Sancti Concilii Tridentini restitutum: Pi^. 5. Pontif.
Maximi juss^ Editum, Salmantieae. 1588. (which the Archbishop has diligently
noted with his own hand, and used the Calendar in it for his Diary, Memorial
and common-Place-Book) Rubricae Generales Missales: and other places of it.
5ly. His order to omit the Doxology in the Lords Prayer* in the repetition of
it (as it is omitted in the Roman Missall, p. 311, 312. 913. 314. and else
where) for which he inserts this special Directory. The Lords P^ayer in this
and all other places of the Lyturgie, where the last words, For thine is the
Kingdom etc. shall be expressed; shall read them: But in ALL Places, where they
are not expressed, HE SHALL END AT THESE WORDS; But delive^ is from evil. Ame^
(As the Papists do in all their Missalls and Hours:) belike, Glory be to the
Father, etc. will supply this Omission. 6ly. His inserting a new Prayer into
the Collects, p^efaced with this Title and Directory. A prayer to be said in
(...) Ember-weeks* for those who are then to be ordained into holy Orders: And
is to be read every day of the week, beginning on the Sunday before the day of
Ordination; Almighty God, etc. and this new Rubric, before the old Prayer
(Almighty and everlasting God, who only works great marvells, etc.) A prayer
for the HOLY CLERGY. 7ly, His obliterating, the word Congregation, in most
Collects, Prayers, and inserting the word Church and Holy Church, in its place.
8ly. In the order of the Administration of the Lords Supper he prevaricates
most of all, to usher in the Mass, Transubstantiation, and reconc^le us to the
Church of Rome in this maine point of difference. To instance in some
particulars of moment.

First, in the situation and furniture of the Lords Table; for which purpose he
alte^ed the last clau^e of the first Rubric of the Communion in this manner*

The old Rubric. The new altered thus. The Table having at the Communion time
a fair linen cloth upon it: shall stand in the body of the Church or in the
Chancell, where Morning Prayer and Evening Prayer be appointed to be said. And
the Priest standing at the Northside of the Table, shall say the Lords Prayer.
The Holy Table having at the Communion time a fai^e white linen cloth upon it
WITH OTHER DECENT FVRNITVRE, meet for the high mysteries there to be
celebrated, shall stand AT THE UPPERMOST PART OF THE CHANCEL, or Church: where
the Presbyter standing at the North side OR END thereof, shall say the Lords
Prayer, etc.

By this Alteration, the Bishop made way for the Introduction. First, of the
solemn Consecration of the Lords Table and Altar, after the Popish manner, to
make it an HOLY Table, which he holds it could not be without a special
Consecration. Secondly, For Cruci^ixes, Candlesticks, Tapers, Basins,
consecrated Flagons, Chalices, and all other manner of Altar furniture used in
his own Chapel at Lambeth. Thirdly, For Railing in and impounding the Lords
Table Altar-wise at the Eastend of the Church; to which all the Communicants
must make their approaches to receive the Sacrament kneeling, at the new
Rayles. A very advantageous alteration to introduce, Authorize and enjoin all
these Innovations by color of it.

The old Rubricke. The New. Then shall the Priest rehea^se distinctly all the
Ten Commandments, and the people kneeling shall after every Commandment ask
God mercy for their transgressions of the same, after this sort. Then shall the
Presbyter TVRNING TO THE PEOPLE, rehearse distinctly all the Ten Commandments;
The people ALL THE WHILE kneeling* and asking God mercy for their transgression
of every duty therein; either according to the Letter, or to the MYSTICAL
IMPORTANCE of the said Commandments,

By which Alteration, First, Intimation and way is given that the Minister who
Officiats at the Communion, is to turn his back to the people, as the Popish
Priests do, save only when he reads the Commandments: as the words, turning
to the people, imply. Secondly, A mystical sense of the Commandments
introduced, whereby their litterall morality is denied: which may well relate
to the second Commandment, which the [ See Doctor R^ynolds Do Idolotri Romanus
Ecclesi^.
] Papists^hold Ceremonial, and therefore omit, delete it out of all their
Decalogues in their Missalls, Breviaries, Hours of prayers Manuels,
Catechisines, as made only for the Jews* not Christians: which in its
litterall sense would quite have ^ubverted the Archbishops new Crucifixes and
Images erected in his own Chapels at ^ambeth and Croydon* taken out of the
very pattern in the Massebooke; or at least to the fourth Commandment,
contradicting the Bishops new Book of sports and pastimes on the Lords day;
which he thrust out in the Kings name; and refuting^ ^is opinion that the
Sabbath is not moral* and that there is now NO SABBATH AT ALL; as his Creature
and chief Favorite Doctor Heyly^ has taught us in his History of the Sabbath
(he might better have entitled it, De Non-ente, of no Sabbath, if there be
none) published by the Prelates instigation and approbation, and Dr.
Pocklington his Minion, in his S^nday no Sabb^th.

Thirdly, In the first Collect after the Commandments* Almighty God, etc. have
mercy upon the whole Congregation and so rule, etc. is changed into: upon thy
Holy Catholic Church, and in the particular Church wherein we live; So rule,
etc. which makes way: 1. For the Popes, Prelates, and Clergies usurping and
ingro^sing of the Title Church, unto themselves, as they do; excluding the
Laity: which the wo^d Congregation; and whole Congregation includes; making the
people if not the entire, yet at least the principal and greatest part of the
Church. 2ly, For a union with Rome, who style their Church; [ See Bishop
Mor^ons Grand Impostor: Doctor Reynolds 6. Theses. These. ^
] the holy Catholic Church, and all others but particular Churches: And in this
sense would not only approve, but applaud this Alteration, fitted to their
purpose.

Fourthly, In lieu of this Directory; Then shall the Churchwardens, or some
other by them appointed, gather the devotion of the people, and put the same
into the poor man's box, and upon the offering days appointed, every man and
woman shall pay to the Cura^e the due and accustomed offerings; after which
done, the Priest shall say, He inserts this following, While the Presbyter
distinctly pronounces some or all of these sentences for the offertory, the
Deacon, or if no such be present, one of the Churchwardens shall receive the
devotions of the people there present, in a Basin provided for that purpose.
And when all have offered, ^e shall reverently bring the said Basin with the
Oblations thereon, and deliver it to the Presbyter, who shall humbly present it
before the Lord, Note.
and set it upon the holy Table. And the Priest shall then [*] OFFER UP and
place the bread and wine prepared for the Sacrament, upon the Lords Table, that
it may be ready for that service. And he then shall say, Let us pray for etc.
And after the divine Service ended, that which was offered shall be divided in
the presence of the Presbyter and the Churchwardens, whereof one half shall
be to the use of the Presbyter to provide him Books of holy Divinity: The other
half shall be faithfully kept and employed on some piou^ or charitable use*
for the decent furnishing of that Church; or the public relief of their
poor, at the discretion of the Presbyter and Churchwardens. In which we have
the Popish phrase of an Offertory* foisted into the place of the devotion of
the people; which much be carried up REVERENTLY (with Congings and Duckings) to
the HOLY Table, and there OFFERED up to God as a sacrifice, and humbly
presented before the Lord: to make men dream of and draw them to a Massing
sacrifice. That this Offertory is a part of the Popish Mass* you may see in
Missale Romanum Ritus Celebrandi Missam p. 12, 13. and 261. and Fox Acts and
Monuments. Edit. ult. vol. 3. p. 8. to omit all others. 2ly. An ^ffering up of
the Bread and Wine by the Priest at the Holy Table: just as the Priests do in
the Mass, and derived from them, as Missale Romanum, Caeremoniale,
Po^tificale, and Braeviari^^ Romanu^ inform us.

Fifthly, In the prayer for the whole estate of Christ's Church, there are these
two Clauses added. And we commend especially unto thy merciful goodness^ the
Congregation which is here assembled in thy name, to Celebrat^ the
Comme^oration of the most precious death and sacrifice of thy Son, and our
Savior Jesus Christ. (When there is no Communion these words enclosed are to
be left out.) And we also bless^ thy holy name for all those thy servants who
having finished their course in faith, do now rest from their labors. And we
yield unto thee most high praise, and hear^y thanks, for the wonderful grace
and virtue declared in all thy saints, who have bin the chief vessels of thy
Grace, and the lights of the World in their several generations: Most humbly
beseeching thee, that we may have grace to follow the example of their
steadfastness in thy faith, and obedience to thy holy Commandments. That at
the day of the general Resurrection we and all they which are of the mystical
body of thy Son, may be set on his right hand, and hear that his most joyful
voice; Com^ ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom pr^pared for you from
the foundation of the world.

This clause is added in imitation of the [ Ritus Celebr^^di Missa^ p. ^3. and
P^ae^^tione fine Notis. p. 298, 299, 230, 231 Canon Missae* p. 306. 309.
] Roman Missall, wherein we find frequent Commemorations of the Saints departed
whose memories are there celebrated: Memoriam Venerantes famulorum famularumque
tuar^m qui nos pr^cesser^nt in signo fidei* and dormiunt in somn^ pacis etc.
Nobis quoque peccatoribus famili^ tuis, de multitudin^ miserationum tu^rum
petentibus partem aliquam and societatem donare dign^^is cum tui^ sanctis
Apostolis and Martyribus and omnibus sanctis tuis, intra quorum nos cons^rtiu^
n^n estimator ^eriti, sed veniae qu^sumu^ la^gitor, admit, etc. If he come
not up fully in all things to the Papists or their Masse-booke at the first,
yet he will do it as near as may be, inserting these passages into it, which
were formerly expunged out of it at the Reformation, to avoid the Invocation of
dead Saints, which was first usherd into the Church by the frequent public
Comme^oration of Saints departed.

Sixthly, In the first exhortation before the Communion, he makes this
Alteration and insertion.

The English Book. The Alteration. And as the Son of God did vo^chsafe to
yield up his soul by death upon the Cross for your health, even so it i^ yo
ur duty to receive the Communion together in remembrance of his death. But the
fault is much greater, when men stand by, and yet will neither eat nor drink
the holy Communion with others. And as the Son of God did vouchsafe to OFFER up
himself by death upon the Cross for your Salvation; even so it is our duty to
celebrate and receive the holy Communion together in remembrance of his death
AND SACRIFICE, etc. But the fault is much greater, when men stand by, and yet
will not receive this holy Sacrament which is offered unto them.

By which Alteration and insertion [ See (...) p. 261, 262, etc.
] taken out of the Roman Missall, he makes the Book admit and approve of A
S^crifice, (at least a Commemorative one, if not a real) in the administration
of the Lords Supper* to countenance the Sacrifice of the Mass; which the old
English passage will neither intimate, not warrant, but rather denies.

Seventhly, In the Rubricke before the Prayer of Consecration* he makes this
observable Alteration and insertion of his own. The English Rubricke is only.
Then the Priest standing up shall say as follows: The Archbishop adds this
with his own hand, shall say the prayer of Consecration, as follows: But
then during the time of Consecration, the Presbyter which Consecrateth SHALL
STAND IN THE MIDST BEFORE THE ALTAR* Note.
That he may with the more ease and decency USE BOTH HIS HANDS* which he cannot
so conveniently do, standing at the Northside of it. A very memorable Addition
in several respects, taken our of the Roman Missall, and introducing Mass in
good earnest, if compared with the premised and ensuing Alterations. For first,
it brings in AN ALTAR in lieu of a Lords Table (contrary to the first Rubricke)
that so we may have a Massing (...), which cannot be without an Altar 2ly. It
removes the Priest that Consecrates, from the North-side or end of the Table*
where the first Rub^icke enjoynes him to Celebrate, TO STAND IN THE MIDST
BEFORE THE ALTAR while he Celebrates; with his back to the people, who by this
means can neither see not hea^e very well what he does: which is directly
taken out of the Mass^-Booke, Missale Romanum. Ritus Celebrandi Missam p. 8. 10
13* 14, 15, etc Ordin^^ium Missae p. 258. 359. 260, etc.
where we find these Rubricks very frequent: [ Missale Ro^^ Ritus Celebrand.
Missam. p. 17. 1^1.
] Sacerdos Celebraturus accedit AD MEDIUM ALTARIS UBI STANS VERSUS ILLUD.
Sacerdos rediens AD MEDIUM ALTARIS. Sta^s IN MEDIO ALTARIS. Stans. ANTE MEDI^M
ALTARIS, V^rsus ad illum, etc. 3ly. We have an Elevation of the hostia after
its Consecration, insinuared in these words; That ^e may with more ^ase and
decency use both his hands, etc. to wit in Consecrating and elevating the Bread
and Wine, as the Priest is enjoined to do in the [ Missale Ro^^ Ritus
Celebrand. Missam. p. 17. 1^1.
] Roman Missall* that so the people may adore it: Quibus prolatis, celebrans
tenens ^ostiam inter polliees, etc. ge^^slexus eam adorat, Tunc se erigens,
quantum comm^d^ potest ELEVAT IN A^^UM^IOSTIAM* et intentis in (...) (quod* and
in ELEVATIONE CALICIS FACIT) populo reverenter ost^^dit adorandam: After which
he elevates the Cup in lik^ manner, as the Missall enjoynes him.

Eighthly, In the very Prayer of Consecration it self, there are these
observable insertions and Alterations made with his own hand; which you will
best discern by placing the old and new Clauses one over against the other.

The old. The New. Who made there by his own oblation of himself once offered
a full perfect and sufficie^^ sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction for the
sins of the whole world* and did institute, and in his holy Gospel command us
to continue a perpet^all memory of that his precious death until his coming
again, hear us ^most merciful Father, we beseech thee, and grant that we
receiving these thy creatures of Bread and Wine, according to thy soune our
savior Jesus Christ's holy institution, in remembrance of his death and
passion, may be partakers of his most precious body and blood. Who made there
by his own Oblation of himself once offered a full perfect and sufficient
satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, and did institute and in his holy
Gospel ordain a perpetual memory of his precious death AND SACRIFICE, until
his coming again. Hear us O merciful Father, we humbly beseech thee, and of
thy ALMIGHTY GOODNESS vouchsafe SO TO BLESS and SANCTIFY with thy word and
holy spirit, NOTE.
these thy gifts and creatures of bread and Wine. That THEY MAY BE UNTO US THE
BODY AND BLOOD OF THY MOST DEARLY BELOVED SON, so that we receiving them,
according to thy Son our savior Jesus Christ's holy institution in remembrance
of his death and passion, may be partakers of THE SAME his most precious blood.

Where 1. we have the word Sacrifice, inserted, to make the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, a Sacrifice, as the Petrus Binsfeldis Enchlrid Theologiae c. 7 p
49.
Papists hold their Mass to be; when as it cannot be one: 1. Because there is
nothing offered, slain or sacrificed in it: 2ly. Because the Elements are not
offered up to God therein by us; but given as from God and Christ unto us, as
these very words. evidence takes eat drink, etc. do this in remembrance of me.
Now nothing can be a sacrifice but what is offered up unto God himself, nor
ought we receive from him. 2ly. We have a Transubstantiation of the Elements
into Christ's very Body and blood intimated in the words Almighty goodness.
(Transubstantiation being a work of Gods Tho Waldensis pars. 2. cap 69.
Omnipotency, as the Papists teach) and so to bless, etc. but more clearly
expres^ed in this subsequent clause; That they may be unto us THE BOD^ AND
BLOOD of thy most dearly beloved Son: so that we receiving them, etc* may be
partakers of THE SAME his most precious body and blood, which addition is taken
Verbatim ou^ of the Missale Rom p. 307* Oratione^ ad diversa p. 82. Pontif.
Romans p. 173.
Roman Missall. Quam oblationem tu De^s in omnibus quaesumus benedictam,
ascriptam, rationabil^m, acceptabilemque facere digneris* UT NOBIS CORPUS
ETSANGVIS FIAT, dilectissimi Filij tui Domini nostri Jesus Christi* And- Munera
quaesumus Domine oblata sancti^ica: ut E^ NOBIS Vnigeniti tui CORPUS (...)
SANGVIS FIANT etc. And to what end this clause should be inserted out of the
Roman Missall and Pontificiall now, which had been quite obli^terated
heretofore* when the Common prayer Book was refined; unless to reduce us
back to Rome, and introduce the sacrifice of the Mass and Transubstantiation,
no wise man can conjecture.

Ninthly, He added these two Rubrickes to this Prayer of Consecration in the
Margin: These two Rubr^ckes following, and to stand in the Margin thus: A^
these words, (Take bread) the Presbiter is to take the Paten in his hand: etc.
NOTE.
At these words (Take the Cup) he is to take the Chalice in his hand and lay
his hand UPON SO MVCH BE IT in Chalice or Flaggons AS HE INTENDS TO CONSECRATE,
which impli^s that Popish Position to be Orthodox: See Summ^ Angel^ca
Tit-En^aristia, P^tti Binsfoldii Enchirid. Th^ol. c. 6. p. 46.
That the Priests intention is necessarily required to cons^crate the Elements,
and that no more of them is consecrated then he intends to consecrate, and
lays his hands on.

Tenthly, In the words prescribed to be used in the very delivery of the bread
and Wine after consecration, there is a most notorious alteration made by way
of an I^dex Expurgatorius with this Prelates own hand: The ancient English
form stood thus: The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee,
preserve thy Body and Soul unto everlasting life: AND TAKE AND ^ATE THIS IN
REMEMBRANCE THAT CHRIST DIED FOR THEE. AND FEED ON HIM IN THY HEART BY FA^^H
WITH THANKSGIVING.

The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that was shed for thee, preserve thy Body
and Soul unto everlasting lif^: AND DRINK THIS IN REMEMBRANCE THAT CHRIST'S
BLOOD WAS SHED FOR THEE AND BE THANKFVLL. But the Bishop thought good to
curtall these clauses, by dashing out the latter words; NOTE.
And take and eat this in R^memberance that Christ died for thee* and feed on
him in thine heart by faith with thanksgiving: in the ne: And drink this in
rememberance that Christ's blood was shed for thee and be thankful in the
other^ adding only this Rubricke in stead of them, Here the party receiving
shall say, Amen, and also after the receiving of the Cup. And accordingly these
passages were omitted in the printed book.

Now what might be the mystery of this notable alteration? surely it could be
noe other: But first, to conform it to the very Roman Missall, and Order of
the M^sse, with which it now accords, as will appear by this Parallel.

The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee, preserve thy body
and Soul unto everlasting life: (here the party receiving shall say) Amen.
Missale Romanum. Ri^us Celeb^: Missam, p. 21. Ordinarium Missae p. 318.
Corpus Domini nostri Jesus Christi custodiat animam meam in vitam aeternam,
Amen. The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for thee, preserve thy
body and soul unto everlasting life, (here the party shall say), Amen. Sanguis
Domini nostri Jesus Christi custodiat animam meam in vitam aeternam, Amen.

2ly To introduce a Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine into Christ's very
body and blood, and an external receiving of them with the mouth, to make a
complete sacrifice of the Mass, which these expunged clauses do expressly
contradict; and were added by our Reformers heretofore for this very purpose,
to take away all opinion of any transubstantiation, or corporal eating of
Christ's Body, or drinking his blood in the Sacrament.

11ly. In the Rubricke next after the delivery of the Cup he inserts this
clause. Note.
And after shall be said, THIS MEMORIAL, OR PRAYER OF OBLATION: and these
clauses into the Prayer it self. Wherefore O Lord, heavenly Father according
to the institution of thy dearly beloved Son our Savior Jesus Christ, we thy
humble servants do celebrate and make here before thy Divine Majesty, with
these thy holy gifts, the memorial which thy Son has willed us to make,
having in rememberance his blessed passion, mighty resurrection, and glorious
as^ention, rendering unto thee most hearty thanks for the innumerable benefits
procured to us by the same, etc. Humbly beseeching thee, that whosoever shall
be partakers of this holy Communion, may worthily receive THE MOST PRECIOVS
BODY AND BLOOD OF THY SON JESUS CHRIST, and be fulfilled with thy grace and
heavenly benediction and made one body with him, that he may dwell in them, and
they in him. In which additions; we have, first an Oblation in imitation of the
Mass book, where we have this prayer. Canon Miss^e. p. 306. 307
hanc igitur OBLATIONEM servitutis nostrae, quaesumus Domine ut placatus
accipias, etc. 2ly A real receiving of Christ's body and blood in the Papists
sense, taken out of this prayer in the very 1 Canon Missae. p. 309
Mass Book: Vt quotquot ex hac Altaris participatione sanctum Filij tui CORPUS
ET SANGVINEM SVMPSERIMVS, omni benedictione caelesti, and gratia repleamur, etc.

12ly. Before the very next Prayer there is this Rubricke added. When all have
communicated he that celebrates, shall go to the Lords Table, and cover with
afaire linen Cloth OR Note.
CORPORAL, that which remains of the consecrated Elements, and then say as
follows. Which word and Linen Cloth here termed A CORPORAL, is taken out
of the Canon Missae p. 308. Ordinarium Missae p. 261. Ritus celebrandi Missam.
p. 17. 18.
Roman Missall, where it is frequently mentioned: as Mox ipsum reverentia super
CORPORALI reponit^ reposita hostia consecrata super CORPORALI: Reponit super
CORPORALE, etc And in the Roman Pontifical, P. 359. De Benedictione
CORPORALIVM; we have a special form of Consecration prescribed for
Corporalls, before they must be used, and 3. special prayers for that purpose,
wherein are these Clauses. Tribue quaesumus ut hoc Linteamen ^uae
propitiationis benedictione sanctificetur, ad consecrandum super illud Corpus
and Sanguinem Dei and Domini nostri Jesus Christi; Benedicere, sanctificare and
consecrare digneris linteamen istud, ad tegendum, involve^dumque CORPUS ET
SANGVINEM Domini nostri Jesus Christi, Omnipotent Deus, manibu^ nostris opera
tuae benedictionis infunde, ut per nostram benedictionem hoc Linteamen
sanctificetur, and CORPORIS ET SANGVINIS Redemptioris nostri novum sud^rium.
All which compared with the Archbishops speech in Star Chamber. For there
it is, Page 47.
Hoc est ^corpus meum, etc. will clearly manifest, that the maine end and
design of all these his forementioned alterations, and inser^ions was the
introducing amongst us of Transubstantiation, and the Romish sacrifice of the
Mass, with the very Masse-Booke it self, by peece-meales.

13. In the very close of the last Rubricke for the Communion there is this
notable alteration and insertion for the same purpose, NOTE.
THOUGH IT BE LAWFUL TO HAVE WAFER BREAD (which the Papists use) it shall
suffice that the Bread be such as is usual. And whereas the old Rubricke was:
If any of the Bread and Wine remain, the Curate shall have it to his own use:
It is thus altered in the new. And if any of the Bread and Wine remain which
is consecrated, it shall be reverently eaten and drunk by such of the
Communicants only as the Presbyter which celebrates shall take unto him: But it
shall not be cursed out of the Church. And to the end there may be little left,
he that Officiates is required to consecrate with the least; and then if there
be want, the words of Consecration may be repeated again, over more either
Bread or Wine, the Presbyter beginning at these words in the prayer of
Consecration. Our Savior in the same night that he was betrayed took, etc.

Finally in the commination against sinners, he has made these insertions.
Prayers to be used diverse times of the year, (AND ESPECIALLY ON THE FIRST DAY
OF LENT COMMONLY CALLED AS HWEDNESDAY, is added: Brethren in the Primitive
Church there was a godly Discipline, that at the beginning of Lentsuch persons
as were notorious sinners, (were put to open penance, and punished in this
world:) which he thus alters; were put to open penance, and did humbly submit
themselves TO UNDER GO PUNISHMENT IN THIS WORLD. Note.
Which alteration makes way, and gives good coulor for the introduction of
Popish Confession, and Penances imposed by Priests; the end no doubt for which
it was made.

To conclude: Whereas there were diverse godly-prayers printed at the end of
the common Prayer Book after the Psalms, to be used for sundry purposes; some
whereof were made use of in private families, Morning and Evening; the
Archbishop gives this direction in the Margin concerning the expunging of
them, with his own hand. His M^^^sty commands, That these prayers following, or
any other (for they are different in several editions) BE ALL LEFT OUT, and
not printed in your Lyturgie: Which command was accordingly observed.

Now I beseech you judge by all these particulars what the Archbishops design
was in making all these alterations, additions, and endeavoring to obtrude
this Common-P^ayer Book and new Lyturgy upon the Church of Scotland without
consent of their Parliament, or General Assembly, and what just cause our
Brethren of Scotland had to oppose and resist them as they did.

This Service Book being printed in Scotland, Note.
with these and sundry other alterations, and additions, wherein it differed
from the English, in the Year 1637. the Archbishop having first caused Mr.
Prynne, Doctor Bastwicke, and Master Burton, to be severly censured, pillered,
stigmatized, cropped off all their Ears, and sent them close pri^oners to
sundry remote Castles, for opposing his popish Innovations here in England;
which struck an extraordinary terror into many, here, and (as he conceived)
would have terrified all from any future opposition of his Popish designs
elsewhere; took occasion immediately after their censures to endeavor to set
this Service Book on ^oote in Scotland by a meare Arbitrary power. For which
purpose he gave order that this Book should be publikly read in all Churches
within the City of Edenborough in July 1637. about which time he writ this
Letter to the Lord Treasurer of Scotland, concerning the Priory, and other
Lands (which the Bishops of Scotland labored to get in possession to augment
their revenues,) and the affairs of that Church.

My good Lord; S. In Christo.
YOur Lordships of June 26. came to my hands on Sunday July* 2. And they were
the first, I received out of Scotland since your return thither, save only
that I had one from the Kings Advocate in answer to mine, and one from my Lord
of Bre^^en. And I confess I did and do a little wonder at it considering how
many Letters I writ, and what their contents were. So I was glad to see one
come from Your Lordship till I read it, but then I confess I was much troubled
to see things go on there in such a way. For I thought we had been happily
come to an end of those troubles.

My Lord, I have much a do to read some words in your hand-wrig^ting, and some
things concerning that Kingdom, I understand not. Between these two if I
mistake any thing, I heartily pray you it may go pro non scripto. And now for
Instance, I confess I do not well understand what that particular is at which
my Lord of St. Andrews checks; but what ever it be, I am sorry his Grace will
not privately debate it before it come in public: Or since he cannot gain his
Commission in Exchequer he will take a course before the Commission of
surrenders that may be prejudicial to the Archbishopric. For I hope he will
not think of any advantageous way to particular persons with disadvantage to
the public.

His Majesty's intention certainly is, that all mortifications to Bishoprics
or other pious uses should have all immunities for the advantage of the Church
that may be had. And if my Lord of Saint Andrews, either by the Commission to
which His Majesty's hand was gotten, or by valuation before the Commission of
surrenders, depart from the good of the Church in the particular of the Prio^y,
I must be sorry for it, but certainly the Kings bounty must not be abused. Only
I beseech your Lordship look carefully to it, that my Lord Archbishop have no
prejudice, for it seems exceeding strange to me, that any thing should be
attempted by him in this, that is not pregnantly for the Churches good.

For the Commission of surrenders, you know my opinion of it, and of whom I
learned it. And I hope before these Letters come to you, you will understand
His Majesty's pleasure concerning that Commission from the Earl of Sterling.

To your Lordships demands and desires, I give you briefly this answer.

First, I heartily thank you that you are minded once more in a private way to
move my Lord Chancellor to alter his intended course by debate there, or from
hence (if there be any use of me) and I heartily pray you so to do. And if
you think fit, you may tell him, it is my desire as well as yours. For I have not
at this time written any one word of this business.

Secondly, If the Kings intentions for the laying the foundation of the
Cathedral Church of Saint Andrews, will in this way my Lord Chancellor now
takes be wholly eluded, you must by all good and fair means prevent it. And
if you cannot so do it, you must acquaint His Majesty with it before it be
too late.

Thirdly, I do hereby heartily pray you to stop all things which come to your
knowledge, NOTE.
if you find the Church prejudged or any thing intended contrary to the
general course introduced in favor of the Church. And I assure my self, that
His Majesty will thank you for the service.

Lastly, Your Lordship did understand me right, and I am still of opinion, that
more care is to be taken in the settling of all these Church businesses, for
the dignity and advantage of the places themselves. And that course I beseech
you hold for those things which come within your power. And yet I shall still
desire the present incumbent may be considered also, where it may be without
prejudice to the place it self in perpetuity.

This has been one of the heavyest Terms that ever I endured, NOTE.
and it seems you have had troubls enough. The best is, the remembrances which
I last put into your hands may stay for times of more leisure, The sickness
increases sorely, yet I cannot get out of London. God bless you with health in
those parts, in which prayers I ^est.

Your Lordships loving poor Friend to serve You Will. Cant.
Lamb. July 4. 1637.

After this on the 23. of July the Service Book was to be read in all Churches
of Edenborough the chief City of that Kingdom, as a president for all the
rest; where it found such public general opposition by the people, that the
design of reading it was prevented, and the Bishops and others who were to put
it in execution, were enforced to give the people good words and promises nor
to bring in the book among them, NOTE.
till further order for fear of being torn in pieces. The particulars whereof
being at large related by other^, I shall pretermit. Upon tidings of this
tumultuous opposition, the Archbishop writ this letter to the Earl of
Traquarer, Lord Treasurer of Scotland. August 7. 1637. concerning Tithes, and
it.

August 7th 1637.
FOr the Commission of Tithes I was ever against it in my own Judgment, and
there in I agreed with my Lords of St. Andrews and Rosse, since neither of them
has given me sufficient reason, why J should change my mind, ye^ if the
Commission ^ye a sleep a while to see what may be said further for it, J
think it is not amiss. And then if nothing can be said that shall make it
appear more beneficial to that Church then yet it does to me, it may be with
the better deliberation quite extinguished. The truth is, at least as it
appears to me, in the present use of it, it is made a public pretense to
private ends.

My Lord, J think you know my opinion how J would have Church-businesse
carried, were I as great a Master of Men, as I thank God, I am of things. It Is
true the Church as well there as else where has been overborne by violence
both in matter of maintenance, and jurisdiction. Note.
But if the Church will recover in either of these she and her Governors* must
proceed, not as she was proceeded against, but by a constant temper she must
make the world see she had the wrong* but offer none. And since Law has
followed in that King dome perhaps to make good that which was ill done, yet
since a Law it is, such a reformation or restitution would be sought for as
might stand with the Law, and some expedient be found out, how the Law may be
by some just Exposition helped till the state shall see Cause to abolish it.

His Majesty takes it very ill that the business concerning the stablishment
of the Service book has been so weakly carried, and has great reason to
think himself and his Government dishonored by the late tumult in Edenborow,
July 23. and therefore expects that your Lordship and the rest of the
honorable Council set your selves to it, that the Liturgy may be established
orderly and with Peace, to repair what has been done amiss. Note.
For his Majesty well knows the Clergy alone have not power enough to go
through with a business of this nature, and therefore is not very well
satisfied with them, either for the Omission, in that kind, to advise for
assistance of his Lords Council, or for the preparation, or way they took.
For certainly the publication a week before, that on the next Sunday the
prayers according to the Liturgy should be read in all the Churches of
Edenborow, was upon the matter to give those that were ill affected to the
service, time to communicate their thoughts, and to premeditate, and provide
against it, as it is most apparent they did.

Nor is his Majesty well satisfied with the Clergy, that they which are in
authority were not advertised, that they might attend the countenancing of such
a service, so much tending to the honor of God and the King. And I am verily
persuaded if that accident of the marriage of your Kinsman had not carried your
Lordship out of the City that day, some things would not have been altogether
so bad, and my Lord privy seal would have had the better assistance.

Neither was this the best Act that ever they did to send away their letters
apart without acquainting the Council, that their advertisements might have
come by the same Messenger, together with their joint advise, which way was
best to punish the Offenders, at least the prime and chief of them, and which
to prevent the like disorders. And after so long time of preparation to be to
seek who should read the service is more then strange to me, unless they
think such a business can do it self, but his Majesty out of his piety and
wisdom gave (by the Messenger which the Bishops sent) such full directions
both to the Lords of the Council and the Lords of the Clergy, as I hope will
settle the business from further trouble. But the Proclamation, which you have
now sent up to the King, I have not yet seen.

Of all the rest, the weakest part was, the interdicting of all Divine service,
till his Majestyes pleasure was further known. And this (as also the giving
warning of the publishing) his Majesty at the first reading of the letters and
report of the Fact, checked at, Note.
and commanded me to write so much to my Lord of Saint Andrews, which I did And
your Lordship at the Council, July 24. spoke very worthily against the
in^e^dicting of the service. For that were in effect as much as to disclaim
the work, or to give way to the insolency of the baser multitude and his
Majesty has commanded me to thankyou for it in his name. But the disclayming
the Book as any act of theirs (but, as it was his Majestes command) was most
unworthy. It Is most true the King commanded a Liturgy and it was time they had
one. They did not like to admit of outs, but thought it more reputation for
them (as indeed it was) to compile one of their own, yet as near as might be,
and they have done it well: will they now cast down the milk they have given,
because a few Milke-maids have scolded at them? I hope they will be better
advised: Note.
certainly they were very ill advised, when they spoke thus at the Council
board. But my Lord of this there was not one word in the letter. So I hope they
have done with that.

W. Cant.


Upon this Letter, the design of imposing the Service-Booke was more
strenuously prosecuted then before, and diverse Ministers were enjoined to read
it by a certain day in their Churches under pain of Horning; and the Bayliffes
of Edinborow were so terrified and wro^e upon by the Lord Treasurer and
Council, that they writ this submissive Letter to the Archbishop thus
superscribed.

To the most Reverend Father in God and our very honorable good Lord, the
Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all England,
these: The original whereof is thus Indorsed with the Archbishops own hand.
Rece. September 1, 1637. From the City of Edenborough: Their readiness to
receive the Liturgy.
Most Reuerena Father in God, and our very good Lord.
WE regreive from our hearts that tumult which did fall out in our Churches
that day of the imbringing of the Service Book. Wherein now these of His
Majesty's Council, who has labored the trial thereof, will give testimony of
our innocence; since that time and rinsig of his Majesty's Council in this
feriall time we have daily concurred with out ordiner and our Ministry for
settling of that Service, as the Right Honorable the Earl of Traquair L.
Treasurer with the Bishop; of Galloway, and Dunbleane will bear witness, Who
has spared neither pains no^ attendance to bring that purpose to any good
conclusion; and although the poverty of this City be great, being almost
exhausted with public and common works, yet we have not bin inlacking to offer
good means above our power, to such as should undertake that service, and in
all things wherein we have bin required, we have ever bin ready really to
approve our selves obedient and loyal Subjects to his Majesty in all his
Royal Commandments, which we have vowed ever to second to our lives end. And
we being infinitely obliged to your Graces favor, We now presumed by these
lines to give your Grace that assurance of obedience upon our part. in this
purpose and in all other purposes wherein we may contribute to the advancement
of His Majesty's service, as can be expected of good Subjects. Whereof if His
Majesty by your Grace shall be pleased to rest assured, what things any other
shall suggest, we will accept it from you as ane great accumulation of favor;
for all which your Grace shall ever find us most thankful remembrancers, and
most ready really to express our thankfulness, when ever we shall be made so
happy as your Grace shall have occasion to use our service. Thus from our
hearts wishing you all happiness, we kiss your Graces hand

Your Graces most affectioned and humble Servants, the Bayliffes of Eden. I:
Cochrane Bayliffe. I. Smyth Bayliffe. Al. Linfie Bayliffe. C: Hammilton
Bayliffe.

Eden. this 19th of August 1637.

But notwithstanding this submission of the Bayliffes of Edinburgh, yet most of
the Ministers and People strenuously opposed the Service-booke, and presented
diverse Petitions to the Lords of secret Council against it; whereof this was
one of the principal, presented to them August 23, 1637, containing some
reasons against receiving the Book.

MY Lords of secret Council, Unto your Lordships humbly mea^es and shows; We
your subjects Master Alexander Henderson Minister at Lenchars, Master George
Hamilton Minister at Newbourne, and Master James Bruce Minister at Kings-Barnes
That where we were required of late by the Moderator of our Presbytery to
receive two Copies of the new Book of Common Prayer, and declaring our selves
willing each of us to receive any of the said Books to read, that we might
know what it contained before we could promise to practice it; Alleging that
in the matters of Godsworship, we were not bound to blind obedience. It was
refused by us and taken out of some of our hands; And yet we are now charged
with Letters of horning Decreed be your Lordships, upon a narrative that we
have refused the said Books out of curiosity and singularity. To provide each
one of us two of the said Books for the use of our Paroches; Which has made
us, who were never before acquainted with any charge from Authority, and
knowing no other way so just and void of offense, to have recourse to your
Lordships; Most humbly entreating that the charge may be suspended for the
reasons following. First, Because this Book is neither warranted by the
authority of the general Assembly, which are the Representative Kirk of this
Kingdom, and has ever since the Reformation given direction in matters of Gods
Worship, nor by any Act of Parliament, which in things of this kind, has ever
bin thought necessary by his Majesty and the Estates. Secondly, Because the
liberties of the true Kirk, and the form of Worship and Religion received at
the Reformation, and universally practiced since, were warranted by the Acts of
the general Assemblies, and diverse Acts of Parliament; specially of the
Parliament 1567, and the late Parliament 1633. Thirdly, The Kirk of Scotland
is a free and Independent Kirk, and her own Pastors sold be most able to
discern, and direct what does best beseem our measure of Reformation, and
what may serve most for the good of the people. Fourthly, It is not unknown to
your Lordships, what disputing, division, and trouble has been in this Kirk,
about some few of the maine Ceremonies contained in this Book, which being
examined (as we shall be ready, a competent time being assigned by your
Lordships to show) will be found to depart far from the form of worship and
Reformation of this Kirk, and in points most material to do all near to the
Kirk of Rome; Note.
which for her Heresies in Doctrine, Superstition, and Idolatry in worship,
tyranny in government, and wickedness every way, is als Antichristian now as
when we came out of her. Fifthly, The people have been otherwise taught by us,
and by our Predecessors in our places, ever since the Reformation, and so it is
likely they will be found unwilling to the change, when they shall be assayed,
even where their Pastors are willing. In respect whereof, The sayds Letters of
horning whole effect and execution thereof, ought to be suspended simpliciter
in time coming. Therefore we beseech your Lordships, that we may have Letters
Direct, charging the persons who have caused use this charge against us, to
compeir personally, bring, and produce the said Letters of horning, with the
executions and indorsations thereof before your Lordships at a certain day, to
be seen and considered of. And in the mean time to suspend them, And your
Lordships Answer.

The Copy of this Petition was sent up to London to the Archbishop, together
with the Answer of the Bishop of Rosse thereunto; who received both of them
September 5, 1637. as appears by the endorsments under his own hand.

The Answer to this Petition was as follows.
A short Answer to the Petition of the Ministers given in to the Lords of His
Majesty's Council the 23 of August, 1637.
THe Narrative of the Petition concerning the Moderator of the Exercise, His
carriage, as we hear is false: and where they pretend that they knew not what
was in the Book, it appears by their many objections and exceptions they
object and except against it, in all parts of it almost, that they are too well
versed in it, but abuse it pitifully.

To the first reason it may be truly replied, That not the general Assembly,
which consists of a multitude, Note.
but the Bishops having authority to govern in the Church, are the
representative Church of the Kingdom. And that the matters of Worship, if they
understand thereby, the forms of Confession, Prayers, celebration of Baptism,
and the Lords Supper, etc. were committed in the time to some few Ministers,
not exceeding the number of Seven, as is clear by the Psalm Book, that
bears the number of the approvers. Whereas this Book of Common Prayer
committed in the Assembly of Aberdene, Anno 1616. to some three or four that
since are deceased, has been revived and approved by the Bishops. Note.


The second reason is untrue, that which they call the form of Worship, was
never established by Act of Parliament. The confession of Faith was in Anno
1567. rati^^ed, and the same often repeated since; But not the Book of Praye^s
and Psalms.

Thirdly, Note.
That the Church of Scotland is a free and Independent Church, none does
question: And it is her own Pastors (for that title (...) antiquity was given
to Bishops only) that have judged this form to be most for the good of the
people. As to the measure of Reformation they speak of it is we^l, that they
grant it to be a measure, for other whiles they think it absolute and perfect.

The fourth reason reflects upon themselves, that have stood out so
rebelliously against the Ceremonies concluded by the Church, and ratified in
Parliament. And for the rest contained in this Book, not received as yet in
this Church, that which is set down in the preface, might have sufficed to
convict them. They will never be able, do what they can to prove the same, or
any thing in it to be either Supers^itious or Idolatrous; yea we dare to say,
it is one of the most Orthodox and perfect Litturgies in the Christian Church.
Note.


For the fifth, If they have taught the people, that the form contained in the
old Psalm Books is the only form of Worship they have taught falsely. And it
may be justly asked, if this was the only true form; why did not they
themselves keep to it, but did use other Prayers, and other forms then are
prescribed in the Book, both in Marriage, Baptism, Celebration of the Lords
Supper, Visitation of the Sick, etc. As to the unwillingnesse of people, so
many as are led by them, and carried by their Seditious and turbulent Sermons,
will perhaps run their ways to their own destruction: But good and
well-disposed people, will still obey God, the King, and other powers
subordinate to him.

By this Answer you may discern what power the Scottish Bishops arrogated to
themselves, through Canterburies encouragement, even more then to a general
Assembly.

September 4. 1637. The Archbishop writ this branch of a Letter to the
Archbishop of Saint Andrews concerning the tumult in Edinburg^, and new
pressing of the Service Book, in answer of his Letter received from thence
August 11, 1637. as appears by the Endorcement under his own hand.

TOuching the tumult, I can say no more than I have already. And for the
casting of any fault upon your Grace, and the rest of your Brethren, as if the
thing were done precipitatly: I think few men will believe that. But that which
is thought here, is, that though you took advice among your selves, yet the
whole body of the Council was not acquainted with all your Determinations, nor
their advice taken, nor their Power called in for assistance, till it was too
late. And that after the thing was done, you consulted apart, and sent up to
the King without calling a Council, or joining the Lay-Lords with you: whereas
all was little enough in a business of this nature, and so much opposed by
some factious men gathered (it seems) purpos^ly together at Edinburgh to
disturb this business. And indeed my Lord, you could not in this particular
have engaged the Lay-Lords too far. And if any Lord here spoke too much when he
thoug^t the service might have bin received throughout all that Kingdom in one
day, I hope your Grace falls as much too short on the other side. For I hope it
will be settled in far l^sse time than 7. years.

And whereas you write, that the fault is m^st in your Ministers; I easily
believe that to be true: But then they should have bin dealt withal before
hand and made pliable, especially in Edenborow, or else some others appointed in
the room of such as disliked. And since your Grace is of opinion that a
sharper course would do more good* and that you would have taken such with
Master Ramsey, if my Lords had not altered your opinion. His Majesty leaves you
to take that course both with him and others, as you shall find fittest for
his service, and the Churches. And for the Postscript, I am sorry as well as
you for Master Rollock and that is all I have to say of him. So desiring God to
bless you through these troubles, I leave you, etc.

Will. Cant. September. 4. 1637.


On the 11. of September 1637 the Archbishop writ another Letter to the Lord of
Tr^qu^^re; Part whereof c^ncerning the Scottish Liturgy I have h^re inserted,
discovering how zea^ous and active his little Grace was in it.

My very good Lord,
I Have received your Letters of Aug. 20. And am very glad to read in them that
mine came safe to you by your servant: For the business, I had some little
inkling given me by my ^, Sterling about the stay of the service: But till I
read your Letter, I did not believe it possible that way should be given to an
Interdiction, especially considering how strongly you had ever opposed it; and
withal how weak, Note.
and uncounsellable (at least in my judgment) the thing it self was. For they
could not but foresee, that that course would add a great deal of heartning
and encouragement to the Puritan Party. And therefore it is no wonder, if such
Lords and others as were ill-affected to the Lyturgy, were easy in giving way
to that Counsel, which they could not but see would advance to their own ends.
But that my Lord of Rosse should give the advice, and my L. of St Andrews
follow it with such stiffness, may be a wonder to any man that knows them, and
the business.

My Lord of St Andrews has lately writtten to me, that my Lord of Rosse was
gone into his Diocese. But for my part, I did not think that all the rest
would have gone away and left the business: For they cannot but think that the
adverse part would make use of the present time to put further difficulties
upon the work; And therefore they should have been as careful to uphold it, my
Lord of Rosse especially, whose hand has been as much in it as the most: But
since they are gone, His Majesty takes it extremely well from my Lords of
Edenborow, Galloway, and Dunblane, that they stay and attend the business as
well as they can: But he has expressly commanded me to give your Lordship
thanks for staying with them, Note.
and keeping them so well in heart: For as the business is now foiled, if you
do not stick close to Gods and the Kings service in it, it will certainly
suffer more then is fit it should.

His Majesty likewise takes it exceeding well from your Lordship, that you have
dealt with the City of Edenborow for maintenance for such as shall take upon
them to read the Lyturgy: And takes it as well from the City it self, from
whom I have received a very fair and discreet Letter, which I have showed his
Majesty, and writ the City an Answer by this Return, and given them His
Majesty's thanks, which indeed he commanded me to do very heartily: And in
truth they deserve it, especially as the times stand.

As for the Ministers of Edenborow, I know the refusal of Mr Ramsay, and Mr
Rollock: But that any other of them stuck at it, or that any Bishops seem not
to be forward, is more then I heard till now: But for that of Mr Ramsey, or any
of the Bishops that would have somewhat amended, if that should be yielded unto
now (unless they should be able to give such reason against it, Note.
as I know they cannot) it would mightily dishonor the King, who to my
knowledge has carefully looked over, and approved every word in this Lyturgy:
And I doubt, it would utterly destroy the service it self: For while one man
out of a humor dislikes one thing, and another another, by that time every
man's dislike were satisfied, I doubt there would be but little left to serve
God with: Besides, it is not improbable but that some men would be as earnest
to have the self same thing kept in, which others would so f^ine thrust out,
what ere it be: And that may make it grow up into a formal contestation upon
some particulars, and quite distemper the service. But whereas you write that
some Bishops speak plainly, that if their Opinions had been craved, they
would have advised the amending of some thing: Truly for that, and in that way
I would withal my heart they had seen it: And why my Lord of St Andrews and
they which were trusted by the King, did not discreetly acquaint every Bishop
with it, considering that every Bishop must be used in their several
Diocesses, I know no reason; and sure I am, there was no prohibition upon them.
And since I hear from others that some exception is taken, because there is
more in that Lyturgy insome few particulars, then is in the Lyturgy in England,
why did they not then admit the Lyturgy of England without more ado? But by
their refusal of that, and the dislike of this, it is more then manifest they
would have neither, perhaps none at all, were they left to themselves: But my
Lord to your self only, and in your ear; a great favor you should do me,
if you will get my Lord of Galloway to set me down in brief Propositions
without any further discourse, all the exceptions that are taken against the
Lyturgy by Ramsey, Rollock, or any other; and I could be content to know which
the Bishops are, which would have amended something, had they been advised
with, and what that is which they would have so amended, etc.

Will. Cant. Sept. 11. 1637.


After this, diverse Treatises written against the Service Book in Scotland,
were sent thence to the Archbishop; four whereof he received thence October
12. 1637. as appears by their Indorsements with his own hand, with which I
shall not trouble the Reader; the substance of all of them being long since
printed.

From this time till about June 1638. the business of the Service Book was
carried on and pressed by the Archbishops means, with sundry rigid and
terrifying Proclamations; which not prevailing, what desperate counsels and
resolutions were thereupon taken up, and by whose advise, these ensuing
passages in some Jesuits Letters, written from hence (in French) to their
Superior and other Jesuits at Paris (which Jesuits were more privy to our
Counsels and designs, then most of the Privie-Councell themselves, as their
Letters intimate) will best inform us. These Letters by some means or other
came to Secretary Windebanks hands, among whose papers I found the Originals
themselves; out of which I have translated these ensuing clauses.

One of the Letters was thus superscribed, in French, Au R. Pere P. Gasper
Segnis^n, SVPERIOR de la Maison profess de la COM. DE JESUS, A PARIS; it
bears date the 28. of June 1638. wherein he writes thus in French, out of
which I have faithfully translated it.

My Reverend Father,
I have not been at London five days in all since I came from France, else I
had not failed to salute your Reverence, etc. I have treated with Father
Provincial touching a succession, but he says there is some body who hinders
the Father General, that he cannot at all resolve himself as yet to send one;
but as soon as he shall have resolved, he has one which he will design for
this place; but he speaks not one syllable who it is, and I have not at all
demanded it. For my self, I continue the design for Italy, as soon as the time
and season shall be proper, but I know not whether I shall pass by Paris as I
go, etc. I know not what to say of Mortimer, the Superior of Scotland, as
knowing not whether he has leave to go or not, nor yet their Procurer who
resides in this Court; for the General has given no answer to the reply which
Mortimer has made. The Country there is in a very ill posture, and in evident
danger to sever it self from this Crown.

Your most humble and obliged servant, G. T.
June. 28.

This Jesuit sent another Letter with this form, writ in French, without any
superscription, containing a full relation of the Scottish troubles and
proceedings, to another Jesuit (as I suppose) in which there is this memorable
clause, containing a resolution here taken to subdue the Scots by force, the
Counselors names, who gave this advice, and the instruments to be used in this
service, to wit, the Irish, because they durst not trust the English.

Sir, etc.
BY all these proceedings the King evidently sees, that they (the Scots) will
not submit themselves to reason by fairnes or sweetness; and therefore he has
taken a resolution, to tame them by force, and to this purpose goes about to
raise an Army in Ireland, not daring to trust himself with the English; Note.
who already are much irritated against him, by reason of the moneys which he
pretends to raise to maintain his Fleet, the which they refuse down right to
pay. This Council of raising an Army, has been suggested unto him by the
Bishop of Canterb. and the President of Ireland; Nota.
the which are they alone that govern him, for he has never yet opened his
mouth, or spoken one soleword of it to his Council of State, but seeks very
much to keep (...) this Jesuit knows all the plot and secrets of it, though
the Co^nsell (...) not.
all close from them; The which highly displeases all these Lords, and men
hold this Council of the Army for Ireland a most pernicious Council. But I
know not what better he could take, for it is most dangerous to raise it in
England, where all the world is discontent; and for to raise an Army here, it
were to give them the sword in their hands to defend themselves; for the part
of the Puritans is so great, and they have such a correspondence with the
Scots, Not^.
that they begin already to break the Altars which the Bishops had erected, and
to accuse the Bishops of crimes, and to demand the re-establishment of many
silenced Ministers, with a thousand other insolences, etc.

Your most humble and most obliged servant, G. T.
This 28. of June.

The same Jesuit writ another Letter in French of the same date, with this
superscription; A Messieur, Messieur La match: wherein, after a pretty large
relation of the Scottish affairs, he has this clause, somewhat suitable to
the former.

THey (to wit, the Scots) will first of all have a free and full Parliament:
they will have a reformation of their own Church, and likewise of the Church of
England. They will that the King resideth 6. months in their Country; (...)
they will have the Archbishop of Canterbury as their prisoner; they will
banish Monsieur Con. which they call the Man of the Pope; they demand the
banishment of the Catholics there; this is that they demand.

The King has never yet opened his mouth to his Counsel of these affairs,
neither has he consulted with any soul living hereupon, Note.
but the Bishop of Canterbury; and forasmuch as I can learn, all their
counsel tends to this, that there must be an Army raised in Ireland, to tame
these Rebels, the which Counsel men of State hold far more dangerous: and so
it is feared that they may call the Palatine in for their King.

Your most humble and affectionate servant, G T.
This 28. of June.

There was another Letter of the same date writ to one Monsieur Ford at Paris,
by another Priest or Jesuit, (as I conceive) but certainly a Papist, wherein
there are these Passages.

My Dear, etc.
Our Scots business troubles us shrewdly, and grows worse and worse; they
will have a Parliament, and the King, for the consequence of it in this
Kingdom, will never permit it; Not^.
and so they have taken a resolution to leavie an Army in Ireland, so to
trouble them and subdue them; which is held here by wise men, to be a very
desperate Counsel: But the King counsels NONE BUT THE ARCHBISHOP AND THE
DEPUTY of Ireland, which disgusts all; and makes men see more weakness in him
then was ever imagined. Other news we have none. Fitton (the Agent for the
secular Priests at Rome) is here, and was presented to the King by my Lord
Arundel, to whom he had sent from Italy many little toys, but now he knows he
is a Priest. I pray you tell my dear Amiable, I thank him heartily for his
note, and have seen his man Jacques Depuis, who is a good cutter or graver in
stone, and continues Catholic, honest, and known to the Capucins,

Yours as you know, W. Hoill.
This 28. June. (A Postscript.)
This Letter to John Foord is monstrable TO FATHER SVPERIOVR, because you must
give him one enclosed from me.




This very Postscript makes me believe both Hoill and Foord to be Jesuits*

How active and industrious both the English and Scottish Jesuits were in
fomenting the Scottish Commotions, Wars, upon what terms and designs the
Papists promised the King their assistance in those wars, refusing to aid
him therein, except he would grant them a freetoleration of their Religion, yea
resolving to poison him with an Italian fig, in case he condescended not to
their demands; and to seize upon the Princes person, and train him up in their
Religion, you may read at large in my Page 8, 9. 13. to 25.
Romes Masterpiece, from the discovery of one who was sent from Rome by
Cardinal Barbarino into England to assist Con the Popes Nuncio, and privy to
the whole Plot, which he revealed out of conscience. How forwards the Irish
Papists were to assist the King and Prelates, in this unnatural war against
the Scots; and what large contributions they gave toward the maintenance of
the War, by the instigation of Sir Toby Matthewes (a lesuite) who went over
with the Lord Deputy Wentworth into Ireland for this purpose, to animate and
stir up the Popish party there, to this Pontifical and Prelaticall war,
their Subsidies there granted in Parliament 1639. and the Prologue thereunto,
with the Rise and Progress of the Irish Rebellion published by Authority of
Parliament, will sufficiently demonstrate, to justify the Jesuits
forementioned Letters, and intelligence to be no fancy, but a real verity.

How the Archbishop carried on this design of the war against the Scots in
England, I shall give you a brief account out of his own, Sir John Lambs, and
Secretary Windebankes Papers.

The 9. of September, 1638. The Archbishop received from some great man in
Scotland a paper thus indorsed with his own hand. 1. That the Garrison^ ought
to be kept at Barwick and Carlisle: First, for Defense: secondly, for Nurceries.
3. That the Affairs of Scotland ought not to be kept so reserved from the
Council of England. And the paper begins thus: That the Scottish have a great
desire to ruin 102. (a Character for the Archbishop) you need not doubt it,
etc. I beseech your Lordship not to overcharge your self by writing to me but
at your best leisure, etc. After which he advised the keeping of Garrisons at
Barwick and Carlisle, etc.

In December, the Archbishop received this paper from Sir John Burrowes thus
in dorsed with the Bishops own hand: Rece. December. 31. 1638. Sir John Burrowes:
A brief Note out of the Records, what the King may do for raising of men in
case of a war with Scotland.

Observations concerning war with Scotland, out of Records.
SUch Lords and others as had lands and livings upon the Borders, were
commanded to reside there, with their retinue.

Those that had Castles near the Borders, were enjoined to fortify them.

The Lords of the Kingdom were summoned by writ to attend the Kings Army with
Horse and Armor at a certain time and place, according to their service due
to the King: or to repair to the Exchequer before that day, there to make Fine
for their said service.

So were all Widows Dowagers of such Lords as were deceased.

So were all Bishops and Ecclesiastical persons.

Proclamations were likewise made by the Sheriffs in every County, that all men
holding of the King by knights service or sergeancy, should come to the Kings
Army, or make Fine as aforesaid: with a strickt command that none should
conceal their service under a great penalty:

Like Proclamations were made, that all men having 40. l. land by the year,
should come to the Kings Army with Horse and Armor.

The Earl Marshall made a Roll, and entered the appearance of all such as came
and tendered their service.

If any failed to come, or to make Fine, their Lands, Tenements, Goods, and
Chattels, were distrayned by the Sheriff upon summons out of the Exchequer.

If any pleaded, that he had attended, he was discharged upon certificate out
of the Marshals Roll, testifying that he had done his service.

If any being come, did depart before the war ended, their Lands, Tenements,
Goods, and Chattles were seized until they had made Fine, or the King had
pardoned their offense.

Commissions went out for levying of men in every County, and bringing them to
the Kings Army.

Like Commissions were made for mustering and arraying the Clergy throughout
England.

Commissions were likewise issued to enquire and punish all Bailiffs, and other
Officers, that for reward had suffered Soldiers to depart before they came to
the Kings Army.

The King appointed certain Captains in such Counties as bordered upon
Scotland, to levy able men in those Counties, and to bring them with their
Horse and Arms to the Kings Army.

Those of the bordering shires were commanded to be ready at eight days
warning, to come unto the Kings Army well armed: and Commissions were made for
punishing such as refused.

Writs were sent into several Counties for certifying the King what number of
Horse and Foot every County could afford him in his wars of Scotland.

The Clergy of England furnished the King with a proportion of armed men.

The Ports were summoned to attend with their service of shipping.

The Constable of Dover Castle was commanded to guard the Ports, lest any by
coming in or going out there, should bring danger to the Kingdom.

The Sheriffs of Counties were commanded by writ to make provisions of corn
and victuals for the Kings Army, and to cause them to be carried to the place
appointed.

Writs also were sent to diverse Towns of England and Ireland, commanding all
Merchants to bring provisions to the Kings Army.

Ships of the Subject were taken up for transporting those provisions to a
place assigned.

Inhibitions were made, that no victuals or other munition should be
transported beyond the Seas during the war.

Diverse Subsidies and Fifteens granted to the King by the Subject toward the
war.

Merchants strangers gave the King aid of money toward the wars of
Scotland, and lent him diverse sums.

Those of Wales furnished the King with a proportion of money toward the war.

The Lords and Clergy of Ireland were required to contribute toward the war.

The King suspended the payment of his debts for a certain time, in regard of
the great occasions he had to use money in the wars of Scotland. Note that no
particular Records were cited or produced to warrant the Premises.

In January he received another Paper from him, which he thus indorseth with
his own hand: Rece. Ian. 29. what was fit to be done in point of danger from
the Scots, Sir Io. Burrowes.

When War was intended against Scotland, three things were heretofore taken
into special care.
First, how to raise Horse and Foot, Victuals, Ammunition, Money, and other
necessaries for that service.

Secondly, how to secure the Seas and Sea coasts of the Kingdom, from danger
of foreign attempts, while the Kings forces were employed in those Northern
parts.

Thirdly, how to provide for the preservation of the peace of the kingdom
within it self, against riots, mutinies, and rebellions whereunto ill
conditioned and desperate persons at such times are easily moved.

The first of these has already in some special points been expressed.

For the second, touching the guard of the Seas, sufficient provision is made
by the late course taken.

And for securing the Sea coasts,

1. The Forts near the Sea were fortified and furnished with men and munition.

2. All persons that had possessions and estates in mari^ine Counties, were
commanded by Proclamation to reside there, with their families and retinues.

3. Beacons were erected in all fitting places.

4. Certain light Horse were appointed by the Country to watch along the Sea
coasts, to give advertisement if danger appeared.

5. All able men of those Counties were commanded to be sufficiently armed and
trained, and put into Companies and Bands under certain Leaders, who were to
be commanded by some one General appointed by the King.

Concerning the peace of the Kingdom.

1. All conventicles and secret meetings were straightly forbidden by
Proclamation, and parties offending severely punished.

2. All spreaders of Rumors, and tale-bearers were by Proclamation commanded
to be taken and imprisoned.

3. All able men between 16 and 60 years of age in every shire were commanded
to be sufficiently armed and trained, and to obey such Generals as the King
appointed.

4. Such as were not able in body to bear Arms, but had Estates, were to
maintain at their charges such able men as were appointed in their rooms.

The very same day the Archbishop procures this ensuing warrant from the
Council Table to himself and the Archbishop of York, to write letters to all
the Bishops within their several Diocese, to summon their Clergy before them,
to excite them to a liberal contribution against the Scots.

At White Hall the 29. of January, 1638.
IT was this day ordered by his Majesty sitting in Council, That the Lords
Archbishops of Canterbury and York their Graces should be hereby required and
commanded to write their letters to all the Lords Bishops in their several
Provinces respectively, forthwith to convene before them all the Clergy of
ability in their Diocesses, and to incite them by such ways and means as
shall be thought best by their Lordships, to aid and assist his Majesty with
their speedy and liberal contributions, or otherwise, for the defense of his
Royal Person, and of this Kingdom, against the seditious attempts of some in
Scotland. And that the same be sent to the Lord Treasurer of England with all
diligence.

Tho. Coventry C. S. Guilliel. London, H. Manchester, I. Lenox, Lind^ey,
Arundel and Surrey, Dorset, Pembroke and Mongomery, Holland, Fra. Cottington,
H. Vane, I. Coke, Fran. Windebanke.


But doubting of the validity of this warrant for such a contribution, he of
late procured this warrant written with his own hand (antedated two days
before the Council Table Order) to be signed by his Majesty, to help him at a
pinch.

Charles Rex.

CAnterbury, I require you to write your Letters to your Brethren the Bishops,
(...).
for a contribution of the Clergy toward my affairs with my Scottish
Subjects, as was done in my Fathers time for the Palatinate. And for your so
doing this shall be your warrant.

Jan. 27. 1638.

That this Warrant was since forged by him, to which he procured the Kings
hand, is apparent, not only by the freshness of the ink, but by the very
Letter he writ to the Bishops of his Province to set on this Contribution,
dated the last of January: which mentions only the Lords Order, but not one
syllable of this Warrant of the King; which, if real, he would have recited in
the first place: His Letters were all of this form, two whereof I have signed
with his own hand; and thus endorsed; A Copy of those Letters which by Warrant
from the Lords, I wrote to the several Bishops within my Province, etc. in the
business of Scotland.

My very good Lord.
I Have received an Order from the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privie-Councell, giving me notice of the great preparations made by some in
Scotland, both of Arms, and all other necessaries for War. And that this can
have no other end then to invade, or annoy this his Majesty's Kingdom of
England: For his Majesty, having a good while since most graciously yielded to
their demands for securing the Religion by Law established amongst them, has
made it appear to the World, That it is not Religion, Note.
but Sedition that stirs in them, and fills them with this most irreligious
disobedience, which at last breaks forth into a high degree of Treason against
their Lawful Sovereign. In this case of so great danger, both to the State and
Church of England, your Lordship, I doubt not, and your Clergy under you, will
not only be vigilant against the close workings of any Pretenders in that
kind, but very free also to your power and proportion of means left to the
Church, to contribute toward the raising of such an Army, as, Note.
by Gods blessing, and his Majesty's care, may secure this Church and Kingdom
from all intended violence. And according to the Order sent unto me by the
Lords (a Copy whereof you shall herewith receive:) these are to pray your
Lordship to give a good example in your own person; And withal convenient
speed to call your Clergy and the abler Schoolmasters (as well those which
are in peculiars, as others) and excite them by your self, or such
Commissioners as you will answer for, to contribute to this great and necessary
service, in which, if they give not a good example, they will be much to blame.
But you are to call no poor Curats, nor Stipendaries, but such as in other
legal ways of payment have been and are by Order of Law bound to pay. The
proportion I know not well how to prescribe to you, but I hope they of your
Clergy, whom God has blessed with better Estates then ordinary, will give
freely, and thereby help the want of means in others: And I hope also your
Lordship will so order it, as that every man will at the least give after the
proportion of three shillings ten pence in the pound of the valuation of his
living, Note.
or other preferment, in the Kings Books. And this, I thought fit to let you
further know, That if any men have double Benefices, or a Benefice and a
Prebende, or the like, in diverse Diocesses; yet your Lordship must call upon
them only for such preferments as they have within your Diocese, and leave
them to pay for any other which they hold, to that Bishop in whose Diocese
their other preferments are. As for the time, your Lordship must use all the
diligence you can, and send up the moneys, if it be possible, by the first of
May next: And for your Indemnity, the Lord Treasurer is commanded to give you
such discharge, by striking a Talley, or Talleys upon your several payments
into the Exchequer, as shall be fit to secure you without your charge: And of
this service you must not fail. So to Gods blessed protection I leave you, and
rest

Your Lordships very loving Friend and Brother W. Cant.
Lambeth, Ianuar. ult. 1638.

Your Lordships must further be pleased to send up a List of the names of Note.
such as refuse this service within your Diocese; but I hope none will put you
to that trouble.

It is expected that your Lordship, and every other Bishop, express by it
self, and not in the general sum of his Clergy, that which himself gives.

On the eleventh of February 1638. he wrote this Letter to Sir John Lamb (his
creture) Deane of the Arches, for a Contribution among the Doctors of the Law
at Doctors Commons and elsewhere without Warrant; the Original whereof I found
among Sir John Lambs sequestered writings, together with the first draught of
it with the Archbishops own handwriting.

After my hearty Commendations, etc.
I Have received a Warrant from the Lords of His Majesty's most honorable
Privie-Councell, which requires me to write to all the Bishops in my Province,
to call their Clergy together, and put them in mind of the great danger which
this Kingdom is in, by the Traiterous Conspiracies of some ill-affected in
Scotland: These seditious persons have begun and continued hitherto their foul
Disloyalty under the pretense of Religion, which by factious spirits in all
times is made the cloak to cover and hide (if it might be) their designs. But
now it appears clearly to the State that they daily strengthen themselves by
Arms and Munition and other preparations for War: And though his Majesty
has graciously condescended to more then they could justly ask in all things
concerning their Religion and their Laws, yet they go on still, and are
satisfied with nothing but their Rebellious Disobedience, and have no less
aim then to invade or annoy England. The Letters to the several Bishops, I
have sent as I was commanded, and I doubt not but they and the Clergy in
general will give very freely, toward this great and necessary defense of the
Kingdom. And because this great and common danger cannot be kept off, but by a
common defense; and for that the Reverend Judges and others of the Common Law
have bountifully expressed themselves already; I am required to write to you
also, that you calling to you the rest of the Doctors of the Commons, propose
to them now while most of them are together, this great and weighty business
belonging as much to their defense as to other men's: and let every man set
down what he will give to this service; When this is done, I will acquaint
his Majesty with it, and yours and their forwardness herein: And it is
expected that you hasten this with all convenient speed. So to Gods blessed
protection I leave you and rest

Your very loving friend, W. Cant.
Lambeth Feb. 11. 1638.

You must send to such Chancellours and Officialls as are not at the Commons,
but at their several Residencies: And if you give them a good example here, I
doubt not but they will follow it.

You shall not need to call Sir H. Martin, for his Majesty will send to him
himself, and looks for a greater sum then in an ordinary way.

Upon these Letters of the Archbishop, the Bishops in each Diocese summoned
their Clergy before them, exhorted them by public speeches, to a liberal
contribution against the Scottish Rebels (as they styled them) and Dr. Pierce
Bishop of Bath and Wells, among other Motives, used this as a very effectual
one to excite his Clergy to an extraordinary liberality toward the maintenance
of this War, because it was The Antipathy of the English Lordly Prelacy, etc.
par. 2. chapter 6.
BELLVM EPISCOPALE, an Episcopal War (raised by them, and for the Bishops, to
support their Lordly Power and Pomp) he might have added, that it was Bellum
Pontificale too, which made the Papists contribute as largely toward it as the
Prelates.

What the Total of the Clergies Contributions amounted to, you may conjecture
by these particulars found among the Archbishops Papers.

The Contribution of the Clergy in the Diocese of Canterbury, as appears by
Mr. William Cranmers Account, An. 1639. amounted to 534. l. 5. s. 3. d. Of the
Dean and Prebends of the Cathedral of Canterbury 300. l. Bangor Diocese 192.
l. 8. s. 8. d. Bristoll Diocese 714. l. 11. s. 8. d Chichester Diocese 985.
l. 16. s. Ely Diocese 764. l. 8. s. Gloucester Diocese 566. l. 7. s. 5. d
Hereford Diocese 662. l. 1. s. 3. d Lincoln dioces, in Bedford 315. l. 19. s.
6. d In the Archdeaconry of St. Albans in Hertfordshire 72. l. 12. s. 4. d. In
the Archdeaconry of Huntingdon 209. l. 14. s. 6. d. Norwich Dioces in the
Arcdeaconry of Norwich and Norfolk 1094. l. 16. s. 8. d. In the Archdeaconry of
Suffolk and Sudbury 921. l. 19. s. 9. d. Winchester Diocese 1305. l. 5. s. 8.
d. Worcester Diocese 624. l. 19. s. 7. d. The Dean and Chapt. of Windsor 200.
l.
What was contributed in other Diocesses, I find not among his Papers, but in
all these forementioned, every particular Clergy-mans contribution is specified
by Name, and the Names of those who refused, or were unable to contribute, were
specially certified, and returned to the Archbishop.

The contribution of the Doctors of the Civil Law at Doctors Commons, as
appears by several Notes under Sir John Lambs own hand, found among his
Writings, amounts to -- 671. l. 13. s. 4. d. paid in besides remains.

What sums were paid into the Exchequer by the Archbishop himself upon this
Collection, will appear by this Extract out of the Pell, in the Receipts of the
Exchequer.

In Pelle Recept. Termino Mich. An. R. Caroli 14. Sabbathi, 15. Martii, 1638
Anglia. A Reverendissimo in Christo patrae Willielmo Cant. Archiepiscopo totius
Angliae Primat. and Metropol. 100. l. de Denar* per ipsum recept. ex dono
Thomae Row in sacra Theolog. doctor. nup. defunct. versus defensionem Regni.
-- 100. l. sol. Eodem Termino Veneris duodecimo Aprilis, 1638. Cantuar. Dioc. A
Decano and Capit. Eccles. Cathed. Christi Cant. ut don. suum spontaneum versus
defens. Regni per manus Reverendis. in Christo patris Willielmi Archiep. ibid.
solut. -- 300. l. sol. Termino Pasche Anno Reg: Caroli 15. Martis ultimo
Aprilis; 1639. A Archiepis. ib. per Williel. Cranmer Genesis 502. l. 12. s. 9. d.
de Denar. per ipsum recept. de diversis clericis infra Dioc. pred. ut don. S:
spontan. versus defensionem Regni. 502. l. 12. s. 9. Eodem Termino Mercurii
primo Maii, 1639. Lincoln Dioc. A Willielmo Archiep. Cant. coll. Denar. ut don.
spontanea Cleri infra dios. predict. 473. l. 13. s. 8. d. versus defensionem
Regni in hac expeditione S. Majestatis in parts boreal. per Matthew Leak Genesis
solut. -- 473. l. 13. s. 8d Eodem Termino, Anno and die. A Willielmo
Archiepiscopo Cant. coll. Denar. ut don. spontan. cleri infra dioc. predict.
versus defensionem Regni in hac expeditione suae Majestatis in parts boreal.
per William Rolf Genesis solut. -- 209. l. 14. s. 6d Termino Paschae Anno Reg:
Caroli 15. Iovis 13. die Maii, 1639. Anglia. A Reverendissimo in Christo patre
Domino Williel. Cant. Archiep. 500. l. de Denar. per ipsum recept. de quadam
persona cujus nomen concelari desideratur, dat. versus defensionem Regni. --
500. l. sol. Eodem Termino Sabbathi, 4. Maii, 1639. Lincoln. Willielmo Archiep.
Cantuar. col. Denar. ut don. spontan. cleri infra dioc. predict. versus
defensionem Regni in hac expeditions S. Majestatis in parts boreal. per
G^alter Walker Genesis Comiss. com. Bed. solut: -- 315. l. 19. s. 6d Eodem Termino
Martis 14. Maii, 1639. Anglia. A Reverendissimo in Christo patre Williel.
Archiep. Cant. ut don. spontaneum clerici ignoti versus defension. Regni. 87.
l. sol. Eodem Termino Lunae, 20. Maii, 1639. Cantuar. Dioc. A Reverendissimo in
Christo patre Williel. Archiep. Cant. 20. l. ut dom. spont. clerici ignoti
versus defens. Regni. -- 20. l. sol. Eodem Termino Martis 28. Maii, 1639.
Lincoln Dioc. A Willielmo Archiep. Cant. coll. Denar. ut don. spont. cleri
infra dioc. pred. versus defens. Regni in hac exped. S. Majestatis in parts
boreal per Johan. Cross, Genesis solut. 289. l. sol. Eodem Termino Mercurii, 15.
Iunii, 1639. Cantuar. Dioc. A Reverendissimo in Christo patre Williel. Archiep.
ibid. ut donum spontaneum clerici ignoti versus defens. Regni. -- 20. l. sol.
Eodem Termino Mercurii, 19. Iunii, 1639. Cantuar. Dioc. Archiep. ibid. per
Willielmo Cranmer Genesis 31. l. 12. s. 6. d. de Denar. per ipsum recept. de
diversis clericis infra dioc. predict. ut donum S. spontaneum versus defens.
Regni. 31. l. 12. s. 6d Eodem Termino Mercurii, 26. Iunii, 1639. Cantuar. Dioc.
A Reverendissimo in Christo patre Williel. Archiepiscopo ibidem 500. l. ut
donum suum spontaneum versus defensionem. Regni. -- 500. l. sol. Eodem Termino
Anno and die. Lincoln. Dioc. A Williel. Archiep. Cant. coll. Denar. ut dona
spont. cleri infra dioc. predict. 38. l. 6. s. 8. d. versus defens. Regni in
hac expedit. S. Majest. in parts boreal. per W. Rolf, Genesis sol. 38. l. 6. s.
8. d. Eodem Termino Mercurii, 3. Iulii, 1639. Lincoln. A Willielmo
Archiepiscopo Cant. coll. Denar. ut dona spontan. Cleri infra Dioc. predict.
versus defensionem Regni in hac expeditione S. Majestatis in parts boreal. per
Walter Walker, Genesis Comiss. Com. Bed. solut. 13. l. 12. s. sol. Eodem Termino
Veneris, 26. Iulii, 1639. Lincoln. A Willielmo Archiepiscopo Cant. 3. l. ut
dona spontanea cleri infra dioc. predict. versus defensionem Regni in hac
expeditione S. Majestatis in parts boreal. per Iohannem Farmery Iuris Civilis
D^ctor* solut. 3. l. sol. Summa totalis 4401. l. 11. s. 7. d.

How ready the Popishly affected Clergy were to contribute to this War, will
evidently appear by this Letter of Doctor John Pocklington (who wrote Sunday no
Sabbath) to Sir John Lamb, among whose Papers I found it.

SIR,
ON Thursday, and Friday last, the Clergy met at Bedford, before Mr.
Commissary, Mr. Thorn, and my Self: We found them willing to contribute as
much as was propounded; The poorest that gave any thing at all, gave no less
then 3. s. 10. d. in the pound, without deduction of Tenths: The most gave
after 4. s. some after 5. s. some after 6. s. in the pound: Much of the money
is paid in, and I suppose it will be all in Mr. Commissaryes hands by the 26.
of this month the day appointed for the payment. I doubt not but the Clergy of
England will teach the Ministers of Scotland Duty and Obedience; And if their
Laity will be taught the like by ours, His Majesty I hope will have a royal
and joyful Progress into Scotland; which God grant.

At this meeting I understood that Doctor Mickle-thwait is the man in
nomination for Sandy: He is my old acquaintance, and very good friend, whom I
love with all my heart, for I take him to be a right man for the Church; and if
it might please God that he might be better accommodated nearer his own means,
I think we should mutually rejoice.

No parsonage of England could sit me better then Sandy: Note.
It is of good value, it would draw me out of that corner where my stirring for
the Church-rights makes me less acceptable with some great hands: It brings me
into the neighborhood of my best friends, Doctor More, and Doctor Martin, and
sets me within a small distance of Bedford, where I shall be ready at hand to
assist any service for the Church and King, though I am not ignorant that my
devotion that way has done me no great good amongst some, no mean ones; and
paradventure Mr. Thorn may suffer a little for such employments.

To Mr. Thorn I showed your Letter, and he showed me Wallingers Petition to
the Lords; To him I spoke nothing at all about it; but I beseech you give me
leave to vent my thoughts of it to you: The hands that delivered it may be a
Commoners of Bedford; but the head that devised it, has the countenance of a
Commissary, rather then a Commoner of that Town; the inditer makes familiar
use of diverse words that come not within the Cognizance, nor liberty of the
Town of Bedford: Their Charter surely reaches not to take up errors and
strayes of youth, that are laid hold on at Oxford; I am afraid that some
retainers to the Commissaryes Court cast an evil eye upon him, because it is
like enough he may cast an eye upon some evil, that may be done there.

I shall not easily believe that either Smith late vicar of St. Paul's, or
Collyer have trained up their Auditors to be so zealous to have the King prayed
for according to Canon. I would to God they and all the Churches of England
might be tried with a Prayer for the Kings happy journey, and joyful return
out of Scotland, to see how zealously they would pray for the conversion, or
confusion of their own Faction, and how they would make the Pulpits ring with
invectives against Puritan Rebellion and Traitors, which as yet are silent
enough. When Treason and Rebels is with like zeal detested, and declaimed
against in Puritans, as in Papists; I shall believe there is some Religion and
Piety in that Generation.

Sir, you will pardon me if I am thus profuse and loose with you; where I have
not a window to the heart, I am reserved and close enough. Thus with
remembrance of my due respects and best wishes, I rest,

At your service ever to be commanded, John Pocklington.
Yevelden, March 4. 1638.

The King asisted with these Contributions, raised an Army, and marched into
the Sea the Breviate of the Archbishops life; page 22:
North against the Scots, departing from London Northward March 27. 1639, and
through Gods blessing on the 17, of June following, a happy Pacification and
Agreement was concluded and ratified between His Majesty and His Subjects of
Scotland, and thereupon the Armies disbanding, and all parties returned home
with much joy and contentment.

But Canterbury upon his Majesty's return, disliking the Articles of
Accommodation as prejudicial to the Lordly Prelacie, and giving overmuch
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the general Assembly of Scotland, was very
much discontented and offended at this happy Pacification, stiling, it a very
dishonorable Peace to His Majesty, and exceeding prejudicial to the Church;
telling His Majesty, that it was made by a company of hunting Lords, who
regarded their own sports and pleasures, more then His Majesty's honor, or the
honor and safety of the Church and Realm; and by his violent importunity,
caused His Majesty to dissolve and Nullify the Pacification, as dishonorable;
And by Proclamation dated August 11. 1639. to call in some papers dispersed
concerning the Pacification, as scandalous, ordering them to be publicly burnt
by the hand of the common Hangman, engaging His Majesty in a new resolution to
subdue the Scots, and establish both a Lordly Prelacy and Liturgy amongst them,
by force of Arms.

Which being resolved on by the persuasion of this Arch-Incendiary, he
thereupon projects and resolves upon new ways of raising moneys without a
Parliament by way of Loan, and thereupon combines with Windebank to send for
several Officers, Judges, Servants of the King and Queen, and others before
the Lords of the Council, to lend such fums of money toward the raising of a
new Army, and maintaining of a new War against the Scots, as he was pleased to
prescribe.

Hereupon, in November 1639. by the Archbishops directions and procurement,
diverse Persons were sent for before the Council Table to lend and contribute
toward the maintenance of this civil War, on whom they imposed several
sums before hand, which they must be enforced to contribute, as appears by
these several Lists under Windebanks hand: 14. November. 1639. A List of those
that are to Lend.
Mr. Justice Crawley 500. l. Mr. Justice Rives 500. l. Mr. Solicitor Herbert
500. l. Mr. Surveyor 1000. l. Mr. Comptroller 500. l. Sir Robert Banaster 1000.
l. Sir Paul Pinder 50000. l. Mr. Henly 6000. l. Strangers 20000. l. Danby
10000. l. Gib 10000. l.


December 5. 1639. (as the Archbishops Diary informs us) The King Declared
His resolution for a Parliament in case of the Sottish Rebellion; See The
Breviat of his life, page 22*
The fi^sst movers of it were the Lord Deputy of Ireland, and the Archbishop;
and a resolution voted at the Board, to assist the King in extraordinary ways,
if the Parliament should prove peevish and refuse to grant Subsidies to
maintain this War; the calling of this Parliament being made but a Stale to
serve this Archprelates papal ends and designs against the Scots.

And to testify this, he most illegally in February 1639. (after Writs for
calling this Parliament issued) caused this list of names and sums to be given
in to the council Table, of Parties that must lend the sums assessed by him
for support of these Wars, who were sent for accordingly before the Lords, and
many of them there enforced to lend: Sir Henry Martin 3000. l. Sir John Lamb
2000. l. Dr. Duck 1500. l. Dr. Eden 1500. l. Sir Nathaniel Brent 500. l. Mr. of
the Roles. 2000. l. Sir Edward Leech 2000. l. The six Clearks 6000. l. The Lady
Cambden 5000. l. Baron Westo^ 500. l. Baron Trevor 4000. l. Baron Hendon 3000.
l. Sir Thomas Fanshew 1000. l. Sir Peter Osborne 1000. l. Sir Robert Pie 2000.
l. Sir Edward Sawyer 500. l. Sir Charles Herbert 1000. l. Sir Edward Powell
2000. l. Sir Sidney Mountague 2000. l. Sir Ralph Freema^ 2000. l, Mr. John
Packer 1000. l. Morley 2000. l. Massam 4000. l. Surveyor of the Works 1000. l.
Sir Richard Win 3000. l. James Maxwell 2000. l. Patrick Mall 20^0. l. James
Leviston 1000. l. George Kirk 2000. l. William Murrey 1000. l. Henry Murrey
2000. l. E^dymion Porter 1000. l. Sir Henry Mildmay 2000. l. Sir William Vdall
1000. l. Sir Edward Varne 1000. l. Sir Richard Young 1000. l. Mr. Audley 4000.
l. Sir Miles Fleetwood 1000. l. Sir Benjamin Rudiard 500. l. The Attorney of the
Wards 1000. l. Mr. Chamberlin 1000. l. The Attorney of the Duchy 500. l. Mr.
Cofferor 3000. l. Sir Thomas Merry 2000. l. Mr. Fenner 1000. l. Sir Richard
Manley 500. l. Mr. Comptroler of the Works 500. l. Lord Chief Justice Branst^n
500. l. Mr. Justice Barkley 1000. l. Mr. Justice Crook 1000. l. Sir Thomas
Hatten 1000. l. Sir John Winter 1000. l. Mr. Attorney Ball 500. l. Mr.
Solicitor Win 500. l. Sergeant Whitfield 500. l. Mr. Justice Jones 500. l.
Mr. Henly 5000. l. Lord Chief Justice Litleton 1000. l. Solicitor Lane 500. l.


In this Schedule there we^^ diverse names of Noblemen and others inserted with
blanks left for the sums they were to lend: And the Officers of Star Chamber,
Chancery and other Courts here omitted, were likewise therein ordered to be
sent for; under which the Archbishop with his own hand writ these directions,
To call upon the Lord Keeper for these Names: Call for Names: Which clearly
manifests this sending for all these to lend the sums here specified to be his
project; and that he was the chief Actor in these Assessments of them: The most
of whom were enforced to lend; 38000. l. being subscribed before the Lords of
the Council by some of these persons in one day, and 10000. l. another day, as
appears by a Note under Windebanks hand.

Moreover, I found this ensuing List of Names and Sums under Windebanks hand.
6. March 1639. Kings Servants to be warned on Friday.

These in this Paper now absent, to be sent for against Wednesday, to Mr.
Solicitor Herbert.

gr. -- Sir Gdward Griffin 1000. l. gr. -- Sir Edward Savage 500. respect. ^Sir
John Trevor 1000. Mr. John Frecheville 500. gr.^Sir John Maynard 500. Sir Henry
Herbert 1000. Sir Francis Vincent 500. Sir John Smith 500. Sir Thomas
Walsingham 500. Mr. Solicitor 500. Sir Lionel Palmage 2000. gr. -- Mr. Thomas
Fotherley 500. refus. Sir William Ashton 500. Sir Thomas Richardson 1000. gr.
-- Mr. Edmund Windham 500. gr. -- Mr. Pie 3000. Mr. Ioh: Manors of Hadden
2000. Massam 2000. He will give his own Bond; the Lords will bring it down to
1000. l. Mr. William Walter 500. Mr. Edmund Dunch 500. gr. -- Capt. Richard
Crane 500. Sir Thomas Ashton 500. Mr. William Coryt^n 500. gr. -- Sir James
Thynne 3000. gr. -- Sir Henry Newton 1000. resp.^Mr. Henry Frederick Thynne
2000. Sir Ralph Hopton 500. Sir William Savile 1000. gr. -- Mr. James Maxwell
2000. Mr. Patrick Mawle 2000. He is to do what he can. gr. -- Mr. James
Levingston ^000. gr. -- Mr. George Kirk 2000. gr. -- Mr. William Murray 1000.
gr. -- Mr. Henry Murray 1000. gr. -- Mr. Endymion Porter 1000.
How much of these sums were lent or contributed I cannot certainly define, but
on April 13. 1640. the Parliament called about the Scots assembled, wherein
many Subsidies were demanded to be presently granted and levied before any
grievances redressed: in conclusion after much debate, the Parliament on the 5.
of May was suddenly dissolved, and no Subsidies given; but then the Convocation
was continued by the Archbishops means; who granted the King a large
Benevolence to continue for 3. whole years in nature of 3. entire Subsidies, to
maintain this war (against all Law) to be paid in and levied under severest
penalties, (of which more in due place) and made 17. Canons exceeding
prejudicial to the Kings Prerogative, the Parliaments and Subjects Liberties,
in justifying and establishing diverse Popish Innovations in Religion, in
affront of the Parliament; upon whose dissolution, diverse illegal means were
set on foot by Canterbury and his Confederates, to raise moneys to support
this war, as forced Loans, (diverse Aldermen of London being imprisoned in the
Tower, for refusing to certify names of Persons within their several Wards
for to lend) by enforcing Shipmoney, Coat and Conduct money, in the Countries,
more then ever: By Commanding by a special Proclamation, Aug. 20. 1640. all
the Nobility, Knights, Gentlemen, and those who held Lands of the King, to
attend him at the Army, with horses, men and arms, in this service according to
their abilities and estates. Hereupon a great Army was raised in the North, and
a bloody war likely to have ensued, but that God by his overruling Providence
happily appeased it without bloodshed, by a Treaty first, and then by an Act of
Pacification and Oblivion passed in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms.

What Tumults and Libels, the Archbishops breaking the first Pacification with
the Scots, and after that the Parliament, occasioned, to the endangering of his
Person, you may read out of his own Diary in the Breviate of his life, page 22,
23* which I will not repeat.

That he had the principal hand in exciting and directing these wars, will
appear by the Lord Conwayes Letters to him, (who had then the Command of the
Northern forces) the extracts of some whereof out of the very Originalls, I
shall here present you with.

The first is thus Endorsed with the Archbishops own hand, Received Iunij, 12.
1640. my Lord Conway his Judgment concerning popular Tumults now in England,

May it please Your Grace,
I Have received two Letters from you, Note.
the one by Mr. Tre^orers conveyance, wherein you were pleased to let me know
what the disorder at Lamb^eth was; the mutinies of the base multitude are not
to be feared, nor to be neglected, the chief inciters are to be castigated and
that quickly: if there were persons fitting to be Heads to a discontented
multitude, there were some danger if those men could not be secured, but he
that fears any Head that can be given to any discontented Body here in
England, will be afraid like boys and women of a Turnep cut like a deaths head
with a candle in it. All these accidents must be overcome with patience,
dexterity, and courage; If the end whither one would go cannot be attained with
that speed is desired, learn of Seamen to lie by a wind, and gain ground by
boarding: I do assure my self, that if wise thoughts be with courage put in
execution, all difficulties will be overcome; there must not be any fainting by
the way, if the heart fail the legs will never leap over the d^^ch, and if
courage be added to wisdom, a Prince is able to overcome any opposition; what
things did the Duke of Savoy do with that small and inconsiderable Country, in
respect of Spain and France, with one of which he was in continual opposition?
what things did King Henry the seventh Governing well? what King Henry the
eight Governing ill? and what does not the Cardinal of Richelieu bring to
pass if he have a desire to effect it? and all this is done only by
considering how things should be done, and by causing them to be done, and all
commands of what kind soever will be executed if he that commands has power to
reward and punish.

I do most Humbly thank your Grace for your favor to Mr. Neville, and if the
cause were my own, I would not desire that any man should do more for me then
what were very reasonable; if you think it not seasonable to move any thing
that may offend my Lord of Holland, I do believe that Captain Neville is a man
of so much reason, as that he will think himself obliged to you for your good
will; but I assure my self that there is not any less your friend then my Lord
of Holland, and I believe that at all times you ought to take heed to your self
with him. And I think that at any time there is not any great danger in him, if
the King be well with you; my Lord of Warwick is the Temporal Head of the
Puritans, and my Lord of Holland is their Spiritual Head, or rather the one is
their Visible Head, the other their Invisible Head; peradventure not because he
means to do either good or hurt, but because he thinks it is a Gallantry to be
the principal Pillar on which a whole Caballe must rely. I am extremely sorry
for my Lord Lieutenant that he is again fallen ill, I wish his health, as I do
my own, and I have reason so to do, for I have received more favors from him,
then ever I did from any man.

If the times do grow Tempestuous, I do believe that you will find many a Sir
Henry, but I will not for fear, be made to be other then

Your Graces most humble and most faithful Servant, Conway and Kilulta.
Newcstale, June 8. 1640.

The second is thus endorsed by him, Rece: Iunii 16. 1640, The Lo: Conway
concerning the fortifying of Newcastle.

May it please your Grace:
THe King has been pleased to call me into his service, and I shall not fail
to serve him faithfully; and in all things wherei^ I may advance the Kings
service I will do it with my best endeavor; and if I should not do so I
should use the King worse then I do other men; for to tell you truth under the
seal of Confession, the faults that I commit are against my self, not against
other men. This Town of Newcastle I believe may be fortified in such manner as
that an enemy may be kept off until an Army might be brought to relieve it:
the profit that will be to the King is, that the Country will be better assured
if they have a place whither they may retire if there be danger, and the
Country will be pleased that the King does take care of them: this enclosed
paper will tell you the means whereby Money may be raised to effect this; and
from the doing of it this benefit will arise to the King, that he may make this
a constant Revenue to himself; they will I believe be brought to do this
willingly for their own safety, which they will never know how to put off from
themselves, and it will be a fair example for others to follow; if you will
get it resolved on while the power that I have here does continue, which will
not now that the Army is coming hither be long, I will do my best to get it
effected; If you think this to be out of your way, I desire your pardon for
giving you the trouble; but knowing you to be faithful to the Kings service,
and not knowing very many that would be sincere in a Proposition for the King
to lay any imposition, I did think it a necessity. I do not hear yet so good
news of my Lord Lieutenants health as I do desire, his loss would be
irreparable to the King, and to all his friends; but I hope he will recover,
which God grant: I have not any way abilities in me to serve you as he may, but
such as I am I shall not fail to be:

Your Graces most humble and most faithful servant, Conway and Kilulta.
Newcastle, June 13. 1640.

Whereas it is conceived to be needful, that some Fortifications be presently
made without the Walls, for the safety of the Town of Newcastle, which will
require a great charge both for the erecting and keeping the same; For the
raising of Moneys to that purpose, these four Propositions are to be considered
of:

IMprimis, Whereas this new Corporation of Masters of Ships, have imposed of
every several Master who shall carry Coals, from either Newcastle or
Sunderland the payment of 2. d. per. Cha. of Coals so carried; which does
amount unto 1300. l. per annum at least, which they say is for the maintenance
of their Corporation: Now forasmuch as the moneys thus paid does arise forth of
the purses of those, which are owners of Ships according to their several
parts, of which number abundance of them are no members of that Corporation,
therefore ought not to be Assessed for this purpose: It is therefore desired,
that this 2. d. per. Cha. henceforth may be paid for two or three years, or as
long as need shall be for the use above mentioned, and then quite to ^urcease;
it being both reasonable and just, that moneys thus raised should be employed
for the public good, and not for any particular society. And in case it be
alleged, that they have spent much moneys in procuring their Pattent to be a
Corporation; It may be answered, they have received these moneys two years
already, which is more then they can have expended; and besides, they have and
do still receive a Mark at least of every one they make free, which does arise
to a great sum of Moneys, for they make many free every year.

2. That as much be paid upon every Chaldron of Coal^, for the same use, by
those who sell the same, for the same time and no longer.

3. That there be as much paid upon every Chaldron of Coals, which is laden
from Sunderland, both by the seller and buyer as is paid at Newcastle, and
during the same time; for otherwise all the small Ships will go from that
place, which will hurt Newcastle very much and be distastefull.

4. That all common Brewers, and all others who brew strong Ale or Beer to
sell, shall pay so much of every Tun, as shall be thought fitting: And likewise
all those who sell Tobacco.

The third is thus endorsed, Lo. Conway, Rece: Iulii 11. 1644. The
consideration about execution of Martial Law.

May it please your Grace:
THe Deputy Lieutenants and Captain Alcocke did send me a fierce Alarm from
Cars^ie, desiring me to send them five hundred horse, because the Scots are
within a few days at Dumfrise, seven or eight thousand, with which Army they
mean to fall into Cumberland, but I am slow in answering the spur, because
the advertisement of the Scotch preparations on this side are not such as that
they may be much feared as yet: In my opinion the Scots will not come into
England, but least they should go against the rules of right reason, I do
provide as if they were coming: The horse are now come to the North part of
Yorkshire, into Cleveland, the foot about Selby were disorderly, and took out
of Prison those that were committed; but now a Guard is set upon the prison,
and they begin to be better in order.

One thing I will tell you, and shall desire that you will speak with my Lord
Lieutenant in it: I did write to him of it, but I have not heard any thing from
him, so that I think that in his sickness, believing that my Letter did only
contain news of Scotland, he did not read it; the business is this; My Lord
of Northumberland did write to me, that having had occasion to look into the
power he has to give Commissions, the Lawyers and Judges are all of opinion
that Martial Law cannot be executed here in England, but when an enemy is
really near to an Army of the Kings, and that it is necessary that both my
Lord of Northumberland and my self do take a pardon for the man that was
executed here for the mutiny; if this be so, it is all one as to break the
Troops, for so soon as it shall be known there will be no obedience;
therefore put some remedy to this by all means very speedily: there are now
here in prison two men for killing of men, and the Provost Martial for letting
them escape out of Prison, although he took them again: I do forbear to call
them to a Court of War, neither dare I tell the reason why I do not, Note.
being often urged, but suffer them to think me negligent. I do not think it
fit that the Lawyers should deliver any Opinion, for if the S^^diers do know
that it is questioned, Note.
they will decide it by their disobedience, as the Country does by the
Ship Money, and with far more dangerous consequence, for the Soldier may
bring the Country to reason, but who shall compel the Soldier? therefore if
it cannot be helped with a Commission of Oyer or Terminer, which ^^st be only
in the Officer or Officers of the Army, or in some especial Commission of the
Kings, such as he gives when Noblemen are Arraigned; let him then give under
his own hand a Commission for the Execution of Martial Law, to him that will
hazard his life and estate upon the Kings Word. Sir Jacob Ashley has no
Commission for the execution of Martial Law, but if the fault deserve death,
he is to advertise my Lord of Northumberland; this will absolutely undo all:
the Soldier must be punished by his Officer: If it would come to debate some
may peradventure say, that for faults that deserve death the Soldier may be
sent to the Goal to be tried by the Judges; this will take away the respect of
the Soldier to the Officer, and there will presently be no obedience, or care,
either in Soldier or Officer. I think that this does so much concern the
King in the go^ernment of the Army, Note.
that if a Lawyer should say so here, if I had a Commission I would hang him,
and so I think the King ought to do others. I shall ever ^e

Your Graces most humble and most faithful Servant, Conway and Kilulta.
Newc^stle, June 13. 1640.

To which I may add this Letter of my Lord Conway to Secretary Windebank,
concerning certain Intelligence of the Scots intentions to enter England, which
he was to impart to the Archbishop.

Mr. SECRETARY,
MY time is very short, I now receive your Letter, I have within these two
^oures word brought to me, Note.
I pray you tell my Lord of Canterbury, that it is by that man I did write last
to him, that I have sent into Scotland and gave him six^een pound; that the
Scotch Army, as he does assure me upon his life, and b^ds me hang him if it be
not so, will upon Monday or Tuesday next come into England that they will upon
Satturday be before this Town, which they will take or here b^ broken; from
hence they intend to go to Yorkshire, my Lord Lowden told him that he did
expect that more then half the Trained Bands would join with them: in Yorkshire
or upon the confines they mean ^o stay un^ill some English ^orces join with
them; there was a man out of England lately with the Scots, to desire them to
come in, and told them they did ill to stay so long, that if they had come in
but six weeks ago, the English Army had not been raised* I doubt very much this
Town cannot be kept; if a Citadell had been made according as I did advise,
they would never have attempted it; If you have written to Sir Jacob Ashley, it
will gain two or three days, but I do now write to him, least you have not; If
any English forces join with them, they will give the Law: I have sent to my
Lord of Northumberland their last Proclamation, I shall ever be

Your most humble Servant, Conw^y and Kilulta.
Newcastle, Aug. 15. 1640.

The Country will not drive their Cattle, they say that they know not where to
have grass, therefore they will only drive them out of the way, where they
march.

To which I shall annex this Warrant to the Lord Cottington, whereunto the
Archbishops hand is first.

AFter our hearty commendation to your good Lordship, Whereas We understand
there have been delays and difficulties in some places, in the ex^cution of
his Majesty's late command, for putting in readiness the Trained Bands, and
other Forces of that County to march and to serve in the common defense in this
time of public danger, which delays have been occasioned through some
misapprehension, concerning the defraying of the charge of the Trained Men to
the place of the service when they march. We have therefore thought good for
preventing of further delay in matters of this importance, hereby ^o advertise
your Lordships, that not only the Customs and Laws of this Kingdom do require,
that in a time of actual Invasion, every man ought to serve in the common
defense at his own charge, but that the very Law of Nature does teach and
oblige us all thereunto without sticking or staying upon any terms or
questions. And that it has been the Custom and practice within this Kingdom
both in ancient and modern times, (even but when a doubt or fear was had of an
Invasion) is very manifest. But this present danger is past all manner of
doubt, by reason of actual Invasion of the Scottish Rebels with so great an
Army, and the same so far advanced, that the whole Kingdom may soon be
overrun, unless by a great power they be repelled and beaten back.

And whereas His Majesty's Subjects of the North parts of this Kingdom do
cheerfully hold together, and serve His Majesty in this great occasion at their
own charge, both with their Bodies and Fortunes without trouble to His Majesty.
We have therefore thought good hereby to pray and require your Lordships, to
acquaint the Country with the sense of this Board in this particular, and that
We doubt not but His Majesty's Subjects of that County, will in this occasion
show as much forwardness and zeal for the common safety wherein We are all so
nearly concerned, as is either shown now in the Northern parts, or has been
practiced in any other time of danger heretofore in this Kingdom. Which We do
hereby effectually recommend to your Lordships care, and bid your Lordship very
heartily farewell.

From White Hall the 16. of September. 1640. Your Lordships very loving
Friends, W. Cant. Guil: London. Arundell and Surrey. Dorset. Fra. Cottington.
Fra. Windebank. Tho. Roe.



To our very good Lord, the Lo: Cottington, Lo: Lieutenant of the County of
Dorset, and in his Lordships absence, to his Deputy Lieutenants.

After the Scots entrance into England, the Archbishop received this Letter of
Intelligence from one John Rocket (mentioned in his See the Breviate of his
life, p. 23.
Diary) which lively sets forth their opinion of him.

To the most Reverend Father in God, William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and one of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Counsel, At his Palace this, etc. Lambeth.
Right Reverend Father,
DUty binds me to study your Graces health, and to frame my weak endeavors
correspondent to your gracious pleasure, which is the accomplishment of my
desire and joy, the only motive of my Intelligence: I therefore desire to
acquaint your Grace, with what is dangerous to your person, and adverse to your
happiness; which is that I received from the Scots; of which I am Sole
witness, and your Grace only made acquainted with, viz.

After the late Skirmish betwixt the English and the Scots at Newburne, my
occasions urged me to return to Blaiden, (a Town betwixt Newburne and
Newcastle, whether my journey tending; the Rebellious Scots took me upon
Chestenmore, the midd-way betwixt Durham and Newcastle) either for a Spy, or a
Jesuit: And being had to Durham, was detained there for the space of four
days, viz. from the 8. day of September till the 13. when being examined I
fashioned my speech for their humors, and complied my self as near as I could
to their dispositions; with which at length they were affected, supposing me to
be one of their beloved Brethren; whereon great tokens of love and familiarity
were moved, and private discourse for the space of five hours, relating such
news, whereof they were knowing; wherein they vomited the venom of their
malicious minds, and revealed the extremity of their wrath against your Grace:
Calling you Papist Priest, Note.
a new Bonner, a Superstitious, and proud Bishop, on whom if they might not
revenge the Lords Quarrel, satisfy their minds, and cut off Superstition by
cutting down your Grace the mighty son of Belial, and high Priest of Baal: (For
in such terms they expressed their mischievous thoughts.) We hope, and know,
we have some holy and zealous Brethren in England, who^ will take up our
Quarrel against this rageing Tyrant, and Bloud-sucking Wolf, the Archbishop of
Canterbury; whom they hoped to hear slain shortly (if not by themselves) by
some people little suspected.

These things, or worse (right reverend Father) I heard, and I alone; which I
could not refrain, but signify to your Grace with all the have I could;
whereby you might avoid their rage, and cruelty; and your person might be
preserved in safety in spite of all their envious Plots; flourishing in this
Kingdom gloriously, for which earn^stly and truly prays

Your humble Servant in all duties most ready, though unknown, John Rocket.
From Seth Bernard his house in the Minster yard at York. September 16. 1640.

This Letter is thus Endorsed with the Archbishops own hand, Rece: September. 21.
1640. From Mr. John Rocket a man whom I never saw. The hatred of the Scots
against my Person and Life.

I shall conclude with Mr. Alvyes Letter to him the then Arminian and
Superstitious Vicar of Newcastle; Thus Endorsed with the Archbishops hand,
Rece: October. 19. 1640. Mr. Alvyes Case in and since his flight from Newcastle.

To the most Reverend Father in God, William by Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all England,
and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
Most Reverend and Right Honorable,
I Make bold to represent unto your Grace, the sum of that which I lately
represented to His Majesty, in an humble Petition, that I am for the present
Outed of all my Spiritual promotions, to the yearly value of 300. l. and have
most of my moveable goods seized upon by the Rebels; being forced (upon some
threatening speeches given out by them, that they would deal more rigoro^sly
with me then others) suddenly to desert all, and to provide for the safety of
my Self, Wife, and seven Children by a speedy flight in the night time; how
they would have dealt with me, they have since made evident, by their harsh
dealling with two of my Cura^s, whom I le^t to Officiate for me in my absence,
who have not only been interrupted in reading Divine Service, but threatened to
be Pistold, if they would not desist from the execution of their Office.

And whereas I had lately purchased 60. l. per anum in Northumberland, and
hoped to have been supplied that way in these calamitous time, till I might
with safety return; they have since I presented my Petition to His Majesty,
seized upon that also, and commanded my Servant to be accomptable to them for
it; this is my case at this time.

His Majesty's gracious Answer returned to my Petition, by Mr. Secretary Vane,
was, That he would recommend me in special manner to your Grace, and it pleased
His Majesty further to signify, Note.
that he had received good Intelligence from me, and that hereafter I should
have a remembrance over and above for it.

There was a Letter found in Newcastle, superscribed to the Lords of the
Scottish Army, which coming first to my hands, I presented to His Majesty:
Another Letter was sent me from a Merchant in Newcastle, which discovers the
miserable estate of that Town; I showed it to Sir Henry Vane: I my self also
was commanded by His Majesty, to give in to the Lord Bishop of Durham a short
relation of some remarkable passages of the Scots proceedings in, or near
about Newcastle, which accordingly I did, and least any of them have not, as
yet, come to your Graces hands, I have here enclosed them all: Thus with my
prayers for the long continuance of your Graces health, and happy government of
this Church, I humbly take my leave;

Your Graces in all due observance Eldard Alvey.
York October. 16. 1640.

What else concerns the Archbishops activity and proceedings in the Scottish
Troubles and Wars* you may read in the Articles exhibited against him to the
Lords in Parliament by the Scotch Commissioners, and the House of Commons: But
before I leave this subject, I shall only give you a little more light how
active the Papists were to concur with the Archbishop and Prelates, in setting
on these Scottish Wars, Troubles, and what advantages they made of them.

Not long before the Scottish troubles, one Francis Smith a great Jesuit,
discoursing with Mr. See the Popish Royal Favorite. p. 31.
James Wadd^sworth, and one Mr. Yaxley in Norfolk, touching some points of
Religion, used these speeches. It is not now a time nor way for us to bring in
our Religion by Disputes, or Books of Controversy, But IT MUST BE DONE BY AN
ARMY, and BY FIRE AND SWORD. This Smith usually frequented Lambeth house, and
Windebanks Lodgings, with whom he was very familiar, and was no doubt a great
stickler in raising the Scottish Tumults, and fomenting that war, as well as
other Jesuits: to further which and advance the Catholic cause, the
Queen Mother of France unexpectedly came over into England, and landed at
Harwich about the 19. of October, 1638. This war was no sooner resolved on by
the King, by the Archbishop and his confederations instigations, but the Popes
Nuncio with the Priests, Jesuits, and Roman Catholics of England and Wales,
(all privy to the plot) assembled together in a kind of Parliament, or general
Counsel of State, at London in April, 1639. In which Council (convened by
the Queens command) Con, the Popes Nuncio sat President, where (in imitation
of the Bishops and Clergies forementioned Contributions to maintain this war)
they all resolved upon a liberal Contribution toward it. To which end the
Queen her self, Sir Ke^elm Digby, and Mr. Walter Mountague, together with the
Noblemen, Gentlemen, Priests, and Recusants assembled at London, writ several
Letters, to all Recusants in the several Counties of England, and Wales, to
excite them to a most liberal and free Benevolence toward the maintenance of
this war, appointing special Collectors publicly to gather in the same; (in
regard whereof all Process against Recusants, were stayed by His Majesty's
special direction, who was privy to this assembly and contribution, as is
evident by his See the Royal Popish favorite, p. 16.
answer to Mr. Pulfords Petition) The verity of this contribution of the
Papists is most apparent by these ensuing Copies of their several Letters,
produced and read in the Commons House, See the Diurnall, Occurrences, etc. p.
22. to 23.
January 28. 1640. on which day, Sir Kenelm Digby, and Mr. Mountague, were
brought upon their knees at the Commons Bar, for furthering this Collection
with their Letters, which they there professed they did write and disperse
only in duty to the King to relieve him, he being at that time in great
distress for moneys.

The Queens Letter for the Levying of money.
Henretta Maria R.

WE have so good a belief of the loyalty and affection of his Majesty's
Catholic Subjects, as we doubt not but upon this occasion that has called his
Majesty into the Northern parts, for the defense of his Honor and Dominions,
they will express themselves so affected, as we have always represented them
to his Majesty; so in this common consent, which has appeared in the Nobility,
Judges, ^entry, and others to forward His Majesty's service by their persons
and states. Note.
We have made no difficulty to answer, for the same correspondency in his
Catholic Subjects, as Catholics: notwithstanding they all have already
concurred to this his Majesty's service, according to the qualities whereof
they are, when others of the same quality were called upon, for we believe that
it bec^me us, Note,
who have been so often interested in the s^licitation of their benefits, to
show our selves now in the persuasion of their gratitude. Therefore having
already by his Majesty, by other means recommended to them this earnest desire
of ours to assist and serve his Majesty, by some considerable sum of money
freely and cheerfully presented: We have thought fit (to the end that this our
desires may be the more publik^, and the more authorized) hereby to give you
Commission and direction, to distribute Copies under your hand of this
testification thereof, unto those that have met in London by our direction,
Note,
about this business, and unto the several Collectors of every County. And as
we presume the (...) they will raise, will not be unworthy our presenting to
the King, so shall we be very sensible of it, as a particular respect to our
selves; and will endeavor in the most efficatious manner we can to improve the
merit of it, and to remove any apprehension of prejudice, that any (who shall
employ themselves toward the success of this business) may conceive; by this
they may be assured, that we will secure them from all such objected
inconveniences. And we are very confident, that this our first recommendation
will be so complied with all, Note.
as may not only afford us particular satisfaction, but also faciliation
toward their (...) advantages.

Given under our signet at White Hall this 17. of April. 1639.

Sir Kenelme Digbies and Master Mountagues Letter, concerning the Contribution.
IT is sufficient already known to every one the extraordinary Graces and
Protections^ Note,
we owe the Queens Majesty, to whose favorable intercession we must ascribe
the happy moderation we live under; so as we doubt not, but an occasion of the
expression of our gratitudes, will joyfully be embraced by every body which the
present estate of his Majesty's affairs, does now offer us. We have already by
our former Letters endeavored to prepare you to a cheerful assistance of his
Majesty, in his declared journey to the Northern parts; for the securing of
his Kingdom, and such other purposes as his Royal wisdom shall resolve of:
That so you may really demonstrate your selves as good Subjects, as God and
nature requires of you. Now Her Majesty has been graciously pleased to
recommend unto us, the expressions of our duties, and zeal to his Majesty's
service, by some considerable gift from the Catholics, and to remove all
scruples (that even well-aff^icted persons may meet with) she undertakes to
secure us, and all that shall employ themselves in this business, from any
inconvenience that may be suspected by their or our forwardness and
declaration in this kind. It will easily appear to every body how much it
imports us, Note,
in our sense of her Majesty's desires to pr^sse everybody, to strain himself
even to his best abilities in his Proposition, since by it we shall certainly
preserve her graciousnesse to us, and give good Characters of our d^votion to
the King and State; of whose benignity we have all reason to give testimonies,
and to endeavor to produce Arguments for the prosecution and increase of it.

Now for (...) best expedition of this business (which is the chief
circumstance that imports in it) we have thought fit to recommend it to your
nominations of such persons, as shall in your opinions be agreed for the ablest
and best disposed in every several County, not only to solicit, but to
collect such voluntary Contributions as every bodies consciences and duty shall
proffer: And we shall desire you to give us an account of what acceptance it
finds with his friends, which we cannot but expect very succesfull, and
answerable to the forwardness we meet with here about London, for which we
shall offer up our prayers to God.

Walter Mountague, Ken. Digby.



The Copy of the Letter sent by those assembled in London to every shire.
THe enclosed advices and Motives being so ample, as you will perceive by
perusing them; it will not be needful that we enlarge our selves upon any
particulars concerning the conduct of the business, which they direct the way
in. This therefore serves only to convey them to you (as we are entreated by
those that have met here, and we have undertaken to do) and desire you to
repair Immediately unto those persons to whom they be directed, and to deliver
the same unto them, Note.
in the name of all the Noblemen, and Gentry, (together with our selves)
assembled here in London, by the Queens commandment, to set forward the
work. And we pray you assure them in the most effications manner you can
(ingageing all our credits for the truth thereof) that it is the sense of us
all both Ecclesiastical and Lay Persons, Note.
that besides the discharging of their and our duties to God and the King, it
mainely imports the good of Catholics to have their business take good
success. Therefore entreat them to deal actively and efficatio^sly and
speedily according to their advices and motives. We are so well persuaded of
their devotion to put forward so pious a work, that we doubt not but they will
be as well satisfied in the needfulnesse of the thing, and be as ready to
employ themselves in it, receiving the assurance thereof and persuasions
thereunto; only from our hands, as if they came by all the most formal ways
that can be imagined; which in a business of this nature cannot be expected.
And although the advices and motives be directed only ^o Lay-Gentlemen, yet we
desire you, (and have answered for you) that you will employ your selves, and
all those that depend on you, sincerely to solicit and dispose all their
minds that you have relation unto, as powerful as you can, to contribute
cheerfully and bountifully upon this occasion; which is the first that ever we
labored in of this kind, so we hope in God it will be the last, there being no
probability of so pressing and urgent a necessity to occur any more.

Yours, etc.
London, April, 1639.

The names of the Collectors for gathering the Recusants money.
Bedfordshire. Master Church, Sir Robert Charnock, Mr. Robert Hewet. Barkshire.
Mr. Anthony Inglefield, Mr. Tirrill. Buckinghamshire. Mr. Robert Dormer, Sir
Edward Manfield, Mr. Throgmorton Mr. Bring^urst. Cambridgshire. Mr. Henry
Huddleston, Mr. Charles Paryed Mr. Barker. Cheshire. Mr. Bidulph of Bidulph,
Sir William Massey, Mr. William Stanley, Mr. James Poole* Cornwall. Mr. Victor,
Mr. Burlacy, Mr. Trevelion. Cumberland. Sir Fran. Howard, Mr. Joseph Porter.
Darbyshire. Sir Fran. Willoughby, Mr. Avery of Hastop, Mr. Poole of Spinckill.
Devonshire. Sir Edward Carey, Mr. Berry, Mr. Anth. Gifford, Doctor Chichester.
Dorsetshire. Mr. Geo. Penny the elder, Mr. Geo. Arundell, Mr. Web of Lanford,
Mr. Wells of Purbeck. ^urham. Sir Ralph Coniers, Master George Collingweed, Mr.
Edward Smith. Essex. Mr. Willam Peter's, Mr. Thomas Wright, Mr. Rich. White.
Glocestershire. Hertfordshire, Sir John VVinter, Mr. VVakeman, Mr. Benidict
Hall, Mr. Atkinson. Huntingtonshire. Mr. Price of Washingley, Sir Thomas
Shell^y, Mr. Thomas Cotton. Herefordshire. Master William Bodenham, Sir John
Wigmore, Mr. William Moore, of Burrop, Master John Harp. Hampshire. Master
John Arundell, Mr. George Penny the younger, Mr. William Owen. Kent. Master
Benjamin Wyborne, Master Clement Finch, Master Pettite. Lancashire. Master
Bradshawe, Sir Cicill Crayford, Sir William Gerrard, Mr. Molineaux of the Wood,
Master Townly of Townley, Anderton of Lostock. Leceistershire. Sir Fran.
Englefield, Mr. Golding. Lincolnshire. Master Anthony Mounson, Sir John
Thimbleby, Mr. Robert Constable. London and Middlesex. Master Cape, Master
Thomas R^x, Master Becket, Master Richard Betham, Mr. Edw. Harp, Mr. Morgan,
Master Io. Chapperly, Doctor Kirton. Norfolk. Master Everard, Mr. Charles
Walgrave, Sir Henry Bedingfield, Mr. William Paston. Northamtonshire. Sir
William Saunders, Mr. Io. Poulton. Nottinghamshire. Master Thomas Smith the
elder, Master Thomas Smith the younger. Northumberland. Sir William Fenwicke,
Master Haggerston, Mr. Withrington, Sir Edward Ratleif. Oxfordshire. Sir
Richard Farmer of Kiddington, Mr. William Stone, Mr. Ralph Sheldon.
Rutlandshire. Master Nicholas Cripp^, Mr. William Andrews, Mr. Alcock, Mr.
James Digby. Shropshire. Sir Basil Brook, Master Plowden, Master John
Harrington. Somersetshire. Master R^ino, Mr John Ewnis the elder.
Staffordshire. Master Brook of Lapley, Mr. Stanford of Perry-hall, Mr. Phillip
Draycot. Surrey. Master Edward Cotton, Sir Richard Weston. Suffex, Sir John
Shelly, Sir John Carroll. Suffolk Sir Francis Monnocke, Sir Roger Martin, Sir
Edward Sylyard, Mr. Thomas Beddingfield of Beddingfield. Warwickshire. Master
Antho. Dormer, Master Thomas Morgan, Mr. William Sheldon, Mr. Richard
Middlemoore. Wiltshire. Master William Arundell, the Lord Baltimore, Mr. Edw.
Stilling. Worce^tershire. Master William Abingdon, Master William Sheldon.
Westmerland. Master Anthony Ducket, Master John Leyborne, Master Fleming. East
Riding. The Lord Dunbarre, Master Brigham, Master Longdaill. Yorkshire. West
Riding. Baronet Vavesar, Baronet Gascoigne, Mr. Thomas VVaterton, Mr. Philip
Hiuegate. North Riding. Master Craythorne the younger, the Lord Fairfax, Master
Anthony, Menn^ll, Master Lawrence Sar^. Brecknock. Master Winter, Master Bevan,
Master Maddocke. Carnarvon. Master Lewis. Carmarden, Master Towley. Cardigan
Master Lewis. Glamorgan. Master Turbervile the younger. Denbigh. Master Richard
Floyd, Master Crew. Flintshire. Sir John Connoway, Master Pennat. Monmouth. Sir
Charles Somerset, Master Morgan of Lantarnam. Master Morgan of Itton.
Mountgomery Me^ioneth. Sir Piercie Harbert. Pembrookshire. Master Towley of
Arnostill. Radnorshire. Master Thomas Crowther.
The Reallity of is Collection, will yet more clearly appear to all the World
by the Queens own Confession, in a Message sent by her to the House of
Commons, to excuse her activity therein; together with her entertainment of a
Nuncio from the Pope (Seignior Rossett being then Nuncio) whom she promised to
dispatch out of the Kingdom with all convenient speed; In which Message
(Recorded in the Commons Iournall) we have a clearer acknowledgement likewise
of many premised particulars prefaced with a specious Court-Complement, and
many fair promises (since not very punctually performed) to Court the Commons
into a good opinion of her Majesty's real affections and endeavors to remove
all mis-understandings between the King and his people, and to do all good
offices between them.

See the Commons Iornall, Feb. 3. 1640. Diuinall Occurrences of both Houses. p.
31, 32.
A Message sent from the Queens Majesty to the House of Commons, by Master
Comptroller, Feb. 3. 1640.
THat her Majesty has been ready to use her best endeavors for the removing
of all misunderstanding between the King, and Kingdom.

That at the request of the Lords, who Petitioned the King for a Parliament;
her Majesty at that time writ effectually to the King, and sent a Gentleman
expressly to persuade the King to the holding of a Parliament.

That She has since bin most willing to do all good offices between the King
and his people: which is not unknown to diverse of the Lords, and so Quere how
well this Clause has ever since bin performed?
shall, ever continue to do, as judging it the only way of happiness to the
King, her Self, and Kingdom.

That all things be justly settled between the King and his people, and all
cause of misunderstanding taken away and removed.

That her Majesty having taken knowledge, Note.
that having one sent to her from the Pope, is distastefull to the Kingdom, She
is desirous to give satisfaction to the Parliament, within convenient time she
will remove him out of the Kingdom.

That understanding likewise that exception has bin Note.
taken at the great resort to her Chapel at Denmark House, she will be
careful, not to exceed that which is convenient and necessary forth exercise
of her Religion.

She further takes notice, That the Parliament is not satisfied with the
manner of raising money for the assistance of the King in his journey to the
North, in the year 1639. at her entreaty; from the Catholics: She was moved
thereunto merely out of her dear and tender affection to the King, and the
example of other His Majesty's Subjects; she seeing the like forwardness,
could not but express her forwardnes to the assistance of the King.

If any thing be illegal, she was ignorant of the Law, and was carried therein
only out of a great desire to be assisting to the King in so pressing an
occasion; but promises to be more cautious her after, Her raising men, monyes,
horse, Arms, Ammun^tion in foreign Parts to maintain a bloody civil War in
Ireland and England; is a very real performance of this promise.
not to do any thing but what may stand with the established Laws of the
Kingdom.

Her Majesty being desirous to employ her own power to unite the King and
people; desires the Parliament to look forwards, and pass by such mistakes
and errors of her Servants as may be formerly; and this your respect she
promises shall be repayed with all the good offices she can do to the House
which They have done sowith a witness ever since.
you shall find with real effects, a^ often as there shall be occasion.

How sincerely and cordially her Majesty has performed all these her Princely
promises to the Parliament, Kingdom, King, and his people, her Actions both at
home and in Foreign parts, with our bloody Wars and Massac^es since both in
Ireland, England, and Scotland proclaim to all the World. God deliver us all
from such Court-holy-water, such Popish Dissimulation, which may seem
commendable in Romish Catholics; who hold See Master Hen; Mason of
Equivocation. and Surins Council. Tom. 3. p. 860.
Equivocation lawful, and that no faith is to be kept with Heretics, as they
esteem all Protestants.

But to return to our Papists activity in the Scottish Watres, to which this
Message relates, it is very well known, that many if not most of the Captains
and Officers employed in the last expedition, were either professed Papists, or
persons Popishly affected, and how the Earl of Arundell (the General of the
Army against the Scot^^) together with his Lady, family, stand affected in
Religion, and what active (...) they were to promote this War, you may read
at large in Page 17, 22 23, 24-32
Romes Masterpeece. Their Contributions toward this War were so large, and
their assistance so cheerful, that some of our Episcopal Preachers (and Mr.
Whites First Cen^^^y of Randalous Malig. Priests p. 25. 29.
Mr. Squire of Shoreditch London by name) preached openly in his Pulpit; That
the Papists were the Kings best Subjects, and better then Protestants for three
reasons. First, their Loyalty, Secondly THEIR LIBERALITY, having like Arauna,
contributed like Kings to the King in his necessity: Thirdly, For their
Patience: adding, that they were the good Samaritan, who poured Oil into the
wounds of that man, (the King) that was fallen among Thieves who wounded him,
Especially the Irish Papists. And Audomarus Ioannes, Abbot of Wurtzburge in
Germany in a letter of his to Secretary Windebancke Dated 13. August 1639.
(endorsed with Windebanks own hand) writes, that his Majesty had a sufficient
trial of the fidelity of his Catholic Subjects in this accident, I shall
insert the whole letter, because it discovers Windebanks intimacy with this
Abbot and other Papists, whose letters (enclosed under his own packet, to
prevent intercepting) he usually dispersed to their Agents here.

Right Honorable,
THree Months ago and more I wrote signifying to your Honor, that after I came
from London, it being mo^e then a quarter of a year, before I could reach the
wished place I did aim at, to see the desolation of which, and generally, of
all the parts I did pass through, I was so disconsolated, that all be it, I
often thought to discharge my respective salutes to your honor, yet present
cares and occasions did ever prevent my intention. Notwithstanding at last, I
did take the boldness to entreat, that your Honor would let me know your
commands, in discharge of which your Honor, God willing, shall find me most
solicitous and careful. But least such my former letters has miscarried, as
several to Sir William Howard, and other honorable friends has done, I
resumed the boldness to make a Brief repetition of the same, letting your
honor know that I have found King James letter (of happy memory) which my Lord
Hay then Ambassador after his return to London, moved his Majesty to write to
Prince Godefrid then Bishop of Wurtzburge, wherein his Majesty was pleased to
give thanks to the Bishop for the favors done, NOTE^
as to himself. Moreover his Majesty was pleased to take * notice of us his
poor Subjects commending us to the Bishops noble charity. I find also Prince
Godefrids answer to his Majesty, w^it by occasion of Abbot Ogilby; whom the
Bishop did commend to his Majesty, entreating that at his request the said
Abbot Ogleby might have free passage to see his native Country out of the which
he had been 40. years and more, The Prince who is now, does truly honor his
Majesty and respect his Subjects, of the which my Lord Arundell about two year
ago being here received a worthy token and likewise of this Bishops and
Princes courteous respects, Mr. Tailor, who about three months ago on his way
to England in transitu coming hither, can give evident testimony both to his
Majesty and to your Honor, which according to your promise made to me, I doubt
not but he has already done. Last of all, my Lord Craven has reason to renound
this Princes singular favors toward him* by whose means he has not only
obtained freedom, but likewise being here at Wurtzburg has received
particular curtisies and favors of his highness, which I doubt not, but at
occasion his Lordship will declare at length to your Honor. At divets
occasions being called to the company and Counsel of the principalls here, as
the best means to obtain to peace, I use several inductions, arguments and
reasons for to advance and promoove the restitution of our Prince Palatihat;
against the which albeit there be strong adversaries, yet further
considerations may hapily move their hearts to condescend thereunto. The
Catholic Bishops and Princes thirst mightily for Peace, but higher powers and
some Generals and Commanders of Wars on both sides, for their private ends, by
practical inventions and factious coll^tions labor to the contrary, in the
which they are like to continue so long Germany can afford them maintinance,
of the which in most parts here, there be greater scarsity, and that at an
extraordinary rate. Of the particular miseries and desolation of the most parts
in Germany, as likewise of other occurrences, if I did not persuade, with my
self that your Honor had every, fortnight certain ^nformation, I would write
at length, but unwilling to impesh your Honors more serious business I
abstain from superfluous discourse, My Lord Craven desired me in this my
letter to salute your Honor with all respect, as his singular good friend and
Patrons Patron: he went ^tom hence much of eight days ago, after expedition
of some business in Holland, soon thereafter Godwilling he thinks to see his
wished Country and honorable friends amongst the which he esteems your Honor
most trusty, of which before mentioned courtesies done to his subjects if your
Honor think that his Majesty will be pleased to take notice by writing a kind
letter to the Bishop after advertisement, I shall send the aforesaid letters to
your Honor, I hear for certain that matters betwixt our Kings Majesty and
Scotland are (God be glorified) composed and agreed, whereupon for conclusion
of some Articles there is a Parliament Convocat at Edinborough, where the Kings
Majesty is said to be for the present. In this accident I hope his Majesty has
had, a sufficient trial of the fidelity of his Catholic Subjects who in this
or any other occasion, NOTE*
I am confident, by their true service will endeavor to deserve his Majesty's
love and affection toward them. For my own part while as I live I will
profess my fidelity to his Majesty, as my dread Sovereign, obeying and
honoring him above all Kings and temporal Princes on the earth. Praying God
to multiply upon his Majesty heavenly and temporal blessings, NOTE.
with my best wishes for your Honors good health, and prosperity, I rest. In
the Scots Abbacie at Wortzburg.

Your honors most humble servant and beadsman. Audomarus Ioannes Abbas.
This 13. of August 1639. A Postscript.
P. S. I humbly beseech your Honor to give order, that these enclosed safely
be delivered: in the like or any occasion, I shall be always most ready to
serve your Hnour.




These contributions, and this Assembly of the Papists 1639 with the Popes
Nuncioes residence among us, were so publicly known, and the Papists grew so
insolently bold thereupon, that the Apprentices and common people took notice
of it, whereupon they scattered these two insuingpapers in the streets of
London, and pasted up some of them in public places, from whence they, were
taken and carried to Secretary Windebanke, among whose papers they remained.
The first was this.

Reasons that Ship and Conduct-money ought to be had, and also Money, by the
City of London.
FIrst, for the setting up of Mass, and maintaining of Idolatry, as it is
begun, but not brought yet (as was intended) to perfection, praise be to God,
and the Scots, whom he has made an instrument to prevent the same.

That the Popes Nuncio takes and has these five years, taken great pains in
perverting His Majesty's simple Subjects, who herein is weekly at very great
charges in sending to Rome for a cart-load of the Wood of the holy-Crosse, and
many old horses and dogs teeth and bones, with Indulgences and Pardons, which
he sells dear enough, but that cannot defray him and his great Train, for he
sends every week a Packet or two of all the affairs here to Rome, he must
be well rewarded out of ship and conduct money, and of that which is expected
to be lent by the City,

The Friars of Somersethouse who do labor in distributing those relics, and
for many private Masses, and for keeping of Bastards four in Dunhill Alley,
^enne in Druty Lane, besides twenty in Saint Giles in the Fields, must have
money to keep them and pay the Nurse, or else all is undone with them.

Sir John Winter (whose kindred were some of the chief projectors of the
Gunpouder treason (and is now not better then his kindred) and my Lords Grace
of Canterbury, now her Majesty's Bishop, is and are great instruments, and
specially the said Sir John, who with the Popes Nuntio does keep diverse Bawdes
for Friars; Sir Thobias Math^w does blow the Coals of dissension with Sir
Killam Digby, and Mr. Indimion Porter, all birds of a Feather, therefore we
must needs go against the Scotch for being not Idolatrous, and will have no
Mass amongst them, yet Cond^ct and Ship Money must be had to go against them,
to reduce them to some obedience.

The Queen Mother wheresoever she has been, there could be no peace or
tranquillity, yet ship and conduct money must be had to keep her and her
Sha^^agg^, who are now well clothed and must have new suits if the City lends
money.

But it was not before now permitted talk of a Parliament to redress these
abuses nor to hear the Scotchs greavances, but ship and conduct money with
that of the City which is the sinewe wherewith we must go to War against them,
and the Papists in the mean time do make a laughing stock of us, and indeed
the Captains and Leiutenants must be all Papists, for none other will go but
them, and therefore they have the command of all the forces.

Sir John Winter by his letter 30. August last to the Pope, desires that his
Holiness Note.
would be pleased to make have for Indulgences and pardons, for that God was
somewhat favorable to the Catholic Religion which did daily increase in the
Kingdom, and without doubt with his Holiness help by prayers, would be
planted here to maturity within two years.

All her Majesty's servants, who do suck the marrow of our estate, do buy
whole streets of houses in Paris and Lordships in the Country, and when they
first came hither they were but poor beggars, and now they keep Coaches: what
houses have they built in the Covent Garden, and what fair houses do they
built in Lincoln In-fields? And the City must lend money to build them in other
men's name.

And to hide all, the Papist will have the Pa^liament to be held at York, and
thereby to undo this poor City.

The second Paper was, as follows.

Gentlemen and others that are Christians assist us for the truth of the
Gospel that is like to be extinguished, viz. The Popes Nuntio does protest to
make us all Roman Catholics, the Ambassador of the Antichrist. Sir John
Winter (whose kindred were of the Gunpouder Treason is his associate and does
trust to work that treachery upon us.

Sir Kellam Dighigh a maintainer of that Society is going to Rome, and the
ship money must defray him, as the Queens Mother and the froggs of Hell in
Somerset House,

Finis Coronet opus*
For Wednesday next.
Besides these papers, the Apprentices of London drew up, and presented this
ensuing Petition to the Lord Major, and Aldermen of London, which was sent to
Secretary Windebanke, and endorsed with his own hand.

To the Right Honorable, the Lord Major, and the Worshipful Aldermen his
Brethren:
The humble Petition of the Apprentices of London, whose Names are under
written, in the behalf of themselves and others.
In all submissive manner shows:
THat it is well known unto this Honorable Court, that there are many thousand
Apprentices in this City, with whom their Parents, and friends have given some
two hundred pounds, some more, some less sums of Money to Merchants, or other
Tradesmen in London, who are bound for several terms of years, to be
trained up in their several Callings. That at the end of their Apprentiship,
they might exercise their Trades according to the Custom and Charter of the
City of London. That by reason of the great number of Monopolies, Patents, and
Impositions upon Commodities and Manufactures, the Trade of the City is so
burdened, that to the Petitioners knowledge, diverse of their Masters are not
able to live of their Trades, to maintain themselves and their families. That
many Factors and others have been made free by Redemption, together with the
liberty that Forraigners use in this City; contrary to the Custom and Laws in
that case Ordained and Provided, whereby your Petitioners evidently perceive,
that they are deprived of all hope to live by their calling, and that the
freedom of this City will not be a benefit, but a burden to them, unless
some speedy course be taken for redress. Further shows: That by the
multitude of Papists, Priest, and Jesuits residing in and about this City, many
weak in Learning, and young in understanding, are subject by their subtle
delusions to be drawn away to Romish Religion. That many fears are upon us by
reason of their audatious and insolent carriages, and demeanor in speeches, and
their furnishing themselves with Arms, threatening the ruin of this City,
which has been famous for exercise of Trade and Religion.

May it therefore please this Honorable Court to take the Premises into due
and serious consideration, and to be pleased to the future encouragement and
livelihood of the Petitioners (who are the inferior members of this City,
speedily to move the Kings most excellent Majesty, that the evils and fears
before specified may be removed, and others in your power may be redressed, that
so your Petitioners may with cheerfulness discharge their duties to Almighty
God, his Sacred Majesty; and their respective Masters.

And your Petitioners shall be ever bound to pray.

About the year 1635. the Priests and Jesuits by means of Windebanke,
Canterbury, Note.
and the Lord Treasurer of England, procured Mr. Rooks the searcher of Dover to
be extrajudicially removed from his place, and two professed Popish Recusants,
Turbervile Morgan and Charles Powell, to be thrust into it, who held it for the
use of Father Leander a Benedictine, and Father Price, General of that Order,
the former once Chamber-fellow to the Archb* of Canterbury in St. John's in
Oxford, and sent over into England, to help the reconciliation with Rome, in
which he was very active. By means whereof the Priests or Jesuits, Papists,
and their Agents, had free Passage till this very Parliament, in and out of the
Realm without search or molestation, conveyed their Intelligences to and from
Rome, and other places with greater security, yea sent over diverse Gentlemen
and Gentlewomen to foreign Monasteries, Seminaries, Nunneries without any
obstacle, dreaming hereupon of nothing else but an absolute triumph over the
Protestants, and a speedy extirpation of their Religion throughout all our
three Kingdoms.

Whiles we engaged in this civil war with Scotland, by the Prelaticall and
Popish par^y; these Conspirators prepared a great Spanish Fleet to invade us,
and join with the Papists in England then in Arms (most of our Captains and
Commanders being professed Papists) to cut all the Heretics and Protestants
throats, while embroyled in a civil war, and busied in murdring one another, as
I have The Royal Popish Favorite, p. 58, 59.
elsewhere manifested: But the admirable Providence of our ever gracious God
secured us from their bloody designs, by stirring up the Hollanders
miraculously to encounter and vanquish that puissant Fleet of Spaniards,
notwithstanding all the assistance and protection they received from us; (at
which the Sea the Breviate of his life, p. 22.
Archbishop of Canterbury and Spanish Faction were exceeding angry and
discontented) and by making a happy Accommodation between the King and our
Brethren of Scotland, June the 17. 1639. before the Spaniards arrival on our
coasts, which was not till about the beginning of October: But this Parliament
was no sooner called, but dissolved again by the Archbishops and Papists
solicitations, and a new war resolved on with more vigor and violency then the
former.

Hereupon Secretary Windebanke, the great Agent for the Archbishop, Queen and
Papists, writing to his Son Tom Wind^banke (then at Paris, negotiating the
Palsgraves enlargement) concerning the Scottish affairs, gives this direction
to him among others,

TOm, Note.
etc. If you see Doctor Smith the Bishop of Cal^edon there, who is a great
confident of the Cardinull, he may be a fit instrument to make some discovery
of the intelligence the Scots hold there, but this must be with great caution,
etc.

Your very loving Father Francis Windebanck.
Drury Lane, 12. December. 1639.

It seems both the Secretary and his Son, had some interest in, and
acquaintance with this Bishop, else they would not make use of him for their
Intelligencer.

These Wars and the Papist forwardness to assist his Majesty in them, gave
great encouragement (as it seems) to Cardinal Barbarino to ingratiate himself
further with his Majesty, as this Clause of Mr. John Graves his letter to the
Archbishop (endorsed with his own hand thus, Recep. March 27. 1640. etc.)
intimates.

MAy it please your Grace, etc. I humbly beseech your Grace to pardon these my
presumptions, and this other Information which I shall assure your Grace, They
have printed at Rome a Book of Fastidius a Britain Bishop, De Vita Christiana,
which THE CARDINAL FRANCISCO BARBARINO INTENDS TO DEDICATE TO HIS SACRED
MAJESTY. Note.
A Book of singular Devotion and Piety, and of great Antiquity, the Author
being a Bishop in England, about 300. years after (...) Savior: Lucas
Holstenius a very learned man, has the care of the Edition; but has not, I
think, as yet finished his Annorations upon it. For the Text, he and I
compared the Manuscript (which is also very ancient) with the printed Copy, and
I find it exactly to agree, etc.

Your Graces most obliged servant, John Greaves.
Ligorn, March 3.

Nay this War and the other designs of the Popish party, notwithstanding the
second Treaty with the Scots, and the present Parliaments summons and meeting,
did so elevate the Papists hopes in England; that Mr. Brudnell and Mr.
Somerset, went purposely over into Italy in November 1640. Note.
to sue for Cardinals Caps upon an expectation of a new creation of Cardinals;
as the passages of these ensuing Letters writ to Secretary Windebancke from
Rome (found among his Papers, and indorsed with his own hand) abundantly
evidence.

RIght Honorable Sir, etc. Mr. Thomas Sommerset is safely arrived at Ligorn,
upon his journey to Rome, I conceive to prosecute his own intentions.

Your honors most affectionat and humble Servant, John Wilford.
The 3. of November, 1640.

SIr, Mr. Thomas Sommerset is at Florence, where Mr. Brudnell is also arrived.
There are some hopes of a Creation before Christmas, the Pope being troubled
with a Catarre, which argues a multiplicity of humors.

Yours, John W.
November. 10. 1640.

Right Honorable Sir,
THe Pope his Catarre arguing a multiplicity of humors dangerous in 74. years
of age, gave occasion to his Physician to suggest so much to Cardinal
Barbarino, and to him, to make serious instance with the Pope for a Creation,
lest some sudden sickness portended by those Catarres, prevent him. This makes
the pretendants expect the complements of their desires about Christmasse; and
indeed there would not be much improbability in it, the creation importing the
Pope and Nephew so much; if the dispute about the nominated by the Crowns were
ended. But as yet, nor France, nor Spain, has had promise of having Abbot
Peretti or Mon Seigni^ur Massarini created; Mr. Sommerset is come to Florence;
upon his arrival here, and his Negotiation, we shall see what hopes, either he
or any others WHO AIM AT OUR ENGLISH CARDINALS CAP MAY PROMISE THEMSELVES,
Note.
etc.

Your Honors most affectionate and humble servant John Wilford.
November. 10. 1640.

About this very time it seems Mr. George Fortescue had some special
Commission and employment at Rome from hence, (it may be to succeed Sir William
Hamilton in his negotiation there, or to solicit a Cardinals* Cap) as this
Letter of his to Secretary Windebanke (found among his papers) imports.

Right Honorable:
Understanding by my Kinsman that your Honor desired light in two points
concerning my self, I was glad of the occasion to present with these lines my
humble service, and to assure your Honor, though unknown, I have ever upon all
occasions pro^essed my self a passionate servant of yours, and shall be ever
most ready to do your Honor all service. To those points:

I affirmed not, that I had leave of his Majesty to follow that particular
business, for I my self knew it not, Note.
till I came to the City, where I met with my Commission and Instructions, not
seen before.

Immediately at my arrival here I addressed my self to Sir William, and
carried my self with that obedience to his intimation, as in that passage I
rather refer my self to Sir Williams report then to my own relation, which
so much would tend to my commendation.

Upon his intimation, I moved my Master to employ some subject of his own in
that business, which very graciously upon my letter he has done.

So that a primo ad ultimum I never meddled in that business.

For my coming to Rome, I might very well conceive no place forbidden me, his
Majesty giving me so fair a leave to serve his Highness.

Neither has the License which his Majesty gave me to travel, any restriction
at all.

In these I presume your Honor will discover with what resignation I have
carried my self all along, and with what obedience to his Majesty's pleasures,
though so suddenly made known unto me, and without any command at all.

As in these, so desire I in all, to give your Honor a true account of my
actions, which God willing shall be ever most suitable to an obedient Subject
to his Majesty, a most zealous Patriot to his Country, and to your Honor a
servant most ambitious of your command.

And shall I understand that my Letters shall be agreeable to your Honor, I
shall make bold to present them sometimes, with the respect of

Your Honors most humble and most obedient Servant, Geo: Fortescue.
Rome this 11. Oct. 1640. A Postscript.
The Physicians having given notice to the Cardinal of the increase of the
Popes Catarrs, Note.
the Cardinal thinks seriously of the new creation of Cardinals, in which it
is thought the Kings shall have the Caps they desire.




This Letter needs no great Commentary, but clearly shows that this Gentleman
met both with a Commission and Instructions from hence at Rome, and was to do
some special service there.

About May 1640. Con the Popes second English Nuncio returning from England to
Rome to be Cardinal, the Pope sent a Nephew of his, Count Roset^ to succeed
him; who being but young and unexperienced, the Pope commended him by this
special Bull, Note.
to the old active English lesuit Sir Toby Matthew* (very intimate with the
Archbishop, Windebank, Wentworth, Lord Deputy of Ireland, the Earl of Arundel,
and most great Lords and Ladies about the Court or city) as to his Angle
Guardian, the copy whereof I found among Windebanks papers (written with his own
hand) which intimates, that the Pope had very great hopes of reducing England
to its ancient vassallage to him in a very short space, by the help of those
female active Amazons and instruments who labored day and night to effect this
design of his.

Dilecto filio Tobiae Matheo Societat. Jesus sacerdoti Urbanus Papa 8.
DIlecte sili salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem. Note.
Ardens animar^m zelus quo ja^ a tot annis in vinea Domini laborando strenuum
te militem exhibuisti, promeretur ut tuae virtu^i debitam laudem reddamus. Sane
magna cum exultatione audivimus See Romes Masterpiece, p. 19, 20. 21.
labores quos sustines ut sedis Apostolicae amplitudinem augeas, and quo
caritatis zelo omnibus omnia fias, ut omnes lucri facias. Decet certe te virum
Apostolicum magni Apostoli exemplo doctum, ut Iudeis sias tanquam Iudeus, and
iis qui sunt sine lege, tanquam sis sine lege, dummodo Sedis Apostolicae
dignitatem promoveas. Ideo cum in magnam Brittaniam mittere statuerimus
dilectum filium Comitem Rosseti, nostrum and sedis Apostolicae cum potestate
legati a lat^re Nunt^^m, Iuvenem zelo Dei accensum, Note.
Apostolicae soli^itudini nostrae satisfactum credidimus, si eum tuae curae
committeremus. Iussimus igitur ut tibi communicet Instructiones sibi datas, and
a dilecto filio and Nepote nostro, Francisco Sanctae Reverendis. Ecclesiae.
Card. Barbarino subscriptas, teque pro eo quo pro sede Apostolica zelo ardes
rogamus, and in quantum opus est, tibi mandamus, ut predictum filium and
Nuntium nostrum, in omnibus dirigas, moneas, instruas, lapsus and errones ejus,
(qui per juventutem facile accidere possunt) corrigas (ut sedis Apostolicae
decor inviolatus permaneat) and ut denique in omnibus ei te Angelum custodem
prebeas. Note.
Magnam certe spem concepimus predictum filium and Nuntium tuis consillis
adjutum, non parvos, in Ecclesia Catholica fructus producturum. Labora igitur,
dilecte fili, opus fac Euangeliste, Ministerium tuum imple, Catholicos zelo Dei
accende, ipsos conforta, sed praecipue Amazones illas quae (ut a dilecto filio
Georgio Conneo audivimius) die ac nocte stre^ue decertant pro dignitate sedis
Apostolicae. Non dissidimus de Domino, neque de potentiae ejus, quia sicut
occasion Q. Eliz^b,
unius ^aeminae, authoritas sedis Apostolicae in Regno Angliae suppressa fuit,
sic nunc per tot Heroicas faeminas (illas imitantes quae-a-Galilea sequebantur
Dominum) societatem ejus assidue sequentes, Note.
BREVI in eode^ Regno restituenda sit. Adhortare igitur illas ut opus aggressum
viriliter prosequantur, and de sede Apostolica (quae devoti Faeminii sexus
peculiarem curam gerit) been mereri pergant. Rogamus patrem Domini nostri Jesus
Christi, ut tibi spiritum sanctum suum mittat, quite in omnibus and per omni^
custodiat, Apostolicam nostramque benedictionem, dilecte fili, iterum atque
iterum tibi impartimur. Datum Romae apud S. Petrum sub annulo Piscatoris,
pridie idus Maii.

About January, 1640. next following this Bull, there was this notable
discovery of the Jesuits and Papists Practices made to the House of Commons, by
one Brown a Popish Priest, which makes some mention of it, and I cannot
pretermit.

The voluntary Confession of John Brown a Romish Priest, of the age of 72.
yeer^ (a prisoner in the Gate House) who being twice examined by a Committee of
the Honorable House of Commons, did thereupon further explicate himself for the
good of the Commonwealth, and ease of the House.
THe Honorable House takes notice of the Party (who delivered this Petition)
Note.
to be one of the most eminent in these Dominions of this Age, who has read
Divinity, Mathematics, and Philosophy in the special Universities of
Christendom; as Salamanca and Alcala in Spain; in Tholous and Avignon in
France; in Rome, Venice and Genoa in Italy; and has preached in special Cities
in these Kingdoms; and in presence of the French King at Paris, and in the Low
Countries, at Antwerpe, Brussells, Dunkirke, etc. who desires to inform
concerning some special points for the Weal of this State, as himself has
observed above fifty years past, which are reduced to these Heads,

First, concerning the Jesuits, and danger they have done to these Kingdoms,
laboring that the Oath of Allegiance might not be taken; And the ways they
use with their Penitents, and projecting of Monopolies, of the Ministers and
Substitutes they use, and the way quite to root them out of these Dominions.

Secondly, the reformation of some things in the Queens Court,; and of some
persons which are fi^ to be removed.

Thirdly, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and of the great damages done, partly
by himself; and in his Court of High Commission.

Fourthly, Note.
of the manner whereby the Pope means to intrude himself into the Temporal
Monarchy of these Kingdoms; and to eschew all future danger in time coming:
What persons are to be removed from hence, and that there should not be
permitted any Resident to remain at Rome for the Queen, nor none here from the
Pope, nor for foraign Princes (to stir sedition in the State) namely France and
Spain.

Fifthly, that Roman Catholics shall be stopped from going over Sea, with their
goods and all.

First, concerning the first, the whole Christian world does acknowledge the
prediction which the University of Paris does foresee in two several Decrees
they made, Anno. 1565. where the society of Jesuits did labor to be members of
the University: Note.
Hoc genus hominum natus est ad interritum Christianae Reipublicae et
subvertionem literarum: that is, This society is erected to be the overthrow of
Christendom and ruin of Learning, as woeful experience has taught us.

They were the only cause of the troubles, which fell out in Muscovia, when
under pretense to reduce the Latin Church, and plant themselves and destroy
the Greek Church (which is only profess't in the Empire of Russiae) the poor
King Demetrius and his Queen, and those that followed him from Polonia, were
all in one night murdered, by the monstrous usurper of the Crown, and the
true Progeny rooted out.

They were the only cause that moved the Swedes, to take Arms against their
lawful King, Sigismund, and chased him to Poland; and neither he nor his
successors were ever able to take possession of Sweden; For the Jesuits
intention was to bring in the Romish Religion, and root out Protestants. They
were the only cause that moved the Polonians to take Arms against the said
Sigismund, because they had persuaded him to marry too Sisters, one after the
other: both of the House of Austria.

They have been the sole cause of the War entered in Germany, since the year,
1619. as Pope Paulus Quintus did tell the General of their Order, called
Vicelescus, for their Avarice, pretending to take all the Church Lands from the
Hussits in Bohemia to themselves; which has caused the death of many
thousands, by the Sword, Pestilence, and Famine in Germany.

They have been the cause of civil Wars in France, during all which time
moving the French King to take arms against his own Subjects the Protestants,
where innumerable people have lost their lives, as the Seige of Rochell (and
other places) will give sufficient proof: For the Jesuits intentions were to
set their society in all Cities and Towns Conquered by the King; and quite to
abolish the Protestants.

They were the cause of the murder of the last King of France.

They were the only Projectors of the Gunpowder-Treason, and their Penitents
the Actors thereof.

They were the only cause (namely Father Parsons that incensed the Pope to send
so many fulminate Breeves to these Kingdoms, to hinder the Oath of Allegiance,
and lawful obedience to their temporal Prince, that they might still fish in
troubled waters.

Their damnable doctrine to destroy and depose Kings, has been the cause of
the Civil Wars; likely to befall these Kingdoms, if God (in his mercy) do not
stop it.

They have been the cause of the Monopolies projected in this Kingdom,
especially concerning Soape, the Forest of Dean, and marking of Granted to
Captain Read, chief Agent for the Jesuits. See Romes Masterpiece, page 20, 21,
2^.
Butter Caske, where all the Parties were Partners, and Confederates of the
Jesuits; as Sir Bazill Brooks, sir John Winter, and a brother in Law of the
said sir John's, that lived in Worcestershire; and Mr. Ployden, whose servant
called Baldwyn (in my presence) about a year since did deliver to Captain
Read (a substitute of the Jesuits) a hundred pounds, to be given to a Jesuit
who lived in his house.

They have their Lay Brethren which collect duly their Annuities and Rents,
and play the Merchants, transporting Cloth and other Merchandises of great
value.

I do know one, Brother in Law to Captain Read, who continually Trades in
Merchandises, who is a Novice of theirs; and one Cu^bert of Lanca^hire, who
collects their Rents; and one Gray of Barwicke: they are protected by the
Spanish Ambassador, and live at his house.

They have their Merchants in London, namely one Evans worth fifty thousand
pounds, who means to make them his Heirs, and dis-inherit his Kindred. Doctor
Moore also is their Agent, and puts out this money to Interest.

This Evans (who was appointed to be Sheriff of London last year) by their
persuasion did go out of London, and refused to accept of it, and by them was
sent into the Country, and lived retired till Michaelmas was past, and escaped
to be Sheriff of Middlesex, and paid no Fine for refusing the said Office,
being till the time was past in obscurity.

See Romes Masterpiece, p. 2^. to 25.
Captain Read a Scottish man, now Lieutenant Colonel in Ireland, (under Col.
Henry Bruce) is also one of their Agents, and lets their buildings in Long
Acre, and other parts of London for their use, especially the fair buildings
in Lincolnssnne-fields, inhabited sometimes by George Gage, and at his death
left to my Lady Gardner; where the Jesuits ordinarily resorted. It is thought
that Mr. Newton who built all those fair houses in Queenes-street is their
Agent, for of himself he was never so able as to build the hundredth part of
them.

It is strange to see the stra^agems which they use with their Penitents
concerning to Oath of Allegiance; If they be poor, they tell them flatly (when
they are demanded to take the Oath) that it is damnable and no ways to be
allowed by the Church; If they be of the richer sort, they say they may do as
their Conscience will inspire them: And there be some of them that make no
Conscience at all, to have it taken so often as they are demanded.

It is no less strange to see, Note.
what great Treasures they have heaped up, and made four Colleges in Flanders,
only of Annuities of their moneys, and such houses as are now appertaining
unto them.

From Mr. Sackvile they got ten thousand pounds, and afterward most miserably
dismissed him, Note.
so that he was constreined to beg: And after great threatening; they allowed
him of all his means, only a hundred pound per annum, during life. The like
dece^t they did use to the whole Regiment of my Lord Vaux in Flanders, which
for the most part were composed of younger Brothers, who at their persuasions,
sold their Lands and Annuities, and gave them their moneys; assuring them that
they should lose nothing; and get all again: But when they came in their great
necessities, and demanded it, they absolutely refused them; and so they saw the
most part of those younger Gentlemen perish for want, in Hospitals.

The like they did with above two hundred Gentlewomen of good extraction, whom
they seduced, and got from them their portions; the least having a thousand
pounds (for less they would not take) and when they came to Flanders, Note.
they were committed to the charge of Mistress Mary Ward, who forced them to
labor with their hands, and live in great misery with bread and water: And at
last (like gallopping Nuns) made thirty of them to take their Journey to Rome
and Naples, and there to teach young Children: When it came to the Popes
knowledge, he made a thundering Bull against them, either to enter into a
Monastry, or else within fifteen days to depart the Territorirs of Rome, and
within forty days all Italy; but afterward this Bull was retracted.

The College of Saint Omers is no less memorable, which was erected by Pope
Gregory the thirteenth, and partly endowed by the King of Spain with great
means: The Jesuits nevertheless (insatiable cormorants) have by their
allurements, got great wealth from England under pretense to nourish some
Students, which in time might labor in this Vineyard; some by Testament,
others by Donation, have left means to bring up, some two, some three, and
paid twenty five, and thirty pounds per annum. But since, they are not willing
to undergo the toil to take it yearly, but have enticed the Donators to give
them, some three, some four, and some five hundred pounds; and in my knowledge
they got in this manner for nourishing above two hundred; so that they have
extorted and got great sums of money from this Kingdom, to the great prejudice
of the State.

The wise State of Venice, foreseeing their ambition to creep into the
knowledge of their Government, Note.
and to Conquer high Territories by tricks, unlawful means, and sleights: By
Order of their great Council, they were adjudged to be banished for ever their
Dominions, and never to return thither till they had the consent of the whole
Senate, which is impossible to be obtained, although the French King and the
Pope have labored sundry times, yet in vain. And also the said State did
declare, That whosoever should speak in their favor (for their
re-establishing) should be degraded of his Honor, and his Posterity after him,
and loose all his goods; and the like should befall to them that send their
children to their colleges.

Would to God such Laws were made in these Dominions, severely to punish the
Parents for sending their Children to Jesuits Colleges: And to conclude, they
should be expelled from all humane society, as unsit to be dealt with, for
their equivocation and mental reservation; never telling the truth, being
mortal enemies to all charity, and the true forerunners of Antichrist,
oppugning all verity, and taking all for themselves without Communication of
good to others: And as for those that are beyond Seas in their Colleges, it
were more then necessary, to make a Decree, that within a short time prefixed,
they should return to their Native soil, under pain of perpetual banishment;
and their Parents to lose their goods and estates. As also to enquire and
learn who they be that do live now at Doway, and St. Omers under them, and
their Parents be brought in question, which may easily be done with small
charges; sending two or three over into those parts, who by degrees may know
the special of them: I omit their juggling with the Emperor, King of France and
Spain, and other Potentates, and with the Popes themselves, as they have
publicly confessed,

Secondly, not to be tedious, I come to the second point: The reformation of
some things in her Majesty's Court, Note.
is so necessary for the quietness of the State, as nothing more; and
therefore labor to remove all impediments that may happen.

It is to be observed, that a great part of the unquietness of this State
comes from thence; Note.
and of some persons about Her Majesty not fit to remain there; For it is
known, Her Majesty does nothing but as she is acquainted with, which she after
delivers to the King, and he to the Council, and when there is any crossing,
there arises Iarres and unquietness.

The actors of those are F. Phillips, her Confessor, and the superior of the
Capuchins.

This last, in times past, was one of the Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem, a
most turbulent spirit, Note.
and one sent by Cardinal Richlien, to be a spy at this Court for the French
Faction, who labors by all means to breed dissentions.

For the French (as I have read in Cardinal D'Ossats Epistles) aim at nothing
more then to make a schism betwixt the English and Scots, that this state may
be weakened and not able to do them harm, the more easily to conquer these
kingdoms.

This unquiet spirit at all occasions, has access to Her Majesty, and
acquaints. Her with all he thinks fit for the French Faction, and when he
thinks it a hard business, then does he entice Father Phillips to present it.
This man being of a quiet and meek nature (yet a great Favorite of Cardinal
Richliens) Does acquaint her Majesty with the business, Note.
and she the King, and obtains by opportunity things which are not fit and
convenient for the State.

Father Phillips, is guided altogether by a Scottish Gray Friar, (who by
degrees has intruded himself to be a Clerk of her Majesty's Chapel) and he
goes by the name of Master Wilson, but his true name is William Tompson, a
Doctor of Divinity, and a most furious and unqviet spirit, and by a nickname
was called Cackafugo shit fire; He rules altogether Father Phillips, insomuch
as he fears him, and dares not disobey him. He rules all the business which
concerns the two Kingdoms, and the most part of the matters for Rome.

By his persuasion, Father Phillips has placed many unfit persons about her
Majesty; He was the only Agent in promoting Sir John Winter to be her Majesty's
Secretary; (he being most addicted to the Lord William Howards Daughter) and so
got into that place.

He was also the cause that Signior Georgio Conne (late Agent of the Pope his
brother) was admitted to be extraordinary Servant to the Queen; NOTE.
A man altogether unworthy of that place, and a most scandalous person, having
at this present three wives alive, as after shall be related; Sundry Priests by
his means (to Father Phillips) have been admitted to be the Queens
extraordinary Servants; Some, by some supposed office or other, as one Master
Laborne, and George Gage (brother to Colonel Gage beyond Seas, in Flanders)
both Oratorian Priests; the one of the French Faction very feditious; the other
of the Spanish; (for his brother is in the King of Spains service.) Both these
under pretense of some service to the Queen, the one extraordinary Sewer (as I
believe) and the other under the name of a Cup Bearer.

There is also one Penricke, brother to him who is now left Resident at Rome;
this Penricke a^ias Iott-Signeur, NOTE.
is sworn extraordinary Servant to her Majesty; a sworn Spaniard, and
Intelligencer for Rome: In respect his brother is Agent for her Majesty; there
being many otherwhich I cannot remember at this time. One Francis Maitland
alias Quashe^ a Scottish Friar Mendicant, and has an hundred Crowns yearly as
her Majesty's Pentioner; a very firebrand Intelligencer at Rome, France,
Flanders, and Spain, with Lyddington, Colonel Sympis, Chambers, and Penricke
at Paris. All these, and sundry others, have Protections of the Queens Majesty
(who are all factious and turbulent spirits) by Father Phillips means, and this
Wilsons instigation, fit to be removed.

Father Phillipt his servant, called John Belfaur a Scot, rules all the rest,
and guides Father Phillipt at his pleasure, and obtains many things not lawful.

It is not expedient at this present, to remove Father Phillips from her
Majesty, it will irritate her greatly, but remove all those that incense him:
he is a very good man, and of a sweet disposition, but easily persuaded, by Sir
Toby Matthewes, Sir John Winter, Master Walter Montague, who are of the
Cabbinet Council.

Thirdly, NOTE.
concerning the Bishop of Canterbury; It is most notorious, he has bin the
special cause of the troubles in Scotland, and jarre^ betwixt them and the
English. For when he went to the North with His Majesty, he being of a high and
lofty spirit, remarking the government of the Church of Scotland, began his
Innovation by setting up of Altars, Episcopal Robes, and Organs, which were
not seen since the birth of King James, more than eighty years before in that
Kingdom; with which they were much in^ensed. Insomuch that when the common
people, upon a Sunday perceiving His Majesty to go on foot, from His Palace of
Holy-Rood House, to the Church at Edenborough, and so to return, and all His
Nobles with Him; My Lords Grace and the Bishop of Ely were seen to go in their
Coach; they exclaimed on them and said, NOTE.
How dare you presume to go so, when our Sovereign goes on foot; You are the
Rags and servants of the Pope.

That same time he did move his Majesty to make that Church a Cathedral, and
appoint a Bishop where was never any before; and so the people were more and
more stirred up.

At his return from thence, he moved His Majesty to erect a High Commission in
all the Bishoprics of that Kingdom, by virtue of a Proclamation which he
extorted from His Majesty in August (If I be not deceived) some five years ago;
wherein was Ordered, that here in England the Bishops Courts should have not
Subordination to any other Courts, no not to His Majesty's own Council, but
should proceed without any dependency, not so much as to use His Majesty's Arms
in their Seals, but their own, and so deprive His Majesty of His Supremacy,
which was never done since the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

So soon as he had obtained that of His Majesty, he in all haste sends this
Proclamation to all the Bishops of Scotland, who being blown up with pride
(following the Archbishops footsteps) began to erect a High Commission Court in
their Diocesses, and called to it the Gentry and Nobles, punishing them for
trifling things; and sining and confining them to the farthest part of the
Kingdom, from Galloway to Cathnes, near three hundred miles. A cruelty never
practiced in Scotland before in any Age.

Nay, the became so insolent, being made Privy Councillors (by the Archbishops
solicitation of His Majesty,) Note.
And the Archbishop of Saint Andrews, being made great Chancellor of that
Kingdom (never practiced this three hundred years) that in open Council Table
they gave the lie to the Peers of the Land; Namely, to the Earl of Argile;
which affront was done by one Sedeserfe now Bishop of Galloway, and resident at
this present in London, where began the fire to appear, which before this was
but smoke.

The Nobles, Gentry, and Commons made a league, which they called a Covenant,
and combined together for the rooting out of Bishops, and Conservation of their
ancient Liberties, upon which is ensued a million of miseries, putting both the
Kingdoms to excessive charges, exhausting the Kings Coffers, and oppressing
the people.

I believe, If my Lord Archbishop were merely questioned, it would be found, he
stirred up His Majesty to make up his Army two several times, Note.
which has bin the occasion of the utter ruin of two Shires, Northumberland
and the Bishopric of Duresme, which loss will not be repaired in an hundred
years.

These firebrands Bishops of Galloway and Rosse, who are Clyents to Canterbury,
and altogether guided by him; it is more than expedient that they and other
Incendiaties were given to the Scotts Commissioners to betryed by their
Parliament. But I believe Rosse will fly to Ireland, where His Majesty has
given him a Bishopric: And Galloway will be forced to hide himself in some
Island and shake off his Robes, or become a Peddler in Poland, as his Father was
before him.

One Sandall, a Clerk of the Rolls told me, he saw my Lord Sterling, Secretary
of Scotland, (Agent at Court for the Bishops) viewing very narrowly the Rolls,
to see the original Institutions of the High Commission; which he would not
have done, had he not bin informed by my Lords Grace.

I may not omit to let you know, how of his large liberality, he has given to
those firebrand ministers (refuges in this Kingdom) at sundry times, large
and prosuse charity, which he would never have bestowed on the poor Clergy of
his Diocese.

I come to his Government, wherein he has bin like to a Cam^lion of diverse
colors; now punishing of Roman Priests, but poor ones, for the fattest he
protected and cherished without all measure; As Father His ancient
chamberfellow in St. John's in Oxford.
Leander Superior of the Benedictines Master Flanders, and Master Price, after
Leanders death; and Master Gascoyne, and the whole Order of the Jesuits, as
hereafter shall be related.

The poor Recusants for going to heat Mass, or only upon suspicion, were
cruelly used by him; but the chief he tenderly loved and feasted, as Sir
K^nelme Digbie, and others, to what end you may conjecture.

Afterward* he took a fit to punish severely, Anabaptists, Familists, and
Brownists, sometimes one, sometimes another; He followed the steps of Cardinal
Wolsey, and intended, (because he could not be Po^e at Rome) to be a Patriarcke
in these Kingdoms; To which end ('it is well known) he did so credit and grace
Father Leander (aforesaid) cherishing him above the rest, giving him his ear
at all times, remaining here at London publicly till his death; and after him
Price, NOTE.
and Gascoyne aforementioned.

At the coming of Father His old Chamberfellow in Oxford.
Leander, he began to look cheerfully upon Recusant^; then began he to erect
Altars, to take away the Communion Table, to make all kneel when they took the
Sacrament, to be all uncovered at Divine service, to stand up at the reading of
the Gospel, bow at the name of Jesus, and to consecrate an old Church a new,
as that of Saint Gylses, with many other Arch-trike^, that he might be in the
Popes and the Queens favor, and so continue in his Majesty's good liking.
Then began he to use rigout against Puritan Ministers, calling them into his
high Commission some for Symony, as Mr. John Ward [and others] of Suffolk; some
for contradicting the Bishop of Norwich; others for Heresy, as one Doctor
Everd, Chaplin to the Earl of Holland.

Then began he to practice his Excommunications and aggravations against Sir
Robert Willoughby (Son in Law to the Bishop of Worcester) and Mr. Hope a
Scottish man, Cup Bearer to his Majesty, for contemning his Citations. In the
end, such were his Actions, that he is an Admiration to the whole world for
Inconstancy. At the last he became so outrageous, as were never any of his
Predecessors, conventing before him the Bishop of Lincoln; whose heavy hand
and Dragon-like wrath he felt many years, being in Prison in the Tower of
London.

So was Bishop Goodman soundly whipped, for refusing to subscribe to his Canons,
being laid in the Gate House; so that he became the wonder of this Age.

Noe less wonderful has he been in his Vatican at Lambith, sitting in his
Graceful Throne, compassed with Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Doctors,
Proctors, Notaries and Registers, guarded with a multitude of Tipstaves, from
all Prisons in and about London, besides a hellish Guard of Promoters, In his
Tribunal sitting in his Corner-Cap, Lawne sleeves and R^tchet; No Pope is so
glorious on most festival days, as his Grace is on Thursdayes in term time.

It Is a petious thing worthy of consideration to see, what Injustice is don in
that Court by his own knowledge; and what extortion and exaction is used by
his Officers. There is not a more corrupt Court in the world, wherein Innocence
is punished, and public sins countenanced; the greatness of the extortions
of that Court cannot be expressed; some are a whole year before they can be
heard, and at the last for a fatherly. Benediction, are remitted to Sir John
Lamb and Doctor Ducke, I will instance in two parties.

The Lady Willoughby spent in suit in less then two years (as she related to
me) five hundred pound^ and above, and all tended, that her Husband should
wear a white sheet at the Church door. When [God knowes] her self deserved
no less; For Doctor Ryves assured me, she was declared innocent by Bribery.

The other was Mr. Stapleton, Nephew to the Earl of King stone, who claimed a
certain Lady to be his Wife, having married her before two witnesses, and used
the formal words of Matrimony; And seen by the said witnesses lie together in
naked bed; yet by force of money he was divorced from her, having spent in the
suit, in Charges only, three hundred pounds.

In like sort Francis Conne [brother to Signiour Georgio Conne] now Cup Bearer
extraordinary to her. Majesty, was convented at the high Commission, for having
married one Mistress Steward, his Country Woman in Scotland, and had married
another, (one Mistress Wiseman) in England, with whom he cohabited here in
London.

The Scottish Woman claymed him, but she being poor and none to protect her,
after two years suite he was declared to be Wisemans husband, money was his
Cause for himself assured me, it cost him in gifts, feasting his Advocates and
Clerks, above 150. pounds. What intolerable Injustice was this, it being
notoriously known that the Scottish Woman was his wife?

The chief Extortioners are, the Registers of the Court, Stephen Knight, and
his companion (Brother in law to Sir John Limb.

When his Grace foresawe, the Parliament would call them in question, he
presently deposed them, and made the said Knight principal Proctor in his
Court, who fearing to be questioned for the same misdemeanors fled with his
whole Family to Norwitch, and there bought of that Bishop the Registers office,
and so is like to continue his accustomed trade of extortion, except this
Honorable Court call him coram to answer his innumerable oppressions which are
to be seen in the Registers book of the high Commission.

He has two bonds of mine, and two letters of Attorney made by me to him; His
ordinary course was this, to take for every one twenty shillings, for that he
should have had but two shillings sixpence, which extended to a great sum in
the year; And out of Term he had Fees for six Clerks, and so many Promoters,
which went throughout England, plaging the poor, and enriching themselves and
their Master Knight.

Likewise, the other extortioner was Bonnyragge, the greatest Knave in the
Country; For money he would do any thing; He carried in his Pouch a number of
Citations, and when he pleased for money dismissed any one; A Master Quashet,
Mr. Smith the Jesuit, and Mr. Fisher of the same Order; And one Cutbert, a lay
brother of theirs, of whom I spoke before; A great number of lay persons
Recusants, whom I know have been dismissed by him some for forty shillings some
for twenty shillings, but the least was ten shillings: Of a great part of
Anabaptists, and Brownists, some that were poor he imprisoned; But the rich
for money escaped, as themselves will depose. It is fit this Bonnyragge, and
also the Bishop of Londons Pursivants be called in question with many other of
his Promoters, and under Officers; As Arthur Huffe living in Saint Peter's
street in Westminster.

concerning the Popes aspiring to the temporal government of these Kingdoms,
NOTE.
and the manner how he proceeds, which I will clearly set down.

You shall be informed what his Ambition was, seeing himself exalted to Saint
Peter's Chair, being before Cardinal protector of the Scottish Nation. And
which is ominous; the two former Popes Clement the eight, and Paul the fifth,
his Predecessors, having been: in minoribus protectors of Scotland. He thought
to do something more to reduce both (under one King) to the Romish Church. NOTE.
And as Clement the seventh had by his miscarriage been the Cause of this
di^coriation, from the obedience of the sea of Rome, he might be the means of
their reconciliation. Wherefore he was no sooner made Pope but the same day
with his own hand (a thing not accustomed) he writ a letter to King James, of
good memory, showing his election and promotion to saint Peter's Chair and
offering his correspondency with his Majesty; at the same instant he nominated
Signiour Georgio Conne a Scottish youth (who was School fellow with his Nephew
Signior Francisco, afterward Cardinal) who should inform him of all
important business of England and Scotland.

This Signior George, was a very fair youth of some fifteen years of age,
and of a fair disposition, having also access to his Holiness, (you may
understand my meaning for in minority being Legate in P^lonia, he was much
suspected of incontinency.) And as soon as any English, Scottish or Irish
Runagates came to Rome, he went to their lodgings in the Popes behalf, and
brought them of his Holiness Bread, and Wine, and other rarities, as Boligman,
Sauseges and other dainties; letting them see all the Antiquities of Rome, and
their Churches, though they were not of their Religion, and feasting them on
the Popes charge when they visited the seven Churches, as the Lord Craven and
others; And now the Pope with his politic brain, began to excogitate the
means, to have correspondency with the King: by fortune there was at Rome a
Hollender expert in drayning of Lands to make the Marish grounds pasturable and
arrable; who having got access to his Holiness, Informed him that all the
Marish grounds in the champaigne of Rome (which was above six miles) might be
drained and made profitable.

The Pope [for his profit] gave a great ear, and understanding by this man the
means to effect if in a short time, that he needed great store of men to
work, and that of all Nations the English were most expert, The Pope presently
takes hold thereof, apprehending it, as a fit occasion to treat with our K.
wherefore he sends hither the Hollander in post have, by whom Signior Georgio
writ to sundry of his frinds, viz. to some of the Queens Court, Note.
by whose means [at last] he got access to his Majesty signifying from whence
he came, and the great profit which would redouud to this Kingdom, if he would
permit some two thousand Familyes of his People, with their Wives and Children
to go and inhabit there, and after, successively more, For he had gotten
promise of the Pope, that they should not be troubled, but use their
consciences without any vexation at all: More, this Hollander signified to his
Majesty, the great Commodity it would be to the trade in those parts, for
transporting from hence, Cloth, pewter, lead and other Commodities, and from
thence Wines, Raysins, Oils, Capers and other fruits, with a great quantity of
Allome.

The business is remited to the Council to consider, if his Majesty might
have correspondency with the Pope, Note.
as a temporal Prince, as he has with other Princes and States, (who are not
so potent) as Holland Venice Florence, etc? After mature deliberation it was
concluded, he might, for the causes prementioned.

The Hollander returns with speed to Rome, showing how well he had dispatched,
together with His Majesty's Declaration, and Order of the Council, with
Letters and answers of sundry persons to Signior Georgio, whom he had feasted
at Rome, and knew of the Queens Court, being his Countrymen.

Then was it thought fit by those about Her Majesty, to begin the Treaty, and
to break that holy Ice for the Popes honors sake; then was nominated Sir
Robert Douglas (Couzin Germain to the Marquess Douglas) an ancient friend to
Father Philips, and Signior Georgio; a disc^eet Gentleman, who had much
travailed, and was expert in the Italian, French, Spanish, and Germain
languages, A Courtier, yet modest and discreet.

But the Cardinal Richleau must be the man, Note.
who should have the honor to direct him, and to be sent by him to begin the
correspondency betwixt his Holiness and the Queen, (for in all this business
the King must not be mentioned) from whom with many Letters, this Gentleman
goes to the Court of France; where after few days he is dispatched by the said
Cardinal, with money to make his journey and bear his charges at Rome, where
graciously he is accepted of the Pope, his Nephew, and others of the Popes
Cabinet Council.

There he remained above one year, and after a good viaticke was dismissed, and
returned to London, with a few gifts (but small ones) to her Majesty, Father
Philips, and others of that Function; As some Meddulls Roscer^es, Agnus Deus
and Pictures.

After this Gentleman's departure from Rome, was presently sent hither an
Oratorian Priest called Signior Georgio See the Popes Nuncio.
Panzano, under pretense with a Breve from his Holiness, addressed to the
Clergy, secular and regular, and Lay-Catholikes of the two Kingdoms of
England and Scotland; The substance of that Breve was, That his holiness was
verry sorry, for such jarres and divisions See here p. 100. 106. to 110.
between the secular and the Clergy, to the great prejudice of the Catholic
Church, and for that respect (having a ^atherly care of Souls, in these
Kingdoms of England and Scotland) he had sent expressly, that Reverend
Father, Georgio Pansano one of his Family to compose and reconcile them if he
could.

This man at Paris, quits his Priests Robes, and dressed himself in secular
Apparel; his shaven Crown is covered with a monstrous Periewig: he writes to
Father Philips, who is to be the primum mobile and director of all, who sends
to him at Paris, as to an Italian Gentleman desirous to see the Kingdom; A
pass was delivered him to Gallie, where he hires a baryne and brings with him
two Raggamuffian young boys, and one Interpreter, who was presently sent back
to save charges.

At his first coming to London he lodged at the Italian Ordinary in the
Strand; but shortly (being disturbed by much resort of pe^^ons of great
quality which repaired to him) he took Chambers, in one Signior Germynes
House (a Lombard by Nation) living then near to the New exchange, as you pass
to the Covent Garden: this Agent had sundry meetings with the superiors of the
Regular Order, but to those meetings the Jesuits would not come, though called
and often desired by the Popes Agent; At last it was concluded, they should not
meddle with any Court business, they should speak honorably of the King and
Queen, and be sparing to discorse of the Oath of Allegiance; yet never to
undertake that it was altogether unlawful.

This Agent returned having negotiated his principal business, which was to
have See the Popes Nu^cio.
Signior Georgio (the Popes best friend) to be sent hither, which her Majesty
obtained of the King, with great importunity. Pansano having remained here,
about two years, and having had his Viaticum and good presents from her
Majesty, and Catholics of the better sort, went away; In whose place
succeeded Signior Georgio, bringing with him a great Breve, declaring him to be
Apostolical Nuntio; and in his company, the Lord Don Luces brother, and his
Pedagogue, one Connigham, Nephew to Sir David Connigham, his Majesty's receivor
in Wales.

This Nuntio, (but styled after inter-Nuntio, for not incensing the States)
comes hither in May, See the Pops Nuncio, and Romes Masterpiece.
and finding her Majesty at Homeby in Northamptonshire, repayring thither, he
was presently admitted, and then likewise gained audience of the King.

To the Queen, he presents rare gifts, some relics of Saints, meddalles, a
few of Gold and Silver, with the Popes picture stamped on them, and other
trifles of small value; In (...) whereof, she sends to the Pope, a great
quantity of scarlett to vest his Holiness, his Nephew, and the other
Cardinals of the English Faction; He receives an hundred for one.

Here, he visits the great Ladies and Gentlewomen of the Court; He stays all
the Progress at Northampton; returning to London, it is worthy of consideration
to observe his carriage day and night, courting of Ladies and Gentlewomen.

In Term time, all the Gentry of both Sexes, yea and poor women of any
fashion that had scarce means to bring them to London; and were come thither to
be cured of the Kings evil, must likewise visit him.

Such were his compo^^ments here, that I am ashamed to relate them. His
nightlie See Romes Master pecce.
Conversation abroad, and Conventicles with Ladies; Sir John Winter, Her
Majesty's Secretary, Sir Toby Matthew, Sir Kenelme Digby, and Master Walter
Mountague, were his Cabinet Council; This last aspyring to be Cardinal after
Signior Georgio's death.

Yea, he was so impudent and shameless, as to visit one of the greatest
Ladies of the Kingdom alone, who being found by her Husbond, and demanded by
him, what made him so bold, he was in fear to have been precipitated out of
the Window; This his own Secretary told me: Two hours before day (In Winter)
his manner was to visit Ladies and Gentlewomen, and to enquire of them how they
slept that night. After three years and two months, impatient to stay any
longer (aspyring to a Cardinals Hatt) laden with great store of Jewels and
Gold (which he got, partly of the monyes which Recusants lent to the King, Note.
to assist him in his Northern expedition; and partly given him by Ladies and
Gentlewomen, amounting to above ten thousand pounds) he returned to Rome,
spitting his lungs; But the truth is, he was soundly paid with the French
disease: A brave instrument to reduce this Realm to the Roman Religion!

He was very lavish and prodigal in his gifts, spending many thousand pounds,
fitter to have been bestowed on his poor kindred, and beggarly Parents in
Scotland who had scarsely to nourish them.

The Jesuits likewise collected from their Penitents, Note.
and got (at least) two parts of that money to themselves.

To return to the Pope, so soon as he had Intelligence, that his Ganymede and
Creature was received with such honor, he thought he had got already, the
temporal Monarchy of great Brit^aine, making his Eldest See Romes Masterpiece.
Nephew Francisco protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and erecting a
particular Congregation for the matters of these Kingdoms; whereof his said
Nephew was President, and two other Cardinals joined with him, See Romes
Master piece.
and a new Secretary, and other Prelates of that Court, his Councillors.

He graciously entertained Master Walter Mountague keeping him in his Palace,
and sending him abroad in his Nephews Coach; And others of any note, as my
Lord of West-Meath an Irish Baron, and others.

He made Signior Georgio Pat^iarch of Jerusalem, an Honor without any Revenew.

No less was his pride puffed up, when Sir William Hamilton (brother to the
Earl of Abercorue, and Cozen to the Marquess Hamilton, was sent Ambassador
from our Queen to that Court; whose carriage was like to Signior Georgio's
here, carrying clothed in man's apparel thorough England, Scotland, France, and
Italy, his sweet heart Engenius Bonny, a daughter of the Yeoman of His
Majesty's Wine Celler.

After Signior Georgio, he sent hither a new Nuntio, Count Rossetti, Note.
a Noble man of Ferrara, but of better carriage, then his other deceased, whom
he intended to make Cardinal, in leiu of the other defunct.

As soon as Walter Mountague heard of Signior Georgio's death, he sent his
Chaplain Post to Rome, Note.
with Letters from Her Majesty, entreating his Holiness to make him Cardinal;
The Popes answer was, he would gladly condescend to that motion, If she would
oblige her self to make an estate to him for his maintenance conformable to a
Cardinal; So was it dashed; And so will all correspondency be hereafter with
that Court, by the wise and grave Council of the Parliament. So that Master
Penricke, Agent in that Court for the Queen be called back; And a certain
Knight, of the Order of Saint John of Jerusalem, (whom Count Rosetti intends to
send hither, to keep correspondency) be likewise dismissed from hence; which
done, all that Project will end in smoke; Always provided, that Master
Mountague, Sir Toby Matthew, Sir Kenelme Digby, Sir John Winter, be removed and
barred from going to Rome, or to any of his Holiness Territories; Not yet to
Italy, for fear of sedition, and keeping correspondency with their associates.

I heard a French Gentleman of good worth say, that he had seen a Breve from
Rome, with this Inscription, Tobiae Mattheo Sacerdoti soci^tatis Jesus, which
is, To Toby Matthew Priest of the Order of Jesus; wherein (inter alia) was,
Confirma Amazonas illas quae strenue laborant in vinea pro Christo. Note.
First, Confirm those Amazonian Court Ladies (that is) those brave Catholic
Catamountaines of the Popish faction, that labor ^ustily for the advancement
of Popery.

Touching the fifth point, in my Judgment, Roman Catholics, especially those

This voluntary Relation of this ancient Intelligent. Popish-Priest (which I
find to be generally true and real, by orher Letters, and Intelligence, and
concurring with the Plot discovered to the Archbishop and King Himself in my
Romes Masterpiece, in most particulars touching the Jesuits, Scottish
troubles, Popes Nuncioes, and other Instruments of his here nominated) gives
much luster and confirmation to many of the premises and some ensuing passages;
therefore I could not well omit it, though it be somewhat tedious.

But to proceed: the 2d. intended Civil War against the Scots ceasing contrary
to the Prelates expectations, through the overruling providence of God, both in
the rude Common Soldiers, who refused to serve under their Popish Commanders
(some of whom they murdered) declayming against the Bishops, breakiwg down
their New-Rayles, Altars, Crucifixes, in diverse places, and in sundry of our
Nobles who Petitioned His Majesty for a Parliament, and New Treaty with the
Scotts together with the General opposition of Ministers and people against
the new Canons and, etc. Oath, which put a period to this War without
bloodshed: hereupon there were sundry New desperate Plots, Conspiracies,
Counsels entered into by the Popish and Prelaticall party to undermine this
Parliament soon after it was first Assembled, and imbroyle all our Kingdoms
in New Civil Wars and distractions more dangerous then the former; of which
I shall give you a short hi^, out of the Commons Journall, and some other
papers, letters, examinations which have come unto my hands.

February 10. 1640. There were four Gen^lemen of the House of Commons, went up
to the Lords Diurnall Occurrences p. 36.
to discover a great design on foot among the Papists in England, Ireland,
and Wales. That there were in Lancashire one thousand five hundred, NOTE
in Ireland, eight thousand Papists in Arms, and many thousands in
South Wales, and North Wales, well paid and provided for by the Earl of
Strafford, Earl of Worcester, and others; and did use frequently to go to
Mass at the sound of the drum.

There was also a great Nobleman in Wales that bought up all the Provisions he
could, kept Corn enough for three years, and got all the Arms he could, and
had a strong Commission to furnish whom he would: And there was also a Letter
brought to the house, as from Secretary Windebanke in the Queens name, to have
all the Papists fast every Saturday for the good success of that design.
Whereupon there was also this day an order made, that all Judges in the next
Circuits at the Assizes, should put the Law in execution against Jesuits and
Priests, and make return of the proceedings herein to the Parliament.

Upon this occasion, The Diurnall Occurrences p. 42.
February 22. There was a Message from the Lords for a Conference with both
Houses, for the disbanding of the Irish Army, and the removing of Papists from
the Court and the English Papists in the Queens household.

The Diurnal Occurrences. page 93. 94.
May 5. 1641. There was discovered to the House of Commons a strange
conspiration in agitation, against the whole body of the Kingdom, for the
landing and bringing in of a French Army, to which our English Army should be
joined, which were all to meet by the 22. of this Month. whereupon the House
sent out diverse warrants for Master Henry Perry, Colonel Goring, Sir John
Suckling, Master Henry Jermyn, and others as conspirators therein, to appear
before the House of Commons the next day.

There was also intelligence given to the House of Commons of 1400. barrells of
Powder that were prepared in readiness, and laden by stealth, to be carried
away by the appointment of the Conspirators, upon which the Commons appointed
some of the House to make further enquiry thereof.

Hereupon most of the parties upon this discovery fled into France, and had
passes to transport them without search from the King.

May 14. The Diurnal Occurrences page 102*
There was a Report in the Commons House of a Jesuit, That should say (it
being noised the Parliament House was on fire) the time was not yet come, but
it would be so ere long; and of another that should say, there would be many
fatherless Children in London very shortly: upon which there were more
warrants sent out for the attaching of those Jesuits.

May 19. Ibid. page 106
There was one Newton a Priest an English man, which belonged to the Spanish
Ambassador, committed to the Gate House, also a Message was sent to the Lords,
desiring that the French Letters might be stopped this week, as they were the
last, and viewed by a Committee, which was accordingly done, the Committee
reporting they had both weeks received intelligence of diverse dangerous
plotts in agitation against the State, but they have not as yet made a full
report in disclosing of the same.

Upon this danger from Recusants, Ibid. page 113 114.
the Committee appointed to provide carefully against their future attempts,
May 29. presented their resolutions to the House That if any man entertained a
Popish servant knowing him to be so, and lodged him but one night, he should
be imprisoned without Bail, or mainprize, during the Kings pleasure; But if
he knew it not, for the present, if upon after knowledge of it, if he keep
him in his House a months time, he should not only be imprisoned, but be
fined according to the contempt. Likewise if any man married a Recusant, and
had issue by Her, his Children should not only be Christened after the manner
of the Church of England, but they should be also brought up in the Protestant
Religion. In the willing neglect of which, they were not only to be
imprisoned, but fined for their contempt.

Also if any man knew where any Armor Powder or other Ammunition which belonged
to any Recusant was kept and gave not notice to the next Justices of Peace
thereof, but concealed it, they likewise to be imprisoned, without Bail or
mainprize, and fined for their contempt.

After this May 2. Ibid. page 117.
one Sanford was committed to prison by the House, for enticing a young
Gentlewoman to go beyond Sea to be a Nun: And Master Preston and Master Allen
committed, for refusing both the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy.

June 10. 13. 16, etc. Ibid. p. 12^; 137. 140. 151 153, 154.
The Conspiracy of Master Iermyn and the rest out of diverse Letters and
examinations was reported to the House to consist of these particulars. 1. To
bring in a French Army, and to surrender Portsmouth into their hands. 2. To
seize upon the Tower of London: 3. To bring in the Northern Army to London to
overawe the Parliament, to support Episcopacy (the Bishops and Episcopal
Clergy being to maintain 2000. Horses for this purpose) and uphold the Kings
Prerogative and Revenew to the full as it was formerly. 4. To keep the Irish
Army on foot from being disbanded, till the Scotts were first disbanded.

June 24. 1641. There was a Conference at a Committee of both Houses managed by
Master Pym, consisting of diverse heads, whereof the fourth head was touching
the Queens most Excellent Majesti^ which contained diverse particulars.
1. THat His Majesty, Diurnall Occurrences near the end.
may be pleased by advise of his Parliament, to persuade the Queen to accept
some of the Nobility, and others of trust into her Majesty's service, into such
places as are now in her disposal.

2. That no Jesuit nor none of other Orders, what Country men soever, whether
French or Italian, be received into Her Majesty's service, nor any Priest of
His Majesty's Dominions, English, Scottish, or Irish, and that they be
restrained from coming to Court.

3. That the College of Capuchines at Somerset House may be dissolved, and
sent out of the Kingdom: these two last mentioned concerning the Queen,
Priests, Jesuits and Capuchines, for these particular reasons.

1. Public danger, and scandal of this Kingdom, and peace of the Kingdom.

2. Dis-affection of some of those wicked conspirators is expressed in two
Letters, which Letters were here read openly.

3. A particular Letter of Father Philips there also read.

4. Because of the Priests, Jesuits, and the College, there are diverse great
quantities of gold transported frequently.

4. The fourth particular that concerns the Queen, is upon special occasion
of his Majesty's absence: That their Lordships will be pleased to join with
us to advise the King, that some of the Nobility, and others of quality, with
competent ^uardes, may be appointed to attend the Queens person against all
designs of Papists, and of ill affected persons, and of restraining resort
thither in his absence.

5. The fifth Head concerns the Kings Children; that some persons of public
trust and well affected in Religion, might be placed about the Prince, who may
take care of his education, and the rest of his Children; especially in matters
of Religion and liberty.

6. The sixth Head concerned such as come into the Kingdom with Titles OF BEING
THE POPES NUNCIO, that it may be declared, that if any man come with
instructions into this Kingdom, from the Pope of Rome, he shall be in case of
high Treason, NOTE.
out of the Kings Protection, and out of the protection of the Law. And there
is notice upon very good grounds, that Count ROSSETI (The Popes Nuncio) does
yet continue in the Kingdom, AND YET RESORTS UNTO THE COURT: (notwithstanding
the Kings former Promise to the Houses, to send him hence.)

A little after Father Philips the Queens Confessor writ a very Seditious
Diurnall Occurrences. p. 160, etc.
Letter to Mr. Mountague into France, intercepted, and produced to be read in
the House of Commons, by Master Pym, the 25. of June 1641. to this effect, to
stir up the French against the PARLIAMENT.
This good King and Queen are left very naked; NOTE.
the Puritans if they durst, would pull the good Queen in pieces: Can the good
King of France suffer a Daughter of France his Sister, and her Children to be
thus affronted? Can the wise Cardinal endure England and Scotland to unite,
and not be able to discern; in the end it is like they will join together and
turn head against France? A stirring Active Ambassabour might do good service
here; I have sent you a Copy of the Kings Speech on Satturday last, at which
time he discharged his conscience, and was advised to make that speech by the
Earl of Bristoll, and the Lord Sey, but I believe there is a mistake in the
writing, and that it should have bin the Lord Savill. This Speech did much
operate to the disadvantage of the Earl of Strasford. for the Commons were
much thereby incensed and inflamed against him; and this brought forth the next
day being Monday, a Protestation which was taken in both Houses of Parliament;
of the same nature, but rather worse than the Scottish Covenant.

The Londoners who are very boisterous, came upon Monday 5 or 6000. and were so
rude, that they would not suffer the Lords to come and go quietly and peaceably
to their houses; but threatened them, that if they had not justice, and if they
had not his life, it should go hard for all those that stood for him, following
them up and down, and calling for Justice, justice, justice.

There was in the House of Commons, fifty six that denied to pass the Earl
of Straffords Bill, their names were taken, and they were fixed upon posts in
diverse parts of London, and there was written over the head, these are
Straffordians, the betrayers of their Country.

By this means it came to pass that the Lords and Judges were much
affrighted, and the most of his friends in the Lords House forsook him all;
the Popish Lords did absent themselves, the Lord of Holland and Hartford were
absent, so was Bristol and others; Savill and the Duke only stuck close and
faithfully to him and some sew other Lords. God knows the King is much
dejected, the Lords much aff^ighted, which makes the Citizens and House of
Commons show their heads: some have braved little less than to unthrone His
Majesty, who if he had but an ordinary spirit, might easily quash and
suppress these people. Our good Queen is much afflicted, NOTE.
and in my conscience, the Puritans if they durst would tear her in pieces;
this cannot be for the honor of France, to endure a Daughter of that Nation,
and her Children, should be thus oppressed and affronted.

The Earl of Holland is made General of the Army, whither he is gone down;
the E. of Newport Master of the Ordnance, Belfore Lieverenant of the Tower has
proved an arrant Traitor to the King, NOTE.
who commanded him upon his Allegiance to receive a Captain and 1000 men into
the Tower, which he most traitorously refused to do. One clause is omitted
which should have bin placed in the middle of the Letter, which was to this
effect: That there was a Report in London, that the Parliament House was on
fire, whereupon there was more than 1000 people very suddenly gathered
together, whereby you may easily perceive the height and (...) of the peoples
affections. May 6. Anno Dom. 1641.

There was another Letter sent from one Robert Phillips, one of the Queens
Priests ( supposed to Master Mountague^) to this effect; You may expect some
company with you ere long, Crofts, Suckling, Piercy, Iermaine are gone; all
things here are in great incertainties, Protestation is made, and taken by both
Houses, much like, but much worse than the Scottish Covenant. I sent you some
money by Mr. Iermaine; but now that he is gone, I make some doubt whether he
might be mindful of you to take it with him. I have spoke to the Queen about
your occasions, and will do what I can, though I am not able to undertake much.

Your loving friend, FRAN: PHILIPS.


Hereupon Father Philips was sent for by a Messenger to appear before a
Committee Ibidem p. (...).
that afternoon to be examined about it.

The Messenger coming to White Hall, and finding him, acquainted him
therewith, who said he would go in and eat something, and come presently and
go with him.

But by a back door he went and acquainted the Queen with his sending for; and
after some stay, came and told the Officer that he had bin with the Queen, who
had commanded him that he should not go till she had spoke with the King, and
that he would obey her command before the Parliament. Which being related to
the House of Commons, they were much distasted at it, and sent another Warrant
to apprehend, and bring him forthwith the next day as a delinquent.

There was also a Warrant sent by the Sergeant at Arms for the Popes Nuncio,
NOTE*
and to bring him likewise before the House, but he was not to be found. The
next day, the King sent a Message to the Commons, promising that the Popes
Nuncio should be presently sent away out of this Kingdom. Presently hereupon,
the Officer was again sent with a Warrant to apprehend Father Philips, and
waiting for him at White Hall, complaint had bin made (as it seemed) to the
King about it, and the Lord Chamberlain at the Kings Command, sent for the
Officer to examine him, by what Authority he came within the Verge of the
Court, to Attach any one; who showing his Warrant, desired he would trust him
with it to show the King, which the Officer did; And the Lord Chamberlain soon
after returning, gave this answer; That His Majesty would satisfy the House
about it, if Philips did not appear. But in the afternoon, the said Philips
appeared before the Committee, and was examined, and commanded to attend the
House of Commons the next day. After which Father Philips was committed
prisoner to the Tower, and these Articles of Impeachment drawn up against him;
most of them comprised in Brownes Relation.

The Impeachment and Articles of complaint against Father Philips the Queens
Confessor, Ibidem p. 400. to 411.
lately committed to the Tower, by the Honorable and High Court of PARLIAMENT.
THat the said Father Philips has bin observed to have bin a great cause, both
in

He with Parsons and other their Assistants were the only cause, that the Pope
Breves to these Kingdoms of Englaud, and Scotland, and to hinder the oath of
Allegiance, Note*
and lawful obedience of the subjects to our Gracious King, that so they may
still fish in troubled waters.



Basil Brook, sir John Winter, and a brother in Law of the said Sir John,
that lived in Worcestershire, and Master Ployden, whose servant named Baldwin,
has bin seen to deliver to Captain Read a substitute of the Jesuits, an
hundred pounds at a time, to one Jesuit that lived in his house.

Father Philips has bin a great Actor with the superior of the Capuchions,
who Richlieu of France, to be a Spy at this Court for the French Faction, and
has therefore labored by all means to breed dissentions; Note.
for the French Aim at nothing more than to make a Schism betwixt the English
and the Scots, that this State might be so weakened, and made unable to
withstand them, that so they might have an opportunity to Conquor these
Kingdoms; these unquiet spirits having access to her Majesty, may importune
things not fit for the State.

Philips has bin guided by a Grey-Fryar, who by degrees has intruded himself
to be a Clerk of her Majesty's Chapel, and Chaplain Extraordinary in time of
Progress; who when he is out of London, goes by the name of Mastor Wilson,
but his true name is William Tompson Doctor of Divinity, as some Jesuits have
affirmed, but a most furious spirit and unquiet; and therefore by a Nickename,
is by some called Cacafugo, that is as much as if in English you should say,
Shit-fire; by whom Father Philips has bin so led, that he has bin very
officious to perform whatsoever he would have done. These two have ruled all
the business concerning the two Kingdoms on the Popish parts, and for the most
part of Rome also,

The said Father Philips has placed many unfit persons about her Majesty, Sir
John Winter to be her Majesty's Secretary, Seignior Georgeos Conne late Agent
of

Sundry persons by the said Father Philips have been admitted to be the Queens
Labourne, George Gage (brother to Colonel Cage) both Oratoriant Priests; the
one of the French Faction very seditions the other of the Spanish, whose
brother is now left Resident at Rome: for thereby his Master* Sr. William
Hambleton late Agent at Rome* Penricke is sworn servant Extraordinary to her
Majesty, who is a sworn Spaniard and Intelligencer for Rome, in respect his
Brother is Agent here, by Father Philips: These and many others who are
factious and turbulent spirits, have by Father Philips his means received
Protection from the Queens Majesty.

The said Philips has been much ruled by Sir Toby Matthewes, Sir John Winter,
Walter Mountague.

He was very forward with his Accomplices, for the breaking of the Ice to begin
Robert Douglasse, and Seignior Georgio were nominated, whom he thought most
fit, Cardinal Richlieu was thought fittest to be the man, who should direct
him to begin the correspondency betwixt the Pope and the Queen; and therefore
he was sent to France with many Letters, and from thence he was dispatched for
Rome by the Cardinal, where he was received with great respect, and after a
viatick, he was dispatched again for England with some few small gifts,
Pictures, Crosses, Agnus Deies, and such like Popish stuff to Father Philips,
and other of that Function.

Father Philips was the chief Agent in correspondency with, and bringing in of
Signior Georgio Panzani, the Oratorian Priest, by whose direction, this Priest
being at Paris, left wearing of Priests clothes, and went in the habit of a
Gentleman; and because he had a shaven Crown therefore he wore a Perriwigge,
and Father Philips, directed all those that sent to him, to write to him as to
an Italian Gentleman, desirous to see these Kingdoms, and by Father Philips
his direction he afterward came hither; who did here continue for the space of
two years, practicing great and dangerous Innovations from place to place; and
then having dispatched his business, returned to Rome, with great Presents
from the Catholics of the greater sort.

Whereas it has pleased God, to bless us with a hopeful Prince, to the
comfort King and Kingdom: Note.
Yet the said Father Philips has attempted to traduce his tender years to
Popery. But God has prevented him of his purpose, and let us pray to God to
preserve that Royal Race from Popery, and the whole Land from all Innovation;
that our Cracious King may Rule Gloriously, and the whole Land live in peace,
to the honor of God, and comfort of us all, Amen.

Father Philips during his Imprisonment in the Tower, was visited by many
Jesuits, Priests, Papists, who refused to take the oath of Supremacy, some
whereof were committed; and many suspected persons who had taken by Lodgings
near the Tower (with an intention to surprise it, as was feared) were
apprehended and restrained.

Ibid. p. 284. 285, 286, 287*
July 13th. 1641. The Commons were informed of the Queens intention to pass
beyond the Seas, under pretense of going to the Spaw for her health, and
carrying over the Lady Mary into Holland. Whereupon the Houses being jealous of
some ill designs to be acted by her against the Realm in Foreign parts
appointed a special Committee of both Houses to attend His Majesty and the
Queen at White Hall; and to present them with reasons against their intended
journey, which they accordingly presented to the King the 15th of July, and the
next day to the Queen her Self.

The Reasons were these.

1. There is a great cause to doubt, least the Papists have some design upon
her Majesty's journey, Note.
because the House has been informed, that diverse of them have sold off their
Lands to a good value, and used other means to get ready money. 2ly. It is
observed, some of them have been very diligent, gathering great quantities of
gold. 3ly. It is informed, that more than an ordinary number of Papists are
gone beyond Sea already, and those of the better sort.

2. The great number of English fugitives now beyond the Seas, who by their
late designs and practices are known to be full of malice to the State, and
will no doubt seek all opportunities of access to her Majesty, and as much
as they can labor to infuse into her Majesty, such evil Counsels, as may
trouble the peace of the Kingdom, whereof at this time there is more danger,
because the affairs of the Kingdom, are not yet fully settled, and upon
disbanding of the Army, all parts will abound with Soldiers, and such others
as will be apt to be provoked to tumults and seditions; and especially in the
time of the Kings absence in Scotland.

3. That the House of Commons have received information of great quantity of
treasure in Jewels, Note.
Plate, and ready money packt up to be conveyed away with the Queen, not only
in such a proportion as the present occasions, with due respect to her
Majesty's honor may seem to require, but a far greater quantity: and that
diverse Papists and others, under pretense of Her Majesty's goods, are like to
convey great sums of monyes, and other treasure, beyond the Seas, which will
not only impoverish the State, but may be employed to the fomenting of some
mischievous attempts to the trouble of the public peace.

4. That as it will be great dishonor to the State, if Her Majesty should not
be attended and furnished sutably to her quality, so it will be a very heavy
burden in this time of great necessity, and occasions of other public charges,
if she should be provided in so royal a manner as shall be fit for her
Majesty, and the Honor of the King and Kingdom.

5. That because we understand by Sir Theodore Mayern, that the chief cause of
her Majesty's si^knesse, and distempers proceed from some discontent of her
mind. The House of Commons have thought good to Declare; That if any thing
within the power of Parliament may give Her Majesty contentment, they are so
tender of her health, both in due respect to His most Excellent Majesty and Her
Self, that they will be ready to further Her satisfaction in all things, so
far as may stand with that Public to which they are obliged.

6. That the Commons conceive it will be some dishono^r to this Nation, if Her
Majesty should at this unseasonable time go out of the Kingdom, upon any
grief or discontent received here: And therefore we shall labor by all good
means to take away and prevent all just occasions of Her Majesty's tr^uble, in
such manner as may further Her content, and therein Her health, which will be a
very great comfort and joy to our selves, and the rest of His Majesty's loving
Subjects.

But notwithstanding all these Reasons, the Queen (though she seemed satisfied
for the present) continued in Her resolution, See the Breviate of the
Archbishops life. p. 25.
and on Febr. 11th following, went from Greenwich toward Dover, and from
thence into Holland with Her Daughter the Princess Mary.

What ill offices she did there against the Parliament, Kingdom, by furnishing
the King with Monyes, Ammunition, Arms, Horse, Men, and Commanders, to raise
and carry on a civil War against the Parliament, and His Protestant Subjects,
Selling and Pawning the Jewels of the Crown etc is so well known, I shall not
relate it; and what ill offices of like nature she is now like to do against
them in France, upon Her late Voyage thither, time will ere long more fully
discover.

Before the Queens first departure hence* Diurnall Occurrences p. 310. 339.
in July 21. 1641. There was a Petition read in the Commons House, in behalf
of the Lay-Papists of England, wherein they made Protestation of their fidelity
to the Crown and Kingdom, and desired a mittigation of the severity of the
Laws against them: but nothing was done therein. August 12. 1641. The Queen
Mother (who had formerly desired a Guard to secure her against the feared
tumults of the people, and that being denied, supplies of money to transport
her hence) departed from White Hall toward Italy, her Native Country,
attended by the Earl of Arundell and his Lady, who never returned since. Ibid.
p. 351. (...) 364.
After this, upon the 28. 30. and 31 of August and in September following, upon
the disbanding of the Irish Army, the Spanish Ambassador moved the King for
four thousand of the Irish to serve his Master, which the King condiscended
too, and engaged himself by promise to grant, But the Lords and Commons upon
serious debate, considering the evil consequences of it, and fearing some
dangerous design against the State, and our Religion to be couched under it,
denied to condescend thereunto, for these two principle reasons which they gave
to the King and Spanish Ambassador: First, for that the Spaniard was an
Assistant to the Emperor against the Palsgrave, and in keeping the Lady
Elizabeth from being settled in her inh^ritance, so that to assist him, would
be to turn the points of our own swords against our selves. Secondly, That
they are contrary in Religion to us, and that to assist them is not only matter
of Conscience, but it would be of evil president if it should be granted:
Whereupon it was moved, that no Officers should serve the Spaniard, without
leave, and that no Merchant nor Master of ship should transport any Ammunition
of War to them, under penalty and confiscation of the same, and displeasure of
the Parliament.

You have heard before what a laboring and plotting there was to keep the
Irish Army from disbanding, and to give a new occasion of assembling them to
some parts of Ireland under pretense of transporting them into the Low
Countries or Spain to serve the Spaniard; but no doubt, the true reason was to
execute that horrid bloody Massacre and design of surprising Dubline Castle
and all other Forts of Irealnd, by the popish party in one day, which was
formerly plotted, and intended to be put in execution the 23. of October. 1641
but that it was in part prevented by a timely discovery of it the very night
before Dublin Castle should have been surprised by those Popish conspirators.

How, and by whom this horrid execrable conspiracy was plotted contrived and
executed, you may read at large in The Rise, and progress of the Irish
Rebellion in Doctor Jones his book of Examinations, and sundry other Treatises
of this subject set forth by Authority of Parliament, whereunto I shall only
annex such supplymentall evidences concerning the Rebellion which have come
unto my hands, omitted for the most part, by them.

Among Secretary Windebankes papers I found this ensuing subscribed by Daniel
Oneale about the year 1640. which has some relation to this Irish Rebellion.

Owe^ O Neall, by his Majesty's permission about five years* ago, raised a
Regiment of 30. Companies, NOTE.
wherein there were 3500. men; by reason of the stop of supplies since, the
Regiment is become so weak, that it is scarce 1000. strong: His humble request
is, that being his Regiment was raised by his Majesty's leave, and that he
intends, it for his Majesty's service when he has occasion for him, (to
perform which I Will engage my life and reputation to his Majesty) his Majesty
would be graciously pleased to grant him a recrute, NOTE.
of 50. men to every Company, which he thinks will purge the Kingdom rather
then impoverish it, and will enable him to come strong upon any summons to his
Majesty's service.

Daniell O Neille.


This Owen Neale, as this writing Manifests, about the year 1635. raised a
Regiment of 3000. men for the service of the Kings Majesty when he had occasion
for them, which he transported into Flanders to serve the King of Spain for the
present: which Daniel Oneale petitions, 1640. might be recruted, to enable him
to come strong upon any sommons to his Majesty's service: This Owen Oneal was
made acquainted with the Jrish Rebellion, and particularly sent to by the Lord
Maguire and other the Conspirators to aid and assist them with Arms and men
which he promised to send them before the Rebellion was fully concluded, as the
Lord Maguire himself^^ con^esseth, as you shall see anon: which compared with
the Examinations following, and those published by Doctor Jones, and Daniel
Oneiles activity to keep on foot the Irish Army and bring the Northren Army
against the Parliament; will sufficiently evidence, that Oneyle had some
Rebellious designs both in the raising and recrute of his Popish Regiment, to
be acted within Ireland and his Majesty's Dominions upon occasion.

That this conspiracy was ploted and agreed on in the general, and discovered,
if not to his Majesty, yet at least to Secretary Windebanke above a year
before it brake forth, is manifest by this letter found, among Windebankes
Papers thus directed.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The King is abused. The Law is wrested. It slayes the Innocent. It acquites
the guilty. It Is like a spiders Web. It catches the small. The great ones
break through.
It is as it is Justly termed, concessum Latrocinium: I wonder the world is ^o
ecclipst in understanding as not to certify and prevent that, that must of
necessity ruin ere long the Commonwealth, but your Majesty may let them rest,
they bring in profit to your Exchequer, or Coffers, but at last they will shake
the foundation of your Monarchy, and their own weight will make them shrink
under their own burden, their supporters being not able to bear up their
bodies.

I love and honor your Majesty so much that I would have discovered an
intended Plot, Note.
which I doubt this next Summer will be put in execution against the State of
our Kingdom of Ireland, but that I am sworn the contrary. I was requested
(after many deep Protestations and injunctions not to make it known) to be an
actor in the design; I refused it, and took time to consider: your Majesty
with your learned Council, may find out and prevent the ensuing perils.

I have this day poisoned my self at the Kings Bench Bar to prevent the
malice of Judge loanes, and of your Judges, whom as I shall Answer at the
dreadful day, would unjustly have deprived me of life, had not my self
prevented him; he has done this, not for any benefit to the weal public, but
upon particular revenge; he only aimed at my blood and life. I beseech your
Majesty to give him my carcass to ear also: a corrupter Judge I suppose the
Kingdom has not any: Roberies, Murders, and all manner of villainy shall pass
by him^ undiscerned let him be but bribed, otherwise the Inocents must suffer,
and so have I. What the party was who writ this Letter, I cannot certainly
determine; but certain it is he was some Soldier dwelling in Ireland at first,
who should have been an Actor in the Irish Rebellion, and was charged under an
Oath of Secrecy, not to reveal it, above a year before it brake out, this
letter being written in 1640. before Windebankes slight, and Judge Jones his
death. The party who writ it was (it seems) examined; concerning this Plot, as
appears by these heads of his examination indorsed in another hand on the
back of the Original, viz.

Roch, a Priest that lived in Develin, and a Bishop called Bar^well, w^ld
commond him to Tyrone in Flanders, This Tyrone was Owen Oneal that had the
Regiment.
and he should be an Actor in the d^signe, THAT SHOULD FREE THE PAPISTS IN
IRELAND. We may TAKE DEVELIN BY AN ANSLAT, as easily as kiss a man's hand. The
Kingdom is so secure, and the Soldiers so base, AS IT IS AS EASY TO TAKE THE
KINGDOM. The Soldiers are but hirelings for 13. pound a year, and so they
serve all their men, and scarce pay them, but you shall be better used. Go
into England, get up your debts. AND WE WILL EMPLOY YOU. Stanley and others
have been ill used AND GIVING THEIR SERVICE TO US HAVE RELEASED THEMSELVES OF
THOSE ENEMIES, SO MIGHT HE Do,

The Examination and confession indorsed on the Letter informs us of these
particulars: 1. That the Plotte mentioned in the Letter,, was to surprise
Dublin; and the Kingdom of Ireland too: The very plot the Rebels intended,
endeavored afterward to put in execution: 2ly. that the end of it was to free
the Papists in Ireland: 3ly. That they thought this Plot was as easy and
feasible as to kiss a man's hand. 4ly. That one Roch, a Priest in Divelin, and
a Bishop called This Barnwell was a man very Active in this Conspiracy, as
appears by Maguires confession following.
Barnwell, were the parties who acquainted him with the Plot (under an Oath of
secrecy) and would have engaged him in it. 5ly. That Tiroen (to wit Owen Oneal)
the man who raised the Regiment of 3500. men and desired a Recrute in the
former paper) was the person to whom he should be recommended in Flanders, to be
a principal actor in this Plot, being there enabled to raise men, Arms, and
train up the conspirators to the use of Arms without suspicion or noise,
better then in any other place. 6ly. That they had then drawn Standley and
other Soldiers to their party. Seventhly that all this was confessed and
discovered in manner aforesaid, above a year before this Rebellion brake out.

That this Plot was thus laid and discovered before hand to Owen O Neale in
Flanders, will appear by this examination taken upon Oath in Ireland.

The Examination of Henry Mac Cart taken before Sir Gerrald Lowther Knight,
Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and Sir Robert Meredeth
Knight, Chancellor of His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, of His Majesty's
Privy Council of the Kingdom of Ireland; by direction of the Right
Honorable the Lords Justices and Council, the 12th. day of February, 1641.
Who being sworn and examined says; that about nine years since he this
Examinant left the Kingdom of Ireland, and went into Flanders, under the
command of James Fitz-Garret, of Ballysonan, in the County of Kildare, and at
his said Captains landing In Flanders, he and his company were put into the
Regiment of Owen Roe O Neale, Colonel under the Cardinal, where this
examinant served for about two years of the said time, under the said Captain
Fitz-Garret, and then was transferred under the command of Captain Conn O
Neale in the same Regiment, and afterward was preferred by the said Colonel
Owen O Neale, to be his Major Domo. which Office is of the nature of Steward of
his House, and after was by the said Owen, made Quartermaster of his Regiment,
in which employment he this examinant remained until he was sent into this
Kingdom by the said Colonel Owen O Neile. And this examinant says, that Sir
Phelim Roe O Neale had sent a Table with a Character from this Kingdom of
Ireland, unto Col. Owen O Neale into Flanders, the which Table was lost at the
siege of Air. And for the loss of which Character he this examinant heard the
said Colonel lament much, saying; That all the great Towns, Ports, Provinces,
and remarkable places, and persons in the Kingdom of Ireland had their
particular names deciphered in that Table. After which time the said Colonel
received from Captain Conn O Neale, Nephew unto him the said Owen, one other
Table of Characters of the like contents. And the said Captain Conn was sent
from Flanders into England about Lent last by the said Colonel, to obtain
leave for the raising of men in this Kingdom of Ireland, under pretense of
carrying the said men so to be raised into Flanders. Note.
The true intention of the raising of those men being to set on foot the
Rebellion in Ireland, which has since accordingly been done; and the said Conn
having spent about six weeks in England retu^ned into Flanders, upon pretense
of furnishing himself with money, for the raising of the said men: but before
he the said Conn returned back for England, the said Colonel Owen being on a
journey unto the siege of Air, there repaired unto him Hugh Mac Phelim Birne,
now a Colonel, among the Rebels of this Kingdom of Ireland, who formerly had
been a Captain in Tirones Regiment in Spain, and the said Hugh remained with
the said Colonel Owen about four and twenty hours, most of which time they
spent in private conference, in which discourse he this Examinant overheard the
said Hugh say: We are to adventure our lives for the succouring of a scabbed
Town of the King of Spaines. where we may happily lose our lives, and we can
expect no worse then death if we go unto our own Country and succor it. And
the said Hugh leaving the said Colonel in his journey toward Air, went unto
Dunkirk, and from thence into England, and soon after at the Camp of Air
there came unto the said Owen an Irish Friar, one of the O Neales disguised,
who after much private conference with the said Colonel for about six days,
the said Friar departed thence for England, together with Captain Edward
Birne, and Captain Bryan, O Neale, a kinsmans of the said Colonells, and a
Captain of his Regiment, and now in Ireland amongst the Rebels. And at the
said Captains departure from the Collonell, he the said Col. presented him
with a case of Pistolls, and shortly after the aforementioned Cap. Conn O
Neale was again sent into England, and from thence he the said Captain Conn
wrote into Flanders, unto the said Col. Owen, that Hugh Mac Phelim Birne,
Captain Brian O Neale and the aforesaid Friar were gone to Ireland. And that
he the said Conn had received a Letter out of Ireland from President Rosse (by
which name in their Table of Characters is understood Sir Phelim O Neale) and
that the said President Rosse went very well on in his business, by reason
that Brabant and Valous were fully satisfied to join together (by which
Brabant and Valous are understood in the aforesaid Table of Characters, Vlster
and Leinster) And did further write at the same time, that he the said Conn
expected Lewis Lanois his coming into England (by which Lewis Lanois in their
Table aforesaid is understood Daniel O Neale, brother to the said Conn now in
restraint in England, and for whom he had stayed, and was in fear of staying
overlong least he should be entrapped) And desired his Uncle the said Col.
Owen O Neale, to send some one from him unto the said President Rosse into
Ireland, with his resolution and instructions what to do, which the said
President daily expected, which Letters were sent from the said Conn unto him
the said Owen into Flanders by a special Messenger: At which time one Byron
Mac Phelim Birne came out of England unto the said Colonel Owen, and stayed
with him a few days, and had conference with him, and so returned back for
England; and after in October last the said Col. Owen O Neale sent one Art. Mac
Ginnis a Friar, being his Nephew, into England, who at Dunkirk met with a
Jesuit, who as this examinant was told was a son of the Lord Viscount
Netterfield which came thither with him into England, and so for Ireland. And
this examitant further says, that in November last, news came unto the said
Colonel Owen O Neale, that there was an enterprise to be made on the Castle of
Dublin for the taking of the said Castle by the Lord Mac Guire, Mac Mahone, one
of the O Neales and others; which Plot being discovered, the said Lord Mac
Guire, Mac Mahone, O Neale and others were imprisoned. And that nevertheless
the Irish had raised a great company of men, and possessed themselves of the
Newrie, Dundalke, Ardmagh, Monaghan, and several other Country Towns. And
that they had taken prisoners the Lord Calfield, the Lady Blaine, and her
Children, and that their numbers did daily increase. And being demanded how
they could have the said News so soon in Flanders, answered, Note.
that they had that and most of the News of Ireland, out of England; and that
it was notable to observe, with what speed and certainty the Irish in Flanders
received the News of Ireland out of England: upon receipt of which News, the
said Col. was in a great rage against the discoverer, and said he wondered how
or where that villain should live; for if he were in Ireland, sure they would
pull him to pieces there. And if he lived in England, there were footmen and
other Irish men enough to kill him. And he further says, that the said Col.
Owen acquainted the general Francisco de Melloe, with the said News, who told
the said Colonel that he had understood as much before. And thereupon the said
Col. desired License to depart for Ireland. And likewise that he might have
Arms and Ammunition to carry thither with him: whereunto the said General
Answered; That the said Col. should not want either Arms or Ammunition, or any
thing else that he could furnish him withal; Note.
if he the said Colonel were sure of any Port where they might be safely
landed in Ireland. And thereupon the said General advised the said Colonel,
to send one of trust into Ireland without Letters, to be informed there, which
were the safest and best way Ports in Ireland where Arms and Ammunition might
be landed; and to direct that some Friar or Priest might for that purpose be
sent back into Flanders, to certify them of those Ports; and likewise that
some person of special trust should be sent into France, Rome, and to the
Emperor to negotiate with them, Note.
and to desire their assistance for the Irish in defense of their Religion:
Hereupon the said Col. designed for that negotiation, one Ever Roe Tituler
Bishop of Down: And by reason that he this Examinant, and the special
employments which he had under the said Col. and the trust reposed in him by
the said Colonel, were known unto the said Conn O Neale; and diverse other of
the Rebels now in Irelands. He the said Col. chose this Examinant to send into
Ireland, with the said Message and these instructions. That he this Examinant
should repair unto Sir Phelim O Neale, Conn O Neale, Brian O Neale; and Hugh O
Birne, and to acquaint them that he the said Col. was purposed to come from
Dunkirke for Ireland with all expedition, and to bring with him three Ships,
wherein should be three or four hundred Commanders and Officers, Note.
with Munition and Arms for Horse and Foot for the supply of such companies of
Soldiers, as were or could be raised in Ireland by those of the Catholic
League, for the prosecution of the war there next; that he the said Col.
expected to be forthwith advertised and advised from them in Ireland (by some
Friar or Priest to be sent from thence for that purpose) what Port in that
Kingdom he should land in. And directed the sending of the aforenamed Ever Roe
Titular Bishop of Down into France unto Rome, Note.
and the Emperor to solicit their Aids for the defense of the Religion in
Ireland. And likewise further advised that the Lords and great Commanders of
the Catholic League in that Kingdom, should by all means avoid to fight any
battle with the English or Kings Army, until the said Colonells arrival in
Ireland, and they were better furnished with Arms and Munition: And that in
the mean time and until his coming, Note.
if there were any Noblemen, and Gentlemen in Ireland who would not join with
them in this war, they should Proclaim the said parties unnatural Members
of that Nation and Kingdom, and enemies unto that Religion. And also that the
Goods and Lands of those who would not join with them, should be given unto
him or t^^m of that House or Family who would accept thereof, and join with
them. And also that until his coming, and until they were better furnished
with Arms they should not give the Kings Army and me^ting in the day time, but
should set upon them in their Quarters by night, when they were wearied by
marchi^g abroad in the Country, or upon other occasions. And another of this
Examinants Instructions was, to persuade them by all means that they should
not mistrust or doubt of his coming, for he would be with them ere long, and
that he had taken a great Oath, that if he could not obtain leave, Note.
Munition and Arms from the General, yet if all failed he would adventure him
and his whole estate in that service, and that if he lived he would assuredly
be with them within ten weeks, and would bring with him Miners, Canons and
Cannoneers, and such other instruments as should be necessary for them. And
that he did wonder although there were no Miners there, that his Countrymen
did not employ and set on work such persons as dug for Iron, Mine, or
Coals. And further that the Lords and Commanders of the Catholic League in
Ireland should send one Patrick Heggartie a Friar, Note.
who had spent much time in Scotland to solicit for them there. And to put the
Scots in mind that they were for the most part descended from the Irish, and
that the Irish never drew any of their blood. And therefore that they should
not offer the Irish any injury: But keep themselves quiet in their own
Country, not helping the one part or the other, Another of this Examinants
Instructions was, to persuade the Lords and great Commanders of the League,
that they should hold firm, Note.
and not be deceived by the fair promises of the English or of the State in
Ireland, as Tirone and Tircunnell were; who after they had submitted were
forced to fly the Kingdom, and many others beheaded, and others restrained in
the Tower of London until they there dyed and lost their Lands; and that they
should not doubt of succor. And further says, that he was directed by his
said Colonel to impart these Instructions and Message unto such Lords,
Commanders and Gentlemen in Ireland; as the said Sir Phelim O Neale, Conn O
Neale, Brian O Neale, and Hugh Birn^ should direct and advise him unto. And
that at his departure from his said Colonel, he the said Col. called for a
Glass of Wine, and drank the health of the said Captain Hugh Mac Phelim
Birne, who he said was desigred Governor of the Fort of Duncannon in the
County of Wexford. And this Examinant further says, that he being directed
with a Letter in December last, from his Col. unto one Brian Birfield a Friar,
and resident at Dunkirke, for the helping of him this Examinant, that he the
said Friar would make a Journey forthwith unto Col. Owen O Neale, and from him
unto Col. Preston, to labor the joining together of the said Colonells to go
into Ireland, to further with all the force and aid they could make, the
prosecution of the present war there. And further says, that in his this
Examinants Voyage from Ireland (he with a Friar in his company) was landed at
Dover before Christmas last; Note.
where they the said parties remained for three weeks, no examination or
notice being taken of them there. And from thence the ship being bound for the
Port of Waterford, the same landed him this Examinant and the Friar at the Port
of Youghall, about the beginning of January last, where they were brought
before the Earl of Cork, and by his Lordship sent by sea unto the City of
Dublin. And further this Examinant says, he conceived that the said Col. Owen
may be easily surprised in his passage for Ireland, if he be laid for with good
advisement. The said Owen purposing to come with his Men, Munition, and Arms
unto Bergam, within a mile of Dunkirke, which place he intends to gain for his
Garrison; and to carry in Lighters the said Arms, Munition and Men as secretly
as he may by night unto the Ship at Dunkirke, without showing himself there:
And his pretense will be that he is employed into Spain. And the said Col.
purposes to bring with him all the Irish Mariners which may be had about
Dunkirke, Note.
where there are store; and in special one Captain Donnell a sea Captain,
and so to come for Ireland, either by Dover, or if he see cause by the North of
Scotland.

And this Examinant further says, that he this Examinant durst not refuse to
go into Ireland with the said message, and instructions, for fear of his said
Mr. Collonell Owen O Neale, well knowing of his severity. But this Examinant
intended to discover the same when he thought he safely might: And he says,
that he does not know or has heard of any other that was sent from his
Collonell into Ireland of this message besides himself; but believes that some
Messenger might be sent from Col: Preston unto the Lords of the Pale, and other
Commanders in the Province of Lemster, as well as he was sent by his Col: unto
Sir Phelim o Neale, and those of Vlster; he also says, that the principal
Commanders and Captains of the Irish in Flanders, are these whose Names are
under written, viz. Owen o Neale, Col: Patrick Dovelle Sergeant, Major Conn o
Neale Captain, Bryan o Neale Captain, which Conn and Bryan, are now in Ireland,
Commanders with the Rebels; the rest of the Captains that are now in the Low
Countries, of the said Col: Owen o Neales Regiment, are these, viz. Melaghlin o
Moore, Griffin Cavanagh, Donnogh Laler, James Dillon, Stephen Delahord,
Nicholas Dalton, George Hoverden, Richard Bourke, Gerrald Fitz-Gerrald, Dermot
Consedeu, Neale o Neale, John o Neale, Henry o Neale, Conn mack, Neale o Neale,
Bryan Roe o Neale, John Donnelle, adjutant, Maurice o Hean, adjutant, Henry
Neale, son to the said Col: Owen, Captain of a Troop of Horse, David Brown,
Col: to the said Captain, Edmund Loughram, Auditor in the the same Regiment.

Captains of particular Companies, not of any Regiment, viz. Col: Prest^^,
William Butler, Maurice mac Donnell, James Geffry, and one Captain, Tailor.

Henry mac Carton. Gerrald Lowther. Robert Meredith.


BY this examination it is clear, that o Neales Regiment in Flanders,
(consisting for the most part of Irish Papists) was purposely raised to train
up the Irish in arms there, without any noise or suspicion to surprise the
Forts in that Realm, and make a general Massacre of the Protestants there,
when they should find ^ sitting opportunity; and that Owen o Neale in
Flanders, and Daniell o Neale his Brother in England, (who was in extraordinary
favor with His Majesty and the Queen at Court, and one in Mr. Iermyns
conspiracy), were two of the principal contrivers, and abbetters of this
conspiracy, in which all the Irish, Popish Bishops, Priests, Friars, Jesuits
(and scattered like Frogs in several Popish Kingdoms and Seminaries) were very
active.

I shall only add to this, That William O Conner, an Irish Priest, servant to
the Queen Mother, who lodged at one Mistress Scarlets house in Coven-Garden, and
shifted his habit very often to disguise himself, coming to one Anne Hussy an
Irish Gentlewoman, a little after Easter, 1640. with another Irish man in his
company, having a long gray coat, and a sword girt close to his side, to her
lodging; and going with her thence to Mistress Prinocks house in the Strand; she
demanded of O Conner, who his companion was? who answered, he was one of the
number of 7000. that were in private pay, AND IN READINESS TO AID THE CATHOLICS,
Note.
AND TO OUT THE PROTESTANTS THROATS THAT SHOULD RESIST THEM; and that he was
one who played on the Flute to the Drum. After which, about the end of July,
1640. he came to her foresaid lodging, and said, He came upon great occasion,
and in great haste, and he must immediately return back, for he had three
Letters from the Queen Mother, to deliver to three Ambassadors, the Spanish,
the Venetian, the French, Note.
TO SEND TO THE POPE, FROM WHOM, OR FROM HIS LEGATE, WE MUST KNOW WHEN TO BEGIN
THE SUBDUING OF THE PROTESTANTS: That they must first BEGIN TO CONQUER ENGLAND
BEFORE IRELAND. Being demanded by him, How, or in what manner will they begin
with England? And when will it be? He replied, When the King goes to Scotland.
To which she answering, There was no hopes of the Kings going to Scotland; He
replied, He warrant you he does. He further added, That he had long been
employed by the Queen Mother in her business with all the Princes of
Christendom: That they had some design to cut off and kill the King: adding,
That they would kill an Heretic at any time, for the advancement of the
Mother Church of Rome; and swore by Saint Francis and Saint Dominick that he
would do it: He further said, He was bound to keep the Queen-Mothers secrets;
and that he would be burnt in fire before he would reveal them.

All this she discovered soon after to the Lords of the Council, by whom and
by several Justices of Peace, she was examined upon Oath, and produced Letters
of this Priest, written to her with his own hand; whereupon, he was Committed
close Prisoner to the Gate House, where he yet remains unproc^eded against.
After this she attested it in the Parliament House upon Oath, before the
Rebellion brake forth, and witnessed it since upon Oath at the Archbishops
Trial; who said she was mad when she attested it at the Council Table,
demanding of her, how she durst speak any thing of this Nature of the
Queen Mother? and telling her she was set on and hired by the City of London to
do this, Note.
and Commanded her to be Committed: But she producing the Priests own Letter,
and he confessing it to be his own hand before the Lords; she was sent only to
one of the Sheriffs of Londons house, and there secured, till released by the
Parliament.

About the time of this discourse, the Earl of Worcester a great Papist, and
very powerful in Southwales, bordering next to Ireland, procured a Commission
from His Majesty for to be Lord Lieutenant and Commander in chief of all
Southwales, (as the Lord Herbert his Son an Arch-Papist, has been since the
Rebellion brake forth) as appears by this Minute, an Original draught of a
Letter under Secretary Windebanks own hand to the then Lord Chamberlain
signifying as much.

HIS Majesty being well inclined to employ the Earl of Worcester in some
particular service best known to himself in South Wales, Note.
being most confident of his Loyalty, Duty and good affection to His Person and
Service; has thought fit to acquaint Your Lordship therewith, considering the
great Power and Interest Your Lordship has in those parts, and has commanded
me in his Name to signify his pleasure to Your Lordship, that you give speedy
and effectual order, to all Your Principal Officers, Note.
Tenants, and Dependents, and such others as have relation to you; that as soon
as the said Earl shall produce any Commission or Authority from His Majesty,
for the performance of any service in those parts, they fail not, to obey His
Lordship in all such things as by virtue of such Power given by him and His
Majesty he shall require and Command. This His Majesty expects Your Lordship
shall do with expedition, to the end, Your Officers there may be the better
prepared whenever the said Earl shall exercise any such Commission from His
Majesty; that so His Majesty's service may not suffer. His Majesty has already
signified His pleasure to the Lord President of the Marches to this effect, who
has yielded all obedience and conformity thereunto, and His Majesty is
confident that in that Your Lordship and those who have Relation to you will
give place to none.

This commission was ordered to be brought into the Commons house as dangerous.

But the happy unexpected Treaty and assembling of this Parliament, frustrating
the intended Massacre and Design of subduing the Protestants in England for
the present; the Plot in Ireland still proceeding, and was to be put in
execution on the 23. of October, 1641. on which day, all the Forts and Towns in
Ireland should have been surprised at an instant by the Popish Rebels, and
most of the Protestants destroyed; and accordingly that very night Charlemont
Fort was on the 23. of October at night surprised by Sir Phelim O Neale, a
principal actor and conspirator in the Rebellion; who there took the Lady
Calfield prisoner, and murdered the young Lord Calfield her Son: And at that
time Sir Phelim o Neale himself and other of his companions told her, That
Dublin castle and city, Note.
and most other Forts of Ireland were surprised by their confederates the
Papists; that the Tower of London was taken by their party, and the Archbishop
of Canterbury released thence; (a good sign he was their friend:) that
ENGLAND, and the Protestants there, were then, or would be very shortly in the
same, or as bad a condition as Ireland, and Protestants there were; and some of
them said, that their party had taken Edenbrough castle: All which was attested
upon Oath by the Lady Calfield, and her Gentlewoman Mistress Mary Woodrose, at
the Trial of Mac Mohon in the Kings Attested on Oath at Mac ^Mohones trial by
Sir William Steuart, Sir William Colc, Sir Willi^m Hamilton, Sir Charles Coot,
Sir Arthur Lofi^s and others.
Bench, in Michaelmas Term last: where this was likewise attested upon Oath,
That ALL THE PAPISTS IN ENGLAND WERE PRIVY TO THE PLOT IN IRELAND, and intended
the like in England, which we have since experimentally found to be true.
Diverse other Forts were the same day and soon after surprised by the Irish
Rebels, and above one hundred fifty two thousand Protestants there destroyed in
the first four months of the Rebellion, as the Rebels themselves certified the
Pope upon inquisitions of their number taken upon Oath.

But notwithstanding those their successful proceedings in other parts, yet
through the admirable Providence of God, they were prevented of the main part
of their design; the surprising of Dublin Castle, the chief strength and
Magazine of that Realm; which had they gotten, they had in very few days been
Master of the whole Kingdom: For the very night before the Castle should have
been surprised, the Plot was discovered to the Lords Justices of Ireland by
O^en Connelly; whereupon, that design was frustrated, and the Lord Maguire and
Hugh Macmahone, two principal men in the Conspiracy, who came purposely to
surprise it, with other their Confederates taken Prisoners; whose Examinations
and Confessions, together with the Lords Justices Letter to the Earl of
Leicester; discovering the manner and proceedings of this Conspiracy; I shall
here insert.

I shall begin with the Relation of the Lord Maguire himself, written with his
own hand in the Tower, and delivered by him to Sir John Conyers then
Lieutenant, to present to the Lords in Parliament, because it is the fullest.

BEing in Dublin Candlemas Term last was 12. months, the Parliament then
sitting, Mr. Roger Moore did write to me, desiring me that if I could in that
spare time, I would come to his house (for then the Parliament did nothing but
sit and adjourn, expecting a Commission for the continuance thereof, their
former Commission being expired, and that some things he had to say to me, that
did merely concern me; and on receipt of his Letter, the new Commission for
continuing the Parliament Landed; and I did return him an answer, that I could
not fulfill his request for that present, and thereupon he himself came to Town
presently after, and sending to me, I went to see him at his Lodging, and after
some little time spent in salutations, he began to discourse of the many
afflictions and sufferings, Note.
of the Natives of that Kingdom, and particularly in those latter times of my
Lord of Straffords Government, which gave distaste to the whole Kingdom) and
then he began to particularize the suffering of them that were the more ancient
Natives, as were the Irish; how that on the several Plantations they were all
put out of their Ancestors Estates, all which sufferings he said did beget a
general discontent over all the whole Kingdom in both the Natives, to wit, the
Old and New Irish, and that if the Gent. of the Kingdom were disposed to free
themselves furtherly from the like inconvenience, and get good conditions for
themselves for regaining their Ancestors (or at least a good part thereof)
Estates, they could never desire a more convenient time, then that time (the
distempers of Scotland being then on foot,) and did ask me what I thought of
it; I made him answer, that I could not tell what to think of it, such matters
being altogether out of my Element; then he would needs have an oath from me of
secrecy, which I gave him, and thereupon he told me, that he spoke to the best
Gentlemen of Quality in Lemster, and a great part of Conaght, Note.
touching that matter, and he found all of them willing thereunto, if so be
they could draw to them the Gent. of Vlster, for which cause said he, I come to
speak to you; then he began to lay down to me, the case that I was in then,
overwhelmed in Debt, the smalnesse of my Estate, and the greatness of the
Estate my Ancestors had, and how I should be sure to get it again, or at least
a good part thereof; and moreover how the welfare and maintaining of the
Catholic Religion, Note.
which he said undoubtedly the Parliament now in England will suppress, does
depend on it, for (said he) it is to be feared, and so much I hear from every
understanding man, the Parliament intends the utter. subversion of our Religon;
by which persuasions he obtained my consent, and so demanded whether any more
of Vlster Gent. were in Town? I told him that Philip Relly, Mr. Torrilagh o
Neal, Brother to Sir Phillim o Neale, and Mr. Cosloe, Macmahone, were in Town:
so for that time we parted.

The next day he invited Mr. Relly and I to dine with him, and after dinner, he
sent for those other Gent. Mr. Neale, and Mr. Macmaehone,, and when they were
come, he began the discourse formerly used to me, to them, and with the same
persuasions formerly used to me, he obtained their consent: And then he began
to discourse of the manner how it ought to be done: Of the feazebility and
easiness of the attempt, considering matters as they then stood in England, the
troubles of Scotland, the great number of able men in the Kingdom (meaning
Ireland, what succors they were (more then) to hope for from abroad, Note.
and the Army then raised all Irishmen, and well armed, meaning the Army raised
by my Lord of Strafford against Scotland. First, that every one should endeavor
to draw his own friends into that act, and at least those that did live in one
Country with them; and when they had so done, they send to the Irish in the
Low Countries and Spain, Note.
to let them know of the day and resolution, so that they be over with them by
that day, or soon after, with supply of Arms and Munition as they could, that
there should be a set day appointed, and every one in his own quarters should
rise out that day, and seize on all Arms he could get in his County, and this
day to be near winter so that England could not be able to send Forces into
Ireland before May; and by that time there was no doubt to be made, but that
they themselves would be supplied by the Irish beyond Seas, who he said could
not miss of help from either Spain or the Pope, but that his resolution was
not in all things allowed. For, first it was resolved, nothing should be done,
until first they had sent to the Irish over Seas, to know their advice, and
what hope of success they could give, for in them, as they said, all their
hope of relief was, and they would have both their advise and resolution
before any further proceedings, more then to speak to, and try Gent. of the
Kingdom, every one as they could conveniently, to see (in case they would at
any time grow to a resolution) what to be, and strength they might trust to:
Then Mr. Moor told them that it was to no purpose to spend much time in
speaking to the Gent. for there was no doubt to be made of the Ir^sh, that they
would be ready at any time: And that all the doubt was in the Gent. of the
Pale; but he said that for his own part, he was really assured when they had
risen out, the Pale Gent. would not stay long after, at least that they would
not oppose them in any thing, but be Newters, and if in case they did, that
they had men enough in the Kingdom without them. Moreover he said, that he had
spoke to a great man (who then should be namelesse) that would not fail at the
appointed day of rising out to appear, and to be seen in the Act; but that
until then he was sworn not to reveal him: And that was all that was done at
that meeting; only that Mr. Moore should the next Lent following, make a
Iourny down into the North, to know what was done there; and that he also might
inform them what he had done, and so on parting Mr. Philip Relly, and I, did
importune Mr. Moore for the knowledge of that great man that he spoke of, and
on long entreaty, after binding us to new secrecy, not to discover him until
the day should be appointed, he told that it was the Lord of Mayo, who was very
powerful in command of men in those parts of Co^aght wherein he lived; and
that there was no doubt to be made of him, no more then was of himself: and so
we parted.

The next Lent following, Master Moore according to his promise came unto
Ulster, by reason it was the time of Assizes in several Counties, there he met
only with Mr. Rely, and nothing was then done, but all matters put off till the
May following, where we or most of us should meet at Dublin, it both being
Parliament and Term time; in the mean time there landed in Ireland one Neall
O Neale, Note.
sent by the Earl of Tyrone out of Spain, to speak with their Gent. of his
name and Kindred, to let them know that he had Treated with Cardinal Richelieu
for obtaining succor to come for Ireland, and that he prevailed with the
Cardinal, so that he was to have Arms, Munition, and Money from him on demand
to come for Ireland, and that he only expected a convenient time to come away,
and to desire them to be in a readiness, and to procure all others whom they
could to be so likewise; which mess^ge did set forward the proceedings very
much, so that Mr. Moore, Mr. Relly; my Brother and I meeting the next May in
Dublin, and the same Messenger being there too, it was resolved that he should
return to the Earl into Spain with their resolution, which was; that they
would rise out 12. or 14. days before or after Alhollantide, as they should
see cause, and that he should not fail to be with them by that time; there was
a report at that time and before, that the Earl of Tyrone was killed, which was
not believed, by reason of many such reports formerly which were found to be
false, Note.
and so the Messenger departed with directions, that if the Earls death were
true, he should repair into the Low Countries to Colonel Owen O Neale, and
acquaint him with his Commission from the Earl, whereof it was thought he was
not ignorant, and to return an answer sent by him, and to see what he would
advise, or would do himself therein: B^t presently after his departure the
certainty of the Earls death was known, and on further resolution it was
agreed that an express Messenger should be sent to the Colonel to make all
the resolutions known to him, and to return speedily with his Answer, and so
one Tool O Connelly a Priest (as I think Parish Priest to Mr. Moore) was sent
away to Colonel O Neale; in the interim there came several Letters and News
out of England to Dublin, of Proclamations against the Catholics in England,
Note.
and also that the Army raised in Ireland should be disbanded and conveyed into
Scotland; and presently after several Colonells and Captains landed, with
directions to carry away those men, amongst whom Col. Pluncket, Col. Birne, and
Captain Breim O Neale came, but did not all come together, for Col. Pluncket
landed before my coming out of Town, and the other two after: wherein a great
fear of suppressing Religion was conceived, and especially by the Gent. of the
P^le, and it was very common amongst them, that it would be very inconvenient
to suffer so many men to be conveyed out of the Kingdom, it being as was said
very confidently reported, that the Scottish Army did threaten, never to lay
down Arms until an uniformity of Religion were in the three Kingdoms, and
the Catholic Religion suppressed.; and thereupon both Houses of Parliament
began to oppose their going, and the Houses were divided in their Opinions;
some would have them go, others not, but what the definitive conclusion of the
Houses was touching that point I cannot tell, for by leave from the House of
Lords I departed into the Country before the Prorogation: but before my
departure I was informed by John Barnawall a Friar, that those Gent, of the
Pale (and some other Members of the House of Commons) had several meetings and
consultations how they might make stay of the Soldiers in the Kingdom, and
likewise to arm them for the defense of the (...), being much injured both of
England and Scotland then (as they were informed) and to prevent any attempt
against Religion: Note.
and presently after I departed into the Country, and Mr. Relly being a Member
of the House of Commons stayed the prorogation, and on his coming into the
Country sent to me to mee^e him, and I came to his house, where he told me that
he heard for certain that the former Narration of Barnawall to me (for I did
acquaint him with it) was true, and that he heard it from several there: also
was Emer Mac Mahone (made privy formerly to all our proceedings) at Mr.
Rellies lately come out of the Plea, where he met with the aforementioned John
Barnawall, who told him as much as he formerly told me; and moreover that those
Colonells that lately came over, did proffer their service and industry in that
Act, and so would raise their men under color to convey them into Spain, and
then seixe on the Castle of Dublin, Note.
and with their Arms there to arm their Soldiers, and have them ready for
any action that should be commanded them, but that they had not concluded any
thing, because they were not assured how the Gent. of the remote parts of the
Kingnome (and especially of Ulster) would stand affected to that Act, and that
assurance of that doubt was all their impediment. Then we three began to think
how we might assure them of the assistance and help of Ulster Gent. It was
thought that one should be sent to them to acquaint them therewith, and they
made choice of me to come, by reason as they said that my Wife was allied to
them, and their Country-woman, and would believe me, trust me sooner then other
of their parts, they or most of them being of the Pale, and so (without as much
as to return home to furnish my self for such a journey (Volens nolens) they
prevailed, or rather forced me to come to Dublin to confer with those
Colonells (and that was the last August was twelve-moneth) coming to Town I
met Sir James Dillon accidentally before I came to my Lodging, who was one of
those Colonells; and after salutation he demanded me where my lodging was,
which when I told him, and parted; The next day being abroad about some other
occasions of my own in Town, I met him (as he said) coming to wait on me in
my Chamber, but being a good way from it, he desired me to go into his own
Chamber being near at hand, and then began to discourse to the present
sufferings and afflictions of that Kingdom, and particularly of Religion, Note.
and how they were to expect no redress (the Parliament in England intending,
and the Scots resolving never to lay down Arms until the Catholic Religion
were suppressed, then he likewise began to lay down what danger it would be to
suffer so many able men as was to go with them to depart the Kingdom in such a
time, neither (says he) does their other Gent. that are Colonells, and my
self affect our own private profit so as to prefer it before the general
good of the Kingdom; and knowing that you are well-affected thereunto, (and I
hope, said he, ready to put your helping hand to it on occasion) I will let you
know the Resolution of those other Gent. and mine, which is if we are ready to
raise our men, and after to seize on the Castle where there is great store of
Arms, Note.
and arm our selves there. This was the first motion that I ever heard of
taking the Castle, for it never came into our thoughts formerly; nor am I
persuaded never would, if it had not proceeded from those Colonells, who were
the first motioners and contrivers thereof for ought known to me; and then to
be ready to prevent and resist any danger that the Gentry of the Kingdom like
thereof and help us, for we of our selves neither are able nor will do any
thing therein without their assistance: I began according to the directions
that was sent with me to approve of the Resolution, and also to let him know
how sure he might be of the assistance of those of Ulster; then he told me that
for my more satisfaction I should confer with the rest of those Colonells
themselves, as many as are privy to the Action, and accordingly a place of
meeting was appointed that afternoon, and on the time and place appointed
there met sir James himself, Colonel Bourne, and Col. Pluncket, and that
former discourse being renewed, they began to lay down the Obstacles to that
enterprise, and how they should be redressed.

First, if there should war ensue, how there should be money had to pay the
Soldiers.

Secondly, how and where they should procure succor from foreign parts.

Thirdly, how to draw in the Pale Gentry.

Fourthly, who should undertake to surprise the Castle, and how it should be
done.

To the first it was answered, That the Rents in the Kingdom every where, not
having respect whose they should be, due to the Lords and Gentry thereof,
should be collected to pay the Soldiers; and moreover they might be sure (nay
that there was no doubt thereof) to procure money from the Pope, who gave
several promises formerly to my Lord of Tyrone, (in case he could make way to
come into Ireland) Note.
to maintain six thousand men yearly at his own charge, and that
notwithstanding that my Lord of Tyrone was dead, yet that he would continue the
same forwardness now. To the second it was answered by Colonel Bourne, that
help from abroad could not fail them, for (said he) Colonel O Neale told me
that he had or would procure in readiness, (I do not remember which of those
the Colonells spoke, Note.
or whither he spoke positive, that Col. O Neale had the Arms, or would
procure them) Arms for ten thousand men. And moreover (said he) I make no
great question that if we send into Spain we shall not miss of Aid; for I
being in London the last year, in the Scots troubles, Note.
I was in conference with one of the Spanish Ambassadors there then, and
talking of their troubles then a foot, he said, that if the Irish did then
rise to, and send into Spain, their Messengers would be received under
Canopies of gold; these last words he told me, and some one man of those that
were present privately, whose name I cannot call to mind, (neither well
remember I whether he spoke to them all or no.) Then it was thought that when
they were both in Arms for defense of the Catholic cause, Note.
they would be succored by the Catholic Princes of Christendom. To the third
it was Answered by Colonel Pluncket that he was as morally certain (for those
were his words) as he could be of any thing that the Pale Gentry would join
with them, and assist them; for he said I have spoke to several of them since
my landing in the Kingdom, and I find them very ready and willing, and
withal I have at London spoke to some of the Committees, Note.
and particularly to my Lord of Gormonstone to let them know his resolution,
and they approved of it very well, and withal they knew of the former
consultations by those Gentry, told me by Barnewall: For it was said but very
secretly, that the King did in these terms say to Mr. Nicholas Pluncket, one
of the Irish Committee then in England, Note.
that if they would stick to him, he would stick to them; this I heard I think
from the said John Barnewall, but in truth I am not sure whether from him or
no, but certain I am that he from whom I heard it did confidently report it.
All this was not done at the first meeting, but at three or four meetings, and
so on the last meeting it was resolved to the last doubt touching seizing the
Castle; That Colonel Pluncket and Col. Burn should undertake that task
because they were nearer to it then any other, and also seize on all the Forts,
Garrisons and other places where they think any Arms should be, and in
particular London Derry, which should be undertaken by those of Ulster. And
then there was a set day appointed for the execution thereof, that was the
fifth of the ensuing September. (this being the latter end of August, or the
beginning of September. Anno 1641. I do not know whether) and every one should
make provision to rise out that day, and they were named that should first
succor them that should take the Castle with men presently, namely sir James
Dillon, who did undertake to be with them within three (or at the most four
days with one thousand men, and so much more, should come to them out of the
North, for those two Colonells did not intend to use above one hundred men in
the surprisall, whereof they were to have twenty good able Gentlemen; for they
made account that having the Castle, they with the Artillery would master all
the Town until they were releeved by men from the Country: and because there
was a doubt made, how all this could be done in so short a time, they did
appoint that all that were there present should not fail to meet again there
the 20. of September, to give an account of all things as well hopes as
impediments, and if on that interview all things should happen to be well, that
they go forward, or if otherwise, to prolong the Execution of it to more
convenient time, and so we parted, every man into the Country, about his own
task, and I in my way home, came to Mr. Rellyes house, and there I received a
Letter from Sir Phelim o Neale, that his Lady was dead, and to be buried on the
Sunday following; this being on the Satterday, and desiring mein all kindness
to come to the buri^ll; and Mr. Relly having received another Letter to the
same effect, would needs have me go thither, (whereunto I was very unwilling,
being weary withal, not provided to go to such a meeting) as well (said he) to
prevent any iealousy from the Ladies friends, as also, to confer with Sir
Phelim touching all these proceeedings, (for neither he nor I did ever speak
with Sir Phellim concerning those matters before) but to his Brother Tirolagh o
Neale, and coming thither, we found Captain Bryan o Neale, lately come out of
the Low Countries, sent over by Col: o Neale, to speak to and provoke those of
Vlster to rise out into Arms, and that he would be with them on notice of
their day; the same day or soon after it: and it was asked of the said Captain,
what aid he could send or procure, being but a private Collonell, or where he
could get any? he replied that the said Col: told him, that he had sent to
several places that Summer to demand aid, Note.
and in particular to Cardinal Richelieu into France (to whom he had sent
twice that year) and had comfortable and very hopeful promises from them, and
especially from that Cardinal on whom he thought the Collonell did most
depend, so that there was no doubt to be made of succor from him, and
especially when they had risen out, that would be a means to the Cardinal to
give aid: Note.
We did the more credit him in regard of the former Treaty between the said
Cardinal and the Earl of Tyrone, as formerly is said; for my own part, I did
and do believe that the Col: does depend on France for aid; more then on any
other place, as well for these reasons, as also that Ever Macmahone formerly
mentioned told me, that presently after the Isle of Rees enterprise (he being
then in the Low Country, did hear for certain that the Earl of Tyrone together
with the Collonell did send into France to the Marshall of France (that was
general of the French Forces at the Isle of Ree) to deal with him for Note.
procuring of aid to come then for Ireland, and that he received an answer
from the said Marshall, that he was most willing and ready to contribute his
endeavors for his furtherance therein, but that for the present he could not
answer my Lords expectation, by reason that the King had wars in Italy, which
he thought would be at an end within half a year or little more, and then my
Lord should not doubt of any thing that he could do for his assistance, but
those continued a great deal longer, so for that time that enterprise faild: So
after the Burial was done, I gave these Gentlemen knowledge of what I had done
at Dublin, and how I was to retire thither, and then they began to think how to
surprise Londonderry, they being near it, but could not then agree in the
manner; and so Sir Phelim desired me to take his horse in my way going to
Dublin, and that I should have a resolution to carry with me touching
Londonderry, and thereon I parted home; but soon after came to Dublin, to the
before appointed meeting with those Collonells: But first, I took in my way Sir
Phellim o Neales house to be certain what he had done; and his answer was, that
he knew that matters could not be put in execution by the 5. of October, as was
appointed, and that they would make another longer day for it, and that he
would provide for the taking of Londonderry by that day; and so I came to
Dublin, to give an account of that was done, and also know what further should
be done: I was not two hours in my lodging, when Mr. Moore came to me (who
knew of what was done by those Colonells formerly from Col. Burn, and told me
that the Messenger sent to Colonel Neale was come with answer, desiring us not
to delay any time in rising out, and to let him know of that day beforehand,
and that he would not fail to be with us within fourteen days of that day
with good aid, also desiring us by any means to seize the Castle of Dublin if
we could, Note.
for he heard that there was great provision in it for War, and Mr. Moore
moreover said, that time was not to be over-slipped, and desired me to be very
pressing with the Col. to go on in their resolution; but on meeting the Col.
with them they were fallen from their resolution, because those of the Pale
would do nothing therein first, but when it was done they would not fail to
assist us; Col. Pluncket did affirm, and so by several meetings it was
resolved on by them to desist from that enterprise for that time, and to expect
a more convenient time; but before that their resolution Sir Phelim O Neale,
and the aforesaid Capt Brion O Neale followed me to Dublin (as they said) to
assist and advise me how to proceed with that Colonel (but neither they nor
Mr. Moore would be seen therein themselves to those Gent. but would meet me
privately, and know what was done at every meeting, alleging for excuse, that
I being first employed in that matter, it would not be expedient that they
should be seen in it. And moreover they would not know to be in the Town but
by a few of their friends, until they were in a manner ready to depart the
Town, at least as long as I was in Town, for I left them there: But when I
made them acquainted with their determination of desisting from that
enterprise, they thought it convenient that we should meet with Mr. Moore, and
Col. Burn, to see what was further to be done concerning the former intention
of their own, and accordingly we did send to them that they should meet us,
and on that meeting it was where was only Sir Phelim, Mr. Moore, Colonel
Burn, Captain Neale and my self; after long debate it was resolved, Note.
that we with all those that were of our Faction should go on with that
determination that was formerly made, concluded to, to rise out; moreover to
seize on the Castle (as the Collonells were purposed, for if it were not for
their project and the advice sent by Col: Neale, we would never venture to
surprise it, neither was it ever thought on in all the meetings and resolutions
between, before that those Collonells did resolve on it; but by reason that the
other Gent. that were privy to these proceedings were not present, the
certainty of the time, and the manner how to execute it, was put off to a
further meeting in the country, and this was resolved in Dublin on the Sunday
at night being the 26. or 27. of Septem. and that meeting was appointed on the
Saturday following, at Mac Collo mac Mohones house in Farney in the county of
Monaghan, and thereupon we all left the Town, only Sir Phelim stayed about
some other his private occasions* but did assare his being there at that day;
and by reason that at that meeting the Gent. of Leinster could not be,
considering the remoteness of the place from them, it was thought fit that Mr.
Moore should there meet to receive the final resolution, and should acquaint
them therewith; and in the mean time Colonel Burn, who had undertaken for Col.
Pluncket, should inform them all of the intention conceived, and dispose them
in readiness against that day that should be appointed; on Saturday I came to
Mr. Mac Mohones house, there met only Mr. Mac Mohone himself, Captain Neale,
Ever Mac Mohone, and my self, (and thither that same day came the Messenger
that was sent to Col. Neale, and did report the Colonells Answer, and advise
verbatim, as I have formerly repeated from Mr. Moore) and by reason that Sir
Phelim his Brother or Mr. Philip Relly that were desired to meet, did not meet,
we stayed that night to expect them, and that nigh^ I received a letter from
Sir Phelim, entreating us by any means not to expect him until the Monday
following, for he had nor could dispatch some occasions merely concerning him,
but whatsoever came of them, he would not fail on the Monday, and the next day
after receipt of the letter being Sunday (by Mr. Moors advise) we depared from
Col. Mac Mahones house, to prevent (as he said) the suspicion of the English
there (many living near to Long^ros^e in the County of Ardmagh to Mr. Torilagh
O Neales house, not Sir Phelims brother, but son to Mr. Henry O Neale of the
Fires) son in Law to Mr. Moore, and left word that if Sir Phelim, or any of
those Gent. did come in the mean time they should follow us thither, (whether
only went Mr. Moore, Captain O Neale and my self) and there we expected until
the Tuesday subsequent, before any of those did come: On the Tuesday came Sir
Phelim and Ever Mac Mahone, all the rest failing to come, Mr. Mac Mahones wife
was dead the night before, which was the cause that he was not there, but I
gave his assent to what should be concluded to win therein, and execute what
should be appointed him, and then we sive, viz. Sir Phelim, Mr. Moore, Captain
O Neale, Ever Mac Mahone, and my self, assuring our selves that those Gent.
absent would both allow and join to what we should determine, did grow into a
final resolution, grounding all or most part of our hope and confidence on the
succor from Col. Neale, to seize on the Castle, and rise out all in one day,
and the day was appointed on the 23. of that month (this being the fifth day
of September, having regard therein to the day of the week whereon that day
did fall, which was the Saturday, being the Market day, on which day there
would be less notice taken of people up and down the streets; Then began a
question who should be deputed for the surprisall of the Castle, and then Mr.
Moore said he would be one of them himself, and that Col. Burn should be
another, and what other Gent, of Leinster they could procure to join with
them; and seeing the Castle had two Gates, the one the great, and the other the
little Gate, going down to my Lord Lieutenants Stables, hard by which Stable
without the Castle was the Storehouse for Arms, they of Leinster would
undertake one Gate, and that should be the little Gate, and the Gate should be
undertaken by those of Ulster, and (said he) of necessity one of you both
(meaning Sir Phelim and me) must be there for the mere countenance of that
matter, it being the glory of all our proceedings, and all that his speeches
were well liked of all present, but Sir Phelim would be exempted from that
employment, and so would I, but then all of them set on me, desiring me to be
one, Note.
alleging for reason that their proceedings and resolutions were very
honorable and glorious, it being for Religion, and for to procure more liberty
for their Country, as did (say they) of late Scotland, and that in taking the
Castle consisted all the glory and honor of that said Act, all which should be
attributed to them which should be employed therein, and so by consequence all
or most part to be there, Note.
being (as they said) the chief in that enterprise, and more, Sir Phelim said,
that he would endeavor to take or procure others to take LONDONDERRY the same
day, and if he should be away that place would not be taken: with these, and
many other persuasions they obtained my consent, and then the Captain offered
himself; they began to think what number should be employed in that Act, and
they concluded on two hundred men, a hundred from each Province for those
States which they seize on: of which number Sir Phelim O Neale should send
forty with an able sufficient Gentleman to conduct them, and likewise Captain
Neall twenty, Mr. Colonel Mac Mahone, Mr. Relly, ten more, and I should bring
twenty two. Then began a doubt how they should raise those men, and convey them
to Dublin without suspicion? and it was answered, that under pretense of
carrying them to those Colonells that were conveying soldiers out of the
Kingdom, it might safely be done; and to that purpose Sir Phelim O Neale, Mr.
Moore, and the Captain had several blanke Pattent^ with deputations to make
Captains to those Colonells, which they sent to those Gentry that should send
men to Dublin: for the more color they be thought of what was to be done in
the Country that day, Note.
and it was resolved that every one privy to that matter in every part of the
Kingdom should rise out that day, and seize on all the Forts and Arms in the
several Counties, to make all the Gentry Prisoners, the more to assure
themselves against any averse fortune, and not to kill any but where of
necessity they should be forced thereunto by opposition (and that those that
were appointed for taking the Castle should observe) and in particular the
Gentry: all their Army in Ulster to take that day London Derry, which Sir
Phelim did undertake, and Knockfergus which they thought Sir Henry Mac O Neale
would do, and to that end Sir Phelims brother Terlagh O Neale should be sent
to them; and the Nu^ie, which should be undertaken by Sir Conne Kenish, and his
Brothers, for whom Sir Phelim (in regard they were his Brothers in Law, his
deceased Lady being their Sister) did undertake: Moreover it was agreed, that
Sir Phelim, Mr. Relly, Mr. Coll^ Mac Mahone and my Brother should, with all the
speed they could after that day, raise all the forces they could, and follow us
to Dublin, but to arm the men and succor us, and defend and Garrison the
Town and Castle, and likewise Master Moore should appoint Leinster Gentry to
send like supply of men. Then there was fear of the Scots conceived, that they
should presently oppose themselves, and that that would make the matter more
difficult, and to avoid which danger, it was resolved on not to meddle with
them, or any thing belonging to them, and to demean themselves toward them as
if they were of themselves, which they thought would pacify them from any
opposition, Note.
and if the Scots would not accept of that offer of Amity, but would oppose
them, they were in good hope to cause a stir in Scotland that might divert them
from them, and I believe the ground for that hope was, that two years before,
in or about the beginning of the Sco^s troubles, my Lord of Tirone sent one
Torilagh O Neale (a Priest) out of Spain, and that this I take it was the time
that he was in Treaty with Cardinal Richelieu to my Lord of Argile, to treat
with him for help from my Lord, for him to come into Ireland as was said for
Marriage, between the said Earl and my Lord of Argiles Daughter (or Sister, I
know not which) and this Messenger was in Ireland, with whom Mr. Torilagh O
Neale, Sir Phelims Brother had conference from whom this relation was had: that
said Messenger went into Scotland, as I did hear from the said Mr. Neale, or
from Emer Mac Mahone before named; I know not from which of them; but what he
did there I could never hear, by reason that my Lord of Tyrone was presently
after killed: They were the more confirmed therein, hearing that my Lord of
Argile did say (near on the same time as I guess, and when the Army was
raised in Ireland as I think) to a great Lady in Scotland, I know not her
name, but did hear that she was much embarked in the troubles of that
Kingdom; Note.
then she questioning how they could subsist against the two Kingdoms of
England and Ireland, that if the King did endeavor to stir Ireland against
them, he would kindle such a fire in Ireland as would hardly or never be
quenched: And moreover, they knew my Lord to be powerful with the Ilanders,
Red-shankes in Scotland, whom they thought would be prone and ready to such
Actions, they for the most part disce^ded out of Ireland, holding the Irish
Language, manners still, and so we parted. The next day being Wednesday, from
Lough Rosse every man went about his own task, and so when I came home I
acquainted my Brother with all that was done, and what they had appointed him to
do, and did like according as they appointed me, send to Mr. Relly to let him
know as much, and the 18. of the same month I began my Journey to Dublin, and
when I came to Dublin (being the day before the appointed day of putting that
resolution in execution there, I met with Captain Conn O Neale, sent out of
the Low Countries by Colonel O Neale, who was sent after the Messenger sent by
us formerly to the said Colonel, was by him dispatched with his Answer) to
encourage us in our resolution, Note.
and to speedy performance, with assurance of succor, which he said would not
^aile of the Colonells behalf, and for the more certainty of help from him,
and to assure us that the Colonel had good hopes to procure aid from others;
he said, that it was he himself that was employed from him to Cardinal
Richelieu twice, that some men who gave very fair promises to assure the
Colonells expectation, Note.
with which he said that the said Colonel was really with himsel^e assured of
the Cardinals aid, and that he was likewise commanded by the Colonel upon
our Resolution of the day to give notice thereof to him, and that he would be
within fourteen days over with them with aid, but he landed nine or ten days
before, and meeting with Captain Brian O Neale, who made him acquainted with
what was resolved, he did write all the matter to Col. O Neale, so as he was
sure of his speedy coming; and so that Evening he and I came to meet the other
Gentry, and there were met Mr. Moore, Col. Burn, Col. Pluncket, Captain Fox,
and other Leinster Gentry, a Captain I think of the Burns, but I am not sure
whether a Burn or Tool, and Captain Bryan O Neale, and taking an account of
those that should have been there, it was found that Sir Phelim O Neale, Mr.
Col. Mac Mahone did fail of sending their men, and Col. Burn did miss Sir
Morgan Kennanaugh that had promised him to be there, but he said he was sure he
would not fail to be that night or the next morning in Town, and of the two
hundred men that was appointed there was only eighty present, yet
notwithstanding they were resolved to go on in their resolution, and all the
difference was at what time of the day they would set on the Castle; and after
some debate it was resolved in the afternoon, and the rather hoping to meet
the Col. there then, for they said, if they should take the Castle, and be
enforced by any extremity for not receiving timely succor out of the Country
(having them they could not want) and so parred that night, but to meet in the
morning to see further what wrs ^o be done; and immediately thereon I came to my
Chamber, and about nine of the clock Mr. Moore, and Captain Fox came to me
and told me all was discovered, and that the City was in Arms, and the Gates
were shut up, and so departed from me, and what became of them or of the rest I
know not, nor think that they escaped, but how and at what time I do not
know, because I my self was taken that morning.

To this I shall add his Examinations taken before the Lords Justices of
Ireland, and since in England

The Examination of Connor Lord Magwire, Baron of Eniskillin, taken before us,
Charles Lord Lambart, and Sir Robert Meredith Knight, Chancell^r of his
Majesty's Court of Exchequer, the 26. day of March 1642. by Direction of the
Right Honorable the Lords Justices and Council.
Who being Examined says, That about the time when Mr. John Bellew came out
of England with ^he Commission for the continuance of the present Parliament,
Koger Moore, in the said Moors Chamber in the house of one Peter de Costres of
this City, acquainted him this Examinant; that, if the Irish would rise, they
might make their own condition for the regaining of their own Lands and
freedom of their Religion, Note.
at which time the said Moore also acquainted him this Examinant, that he had
spoken with sundry of Leinster who would be ready for that purpose, and withal
told him this Examinant, that he was assured a good part of Conaght would do
the like, and thereupon moved this Examinant to join likewise with them with
all he could make, unto which motion he this Examinant yielded. And the next
day following, there was a meeting in his the said Moors Chamber aforesaid*
where were Col: Mac Bryan, Macmahone, Tir^lagh o N^ale, Philip mac Hugh o Rely
this, Examinant, and Roger Moore, where discourse was had of that busi^esse,
yet nothing concluded on; save that Roger Moore and the rest should go and
prepare their parties: And this Examinant further says, That about May l^st,
he this Examinant, Roger Moore, Philip o Rely, and Roger mac Guire, this
Examinants Bro^her, dispatched a Priest, one Tool o Conleij, who lived in
Leinster, unto Owen o Neale into Flanders to acquaint him with the business
concerning the General Rebellion then in preparation, Note.
which said Priest re^urned about a Month before the time appointed for
execution thereof: And the answer which the said Priest brought from the said
Owen o Neale was, that he would (within fifteen days after the people were up)
be with them with his best Assistance and Arms; and it being demanded why he
said Owen should bring Arms considering the C^stle of Dublin was to be taken
and the Arms therein. This Examinant answered, that they so provided for
Arms, that they might not want any in case they could not take the said
Castle, whereof they doubted: And this Examinant acknowledges, That the Castle
of Dublid, was to have been surprised by himself, Captain Bryan o Neale,
Captain Con o Neale Captain Macmahone, one Owen o Rely, Roger Moore Hugh
Macmahone, Col: Pluncket, and Captain Fox, and likewise further acknowledges,
that Hugh mac Pheli^^, Captain Con o Neale, and Bryan o Neale, brought from
Owen o Neale out of Flanders, the very same Message which the said Priest
brought: And this Examinant further says, That he was told by Roger Moore,
that a great Man was in the Plot, but he might not name him for the present:
And at another time, and during the sitting of the Parliament; the last Summer,
he this Examinant was informed by one John Barnwell, a Tranciscan Friar then
resident in this City, that those of the Pale were also privy unto the Plot
(meaning the present Rebellion) and lastly says, That of those persons who
came to attend him this Examinant for the surprise of the said Castle of Dublin
only Cohonough Maguire, was privy unto the business in hand, and that the last
meeting (when the day appointed for execution thereof was resolved on) was at
Logh Rosse, where were present only, Note.
Ever Macmahone Vicar General of the Diocese of Clogher, Thomas mac Kearnan,
a Friar of Dundalk, Sir Phelim o Neale, Roger Moore, and Bryan o Neale.

Charles Lambart. Rob: Meredith. Concordat cum Originali. Ex. per Paul Harris.

Memorandum, That this within written being showed and read unto the within
named Lord Maguire, and himself having perused the same, his Lordship did
acknowledge the same to be true in all things, saving, that he does not now
acknowledge that Barnwell told him, that those of the Pale were privy to the
Plot; neither does acknowledge, that Cohonagh Maguire was privy to the Plot,
before his coming to Dublin.

This Examination and acknowledgement, was made and taken the 22. day of June,
1642. Anno Regni Caroli Regis deremo ditum, before us.

John Bramstone. Thomas Malet.

In the presence of Io. Conyers. W. Ayloffe. Nath. Finch.


The Examination of Cornelius Maguire, Lord Baron of Eniskillin in Ireland,
taken before Isaac Pennington Esquire Lieutenant of the Tower of London; and
Laurence Whitaker Esquire two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, for the
County of Middlesex, the first day of October. 1644.
HE denies the receiving of any Letters or Messages out of England before the
Rebellion, nor did he ever hear of any. He, says he* was but a mean Instrument
in the design in Ireland: He confesses, he intended to Seize upon the Castle
of Dublin, and the Magazine there, and keep it till they had redress of some
grievances, which they purposed to propound to the Parliament there: One
whereof was, to have a Toleration of the Roman Catholic Religion. He
confesses that he came accidentally to Phillip Rellyes house as he came up to
Dublin; and as he remembers, Mr. Macmahone was then there, and that his
intention of coming up to Dublin, was to put the aforesaid design in execution,
and that then and there, they had speech about that design; but remembers not
the particulars: Which design was to be put in execution the 23. day of October.
in that year, and that he was taken there that very day, being Saturday upon
search made for him, carried before the Lords Justices, examined, committed and
sent over into England.

He says further, that he made his escape out of the Tower of London, upon
Sunday the 18, of August last, about four of the clock in the Morning.

Laurence Whitaker. Isaac Pennington.


The Examinations of Hugh Macmahone, taken at Dublin in this conspiracy, since
condemned of High Treason in the Kings Bench, and executed as a Traitor at
Tiburn the last Michaelmas Term, I concur in substance with the L. Maguires:
and here follow in their order of time.

The Examination of Hugh oge Macmahone of Connagh, in the county of Monoghan
Esquire aged 35. years, or thereabouts, taken before the Right Honorable, the
Lords Justices and Council.
THe said Examinant says, That he thinks here will be trouble this day
throughout all the Kingdom of Ireland, Note.
and that all the Fortifications of Ireland will be this day taken as he
thinks: Note.
And he says, that he thinks that it is so far gone by this time, that all
Ireland cannot help it: He says that he was told this by Captain Bryan o
Neale. He says that Captain Bryan o Neale, and Captain Hugh Birne, were
designed for surprising the Castle of Dublin; and that if he, this Examinant
were one for surprising the Castle of Dublin, those two Captains were
principal therein. He says the place of meeting was to be at the Examinants
Lodging. He says that twenty prime men out of every County in Ireland were to
be at Dublin this last night concerning that matter; and that they were to
consult of it this Morning at the Examinants Lodging* Their Weapons were to be
Swords and Skenes, and that the Captains that were raising men in the Irish
Countries, were they that should send men hither to second the business. He
says, when they had Dublin, they made sure of the rest, and expected to be
furnished with more Arms at Dublin. He said, I am now in your hands, use me as
you will, Note.
I am sure I shall be shortly Revenged: And being demanded whither the Lord
Maguire was one appointed to this business; he at last said, he thought he was.

William Parsons.

R. Dillon. Ad. Loftus. I. Temple. Tho: Rotherham. Robert Meredith. Hugh mac
Mohone his Examination, the 22. of March, 1641.
HE says, that Sir Phelim o N^ale, the Lord Maguire, and Philip mac Hugh o
Relli, were the first complotters and contrivers of the late Rebellion in
Ireland.

He further says, that the said Sir Phelim, the said Lord Maguire, and the
said Philip mac Hugh o Relli, Note.
did tell him this Examinant, that all the parties who were See the good
effects of the Lo^ Straffords ballancing the Irish P^ote^ stants with Papists
in Parliaments here, p. 117, 118.
Parliament men at the Session of Parliament holden about May last, that were
Papists, did know of the intended Rebellion in Ireland, and did approve of the
said Rebellion.

He further says, that Philip mac Hugh o Relly did tell to this Examinant
about May last at Dublin, that the Committee or Agents who were employed into
England by the Parliament, would procure an Order or Commission from the King,
to Au^horize the Papists of Ireland, to proceed in their Rebellious courses,
and that the said Philip mac Hugh o Relly, did also tell him the same again in
October last, in the County of Monoghan, a little before the 23. of October; at
which time this Examinant came to this Town.

He also says, that Col: Mac Bryan mac Hone, upon a Wednesday being the 20. of
October last, did at his own house tell to this Examinant, that the King had
given a Commission to the Papists of Ireland, to seize upon all the Garrisons
and strong holds in Ireland, Note.
and that this Examinant should see the said Commission at his coming to
Dublin, and that Captain Bryan o Neale, Grandchild to Sir Turloe mac Henry
should bring this Examinant to the Agent, who was one of the Committees that
did bring the Commission out of England, but the Agents name the said Col: mac
Bryan, did not, or could not tell him.

He further says, that his Nephew Philip mac Hugh O Relli, about six days
before the 23. of October last, being at his own house of Ballanecarrick, did
tell this Examinant, that the Lord Maguire would be at Dublin upon the 23. of
October last, to take the Castle of Dublin; and this Examinant did then promise
to be there at the same time, to the same end and purpose* if he did see the
Commission.

He further says, that Captain Brian O Neale meeting with this Examinant at
Finglas near to Dublin, upon the 22. of October, did tell this Examinant that
there would be twenty persons out of every county in the Kingdom, to assist in
the taking of the Castle of Dublin.

He says further, that Art. mac Hugh Oge mac Mohone came in the company of
this Examinant to this city of Dublin, to assist in the taking the Castle of
Dublin.

He further says, that Collo mac Brian mac Mohone did procure Rory Oge mac
Patrick mac Mohone, to persuade Patrick mac Art mac Mohone, and Patrick man
Owen mac Mohone, Ardell mac Patrick mac Mohone, and two other mac Mo^ones,
whose names he knows not, and Donogh o Finely to come to Dublin, to assist in
the taking of the Castle of Dublin, who were all apprehended in the house in
Dublin, together with this Examinant.

Fr. Willoughby. Concordat cum originali. Exam. Paul Harris.

The said Hugh mac Mohone having heard this his Examination taken in Ireland
the 22. of March last now read unto him, he does acknowledge the same to be
true in all parts, Note.
as the same is therein set down; save only that by the Rebellion in Ireland,
mentioned in the third line thereof, he meant and intended the Rebellion in
Ulster, and the intent and attempt to take the Castle of Dublin* And says,
that Sir Phelim O Neale and the Lord Maguire, did not tell him that the parties
who were Parliament men, did know of the intended Rebellion in Ireland, or did
approve thereof; but says, that Philip mac Hugh O Rely first in May 1641.
covertly and afterward on Monday next before the 23. of October last, did tell
this Examinant in express words, and that the matter of the Rebellion, did
first begin and proceed amongst the Parliament men in Ireland Note.
in the last Parliament there: And this Examinant says, he is Grandchild to
Hugh late Earl of Tyrone, and that this Examinant is of the age of 35. years
or thereabouts, and was born at Rusleigh, in the County of Monaghan in Ireland:
And this acknowledgement he made 24. Iunii 1642. before us,

John Bramstone. Tho: Malet. Hugh Macmahone.

In the presence of Io. Conyers. W. Ayloffe. Ralph Whitsell. Nath Finch. Io.
Glanvill, William Constantine.


The Examination of Hugh Macmahone taken before Isaac Pennington Esquire,
Lieutenant of the Tower of London, and Laurence Whitaker Esquire, two of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, the first day of
October. 1644.
HE says, that one Philip O Relly told him there was a Commission from the
King sent into Ireland, Note.
and that their design was to assure themselves of the Castle of Dublin till
things were settled, and that 20. out of every Shiere in Ireland should join to
seize upon the Castle, and Magazine of Dublin, and the other strength of that
Kingdom, till they might bring their design to effect, which was to be
assured of some demands which they were to make to the Parliament there; Note.
and that O Relly told him they had a Commission from the King to seize, as he
has said, and told him also he saw a Warrant pretended to be under sir Maurice
Eustace, Speaker of the Parliaments hand to that purpose, and that it was an
agreement amongst them that this seazing should be general throughout the
Kingdom as he was told. He says, that it was one of his businesses that
brought him to Dublin to put this matter in execution, if it could be done in a
fair way, and that O Relly told him all he has said in the May before; and
says that O Relly being then in the County of Cavan, directed twenty to come
up out of the County of Monoghan to put this design in effect, whereof this
Examinant was one, and of that County only seven or eight came up to him; and
says, that the Lord Magwire came up to Dublin about the same time, about the
same design, and that five nights before he met with the Lord Magwire at
Philip O Rellyes house, at which time Philip O Relly related all this to this
Examinant, and the Lord Magwire told him he was to go to Dublin about that
design.

He says, that the 18th. of August last, being Sunday, about four of the
clock in the morning, he did saw in pieces the Door of his Lodging in the
Tower, and with a bed-cord let himself down, and having gotten over two
walls waded through the ditch, and so escaped.

Lawr* Whitaker, Isaa^k Pennington.


The Examination of Hugh Mac Mahone, taken the 20. day of October. 1644.
I. HE says, that the Warrant which Philip O Neale told him of, was for the
seazing of some strong Holds in his Country, Note.
which was the County of Cavan; remembers not whose hand or hands were
subscribed to it besides Sir Maur* Eustaces, and that the intention of that
Warrant was, that the strong Holds of that County should be seized upon until
they of that County had satisfaction unto their demands and grievances, which
were to be presented to the Parliament. He remembers not the date of that
Warrant, nor how long it did bear date before the discovery of the Plot:
remembers not who were acquainted with the Warrant besides Orelly and
himself, saving only one Hugh Orel^y, who was then present, when Philip Orelly
showed it to this Examinant; and Philip Orelly told him that the like Warrant
was to go into all Shieres of that Kingdom, and that it was to be accompanied
with a Commission from the King or with other Copies of it; which he says, he
has That is by some Oxford cavalliers sin^e his escape out of the Tower: S^ he
twice confessed it her^t^fore. p. 238, 239.
since heard to be false.

II. He confesses, he was at Philip Orellyes house five nights before the
discovery of the Rebellion; and that he told him this, except that the design
thereof was resolved upon in the May before, and that the matter touching the
seazing of the Castles of the Kingdom, was referred to a Committee of
Parliament to be considered of; and says, that the Lord Magwire met him that
night at Orellyes house, with his wife and children; but denies, that the Lord
Magwire heard any of the conference which this Examinant had with Philip
Orelly, but only at this Examinants departure from thence in the morning, he
said, he should mere this Examinant in Dublin: but upon better advertisement
this Examinant says, that at his taking leave of the Lord Magwire, this
Examinant said to him; What if the matter be as Orelly said, and that we seize
upon the Castle at Dublin, how if the City stir? The L. Magwire answered; What
should they stir for, when we This he feined since his app^ehension after his
escape the carriage of the Rebels in all other parts, and the Testimonies p.
241, 242, 24^. contradicting it.
will do no body no hurt? perhaps we may shoot off a warning-piece, when we have
taken the Castle, in some void place, or some Chimnies to make a noise.

III. He knows not any thing.

IV. and V. He says, he did discourse about that Plot with one Rory Mac
Mahone, and Kedman Mac Mahone, but did not consult with them about it otherwise
then by telling them, what Philip Orelly had told him; and that he was the
first and last that ever told him of it, and he thinks Rory Mac Mahone, and
Redman are still living, but where he knows not.

VI. He says, that one Art. Mac Mahone, and two Boys did accompany him to
Dublin the 22. of October, of which boys one was 24. or 25. years old, and
the other 16. or 17. which Art. was also taken there and put in prison, and for
the two boys he knows not what became of them, and says, that 8. persons
came up after him out of the County of Monaghan, which were part of the twenty
that were to be sent up out of that County; but remembers not the names of any
of those eight persons, and he spoke not with any of them.

VII. He says, that Ockonelly (as he remembers) told him of the taking of
Charlemon^, or of some stir about it, but by whom it was taken or seized upon
he knows not, if it were taken; nor knows who was at the taking of it.

VIII. He knows the L. Blanyes house in the County of Monaghan, but knows
nothing of the Fort of Mont-Ioy, nor whether there be such a place, or no.

IX. He knows not what Forts or places were taken in this rebellion.

X. He knows most of the parties named in this Inter; but denies that ever
he had any discourse with any of them about the rebellion, more then that he
told two or three of them what Philip Orelly had told him.

XI. He had speech with Con Mac Bryan Mac Mahone, so far as to tell him what
Orelly had told him, but with the other man no speech at all.

XII. No speech with any of them.

XIII. He knows of no other encouragement given to him but that Orelly told
him, that the King did say to Pluncket, stick you to me, and I will stick to
you, and the Commission formerly mentioned which the Lord Since his escape
here, but confesses it here before. p. 231.
Magwire said, was not true.

XIV. Knows no more then he has said, but that Mackennay should come up from
the County of Monaghan with twenty men, to be of the number of those that
should seize the Castle.

Isaac Penington. Lawrence Whitaker.


To these Examinations I shall add this ensuing Testimony which will more
fully discover the bloody intentions of those Conspirators against the
Protestants and English in Ireland.

John Carmicks Testimony upon Oath to the Jury in Court at the Kings Bench in
Westminster Hall, upon the trial of Hugh Oge Mac Mahon, Esquire the 18. of
November, 1644.
THat upon the 21. of October 1641. Fergus O Howen one of the followers or
servants of Bryan Mac Gwire Esquire, came to my Chamber in the Castle of
Eniskillin, in the County of Fermanagh in Ireland, and after, he endeavored to
bind me to keep secret a matter of great concernment, which he said he had to
disclose unto me, and particularly to conceal it from Sir William Cole, and
all other Englishmen: He discovered unto me that the Lord Magwire, and the
above named Hugh Oge Mac Mahon, accompanied with sundry Irish-men of the
Counties of Fermanagh and Monaghan, did take their Iournies out of the said
Counties upon the nineteenth and twentieth days of October, 164^. to the City
of Dublin, with resolution and intent, to surprise, and seize upon his
Majesty's Castle of Dublin, and to murder Note.
and kill his Highness Lords Justices, and Council of the Kingdom of
Ireland, and the rest of the Protestants there; and also to possess themselves
of the City of Dublin, and to put all the Protestants there likewise to the
Sword, and that to that effect; there were other great men and others of the
Papists of that Kingdom to repair unto and meet them in Dublin on Saturday 23.
October. 1641. or there abouts.

And that all the Castles, Forts, Sea^ports, and Holds that were in the
possession of the Protestants in the several Counties and Provinces in the
Kingdom of Ireland, were then also designed and resolv^d to be surprised and
taken by the Irish Papists, and the Protestants in every of those Castles
Forts, Seaports and Holds, Note.
to be then also put all to the sword by the Irish Papists in Ireland, in their
own several parts and limits, by men thereunto chiefly and particularly
appointed by the contrivers thereof.

And especially this Castle and Town of Eniskillin (with the rest) will also
be taken, Note.
and all you that be Protestants in it put to the sword* whereof I give you
this notice, advising you to get your self and goods out of this Town and
Castle with all expedition, and sell your stock, of Cattle, and whatsoever
else you have in the Country, for any money that you can get for them; for I
assure you these things that I tell you will come to pass before it be seven
days next after this day, and this Castle and Town will be no place of refuge
or safety for you; wherefore I desire and advise you again, to get you hence,
with all speed, Note.
for the war against the English and Protestants will be universally raised
throughout the Kingdom of Ireland, which if you find not to be true (as I
say) before it be full fourteen days to an end, then I will give you leave to
cut off my head. Whereupon I presently acquainted Sir William Cole with this,
and even then also one Flartagh Mac Hugh a Gentleman and Freeholder of that
County came to the said Sir William the said one and twentieth of October in
Anno 1641. declaring upon Oath, that the Plot for the surprising of the Castle
and City of Dublin, the Castle of Eniskillin, and all the Castles and strengths
in Ireland (which were in the possession of Protestants in that Kingdom, Note.
together with some further mischief to be done to the Protestants in
general) was to be put in full execution by the Papists upon the 22. and 23.
of October 1641* throughout the said Kingdom: And that Bryan Mac Coconnaught
Mac Gwire Esquire, did send him the said Flartagh Mac Hugh, to give notice and
warning thereof, to the said Sir William Cole, whom he earnestly desired to be
upon his Guard, upon Friday the 22. and Saturday the 23. of October 1641. For
the Lord Magwire, who is gone with Mac Mahon (this Prisoner now at the Ba^) and
others to Dublin this week, with purpose to possess themselves of the Castle
and City of Dublin, has written his letters lately to Conn O Rourke, Owen O
Rourke, Murtagh Oge O Flumagon and others, to go on with that Plot in these
parts; and has appointed his Brother Rory Mac Gwire in his absence to command
the Irish Papists of this County of Fermanagh, for the surprising of the
Castles and houses of the Protestants, and especially this Castle and Town of
Eniskillin. And after he had ended this Relation, he requested the said sir
William Cole and me, that his name should not be used as in discovering of the
said evils, least it should prove his ruin and destruction amongst his
Country men; and thereupon he departed, promising to return with further
Intelligence of the progress of that matter unto the said Sir William Cole.

Of all which the said Sir William dispatched letters of notice unto the Lords
Justices and Council of Ireland the same day, and also gave notice by several
other letters and Messengers to his Neighbors, the undertakers, and other
Protestants in the several parts next adjoining to him.

And yet upon the 23. of October 1641. Redmond Mac Rory Mac Mahon, (cosen
German of the prisoner at the Bar) with armed multitudes and Colors
displayed, did enter into the Town of Clownis, in the county of Monaghan, and
possessed themselves of the Castle and all other houses there, and did rob and
spoil the Protestants, viz. Edward Aldrith Esquire and others, of all their
money, plate, household stuff, goods and chattels, within and without doors,
as Robert Aldrith Gentleman, John Mac Reavy and others affirmed upon Oath,
before the said sir William Cole.

And upon the 23. of October 1641. or there abouts, Art Roe Mac Mahon Esquire,
kinsman of the prisoner at the Bar, did surprise and seize upon the Castle,
Fort, and Town of Monaghan in the County of Monaghan, did rob, strip and
dispoile, hang and kill the Protestants there; as namely, Richard Blayney
Esquire, a Parliament man, Luke Ward Gentleman and others, and did then also
imprison the Lady Blayney, wife of Henry Lord Blayney, and some of her servants
and others Protestants, as was also affirmed upon Oaths of the persons
aforesaid, before the said sir William Cole.

And Colonel Mac Bryan, Mac Mahon of Fearney (being the Earl of Essex his
Lands in that County) another kinsman of the prisoner at the Bar, did break out
the same time into open Rebellion in the said County of Monaghan, he being a
Papist* and a Member of the Parliament then in Ireland, as was also affirby the
persons aforesaid upon Oath before the said sir William Cole.

And Neill Mac Kennay of the Troogh Esquire, another kinsman of the prisoner at
the Bar, did rebel the day aforesaid, in manner aforesaid, in the said County
of Monaghan, and did seize upon the Castle of Glosslogh, and imprison Mr.
Robert Barkclay a Protestant Minister, and his wife, after he had robbed them
of all their goods: he the said Minister and others did upon Oath also affirm
before the said Sir William Cole, and Redmond Mac Mahon, cosen German of the
prisoner at the Bar, with Colors displayed, and armed multitudes did upon the
18. day of December 1641. or there abouts, come with Rory Mac Gwire with armed
men, in all to the number of 1500. or there abouts, before the Castle of
Lisgoole in the County of Fermanaugh in Ireland, where they murdered and
burned Thomas Grahum Gentleman, Matthew Moore a Protestant Minister, Richard
Peasant, Richard Rainebow, and others to the number of one hundred thirty and
one protestants or there abouts.

And also the same Rebels afterward, viz. upon the 25. of December, 1641. or
there abouts, after quarter given unto Tho. Trotter, Francis Trotter, Alexander
Bell, and other Protestants, to the number of 152. persons or there abouts,
which for safety of their lives, fled into the Castle of Tully in the County of
Fermanagh, belonging to sir Geo* Hume Baronet, Note.
did murder them all, and then burned the said Castle the same day, which was
done by the command or permission of the said Rory Mac Gwire, brother of the
said Lord Mac Gwire, by the aggravation and council of one Patrick O Cassedie a
papist Friar, who concluded his invective Exhortation in these or the like
words, Note.
I will take the sin and guilt of the blood of these Heretics upon my Soul,
and do absolve you all thereof, and therefore spare not one of them.

This proved upon Examination of Edmond Grace, Rich: Fawcet, and diverse other
English Protestants (that were then present) upon oath before the said Sir
William Cole, whose Examinations I did write, and did see and hear the several
examinants depose the same. And I did see the said Castles on fire about the
times aforesaid.

And further I say, that I have heard sundry credible persons in Ireland
relate, that the Roman Catholics in that Kingdom, Note.
did brag and report that they did destroy 152000. Protestants in the province
of Ulster, in the beginning of this late Rebellion; and the Examinations of
sundry English and Scotch men protestants (taken upon Oath at several times by
Sir William Cole a Justice of Peace in the County of Fermanagh in Ireland) does
particularly show the number of 764* Protestants hanged, killed, burned, and
drowned in that County by the Rebels there in that Rebellion, besides many
that were cut off, touching whom no evidence could appear.

And it was averred upon the Oaths of Flartagh mac Hugh, John Oge mac Hugh, and
Terlagh Oge Mac Hugh before the said Sir William Cole, that 150. men were
appointed to surprise the Castle of Eniskillin, under the leading of Don
Magwire and Bryan Mac Rory, Mac Gwire, Note.
who were to murder the said Sir William Cole and his wi^e, children and
servants, and throw them over the wall into the River, and then to do the like
unto the Protestants in the Town and Corporation of Eniskillin; for which
service they were not only to have the spoil and riches of the said Castle and
Town, but to have also the Barony of Clanawley granted and confirmed in Fee to
them and their Heirs from the said Lord Mac Gwire and his Heirs. And the said
Don Mac Gwire was for the same taken (in February or March last, or there
abouts by the said Sir William Cole, to whom he confessed upon his Examination,
that he was to have surprised and taken the Castle and Town of Eniskillin the
23. of Octo. 1641. but denied that he had any intent to kill the said Sir
William, or his wife, or children; wherefore the said Sir William did commit
him to prison in his Majesty's goal at Eniskillin about February or March 1643.
where he remained the 18. of May 1644. when the said sir William and my self
came on his Journey hither into England, and where I believe he yet continues
in safe custody, and so will until he be brought to Justice. John Carmick.

The like was then attested by Sir William Cole, Sir William Hamilton, Sir
Arthur Loftus, Sir Charles Co^t and others, upon oath at this Trial; and that
the Irish Rebels did rip up diverse Irish wom^ns bellies great with child, and
toss their Infants upon their pikes, and throw them to their dogs to eat,
ravished some to death, buried others alive, drowned others, after quarter, and
used unheard of cruelties of sundry kinds, without provocation. And yet now
they must be reputed the Kings good subjects, and sent for over into England to
commit the like cruelties on us here; which should cause all English men's
hearts and bloods to rise up for vengeance against such blood-sucking Villains.

The manner of the discovery of that Conspiracy, and apprehension of some of
the Conspirators, who were to surprise Dublin last, is thus expressed by the
Lords Justices of Ireland, in a Letter to the Earl of Leicester then Lord
Deputy, extracted out of the Original.

The Lords Justices of Irelands Letters to the Earl of Leicester, etc. October.
1641.
MAy it please your Lordship: On Friday the 22. of this Month after nine of
the clock at night, this bearer Owen Connelly, servant to Sir John Clotworthy
Knight, came to me the Lord Justice Parsons to my house, and in great secrecy (as
indeed the case did require) discovered unto me a most wicked and damnable
Conspiracy, plotted and contrived, and intended to be also acted by some
evill-affected Irish Papists here. The Plot was on the next morning, Saturday
the 23. of October. being Ignatius day, about nine of the clock to surprise his
Majesty's Castle of Dublin, his Majesty's chief strength of this Kingdom,
wherein also is the principal Magazine of his Majesty's Arms and Ammunition,
and it was agreed (it seems) amongst them; that the same hour all other his
Majesty's Forts, and Magazins of Arms and Ammunition in this Kingdom should
be surprised by others of those Conspirators; and further, Note.
that all the Protestants and English throughour the whole Kingdom that would
not join with them should be cut off, and so those Papists should then become
possessed of the government and Kingdom at the same instant.

As soon as I had that Intelligence, I then immediately repaired to the Lord
Justices Palace, and thereupon we instantly Assembled the Council, and having
sat in Council all that night, as also all the next day, the 23. of October,
in regard of the short time left us for the consultation of so great and
weighty a matter: although it was not possible for us upon so few hours
warning, to prevent those other great mischiefs which were to be acted even at
that same hour, and at so great a distance as in all the other parts of the
Kingdom; yet such was our industry therein, having that night caused the
Castle to be that night strengthened with armed men, and the City guarded as the
united counsels of those evil persons (by the great mercy of God to us)
became defeated, so as they were not able to Act that part of their Treachery
which indeed was principal, and which if they could have effected would have
ended the rest of their purposes the more easy. Having so secured the Castle,
we forthwith laid about for the apprehension of as many of the offenders as we
could, many of them having come to this City, but that night intending (it
seems) the next morning to Act their parts in those treacherous and bloody
crimes.

The first man apprehended was one Hugh Mac Mahone Esquire (Grand-so^n to the
Traitor Tirone) a Gentleman of a good fortune in the County of Monoghan; who
with others was taken that morning in Dublin, having at the time of their
apprehension offered a little resistance, with their swords drawn; but finding
those we employed against them more in number, and better armed yielded: He
upon his Examination before us at first denied all, but in the end when he saw
we laid it home to him, he confessed enough to destroy himself, and impeach
some others, as by a Copy of his Examination herewith sent may appear to your
Lordship. We then committed him until we might have further time to examine
him again, our time being become more needful to be employed in Action for
securing this place then in examining.

This Mac Mahon had been abroad, and served the King of Spain as a Lieutenant
Colonel.

Upon conference with him and others, and calling to mind a Letter we received
the week before from sir William Cole, a Copy whereof we send your Lordship,
here enclosed we gathered that the Lord Magwire (was to be an Actor in
surprising the Castle of Dublin; wherefore we held it necessary to secure him
immediately, thereby also to startle and deter the rest when they found him laid
fast: his Lordship observing what we had done, and the City in Arms, fled from
his Lodging early before day (it seems) disguised, for we had laid a watch
about his Lodging, so as we think he could not pass without disguising
himself, yet he could not get forth of the City, so surely guarded were all
the gates.

There were found at his Lodging hidden some Hatchets with the Helves newly cut
off close to the Hatchets, Note.
and many Skeines, and some Hammers. In the end the Sheriffs of the City, whom
we employed in strict search of his Lordship, found him hidden in a Cockloft,
in an obscure house far from his Lodging, where they apprehended him, and
brought him before us.

He denied all, yet so as he could not deny but he had heard of it in the
Country, though he would not tell us when or from whom; and confessed that he
had not advertised us thereof as in duty he ought to have done. But we were so
well satisfied of his guilt by all circumstances, as we doubted not upon
further Examination when we could be able to spare time for it, find it
apparent; wherefore we hold it of absolute necessity to commit him close
prisoner, as we had formerly done, Mac Mahone and others, where we left them on
the 23. of this month in the morning, about the same hour they intended to
have been Masters of that place, and this City.

That morning also we laid wait for all those Strangers that came the night
before to Town, and so many were apprehended, whom we find reason to belive to
have hands in this Conspiricy, as we were forced to disperse them into several
Goales; and we since found that there came many Horsemen into the Suburbs that
night, who finding the Plot discovered, dispersed themselves immediately.

When the hour approached, which was designed for surprising the Castle, great
numbers of Strangers were observed to come to Town in great parties several
ways, who not finding admittance at the Gates, staid in the Suburbs, and there
grew numerous, to the terror of the Inhabitantss; we therefore to help that,
drew up, and instantly signed a Proclamation, commanding all men, not dwellers
in the City or Suburbs, to depart within an hour upon pain of death, and made
it alike penal to those that should harbor them; which Proclamation the
Sheriff Immediately proclaimed in all the Suburbs by our commandment, which
being accompanied with the example and terror of the committall of those two
eminent men and other, occasioned the departure of those multitudes: And in
this case all our lives and fortunes, and above all, his Majesty's Power and
regal Authority being still at the stake, Note.
we must vary from ordinary proceedings, not only in executing Martial Law as
we see cause, but also in putting some to the Rack to find out the bottom of
this Treason, and all the Contrivers thereof, which we foresee will not
otherwise be done.

On that 23 day of this Month, we conceiving that as soon as it should be
known, that the Plot for s^izing Dublin Castle was disappointed, all the
Conspiratos in the remote parts, might be somewhat disheartened; as on the other
side, the good Subjects would be comforted, and would then with the more
confidence stand on their guard, did prepare to send abroad to all parts of the
Kingdom this Proclamation, which we send you herein enclosed, and so having
provided that the City and Castle should be so well guarded, as upon the
sudden we could provide, we concluded that long continued consultation.

On Saturday at twelve of the clock at night, the Lord Blaney came to Town, and
brought us the ill news of the Rebels seizing with 200 men his House (at
Castle Blainey, in the Countey of Monoghan, and his wife, children, and
servants; as also a House of the Earl of Essexs called Carrickmacrosse with
200 men, and a house of Sir Henry Spotwords in the same County with 200 men,
where there being a little Plantation of British, Note.
they plundered the Town and diverse houses, and it since appears that they
burnt diverse other Villages, and robbed and spoiled many English and none but
Protestants, leaving the English Papists untouched as well as the Irish.

On Sunday morning at three of the clock, we had intelligence from Sir Arthur
Tir^ingham, that the Irish in the Town had that day also broken up the Kings
store of Arms, and Munition at Newry, where the store for Arms has been ever
since the Peace, and where they found threescore and ten barrels of Powder, and
armed themselves, and put them under command of Sir Con-Magenis Knight, and one
Cerly a Monk, and plundered the English there, and disarmed the Garrison: And
this though to much, is all that we yet hear is done by them.

However we shall stand on our guard the best we may to defend the Castle and
City principally, those being the pieces of most importance: But if the
Conspiracy be so universal as Mac Mahoun says, in his Examination it is,
namely, that all the Counties of the Kingdom have conspired in it, Note
which we admire should so fall out in this time of universal peace, and
carried with that secrecy that none of the English could have any friend
amongst them to disclose it; then indeed we shall be in high extremity, and the
Kingdom in the greatest danger that ever it underwent, considering our want of
men, money, and arms, to enable us to encounter so great multitudes as they
can make, if all should so join against us: the rather because we have
pregnant cause to doubt that the Combination has taken force by the incitement
of Jesuits* N^t^.
Priests and Friars.

All the hope we have here is that the old English of the Pale, and some other
Parts, will continue constant to the King in their fidelity as they did in
former Rebellions.

And now in these streights, we much under God depend on aid forth of England
for our present supply with all speed, especially money we having none; and
Arms which we shall exceedingly want, without which we are very doubtful what
account we shall give to the King of his Kingdom.

But if the Conspiracy be only of Mac Guire and some other Irish, of the
kindred and friends of the Rebel Tyrone, and other Irish in the Counties of
Down, Monaghan, Cavan, Termanagh, and Armagh, and no general revolt following
thereupon, we hope then to make head against^them in a reasonable measure, if
we be enabled with money from thence, without which we can raise no forces; so
great is our want of moneys as we have formerly written, and our debt so great
to the Army; nor is money to be borrowed here, and if it were, we could engage
all our estates for it; neither have we any hope to get in his Majesty's Rents
and Subsidies in these disturbances, which adds extremely to our necessities.

On Sunday morning the 24, we met again in Council, and sent to all parts of
the Kingdom the enclosed Proclamation, and issued Pattents to draw hither
seven horse Troops, as a further strength to this place, and to be with us, in
case the Rebels shall make head, and march hitherward, so as we may be
necessitated to give them Battle; we also then sent away our Letters to the
Presidents of both the Provinces of Munster and Conaught: and we likewise then
sent Letters to the Sheriffs of the five Counties of the Pale, to consult of
the best way and means of their own preservation; That day the Lord Viscount
Fitzwilliam, and the Lord of Houth, and since the Earl of Kildare, Trigall,
and the Lords of Dunsany and Slane, all Noble men of the English Pale, came
unto u^, declaring that they then, and not before, heard of the matter, and
professed all Loyalty to his Majesty, and concurrence with the State; but said
they wanted Arms, whereof they desired to be supplied by us, which we told
them we would willingly do, as relying much on their faithfulness to the
Crown; but we were not yet certain whether or no we had enough to Arm our
strength, for the Guard of the City and Castle, yet we supplied such of them as
lay in most danger, with a small proportion of Arms and Ammunition for their
Houses, lest they should conceive we apprehended any jealousy of them: And we
commanded them to be very diligent in sending out Watches, and making all the
discoveries they could, and thereof to advertise us, which they readily
promised to do.

And if it fall out that the Irish generally rise, which we have cause to
suspect, then we must of necessity put Arms into the hands of the English Pale
in present, and to others as fast as we can, to fight for defense of the State
and themselves.

Your Lordship now sees the condition wherein we stand, and how necessary it is
first that we enjoy your presence speedily, for the better guiding of these and
other the public affairs of the King and Kingdom: and secondly, that the
Parliament there be moved immediately to advance to us a good sum of money,
which being now speedily sent hither, may prevent the expense of very much
Treasure and blood in a long continued war: and if your Lordship shall happen
to stay on that side any long time, we must then desire your Lordship to
appoint a Lieutenant. General to discharge the great and weighty burden of
commanding the Forces here.

Amidst these confusions and disorders fallen upon us, we bethought us of the
Parliament which was formerly adjourned to November next, and the Term now
also at hand, which will draw such a concourse of people hither, and give
opportunity, under the pretense of assembling and taking new counsels, seeing
the former seems to be in some part disappointed, and of contriving further
danger to this State and people; we have therefore found it of unavoydable
necessity to prorogue the Parliament to the 24 day of February next, and
therefore we do by Proclamation prorogue it accordingly, and to direct the
Term to be adjourned to the first of Hillary Term, excepting only the Court of
Exchequer for hasting in the Kings money if it be possible.

We desire that upon this occasion, your Lordship will be pleased to view our
letters concerning the Plantation of Conaught dated the 24 of April last,
directed to Mr Secretary Vane in that part thereof, which concerns the County
of Monaghan, where now these fires do first break out.

In the last place, we must make known to your Lordship, that the Army we have
consisting but of 2000 foot and a 1000 horse, are so dispersed in Garrisons in
several parts of the four Provinces for the security of those parts, as they
continually have been since they were so reduced, as if they be all sent for to
be drawn together, not only the places whence they are to be drawn, and for
whose safety they lie there, must be by their absence distressed; but also the
Companies themselves coming in so small numbers may be in danger to be cut
off in their March; nor indeed have we any money to pay the Soldiers to enable
them to March. And so we take leave an^ remain

Your Lordships to be commanded.
From his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, 25. October. 1641. Poscript.
THe said Owen Connelly who revealed this Conspiracy, is worthy of very great
consideration to recompense that faith and loyalty, which he has so extremely
to his own danger expressed in this business; whereby under God, there is yet
hope left us of deliverance of this State and Kingdom from the wicked purposes
of those Conspirators: And therefore we bese^^^ your Lordship, that it be taken
into consideration there, so as he may have a mark of his Majesty's most
Royal bounty, which may largely extend to him and his Posterity, we not now
being able to do it for him.

As we were making up these our Letters, the Sheriff of the County of
Monoghan and Dr Teats having fled came unto us, and inform us of much more
spoil committed by the Rebels in the Counties of Monoghan and Caven: And that
the Sheriff of the County of Caven joins with the Rebels, being a Papist and
prime man of the Irish.




What encouragment these Conspiratours had from Rome, to proceed on in this
design (after it was in part prevented) will evidently appear by these three
Letters written from thence to the Lord Mac Guire, and Sir Phelym* Oneale in
Irish, intercepted by the Lords Justices in Ireland, and sent over (thus truly
translated) into England, together with a Letter May, 11. 1642. In which we may
clearly discover, that Cardinal Barbarino who was so intimate with
Windebanke, and held correspondency with him and the English Papists; had a
great hand in plotting this long intended Rebellion, and was privy to it ere it
brake forth.

A Copy of a Letter from Francis Mac Guire from Rome to the Lord Mac Guire.
The superscription. Deliver me to Connor Mac Guire Lord of Eniskilin, or in
his absence, to his brother Rowry Mac Guire in Ireland.
My honored Lord,
THousand commendations unto you, to Bryan Rowry, and the rest; I have heard of
yours, and Hugh Oge his imprisonment; truly, I never heard worse news in all
my life, who esteem that it is rather much good then any hurt, which will
redownd to you, and the whole Nation from these your troubles: Truly (my Lord)
if you be dead through that attempt (the ^which God forbid) it is a most
glorious and everlasting name, Note.
which you have added to your self. The Pope and the two Cardinals his two
Nephews are acquainted with your case, and heard likewise how valorously,
Phelym and Rowry, and the rest of the Gentlemen, their assistants have behaved
themselves, and rejoiced greatly thereat; so that I make no question he will
help you if you demand his side, as becomes you; therefore Bonaventura O C^nny
brother to Eneas O Con^y, who is Lecturer here, thought fit to write unto the
General Phelym touching this matter: and I advise you to see wisely unto the
reasons which he writ, and unto the good which will arise from them in time,
and that you and Phelym be guided and directed by them, and the rather for that
Bonaventura is a wise, prudent, and learned man, and as loving and faithful
unto you as I am; if you be not present, Rowry will supply your place. I
beseech you above all things, and for the love of Jesus Christ, let true love
be established among you all, and let not the temptation of the Devil or man
divert your mind from cherishing all possible love and amity between your
self and Bryan Mac Coghonaght and his children, (as I doubt not you will)
endeaver to draw unto you, not only your own kindred; but also the ancientest
root of the Irish, Note*
wheresover dispersed or distant, and all to the glory of God, and the defense
of your Religion; and I will be bound God will be your help: If you bear out
your year, believe me, the Pope and all the Catholic Kings will be glad that
you crave their assistance: Note.
the merciful God grant it, and defend you from the outrage of your enemies.
So will he pray night and day, who is

Your poor Kinsman Francis Mac Guire.
from Isitdors College, Rome 4 Ian. 1642. after the Roman account.

Were it not that I have not finished my Studies, there is nothing in the
world, I had rather then to live with you, to do for you any service even to
my death, though I want nothing where I am: and seeing I am not present with
you, let none be your Council, but such as be wise, and conscionable men, and
acquainted with the Customs of other Nations: I commit you to Gods protection,
and behave your self nobly for your Religion; commend me to Hugh Man Maho^n
and his children* seeing the way is very long. I will be so bold as to send
unto you no more paper at this time.

Malachias is a Lecturer in the Country, an excellent Italian; as you think
best, either send for him to go over, or else let him tarry here.

A Copy of a Letter from one in Rome to Sir Phelym O-Neale.
Right Honorable,
YOur Honor and worth does embolden me, though unacquainted, to present unto
your honor herewith, my humble duty and service, which shall be always at
your Lordships command, if in ought your Lordships may be pleased to make use
thereof. I have received of late some Letters out of London, wherein they write
that your Lordship has taken Arms in Ireland against the King of England; of
this I have informed our old Father, Note.
who received much comfort thereby, and promised to give his helping hand to
all your exploits, which our Munster men here underhand do offer to make his
Holiness believe, that if any such business or alteration be in Ireland, it
is rather begun by my Lord Roch or Wormouth, then by you, or any in your
Province, being very poor and wanting the ability or means to maintain or
make up any such Army: this with other sinister informations, does this Munster
Agent (whom in Gods name Mr Reily nominated for Vlster) offer to diminish the
^ame and credit of those who venture their life and health for the common good
of their Country and Church: Note.
It is most necessary, that your Honor do write with all speed and by
several ways, both to this old man with his Nephew Cardinal Francisco, and
also to our Protector Cardinal Anthony, or send some natural Prelate, that
may inform them at large of all your proceedings and mind: In the mean time
what I or Father Bonaventura Conne^ can do shall not be wanting; observe
always good correspondency with the Ancient Catholic houses of both England
and Scotland, Note.
as your Predecessor the defunct did, and also with those here and elsewhere:
Father Francis F^rrall is in Vienna to serve us; and Father Magnesius in
Madrid, so as nothing may be wanting, if due correspondency be observed, trust
and make use of old Rosse de Cruce, who knows how to see your letters directed
unto me: See that you live all in a general union, and not have any
contradiction among you, otherwise you can hardly arive to what we desire you.
If any service I can do you either here or elsewhere, be sure to command me as
your own, in the mean time, my daily prayers shall not be wanting for your
happy and prosperous success in all your p^oceedings, desiring the mighty
Majesty to lend you his helping hand^ and so will I take leave, wishing your
honor a most happy new year,

Your Lordships humble servant and cousin to commad, G. F.
Rome 4 Ianu. 1642. Here I send you a letter from Father Bonaventura Conneo, a
most good and discreet friend of yours. This is Gerrald Farrall, as appears by
other Letters. This man did write several other Letters to this purpose, to
several other Priests and Titulary Bishops in this Kindome.

A Copy of a Letter from Bonaventura O-Conny, to Sir Phelym Roe O-Neale, from
Rome.
To my Honored friend Phelym Roe O-Neale, with my well wishes, in Ireland.
My honored Lord,
THe great God help you, I would have often written unto you since I received
St Francis his habit, and especially during these seven years I lived in Rome,
had not the Lord which lately dyed, and Hugh Roe my brother charged me to keep
no correspondency with you, or with any other friend there, to avoid all
suspicion and damage which might happen unto you thereby; now, if that which is
written unto us, and which we hear from all parts, be true, to wit, That the
thing which Note*
we long desired, whereof our hope was in God and you heretofore become to
pass, the time of writing and keeping correspondency with you, touching such
matters as are best and most needful unto you in the present opportunity, is
now at hand: therefore I could not choose but write above all things these few
lines unto you in my mother tongue, as being most safe and less suspicious in
these times. The holy Father and his two Nephews, Cardinal Anthony Barbarino
Protector of Ireland, Note.
and Cardinal Francis Barbarino, who has all the power here in such matters
as concern the Pope, have heard of the War and Confederation which you make
for your Religion and Liberty; And truly I cannot express the greatness of
the joy (no wonder) which they receive thence, in such manner that if they had
received Letters, Note.
or if you had sent an Agent unto them, to express your will or designs, you
should want no help for your better proceedings: Wherefore I would have you to
send some able man, with a Declaration of your grievances in form of Law: my
Brother Owen Roe O Conny the Priest, is in Spain, except he begone into Ireland
before this; he has finished very well his studdy of Philosophy, Theology, and
Law; and is well spoken in the Latin, Spanish, and Dutch; he is, as I know,
wise, sober, discreet, learned, and bred according to the manner of several
Nations, to treat with any Prince of what matter soever. Furthermore, he is
(as you know) faithful and natural to the other Lords, your Confederates,
which qualities are most requisite in any man to be sent hither, or to any
other place upon the like Embassage. I protest unto you before God, that I
commend him, not in that he is my Brother, but that I am not acquainted with
any man of better ability to be employed here in your service then he, since
Hugh Roe my Brother died, through the great misery and pains he has taken in
his last travel. I am Teacher here in the College of the Irish, these six
years, employed all that time about the affairs of the late (...)
slain Lord: I might do you some service, if I had some intelligence from
you, and some help of him whom you intend to send hither. There is nothing I
desire more, then to return to my Country, though I be settled here to my own
contentation. I pray use me, and the rest of my functions after such manner, as
shall seem best unto you, for your own service. Father Arthur Mac Gennis is
in Madrid, and so are many others, who would perform any service wherein you
would be pleased to employ them. Father Francis Mac Gennis is in Germany; so
likewise is Father Francis O Farrell, who loves and honors you, and is very
intimate with the Emperor, who might well help you now, since you have eased
him of the troubles of the Palatinate, whom only he feared. There is also in
Germany a Priest from the County of Tyrone, Edmond Mac Grava, a learned man,
having late commenced Doctor. In France there is a Divinity Professor, Patrick
O Connor, descended from the Connoy of Leinster, who did much service unto the
late deceased Lord; he is of nature, loving, constant, of audacity, guided with
discretion, as is his Cousin Leander O Connor, who I doubt not will do any
service for you. Michard O Gormeley is in the Low Countries Guardian of
Lovaine, and many more of the like sort: see your self what is best to be done
with Owen O Neale, who is in Flanders, and with Conn Mac Carmack, who is
Sergeant Major in Spain, but more is the pity, a man of no great poli^y or
wisdom. I would all the old Trained Soldiers were there. I will write to my
Brother Murtagh O Conny who was ancient to the deceased Lord, and is now
Captain; and to the rest of the Nobility of Vlster, that they repair unto you
without delay: you may write to the King of Spain, Note.
among other things, to give them leave to come unto you. I know not what the
Earl of Tireconnell does upon this occasion, his Regiment is disbanded, and he
himself is gone to the Court to Madrit; I fear much that if he should go
into Ireland, he would do more hurt then good. Noble Sir, fear God above all
things in prosecuting wisely the Fortune which God offers unto you; let love
and unanimity be among your selves; show all possible kindness to the old
Irish of Leinster, and oblige unto your self all men as near as you may.
Beware of the tricks of the Munster men, who at this ^oure show no candid
dealing toward you in Rome, as you shall soon understand, except you send your
Agent to prevent it with all speed; for they ascribe unto themselves, without
any ground, the praise and glory of all your Heroical deeds, as you may learn
of Levit that lives with your self. Be sure to have a great heart, and make
some chief head among you; but reserve the Crown for Con his side the Neales.
Note.
Remember the old slavery wherein you have lived a long time, and the
destruction which will generally come upon you, except you get the upper hand.
You will prevail, if you join together as you ought; God send it. I would
advise every chief Officer among you to have a Secretary along with him, to
write a Diurnall of your passages and overthrows which your enemies receive,
which will redound much to your glory: spoil not the Country for fear of
famine. I will not fail to write according as I shall hear from you: Note.
we would send unto you a Bull after the form of the Bull which Hugh Mac Baron
got, if we had received your Letters: and if the Church do well, they will
turn over the election of Prelates there to the Nobility, and give them
Authority in that point.

Your faithful Servant, Bonaventura O Conny.
Rome from Isiodors College 4 Jan. after the Roman Account.

With what bloody cruelty, industry, animosity on the Popish Rebels part, and
what encouragements, See Doctor Jones his book of Examinations, and the Mystery
of Iniquity.
pretended, if not Real Commissions, countenance, assistance from the Court
and Popish party here, this war against the Protestants in Ireland, (to the
destruction of near two hundred thousand of them or more) has been carried
on; how the aid, moneys, arms, assistance then sent them by the Parliament
from hence, has been retarded, and intercepted by their Court friends here:
how the Estates and Goods of the Protestants there have been seized on by the
Rebels, and their persons murdered, The Preface of the Acts of the General
Assembly of the Rebels at Kil^kenny 1642.
For the Exaltation of the Holy Roman Catholic Church, the Advancement of His
Majesty's Service, and his defense against the Parliament: how his Majesty,
since their effusion of so much Protestant blood, has admitted them all to his
Royal favor, without exception of any particular person, by See the Articles
printed at Shrewsbury.
Articles of Pacification, wherein the styles them his GOOD SVBIECTS: how he
has by special Commissions (as The 48 week Dec. 2. 1643. p. 681. 685
Aulicus himself informs us) drawn over the English Forces sent from hence
into Ireland against the Rebels, to fight against the very Parliament Forces;
administering an Oath to every Officer and Soldier before they were transported
from Ireland hither, To the utmost of his power, and hazard of his life, to
fight against the Forces now under the conduct of the Earl of Essex, and
against all other Forces whatsoever that shall be raised under what pretense
soever, contrary to his Majesty's Command or Authority: how Captain John Read,
one of the chief Actors in this Conspiracy, there taken Prisoner in the field
and sent thence to the Tower, has since his escape from thence been knighted
by his Majesty; who granted him a See Romes Master-^iec^, p. 20, 21, 22, 26.
The Popish Royal Favorite, p. 25.
Patent for Butter and a special Protection heretofore, though a most
desperate Papist, and Agent for the Jesuits, who had a Chapel, and kept
weekly Conventicles in his house for Jesuits sundry years: how the very
Popish Irish Rebels themselves have been in great numbers impor^ed and
entertained in his Majesty's Armies with much respect, yea some of the chiefest
of them highly honored and favored at Court, to the very envy of the
Protestant party there, notwithstanding all their bloody massacres in Ireland
and England too; and their base Irish coin made current in England by special
Proclamation; how they have gained Letters of Mart from the King, to spoil and
rob his Protestant Subjects Ships, Goods, Persons by sea; and what hopes they
have that the City of Bristoll it self shall be shortly put into their power;
notwithstanding their General Assemby held at Kilkenny in nature of a
Parliament, where they have erected several Courts of Justice civil and
military, created sundry Judges, See the Act^ thereof printed 1642.
Officers of all sorts, imposed arbitrary Taxes, enacted Laws, usurped to
themselves both a transcendent Regal and Parliamentary Power; which yet they
execute in their own names as a SVPREAM COUNCIL, has been already so fully
related in Dr. Jones his book of Examinations, The Rise and Progress of the
Irish Rebellion, The Mystery of Iniquity, The Acts of the General Assembly of
the Rebels at Kilkenny An. 1642. with sundry other late printed Relations, and
Declarations of both Houses concerning Ireland, yea in sundry Oxford
Aulicusses, and are so experimentally known to most, that I shall totally
pretermit them; And conclude only with the Testimony of Sir Arthur Lof^us,
delivered upon oath in the Kings Bench in Mac-Mohuns trial, concerning the
Popes Bull lately sent from Rome to the Irish Rebels (portending more massacres
and wars both there and here) to this effect, Note.
That his Holiness did give them his fatherly Benediction, and a plenary
indulgence for all their sins, for the extraordinary service they had done
for the Catholic Cause and Church, in invading, extirpating the Heretics in
Ireland; exhorting them to proceed on in that acceptable service, till they had
fully completed that work. A true copy of which Bull sent to the Lords
Justices in Ireland, he both saw and read.

How the English Papists, all privy to that Design (as was then attested on
oath at the same trial) to divert all assistance of the Irish Protestants from
hence, have raised up a bloody civil war in England, to the ruin of many
thousand gallant men on either part, and almost utter desolation of our
Kingdom; how (contrary to his Majesty's first Orders, Proclamations) they have
all had free access to his Court, Armies, Forts, and received very gracious
entertainment, if not great commands in both; and how both English, Irish,
Dutch, French, Italian, Spanish, and German Papists have combined all their
Purses, Forces, Arms, Policies, and Power together, to assist the King (who
yet adheres unto their party, Councels) against his Parliament, and Protestant
Subjects, is so experimentally known to all of all sorts, especially to the
Protestants in his Majesty's Court, Armies, Quarters, that it would be a mere
unnecessary expense of time and paper to make any particular relation of them.

Should I here insert all other papers concerning Papists and their
proceedings, which have come unto my hands, I might tire both the Reader and my
self, and make my Gate far larger then my City; I shall therefore close up
this introduction with three late Letters from beyond the Seas, discovering
fully to the world, how vigorously the Popish Faction still carry on their
designs of reconciling us speedily unto Rome, and are now in agitation to
procure a Cardinals Cap from the New Pope for the Lord Aubeny Brother to the
Duke of Lenox (one of the late Commissioners sent from Oxford to the
Parliament, about the Treaty of Peace) to which our present Negotiations with
the Pope for a Cardinalship for so great a Person at this nick of time, is a
very sad inauspicious Prologue, ^ngaging all who have any sparks of real love
to God, Religion, his Majesty, their Country, or Posterity, to look about them
with greatest care, for fear of Circumventions.

The first Letter was written out of Flanders (by some Priest or Jesuit of the
Spanish Faction) to Mr Henry Howard, relating the manner of the New Popes
election; with the Queens sending Sir Kenelm Digby to Rome to him for a
Cardinals Cap for the Lord Aubeny (since made an Abbot in France) and
intimating that there is some design to make the Lord Herbert a professed
Papist, Governor of Bristoll ere long, and to put that City and Castle into
the Papists hands; where thousands of them at this present reside, and some
overtures of putting this design in speedy execution (if our late intelligence
thence deceive us not) have been lately made, and much feared by the
Inhabitants. This Letter was intercepted in its passage toward Oxford, and
brought to the Committee of Examinations, where the Original remains, out of
which I copied it.

YOu hear ere this, that Cardinal Pam^ilio, a Roman borne, a great Lawyer,
and a very wise man, Note.
is made Pope, with the name of Innocentius Decimus; he was made by the Spanish
Faction, who having excluded Cardinal Sachetti, though a gallant man, but
desired above all by the French and Barbarinoes, and after that excluded also
another, a Dominican, whom Barbarino desired to advance; by these exclusions,
our Faction, of which the Cardinal of Florence was the Capo, constrained
Barbarino to join with them in favor of Pamfilio, as being also a Creature of
the last Pope: but the French Faction opposed all they could, though in vain.
He has been Nuntio in Spain eight years, that it is conceived he is well
affected to that Crown: but I wish he may carry himself indifferently, and
like an Universal Father; and only favor that party which shall most apply it
self to reason. He is 70 years old and a half, but of a very strong
Constitution. His Nephew, being but one, is not above 18 years old, and so he
is not sit for Businesses: he has therefore made choice of three or four
Cardinals to assist him in the Government: and Cardinal Pancirellio being one
of them, is to lodge in S. Peter's, as his chief Confident. He will certainly
set instantly upon the business of the General Peace, part of his Arms is a
Pigion, which is a good Augury.

Tell me whether the Archbishop of York be at Oxford; Note.
he is a gallant man, and of good intentions; be acquainted with him. Where is
my Lord Herbert all this while? is he Governor of Bristoll? It is writ from
Paris lately, that Sir Kenelm Digby is going to Rome, sent by the Queen, and
among other things, he must solicit a Cap for the Duke of Lenox his Brother.
In my conscience, between you and me, I think Mr Thomas Courtney deserves it
infinitely better, and would make good use. Thus I end,

Yours, etc. The 22 of October. 1644.
Burn this Letter, I pray you, and tell me you have done it. To my very good
Friend Mr Hen Howard, recommend to Mr Francis Howard his Brother.

The second Letter was writ by Sir Kenelm Digby, and sent to Mr Walter Montague
in the Tower and forti^ies the former, though in more obscure terms.
I Hope you have your book ere this time; Mr Gibson my Lord of Pembrooks Dwarf
took charge of it at his going h^nce, and I am confident he will be most
careful to deliver it into your own hands, if it may be, if not, he will give
it to -- of the house as you direct: I sent it open, that it may give no
ombrage, but as for the note under Standre^s hands, assuredly there is none at
It seems Mr Montagues Cabinet of secret Papers are kept at Pontoise, a Nunnery
in France, ^y the Abbess there.
Pontoise. La Mere and I have looked over every paper in the Cabinets, she
giving me them one by one through the grate: she had emptied all together, when
she sent your Indian ones to be sold, which caused some confusion. We find a
copy of that note under Filbricks hand, attested by him and Tho. Cook to be a
true copy, and mentioning, that Filbrick being then to go into England, was to
take the Original note with him, to demand thereupon the money of Standrets
brother Oliver. I understand that Filbrick will be here shortly with my Lord
Iermyn, and then I will know of him what he did with the Original note. In the
mean time, I have desired La Mere to send this attested copy to Mr Foster to
do with it as you shall hereafter direct: I have given your fine Cane to The
Lady Abbess.
La Mere to keep carefully for you; I fear I shall not be so happy as to have
much conversation with the Paradise of Pontoise, before my going into Italy,
Note.
for the Queen presses much my departure; yet I hope so much time will slide
away before, that I may hear of your enlargement from your close habitation,
and obey your command of not going out of your call, till you give me my
dismissory. La Mere and I have had much conference of what is fit to be done in
your behalf, and of what advantage the present resolution of your enlargement
thence may be to you in the maine of the business. Note.
And after much debate, both she and Late Agent for the secular Priests at
Rome, at whose house Mr Montague lodged for a time in Rome.
Mr Fi^ton are come to my sentiment, That you should accept of your freedom,
though clogged with the condition of not coming over hither. Me thinks your
coming into France might as well be accorded unto, so that both you and this
Queen give your words of not coming to the Court, nor negotiating any
business; however that will be relished, I wish you and all your friends might
lay your strength upon permission for you to go into Italy. At the worst
settle your abode in Monsieur Sabrans house, for time may enlarge their
enlargement with more ease then from the strictness you now are under: Still
the burden of my song is, get out upon any terms, for take my word, if in any
reasonable time you gain so much liberty as to be capable of it, your That is,
he shall be made a Cardinal there.
Italian business will be done, which otherwise the necessity of affairs (or
at least the conceived necessity) will cast it upon the The Lord Aubeny.
Lord you know, who has very powerful advancers, by his friends in this
Court, by his being much liked (in a manner accepted of) in Italy, and by his
own much pressing and public declaring himself for it, and thereupon taking
the sentane. The Queen is firm to you, Note.
if you may be capable of it in any reasonable time, and accordingly has
declared to that Lord. But if it cannot be in your behalf, then she has
promised him her powerful assistance. I pray you write me as soon as you can,
all your Sentiments and Orders upon this, as also upon what you may reflect
upon concerning my journey: for I shall sail by your compass, and lose no
time in doing so; for I shall not be able to delay much.

I have desired La Mere to send Mr Foster the several notes I have given for
money received of you, that I may take them in, and give one formal one for
the whole sum, (in case I pay it not before I go) deducting the 100. l. you
had of mine. I have had in all 480 pistols, out of which deducting 140 for that
100. l. (for that is the lowest and ordinary rate of exchange) I have had;
though some more diligent persons have had 48 of advantage) there remains due
to you 340 pistols, which in English money (at the same rate of 40 per cent.)
is 243. l. sterling; which by the Grace of God shall ere long be reimbursed
you, either here or in England, and peradventure before I go hence. La Mere
tells me, there is no hope of getting above 200 pistols for the hanging
though she have employed Madam le Cant. and other friends and several
Tapistiers about them. If you will let them go now, I pray you let me have
them to carry with me into Italy: That is, if I have money to pay for them when
I receive them, for otherwise I will not have them (knowing how much you stand
in need of present money. Farewell, dear Sir, I have interrupted your
meditations too long.

The 21 October.

This Letter, written with Sir Ke^elm Digbies own hand, and sent by him to Mr
Montague (a man best acquain^ed, of any living, with all the secret
Negotiations and Treaties between Rome and us, and best able to discover them,
having had a great share in the plotting and acting of them was intercepted,
and brought to the Committee of Examinations, where the Original remains, out
of which I have transcribed this extract.

The third is the Clause of a Letter lately written by a Noble English Lady,
now residing in Paris, to a Member of the house of Commons; wherein she writes
thus to him for News in confirmation of the two preceding Letters, touching
the intended English Cardinal, and Sir Kenelm Digbies Embassy from the Queen
to Rome.

Paris December. 8. 1644.
My Lord Aubeny is now made an Abbot, The Queen of France has given him one
worth 1500 Pistols a year: Note.
There is a speech HE SHALL BE A CARDINAL. Sir Kenelm Digby GOES EMBASSADOVR
TO ROME TO THE NEW POPE FROM THE QVEENE, etc.


What little hopes we can then have of a firm or real Peace, whiles the
Popish Party are so prevalent, active, audacious, as even in this very nick of
time to send a special Ambassador to Rome from our Queen to the New Pope, to
solicit a Cardinals Cap for the Lord Aubeny (brother to the Duke of Lenox, a
man so nearly allied to his Majesty, and many great Personages in this Realm)
I shall humbly refer to the consideration of all understanding men, both
here, and in his Majesty's Quarters. Certainly I dare say with old Father His
second (...) before King Edward the (...), f. 36.
Latymer, That the Romish Hats never brought good into England, heretofore; and
can they presage ought but much more evil ^o us now? What good our last great
Cardinal Poole of Noble extraction, brought to this our Realm, and Religion
in Queen Mary's days, you may read in the Statute of 1 and 2 Phil. and Mary
chapter 8. in Mr John Fox his Acts and Monuments, volum. 3. and can we now expect
any better fruits from this intended Cardinal of more Noble Parentage? I fear
me, no: Wherefore I can give no other sentence of him, and all others designed
to this Antichristian dignity, or ambitious of it, then (...)
Father Latymer has long since passed against them, in the case of Henry
Beaufort Bishop of Winchester (made a Cardinal by the Pope in King Henry the
^ixt his reign:) He was made a Cardinal at Calys (in France, where our new
Cardinal is now to be made) and thither the Bishop of Rome sent him a
Cardinals Hat: He should have had a Tiburn-tippet, an halfpenny halter, and
all such proud Prelates. And they do well deserve it, their only aim and
endeavor being to reduce, reconcile, and enslave our souls, bodies, estates,
Realms to the Antichristian vassallage of the Sea of Rome, which is no less
then (...)
High Treason by our Laws.

For my own particular, I have ever been a cordial affecter, endeavourer,
promoter of our public Peace to the uttermost of my power, and shall ever (God
willing) continue such; but my own Judgment, Reason, Conscience persuade me,
we shall never enjoy any real, solid, lasting Peace one with another in any of
our three Realms, whiles we negotiate a Peace, or hold the least
correspondency with the Sea of Rome, which has lately drenched, and almost
drowned us all in our own blood, metamorphosed all our Kingdoms into so many
Acheldamaes, after a long-enjoyed Peace, and by new Letters, Commissions to
raise Irish Forces in Ireland, and new Contributions, Conspi^acies, Designs
against us in France, Italy, and other Popish Realms, during the overtures of
a Treaty of Peace, threatens us only with a continual succession of wars.

It was a memorable Answer that Iehu made to Ioram King of Israel, when he and
Ahaziah King of Judah went out against him, 2 King. 9. 21, 22. And it came to
pass when Ioram saw Iehu, th^^ he said, is it PEACE Iehu? And he answered,
WHAT PEACE, so long as the Whordoms of thy mother Iezebel, and her witchcrafts
are so many? as long as we have any enchanting Iezebels domineering in our
Councels, and soliciting us to Court at least, if not to commit open
fornication with the whore of Babylon (as to many have done of late years)
alas what peace can we expect, or what have we to do with Peace? We have all
cause to consider what the Apostle writes, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17. Be not
unequally yoaked with Unbelievers: for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what communion has light with darkness? and what
concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has he that believes with an
Infidel? or what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? Wherefore come
out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and I will receive
you: yea, I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters,
says the Lord Almighty. Doubtless we shall never enjoy any well-grounded
Peace with God, or one another, till we utterly renounce and separate our
selves wholly from all communion, fellowship, agreement, concord with the
idolatrous Antichristan Church of Rome: and execute exemplary justice on all
those who have been active instruments to reconcile, seduce us to her; of whom
I can give no other Character nor issue of their Consultations, then that of
the Prophet Isay Isa (...).
They conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity: they hatch Cockatrice eggs,
and weave the Spiders web; he that cateth of their eggs, dies, and that which
is crushed, breaks out into a viper. Their webs shall not become garments,
neither shall they cover themselves with their works; their works are works of
iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands. Their feet run to evil,
and they make haste to shed innocent blood: their thoughts are thoughts of
iniquity; wasting and destruction are in their paths: the way of peace they
know not, and there is no Judgment in their goings; they have made them
crooked paths: whosoever goes therein shall not know peace. Therefore is
Judgment far from us, neither does Justice overtake us; we wait for light,
but behold obscurity, for brightness, but we walk in darkness. We grope for
the wall like the blind, and we grope as if we had no eyes: we stumble at
noonday as in the night, we are in desolate places as dead men. We roar all
like bears, and mourn sore like doves; we look for judgment, but there is none;
for salvation, but it is far off from us. As ever therefore we would enjoy
peace or safety, let us eternally renounce all Leagues, Treaties,
correspondencies with these enemies of our peace, these Authors of our forepast
and present dangers, wars, desolations: If all our former smarting
experiences of their Treacheries, Cruelties in Ireland, in England, with their
many late Treacheries, Designs upon us, even since the late Overtures of this
approaching Treaty of Peace, will not now awaken us unanimously and effectually
to provide, secure our selves against them for all future Ages, God in his
justice may and will deliver us over, one time or other, to their sword, power,
va alage, and continue this war among us (somented by their Counsels,
supplied by their Arms, and Contributions) till we be all consumed one of
another, and made a Prey to our foreign Enemies* which deplorable misery and
Antichristian bondage, the God only Wise, of his infinite mercy make us all
wise timely to prevent.

FINIS.
A Table to some principal Passages in this Necessary Introduction, etc.
Note that the figures of the pages in the book from 206, to 253, are for the
most part misprinted, and that the references to them in this Table are as they
should have been, not as they are printed,

A.
ABbot, Archbishop of Canterbury his Remonstrance to King James, against a
toleration of Popery, and the Spanish Match, page 39, 40. His Letter to his
Suffragan Bishops for prosecuting Recusants, p, 78, 79. Abbot, Audomarus
Ioannes his Letter to Secretary Windebank, concerning the Papists fidelity to
the King in the Scottish wars, and other particulars, p, 194, 195. Altars,
inserted into the Scottish Liturgy by Archbishop Laud, p, 160. Broken down and
removed by the rude Soldiers raised against the Scots, p, 171, 212. Alvey, an
Arminian Vicar of Newcastle, an intelligencer against the Scots, his Letter to
Archbishop Laud, p, 188, 189. Articles concerning the Spanish Match, with their
alterations and ratifications, p, 3, to 8. 14, 15, 25, 40, to 46. Arminianisme
planted here by the Jesuits, their chief engine and bridge to Popery
^ountenanced by Bishop Laud, and Arminians to, p, 92, 93, 94, 146, 147.
Articles of the French Match, p, 70, 71. Articles and Favors condescended to
by King James and King Charles in behalf of Romish Priests and Catholics upon
the Spanish and French Marriage treaties, p, 44. to 49, 71. The Lord Aubeny
(brother to the Duke of Lenox) newly made an Abbot in France and to be
forthwith made a Cardinal at the Queens solicitation by the new pope, p, 252,
to 255. Monsieur Aubert sent along with Secretary Windebank by the Queen, when
he fled, to assist him, p, 126, 128.
B.
Cardinal Barbarino the lates Popes Nephew made Protector General of the
English and Scottish Nations; and Superintendent of the Society of Jesuits
erected in London, p, 141, 144, 145, 146, 210, 211, 214. His arms set above
the Kings, p, 145. A great friend of Secretary Windebanks, entertaining his
son at Rome, who brought ^ver in his Trunk diverse things to Con the Nuncio
from him, p, 141. 144, 145, 146, He sent over statues into England, p, 146. He
had a hand in the Irish Rebellion, and much rejoiced at it, p. 247 to 251.
Barnwell an Irish Popish Bishop a great stickler in the Re^ellion there, p,
220, 229, 231, Bishop Beadles Letters concerning the increase and insolency of
the Papists in Ireland, p, 99, 100, 111, 112, 113. The Bishops of Scotlands
Letters to Archbishop Laud concerning their Liturgy and Canons, p, 149, 150.
Their insolency toward the Peers, through Canterburies advancing of them, p,
206. They deemed themselves the representative Church of Scotland, and above a
general Assembly, p, 167, 168. Fr. Boethius the Popish Bishop of Elphin in
Ireland, his certificate, p, 113. The Lord Digby Earl of Bristoll his
Negotiations in and Letters from Spain, touching the Spanish Mat^h, and the
Palatinate, p, 2, to 69. Impeached of High treason by Sir Robert Heath the
Kings Attorney, by the Kings special command, (for persuading him to become a
Papist, and alter his Religion in Spain, and other miscarriages) in the Lords
House in Parliament, p. 32, 33, 34. Major Bret sent agent to Rome from the
Queen, with the Archbishops privity, as was there conceived, An. 1635. p, 143.
John Brown a popish Priest, his notable discovery of sundry plots of the
Jesuits, Queens Priest, Agents, Popes Nuncioes, etc. to this Parliament, p.
207, to 215. The Duke of Buckingham accused by the Earl of Bristoll of high
treason in Parliament, for laboring to seduce the King to become a Papist, and
other miscarriages in Spain, p, 30, 31, 32. His voyage into France to bring
over the Queen, p, 73, etc. His voyage to Ree, and betraying of Rochel, p, 84,
85, 86. Burlemachi, the chief Conveyer of Secretary Windebanks Letters since
his slight, p, 138. Sir John Burrows papers writ to the Archb, concerning the
war with Scotland, p, 172, to 175. Bonnyragge his exactions, p, 212*
C.
The Bishop of Calcedon, Smith, sent from the Pope into England, where he
ordained Pri^ sts, and seduced his Majesty's subjects: Proclamations for his
apprehension procured by the secular and regular Priests, who persecuted and
caused him to ^ly into France, p. 98, 99, 100. The Oath the English Priests
were to take to him, p, 82, 83. Windebanks correspondencie with him to make him
his intel^igencer in France concerning the Scots, p, 199. The Lady Calfields
testimony concerning the Irish Rebellion; that the Rebels gave out England was
in the same condition with Ireland; the Tower of London surprised by their
Party, and the Archbishop of Canterbury rescued thence, p, 226. Secretary
Calverts Letters to the Earl of Bristoll, Gage, and others touching the
Spanish Match, p, 21, 25, 28 29. Cardinals at Rome writ to by King James,
during the Spanish treaty, and their respects to him, p, 26. Cardinals Caps
sought after, expected by, or promised to Mr. Walter Montague, Mr. Sommerset,
Mr. Brudnell, and the L. Aubeny, p, 143, 199. 200, 211, 252, 253, 254. A
Cardinalship seriously offered twice one after another, to Archbishop Laud, p,
149, John Carmick his testimony concerning the late Irish Rebellion, p, 241,
242, 243. King CHARLES his voyage into Spain whiles Prince of Wales; by whom
and for what end designed, to wit, to make him a professed Papist; the
Palsg^aves eldest son being at the same time intended to be sent to the
Emperors Court, to be there trained up in Popery, p, 30, to 38. The arts and
persuasions there used to make him a Papist, ibid. The Popes Letter to him
there* and his answer to it, sent to the Pope, p, 36, to 39. His Oath and
Articles in favor of Papists there sworn and subscribed, p, 40, to 49: His
Letters of procuration, and delays there put on him by the Spaniard, p, 48, to
52. His return from Spain, and the jewels he there gave away at his departure,
p, 49, to 56. His Match with France, and the articles concerning it, p, 69, 70,
71. His pardon of 20 Priests and Jesuits within three days after it, p, 71,
72, 73. His Answer to the Petition of both Houses against Recusants at Oxford
Anno 1625. and his Proclamations against Recusants and Priests, with the ill
execution of both, and the discharging priests, protecting Recusants
notwithstanding, p, 74, to 148, His Warrant to Captain Pennington, An. 1625, to
sink the English ships who refused to serve the Papists against the
Protestants in Rochel, etc, p, 84, 85, 86, His setting the Lone on foot, and
Letters concerning it, An. 1626. p, 86, 87, 88. The Parliaments Remonstrance to
him called in by proclamation, and answered by Bishop Laud by his command, An.
1627. p, 90, to 95. His proclamations against the Bishop of Calcedon procured
by the secular priests, p, 98, 99, 100. Advices to him concerning the Queens
Priests, p, 119, to 103. His Pass to Secretary Windebank when he fled into
France, and the continuance of his Royal favors to him there, though he
professes in sundry Letters, he did release no Priests, etc. but by his
Majesty's specall direction and command, p, 123, to 140. Windebank sends his
petition to the Parliament to him to correct and further it in the Houses, p,
134, 135. The received Copy of his Letter to the Pope in (...) behalf of the
Duke of Loraign, p, 142. Pope Urban the 8, his affection to his Majesty, p,
142. What opinion they held of him at Rome, An. 1635. p, 14 (...) 43. His
Articles and Letter concerning his Chapel in Scotland, and (...) Archbishop
Laud to hold correspondency with the Deane of it, the Bishop of Dunblane, ^.
148, 149. His Command to the Archbishop of S. Andrews, to hold correspondencie
with the Lord Traquaire, p. 151. His Warrant concerning the Scottish Canons
without date, p. 152. His Instructions to the Archbishops and Bishops of
Scotland; and a pretendant Warrant to archbishop Laud concerning the Scottish
Liturgy, p. 156. His offense at the opposition of the Scots against this
Liturgy, p. 165. Canterbury and Wentworth his sole advisers in the Scottish
wars, to subdue them by an Irish Army, p. 170, 171, etc. His antedated Warrant
to Canterbury, to warrant the Clergies benevolence against the Scots, p. 174.
His courteous entertainment of the Popes Nuncioes, p. 141, 210* Privy to the
Popish General assembly (in nature of a Parliament at London, and to th^^
contributions against the Scots, p. 189, etc. His consent for Owen Oneale to
raise a regiment of 3500. men to serve the Spaniard in Flanders that he might
come over strong upon all occasions to his assistance, p, 219, 220. His release
of Priests, Jesuits, and stay of proceedings against Recusants, p. 122, 123,
124, to 137. Acquainted in general with the Irish Rebellion by a paper
directed to him above a year before it brake out, p. 231, 238, 239, 240. His
Pacification with, favor to, and entertainment of the Irish Rebels, and
sending for them into England, and those sent against them to fight against the
Parliament p, 251. His encouragement to stick close to them if they stuck close
to him, and pretended Commission, at least, to authorize their conspiracy, p,
251. His Commission to the Earl of Worcester, a Papist, to be Lord Lieutenant
of all South. Wales, p, 225, 226, His children by the Spanish Lady how to have
been educated, p. 21, 22, 24. St. Clara his Book printed here to reconcile us
to Rome, the Author approved, defended against the Jesuits by Secretary
Windebank, as in the Kings name, p. 143, 145. The Commons petition against
popish Priests, and Recusants, and the Spanish match, with their Protestation
in point of privilege, An. 1621. p. 10, to 14. Their Petition against Priests
and Recusants, An. 1625. p. 62, to 70. Their Remonstrance concerning Religion
and the growth of Popery and Arminianisme, both in England and Ireland, with
Bishop Lauds answer to it, p. 90, to 95. Signiur George Conne the Popes second
Nuncio, when sent into England, his deportment here, and entertainment at
Court, p. 143, 144, 145, 146, 209, 210, 211. President of the Grand assembly of
the Papists in London, called by the Queen to contribute aid against the
Scots, p. 189. Lord Conwayes Letters to archbishop Laud concerning popular
tumults; the Earl of Holland fortifying New Castle; the Scots and Martial
Law, p. 183, 184, 185, 186. Popish Corporals inserted into the Scottish
Liturgy by Canterbury; their manner of consecration, p. 162. Lord Cottington,
Secretary to Prince Charles, who accompanied him into Spain, and was active in
that ntch, p. 31. The Earl of Bristols Letter to him, p. 49. The Lords of the
Councels Letters to him in the Scottish business, p. 186, 187. Contributions
of the English Clergy and Civil Lawyers-against the Scots, p. 174 to 183.
D.
Sir Kenelm Digby his entry into Religion in France, p. 141. His intimacy with
the Popes Nuncioes, and archbishop Laud, and activity to promote the popes
designs, p. 206, 211. His Letter concerning the collection of moneys by the
papists against the Scots, p. 189, 190. His Letter to Mr. Walter Mo^tague,
touching his Embassy from the Queen to the new elected Pope; p. 253, 254, Earl
of Dorset, how thought of at Rome, An. 1635. p. 143.
E.
The Bailiffes of Edenburghs Letter to archbishop Laud, in excuse of the tumult
above the Service-Booke, etc. p. 166.
F.
Father Fitton (agent for the secular priests at Rome) presented to the King by
the Earl of Arundell, though a Priest, p. 171. Mr. Mountagues adviser now at
Paris p. 253. Th. Flemming the popish archbishop of Dublin, publicly protested
against in print for sundry grievances, and appealed from to the Pope by the
secular priests in Ireland, p. 107, 108, 109. Mr. F^sters discourse concerning
a Reconciliation, p, 146. What he obtaind at Paris for the English fugitives p,
138, 253. Mr. Fortes^ues Letter from Rome to Secretary Windebank p. 200.
G.
George Gage King James his agent at Rome, his Letter to King James from
thence, touching the Spanish Match, and Letters from hence to him, p, 13, 14,
15, 21, to 29.
H.
Sir William Hamilton our English Agent at Rome, his arrival, entertainment
and carriage there, with his intimacy with Secretary Windebank, and
entertainment of his sons there, p, 143, 144, 146, 211. Hoyle a Jesuits
Letter concerning the Scottish troubles, p, 171.
I.
King James his instructions to the Lord Digby, with all his articles, Letters,
proceedings, concerning the Spanish Match, p. 1, to 69. His Letters to, and
articles sworn to the King of Spain in favor of papists, and Discharges of
papists and Recusants, p, 8, 9, 23, to 29. 44, to 48. His speech at Council
table in favor of papists, p, 30. H^^ Letter to the Speaker of the Commons
House, and dislike of the Commons Petition against the increase of popery and
the Spanish Match, and dissolving the Parliament thereupon, p, 9 to 14, He writ
Letters to the pope and Cardinals, who had a good opinion of his favor
toward them and Roman Catholics, p, 24, 26, 30, 31. How deluded by the
Spaniard, under pretext of the Spanish treaty, p, 10, to 21, 27, 28. His
Protestation concerning the Articles sworn by him and his Council in favor of
papists* p, 47, 48. His recalling the Prince from Spain, and breaking of the
treaty by advice of Parliament, though very unwillingly, p, 49, to 63. How he
would have overreached his parliament by mis-reports of the Spanish, treaty,
p, 20. His Letter written with his own hand to Secretary Conwey concerning the
Commons petition against the papists, and war with Spain, p, 62. Pope Clement
the 8. writ to him p, 208. His Letter to the Bishop of Wort^burg in favor of
the popish Scottish Seminaries there, p, 194, 195. A Jesuits Letters
concerning the Parliament, 1627. their project upon it and the Realm, p, 89,
90. A Jesuits Oration to pervert the King whiles he was in Spain, p. 35, 36. A
College of Jesuits surprised in Clarkenwell, yet some released by their Court
friends, p, 88. A College built by them in Queens street, and their activity
in the Scotch wars, 144, 172, 189, to 193. The hurt they have done to all
Christian Realms and States, many of which have banished them. p. 202. to 208.
Petitions against them in parliament, yet favored, protected, and released:
See Commons, Petitions* Papists, and p, 71, 72, 73, 80, 122, to 130. Jesuits
Letters from hence to their Superiors and fel^ow Jesuits, concerning the
Scottish affairs, discovering their privity to the Archbishops secrets and
Kings counsels, p, 170, 171, 172. Father John, Agent for the Benedictines at
Rome, a great Servant of Windebanks, page 146. Father Joseph his Letter of
thanks to Secr. Windebank for his releasing of, and favor to popish Priests,
p, 123. Ireland, the monstrous increase of Popery, Monasteries, Jesuits,
popish Bishops, Priests, and Papists, complained of in Parliament by the
Commons, yet denied, p, 93, 94, Manifested by a Proclamation of the privy
Council there, p, 100, 101. by Bishop Bedles letters, the Commons petition,
and other Evidences, p, 101, to 214, Cherished in Ireland of purpose by the
Lord Deputy Wentworth to balance the Protestants, and make them serve his
turns in Parliament, p, 113, 117, 118, 238. Their t^mult in Dubliu, p, 119,
Divisions between the secular Priests and regular in Ireland, and their titular
Archbishop of Dublin, p, 106, to 110. The Deput^es project to pack a Parliament
in Ireland, and conquer that Nation and Kingdom by it, p, 114, to 119. The
Protestants grieved and oppressed by the Papists there, p, 110, to 113, The
Protestation of the Archbishops and Bishops there against a Toleration of
Popery p. 83. The rise and progress of the late Irish Rebellion, and the
chief Actors in it, p, 218, to 252. Discovered in gross to the King, and
Windebank above a year before it brake out, p, 219, 220, etc. All the Irish in
foreign parts privy to and active in it, especially their Priests and Friars,
p. 220, to 252. All the Papists in England privy and assistant to it, p. 226,
251. The Pope, Cardinal Barbarino, and Irish at Rome privy to it, and much
rejoiced at it, p, 230. etc. 247. to 253. The Spaniards, French, and other
popish States acquainted with it, and assistant to it, p, 220. to 253. Above
one hundred fifty two thousand Protestants murdered, and destroyed the four
first months by the Rebels, p. 226, 242, 243. The Pops Indulgance granted to
the Rebels for extirpating the Heriticks, and exhorting them to persevere in
and accomplish that work, p. 251. Mr Henry Iermyn his plot and ^light, p, 212,
213. His Letter to Windebank into France, and power with the Queen, p. 131.
134. Judge Jones, a character of him. p. 220.
L.
Archbishop Laud privy to the Kings and Dukes voyage into Spain: and a
furtherer of that Match, p, 34, Writ letters to the Duke of Buckingham into
France, and was privy to that macth, p, 73, 74. A procurer and count^nancer of
Dr Manwarings and Sybthorpes Sermons in justification of Lones and arbitrary
taxes imposed by the Kings prerogative without a parliament, and accused in
parliament for licensing them. p, 86, 90. Accused by the Commons as a Favourer
of Arminians, and persons popishly affected, Iun. 11. 1628. p, 92. His saucy
and scandalous false answer to the Commons Remonstrance, p, 93, 94, 95. Bishop
Bedles and Vshers letters to him concerning the power and increase of papists
in Ireland, p. 101, to 113. The Lord Deputy Wentworth his desperate dispatch to
him concerning parliaments in Ireland, p. 114. to 118. Windebanke made
Secretary of State by him, p. 122, 123. Presents his humble service to him out
of France. p. 127. What opinion they had of him at Rome and Venice p. 143.
Twice proffered seriously a Cardinals Cap, p. 140. He advanced Bishop Montague
an Arminian, and one who held correspondency with the popes Nuncio, p. 146,
147. His Innovations in England, and power in Ireland, p. 148. His whole
proceedings, letters, directions, alterations, Contributions, etc. concerning
the late Scottish Lyturgy, and Wars against the Scots, p. 148, to 189. He
fradulently ex post facto procures and forgeth diverse Warrants from the King,
written wi^h his own and his Secretary Dells ^and, touching the Scottish
Canons, Lyturgy, Contributions, and intelligence with the Scottish Bishops, p.
149. 152, 156, 174. His many popish alterations and insertions for the
introducing of Altars, Transubstantion, the sacrifice of the Mass, Prayer to
Saints and other Popish rites, writ with his own hand and taken out of the
Roman Missall, and Pontifical, made in the New Scottish Liturgy, worthy
observation p. 156 to 164. An Enemy to the Sabbath, p. ^58. The Kings chief
Councellor in the Scottish Wars by the Jesuits own letters, and advises
him to subdue them by an Irish Army, p. 170. 171. his Listing, Assessing and
conventing men before the Council Table to lend to the Scottish Wars; his and
the Clergies large contributions toward these Wa^, with his letters to further
the some, p. 174. to 189. The Lord Conwayes and other letters to him concerning
the Scotts affairs, and Wars, p. 172. 173. 174. 183. to 189. His tyranny,
injustice in the high Commission, and intimacy with Father Leander and other
Popish Priests and Recusants, p. 205. to 209. 198. The Irish Rebels reported,
their Confederates in England had taken the Tower of London, and rescued film
from the Parliament, p 226. His pride in Scotland and here page 205. 206. 207.
Earl of Leicesters favors to Windebanke in France, p. 130. 133. Father
Leander General of the English Benedictiones, (Archbishop Lands Chamberfellow
in Oxford, and very intimate with him here,) sent over to reconcil^ us to Rome
p. 145. 206. 207. persecuted by the Jesuits p. 144. Livet a Papist,
proceedings against him stayed by royal command p. 140. Ludovicus a sancta
Maria, his Theological conclusions printed at Rome, p. 145. his Lecherous and
lewd behavior in England, Ibid. Cardinal Ludovisio protector of the Irish
Nation p. 109.
M.
Marshall Law the Lord Conwayes advice about it, p. 185. 186. Master Moore a
chief Actor in the Irish Rebellion. p. 227. to 237. Henry Mac Carter his full
examination touching the Irish Rebellion. p. 202. 203. 204. Mass endeavored
to be introduced by Archbishop Land, in the Scottish Li^urgy, into which he
inserts divert things out of the Mass and Roman Missall p. 158. to 163.
Mac-Mohon's examinations touching the Irish Rebellion. p. 237. to 241. Maguires
examinations and Confession touching the Irish Rebellion p, 226. to 240. Nich,
Le Maistre his testimony concerning the design of the French match p. 69. Sir
Toby Matthew; a dangerous active Jesuit, p. 210. 211 The Popes Bull to him.
commending his last Nuncio Rossetti to his charge as to his Angel Guardian, p.
201. 211. Si^ Henry Merry, a Recusant his protection p. 139. Master Middletons
Letters to Archbishop Laud from Venice, p. 142. 143. Bishop Mountagu^ advanced
by Laud, an Arminian, his intimacy with the Popes Nuncio, his letter to
Windebanke for a License to his son to go to Rome, and his entertainment
there p. 146. 147. Master Walter Mountague, his first voyage to Row, his
extraordinary entertainment in his passage thither, there this intimacy with
the Pope and Cardinals, promised and expected a Cardinals Cap, his
dangerousnesse, Sir Kelime Digbies late letter to him, and the Queens
intention to make him a Cardinal at this present, could he procure his
liberty. p. 140. 141. 143. 210. 211. 212. 253. 254. His Letters to the Papists
concerning a contribution against the Scotts p. 190. 191. his intimacy with
Windebanke p. 131. 132, 133. 134.
N
Nuncioes sent from the Pope into England: see C^n, Pau^ani, Rossetti. The
Apprentices and People take notice of them p. 895. to 199. 208. to 282.
O.
Oath of King James to the Spanish Articles, and in favor of Papists, p. 43.
to 47. of K. Charles to like purpose, and not to endeavor to convert the Queen
or withdraw her from, or hinder her in her Religion p. 46. 47. 71. of the privy
Council not to prosecute Papists p. 46. of English Priests to the Bishop of
Calcedon. p. 82. 83 Oblations Popis^i introduced by Bishop Laud, page 159.
Ordinntion, A form of it, by a Popish Irish Bishop, page 84. Owen, Daniel, and
Sir Phelim Oneale chief actors in the Irish Rebellion, having formerly raised
a Regiment of Papists, and carried them into Flanders for that purpose, page
219. to 250. A Letter to Sir Phelim Oneale from Rome, page 248. 249. O-Conner,
one of the Queen Mothers Priests, his desperate speeches concerning a Plot
Massacre to the Protestants in England, etc. to Anne Hussy, page 225.
P.
Papists and popish Priests and Jesuits plots to usher Popery into our
Realms, page 1. 2, 4. etc. Their dangerous increase in England, Ireland, and
petitions against it: p. 10. to 12, 65. to 85. how protected, favored, etc.
notwithstanding all pretended Proclamations against them by the King, Queen,
Bishop Laud, Windebanke, and others, page 12. 13. 25, 29, 45, to 48, to 150.
206. to 214. Their forwardness to promote the lean, An. 1626. page 88. Their
Assembly, Collections and large contributions toward the Scottish Wars, page
189. to 194. English, and Irish Papists joint Conspiracy in the Irish
Rebellion, and present Wars: See Ireland, King James, King Charles,
Windebanke, Laud: Articles: Gregorio Pa^zani, the Popes first English Nuntio,
his Arrival and entertainment in England, page 141. 143. 209, 210. His
intimacy with Windebanke, and Letters of thanks to him from Rome, for his
daily favors whiles here, page 141. 146. his intimacy with ^ishop Mountague,
and Letters in favor of his Son to Rome, page 147. Stay of proceedings
against the Lady Perkins, for sending her daughter to be a Nun page 139.
Penricke, the Queens last agent at Rome, and his brother the Queens servant
an Intelligencer for Spain and Rome, page 205.etc. Father Philips the Queens
Confessor his Letter to Secretary Windebanke, page 144 See p. 134. His
dangerous Letters* commitment by the Parliament, and Articles there exhibited
against him, page 205. to 217. His dangerous positions, page 119. 120, 121. his
danger about the Queens person, and her chief Counselor, page 205. to 217.
Sparsim. Doctor Pocklington his Letter concerning the Clergies contribution
against the Scotts, etc. page 179. 180. Pope Gregory the 15. his dispensation
must be granted to complete the Spanish Match. p. 3. 4. 5. 13. 14. 15. 18. 19.
his exceptions to and alterations of the Articles with Spain, p. 4. to 9. 14.
15. 18. 39. 40. The Articles he obtained from King James in favor of Papists,
ere he would grant a dispensation, p. 8. 14. 41. to 49. his letter to the
Bishop of Conchen in Spain to reduce King Charles and our Realms to his
obedience during his residence there; and his Letter to King Charles in Spain
to seduce him in his Religion. p. 34. to 38. His Clogged dispensation and
death, p. 39. 49. King James Letter to him, p. 26. 31. Pope Urban the eight his
election and new dispensation for the SPANISH Match page 50. 61. His
dispensation with the French Match, page 70. 71. His consolatory Bull to the
English Catholics p. 81. 82. He claims an absolute Jurisdiction over the
Queens househould, endeavoring thereby to usurp a temporal Jurisdiction, p.
119. to 123. 208, 209, etc. The Kings Letter to him in behalf of the Duke of
Loraigne, and his affection to and opinion of the King. p. 142. 143. his
Nuncioes sent into Eng. and entertained here: see Conne Panzani, Rossetti,
Nuntio: and p. 209. to 212. His Bull to Sir Toby Matthew. p. 201. 211. Privy and
assistant to the Irish Rebellion, p. 230. 247. to 553. his Bull and Indulgence
to the Irish Rebels p. 253. The election of Pamphilio the now Pope his age and
intentions: and the Queens sending Sir Kenelme Digby to him p. 252. to 255.
Father Price General of the Benedictines, his intimacy with Laud, London,
Windebank: procures the searchers place at Dover by their might, and puts in
Papists to be his Deputies there, page 198. 206. 207.
Q*
The Queens marriage with the King, designed to introduce Popery, page 69. The
Articles of her marriage and present effects of it in favor of Papists, p. 70.
to 74, 83. to 198. The King bound by Oath not to endeavor her conversion to
our Religion by any means; (but, she not obliged not to seduce the King) page
71. The Pope challenges jurisdiction over her household, p. 119. to 122. 208.
The dangerous positions of her Priests, Ibid: Priests, released by the K. and
others at her instance, p. 122. 123. 190. Her favors to, and Letters of favor
to the Queen, and Officers of France, in the behalf of Secretary Windobanke;
and the many courtesies he and his receivd from her since his ^light, p. 127,
to 140. She sends Major Bret, Sir Will. Hamilton, Mr. Walter Mountague and
others successively to Rome, p. 140. 141, 143, 144, 146. 204. to 214. Her
calling of a general Assembly of all the Romish Catholics at London to assist
the King against the Scotts, her Letters to them for that purpose, and Message
to the Parliament, page 189. to 196. Dangerous Popish Incendiaries about her
person. page 204. to 218. Her contributions and assistance to English and Irish
Papists, and these unnatural Wars, p. 194. 151. The Queene-Mothers arrival in
England, to further the Papists Designs, and Massacre of the Protestants, p.
189, 225. The people murmr against her; her desire of a guard and departure
hence, p. 195. to 198. 218.
R
Captain Read: a chief agent of the Jesuits; an Actor in the Irish
Rebellion; escapes out of the Tower, and since affirmed to be Knighted by the
King, p. 147. 25^. Robert Read Secretary and Nephew to Windebanke, his Letters
out of France to Master Thomas Windebanke, page 125. to 139. Rebellion in
Ireland: See Ireland, p. 218, to 251. Judge Richardson, his stay of proceedings
against Recusants by command, and Letter to Windebanke concerning the same,
page 139. 140. Cardinal Richelieu: his favor to Windebanke, Master Mountague
and the English Fugitives at Paris, p. ^30. 131, 132, 138. His Spies and
Activity here, p. 204. to 217. Privy and assistant to the Irish Rebels, page
232. 233. 234. Count Rossetti the Pope* last Nuntio, his arrival in England,
and the Bull to Sir Toby Matthew concerning him, page 210. 211. Complained of
in Parliament promised to be sent away hence, yet secretly detained here, page
193. 214. Rochel lost by the means of our ships: etc. p. 84. 85. 86.
S.
Sabbath, denied by the Archbishop and his creatures, p. 158. Sacrifice of the
Mass endeavored to be introduced by Canterbury, in the Sco^tish Liturgy, p.
160. 161. 162. 163. Scottish Innovations, Liturgy, Wars, Troubles, occasioned
by Canterbury fully related out of his own Papers and Letters. p. 148. to 196.
Spanish Treaty concerning the Match, Palatinate, and all the passages
concerning it, and their juggling with us in it fully related from p. 1. to 69.
The Spanish fleet 1639. designed for England beaten by the Hollanders, at which
the Archbishop and others were much discontented. page 198. Standing up at
Gloria Patri, the New Creed, etc. enjoined by Canterbury, and Chanting divine
service, together with New holy days, and diverse Popish Innovations in the
Scotts Liturgy. p. 118. to 163. The Lord S^udamores Letter to Windebanke. p.
^46. Earl of Strafford, his advice concerning the calling and packng a
Parliament in Ireland to conquer the Realm thereby, and to balance the
Protestants and Papists in it. p. 113. to 118. 238. his advice and Lauds to
subdue the Scotts by an Irish Army, and not to trust the English. p. 170. 171.
his oppressions, one principal cause of the Irish Rebellion. p. 227.
T.
Transubstantiation introdu^ed by (...) in the Sco^tish Liturgy. p. 161. G. 7.
(Father Talbot as I conjecture) a Jesuits Letters concerning the affairs that
war with Scotland. p. 170. 171.
VV
Wilson a dangerous seditious Priest. p. 205. The Kings Commission to the Earl
of Worcester a Papist, to be Lord Leiutenant of all South Wales and command the
forces there, when the Papists had a design, and secretly entertained
thousands of Irish and others to cut the English Protestants throats. p. 205.
206. Master Wilfords Letters from Rome to Secretary Windebanke concerning
English Cardinals. p. 199. 200. Sir Francis Windebanke made Secretary of State
by Archbishop Lands procurement p. 122. his extraordinary favor to Priests,
Jesuits, Papists, the Popes Nuncioes, his, letters from them and great respect
at Rome, and the entertainment his Sons had there for his sake. p. 122. to
148 his charge in Parliament and slight into France, and Letters thence p. 123.
to 139. he had a Pass from the King, and yet counterfeits another. p. 125.
126. he ^layes all his charge in discharging Priests, Jesuits, and stopping
proceedings against Papists, by Letters of Grace, on the King and Queen. p.
123. to 134. The Queens Letters of favor in his behalf, and his
extraordinary entertainment in France for her sake, with his addresses, Letters
to her Majesty and the continuance of hers and the Kings favor to him ever
since his ^light. p. 125. to 139. his Petition intended to the Parliament. p.
136. 137. his Sons letters to him from Rome and Italy. p. 144. 145. 146. his
Letters out of France to his Son at Court. p. 126. to 139.
Errata.
COurteous Reader, the Printers carelessness has occasioned these ensuing
Error^, which I must desire the to corect: p. 4. l. 36. 37. ^b declari^ur,
Decla^^bitur, p. 8. l. 1. dele, m^^o sunt Vassalli p. ^ l. (...) 39. procure,
p. 32. l. 4. trust, l. 11. pro^ered, p. 35. l. p. 35* l. 1. (...) p. 38. l. 13.
continuance, p. 40. l. 47. perpet^^m, p. 42. l. 1. In^an^, p. 43. l. 7.
minimum, l. 35. Duce. l. 44* Scaccarij, l. 37. Arc^i^orum, p. 45. l. 20. de.
elinquet^ l. 36. (...), p. 48. l. 47 and p. 49. l. 8. business, l. 10. Comedy,
p. 50. l. 4. newly elected Pope. l. 6. we, were, l. 12. magis l. 21. jucundoque
in^^undoq^e, p. 51. l. 4^ quar^i, p. 54. l* 47. Causa p* 55. l. 2. ^^rcis, l.
7. Infan^^m in, p. ^ 4. l. 56. prefixed, p. 65. l. 51* royal, loyal, p. 70.
l. 10 that p. 72. l. 55. judiciorum, p. 73. l. 15. N^str^rum, p. 78, l. 24*
superstition, p. 81. l. 37, cu^* cum, p. 82. l. 2. amarities, l. 13. quos,
quod, l. 28. ^alun^, l. 51. Calcedonensi, l. 52. em, etiam, p. 86. l. 47.
Letters, p. 93. l. 40 embraced, p. 99. l. 4* day, p. 101. l. 45. Bedle, p. 17.
45. Thomas p. 119. l. 36. resumed, reserved, p. 124. l. 39* very like, p. 126.
l. 3. not l. 20* hence, thence, p. 1^7 l. 53* that, than, p. 129* l. 32*
affectionate, p 134. l. 20. con^ident. p. 142. l. 17. dele. p. 143. l* 38.
must, most. p. 147. l. 3. Bishopric, writ thus to Secretary winde^anke, p.
149. l. ^ signer, p. 155. l. 52^ this. the, p. 157. l. 37. ^13. 313. p. 166. l.
22. rising, p. 180. l 23. Rebels, Rebellium* l. 34. dele and. p. 189. l. 28.
considerates, p. 190 l 23. ^^cilitation, p. 133. l. 13. is, this, p. 195. l 8.
your, his, p. 198. l. 24* ^ereon, l. 25. dele, or, l* 46. About which time the
Pacification with Scotland was dissolved and a waragainst them concluded by the
Archbishops and Papists means, and a Parliament assembled to gran^ Subs^dies
to support this war. But, etc. p. 199. l* (...) Papists, p, 203 l* 32. to,
the, p. 207. l. 15. (...), p. 109. l. 2. if, ^f, 39 De^es. p. (...). P^^ckes,
p. 228. l. 44 where, when, p. 229 l. 19. ^rian. P. 231. l. 28. S^ptem October.
Margin p. 31. l. 2. Francoi^, p. 59. l. 3. Harborers, p. 158. l. 3. 4.
Idol^la^ria R^m^nae, p. 162. l. 2. Bin^feldius l. 17. E^cha^is^^a.

To the Reader.
READER;
NOte that from p. 206. to the end, most of the printed pages (through the
Printers oversight) are mistaken, and must be mended with a pen, and then
the Errata and Table referring to them will fall out right, which are as these
pages should have been, not as they are misprinted: Else there will be a
mistake in both so far as they relate to the misprinted pages.

FINIS.

