A TESTIMONY OF TRUTH, Given forth by a Servant of the Lord, on the behalf of
the despised servants, and professors of truth (who are made partakers of the
heavenly Power, which shakes the earth, and makes the Inhabitants of the Land
to tremble, who are by the scorners of this Generation called Quakers] against
the many lies and slanders (which the Devil is the chief author of) arising
forth of the bottomless pit, and vented forth by one James Livesey a professed
Minister of Christ in the County of Chester; but by his fruits is plainly
manifested a Minister of sin, and so of his Father who begat him, and sent him
forth to oppose the living truth of God; but his folly is here manifested and
declared to open view, that the simple and honest hearted may turn from him,
and all such deceitful workers, and may learn of Christ the light of the World,
that their souls may live.

Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say
all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake; rejoice and be exceeding
glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets
which were before you, Mat. 5.11, 12. For as concerning this Sect we know that
every where it is spoken against, Acts 18.22 But this I confess, that after
the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, Acts
24.14. Truth was formerly called a Sect, and the way of God heresy by formal
professors; Therefore let none be deceived with vain words and flying reports.
But prove all things; and hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5.21. A.
Parker. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1659.

THe Almighty wise God, has (according to his promise declared by his holy
Prophets and Apostles appeared in these last days, and has caused his light
to shine forth, which has not only discovered and manifested the deceits of
the serpent, and all the deceitful workers in all their deceivablenesse, and
cunning craftiness, whereby they have long lain in wait to deceive, and many
have been deceived and led away from the light, which should have given unto
them the true knowledge of the Mysteries of God, and of those things that does
pertain unto life and peace; I say the Lord our God has not only revealed the
Mystery of iniquity, but has also (to the glory and praise of his great Name)
revealed, and in a great measure discovered the mystery of truth, which is
glorious and precious, even that same Truth which (in ages and generations
past) has been the stay and comfort of Gods people, and was their joy and
refreshment, and did uphold them in the time of their trials and troubles,
which from the beginning of times ever since the fall of man, has been
gainsaid and opposed by the seed of evil doers, and those who have from time
to time born a true testimony for the truth (who lived in the truth) they have
been reviled and reproached, and suffered many and great afflictions in the
world, chiefly from those who have had a name and an outward profession of God,
but lived out of the life of God; such have been the enemies of God, and of his
Truth, and also of his Messengers and servants, who have been true witnesses of
Truth (as the scriptures of Truth do largely testify all along to which I
refer thee that may read this, to search and try) and as it was then in the
days of old, even so it is now, he that is born after the flesh does persecute
him that is born after the spirit; and it cannot be otherwise, for there can be
no agreement between light and darkness, between Christ and Antichrist; but
enmity, and discord, waring and fighting one against the other, and so as we
are made partakers according to our several measures of that life of
Righteousness which the Saints, the people of God were made partakers of, so
we are made sharers and partakers with them of the like sufferings; and this we
do account to be our joy and great riches, and do rejoice in Christ that we are
of that number who suffer for Righteousness sake, well knowing, that according
as it is written, all that will live godly in Jesus Christ shall suffer
persecution.

Now it being so that the most high God in his dear love in Christ Jesus,
having visited this Nation with mercy from on high, even in a time when many
were wallowing in their blood, and even past hope of recovery, the Nation being
overrun with wickedness, even then did God appear, and rent the thick vail,
which had long been over many, and caused his light to shine out of obscurity,
and uttered forth his voice in great power, and raised up many from the grave,
and restored them to life again who had been dead in trespasses and sins,
reviving them by his quickening power, and brought life and immortality to light
through the Gospel, and revealed the great mysteries of his Kingdom, which has
been hid from the worldly wise, even from the beginning of time, which is
Christ in us the hope of glory, who was revealed and manifested in the true
Christians in the primitive times, This was their Privilege, they were made
partakers of life eternal, and translated out of the kingdom of darkness, into
the Kingdom of the Dear Son of God; they had the true light in them, and the
word of life was in them, by which they were sanctified and made holy, and
their bodies were Temples of God, and God and Christ dwelt in them and spoke in
them, and wrought all their works for them and in them; and so by the cords of
pure love, they were drawn near unto God, who sometimes were afar off; and
their unity was in the spirit, for they were written in one another hearts,
with the spirit of the living God; but since those days, there has been a
great darkness over the Nations, and that Christian beauty of love, meekness,
patience, humility, etc. has been marred and stained by the deformed spots of
envy, wrath, rashness, impatiency, pride, covetousness and the like; and
though many have retained and kept the name of Christianity, yet the life and
nature has been wanting, as the true light has made it manifest; for after
these many years of profession, and these glorious and fair pretenses, God is
coming to view the fields, and to see what fruits may be reaped in this Nation,
and Nations, and behold a great crop of corruption may be reaped, but no fruits
from the good ground is brought forth, which has grieved the good spirit of
God; and now is he arisen as a man of War in dread and fury, and will pour
forth the Vialls of his wrath upon the man of Sin, and will bring deliverance,
and has brought deliverance unto his people, and this we testify that God is
light, and is appearing in the power of light to manifest and destroy sin, and
bring in everlasting righteousness, and this is no new truth, but the same as
ever, even that which was from the beginning, which is the same to day and for
ever; and unto that which all people have erred from, is the Lord now bringing
them back again unto, that they may have union with him in spirit, and worship
him in spirit and in truth, and this is the worship that we own, and the true
faith which is the gift of God, which we are made partakers of, which purifies
the heart, and gives victory over the world, and the lusts and pollutions of
it; and for this faith and no other, do we contend against all opposers and
gainsayers (as many we have met withal within these few years, in this Nation
of England since the glorious light of truth did shine forth) but over them all
the truth does reign and shall reign, and the Lamb shall have the victory;
And amongst the many opposers who have appeared by word and writing against the
truth, I have lately seen a book given forth by one James Lives^y, a Parish
Priest in Cheshire who has vomited forth a great de^l of silthy stuff, like
smoke from the bottomless pit, which darkens the air, and blinds the eyes of
some people there away, and causes them to stumble at the appearance of truth.
Now for the truths sake and for their sakes who love it, I am made free to
write some few things to the chief points or heads in the said book, for the
manifesting and laying open deceit, and removing the stumblingblocks out of the
way of the simple; as for my own particular I am satisfied, and I know many
more in this Nation, who have received of the fullness of God, and have drunk of
the sweet and pleasant streams that have sprung from the Fountain of Sion, and
have received satisfaction, and can no longer drink of the dury, muddy, filthy
streams that springs from the well head of Babylon, nor can any longer trade
with the deceitful Merchants of Babylon; for the day of her calamity is come,
and the Lord is discovering the witchcraft and sorcery of her Merchants, unto
thousands is this Nation, and other parts, who can buy her Merchandise no more;
but to come to the matter in hand, and the first things I meet with in the Book
aforesaid in the first page, are some relics or remainders of some old wares
which this Merchant of Babylon has taken back again from something formerly
sold by him, which he casts in to fill up the measure of the other, which he
has compacted together to make sale of, which I may pass over and come to the
matter, and its possible when the Merchandise is opened, I may find some of
these relics, and may return them back again with the other deceitful wares,
unto this Merchant of Babylon, for the Children of Sion loathes them, and will
no longer buy them.

Pr. Is the written word Gods?

Answ. The written words or sayings of the holy men of God, so far as they are
not corrupted in the translations, I own to be a true testimony or declaration
of the eternal word, and being given forth from the moving of the spirit they
are good, they are words of God, and dearly owned and prized by us, and were
given forth to be read, believed, practiced and fulfilled, but He cannot be
written with pen or ink whose Name is called the word of God.

Pr Then in the next place, what ever humane doctrines or opinions you meet
with which thwart, contradict or oppose the written word; reject.

Answ. We who fear God, and are led and guided by the spirit of God, which
leads into all truth, we do not act things contradictory to the Scriptures,
though to dark understandings, something may be so judged, as sometimes in the
days past, the chief Priest and great professors Judged the Ministers Christ,
who denied the outward commandments and shadows of the Law, which were commands
of God written in the Scriptures, as the Temple, Sabbath, circumcision,
Priests, tithes, osterings and the like, and brought people to the guidings and
leadings of the holy spirit, and the holy unction within them; but the Priests
of England do act things invented by humane wisdom, and that which does oppose
and contradict plain Scriptures: as first their carnal, and man-made Ministry,
being brought up at Schools and Colleges, and so made Ministers in and by the
will of man, contrary to Paul who neither received it of man, neither was he
taught it, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal 1.1.11.12.15.16. 2 Their
man-made Churches which God never commanded to be built in the Gospel
ministration; but on the contrary said, God that made the World and all things
therein, seeing he is Lord of Heaven and earth, dwells not in Temples made
with hands, etc. 3. Their carnal call by ringing of bells. 4. their standing
praying in the high places there, and being called of men Master, contrary to
the plain words of Christ, Mat. 23. who says unto his true Ministers, be not
ye called of men Master, etc. 5. Their long prayers, and studied Sermons (as
they call them) their singing of David's experiences in Rhyme and Meter, which
they does not witness in themselves nor hearers, their sprinkling of Infants,
an invention of man never commanded by Christ, nor practiced by his Apostles;
their yearly set and forced maintenance, and many other things are done and
acted by the Priests of England, which does contradict and oppose plain
Scriptures, and they have no example for such practices, but are humane
inventions, and therefore we do deny them and turn from them, and testisie
against them, and know assuredly that God will overturn them.

The next thing I meet with, is a saying of Austin, which the Priest brings,
which makes nothing for his purpose, but is altogether against the end for
which it is alleged, for Austin speaks there of the teachings of Christ, and
labors to bring from the teachings of men, the words are these; nec tu me, nec
ego te, sed ambo Christum, audi veritatem loquentum, audi Christum dicentem,
neither hear thou me, nor will I hear thee, but let both of us hear Christ,
hear the truth speaking, hear Christ teaching; the words are sound and good,
for all flesh is to be silent, and Christ must speak in male and female; Ye
seek a proof of Christ speaking in me says Paul, 2 Cor. 13.3. And the
anointing which ye have received of him abides in you says John, and ye need
not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you, 1 John
2.27. which teachings of Christ Austin in this place speaks of, which this
opposer Livesey would apply to the Scriptures without, and so pervert his words
above mentioned; But the words of Austin do not bear such a sense as Christ
speaking in the Scripture, but hear Christ's teaching, and so let him that has
an ear to hear, hear what the Spirit says.

Pr. Furthermore I find a Scripture quoted Isay 8.20. To the Law, and to the
Testimony, etc.

Ans. To which I say, the Law is light and was written in the heart, and the
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy, which spirit is a discerner and
a tryer of Doctrines and opinions; but that the Scriptures themselves are the
touchstone and tryer without the spirit, I deny, and I put it upon Livesey
(truths opposer) to prove; but to give a little light to the people who do not
understand aright, this I say, that in trial of things and spirits, there is
three things to be considered of, that is, the tryer and the thing tried, and
the Rule to try by; Now if I grant the Scriptures to be a rule, yet a blind man
cannot see them, nor walk according to them, so that whosoever does Judge of
things, or go about to try spirits, if he have not the spirit of God in his own
particular, he cannot try nor Judge aright, and whereas he speaks of conscience
being Regula regulata, non regula regulans, I say the conscience is not the
rule, but the light, or spirit of God, which exercises the conscience toward
God and man, that is the true rule; for as many as are the Sons of God they are
led by the spirit of God;

Pr. And whereas he further says, It may not be unseasonable nor unprofitable
to give you of this Congregation a short draught of some opinions owned and
maintained by the Quakers.

A. To which I say and in the fear of God I declare unto you who are hearers of
the said Livesey, that to hear a liar, and a false accuser, is both
unseasonable and unprofitable; and hear him so long as you will, you shall
never be profited by him nor converted to God, for being out of the Counsel of
God himself, he cannot bring others unto God; and that he is a liar and a false
accuser, I shall make it plainly manifest, as I come to his charges against
those people; for I have read over his Book or Papers, and I find a great heap
of filthy stuff; for wanting matter wherewithal to accuse, he himself lays a
false foundation, and then goes to build, inventing lies and false things, and
calls them the Quakers opinions; and so heaps a great deal of stuff together,
and to color his deceit, gathers up several texts of Scriptures, and makes a
great noise, as though he had confuted the Quakers opinions, when indeed it is
nothing but his own lies and inventions that he has confuted; like unto a
distracted man, creating imaginations, and then fights with his own created
images, as this opposer does, as I shall make it manifest in due time; and so
that which he casts upon the Quakers, will justly fall upon his own head; for
where envy, lying and false accusing is, that Religion is not of God; but (to
turn back his own words) is a mellany of froth, filth, vanity, and villainy,
lies, and lewdness, errors, Heresies and blasphemies, which they have invented,
and through covetousness and love of money have deceived the Nations long with,
which grieves the hearts of the righteous; but the Lord in due time will throw
down Babylon, and mar all her Wars, and spoil all her Merchants, and the great
Whore which has made all Nations drunk with the cup of her fornication, shall
be cast upon a bed of sorrow, and all who have committed whoredom with her
shall drink the cup of fury and indignation of God, and the Beast and false
prophets which have deceived the Nations shall be cast into a lake of fire
burning with Brimstone.

But I shall be as short as I may have liberty from the Lord, and come to his
charges and accusations against those whom he calls Quakers, and the first is
this.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them that salvation is attainable without
Jesus Christ.

Answ. That is a wicked lie, I detest and abhor that spirit that uttered forth
those words, there is no such opinion among us, who are scornfully called
Quakers; we profess salvation by Jesus Christ, and not by any other thing or
things; for of our selves we are not able to think a good thought, nor speak a
good word, nor do a good deed, but our strength and sufficiency is in Christ's
and Christ is in us the hope of our glory, and by him are we saved, and made
free from the devils bondage and slavery, and from lying, and slandering, and
it it Christ in us that works our works, and enables us to perform and do his
will; and we are Gods workmanship, Created in Christ Jesus unto good works, and
so I testify that salvavation is attainable in Christ, and not without him;
and that lying spirit in Priest Livesey I do deny; and this is his foundation
upon which he builds; and the foundation being a lie, and rottenness, the
building cannot stand; Gods vengeance and wrath is kindied, and all liars and
deceitful covetous hireling Priests shall be as stubble before the fire, and
the Lake is the liars portion, Rev. 21.8. as for the Soriptures mentioned by
him I own them in their place, and they stand a testimony against the liar, and
false acculer, and such denies Christ, though in words they profess him; so
let every one who hears or read these lines examine your selves whether or no
you be in Christ, and Christ be in you, for except Jesus Christ be in you ye
are Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them that the Scripture is not the word of
God.

Answ. The Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, are
words of God, a Declaration of the things of God, and they testify of Him
whose Name is balled the Word God, Rev. 19.13.

Pr. There is an opinion among them that every man coming into the world has
in him, and connatural to him a saving light.

Ans. As this is laid down it is false, invented in a false deceitful deceived
heart, manifesting his wickedness that gave it sorth; But for the satisfaction
of the upright I shall declare the truth, and that is this, we say that Jesus
Christ is the light of the world, and so it is written in the Scripture, Joh. 8
12. and he lights every man that comes into the world, according to to the
testimony of Joh. 1.9. and though darkness may be over the Nations, yet light
shines in darkness, but the darkness does not comprchend the light, and this
light is a manifestation of the fathers love in Jesus Christ, and is Gods true
and faithful witness, which reproves in secret for sin and evil, and does make
it manifest in the heart and conscience, and reproves him or her that acts and
commits it, and that which reproves and makes sin manifest is light, as it is
written, all things that are reproved are made manifest by the light, for
whatsoever makes manifest is light, Ephesians. 5.13. this light is the key that
opens the door where the heavenly treasure is, and no man or woman in the world
can ever come to the true knowledge of sin, much less to the knowledge of
truth in its purity, until they own the light which Jesus Christ the light of
the world has enlightened them withal, thou can never see thy ugly shape and
thy foul and filthy garments which the devil has put upon thee; until thou
viewest thy self in this light; therefore beware of hating and despising the
light within which is of Christ, for whosoever hates that light which checks
and reproves for sin, they hate Christ, and the light is the condemnation; for
as Christ has said, this is the condemnation of the world, that light is come
into the world, and men love darkness rather then light, because their deeds be
evil, for every one that does truth, he loves the light and brings his deeds
to the light that they may be proved and tried whether or no they be wrought in
God, but every one that does evil, hates the light, and will not bring his
deeds to the light, least they should be reproved, Joh. 3.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them that every man may be saved if he will,
etc.

Ans. This is likewise false, and no truth in it, for we do not say that the
power of salvation is in man's will, but in God, who by his power subdues and
subjects man's will; for it is not in him that wills or runs, but in God
that shows mercy, and this is the mercy and loving kindness of God who has
sent his Son into the world, that whosoever believes on him should not perish
but have everlasting life; and so salvation is of God, but destruction is of a
man's self, for the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared unto all
men, teaching us, etc. So he that will be a Disciple of Christ must deny
himself and take up his Cross and follow Christ, and the Cross of Christ
crucifies the carnal mind and subjects man's will and God works in the
creature both to will and to do, yet obedience is required of the creature,
that as God by his light does show his will and mind; it is the duty of men and
women to do his will which is our Sanctification.

Pr. There is an opinion among them that there is in man no light of reason, no
light of nature.

Answ. All men that be out of the true light of life, notwithstanding all that
which they may call light of reason on light of nature, are darkness according
to that Scripture, Ephesians. 5.8. once were you darkness, etc. and yet in that
state there is a spark orsome glimering of the true light which shines in
darkness, but the darkness cannot comprehend it, Joh. 1. and this light is the
ground of right reason, and men that despise and reject the counsel of the
light become brutish, and unreasonable, and so the understanding comes to be
darkened, and the sense of it is lost.

Pr. There is an opinion that conscience in man is nothing else but faith.

Ans. That is not so; for conscience in man may err, and may be seared; but
faith is pure, it is the gift of God, and cannot err, and the mystery of it is
held in a pure conscience.

Pr. There is an opinion among them that the light within them is sufficient,
that there is no need of other teachers, etc.

Answ. That light that is of Christ, in it self is sufficient, but there be
some that are but Babes and sucklings, and the Lord takes care for them, and
for this end was the true Ministry given, having received perfect gifts which
were for the perfecting of the body of Christ, until all come into the unity of
the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, even to
the measure and stature and fullness of Christ, and this does not overthrow all
Scripture, but establish the Scriptures, for this is the very end for which the
Scriptures, were given forth, to wit, that people may be brought to God, and
worship God in spirit and in truth, and know the holy unction within them; and
John did not overthrow the Scriptures nor the true Ministry when he said, the
anointing which ye have received of him abides in you, and ye need not that any
man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you, etc. and the Prophet
Isaiah did not lay waste the Scriptures, nor frustarte the work of the
Ministry, when he says, cease from man whose breath is in his nosirils, for
wherein is he to be accounted of? and as then the work of the true Prophets,
and Apostles was to bring to God, so now, for all the children of the Lord
shall be taught of the Lord, Isai. 54.13.

Pr. Their opinion is, that God is not to be worshipped in places made with
men's hands.

Ans. We say, God is a spirit, and is worshipped in Spirit, and in Truth, in
his own holy Temple not made with men's hands; for God who made the world and
all things therein, seeing he is Lord of heaven and Earth, dwells not in
temples made with hands, neither is he worshipped with men's hands, and this is
truth, and whereas he the said opposer does bring some scriptures, as Act.
20.7, 8, 9. how Paul preached in an upper chamber, and continued his speech
till midnight, this proves nothing for, but against him; for we bear witness
with the Apostle against the Temples made with hands, that God is not
worshipped there; and so as the Apostles did meet together apart from the
Temple worshippers, so do we now, and worship God in spirit; and whereas he
brings some other Scriptures, as Luke 4.15. where Christ taught in the
Synagogue, and Io. 18, 19, 20. which we deny not; but this was a time befroe he
was sacrificied up, and he came to fulfill all righteousness; for he is the
end of the Law for Righteousness sake to them that do believe; and whereas he
adds a scripture in Psa. 132.13, 14. For the Lord has chosen Sion, he has
desired it for his habitation, this is my rest for ever, this he brings to
prove that God is worshipped, and dwells in a man's made house, if any be so
blind and ignorant to believe him; for my part I believe him not; but I believe
what the Scripture says, Heaven is my Throne and earth is my footstool, what
house will you build unto me says the Lord? or where is the place of my rest?
not in a man made house. The heaven of heavens is not able to contain him whom
we worship.

Pr. There is an opinion among them, that the place where the people of God
convene to worship, is not the Church, nor to be called a Church.

Ans. We say no, For the Church is the body of Christ built up of living
stones, elect and precious, and the Apostle does not any where call a man-made
house a Church, and it is error and blasphemy to call a house (made with men's
hands of wood and dead stones) a Church; and therefore a vain wicked and
sottish assertion of this blind Priest so to call it.

Pr. There is an opinion among them; that God is not to be worshipped in places
where idolatrous worship has been performed.

Ans. As for the days of old, what was done then, we let pass, but as for
your steeple houses which a few years since were the Popes Masse-houses, God
does not dwell, neither is he rightly worshipped there, and therefore we do
deny them and all your dead performances in them.

Pr. There is an opinon among them that God is not worshipped with the body.

Ans. God is worshipped in spirit and served with the body, according to that
Scripture quoted by this opposer, Romans 12. 1. I boseech you therefore brethren
by the mercies of God, that you present your bodies a living sacrifice, Holy
and acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service, (mark he calls it a
service.)

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them that the law is made hy the beast, and it
is not lawful to use the law.

Ans. The law which is perfect was made by God, and is good, just, and holy;
and is for the lawless to be as a curb and limit to them, which law we own,
and all just laws made by men, which are according to the law of God, we own;
and therefore do I testify against Priest Livesey as a liar and false accuser
of the Innocent; as for all laws that are unjust and contrary to the law of
God, such are made by the power of the beast, and such laws we cannot obey but
testify against them.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them that there is no mediate call to the
Ministry.

Ans. The true Ministers of Christ their call was immediate, by the power and
spirit of the living God, that which is mediate is carnal; and Christ is the
same yesterday, to day and for ever, and his call to the ministry is immediate
by his power and spirit, and all such as deny an immediate call now, I deny
them, they are not Ministers of Christ, but of Antichrist.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them, that Christ is the original language of
truth, not Greek, not Hebrew.

Ans. As this is laid down Iown it not, but this I say, that Christ is the
fountain and fullness and the original of all Truth, and the wisest linguist in
all the world, Grecian or Hebrewcian, cannot by all their skill open the door;
nor suck any sweetness from this fountain, for it is locked and sealed up, and
only they that drink at the stream, the true light, do taste of the sweetness,
and such receive satisfaction and refreshment, and are led to the fountain,
there to drink deep and full draughts, to their comfort and consolation^

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them that the conscience of one man is the
light of Christ in an other man.

Ans. This is altogether false and a lying invention of his own, and therefore
I need not speak to any thing in this charge, for the foundation being taken
away, the building will quickly fall down to the ground.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them that baptism of Infants is of the Popes
institution.

Ans. Has this opposer so long been trained up in the Popes way and order, and
so long continued in the Popes Masse-house and has he not yet learned all his
institutions? let him go to school again, and he may find it among some of the
old rotten trash.

But says this opposor, this opinion is contrary to Mat. 28 19, 20. Go and
disciple all nations baptising them, were there no infants in all the world,
nor in all the nations says he?

I answer, This command of Christ does not at all give power to sprinkle
infants, for they are not capable of discipling or teaching; mark that, go and
disciple all, nations baptising them, here is discipling before baptising, but
children are not capable of being discipled, so not of being baptized with
water, and so in this he contradicts himself; besides it is a thing never
commanded nor practiced by Christ nor any that he sent forth; and so to Rome
he must go and seek the institution of it, for the scriptures mentions no such
thing as sprinkling of Infants, Christ said suffer little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God; he took them in
his Arms and blessed them, but he did not sprinkle water on their faces, as
the Priests of England do; he sets them as a figure, and says whosoever shall
not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, shall not enter there in.

Pr. There is an opinion among them; that they cannot sin.

Ans. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in
him, and he cannot sin because he is borne of God, 1 John 3.9. But he that is
born of the flesh does sin altogether; and so if any man say he has no sin
before the birth immortal be born in him, he does deceive himself, and the
truth is not in him; but whosoever does own the light of Christ, that does make
manifest sin, and confess and forsake sin, they shall find meroy; and
walkingin the light, the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin; and said John
hese things I write unto you, that you sin not; John does make clear
distinction between the two births the one from beneath, the other from above,
whosoever abides in Christ does not sin, whosoever sins has not seen him
nor known him, etc. And whereas he mentions an other Scripture, Eccl. 7.20.
that, with many other Scriptures, are spoken to the seed of the first Adam, and
not to the regenerate seed, for as it is written, he that is born of God
sins not.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them, that men are not now outwardly to
express their thankfulness in a vocal solemn form of blessing for what
creature comforts they receive from the hand of God, exempli gratia, not to
crave a blessing upon their meat.

Ans. This is false and a lie, proceeding from the old root; for we do own and
practice prayer by speaking of words as the Lord by his spirit does move, and
owneth the saying of the Apostle where he says, I will that men pray every
where, lifting holy hands without wrath and doubting, such their prayers are
acceptable unto God; but all lying covetous greedy men, who harbor wrath and
malice in them, the Lord abhors, and loathes their services; furthermore I say,
that whosoever does see with a single eye, does see every creature of God to be
good, and are sanctisied by the word, and so to the pure all things are pure,
and if never a word were spoken to the hearing of the ear, yet the blessing
and virtue is felt in the creatures, and praises arises, and is given to God
for his mircies who is over all, blessed for ever.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them that salutations are unlawful.

Ans. This is false and untrue as others before mentioned, for salutations of
love we own and practice, according to Scriptures, and what Christ said and
commanded as to that we practice, if we go into a house, we salute the house,
and if the Son of peace be there, our peace remains, but if not, it returns
back to us again and we shake off the dust of our feet as a testimony against
such who reject the love of God; and these salutaions we own in the fear of
God, according to the Scriptures; but as for all the vain traditional customs
of the world, the capping, bowing, cringing and the like we deny, and all vain
customarie words, which feeds the wrong part, we deny and speak in the fear of
God, as we are moved of God by his spirit; as for other things in this
particular, the ground being taken away, the rest will wither; as for the
scriptures mentioned I own in the true meaning of them, and in their places
according to the mind of the spirit.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them, that Ordinances are not now in force, we
are to wait for immediate inspirations, and Revelations.

Ans. All the Ordinances and traditions of men, which have been invented and
set up in the time of darkness and night of Apostacy since the days of the
Apostles, which be carnal and fading, we do deny; but all the pure, holy and
substantial ordinances of Christ which abides and endures for ever, we do own
and practice, as the pure spirit of God does move and lead us; and as for
inspirations and Revelations, first for inspirations, this I say, that no man
upon earth can know God, savingly in any other manner, then by the inspiration
of the holy spirit, for the things of God knows noman but the spirit of God,
and no man knows the Son save the Father, neither knows any man the Father
but the Son, and he to whom soever the Son will reveal him; he that denies
Revelation, denies the knowledge of God.

Pr. Faith came by hearing, Romans 10.14. Now hear and your souls shall live so
the promise runs, Isai. 55.3. Now they say your souls may live though you never
hear.

Answ. Its true, that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God;
but where is the word to be found? read the 6.7. and 8. verses of the tenth
Chapter to the Romans, where the Apostle speaks of the word of faith; Say not
in thy heart who shall ascend into heaven (that is to bring Christ down from
above) or who shall descend into the deep, that is to bring up Christ again
from the dead, but what says it? the word is nigh thee, even is thy mouth, and
in thy heart, that is the word of faith that we preach. This was the word that
faith came by the hearing of it, and this word was manifested in the Prophet,
who says come unto me, hear and your souls shall live; now whereas this
opposer says, that we say souls may live though they never hear; that is
false, we do not say so, but exhort people to hearken to the voice of Christ,
that their souls may live, and whosoever hears Christ, (though they never hear
a covetous proud priest more, who loves money, and seeks gain from his quarter;
yet) their souls shall live; for such as loves money and are envious and proud,
liars and false accusers, were never sent of God, and shall never profit people
at all; such are to be turned away from; and whereas this opposer Livesey
speaks against Revelations, and says, What need have we to wait for
Revelations? etc. I say there is not any man that rightly knows God, nor any
thing of God but by Revelation; for though the Scriptures are given forth, and
any one may buy them for money, yet none in all the world, no not the wisest,
nor the most learned of men can understand them, except the same spirit that
gave them forth do reveal and open them; For as I have said the things of God,
knows no man but the spirit of God: And whereas he queries, and says, Where
has these men a promise to encourage them thus to wait, etc I say many and
precious are the promises and the reward of those that wait upon the Lord, for
be that waits upon the Lord, his strength shall be renewed, and again, wait
upon the Lord, and he will save thee, there were never any that waited on the
Lord in vain So I say, blessed are they that wait upon the Lord, and stand upon
their watch and are not weary, the Lord will reward them with his everlasting
blessings, and give them an inheritance amongst the Saints in light.

Pr. The great object of the Quakers is grounded on the first of Ioh. 2.27. Ye
need not that any man teach; this makes not for them nor their Revelations, but
against both; See verse foregoing, which speaks of Seducers, John means as is
evident, that they need not any of those Seducers to teach them but the spirit
and the written word, and the Ministers of Christ were sufficient.

Ans. O the wickedness of man! when once turned from the holy unction and
light of the spirit within, how he twines and turns, and confounds himself as
this opposer does, one while accuses the Quakers with denial or slighting of
the Scriptures, and here says their great object is grounded on 1 John 2.27,
what, neither be contented to let us own nor disown? and then like his Master
brings part of the scripture, and gives a wrong sense of the other part; Ye
need not that any man teach, says ye, but the Scripture says thus, but the
anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you; and ye need not that
any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches, you of all things which
is truth, and is no lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him;
Here its plainly manifest, John speaks of the holy unction which taught them
of all things, and labors to keep the Saints to the anointing within them, as
a safty against all Seducers and deceivers, who labored to draw from it to
their own inventions. And this same holy anointing we have received of God, to
be our teacher and we do deny and turn from all such Seducers and liars as
James Livesey, for such are not of God, neither can enter into the Kingdom of
God.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them, that no reverence is to be showed, no
honor nor titles of honor to be given to man, Magistrate or others.

Ans. The day of Gods mighty power is come, and the Lord is staining the pride
and the glory of all flesh, and the everlasting Gosple is preached, fear God
and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come, Jesus Christ is
our Captain, and we follow him that did not respect the persons of men, neither
received honor from men, who says, how can ye believe that receive honor one
of an other, and seeks not the honor that comes from God only? we are such as
do not seek honor, nor receive honor from men, and this was the Christians
practice, which we own, but in the Lord we honor all men and give that which
is just and due unto men, honor to whom honor, custom to whom custom; but
amongst the Saints there was no such custom as to Lord one over another; that
was the manner of the heathens, but says Christ, it shall not be so amongst
you.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them that its unlawful for Ministers to take
hire, any reward or encouragement for their preaching, not Tithes especially.

Ans. To preach for hire, Lucre or gain is a great evil, testified against, not
only in the old time under the Law by Gods true Prophets, but also by Christ
and his Apostles; whatsoever was allowed by God, was free under the Law, as
well as under the Gospel, and when any did it for hire or gain, it was a
loathsome and a filthy thing. When Tithes were allowed by the Law of God unto
the tribe of Levy, they having no other portion or inheritance, it was a free
thing, they people were to offer freely, and to bring their Tithes into the
storehouse, and the Priests, which were ordained to offer burnt offerings and
Sacrifices were to do it freely, a figure of Jesus Christ's laying down his body
freely; and in those days when any did it for hire or gain, the Lord sent his
holy Prophets to testify against them, as ye may read in Isa. 56.10, 11. Jer.
5.30, 31. Mica 3.5.11. Eze. 34. chap. Hos. 6.9. and many others: And when
Christ was come in the flesh he changed the ministry, and also the maintenance,
and gave forth new commissions; though he owned the Law (with all its commands
and ordinances) in its place; and whereas he reproves the Pharisees, saying, Woe
unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for you pay Tithe of Mint, Annis,
and Cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law, judgment, mercy
and faith, these ought you to have done, and not to leave the other undone; And
upon these sayings of Christ, this opposer Livesey seems to be much
strengthened in upholding this great Idol of Tithes; says he, Were not those
times in which those Scribes and Pharisees were, the times of the Gospel? are
they reproved for paying Tithes, no, no? (says he) these things ought you to
have done says Christ; these things ought not to have been done says the
Quakers. Ans. Can a Leopard change his spots? or can this wicked Priest leave
off his lying? When did any Quaker say that Tithes ought not to have been paid?
I leave this as a charge and and weight upon the head of this opposer, and
surely it will sink him into the pit at last, if he do not with speed repent;
but to clear the case, That was a time before that, Jesus Christ was sacrificed
up, and he did not come to break, but to fulfill the Law; and therefore says
Christ, and so say we, These things you ought to have done (mark a time
perfectly past) he does not say these things ye ought to do or continue; but
speaking to them who were under the Law, and not to the Gospel Ministers whom
he sent forth; For this was their commission, freely ye have received, freely
give; and into what City or Country ye come, enquire who is worthy (mark) he
does not say enquire what sums of money people will give you for preaching, or
what Tithes or Gleab Lands, or augmentations belongs to such a place, that was
abhorred by them (but they were to enquire) who was seeking the kingdom of God,
and if any one was found worthy, and did receive them and hear their words,
they were allowed to stay and abide there, and they might freely eat and drink
such things as were set before them; For the worke-man is worthy of his meat,
but if any did reject their sayings and did not hear their words, they were to
depart and shake off the dust of their feet as a testimony against them, read
Mat. 10. Luke 10. Here was a free Ministry and a free m^intenance; agreeable to
this, is that of the Apostle to the Corinthians 1 Epistle 9. chap. where he
pleads his power and authority to cat and to drink with such as did receive his
testimony, which scriptures are much abused by the earthly covetous teachers in
these days, perverting the scriptures for their own selfish ends. The words of
the Apostle are these, Have we not power to eat and to Drink? (mark) he does
not say, have not we power to take Tithes, or 2. or 300 l. or more or less by
the year, but he shows his power amongst them, that he had power to forbear
working, and so brings several similitudes) who goes a warfare at any time at
his own charges? who planteth a vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof?
or who feeds a flock and eats not of the milk of the flock? (mark, it was
cating where they had planted, and so he goes on) it is written in the Law,
thou shall not muzel the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn, and so
say we, it were unjust to let the Ox starve that treads out corn; but there
be some filthy beasts that spoil the corn, and such their mouths must be
stopped; but what are all these sayings to the idle slothful teachers in our
age? when do they go and plant a vineyard, or get a flock, or tread out corn?
when do they go into other Nations to convert the Turks and heathens? they are
ready to plead for the maintenance of Gospel Ministers, but why do they not do
their work; the Apostles and Ministers of Christ traveled up and down in hard
labors and great sufferings, and their great care was to make the Gospel
without charge; but the Teachers in England they love their fat benefices; and
large houses, and love not to go into the Lords battle, but if a larger
benefice happen to be vacant, they be ready to go thither, that i^, from a
little one to a great one; but I seldom see a Priest, or have known any to be
moved or called from a fat benefice to a poor one; and so are contrary to the
Gospel Ministers, who were ordained of Christ, and so have no right to their
maintenance; they that preach the Gospel may live of the Gospel, and such as
sow spiritual things may reap of the carnal things, what is necessary for his
body for food and raiment, and this is allowable; and he that is taught in the
word ought to communicate to him that teaches in all good things freely, but
not by constraint; but says this opposer who minds earthly things, whose God
is his belly, Let him communicate in all his goods, hay, hemp, flax, pige,
geese: I say the Ministers of Christ did never plead so for their bellies; and
as for Tithes, it was never paid amongst the true Christians, but the Minister
of the Gospel in the seventh chap. to the Hebrews speaking through all the
figures, Tithes before the Law, to Melchisedeck the similitude like the Son of
God, Tithes under the Law to the Levitical Priesthood, and speaks of the
change of the Priesthood, and of the Law, and disannulling the Commandment;
and in the beginning of the eight chapter sums up all in one, now says he of
the things that we have spokn of (and Tithes was one of the things) this is the
sum, Jesus Christ, who is a Priest for ever, not after the order of Aaron, but
by the power of an endless life, who is the end of all likenesses, the sum of
the signres, Types and shadows, the end of the first Priesthood that received
Tithes, and the end of the Law, and so an end of Tithes, and all who take or
pay Tithes now, it is a denying of Christ to be come in the flesh, and such are
Antichristian; and all Laws and Statutes which are made by men for the payment
of Tithes God will overturn and throw down, and the true Christians who are
subject to the Ordinances and commands of Christ cannot obey, but testify
against such Laws which have been made in the dark times of Popery, which the
Priests of England, who deny the Pope in words yet are upholden and maintained
by his maintenance, which never any of the true Ministers of Christ did, as
this opposer does in words confess that the Apostles took no Tithes; but I
shall leave this point and go on, and leave Tithes and all set and forced
maintenance to fall with the hireling and carnal-man-made Ministers.

And whereas this opposer and gain-sayer is speaking of expounding, adding and
giving meanings upon the Scriptures, and brings the expounders of the Law, and
Paul confounded the Jews and the like, and then numbers himself amongst them,
and says we are Christ's Ambassadors, when he is manifested to be a liar, a
false accuser, Preaching for hire, and is one in nature with those blasphemers
who said they were Jews but were not, as these say they are Ministers of
Christ, but are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them that the Church of England is no true
Church.

Answ. That which is commonly called the Church, which this opposer went about
to prove, to wit, a place built with men's hands, is no true Church, neither are
the Saints that meets in those Idolatrous places, but a company of mixed
people, of proud, covetous, heady, high-minded ones, scoffers, and scorners,
liars, and swearers, drunkards, and all manner of ungodly persons meets in
those places, and all the whole body of that worship which is maintained and
practiced there, is quit another thing then what was practiced in the true
Church, and so not the Church of Christ, which is his body, which he has
Redeemed with his own blood, that he may present it without spot unto God, not
having any spot or wrinkle or any such thing.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them, that there has been a night of a
Apostasy ever since the days of the Apostles, now the life is risen which
guided the Apostles.

Answ. There has been a dark night of a Apostasy since the days of the
Apostles, and the sheep of the Lord they have been made a prey upon, and have
been scattered all this cloudy dark day, not that the Lord has not had a
people through all ages even in the darkest times, but they have been under
great sufferings, and great tribulations, and it is also true that the life and
spirit is again risen, and the Almighty God by his power is bringing people
back unto that, which the deceivers and the Antichrists went from, and the
foundation of many generations is raised up, and the Rock is witnessed amongst
those who are the reproach of many people, which shall dash to pieces all that
strive against it, time will make it manifest.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them, that the Scriptures are to be taken
literally, etc.

Answ. The Scriptures are not of any private interpretation, neither can any
man by his learning or wit understand, or open them, but the same spirit that
was within the holy men of God which moved in them, and gave unto them an
understanding, must give unto people now a knowledge and understanding of the
Scriptures and of the things of God, and not another spirit.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them, that they ought not to swear at all, no
not when called before the civil Magistrate.

Answ. We have Christ amongst us who is the truth, who teaches us in
righteousness, to let our yea, be yea, and nay, nay in all things, and we have
the Scriptures of truth which testify of Christ amongst us, where it is
plainly written in Mat. 5.33, 34, 35, 36, 37. and given forth as a command of
Christ among many other things which he had been speaking of in that same
Chapter, speaking of things in old time, which Christ ownes in their place, but
he gives forth Laws in a more strict manner, for example, ye have heard that
it was said by them of old time thou shall not kill, and whosoever shall kill
shall be in danger of the Judgment; But I say unto you, that whosoever is
angry with his Brother, etc. shall be in danger of Judgment. Ye have heard
that it was said by them of old time thou shall not commit adultery, but I say
unto you that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her has committed
adultery with her already in his heart, (Mark these sayings, here is mentioned,
what the Law faith, and then what Christ says, who is the perfection of all
things) and so he goes on, and says, again ye have heard that it has been
said by them of old time, thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform
unto the Lord thine oaths, but I say unto you swear not at all, (Mark these
words, as he spoke to the perfecting of other things, so of this of swearing;
he does not say that it was lawful to swear before a Magistrate, as some say
now, but there is nothing more plain, he puts an end to all swearing, not only
of vain and frivolous oaths, in common speaking, but also all oaths
whatsoever, for as he spoke absolute in other things, so in this; for no doubt
if an oath had been lawful to be taken in the Gospel times, he would have
mentioned it in this place, but it is so far from holding forth such a thing,
that it is absolutely forbidden; the Law says thou shall not forswear thy
self, but perform thine oaths, to the Lord, but I say, swear not at all,
neither by heaven, for it is Gods Throne, nor by the earth, for it is his
footstool, neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King, neither
by thy head, because thou caust not make one hair white or black; but let your
communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever is more then these comes
of evil, so by this it is plainly manifest that Christ has ended all others;
for as the perfection of ancient times under the Law was not to forswear, so
the perfection of Christian men is not to swear at all; And whereas this
opposer, that I have to deal with, brings a Scripture out of the Prophets, Jer.
4.2. and thou shall swear the Lord lives in truth, etc. I say this does not at
all make void the sayings of Christ because he is the end of the Prophets, who
says swear not at all; and whatever other Scripture may be alleged, it is
not at all contradictory, because Christ the Son is greater then Moses, he
raigns over the house of Jacob and Joseph who swore in their day, Solomon
swore, but a greater then Solomon is here; And whereas the Prophet says thou
shall swear by the Lord, this was to bring them off from all false oaths, not
to swear by Baal nor other false Gods; but they were in those days to swear by
the Lord; but Christ is come, as I have said, who is the great Prophet, who
ends all oaths; And whereas it is alleged that an oath is an end of strife,
and therefore to be used, says this opposer; But I say that whosoever does
bring that Scripture in Heb. 6.17. to maintain swearing, contrary to Christ his
command, they pervert the Scripture; for the Author to the Hebrews does not
speak there to prove an oath lawful at that time, but he is speaking of God
making a promise to Abraham; and because he could swear by no greater, he swore
by himself, saying, Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will
multiply thee; and so after he had patiently endured, he obtained the promise;
for men verily swear by the greater, and an oath for confirmation is to them an
end of all strife; the Apostle does not bring this in opposition to Christ, but
speaking concerning God, who swore by himself concerning his promise and giving
his Son, Christ, who ends the strife; and this I further say, that those that
be in strife and oaths they have not learned Christ; one Scripture more I
shall add as a confirmation against swearing, and that is in Jam. 5.12 but
above all things my brethren swear not, neither by heaven, neither by the
earth, neither by any other oath (mark all oaths are forbidden) but let your
yea, be yea, and your nay, nay, least ye fall into condemnation.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them, that singing of Psalms is no Gospel
ordinance, especially not to be used in mixed Assemblies.

Answ. This is false; for singing of Psalms according to the Scriptures, we
own, singing with the spirit and with understanding, making melody in our
hearts to the Lord, according to those Scriptures, Col. 3.16. Ephesians. 5.19. And
whereas another Scripture is alleged, Jam 5.13. if any be afflicted let him
pray, is any merry let him sing Psalms, this is owned by us, but the question
will be, who are they that are truly merry? I say that none are truly merry but
the ransomed of the Lord, who have passed through many tribulations and fiery
trials, whose garments are washed with the blood of the Lamb, such shall return
to Sion with joy and singing, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads;
But the songs of the wicked shall be turned into howling, and weeping, and such
we do deny, and all such as take David's words (a man after Gods own heart) and
turn them into Rhyme, and Meeter, and a company of mixed people of proud ones,
covetous, envyous, wrathful, scoffing and scornful ones, for such as these to
sing David's experiences, his prayers and prophesies, his weenings, wastings,
roarings, cryings, tremblings, and such like, this is a great wickedness, to
speak David's words and say, O Lord I am not puffed in mind, I have no scornful
eye, I do not exercise my self in things that be too high, etc. when both
Priest and people are proud and scornful; such singing we do deny, and as sure
as God lives it shall be turned into howling and weeping and bitter lamentation.

Pr. There is an opinion among them, that the spirit is the rule they ought to
walk by, the spirit is our guide, teacher and leader.

Answ. That which was the Rule and guide of the people of God before the
Scriptures were written, and their rule and guide that writ the Scriptures, is
our Rule and guide now; and that was the spirit of God which led and guided
them in the way and truth of God, and it is written in the Prophets, all the
children of the Lord shall be taught of the Lord; and this was the promise of
Christ to send the Comforter, the spirit of truth, which should lead and guide
them into all truth; and this is according to the Scriptures, and stands over
the head of all gainsayers, and opposers; but this is so plain that no
reasonable man will gainsay it; for as many as are led by the Spirit of God are
the Sons of God.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them that the Trinity of persons is a lie, and
that there are not three persons in the God head.

Answ. What the Spirit of the Lord does own, we own, and what is written in the
Scriptures by the motion of the spirit we own; There is three that bear record
in heaven the Father the Word, and the holy Spirit, and these three are One,
and this we own, as for three persons I have not read of such a thing in the
Scriptures, God is an incomprehensible spirit, and is but One; Father Son, and
Spirit, three in manifestation, but all one in power, one God over all, blessed
for ever.

Pr. There is an opinion amongst them that the Ministry of England is
Antichristian, and our Ministers no Ministers of Jesus Christ.

Ans. 1. Such as are brought up at Schools and Colleges, and there learn
Aristotle's moral and Philosophical Arts and sciences, and there take certain
degrees and orders, as Bachelor of Art, Master of Art, Bachelor of Divinity,
Doctor of Divinity, and the like, and are trained up there certain years, and
so made Ministers in and by the will of man, such are Antichristian; but such
are the Ministers of England, therefore no Ministers of Christ.

Ans. 2. Such as make contracts and bargains with people for certain set
stipends and great sums of money, as 80.100, 200, 300. pounds or more or less
by the year, and will not preach without money, such are Antichristian, but
such are the Ministers of England, therefore not the Ministers of Christ.

Ans. 3. Such as denies the Doctrine of perfection, the life of pure Religion,
the work and end of the Christian Ministry, Ephesians. 4.11.12, 13. Col. 1.27.28,
29.) and say that none can be perfect or free from sin while they walk upon the
earth, but must always live in sin, and sin in them, such a Ministry is
Antichristian; But such are the Ministers of England, therefore not the
Ministers of Jesus Christ.

Pr. I would gladly know, if the Ministers of England be not the Ministers of
Christ, what Ministers are the Ministers of Christ?

Answ. For satisfaction of the honest hearted, I shall declare who are the true
Ministers of Christ, that is to say, such as have received perfect gifts from
God, freely, and are made Minsters by the will of God, and sent forth by his
power to turn people from darkness unto light; and from the power of Satan unto
God, who freely Minister as they have freely received, who cover no man's gold,
silver, nor apparel, but preach the word of God freely at all times and
seasons as the spirit does move and give utterance; and many such there are
amongst those that the scorners of this world do call Quakers, who preach the
Gospel of salvation freely, not seeking money or maintenance, and many within
these few years in England by the power of this Ministry received from God,
have been converted from sin unto God.

Pr. Whether Jesus Christ have any, especially designed for his work, or none
but himself the Prophet of his Church.

Answ. Christ is the head of his body the Church, and is the great Prophet, and
from him who is the head every member of the body receives nourishment and
refreshment, but I do own a Ministry ordained and sent forth by him for the
perfecting of the Saints, and for the edifying of the body, until we all come
into the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a
perfect man, even to the measure and stature and fullness of Christ as I have
said before,

Pr. When the Ministry of England began to be Antichristian, and how long it
has been so?

Ans. The Antichristian powers of darkness has reigned long, and I question
much whether ever the National Ministry of England were free from
Anti-christianism, though I do believe the Lord has had many precious people
in it, who in their time have stood faithful witnesses for God, some have
suffered death; but the Ministry was never thoroughly purged from popery, no not
to this day, but most things practiced are Popish inventions, as their Schools
and Colleges where they make their Ministers, little or nothing differing from
the Papists Schools and Colleges, where they make their Ministers, their
maintenance by Tithes, vicarage houses, gleab lands, etc. even as the Papists
do; and many other things there are wherein they do agree; so that it is hard
to tell the time when it began, but this I say, in the night of Apostasy, since
the days of the Apostles it begun.

Pr. What it is that renders them Antichristian? taking of Tithes, or what?

Ans. Taking of Tithes is one thing that renders them so; but there be many
other things, as their call into the Ministry, and being made Ministers by the
will of man, and their set maintenance, great sumes of money by the year, their
doctrine and practices, scarce any one thing is acted or done by them in all
that which they call the worship of God, as it was acted or done in the days
of the true Apostles; and if it were so that they were found in the very
practice of the Apostles, yet not being led by the same spirit, it is
antichristian: for the Christian worship was in the spirit and in the truth;
and all peoples and nations, though they may have all the words given forth
from the spirit, if they be not in the spirit and in the truth, they be false
worshipers, and are Antichristian, that profess Christ in words, but have not
the life of Christ within them; more I might say as to these things, but so
much having been written already by others, I shall proceed further; only I
take notice of three accusations against us, that is, 1. That we deny the
Trinity of persons; 2. The Divine authority of the Scriptures. 3 And the Souls
immortality; to the two first I have already spoken; and the Soul we say is
immortal, and so I leave the liar to receive his portion in the lake of
endless misery, Rev. 21.8.

Now I come to ^^* particulars wherein this opposer goes about to cast an odium
upon the Quakers bringing several things which he says the Jesuits and
Papists holds; it seems he is well acquainted with them, but what is that to
the matter; because the Devil believes there is a God, shall not I believe
truth because the Devils believes? If Jesuits an I Papists, Turks and Infidels
hold any truth, their holding of it shall not make me deny it; but truth I
shall own where ever I find it, and all Liars and false accusers, and that
which is contrary to truth I deny; but I shall come to the particulars, and
what concerns those whom he calls Quakers I shall speak to, and what concerns
the Jesuits and Papists, let them answer for themselves, if they will.

Pr. Jesuits have low, base and vile thoughts of the Scripture, its with them
a nose of Wax, a dead letter, no sufficient ground of Faith nor judge of
controversies, so Bellarmine, etc. so Quakers.

Ans. That the Quakers have low, base and vile thoughts of the Scriptures is
very false, and wickedness it is to say so; for we dearly own and highly prize
the Scriptures, and own them to be a true testimony of him who is the author
and foundation of faith, Christ Jesus; but life is not to be found in the
Scripture, but in Christ, who is the life and the quickening spirit, who is the
judge of all controversies according to the Scriptures.

Pr. Jesuits and Papists cries up salvation by the light and law of nature,
without the knowledge of Christ, etc. so Quakers.

Ans. We say as I have said before, salvation is by Christ who is the light of
the world, and lights every man that comes into the world, and not by the
light and law of nature without the knowledge of Christ, this charge is
altogether false, as to the Quakers; as for the other let them answer for
themselves.

Pr. Papists say the Church of England is no true Church. They say the Ministry
of England is antichristian, and so Quakers.

Ans. To both these I have spoken of before, to which I refer the Reader.

Pr. Subesse Romano pontifici est de necessitate salutis; No salvation for us
unless we become Catholics in their sense. Quakers say we are all damned
except we turn Quakers.

Ans. We say this, and it is no more then truth, that except ye repent and be
converted, ye must all perish; But as for the words as they are laid down, they
proceed from the wickedness of his evil heart, and are not true; our way is
Christ, and this is the way of holiness, and is but one, and there is none
other, and to this way must all come that are saved, and must know trembling
and quaking before all wickedness be thrown down, and truth and righteousness
be set up; therefore let none despise the power of God, least ye be cut of in
his feirce wrath.

Pr. Jesuits allow women to do the work of the Ministry, etc. Quakers allow
women's preaching as spiritual.

Ans. God has spoken by his holy prophet, saying, it shall come to pass in
the latter days, that I will pour forth of my spirit upon my Sons and
daughters, upon my servants and handmaids; and where the spirit of God is,
there is liberty, it is not to be quenched, neither in Son nor daughter; where
the seed is witnessed either in male or female, to wit, Christ who is one in
the female as well as in the male, and where he rules and reigns he may and
ought to speak, and this is according to Scriptures, but let the woman be
silent as says the Scripture.

Pr. Papists look upon miracles as signs of the true Church, so Quakers.

Ans. This is but the man's imagination, because he would have ^o^ething to say,
as for miracles I do not look for them, but if any by the power and spirit of
God do work miracles, as some have done among us, we do own it, and give God
the honor, whose work and power it is, and not any work of the creature.

Pr. Papists put a high esteem on visions and Revelations equalling them with,
or preferring them above the written Word; so Quakers.

Ans. True visions and true Revelations seen and revealed by the true spirit I
must needs own, if a Turk or infidel should profess the truth, its no worse
for their professing of it; And so I say that which is revealed by the same
spirit which was within them that gave forth the Scripture, is one and the same
with the Scriptreu, for the Truth is the same yesterday, to day and for ever.

Pr. The Jesuits say a man may be saved if he will, if he will follow the
light, etc. and the Quakers.

Ans. I have formerly answered to this point, yet this further; I say the
saving power is not in man's will, but in Christ the light, and whosoever
believes in and follows the light shall be saved, and he that believes not,
but follows his own will shall be damned.

Pr. The Papists extenuate imputed Righteousness in setting up their own
Inherent Righteeusnesse, so Quakers.

Ans. All our own Righteousness is as filthy rags, and we do not set it up but
deny it, together with all unrighteousness; but we exalt and set up Christ,
who of God is made unto us Righteousness, Justification, Redemption, and all
other things who dwells in us and is our life, and we in him, and have our peace.

Pr. Papists say they can keep all Gods commandments perfectly, fulfill the
law in their own persons, so Bell, and the Quakers.

Ans. Through the strength and power of Christ, that dwells in us we can do all
things, and his commandments are not grievous but joyous to us; and Christ
does fulfill the Righteousness of the Law in us, who walk^ not after the flesh
but after the spirit, and whosoever says he knows God and keeps not his
commandents, is a liar and the truth is not in him.

Pr. The Church Papists hold that their Church is infallible, which at last is
the Pope; so Quakers.

Ans. We do not hold the Pope to be the Church, neither do we believe the Pope
to be infallible, any more then the Priests and Church of England.

Pr. Jesuits say there is no foundation for Insants Baptism in the written word.

Pr. The Jesuits say baptism is of man's institution; so Quakers.

Ans. We are bold to affirm it, and say there is no command nor example nor
practice in the Scripture for Infants baptism, it is an invention of man, and I
lay it upon all the Priests of England, and Papists, and all who practice it,
to bring me a proof of it from the Scriptures, or else confess their sin in
doing that which was never commanded, nor by any of the Ministers of Christ
practiced.

Pr. Jesuits make their Pope a God, etc. Quakers make themselves Gods, curse
men, damn them to Hell.

Ans. It seems this Priest is wholly given up to the Devil, in venting forth
so many and gross wicked lies; we do not make our selves Gods but deny our
selves, and take up the Cross and and follow Christ; But we do witness that
God dwells in us; and we never curse men nor damn them to Hell; but we testify
against sin, which if not forsaken and repented of, will lead men to Hell; for
the wages of sin is death.

Pr. Jesuits call us heriticks, dogs, etc. and the Quakers calls us the brood
of Cain, Baals Priests false prophets, Seducers, etc

Ans. They that are envious and wrathful are of Cains generation and off
spring, and if we find any of the priests of England in that nature, we must
tell them the truth, it is no other language then what the spirit of the Lord
has given to deceivers and false prophets in times past, and the priests of
England being found in the same steps and covetous practices, we do them no
wrong to give them their right names.

Pr. Papists place most in external observations, seeming authority, so Quakers.

Ans. The liar will arive at Hell at last, when he has filled up his measure:
once more I testify that we do not place most in outward things, but in Christ
is our strength who works in us to will and to do of his good pleasure.

Pr. Papists prefer Jeromes version of the Bible before the Hebrew and the
Greek, so Fox and others deny Greek and Hebrew to be the original, preferring
the English.

Ans. Where did ever this opposer hear Fox and others speak of preferring the
English before the Greek and Hebrew, the English we own in its place and so
Hebrew and Greek; but not any of these Languages can open the mysteries of God,
therefore let all flesh be silent before the Lord, and let God alone be exalted.

Pr. The Jesuits cast off prayer to God, and pray to Saints, etc. Quakers have
cast off prayer to God, when do they pray in their families, meetings? etc.

Ans. H^re is a Charge and a question laid down: the charge is that Quakers
have left off praying to God. Now if the Quakers have not left off prayer to
God, then Ia. Livesey is a liar; but they have not left off prayer to God, as
thousands in this Nation can testify, but pray often both in their meetings
and in their families as the spirit of God does move and guide them, therefore
is Livesey a liar.

Pr. The Jesuits say that the Empire of learning is within the heritage of the
Jesuits, so Quakers say we are in darkness, all our eyes are out, theirs only
open.

A. Every tree is known by his fruits, and so we say of the Priests of England
after all their talking and profession, and having received so much money, see
what may, be reaped in their fields, even a great Crop of corruption pride and
covetousness reigning in themselves, and what can be expected to be brought
forth in people, but like Priest, like people, wandering astray like sheep
without a shepherd; but the day of the Lord is dawned, and the Lord has opened
our eyes, praises to his holy Nime; and we desire that their eyes may be
opened, that they might see their filthiness, and repent that their souls might
live.

Thus I have gone through his 20. particulars, and what is truth I have owned,
and what is not I have denied, and turned it back again into the old bottle
from whence it sprung: I shall hasten to an end, for it is out of my life to
wade in such muddy filthy stuff as this is, only for Truths sake to remove the
stumbling block out of the way of the simple: And now whosoever thou art that
reads this, let not prejudice enter into thee, but in the fear of God weigh
and try things, and hold fast that which is good.

The next thing I meet with is some questions, which he propounds, and then
goes about to answer, or give his censure; I may speak something to the
questions, and to other things as the Lord moves.

Qu. What may we rationally and Charitably conceive or judge of the Quakers
pretended piety and sanctity, have the truth of grace in them or no?

Ans. Wicked ungodly men, such as I have found this Priest, a Liar, a
Blasphemer, a false accuser have nothing to do to judge of the Piety and
Sanctity of the people of God; but they themselves are reserved for the
judgment of the great day, when the lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven
with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not
God, and that obey not the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ who shall be
punished with evelasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and
to be admired in all them that believe; this day is coming on apace, wherein
the deceits of all deceivers shall be made manifest; and this know, that our
Piety and Sanctity is not pretended, but true and firm, proceeding from the
true root and sure foundation, and we have the truth of grace in us, by which
we are taught to deny the deceitful Ministry of Antichrist, and all ungodly
lusts and pleasures, and to live a godly and sober life in this present World.

Some things I take notice of in this opposers pretended answer, to this first
question which he charge upon the Quakers, which justly falls upon his own
head, false doctrine says he begets false Piety, now what can be falser
doctrine then to deny perfection and cleansing from sin? this opens a door to
wickedness, and strikes at the life of Religion, denying the very end of
Christ his coming and being manifested, which is to destroy the works of the
Devil; so this is the ground of the bad conversation and falls piety, and
whereas he seems to strike at the converfation and practices of those called
Quakers, I leave it to all sober people to judge whether the Quakers or the
Priests walks more strictly and soberly, and which of them deny themselves the
most; for those who are found most in solf-denial, are the lowest disciples of
Christ, and whereas he queries how can a good life and an ill belief stand
together, corrupt head and corrupt heart commonly go together, corrupt
principles breeds and seeds corrupt practicer, all these considered, they fall
heavy upon the Priests and carnal professors, for how can there be any worse
belief, then to believe that people shall never be pure nor clean, nor overcome
sin while they live, this is the ill belief, from whence all the corrupt
practices have liberty; but we own no such faith, but our faith is the gist of
God, which purifies our hearts, and gives us victory over the World and the
lusts of it; and so a good belief and a good life stands firm and fast
together; and whereas he speaks of the power of Goddlinesse, and the powen of
sin cannot dwell together; I say that the Priests of England are so fur from
the power of godliness, that few are come so far as the form of godliness,
but are spending their time like dreamers, keeping people in the dark; always
learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of God.

2. Qu. What is the Religion of the Quakers?

Ans. Our Religion is not known to the World, nor ever can be learned by a
wordly principle, but the sum of it is this to love God, with all our hearts,
and our neighbors as our selves, to visit the fatherless and the widows in
their afflictions, and to keep our selves unspotted from the World; and
whosoever shall learn our Religion, which is the one true religion, must own
that principle of light which is of Christ, which shines in the conscienoe, and
stands as a witness against all sin and evil, and leads out of the Worlds
Lusts, and vanities, into holiness and Righteousness, which exercises the
conscience toward God and man, and leads in the way of Justice, and
Righteousness; for our Religion does not admit of any sin or iniquity
whatsoever; but is holy and pure, by which we are joined to God, and have unity
with him, and worship him in spirit and truth.

3. Qu. Is it your duty to endeavor the conviction of them?

Ans. We are convinced long ago of the evil of the Priests of England, and of
the deadness and emptiness of their forms, and dead observations, and the Lord
has turned us from them, and have converted us from evil unto good, and we are
his, and in vain it is for all the Priests in England, with all their cunning
craft, to convict, or draw us back again; no, no, we are drawn by the cords of
everlasting love, out of that thick mire and Clay, which they and thousands of
their hearers stick fast in; and it is our desires, and also our endeavors to
draw them out of it, that they may feed with us at the Lords Table, and eat
plentifully to the satisfying of their hungry souls. And whereas he speaks of
prayer to God for us; alas poor man, his prayers we deny; God has no regard to
him and his prayers, they are abomination, because of his great wickedness;
Therefore before he talk of praying for others, let him repent of his sin, left
God cut him down and cast him off for ever.

Furthermore this opposer vomits up more of his filthyness and wickedness,
saying, now they cast by the written word, saying salvation is attaineable
without Christ. Oh! horrible wicked liar, Gods vengeance hangs over his head;
Scriptures we own, and Christ alone our salvation: Further he goes on and says
Quakers are heretics, therefore are to be rejected and left to the civil
Magistrates Cognizance.

Ans. By this I smell his wicked spirit, no less then blood would satisfy
that spirit; but the Lord has put a curb in their mouths; that's the spirit of
an heretic that would punish the bodies of people; and not the spirit of the
true Apostles, for they wrestled not against flesh and blood but against
principalities and powers, against spiritual wickedness in high places; but I
shall pass by some of his chaffy stuff, and leave it to be blown away by the
breath of the Almighty, and so come to the next.

4. Qu. Whether are Quakers witches?

Ans. I answer no; but the Lord has raised them up by the power of his spirit
to testify against all the sorceries, and witchcrafts and enchantments which
are found amongst the Merchants of Babylon, the black priests, who have been
clouded with blackness who have long beguiled unstable souls, and made
Merchandise of them; such as led people from the Spirit of God, were witches,
and bewitched the Galatians, and such now in England, who draw people from the
light, life and spirit within to carnal observances without, such are they that
bewitch and beguil poor souls; Now whereas this opposer does bring some
Scriptures, whereby his intent is to prove the Quakers witches, but I shall
examine them; the spirit of God (says he) sets out impostors to the life,
sometimes comparing them to deceitful Merchants who can set a fair gloss upon
their false ware; to which I say, who are more deceitful then those Merchants
of Babylon, the covetous Teachers, who heaps a great deal of fluff together,
nay sometime steal a Scrmon, and set a fair gloss on it and sell it to the
people, and when they have sold it once over, and received money for it, yet
they oftentimes sell it over, and over again, and so cheats and cozens the
people; then he alleadges, 2 Pet. 2.3. they are said with fained words to make
Merchandise of souls; here he has learned of his master the Devil to leave out
part of the Scripture; the Apostle says thus; and through covetousness shall
they with feigned words make Merchandise of you, this hits the pricsts and
strikes very near them; and the Apostle further marks them out, spots they are
and blemishes, sporting themselves with their own deceivings having eyes full
of Adultery, and that cannot cease from sin, begniling unstable souls, an heart
they have exercised with covetous practices; whether this touches the priests
of Eng. or the Quakers, I leave it to the wise in heart to judge, Another
Scripture alleged 2 Cor. 2.2.17 for we are not as many which corrupt the word
of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God in the sight of God speak we in
Christ; now how can those speak in Christ, that denies Christ in them, and
oppose his light within as the parish priests do, and so are not like the
Apostles; Another Scripture I find quoted Ephesians. 4.14. that we hencefotrh be no
more children tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine by the slight of
men and cunning craftiness whereby they lay in wait to deceive; But those
called Quakers do not go about to draw people from God, but to bring home to
him, that they may be presented perfect in Christ Jesus, as in the 13. verse of
the said fourth Chapter which the priests of England deny, and says none can
be perfect in this life, and so deceive your souls by their slights and cunning
craftinss.

Another Scripture alleged by this opposer is, 2 Timothy 3.8.9. but read from
the beginning of the Chapter, and there as in a glass thou may read the
Character of the parish Priests of England, read the Chapter through, and then
try and let the light of Jesus Christ in thy conscience Judge, without
partiality; Another Scripture is in Jude the 11. the words are these, woe unto
them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and run greedily after the error
of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core; these are the
several Scriptures which the adversary brings to prove the Quakers to be
witches; but to those whose eyes are in any measure opened, there are not many
such Scriptures that so nearly touchea the covetous priests and deceitful
Merchants of England, but their folly shall be made manifest to all in Gods day
of light; some other frothy things are spoken of by this adversary, as tying of
Ribbands or Bracelets about men's wrests; oh horrible deceiti! I am sure few
people in all England do slight and cast off such bables more then we do; and
as for his speaking of falling into trances, srantick postures, grovelling on
the ground; soaming at the mouth, and such like frothy stuff, all this does
arise as smoke out of the bottomless pit, which God will blast, and has
already blasted; for the Lord has opened the eyes of thousands in this Nation
to see the envy and wickedness of those who have invented such wicked lies
against the people of God; and they see and have found them liars, and God is
causing the light to shine forth, and the beauty of his people begins to
appear, which has long been marred and stained by reproachful lying, and
backbiting tongues.

Quest. 5. Whether are the Quakers to be tolerated, suffered, or to be punished
by the civil Magistrate?

Answ. If the Priests might be judges, they would soon have their hands in
blood, though little cause there is for it, but only their trade is like to go
down, and therefore if these men be suffered their Diana will fall, they are
nearly related to their brethren the Priests in the days of Christ who cried
out, crucify him, crucify him, though Pilate a Magistrate sound no fault in
him, and as it was then, so it is now, the servant is not greater then his
Lord, we cannot expect better things from this wicked generation, but
sufferings and reproaches, stocks and imprisonment, but the Lord is our
support, and we magnify his name that we are of that number who are counted
worthy to suffer for his(...)


