A LEGAL RESOLUTION OF TWO Important Quaeres Of general present Concernment.

Clearly demonstrating from our Statute, Common, and Canon Laws, the bounden
duty of Ministers, and Vicars of Parish-Churches, to administer the Sacraments,
as well as to preach to their Parishioners; with the Legal Remedies to reclaim
them from, or punish and remove them for their wilful obstinacy in denying the
Sacraments to them.

By William Prynne Esquire a Bencher of Lincolns Inn; to whom these Quaeres were
newly propounded by some Clyents.

August. contr* Cresconium Grammaticum, l. 2. c. 10. Christiana sane in vobis
Sacramenta cognosco, et in his illud quoque diversum improbo ac respuo, quod
cum eadem etiam in Schismate habea^^, eadem Catholicis ex^fflatis. Prorsus
agnoscit in vobis Ecclesia cuncta quae sua sunt, nec ideo non sunt ejus quia
apud vos inveniuntur. Apud vos quippe aliena sunt, sed cum vos correctos
recipit cujus sunt, fiunt etiam salubriter vestra, quae perniciose habebatis
aliena* Discordia vos possedit sub titulo pacis; Ergo, discordia pellatur, pax
introducatur.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. in the Year, 1656.

A Legal Resolution of Two Important Quaeres of general present Concernment,
etc.
The Case and Quaeres propounded.
A. Is presented, instituted, inducted to the Vicaridge and Parish Church of B.
having immediate and sole Cure of Souls (the Rectory being impropriate) and
receives the whole Profits thereof from the Parishioners, to whom he usual
preaches; but yet (after many freindly Solicitations and Meetings)
peremtorily denies publicly to administer the Sacraments of the Lords Supper
and Baptism to the Major part of the Parishioners; or to any of them, as his
Parishoners; but only to some few in private, as Members of his New-gathered
Congregation; to the great Discontent, Grief, Injury of the Generality of the
Parishioners. Who thereupon desire to be resolved,

1. Whether A. their Vicar, by the Laws of England, accepting of this Parochial
Vicaridge and Cure, and receiving the Profits thereof, be not in ^oint of
Right, Justice, Law, Equity, Ex Officio mero, obliged duly to administer the
Sacraments publicly to the Parishioners in the Church, as fitting and formerly
accustomed times, as well as to preach unto them, and that in proper person, if
in health and required?

2. Whether the Parishioners may not now legally prosecute A. for his obstinate
peremptory refusal to administer the Sacraments publicly, personally, and duly
to them? To what penalties A is liable for this contemptuous neglect of h^s
duty toward them? And what Legal Course is best for the Parishioners to
prosecute for their just relief herein, in these distracted times?

The Resolution returned to the Propounded Case, and Quaeres.

These Quaeres being of Great Moment and Universal concernment to all
Ministers, Vicars, and Parishioners throughout the Nation; and not debated to
my knowledge in any Printed Law Books or Reports, I shall be more copious in the
Resolution of them for my own Satisfaction, as well as your Resolution, whom
they so much concern; this being like to prove a leading Case to many others in
like condition.

To your first Question, I return this Answer. 1. That it is the General
received Opinion, Resolution of all In their Canons, Titles, Discourses,
Treatises De Clericis, Pastoribus, Sacerdotio, Parochia, Sacramentis,
Ordinatione, Ministris, et ministerio Verbi Dei, Baptismo, Divinis Officiis,
etc.
Councils, Fathers, Canonists, Casuists, Schoolmen, Divinis, Ancient or Modern,
Papists or Protestants, (whether Lutherans, Calvinists, Presbyterians, or
Independents) I have seen* and the express Resolution of the Church of
England, both in ancient and modern Councils, Synods, Canons, Injunctions, the
Book of Ordination, Common Prayer, Articles of Religion, A. 23. 26. Homilies,
and late Directory; That all Ministers, Presbyters, Priests, whatsoever,
lawfully called and ordained, are by Christ's one Gospel Institution, specially
ordained, enjoined, as well to administer the Sacraments of Baptism and the
Lords supper to the People, and Parishioners committed to their charge, as to
preach the Gospel to, or Catechize them, and that as an Essential part of their
Ministerial Function. Which they at large evince from Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mar. 14.
22, etc c. 16. 15, 16. Luke 14. to. 25. c. 17. 37. 22. 1^. c. 24. 47, John 3.
22, 23. c. 4. 1* 2. Acts 2. 41, 42, 46. c. 6 4. c. 8. 12, 13, 36, 38. c. 10.
48. c. 16. 15. 33. c. 18. 8. c. 19. 4, 5. c. 20. 7. 11. Luke 12. 42. 43. 1 Cor.
1. 14, 15, 16. c. 9. 11* to 15. c. 10. 16, 22. c. 11. 20. ^^ 34. c. 4. 1, 2.
Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 4. 11* 12, 13. Tit. 1. 7, 8, 9. Phil. 4, 17, Gal. 3.
1, 27. and Heb. 6. 1, 2 c. 7. 31 to 28. c. 8. 3. 4 etc. 10. 29. 1* Pe^ 3. 21.
c. 5. 2. 3. G^n. 14. 2. 8.
other Texts. Hence all the Protestant Princes, States, Cities, and Divines in
Germany, in their Concordia Pia, and confessio Fidei and doctrinae, under all
their hands and seals, printed Lipsiae 1584 p. 188. define the Ministers Office
(commonly called Sacerdotium by the Papists) to be Ministerium Verbi, Of
Sacramentorum aliis porrigendorum: Evangelical Bishops and Presbyters to be
such, p. 39. Quibussecundum Evangelium, sou ut loqunntur de jure divine, est
commissum Ministerium Verbi et Sacramentorum. And p. 15. Artic. 14. De Ordine
Ecclesiastico, docent Quod nemo debeat in Ecclesia public docere aut
Sacramenta administrare, nisi rite vocatus: who when thus duly called to the
Ministry, ought as well to administer the Sacraments, as to preach to the
people, as they there resolve, p. 316. and elsewhere: with whom all other
Protestant Churches accord, as you may read at large in the Harmony of
Confessions, Sect. 12, 13, 14, 15* etc. This likewise is the Resolution of our
Statutes of 50 E. 3 c. 5. 1 Rich 2. c. 15. 31 H. 8. c. 14. 32. H. 8. c. 44. 33
H. 8. c. 32. 1 Mariae* c. 3. made in times of Popery; and of the Statutes of 1
Ed. 6. c. 1. 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 1. 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 1. 1 Eliz. c. 2. 8 Eliz. c.
1. 13 Eliz. c. 12. (made in times of Reformation.) That Priests and Ministers
ought ex officio mero, to administer the Sacraments, as well as preach to their
People; and thereupon these Later Statutes expressly style all and every of them
in particular, A Priest or Minister of Gods holy word and Sacraments, in the
copulative; because they are obliged to minister both of them unto their Flocks
upon all occasions, both by the Laws of God, and the Land, as they are
Ministers.

2ly, As they are Parochial Ministers, Vicars, or Incumbents of
Parish-churches, they are precisely, personally and indispensably obliged, See
Pontifical^ Romans De Ordinatione Presbyteri, p. 41, 42, 50, 55, and p. 458.
Degrada^io ab Ordine Presbyteratus. Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol. 2. p. 87, 109.
388. 392.
ex Officio, of mere duty and right to administer the Sacraments of the Lords
Supper and Baptism to all their Parishioners (who are legally qualified and
desire the same) publ^kely in the Church at convenient seasons. This I shall
clear, first from the very definition of a Parish, and Parish Church, to which
they are presented, and then by direct Statu tes and Authorities. Cardinal
Hostiensis in his Summa, l. 3. Tit. de Parrochiis, Panormitan in Rubrica de
Parrochiis, Petrus Rebuffus de Collationibus, p. 655 Willielmus Lyndewoode
Provinc. Constit. l. 3. Tit. de Parrochiis, Duarenus de Beneficiis, and
Disputat. Anniversaria, l. 1. c. 26. Franciscus Zerula Praxis Episcopalis, pars
1. Tit. Parochia. Goffriaus Abbas, Tit. Parrochi^, with sundry others, define a
Parish to be Locus in quo degit populus certis finibus limitatus, et alicui
Ecclesiae Deputatus. And a Parish Church to be, Ecclesia quae habet Parochiam
ad ejus curam deputatam, ad quam convenit populus See Pontificale Roman^^ p.
247, 259. De Ecctesiae Dedicatione.
Ad Recipienda Sacramenta, et ad audienda sacra, et verbum Dei, et rudimenta
fidei, diebus sacris. Which Dr. John Cowel in his Interpreter, and John
Minshaw, in his Guide unto Tongues, in the word Parish, thus second and
English; A Parish in our Common Law, is the particular charge of a Secular
Priest: and then subjoyn, A Parochial Church is that which is instituted for
the saying of Divine Service, and Ministering of the holy Sacraments to the
people dwelling within such a compass of ground near unto it. With them accords
the Book of Mich. 34 E: 1. Fitz. Quare Impedit 187. where they prove a Church
to be no Chapel, but a Parish Church, because it had Sepulture, Baptism, and
Sacraments administered in it. And the Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 32. For the Church
of Whitegate to be made a Parish of it self, and no part of the parish of Over;
proves it to be a Parish Church anciently, from this very reason, Because the
Inhabitants and Tenants within such places and precincts, time out of mind,
came and resorted to the said Parish Church of Whitegate, within which times
they have continually received Sacraments and Sacramentals at and in the said
Church, and have continually used to marry, bury, and Christen within the same.
And the Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 44. reduced the Town of Royston, belonging to 5
remote parish-Churches, to one Parish Church new built i nt, because it was
over-painfull (especially to the impotent, sickly, and aged Inhabitants (to
travel to those Churches so remote, or any of them, to hear their divine
Service, and they could not have the Sacraments and Sacramentals to be
ministered to them, according to the laudable custom of holy Church, to their
great perils and jeopardies, through the remoteness of these Churches, and
absence of their Parsons and Curates in such cases of necessity, when their
presence o the comfort and consoliation of their Parishioners, is most
requisite and ^ehovefull. So that Parish Churches (so styled, because
originally built by the Patrons and Parishioners for their ease, use, benefit,
and the use of, and Pas^. 2 Car. B. R. Carlton and Huttons case resolved.
seats in them are still in the Patron and Parish, who repair them) were
originally built and Pontificale Roma^um, De Dedica^ione Eccle siae. p 247 259.
etc.
consecrated, as well for the Administration of Sacraments in them, by their
Parish Priests, Parsons, and Vicars, as for Divine Service, Prayers and
Preaching; Of which the people cannot be deprived, without their great
disconsolation, perils and jeopardies, as this Paliament and Statute resolve:
to which the Statute of 1 Jacobi, chapter 30. For errecting a New Church in
Melcombe Regis, to be the Parish Church of Radipol, etc* might be added, to the
like effect.

This will be most apparent and irrefragable, by considering the Office and
Duty of every Parish Priest Parson and Vicar, and why he is styled Par^chial:
he his styled a Parish Priest or Minister, as Duarenus and others forecited
resolve, because he is specially obliged to preach, administer the Sacraments,
and perform all other duties belonging to a Minister, to all and every
Inhabitant of that Parish to whose Church he is presented, instituted inducted;
and not to any others, but only voluntarily when he pleases, being married and
espoused to that peculiar parish; whence he is styled See Calvinii L^x (...)
(...) cum. Tit. Parochia and Parochus.
Parochus, and the people Parochia, by the Canonists and Lawyer; Summa
Angelica, Tit. Parochia.
Angelus de Clavasio, and Praxis Episcopalis, pars 1. Tit. Parochia, sect. 3.
f. 162.
Franciscus Zerula, thus describe the Office of a Parish Priest, or Vicar.
Parochi officium est, Primo praedicare: Pueros rudimenta fidei et obedientian
docere: Vim, et usum Sacramentorum exarare populo: oves sass agnoscere, et bono
exemplo pascere; Sacramenta administrare, etc. Praxis Ben^eficiorum, aps 1 p.
4. sect. 10.
Rebuffus thus seconds them. Ecclesia Parochialis dicitur Beneficium saeculare
et cum administratione, Quia Curatus tenetur ministrare Sacramenta
Ecclesiastica, etc. aliaque opera Parochianos tangentia, facere tenetur. And he
is called an Littleton, sect. 180. 14 H. 7. 25, 26 Cooks 1 instit. f. 11 90.
Incumbent, both by the Common, and Canon Law, from the word Incumbo, because
he ought diligently and wholly to apply him self to discharge these his
Pastoral duties himself, 1 Timothy 4. 15, 16. Acts 6. 4. This duty of administering
the Sacraments, as well as preaching, is so inseparably annexed to every
Parochial Minister, Vicar and Incumbent, that Appendicis Aurei, l. 1. c. 12.
sect. 18. 20. p. 53.
Jacobus de Graffiis, Ind. cap. Omnis in Glos. executionem.
Jo. Andreas, and other Casuists, question, whether Parochus potest assumere
alium Sacerdotem in adjutorem pro administranda Eucharistia, vel in officio
praedicandi, vel aliis? Resolving affirmatively, that he may, only for a
season, when himself by reason of sickness, or multitude of the Communicants,
or other necessary occasions, is unable to discharge those duties in person,
quia tunc necessitas legem non habet. Non tamen possit per viam delegationis
generalis committere alicui omnem suam curam, quia videretur se exonerare, Cum
tamen debeat per se exercere. With these Canonists, the book of the
consecration of our English Ministers; the Homilies touching the Use and
Administration of the Sacraments; The Book of Common Prayer and Administration
of the Sacraments, with the Rubricks therein; the Articles of the Church of
England, Artic. 23, 26. confirmed by several Protestant Parliaments, the
English F^x Acts and (...) vol. 2. p. 388. 392, 393* 401
Injunctions of H. 8 and Qu. Eliz. Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum, in King
Edward the 6. his reign, and the Canons of King James, and the Convocation
under him, Can. 20, 21, 22, 23. fully accord, injoyning all Parsons, Vicars,
Incumbents whatsoever, to administer Baptism and the Eucharist to their
Parishioners, at least See Sp^lmani Council. p. 529. 548 615. 616. and my Suspo
siat suspended p. 24, 25, 26. Giving and receiving being relata; all those
Texts, Laws, that prove it the peoples duty to receive the Sacraments* de eo
Nomine oblige the Minister to admit and del^ver to them. Posito (...) relatosum
ponitur alterum. Mr. John Humfrey. A Second Vindication of Free-admission to
the Lords Supper. p. 125, etc.
thrice every year in person (which they used to administer ever^ Lords day to
the people in the primitive Church, as I have elsewhere proved at large) as
well as to preach, Catechize, and read Divine service to them. Memorable is
that passage in that Pathetical exhortation prescribed by the Church of
England, in the B^ok of Common Prayer, to be used by all Ministers when they
shall see the people negligent to come to the ho^y Communion, viz. when God
calls you, be you not ashamed to say, I will not come? etc. I for my part am
here pesent, and according to mine office, I bid you in the name of God, I call
you in Christ's behalf, I exhort you as you love your own Salvation, that ye
will be partakers of this holy communion, etc. And whereas you offend God so
sore in refusing this holy banquet, I admonish, exhort, and beseech you, that
unto this unkindnesse you will not add any more, which thing ye shall do, if
ye stand by as Gazers and Lookers on them that do communicate, and be not
partake^s of the same your self, etc. How many Ministers now a days preach
direct dehortations from the Sacrament, pointblank against this Exhortation and
their t^^s, prescribed by God and Christ himself, 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25. This do,
as often (as ye do eat and drink ^t) ^n remembrance of me, and no less than 5
Acts of Parliament, which thus back the premises.

The Statute of 1 E. 6 c. 1. in the very beginning of Reformation, and yet in
force, enacts, That the blessed Sacrament be hereafter commonly delivered and
ministered unto the people within the Church of England and Ireland, and other
the Kings Dominions, under both the kinds of bread and wine; That the people
present shall receive the same with the Priest which shall administer the sam^,
who shall, at least one day before, exhort, all persons which shall be present,
likewise to resort, and prepare themselves to receive the same: and when the
day prefixed comes, after a godly exhortation by the Minister made, the said
Minister shall not without a lawful cause deny the same to any person that
will devoutly and humbly desire it; any Law, Statute, Ordinance, or custom to
the contrary hereunto in any wise notwithst^nding. The Statutes of 2 and 3 Ed.
6. c. 1. 5. and 6 E. 6. c. 1. and 1 Eliz. c. 2. enact and ordain* That all and
singular Ministers in any Cathedral or Parish Church shall be bound to say and
use the celebration of the Lords Supper, and administration of the Sacrament of
Baptism, and of the Lords Supper, in such Order and form as is mentioned in the
Book of Common Prayer; Nota.
And if any manner of Parson, Vicar, or other whatsoever Minister that ought to
mi^ister the Sacraments shall refuse to minister the Sacraments, in such
Cathedral or Parish Church, or other places, as he should use to minister the
same, in such Order and form as they be mentioned and set forth in the said
Book: or shall wilfully and obstinately standing in the same, use any other
Rite, Ceremony, order, form, or manner of administration of the Sacraments,
than is mentioned and set forth in the same Book: That upon his lawful
conviction thereof, by verdict of 12 men, or by his own confession, or by
notorious evidence of the fact, he shall lose and forfeit to the King, his
Heirs and Successors, for his first offense, one whole years profit of his
benefice, or Spiritual promotion, and also suffer imprisonment for 6 months
without Bayl or Main^rise; and for his second Offense, be ipso facto deprived
of all his spiritual promotions, and likewise suffer one whole years
imprisonment, and for his third offense, suffer imprisonment during life. The
Statute of 13 Eliz. c. 12. enacts, That none shall be made Minister, or
admitted to preach or minister the Sacraments, being under the age of 24 years.
That every person admitted to any benefice with Cure, shall publicly read ^he
Articles of Religion in the same Church whereof he shall have the cure, in the
time of the Common Prayer there, with Declaration of his unfeigned assent
thereto, and be admitted to minister the Sacraments within one year after his
induction; or else upon every such default, he shall be ipso facto immediately
deprived, and there upon the Patron present a New Incumbent. By all which See
also 3 Jac. c. 4, 5. 7 Jac. c. 2.
Acts it is clearly resolved, that every Parson, Viccar, Minister of a
Parochial Church is admitted thereunto, as well to administer the Sacraments as
to preach, and peremptorily obliged, frequently, constantly to do it in person,
as a principal duty of his Function and Pastoral cure, under pain of forfeiting
of the profits of his Benefice, Imprisonment, and Deprivation, for his contempt
and neglect thereof, by these express Statutes of our Protestant Parliaments,
as well as by our Canons, Convocations, Divines and the whole Church of England.

If any Object, Object. 1.
that these Statutes are now abrogated, repealed by the Ordinance of both
Houses, prescribing the use of the Directory, in place of the Book of Common
Prayer and administration of the Sacraments; Therefore Ministers are not now
obliged by them to administer the Sacraments to their Parishioners.

To this I answer. Answer,
1. That no Ordinance of Parliament whatsoever (especially to repeal and alter
former Acts of Parliament) can be made without the three fold consent of King,
Lords, and Commons in Parliament, an Act and Ordinance of Parliament being
all^ne, and requiring the self same treble consent in Law, as I have
irrefragably proved at large in my I^enarches Redivivus printed Anno 1648.
against Sir Edward Cooks and other mistakes in this point; which threefold
assent the objected Ordinances wanting, are mere Nullities in Law, and can no
ways repeal these forecited Statutes, remaining still in their Legal power.
2ly. Admit these Statutes repealed, or suspended by these Ordinances, (which I
deny in point of Law) yet these very objected Ordinances, and the Directory it
self, positively enjoin all Ministers and Vicars, duly to administer the
Sacraments of the Lords Supper and Baptism to all their Parishioners (duly
prepared and qualified according to these Ordinances) as well as these Statutes
and the Books of Common Prayer. Therefore if these Ordinances or the Directory
be still in force, they are bound by them to administer the Sacraments to their
Parishioners; but if they be grown out of date, and absolete, (as the Objectors
and those of the Congregational way believe, who will not submit unto them)
then the Statutes pretended to be repealed by them, are again revived by their
expiration, and so oblige them as firmly now as heretofore. 3. The
Administration of the Sacrament being an See Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 2 p.
87 388, 392, 393. the Books of ordination ^f Ministers.
essential inseparable part of every Ministers duty, who has a Parochial cure,
or charge of Souls, both by the Law of God, and constitutions of our own and
all other Christian Churches, as I have proved, admit these Statutes all
repealed, yet they are still obliged by their very Office, and Pastoral
Function, to administer the Sacraments to their Parishioners, and therefore
liable to Divine and humane punishments for contempt or neglect thereof.

If any object in the second place, Object. 2.
That they are now admitted to Parochial cures, only to preach the Gospel in
their Parish Churches, but not to administer the Sacraments to their
Parishioners, as formerly.

I answer, 1. That if there be any such new forms of admissions and
institutions used, Answer.
they are merely void in Law by the express resolution of the Statute of 13.
Eliz. c. 12. and the other forcited Acts: And Ministers thus admitted are but
only bare Lecturers, not Parsons, Vicars or Incumbents by our Laws, and so the
Church still void notwithstanding such admissions, which are only to one part
of their ministerial Function, not to all their spiritual cure*

2ly. Such admissions to cures are strange monstrous Impostures, Hypocritical
Delusions, yea gross Absurdities, execrable to God and all honest Christian
men; enabling Ministers to receive the whole Tithes, Dues of their
Parishioners, yet exempting them from the moity at least of their Pastoral
Duties, to which the Laws of God and the Land oblige them. We lately decryed it
as an impious Solecism and excuse in our old lazy nonpreaching Parsons and
Vicars; that they alleged, they were instituted only to read common P^ayers,
Homilies, and administer the Sacraments; but not to preach to their
Parishioners. In the Bishop of Fox Acts and Monument. Vol. 2. p. 614. See
Re^ves and Shelfords Treatises to the same purpose.
Dunkelden, and other Lordly Prelates, that they were ordained Bishops only to
govern the Church, confirm and ordain Ministers, but not to preach or
administer the Sacraments: And shall we now after all our late pretenses of
Reforming their abuses, and declamations against their Idleness, admit our New
Parochial Incumbents to plead they are only half-Ministers; bound solely to
preach, but not to Baptize, administer the Lords Supper, Catechize, visit the
sick Marry, Bury, as all their Predecessors did? If any Gentleman's hired
Shepherd should neglect to fold his Sheep, or look them out when strayed, and
then plead he was only bound by his office to feed, keep them in their pasture;
Or if his hired Cook should tell him, that as his Cook, he is bound only to
boil, but not to roast his meat, or bake his Venison; or should his Laundress
affirm, she was hired only to m^ke his Bed, and sweep his Chamber, but not to
wash his Linen, or starch his bands or cuffs; Or his Groom maintain, he was by
his place obliged only to dress his horses, and give them hay, but not to water
or carry them their provender; would not all deride these their absurd,
irrational allegations, and their Master cudgel them to the performance of all
the parts of their respective duties, or else turn them presently out of
Service? And will God or men then endure, that their Ministers of the Gospel
(especially when pretending extraordinary eminency, Diligence and Saintship
above other of their Brethren) should thus juggle with them to their faces, as
openly to affirm, they took the ^ole cure of their souls only to reap all their
Dues, Tithes, and to feed them with Gods word in the Pulpit, (of which the Mat.
28. 19, 20. Acts 26. 18. c. 15 3. c. 21. 22. 2 Timothy 4. 17.
unconverted, unbaptized heathens, are capable as well as Christians:) but not
with Christ's Sacramental body or blood at the Lords Table; whereto professed
Christians only have a right, 1 Cor. 10. 16. to 20. c. 11. 22. to the end? To
instruct their aged* but not baptize their Infant, or catechize their younger
Parishioners? Yea, that they took upon them their Pastoral Cure only to shear
their fleeces, but not to own them as any part of their Church or ^lock, or
discharge the duty of a Pastor toward them, unless they will unmodel
themselves from a Parochial Church, into a private Congregational conventicle?
Those who have hearts of Eze. 3. 9.
Adamant, or faces of Brass, Publicly to make such an untheological, Zech. 7.
22.
irrational, illegal, unministerial Plea as this, so diametrically contrary to
the very essence of their Pastoral Function, duty, and to their painful
Predecessors practices in all ages, Churches; to our blessed Mat. 26. 26. to
31. Mark. 14. 22. to 27. Lu. 22. 14. 19. 20. 1. Cor. 11. 23. 24: 24.
Saviors own prastice, precepts; and his description of a true and good
Shepard: John 10 (yea to the definition of a true See Dr. John White, and Dr.
Field of the Church.
visible Church, wherein the word of God is truly preeched, and the Sacraments
duly administered,) may justly fear they are no true Shepards, but rather
thieves, robbers, hirelings; because they withhold from their flocks the
Sacrament of their Spiritual Regeneration; yea the Body, Blood, Cup of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the 1 Pet. 2. 3. Hebr. 13. 20.
chief Shepard of the Sheep, who bequeathed it to them as their chiefest
Legacy, at his death, though themselves style and confess them to be, the very
See my Sustension Suspended.
seals of the Covenant of Grace, which they hold forth unto them only as a
Blank without a Seal, refusing to set these Seals unto it, when importuned by
their people, upon any terms, but conformity to their own new Church-wayes,
thereby making the very 1 Cor. 11. 26. to 33.
Sacrament of Christian love and union, 1 Cor 10. 16, 17.
a mere Seminary of Schism, contention, division, separation. And because they
entered not by the door into the Sheepfold, that is by any legal form of
admission to their whole pastoral cure, but climbed up some other new way, only
to preach unto their people, rather as to a company of unconverted Heathens,
than a Christian Church, till new minted into a segregated Congregation,
(collected out of sundry Parishes though never so remote) but not to give the
Sacraments to them upon any terms; Mat. 23. 23 Lu. 11. 42
which they ought to do, yet not to leave their preaching undone, which though
it be the first and chiefest part of their Ministry, yet it is not the quarter
part of their Pastoral function, as Scriptures and our Laws resolve.

If A. object, that he hires another to baptize and give the Lords Supper
sometimes to his Parishioners, Object. 3.
though he do it not himself, his judgment and conscience being to the
contrary.

I Answer, 1. This is a clear confession, that it is a part of his own duty,
Answer.
else why should he hire another to discharge it in his stead? 2. This proves
the former Objection (that he was admitted only to preach) a mere fiction. 3.
If he refuse to do it himself, out of conscience, as a thing utterly unlawful
in his Judgment for him to administer unto his Parishioners, whilst in a
Parochial way; with what conscience can he hire another to do that in his
behalf and right, which himself holds sinful, unlawful for himself to do?
Doubtless a sincere purely tender conscience will never hire or authorize any
other to discharge that office for him, which himself holds utterly unlawful,
unevangelicall, nor dare accept or retain a Parochial Cure upon any terms to
gain the fleece so long as he disclaims the constitution as Antichristian, and
the flock as none of his Pasture sheep. 4ly. Such a poor tender conscience
would rather resign its Parochial charge, to avoid all appearance of evil, of
scandal, and still the checks arising in it, that grieve the Spirits, wound the
consciences, or disquiet the Peace of the generality of his Parishioners, by
the personal neglect of his duty, in not communicating with them at the Font
and Lords Table as his real flock, or as one speritual bread and body with
them, as he ought to do. 1. Cor. 10. 16, 17. and that only upon this ground,
because they will not conform to the new Independent Guarb against our Laws,
for which they can produce no text, no color of Authority from scripture,
Antiquity, or reason, to warrant the seclusion of any from the Sacraments that
are under their Parochial cure. 5ly. The discharge of this part of his duty by
such a person, or in such a manner as gives no satisfaction to our Laws, nor
his parishioners, is no Satisfactory plea before Gods or man's tribunal, since
he can no more conscientiously or duly administer the Sacraments, than the
Parishioners receive them, only by a substitute. Yea, if it were no good excuse
for our Pluralists, or Non-resident Prelatical Clergymen heretofore, that they
preached and discharged their ministerial function by their Curates, their
office being 1 Cor. 9. 16, 17. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 5. 1. Tim. 4 13. 16. Col. 4. 17.
Heb. 7. 24.
personal and untransferrable to another, then by the selfsame reason, it can
be no plea in Law or Conscience for this Vicar, that be administers the
Sacraments to them only by another Vicar; especially when he does it to his
separate Congregation by himself alone, and never by a Proxy. 6ly. It it a
strange plea to plead conscience against doing that express duty, which his
very place and calling oblige him both in See my Suspension 1 suspended, and
answer to 4 serious Questions.
conscience and Justice to perform. Such is the free admission of his
Parishioners to the Lords Supper. Which Christ himself, his Apostles, Christian
Ministers in all ages till this present, made conscience duly and diligently to
administer to the People, exhorting them frequently to receive the same. I
suppose Mr. John Humfrey his Treatises of free admission unto the Lords Supper,
his Rejoinder to Dr. Drake, and John Timson his Bar removed, will rectify his
conscience, and remove this bar, if perused by him.

To your 2 Quaere I answer, Quaere. 2.
1. It is a principle in divine, Civil, Canon, and Common Law, and in the
Gospel too, Beneficium propter officium; that every Minister or person who
enters into, and reaps the benefit of any Office or Function, ouhght
coscentiously to perform all the duties of his Ministry and Function, and
addict himself fully and personally to discharge them, as Luke 12. 42, 43. Romans
12. 7. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 4. 1, 2. and 6. 3, 11, 12. 1 Cor. 9. 7, to 13.
Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. Col. 4. 17. 1 Timothy 4. 15. c. 3. 1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 5.
Tit. 1. 7. 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13. compared with Luke 10. 7. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. Romans
15. 27. Gal. 6. 6. 2 These. 3. 10. resolve. 2ly. That it is a Maxim in Law,
Li^^leton Sect. 378, 379. L. qu. E. 4. ^. 26, 27. 2 H. 7. 11, 39. H. 6. 32, 33.
Br. Office 19. Forfeiture 27. Plouden. f. 379, 380. 21 E. 4. 20. Cook 8. Rep.
f. 44. 9. Rep. f. 50, 95, 96, 97 and 1 Inst. f. 233, 234.
That the grant of every Office to any person for life or in fee, has this
tacit condition annexed to it by the very Law it self, without any special
words or condition of the Grantor, That the Grantee shall well and truly
perform his Office, execute that which to such Office belongs to be done, and
attend upon it; or otherwise, that he shall forfeit the same: and that it shall
be lawful for the Grantor or his Heirs, to out him of his Office, and grant it
to another who will more faithfully discharge it. Littleton puts the case of a
Parker, Steward, Constable, Bedelary, Baylywick; and he adds other Offices,
etc. which extend to Ecclesiastical, as well as temporal Offices. I shall
illustrate it by some few unprinted Records. Claus. 6. E. 1. m. 1. Earl Waren
Camerarius Scaccarii (which Office he had leave to execute by Deputy) forfeited
his Office by the default and negligence of his Deputy. Claus. 17. E. 2. Dors.
31. The Marshal's Office of England was seized as forfeited by the Judges of
the King's Bench, because he had not one to attend there for him: after which,
he was fined at 200 l. and upon promise of better attendance, restored. Clause
33. E. 3. m. 33. The King sends a Writ to the High Sheriff of Cambridge, De
subvicecomite amovendo, and aliena substituendo, because he misdemeaned himself
in his Office, was a person of ill fame, a cozener, one that had two names.
Claus. 4. E. 1. m. 5. Claus. 15. E. 1. m. 4, 8, 9. Claus. 16. E. 1. m. 2.
Claus. 17. E. 1. m. 2, 3. Claus. 25. E. 1. Dors. 13. Claus. 31. E. 1. m. 1. I
find See Fit. Not. Brevium* f. 162, 163. and the Regist. de Coronatore
ox^nerand.
several Writs to remove Coroners from their Offices, and to elect new in their
places, because they could not, or did not attend upon their Offices, or were
sick, deaf, or unable to discharge them, though elected only by the County in
their Couny-Court.

And if temporal Offices have such a Condition in Law annexed to them, and are
forfeited by the nonperformance of them, and all the duties belonging to them;
much more then spiritual, which concern Men's Souls. 3. Every person who
sustains any considerable prejudice or damage by the wilful negligence,
nonperformance or mis-performance of any See Ashes Tables, Tit. Action sur le
case, Sect. 1, 2, 4, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15. Brook and Fitz. Actoin sur le case.
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Escheators, Guardian, Attorney, Viteler, Hostler, Smith,
Physician, Surgeon, Carpenter, Mason, or other Officer, or person entrusted
by, or set over him; may have a legal Action or remedy against them at the
common Law, by an Action of the case, or otherwise, wherein he shall recover
damages: Which Law holds in Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Offices. Littleton is
express, Sect. 136, 137. That if a man give Lands in Frankalmoigne to an Abbot,
Prior, or any other Man of Religion, or holy Church; or to a Parson of a Church
and his Successors, to have only divine and spiritual Services done for him;
if they afterward will not do, or fail to do such divine Services; if the
Services be not put in certainty, the Lord may complain thereof to their Lord
or Visitor, praying him that he will lay some punishment or correction for
this, and also provide that such negligence be no more done; and the Ordinary
or Visitor of right are to do this: But if the divine Service be in certain to
be done, as to sing a Mass, Placebo, or Dirge, etc. on some set-day of the week
or year; the Lord, if such divine Service be not done, may enter and distrain
them to do it; or else detain the Lands, as forfeited, and See Cooks 1 Instit.
f. 96, 97.
escheated to him by the nonperformance of the divine Service.

These Generals premised, I conceive the grieved Parishioners may relieve
themselves, and either reclaim or remove their Vicar, if obstinate, by these
Legal Proceedings, at the Common Law, (which must be as just and equal to right
the Parishioners against their Vicar for detaining their spiritual Food and
Duties from them, as to help the Vicar to recover his Tithes and Duties from
them, when injuriously detained; else it should be either very partial or
defective) there being now no Ecclesiastical Court, Jurisdiction or Commission
extant, wherein or whereby to right them.

1. They may once more in a Christian friendly manner (for I would have no
violent courses used, if Christian Intercessions may prevail) repair to their
Vicar before the first Lord's Day of the next Month (and so in succeeding
Months) and importune him to deliver the Sacrament to such of them publicly in
the Parish Church, as he cannot charge with any scandal or ignorance, and to
baptize their Children at Cording to his duty, else to resign his place to such
a godly Minister as will constantly do it: and if he peremptorily and frowardly
deny to do either, or to allow such other able Minister as the Parishioners
shall make choice of to perform these duties to them, they may then Mr.
Buroughs did so accolchester by my advice, only for denying him the Sacrament,
because he would not receive it at the New Rail: see My quenchcole at the end.
publicly indict him for it upon the Statutes of 1 E. 6. c. 1. and 1 Eliz. c.
2. and upon the second conviction, he is Ipso Facto deprived of all his
spiritual Promotions, and his Vicaredge, and the Patron may present another.

2. They may all, after such refusal, jointly detain their Tithes and Duties
demanded by him as their Vicar, because by his own confession he was never
legally instituted to discharge all the Duties of an Incumbent, according to 13
Eliz. c. 12. and disclaims to own them as his proper Flock and Cure, owning
only his Segregated Congregation for such, in opposition and contradistinction
to his Parish; which they may plead in Bar of any Legal Action to recover his
Dues: this See Cooks 1 Instit. f. 101, 102, 362, 363. and Brooks and Fitz. Tit.
Disclaimer.
disclaiming of them, being a kind of resignation of his Vicaredge, and bar
unto his Dues; quia Beneficium, propter Officium: and if he be not their true,
real Parochial Vicar, and do not his duty to them, he has no right to their
Parochial dues, nor yet unto the Glebe. If he will muzzle their mouths, 1 Cor.
9. 9, 10, 11* 2 These. 3. 10.
not tread out the corn to them at the Lord's Table; they may also muzzle his
mouth, that he shall not eat of their Corn, at his own or their Tables, by way
of retaliation.

Our 21 E. 3. 7. 41 E. 3. 6, 19. 38 H. 6. 20. 39 H. 6. 22. 5 E. 4, 5. 15 E. 4.
3. 20. E. 4. 18, 19. Brook Annuity, 7, 8, 25, 28, 29. Condition 45 Dyer. 6 H.
8. 2. 6 E. 6. f. 76. Sir John Davis Reports, f. 1. b.
Law Books resolve, That if an Annuity be granted to a Lawyer, Attorney or
Physician, pro Consilio suo impenso and impendendo; if they stop or refuse to
give the Grantors their Counsel when required; or if A. grants an Annuity to B.
for the use of a way, and B. stops the way, that hereupon the Grantors may
justly stop and detain the Annuities, being forfeited by their stoppage, and
refusal of their Counsel, Advice or way granted; and may plead the same in Bar
of any Action at Law for these Annuities: much more then may the Parishioners
do it, when their Vicar or Incumbent not only peremptorily refuses to give
them the Sacraments, but disclaims to be their Vicar or Pastor in a Parochial
and Legal way. If they will reap all their temporal things and duties, it is
just they should sow and administer to them all their spiritual things and
Nutriments; if the Parishioners must not muzzle their mouths, much less must
they muzzle their Parishioners, by keeping them back from the Lord's Table, 1
Cor. 9. 10, 11. Romans 15. 17.

3. Every particular Parishioner grieved, may by the Statutes of 13 E. 1. c.
24, 25, 50. have a special Action upon the Case against him at the common Law,
(as I conceive) since he can now have no remedy in any spiritual Courts, as
formerly, being all suppressed: by the self-same Reason, as Executors and
Legatees, now sue at the common Law, and in Chancery, for such things, such
Legacies, and Ministers for such Tithes and Duties, as formerly they had no
suit nor remedy for, but in Ecclesiastical Courts alone; else there should be a
great failer of Justice: and because no Ecclesiastical See Brooks and Fitz.
Tit. Conusance and Jurisdiction.
Jurisdiction is now either wronged by, nor can be claimed, pleaded against
such Actions, there being none to take present conusans of them: Or at least,
they way have a See Fitz. Brook and Ash. Actions sur le Statute.
special Action against him, upon the Statutes of 1 Ed. 6. c. 1. and 1 Eliz. c.
2. as well as upon the Statutes of Magna Charta, c. 20. of Merton, c. 10. and
other Acts.

4. I conceive the Patron himself (from the forecited Reasons of Littleton's
Cases of Frankalmoigne, Sect. 136, 137. and of Conditions in Law, Sect. 378,
379.) upon the Vicars refusal to own the Parishioners, and administer the
Sacraments to them, as his Flock; (for which end, the Glebe and Duties
thereunto belonging, were first given by the Patron and his Tenants to the
Vicar and his Successors, as well as to preach) may justly enter upon him for
breach of this Condition in Law, out him of the Glebe and Vicaredge, and bestow
them on some other by his immediate deed of Collation, and Livery of Seisin,
without any Presentation, as Sir John Davis Reports, f. 46. b. 2 Jacob
Fa^rchelas case Cooks 1 Instit. f. 344. ^. West's Presidents. Grants. 337, 354.
free Chapels used to be, and are still collated; and that upon this Legal
Ground; See M. Seld^ns History of Tithes, chapter 6. sect. 2. chapter 9. sect. 4. My
Ju^ Patronatus, p. 15, 16.
because Patrons originally had the sole right of collating, inducting,
instituting Clerks and Incumbents to their Churches, without the Bishops
special license, (as they conferred other Freeholds to their Tenants, by their
own immediate grants and liveries) till Bishops and Ordinaries, by sundry
Canons extorted by degrees this Jurisdiction from them, engrossing the power of
approving, admitting, instituting, and inducting Clerks into Parochial Churches
by degrees into their own hands. Which Bishops with their Canons, Ordinances,
being now suspended or abrogated in England, and their ancient Jurisdiction, by
no express Act of any real Parliament legally transferred to any other
Ecclesiastical or Civil Jurisdiction; thereupon the Patron's original right of
collating Benefices by immediate grant and livery, and outing the Incumbent
thereof, (as Patron 8 E. 3. 69, 70. 8 Ass. 29, 31 Cooks 1 Instit. f. 344. a.
Fit. Nature. brev. 35. A 42. a. b. 6 H. 7. 14. a. Dyer 273. b. Co. 11. Rep. 99.
b. Fit. Brief. 660. 27. E. 3 85. a. 30. E. 3. 10. a.
and Visitor of the Church) for not administering the Sacrament and discharging
his pastoral Office, is Sir John Davis Reports, f. 39. b.
revived, resetled in him by Law: So as he may now justly enter, put out, or
deprive the Vicar, as the Bishop and Ecclesiastical Courts might formerly have
done, there being no other Legal Ecclesiastical Powers here extant to depose
him: which the Marginal Law Books, with other Authorities will clear, compared
with 21 E. 3. 46. 13 E. 4. 8, 9. Br. Extinguishment and Reviver. 16. 46. Cooks
1 Instit. f. 319, 338. 24. E. 3. 72. Bro. Escheat 9, 19, and 13 E. 1. c. 25, 50.

5. I conceive a special Writ may be framed and directed to the Vicar,
commanding him to administer the Sacraments to his Parishioners, according to
his Pastoral duty, and the Laws and Customs of England; and if then he refuse
to do it, thereupon he may be fined, attached, ejected for this contempt, and
that upon this Ground. Our King heretofore, being 26. H. 8. c. 1. 37 H. 8. c.
17. 1 El. c. 1. 5 El. c. 1. 8 El. c. 1. Sir Joh. Davis Reports, f. 19.
Supreme Governors in and over all Ecclesiastical and Temporal Causes, and
persons, had by the very Common Law of England a Sovereign Power, without any
Act of Parliament, by their remedial Writs upon all occasions, to enjoin all
Officers, Prelates, Priests, Ministers, persons under them, to discharge those
Offices, Duties, which the Laws themselves and their Offices engaged them to
perform. This is evident, not only from the examples of Solomon, Jehosaphat,
Hezekiah, Josiah, Ezra, and other godly Kings and Governors in Scripture, who
appointed the Courses of the Priests and Levites to be in the Temple, commanded
them to wait upon, and execute their Offices in every particular, according to
their charges; to offer Sacrifices, praise, and minister before the Lord, as
the duty of every day required, to kill and prepare the Passover for the
people: but likewise, by special Proclamations and Edicts, commanded both
Levites, Priests, people, to keep, celebrate and eat the Passover (a Type of
the Lords Supper which succeeds it) when they had neglected it sundry years, 1 Chronicles. 24. 2. Chron. 8. 14, 15. c. 13. 10, 12, 18. c. 29. 16, to 35. and 30. 3,
16, 24. c. 35. 2, to 18. Ezekiel. 6. 18, to 22. But also, 1. From the Elegant
Ethelredus Abbas, de Genealogia Regum Angliae, Col. 359. Isaac Causabon, in
Epistola Exercitationibus praefix^. Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 218. Jo.
Seldeni ad Eadmerum Notae, p. 161, 162. Mat. Parker, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. in
Dunstano. Spe^manni Council. p. 477.
Oration of King Edgar to his Prelates and Clergy, Et mea quidem interest
Laicos, cum aequitatis Jure tractare, inter virum and proximum suum justum
judicium facere, etc. Sed and meae sollicitudinis est Ecclesiarum Ministris,
Gregibus Monachorum, Choris virginum and necessaria administrare, and paci
little ac quieti consulere. De quorum omnium Moribus ad nos spectat examen, si
vivunt continenter, si honest so habent ad eos qui foris sunt, si in Divinis
Officiis solliciti, ^^ in docendo populo as^^dui si victu sobrii, si moderati
habitu, s in Iudiciis sunt discreti, etc. Ego Constantini, vos Petri gladium
habetis in manibus; jungamus dextras, gladium gladio copulemus, ut projiciantur
extra crastra leprosi, etc. 2. From the Statute of Magna Charta, c. 22. We
shall deny nor defer to no man justice or right; to wit, neither in Civil nor
Ecclesiastical things or causes, the words being general, and extending equally
to both, as this Charter does, both to all Ecclesiastical and temporal persons,
Freemen of the Realm of England, c. 1, and 2. 3. From this usual recital in our
Kings Writs: Register of Writs pars 2. f. 10, 15, 38, 127, 189. Fitz. Nar. Bre.
f. 153, 154, etc. See the 2d Part of my Sovereign Power of Parlaments p. 79, 80.
Nos qui singulis de Regno nostro in exhibitione justitiae sumus debitores: Nos
volentes quibuscunque legis nostris in Curits nostris plenam, and celerem
Iustitiam exhiberi. Precipimus, etc. Justiciae complementum sibi fieri and
nullatenus differri, etc. secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri. 4. By
the Statute of West. 2. An. 13 E. 1. c. 24, 25, 50. which enacts, that where a
Writ is granted out of the Chancery for a thing done to the noysance of
another, the Plaintiffs from henceforth shall not depart out of the Kings
Courts without remedy, because in the Register of the Chancery there is no
special Writ found in his Case; but from henceforth, where in one case a Writ
is granted, In like case when like remedy fails, the Writ shall be made as
has been used before: and from henceforth, as often as it shall fortune in the
Chancery, that in one case a Writ is found, and in like case, falling under
like Law, and requiring like remedy, there is found none; the Clerks of
Chancery shall agree in making the Writ, or the Plaintiffs may adjourn it till
the next Parliament; and by consent of men learned in the Law, A (new) Writ
shall be made (according to his special new Case) lest it should happen
afterward, that the Kings Court should fail to minister Justice unto
Complainants. And lest Suitors coming to the Kings Court should depart from
thence without remedy, they shall have Writs provided in their Cases: By virtue
of which Statutes, the Subjects grieved, have usually had, not only a Writ
grounded thereon, particulatly styled Fitz. Brief 283, 309, 794, 807, 810, 849,
947. and Entree 3, 7, 8, 61, 68. Not. Br. f. 206, 207, 38 H. 6. 3, 12, 30. Cook
l. 8. f. 49. Instit. 2. f. 405, 407, 486.
in consimili casu, but many other writs, as appears in our Books, though
they bear not that name. And by virtue thereof, I am clear of Opinion, the
Parishioners may have a special Writ against their Vicar in this very Case, to
enjoin him to administer the Sacrament of Baptism and the Lords Supper to them
and their Children, to admit them thereunto, as well as a Writ De Clerico
admittendo, to the Bishop, and De Attornato recipiendo, to the Sheriff, upon
the Statute of Merton, c. 10. when they refuse to admit them contrary to our
Laws. 5. From the ancient Writ of William the Conqueror to Cart. 2. R. 2. m.
12. n. 5. Fox Acts and Mon. l. 4. p. 154. John Seldeni ad Eadmerum Notae, p.
167.
Remigius Bishop of Lincolu, and all other Bishops and Archdeacons: Willielmus
Dei Gratia, etc. Propterea mando and regia auctoritate praecipio, ut nullus
Episcopus, vel Archidiaconus de Legibus Episcopalibus amplius in Hundret,
placita, teneant, etc. And from his Jurisdiction over all Ecclesiastical
persons and causes thus recorded by Eadmerus, Hist. novorum, l. 1. p. 6. Cuncta
ergo divina simul and humana ejue nutum expectabant. Non ergo pati volebat
quenquam in omni Dominati^ne sua constitutum, Romanae Urbis Pontificem, pro
Apostolico, nisi se jubente recipere, aut ejus literas si primitu^ sibi
oftensae non fuissent ullo pacto suscipere. Primatum quoque regni sui,
Archiepiscopum dico Centuariensem, si coacto generali Episcoporum Concilio
praesideret, Non sinebat quicquam statuere vel prohibere, nisi quae suae
voluntati accommodata, and a se primo essent ordinata. Nulli nihilominus
Episcoporum concessum iri permittebat, ut aliquem de Baronibus suis, seu
Ministris, sive incesto, sive adulterio, sive aliquo capitali crimine
denotatum, public nisi ejus praecepto implacitaret, aut excommunicaret, aut
ulla Ecclesiastici rigoris poena constringeret: Therefore much less would he
permit any Bishop or Minister under him to suspend or seclude them from the
Sacraments, (especially those no ways guilty of such scandalous sins or other
crimes) as now our Ministers do their Parishioners, without any divine, regal,
or legal Authority, but their own Papal Usurpation, Pride or Peevishness.

6. This is most apparent by the usual known printed Writs of our Kings to
relieve their grieved Subjects both in Civil and Ecclesiastical Courts and
things; as namely, the Writs Fitz. Not. Bre. f. 153, 154. Regist of Writs.
De Procedendo ad Judicium, when any Judge or Court of Justice delays the
Plaintiff or Defendant of his right, in not giving Judgment for them, when,
and so speedily as they might. Fit. Not. Bre. f. 229. Register of Writs.
De Libertatibus allocandis, when the Justices of the King, Air or Forest,
deny or delay to grant any Borough or Person the ancient Liberties they
formerly enjoyed by Charter or prescription. The Writ Register of Writs Fill.
N. Br. f. 234. Claus. 20 E 3. part 1. m. 18. 14.
De Leproso amovendo to the Major of London, and other Officers, to remove
Lepers which infect the people; and, De villi^ and venellis mundandis, when
they neglect to remove the one, and cleanse the other, as they ought. The
several Pat. 14 E. 1. pars 1. dors. 2. Pat. 18. E. 1. m 4, 5. and dors. 8 9,
44. Claus. 4. E. 3 m. 2. Claus. 11. E. 3. pars 2. m. 10. Claus. 48. E. 3. m.
22. Claus. 10. E 3. m. 28.
Writs to Sheriffs and others, to repair Highways, Bridges, Walls, Sea-banks,
and the like, extant in the Clause and Patent Rolls, before any Statutes made
for their repair: The Writs Fit. Not. Er. f. 228, 229, 163, 164.
De reparatione facienda, de Curia claudenda, and quod permittat, to particular
persons to repair houses and fences, when they neglect to do it, and are bound
thereto by Law, and to enjoy their Commons, Rights, etc. The Writs De
Attornato recipiendo, De moderata misericordia, De secta ad molendinum and
curiam, De ne injusta vexos, De non ponendo in assisis and juratis, Quod
Clerico non eligantur in Officium Ballivi, etc. De corrodio habendo, Quo Jure,
Vilaica removenda: With many other Writs of this nature to temporal Officers,
persons: by these ensuing Writs to Ecclesiastical persons; as namely, the
usual Writs to Bishops Fit. Not. Br. f. 38, 30, 63, 64 65. and the Register of
Writs.
Ad admittendum Clericum, and de cautione admittenda; to enforce them to admit
Clerks, and absolve, excommunicate persons upon caution tendered, when they
refused to do it against right and Law. To which I shall add, Claus. 24. E. 1.
dors. 10. and 8. Claus. 32. E. 1. dors. 9. Claus. 33. E. 1. dors. 16. Claus. 34
E. 1. dors. 10. Claus. 8. E. 2. m. 25. Claus. 20. E. 2. dors. 10, 11. Claus. 7.
E. 3. pars 2. m. 4. Where several Writs are directed to the Bishops and
Clergymen, to make special Prayers and Supplications for the King and his
children, the Nobles and State of the Realm, upon several occasions, in times
of war and danger; to make special thanksgivings for Victories, and
intercessions for eminent persons Souls departed, as they were then obliged to
do in those times of Superstition. Cart. 16. Joan. dors. 10. A Writ to the
Chapter of York, not to elect S. de C. for their Archbishop, quia esset contra
honorem nostrum and oommodum Regni nostri, Pat. 18. H. 3. m. 17. Claus. 26. H.
3. m. 12. Pat. 29. H. 3. dors. 5. Pat. 9. E. 1. m. 2. Pat. 25. E. 1. pars 1. m.
9, 10. Pat. 8. Joan. m. 1. where King John, Henry 3, and Eward 1. by their
special Writs, prohibited the Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy in their
Counsels and Synods to do, act, enact, or assent to any thing concerning their
Crowns, Person, State, Counsel, or against their royal Crown, Dignity, or the
Rights of the Realm of England; and to revoke, suspend the Counsels and
Convocations summoned by the Archbishop, under pain of forseiting all their
goods, and seizure of their Baronies, Claus. 41. H. 3. pars 1. dors. 5. A Writ
to Walter Bishop of Duresm, reciting, That none ought to judge the Laws of the
Realm, but the King, and his Nobles and Judges; that if he presuming on his
Royal Liberties, did otherwise, ipsas Libertates regales, ad nos per vestrum
abusum censemus devolvendas, Claus. 16. E. 1. dors. 2. A Writ to the Bishop of
London injoyning him no longer to permit any persons to come and worship
quandam Tabulam, (having diverse pictures in it, and the Earl of Lancansters
amongstothers) which they worshipped and adored, tanquam rem sine sanctum,
absque authoritate Ecclesiae Romanae: with sundry suchlike Writs to Bishops
and Clergymen in our Records, the grounds whereof extend to our present case.
And Claus. 4. H. 3. m. 10. A Writ of prohibition to the Archbishop of York,
not to excommunicate some who hurt and molested the Cruce-signati, because the
Cruce-signati had no title to the Lands. But that which comes nearest to our
case, and is the same in substance, (Confirmation and Chrism being formerly
reputed See Lindewood, Summa Angelica, Rosella, and Thomas Zerula Praxis
Episcopal. 1. Tit. Chrisma and Confirmatio Sacramentum.
Sacraments amongst us in time of Popery) is this memorable case, recorded in
Rot. Claus. An. 26. E. 3. The Bishop of Exeter would have visited the Church of
St. Burian in Cornwall, founded by King Arthur, and exempted from Episcopal
jurisdiction: whereupon, they opposing his visitation, the Bishop interdicted
the Parish, and refused to give them oil and chrism to baptize their Infants,
or to confirm their children: upon complaint whereof to the King, there issued
a Writ out of the Chancery to the Bishop, commanding him to absolve them,
confirmare parvulos, and chrisma mittere, to confirm their Children, and send
them Chrism to baptize their Infants. This Record was vouched and showed to the
Judges of the King; Bench, Mich. 17 Jacobi, upon this occasion: The
Parishioners of a Village in Kent, elected a Churchwarden according to their
ancient custom, but the Bishops Official refused to admit him; whereupon the
Parishioners, by M. Noy their Counsel, moved in the Kings Bench for a Writ and
Mandamus to the Official, to admit the Churchwarden, or if he did not, to show
good cause to the Court why he refused to do it; which the Court upon view of
this president granted them, and upon it the Churchwarden was admitted to his
Office: If then our Kings, and their Courts of Chancery and Kings Bench might
enjoin this Bishop and this Official by special Writs and Mandates to absolve
these interdicted Parishioners, confirm their Children, and send them Chrism to
baptize their Infants, and to admit the Churchwarden the others had chosen
according to their duties, by the Statutes of 13 E. 1. c. 24, 25, 50.
forecited, or by their own inherent jurisdiction without any special Act of
Parliament, being things to which they were obliged by our Laws and their very
offices, duties to perform; then by the self-same Law and Reason, may our
Kings, and Courts of Justice upon all occasions, by virtue of these Statutes,
whereon these Writs were principally grounded, issue forth the like Writs and
Mandates to all Ministers and Vicars, who refuse personally to baptize or
deliver the Lords Supper to their Parishioners at due and accustomed seasons,
or to admit them freely to those Sacraments, according to their bounden duties,
to which their very Office with the Laws of God and the Realm oblige them,
unless they can show a legal cause to the contrary, (as none of them can do)
and in case they refuse to do it, they may thereupon be attached, fined,
imprisoned, till they do conform and assent to do it; as well as in the Case of
a 37 H: 6. 14 Brook, Quid Juris clamat 18. Imprisonment 26. 3 E. 3. Per quae
servitia, Fitzh. 17. Ash Attornment 9. and 12.
Quid Juris clamat, or Per qua servicia, by which any tenant where he is bound
and adjudged by Law to attorn, and refuses to do it, shall be imprisoned till
he actually attorn in proper person; (not by Deputy, which the Law will not
admit) it being a personal duty, not performable by any other. I shall conclude
this with that memorable Record of Pa^. 8. E. 1. m. 27. where the King by his
Writs, commanded all his Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and Lieges, effectually to summon,
admonish and induce all the Jews within their Bayliwicks, diligently to meet
together to hear God's word preached to them by the Friars Predicants without
tumult, contention or blasphemy, and not to hinder any Jews from conversion
whose hearts God should please to convert, as you may read at large in the 2
Part of my short Domurrer to the Jews long discontinued Remitter into England,
p. 87, 88. And if our Kings by their Writs might lay such Injunctions on the
unbelieving English Jews, much more may they enjoin all English Ministers to
administer the Sacraments to their people, and not to hinder any of them from
this See my Answer to 4 serious questions, my suspension suspended, Mr. Humfrey
his Reply to Dr. Drake his second Vindication of Ortodox free Admission, P. 58,
59. Mr. Blake, his Covenants sealed, chapter 7. sect. 13, 14.
means of their spiritual conversion, as well as confirmation; and likewise
command the people diligently to frequent and receive them, especially when so
long discontinued, neglected, slighted, denied, to Gods dishonor, Religions
scandal, our Chuches insamy, good Christians greatest grief, the grand increase
of impiety, profaneness, schism, and decrease of Christian amity, unity, zeal,
that cordial brotherly love and sweet communion which was between Ministers and
their people, and between private Christians heretofore when Sacraments were
more frequent. Finally, If any Parson or Vicar for 2 years space refuse and
cease to administer the Sacrament to his Parishioners, (as many of late times
have done) I conceive a Writ of Cessavit will lie against him by the Patron
upon the Stat. of West. 2. 13 E. 1. c. 41. as Fitzh. Natt. Brev. f. 209 L. 5.
E. 3. 25. b. Register f. 238. Fit. ^essavit, 12, 18, 24. 12 H. 4. 24. 45 E. 3.
10. Ploud. f. 58. Cook 4. Rep. f. 118. 11. Rep. f. 63. and 2. Instit. f. 460.
more then intimate, if not fully resolve. These legal remedies, if pursued in a
just and Christian way, may through Gods blessing reduce many refractory
Parochical Ministers and Vicars, to the due administration of the Sacraments to
their Parishioners, which too many of them have of late, totally, and diverse in
a deplorable measure cast off*restore the comfortable, frequent enjoyment of
them to those Parishioners who have a long time earnestly thirsted after them,
and prevent the Anabaptistical, Jesuitical design of His Voice from the Temple.
See my Jus Patronatus.
John Can with his Fraternity, and others of late years crept into Parochial
Cures, of purpose to subvert them, with all other Parochial Congregations, and
all Patrons rights to present unto them: a design most eagerly prosecuted,
publicly allowed, and much advanced of late years by unchristian and illegal
practices, gilded over with religious pretenses: this is the Opinion and
Judgment (in answer to your Case and Quaeres) of your Friend and Counselor,

Will: Prynne.
Lincolns Inn, 20 Junii, 1656.
AN APPENDIX.
OUr Vicars and Ministers refusal to administer the Sacraments to their
Parishioners, is in truth an actual penal suspension and excommunication of
them and their Infants from the Lords Supper and Baptism, without any precedent
citation, articles, legal proceeding, hearing, or sentence denounced against
them in any Ecclesiastical Classis or Judicature, against all rules of
Religion, Conscience, Law, Justice, and the express Letter of Magna Charta, c.
29. Wherefore, as King Edw. 1, 2, and 3. did issue forth several Writs and
Mandates to their Bishops and Clergy, Pat. 25. E. 1. pars 1. m. 9, 10, 12. pars
a. m. 5. Claus. 25. E. 1. dors. 6. Claus. 30. E. 1. dors. 14. Claus. 12. E. 2.
m. 12. Claus. 15. E. 3. pars 1. dors. 39, 40.
not to convent, question, censure, excommunicate any of their Officers or
Subjects within their Dominions, for discharging their Duties, and duly obeying
their Mandates, and to absolve all those they had excommunited upon this
account; and likewise issue out Writs to their Sheriffs. De promulgantibus
sententiam excommunicationis in Ministros Regis capiendis and imprisonandis,
for obeying their commands: So by like Justice, Reason, may Writs be issued to
all those Vicars and Ministers who deny the Sacraments to their Parishioners,
without any legal cause or sentence of suspension or excommunication first
denounced against them, commanding them peremptorily to admit them to, and
administer the Sacraments duly to them; yea, Writs to the Sheriffs to attach
and imprison them in case of their wilful neglect or contempt herein, Claus.
12. E. 2. m. 20. The Archbishop of York and his Ministers, oppressed, vexed the
people of his Diocese in his Courts and Visitations, by malicious citations for
pretended adulteries, and other Ecclesiastical crimes, before they were
publicly defamed of, or presented for them, and for which they could not aid
themselves by the Kings prohibition, they having legal conns^^s of these
crimes: upon Petition to the King and his Counsel against these malicious
citations, by the people, there issued a special Writ to the Bishop, reciting
and prohibiting such citations and proceedings for the future; De
oppressionibus populo per citationes non inferendis. By like reason and equity
may special Writs now be granted to Ministers, not to oppress, vex, injure
their Parishioners, (especially such as are neither scandalous, ignorant, nor
actually excommunicated) by depriving them of the Sacraments at due and
accustomed seasons, far worse then those malicious citations, which were but
Ecclesiastical process, when as these amount at least to Ecclesiastical
censures, suspensions, excommunications from the Sacraments, and that for
sundry months, may, years, of many whole Cities and Parishes, without any legal
accusation, conviction, hearing. In times of popery, if any religious person or
Monk professed, departed from his house, and wandered abroad in the Country,
against the rules of his Religion or Order, upon a certificate thereof in
Chancery by the Abbot, there issued a Writ de The Register, Tir. Not. Bre. f.
233, 234.
Apostata capiendo (of which I find Pat. 25. H. 3. dori. 8. Pat. 39. H. 3. m.
^o. Pat. 47. H. 3. pars 1. m. 20. Pat. 49. H. 3. m. 2. Pat. 53. H. 3. m. 31.
Pat. 54. H. 3. m 28. Pat. ^. E. 1. m. 19. Pat. 4. E. 1. m. 29. Pat. 9. E. 1. m.
22. Claus. 12. E. 2. dors. 12. Claus. 25. E. 3. pars^. dors. 14.
many presidents in our Records) for the Sheriffs to apprehend and deliver him
to his Abbot or his Attorney, to be chastised according to the rules of his
Order. And if any Priests wore long hair (against the Canons and rules of their
Order in the Kings Court, where the Ordinaries had no power to reform them, the
King himself granted a special Writ and commission to certain persons, giving
them plenam potestatem scindendi capillos Clericorum qui sunt in Hospitio
no^^ro, and familia nostra longos crines habentium, and capillos nutrientium,
etc. Pat. 21. H. 3. dor. 3. By the like and better reason then may special
Writs be issued, to reduce Ministers off^ending in, and apostatizing from the
very essential duties of their function, (not in circumstantials only, as these
in former times) to the due execution of the duties of their function, and
administration of the Sacraments to their Parishioners, according to the rules
of their Order, the Statutes of the Realm, the Doctrine, custom of the Church
of England so much now slighted, contemned by them, to Gods dishonor, the
vilipending of their Ministry, function, yea, the Sacraments themselves, and
their peoples grief, offense and spiritual prejudice, who may doubtless have a
See Brook, Fitzh. Ash. Action sur le Statute.
special action at law against them on the Stat. of 1 Ed. 6. and 1 Eliz. c. 2.
for their relief herein.

The Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper are bequeathed by Christ to all
visible Members of every visible Church, as visible, (who are known to their
Ministers) not to the elect, invisible, regenerated Members only, infallibly 2 Timothy 2. 9. 1 King. 8. 39. 2 Chronicles. 6. 30.
known to God alone, but not to any mortals: Every Member of a visible Church,
has an equal right to, and Ephesians. 2. 13, 10. 22. c. 4. 4, 5, 6. Col. 3. 11. 1
Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. c. 6. 17, 18. c. 3. 21, 22, 23.
in all Sacraments, Ordinances, Privileges of the visible Church, as he is a
Member of it, by virtue of his Membership; as Magna Charta, c. 29. The Petition
of Rights 3 Caroli 5 E. 3. c. 9. 25 E. 3. c. 4. 28 E. 3. c. 3. 47 E. 3. c. 18.
42 E. 3. c. 3.
all Freemen of England have an equal interest in all the Laws, Rights,
Liberties, Franchises of the Realm of England, as they are native Freemen of
the Body politic of England.

As therefore no English Freeman may or can by Law be debarred from the use and
benefit of the common Laws, Liberties and Franchises of England, or any
pretended or real crimes, but by and upon a legal conviction, and judgment
according to the Laws of England; so no member of the Church of England (of
ripe Years, and in his right Senses) may or can be debarred from the Lords
Table, or any other public Ordinances, Privileges of the Church of England,
for any pretended scandal, but by a judicial legal sentence of Excommunication,
whereby he is actually suspended or cut off from being a Member of the Church
for the present: his very Membership, whiles he is a Member, entituling him of
Right to whatever Ordinances any other Members enjoy, and to participate with
them therein. It is therefore as great, as high an Injury, Injustice, Tyranny,
for any Ministers whatsoever, to deny, seclude, all or any of their
Parishioners from receiving the Lords Supper, upon any pretext of scandal,
ignorance, unpreparedness, or for fear those who are scandalous and
unregenerate, should participate with such who are regenerated, if they should
permit the Eucharist to be frequently celebrated, without or beside any real
accusation, conviction, and excommunication of them by any legal Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; as for any Judge or temporal Officer to outlaw, imprison, banish,
dis-inherit all or any of them of their hereditary Franchises, Liberties,
Free-holds, without the least legal Indictment, Trial, or judgment by their
Peers for any real or pretended crimes, or misdemeanors surmised or suggested
against them: and therefore not patiently to be tolerated any longer, but
suddenly reformed, reduced by all legal means and lawful civil Power, without
partiality or connivance; who ought to be as careful of the peoples spiritual
Food and Privileges, as of their Ministers Tithes and Duties; and to do equal
right to both.

FINIS.

