Four serious Questions of Grand Importance, Concerning Excommunication, and
Suspention from the Sacrament; propounded to the Reverend Assembly, and all
Moderate Christians, to prevent Schisms, and settle Unity among us, in these
divided Times; by a Lover both of Peace and Truth.
THe business of Excommunication, and Sequestration from the Sacrament, now in
public Agitation, is a matter of great moment, much difficulty, and very
circumspectly to be handled, established, to prevent Profanation and Scandal
on the one hand; and Arbitrary, Tyranicall, Papal Domineering over the
Consciences, the spiritual Privileges of Christians, on the other; which will
necessarily follow, if it fall into indiscreet, over-severe, ambitious,
passionate or revengefull hands, as we felt by woeful experience under the
Papacy and Prelacy: (Nam paucis res illa tuto committi potest: Mox solet
subrepere Dominandi studium, and sub praetextu Pietatis suunt paenas ob privata
odia, aut Dogmata, vel Talia; as Theologiae Problemat, Locus, 112. De
excommunicatione, p. 340.
Aretius well observes; who debating this question; An hodie restitui possit
Excommunicatio? Resolves thus. Sunt qui disciplinam hanc etiam hodie reducere
velint, in eamque rem toti incumbant; Alii in eo videntur desperare: Et
quanquam despera^dum non putem, tamen perquam arduum judico, nec non
impossible praesentibus moribus, col^a submittere ejusmodi disciplinae: For
which among other reasons, he renders this. Accedunt exempla little, qui idem
conati, cum risu destitere, aut quibus pessime cessit: magno studio in
Germaniae quibusdam ecclesiijs instituta fuit; sed cecidit in spongiam natus
ridiculus mus: as some fear it nay now do among us, unles it be settled with
great wisdom, caution, moderation, certainty, and as little as possible herein
left to any man's discretion; The serious consideration whereof has induced me
to propound these ensuing Questions to our Venerable Assembly, and all other
moderate Christians, who ought in all things (especially in this) to avoid
Extremes, and the seeming affectation of any greater lording power over the
Consciences or Privileges of their Christian Brethren, then of right belongs
unto them; least they approve that in, or usurp that to themselves, which they
have so vehemently heretofore declaimed against in, denied to, and quite taken
away from the Pope and Prelates.

1. Whether Matthew 18. 16. 17. Let him be to THEE, (not to the whole Church,
and all others) as a Heathen, and a Publican, (meant only of personal private
trespasses between man and man, not public scandalous sins against the
Congregation, as is clear by v: 15. If thy Brother shall trespass against
THEE, etc. not the Church: and Lu. 17. 3. 4.) Or 1. Cor. 5. 5. 11. 1. Tim. 1.
20. To deliver such a one to Satan, etc. with such a one no not to eat, etc. be
properly meant of Excommunication, or suspention from the Sacrament only? And
what warrant there is in Scripture for Ministers or others to suspend men from
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper only, and not from the Congregation and all
other public Ordinances, together with it? since 1. Cor. 5 7. 9 13. John 9.
22 32. 33 chap. 12, 42, chap. 16. 2. 2 These. 3, 14. 2 John 16. 11. 3 John 10.
Numb. 12. 14. Deuteronomy. 23 1, 2, 3 with all other Scriptures alleaaged for the
proof or practice of Excommunication; speak only of putting, casting out, and
excluding men wholly from the Congregation, Syragogue, and all public
Christian Communion; but not one of them of excluding, or suspending men only
from the Sacrament, and not from (...) public Ordinances, as Prayer,
Preaching, and the like: And since in the primitive times, (is is evident by
Tertulians Apollogy: c. 39. De Paenitentia Lib. and others) scandalous persons,
were ever excommunicated and wholly cast out of the Church ( extra Gregem dati)
not barely sequ^stred from the Sacrament: Whence all the Canonists and
Schoolmen determine: (...)
Excommunicatus non possit interesse divinis Officiis in Ecclesia, vel extra
cum aliis: and define Excommunication to be, An Ecclesiastical censure, which
deprives a man from the Communion of the Church, Sacraments, and all public
Ordinances: and A^etius defines it, to be, A^icuius professi Religionem
nostram, a consortio fidelium, in sacris et prophanis rebus exclusio, etc.
which excludes men totally from the Church, and all public Ordinances, not
from the Sacrament only.

2. By what Divine Authority or Scripture Text, can any Minister lawfully keep
back any Christian from the Sacrament, (not actually Excommunicated and cast
out of the Church for some notorious scandal upon a legal Conviction) who
earnestly desires to receive it, though in his own private judgment he deemes
him unfitting or unworthy? since we read of no circumcised person in the old
Testament, ever debarred from the Passover by the Priests, that was willing or
desirous to eat it, though perchance not altogether so prepared to ea^e it, as
God requi^ed, Exodus 12. 3. 4. etc. 44, to 58. 2 Chronicles. 30. 13. to 21. Since
Christ himself admitted Judas to it, though he knew him to be a Devil, a
Traitor; John 6. 70. 71. as is clear by Math. 26 20. to 31 Mar: 14. 18. etc.
Luke 22. 14 etc. John 13. 31. And since Paul in the 1. cor. 11. 20. to 36:
usurped no other Authority to himself, nor gave any power to others, to keep
unworthy receivers from the Sacrament, but only admonished them of the danger
of unworthy receiving, and thereupon advised every Receiver, to examine HIM
SELF before he came to receive? And whether the Minister by admonishing his
Flock, of the danger of unworthy receiving, and seriously dehorting such as he
deemes unworthy not to receive the Sacrament til they become more fit to
participate, under pain of eating and drinking their own damnation, and other
judgments that will ensue thereon, has not thereby discharged his full duty
and conscience, as this text of the Corinths. Ezech. 33. 1. to 10. Acts 20. 26.
27. with the Liturgyes of our own and the French Churches, in their
Exhortations before the Sacrament, both intimate and resolve?

3. Whether the unprofitable, and unworthy hearing of the word, be not as
great, as dangerous, as damning a sin, as the unworthy receiving of the
Sacrament, as Math. 10. 14. 15. Mar. 16, 15, 16, Luk 8. 18 Heb 2 1, 2, 3. c. 3.
7, 8, 1^. c. 6. 6. 7. 8: assert? Whether Ministers upon the self same grounds
and pretenses (of partaking of other men's sins, of being guilty of their
damnations, of not giving holy things to Dogs and casting Pearls before
Swine; Math. 7. 6. meant principally of preaching the Gospel to such as shall
contemn it, not of the Sacrament, as is clear by Math: 10, 14, Mar. 16, 15.
16. Acts 13 46, 51) may not as well keep their people from preaching of the
word, and refuse to preach unto them, leaft it should not profit them for want
of faith, Hebr. 4 2. but increase, or aggravate their sins, and become unto
them the Savor of death unto death, 2 Cor 21 5. 16 John 12: 4^. as from the
Sacrament? And what substantial difference they can produce, warranted by
Scripture, why they may not deny to preach the word to such Christ^ans whom
they deem unprofitable under, or unfit to hear it, as the Sacrament to those
whom they judge unmeet to receive it?

4. Whether, seeing God only knows the Secrets of all men's hearts, and who are
his, 2 Chronicles. 6. 30. 2 Timothy 2. 19. not Ministers; who may often times deem those
Worthy Communicants, who are not (as close Hypocrites, etc.) and those unworthy
who are not, 1 Samuel 16. 5. to 14. S^eing he can suddenly change notorious
sinners hearts, lives, and bring them to repentance in a moment, before
Ministers can take real notice of it, Act. 9. 3. to 28. Seeing we must not
censoriously judge one another, because we fall or stand to our own Master,
Matthew. 7. 1. Luke 6. 37. Romans 14. 4. to 15. Seeing none must quench the smoking
flax, nor break the bruised Reed, nor discourage weak Christians by overmuch
rigor, or indiscretion, Matthew. 12 20. Rom 14. Seeing every Communicant is bound
to examine HIMSELF, which he best knows, (not others peremptorily to examine
him) 1 Cor. 11. 27. 28, 29. 2 Cor. 13 5. Gal. 6. 4. 5. And every man is only to
bear his own sin, not another, in which he is no partaker, Gal 6. 4. 5.
Ezec. 33. 1. to 10. Ezec. 18 4 to 21. And seeing every Christian when he is
invited to the Sacrament, is bound under pain of sin and contempt to receive
it, 1 Cor. 11. Heb. 10. 29. Whether can any Minister in point of Conscience
refuse any Christian, not actually excommunicated, the Sacrament, if he desires
to receive it, in case he profess his sincere repentance for his sins past,
and promise newness of life for time to come, though in his own private
opinion, he may chance to judge him a person unfit or unworthy to communicate?
If yea, let him show his charter for it in Scripture: This I am certain he
cannot do: If he allege, he cannot do it in point of Conscience, because he
should be paraker of his sin, if he eat and drink damnation by unworthy
receiving: The Apostle resolves the contrary; that he eats and drinks
damnation only to HIMSELF, not to the Minister, or the other Communicants;
that he shall only bear his own burden, and give an account of himself to
God, Gal. 6. 4, 5. Romans 14. 12. And the administration being only the
Ministers act, which is a holy and divine institution, the unworthy
participation the parties own iniquity, (as is his unworthy hearing, praying
etc.) not the Ministers; it can no more involve the Minister in the guilt of
it, then his unprofitable hearing; of which no Minister holds himself guilty,
who with care and conscience faithfully dispenceth the Word unto his Auditors,
Eze. 33. 1. to 10. Acts 20. 26. 27; which E^chi^dian Contro. ver. ^um Anabap.
De Ecclesia. c. 6. Quaest. 3.
Lucas Osiander proves at large against the Anabaptists.

Seeing therefore there is as much danger to peoples Souls in their unworthy,
unprofitable hearing of the word, as receiving of the Sacraments; and since
Ministers are and may be unto God a Sweet savor of Christ, as well in them
that perish, by unworthy receiving the Sacrament as in them that are saved, by
worthy participation thereof; as they are in the preaching of the Gospel, 2
Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16. I cannot discern any shadow of reason, why any godly
Ministers should over-earnestly contest for such a large or unlimited
Ecclesiastical power, to exclude their Christian Brethren from the Sacrament
(when not actually excommunicated from the Church and other Ordinances) as some
pretend to; much less, why any of them should resolve to give over their
Ministry to which Christ has called them, in case they cannot obtain such a
power from the Parliament, as neither Christ, nor his Apostles, nor the
Primitive Christians in the purest times did ever exercise; or why any should
forwardly separate from our Church, in case such an unlimited arbitrary power
be not established in our new Presbiteries, as our very Lordly Prelates never
durst to claim. Moderata durant. Wherefore my earnest request to all Ministers
and people shall be, to rest fully satisfied with such a limited Jurisdiction
in this kind, as our Honorable, Parliament upon serious debate, shall in their
Piety and Wisdom think meet to settle, for the prevention of scandal,
Profaneness in the people, of Tyranny and oppression of men's consciences in the
Presbytery; the only desirable boundary between these two Extremities, which
must be avoided with all special care.

FINIS.

