A BRIEF, PITHY DISCOURSE Upon 1 Corinthians 14. 40. Let all things be done
decently and in Order. Tending to search out the Truth in this Question:
Whether it be Lawful for Church Governors to Command and Impose indifferent
decent things (not absolutely necessary) in the Administration of Gods worship?

Written some years past by a Judicious Divine, and Seasonable for our present
Times.

Numb. 15. 39. That ye may look upon it, and remember all the Commandments of
the Lord, and do them; and that ye seek not after your own heart, and your own
eyes, after which ye use to go a Whoring. Gregorius Magnus Pastoralium, lib.
3. cap. 5. Aliter admonendi sunt subditi; and aliter Praelati illi ne subjectio
Conterat, illi ne-locus superior extollat: illi ut humi^^ter subjaceant; illi
quoque ut temperantur praesint. Bishop Pilkingtons Exposition on the Prophet
A^di^s, page ult. It is not meet that God should be King, and the Pope and
Prelates to make Laws for him to rule by: But God Rules by his own Laws.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.

Which will serve for an answer to Dr. Alexander Read Parson of Fifield in
Essex, his idle Visitation Sermon, (printed, 1636.) upon this very Text.
Throughout which he makes his own private Fantasies the sole rule of Decency,
without one word of Scripture to back them.
A Brief, Pithy Discourse upon 1 Corinthians 14. 40.
Let all things be done decently and in Order.
ALL (I conceive) that this place, 1 Corinthians 14. 40. Let all things be done
decently and in order, holds forth touching the point of Decency and Order,
may be summed up in these particulars.

First, That the whole Church and every Member thereof are to perform all the
duties of Gods worship in a decent and orderly manner.

Secondly, What the Church and Members thereof are to do in this kind; That the
Church Governors may and ought to see it done.

Thirdly, That it being the duty of Church Governors to see that all things in
the Congregation be done decently and orderly; It is therefore their part in
eminent measure to be able to discern and judge what is decent and undecent,
what is orderly and disorderly.

Now, when I say, it is their part, I mean, it is their duty; Their place and
authority requires it, nor that they always have a power and Spirit, of
discerning to judge aright in this Case; For, it seems, the High Priest with
the rest of his Brethren and Prophtes, yea and David himself, all of them
thought it decent to bring back the Ark of the Lord upon a New Cart, which
afterward David himself saw and confessed it, was not done after due order, 1.
Chron. 15. 13. From whence it appears (since they also are subject to errors
in this kind) that it will not be safe for them to judge and declare the
decency of things by no better a rule than their own wisdom, judgment and
pleasure; But even they also, as well as the people, must be guided by such
rules as the Holy Ghost direct thus unto in this Case, which are the holy and
infallible Gal. 6. 16. 2 Pet. 1. 16. 19. Isay. 8. 20. Luke 16. 29.
Scriptures, and with Scripture, Nature and Civil-Customes; Yea and I willingly
also admit the lawful Custom of the Church or Congregation in which a man
lives: For to judge of decency by all these Rules we have warrant in
Scripture, as 1 Cor. 14. 33, 34. 1 Cor. 11. 14 and 16.

And indeed, they who are to approve themselves in all their proceedings, (as 2
Cor. 4. 2. When Peter and Paul commanded us to obey our Superiors, they
commanded to obey the Bishops in the Doctrine of Christ, not in their own.
Tyndals Answer to Mr. Mores first Book, p. 286.
Paul did) and as all Church-Masters ought to do, to every Man's conscience in
the sight of God, ought to be seriously guideo by these patterns.

It is not fit for them (I say) to give for the ground of their proceeding,
their own wisdom and pleasure, but it behooves them to justify their doings
therein from such rules, as every good Conscience may see approveable, 2 Cor.
1. 12. 13. c. 4. 2.

Fourthly and lastly, this place in hand holds forth also farther this truth,
that whatsoever thing the Church sees by those former rules to be indifferent
and decent, or which Church-Governors shall by these rules declare so to be,
those things may and ought lawfully to be done.

For farther clearing whereof, and the better describing of the power of
Church Governors in these matters; It may be observed, that of decent things
lawful to be done in Gods Church, some are; 1. Indifferent and decent only; As
to preach in a Gown or a Cloak, whereof the one is no more necessary or
expedient than the other. But now they are become Laudable Ceremonies, whereas
before they were but Ceremonies alone. Now are they become necessary Rites,
godly Institutions, seemly Ordinances, when as before they had no such names,
and he that disobeyeth them shall not only be judged a Schismatic, or Felon,
but also condemned as a Traitor against the King, as John Bale Bp. of Ossery
writes in his Image of both Churches, on Apoc. 13. f. 108.

2. Decent and Expedient; As to abide in single life, or to enter into marriage;
of which though marriage in time of persecution be indifferent, yet single life
is more expedient, to prevent the troubles of the Flesh, 1 Cor. 7. 26. etc.

3. Necessary and decent, either always; As for a Woman to keep 1 Cor. 14. 34.
15. 1 Timothy 2. 11. 12.
silence in the Church: Or at least Hic and Nune, in some places and at some
times, so as the neglect thereof would be uncomely and unexpedient, by light of
1. Nature. 2. Scripture. 3. Custom.


As, a 1 cor. 11. 5, to 11.
Woman to be unvailed in the Congregation in Eastern Countries; so, to Acts 15.
29.
abstain from blood, whilst the eating of it was offensive to the Jews.

Now, for such things as are necessary and decent, Church Governors have power
to give order and commandment concerning them. As did the Synod at Jerusalem
touching those things, which they called Necessary, to wit, Necessary during
the time of the offense of the Jews; which was necessary to be avoided, Acts
15. 28, 29. 1. Cor. 20. 32. Of such things as are decent and expedient,
Church-Governors also have power to declare the Decency and Expediency of them,
yea 1 Cor. 7. 8, 9. 12, 13, 14, 25, 26 etc. cap. 11. 4, 5, 13, 14, 15, 16.
and to advise and persuade the practice of them; but not to give an Order or
Law to bind the people thereunto farther than themselves shall find it
expedient and decent for themselves.

Thus in point of abiding in Single-life, in time of the Churches Distress,
the Apostle gives his advise and judgment: 1 Cor, 7. 25, 40. Yea and persuaded
to it, for avoiding trouble in the flesh, Verse. 26. and 28. but would not bind
them to it, neither in point of Conscience nor of outward practice, as having
no command for it from the Lord, V. 25. In which respect he calls such a
commandment (if he had given it) a Snare, V. 35.

And herein the power of the Church Governors falls short of the authority
of Civil Majestrates, who may in civill-matters make binding Laws for any
thing expedient, for public weal, which subjects are readily to submit unto,
1 Pet. 2. 13. Tit. 3. 1. Romans 13. 1. 2. 5.

But See Dr. Barnes his Discourse, that Men's Constitutions bind not the
Conscience: p. 297. to 301.
Church Governors have not the like power in matters Ecclesiastical, to make
binding Laws for any thing expedient in the Churches behoof, unless Necessity
be joined with expediencie.

Against this it may be objected, Objection.
Paul had power to command Phil^mon that which was convenient; Phil. 8.
Therefore he might make a Law commanding the Church some expedient decent
things.

It follows not; Answer.
For first, its one thing to give a Commandment for once, and that in a
particular case, as here; another thing to make a Law to bind One always to
do the like.

Secondly, it is one thing to command a particular person, in case only of a
private wrong, who may owe himself to a Church-Governour, as Philemon did to
Paul: Another thing to command, yea to give a standing command and binding Law
to a whole Church, in Worship or Ceremonies, to whom he professes himself only
a Servant or Minister, 2 Cor. 4. 5. over whom he has no authority, but only 1
Cor. 4. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 14 Luke 12. 42. to 49. Tit. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 3.
Stewardly or Economically, to wit, when he speaks in his Lords or Masters
name, not in his own. As the Steward in a family has not power over his
Masters Spouse, but when he speaks or shows his Masters command or directions,
Note this.
not his own.

But, of such things as are only Indifferent and Decent, I do not find in
Scripture that ever Church Governors did Lawfully advise and persuade them;
Much less charge and command them. And that this place in hand, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
does not give them any such power (though it be much urged to this end) may
appear from these reasons.

First, the place speaks not of Indifferent Decent things, but of Necessary.
Decent things only, the neglect whereof was undecent, and disorderly, by the
light of Nature, Scripture Custom. As 1 Cor. 11. to 18 c. 14. 2 to 38. 1 Timothy
2. 9, 10. 1 ^^t. 3. 3.
for Men to wear long-hair, women to be bareheaded, and brayd their hair, for
women to speak in the Congregation, as also for men to speak many of them at
once.

Secondly, the words of this place run not thus, Let all decent things be done;
Or, let all things judged or declared by the Church Governors to be decent, be
done; but thus, Let all things, (to wit, all Ecclesiastical matters; As all the
Ordinances of God that are done in the Church, all the duties of Gods worship;
Whether Praying, Prophesying, Psalms, Sacraments, or the like) be done
decently and orderly, in orderly and decent manner.

But whether in that decent manner, which Church Governors do appoint, or in
some other, that the Apostle limitteth not, but only requires that all be done
decently, which if it be done (in any decent manner, gesture, warranted by
Scripture or Nature) his rule here prescribed is fully observed and followed.

3. Thirdly, the same may appear out of this place by this argument.

If this Text of the Apostle did give power and authority to Church Governors
to command indifferent decent things, then he that should transgress the
commandment of the Church therein, should also transgress the commandment of
the Apostle: As, look what Order or Acts of Justice any civil Governor does by
virtue of the Commission of the King, He that violateth such Acts, or
transgresses such Orders, transgresses also against the Commandment and
Commission of the King.

But, it appears to be otherwise in this See D. Barnes, That men's
Constitutious bind not the Conscience p. 297. to 300.
case, as for instance.

If the Church Governors command a Minister to pre^ch always in a Gown (it
being indifferent and decent so to do) he that shall now and then preach in a
Cloak, transgresses the command of the Church; But not of the Apostle: For he
that preaches in a Cloak, preaches also decently, or else whereto serves
Tertullians whole Book, see La Cerda his Commentary thereon.
de Pallio.

Now, if so be it be done decently, then it is all that the rule of the Apostle
requires in this point.

The like may be (...) of praying, and of receiving the Lords Supper standing,
kneeling or siting, which are all three lawful, indifferent and decent
gestures, warranted by Mar. 11. 25. Lu. 18. 11. 2 Chronicles. 6. 13. Lu. 22 41. Acts
3 60. c. 9 40. c. 20. 36. c. 21. 5. 2 Samuel 7. 18. 1 Chronicles. 17. 16. Ezr. 9. 4.
Ezech. 20. 1.
Scripture Presidents, and Sitting (the gesture which doubtless Christ and his
Apostles used when they instituted and received the Lords Supper) is a posture
of Humility and Reberence as well as Kneeling, always used at Suppers and
Feasts among all Nations, as St. August. Enarratio in Psalm. 126. and 138. and
ad Simplicianum, l. 2. qu. 4. Gulielmus Stuckius, Antiqu. Convivialium, l. c.
33. l. 2. c. 34. and Walaeus in Mat. c. 26. p. 294, to 299 and in Mar. c. 11.
v. 25. prove at large; Therefore to confine Christians to pray, Mat. 26. 7. 20.
Mar. 14. 18. Lu 22. 14, 27, 30. c. 24. 30, 31. Chrysostom, Theophilact, Beda,
Beza, Walae us, Buxtorfius, and others on those Texts.
or receive the Sacrament only kneeling, not standing or sitting, or else to
censure or debar them from these Ordinances, must needs be without the verge of
this Text, and so of Church Governors Jurisdiction, and a high encroachment
upon their Christian Liberty

But, because this point is of great consequence both for Church Governors and
others to be truly informed in, give me leave to clear the same from some other
arguments; To wit, That it is not in the power of Church Governors to command
things merely decent and indifferent in the worship of God by Order of Law.
That so Prelates and Clergy men may be right well assured, God never gave unto
them authority to make and establish so many Ceremonies and Traditions which be
contrary to the liberty of the Gospel, and are blocks in Christen men's ways,
that they can neither know nor observe the same his Gospel in liberty of
Conscience, nor attain a ready way to Heaven; as John Purvey affirmed in his
Articles. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 7. 11. 712.

First then, that which exceeds the bounds of Apostolical authority and
straightneth the bounds of Christian Liberty, is not in the power of any
Church-Governour to command.

But to command indifferent decent things, by order of Law, exceeds the
bounds of Apostolical authority, and straightneth the bounds of Christian
Liberty. Ergo, etc. The former of these, to wit, that to command indifferent
decent things exceeds the bounds of Apostolical authority, appears from the
Commission granted to the Apostles, which was the largest Commission that ever
Christ gave to any Church Governors, This was the Argument of Joannes de
Wesalia Abb: Uspergensis, Paraleipomena, p 419, to prove.

Quod praelati non habent autoritarem instituendi leges.


Mat. 28. 20. Where our Savior gives them Commission, to teach all Nations to
observe all things whatsoever he had commanded them.

Now, all things whatsoever he has commanded them are Necessary, not
indifferent for the people to observe: If therefore the Apostles over and above
the Commandments of Christ, which are necessary, should teach the people to
observe indifferent things also, which Christ has not commanded, they shall
exceed the bounds of their Commission, 1 Cor. 11. 23. c. 14. 37. 1 Cor. 7. 6.
10.

It will be in vain to object, that our Savior here speaks only of matters
of Doctrine and Faith, not of Government and Order: unless it could be proved,
that our Savior else where did enlarge this Commission, and gave them more
unlimited power in matters of Government, Order or Indifferency: Which for
ought I can see no man goes about to do, unles it be from this place of the
Corinth. which has been already cleared (as I hope) from any such meaning.

As for the second or latter part of the Assumption, that to command
indifferent Decent things straightneth the bounds of Christian Liberty, is of
it self evident. For, whereas (for Example,) a single man or woman are at
Liberty to marry where they will, 1 Cor. 7. 39. If the Apostle had bound them
from marriage by any command of his, though they had received that Gift of
Continency, yet he had then straightned and deprived them of their Liberty in
that particular, 1 Timothy 4. 3. 4. Col. 2. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 7. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39,
40.

It is wont to be excepted against this, Objection.
that Christian Liberty stands not in the freedom of outward Actions, but only
in the fredome of Conscience.

As long therefore as there is no Doctrinal necessity put upon the Conscience
to limit the lawfulness of the use of outward things, Christian Liberty is
preserved, though the use and practice of outward things be limited.

Whereto I answer; Answer.
1. That the Apostle in this case leaves the people of God at Liberty, not
only in point of Conscience for lawfulness to marry; But even in outward
Actions and Practice. Let him do (says he) what he will; he sins not, let
him be married, Verse. 30. 38. As who should say, the Conscience being free from
sin in it, I will put no tie on the outward practice to restrain it.

2. That true Christian Liberty, consists principally in the free Actual use
of things lawful and indifferent in themselves, and the Prohibition or their
free Actual use to Christians is expressly censured as Anti-evangelical, a badge
of false Apostles, of Apostlates from the faith, Hypocrites, men of seared
Conscienc^s, Antichristian Usurpers, 1 Timothy 4. 1. 3. 4 Now the Spirit speaks
expressly, that in the later times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed
to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of devils; Speaking Lies in Hypocrisy,
having their, Consciences seared with an hot Iron, forbidding to Marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats which God has Created to be received with
Thanksgiving: For every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused if
it be received with Thanksgiving; For it is sanctified by the word of God and
Prayer, Col. 2. 20, 21. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the Rudiments
of the World; why as though living in this World are ye Subject to Ordinances?
(or Canons) touch not, taste not, handle not (no not Gods Ordinances,
Sacraments, Creatures, but in such Vestiments, Gestures, Postures) which all
are to perish with the using; which things have indeed a show of Wisdom in
will-woorship, and Punishing of the Body, 1 Cor. 4. 5, 6 Have we not power to
Eat and to Drink? Have we not power to lead about a Sister, Wife, as well as
other Apostles, and as the Brethren of the Lord and Cephas? compared with verse.
19. to 24. Romans 14. 2, 3. For one believes that he may Eat all things another
who is weak Eats Herbs; Let not him that Eats despise him that Eats not;
and let not him which Eats not, judge him that Eats; For God has received
him. Who art thou that iudgest another man's Servant? To his own Master he
stands and falls. But why do thou judge thy Brother (or refrain him in
the use of things indifferent) or why do thou set at naught thy Brother? We
shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ? etc. Let us not therefore
judge one another any more, but judge this rather that no man put a stumbling
block or an occasion to fall in his Brothers way, etc. to wit, by any
restraints, Canons, Inhibitions, Censures, in or concerning things or
ceremonies that are but indifferent, and not absolutely necessary by Gods
prescription, or the nature of the things themselves. Therefore to prohibit any
Ministers of the Gospel who are able and faithful to preach the Word, or to
excommunicate or cast them, or any other conscientious Christians out of the
Church, or debar them from the Sacrament, because they cannot wear a Surplice,
kneel at the Lords Table or Supper, or conform to every Punctilio in the
Liturgy or Canons, and to deny them their Christian Liberty in the free use or
forbearing of Ceremonies which are only decent and indifferent, indirectly
repugnant to Christian Liberty, the Gospel of Christ, and to Acts 4 18, 19, 20,
Chapter 5. 27, 28, 29, 41, 42. 1 These. 2. 14, 15, 16. 3 John 9. 10. Rev. 13. 16,
17. 1 Cor. 7. 8, 9. 25, 26, 27, 28, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40 Gal. 5. 13. 14.

The second reason may be this; Argument 2.
They who are not to judge or censure another in differences about
circumstantial things or matters of Indifferency, they (surely) cannot make a
binding Law, that all men shall be of one mind or of one practice in such
things. But the former is true, from the rule of the Holy Ghost, binding all
Christians, even the Apostle as well as others, Romans 14. 3. Let not him that
eats despise him that eats not, and let not him that eats not judge him
that eats, for God has received him. Col. 2. 16. etc. Ergo, etc.

But if it be said here, Objection.
that this place speaks only of private Christians, not of Church Governors.

I answer; Answer.
The place speaks of Christians private and public, seeing it referveth and
reserreth the judgment of our Brethren in such like things, not to public
persons, but only to Christ, Romans 14. 4. 10.

The third Argument or reason is this: Argument 3.
They who did accomodate themselves in the use of indifferent things according
to the judgment and practice of all Christians wheresoever they came, they
(surely) did not make Laws and bind Christians to accomodate themselves to
their own judgment and practice in the use of things Indifferent: But the
Apostles of Christ (and the sea Niceph. Call. Eccles. Hist. l. 1, 2. c. 33, 34,
35. Socrates Eccles. Hist l. 5. c. 21, 22. l. 7. c. 28. ^5.
Christians too in the primitive Churches) did accommodate themselves in the
use of Indifferent things according to the judgment and practice of all
Christians whersoever they came; as appears from the Sea Acts 21-23, 24, 16,
27. Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 21, to 25. in the English Translation.
Apostl^s Example 1. Cor. 9. 10, 21, 22, 23. To the Jews (says he) I became as
a Jew etc Ergo, etc.

But, Objection.
here it may be objected, though the Apostles rather chose to use their Liberty
and their ^nity than their authority in these indiff^rent things, wheresoever
they came; Yet if they had pleased, they might have used their Apos^olical
authority in binding all Churches to their judgments and pract^ce in such
things.

Hereunto I answer, Answer 1.
first, that doubtless if they had received any such authority, they would in
some place or other, and at one time or other have claimed it and practiced it:
For, a sword never used ^u^^eth in the scabbar^; And, Frustra est potentia quae
nunquam venit in actum. I^ is a true Axiom^, and pertinent to what we speak of.

Secon^ly, Note this.
I say, that the Apostle himself does clear the point, when he confesses he
did thus accommodate himself even to the weaknesses of Christians, least be
should abuse his authority in the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 18, 19, 20. O that such
Governors as plead their succession to the Apostles, and do challenge in
sund^ie passages of Government Apostostolical authority, would be pleased to
study and emulate an Apostolical Spirit!

Let a fourth Argument be this, Argument 4.
That if the Synod of Apostles, Presbyters and Brethren of Jerusalem did reach
their authority no farther, than to lay upon the Disciples necks the yoke and
burden of Necessary things, and that only during the time while they continued
Necessary; Then See 1 Cor. 7. 5, to 40. Col. 2. 19, 20, 20. 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4 Mar
7. 7, 8, 9. Matthew. 15. 9 Gal. 1. 10, 11, 12. c. 6. 12, 13.
may not any succeeding Synod reach their authority to lay upon the Church
Commandments and Canons of indifferent things; For, this Synod at Jerusalem
was and ought to be the pattern and president of all Succeeding Synods; For,
Primum in unoquoque genere est mensura reliquorum.

And our Savior teaches us to refute aberrations from Primitive-patterns with
this, Math. 19 8. Non sic fuit ab initia. From the beginning it was not so: But
the Synod at Jerusalem reached their authority no farther than to lay
Commandments upon the Disciples only touching Necessary things, Acts 15, 28
Necessary (I say) either in themselves ( as abstaining from Fornication;) or
at least in respect of present offense, as abstaining from blood, etc.

And let me conclude this Argument taken from the Apostle Paul his intercourse
with the Apostle Peter, about a matter of this kind: If the Apostle Peter was
to be blamed for compelling the Gentiles by his example to observe Indifferent
things or Ceremonies of the Jews; Then other Church Governors will be as much
blame worthy for compelling Christians by Law and by grievous censures, to
observe the Ceremonies now in question, though they were Indifferent. But, the
Apostle tells us, that Peter was to be blamed in this Case, Gala. 2. 11. 14.
Ergo, etc.

Now, Objection.
if any except thereat (as some are wont to do in this case) and say, that
Peter was therefore blamed, because the Ceremonies to which he compelled the
Gentiles were not urged as things Indifferent, but as Necessary to
Justification and Salvation.

I answer, Answer.
This is but a mere evasion, and will stand them in no stead; For, it is
certain, Peter did not account them as necessary, he knew the contrary, nor did
he so use them himself, nor so compel others to them; But, knowing his Liberty
for him (a Jew) to use them among the Jews, he used them only when the Jews
came down from Jerusalem, out of a tender care to prevent their offense.

But, Object.
you will urge again, and say: The false Teachers did urge them as necessary.

I answer; Answer.
What then? So did the Christian Jews at Jerusalem, yea Paul himself used them
there, Acts 21. 23, 24, 26, 27. notwithstanding the corrupt opinion of Worship
and Necessity which they put upon them, as much as ever did the false Teachers
in Galatia

Why then (will you say) did Paul blame that in Peter, Objection.
which he practiced himself?

He had indeed blamed Peter for that which he practiced himself, Answer.
if he had therefore blamed him for practicing such Ceremonies, because they
were urged by others with a corrupt opinion of Necessity and worship.

What was then the difference that made the practice of Paul lawful in using
the Ceremonies at Jerusalem, Quere.
and the practice of Peter unlawful in using the same Ceremonies among the
Gentiles at Antioch.

I answer; Answer.
The difference was this: Though that corrupt opinion of the necessity of the
Ceremonies prevailed alike in both places; yet the Ceremonies themselves had
not the like warrant in both places. In Jerusalem they were known to have been
the Commandments of God, and were not yet known to the Christian-Jewes to have
been abrogated, and therefore at Jerusalem they had warrant from God to use
them, to avoid the offense of the weak Jew there. But at Antioch and all other
Churches of the Gentile, they were (at best) but things Indifferent, as having
never been commanded of God there; Whence it was, that Peter saw his Liberty to
forbear them there at his first coming.

What was then the Sin of Peter in resuming the practice of the Ceremonies
there? Q^ere.


His Sin was double. First, Answer.
the abuse of his authority in the Church, for that unawares by his Example he
compelled the Gentiles to the use of such Ceremonies, as himself saw Liberty to
forbear amongst them; And which having never been commanded by God to them, he
had no power to impose on them. His other Sin was, the dissembling or
concealing of his Christian Liberty which he should then (then) have stood
upon, when he saw the false teachers urge these Ceremonies upon the Gentiles as
well as upon the Jews, to the prejudice of their Christian Liberty.

When things that are indifferent are commanded to be done of necessity (as now
all Popes, and Prelates Ceremonies are) then are not the same to be obeyed,
because the same destroys our freedom in Christ.

The Sum of all this will lead us by the hand one step farther, namely; if it
be a sin in Church Governors to command (especially upon strict penalty)
Indifferent decent things; It will be a sin also in Ministers, and in private
Christians to subscribe Ex animo, and to yield obedience by Conformity to such
commands, although the Ceremonies were as good (indeed) as they were pretended
(which This was the judgment of the Author of them.
I believe they are not) Indifferent-Decent-Things. For, does not such
voluntarily Subscription and Conforming to them build up our Church Governors,
yea and with them (that which is most to be taken to heart of us, our Sovereign
civil Governors also in the confidence) that such Commandments are as well
lawfully given by them, as received and obeyed, yea confirmed and allowed by us?

Now to build up or edify a Brother to sin, is properly to offend a Brother;
For the proper definition of an offense is, that which edifieth a Brother unto
Sin, as the original word expresses it, 1 Cor. 8. 10. and so to sin against a
Brother, is to wound his Conscience; Yea, and as much as in us lies, to cause
him to perish for whom Christ died; Which is no better then Spiritual Murder
of his Soul.

Now, if thus to edify any Brother to sin be so heinous an offense, how much
more heinous an offense is it, to edify our Governors to the giving and
urging of such Commandments, yea and to the sharp Censuring of all others, as
refractory and factious persons, who choose rather to undergo the loss of the
greatest Comforts they enjoy in this World, then to wound the Consciences
either of themselves or of their Governors.

It is true, by forbearing obedience to those Commandments we offend the
Spirits of our Governors, and make them to be (though causelessly) offended
with us; But by yielding obedience to these things we should offend their
Consciences in edifying them to sin, and provoke the Lord to be offended with
them. Better they be offended with us, without fault, then through our fault
God to be offended with them and us.

It is not for Christians; Muchlesse for Ministers, to redeem outward peace and
Liberty at so dear a price as the hazard of the blood of so many precious
Souls, especially of our Governors in highest place and Authority. This was
the Authors Judgment, with whom our Martyr Mr. Will. Tyndall concurs, in his
Answer to Mr. Moors first book, p. 285, 286. Our Prelates ought to be our
Servants, as the Apostles were, to teach us Christ's Doctrine, and not to Lord
over us with their own, Peter called it tempting of the Holy Ghost, Acts 15 to
lade the Heathen with ought but that which necessity and brotherly love
requires, and Paul rebuking the Corinthians and Galatians for their over much
obedience, warns all men to stand fast, and not to suffer themselves to be
brought into bondage.

FINIS.

