THE HYPOCRITES UNMASKING; OR A Clear Discovery of the gross Hypocrisy of the
Officers and Agitators in the Army, concerning their pretended forwardness,
and real sincere desires to relieve Ireland, with the obstruction whereof they
falsely charge some of the 11 impeached Members, (who cordialy advanced it) in
the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13., 11, 12, and 14. Articles of their mostfalse and
scandalous Charge.

By a Letter of the Agitators to Lieutenant General Crumwell, March 30. 1647:
and Colonel Robert Hammond his unreasonable Propositions to the Parliament;
and some brief Observations concerning Sir Hardresse Waller, and the Lord
Lisle; late Governor of IRELAND.

Isay 9. 16. 17.

For the Leaders of this People cause them to err: and those that are led of
them are swallowed up: For every one is an Hypocrite, and an evil doer, and
every mouth speaks Villainy.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1647.

A Letter of the Agitators to Leiutenant General Cromwell.
May it please your Honor.
WE, who have [for these two years past and more] bin by your Sir Thomas
Fairfax (It seems) was and is but a cy-;pher with you: crumwell, only your
Conductor, and General.
Honor conducted through many dangers, and by providence have been hitherto
protected; who have often seen the devouring sword of a raging enemy drawn
forth against us threatening destruction to us, and now see them vanquished, and
our selves seemingly settled in peace and safety, are not unsensible of a more
dangerous storm hanging over our heads then ever the malice of our open Enemies
could have contrived, or their fury caused to fall upon us, which unless
diverted, strikes not only at our liberty, but also at our lives: To whom
(next to our maker) shall we fly for shelter but to This disc^vers, who is
supreme head of the mutinous faction in the Army
your Honor, our Patron and Protector? from what Secondary means shall we
expect our deliverance, but from that hand that has been so often engaged with
us? and from that heart that has often bin so tender over us, and careful for
our securities? Can we suffer, and, you not Sympathize? can we be proclaimed
Rebels, and your Honor remain secure? Ah dear Sir, let your wonted care for us
be further demonstrated: cease not to speak for us who together with your
self, and in obedience to your commands have adventured all that is dear to
us for the Kingdoms safety: Has any thing bin desired by, that has bin
promised us, or then we have just cause to expect? if there has, then let it
and the Authors thereof perish. But can the Parliament upon misinformation
pass us for Enemies, and we not therein perceive the designs of our Enemies?
can we be satisfied with a complement, when our fellow soldiers suffer at
every A more untruth, never cleared by any one real instance;
Assi^e for Acts merely relating to the war It is not our lives we seek for:
where shall we be The Ordinance for Indemnity has prevented this danger.
secured whom the mere Envy of a Malicious person is sufficient to destroy us?
were our Enemies in the field with their swords in their hands, we should
expect no more then a bare command, and a divine protection in our endeavors
to free our selves: but it is another and a far worse Enemy we have to deal
with, who like Foxes lurk in their Dens, and cannot be dealt with though
discovered, being protected by those who are entrusted with the The XI
impeached Members, who now can neither protect themselves (though Innocent) nor
others against these Agitators and the Armies rage, and violence.
Government of the Kingdom. It is the grief of our hearts that we cannot
desire our own security without the hazard of your Excellency if but in
speaking in our behalf. When shall we see Justice dispensed without partiality,
or when shall the public weal be singly sought after and endeavored? Can
this Irish Expedition be any thing else but a design to ruin and What need
they continue entire to oppress the kingdom withtheir pay and frequarter, now
the wars are ended.
break this Army in pieces? Certainly Reason tells us, it can be nothing else,
otherwise why are not those who have been made Instruments in our countries
deliverance, again thought So they were: as Major Genesis Skipp^n, Massy.
worthy to be employed? or why, are such [who for their miscarriage have been
cast out of the Army] thought fit to be entrusted, and those Members of the
Army encouraged and preferred to that service, when they are for the most part
such, as (had they considered their just demerrits) might rather have expected
an Because not of the Present faction and confedracy which they long have ^^nce
in conscience deserted
ejection then employment? We are sensible, Yea, Your comm-dictory Actions and
present rebellious proc^edings, obstructive and destructive to Ireland,
proclaim this anotable untruth.
far more sensible of the bleeding condition of Ireland crying aloud for a
brotherly assistance, then those forward undertakers in this present design
manifest them selves to be, and shall willingly contribute the utmost of our
abilities toward their releife, when we shall see this to be the only thing
sought after and endeavored: But we are confident that you cannot but
perceive, That this Plot is but a mere Cloak for some who have lately tasted
of Sovereignty, and being lifted beyond the ordinary sphere of servants This
is mosttrue of the Agitators and Officers in the Army, who now exalt themselves
above king and Parliament, and give Laws to both.
seek to become Masters and degenerate into Tyrants. We are earnest therefore
with your Honor to use your utmost endeavors that before any other or further
Propositions be sent to us, our expectations may be satisfied; which if they
are not, we conceive our selves and our friends as bad as destroyed, being
exposed to the merciless cruelties of our malicious Enemies. And shall your
Honor, or any other faithful servant to the State, be appointed for the
service of Ireland, and accept of that employment, we This is their real
forwardness to relieve Ireland.
must of necessity (contrary to our desires) show our selves averse to that
service, until our just desires be granted, the just Rights and Liberties of
the Subjects of England vindicated, and maintained: And then, (as God and our
own consciences bear us witness) shall we test^fie to the Kingdom the You
should say Hypochrisy.
integrity of our hearts to the service of Ireland, and our forward actions
shall demonstrate the sincerity of our expressions, in reference to that
employment. Once more, we are earnest with your Honor for your assistance;
without it we are like to be wholly ruined, and having obtained it, may be
enabled [as in duty we are bound] to express our selves.

Your His in the first p^ace, and a truth as to him.
Honors and the This your present Rebellion and disobedience to the Parliament
proves a falsehood, in relation to the Kingdom.
Kingdoms most faithful and obedient Servants, whose names are here annexed,
as agitating in behalf of their several Regiments. Traitrous Mutineers by Law
Martial, and the Common Law of the Land.
Agents for the Generals Regiment. Tho. Moore Edward Sexby
For the Lieutenant Generals Regiment. Samuel Whiting William Allin.
For the Commissary Generals Regiment. Anthony Nixson Tho. Sheppard.
For Col. Fleetwoods Regiment. William Jones John Cusby.
For Col. Sheffeilds Regiment. Henry Gethings Edw. Star
For Col. Whalleys Regiment. Tho. Lindoll John Thomas
For Col. Butlers Regiment. Tobias Box John Willoughby
For Col. Riches Regiment. Nichol. Lockyer Joseph Foster


For our Honored Commander, Leiutenant Though no present Officer in, or Member
of the Army; yet, now chief President in the Council there, and is appointed
a Commssioner for the Army to treat with the House, of which he is an actual
Member; as in contradistinction to the House. A strange Mystery of iniquity.
General Crumwell these. 30. Aprilis 1647.

Propositions of Colonel Robert Hamond concerning the present service of
DVBLIN.
1. THat the time of his employment, and those of this Army going with him, in
this service, Why so? but only to carry on the designs now on foot here in the
Army.
exceed not two, or three Months at the farthest.

2. To have the Yet these Gentlemen are not Mercenary and scorn and neglect
their pay in respect of Justice and higher ends.
Proportion of money in hand for the pay of the said forces for the said Term,
and that their pay be made good by the Parliament for what further time their
return and landing again in England, shall by casuality of weather, or any
other unavoydable necessity, be protracted beyond that time.

3. That good shipping, well victualled, both for Soldiers and Mariners, with
sufficient convoy, be provided and appointed for the Transportation of the said
Forces to Dublin; which shipping and convoy to This Gent. would be supreme
Commander both by Sea and Land
be commanded to observe his directions in Order to that service, and not to
depart until he dismiss them.

4. That the said Forces going over with him, be not obliged to Their de^^g^
therein was to posse^ themselves of Dublin, not to relieye Ireland. this seems
unreasonable when they would stay there but 2. or 3 months at furthest.
any other service whatsoever, more then the possessing and defending of Dublin.

5. That there be imbarqued with them victual for he would be both Lord
General and Lord Admiral at once, and command both by Land and Sea.
six Months after their coming thither, for their supply, in case they should
be so besieged, that it should not be possible for them to return for England,
at the time appointed.

6. That sufficient shipping of War, convenient for that service, lie in the
River of Dublin to serve upon al occasions, and to preserve an interc^urse
betwee^e the town and releife by Sea in case the Enemy [being potent] should
besiege the Town: Which shipping to be commanded to observe what orders or
directions they shall receive from him in Order to that service during his said
continuance there.

7. That shipping be ready in the harbor of Dublin victualled at the
Parliaments Charge with sufficient Convoy, A very reasonable motion to wait so
long upon his worship before hand, at so great expenses, only for a months
continuance (not service) in Dublin.
fourteen days before the expiration of the said Term, to transport the said
Forces back again for England, which shipping to be commanded to observe his
orders or directions in order to that service, until he be landed in England;
and that in Case releife do not come for him and the Forces of Sir Thomas
Fairefax his Army with him, within fourteen days before the end of the said
Term, That [whatsoever otherwise shall happen] It shall be lawful for him and
them to take shipping A very Just demand to receive full pay beforehand for the
whole time and yet to return without Orders 7. days before the time.
seven days before the expiration of the said time and to return for England.

That a good Ingineere, What need such extraordinary provision for 2 months
service only when moneys were so scarce.
Gunners, Matrosses, with pay for them, convenient Ammunition and Provisions of
War with Materials to work, as spades, shovels, Mattocks and the like, may
be ready to go with them.

That at Chester there may be A very just (...) for scarce 2 months stay in
Dublin.
Fourteen days pay ready for the said forces at their return put into the
hands of such as he shall name, to carry them from thence to their own homes,
in case the Army, whereof they are Members be disbanded.

That in all other things, they shall enjoy a like privilege in point of
Arreare or otherwise, with the Army They knew the Army would not disband, and
therefore would continue Members of it, and return from Ireland to join in
their present designs
whereof they Are Members if disbanded

That the said To gain all into the Armies power both in Irel. and Engl. to
carry on their present designs the better.
Colonel Hamond may have the Command of the said Garrison of Dublin and of all
the forces in it, during the said Term, or until he and the forces going with
him be releived; and also that a good Proportion of Money be provided for the
contingent occasion that may happen, for the better carrying on of this work,
to be trusted in the hands of some, whom the Parliament shall appoint^, and to
be issued out, as Colonel Hamond shall Order.

Which last proposition (as also some parts of the former) he would not have
made, but that he doubts and Pay before hand for all the time; 14 days pay at
the return; and yet such a good proportion of money besides: is a very
unreasonable demand of unmercinary men for a months service only
finds, he shall not be able to get any considerable number with him to answer
this service, unless they be so satisfied in the point of command during their
stay. Nevertheles, If that, or any of the other propositions be thought unfit
[to manifest the Therefore neither he nor his friends in the Army ever realy
intended Irelands releif, but their own private interest and lucre-
reality of his intentions for the advancement of this service, in case it
could be no otherwise supplyed] he is willing himself, with as many others as
he can persuade, to go over for that space, upon what terms the Parliament
shall think fit, But he He means Hypocrsy: Elswhy such Articles or such a
conclusion as this.
doubts, that upon other terms then these, the number would not be
Considerable. Which puts al out of doubt, that the Army never cordially
intended Irel^. releif, but only jugled with the Parliament therein.


Sir Hardress Waller, a Colonel in this Army, one of the Council of War there:
a great stickler against the Accused Members, has so little zeal to Ireland,
and so large a conscience [though he disdaines the thoughts of being Mercinary]
as to continue with this Mutinous Army instead of repairing into Ireland, where
he has a plurallity of Offices of very great trust and profit: being Major
General of the Army there, Governor of Cork and Colonel of 2. or 3.
Regiments, and Captain of one Troop of Horse at once: receiving no less then
5079. 17. 6 4. d. this last year from the Houses for his pay and raising
forces for Ireland, which lay many months upon the western parts, and spent as
much in free quarter as would have raised five times more men, who yet were
never transported thither to do service there, till the Country rose up in
arms against them and some of the accused members sent some of them over.

The Lord Lisle [a great Independent and friend of the Armies] who in the 14.
Article against the Members, accuses Sir Io^ Clotworthy, Mr. Holles, and Sir
Philip Stapleton, for Calling him back from the Government of Ireland, of which
he was made Lord President for one year; did during that whole year space,
except two months in the Winter; continue constantly in England, without doing
any service at all in the Field; yet received his full pay of 10. l. a day [or
more] for all the time he resided here in London (being near ten months space)
as well as for the time he was in Ireland: During which year, he and his
Agents received from the State no less then 236000. l. in money and Provisions
for the service of Ireland; and put the Kingdom to near as much charge in
quartering of Soldiers raised and designed for Ireland, which lay some 8. 9.
10. 11. and 12. months upon the Country on free quarter, or more, and yet were
not transported during his time; which money and forces if well employed, might
have reduced Ireland ere this: And to recompense this disservice, his interest
in the Officers and Soldiers of the Army at this time, has obstructed the
relief of Ireland, of purpose to gain a New Commssion for himself to be
Governor there; rather to promote his own ends, and the Independents interests
and designs, then the welfare of that bleeding Kingdom, which has already
suffered too much by his service, (bought at an over dear rate) as will
appear by his Accompt^ when they come to be examined.

By all which (and the late treacherous engaging of Col. Birch his forces to
join with Sir Tho. Fairfax and the Army against the Parliament, when they were
to be shipped for Ireland, by letters and solicitations from the Army, and to
return to Hereford) let the world Judge of the Armies and Independents most
derestable Hypocrisy, dissimulation and feigned intentions to relieve Ireland,
whose releife they have most wilfully obstructed, and how false their Charge
against those worthy Members of the House, for obstructing its releife, is,
even for their most cordial and real endeavors to accelerate and promote it,
all they could.

FINIS:

