THE RE-PUBLICANS AND OTHERS SPURIOUS Good Old Cause, briefly and truly
Anatomized.

To preserve our Native Country, Kingdom, legal Government, Church,
Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Privileges of Parliament, and Protestant Religion
from ruin, scandal, and perpetual infamy; to reform, reclaim all Jesuit-ridden
seduced Republicans, Officers, Soldiers, Sectaries, heretofore, or now engaged
in the prosecution of this misintituled Good Old Cause, from any future pursuit
thereof, and engage them for ever to abominate it, as apparently tending to
public ruin, their own temporal and eternal condemnation, infamy, our
Religions Reproach, in present and succeeding ages.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE Esquire a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

Jer. 6.15. c. 8.12. Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination?
nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: Therefore they
shall fall among them that fall, at the time that I shall visit them, they
shall be cast down, says the Lord.

Prove: 29.1. He that being often reproved hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy.

Zech: 7.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Execute true judgment, etc. and let none of
you imagine evil against his brother in your heart. But they refused to
hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears that they should
not hear. Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should
hear the Law and words which the Lord of hosts has sent in his Spirit by the
former Prophets: Therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of hosts, who
scattered them with a whirlwind

Numb. 16.26, 27. And Moses spoke unto the Congregation, saying, Depart I pray
you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye
be consumed in all their sins. So they gat up from the Tabernacle of Korah,
Dathan and Abiram, on every side.

Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1659.

The Republicans and others spurious Good Old Cause briefly and truly
anatomised.
IT is not only an Evangelical counsel, but Precept, which every conscientious
Christian, as well in point of conscience as prudence, is obliged strictly to
pursue, 1 These. 5.21, 22. Prove all things: hold fast that which is good:
abstain from all appearance of evil: this being the distinguishing character
between a real Wiseman and a Fool: Prove. 14.15, 16. The simple believes every
word, but the prudent man looks well to his goings. A wife man fears and
departs from evil, but the fool rages and is confident.

This consideration put me upon a serious scrutiny of the Good Old Cause, newly
cried up, highly magnified, and violently pursued, not only in sundry printed
Pamphlets and Petitions, but also in the last convention at Westminster by the
confederated Triumuirate of Republicans, Sectaries, and Soldiers, pre-engaged
in its pursuit, and endeavoring (like those old seditious Seducers, whom the
Apostle beseeched the Roman Saints both to mark and avoid, Romans 16.17, 18.) by
good words and fair speeches to deceive the hearts of the simple Soldiers,
People, and some of the wiser sort of Members, Citizens, and Army Officers, yet
dissenting from them, to engage them to espouse so Good and Old a Cause, set
out with glorious general words and painted varnishes; without acquainting them
particularly, really and ingeniously what it is.

When I had not only superficially viewed the outside, but considerately
penetrated into the true original, seminal sourse, and intrals of it, I
discovered it to be in truth the Jesuits and old Gunpowder-Traytors, most
execrable Plot and Cause, principally projected and secretly promoted by Popish
Cardinals, Jesuits, Priests, Agents of all sorts, but visibly carried on and
effected, by Apostate Republican, and Sectarian Members of the late long
Parliament, Army, and their confederates, to blow up, subvert, destroy the
King, Queen, Prince, Royal posterity, Lords, commons, Kingdom, Government,
Laws, Liberty, and Property of the People of England, yea the very
constitution, freedom, power, privileges of all true English-Parliaments, the
church and ministry of England, and true Protestant Religion it self, formerly
established, to set up Oligarchy, Anarchy, Tyranny, Oppression, Libertinisme,
Marshal-Government, and all kind of Heresies, Blasphemies, Religions, Sects,
yea Atheism, Popery it self at last in their steads, to bring our Kingdoms,
Churches, Nations, Religion to inevitable desolation, and subject them to the
Iron yokes of Rome, France, and Spain, for the future, The blackest, horridst
infernal cause ever yet owned by any Christians, or treacherous perfidious
Sons of Adam since the Creation.

This needs no better nor clearer demonstration, than the review of all their
late treacherous perjurious actings, proceedings, (contrary to all their former
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, Protestation, Vow, League, covenant,
Declarations, Remonstrances, new Acts of Parliament, yea the very* clauses of
the Writs, Indentures by which they were choosen and returned Members, and the
Commissions whereby they were first made Army Officers) not only against the
late beheaded King and his posterity, but Monarchy it self (the Deuteronomy. 17.14,
15. Ezech. 16, 13, 14. Jer. 17.25. c. 21.3, 4.
best of Governments) being that of Ps. 10.16. Ps. 29.10. Ps 47.7. 1 Timothy 1.17.
God himself over the whole World, and of Ps. 2.6. ps. 24.9, 10 ps. 45 14, 15.
ps. 149. 2. Is. 32.1. c. 33.17.22. Dan. 7.14. Lu. 1.23. Mat. 2.2. c. 21.5. c.
25, 34, 40. Rev. 15.3. c. 17.14. 1 Timothy 15.
Christ himself in, over his Church, of which they prophesied, ordained Kings
to be the chief nursing Fathers, Protectors, Ps. 72.10, 11. Ps. 138.4. Psalm.
148.11. Is. 46.7, 33. c. 60.3, 10, 11, 16. c. 62.2. against the successively
impeached, restrained, secluded; secured Members of both Houses of Parliament,
and the whole House of Lords, not only most insolently and illegally voted down
but professedly engaged against, by the Tail, of the garled commons House,
when they had forcibly thrust out the Majority of their Fellow Members,
Burgesses, which made it no legal House, and usurped to themselves by a new
Self-creation, without a new Election, not only the name of the Parliament of
England, when they had totally destroyed the Parliament it self, but the
Supreme Authority of the Nation; Antichristianly 2 These. 2.4.
exalting themselves above all that is called God, or worshipped, and
exercising a more transcendent lawless boundless Arbitrary power, than any
Parliament of King, Lords and Commons, all united in one, ever formerly
claimed, attempted, both in their Westminster-Conventicle, its several
Committees, their new High-courts of Injustice, their Counsels of State at
Whitehall, their City and Country Sub-committees, (set forth in their proper
coulors in the History of Independency, their own printed new Knacks,
Remonstrances, Engagements, John Lilburnes, Englands New Chains his printed,
Letter to the Speaker, July 6. 1649. and other Pamphlets.) In so much that
after their near five years exorbitant Tyranical Domination, the very General
and Officers of the Army, (by whose power, assistance they undermined,
destroyed the King, Lords, former Parliament, and constituted themselves alone
the Parliament, and Supreme Dictators over our three whole Nations,) by way of
just Retaliation, forcibly dissolved, shamefully thrust them out of the
Parliament House, and Whitehall, laying their elevated Honor in the dust; And
by their Declaration of August 22. 1653. and A true state of the Commonwealth
of England, 1654. p. 8. etc. not only declared them to be actually, finally,
and justly dissolved from being any more a Parliament, by an extraordinary
providence, and power; but also branded them to all posterity, for a CORRUPT
PAKTY carrying on their own ends, to perpetuate themselves in their late,
PARLIAMENTARIE and SVPREAM AVTHORITIE; never answoring the ends which God, his
People, and the whole Nation expected from them, but exercising an Arbitrary
Power over them, likely to swallow up all the ancient Liberties and Properties
of the People, and to perpetuate their Vexations and Oppressions in every kind,
though the multitude of unnecessary Laws, and Ordinances, many of which were
made upon occasion of, and to suit with the concernments and interests of
partiaular parties, tending to the absolute enslaving of the freeborn Nation,
under their perpetual Dictatorship; as they there at large remonstrate.

These New Athenian Republican Tyrants (worse than the worst of all our Kings)
being thus suddenly dismounted by the Army, to the general joy and contentment
of all three Nations; General, and the Army Officers, seating themselves in
the Supreme Power, (which they allawaies retained and actually exercised in
reality at their pleasures, though their Mock-Porliament had the Title and
visible administration thereof) usurped an absolute Legislative, Tax imposing,
Parliament-modelling, electing, convening, secluding, dissolving power at their
pleasures; and made their Genera, under the Title of Lord Protector of the
Infant Common wealth of England Scotland, and Ireland (as the Roman-Souldiers
did their Generals, under the' Titles of Caesar, or Emperor) a more absolute
real, though not nominal King over us, than any of our ancient Kings, and
themselves as a Counsel of State and Major Generals under him, acted more
arbitrarily, tyranically, oppressively, as Legislators, Military, and civil
Dictators, Judges, or pety Kings under him, than any of our Saxon Kings during
the Heptarchy, or old Counsel-Table, Lords, or Lord Lieutenants under our late
King, though branded by them as the worst of Tyrants. Whose exorbitant
Authorities being in some measure bounded, and their Major-Generalships set
aside by the Assembly at Westminster, 1657. and their first Protector (soon
after his beloved Daughter) suddenly out off by unexpected death, and his Son,
(no former Officer in the Army) succeeding him, calling a New Convention at
Westminster in January 1658. the all-swaying Army-Grandees, either fearing or
discerning in him an inclination, rather to close with the ancient Nobility,
Gentry, Lawyers, and Prebyterians, than with them, and to revive the old
English Militia of Trained-bands by degrees for the peoples ease in their
Taxes, as the probablest means for, his own and our Nations ease, settlement,
security; Thereupon they resolved to set up their new Republic again: but
finding themselves and the old and new Rebublican Members, (with whom they
confederated) over-voted in the House by the Lawyers, and Court-party, in their
design of the reviving their former Commonwealth, purposely to set aside their
young Protector, or reduce him and the Republic too under their own pristine
Wardship, they fell to their former Policy, whereby they dismembered, dissolved
the long Parliament, setting up a new General Counsel of Officers, and
Agitators of the Army, against their Protectors will, and the Votes of those
they acknowledged to be the Parliament, and General Counsel both of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, of both which themselves (like Ambidexters) were
Members, by which stratagem they engaged the major part of the forces here, to
side with them against the Parliament, and enforced their Protector, by a
sudden surprise, much against his will, unexpectedly to dissolve the
Parliament, to make themselves the present Supreme Counsel, Dictators, and
Governors of our three Nations, as their subsequent actions every day more and
more demonstrate.

To engage all the old and new Republican Members, Sectaries, Soldiers and
others in this their foreplotted New-Confederacy, they did in sundry printed
papers, at the beginning of the last Convention, since its dissolution, and in
several Speeches in the House, extol The Good Old Cause in which they formerly
engaged; and what that was, themselves in some of their Speeches, motions for
their indemnity and justification therein, have discovered: to wit, the
impeaching and beheading of the late King in an illegal new High Court of
Justice, against the Votes of both Houses, the Presidents of all former Ages,
the Laws and Statutes of the Land; their own Declarations, Remonstrances,
Commissions, Oaths, Vows, Protestations, Covenants, yea the very Writs and
Indentures by which some of them were elected Members of the long Parliament,
all obliging them in precise terms to defend the Kings Person, Crown, and
lawful Authority, (as well as both Houses of Parliament, their Members,
privileges) against all violence, conspiracies, and attempts whatsoever. To
disinherit his royal posterity, to sell, divide among themselves all or most of
the ancient Lands, Rents, Revenues, Treasure of the Crown, which formerly
defrayed the ordinary expenses of the Realm, (without taxing the people) to
dissolve the whole House of Lords, impeach, seclude, secure, imprison, and
close imprison the majority of the House of Commons, opposite to their new
spurious Good Cause at their pleasure, and to create the small remainder of the
Commons confederated with the Army, an absolute Parl. and the Supreme Authority
of the Nation, without King or House of Lords, or the major part of their
secluded Fellow-Commoners; to metamorphose our Old Kingdom into a new Infant
Republic, Oligarchy under themselves alone, to disinherit all secluded
Members, and other English Freemen of their hereditary Laws, Liberties,
Franchises, and put them into a new Praemunire without any legal Indictment or
Conviction, disabling them to sue in any Court, or enjoy, receive any office or
preferment whatsoever, unless they shall perfidiously abjure all former Oaths,
Protestations, Vows, Covenants, and engage to be true and faithful to them and
their new-minted Republic, without a King or House of Lords; to new-modle our
Nations, Parliaments, Government, subvert our old fundamental good Laws,
Liberties, Properties; imprison, banish, condemn, execute our persons,
sequester, confiscate our Lands, Offices, real, personal Estates, ransack our
Houses, Studies, papers, and create new Treasons, forfeitures of our Freeholds
at their arbitrary Lordly pleasures: to repeal the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, suspend all penal Executions against Jesuits and Romish-Seminaries;
give a free toleration, protection to all sorts of Sects and Religions
whatsoever; to hold intimate correspondency with Popish Princes, Cardinals,
Jesuits, Jesuited Papists, and maintain justify their most abominable,
treasonable principles, as they did in their preceedent, concurrent and
subsequent to, in and after the proceedings against the King, Members, erection
of their new Free State, the worst of all Arbitrary Tyranies; All which and
naught else but this is the only Good Old Cause they now extol, and are to act
over again, perchance to the ruin or their late Protectors, as well as K.
Charles his posterity, if they prevail. This their Good old cause, and
Republike, is in truth the old pernicious project of Father Parsons the Jesuit,
and his confederats, in their high Court of and his Memorials for Reformation
for England, at Sevil in Spain, An, 1590 as In his Quodlibets, p. 92, 94, 95,
233, 286, 305, etc. 306, 307, 308, 330, 332. See my Epistle before my
Historical and Legal Vindication of the Fundamental Laws, Liberties Privileges
of all English Freemen: where all this is largely evidenced: And before my Jus
Patronatus.
Will: Watson a secular Priest at large relates; and of Tho: Campanella, an
Italian Friar, De Monarchia Hispanica, c. 25. p. 204. where he informs the K of
Spain, That nothing will so much conduce to weaken the English forces, as
dissension and discord sowed amongst them, and perpetually nourished; which may
best be effected by these 2. means, 1. By instigating the swaying men in the
Parliament of England, Vt Angliam in formam Keipublicae reducant, in
imitationem Hollandorum; to reduce England into the form of A Common Wealth, in
imitation of the Hollanders. 2ly, If that could not be effected, then, either
by making it an Elective Kingdom; or by setting up Kings of another Family, in
opposition to the true hereditary royal line. To effect which good old cause,
and plot, the Pope, Parsons, and other Jesuits engaged the old Gunpowder
Traitors to blow up both the King, royal issue, Lords and Parliament, Anno 1605
as the History of their Arraignment, Speed, the Statutes of 3 Jac. c. 1, 2, 4,
5. relate: which then proving abortive, the Pope, Jesuits, and Cardinal Romes
Masterpeace.
Richelieu of France, whiles living, revived, prosecuted this good cause, to
destroy our King, Monarchy, and turn it into a Republike, or else into an
Elective Kingdom, to put by K. Charles his progeny; and Historia de Conte
Galeazzo, Gualdo Priorato. Venis, 1648. p. 175, 176.
recommended it in writing to the French King, and his Successor Cardinal
Mazarine, (with whom our Grandees of late years have held intimate
correspondency in prosecution of this good old cause) vigorously to prosecute
after his death; who accordingly accomplished it by the old Republican Members,
and Parliaments own Army, seduced, instigated, assisted in it by the Spanish,
French and Jesuits Agents. Ol: Cromwell Pro: himself publicly declaring in his
printed Speech to his Parliament at Westminster, September. 4. 1654: p. 16, 17.
That he knew very well, that Emissaries of the Jesuits never came over in those
swarms as they have done since these things were on foot: and that diverse
Gentlemen can bear witness with him, that they had a Consistory and Counsel
abroad that Nota been.
rules all the Affairs of the things in England: and had fixed in England, in
the limits of most Cathedrals (of which he was able to produce the Particular
Quaere, whether the Instrument of Government, took not its Title thence?
Instrument) an Episcopal power, with Archdeacons, and other persons, to
pervert, seduce, and deceive the people: yet never capitally executed the penal
Laws against any of them.

This being the true Original, progress, state, anatomy of this Good old cause,
wherewith the old Republican Members, Sectaries, Army Officers, Soldiers, are
so much enamoured, and some would have enforced all Members of the last
Convention publicly to justify and subscribe to, under pain of being
secluded. To draw off and divorce their affections, if not henceforth to engage
them cordially against it, for their own and the public good, I shall further
Anatomize, and paint out the horrid deformity, and infernal execrableness,
blackness thereof, by parallelling it with the old Gunpowder Traitors Plot and
Cause, which it far exceeds in monstrosity, exorbitancy, treachery, and
matchless flagitiousness; though justly styled by the Parliament and Statute of
3 Jacobi chapter 2. The most wicked, barbarous, execrable and abominable Treason
that ever could enter into the heart of most wicked men; and such as was never
before heard of: (though now gilded over with the glorious Title of The Good
Old Cause,) as these 8. circumstances will demonstrate.

1. That Good old Cause and Treason, to destroy the King, Parliament, Kingdom
was originally 3 Jac. c. 2, 4, 5. Speeds History, 3 Jac.
contrived in the years 1604. 1605. by English, Spanish Jesuits, acted by
discontented Jesuited Papists, abetted by the Pope, and other foreign papists,
all inveterate professed Enemies to our Protestant Princes, Parliaments,
Kingdom, Church, Religion: But those who lately prosecuted, visibly engaged in,
and actually accomplished it, in the years 1647, 1648, 1649, and still pursue
it; profess themselves the most zealous Protestants, Puritans, Saints, the
greatest Opposites to the Roman Pontiff, Church, Religion, Jesuits, Seminaries
and Papists, of all others, and the best affected people to our Parliaments and
their privileges.

2. The old Gunpowder- Traitors 3 Jac. c. 1, 2, 4, 5, and Speed.
contrived that good old Cause, Treason beyond the Seas and in private secret
conventicles here, of none but Jesuits, Papists, obliged by an Oath of Secrecy
to conceal it, and were so afraid, so ashamed of it, that they pursued it only
in the night, acted it under ground in a dark vault under the Lords House,
wherein their train of gunpowder was secretly hid with Fagots and other
materials. But those who since espoused it, consulted about, promoted, avowed
it in open General Councils of the Army, and known public Meetings, Committees
of Republican Members of the Long Parliament, Army, and others confederating
with them, in England, London and Westminster it self, in the very daytime;
and then presented it in the name of the Counsil and Army it self, to the
Parliament House, at the Commons bar, in their Remonstrance from St. Albans 16
November. 1648 and The 2. Part of the History of Independency. J Sedgwicks
Justice on the Armies Remonstrance
other precedent and subsequent papers; which they printed, divulged in a most
insolent manner to all the world.

3. They plotted, prosecuted their Old cause by the instigation of the 3 Jac.
c. 2, 4, 5.
Pope, Jesuits, and Popish Priests, their ghostly Fathers, who confederated
with, and encouraged them therein, and that from the Parsons Philopater,. 2.
Tresham de Officio Principis Christiani, c. 5. Hospinian, Historia Jesuitica,
l, 3. Ludovicus Lucius Hist. Jes. l. 2. c. 4. Speculu^ Jesuiticum, p. 156, 157.
etc.
principles of their own Antichristian, traiterous, bloody Romish Religion;
which assured them, that it was not only just, lawful, necessary expedient,
but a most heroike and meritorious Christian Act, to destroy, subvert, ruin all
Protestant Kings, Princes, kingdoms, churches Parliaments, declared by the Pope
to be Heretics, Enemies, or Schismatics from the Church of Rome, and assure
them of a saintship on Earth, and a crown of glory in heaven for such an
heroic attempt. But those who since took up their good old cause, 1648. and
1649. and would now revive it, by their instigation; did it against the
dehortations of The 47 London Ministers Petition, Dr. Hamonds Address, and
others
sundry godly Protestant Ministers, the The Homilies of Disobedience and
Rebellion, Deus and Rex, 3 Jac. c. 4. Dr. John Whites Sermon at Paul's Cross,
1615. and Defense of the Way chapter 6.10. Samuelis Bocharti Epistola Parisiis 1650.
dehortations of their most indeared Protestant Friends, the Votes of their
Fellow Members; the very principles of the Christian and Protestant Religion
they professed, and public doctrine of the Church of England, whereof they
were Members; and the Common and Statute Laws of the Realm, all declaring and
branding it, as an infernal, Jesuitical, Popish, Antichristian practice, and
most detestable, matchless, High Treason, deserving the highest temporal
Punishments, eternal torments, and condemnation in this and another world.

4. The 3 Jac. c. 12. and Speed.
old Popish powder Traitors, contrived their treason against the King and
Parliament, merely out of envy against the flourishing estate, and true
profession of the Protestant Religion in our 3. Realms under King James, the
continuing of which happiness and profession to all posterity, by reason of his
most hopeful and plentiful Progeny, they much fearing, and maligning;
thereupon most horribly and traitorously conspired ^ to blow up the King,
Queen, Prince, with all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, when
assembled in the Upper House of Parliament, Nov. 5. 1605. purposely concluding
to do it in that House, that where sundry necessary and religious Laws for the
preservation of the Church and State were made, (which they falsely and
slanderously termed Cruel Laws) and enacted against them and their Religion;
both place and persons should be all destroyed and blown up at once; which
would have turned to the utter ruin of the whole kingdom, and subversion of
the whole State, had it been effected: But the Republican Members,
Army Officers, and chief Actors in this new Good old cause, had no such
inducements, to engage them against the King, his royal issue, the true
Protestant Religion, Parliament or kingdom of England; whose flourishing
estate, welfare, prosperity safety, and defense against these Romish Enemies
forces, conspiracies, and the making, executing of new severer Laws against
them passed by both Houses, and assented to by the King in the last Treaty:
were the principal things they pretended they contended and fought for, in all
their printed Remonstrances, Declarations protestations, and Solemn League and
Covenant: as the printed Collections of both Houses and the Armies Declarations
irrefragably manifest: And so most powerful arguments to diswade them from,
and engage them against this their Good old cause; which yet notwitstanding
they wilfully prosecuted, to the utter overthrow and subversion of the late
King, kingdom, Parliament, House of Peers, which they quite blew up; the Royal
posterity, and thereby the Church of England and Protestant Religion (much
scandalized, defamed by it) in a great measure.

5. All those who lately engaged in this good old cause, were Members of
Parliament, or of the Parliaments Army, commissioned. raised, paid, Exact
Coll. p. 339, 340, 342, 456, 457 932. A Collection, p. 43, 44, 305, 406. to
430, 598, 606, 623, 668, 669.
obliged by their Writs and Indentures of election, their Oaths of Supremacy,
Fealty, Allegiance, Protestations, Vow, Covenant, League, with their manifold
Declarations, Remonstrances, which they all made as Members of Parliament or
the Army, and other sacred and civil obligations inviolably to preserve, defend
the Kings person, crown, dignity, posterity, the kingdom, Church of England,
the Parl. with its Members, privileges, the fundamental Laws, Liberties, and
Government of the Nation: who yet notwithstaning most perfidiously,
treacherously, atheistically, subverted and destroyed them all one after
another, contrary to all these most sacred multiplied oaths, and strictest
obligations, beyond all presidents of the worst and most treacherous Monsters
since the creation; whereas all the Gunpowder Traitors, (as the Lud. Lucius and
Hospinian, Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. p. 204 l. 4. p. 264. Speeds History.
Jesuits by their Oaths, the rules of their Order, the commands of their
Superiors; the rest by a particular Oath; Guy Faux, the Low Country Soldier
who was to set fire to the train, and others) were purposely hired, employed
thus to blow up, destroy our old King, Parliament, Religion, kingdom, and had
no such obligations, oaths to restrain them from it, as these New conspirators
had; which aggravates their Guilt, and makes them ten thousand fold worse, yea
more execrable to God and all good men, than they.

6. The Gunpowder Traitors, had their plot taken effect, were yet so ashamed of
it, yea so far from justifying or owning it as a good old cause; Speeds
History, p. 1241. The Arraignment of Traitors.
that they agreed beforehand, to cast the Imputation thereof on the Puritans,
to make them more odious: And some Jesuits and Papists soon after published in
sundry Books, Ludovicus Lucius Historia Jesuitica l. 2. c. 4. p. 208, 209.
that there was no such plot as this really contrived by them, but that it was
a feigned plot devised by the Puritans, to render them and their Religion
infamous and odious to all posterity. Yea the Jesuits of Colen most impudently
asserted; that this Gunpowder Treason was plotted only by the Calvinists, and
not by any Catholic; that no Jesuit had any hand in, or knowledge of it; and
that Henry Garnet the Jesuit, was only executed for his Religion, not for this
horrid Treason, of which he was not found guilty, as Andreas Eudemon, Johannes,
Apologia pro Henrico Garneto,
Endaemon Johannis, and Opus Chronographicum totius Orbis p. 309.
Laurentius Beyerlincke, most falsely published to the world, against the
Indictment, Verdict, Evidence and Judgment against him, by which he was most
clearly found guilty thereof: But those Republican Saints, Zealots, and
overgrown Puritans, who lately prosecuted their good old Gunpowder plot and
cause, executing far more than they durst project; are so far from being
ashamed of, disowning, abominating this most execrable, impious, treacherous,
monstrous powder treason; and that after 3 Jac. c. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7. Jac. c, 4, 6.
sundry Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, Histories, Treatises, public annual
solemn thanksgivings, and thousands of excellent Sermons preached, printed on
the Fifth of November for above 40 years space, (yet continued in most places,
and still observed by many of themselves) setting forth the matchless,
devilish, infernal, monstrous barbarousness, of that old abominable Treason;
the transcendent Treachery, Execrableness of those unnatural Traitors, and the
odiousness of that Antichristian Religion (whose Faith is but mere faction,
rebellion, and whose practice is the murdring of souls and bodies) that engaged
them therein, to their everlasting 3 Jac. c. 1.
infamy, by a special Act of Parliament, that so it and our thankfullness for
being delivered from it, may never be forgotten, but had in perpetual
Remembrance in all ages to come. Yea after all these old Traitors exemplary
condemnations, forfeitures executions, and hanging up of their Heads, Quarters,
over both Houses of Parl. to deter all others from the like treasonable
attempts. That though this their late plot was for certain The 2. part of the
History of Independency, my Epistle to a Seasonable, legal and historical
Vindication, My Speech in Parliament, p. 107 and the Appendix to it.
originally projected and infused into them by Jesuits and Popish Agents, yet
they openly attributed to themselves both the projecting, prosecution,
accomplishment of this transcendent Treason, far exceeding theirs, and
proclaimed, justified it in sundry of their Remonstrances, Ac^s, Ordinances,
Papers, as a most heroic, Saint-like Christian, Honorable, and meritorious Act
of Justice, wherein God himself has most gloriously appeered, bearing witness
to, and owning it from Heaven, by their unparalleld successes, not only as a
Good, but the very best of causes, tending to the great advancement of the
Throne and kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ; Some of them desiring that the
everlasting memory of it may be inscribed on their public Statues, or
Monuments For their eternal honor in all succeeding Generations: Whereas the
very foulest Devils, and worst of damned Spirits in Hell, would be both afraid,
ashamed to own or approve such an infernal black cause as this, much less to
justify and extol it in such a prodigious impudent manner, as some now do,
which exceedingly heightens and aggravates their Impudency, Impenitency, Guilt,
and Condemnation. Certainly those must have Jer. 3.3.
wh^rish forheads, brows of brass, hearts of steel, 2 Timothy 4.2.
and conseiences seared with an hot iron, who dare to own, extol, or espouse
such a prodigy, or Cause as this. And may do well to remember those two woes,
which will fall upon them for it, Isa. 5.18.20. Woe unto them that draw Iniquity
with cords of vanity, and sin as with a cartrope. Woe unto them that call Evil
(yea the worst of all Evils, Treasons) Good, and good will, that put darkness
for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter; and now call the destruction of their lawful Sovereign, their Native
Country, kingdom, Church, the Parliaments of England and their privileges,
their Good Old cause, and Phil. 3.19.
glory in these their shameful Actions; Job. 42, 6.
which should cause them rather to abhor themselves, and repent in dust and
ashes.

7ly. The old Gunpowder Traitors only plotted, but never actually effected the
blowing up of the King, Parliament, and House of Lords, thorugh the providence
of 3 Jac. c. 1.
Almighty God, who in all ages has showed his power and mercy in the
miraculous and gracious deliverance of his church, and in the protection of
Religious Kings and States. But our new Salt-peter-men, have with an high
storng hand fully executed, See their Declaration of 17 March, 1648. and May 6.
1659. John Godwins Obstructors of Justice, Cooks and Bradshawes Speeches, John
Miltons Answer to Salmatius, and sundry other printed Pamphlets.
accomplished whatever they designed; and because they miscarried not in it,
like them, but by Gods justice upon them, us, our King, Lords, Parliament for
all our crying sins, have prospered in this Foelix Seelus, and brought their
wicked devices to pass; they glory in it, as the Highest Act of Justice, the
Best of Causes; the Greatest Mercy and Deliverance that ever befell the English
Nation; point blank against the Psalm. 37, 1.7. Ps. 73.3, etc. Ps. 92.6, 7. Ps.
94.3, 4, 5. Dan. 11.33.36 Mat. 7.21. Acts 2.33. Pro. 29.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Job
21.7. etc.
Scriptures, and principles of Christian Religion: whereby they have involved
us in many intestine and foreign Wars with our Protestant Brethren and Allies,
by Sea and Land, which they have dyed red and drenchd with precious Christian
blood; exhausted our public treasures, destroyed our trade, impoverished,
oppressed, quite eaten out the wealth and spirits of our Nation; imposed
endless Egyptian burdens on their backs, an Iron Yoke of vassallage on their
necks; subverted all Liberty, property, unity, amity, real piety, charity,
honesty, justice; divided us into sundry irreconcilable Sects, schisms,
factions, fractions; perplexed us with sundry manifold fears, dangers, sudden
changes, alterations, dissolutions of Government, Parliaments, supreme and
subordinate Authorities, yea reduced us into a desperate, unsettled, floating,
tottering condition, without any probable means or hopes of the least settled
establishment, and brought that severe judgment which God threatened to, and
inflicted on the Rebellious ten tribes of Israel, (who revolted from, and
rebelled against their lawful Sovereign, and right heir to the House of David,
King Rehoboam; Hosea 8.4. c. 13.11.
setting up Kings, but not by God, and making them Princes, Hosea 3.4.
and he knew it not, whom God took away in his wrath?) The children of Israel
shall abide many days, without a King, and without a Prince, etc. Hosea 10.2,
3, 4. etc.
He has divided their heart, now shall they be found faulty: For now they
shall say (and I wish we all would consider it and say so too) We have no King,
(no true Parliament neither) because we feared not the Lord: What then should a
King (or Parliament) do to us? (to help us in our confusions and extremities.)
They have spoken lying words swearing falsely in making a Covenant; thus
judgment springs up as hemlock in the furrows of the field: (one Judgment
of God, one trouble, war, change, confusion, oppression upon the neck of
another, and many complicated Judgments together) So that Israel shall be
ashamed of his own counsel; now her King is cut off, as the foam upon the
water; and the High places (wherein they seated themselves) destroyed; and all
their New Modles of Goverments, Parliaments destroyed by themselves; they being
now disuniting, undermining one another more than ever; never free from new
Troubles, plots, fears, jealousies, perplexities, since they undertook this New
Good Old Romish Cause; blow up King, Lords, Parliaments; since they 1 Kings 21,
19.
killed, and also took possession; and like those rebellious wicked H. sbandmen
in the Mat. 21.38.39. 1. u. 19.27 c. 20.14, 15, 16.
Gospel said among themselves (when the son came to them and the fruits of his
Fathors vineyard from them, and cast him out of the vineyard) this is the Heir,
Come let us kill him, and seize upon the Inheritance, and it shall be ours:
which ended in the miserable destruction of those wicked men, and taking away
their usurped vineyard, which was let out to other Husbandmen, who would render
the fruits thereof in due season. All which considered, our new Powder men's
Guilt, crime as far transcends the old Powder Traitors, as actual Murder,
destruction of the King, Parliament, kingdom, Laws, Liberties, and ill
consequents thereof, exceed only intentionall, without effect: Theirs unsettled
nothing, and did no mischief to the public: whereas their actual
accomplishment of their old plot, has brought actual destruction on them all,
and endless miseries, distractions ever since to our Three whole Nations,
Churches, and God only knows, not man, what sudden and final ruin it may bring
upon them all. And is it then a good old cause as they now proclaim it to all
the world afresh May 7. 1659?

8ly. The Gunpowder Traitors engaged in their pretended Good old Cause, never
passed any solemn Judgment and condemnation against it, before or after its
undertaking, which those who espoused this new misnamed Good old cause have
often done, against it, themselves, and all such who appeared in it. Not to
press or insist upon the ancient Resolutions, Statutes of 4 E. 3. rot. parl. n.
1. 25 E. 3. c. 2.21 R. 2. c. 22. 1 H. 4. c. 10.31 H. 6. c 1. i E. 6. c. 12. 3
Jac. c. 1, 2, 4, 5. positively declaring, resolving, the levying of war against
the King or Parliament, the plotting, compassing the death or destruction of
either of them by any open Acts, to be High Treason. The Republican Members of
the long Parliament and Army did together with the rest of the members, in
sundry Ordinances, resolve, declare, [particularly in the Exact Coll. p. 576.
Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, printed and
published by their special Order, August 8. 1642. to the end that no man might
be misled through ignorance:) That all such persons who shall upon any pretense
whatsoever, assist the King in making war against the Parliament, with Horse,
arms, plate or money, are Traitors to His Majesty, the Parliament, and the
Kingdom, and shall be brought to condign punishment for so high an Offense.
Upon which ground alone, the Lords and Commons by their Ordinance of Apr.
1.1643 sequestered the estates of all such persons, Ecclesiastical or Temporal,
as Traitors and Notorious Delinquents, who have raised or shall raise Arms
against the Parliament; A Collection of Ordinances p. 13. 219, 220.
or have been, are, or shall be in actual Arms against the same; or have
contributed, or shall contribute voluntarily, any money, plate, horse, arms,
ammunition, or other aid or assistance, for or toward the maintenance of any
forces raised against the Parliament, and of all such as have joined or shall
join in any Oath, or Act of Association against the Parliament; or have imposed
or shall impose any Tax or Assessment upon his Majesty's subjects, For or
toward the maintenance of any forces against the Parliament. Upon this only
ground they afterward condemned, executed Mr. Tomkins and Mr. Chaloner in the
year 1643. as Traitors, for receiving a Commission from the late King dated A
Collection, p. 199, 200 201.
March 16. An. 18 Caroli, to raise forces in and about London to force the
Parliament, and seize upon some of the principal Members of it, though they
never put it in actual execution, nor offered the least force to the
Parliament, to either of the houses, or their Members. Since which sundry
others were elsewhere condemned and executed as Traitors, upon the same account
of levying war against the Parliament. Yea, both A Collection p. 905, 906, 907,
908.
Houses in their last Propositions to the King, exempted some particular
persons from any pardon for their lives or estates, perpetually banished and
confiscated the estates of others, and put all the rest to great Fines, only
for levying war against the Parliament, See the 2. part of the History of
Independency.
which they declared to be High Treason. Yea the Republican members sitting
after the others seclusion, and Army Officers themselves in their late High
courts of Justice, impeached, condemned, beheaded our late King * Charles
himself, the Head of the Parliament, the Marquess of Hamilton, the Earl of
Holland, the Lord Capel, others of the Lords House, and diverse Commoners; and
condemned, executed Sir Charles Lucas with others, in and by a bare Council of
War at Colchester, confiscating most of their real and personal estates, as
Rebels, Traitors, and public Enemies, only for levying war, and taking up
Arms against both Houses of Parliament. Since which, the Army Officers, and
those in late yea present power, in and by their Instrument of Government,
1653. and contradictory Humble Petition and Advice, 1657. disabled all persons
who had formerly taken up arms and levied any war against the Parliament, at
any time since the year 1641. and given no signal testimony of their good
affection to the Parliament in taking up Arms for its defense; to be disabled
to be chosen Members of Parliament, or to give their voice in the election of
any such Members: Yet neither the King himself, nor any of all these beheaded,
execcuted, excepted, sequestered, disabled Lords, Citizens, Soldiers,
Gentlemen, ever actually assaulted the Parliament it self, or either of the
Houses of Parliament, or any Member or Members thereof, sitting in, entering
into, or returning from the Houses; nor secured, secluded, them by any Gards
put upon the Houses, only for speaking their Consciences, or discharging their
duties in the Parliament, as they did; but only waged war against the
Parliament and Members thereof at a great distance, by levying war against the
forces raised by them: neither did the King or his Forces in any of their
Proclamations or Declarations ever affirm, that they took up arms against the
Parliament it self, or its Members, to dissolve, secure, seclude, force or
interrupt their proceeding; An Exact Coll. p. 349, 350, 351, to 357. 451, 455,
470, 472, 620, 621.
which they utterly disclaimed, but only to defend the Kings person, his just
Royal authority, and those adhering to him, against the Parliament Army; to
preserve and maintain the just Power, Rights, privileges of Parliament, and the
loyal Members therein, the Laws of the Land, the Liberty and Property of the
Subjects, against the usurpations of a prevailing Faction, who had (as they
affirmed) raisod Forces to destroy the King, Mo^^rchy it self, the very
Freedom, Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberty, Property of the
Subjects; which they constantly asserted in all their printed Papers to the
very end of the War. If they then not withstanding all this were thus capitally
and criminally proceeded against, sentenced, executed, sequestered, disabled, by
the Votes, Resolutions, Judgments, Instrument, Declarations of the Republica^
Members, Officers, Soldiers themselves, now crying up this Good old cause, as
Traitors and public Enemies; for levying war against the Parliament only thus
mediately, indirectly, consequentially, and secundarily, because they waged war
against the forces raised for the Parliaments defense and safeguard: and if the
unarmed London Apprentices, and other disorderly persons coming unarmed to the
Commons House doors, and there in a tumultuous manner, pressing some Members to
pass a Petition, and some Votes they desired, without seizing, securing or
secluding any one Member of either House; though an unarmed force; was
presently so resented by the General and Officers of the Army, that they
immediaty declared it to be a The Generals Letter from Bedford, 30 July 1647.
and His and the Armies Remonstrance 8. August 1647.
Treasonable act and force, for which they pressed speedy exemplary Justice to
be executed against the chief Actors in, and abettors of it, to prevent the
like attempts and force for the future. Then doubtless, by all these Judgments
and Resolutions, the Martching up of the Officers and Soldiers of the very
Parliaments own Army, (purposely raised by themselves for their defense against
all force and violence whatsoever offered unto them as Members) in an hostile
manner; against their Duties, Trusts, Commissions, protestations, Covenants,
both Houses Votes Orders, and express commands, several times one after
another; to impeach secure, seclude, imprison eject what Members of the Lords
and Commons House they pleased; to garble purge the houses themselves; to
enforce them to repeal their former Votes, Orders, Odinances; their bringing up
the whole Army to London and Westminster, against the Houses commands, removing
their very Guards out of their Quarters; their forcible taking the kings person
out of the custody of the Committee of Parliament, and disposing of him as they
pleased, contrary to both Houses direction; their securing and imprisoning
above 40 Members, and secluding above 100 more at once, by whole Regiments of
Horse and Foot, besetting all passages to the Houses: Their suppressing the
whose House of Lords and setting Guards upon the small remainder of the Commons
House, to force them to vote and un-vote what they pleased; their beheading the
King, the Head of the Parliament, and sundry Protestant Lords (but not one
Popish Lord, Briest, Jesuit, though the principal Incendiaries and promoters
of these wars, and so Exact Collection p. 816, 817, 819, 826, 827, 662, 438,
662, 664, 664, 666, 336, 637, 637, 907 to 916. A Collect. p. 218, 227, 240,
704, 705, 706.
declared by both Houses) who were Members of the Lords House against the
Houses votes, in strange High Courts of Justice, which they forcibly set up;
their dissolving the Parliament it self by force, against an express Act of
Parliament (to omit the like force since upon some of their own created
Mock-Parliaments, transcending all presidents of former ages) and secluding
mcself and other Members afresh, May 7. 1659. contrary to all their
Obligations, Trusts; must needs be a more Capital Treason in all respects, than
the bare successeless plot of the old Guno powder Traitors; and a more
treasonable, actual levying war against the Parl. it self, than the late
beheaded kings, Lords or any sequestered disabled Cavahers, for which they
deserve all the capital Judgments, execution, penalties, forfeitures,
sequestrations and disabilities for ever to elect, or to be elected Members in
any suture Parliament; which they and their Confederates have denounced against
others; for far lesser Offenses, and not so direct and professed Wars
immediately against the Parliament it self and its Member, as themselves are by
their own Declarations, Remonstrances, and printed Papers, most really guilty
of in a far higher degree than the late King, or any Cavaliers, and still
impenitently justify, applaud, persist in without the least remorse, and now
style, their Good Old Cause.

I shall therefore earnestly desire all persons engaged in this whorish,
bastard old Cause, now seriously and sadly to consider, how their often forcing
Ruptures, of the houses, Members, privileges of Parliament; their absurd,
frequent new-modelling of our Government, Parliaments, according to their own
whymsical fancies, present interests and designs, carried on with prayers,
mock-fasts, and humiliations, for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist
of wickedness, Isa. 58.2, 3, 4, 5, etc. c. 1.10. to 24. c. 66.3.4.
most execrable unto God, have produced these deplorable effects.

1. A justification and verification of all the late Kings Declarations,
Proclamations, Prophetical predictions, grounds, reasons, fears: Exact
Collection, 618, 657, 658 893 895, 320, 325, 322. A collection, p. 28, 38, 39,
116, 117.
That this Army was raised by a factious, ambitious, prevailing party in the
Houses of Parliament (whatever they pretended to the contrary) to depose,
murder, and destroy the Kings person, life, Crown, dignity, posterity, and
Monarchy it self; the whole frame of Government both in Church and State; the
Rights, Privileges and Freedom of English Parliaments, to subvert the true
established Protestant Religion; the Law of the Land, the Properties, Laws and
Liberties of the Subject; to introduce Democracy and Parity; and subject them
all to an Arbitrary, Military and Tyrannical power of Anabaptists, Brownists,
and of a few Seditious, Factious, Covetous and Ambitious persons; who by being
seized of all the Arms, Ships, and strong places of the kingdom, (if they
should happen to prevail in this war against his Majesty,) would in despite not
only of the people, but of their present Rulers, (if they should be willing to
divert them) extirpate the Law rent and branch, alter the whale Frame of
Government, introduce Democracy, Independency, Parity and leave neither King,
Church, Lord nor Gentleman: distinguish between those who assisted them but a
little, not out of zeal and out of fear, and those now called Moderate man,
they will then call Malignant, and the Inequality, Injustice and Oppression
they will then endure, will too late discover to them to their costs; That they
have undone themselves with too much Discretion, and obtained nothing by their
unjustifiable cautious Compliance, but to be destroyed last. Exact Coll. p.
320, 321, 322.
And by this means the most excellent Constitution of our Government, molded
out of a mixture of the three kinds of Government amongst men, Absolute
Monarchy, Aristocracy and Democracy, by the experience and wisdom of our
Ancestors, to give to this Kingdom (so far as humane prudence can provide) the
conveniences of all 3, without the inconveniences of any one of them, as long
as the balance runs even between them, and they run jointly in their proper
channels; (which bath made this Nation for many years both famous and happy,
even to a great degree of envy;) shall by this means end in a dark equal Chanos
or confusion; and the long Line of our Noble Ancestors, end in a Jack Cade, or
a Wat Tyler. Upon which reasons alone the King professed he took up arms, for
his own necessary defense, and prevention of all these predicted mischiess, now
really and truly accomplished in every point, worthy our saddest
contemplations. 2ly. It has produced a falsification of all the long
Parliaments and Armies Declarations, Remonstrances, Protestations, Vows,
Covenants, to the contrary, in answer, or opposition to the Kings Declarations
and Proclamations. 3ly. A translation from the Kings and his parties heads,
souls, upon the Armies and some of the late Parliaments heads, souls the guilt
of all that Christian blood, shed in our intestin wars against the King and his
party, by turning their pretended just defensive, into an unlawful, offensive,
invasive, destructive war against their lawful King and Parliament too. 4ly. A
justification, or extenuation of the Popes, Jesuits, and papists most
treasonable, Positions, principles, Conspiracies, Practices, Regicides,
Powder-plots, against our Protestant Princes, Parliaments, Kingdom, Church,
Religion, and other foreign Kings, Churches, States, now exceeded by them. 5ly,
An inexpiable scandal, infamy, to the profession, and zealous Professors of the
Protestant Religion, as now more treacherous, perfidious, disloyal, seditious,
covetous, rebellious, bloody, hypocritical, faithless, apostatical,
diabolical, atheistical, than the worst of Papists, Pagans, Turks, Infidels.
6ly. A base contempt, scorn, derision, infamy, dishonor even of Parliaments
themselves, their lurisdiction, Privileges, Members, Proceedings, Votes,
Ordinances, quite trampled under feet, and made the song and byword of every
common Soldier, Sculler, Fiddler, Drunkard. 7ly. A perpetual dishonor,
obloquy, disgrace upon the whole English Nation, in all foreign States,
Countries, Kingdoms, who now scorn us as the most slavish, sottish,
unfaithful, unpolitick, unprovident, vilest, perversest, foolishest,
variablest Nation under Heaven. 8ly. An indeliable infamy upon the very
profession of a Soldier, and whole Parliament Army, who have verified this old
Adage to the uttermost, Lucan.
Nulla fides pietasve viris qui castra sequntur. 9ly. A present incomparable
dearth and loss of all sorts of Trade, Traffic by Land or Sea; a present
confusion, unsettlement in our Government, Counsils, and all public Affairs; a
general discontent, fear, dispondency in all sorts of people, a greater
fraction, disunion of all domestic public interests, and stricter
combination of our foreign Enemies against us to work our ruin and wreck their
malice and revenge upon us, than ever heretofore. 10ly. A fresh occasion and
advantage to all our Popish Adversaries, not only to traduce, deride, reproach,
blaspheme our Protestant Profession and Religion, as Milliere his victory of
Truth. 1654.
some of them have done in print, as a mere Seminary of Treason, Rebellion,
Sedition, Hypocrisy, perjury, Disloyalty, and all sorts of Villainy: but to
combine together in a holy League, to Hospinian Jesuit. l. 2. p. 213, 214, 215.
Lud. Lucius Hist. Jesuitica, l. 2. c. 2. p. 186, 187, 188 and l. 4 c. 1. p. 346.
extirpate it and all professors of it out of the World, now thus divided from,
engaged against each other, exhausted, weakened, dis-united from eachother, and
almost totally ruined one by another, through their long intestine bloody wars,
feuds, and infinite Sects, Factions, endeavoring to undermine, weaken,
destroy, and not daring to trust each other. Mat. 12.25.
A very sad presage, or forerunner of our approaching ruin; Lucan, lib. 1.
En que discordia Cives porduxit miseros? Lam. 2.13.
What shall I equal unto thee, O Virgin Daughter of our distracted English
Zion, that I might comfort thee? for thy breach is great like the Sea, who can
heal thee? O that the serious consideration of all these deplorable effects,
might now at last effectually work upon the iron, steeled hearts, the
intoxicated brains, seared consciences, rebellious spirits, perverse wills,
reprobate senses, disorderly passions, self-seeking affections of all
Army Officers, Soldiers, Republicans, Sectaries, and others heretofore or now
engaged in the pursuit of this Good Old Cause, to bring them to a speedy
repentance of all the evils they have acted, occasioned by and under the
specious mask of Religion, Justice, Liberty, Zeal, Necessity, Public safety,
Self-preservation, the setting up Christ's Kingdom, propagating the Gospel,
reformation of Abuses, and maintaining their Good Old Cause. And that this
Anatomy of their Good Old Cause, (the principle end of its publication.)
according to their fresh printed Misdated April 6. for May 6. being made in
have.
Declaration, May 6. 1659. might lead them to look back and examine the true
cause of the Lords late withdrawing his wonted presence, and GOOD SPIRIT (which
formerly appeared among them) from them, and where they first turned out of the
way; (in forsaking their first espoused Good Old Cause, to commit Whorcdom with
the old whore of Romes cause) their many backslidings from which, by wandering
diverse ways FROM RIGHTEOUS AND EQUAL PATHS; has (as themselves ingenuously
confess) put the Public concernments of this Common wealth, through a
Vicissitude of dangers, into that sad unsettled state and posture wherein they
now stand, and rendered all their essaies to obviate the dangers, and to settle
these Nations in peace and prosperity utterly ineffectual, the only wise God in
the course of his providence disappointing all their endeavors therein: since
they secured, secluded the old honest members and House of Lords, from the
exercise and discharge of their trusts, and owned their new Old Cause, and
purged Republican Conventicle, for the only Parliment, without their
Fellow Members, King, or House of Lords whom they now call in again against
their former Declaration upon which they case them out.

It shall be my prayer to God, that the serious perusal of the premises
(intended only for their information, reformation, not perdition) may at last
induce them for ever hereafter to stop both their ears against the enchanting
songs of all Romish Sirens, and open both their ears and hearts cordially to
embrace this sacred counsel of God himself, they have so long obstinately
trampled under feet, Prove. 24.21, 22. My Son fear thou the Lord and the King,
and meddle not with Changers, or those who are given to change, for their
calamity shall suddenly arise (as we have seen by many late experiments, in the
very making, acting of all our late public changes) and who knows the ruin
of them both?

FINIS.

