Conscientious, Serious THEOLOGICAL AND LEGAL QUAERES, Propounded to the
twice-dissipated, self-created Anti-Parliamentary Westminster Iuncto, AND ITS
MEMBERS. TO Convince them of, humble them for, convert them from their
transcendent Treasons, Rebellions, Perjuries, Violences, Oppressive illegal
Taxes, Excises, Militiaes, Imposts; destructive Councils, Proceedings against
their lawful Protestant hereditarie Kings, the old dissolved Parliament, the
whole House of Lords, the Majoritie of their old secured, secluded, imprisoned
fellow Members, the Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Freemen, Commons, Church,
Clergy of ENGLAND, their Protestant Brethren, Allies; contrary to all their
Oaths, Protestations, Vows, Leagues, Covenants, Allegiance, Remonstrances,
Declarations, Ordinances, Promises, Obligations to them, the fundamental Laws,
Liberties of the Land; and Principles of the true Protestant Religion; And to
persuade them now at last to hearken to and embrace such counsels, as tend to
public Unity, Safety, Peace, Settlement, and their own salvation.

By William Prynne Esquire a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

The Second Edition, Corrected and Enlarged.

Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him; or bear not sin for him.

1 Timothy 5.20. Them that sin openly, rebuke before all, that others may fear.

Prove. 9.8, 9. Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee; give instruction to a
wise man, and he will yet be wiser.

Jude 11, 12. Woe to them, for they have gone in the way of Kain, and perished
in the gainsaying of Core. They are trees whose fruit is withered, TWICE DEAD,
plucked up by the roots.

London Printed, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in
Little Britain, 1660.

Conscientious, Serious Theological and Legal Quaeres, etc.
THe Wisest of Men, and God only wise, informs all Sons of Wisdom capable of
Instruction; that Prove. 27.5, 6^
open rebuke, is better than secret love; because faithful are the wounds of a
friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful: whence Prove. 28.23^
he that rebukes a man, for his exorbitant transgressions, af^erwards shall
find more favor, than he that flattereth with the tongue; by extenuating,
excusing or justifying his Offenses. Upon ^his consideration, I reputed it both
a seasonable and Christian duty incumbent on me in this day of the late
Anti-Parliamentary Iunctoes dissipation, humiliation, confusion, and
Army Officers division amongst themselves, to reminde them fully of, and Tit.
1.13.
rebuke them plainly, sharply, for their manifold Treasons, Perjuries, and
other exorbitant Offenses against their lawful Protestant Kings, Kingdom, the
late dissolved Parliament, the whole House of Lords, the Majoritie of their
Fellow Members, the whole English Nation, Church, Ministry, their Protestant
Brethren, and Allies, against all their sacred and civil Obligations to them,
in a serious, impartial, convincing, least-offensive manner, by way of Q^aeres
drawn from Gods word, and plain sacred Scripture-Texts, and our known Laws,
which they have most presumptuously trodden under foot, and Jer. 22.27. c. 5.5.
Ezech. 22.27.
would not hearken to, in the days of their late self-exaltation and
Prosperity, like their Predecessors of old among the Jews: when I minded and
reminded them over and over, not only in my Speech, Memento, Collections of our
ancient Parliaments, and other publications in the years 1648, 1649. in my
Epistle to, and first Part of My Historical Collections, and Legal Vindication,
1655. My Republicans Spurious Good Old Cause briefly and truly Anatomized; My
True and Perfect Narrative, and Concordia Discors in May, and June last, and
Brief Necessa^y Vindication of the old and n^w secluded Members, in S^ptember
^ollowing; (wherein I truly predict^d their former and present dissolutions by
those very Army Officers with whom they confederated) which they would not
cr^dit, till dissolved by them; being in good hopes, that they ^ill now at last
Hear Counsel and receive instruction, tha^ they may be wise in their latter
end, as God himself advises them, Prove. 19.20.

1. Wheth^r their Speaker Mr. Lenthall and those confederate Members of the
Commons House, who against their duties, upon pretext of the unarmed London
Appren^ices tumult at the House in July 1647. (though they secured, secluded no
M^mber^, but only kept them in the House, till they had read, answered their
Petition, and then quietly depa^ted) went away privily to the Army, by the
invitation, instigation of some swaying A^my Officers, without the leave or
privity of the House; brought up the whole Army to Westminster and London to
conduct them in triumph to the House, caused them to See a Collection of the
Armies Engagements, Remonstrances, etc. p. 106, ^o 145.
impeach, declare against, suspend, imprison sundry Members of both Houses;
nulled all Votes, Orders, Ordinances, Proceedings in their absence, by reason
of a pretended force upon the House by the Apprentices during that space, and
declared them merely void to all int^nts, by the Speakers Declaration, and an
Ordinance of ^0. Aug. 1647 when as there was no force at all upon the Houses
during that time, and these Members might have freely, safely returned to the
House alone, had they listed, without the Army, or any one Troop to guard them:
and afterward mutinied and brought up part of the Army again to Westminster,
to Animadversions upon the Armies Remonstrance, Nov. 20. 1648. p. 10, 11, 12.
force the Houses to pass the Vo^es for No more addresses to the King,
(contrived in a General Council of Army Officers, and seconded with their
Declaration when passed by force and surprise in an empty House.) After that
most traitorously and perfidiously See the 2. part of the History of
Independency.
confederated with the Army Officers to break off the last Treaty with the
King in the Isle of Wight; to seize the Kings person by a party of the Army,
and remove him thence against both Houses Orders, notwithstanding his large
Concessions and consent to their Propositions: to secure, seclude all the
Members of the Commons House, who after many days and one whole nights debate,
passed this Vote according to their judgments, consciences, duties (carried
without dividing the House, notwi^hstanding the A^mies march to Westminster,
and menaces to prevent it) That the answers of the King to the Propositions of
both Houses, were a ground for the house to proceed upon for the settlement of
the Peace of the Kingdom: which Vote of the whole House, when there were above
300 Members present, about 40 of them only soon after repealed, expunged, (the
manner of carrying on of which design against the King and Members, was
concluded by a Committee at Windsor consisting of 4. A^my Offi^ers, whereof Col.
Harrison (their chairman, and a Member) and Col. Rich were two; 4. Members of
the Commons House, whereof Cornelius Holland yet living was one, the 3. others
since dead, 4. Independents, and 4. Anabaptists of London: wherein a List was
made by them what Members should be secluded, secured, and who admitted to sit;
this Committee resolving to dissolve both houses by force, and to try, condemn,
execute the King by a Council of war, See the Republicans spurious good old
Cause briefly and truly anatomised, P. 1. to 6.
if they could not get 40 of the Commons House to sit and bring him to Justice,
as John Lilburn one of that Committee has published in print;) approved,
abbetted the Armies forcible, treasonable securing of many Members, secluded
the Majoritie of the House by their Vote of Ian. 11. 1648. upon the
Armie-Officers false and scandalous printed Answer to them, Ian. 3. touching
the grounds of their securing and secluding them, contrary to their
Protestation, Covenant, the Privileges, Rights of Parliament, the Great
Charter, the Fundamental Laws and liberties of the Nation; And not content
therewith, by their own Anti-Parliamentary, antichristian Usurpation, to out
act the old G^npowder Traitors many degrees, by the Armies assistance, and 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
opposing, advancing themselves against all that is called God and worshipped,
they most traitorously set aside, voted down, suppressed the whole House of
Lords, as dangerous, useless, tyrannical, unnecessary; usurped, engrossed the
^^ile, power o^ the Parliament of England, and Supreme Authority of the Nation,
to themselves alone, without King, Lords, or Majo^ity of their fellow secluded
Members; created a new Monstrous High Court of Justice, (destructive to all our
fundamental Laws, Liberties and Justice it self) wherein (beyond all presidents
since the creation) they most presumptuously condemned, murdered, beheaded
their own lawful Hereditarie Protestant King (against all their former Oaths,
Protestations, Vows, Covenants, Remonstrances, Declarations, Obligations,
Allegiance, the Laws of the Land, the principl^s of the Protestant Religion,
and dissenting votes, protestations, disswasions of the secluded Lords,
Commons, Scots, Commissioners, London Ministers; the intercessions of foreign
States and our 3. whole Kingdoms,) together with 3. Protestant Peers soon
after: After that, close imprisoned my self, Sir William Waller, Sir William
Jews, Major General Brown, with sundry other Members diverse years in remote
Castles, without any hearing, examination, cause expressed, or the least
reparation for this unjust oppression; exercising far greater Tyranny over the
Peers, their old fellow Members, and all English Freemen, during the time of
their Regality in every kind, than the beheaded King or the worst of his
predecessors; Were not by a most just, divine retaliation and providence (when
they deemed themselves most secure and established) even for these their
transcendent Treasons, Perjuries, Tyrannies, violations of the Rights,
Privileget of Parliament, their own sacred Oaths, Protestation, League,
Covenant, suddenly dissolved, dissipated, thrust out of doors, Apr. 20. 1653.
by Cromwell and the Army Officers in a forcible shameful manner, with whom they
confederated all along, though they received new commissions from, and engaged
to be true and ^aithful to the^ without ^ King or House of Lords, and branded
by them to posterity in their printed Declaration, See their Declarations and
Papers of April 20. And August 12. 1653^ And true State of the Commonweal^h of
England p. 8, to 12.
Apr. 20. 1653. as the curruptest, and worst of men; intollerably oppressing
the people, carrying on their own ambitious designs, to perpetu^te themselves
in the Parliamentarie and Supreme Authority, the archest Trust breakers,
Apostates, never answering the ends which God, his people, and the whole Nation
expected from them, etc. Col. Harrison himself (the Chairman at Windsor
Committee to secure us) being the very person employed by Cromwell to pull
their Speaker Lenthall out of the chair, and turn him with his Companions out
of doors; Cromwell himself then stigmatizing Sir Henry Vanes, Henry Martyn, Tom
Ch^lloner and others of them by name, with the Titles of Knave, Whoremaster,
Drunkard, etc. And not long after to requite his good Services, he suddenly
turned Col. Harri^on, Rich, and their party out of the Commons House by Force,
dissolved their Anti-Parliamentary Conventicle (elected only by the Army) De^.
11. 1653. whiles they were seeking God for direction; and soon after cashiered
both these As he did Col. Overton, Okey, and sundry others.
Colonels, (his former greatest Instruments) out of the Army, sent them close
Prisoners to remote Castles guarded with Army Troops; And as they and their
Troops when they seized Major General Brown, with other Members besides, and
conducting them to Windsor Castle, and other Prisons, refused to acquaint them
whether they were to be sent: So Mr. Iess^p the Clerk of their Council of
State, (who brought these Colonels to the Coach at Whitehall garden door, when
they were conveyed to remote Castles) and their Conductors, denied to inform
them to what places they were committed; whereupon they cried out to the
Troopers which guarded them; Gentlemen, is this the Liberty you and we have
fought for, to be sent close Prisoners to rem^te Garrisons from our wives and
families, they will not tell us whether? Will you suffer your own Colonels,
Officers, who have fought for Laws, Liberties, and have been Members of Parl^
to be thus used^ To which they answered, as themselves did in the like case to
other secured Members, conducted by them: We are commanded, and must obey, not
dispute our Orders; and so were hurried away: a^ an eye and ear-witnes^ of the
old Parliament, related to me within one hour after. Yea young Sir Hen. Va^
himself (the bold prejudger of our Deba^es and Vote in the House touching the
Kings concessions, if not a promoter of our unjust seclusion ^or it) was
unexpectedly and suddenly, not only thrust ou^ from all his Employments, as
well a^ out of the H^use, bu^ sent close Prisoner by Cromwell to Cari^brook
^astle in the Isl^ of Wight, the very place where he betrayed his trust to the
King and Parli^ment at the Treaty, to gratify Cromwell, who by an extraordinary
strange providence, sent him clo^e Prisoner thither for sundry months, to See
his re^ired Ma^s (unintelligible) Meditation^.
medi^ate upon this divine retaliation. Whether may not all this dissolved
Iuncto and it^ Members, from these wonder^ul Judgement^, providence^, now
conclude and cry out with that h^athen cruel Tyrant Adonibezeck. Judge. 1.7. A^
I have done^ so God has requited me? And acknowledge the truth of Gods
Comminations against all treacherous betrayers and potent oppressor^ of their
Brethren, Obad. 15. As thou have ^one, it shall be done unto thee, thy r^ward
shall return upon thine own head. Ps. 7.15, 16. He made a pit and dug it,
and is fallen into the ditch which be made; his mischief shall return upon his
own ^ead, and his violent dealing upon his ow^ pa^e. Rev. 13.9, 10^ If any man
have an ear to ^ear, let him hea^; He that leads into Cap^ivity, shall go
into Captivity: He that kille^h with ^he Sword shall be killed with the Sword.
Here is the patience, and faith of the S^ints. O that all real and pretended
Saint^ in the dissolved Juncto and Army would now consider and believe it: as ^
l^tely pressed them to do, in the cloze of my Good Old Cause truly sta^ed, and
the false Uncased; yet they would not regard it.

Whether their illegal forcible wresting the Militia of the Kingdom totally out
of the King^ hands into their own; as their only security to sit in safety; and
perjurious engaging all Officer^, Soldiers of the Army in England, Scotland,
and Ireland, to be true, faithful and constant is them without a King, or House
of Lords (by subscription^ in parchmen^ Roll^ r^turned to them under all their
hand^) contrary to their former Votes, Declarati^ns^ Remonstrances,
Protestations, Oath^, Vows, Covenants, Trust^, yea the very writs, returns
which made them Members, their own Souldier^, Army Officers first Commission^,
Declaration^, R^monstrance^, Propos^l^; and depending on thi^ Jer. 17.5.
arm of fles^, or broken Isay 36.6.
reed of Egypt, as a most sure invine^ble Gu^rd, security, from all forces,
and enemies wha^soever that might assault, dishouse, dethrone them from their
usurped supreme Regal and Parliamental Authority over the three Nations, and
their Hereditary King^, Lu. 19.27.
whom they would not have to reign over them; has not been most ^xemplarily
and eminently requited by God^ avenging providence, in making the very
self-same Army most treacherou^ and perfidious to themselves, to rise up, rebel
against them several times, and turn them out of House, power on a sudden when
they deemed themselves most secur^; to make themselves more than Kings and
Lord over them and our whole 3 Kingdom^; and Isay 24.21.
An host of the High ones that are on high upon the earth: reviving that
Att^xie, which Solomon complained of as a great error in Government, and a
divine judgment upon the Author^ of State Innovation^. Eccles. 10.6, 7, 8, 9.
Folly is se^ in great dignity, and the ri^h sit in l^w place^ I have see^
servants ^n ^orseback, and Princes walking ^s Servants upon the earth. He that
diggeth a pit shall fall into it, and who so breaks a beged a Serpent shall
bite him: Whosoe^er removes stones shall be hurt therewith, and ^e that
cle^veth wood shall be endangered t^ereby^ Whether that curse and judge^^nt,
Jer. 17.5^ 6 Thus, says the Lord, cursed ^e the man that tru^teth i^ man, and
makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departet^ from the Lord; For he shall be
like the heath in the desar^, and shall not see when good comes; but shall
inherit the parc^ed places in the wild^rnesse, a salt land, and not inh^bited^
has not justly b^f^ll^n them and our Nation, ^or relying on and trusting to an
^rm of flesh, an Army and Jer. 9.2, etc.
Assembly of tr^acherous men, whom themselves t^ught, encouraged to be
treacherou^, per^urious to the King, Parl. Lords, their fellow^Memb^r^^ and
Is^y 33.1. Jer. 9^, to 22.
thereby to themselves; yet voted, cried them up for their fait^full Army,
Savi^u^^, Delivere^^, Pro^ect^^^, Shields, and ^o^ly Safegua^d, after they had
dealt ^rea^^erously with themselves, and all their other Sup^rior^; and proved
like Isay 36.6. Ezeck. 49.9, 7.
Egypt to the Israelites who trusted on them: When they ^ook ^old of thee by
the hand, thou didd^st break and pierce through the hand^ and rent all their
shoulders, and when they leaned upon thee, thou breakest and made all their
loins to be at a stand; ye^, dissolved, and Isay 30.14.
broke them in pieces like a po^ters ves^el, so that there shall not be found
in the bursting of it, a s^eard to take fire from the hearth, or water ou^ o^
the pit. And may we not then t^ke up thi^ Song of the Lamb? Rev. 15.3, 4. Great
and mavelous are thy work^ Lord God Almighty; Just and true are thy ways
thou King of Saints; who shall not fear thee, o Lord, and glorify thy name,
For thy Judgments are made manifest?

Whether their clandestine, sudden, indirect stealing into the Commons House
a^ain, May 7. 1659. upon the Army-Officer^ invitation and Declaration, (who
formerly tu^ned them ^ut of it wi^h high^st infamy, contempt and defam^tion
April 20. 1653.) after about 6. year^ dissolu^^on, and 4. intervenient
Vnparliamentary Conventicle^, (wherein many of them sat as Members, and acted
as in Parliament^) by pretext of their old Wri^^ and Elections as M^mber^ of
the long Parliament, ^ctually and legally dissolved by their traiterou^
beheading of the King near 11. years before, as I have In Prynne the Member
recon^iled to Prynne the Barrester. A Legal Vindication against illegal Taxes,
A True and perfect Narrative, p. 24, to 34. A brief necessary Vindication of
the old and new secl^ded Members^ ^. 5.
elsewhere proved; without any new Writs of Summon^, Resum^ons, Electio^s, or
the privitie of their ^or^er ele^tors or fellow Members: Their forcible
s^cluding of my self, Sir George ^ooth, Mr. Ansly, all formerly s^cluded
Member^^ and others not fitting with them from 1648. till April 20. 1653. by
Army Officers and Guards of Soldiers placed at the door ^or that end, and
their justifi^^tion, and ^ontinuing of this new seclu^ion as w^ll ^s the old:
Their usurping to themselves the Title, Power of the Parliament of the (...) of
England, Scotland and ^^eland, and Supreme Authority of the Nation. Their
ex^rcisin^ both the Highest Regal, Parliamental, Legislative, Tax-imposing
Authority over our Nation^, (the worst, highest of all other Treas^^^s) their
^r^ating new unheard of Treas^^^, Exile^ by their (...) Proclamations, imposing
N^w intolerable Tax^^^ Excises, Mill^^a^^ on the whole Nation, against all
Laws, and our Fundamental Liberties, Franchis^^. Their most injurious, illegal,
unpresidented proclaming of Sir George Booth, Sir Thomas Middleton, with other
old and new ^ecluded Members of the long Parliament, and all their adherents,
Traitors, Enemies to the Commonwealth, and Apostates, not only i^ all Counties
and Corporation^, bu^ Churches and Chapels too throughout the Nation, to abuse
both God and men, only for raising forces by virtue of Ordinances and
Commissions granted them by the long Parliament (which themselves pretended to
b^ still continuing) to defend the Rights and Privilege^ of Parliament, to call
in all the surviving Members of both Houses to sit with them, or procure a free
and full Parl. duly summoned, according to the Protestation, Vow, League,
Covenant, and Laws of the Land, being their own and the whole Nations
Birthright, for defense whereof the Army it sel^ was both raised, continued,
and themselves in their Proclamation of May 7. 1659. and Declaration of March
17. 1648 promised inviolably to maintain; which their own consciences knew to
be no Crime nor Treason at all, but an honest, legal, honorable, necessary
undertaking, justified by all their former Votes, Orders, Ordinances,
Commissions for raising force^ against the King^ party for the self-same end:
And themselves greater Traitors, Enemies to the Kingdom and Republike, than
Strafford, Canterbu^y, or the beheaded King, in proclaiming their defense of
this undo^bted Inheritance of all English Freemen against their Tyrannical
usurpations thereon, to be Treason and Apostasy: Their sending out of Major
Genesis Lambert, (who invited them into the House May 6. conducted them into it,
but secluded Sir G. Booth and other Members out of it, May 7. took a new
Commission from them afterward^ in the House, and promised with many large
expressions, ^o be true, faithful, constant, and yield his u^most assistance
to them, to set in safety and support their power) with great forces against
Sir George Booth and all his adherents in this cause, being the Majority of the
old Parl. and of the people of the Nation, and the true old Parliament if
continuing, ^o levy actual war against them; declared Exact Coll. p. 576, 613.
A Collection of Ordinances, p. 13.219, 220.
high Treason by sundry Votes and former Declarations, and so resolved by
themselves in their Impeachments against the beheaded King, the E. of Holland,
L. Capel, other^, and late Pamphlets against the Army; who accordingly levied
war against them routed their forces, reduced their Garison^, imprisoned their
persons, sequestered, confiscated their estates as Traitors; secured, disarmed
Sir Will. Waller, Mr. Holles, with sundry other old Members, promised rewards
for bringing in the persons or heads of others they endeavored to secure,
against all rules of Law, and Christianity; kept a public humiliation for
their good success against Sir George Booth and his adherents, and after their
defeat a public thanksgiving through Westminster and London, to mock God
himself ( Gal. 6, 7.
who will not be mocked) to his very face, and ordained a public thansgiving
throughout the whole Nation, to abuse both God and them, for their Great
Deliverance from the most Dangerous Plot and Treason of Sir George Booth, and
his party; ( to bring in all the old Members to sit with them, without turning
those then sitting out, or to procure a free Parliament,) that so their
Anti-Parliamentary Conventicle, by this pretext, might exercise a Perpetual
Tyranny, and Parliamental Authority over them; and none thenceforth dare
demand a full and free Parliament for the future, under pain of highest
Treason, Apostacy, and the loss of their very Heads and estates. Whether all
these their transcendent High Treasons, with their former 1648. against the K.
secluded Members, Lords, Parliament, people, were not by a most signal
miraculous Providence and Justice of God himself recompensed immediately after
upon their own, Lamber^s, and other Armie-Officers head^, by making their
rou^iing of Sir George Booth and his party, after their first thanksgiving for
it, before the next day of general thanksgiving came, the very occasion of
their sudden unexpected dissolution: 1. [By over-elevating Lamberts, his
Officers and Brigades Spirits, (notwithstanding the signal Marks and Rewards of
their Favors toward them, for the present, and future promises of advancement
for their Fidelity to them in this Service) to enter into contestations with
them by their Petition and Representations. 2ly. By raising the differences and
jealousies between them to such a height and open enmity, notwithstanding all
their large Votes and compliances to satisfy them, all means, mediations of
Friends, and the Londoners public Feast on their thanksgiving day, to
reconcile them; as to incense the Juncto to vote Major Harrison (a chief agent,
Chairman for the old Members first seclusion) incapable of any public Trust or
Office: See the Armies Plea and Declaration, 27 October. The printed Votes,
Diurnals, and Parliaments Plea.
to vote Lambert, Disbrow, Creed, and 6. more field Officers out of their
commands, null their Commissions, and dispose of their Regiments to the next
Officers, without any hearing or examination; if not threatening to commit
Lambert to the Tower as a Traitor; to repeal Fleetwoods Commission and Knack to
be Lieutenant General of their Forces in England and Scotland; and put the
command of the Army and new Militia under 7. Commissioners, to wrest the power
of them both into their own hands. 3ly. By exasperating Lambert and his
confederates by these Votes so far against them, and giving them such favor
with the Army, as to draw up the greatest part of the forces about London in
battle array against them; and notwithstanding their party in the Army,
whereof they had made many of themselves Colonels, their interest in the
Militia of Westminster, London, Southwark, and Sir Henry Vanes two Regiments of
Gathered Churches (who were disgregated and kept their Chambers all that day,
not one of them appearing in the field, because their valiant Colonel took a
Clyster pipe into his fundament, instead of a Lance into his hand in the day of
battle, and durst not hazard a broken pate in the quarrel;) and then in a
hostile warlike manner to besiege many of them in Whitehall, block up all
passages to the House, seize upon their old Speaker with his Coach, Mace, and
new General (without a Sword, Army, Troop or Company) from whose hands they
had freshly received their Commissions, turning him back from whence he came;
to charm all the Junctoes forces so, as to march away without drawing one
sword, or shooting one bullet in their defense, so true, faithful, were they to
their good old cause, as well as to their New Protectors, as to deem neither of
them worth one bloody nose. 4. By engaging Lamber^ and his party,
notwithstanding all endeavored and seeming accommodations be^ween them, to
seize upon their House, and their provisions of ammunition and victuals in it:
to lock up the doors, and keep constant Guards upon the stairs to seclude all
these their new Lords and Masters, as they did on May 7, 9. and afterward
seclude their Fellow Members; and not content herewith, by a printed Plea for
the Army, and Declaration of the Ge^eral Council of the Army, sitting at
Wallingford House, which called them in, and thus shamefully not long after
turned them out of doors, (usurping to themselves both a Regal Authority to
call and dissolve Parliaments, (as they ^epute and style them) and a
Parliamental too, in making and repealing Acts of Parliament (as they deem
them) at their pleasure;) they not only justi^ie this their forcible ejectment,
seclusion to all the world by Lex talionis, even their own abetting, approving,
justifying, the Armies former seclusion of the Major part of their fellow
Members, who were the House, and the whole House of Lords, and securing the
leading Members, when over powered by them, and appealing to the Armies
Judgments therein: but also put a period to their Assembly: branded, ^^lled,
repealed, declared their last Votes, Acts^ Proceedings void to all intents and
purposes whatsoever, ^s if they had never been made; Censured them as
imperfect, ineffectual, irregular, ^nparliamentary, illegal, pernicious, r^sh,
inconsiderate; branding each other in several printed Papers, for Traitors,
Trust-breakers, Treacherous, Perfidious, F^ithless, Vurighteous, Ambitious,
Self-seeking usurpers of the Soverain power, Oppr^ssors of the free people of
England, and invaders, betrayers of their Liberties and Birthrights: the^eby
declaring the old secluded Member, the only honest, faithful, constant,
conscientious men, adhering to their good old ^ause, Oaths, Covenant,
Principles, and the public interest; and Sir George Booth himself to be No
Traitor, but truer Patriot of his Country than any of themselves, as dying
Pure^oy, openly acknowledged before his death, and others of them confess in
private, since even Lambert himself has done and exceeded that work, they
feared he would do, by dissolving their Conventicle, and turning them out of
house and power, which Sir George did not design. Whether all these strange,
unparalleld, sudden, unexpected animosities, divisions between themselves;
their uncommissioning, dissolving, cashiering, disofficing one another, (which
I truly predicted to them from Scriptures, and former Providence, in my Good
Old Cause truly stated; my True and Perfect Narrative, p. 94.98. and
Vindication of the old and new secluded Members, p. 61, 62.) be not the very
finger of God himself, Exodus 8.19. Psa. 118.23.
the Lords own doing, truly mavelous in all our eyes; yea the very particular
Judgment menaced by God himself against all such Traitors and Innovators, as
most audaciously and professedly violate with the highest hand this divine
precept, Prove. 24.21^ 22. My Son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle
not with those that are given to change; for their Calamity shall suddenly
arise, and who knows the ruin of them both: and a verification of Prove.
29.1? If not a divine infliction of the very Confusion and punishment denounced
by God himself against Aegyp^ of old for their crying sins, Isay 19.2, 3, etc.
I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, and they shall fight every
one against his brother, and every one against his neighbor, City against
City, and Kingdom against Kingdom: And the Spirit of Egypt shall fail in the
midst thereof, and I will destroy the Counsel thereof. Surely the Princes of
Zoan (the Juncto and Armies General Council) are become fools, the Princes of
Noph are deceived; they have also seduced Egypt, even they that are the stay of
the Tribes thereof. The Lord has mingled a spirit of ^ervers^ties amongst
them, and they have caused Egypt (yea England) to err in every work thereof,
as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit^ Neither shall there be any work ^or
Egypt, which the head or toil, branch or root may do^ to defend or establish
themselves or their pretended yet un^^^med Free State. And may not they all
then and others (...) the consideration of all the promises, justly cry (...)
with the Apostle in an holy admiration. Romans 11.33. O the depth of the Riches
b^^^ of the wisdom and knowledge of God^ how unsearcheable are his Judgments,
and his ways part finding out.

4. Whether the Juncto and their High Court of Inj^stice-men, who had any hand,
vote in the Traitorous, Perfidious beheading of their late Protestant King, the
head of the Parliament; dissolving and blowing up the whole House of Lords, the
Majority of the Commons House, the whole old Parl^^ment, Kingdom, Kingsh^p; the
Prince of Wales next heir and successor to the Crow^; ^he rights, privileges,
freedom of Parliament, the fundamental Laws, Liberties, Government of the
Nation, and our established Protestant Religion, against all their Oaths,
Allegiances, Trusts, Duties, Votes, Declarations, Remonstrances, Protestations,
Vows, Solemn Leagues, Covenants obliging them to the contrary; can with any
faith, boldness, confidence, piety, or real devotion appear before the presence
of God, Angels, Men in any of our Congregations on the 5. of November, the 3
Jac. c. 1, 2,
joyful day of our deliverance, from the Popist^ Gunpowder Treason^ publicly
celebrated every year; to render public thanks to Almighty God, and ascribe
all honor, glory and praise to his name, for hi^ great and infinite mercy in
delivering the King, Queen, Prince, Lords spiritual and temporal when assembled
in the Lords House, Nov. 5. An. 1650. (from this plot of malicious, devilish
Papists, Jesuits and Seminary Priests, who maligning the happiness and
prosperity of our Realm, Church and Religion under a Protestant King, and its
promising contin^ance to all posterity, in his most hopeful, royal, plentiful
Progeny, intend^d to blow them all up suddenly with gunpowder, but were through
Gods great mercy miraculously delivered from this sudden bo^rid Treason, by a
wonderful discovery thereof some few hours before it was to be executed^) when
as themselves have outstripped them by many degrees in executing, accomplishing
far more than what they only intended, but could not effect; yet repute
themselves Protestants, and the emineniest of all Saints? Whether they can
without the (...) est horror of conscience, confusion of face, spirit,
^^^^sternation of mind, and grief of hear, henceforth ^^^sume to appear before
the presence of God, or any English Protestant^ ^t any time, especially on this
day, before they have publicly lamented, confessed, repented, and made some
open eminent satisfaction, for those transcend^nt new Gunpowder-Treasons, far
worse than the old of the Jesuits and Papists, by whom they were acted in this;
especially if they consider Gods expostulation with such sinners. Ps. 50.16,
17. What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou hate Instruction, and have cast my words
behind thee. When thou s^west these Powder Traitors, thou consentest with them,
and have been partaker with these Murderers, and Adulterers. And that of Romans
2.1, 2, 3. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whoever thou art that
judge: for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self: For thou
that judge, do ^he same things. But we know that the judgment of God is
according to Truth against th^se who commit such things. And think thou
this, O man, that judge them which do such things, and do the same, (nay
worse) that thou shall escape the judgment of God, etc?

5. Whether those turn coat Peace-abhorring, self-seeking, resolved, that the
Vote passed in a full House July 28 1648. That a Treaty should be had in the
Isle of Wight, with the King in Person, by a Committee appointed by both
Houses, upon the Propositions presented to him at Hampton Court: was highly
Dishonorable to the proceedings of Parliament, and destructive to the Peace of
the Kingdom. And that the Vote of 5. D^cemb. 1648. (passed without dividing the
House when there were 300 Members in it) That the answers of the King ^o the
Proposition of both Houses, are a sufficient g^^und for the House to proceed
upon, These Voters certainly intended to make an endless trade of War, and
never to have any Peace.
for the settlement of the Peace of the Kingdom: is highly dishonorable to the
Parliament, and destructive to the Peace of the Kingdom, and tending to the
breach of the public faith of the Kingdom. And in their Declaration of 15.
January 1648. expressing their Reasons for annulling and vac^ting these Votes
in this manner; declared them to be ^ig^ly repugnant to the glory of God,
greatly dishonorable to the proceedings of Parliamen^, and apparently
destructive to the good of this Kingdom: (adding) Yet we are resolved, and that
speedily, so to settle the peace of the Kingdom by the Authority of Parliament^
in a more happy way than can be expected from the best of Kings; Which they
never since performed in the least degree, but the direct contrary, embroiling
us in endless Wars, Seditions, Tumults, Successions, Revolutions of
new-modelled Governments, and oppressing, destructive Anti-Parliame^tary
Conventicles ever sithence. After that suppressed our Kings and Kingly
Government, as the Instruments, Occasions of Tyranny, I^justice, Oppression,
Luxury, Prodigality and Slavery to the Commons under them; together with the
whole House of Lords, as Dangerous, Useless, Dilatory t^ the Proceedings of
Parliament, etc. in their Votes of Febr. 6. and Penned by Mr. Whitlock.
Declaration of 17 Martii 1648. expressing the grounds of their lute
Proceedings, and se^ling the Government in way of a Free State^ Next,
prescribed, subscribed an Engagement to be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth established by them without a King or House of Lords. Yet
afterward in their New modelled Parliament (a^ they reputed it) April 1657. by
their Petition and Advice, (as first penned, passed and presented to Cromwell
for his assent^) Declared the revival of Kingship and Kingly Government,
absolutely Necessary for composing the distractions, and settling the peace and
tranquillity of our Nations; advised, pe^i^ioned, and pressed hi^ to accept the
Name, Title, Power and Sovereign Authority of a King, over our three Kingdoms,
and the Dominions thereunto annexed; Voted him to be King thereof^ with a
constant revenue of no less than. Twelve hundred thousand pounds a year in
perpetuity, and five hundred thousand pounds more for 3. years space, out of
the peoples exhausted purse^, after most of the ancient Crown Lands and
Revenues sold, when as they themselves affirmed and published in their Decl. of
March 17. 1648. p. 19. that the justi^iable, legal Revenue of the Crown under
King Charles (be^^des the Customs and some other p^^quis^^es, cha^^ed with the
maintenance of the Nav^e and Forts) fell shors of ^n^ hundred thousand pounds
yet (...). This new-augmented Revenue for their New King Olivers support being
above 3. times more than any of our lawful Kings ever enjoyed. And when
Cromwell pretended dissatisfaction in point of conscience, to receive the
Kingship and Kingly Government on him; the ^ery Lenthall, Whitlock, etc.
Lawyers, Members, Officers, who drew the Declarations and Reasons for
abolishing Kingship, Kingly Government and House of Lords, were the Committee
appointed to confer with him 3. several times, and draw up reasons to satis^ie
him, why he might and ought in reason, law, policy, conscience to accept the
Kingship and Kingly Title, for his own and the public Safety^ Which he
r^^using (against hi^ through fear of some Army Officers.
desire) they voted him their Royal Protector, took an Oath to be true and
faithful to him, and to his Son Ri^hard after him, and to act nothing against
their Persons or Power; created themselves Another House^ assumed to themselves
the Title of Lords, and THE HOUSE OF LORDS, notwithstanding their Engagements
against it under all their hands. Yet soon after dethroned their young
Protector, nulled all his Conventions wherein they sat, with all Lordships,
Knightships, and Offices granted by their Protectors, as illegal; revived their
Anti-Parliamentary Iuncto, after it had layen buried in oblivion above 6 years
space, in May last; and in July following prescribed a New Oath and Engagement
to all Officers, and others who would enjoy the benefit of their Knack of
Indemnity; To be true, faithful and constant to their Commonwealth (though yet
unborn) without a Single person, Kingship, or House of Lords? Whether such
treacherous, perjured double-minded men, unstable in all their ways, Jam. 1.8.
can ever be deemed chosen instruments ordained of God, to settle the Peace, or
Government of our Nations? Whether the Proph^t Isay c. 59. and the Apostle
Paul, Romans 3.9.10. etc. have not truly characterized them: There is none
righteous, no not one; there is none that understands, there is none that
seeks after God; they are all gone out of the way, they are all together
become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one: their threat is
an open Sepulcher, with their Tongues (yea Oaths, Protestations, Declarations,
Covenants) they have ^sed deceit, the poison of Asps is under their li^s: Their
feet are swift to shed blood, (the blood of their Protestant King, Peers,
Brethren, Alli^s, Fellow Subjects, by Land and Sea, at home and abroad, in the
field, and in new Butcheries of Highest Injustice,) destruction and misery are
in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known; there is no fear of
God before their eyes: they have made them crooked paths, whosoever goes
therein shall not know peace. Therefore is judgment far from us, neither does
Justice overtake us; we wait for light, but behold obscurity; for brightness,
but we walk in darkness: we grope for the wall like the blind, as if we had no
eyes, we stumble at noonday, as in the night; we are in desolate places like
dead men: we roar all like Bears, and mou^n sore like doves; we look for
judgment, but there is none, for salvation, but it is far off from us.

Anti-Parliamentary Iuncto, and General Council of Army Officers hitherto, in
their Iesuitical Project of bringing forth a misshapen monstrous Commonwealth,
and whymfical Freest^t^, to establish things amongst us, a miscarrying womb,
and dry breasts; so as we may justly say of them as the Prophet did of Ephraim;
Hos. 9.12, 14.15, 16. Ephraim is smitten, their r^^t it dried up, it shall bear
no fruit; yea, though they bring forth, yet will I even slay the beloved fruit
of their womb: their glory shall fly away like a bird, from the birth, and from
the w^mb, and from the conception; as their Commonwealth whimfie^ have done?
Whether Gods signal over-^urning, and forcible dissolving the Iuncto by the
Army Officers, twice on^ ^ft^r another in the very generation of this
Iesuitical brat, before it was formed in the womb, to disinherit our ancient
hereditarie legitimate Kings and Kingship, and their turning of all things
upside down (our Kings, Kingdom^, Parliaments, Lords House, Laws, Liberties,
Oaths, Church, Religion, to make way for its production) has not been like
the Potters clay, (a rude deformed Chao^, without any lineaments, or shape at
all;) so as the work yet says of him that made it, he made me not; and the
thing formed says of him that formed it, he has no understanding, Isa. 29.16?
Whither these new Ba^e^-builders, whiles they have been building this new City
and Tower, to keep them from being scattered upon the face of the whole earth,
Genesis 11.3, to 10.
have not like the old Babel-builders, been confounded in their language by God
himself, that they might not understand one another speech, and scattred
abroad thence upon the face of the earth, though guarded by their faithful
Army, on whom they relied for protection, so that they left off to build their
Babel, like them? Their City of Confusion is broken down, and every house (yea
their own Parl. House) shut up; In the City is left desolation, and the gate is
smitten with destruction. Isay 24.10, 12. It shall lie waste from generation to
generation, none shall pass through it for ever and ever; But the Cormorant
and the Bittern shall possess it; the Owl also and the Raven shall dwell in it,
and he shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of
emptiness? Whether their and the Armies endeavors to set up an Vtopian
Commonwealth, instead of our old Hereditarie Kingship, is not a Acts 5.39. c.
23.9.
direct fighting against God, and the express precepts, ordinances of God
himself, Prove. 24.21, 22. c. 22.28. c. 8.15, 16. Romans 13.1, 2. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2,
3. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13.17^ Yea against the good providence, mercy, favor of
God toward our Kingdoms and Nations for their establishment; the want of a
lawful, hereditary King, to reign over a Kingdom and Nation, and a
multiplicity of Governors, Kings, (especially of inferior rank) and reducing
the people to such a confused sad condition; That they shall call the Nobles
thereof to the Kingdom, but none shall be there, and all her Princes shall be
nothing; See my True and perfect Narrative, p. 92, 93.
so that she has no strong rod left to Rule, being a matter of present and
future lamentation, a severe judgment of God for their sins, and wickedness, yea
an occasion of all wickedness, licentiousness, villainies, confusion, and an
immediate forerunner or concomitant of the Kingdoms and Nations desolation,
ruin by Gods own resolution, Hos. 3.4. c. 10.3.7. Ezech 49.11, 12.14, Isa.
33.11, 12, 13. Judges 17.6 etc. c. 18.1. etc. c. 21.25. Prove. 28.2. c. 30 21,
12. Hab. 1.10.14, 15. And is it not so now of ours?

7. Whether the late Petition and Advice 1657. to reduce W. Lenthal, Speaker,
Whitlock, and many others of the dissolved Iuncto assented, as it was first
penned, voted, passed by them and many Army Officers, as the only means to
settle us in peace, honor, safety, prosperity; be not a convincing Argument,
that in their own Judgments; Consciences; Kings and Kingly Government, are
Englands only true Interest, to end our wars, Oppressions, distractions,
prevent our ruin, and restore our pristine uni^ie, peace, honor, safety,
prosperity, trade, glory? And whether it be not a worse than Bedlam Madness,
yea gross error both in policy and expeperience in our Republican Juncto and
Army Officers, to endeavor to erect an Utopian, Jesuitical Republike among us,
(which has produced so many sad public change^, confusions, and made us a
mere floating Island, tossed about with every wind of giddy-brain Innovators)
as the only means of our firm, lasting happiness; and to prevent all future
relapses to Monarchy after King Charles hi^ beheading; which this notable
censure of the incomparable Philosopher De Beneficiis, l. 2. c. 20.
Seneca passed against that great Republic^n and Anti-royallist, M. Brutus,
will abundantly refute. Cum Vir magnus fuerit in aliis, M. Brutus, mihi videtur
in hac re vehementer errare, qui aut Regis nomen extimuit, cum optimus
Civitatis Status sub Rege justo sit: aut ibi speravit Libertatem futuram ubi
tam magnum praemium erat, et imperandi et serviendi; futuramque ibi
aequalitatem civilis juris, et Staturas suo loco Leges, ubi viderat tot Millia
hominum pugnantia, non ne serviret, fed (...): (our present condition between
the ambitious, usurping Antiparliamentary Juncto, and divided Army-Commander^,
all contending which Mark 9.34. Luke 9.46. c. 21.24.
of them shall be the greatest, and who shall most oppress, enslave our N^tions
to their Tyranny, far more exorbitant than the very worst of all our Kings)
Quantum vero illum, aut rerum natura, aut vrbis suae tenuit oblivio Qui uno
interempto (Rege) defuturum credidit alium qui idem vellet; Cum Tarquinius
esse^ inventus post tot Reges ferro et fulmine occisos; even in Rome it self,
and we in England since the beheading of King CHARLES, and voting down Kings,
Kingship, with the old House of Lords, and Ingagemen^s against them, have soon
after found, a more than Royal Protector OLIVER, usurping the Wardship of our
poor Infan^ Commonwealth, aspiring after a Kingship and Crown whiles living;
and crowned in his Statue, Hearse, Scu^^heons as both KING and The Sexton^ boy
at Westminster, who showed his Hearse, at first said, Here is the Hearse of
Oliver late Protector; THE CONQUEROR OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND, whose
CROWNS he ^ears upon his SWORD: and said he had order to say so.
CONQUEROR of our three Kingdoms after his death; bearing Three Crowns upon
his sword, as an emblem of it: a momentanie Protect^r Richard after him; a new
self-created other House, assuming to themselves the Title of LORDS and THE
HOUSE OF LORDS; after an old Lords House suppressed; since that, a CHARLES
FLEETWOOD, and JOHN LAMBERT, aspiring after the Sovereign Power, as their late
and present actions, Declarations more than intimate, and dissolved Juncto
affirm: and an exiled Hereditarie KING CHARLES, with a numerous ROYAL
POSTERITY after him, claiming the Crown and Kingship by lawful indubitable
Right, declared, ratified by the Unrepealed Statutes of 1 Iacobi, c. 1. 3
Iacobi, c 1, 2, 4, 7 Iacobi c. 6. the Sea my Concordia Discor^
Oaths of Supremacy, Allegiance, Feal^y; of all Mayor^, Recorders, Freemen of
every Corporation and Fraternity, of all Justices, Judges, Sheriffs, Officers
of Justice, Graduates in Universities or Innes of Court, Ministers, Incumbents,
all Members of the Commons House of Parliament, and all other Freemen sworn in
our Leet^; who by the powerful assistance of their foreign Friend^ and Allies,
and domestic, oppressed, discontented, divided, ruined Subject^, will in all
probability be restored to the Crown, sooner or later, (as Aurelius Ambros^us
after the murder of his Father and Brother by the Usurper Vor^igerne,) was
called in, restored and crowned King by his own British Subjects, to deliver
them from Vortigerns and his invading Saxons Tyranny, after 21 years
usurpation; and Edward the Confessor, called in and crowned King by his Nobles
and Subjects, after 25 years dispossession of his right by the Dani^h Usurpers,
and all the Danes expelled, without any effusion of blood; as I have See my
Legal Historical Vindication, etc.
elsewhere evidenced at large out of our best Historians.

Irish, Scots, Hollanders, Worcester-fight, and League with Spain by their own
Genesis Cromwell Apr. 20. 1653. 2. Of Pr^t. Isay. 14.20. The seed of evil doers
shall never be renowned.
Richard (and his Brother Hen. too Deputy of Irel.) by his Brother Fleew. Uncle
Disbrow, and other Army Officers, after all their Oaths, and Addresses to him
from them and all the Officers, Soldiers, Navy, most Counties, Corporations in
England, Scotland, Ireland, to be true, faithful, loyal, ob^dient to, and live
and die with him, in the midst of hi^ Parliament, declaring, voting for, and
complying with him; when most men though^ it impossible to over^urn or depose
him. 3ly, Of the revived Antiparliamentary Juncto, after Sir George Booths, and
all their visible Opposites total rout and disappointment, when Ps. 30.6, 7.
themselves and others esteemed them so well rooted, guarded, that there was no
hopes nor possibility left of dissipating^ dissolving them, or abolishing their
usurped Regal and Parliamental power, even by the very instruments that called
them in, and routed their Enemies; all ^^ of them without any one drawn sword
or drop of blood, and that in a moment, be not a real, experimental
verific^tion of Ezech. 21.26, 27. by way of Allusion to our own Governors and
Kingdom, Thus says the Lord God; Remove the Diadem, and take off the Crown,
this shall not be the same^ exalt him that is low, and abase him tha^ is high:
I will Overturn, Overturn, Overturn it, till he shall come whose right it is,
and I will give it him?

Iunctoes and A^my-Officer^ doubling, trebling, quadrupling of our Nations
Monthly Taxes, Excises, Militiaes, Grievances, Oppressions of all kinds by
their usurped power; their consumption, devastation of all the Crown Lands,
Rents, and standing Revenues of the Kingdom; of Bishops, Dean and Chapters
lands, and many thousands of Delinquents real and personal estates, and
greatest part of most ^ens private estates, only to make them greater Bondslaves
to them than ever they were to any King^; without benefiting or easing them in
any kind; and to murder one another by intestin^, unchristian warr^,
Butcheries: And their Monstrous Giddiness, Intoxication in all their premised
Councils, New Models, and Rotations of Government, ever since they turned the
Head of ^^r Kingdoms (which should r^le, direct the whole body) downwards, and
the Heels uppermost, to animate and steer it, against the course of nature,
that rules of Law, Policy, Christianity: and Gods Hos. 2.6, 7.
hedging up all their new By-ways with thorns, and making a wall cross them,
that the people are not able to find their paths: nor to overtake, nor find
their New Lovers they have hitherto followed and sought after; and those mad
new whymsies the Jesuits infuse into their Pates from time to time, to make
them and ou^ Nation ridiculous to all the world till utterly destroyed: may not
justly engage our three distracted Nations, and themselves too now, at a total
loss; to ^esolve and say with the Israelites, (when revol^ed from their
rightful Kings of the House of David in the like case) Hos. 2.7. I will go and
return to my first Husband for then was it better with me than now? And to
imitate the Israelites in the case of King David when expelled his Realm by his
usurping son Absoloms rebellion, after his rout and slaughter, 2 Samuel 19.9,
etc. And all the people were at strife throughout all the Tribes of Israel^
saying; The King saved us out of the hands of our Enemies, and he delivered us
out of the hands of the Philistines; and now he is fled out of the Land for
Absalom, and Absalom whom we anointed King over us, is dead in battle (as their
Pro. Oliver, Richard and dissolved Juncto are in a moment) now therefore why
are ye silent, and speak not a word of bringing back the King to his House: And
Zadok and Abiathar the Priests, spoke unto the elders of Judah saying; Why are
ye the last to bring the King back to his House; seeing ye are his brethren, of
his bone and his flesh? And Amasa bowed the heart of all the Men of Judah, even
as one man, so that they sent this word unto the King; Return thou and all thy
servants. So the king returned to Jordan; where all the people of Judah, and
half the men of Israel met him, and conducted him safe to Gilgal; and the men
of Judah clave unto their King from Jordan even to Jerusalem; and
re-established him in his Kingdom. Whether this be not the only safe, true,
legal, prudential, Christian, speedy and ready highway to their present and
future Peace, Ease, Safety, Settlement, Wealth, Prosperity, both as Men and
Christians, without any further effu^ion of Christian blood, expense of
Treasure; not other new Vertiginous Models, Army Councils, Treaties, tending to
further confusions; (out of which the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry, Freeholders,
Citizens, Burgesses, Merchants, Commons, Sea men, Parliaments of our 3. Nations
are totally secluded, like mere Ciphers, by the Iuncto and Army-usurpers, as if
they were mere Aliens, and wholly unconcerned in their own Government,
Settlement, who will never acquiesce in any thing, but what themselves in a
free Parliament shall resolve on.) Judges 19.30.
Consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds, without fear, hypocrisy, or
partiality. And whether we be not a people marked out and fitted for inevitable
destruction (having all the symptoms, forerunners of it and sins that hasten
it now lying upon us) if we Understand ye brutish among the people: O ye fools,
when will ye be wise? Ps. 94.8.
brutishly reject this only means of our preservation, and follow the
destructive whymsies of those Giddy-pated usurping raw Stears-men? of whom we
may justly say with the Prophet Isai. 3.1.4, 12. Behold the Lord of Hosts does
take away from Jerusalem and Judah the stay and the staff, the Honorable man
and the Counselor: And I will give Children (in State Affairs and
understanding) to be their Princes, and Babes shall rule over them. And the
people shall be oppressed every one by another, and every one by his neighbor:
the child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient; and the Base
against the Honorable (as now they do;) O my people, they which lead thee,
cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths, and they that are led of
them (in their new Jesuitical By-ways) are destroyed, by intestine divisions
and foreign invasions, as in Isai. 9.12. to 21. A sad emblem of our present
condition, and approaching destruction, worthy our saddest meditations.

by their own Knack of the 12. of October, and paper printed by their special
permission and command since their dissolution; entitled, The Parliaments
Plea; declaring resolving, p. 5, 6, 7. That the People of England are of Right,
a Free People, to be governed by their own elected Deputies and Trustees in
Parliament; it being owned on all hands, both by Parliament and Army, and all
the good people engaged with them. That the people under God are the original
of all just Authority; and other original and foundation no man may lay. That
to deprive or deny the People of this Inheritance, is Treason, Rebellion and
Apostasy from the Good Old Cause of the English Nation, for as much as a people
free by Birth, by Laws, and by their own Prowess, are thereby rendered and made
most absolute vassals and slaves, at will and power; and greater Treason than
this no man can commit. That to levy money upon the people without their consent
in Parliament is Treason, for which every man that so Assesses, Collects, or
Gathers it, is to be Indicted for his life, and must dye as a Traitor; not only
by their Knack, but by the Fundamental Good Old Laws of the Land, against which
no By-law is to be made: this being a Fundamental Law, and one of the main
birthrights of England; That no Tax or Levy is to be laid upon the people but
by their consent in Parliament; Be not guilty of the greatest, highest Treason,
Rebellion, and Apostasy, from the Good Old Cause of the English Nation, (and
the Army Officers too confederating with them) by depriving and denying the
free people to be governed by their own elected Representatives and Trustees in
a full and free Parl. by secluding four parts of five of the Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses, and Barons of Ports out of the long Parl. whiles in being Dec. 1648.
with armed power by usurping to themselves the Royal, Parliamentary Legislative
supreme Authority over the people, and As the new Committee of Safety have
(...) impose a new Tax of, and quarter Sold^e^^ on the D^niers of it.
laying, assessing, levying, intolerable excessive Taxes, Excises, Militiaes
upon them, without, yea against their consents and protestations; and without
the consent of the far greater part of the Commons House, the King or House of
Lords, which they forcibly secluded, suppressed, destroyed, against their
fundamental Laws, Liberties, Privileges, Birthrights, Protestations,
Declarations and solemn League and Covenant, by making them most absolute
slaves, vassals from 1648. till their dissolution in April 20. 1653. and
invading, inslaving, destroying their Protestant brethren of Scotland, and
Allies of Holland by Land and Sea, to the undermining, endangering of the
Protestant Religion; by imposing New Oaths and engagements on them
diametrically contrary to the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance (which they
all solemnly took as Members before they entered the House) and disabling all to
sue in any Court, or enjoy the benefit or protection of the Laws for which they
fought, and to which they were born heirs, who refused to take their
Treasonable, perfidious Engagements; by securing, imprisoning thousands of
Freemen, close imprisoning sundry Members of the old Parliament, (my self
amongst others) diverse years in remote Castles, and keeping us from Gods
public ordinances, without any accusation, hearing, trial, or legal cause of
commitment, expressed in their warrants.

By presuming upon the Army and Officers sudden invitation after the old
Parliaments dissolution by the Kings death, and their above 6. years
dissipation by the Army, without the election or privity of the people, to sit
and act as the Parl. and supreme power of the Nation; to seclude at least 3.
parts of 4. of the old surviving Members by force, and proclaiming Sir George
Booth, Sir Thomas Middleton and other Members and Freemen of England Traitors,
and levying war against them, only for raising forces to induce them to call in
all the old secluded Members, or to summon a new free Parliament, and for
opposing their new illegal Taxes, Excises, Militiaes, imposed and levied on the
people, without their Common consent in Parl. deserve not to be all indicted,
executed, and their estates confiscated as Traitors, for these their successive
reiterated high Treasons by their own resolutions, and Sir George and his
adherents totally acquitted from the least imputation or guilt of Treason, and
by consequence from all ^mprisonments, Sequestrations under which they now
suffer. Whether their branding, sequestring them for Traitors, Apostates,
Enemies to the public, against Law and Conscience too, has not justly brought
that woe and judgment upon their conventicle. Isa. 5.20, 23, 24. Woe unto them
that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from him. Therefore as the fire devoureth the
stubble, and the flame consumes the cha^s, so their root shall be rottenness,
and their blossom shall go up as dust; because they have cast away the Law of
the Lord, (and of the Land too) and despised the name of the holy one of
Israel. For all this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is streched out
still.

Whether the Anti-Parliamentary Junctoes and Army Officers England; their
banishing, ^xpelling his Royal Protestant Heir, Successor to the Crown, with
all the rest of his Children (professing the reformed Religion) out of all
their Protestant Realms and Dominions; their invading of their Protestant
Brethren in Ir^land and Scotland, in a hostile manner with potent Armies, and
waging war against them in their own Countries, and after that against their
own Protestant Brethren in England, as professed Enemies, Traitors, Apostates;
slaying diverse thousands of then in the f^eld; imprisoning, banishing,
disinheriting, fequestring many thousands more of them, only for owning,
crowning, assisting their own hereditary Protestant King (according to their
Oaths, Covenants, Laws, Homage, Allegiance, duties, and principles of the
Protestant Religion) to regain and retain his Royal Autho^ity and Kingdoms.
Their waging of a most bloody (...) wa^ with our ancient Protestant Allies of
Holland above 3. years space together, to the slaughter of many thousands of
their and our gallantest Protestant Seaman, Admirals, Sea-Captains, of purpose
to banish their own exiled Protestant King, his Brethren and followers out of
the Netherlands from the Society and charitable relief of the^r Protestan^
Friends, where they lived as Exiles, enjoying the free profession of the
Reformed Religion, and Communion, prayers, contributions of the Protestant
Churches; on purpose to drive them into Popish Quarters amongst seducing
Jesuits, Priests, Papists, to cast them wholly upon their Alms, Mercy,
Benevolence, and by these high indignities, and their pressing necessities, to
enforce them (if they can) to renounce the Protestant-Religion and turn
professed Papists: Their most inhuman, unchristian barbarism, in depriving them
totally of all means of Subsistence, by seizing all their revenues, without
allowing them one farthing out of them toward their necessary relief; yet
enacting i^ High Treason for any of their Protestant Subjects, Friends, Allies
within their Realm^ or Dominions, to contribute any thing toward their support,
to hold the lea^^ correspondency with, or make any public prayers unto God
for them: as if they were worse than Turk^, Jews, Infidels, and most professed
Enemies: for whom we are not only commanded to pray, but also to love, feed,
clo^h, relieve, harbor them in their necessities, overcomming their evil with
goodness, by Christ's own example and express precepts, under pain of
everlasting damnation; be a conscientious Saint-like performanc^ of, and
obedience to, or not rather an Atheistical obstinate, presumptuous rebellion
against the 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3. Mat. 5.44, 45. c. 2^.21. c. 25.34, to 46. Luke
6.35. to 39. c. 10.30 to 38. c. 23.34 Acts 7.60. Romans 10 13, ^9, 20, 21. c.
13.1, to 12. c. 15.26, 27. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. Jam. 2, 13. and other sacred Texts?
A religious, zealous observation of their See my Concordia Discors.
sacred solemn Protestations, Vows, Covenant, Remonstrances, Declarations,
Oaths for the maintenance, defense and propagation of the true Reformed
Protestant Religion, the Profession and (...), against the bloody Plo^s,
conspiracies, attempts, practices of the Jesuits, and other prof^ssed Popish
Ene^ies and ^nderminers of them Or not rather a mo^^ perfidious v^olation,
^bjuration, betraying of and confederating with the Jesuits and Papists against
them? A loving of the^^ Protestant Brethren, with a true heart, fervently, and
laying down their lives for them, and being pitiful, merciful, compassionate
toward them, according to these Gospel-precepts, Ephesians. 4.32. c. 5.1, 2. 1 Pet.
1.22. c. 2.17. c. 3.8. 1 John 2.11.14.33. c. 4.7, 11, 12, 20, 21. John 13.34.
c. 15.12.17. Or not rather a shutting up their bowels of compassion toward
them; a grieving, offending persecuting, murdering of their bodies and souls
too; and an infallible evidence, that they are yet no real Saints or children
of God, but the very children of the Devil abiding in death, having no true
love of God, nor eternal life abiding in them, by Christ's own resolution, John
8.44, 45. 1 John 2.13. to 18? A professed Antichristian contradiction to the
reiterated command and voice of God from heaven, Isay 52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. Rev.
18.2, 3, 4, etc. Depart ye, depart ye, Come ye out of (mystical Romish Babylon,
(the mother of whoredoms, the habitation of Devils, and of every foul spirit,
and the cage of every unclean and hateful bird) O my people that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues: by their
forcible driving of their own Protestant King, Brethren into Babylon, and
keeping them therein, to have their habitation among Devils, foul spirits, and
unclean birds of every kind, that so they may participate both in her sins and
plagues; instead of calling them out from thence into their own Protestant
Dominions and Churches? 1 Pet. 4.18, 19.
Certainly, if the righteous shall scarcely be saved, where shall these most
transcendent, unpresidented, unrighteons, ungodly sinners (who obey not, but
coutradict all these Gospel Texts) appear? and what shall their end be? Verily
the Gospel it self resolves: (and O that they would with fear and amazement of
spirit now seriously consider it) when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire to take venge^nce on them, they
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and from the glory of his power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. Jam. 2.11.
and shall receive judgment without mercy, because they have showed no mercy,
but the utmost extremity of malice and cruelty to the Souls and Bodies of their
Protestant King and Brethren?

Whether the Junctoes and Armies late Proceedings against the King and
Kingship, were not the direct Plot of the Spa^i^lized Priests and Jesuit^, (as
well in France as England, Spain, and elsewhere) who contrived and promoted it
to their power; as I evidenced in my Speech, Memento, Epistle to my Historical
Collection; My true a^^ perfect Narrative, and Vindication of the old and new
secluded Members at large, and shall f^rther clear by this ensuing Letter, the
original whereof I have twice read ^ound by Mr. Sherley a Bookseller in Little
Britain, (in whose hands ^t is) amongst the Books of Mr. Patricke ^arre (Priest
to Don Alonso de Gardenas the Spanish Ambassador) which he bought of him at
this Ambassadors house, when he was departing hence upon the breach with Spain,
1653. within a year after this Letters date, which he soon after showed to
diverse Gentlemen, one of them (who took a copy thereof) promising to show it to
Cromwell himself. The Superscription of it is in Spanish directed (as is
conceived and the Letter imports) to this Patricke Carre (an Irish Priest and
Jesuit) under the name of Had he writ ^t to a Spaniard, no doubt the Letter
would have been in Spanish, (not English) as well as the suprescription.
Don Pedro Garsia: the Letter it self is in English, written it seems by some
English or Irish Priest or Jesuit, sent as an intelligencer, by the Spanish
Ambassador into Holland and France, (with whom the English were then in
hostility) but the direction for Letters to him is in French. In the cloze
whereof the Jesuitical and Spanish party in Paris, expected our
Anti-Parliamentary Iuncto (whom they style, our brave Parliament, as set up by
and acting for them) should espouse their quarrel and act their pa^ts against
the French; and join with the Prince of Condee, to c^t off the King of France
his head, and all Kings else, as they did the King of Englands, by their
instigation, such Antimonarchists, Traitors are these Jesuits, Irish and
Spanish Freers to all Kings and Monarchy.

Paris, 10. of January, 1652. SIR,
I Was no so ner in Holland, then I writ to you, but hearing nothing from you I
concluded, either you were very sick, or that you received not my Letter; I
came hither in an ill time, for the Kingdom is in great disorder, upon the
Kings recalling the Cardinal, against all his Declarations. This Town ready to
declare in favor of the Prince and the Duke of Orleance, who is now treating
with the Duke of Lorrain for his Army. If your dull Leopold.
Archduke make no more advantage of this, than of the disorders of the last
Summer, it is pity but he were sent to keep Sheep. WE EXPECT HERE OUR BRAVE
PARLIAMENT "WILL NOT LET THE GAME BE SOON PLAYED OUT: I could wish Gallant
Cromwell AND ALL HIS ARMY WERE WITH THE Condi^.
PRINCE: for I BEGIN TO WISH ALL KINGS HAD THE Execution he means.
SAME THE KING OF ENGLAND HAD: I Will say no more until I hear from you, but that
I am

Your unfeigned Friend, T. Danielle.


I pray remember me to both my Cozens. Direct your Letters A Monsieur Monsieur
Canell demurant chez Mons-Marchant a la rue de pulle.

The Superscription is thus, viz.

A Don Pedro Garsia en Casa de Embaxador de Espanna que This intimates he was a
Priest or Jesuit who writ it.
Dios guard.

En Londres 9d.

There were many Papers and Notes written in Irish, some concerning the affairs
and transactions of the late wars in Ireland, found amongst these Books, whence
I conceive this Patrick Carre was an Irish Priest and Jesuit; and that the Sea
my hidden works of Darkness, brought to public Light.
Spaniard had a great hand in that horrid Rebellion. From the cloze of this
Letter let all consider.

Whether it can be safe for any Popish, as well as Protestant Kings to harbor
such Jesuitical Antimonarchists and Regicides in their Kingdoms, Courts, who
thus wish ALL KINGS beheaded and brought to Justice, as well as the late King
of England, by Cromwell and his Army, or their own Subjects? and how much all
Kings ought to detest his president (of the Jesuits contriving) let them now
cordially and timely advise for their own security.

Whether the Great swarms of Jesuits and Popish Freers in and about London, by
the Iunctoes, and Army Officers tolleration and connivence (whose Jesuitical
Antimonarchical Plots, Counsels they have vigorously pursued) be not the
principal contrivers, fomentors of all our changes of Government, New Sects,
Opinions, Mutinies in and Usurpations of the Army, (in whose Councils most
intelligent Protestants have just cause to fear they have been and still are
predominant) there being multitudes of them in and about London, under several
masks; some of them saying Mass in their Pontificalibus in Popish Ladies
Chambers one day; and speaking to and praying with their Soldiers in the Army,
or in Anabaptistical or Quaking Conventicles the next day, of which there are
some late particular Instances; I shall relate one only more general and worthy
knowledge.

Two English Gentlemen of quality (one of them of mine acquaintance) traveling
out of England into France in May 1658. and hiring a vessel for their passage,
three strangers (who came from London) desired leave to pass over with them;
which they condescending to, suspected one of them at least, to be a Jes^it, by
his discourse; and during their stay at Paris, saw all three of them there
walking often in the Streets in their Jesuits habits. In August following, they
being at Angiers in France, there repaired to their lodging an Englishman, in
his Friars weeds, who informed them, That he was an Englishman by birth, but a
Dominican Freer by profession, newly come from Salamanca in Spain, and bound
for England; that he had been at Rome, where he had left some goods with an
Irish Jesuit, who promised to return moneys on them in France, but had failed
to do it; whereupon he was in present distress for money to transport him to
England, desiring their favor to furnish him with moneys, which he would
faithfully repay in London, and if they had any Letters to send to their
friends in England, he would see them safely delivered. The Gentlemen finding
him to be an excellent Scholar of very good parts and edu^^tion entertained him
5. or 6. days at their lodging, till they could furnish him with moneys, and
upon his Account as a Freer, had a very good intertainment in the Monastery at
Angiers by the Freers thereof: During his stay there they had much discourse
with him: He told them he had been formerly a Student in Kings College in
Cambridge; after that at Salamanoa in Spain, for 8. years. Being demanded by
them, Whether there were not many Jesuits and Freers then in England? He
assured them upon his own knowledge, they had then above five hundred Jesuits
in London and the Suburbs; and that they had at least four or five Jesuits and
Popish Priests in and about London, to every Minister we had there. Whereupon
they demanding of him; How so many Jesuits and Priests were there maintained?
He answered, That the Jesuits and every Order of Freers had their several
Treasurers in London, who by Orders from their Provincials furnished them with
what ever Moneys they wanted by Bills of Exchange returned to them; That all
the Jesuits and Priests in England were maintained according to their
respective qualities; A Lords Son, like a Lord, and a Knights Son like a
Knight; and if they chanced to meet him in London at their return, though he
were now in a poor weed, they should find him in Scarlet, or Plush, and a
better equipage than what he was in. He would not discover his true name to
them, but upon discourse on a sudden, he mentioned His Cozen Howard in England,
which made them suspect he was of that family. He told them further; that
though we were very cunning in England, yet the Jesuits and Priests there were
too crafty for us, lurking under so many disguises that they could hardly be
discovered: That there was but one way to detect them; which they being
inquisitive to know. He said, it was for those who suspected them to be Priests
to feign themselves Roman Catholics, and upon that account to desire the
Sacrament from them, which they could not deny to give them (after Confession
to them) being bound thereto by Oath, by which means some of them had been
betrayed. He further informed them: That himself had been at all the several
Gathered Churches, Congregations and Sects in London, and that none of them
came so near the Sea Mr. Smiths 2. New Books against the Quakers, and Dell,
proving them to be Papists.
Papists in their Opinions and Tenants as the Quakers, among whom himself had
spoken. This relation one of the Gentlemen (a person of honor and reputation,
the other being dead) has lately made to me three several times with his own
mouth, and will attest it for truth, having related it to sundry others since
his return into England. Which considered, Whether it be not the very Highway
to our Churches, Religions, Ministers, Nations ruin and destruction to list so
many Quakers, Anabaptists, Sectaries, in the Army and New Militiaes in most
Counties, where they bear the greatest sway; and to disarm the Presbyterians
and Orthodox Protestants, as the only dangerous persons, and put all their arms
into Quakers, Anabaptists, and Sectaries hands (headed, steered by Jesuits,
Popish Priests and Freers) as they have done in Gloucester, Colchester,
Cheshire, Lancashire, and endeavor to do in other parts, to cut all true
Protestants throats, and set up Popery by the Army (which has so much advanced
it of late years) before we are aware? Let all true zealous Protestants in
London and else where timely, seriously consider, and endeavor speedily to
prevent (and the Council of Army Officers, with their new Commit^ of Safety
too, if they have any care of their Native Country, or Protestant Religion)
before it be over-late.

Whether we may not justly fear, that God himself in his retaliating Justice,
for the Iunctoes and Armies unparalleld Exile of their Protestant King and
Royal posterity into Popish Territories; and yet permitting such swarms of
Jesuits, Monks and Romish Vermin to creep in and reside amongst us; may not
give up the dissolved Juncto, Army, Council of Officers, Soldiers, and their
posterities, with our whole three Nations, as a prey and spoil to these
seducing, dividing, ravening, all-devouring Wolves; yea to the combined forces
of our Spanish and French Popish adversaries, to the utter desolation,
extirpation, ruin of our Protestant Religion, in the midst of our present
divisions and distractions, under a just pretext of restoring the exiled Royal
issue to their hereditary rights, and avenging the manifold indignities to them
and their relations, unless timely and wisely prevented by a prudent, voluntary
closing with, and loyal, christian restoring them, by common consent our
selves, in a full and free Parl. upon just, safe, honorable terms, becoming us
both as Men, Christians, and Professors of the Reformed Religion? And whether
we be not ripe for such a universal desolating judgment as this, if we
consider, Is. 24.16, 17, 18. c. 33.1, 2. c. 59.1, to 19. 2 Chr. 3.6.15, to 21.
Mich. 2.2, 3, 4, 5. Ezech. 35.14, 15. Joel 3.6, 7, 8. or the late and present
sufferings of most other Protestant Churches abroad, not half so Treacherous,
Perfidious, Wicked, Execrable as we, who are now become the very Monsters of
Men, the scandal, shame, reproach of Christianity, and humanity in the repute
of all the world?

Whether the Iuncto and Army Officers who have (like Is. 5 c 3. to 8.
Hypocritical Israelites) very frequently ordered, celebrated many Hypocritical
irreligious Mock-facts from time to time, to fast for strife, and debate, and
to smite with the fist of wickedness; never yet observing, practicing that
fast which God himself requires, to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo
the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go free, to break every yoke, to deal
their bread to the hungry, to bring the poor (exiled Protestant Royal issue and
their English followers) that are cast out (by them) to their Houses, to cover
the naked, and not hide their selves from their own flesh: who have hitherto
made their public and private days of Humiliation, a constant Prologue to
their ambition, pride, Psa. 66.7.
and rebellious self-exaltation; their days of praying to God, a preface to
their preying upon their brethren; their seeking of God for direction and
assistance in their designs, a means to color and promote the very John 8.44,
45. Ephesians. 5.19, 20, 21.
works of their father the devil; their pretended following the secret impulses
of the spirit of God, the sol^ justification of Ephesians. 2.2, 3.
walking according to the Prince of the air, the spirit that now works in the
Children of disobedience: their making, taking of solemn Oaths, Vows,
Protestations, Covenants, Engagements to be true, faithful, oonstant, loyal,
obedient to their Lawful Kings their heirs, successors, superiors, the
Privileges, Rights of Parliament our Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Religion,
etc. a mere engine and diabolical stratagem, more cunningly, boldly,
audaciously, perfidiously to betray, undermine, supplant, subve^t them; have
not now just cause upon consideration of Isaiah 1.2, to 17. and chap. 58. to
keep many public, private Fasts, and days of Humiliation, to confess,
bewail, repent, renounce, and reform these their transcendent-crying,
wrath-provoking sins and abominations: together with their Micah 3.10 Hab. 2.12,
building up of Zion (their New Republike, Free State, Churches, Kingdom of
Jesus Christ) with blood, and ^stablishing Jerusalem with iniquity, Micah ^.1,
2, 3, 4, 5.
their devising iniquity and working evil upon their beds, and practicing it
when the morning is light, because it is in the power of their hand, and
swords: their coveting (other men's) fields, houses, and taking them away by
violence; so they oppr^sse a man (yea their Protestant King, and thousands more
of their Protestant brethern) and his house; yea a man and his inheritance: for
fear they incur the fatal inevitable Woes, evils, Judgments, denounced by
God, against such crying Sins, oppressions, violences, to the utter
desolation, extirpation of them, their families, yea of our English Zion and
Jerusalem, Mic. 2.1, to 6. Is. 32.1, 2. c. 3, throughout: with that of Hab.
2.7, 8. Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that
shall vex thee, and thou shall be for booties unto them? Because thou have
spoiled many Nations, all the remnant of the people shall spoil thee: because
of men's blood, and for the violence of the Land, of the City, (Army) and all
that dwell therein?

Magna Charta, c. 29, 30. the Petition of Right and all other Laws, Statutes
which concern the preservation of the Lives, Free-holds, Liberties, Properties,
Franchises of the Subjects, the inheritance and succession of the Crown, the
Rights and Privileges of Parliament) their ending the last Easter Term, with
very little Law, and no conscience at all; their beginning Trinity Term with
very little Conscience (monopolized in their conscientious Speakers breast
alone) without any Law at all; and their holding part only of Michaelmas Term
without any Chancery or Conscience (voted by some to be both useless and
dangerous) or any real Law in the judgment of understanding Lawyers, and
breaking it off, without any Law or Conscience, to the undoing of many poor
oppressed Clients left without relief; with their manifold transcendent
obstructions, subversions both of Law, Equity, Justice, Conscience, Property,
Liberty, in their most arbitrary lawless Committees of Indemnity, and Courts
of High Injustice; be not a transcendent violation of all their former
Remonstrances, Declarations, Votes, Protestations, League, Covenant; Inviolably
to defend these Laws, and a mere Iesuitical design (as I have My true and
perfect Narrative, p 58, to 64.
elsewhere evidenced) to work our utter dissolution (the Laws being the only
Ligaments to unite, and Pillar to sup^ort our State and Kingdom; whereby not
only the Regal and Parliamental authority, but the peoples security of Lands,
livings, lives, privileges both in general and particular are preserved,
maintained, by the abolishing or alteration whereof, it is impossible but that
present Confusion will fall upon the whole State, Frame of this Kingdom and
Nation: as the Statute of 1. Iac. c. 2. resolves, and we find by woeful
experience? Whether the Army Council of Officers, have not most exemplarily and
satisfactorily performed this part of their last printed Declaration, 27 October.
1659. p. 18. We earnestly desire and shall endeavor, That a full and through
Reformation of the Law may be effected; by their new Committee of Safeties
imperious Order sent to Mr. Dudley Short (a Citizen of London) whom Mr. Thurlo
(whiles Secretary) committing close Prisoner to a M^ssenger several weeks, so
as neither his wife nor friends could ^ave any access unto him, upon a mere
Trepan, and supposed matter of Account between him and a Scotsman with whom he
traded, and enforcing him at last ere released to enter into a Bond of 6000 l.
with sufficient security for appearing before the Council of State, and to go
in person into Scotl. when ever he should be required, and ordering him to go
into Scotland soon after (under pain of for^^iting his 6000 l. bond) upon his
own expense, where after many weeks attendance, and frequent examinations
before the Council there, touching this account, the Scotsman appeared to be
indebted to him above 120 l. whereupon he was dismissed thence. For which most
unjust vexation, oppression and false Imprisonment against the Great Charter,
c. 29. the Petition of Right, with other Acts, and the late Statute of 17
Caroli, c. 10. For Regulating the Privy Council, (to Mr. Shorts great expense,
loss of trade, reputation, and his damage of Ten thousand pounds, as he
declared) he brought his Action at law in the Common Pleas Court, which was set
down to be tried at Guildhall, the 12. of this November. Whereupon Mr. Thurlo
procured an express Order from the new Committee of Safety, wherein they
presume to indemnifie him (by their exorbitant arbitrary power) against this
action of false Imprisonment, and to enjoin the Plaintiff both to surc^ase and
release his suit, and never to prosecute it more; and command his Counsel,
Attorney, Solicitor, the Judge himself, and all other Officers, not to proceed
therein at their utmost peril, upon this ground; because if this Trial should
proceed, any others of the late and present Council of State might have actions
brought against them for illegal commitments and imprisonments: Upon this the
Officers of the Court refused to seal his Record for the Trial, and his
Attorney and Counsel durst not proceed for fear of being laid by the heels.
Whereupon he complained against this abu^e, and moved for a trial in open
Court, urged these Statutes^ with the Statutes of 2 E. 3. c. 2.20 E. 3. c. 1,
2^ and the Judges Oath, That it shall not be commanded by the great Seal, nor
little Seal, to disturb or delay common right; And though such commandments do
come, the Justices shall not therefore cease to do right in any point: And that
the I^stices shall not deny nor delay to no man common Right by the Kings
Letters, nor none other man's, nor for none other cause. And in case any Letters
come to them contrary to Law they shall ^o nothing by such Letters, and go
forth to do the Law, notwithstanding such Letters: And pressing the Judge to
do him right accordingly, and to give him an answer in open Court; yet their
Order countermanded these Statutes and Judges Oath: So that no man, though
never so unjustly committed, oppressed, grieved by the Old and New Council of
State, to his ruin; shall have any remedy at all against them: since they may
thus indemnify each other against all Actions commenced. And if they bring an
Habeas Corpus for their enlargement, and be bayled according to Law by the
Judges; the new Gardians of our Liberties, Preservers of our Safety, and
Thorough Reformers of our Laws, (by extirpating them root and branch) will
even in the very face of the Court, as soon as they have put in bayl, in
contempt of Law and Justice command Soldiers and their Sergeant at Arms, by new
Orders to arrest and carry them to other Prison^, and foreign Islands, as they
did Mr. Nuport and Mr. Halsey on the 18. of this instant Nov. notwithstanding
they had put in bail of 10000. l. a piece for their peaceable deportment: Yea
if any henceforth move for Habeas Corporaes they will remove them unto New
Prisons, or Gards of Soldiers, or send them into Foreign parts to prevent their
returns and enlargement by our Laws; as some have been newly dealt with, by
these New full and through R^formers of the Laws, Whether these very
first fruits of their full and through pretended Reformation of our Laws,
proving so bitter, trampling all Law and Justice under foot, with greater
scorn, contempt, impudence than ever any Kings, Old Council Table Lords,
Stra^^ord or Canterbury were guilty of: And their leaving not so much as one
Judge or Justice to act under them in any one Court of Justice at Westminster,
nor no face of any real or pretended Legal Authority in England or Ireland to
execute Justice between man and man: and dismounting all those Judges, Grandees
of the Law who formerly complied with them, and acted under them in all their
Innovations, (a just reward for their temporizing against their Judgments, Law
and Conscience) their future harvest of our Laws Reformation will not probably
prove so lawless and exorbitant, that the whole English Nation (and Army too,
if they have not abandonned all humanity, christianity, charity, justice) will
revive this prayer in our ancient Liturgy, against such a full and through
Deformation and Deformers of our Laws. From all evil and mischief; from all
blindness of heart, from pride, vainglory and hypocrisy, from envy, hatred,
and all uncharitableness, from all deceits of the World, the Flesh and Devil
good Lord deliver us. And exhort their fellow brethren of Scotland and Ireland
in the Apostles words, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2. Finally, brethren, pray for us, that
the word of the Lord (and good old Laws of the Land) may run and have free
course, and be glorified; and that we may be delivered from absurd, or
unreasonable and wicked men, (who thus reform and purge out the Laws very
bowels) for all men (and such reforming Saints especially) have not faith:
whatever they profess, who under pretext of a most transcendent Reformation
and purgation of the Gospel and Law, would reduce us into the condition of the
Israelites, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. Now for a long season Israel had been without the
true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without Law? And why so? The
Apostle resolves us in direct terms, 1 Timothy 1.4. etc. The end of the Law is
charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeined:
from which some having swerved have turned aside to vain jangling: desiring to
be teachers, (yea Reformers) of the Law, understanding neither what they say,
nor what they affirm. But we know that the Law is good, if a man use it
lawfully; knowing also that the Law is not made for a righteous man; but for
the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners. For Murderers of
Fathers and murderers of Mothers, for manslayers, etc. For men stealers for
liars, for perjured persons, and every other thing that is contrary to sound
doctrine: And our Army-Grandees, Juncto, and new Reformers being such; would
abrogate all Laws, and Lawyers too, least they should restrain and punish them
for these their Capital crimes: Forgetting this lesson, that though they null
all the Laws and Courts of Justice in Westminster Hall, and elsewhere; yet they
shall never abrogate nor escape the Law, Judgment, Execution, Justice and
vengeance of Romans 2.2, 3, 8, 9, 12.
God himself who will render indignation and wrath, tribula^ion and anguish to
every soul of man that does evil^ whether Jew or Gentile. For as many who have
sinned without L^w^ shall also perish without Law, and as many as have sinned
in the Law, shall be judged by the Law. Enough to dissuade them from their
intended Reformation, to reform their own and the Armies l^wless exorbitances,
before they reform our Laws, or others far better than themselves.

Whether all the old conscientious, faithful, public Member's, who to the
uttermost of their powers opposed, voted, protested against all the late dismal
Jesuitical Powder-Treasons, Violences, Innovations, Ex^rbi^ances of the
dissolved Iuncto and Army, and have 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
vexed their righteous souls, from day to day, yea Psalm. 119.13^
shed rivers of te^rs from their mournful eyes, because of these their heinous
transgressions against the Laws of God and the Land, may not with much comfort
apply this promise of God to themselves, and their uncharitable brethren, who
secluded all, and imprisoned sundry of them. Isa. 66.5, 6. etc. 26.11, 13, 14.
Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word: Your brethren that
hated you, that cast you out for my name sake, said, Let the Lord be (thereby)
glorified, but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed. (by
reason of their own double ejection, dissolution in a strange unexpected
manner) A voice of noise from the City; a voice from the Temple; a voice of the
Lord that renders recompense to his enemies. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up,
they will not see; but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy toward
the people; yea the fire of their Enemies (their very fiery Guards and
Powder-men) shall devour them. O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee (our
New Supr^me Lords, Powers, Protectors of the dissolved Junctoes, counsel, and
the other House) have had dominion over us, but by thee only will we make mention
of thy name: They ^^e dead, they shall not live; they are deceased, they shall
not rise: therefore have thou visited and destroyed them, and made all their
Memory to Perish: Even Judges 5.31.
so let all thine Enemies (and the public impenitent, malicious En^mies of our
Churches, Kings, Kingdoms, Parliaments, Peoples Liberties) fall and perish, O
Lord: but let them that love thee (and the public peace, welfare, settlement,
prosperity of our Churches, Kings Kingdoms, Nations) be a^ the Sun when he
goes forth in his might; That so the Land may have rest forty years together:
as the Land of Israel had, after Judges 4.15.
the Lord had discomfited Sisera, and all his Chariots, and all his host with
the edge of the Sword, before Barak and Deborah, Amen.

Trustbreakers, and the whole House of Lords, for whose defense they were
raised, waged, commissioned; and their subsequent dissolving, dissipating with
high scorn, their own Anti-Parliamentary Iunctoes from whom they received
their new Commissions, end engaged several times, to yield their utmost
assistance to them to sit in safety, to be true, faithful and constant to
them, and to live and die in their defense: be a conscientious saint-like
performance.

1. Of John Baptists Evangelical Injunction to all Soldiers, Luke 3.14. Do
violence to no man, neither accus^ any falsely, and be content with your
allowance. 2ly. Of St. Paul's description of a good Soldier of Jesus Christ 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. Thou therefore endure hardness: No man that warreth, intangleth
himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him who has chosen
him to be a Soldier. (not disobey, betray, supplant or destroy him) 3ly. Of
Paul's and Peter's express commands to all Officers, Soldiers whatsoever, as
well as others, Romans 13.1, 2, etc. Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers: for there is no power but of God: the powers that be, are ordained of
God. Whosoever therefore resists the power resists the Ordinance of God:
and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation, etc. Wherefore ye
must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Tit.
3.1, 2. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers; to obey
Magistrates, to be ready to every good work: To speak evil of no man; to be
gentle, showing all meekness unto all men. Ephesians. ^.5, 6, 7. Col. 4.22, 23, 24.
Servants (and such are all Mercen^ry Officers, Soldiers, under pay to the old
Parliament and Kingdom) obey in all things, your Masters according to the
flesh, in fear and trembling, in singleness of heart, as unto Christ, Not with
ey^ service, as men-pleasers; but as the servants of Christ doing the will of
God from the heart. With good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to
men; for ye serve the Lord Christ. 1 Pet. 2.13, to 20. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man for the Lord sake, whether it be to the King as supreme,
or unto Governors, as unto those who are sent by him for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well; for so is the will of God, that
with well-doing ye put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. As free, and
not using your liberty, as a cloak of maliciousn^sse, but as the servants of
God. Honor all men, (in lawful authority) Fear God, Honor the King.
Servants, be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for
conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. Whether by their
former and late rebellions against the King, Parl. and all their lawful
Superiors, and exalting themselves above all the^r former Lords and Masters,
they have not given Christ himself the lie, and falsified his reiterated
Asseveration, Resolution. Mat. 10.24. John 13.16. c. 15.10. Verily, Verily I
say unto you, the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above, or
groater than his Lord; neither he that is sent, greater than he that sent him.
If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them! Whether they will not
prove bitterness, damnation, ruin to them in the latter end, and teach, engage
all Common soldiers under them to be treacherous, rebellious, disobedient unto
them, and thrust them out of all their commands, now they have neither legal
Commissions nor a^thority to rule them, nor moneys to pay or quarter them, nor
employment under them for the peoples welfare, but only for their own ambitious
ends and self-preservation, for which they were never raised, since their own
presidents and principles of treachery and disobedience to all their former
Superiors animate them thereunto.

publik^ confe^^io^ in the Book of Common Prayer. Almighty and m^st m^rcifull
Father, we have erred and stray^d from thy ^aye^ li^^ los^ sheep. We have
followed too much the de^ices and desires of our own hearts; we have offended
against thy holy laws; we have le^t ^ndone those things which we ^ught to h^ve
done, and we have done those things which we ought not to have done, and there
is no health nor truth in ^s. But thou O Lord have mercy upon us miserable
Offen^^^^. And grant that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober
life, to the glory of thy holy name. Amen. Which if these Workers of iniquity
shall still refuse to do, as if the Lord did neither see nor regard it; and
thereby provoke our 3. Nations to cry out with united prayers to God against
the^; Psalm. 12.^, 2. ^sal. 94.1.
Help Lord, for the godly man cease, for the faithful fail from among the
children of men. With flattering lips, and with a double heart do they ^pake,
every one to his neighbor. O Lord God of revenges, O Lord God to whom vengeance
belongs, show thy self; lift up thy self thou Judge of the Earth, render a
reward to the proud: Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked
triumph: how long shall they utter hard things, and all the workers of iniquity
bo^st themselves? They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, and afflict thine
heritage; they slay the widow and murder the fatherless; They gather themselves
together against the soul of the right^ous, and condemn the innocent blood.
Whether they must not then expect that inevitable doom of God himself, ensuing
after such practices and Prayers, Psa. 94.23. And the Lord shall bring upon
them their own iniquity, and shall cut them off in their own wickedness; yea
the Lord our God shall cut them off? Ps. 37.38, 39^ 40.
The transgr^ssors shall be destroyed together, the end of the wicked shall be
cut off: But the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord, he is their
strength in the time of troble. And the Lord shall help them, and deliver them,
he shall deliv^r them from the wicked, and save them because they trust in him.

Jer. 36.3, 7. It may be they will (now) present their supplications before the
Lord, and r^turn every one from his evil way, that God may forgive their
iniquity and their sin; for great is the anger and the fury that the Lord has
pronounced against this people.

An Exact Alphabe^ical Li^t of the Old and N^w secluded Memb^r^ of the Comm^ns
House in the long Parliament, surviving May 7. 1659. when the dissolved Juncto
began their new Session.
Baronets, Knights and Viscoun^s.
LOrd Ancram, Sir Ralph Ashton, Sir John Barring^on, Sir Thoma^ Barn^rdiston,
Sir Robert Benloe^ Sir George Booth, Sir Humphry Bridges, Sir Ambrose Brown,
Sir John Burgo^n, Sir Roger Burgoin, Sir Henry ^h^lmley, Sir John Clotworthy,
Sir John Corbet, Sir John Curson, Sir Thomas D^cre^, Sir Franci^ Dr^ke, Sir
William Drake, Sir Walter Earl, Sir C^arles Egerton, Sir John Evelin of Surry,
Sir John Evelin of Wilres, Sir John Fenwick, Sir Edmund Fowel, Sir Gilb^rt
Gerard, Sir Ha^botle Grimston, Sir Ri^hard H^nghton, Sir John Holland, Sir
Anthony ^^by, Sir Mar^in Knatchbull, Sir John Leigh, Sir William L^w^^, Sir
William Li^^^r, Sir William Lit^on, Sir Sam^el Luke, Sir Nichol^^ Martyn, Sir
Thomas Middl^ton, Sir Robert Nappirr, Sir Rober^ Ne^h^m, Sir Dudly North, Sir
John No^thcot, Sir Richard Onslow, Sir Hug^ Owen, Sir John P^lgrave, Sir Philip
Parker, Si^ Thoma^ Parker, Sir Edward Partridge, Sir John Pellam, Sir William
Pl^ter^, Sir Nevil Poole, Sir J^^n Po^^, Sir Robert Pie, Sir F^an^is Russel,
Sir (...) Sain^^ John, Sir John S^ymo^, Sir Thoma^ So^e, Sir William
Stri^kl^nd, ^ir John Temple, Sir Thom^^ Trever, Sir Humph. Tu^ton, Sir William
Waller, Th^m^^ Viscount Wenman, Sir Henry Wo^sly, Sir Ri^hard Win, Sir John
Young. In all 64.

Esquiers, G^ntlemen and Lawyers.
Joh^ Alford, Arthur Ansley, Mr. Andrews, William Ardington, John Arundle, Mr.
A^cough, Francis Bacon, Nathaniel Bacon, Edward Bainton, ^ol. John Barker,
Maurice Barro, Mr. Bell, James Bence, Col. John Birch, Edward Bis^, John
Bowyer, John Boys, Major Brooks, Major General Brown, Samuel Brown, Serjant at
Law, Francis Buller, John Bunkly, Hugh Buscoen, Mr. Bu^ton, Mr. Camble, William
Carren^, Col. Ceely, Jame^ Chaloner, Mr. Clive, Commiss. Copley, John Crew,
Thomas Crompton, Mr. Crowder, Thoma^ Dacre, John Dormer, John Doyle, Mr. Drake,
Robert Ellison, Mr. Eri^^y, Mr. Evelin, Edward Fowel, William Foxwi^t, John
Francis, James Fyennis, Nathaniel Fyennis, Samuel Gardener, Francis Gerard,
Thomas Gewen, William Glan^il, John Glynne Serjant at Law, Samuel Got, Thomas
Grove, Elias Grymes, Brampton Gurdon, Edward Harby, Col. Edward Harley, Major
Harley, John Hatcher, John Ha^don, James Herbert, John Herbert, Mr. Hobby,
Thoma^ Hodges, Denzel Hollis, Franci^ Hollis, George Horner, Edmund Ho^kin^,
John Hungerford, Col Hunt, Mr. Jennings, William Jones, George Keckwich,
Richard Knighly, Col. Lassel^, H^nry L^urence, Col, Lee, Mr. Lewis, Col. Walter
Long, Mr. Low^y, Col. John Loyde, Mr. Lucas, Mr. Lu^kin, John Mainard,
Christopher Martin, Major Genesis Edward Massey, Thomas Middleton, Thoma^ Moor^,
William Morris, George Mountague, Mr. Nash, James Nelthrop, Alder^an Nixon,
Mr. North, Col. Norton, Mr. Onslow, Arthur Owen, Henry Oxinden, Mr. Packer, Mr.
Peck, Henry Pellam, William Peirpoint, Jervase Pigot, Mr. Potter, Mr. Poole,
Col. Alexander Popham, Mr. Povy, M^. Pri^ty, William Prynne, Alexander Pym,
Charles Pym, Mr. Rainscraft, Mr. Ratcliffe, Charle^ Rich^ Col. Edward Rossiter,
Mr. Scowen, Mr. Scut, Col. Robert Sh^peot, Col. Shuttleworth, Mr. Spelman, Mr.
Springat^, Henry Stapleton, Robert Stanton, Edward Stephen^, John Steph^ns,
Nathaniel Stephens, Mr. Stockfield, John Swinfen, Mr. Temple, Mr. Terwit, Mr.
Thistlethwait, Mr. Thomas, Isaac Thomas, Mr. Thynne, Mr. T^lson, J^hn T^ever,
Thomas Twisden Sergeant at Law, Mr. Vassal, Mr. Vaugha^, Thomas Waller, Mr.
West, Henry Weston, William Wheeler, Col. Whitehead, Henry Wilkes, Capt^in
Wingate, Mr. Winwood, Thomas Wogan, Mr. Wray, Richard Win.

The Total Number, 203. besides the House of Lords.

An Alph^betical List of all Members of the late dissolved Iuncto.
JAmes Ash, Alderman Atkins, William Air, Mr. Baker, Col. Bennet, Col.
Bingham, Daniel Blagrave, Mr. Br^wster, Willi^m Cawly, Thomas Chaloner, Mr.
Cecil the self-degraded Earl of Sali^bury, Robert Cecil his son, John Corbet,
Henry Darley, Richard Darley, Mr. Dixwell, John Dove, Mr. Downe^, Serj. Earl,
Will. Else, Mr. Feilder, Mr. Fell, Col. Charles Fleetwood, Augustine Garland,
Mr. Gold, John Goodwin, Robert Goodwin, John G^rdon, Mr. H^llowes, Sir James
H^rrington, Col. Harvy, Sir Arthur Hasilrig, Mr. Hayes, Mr. Herbert the
self-degraded Earl of Pembrook, Roger Hill, Cornelius Holland, Col. Hut^hi^son,
Col. Ingol^by, Philip Jones, Mr. Leachmore, William Lenthall Speaker, John
Lenthall his son, John Lisle, Philip Viscont Lisle, Thomas Lister, Nicholas
Love, Col. Ludlow, Henry Martyn a prisoner in execution, Mr. Main, Sir Henry
Mildmay, Gilbert Millington, Col. Herbert Morley, Lord Viscont Munson, a
prisoner in execution, Henry Nevil, Robert Nicholas, Michael Oldsworth, Dr.
Palmer, Alderman Pennington, Sir Gilbert Pi^kering, John Pine, Edmond Prideaux,
William Puresoy, Thomas Pury, Robert Reynolds, Col. Rich, Luke Robinso^, Oliver
Saint-John, Major Saloway, Mr. Say, Thomas Scot, Major General Skippon,
Augustine Skinner, Mr. Smith, Walter Strickland, Col. Sydenham, James Temple,
Col. Temple, Col. Thompson, Serjant Thorpe, John Trencher, Sir John Trevor, Sir
Henry Vane, Col. Wait, Mr. Wallop, Sir Thomas Walsing^am, Col. Walton, Sir
Peter Wentworth, Edmond Weaver, Mr. White, Sergeant Wild, Sir Thomas
Witherington, Sir Thomas Wroth.

The total Sum, -- 92.

Note, That of these Members (whereof two are since dead) there entered only 42.
into the House at first; that the rest came in to them by degrees, either to
keep their old preferments, gain new, or regain the places they had formerly
lost (^specially the Lawyers, who notwithstanding their former complyances, are
turned quite out of Office, and dis-Judged;) that 10. or more of them, came in
by New Writs issued in the Name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England,
after the Kings beh^ading, and were no Members of the long Parliament; That
there were never 60. of them together in the House at once whiles they sat:
and but 57. on the 11. and 12. of October last upon the great debate between
them and the Army Officers: And some that sat formerly with them (as the Lord
Fairfax, John ^ary, and others) refused to sit with them now, as having not the
least color of Law, to sit or act as a Parliament. Yea, their Speaker Mr.
Lenthal, told the Officers of the Army and Members, who came to invite him to
sit again, May 6. That he had a Soul to save; and that he was not satisfied in
point of Law, conscience or prudence that they could sit again: B^t at last
when he considered, he had an estate to ^ave (as he told another Friend) that
over-ballanced all his former Objections: and made him, and other M^mbers act
against their judgments, consciences, and to forg^t our Savio^rs sad Q^aeres,
Mat. 16.26. What is a man profited if he should gain the whole world and lose
his own Soul? O^, what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? With that of
Jer. 5.29.31. Shall I not visit for these things? Shall not my soul be avenged
on such a Nation as this? And what will ye do in the end thereof?

To fill up the Vacant Pages of this sheet, I shall propose 7. Quaeres more to
this late dissipated Rump, to which I expect their satisfactory Answer, ere
they presume to sit again, as many of them endeavor.

1. Whether they could with any color of Law, truth, reason, justice,
co^scien^e heretofore, or can hereafter by virtue of their first Writs and
Electio^s, entitle themselves, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland; when by their Writs, Elections and Indentures, by which
they pretended to sit, they were only a small inconsiderable Fragment, of the
Parliament of the late King and Realm of England, but never of the Realm of
Scotland or Ireland, which have their Cooks 4. Instit, c. 1.75, 76.
distinct Parliaments from England, and no legal Parliament of England,
Scotland or Ireland: ever hitherto was or can be held without a King and House
of Lords, and a full House of Commons, of which they are not the fifth part?

2. Whether those Interloping Members Elected since the Kings beheading, and
old Parliaments dissolution by his death, by Writs only in the name of the
Gaolers of the Liberties of England, can fit, act, or join with the Tail of
the old Commons House, elected only by the beheaded Kings Writs, and so owning
his Royal Authority in Deeds, though abjuring it and Kingship, by their
Declarations, Votes, Knacks, Engagements and new-coined Oaths? Whether such a
strange model as this, be not a Violation of Deuteronomy. 22.9, 10, 11. Thou shall not
sow thy Vineyard with diverse seeds, lest the fruit of thy seed and Vineyard be
defiled. Thou shall not plow with an Ox and an Ass together. Thou shall not
wear a garment of diverse sorts, as of Woollen and Linen together? And as great
an Absurdity as that in Horace, Humano Capiti cervicem jungere Equinam?

3ly. Whether it will not be the Extremity of folly and frenzy for this twice
dissolved Anti-Parliamentary Iuncto to conceit, that Lambert and those
Army Officers, who have twice turned them out of Doors with greatest Infamy,
and branded them with so many deserved Marks of Treachery, Injustice,
Usurpation, Rashness, Oppression, self-seeking, or the surviving numerous
Members of the ou^ long Parliament, or the Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Ports
for which they served, the old House of Peers, or our three Kingdoms, will ever
patiently permit them to sit or Act as a lawful Parliament of England,
Scotland and Ireland; or submit to any of their Anti-Parliamentary Knacks,
Taxes, Excises, Imposts, Militia^s, Orders, or Usurped Regal P^rliamental
sovereign legislative Authority; without rising up unanimously against them, as
the worst, impudentest, sottishest of Trayt^rs, Usurpers, Enemies to the Peace
and settlement, of our 3. Kingdoms, (as their last Knack of October. 12. their
Plea, and other late publications of their own, proclaim them to all the world)
which they have so miserably oppressed, impoverished, rent in pieces by their
forementioned Treasons, Innovations, and complying with those ambitious,
covetous Army Officers, and Jesuitical Emissaries, whose designs, and their own
self ends they have only pursued, to the public desolation of our Kingdoms and
Churches? And whether their re-secluding of the Lords House, and their old
surviving Fellow Members will not be a justification, and ground for their own
third ejec^ment and dissolution, by the Army or others, if they presume to sit
and act again without them?

4. Whether there be any probability or possibility, (considering all the
premises) that any Common Soldiers, Mariners, or other inferior Officers in
the Army or Navy, can expect any real payment of their arrears, or future pay,
or the People of our 3. Nations any Trade, Peace, Ease, Settlement in the least
degree, but inevitable speedy desolation, confusion, destruction, unless they
all cordially unite their endeavors, counsels, forces for the speedy
convening, and secure un-interrupted fitting of a full, free and Legal English
Parliament, according to the Act of 17 Caroli cap. 1. and declaring all such
Members of the twice-dis^ipated Juncto, and Army-Grandees Traitors and Enemies
to the public, who shall openly and wilfully oppose this their just and
necessary only probable means of their Tranquillity, Safety, Prosperity? Which
they pretend to aim at in words and Declaration^, but diametrically contradict
by their Proc^edings, as experience manifests, past all contradiction.

5. Whether our Protestant King, his Brethren and follow^rs expelled out of
their Protestant Realms, and foreign Allies Territories, into Popish idolatrous
foreign Quarters, where they sojourn, to the hazard of their Religion, Souls
Bodie^, by the malice of the dissolved Iuncto, Army, Republican Saints; may not
now justly use that Speech of ^nnocent persecuted, exiled David to King Saul in
the like case and condition, 1 Samuel 26.19. If the Lord has stirred thee up
against me, let him accept an offering: but if they be the Children of men,
Cursed be they before the Lord, for they have driven me out this day from
abiding in the Inheritanc^ of the Lord, saying, On serve other Gods? And
whether God by way of requital for this their transcendent impiety, and other
premised Crimes, Treasons of all sorts, wherein they impeni^ently persevere,
may not justly inflict on the Iunc^o, Army-Grandees^ and their posterities,
that severe judgment threatened to the Israelites, Jer. 16.13. Deutr. 4.27, 28.
c. 28.64, 65, 66. Therefore will I cast you out of this land, into a land that
ye know not, neither ye nor your fathers; and the Lord shall scatter you among
the Nations, and ye shall be left few in number among the Heathen whither the
Lord shall lead you; and there you shall serve Gods day and night, the work of
men's hands, wood and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell;
where I will not show you favor. And amongst these Nations thou shall find no
ease neither shall the sole of thy feet ^ave rest, but the Lord shall give thee
there a trembling heart, and fa^ling of eyes, and sorrow of mind; and thy life
shall hang in doubt before thee day and night, and thou shall have non^
As^uranc^ of thy life: In the morning thou shall say, would God it were even;
and at even tho^ shall say, would God it were morning, for the fear of thine
heart, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shall see: And there shall ye
be sold unto your En^mies for bondmen and bondwomen, and no man shall buy you?
O tremble at the serious thoughts thereof, and be no more stiff-necked.

6. Whether the memorable Example of Gods divine Justice upon Lockier, an
active Agitator and Leveller in the Army, who had a principle hand in seizing,
and bringing the King to his death, cried out Justice, Justice, Justice openly
against him, and spit in the Kings face in Westminster Hall, when going to his
Trial, before his condemnation; conducted him to the block; and was within 3.
Months after condemned in a Council of War by some of the Kings own Judges,
and shot to death as a M^tineer, in London, 27 April 1649^ The tragical
self-execution of Thomas Hoyle, Alderman and Knight for the City of York, one
of the Juncto, and High Court of Justice, (though he signed not the Kings
Sentence) and one who consented to, and subscribed the New Engagement, against
a King and House of Lords, against his conscience, fo^mer Oaths, Covenant, and
Protestation he had taken^ the horror whereof so terrified his conscience, Nota.
that on the 30. of January 1649. (the very day^ Twelvemoneth of the Kings
execution) he hanged himself with a cord in his Chamber at Westminster, about
the very time of the day the King was there executed the year before. The
Execution of sundry Levellers at Burford that year, with John Lilburnes double
Trial for his life soon after by Cromwels own Prosecution: his proceedings
against Saxbey, Syndercombe, and other Levellers, though his chief Instruments
to bring the King to Justice, to seclude the Majority of the Members, and
suppress the whole House of Lords. The sudden and fearful deaths of Col. Ven,
Rigby, and others of the Kings Judges; the cashiering, close Imprisonments,
suff^ings of M.G. Harrison, Col. Rich, Col. Overton, Col. Okey, Lord Gray of
Grooby, and others of the Kings condemners by Cromwell himself who engaged them
therein; The Removal of John Bradshaw, from his Presidentship, and Feudes
between Cromwell and him, who secluded him ou^ of his f^^st Instrumental
Parliament, in 1654. and after that threatened to imprison and question him for
his life; With the la^e pangs of conscience which Col. William Purefoye
sustained before his death in September last, for having a hand in the Kings
blood, which lay heavy on his heart, (as he told some Friends.) To say nothing
of Oliver Cromwels own death, September. 3. on which day he shed much Protestant
Christian blood in the battles of Dunbar, and Worcester, against the present
King and his Adherents: and his two Sons sudden dismounting: May not justly
awaken the stupid, seared consciences of all the dissolved Juncto, and
Army Officers now living, who had any hand in the Tragedies and Powde^-plot
against the late King and Parliament; to bring them to speedy, sincere, real
public Repentance for them, before they sink down quick into Hell; or fall
into like exemplary Terrors, judgments, and self-executions; and likewise
deterr all others from treading in their nnwarrantable paths: 1 Cor. 10.6.11.
all these things happening to them for their examples, to the intent they should
not lust after nor act those evil things, which they attempted, accomplished to
their own prejudice, as well as the public desolation: it being Mat. 26, 24
better for such men never to have been born, than to become Traitors to their
own Christian Kings, Parl. Country, and to be registered to posterity amongst
such who were born only for public mischief, and happier never to have or
enjoy the least power or strength, than to abuse it to the public nuisance of
others. Seneca de Cleme^^ia^ l. 1.
P^stifera vis est valere ad nocendum. Such a power, force as this, which some
in late and present power have exerci^ed, if Enarratio in Psalm. 78.
St. Augustine mistake not; Non sanitatis est, sed insaniae. Nam and phreneticis
nihil fortius, valentiores sunt sanis; sed q^anto majores vires, tanto mors
vicinior: Avertat ergo De^^ ab imitatione nostra fortes istos.

7. Whether if the twice dissolved Rump shall audaciously presume to sit and
act again as a Parliament, notwithstanding all outgoings of Gods former signal
providence, judgments, and the People, Armie^ general indignation against
them; we may not justly apply S. Peter's sentence concerning Apostates to them,
2 Pet. 2.2, 22. W^iles they promise themselves (and others) Liberty, themselves
are servants of corruption (and of the Army too that turned them twice out of
doors) for of wh^m a man is overcome, of the same is he brought into BONDAGE:
But it is happened unto them according to the old proverb; The dog is returned
to his own vomit again, and she sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the
mire; and the latter and (...) (and will be) worse with them than the
beginning. With that parable of our Savior, Mat. 12.43, 44, 45. Lu. 11.24, 25,
26. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, h^ walks through dry places
seeking rest, and finds none; The^^ says he, I will return to my House from
whence I came (and was cast) out, and when he is come, he finds it empty,
swept and garnished: Then goes ^e and takes with himself seven other spirits
more wicked than himself, and they ^^ter in and dwell there: and the l^st state
of that man (yea of our Kingdom, Church, Nation through their usurpations,
whym^ies, pressures,) is worse than the first: Even so shall it be also unto
this wicked generation, Theophylacti Enar. in Mat. C. ^^. See Opus Imperfectu^
in Mat. Hom. 30.
Extrema captivitas vestra gravior erit quam prima; as I told Sir Arthur
Haslerigg in Westminster Hall May the 5. 1659. two days before their las^
Session, when the Commons House was sweeping and garnishing for the Iunctoes
return into it; which they and we have found true by experience, and shall do
so again if they presume to return in^o i^.

FINIS.
^rrata. P^ 46. l. 26. James, r. John Nelthrop.


