BATHONIA REDIVIVA. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of
the Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of your Majesty's CITY of BATH IN THE County
of Somersett.
WE your Majesty's Loyal Subjects the Mayor, Aldermen, Common Counsel, and
other Citizens of your Majesty's ancient City of Bath, originally By King
Bladud in the days of the Prophet Elias as Mat Westminster. Flores Hist. p. 25. and
others record, being 800 years before our Saviors Nativity.
foun^ed, enlarged and endowed with sundry Privileges by your Majesty's Royal
Progenito^s, Kings of this Realm, Do with all thankfulness of heart and tongue
to Almighty God, and demonstrations of our public Joy, and Loyalty to your
Majesty, congratulate your most h^ppy and longed-for return to the actual
possession of your Majesty's hereditary Kingdoms and roya^ Authority over them
and this your City, with Safety, Honor, and Triumph (after many years
deplorable Exile) without the least Opposition or Bloodshed. Which miraculous
Restoration of your Majesty, (begun and completed within the circle of one
month) as we cannot contemplate without Admiration, and acknowledge it an
Unparalled Wonder wrought by God himself without human contributions soon after
your Majesty was proclaimed King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland by
Hereditary and undoubted Birthright, by order of both your Houses of
Parl^ament; Which Solemnity as we most Cheerfully performed with all possible
expressions of our public Joy, by reiterated Acclamations of GOD SAVE KING
CHARLES THE SECOND, vollies of Shot, ringing of Bells, Conduits streaming forth
Wine, Bonfires, and other Festivities: So we think it our bounden duties by
this our unanimous public Address, humbly to prostrate our selves at your
Majesty's feet, assuring your Majesty, That we all are your loyal and dutiful
Subjects (...) assistance, according to our bounden duties, bear Faith and true
Allegiance to your Majesty, your Heirs and Lawful Successors for ever: And
shall with the last drop of our bloods and Fortunes, upon all occasions,
evidence our selves to be, Your Majesty's dutiful and obedient Subjects. In
testimony whereof, we have hereunto subscribed our hands, together with our
hearts, and affixed our Corporation Seal the fourth day of June, in the Twelf
Year of your Majesty's reign; And shall ever pray for your Majesty's long life,
prosperity, increase of glory, and temporal and eternal felicity.

William Prynne, one of the Citizens serving in Parliament George Long,
Minister of Gods word. William Green Minister. Samuel Bave John Maplet Thomas
Bruer Robert P^irce William Smith, Berkeley Carne Thomas Cilbs Walter Baylie
John Chapman Walter Gibbes Robert Penny Anthony Colleby Edward White Henry
Moore senior Thomas Skrine Ed. P^rker John Fisher William Child Richard Biggs
John B^sh John Reed Wi^^iam Bush George ^eeve Benjamin Baber Hen. M^ore junior
Robert Sheppard Samuel Wintle James Parker John Fair Richard Carwardine
William Ho^bus John Harford Richard Price John Biggs Mayor John Pearce Matthew
Clift Io. Parker Io. Atwood, Io. Boys Richard Druce John Masters John Ford
Robert Child Richard Wakeman William Ireland Robert Chapman Henry Parker.
THis humble Address, was presented to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, in
his Bedchamber at Whitehall, Saturday morning ( the 16. of June 1660.) by
William Prynne Esquire ( one of the Citizens now serving in Parliament for the City
of Bath) whom they desired by Letter to present it to his Majesty, his
Fellow-Citizen being absent. Who after a short Speech (comprising the substance
of this Address) read it distincktly to his Majesty, and then delivered it
into his Royal hand. His Majesty most Joyfully and Graciously receiving it in
his hand, commanded Mr. Prynne, to return his Majesty's most hearty thanks to
his City and Citizens of Bath, for this their loyal Address; which he took
very kindly and gratefully from them; and to assure them, in his Majesty's
behalf, that he would upon all occasions most readily extend his Royal Favors
toward them, the rather, for that they had freely chosen Mr. Prynne for one of
their Citizens in this Parliament, who was so Good a Friend to Him, and had
done Him and his whole Kingdom such good service.

LONDON, Printed for EDWARD THOMAS at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1660.


