PHILANAX PROTESTANT' OR PAPISTS Discovered to the KING As guilty of those
Traitorous Positions and Practices which they first Insinuated into the worst
Protestants and now Charge upon all:

To which is added PHILOLAUS Or Popery discovered to all Christian PEOPLE in a
serious diswasive from it.

For further justification of our Gracious King, and his honorable Parliaments
proceedings for the maintenance of the Act of Uniformity.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1663. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange,
Westminster Hall, and most Booksellers Shops.

PHILANAX OR The PAPISTS discovered unto the King.
SECT. I.
NOw the Popish Party being disappointed in their great design for Indulgence.
1. B, the care of our gracious Sovereign; Who will neither be provoked by the
affronts of some that call themselves Protestants, nor enticed by the favors
and civilities of those that call themselves Catholics to do any thing in
prejudice of the Faith, Once delivered to the Saints.

2. By the vigilance of Orthodox and good Bishops and Ministers who stand fast
in the faith and are set for The defense of the Gospel.

3. By the honorable Interposition of those most Noble Lords who search the
Scriptures, the first Counsels, and fathers. Whether these things are so?

4. By the resolution of the most Honorable the Commons of England in
Parliament assembled to stand by the grand establishment of the Kingdom.

5. By the Ingenuity of our two most excellent Queens who will not unseasonably
interpose to gratify a few men's opinions against the conscience of a whole
Kingdom: Now the Popish Party I say thus happily disappointed of their design
against the Church of England, and the Protestant Religion grow desperate and
shake off all modesty; Ingenuity; and fear; Now they dare Publish to the (...)
world a Caveat to all Kings, Princes, and Prelates against the Protestants:
Under pretense of some men's miscarriages Involving all, now they dare charge us
with those Principles against Government which they themselves teach, with
those treasons which they act, with those Rebelions which they promote: which
our Learned and sober writers disown, our Confessions and Articles of Religion
oppose, and our Religion discountenanceth, no Religion in the world stating
government and obedience on better principles, enforcing them upon higher
motives, Or securing them by better Laws than ours: We your most Loyal
Subjects who look upon you as The light of our eyes, as the breath of our
nostrils, as the crown of our head: Who make prayers and supplications for you
and all that are in authority under you; who obey you for Conscience sake: and
cannot resist you, knowing that whosoever resists resistethto hisown
damnation, who must needsbesubject to you, as supreme and to those that are in
Church and State sent by you: who fear God and honor you our King and meddle
not with them that are given to change: for we know their calamity shall arise
suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both? Who dare think no evil of you,
not in our hearts much less murmr and speak evil against you: Who though your
Spirit should be stirred against us, yet will not stir out of our place: who
dare not call you to any account of your matters -- nor say unto you, what do
you: who with the ancient Christians worship God above all: and obey honor and
reverence you as next unto God on earth? We to vindicate our selves; to inform
the world aright; to show the true grounds of our late misery: and the present
opposition to Government: and to confirm your Majesty in your very good
affection for the Protestant religion: and in your just care against the growth
of Popery, a care that aequally tends to your honor and security, and our
comfort. We humbly desire the world may know that it is not any private respect
or opinion, its not any kindness you have for heresy or schism, Its not any
cruelty or persecution that you provide just laws against Popery a new, or
execute those that are already provided: but its a royal care you owe your own
Government and safety both which are endangered by those unworthy principles
first asserted by the Pontificians and than taken up from them by the loose,
giddy, turbulent, and discontented sort of Protestants that have nothing indeed
of Protestants but the name: for you know

1. They teach that the Magistrate has nothing 1 Dan. Pri.
to do in matter of Religion, has no power to restrain or punish any man in
any matter that has but the color and pretense of Religion. Contzen polit: c:
16. Bellarm: 5. de pont: -- A 2 de Primati^ In vain do you Govern if these men
and these positions be endured: one man's Religion is to revile authority, the
others Religion is to rebel: another Religion is to raise scandal upon all
public establishments, another religion is to refuse all manner of oaths
whether of Allegiance or Supremacy etc. another Religion is to deny all
ordinances, ministry, Church duties, etc. another Religion is to disturb all
congregations and meetings: but you must sit still, and let these men play all
these prancks under the notion of Religion, you must endure all these
extravagances, Least you should persecute, or oppress tender consciences, your
Subjects may be perverted, your people may be debauched, and your Kingdoms
seduced from their Allegiance and Loyalty by men of desperate principles, and
you all the while not stir, for the Magistrate has nothing to do in matter of
Religion; we your poor Protestant Subjects Arist. pol. 1. Val. Mar 16. Halic.
l. 2. Justinian l 2. Theodor l. 6. Eusebius. vit. Constable. 3. 13. Socrates eccles
Hist. 6. Niceph. 8. 7. Theodor. ecl. H. 4. 4. Surius Council. Tom. 1. and 2.
thought that you as Nebuchadnezzar and Darius among the Persians as the
Governors among the Grecians whose first care was Religion, as the Roman
Kings, Senates and Emperors whose great prudence it was not to admit of a
strange Religion, as the Primitive Governors who as appears by their Laws,
Orders, Institutes, and nemo Canons: Laid out their highest endeavors for the
settlement of the true Religion, and as your Ancestors of blessed memory, who
are famous for nothing more then for being defenders of the Faith, had power to
defend true Religion, so that under you by the influence of that Religion we
might lead peaceable and quiet lives in all godliness and honesty: but alas!
temporal Princes says Suarez must meddle with temporal matters: they must let
men be of what principles they please though never so dangerous, they must look
on their Subjects divided with different religions which lead to different
conversation and to confusion and every evil work: for why should they says
Costerus the Jesuit meddle with the affairs of the Church of God.

2. We your Loyal Protestant Subjects were really 2 Dang prin.
persuaded that there was none above you, to whom you should give account of
your selves but God: B^lson. Chr. sub. l. 1.
and that there were no Christians that durst say Carel. juris l 2 Confess. fid.
O^, Eccles. ^^^ic. Church Engl.
that any men or estates of men were above you in your Dominion, ha poor we!
alas it seems there are some 50. learned writters of that one society of
Jesuits, who in several printed books which Fides Jesu. ^^ Vid Hospin. thist.
His l 4. Mercure Hist. p 1 p 884.
you may see in speculum Jesuit. p. 187. 188. who have dogmatically asserted
that the Pope has absolute power over Princes to change Government Sanctarel.
de haer.
as God to pull down some Kings, and set up others as Bensarchius profanely
speaks, not only to excommunicate, Extrau. de obed.
but judicialy to suspend to mult with tempor Dr. Cracanth. Popes mon B^^^n
co^^p.
all penalties, depose, dethrone, put to death, and destroy any Christian
Emperors, Kings, Princes, 1 R^p. Thuan passim. Hist 1 Tom. ^^ hoc 3 Du plest^^
Hist. Pap. and many more gathered together by Goldastus,
Potentates, by open sentence, war, force, conspiracies private assassinations,
and to give away their Crowns and Dominions to whosoever will invade them by
treason or rebellion at the Popes command: who may translate Kingdoms to whom
he pleases, all Kings deriving their Crowns from him alone, upon their good
behavior at his pleasure.

We are of opinion that the Government of the Church is enough, if not too much
for the Pope and innocently persuade our selves he need not be so busy in
other men's matters, but we know nothing, we are taught by the Papists that non
solum potest Papa etc. sed debet etc. That the Pope not only can but ought to
show himself above Princes, why say we? why say the Jesuits of Paris against
Arnoldus: to keep them (that is Kings) within their duty that in case of
heresy, schism, disobedience to, Rebellion against the Pope, and see of Rome,
Male administration, refusal, to defend the Pope Insufficiency to govern
negligence, vitiousness of life, Incorrigibleness, Mystery Jes. Antico^om
printed Anno 1633.
Tyranny: or as Sanctarellus taught, and our late disturbers learned the
necessity of Public good, or the safety of the Church and State, or the cause
Censura sacrae ^cologiae Paris in Librum Anti. sanct. Paris Pory 1626. Alphonsa
di varos Tolet. d^aratio ad ^ges.
of God: guess now who set up the high Court of justice. Now that your blood
may not rise against this here is nothing unequal or unfit. For says the said
Sanctarellus: multum aequum, and reip. expediens ut sit aliquis supremus
M^narcha, qui Regum ejus modi excessus noscit corrigere, and de ipsis justitiam
Christianos stratagem. Aulit. ^uc.
ministrare, i. e. in English, demand justice, justice against delinquency, set
up a high Court of Justice. Jes. ^monarch orb^s sib iconficiendam A. 1641.


3. We and the more harmless part of the world thought that no man could lay
his hand upon you King (...) to all Christian Kings.
the Lords Anointed and be guiltless and would teach men that you are secured
by the laws of God and men against all the assaults of the sons of violence.
But we are a soft headed and short sighted people Emanual Sa, that dangerous
Papist assures us, that lat a sentententia quisque potest fieri executor, any
man In vocc Ty^n.
may rid us of a Tyrant, but sure none of those that have sworn obedience to
him may lay violent hands on the King: etiam qui juraverit etc. yea he who has
sworn obedience, if the Prince will not be ruled -- sure every man can not do
it, potest autem e populo: any man may do it anyman that is careless of his own
life may be master of his Sovereigns -- yes, but say some smooth tongued
apologist, this was rashly spoken -- do not deceive your selves -- 40. Annos In
cubui says the solemn D. I studied it, 40. years, -- a well studied, point I
assure you: but his friends do not own him, -- no i will warran^ you, why this
book of his is the ordinary manual of the fraternity: Its the Bible that
belongs to the society of Jesus: I hope you will say no man talks at this rate
but this melancholy father.

Ans. If there be but one traitor among the Jesuits they are much wronged, --
alas he was but a dull melancholy man indeed to Mariana, who tells us De Reg.
In^t l. c. 1.
that we need not stay for the Popes order, if a company of learned and a few
discontented men do but agree upon it. Jure interimi potest, he may lawfully be
killed: but the Learned are many of them honest, most of them ingenuous, and
all depending upon the the Prince, nay then we need Insit. l. c. 3.
no more ado says Ozorius but any man may consider the Law, and the matter of
fact, and if the case be evident he may proceed to execution presently, here is
as Hugh Peter's said a short way to work, and that all mortals may not loose
themselves in insignificant, general Mariana tells you how it may Ibid. A^ 1^.
Ib^.
be done particularly by poisoning a chair as the Conclave at London resolved
to dispatch K. Charles the first, (It was Jesuits that saught that excellent
Princes blood.) 2. by poisoning saddles, as Lopez should have served Q.
Elizabeth, and this he says is an excellent way, for it is the Moors way in
Spain. 3. By poisoning Boots so as gouty Henry of Fra^ was cured of all
diseases. And this is a good way too, quel est Artifice Roi moris. 4. By
poisoning Hist Fam. H. 4. Hist Ga^ l 1. p. ^26. See Dr. (...) way c 10. p. 46.
G^ston. Have. Xeth p. 764. Thuan. l 7^. 3 Jac to c. (...) 2^6 Arraign. Traitors.
gloves, and by this slight of hand they complemented Joan Albretta Q. of
Navarre to death only for favoring and protecting the Protestants in France
against their violence. 5. By stabbing as they let out Hen. 3. and H. 4. of
France great souls into an other world, and by Pistoling as they served William
Prince of Orange Anno 1584. which great man they sent within three days into
another world. 7. By a stone poison wherewith men may be seven years a dying,
going to another world by piece-meals, and dying daily as Stephen Botskay of
Transylvania. By Powder the Friars invention, as they designed to blow up this
whole Kingdom assembled in Parliament. Villainy was innocent before, and the
world simple, now it was complete, and raised to the utmost that Hell could
attain to -- What say the good honest Priests? do they disown M^iana, and
disclaim his doctrine? It were well for the Christian world if you did. Indeed
the whole University of Paris, Anno 1625. and 26. censured Zuares, Bellarmine
and Mariana for these passages, as not only most pernicious detestable,
damnable, erroneous and perturbing the public peace, but likewise as
subversive of Kingdoms, States, Republics, seducing subjects from their
obedience and subjection, and stirring them up to wars, factions, seditions,
and the Murders of Kings. But what say the whole society in their apology 1610.
They are all enemies to the name of Jesus that condemn Mariana etc, for any of
these Theol. Hon. 1. c. 12. See Bensor. chap. c^r.
Doctrines. O how Gretzer is taken with Marianas book, how pious, how useful,
how elegant, Its the least recompense he can have for this work to give Mariana
a name in the Amphithatre of honor. De Onan the Provincial of Toledo would
have lived and died reading that book, Iterum, and tertio Facturus etc. again
and again would he have read Marianaes excellent book if he had been at
leisure. You will say are such things as these licensed? Licensed, yes by any
means, Hoyveda the visitor general of the Jesuits says, he could do no less
then license that pretty thing, ut approbatum a viris doctis, gravibus ex eodem
ordine, as approved by learned and grave men of the same order, you may guess
what they are by this. Arnold indeed arrests them Bishop Tailor Sermon Dedic. to
the late ^chbishop of Ca^.
at Paris for these tenants, but they cry Veritas defensa contra actionem
Antonii, Arnoldj, the truth (a sad truth really) the truth defended against the
Arrest of Arnold. Nay but we wrong them this business of King-killing is but a
disputable question which some may hold one way, and others another. Not so
neither says Bellarmine, Non opinio sed tertitudo, its not only an opinion
but a great certainty: 1^ de Po^t. Romans (...) Parl. l. 3.
res certa, and explorata, you must look upon them in this point as in others
Insallible.

But you will say, I pray deal faithfully with me, do you think the Church of
Rome holds such dangerous positions.

Ans. 1. Ecclesia erreret si impune etc. If the Church should offer to let
Kings go unpunished, it should err? though it be built upon Cephas, though it
be otherwise infallible: though its faith should never fail yet in this it
would err: Bellarmine says in one place, if the Pope persuaded a man to go to
hell it were a sin not to believe him: if he teach a damnable error he is yet
infallible; always provided he does not teach that dangerous error, That Kings
ought not be brought to justice, If he does he erres.

2. That you may be sure the Church is right in this point, Bellarmine tells
you, ex authoritate frequenti Ecclesia facit, etc. The Church does these things
Frequently: Its a very usual thing it seems, nay says Johannes Eudaemon,
mistake not Apol. Cor. c 3.
your self, this Doctrine, non est Jesuitarum propria, sed totius Ecclesiae, to
give the Jesuit his due, it is not the Doctrine of the Jesuits only, but of
the whole Church; yea that the world may know the Jesuits are well backed,
Universa Theologorum and juris consultorum Scholasticorum Schola, says
Creswell: The whole School of Divines and Lawyers, Philop. Sect. 2. de offic.
Princ. Chr. c. 5.
make it a Position certain and undoubtedly to be believed, that if any
Christian Prince whatsoever, shall manifestly turn from the Roman Catholic
Religion, or desire or seek to reclaim others from the same, or but favor or
show Countenance to an Heretic, he presently falls From, and loses all
Princely power and dignity, and that by virtue and power of the Law it self,
both Humane and Divine, even before Treshar. deb. Watsons quoal. p. 295
any Sentence pronounced against him, by the Supreme Pastor and Judge; That
thereby his Subjects are absolved from all Oaths and Bonds of Allegiance, to
him as to their Lawful Prince; nay that they may and ought (provided that they
have competent power and force) to cast out such a Prince from bearing rule
amongst Christians, as an Enemy to his own Estate and Commonwealth, and that
the Kingdom of such an Heretic or Prince, is to be bestowed at the pleasure of
the Pope, with whom the people upon pain of damnation are to take part, and
fight against their Sovereign.

Lord (you will say) can any men after so many Oaths and Obligations upon the
Pope, or others Instigation, rebel against their lawful Sovereign?

A. Aas! do you not know that children are deluded with Rattles, and men with
Oaths -- Papa Fudaem. Apol. Gorn. suarez. def. fin. 6.
potest quanquam absolvere de juramento fidelitatis, when you have taken all
the care Imaginable to oblige men to peace and Obedience, the Pope can absolve
men from all their Oaths. I pray hear how the Jesuit in Bishop Usher, would
make a fool of the wise King James, and the Parliament that formed the Oath of
Allegiance; sed vide (says he) in astutia quanta sit simplicitas, etc. But see
what simplicity here is in so great craft! when he had placed all his security
in that Oath, he thought (I poor B. P. Epist. ^R. Impr. Anno 1609.
man, how contemptible this Jesuit looks, upon an excellent King and his August
Parliament) he had framed such a manner of Oath with so many circumstances,
which no man could any way dissolve. But he (poor man) Could not see that if
the Pope dissolve the Oath, all its knots whether of being faithful to the
King, or of admitting no dispensation, are accordingly dissolved: Thus (now he
was teaching the world a strange doctrine says he) I will say a thing more
admirable; you know I believe, that an unjust Oath if it be evidently known to
be such, or openly declared such, obliges no man: that the Kings Oath is
unjust, is sufficiently declared by the Pastor of the Church himself: you see
now that the Obligation of it is vanished into smoke, and that the band which
so many wise men thought was made of Iron, is less than straw: a trick to over
throw the world.

But sure no Christians will be so wicked as to attempt such things against
their Sovereigns.

Ans. They must -- hear what Father Creswell says, Certe non tantum Licet sed
summa etiam juris divini (...), p (...) 6.
^ssitate, ac praecepto, Imo conscientiae vineulo, extremo Animorum per ^ulo
hoc incumbit, certainly this is not only Lawful, but necessary, as that which
is incumbent upon all Christians upon no less obligation, than that of Divine
law and command, of the bond of their Conscience, and the utmost danger of
their souls. --

But the Counsel of Constance has denied that it is lawful for any private men
to attempt any thing against Public authority. --

Alas! What is that? as they resolve in other things Non abstante sic:
Scriptura -- so in this Case, Non obstantc Concilii constable. decreto licitum est
privatis etc. Notwithstanding any decree of that Counsel by the authority of
the Pope who is above all Counsels, Private men may, Omni ratione and vi^, by
any Bell de Parl. 5, 6.
means, no matter what, so it be successeful attempting the destroying of an
heritical or a wicked Prince.

How may a Prince be safe in that Case?

An. Bellarmine told K. James of famous memory, si secure, regnare velit Rex
etc. If the King would reign with safety -- if he would secure his men's lives
and his, then let him suffer the Catholics to enjoy their Religion -- Wellfair
thy heart Bellarmine -- that was plain English.

It seems that if the Roman Catholics are not pleased there is no security
for King, or People, but may not a Protestant King enjoy the Liberty of his own
conscience as the Papists desire ^berty for their consciences.

Ans. No it is not (says Bellarmine de Pont. Romans lib. 2 cap 7.) For
Christians to tolerate an Heritical King (and he that cannot come up to all the
abominations of Rome is Heritical) if he ende^vour to draw his Subjects to his
Heresy or unbeleif: but to judge whether a King does draw to Heresy or no,
belongs to the Pope, to whom the case of Religion is committed: therefore it
belongs to the Pope to judge a King to be deposed or not deposed.

We Protestants indeed did think that we should be obedient unto the death
rather then resist as all the primitive Christians did, who said they could dye
but they could not disobey.

Alas, We are deceived, alas! if the primitive Christians did not depose the
Emperors, it was because they wanted strength and not because they wanted will
says Bellarmine: so that no Prince is safe any longer than he keeps under the
Papists and as they would persuade the world all Christians too when there is
evident knowledge of the fact, Subjects may Lawfully exempt themselves from the
power of their prince, before any declaratory sentence of a Judge, so they have
but strength to do it: hence it follows that the Papists of England and Saxony
are to be excused (says he) that do not free themselves from the power of
their Superiors, nor make War against them because commonly they are not strong
enough.

It is indeed generally and charitably believed that the Pope raises his power
over Kings and Tred Ep. ad Pope Greg 9 Innocent, 4 Record by Math.
Princes, only for their, and the Churches spiritual good Ah narrow souled We
look about you and It has (says one) been one of the most detestable crimes,
and highest Impeachment in the world against Paris, p 332 Mr. Prynne Epist.
before Vindic.
the Pope of Rome that under a Saint like religious pretense of advancing the
Church cause, the Kingdom of Christ, they have for some hundred of years
Usurped to themselves (as sole Monarchs of the world in the right of Christ,
whose vicars they pretend themselves to be) both by Doctrinal position, and
treasonable practices, an absolute, Sovereign, Tyranical power over all
Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes of the World (who must derive and hold
their Crowns from them alone, upon their good Behaviors at their pleasure) not
only to excommunicate, censure, judge, depose, murder, destroy their Sacred
Persons: but likewise to dispose of their Crowns, Scepters, Kingdoms, and
translate them to whom they please.

Thus O Kings are you served in ordine ad spiritualia by the Papists -- while
We poor Protestants think. Vid Sund. ^m ad Clerum. 2.
That we cannot do any evil against you: that the greatest good many come to
us, or the Church thereby.

If men came to us to discover any design against your Sacred Majesty (whom God
preserve) and asked our advice about it, we must neds have abhored Vid. ^ook,
7. These. 1.
it as treason and have charged them not to touch Gods anointed and have urged
them with this: can a man touch the Lords anointed and be guiltless.

If they come to Gar^et in England about a powder plot: or to Guignard in
France about a murder; Tirannus jure Interini potest, say the one its good and
commendable and Heroic, says the other and both dismiss them, with their
blessing, prayer, and absolution.

When those licentious men among us acted as we are verily persuaded by
Jesuitical Insinuations, and Popish principles: assaulted and murdered hislate
Vid. et l. Regis Elench. Mo. 1
Majesty of blessed memory -- We were all amazed: Our Nobility offered to dye
for him. our Clergy, writ, prayed and preached against it, our whole Nation
abhorred it; some dyed at the very hearing, others were distracted, and the
whole face of England, Scotland, and Ireland, gathered blackness.

When Clement murdered Hen. the 3d. of France, Voiez commends him, the
Preacher at Colen Vid. Proc, Pull.
connes a whole Sermon to extol him, and the Pope Sextas Quintus, makes a
solemn Panegyric upon him on September 11. 1589. in the Consistory in order to
his Canonizations -- Comparing him to Ehud, and Eleazar -- And concluding with
this memorable saying, I pray God finish what he has begun.

When Ravillac stabbed Hen. the 4th. of France, he has no less then two
Apologies made for him, the one by Veruna, the other by Guignard, who writes as
if he would have done as much; himself yea he says that Clements murder was
most Heroical, and most praiseworthy, -- adding moreover these words; -- if we
in the year 1572. on St. Bartholmews day (in the general Massacre of the French
Protestants) had cut off the Basilicon vein (H. King of Navarre) we had not
fallen out of a Feavour, into that plague we now find -- sed quioquid delirant
reges plectuntur Achivi sanguini parcendo, that K. Henry should be but over
mildly dealt with, if he were thrust from the Crown of France into a Monastery,
and there had his Crown shaven -- that if hecould not be deposed without a War,
a War must be raised against him, but if a War could not be levied against him:
the Cause being dead --

Let him be privily murdered (as he was) and taken out of the way: -- and when
this Guignard was justly executed by the Parliament of Richeome makes an
Apology for him: and the whole Society expostulates against the Arrest of
Parliament. --

We say to this day of the powder Traitors: Cursed be their wrath, for it was
cruel: and their anger, for it was sierce: -- our Souls come not yet into their
secrets: -- Bellarmine he has written an Apology for Garnet, -- Gretzer has
seconded him: Eudaemon he goes along with him: -- the whole Church has
Canonized, the Traitors Hallowed the Treason, and consecrated the Villainy. --

We your Protestant Subjects stood firmly to your Predecessor Hen. 8. Obeyed
heartily that Godly Prince, Fd. the 6. suffered patiently under Q. Mary:
assisted our Gracious Q. Fliz. with our prayers, lives, and fortunes: opened
the way cheerfully and unanimously to your famous Grandfather King James, to
his haereditary Dominions and Territories: and the sounder part of us had the
honor of being involved in the fate and ruin of your Father of blessed
Memory, -- that Royal Champion, and most resolved Martyr for the Protestant
cause. --

The Papists in the mean time oppose, resist, abuse, affront, revile, and
excommunicated H. 8. -- rebelled with Ket, and other Northern men, against Se
Speed p 1181. Cambd.
Ed. the 6. -- they incite Q. Mary to destroy and banish her Subjects in whom
consisted her strength Q. Eliz.
and honor. They excommunicate Q. Elizabeth, encourage Cullen and others to
murder her, assuring them it was not only lawful by the Laws, but that they
should merit Heaven and Gods favor by it: Further adding with Jacques Francis,
That the Realm of England, then was and would be so well settled, that unless
Mrs. Elizabeth (so he called Q. Elizabeth) were suddenly taken away: all the
Devils in Hell would not be able to prevail, to shake or overturn it: -- there
was a Bull that came along with the Spanish Fleet in 88. When in it was expired
-- That the Pope, by the power given from God by Lawful Succession from
Catholic Church, for the defection of H. the 8th. who forcibly separated
himself and his people from the Communion of Christians, which was promoted by
Edward the sixth, and Elizabeth; who being pertinacious and impertinent in the
same Rebellion and Usurpation: Therefore the Pope incited by the continual
persuasions of many, and by the suppliant prayers of the English men
themselves. N. B. Has dealt with diverse Princes, and especially the most
potent King of Spane, to depose that woman, and punish her pernicious
Adhaerents in that Kingdom, etc. he adds moreover that Pope Sextus before him
prescribed the Queen, and took from her all her Dignities, Titles and Rights to
the Kingdoms of England, and Ireland, absolving her Subjects from the Oath of
Fidelity and Obedience: he charge all men upon pain of the wrath of God, that
they afford her no favor, help or aid, but use all their strength to bring her
to punishment: and that all the English join with the Spaniard as soon as he is
Landed: offering rewards and pardon of sins, to them that will Lay hands on the
Queen, -- and so showing on what Conditions he gave the Kingdom to the King of
Spain. -- Read the rest there, for though dangerous it is worth the reading.

When We received King James your Grandfather, and him your self, and we hope
your posterity to whom we do and may acknowledge, that by you we enjoy great
quietness: and we hope many worthy deeds may be done to this Nation by Your
providence, which we shall accept always in all places with all ehankfulnesse:
When I say we received that excellent King with all cheerfulness, there was a
Bull from Pope Clement the 8th. directed to H. Garnet Superior of the Jesuits
in England: Whereby he Commanded all the Archpriests, Priests, Popish Clergy,
Peers, Nobles, and Catholics of England, that after the death of Queen
Elizabeth, by the course of nature or otherwise, whosoever shall lay Claim or
Title to the Crown of England (though never so directly, or nearly interested
by descent) should not be admitted unto the Throne, unless he would first
tolerate the Popish Religion, and by his best endeavors promote the Catholic
Cause; unto which by his solemn and sacred Oath, he should Religiously
subscribe, after the death of that miserable Woman; (so he styleth Q.
Elizabeth.) By virtue of which Bull, the Jesuits after her decease dissuaded
the Romish Subjects, from yielding in any wise obedience to King James as their
Sovereign; -- Insomuch that the Catholics durst not be good Subjects: until
Parsons and Champions, procured them an Indulgence to that purpose from the
Pope. --

And what do you think would Cobham Gray etc. have done? They say they would
have surprised K. James his person before he was crowned, and his Son, H. and
Imprison them in the Tower of London. In Dover-Castle, till they enforced them
by durance to grant a free toleration of their Catholic Religion, to remove
some evil Counselors from about them, (Evil Counselors do you hear) Or else
they would put Cook Inst. 7. de Pont. 1 c. 1 Jac. 1.
some further project against them in execution to their destruction.

But say the good Papists here -- really we abhor all these Treasons. Be they
Cath. p. 350.


A. Do you in earnest? -- it is well; but I will tell you a story: -- when the
Parliament of Paris asked the Jesuits their judgment of Sanctarellus his
Book, v. 12. (seeing their general had approved the Book, and judged the things
there written to be certain, whether they are of the same mind?) they answered
(that living at Rome, he could not but approve what was there approved of) But
say the Parliament what think you? say the Jesuits the clean contrary -- say
the Examiners; But what would you do if you were at Rome say the Jesuits? --
That which they do that are at Rome: at which, said some of the Parliament,
what! have they one Conscience at Rome, and another at Paris? -- God bless us
from such Confessors as these: -- I leave it with you to apply it.

Not to be endless, hear what one John Brown a Priest, aged 72 years, says of
them: -- Prynnes Introduction, p. 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 212.

The principal Instruments the Popes employed of late years, in these their
unchristian Treasonable See Maffae ^s V^geus and Petrus ^deniera in ^ta Ignatii
Loyol Hayli^s M^cto (...), p 17 9
Designs, have been pragmatical, furious, active J^ites, whose Society was
first erected by Ignatius Loyola (a Spaniard by Birth, but A (c) SOLDIER by
profession) and confirmed by Pope Paul the 3. Anno 1540. which Order consisting
only of ten persons at first, and confined only to sixty by this Pope, has so
monstrously increased by the Popes and Spaniards favors and assistance (whose
See Jews O^ his Jesuits Looking glass, printed London 16^9. the ^pistle to
the Reader, and p 48 to 58 ^bilaeum, sive speculum Jesuiticum. printed 644. p.
307. to 213.
chief Janissaries, Factors, Intelligencers they are) that in the year 1626. (d)
they caused the picture of Ignatius their Founder to be cut in Brass, with a
goodly Olive Tree growing (like Jesses root) out of his side, spreading its
branches into all Kingdoms and Provinces of the World, where the Jesuits have
any Colleges and Seminaries, with the name of the Province at the foot of the
branch, which has as many leaves as they have Colleges and Residencies
Hospin. Hist. Jesuitica, l. 2.
in that Province; in which leaves, are the names of the Towns and Villages
where these Colleges are situated: Round about the Tree are the Pictures of
all the illustrious Persons of their Order; and in Ignatius his right hand,
there is a paper, wherein these words are engraven, Ego sicut Oliva fructifera
in domo Dei; taken out of Ps. 52. 8. which pourtraictures they then printed and
published to the world: wherein they set forth the number of their Colleges
and Seminaries to be no less then 777. (increased to 155 more, by the year
1640.) in all 932. as they published in like Pictures and Pageants printed at
Antwerp, 1640. Besides sundry New Colleges and Seminaries erected since.

In these Colleges and Seminaries of theirs, they had then (as they print)
15591 Fellows of their Society of Jesus, besides the Novices, Scholars, and
Lay-brethren of their Order, amounting to near ten times that number. So
infinitely did this evil weed grow and spread it self, within one hundred years
after its first planting. And which is most observable, of these Colleges and
Seminaries they reckoned then no less then 15 (secret ones) Speculum Jesui^. p
210. see Romes Masterpiece. and (...) Doom, p. 435. etc. Hidden Work o^
Da^ness 88, 144.
IN PROVINCIA ANGLICANA, in the Province of ENGLAND, where were 267 SOCII or
Fellows of that Society, besides 4 COLLEGES OF JESUITS ELSEWHERE. In IRELAND
and elsewhere 8 Colleges of IRISH JESUITS: and in SCOTLAND and otherwhere 2
Residencies of SCOTTISH JESUITS.

What the chief employments of Ignatius and his numerous swarms of Disciples
are in the World, his own Society at the time of his Canonization for a Romish
Saint, sufficiently discovered in their painted Pageants, then showed to the
people, (e) wherein they pourtraied this new Saint holding the whole Mercure
Jesuit, to^ 1. p. 67. Speculum J^suiticum p 156
world in his hand, and fire streaming out forth of his heart (rather to set
the whole world on sire by Combustions, Wars, Treasons, Powder-plots, Schisms
new State, and old Church-Heresies, then to enlighten it) with this Motto; VENI
IGNEM See ^ewis Owen his running Register, and his Jesuited Loo^ glass The
(...) of the English Nunnery at Lisbon.
MITTERE: I came to send sire into the World; which the University of Cracow in
Poland. objected (amongst other Articles) against them, Anno 1662. and
Alphonsus de Uargas more largely insisteth on in his Relatio de Stratagematis
and Sophismatis Politicis Jesuitarum, etc. An. 1641. c. 7, 8. 24.

Their number being so infinite, and the (f) Pope and Spaniard too, having long
since (by De Monarchia Hispanica, p. 146, 147, 148, 149, 204, 234, 235, 236,
185, 186.
Campanella's advice) erected many Colleges n Rome, Italy, Spain, the
Netherlands, and elsewhere, for English, Scottish, Irish Jesuits (as well as
for such secular Priests, Friars, Nuns) of purpose to promote their designs
against Protestant Princes, Realms, Churches, Parliaments of England, Scotland,
Ireland, and to reduce them under their long prosecuted See Tho^a Campan^. de
Monarchia Hispan. watsons quodl bets, Co^tona Post huma p 19. to 107. C^dinal
de Ossets Letters Arcana Imperii Hispanici Deiph 6^8. Advice a tous les Estat's
de Europe, touches les maxi mas Fundamentales de Gvernment and (...) ^spaginols
Paris 16^5.
UNIVERSAL MONARCHY over them, by Fraud, Policy, Treason, intestine Divisions,
and Wars, being unable to effect it by their own power; no doubt of late years
many hundreds, if not thousands, of this Society, have crept into England,
Scotland and Ireland, lurking under several disguises; yea, an whole College
of them sat weekly in counsel, in or near Westminster, some few years since,
under Conne the Popes Nuntio, on purpose to embroyle England and Scotland in
bloody civil wars, thereby to endanger, shake, subvert these Realms, and
destroy the late King (as you may read at large in my Romes Masterpiece,
published by the Commons special Order, An. 1643.) who occasioned, excited,
fomented, the first and second intended (but happily prevented) wars between
England and Scotland, and after that, the unhappy Differences, Wars, between
the King, Parliament, and our three Protestant Kingdoms, to bring them to utter
desolation, and extirpate our reformed Religion.

We conclude this Importunity with the Prayer on the 5th. of November for your
Majesty.

O Lord who did this day discover the snares of death that were laid for us,
and did wonderfully deliver us from the same; Be thou still our mighty
Protector, and scatter our enemies that delight in blood, infatuate and defeat
their counsels abate their pride, assuage their malice, and confound their
devices. Strengthen the hand of our gracious King Charles, and all that are put
in authority under him, with Judgment and Justice, to cut off all such workers
of iniquity, as turn religion into rebellion, and faith into saction; that they
may never prevail against us, or triumpth in the ruin of thy Church among us;
But that our gracious Sovereigns Realms, being preserved in thy true Religion,
and by thy merciful goodness protected in the same, we may all duly serve
thee, and give thanks in thy holy congregation, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

PHILOLAUS: OR, Popery discovered to the People, In a serious Disswasion from
it.
Dear Countrymen, and beloved in the Lord Jesus:
YOu are so conscious of your Duty to Kings, so obliged to their Government, so
faithful to their Person, so regardful of the peace and happiness you enjoy
under them, every one under his own Vine, and under his own Fig Tree, and so
sensible of the Misery of rebellion, disturbance and confusion; that we need
not use any other argument to dissuade you from Popery than this, That it is a
Religion written in many of your dread Sovereigns sacred blood: a Religion
whose prime Article (as some of them say) is Treason; a Religion managed by
conspirators, and advanced by those who are born for the overthrow of States
and Kingdoms; who turn the World upside down. We know your souls abhor these
courses, and detest these villainies: but this is not all; this way threatens
not only your Kings, but your selves, -- endangereth not only Their lives,
but your souls: -- It Is not only a great inconvenience that hinders your
peace and settlement in this World, but a mischief that may hinder your
Salvation in the next. We hope indeed that you have received the truth of your
own Religion in much assurance; that you are rooted and grounded in the Faith:
Since you have scarched the Scriptures (which the Papists kept from you) and
find that these things are so: Since you have felt the power and comfort of
the Truth in your souls: Since you find it owned by Gods wonderful
dispensations in the World, whereby it is great, and does prevail, and seated in
your hearts by his Spirit: Since you see it eminent in the lives of many good
men, and confirmed by the death of as many excellent Confessors and Martyrs,
who vouch it with their last breath, and seal it with their dearest blood:
Since you know it is owned by the Church of Rome its self (which has nothing,
which we may call a Religion, but ours, viz. The Scriptures, the Lords Prayer,
the Creed, and the Ten Commandments, etc. to which they have added their own
idolatrous, superstitious, idle and vain inventions, which is all the Religion
they have differing from us.) We are persuaded that you will not easily be
moved from the the hope of the Gospel. -- Yet that we may according to our
duties assist our gracious Sovereign, and endeavor to establish your hearts,
while he is establishing your Religion, -- that while he with the advice of his
great Council, by a serious Law restrains you from Popery, for fear; we by
serious motives may refrain from it, for conscience sake. -- The scandals given
you are many, the seducers are numerous, their insinuations are plausible,
their temptations are taking: you, many of you are weak, and we (the Lord
forgive us) have been too careless, and almost asleep, while the Enemies sow
Tares among us: therefore we must leave with you a few plain words, that you
may have always before you; Yea, that they may be in your heart, that you may
teach them diligently to your children, that you may talk of them when you sit
in your house, when you walk by the way, when you lie down, and when you rise
up. Many may write to you with more profoundness, none write to you with more
sincere servencie, and earnest desire to save you: and we are very sensible,
that while exact learned writings are taken up only by learned men, it is
necessary that there be some plain discourses written, whereby the truth may
with evidence be conveyed to you.

1. We taught you (who are our joy and crown, who we hope will be our rejoicing
in the day of our Lord Jesus) we taught you a Religion pure and undefiled
before God, -- which consists in solid virtue, serious holiness; an exact
conversation, led soberly, righteously, peaceably, and Godly in this present
World; a Religion perfect, right, Psalm. 19. 5. Psalm. 119. 118, 140, (...) 138.
pure, sure, faithful, holy, just, spiritual, lively, operative, heavenly; that
enlighneth the mind, sanctifies the heart, reforms the life, -- frames a man
after Gods own image, in righteousness and true holiness. -- We taught, and do
teach you a truth which is after Godliness, a Mystery of Godliness; a Religion
that may make you wise to Salvation through Faith which is in Christ Jesus;
which may be profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
for instruction in righteousness; that you may be perfect, and thoroughly
furnished unto all good works; in whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are Phil. 4. 8.
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report: if there be any
virture, if there be any praise.

Alas! The Papists having nothing besides the Bishop Halls disswasive.
Scripture, which we have as well as they (which yet you shall not read) but
vain shadows of holiness; a gross form of godliness, which they cozen the
Vulgar with, consisting in Latine-service, Images, Tapers, Rich Vestures,
Crosses, Sentings, Holy Water, Offerings, Prostrations, Processions,
Pilgrimages, and other bodily exercises that profit nothing; whereas that true
godliness which you profess is profitable for this life, and for that which is
to come. They can teach you nothing but their own vain and useless inventions,
whereby they make void the Commandments of God: nothing that may settle the
heart, establish the conscience, satisfy the soul, weaken sin, strengthen
grace, promote your comfort, or secure your eternity.

2. We have preached, and do preach to you a Religion plain and close, which
requires not so much shrewd and subtle heads, as good and honest hearts, Luke
8. 5. The Testimony of the Lord, that is sure, making wise the simple. We made
your way plain before you. They of Rome will perplex you with those infinite
rules of Faith, which the Learned among them cannot comprehend: When you have
endeavored to know the mind of God in the Scripture, that you might believe,
and in believing might have lise, you have d^ nothing; there are endless
traditions which no one man ever saw, which you shall never know, but yet must
believe them: many Volumes of Councils which you never saw, you must receive;
all the Popes Decrees, whereof some are not yet published, you must assent to,
before you can be saved: To day you may believe all the Traditions, Councils,
Decrees and Impositions of the Church of Rome, and be saved; and to morrow the
Pope may set out a new Decree, or a new Article of Faith, which if you do not
believe, you are damned: While you are here secure, you know not but that there
is a new article of Faith defined by the Pope, which you do not know, and not
knowing, cannot believe, and not believing may perish for ever. Ah! happy you
who need not say, Who shall go into Heaven, or Hell, or the uttermost parts of
the Earth to fetch down a rule of Faith from thence? -- The word is nigh, even
in your hearts, and in your mouths.

3. We have persuaded, and do still persuade you, that without knowledge, the
mind is not good; we have entreated you to grow in all knowledge, and in all
goodness: and we cease not to pray that you may abound more and more in
knowledge, and in all judgment: You have a sure word of prophecy, to which,
we say, you would do well to take heed, as unto a light shining in a dark
place, a light to your feet, and a lanthorn to your paths. -- We say, -- when
an holy wisdom enters into your hearts and knowledge, it is pleasant unto
your souls; discretion shall preserve you, and understanding shall keep you, to
deliver you, etc.

There are those abroad, a part of whose Religion it is to make you perish for
want of knowledge, to keep you under the power of darkness, that you may walk
after the vanity of your mind, having your understanding darkened, being
alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in you, because
of the blindness of your hearts. -- That Scripture, which we have translated
for you, which is your meat, your drink, your delight, sweeter then honey or
the honeycomb, of more value than the world, must be taken from you; and if
they prevail (as we know they will not) it will be no less than death, to read
that word, which is dearer to you than your lives: your faithful Ministers, to
whom you would have given your right eyes, must be removed into corners; yea,
and must seal that Doctrine with their blood, which they now deliver you. (...)
-- O the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is to behold the Sun! -- If
the light that is in us be darkness, how great, how sad is that darkness! A God
we must own, but shall not know him; a Savior we must have, but we must that
come to him, though this is life eternal to know him, and the Father who has
sent him. Duties we must do, that we may live; but we shall not understand
them: Scriptures there are written to our comfort, but we must not read them.
We err, not knowing the Scripture (says out Savior) we err by knowing the
Scripture, say the Roman Catholics. Hear, read, (says God) and your souls
shall live: Read, says the Papist, and you shall surely dye. O wretched
mankind! a great part whereof Mahomet has taught not to hear reason, that they
may judge in themselves what is right: -- a great part whereof the Pope has
traught not to hear the Scripture, which is no vain thing, which is our life.
-- A Bishop Hall.
sad Religion! (if I may call it Religion) that sets up the kingdom of
darkness, by which the Devil may rule in the children of disobedience. -- A
Religion that hoodwinks poor people in forced ignorance (when alas! we are all
too willingly ignorant) lest we should know Gods will, or any way to Heaven,
but theirs; so as millions of souls live no less without Scripture, than if
there were none: that forbids spiritual food as poison, and fetches God's Book
into the Inquisition. -- Ibid. (...).


4. Although the Church and our selves by her appointment, first discovered to
you the eternal truth; yet have we not suffered you to rest upon us, who may
deceive, and be deceived; but have led to the Rock that is higher than us, and
resolved your Faith into a foundation that cannot fail, the truth and authority
discovered in his Word, by his Spirit. -- They, they of Rome, who are now so
busy, will take you off from the foundation of God, which stands sure: --
they will persuade you that the Word of God which you know is pure, is corrupt;
that the Law of God, which you know is perfect, is defective; that the
Scriptures, which you know in things necessary evident, are dark: and all this
to what purpose? but to settle you upon men, who you know are a lie; to make
you rest on Councils, who, says Bellarm. himself, l. 2. c. 11. p. 153. May
err: Particular Councils confirmed by the Pope, may err in Faith and Manners.
Some Catholics affirm, says Bell. de Council. Ecclesiasticis, l. 2. c. 5. See
Aen. Sylvius, Telesphorus, Platina, and Baron. Annal.
p. 110. or upon Popes, whereof some have been Infidels; and privately
conferring with their Cardinals, said, Oh how much gain this Fable of Christ
has brought us! Others have been Witches, others Murderers, others
Whoremongers, ravishing women in the Apostolic doors: others (as their own
Records testify) by Bribes, by Devils, by Witches, have climbed up to the
infallible Chair. Oh can you trust your souls with those men which have
confessed to have given their souls to the Devil, that they might be Popes!
yea, which is worst of all, the poor Catholics, when they have relied upon
this man as infallible today, must tomorrow rely upon another Pope as
infallible, who may declare this man an Heretic: if they believe not he is
infallible, they are damned; and if they believe not he is an Heretic, when
declared by another Pope to be so, they are damned too: Ah, poor men!

5. We teach you to serve the true God, and him only to worship: and we tell
you he is a jealous God, and he will not give his honor to another: and that
idolatry has been the ruin of all Nations in this World, and is the damnation
of men without repentance in the World to come. You know that Idolaters shall
not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; for without are Idolaters, Rev. 22. 15. Yet
they, they who now with fair words deceive the hearts of the simple, have a
design to bring you to worship stocks and stones, with the same honor that is
due to God blessed for ever! And lest your hearts should rise against graven
Images; lest you should not bow down to them, nor worship them, against the
Letter of the second Commandment; -- they leave out those words of that second
Commandment, as a needless illustration in their Chatechisms and Prayer-books
to the people.

The smith with the tongs both works in the coals, and fashioneth it with
hammers, and works it with the strength of his arms: yea, he is hungry, and
his strength fails: he drinks no water, and is faint. The carpenter
stretches out his rule: he marketh it out with a line: he fitteth it with
planes, and he marketh it out with the compass, and makes it after the figure
of a man, according to the beauty of a man; that it may remain in the house. --
Thus he makes a god, even his graven image: he falls down unto it, and
worshippeth it, and prays unto it, and says, Deliver me, for thou art my
God. They have not known, nor understood: for he has shut their eyes, that
they cannot see; and their hearts, that they cannot understand. And none
considers in his heart, neither is there knowledge nor understanding to say,
I have burnt part of it in the fire, yea, also I have baked bread upon the
coals thereof: I have roasted flesh and eaten it, and shall I make the residue
thereof an abomination? shall I fall down to the stock of a tree? He feeds of
ashes: a deceived heart has turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul,
nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? Isai. 44. 12, 13. -- 16. to 20.

In a voluntary humility do these men worship Angels, who said expressly to St.
John, Worship thou God. Now you seek God in his Ordinances, and desire to see
him in his holy Temple. -- If you be seduced by them, you must go only to poor
creatures like your selves. --

6. We -- or do we only? does not our God likewise teach you, that if any man
add to his holy Word, he shall add to him the plagues that are written in
this book? -- Yet if ever they prevail, you must believe more Scripture then
ever God inspired, or his ancient Church received; and you must do it upon no
less penalty then if God himself should speak from heaven. -- Sad! You must
believe what an Angel from heaven is accursed if he teach you. They have a
design, Beloved, to set up a man in stead of God, who may create new Articles
of Faith at his pleasure, and impose them upon necessity of salvation. In vain,
it seems, came Christ from the bosom of the Father to reveal his will: in vain
does the Spirit lead us to all truth: in vain have we thought that our Priests
lips should preserve knowledge, and that the people should seek it at their
mouth: in vain have we gone to the Law and to the Testimonies, concluding that
if men spoke not according to them, it was because there was no light in them.
If we must lay aside all, and wait upon the Popes Oracles, how shall we be sure
that he is infallible? Not because he says so: for if he bears witness of
himself, his witness is not true. -- Not because the Scripture says so: for
that (they say) is no further true then he confirms it. Not because he is St.
Peter's successor: for we are not sure St. Peter was at Rome: if he was there,
we are not sure that he was Bishop there, being an Apostle of the Circumcision,
i. e. of the Jews, and not of the Romans. If he was there Bishop, we are not
sure he was infallible, who denied his Master thrice, and dissembled once: --
If he was infallible, we are not sure he left any heirs of his grace and
spirit, -- or if any, we are not sure he left one in a perpetual and visible
succession at Rome: -- That he so be queathed his infallibility to his Chair,
as that whosoever sits in it, cannot but speak true; that all which sit where
he sat, must by some instinct say as he taught: -- That if Peter was
infallible by virtue of Christ's promise; yet that what Christ said to him,
absolutely, ere ever Rome was thought of, must be referred, yea, tied to it:
that the Pope whose life, whose pen, whose judgment, whose keys may err; yet
in his pontifical Chair cannot err. -- That the line of this Apostolical
succession in the confusion of so many long and desperate schisms (when there
was one Pope in one place, another in another) shamefully corrupt Usurpations
and Intrusions, confessed Heresies, open Profaness, and celebrated Infidelity,
neither was nor can be broken. -- If you are not sure of these and many more
things, whereof some are impossible, most are improbable; you are sure of
nothing in Popery. Oh, the lamentable hazard of so many millions of poor souls,
that stand upon these slippery terms! O miserable grounds of Popish faith!
whereof the best can have but this security, that perhaps it may be true. --

7. We and our Church have taught you a serious Religion which Angels desire to
look into, which men reverence, which carries a divine authority, a heavenly
awe, a spiritual power along with it, that prevails upon all that hear it. Ten
men are ready to lay hold on him who is a Jew, i. e. a professor of the true
Religion; -- and say, We will go with you, for God is with you. But alas, they
of Rome have set up a Religion that Bishop Hall.
made sport to our plain forefathers, with the remembrance of her gravest
devotion. How often have we seen them laugh at themselves, whilst they have told
of their creeping Crouch, their kissing the Pax, offering their Candles,
signing with Ashes, partial shifts, merry Pilgrimages, ridiculous Miracles; and
a thousand such Maygames, which we are ashamed to name? While you are taught
that decent worship, that solemn devotion, those comely approaches to the
Throne of Grace, that make all Christians rejoice to behold your order, grave,
solemn, and heavenly. We cannot but pity that Religion, whose vanities very
boys do shout and laugh at; if for no more but this, that it teaches men to
put confidence in Bishop Hall Ibid.
Beads, Medals, Roses, hallowed Swords, spells of the Gospel, Agnus Dei, etc.
Ascribing unto them divine virtue, -- yea, so much as is due to the Son of God
and his precious blood.

You are taught to draw near to God, to hear his Word in a Language you
understand, and to make your requests known unto God, in a wholesome form of
sound words you can assent to: and there come in some (it may be) when you are
gathered together in one place that believe not, or one unlearned; he is
convinced of all, he is judged of all: and thus are the secrets of his heart
made manifest; and so falling down on his face, he will worship God, and report
that God is in you of a truth. -- When they of the Church of Rome are together
in one place, they all speak with tongues; and there come in those that are
unlearned, or unbelievers, and they say that they are mad: so that the great
God is blasphemed, Christian Religion is dishonored, Atheism is promoted, and
the world is ready to be shut up in unbelief.

8. We, our God, our Church has taught you a Religion that teaches to deny
all ungodliness, and all worldly lusts; to hate every false way; to allow no
evil inclination in our nature, nor disorder or sin in our life: A Religion
that teaches us to deny our selves, to walk in a narrow way, to mortific our
lusts, to abstain from all appearance of evil, to walk circumspectly, to live
without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, to set God
always before us; -- and not allow our selves or others in the least evil. The
poor deluded souls of Rome endeavor by all means to set up a way that
professes to be a baud to sin, whilst both (in practice) they tolerate open
Stews, Bishop Hall. ibid.
and prefer fornication in some cases before marriage, which is honorable
among all men, and the bed undefiled; and gently blanch over the breaches of
Gods Law, with the name of venials, and such favorable titles of diminution;
daring to affirm that venial sins are no hinderance to a man's clearness and
perfection. -- They would deceive you and themselves with a pretended power in
the Pope to dispense with those sins which none can forgive but God: -- They
encourage one another, and the vitiously inclined world to all excess of riot,
with a vain hope that sin may be bought and sold, that pardon may be had for
money, and that riches will profit in the day of wrath. So as Hell can have no
Dives, no rich men in it; but fools and the friendless Devils indeed are
tormentors there: yet men can command Devils, and money can command men. -- We
have taught you to fear an oath, and to swear in truth, righteousness and
judgment, and to speak the truth one to another, for the peace and security of
the world. How can men live by one another, unless they can believe what each
speaks or swears to other? -- But alas, Rome would impose upon us a Religion
(shall I call it a Religion?) that allows juggling equivocations, and reserved
senses in our very Oaths. -- -- O sad! swear one thing, mean another; mock God,
and deceive the world! Hear what Cardinal Ostatus reports Ep. 87.
of Pope Clement the eighth, who said, he urged that the King of France should
join with Spain in the invasion of England: -- but the Cardinal replied, that
that King was tied by an oath to the Queen of England; whereunto the Pope
answered, (and they say he is infallible) that the oath was made to an
Heretic, but he was bound in another oath to God and the Pope; -- and that
Kings may allow themselves all things which make for their advantage: Indeed
(says he, using the Duke of urbins words) everyone does blame a noble man that
is not a Sovereign if he keep not his word; but supreme Princes may without any
danger to their reputation, make covenants and break them, or betray, and
perpetrate other such like things.

What shall a Confessor do (says Franc. de Fran. S. Vic. ord. praed. sum.
sacr. art. 184. p. 124.
S. Victoria, an ingenious Papist, and a learned reader of Divinity in
Salamanca) if he be asked of a sin that he has heard in confession? may he say
that he knows not of it? I answer, (says he) according to all our Doctors,
that he may. But what if he be compelled to swear? I say that he may and ought
to swear that he knows it not; for it is understood that he knows it not
besides confession; and so he swears true. But what if he be asked upon oath,
whether he knew it in confession or no? I answer, (says he) that a man thus
urged, may still swear that he knows it not in confession; i. e. not so as to
reveal it. O wise, cunning, deep and holy perjuries, unknown to our
forefathers! -- Yea, which is worst of all, they do obtrude upon the World so
many idle Legends, so many false Discourses, so many lying Miracles, so many
pious Frauds, as that they have shaken men's belief of all Antiquity; such
ridiculous and improbable things, that they sure can hardly deliver them
without laughter, (pleasing themselves to see how they deceive the world) and
their abettors cannot hear them without shame and confusion of face. It Is a sad
thing to see the wiser sort of the World read those stories on winter-nights
for sport, which the poor credulous multitude hear in their Churches, with a
devout astonishment. Neither do they satisfy themselves with these false
suggestions they have thrust upon the world; but in conscience of their
untruth, they go about to deprave all Authors that may give evidence against
them; to outface ancient truths, and to deface all monuments of Primitive
belief and practice; leaving nothing unattempted against heaven or earth that
may promote their interest, and disable us their innocent adversaries; though
thereby they blot out all Religion, and suppress all truth.

We teach you to keep holy the Sabbath day, prescribing the careful observation
of this day and others, as the only means to keep up the life and power of
Religion in the world: -- But alas! they turn not away their feet from the
Sabbath, from doing their pleasure upon God's holy Day: they call not the
Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord and honorable, neither do they honor
it; but upon it they do their own ways, they find their own pleasure, and
speak their own words. --

9. Our Church indeed preserves, teaches, opens, confirms, and urges the
truth; yet so as (your selves being judges, and allowed a judgment of
discretion:) she urges nothing contrary to Scripture, Sense and Reason. -- Yet
if our Church were overthrown, there are they that would overthrow with it,
Scripture, Sense and Reason. -- Not to mention their infinite vanities
introduced to the Church, which rob poor souls of the sound and plain helps of
true Piety and Salvation; they take from you one half of that heavenly, which
our Savior left for his last and dearest Legacy to his Church for ever: As if
Christ's Ordinances were superfluous, or they were wiser than their Redeemer,
against express Scripture, which says, Drink ye all of this Cup. They would
have you mock God with a few Latin Prayers, without faith, ignorantly; without
comfort, unprofitably; expressly contrary to the 14 Chapter of the 1 Epistle to
the Corinthians. -- And lest ought should here be wanting to the affront of the
Scripture, and the setting up of the doctrine of Devils: they forbid to marry;
yea, they teach it is better to burn then to marry. And when our Church has
taught you, that all things are lawful, that every creature of God is good, and
none to be refused; all things being yours, as you are Christ's: -- only that
you must admit three moderations of your Christian Liberty, Sobriety, Charity,
and Duty in obedience to your Sovereign forbidding your private enjoyment of
some things for public good. -- But they of Rome will impose upon you a
Relgious prohibition of Meat, and differences of diet; superstitiously
preferring Gods workmanship to it self, and willingly polluting what he has
sanctified. -- But wherefore should ye, being dead with Christ from the
Rudiments of the world, as though living in the world, be subject to
Ordinances? -- Touch not, taste not, handle not; which all are to perish with
the using, after the commandments and doctrines of men; which things have
indeed a show of wisdom, in will worship and humility, and neglecting of the
body, etc. -- Neither may you only go against the Word of God, but even
against Reason it self: If you be a Papist, you must believe the body of Christ
in ten thousand places at once, and yet in no place; you must believe it in
heaven, and yet every where; you must believe it flesh, and no flesh: several
members without distinction; a substance without quantity, and other accidents;
or substance and accidents that cannot be seen, felt, or perceived; and so your
Savior, a monster or nothing: -- Yea, you must go against your own senses: You
must see Bread, yet not believe it; you must taste Wine, yet say it is blood. --
And yet to what pass are we brought, if we cannot believe our senses? Yea, you
must worship those whom the Scriptures declare wicked, for Saints; and adore
them, whom all the world know were lewd, for Martyrs. -- You must honor
Rebels, Villains, with Temples, Altars and Invocations: and yet you must
believe them who lived according to scripture-rule, to be villains, etc.
Wickliff a blasphemer, Luther a devil, Calvin a Sodomite, Tyndal a whoremonger,
Beza and King apostates, -- Protestants heretics, Q. Elizabeth a lewd woman,
our Bishops ordained in a tavern. -- O thus, thus must you live against
Scripture, against Experience, against Sense, against Reason.

10. We desire you to attend upon Gods Ordinance humbly, reverently, and in
faith; and say his Ordinances are his power to their salvation that so wait
upon him. -- But alas! they of Rome will force you to believe that when you
have prepared your selves to meet your God in his ways, yet it shall be to you
only according to your Priests intention. If he intend the Sacrament to your
good, it is your life; if not, you receive it to your damnation. Alas! who knows
when the Minister intends what he is about? How shall you, if you are Papists,
know whether you hear effectually, -- whether you pray savingly, -- whether you
receive the Sacrament successfully, seeing you depend wholly upon the Priests
intention? -- We must needs pity that religion that is not sure of lawful
Bishops, because they know not their intention that ordained them; no regular
Priests, because they know not their thoughts that ordained them: -- a religion
this sure, that was contrived to perplex the world.

11. We desire to be helpers of your joy, and promoters of your eternal
comfort, -- that through the comfort of the Scriptures opened by us, you might
have hope. They of Rome make it their business to torment and frighten you, to
vex and perplex you: they will make you believe that so soon as you are born
you must be cast remedilesly unto the eternal pains of hell for want of
Baptism, which you could not live to desire: Thus they damn all your infants,
and throw all those innocents to hell whom our Savior thought fittest for the
kingdom of heaven. And if you have lived beyond your baptism, they will fright
you, poor souls, with expectation of feigned torments in Purgatory, not
inferior (for the time) to the flames of the damned. How wretchedly and
fearfully must you, poor men, live? how sadly will you die in that way, wherein
you are sure to go through a hell to heaven? yea, you are not sure you shall
ever go to heaven; for they will persuade you that you neither can nor ought to
be assured either of present grace, or of future salvation. -- We indeed wish
you to make your calling and your election sure, -- but they say you cannot. --
Oh an uncomfortable religion, wherein I must enter to an eternity, but God
knows whether of woe or weal; wherein I must say to an immortal soul,
Animala vagula, blundula, qua vadis in loca? etc. -- O poor soul, whither art
thou going? Neither must you only live in fear of your estate in another
world, while you are in that way, but in infinite cares and vexations in this,
-- while they rack your consciences with the needless torture of a necessary
shrift, -- wherein the virtue of Absolution depends on the fullness of
Confession, and that upon examination; and the sufficiency of examination is
so full of ^ruples, (besides those infinite cares of unresolved doubts in this
pretended penance) that the poor soul. never knows when it is clear. -- And
that they may complete your misery, -- they take you off from that comfort you
receive from your Saviors satisfaction for you, and make you rely upon your
works, whereby no man was ever justified before God: -- yea, and when all is
done by Christ and your selves, you must go to the flames, and thence be
redeemed with such corruptible things as silver and gold.

Beloved, if they could show you a more excellent way for Gods glory, the
advancement of grace, and the settlement of your comfort; we would persuade you
to follow them, -- but now it appears that they desire only the advancement of
the Pope, whom if you submit to, you may believe what you will; for he writ to
Queen Elizabeth, that he would confirm all her and our Religion, if she would
but own him head of the Church. Now it appears that they destroy religion,
endanger poor souls, and disturb the world, only for a few men's interests, who
seek their own. -- Mark and avoid them, have nothing to do with them, lest if
you perish, your blood be upon your own heads: keep close to God, stick fast to
his truth, keep within his Church, live by his grace, keep up the power of
religion in your hearts, be at peace among your selves; and your blood be upon
our heads if you perish.

Bishop Sanderson.
But if what is spoken upon examination, appear to have any repugnancie with
godliness, in any one branch or duty thereunto belonging, we may be sure the
words cannot be wholesome words. It can be no heavenly Doctrine that teaches
men to be earthly, sensual, or devilish; or that tends to make men unjust in
their dealings, uncharitable in their censures, undutiful to their superiors,
or any other way superstitious, licentious or profane. I note it not without
much gratulation and rejoicing to us of this Church. There are, God knows,
afoot in the Christian world Controversies more then a good many; Decads,
Centuries, Chiliads of Novel Tenants brought in this last Age, (which were
never believed, many of them scarce ever heard of in the ancient Church) by
Sectaries of all sorts. Now it is our great comfort, (blessed be God for it)
that the Doctrine established in the Church of England, (I mean the public
Doctrine, for that is it we are to hold to, passing by private Opinions) I say,
the public Doctrine of our Church is such, as is not justly chargeable with
any impiety, contrarious to any part of that duty we owe either to God or man.
O that our conversation were as free from exception as our Religion is! Oh that
we were sufficiently careful to preserve the honor and luster of the truth we
profess, by the correspondencie of our lives and actions thereunto! And upon
this point we dare boldly join issue with our clamourous adversaries on either
hand, Papists, I mean, and Disciplinarians; who do both so loudly, but unjustly
accuse us and our Religion: they, as carnal, and licentious; these, as Popish
and superstitious. As Eliah once said to the Baalites, That God that answers
by fire, let him him be God: so may we say to either of both; and when we have
said it, not fear to put it to a fair trial: That Church whose Doctrine,
Confession and Worship is most according to godliness, Let that be the true
Church.

FINIS.

