A BREIFE MEMENTO To the present VNPARLIAMENTARY IVNTO Touching their present
intentions and Proceedings to Depose and Exeute, CHARLES STEWART, their lawful
KING

By William Prynne Esquire: a Member of the House of Commons, and PRISONER
under the Armies Tyrany; who it seems, have leavyed War against the Houses
of Parliament, their quondam Masters; whose Members they now forcibly take and
detain Captives, during their lawless Pleasures.

Proverb 24. 21, 22. My Son, Fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not
with those who are given to Change: for their calamity shall RISE SVDDENLY, and
who knows the ruin of them both?

Gal. 1.10. If I yet pleased men, I should not be the Servant of Christ.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1649.

Die Veneris 20. Aug. 1647. An Ordinance for declaring all Votes, Orders, and
Ordinances passed in one or both houses, since the force on both Houses, July
26. until the sixth of this present August, 1647. to be null and void,
Whereas there was a visible, horrid, insolent, and actual force upon the
Houses of Parliament, on Monday the 26 of July last, where upon the Speakers,
and many Members of both Houses of Parliament, were And yet never a Member
forcibly imprisoned or secluded the House as above 200. are now by the Army.
forced to absent themselves from the service of the Parliament, and whereas
those Members of the House could not return to sit in safety, before Friday
the sixth of August. It is therefore declared by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament Assembled that the Ordinance of Monday the said 26 July, for the
repealing and making void of the Ordinance of the 23 of the said July for the
settling of the Militia of the City of London, being gained by force and
violence. And all Votes, Orders, Ordinances, passed in either or both Houses of
Parliament, since the said Ordinance of the 26 of July to the said sixth of
August, are null and void, and were so at the making thereof, and are hereby
declared so to be, the Parliament being under a force, and not free. Provided
always and be it ordained that no person or persons shall be impeached or
punished for his or their actions by, or upon, or according to the aforesaid
Votes, Orders, or Ordinances, unless he or they shall be found guilty of
contriving, acting, or abetting the aforesaid visible and actual force, or
being present at, or knowing of the said force, did afterward act upon the
Votes so forced; or were guilty of entering into, or promoting the late
Engagement for bringing the King to the City, upon the terms and conditions
expressed in his Majesty's Letter of the 12. of May last.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

A brief Memento to the present Vnparliamentary Iunto, touching their present
intentions and proceedings to depose and Execute CHARLES STEWARD their lawful
King of ENGLAND, etc.
GENTLEMEN.
IT is the observation of King Solomon Prove 25.11. That a word spoken in due
season, is like Apples of Gold in pictures of silver. And seeing I (and above
two hundred Members more) being forcibly secluded from you by the Officers of
the Armies unparaleld violence upon our Persons and the House, cannot speak my
mind freely to you in, or as the House of Commons, I held it my duty freely to
write my thoughts unto you, only as private Persons under the force, consulting
in a House, without your Fellow Members advice or concurrence, about the speedy
deposing and executing of KING CHARLES, your lawful Sovereign, to please the
General, Officers and Grand Council of the Army (who have unjustly usurped to
them the supreme Authority both of King and Parliament) or rather the Jesuits
and Popish Priests among or near them, by whose Councels they and you are now
wholly swayed, and whose traiterous designs you really execute, in most of
your late Votes and Actings.

I have only a few words and considerations to impart unto you: Dictum sapienti
sat est.

First, I shall mind you, that by the Cook 3 Institut. 1. Stamfords Plea^ of
the Crown. l. 1. c. 1.^.
Common Law of the Realm, the Statute of 25 E. 3. and all other Acts
concerning Treason, it is no less then High Treason, for any Man by overt act,
to compass or imagine the deposition or death of the King, or of his eldest
Son and Heir, though it be never executed: much more if actually accomplished.
That many have been arraigned, condemned, executed for such intended Treasons
in former ages; as the Earl of Arundell and others, by judgment in
Parliament, 21. R. 2. Plac Coronae. N. 4.6.7. and the Gunpouder Traitors. 3.
Jacobi, to omit others, whose Examples should be others admonitions, the Heads
and Quarters of some of them yet hanging on the Houses where you now meet and
sit.

2dly That, in the Oath of Allegiance which you have all taken, immediately
before your admission into the House as Members; You do truly and sincerely
acknowledge, profess, testify and declare in your consciences, before God and
the World, That our Sovereign Lord King Charles, Is lawful and rightful King
of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's Dominions and Countries, And
that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any authority of the Church or See of
Rome, or by any Other means, Nor any other, has any power or authority to
Depose the King, or to dispose of any of his Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions,
or to discharge any of his Subjects of his Allegiance and Obedience to his
Majesty, or to give leave to any of them, to offer any violence to His
Majesty's Person, State or Government. Note
And that notwithstanding any sentence or Declaration of Deprivation made by
the Pope, etc. or any absolution of the said Subjects from their obedience, you
will bear true allegiance, to His Majesty, His heirs and successors, and him
and them will defend to the uttermost of your power. Against all attempts and
conspiracies whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their Persons,
their Crown and dignity, by reason or color of any such sentence or
Declaration, or otherwise: And do thereby further swear, that you do from your
hearts abhor, detest, and abjure as impious and Heretical, that damnable
doctrine and position, that Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the
Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.
And that you do belive, and in conscience are resolved, that neither the Pope,
nor any person whatsoever, has power to absolve you of this Oath, or any part
thereof; and that all these things you did plainly and sincerely acknowledge
and swear, according to these express words and their plain and common sense,
without any equivocation or mental evasion or secret reservation whatsoever,
And that you did make this Recognition and acknowledgement heartily, willingly,
and truly, upon the true faith of a Christian. Now whether your present actings
and intentions against the King, be not diametrically repugnant to this solemn
Oath (which most of you have taken sithence these wars; and some of you since
the Treaty, when sworn Sejeants at Law, etc.) let God and the world before whom
you swear, and your own consciences, in which you then swore, determine your
acting herein the Popes and Jesuits designs. Exact Collections p.
6.19.59.66.6.83.102.103.118.123.125.141.142, 143.173.180.
195.219.259.281.307.380.312.360.376.457. etc.


3dly. That your selves among other Members, have in above one hundred
Remonstrances, Declarations, Petitions, Ordinances and printed papers published
in the name, and by the authority of one or both Houses of Parliament,
professed, both to the King himself, Kingdom, World, and foreign States,
that you never intended the least hurt, injury, or violence to the Kings
Person, Crown, Dignity, or Posterity: but intended to him and his Royal
Posterity, more honor happiness Glory and Greatness, then ever was yet
enjoyed by any of his Royal Predecessors: That you will ever make good to the
uttermost with your lives and fortunes, the faith and allegiance, which in
truth and sincerity you have always horn to his Majesty, that you have
proposed no other ends to your selves, but the performance of all duty and
loyalty to his Majesty's Person. That all Contributions, and loanes upon the
public faith should be employed only to maintain the Prote^^ant Religion; the
Kings authority, his Person, his Royal Dignity, the Laws of the land, Peace
of the Kingdom, and privileges of Parliament, and not to be employed against
his Majesty's person or authority. That the A Collection. etc. 18.13 41, 43, 44
49.51 61.64.96.181.182.310.321.424.425.496.599.623.696.806.807.879. Appendix.
p. 15.
Armies and forces raised by the Houses were raised for the safety and defense
of the Kings Person, and of both Houses of Parliament, etc. That his Majestes
Personal safety, honor and greatness, are much dearer to you then your own
lives, and fortunes, which you do most heartily dedicate, and shall most
willingly employ for the maintenance and support thereof. That the Parliament
will ever have a care to prevent any danger which his Majesty may justly
apprehend to his person. That both Houses are resolved to expose their lives
and fortunes, for the defense and maintenance of the true Religion, The Kings
person, honor and State the power and privileges of Parliament: That
notwithstanding his Majesty's proclamations against the General, and Army, as
Traitors, yet to witness their constant and unshaken Loyalty to his Majesty
both houses do solemny declare; That upon his disbanding his forces, and return
and harkning to the advice of his Great Council, They will really endeavor to
make both him and his as much beloved at Home, and feared abroad as any Pr.
that ever swayed this Septer: which is their firm and constant Resolution: from
which they will not be diverted for any private or self respects whatsoever:
That they will faithfully endeavor to secure his Majesty's Person and Crown,
from all dangers: inculcating the apparent danger to his Royal Person among his
popish and Malignants Armies and ill Councelors, and upon that reason,
persuading and inviting him to desert them, and close with his Parliament:
protesting, that the Parliament has been, is and ever will be more ready then
they, to secure and uphold the ^uthority, Prerogative and Honor of the King,
and preserve the safety of his Royal Person, which they have often times
testified by many humble Petitions and Declarations to Him the World and
Kingdom: with many other such like expressions. Which whether your present
Actings and Counsels do not directly oppose, contradict, and give the lie unto,
to your eternal infamy and breach of public faith, as much as in you lies,
let both Houses, the world and all men judge; as they will do in due season.

4thly. Consider, That when the Exact Collection. p. 298.695.696.657.658.991.
King and his party did tax the Houses for insinuating, That if they should
make the highest presidents of other Parliaments their pattern, there would be
no cause to complain of want of modesty or duty in them: That is, they may
depose the King when they will, and are not to be blamed for so doing: and that
the army raised by the Parliament was to murder and depose the King. Both
houses by two solemn Declarations, did most professedly declare and protest
against it, as the falsest and most malicious accusation that could be
imagined: that the thoughts of it never entered nor should enter into their
loyal hearts. That as God is witness of their thoughts, so shall their actions
witness to all the world, that to the honor of our Religion; and of those who
are most zealous in it, they shall suffer far more for and from their Sovereign
then they hoped God would ever permit the malice of his wicked Counselors, to
put them to, since the happiness of the Kingdom does so mainly depend upon
hi^ Majesty and the Royal Authority of that root. That they hoped the
contrivers of these false and scandalous reports, or any that professed the
name of a Christian could not have so little charity as to raise such a
scandal, especially when they must needs know, the Protestation made by the
Members of both houses whereby they promise in the presence of Almighty God to
defend and preserve his Majesty's Person, The Promise and Protestation made by
the Members of both houses upon the Nomination of the Lord of Essex to be
General, and to live and die with him, wherein is expressed, That this Army
was raised for defense of the Kings Person. Their often, earnest and most
humble addresses to His Majesty, Which they often professed both of the Army under
the Earl of Essex, and Sir Thom. Fairfax to. Collection of all Orders. etc.
8.13.41.43.44.49.51.61.64.96.99.623.696.879. Appendix. pa. 15.
to leave that desperate and dangerous Army wherewith he is now encompassed,
raised and upheld to the hazard of his own, and the Kingdoms ruin, and to
come in Person to his Parliament, where he should be sure to remain in honor
and safety, and their humble petition directed to be presented to him by the
hands of the Earl of Essex, before any blow given, to remove his Royal person
from the Army: a request inconsistent with any purpose to offer the least
violence to his person which has and ever shall be dear unto them. Now put it
to your souls and consciences whether yours and the Armies present Councels
and actions, do not really justify the Kings and his parties former
suggestions, and give the lie to these Declarations of both Houses? who
certainly when ever restored to a condition of freedom and liberty of meeting
together again, will crave public reparations and justice against you, if you
violate both their Honor, faith, and engagements to the King, Kingdom and
foreign States, against these their Declarations and Protestations too.

5thly. Remember, that the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, October.
2^. 1642. did in the presence of Almighty God [which is the strongest
obligation that any Christian, Exact. Collection p. 663.664 666.687.686.907.911.
and the most solemn publik faith that any state as a Parliament, can give]
for the satisfaction of their own consciences, and discharge of that great
trust that lies upon them, make this Protestation and Declaration to all this
Kingdom and Not on, and to the whole world, That no private passion or
respect: No evil intention to his Majesty's person, no design to prejudice his
just honor and Authority, engaged them to raise forces or take up Arms. That
if he would return to his Parliament in peace, and by their counsels and advice
compose the distempers and confusions abounding in his Kingdoms, They would
receive him with all Honor, yield him all true obedience, subjection, and
faithfully endeavor to defend his Person and Estate from all danger, and to
the uttermost of their power, establish him, in all the blessings of a glorious
and happy Reign, And that they had no intention or desire to hurt or iniure his
Majesty either in his Person or just power. Which they seconded by many
subsequent Declarations. Since which, both Houses and the three Kindomes of
England, Scotland, and Ireland have entered into A Collection, etc. p. 327.359
399.404.416.420.10.428.806.887.818.878.879.889.
A solemn League and Covenant, For the Honor and happiness of the Kings
Majesty, and his posterity [among other ends therein specified;] That they
shall sincerely, really and constantly endeavor with their estates and lives,
to preserve and defend the Kings majesty's person and authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms
that the world may bear witness with their consciences of their Loyalty; and
that they have no thoughts, nor intention to diminish his majesty's just power
and greatness. That they will, with all faithfulness endeavor to discover
all evil Instruments and Incendiaries Those who depose or divide his Head from
his shoulders must be most guilty of this dividing.

A Collection, etc. p. 420. etc.


dividing the King from his people, that they may be brought to public trial:
and receive condign punishment. And shall never suffer themselves directly, or
indirectly, by whatsoever combination, persuasion or terror, to be withdrawn
from this blessed union, etc. which so much concerns the glory of God, the
good of the Kingdoms, and the honor of the King, but shall all the days of
their lives zealously and constantly continue therein against all opposition.
And conclude. This Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God the
searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to observe the same, as we shall
answer at the great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. This
Covenant you have all taken your selves, (some of you often) and * imposed it
on all three Kingdoms: And will it not stare in your faces your consciences,
and engage God himself, and all three Kingdoms, as one man against you, if you
should proceed to depose the King, destroy his person, or disinherit his
posterity? yea, bring certain ruin upon you and yours as the greatest 2 Timothy
3.3, 4.
Covenant-breakers, and most perjured Creatures under Heaven. O think, and
think most seriously upon it before you proceed to further perjuries. Rot. Pet.
An. 24. E. 3 m. 2. in. dors. Rot. Pat. n. 25.. E. 3. par. 1. m. 17. Cooks. 3.
Instit. p 141.223.
In 24. E 3. William Thrope, chief Justice of the Kings Bench, for taking 80
l. bribes of several persons, was by special Commission, indicted, convicted
and condemned to be hanged, and to forfeit all his Lands, Tenements Goods and
chattels to the King: because thereby Sacramentum Domini Regis quod ergo
populum habuit custodiendum fregit, maliciose, falso and rebelliter, quantum in
ipse fuit: which Judgment was affirmed to be just and reasonable in full
Parliament, where it was openly read by the Kings command, as is evident by 25.
E, 3. Rot. Parl. null. 10. If then this chief Justice for breaking his Oath to
the King and his people, as a Judge, only in taking two or three small bribes,
deserved to be hanged, and to forfeit all his Lands, Goods and Life, by the
judgment of full Parliament, then what will such Members deserve to suffer,
who shall violate, not only their Oaths of Allegiance and Supreamicy to the
King and his heirs, but likewise the several Protestations, solemn League and
Covenant, and the multiplied public faith, engagements, declarations,
Remonstrances, and promises of both houses of Parliament, made to God, the
King, the whole Kingdoms and people of England, Scotland, and Ireland, the
States of the united Provinces, and all the world; an that maliciously,
falsely, and Rebelliously, as much as in them lies, and their own private
Faith, Oaths, Vows, and Covenants involved in them, in deposing and executing
the King, disinheriting the Prince* violating the privileges, usurping the
power of the parliament to themselves, when most of the other Members are
violently secluded by the army, to the subversion of the freedom and liberties
of all Parliaments? this being one article against King Rich. the 2d. in 1. H
4. Rot. Parl. 25 66, 70. when he was deposed. That in the Parliament held at
Salop, intended to oppress his people, he did subtly procure and cause to be
granted, by consent of all the States in the kingdom (which you have not) that
the power of the Parliament should remain with certain persons (* Lords and
Commons) to determine certain Petitions then delivered, but not dispatched,
after the Parl. ended; 21. R. 2. c 16.
by color whereof? the said deputed persons proceeded by the Kings pleasure
and will, to other things generally concerning the said Parliament, to the great
derogation of the State and privileges of the Parliament, and the great
inconveniences and pernicious example of the whole Realm, and to gain some
color and authority to their doings, the King caused the Parliament Rolls to
be altered and deleated according to his Vote, contrary to the effect of the
foresaid Confession; as you have presumed to null repeal, and unvote diverse
Votes, Orders and Ordinances of both Houses made in pursuance of the foresaid
oaths, protestations, the solemn League and Covenant, Remonstrances,
Declarations of both houses and the treaty, when the houses were full, and not
under the Armies force or violence: And if their proceedings and the whole
Parliament of 21. R, were declared L. 1. H. 4 c. 3.
null and void, and the King worthy to be deposed, for such proceedings then;
let Sergeant Thorp, and other Lawyers now acting with you, consider and inform
you what punishment you deserve for such breach of faith, privilege of
Parliament, and usurpation of a monopoly of parliamentary power to your selves
now, whiles under the Armies force, and most Members forced thence: in which
case you ought not to sit, vote, or conclude any thing, but only to As the
House did in the case of the five Members, Exact. collection, p. 35.10.36.
adjourn till the force removed and all Members may freely meet in full Parl.
as is clear by that memorable Record of 6 E. 3. Par. apud Ebor, n. 1.2. Dor.
claus 6. E. 3. m. 4.6. E. 3. apud West. parl. 2. n. 1.13.3. parl. 2. n. 4.15.
E. n 5.17. E. 3. n 2.6.18. E. 3. n. 1.2.5 2^. E 3. n. 5.21. E. 3. n. 4.22. E 3.
n. 1.25 E. 3. n. 1.29. E. 3. n. 4.36. E. 3. n. 1.37. E. 3. n. 1.42. E. 3. n.
1.50. E 3. n. 1.51. E. 3. n. 3.1. R. 2. n. 1.3. R. 2. n. 1.4. R: 2 n 1. R. 2.
n. 1, 4. R. 2. n. 1.5. R 2. parl. 1. n. 1. parl 2 n 1.6. R. 2 parl 1. n. 1.
parl. 2. n. 18. H. 4. n. 28.30.54. 9. H. 4. n. 1.13. H. 4; n. 1. and many more
rolls: where the Par. when any considerable number of the Members of either
house were absent, was constantly adjourned, and refused to sit or do any
thing, [though not under any force] till the houses were full, much more then
when under the Armies sword: it being against Magna, Charta, as the Matthew
Paris. p. 882.885.818. Dan. p. 172.
Barons declared in Parl, Anno Dom. 1257: in the reign of K. H. the third for a
few Members to sit when the rest are absent.

6thly, Consider, that though many of the Kings of Judah and Israel were
extraordinary sinful and Idelatrous bloody and tyrannical great oppressors
of their people; yea shedders of Priests; of Prophets, and other good men's
innocent blood, not only in the wars but in peace: yet there is not one
president in the old Testament of any one King ever juditially impeached,
arraigned, deposed, or put to death by the Congregation, Shanhedrin, or
Parliaments of Judah or Israel. That those who slew any of them in a tumultuous
or treacherous manner, were for the most part slain themselves, either in a
tumult, or 2 Kings. 14.6. c. 15.30. c. 21.10.14.25.24.
else put to death by their Children who succeeded to the Crown, or people of
the Land: and that the Israelites after their revolt from Rehoboham: had never
any one good King, or good day almost among them: but were overrun with
Idolatry, profaneness, tyranny: invaded by enemies, involved in perpetual
Wars, Civil or Foreign; and at last all destroyed and carried away Captives
into Babylon: as the Books of Kings and Chronicles will inform you: That the
rule in the Old Testament is, not to take any wicked Kings from their Thrones
and behead them: Prove. 25.5
but Romans 13 1.2. etc. Tit. 3.1.2. 1 Pet. 3.13 14, 17.1. Tim. 2.1.2.3,
Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be established
in righteousness. And the rule in the New Testament, To be subject to Kings
and the Higher Powers, and to submit unto them even for Conscience and the
Lords sake: and to make Prayers, Supplications, and Intercessions for them,
that under them we may lead a peacable and quiet life, in all Godliness and
honesty, for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior: not
to depose or shed their blood, for which there is no precept. And is not this
plain way of God the safest for you and the Army to follow, yea the only short
cut to Peace and settlement? Ruminate upon it, and then be wise, both for your
souls good, and the Kingdoms too:

7thly. Consider that you now meet, and sit under the armed force and violence
of a mutinous Army, who have leavyed War against the houses to dissolve them,
imprisoned many of your Members forcibly secluded more, and driven away almost
all from the Houses, That til the removal of this horrid force, and
reassembling of all your scattered Members with freedom and safety in the
Houses al you Vote: Act, Order or Ordain, by the Armies own Doctrine in their
Remonstrance of August 18 and the Declaration and Ordinance of both Houses
(made at the Armies instance) August 20 1647. is null and void, even at and from
the time it was voted, acted, ordered, ordained, and so declared by your selves
even by this unrepealed Ordinance and by former Parliaments to, as 21. R. 2. c
12.1. H, 4 c, 3.31. H 6 c 1 39 H 6, c 1. And however you may take upon you the
name and power of the Houses of Parliament, and unvote, vote order and ordain
what you please: yet take it for an infallible Truth, that none of the Sea
their protestation. Dec. 11. 1648.
secluded and absent Members, none of the Counties, Cities and Buroughs, for
which they serve; not those for whom you serve and represent: nor yet the
Kingdoms of England, Sco^land and Ireland (who have as great or greater shares
and interest in the person of the King, as their lawful Sovereign, and are
engaged by Oaths, Covenant, and all the forecited premises to protect his
person and Crown with their lives and estates against all violence and danger)
with Queen, Children and Allies in foreign parts of what Religion soever,
will never own you (in your present condition and constitut^on) to be a
Parliament, but rather a Conventicle or Iuncto nor any thing you vote, order,
or ordain to be See A Collection etc. p. 9.3.2.21.2.22 2.25.2.53.
veiled. And therefore what ever you vote, Order, or Ordain concerning the
Treaty, the deposing or executing the King, the Disinheriting or Banishing the
Prince, dissolving the present Parliament, setting up a new confused
Representative, or new form of State Government, only to please the Officers
and Army, or rather those Jesuits and popish Priests, who have overreached, and
instigated them forcibly to prosecute these their treasonable designs, and
accomplish this their long expected desire and work; you must do only as
private men, not as a Parliament: and if so, what lesser offense then High
Treason, against the King, Parliament and kingdom, your present actings and
proceedings will prove in the conclusion, if you persevere and persist in them,
I leave to a free Parliament, the learned Judges, and all Lawyers now sitting
and voting among you, to consider and resolve. Which the Officers and Council
of the Army considering, would cast the Odium, and danger of all upon you, the
better to exempt and acquit themselves if after reckonings should come, as
probably they may, and certainly will in Gods due time, if you and they repent
not, give over, and crave pardon ere it be over late.

8ly Remember, That no protestant Kingdom or State, ever yet defiled their
hands, or stained the purity and honor of their Reformed Religion, with the
deposition, or blood of any of their Kings or Princes, much less of a
protestant King o^ Prince, of a temperate and sober life, as the King is, who
never immediately imbrued his own hands in any one man's blood, in any
tyranical or bloody way before or since the wars; (for ought I can hear) but
only in a Military, And for a Reforming protestant Parl. pretending the most of
any to piety and religion, to stain their profession or honor by the
deposition, or defile their hands with the blood of a protestant King, or for
an army of Saints to do it, or they to please a Saint-seeming Army, and that
against so many forementioned oaths, protestations, declarations,
Remonstrances, Solemn League; and covenants one after another to the contrary,
would be such an unparall'd scandal to the protestant Religion and all
professors of it (who have upbraided the Jesuits and papists with this
perfidious and treasonable practice, of which they have been deeply guilty, and
themselves innocent) both in our own 3 kingdoms and the whole Christian world,
as would give the greatest occasion, advantage, and encouragement to the
Jesuits, papists, and all licentious persons to join their hands heads,
purses to suppress and extirpate it, and all the professors of it, both at
home and abroad, that ever yet they had, and make Parliaments for ever
hereafter execrable and detestable, both to Kings and people.

9ly, Consider that Scotland and Ireland are joint tenants at least wise
tenants in Common with us in the King, as their lawful Sovereign and King, as
well as ours; and that the Scots delivered and left his person to our
Commissioners at Newcastle, upon this express condition: That no violence
should be offered to his Person, etc. according to the Covenant. How then you
can un-king or depose him as to them, or take away his life upon pretext of
justice, without their concurrent assents, is worthy your saddest thoughts. If
you do it without asking or receiving their consents, you engage both
Kingdoms to make a just War against you, to proclaim and to Crown the
Prince of Wales their King (though you should lay him aside) as being next
heir apparent. And no Ordinance you can now make, will be any legal bar
against him, to the Crown of Eng. where he will find ten thousand persons for
one, who will join with Scotland and Ireland to set him upon his Fathers
Throne, as king of England, and avenge his blood, upon all who shall be aiding
or assisting to its spillings or his dethroning. And what then will become of
you and your army, when thus deserted by most, Walsingham. Hist. Aug. p.
107.108.109. Polichron. 1. c. 44. Se. Speed Holinshed. Grafton. in Ed. 2. and
Rich. 2. Henry the 4th.
opposed by all 3 kingdoms* and all the Kings, Queens, and Princes Allies,
united forces; where will you, where will your St. Cromwell, St. Ireton St.
Pride, Saint Peter's, (that fast and loose carnal prophet and Arch Jesuited
Incendiary in these present tumults (with other Grand Saints of the Army, [who
now force you, the General, Army and whole kingdom, upon such dangerous
councels as these, by the Jesuits principles and practises] then appeer, to
save either themselves, or you, or your posterities from exemplary justice
without mercy, or hopes of pardon? Consider this then seriously, if not as
Christians, yet as Politicians and self ended men, and then repent and be wise
in time.

Tenthly, Remember, that you have neither Law nor direct president for what you
are going about: 1. H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 1. to 60. where the whole proceedings
are at large related.
Edward the 2d. and Richard the 2d. were forced by Mortimer, and Henry the 4th
to resign their Crowns in a formal manner, the one to his Son, the other to
his conquering successor neither of them to the parliament, and then deposed by
a subsequent sentence in Parliament, as unfit to reign without any formal
legal trial, or answer: and that not in an empty Parliament under a force, as
now, when most Members were forced away and secluded, but in a full Parliament,
wherein the articles drawn up against them were never so much as read; and
their depositions made [upon their own voluntary concessions only] to confirm,
their precedent Resignations. Besides, neither of these Kings though very bad
and Papists, were ever condemned to loose their heads or lives, but were to be
well and honorably Treated. And those proceedings were only by Popish
parliaments in time of ignorance, who had no such Oaths, Vows, Covenants,
Protestations and other forementioned considerations to tie their hands as you
and we all have now, Yea this very Parl. has solemnly and particularly
protected, Exact, Col, p 695 699.
that they did never suffer these Presidents to enter into their thoughts, and
they should never be their practice what ever they suffered from the King or
hi^, and that for the honor of our Religion, and the most zealous in it, But
that which is very observable, Roger Mortimer, the principle actor in deposing
King Edward the 2. and Crowning his Son Edward the 3. King in his stead, [as
you must now Crown the Prince of Wales, in his Fathers stead, if you depose the
King, else you pursue not this president as you should do] in the Parliament of
[ E. 3. In which I find no record concerning this deposall] was in 4. E 3. rot,
par, n. 1. to 7.
a full Parliament within four years after, with some other of his Confederates
4. E 3. n, 16.
impeached, condemned, and executed as a Traitor and Enemy to the King and
Kingdom, by the Judgment of the Lords, and that by King Edward the third his
own assent, without any legal hearing or trial, (just as he had there
deposed this King without it) for murdering King Edward in Berkeley Castle
after his deposall: and Sir Thomas de Berkeley, in whose Castle he was slain,
being indicted of Treason likewise for the same murder before the Lords in
Parliament, pleaded not guilty thereunto, and was tried at the Lords Bar in a
legal manner, by a Jury of 12 Knights there sworn and impannelled, and by them
acquitted upon full evidence and trial? 4 E 3. n, 35.
when as Sir Simon de Bereford was impeached, condemned and executed by a
judgment given against him by the Lords alone, without any trial, for
murdering this deposed King, and Thomas de Gourney and William Ocle, adjudged
Traitors by them for the same offense without any evidence appearing on record.
These Presidents then; will be of very hard digestion, and not parall'd to our
times, or the Kings case: Who, having upon the late Treaty granted us, for the
speedy sett^ement and security of our bleeding Kingdoms Churches and Religion,
what ever we could in honor, justice, or reason desire, and far greater
advantages and security then any of our ancestors, or any Kingdom under heaven
from the creation to this present, demanded or enjoyed from any of their
Princes, (as I dare make good to you and all the world:) and that which the
Commons House, after two whole days and one whole nights debate, thought and
voted, a sufficient ground for them to proceed with the King to the speedy
se^ling of the Kingdoms peace: now you, or the army after such large
concessions; contrary to the votes of both houses when full and free; can in
honor, justice, reason, discretion, or conscience proceed to depose or
decapitate the King, as a violater of his faith, a Traitor, etc. Without making
your selves more perjured; treacherous and greater Traitors in all kinds then
he; and incurring the same judgment and execution as you shall pass and
inflict upon him: I leave to your saddest consultations to advise of. I have
thus freely, faithfully and plainly discharged my mind and conscience to you,
without fear or flattery, for the Kings, Kingdoms, Parliaments, protestant
Religions, (I am certain, Irelands, almost irrecoverably lost) your own and
the Armies weal and safety too, if God in mercy please to give you heads or
hearts to make timely use of it, and not suffer your selves to be Jesuit-ridden
any longer. Consider, you have most of you Estates, all of you Heads or lives,
and souls to save, or loose both here and hereafter. If this, and all the
precedent considerations will not prevail with you to take you off from your
present desperate Councels and proceedings for your own, the Kingdoms,
Churches, Religions, Irelands, Parliaments, your own posterities, and the
Armies safety too, Ride on triumphantly still in Ignatius Loyola his fiery
chariot like so many young Phaitons, till you fall and perish; It is sufficient
for me, hour you digest this present friendly Memento to you, and I can truly
say, liberavi animam meam; what ever becomes of you or me. Who do here
solemnly protest to all the world against these your proceedings, as
altogether null, void, unparliamentary, illegal, unchristian, if not perfidious
and Treasonable in these respects.

I shall close up all with that Golden sentance, of God himself, and the
wisest of men, King Solomon, which is twice repeated, verbatim, that it might
be the better remembered and considered by you, and all others in such Exigences
of public affairs, as we are now fallen into. Prove. 22.3. and 27, 12. A
prudent man foreseeth the evil and hides himself, but the simple pass on and
are punished. And with that which is parallel to it Prove. 14.14, 15, 16. The
simple believes every word, but the prudent man looks well to his goings. A
wise man fears and departs from evil, but the fool rages and is confident,
and shall be filled with his own ways: which is thus interpreted, Prove.
1.18.38.32, 33: They lie in wait for their own blood, they lurk privily for
their own lives, whose feet run to evil, and who make have to shed others
blood. For, the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity
of fools shall destroy them, But who so hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely,
and shall be quiet from fear of evil.

From the Kings head in the Strand. Jan. 1. 1648. Your affectionate friend and
servant, as far as you appear to be Gods, your Sovereigns, the Kingdoms,
the Parliaments, Religions, theirs who have entrusted you, or your own true
friends. WILLIAM PRYNNE.

Prove. 28.23. He that rebukes a man, afterward shall find more favor, then
he that flattereth him with his lips.
A POSTCRIPT.
I Am confident that if the Members now meeting at Westminster will but
persuade the General, and his Protestant Officers immediately to render the
Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance, the solemn League and Covenant, and the New
Oath of Abjuration, for the better discovery and speedyer conviction of Jesuits
Popish Priests and Papists consented to by the King in the late Treaty, to all
the Officers Agitators, and Soldiers in the Army, they will presently discover
an whole Conclave of Jesuits, popish Priests, and Iesuited Papists amongst
them, who have instigated them, to disobey and force both Houses, imprison
their Members, to impeach, try, execute the King, dissolve the present
Parliament, subvert the present Government, and constitution of Parliaments,
betray Ireland to the Rebels, and bring new present confusion; the practices,
designs, and studies, of none but Jesuits, and Papists; which all true
Protestants cannot but abhor.

FINIS.

