PROVERBS and PARADOXES
Breaking forth in the day of Contention between the Parliament and Army, to
prevent the dividing of the Army, and the Apparent Deluge of blood, so long
endeavored, and now brought to pass by the Jesuit and Kings Party, using the
Presbyterian and Parliament men, as the Monky the Catts Pavv, but has lingered
in the Birth by needless Importunities, stepping into the Press before them.
PROVE. 28.2. For the Transgression of a Land many are the Princes thereof: but
by a man of understanding and knowledge the State shall be prolonged.


I.
NOt Governors but Government is the delight or grievance of a Nation.
Government.


II.
It is not a King, It is not a Parliament, It is not an Army that makes a
Nation happy, if the Government be bad.

III.
Government is a Systeme, or Body of Laws, Statutes and Judgments, containing
the duties both of Governors and Governed.

IV.
Good Government makes good Governors, and rejoices the Governed: Pro. 18.3.
Pro. 28.4.12.15.28. Pro. 29.2.
but bad Government makes bad Governors, and the Governed mourn,

V.
Good Government is unchangeable, but bad Government, safety no longer then the
Power of the Sword.

VI.
Good Government is only from God, but bad Government is only from men.

VII.
Governments invented by men, tend always to their own Interest.

VIII.
When Governments depend on Governors, they last but a shore time of Life: the
first part deducted for Incapacity, and the latter part oftentimes cut off for
Disabilitie, or Infidelity.

IX.
When Government depends on Governors, they change with every Person, and
every Passion. New Lords, new Laws.

X.
Government is more then Governors, as the whole is more then a part; when
therefore Governors will be greater then Government, Mat. 24 24.
it swells them up into a bubble, and they break. Gnatts cannot swallow Camells.

XI.
When Governors will be greater then Government, they streighten Government,
and squeese the People, to the capacity and boudage of their Lust.

XII.
Such Government disquiets every ambitious Spirit, to contrive how he may get
next into the Saddle, and his friends are Parasites of the same mould, with
their Attendants, fraud and cruelty.

XIII.
Governors and governed might make up a Government, as parts make up a whole.
But because Governors and governed can never meet together in one, nor agree
together if met; therefore it is impossible for men to make a complete
Government, although when all is done, it were but humane, if God be left out,
and far below the Government of God.

XIV.
The framing of a Government is called a Law-giving or Legislative power, but
that (if good) is not in man. Legislative Power. Luc. 18.19.


XV.
He that wakes Laws for men must be above man. And he that will make them
perfect, must himself be without imperfection.

XVI.
A man cannot make a Law more perfect then himself. Nor impartial, because he
is a Party governing or governed.

XVII.
The Laws of Medes and Persians, and all the Governments of Arbens, Rome, and
Venice, etc. were and are imperfect; some profane, some superstitious; Ours,
All.

XVIII.
The man above man, Christ Jesus is our one Lawgiver, Ja. 4.12.
who is able to save and to destroy.

XIX.
He is our King, he is our Law giver, he is our Judge, If. 33.22.
he will save us.

XX.
They that will vie for Legislative power, must necessarily rival Jesus Christ.

XXI.
They that will rival Jesus Christ, can only do it in this life.

XXII.
The Legislative power of Jesus Christ is only in this life, Heb. 9.27. 2 Cor.
5.10. Rev. 20.12. Mat. 16.27. 1 Cor. 15.28.
for after death comes Judgment, that every one may receive the things done in
his body, to be judged out of those things which are written in the Books,
according to their works. And afterward shall the Son himself be subject to
the Father, that God may be All in All.

XXIII.
They that will Rival Jesus Christ, or his Legislative power, must necessarily
find fault with Gods Law.

XXIV.
They that find fault ought to amend, and they that thinck to amend Gods Law,
make themselves wiser then God.

XXV.
They that thinck themselves wiser then God, Prove. 26.12.
are but so in their own conceit, and there is more hope of a Fool, for the
foolishness of God is wiser then men. 1 Cor. 1.25.


XXVI.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, Job 28.28. Prove. 1.7.
Psalm. 119.98, 99; 100.
his Commandments make us wiser then our enemies, and give us more
understanding, then our Teachers. The keeping of his Precepts make us
understand more then the Ancient.

XXVII.
When men acknowledge God, then they are godly, no man does acknowledge God
that does not obey his Law. 1 Jo. 2.3.


XXVIII.
His Law is perfect, LAW. Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9.
his Statutes are right, his Judgments are true and righteous altogether. So
that none may Dent. 4 2.12.32. Prove. 30.6. Rev. 22.18, 19.
add nor diminish. Nor Jos. 1.7. Deuteronomy. 5.32.17.20.28.14.
turn to the right hand, nor to the left. Nor have any Exodus 12.19, 49. Lev.
24.22. Numb. 15.16. Exodus 20.10.23.9.12. Lev. 16.29.17.12, 15, 18.26.19.10,
34.23.22.24.16.25.6.35.47, 48. Numb. 9.14.15.14, 15, 16, 26, 29,
30.19.10.35.15. Deuteronomy. 1.16.5.14.10.8, 19.14.21.17.15.23.7, 20.26.21. Deuteronomy.
29.11.31.12. Jos. 8.33.20.9.
other Law for the stranger, then for the homeborn.

XXIX.
The Law is a Royal Law, Ja. 2.8. Romans 7.12, 14 Ja. 1.25. Ja. 2.10, 11.
Spiritual, Holy, Just and Good. A perfect Law of Liberty, so perfect, that
whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one Point is guilty of
all, and the reason is, because that he that commanded one commanded all.

XXX.
Man cannot possibly invent another Law, save only in disobedience, and
opposition of the Law of God.

XXXI,
God himself keeps his own Law, and with all his Saints and Angels will keep
them for ever in the Heavens.

XXXII.
By keeping this Law, the People of Israel were a peculiar Treasure unto God
above all People, Exodus 19.5, 6. Deuteronomy. 1.10.
and were to be a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation, and were multiplied
as the Stars of Heaven, 1 King. 4.20.
and as the Sand which is by the Sea for multitude, and were eating and
drincking and making merry, 25.
and they dwelt safely, every man under his Vine, and under his Figtree, and
Silver was as the Stones in Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles. 10.21.27.
it was nothing accounted of.

XXXIII.
The People prospered always, and fared well, 1 King. 4. Jos. 24.31.2.7. 2
King. 17.1. Chap. 23.24. Jos. 2.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
keeping this Law, both in the time of Kings, and in the time of Judges; but
they fared ill when they forsook it, both in the time of Kings, and in the time
of Judges.

XXXIV.
The united Provinces, living under the shadow of this Law, are multiplied
exceedingly, and are eating and drincking and making merry, with great plenty
of Gold, Silver, and all other abundance, prospering in all their Labors, and
fare better then all the Kingdoms, and Commonwealths in the whole World, if
then we will envy them, and fare better then they, let us live up closer to
these Laws of God then they, and we shall prosper more then they.

XXXV.
The basis of Tyrants Laws, are Lust and Selfwill. The basis of Laws by
Parliament are Yeaes and Nayes.

XXXVI.
In what a tottering condition is that Nation, whose Being and well-Being
depends upon the Ebbings and Flowings of YEA's and NAYES.

XXXVII.
Though men have not Legislative Power, Council.
yet Council and Wisdom is necessary to the Order and Execution of good
Government.

XXXVIII.
The wisdom of a Nation is in choosing a godly Council, and the safety in a
multitude of Counselors: Pro. 11.14, 15, 22, 24, 26.
where every man's Reason (like a public Treasure) contributes to safety, so
they be not executors of their own Counsels.

XXXIX.
The strength of a Nation is in multitude of People, Pro.
and the wealth of a Nation in frequent Trade and Traffic.

XL.
One chief Council or Authority must be over all, for Appeals and
Difficulties.

XLI.
As it is presumption in the chiefest Councills to Rival the Lord Jesus Christ
in his Legistative Power: so it is below them to descend to less then appeals
or the most difficult Case.

XLII.
When Supreme Councils are but representatives of the People, it obliges them
to obey whom they represent, and be to them accomptable (which would be thought
a soloecism) but if they judge for God, Deuteronomy 1.17. Deuteronomy. 17.19.
they represent God, and ought to obey him, and be accomptable to him.

XLIII.
When Supreme Authority, Council, and Governors, do not represent God, in
judging for God, their highest title can be but to represent the people, though
that be but a fallacy. For the people are never consulted with, nor scarce
suffered to petition. But the shadow will be more considerable then the
substance. The Representative will act both parts, disposing of Estates, Lives
and Liberties of the Represented and their Posterities at pleasure.

XLIV.
A wise Counsel establish the People. But a foolish Counsel establish
themselves.

XLV.
Whether the Supreme Council or Authority be few or many, or whether Appeals be
to many or few, is not worth the dispute, much less one drop of blood, so a
true Government be settled. For then an Eldership of seventy, or a Kingship of
Solomon do alike make the people happy. Then the great dispute o^ Monarchy,
Aristocracie, Democracie, Olygarehy, Polygarchie, Anarchie, (which affrightens
the common people like an exorcism) do all fall to the ground as groundless
disputes. Though all the quarrel hitherto has bin, not What Government, but
Who shall govern?

XLVI.
If the Supreme Authority be wicked, it is better have one Tyrant then many. If
it be good, 1 Cor. 12.2^.
it is better have many helps then few, like two strings to a Bow.

XLVII.
The Election of Governors, Election.
is given by God unto the people to have a share in.

XLVIII.
The excellency of Venice, Deuteronomy. 1.13.16.18.17.15. Act. 6.3.
and other places, is but the wisdom and order of election.

XLIX.
As many are best for Counsel, so few for Order. Order.


L.
Want of order breeds confusion; 1 Cor. 14.33.
but God is the God of order.

LI.
It is a breach of Order to begin a second business, before the first be
finished. And to grasp at all, perfecteth nothing. For all cover, all lose.

LII.
Where there is concord and unity in council, there is strength and honor. But
where there is discord, there enters contention and ruin. Mat. 12.25.
For a house divided cannot stand. Concordia parvae res crescunt, disc^rdia
maxi^^^ dilabuntur.

LIII.
Only through pride comes contention. Pro. 13.10.28.25.25.4.
But take away the wicked from the Council, and Government shall be established.

LIVE.
Whether Governors in Authority be few or many, Governors.
they are but a part of Government.

LV.
Every man naturally affects Government, and would be alone, or (at least)
upper most.

LVI.
Every man by nature will be flattered and adored.

LVII.
Every man's way is right in his own eyes. Pro. 21.2. Pro. 12.15.14.12.26.25.


LVIII.
Till men can submit to Government, they are not fit to be Governors.

LIX.
Such as the Governors are, such are the People, whether it be to Wisdom or
Folly, Pro. 19.12.
Virtue or Vice, Regis ad exemplum.

LX.
Ambitious Governors destroy the People, and covetous make them miserable. We
have had both.

LXI.
Unlimited Governors are like Lions let loose into the Wilderness of their
own Passions, Pro. 28.15, 16.
where Lust (like hunger) minding them of their prey, they seize on all that is
next them.

LXII.
Governors who are supreme above men, have none above them but God. If
therefore they have not the Word of God to limit them, they grow boundless.

LXIII.
Where Kings are Governors, 1 Samuel 8. 1 Pet. 2.13. Deuteronomy. 17.14, 20
they are supreme, yet they are limited by the Word of God. And the people are
limited who desire them.

LXIV.
When Kings forsook the Laws of God they became Tyrants, Pro. 28.16. 1 Chro.
11.14.
and God stirred up enemies against them, sometimes strangers, sometimes their
own people, sometimes private men: For when Governors alter their Properties,
they are no more Governors; no more then when a wise man becomes a fool or
Madman, can be any longer a wise man.

LXV.
Whosoever destroyed a Tyrant, was himself rewarded with their Crown, or might
have been so rewarded.

LXVI.
Places make not men, but men make Places. Place.


LXVII.
Places make not men wise, nor honest, but discover what they are, Magistratus
Ostendit Virum, non facit.

LXVIII.
Men may be as wise and honest out of Council as in Council, out of
Parliament as in Parliament.

LXIX.
A Fool in a wise man's place, a private Spirit in a public, Eccl. 10.6, 7, 17
Is. 1.23.
Servants on Horseback and Princes on Foot, and Princes to be companions of
Thieves, loving Gifts, and following after rewards, makes a lean and deformed
Commonwealth.

LXX.
Nevertheless, 1 Cor. 6.4.
the least esteemed Christian is sufficient for a Judge, and the simplest
meaning man for a witness: since no man ought to witness or judge beyond what
he sees or hears, Deuteronomy. 1.17. Lev. 19.15.
unless it be in discerning of a false witness.

LXXI.
Governors are not Governors without a Sword, Sword. Romans 13.4.
nor ought they to wear it in vain, but to punish evil doers.

LXXII.
Against the Righteous man there ought to be no Sword, for the Law it self is
not made for a Righteous man. 1 Timothy 1.9.


LXXIII.
Every Sword is a Sword of Justice or Injustice, whereof the first is only of
God.

LXXIV.
The ordinary Sword is for the Magistrate in time of Peace, the extraordinary
for the Sold^er in time of War.

LXXV.
The abuse or neglect of the Sword of Peace draws forth the Sword of War,
Eccl. 8.11.
for because Sentence against an evil work is not spedily executed, therefore
the heart of the Sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.

LXXVI.
When offenders are greater and stronger then Magistrates, and do resist them,
then an Army performs the work of a Magistrate,

LXXVII.
When the War is ended, the Sword ought to be put up in a peaceful Scabbard.

LXXVIII.
An Army in time of Peace is a badge of slavery, which in time of war and
danger is a means of deliverance and safety.

LXXIX.
Nevertheless, when soldiers have done their work, they ought to be paid and
cherished.

LXXX.
When soldiers have purchased Freedom and Peace to a Nation, they ought not to
be debarred of it themselves. Nor ought to be disbanded till they are made
capable of the same Peace and Freedom they have procured to others.

LXXXI.
Soldiers, Exodus 18.21. Deuteronomy. 1.15.
who are Magistrates in time of War, may more easily be Magistrates in time of
Peace. And as the Magistrates Sword neglected made the Soldiers, so the
Soldiers Sword improved makes a Magistrate.

LXXXII.
The wisdom and conduct of War is in the Officers, the strength and execution
in the private Soldier.

LXXXIII.
There is as much reason or more to pay the private Soldier, as the Officer, by
how much his labor, danger, and want is greater.

LXXXIV.
There is as sufficient subsistence for private Soldiers in time of Peace as in
time of War, and as all men fare better in time of Peace then War, so ought
the private Soldier.

LXXXV.
Sudden disbandings renew a War, or fill the high ways with violence.

LXXXVI.
War is not ended till a Peace be settled, nor peace settled but by a true
Government.

LXXXVII.
There can be no true Government by the enemies of Truth and Government.

LXXXVIII.
England has many enemies, many such enemies both powerful and dangerous.

LXXXIX.
The dangerous enemies are at home, the powerful are abroad.

XC.
The enemies abroad lose their power, if we subdue or convert our enemies at
home.

XCI.
The enemies at home will never cease so long as the contention is about who
shall Govern.

XCII.
If the Army are our Governors, they can reform no more then the Parliament,
till they have a better Rule then the Parliament to reform by.

XCIII.
There can be no better Rule then the Rule in the Word of God.

XCIV.
God is able to overturn Armies as well as Kings, Parliaments, and Protectors.

XCV.
God will overturn Armies if they set up themselves in the place of his Son
Jesus Christ.

XCVI.
If the Army do own the Legislative power of Jesus Christ, the Lord Jesus
Christ will own them and establish them; 2 Chro. 20.20. Is. 7.9.
but if they believe not they shall not be established. For those that honor
me I will honor, says the Lord, and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed. 1 Samuel 2.30.


XCVII.
If the Army Proclaim the Laws of God, what man dares fight against the Laws
of God, though the Jesuit and Lawyer together should encourage them? for their
own conscience would sight against them. Romans 2.14.


XCVIII.
If the Army Proclaim not the Laws of God, though they had the Ghost of
Lycurgus, Numa Pompilius, and Mahomet to boot, and should penn their Laws from
the Tongue of men and Angels, they should neither satisfy the conscience of
their Friends, nor deterr the courage of their enemies. Gal. 1.8, 9.


XCIX.
What party soever (though a Kings party thus low, though a Parliaments party
thus broken, though an Army party divided) shall first Proclaim the Laws of
God, with any probability of settling them, though they dissemble, yet shall
they prevail, by how much the very title of the quarrel is far more high and
honorable then all other titles whatsoever, and the burden of men's Laws so
great? How much more if they mean in earnest.

C.
The very title of the Laws of God will unite all parties, but the wicked and
profane: and who would willingly hazard his Soul with the wicked and pr^phane?

CI.
The wicked and profane (both unwise) will never set up the Laws of God,
Deuteronomy. 16.18.
though the wicked and profane dare never openly contradict them.

CII.
The seting up of the Laws of God will settle Judges, Recorders, in every City
or Town Corporate, whereby the Town and Cities will be obliged, not only in
conscience, but in gratitude and sense of their own benefit, to adhere to those
that shall first proclaim Gods Laws.

CIII.
The setting up of Judges and Recorders accordingly, will save above two or
three millions to the people yearly, beside Vexations and Troubles.

CIV.
The setting up the Laws of God, will settle all men in a peaceful Possession
of their own, whether it be Houses, Land, or any other Possession.

CV.
The setting up the Laws of God, will take away the strife of Titles and false
witness. Rewarding evil doers with the evil they meant to have done. Deuteronomy.
16.19.


CVI.
The setting up and proclaiming the Laws of God, need no other Council then
alone to proclaim them, being already penned by the Finger and Penman of God.

CVII.
The Curses of the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 28.
are provided for all those that oppose the Laws of God: And the blessings for
all those that love and obey them.

Add this after Proverb LX.
Supreme Officers ought to be changable, Mat. 7.12. Lue. 6.13.
that they may equally share in obedience as well as command, and not forget to
do as they would be done by.

Psalm. 68.1. Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered.
FINIS.

