A PROTESTATION of the Gentlemen Prisoners in the TOWER of LONDON Dated October
1647.

Made by them upon the occasion of an Order of the house of Commons for their
sudden removal thence to several other Prisons where by reason of the
sequestring them of all their Estates (contrary to the known and Fundamental
Laws of England, contained in Magna Charta and the Petition of right, etc. so
often sworn to be maintained and inviolably observed by this present
Parliament) and denying unto them according to the known Law of the Land,
allowance for their maintenance) they must in reason be necessitated to sterve
and perish.

Unto which is perfixed their Letter, which the 14 of October 1647. was
delivered to the Speaker of the House of Commons.

Printed in the Year. 1647.

SIR,
WE being extremely pressed by our unsupportable wants and Calamities, have
thought it expedient once more to put you in mind thereof, and of our former
proceedings, and frequent solicitations, for releif in this our starving
condition; the several applications we have made, to obtain Justice in this
particular, is so well known, both to the Honorable Houses and your self, as it
will be needless for us at prefent to repeat: whereunto may be added the noble
favor and care, the General has expressed toward us, who as we are informed,
was pleased upon our addresses unto him to intercede for us, and to recommend
the Consideration thereof unto the Honorable House, with great efficacy; but
what has all this produced as to our remedy, truly no other effect; save an
increase to our sorrows, and a new addition, (if any addition can be made) to
our former miseries, as is evident by the order, lately made for our removal to
other prisons, one of them being infected with the plague, where if by Gods
mercy we should be preserved from the Contagion of that disease, we must
likewise look for a miracle from the same hand, to preserve us from famishing.
The great debts we have contracted in this place, and the persons unto whom it
is owing left unsatisfied; being likely to prove an ill letter of
recommendation to procure us credit, in those places where we are to be
removed, so as since it apparently threatens our distructions, we cannot but
protest against it, with full resolution, not willingly to remove from hence,
but by force, which we cannot resist, unless our debts here be first paid, and
provision made for the future, for our maintenance in those places where we are
appointed to go; which Protestation we have sent you here enclosed with our
names subscribed thereunto Having thus stated our cause before you, with candor
and truth, the ill Consequences thereof, and how prejudicial it may prove
hereafter, even to those that have least sense of our sorrows, we hope it will
be taken into your most serious thoughts, who having no Charter of exemption,
may peradventure themselves, come to taste of those bitter waters, wherewith we
have already surfeted, and how sad a president our oppressions will afford to
future times, we shall leave to the world impartially to judge of; in the
bitterness therefore of our souls, we are enforced once more to call upon you,
and to conjure you, as you believe a time will come when all must render an
account of their actions; and as you will answer it in that dreadful day, before
the tribunal of the Almighty, that you neglect not the cries of the oppressed
any longer, but that you will speedily apply your self to the Honorable House,
to procure such timely remedy for us, as our necessities require, that so the
inhumanity of these times may not lie as a brand of infamy upon this Nation to
all posterity. It being the last request which we intend to make unto you,
whose names are hereunto subscribed. October. 13.

Henry Vaugham, Wingfield Bodenham, John Slaughter, David Ienkins, John Morley,
Tho. Lunsford, Will. Morton.

The Protestation.
WE whose names are subscribed, being prisoners in the Tower of London,
committed by several Warrants of Mr Speaker of the House of Commons, being
destitute of Means or Money to subsist withal, having made several Addresses to
both Houses of Parliament, by Petition and by diverse Letters and Solicitations
made to the Committee for Relief of Prisoners, to his Excellency Sir THO.
FAIRFAX, and others, whom we thought powerful or willing to relieve Us in our
most Urgent necessities, and having daily and hourly prosecuted our suit on
that behalf ever since the midst of December last, and Maintenance being due
to prisoners committed as well to the Tower as to all other Prisons of England,
especially Prisoners of War, both by the Law of Arms, the Law of England, and
the ancient Customs of the Kingdoms, as by diverse Authentic Records and
Presidents of all ages has and will be made manifest and having had diverse
promises of relief and maintenance from the Committee for relief of Prisoners,
and that an Ordinance should pass for the same, contrary to which engagement
there are Warrants under the Speakers hand of the House of Commons, come to
remove and disperse Us into other prisons, whereof some are infected with the
plague, and others are more chargeable lodgings, being to be paid for there
(but not here) and not a bit of meat to be had in them, but for present money,
which we have not to give, and we having some credit to live upon in this
prison where we are, but have not any acquaintance nor can expect any credit in
those prisons: which Warrants are procured for our prejudice (if we be removed
hence, without competent provision made for our Maintenance) it will be
inevitably to the destruction of us and loss of our lives; we therefore being
instructed thereunto by the law of nature, warranted by the laws of God and
laws of the Land, for the necessary preservation of our lives, least we should
become self-murderers, do profess and declare to all the world and to the
Speaker of the House of Commons, that we cannot suffer our selves to be removed
out of this Prison, wherein we now are, but by Force and Violence, which we
cannot withstand until such time as the honorable Houses of Parliament have
past their Ordinance for our future maintenance in those Prisons whereunto we
shall be sent, and that they by the same Ordinance take care of our Arrears and
provide for the payment of such debts as we have contracted for our necessary
subsistence in this prison of the Tower; and this being done, we shall willingly
remove to those prisons they have appointed unto us, provided that they be not
infected with the Plague: Signed by us, this 9. day of October: 1647.

Henry Vaughan; Wingfield Bodenham; I. Slaughter; David Ienkins; John Morley;
Thomas Lunsford; William Morton.

FINIS.

