A GOSPEL PLEA (Interwoven with a RATIONAL and LEGAL) FOR THE LAWFULNESS and
CONTINUANCE Of the Ancient Settled MAINTENANCE and TENTHS Of the Ministers of
the Gospel: IN TWO PARTS. PROVING That there is a Just, Competent, Comfortable
Maintenance due to all Lawful painful Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel,
by Divine Right, Institution, and express Texts, Precepts of the Gospel: That
Glebes and Tithes are such a Maintenance, and due to Ministers by Divine Right,
Law, Gospel: That if subtracted or detained, they may lawfully be enforced by
Coercive Laws and Penalties: That Tithes are no real Burden nor grievance to
the people; The abolishing them, no ease or benefit to Farmers, Husbandmen, or
poor people, but a Prejudice and Loss. That the present opposition against
Tithes, proceeds not from any real grounds of Conscience, but base
Covetousness, Carnal policy, hatred to, and a Jesuitical, Anabaptistical
design, to subvert, ruin our Ministers, Church, Religion. With a Satisfactory
Answer to all Cavils and Material Objections to the contrary. By WILLIAM PRYNNE
of Swainswick, Esquire, a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

Mal. 3.8, 9. Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me: But ye say, Wherein
have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse, for
ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation. Mat. 22.21. Render therefore to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are his. AUG.
sermon. 219. Si tu illam Decimam non dederis, dabis impio Militi, quod non vis
dare Deo and Sacerdoti: Hoc tollit Fiscus, quod non accepit Christus. London,
Printed by T. Child, and L. Parry, for Edward Thomas, and are to be sold at
the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1660.

To my most High, Mighty, Great, Dreadful, Omnipotent, Omnipresent,
Omniscient, Righteous, True, Faithful, All-gracious, All-sufficient,
Everliving, Everlasting, Immutable, Covenant-keeping LORD GOD; the God of my
Life, Health, Strength, Mercy, Preservation, Consolation, Supportation,
Salvation, Deliverance, Praise.
Isa. 45.15. and 46.9,
O God THE SAVIOR of Israel, ( of England too, anciently styled Mat. West. An.
1055. p. 422. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 88, 89.
Regnum Dei, Gods Kingdom) Thou art God alone, and there is none else. Psalm.
73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth, that I desire
besides thee. Acts 17.28.
In thee alone I live, move, and have my being. Psalm. 73.26.
Thou art the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. My 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
Romans 11.36. Psalm. 139.15, 16, 17.
whole Spirit, Soul, Body, Parts, Endowments Natural, Spiritual, are only of
thee, through thee: O sanctify them wholly for, and only to thee; to whom
alone I desire entirely and eternally to devote them; as Psalm. 100.1, 2, 3. 1
Cor. 6.19, 20. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Job 7.20. Genesis 48.16.
due to none but thee, and that by right of Creation, Redemption, Resignation,
Preservation, and that extraordinary Tribute of gratitude I stand most deeply
engaged to render to thy most gracious Majesty, for those many and manifold
WONDERS of Preservation, Supportation, Concomitation, Protection, Consolation,
Absolution, Vindication and Restoration, thou have (of thy free Grace) most
miraculously extended to me, (the m^anest and unworthyest of all thy servants)
in, under, from all my former and late injurious, illegal Sufferings,
Oppressions, Imprisonments, inhumane close Restraints, Exiles, in TEN SEVERAL
PRISONS, CASTLES ( some of them at remotest distance from all Acquaintance,
Kindred, Friends and thy public Ordinances, under some Rude, Barbarous armed
Gardians and Men of blood, of purpose to destroy me, where thou wast present
with me, as with Dan. 6.16.
Daniel in the Lions den, 2 Timothy 4.17.
Paul in the Lions mouth, the Dan. 3.19, 20, etc.
three Children in the midst of the fiery Furnace, Jonah 1. and 2.
Jonah in the Whales belly, to secure, comfort and supply me) for about ELEVEN
YEARS SPACE; through the malice and cruelty of merciless men: Yet (blessed be
thy holy name) for no other cause or crime thy poor servants conscience is
guilty of (his last close Imprisonments in three several Castles being without
the least Examination, Hearing, Accusation, Charge of any particular offense
against him, or yet declared to him) but only for his sincere cordial desire to
discharge his bounden duty to glorify thee in his generation, by apposing the
In my Histriomastix, Healths sickness, Lovelocks, Cosens Cosening Devotions,
Breviate, Quenchcole, Memento, Speech in Parliament, and other Books.
dangerous wrath-provoking Errors and corruptions of the age in which he
lives; by contending earnestly for the faith which was once delivered unto the
Saints, according Jude 3. Levit. 19.17. Tit. 1.13.
to thy Commands, and for the settled fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights,
Government of his distracted Native Country, against all secret Underminers,
open Oppugners or Subverters of them, to the uttermost of his Ability: By a
conscientious inviolable observation of all those solemn sacred Oaths,
Protestations, Covenants and Obligations, (prescribed by those lawful higher
Powers thou commandedst him to Romans 13.1, 2.
submit to under pain of DAMNATION) wherewith he has frequently bound his soul,
not so much to men as to thee, who art a most Deuteronomy. 7.9. Neh 1.5: Psa. 89.2,
28, to 38. and 110.4. and 111.5. Jer. 33.20, 21, etc. Heb. 5.17, 18.
Faithful Promise-Oath-Covenant-keeping God, especially of those Oaths and
Covenants wherewith thou vouchsafest to oblige thy self even to mere dust and
ashes, both IMMUTABLE and INVIOLABLE, never violating, nor repenting of them in
the least degree, and obliging men both by thine own example, and Genesis 50.5, 6
Levit. 19.12. Number. 30.2. Josh. 1.17. and 6.22. and 9.15, to 22. Psa. 15.4. Hos.
10.4. Zech. 5.4. Eccles. 8.2. Ezekiel. 17.16, 18, 19.
Precepts to do the like, in all their public or private Oaths, Vows,
Covenants to thee or men, under pain of temporal wrath here, and eternal
exclusion from thy holy Hill: And for not daring to confederate or comply
(against his Oaths, Covenants, manifold public Engagements, Conscience,
Judgment and thy sacred Prove. 24.21 22. Romans 16.17. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3.
Inhibitions) WITH THOSE WHO ARE GIVEN TO CHANGE; many of whose Calamities and
Ruins are suddenly risen and fallen upon them, by thy Divine justice (even
from those they least suspected, and most relied on for Protection) for the
manifold changes they presumed to make against their Oaths, Vows, Trusts,
Protestations, Covenants, and unrighteous oppressing of their dearest Christian
Friends, Brethren, and thy suffering Servant among others. Now all Rev. 19.1, 2.
Glory, Honor, Power, Salvation and Praise be for ever rendered by me and all
thy glorious Saints and Angles in heaven and earth, because true and righteous
are thy Judgments: and because the deliverance of me thy oppressed Servant
(without any wound to his Conscience, dishonor to thy name, or scandal to thy
People) is exceeding Gracious and Glorious. Psalm 20.5, 6, 7, 8.
Now know I, ( again and again) that the Lord loves his anointed; that he has
heard him ( and others praying for him) from his holy Heaven; WITH THE SAVING
STRENGTH OF HIS RIGHT HAND. Some ( of his self-exalting Oppressors) trusted in
Chariots, and some in Horses; but he remembered the Lord his God: they are
brought down and fallen, but he is risen and stands upright: Who therefore ever
will rejoice greatly in THY SALVATION, and in the Name of his God will set up
his Banners. Psalm 107.16.
For thou have broken the gates of Brass, and cut the bars of Iron in sunder:
Thou have sent thy holy Angel and knocked off the Chains from my long-fettered
hands, and made the long-barred Iron Castle Gates (wherein I was close shut up)
to open of their own accord ( without any enforced long-expected Petition from
me.) Thou have rescued me from more then 4. Quaternions of Soldiers, who most
strictly guarded me day and night, as they did thy imprisoned Apostle Acts 12.4,
to 11.
Peter, ( and more narrowly than any formerly under the Prelates greatest
Tyranny) and delivered him out of the hand of Herod, and from all the
expectation of the People of the Jews; the Jesuits and Popish Priests, who
marched freely abroad, not only preaching, but printing and dispersing no less
then See the Beacon fired: and Nicolas Causins the Jesuit's holy Court; printed
at London 1650. in folio.
19. gross Popish Books in defense of their Religion, and condemning ours for
Heresy, whiles I (their chief oppugner) was shut up so close in three remote
Castles, that I could neither write against, nor discover their Plots to
undermine our Church, State, Religion, nor yet send Letters to my Imprisoners
to demand my liberty, unless I would first give Copies of them to my Gardians,
and then trust them to send them when and by whom they pleased, nor have
admission to thy public Ordinances for above two years space. In thankful
Commemoration of which my late and great deliverance from this Egyptian
Bondage, I do here presume, in all humility to prostrate at thy feet, and
Ded^cate to thee, the Great Psalm. 146.7.
GAOLE-DELIVERING, PRISONER-LOOSING GOD, ( who Isa. 49.9 and 42.7.
say to the Prisoners GO FORTH, and to them that are in darkness SHOW
YOUR SELVES) this mean and unworthy Gospel Plea, for the lawfulness and
continuance of the Ancient settled Maintenance and Tithes of thy Ministers of
the Gospel, ( reserved to and by thy self AS THY DEVOTED PORTION, DEBT, DUE)
whereof many now by FRAUD and VIOLENCE, endeavor Sacrilegiously TO ROB BOTH
THEE and THEM; as the first fruits of my enlargement, a 1 Samuel 7.12.
Second EBENEZER, Hitherto has the Lord HELPED ME, and a lasting Monument to
Posterity of my gratitude and thankfulness to thee my God, for my late
restitution to so much Liberty and Freedom, as to be able, thus once more
publicly to plead thine own and thy Ministers cause, against Jesuits,
Anabaptists, Quakers, and all other open Oppugners, Subverters of our Church,
State, and secret Underminers of the true Preachers and Preaching of the
Gospel, who now Psalm. 83.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
like Gebal, Ammon, Amalek, Edom, Ismael, Moab, the Hagarens, Philistines,
Inhabitants of Tire, and armed Assure of old, have consulted together with one
consent, and are confederate against thee; and have said, Come and let us cut
them off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in
remembrance. Beseeching thy Majesty most graciously to accept it, most
powerfully to protect and so effectually to bless, prosper it, and thy
servant, against all these combined Confederates, that they may be no way able
to Act. 6.10.
resist thy Truth, Wisdom, Spirit, appearing, pleading in it, by it; but either
like 1 Cor. 14.25.
convicted Seducers or Seduced persons, fall down flat on their faces before
it, worship thee and report, that God is in it ( and in thy servant) of a
truth. Or, in case of wilful malicious obstinacy, against thee and thy
faithful Ministers, Houses of public worship, Truth and Gospel, Psalm. 83.9,
10, 11, etc.
Do unto them as unto the Midianites, as to Sisera, and to Jabin at the brook
of Kison, which perished at Endor and became as dung for the earth: Make their
Nobles like Oreb and Zeeb, yea make all their Princes as Zebah, and as
Salmunna; who said (as these do now) LET US TAKE TO OUR SELVES THE HOUSES OF
GOD IN POSSESSION. O my God make them as a wheel, as the stubble before the
wind: As the fire burns the wood, and as the flame sets the mountains on
fire; so persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid of thy storm;
fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy name O Lord; let them be
confounded and troubled for ever, yea let them be put to shame and perish: That
men ( these men) may know, that thou whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the most
high over all the earth. Psalm. 79.13.
So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks for ever; we
will show forth thy Praise to all generations. And thy servant David's
resolution, Psalm 146.2. and 104.33.
Whiles I live will I praise the Lord, I will sing praises unto my God, WHILE I
HAVE ANY BEING, shall through thy Grace be both the Resolution and Practice of

Swainswick 1 Sep. 1653. Thy unworthy, unprofitable, Redeemed, Preserved and
frequently enlarged Servant and Vassal William Prynne.

To the unprejudiced Christian Reader.
KInd Reader, the 80. Psalm. in my weak judgment, is both a lively Character of
the deplorable condition of Gods Church of late years, and likewise a most
excellent Morning and Evening Prayer for it, in public or private. The
Psalmist thus complains, That God (by the Jer. 46.16. and 50.16. give it this
Title.
OPPRESSING SWORD of combined enemies, as Psa. 83. imports) had broken down his
Churches hedges, so that all they that passed by the way did pluck her, the
Boar out of the forest did waste it, and the wild beasts OF THE FIELD devour
it. The ancient Isa. 5.25. Ezekiel. 13.5. and 22.30.
hedges of the Church here planted and spread in our Nation, to wit, Gods
divine protection and Law; the Patronage, Rights, Franchises, Privileges,
Immunities, granted, confirmed to our Churches, by the manifold Magna Carta of
King Henry the 1. and K. John. Mat. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 53.230, 246. and 9 H.
1. c. 1.29.37 times since confirmed in Parliam.
great Charters, Laws, Statutes, of such bountiful devout Kings and Queens as
God himself Isa. 49.23. and 60.9, 10. Psa. 72.10, 11. Rev. 21.24.
predicted, should be NURSING FATHERS and NURSING MOTHERS UNTO HIS CHURCH under
the Gospel, and bring their Glory and Honor to it; and Kings of Isles, amongst
others; having been of late years very much broken down and almost levelled to
the dust, by arbitrarie Committees, Sequestrations, and the oppressing
all-devouring Sword of War, (which God has kept so long unsheathed, Jer.
47.6.7.
without returning into the Scabberd these many years, for the just punishment
of our manifold sins and enormities) all they that go by the way (or in
by-ways) taking advantage thereof, have so plucked, and the wilde-boares out
of the wood, and wilde-men, and wilde-beasts of the field, have so wasted,
devoured the best and richest part of our Churches Patrimony, originally
designed by the Parliament, by a A Collection of ordinances, etc p. 124, 125.
special Bill tendered to the late King at Oxford, April 1643. (when
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and Chapters were first voted down, and Mat. 15.13.
extirpated as none of our Heavenly fathers plants or planting) for the
increase of the Crown-Revenues, to ease the people in their future Taxes; and
the Augmentation of our Ministers Maintenance and incompetent livings: that
there is little or none of it now remaining undevoured by them, for either of
these two public ends: And many new highway men, wilde-boares and Beasts, as
well as old, encouraged by former rich Church-plunders, in stead of imitating
Gal. 3.9.
faithful Abraham, (whose heirs and children they profess themselves) who
gave Genesis 14.20. Heb. 7.1, to 12.
THE TENTH OF ALL HIS SPOILS OF WAR to Melchisedec Priest of the most high
God, (a type of our Savior Christ, if not Christ himself, as Dr. Griffith
Williams in his Works in folio p. 811.
some probably assert) they most eagerly and violently attempt to spoil,
plunder all the Evangelical Priests and Ministers of God throughout the Nation
at one blow (without any lawful Trial by their Peers, due process of Law, or
Contrary to Magna Carta c. 1.29.25 E. 1. c. 1, 2, 3.28 E. 1. c. 1.5 E. 3. c.
9.25 E. 3. c. 4.28 E. 3. c. 3.37 E. 3. c. 18.42 E. 3. c. 1, 3. 2 H. 4. c. 4.5
H. 4. c. 11.27 H. 8. c. 20, 21.32 H. 8. c. 7. 2 E. 6. c. 13. The Petition of
Right 3 Caroli, and are Ordinances for Tithes and Augmentations
Legal conviction of any Capital crimes, which cannot forfeit their Churches
inheritance, which is not so vested in them as either to forfeit or alien, by
the Law of God or the Realm) of all their inconsiderable remaining Tithes,
Glebes, and settled ancient Maintenance, and of their very Ministry too, as
JEWISH and ANTICHRISTIAN, as John Can the old Anabaptist, in his new Voice
from the ALEHOUSE RATHER, than the TEMPLE (which certainly is as Jewish and
Antichristian as he would have Tithes to be) with sundry late The Kentish
Petition and others.
Petitions, Proceedings, proclaim to all the World, and strip them naked of all
other coercive maintenance for the future, to starve them and their families
bodies, and the peoples souls: that so a new generation of ambulatory Friars
Mendicants and Itinerary Predicants, fixed to no certain Parish or Parishes,
selected out of those swarms of Jesuits, Seminary Priests and Popish Friars,
now in England under the disguises of Anabaptists, Gifted Brethren, Dippers,
Seekers, Quakers, New-lights, Mechanics of all Trades, Gentlemen, Troopers and
Soldiers too, (Ignatius Loyola Maffaeus Vegius and Rabadenira (both Jesuits)
in vita Ignatii Loyolae, Heylins Microcosm, p. 197.
their Father and founder of their Order, being a SOLDIER by his profession,
as diverse of his Disciples are now amongst us, as many wise men believe, and
some on their own knowledge aver) may succeed them in their Ministry, to
subvert our Church, Religion, and reduce us back to Rome; The Pope now living,
within these few years, affirmed to some This one of them affirmed lately to a
friend of mine
English Gentlemen of quality in Rome (who out of curiosity only went to see
him, being Protestants) that he hoped before he died (though he were aged) to
see England perfectly reduced to her former obedience to the Sea of Rome,
having sent many Jesuits, Priests, Friars from all parts into England, and
particularly into THE ARMY (as The false Jew, newly printed, p. 4, 5, 11, 12,
13.
Ramsy the late detected Jesuit at New Castle, under the vizor of a converted
Anabaptized Jew, confessed in his printed Examination there lately taken, and
sent up with him to Whitehall.) Against whom John Can might have done well to
have pressed those, to whom he dedicated his Voice from the Temple, to execute
the Statute of 27 Eliz. c. 2. particularly made against them, as most dangerous
insufferable Traitors, purposely sent over, TO WORK THE RUIN, DESOLATION, and
DESTRUCTION OF THE WHOLE REALM, as well as of our Church and Religion, as that
Statute resolves; and not to have most ignorantly and maliciously wrested it,
(contrary both to the very letter and intention) against our godly Protestant
Ministers only (their greatest opposites, eye-sores) to strip them of their
Benefices, Livelihood and lives together (the whole scope of his Dan. 6.20.
Lamentable Voice) without so much as uttering one word against these wild
boars and beasts of Rome, with whom he and his Companions the Anabaptists, are
apparent Confederates, both in their See Mr. Seldens History of Tithes c. 7. p.
166, 167, 170.
principles and practices against our Ministers Maintenance, Tithes, Callings,
Laws, and settled Government, to their eternal Infamy.

The sad consideration whereof has engaged me, though no Impropriator (whose
cause I plead not) nor other Tithe-receiver, but a conscientious Tithe-payer
(as my Ancestors were before me) without any retaining fee, or other
Solicitation, to appear publicly in the defense of this common cause of God
and all his faithful Ministers Tithes and ancient settled Maintenance, being
through his mercy and their Prayers enlarged from my long close remote
Imprisonments, as I did occasionally in private, whiles a close Prisoner in
Pendennis Castle in Cornwall (in December and January last) against some
Officers and Soldiers there, who publicly subscribed in the Castle by sound
of Drum three several mornings, and promoted in the Country a Petition for
abolishing all Tithes (though our Ministers own by all Divine and Humane Laws,
Rights; which neither our Soldiers nor any mortals now living gave to them,
nor have any pretense of Law, Power or Authority from God or our Nation to take
from them) and all other compulsory Maintenance in lieu of them for Ministers;
sent to them (and to other Garrisons, as they then informed me) by the General
Council of Officers of the Army from St. James, both for their own
subscriptions (though few or none of them or other subscribers of such
Petitions, Tithe-payers) and such hands of Countrymen, as they could procure.
Upon which occasion, I had some brief discourses with some of them concerning
the lawfulness and antiquity of Tithes, Genesis 14.20. Heb. 7.4.
First paid by Soldiers out of the very spoils of Battle, taken in the very
first War we read of, to the very first Priest of God we find recorded in the
Scripture, and therefore admired that our Army Officers, Soldiers in this age
should so far degenerate, as to be the very ringleaders and chief oppugners of
them: drawing up some brief Notes of this subject out of Scripture (to help
pass the time) in defense of Tithes, relating more particularly to Soldiers,
to silence, satisfy, reclaim them from this Sacrilegious design: which having
since enlarged with Arguments and Answers to their chief Objections drawn from
their own Military professions, for the better satisfaction, conviction of all
Sword men and others, I hope, neither Officers nor Soldiers, nor any others
truly fearing God (if they consider Levit. 19.17. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. Prove.
19.25. and 10.17. and 12.1. and 13.18. and 15.10, 31, 32. and 17.10. and 25.12.
Psalm. 141.5. 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. 1 Timothy 5.20. Luke 3.14.) will or can be justly
offended with me, no more for writing truth, than speaking it to their faces,
as I did upon all occasions whiles among them; not to defame, but to inform and
reform them, for their own and the public good, in what I conceive not
warrantable by, but repugnant to Gods word and their duties as Soldiers, as
Christians, and to those known fundamental Laws, Liberties of the Nation they
were A Collection of Ordinances, p. 539, 623, 878, 879.
purposely raised, commissioned, waged, engaged by Protestations, Covenants,
and their own voluntary June 5. and 14. 1647.
printed Declarations, inviolably to protect, but not subvert; and that they
will not repute it a capital crime in me, not to prove a flatterer, dissembler,
or not to act, or write wittingly against my Science and Conscience, when our
Ministers Maintenance, Calling, Religion, Gods glory, Laws, Liberties, all we
have, or hope for, are in danger of such a sad, sudden, destructive Convulsion,
concussion (if not Subversion) as I long since by Authority of Parliament
discovered in Romes Masterpiece, (and since that in My Speech in Parliament
and Memento, well worth perusal now) when so many known Jesuits under a new
Provincial (which Hugh Peter's himself reported, as I have been credibly
informed) are now even in London it self, acting as busily, and sitting there
in See Oliver Cromwells Speech 1654. Sept. 4. p. 16, 17.
Council as duly, as when the reclaimed Author of that discovery (purposely
sent from Rome for the purposes therein discovered) was resident amongst them.
O that these professed Enemies of our Church, Religion, Nation, and those
Janissaries of Rome, may Mat 13.25, 26, 27.
not sow their Tares of error, and seeds of ruin and desolation amongst us,
whiles almost our whole Nation (for ought I can discern) if not those who call
themselves Watchmen, are in a dead sleep or Lethargy, and heaving at our most
faithful Ministers Maintenance and Callings too, in stead of enquiring after,
discovering these Arch-traytots, and executing the good Laws against, and
administering those necessary Oaths of Supremacy, Allegiance and Abjuration unto
them, to prevent those treasonable practices, destructive designs, miseries,
and that ruin to our Protestant Religion, Kings, Government, Governors, Laws,
Parliaments, Church and Commonwealth, which the wise vigilant Protestant
Parliaments of 13 Eliz. c. 1. 23 Eliz. c. 1. 27 Eliz. c. 2. 35 Eliz. c. 2. 1
Jac. c. 4. 3 Jac. 1, 2, 4, 5. 7 Jac. c. 6. with some hundreds of Exact
Collection, p. 3, to 20, 498, 617, 698, 664, 665, 681, 491, 492, 816, 826, 827,
571, 635, 636, 918, 666. A Collection, p. 218, 227, 214, etc. 267, 275, 883,
309, 313, 354, 360, 363, 371, 379, 412, 417, 424, 429, 452, 457, 470, 489, 706.
and elsewhere.
printed Declarations, Ordinances, Remonstrances of the Lords and Commons the
last Parliament (and the good new Laws, Oaths they provided against those
Romish Vipers quite buried in Oblivion) have published, to allarm all drowsy,
stupid, careless people; all lovers of God, their Religion, or Country against
them, even at this very season, when they and their confederates are (wittingly
or ignorantly) over-turning, over-turning, over-turning, whatever is not yet
totally subverted among us, and carrying on these their designs, to their full
accomplishment. If these my impotent undertakings, with a sincere affection
only to Gods glory, the real weal, safety, preservation of our Religion,
Ministry, Laws, Native Country, and Exact Collection p. 666. A Collection p.
218, 254, 363, 424, 706. which I desire may be now seriously perused, together
with my Romes Masterpiece.
all Protestant Churches (now endangered by their mutual discords, wars and
Jesuitical Emissaries to soment their intestine differences) may so far open
the eyes of all Degrees in our Nation really fearing God, as Luke 19.42*
to know in this their day the things which belong unto their peace and
settlement, and move them efectually to pursue them, before they be hid from
their eyes; I have all the reward I do expect, and shall bless God for the
good success. If any shall be offended with me, or it, and requite me only
with envy, hatred, persecution, new Oppressions, Bonds, close Imprisonments,
for well-doing and endeavoring any more public good, for our tottering
Church, Religion, Country; I shall 1 Pet. 2.23.
commit my cause to God, which judges righteously, who has so often Psa.
37.5, 6.
brought forth my righteousness as the Light, and my judgment as the Noon day,
to the shame and confusion of my causeless enemies: and shall carry this
comfortable cordial within my breast, to any Prison, Pillory, Gibbet, Grave,
that the malice or power of poor vapouring Mortals (who know not how soon Psalm.
7.16.
their violent dealing may come down upon their own pates, as well as on my
other potent adversaries) shall be able to hurry me to, and ascend triumphantly
with it even to heaven it self; that I have discharged that duty which God,
Conscience, Providence, the public danger of our Ministry, Religion, Nation,
and my sacred Oaths, Protestation, Covenant, have engaged me unto. And Esth.
4.16.
if I perish for it, I perish; and in perishing shall (by Gods assistance)
depart with this Swan like, Saint-like Song of that eminent Ephesians. 3 1. and 4. 1.
^hilem 9.23. 2 Timothy 1.8.
Prisoner of Jesus Christ (who was in 2 Cor. 11.23.
Prisons more frequent, in Perils, Afflictions, Persecutions often, as I have
been for the faithful discharging of my duty) I have 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which God the righteous
judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but to all them also which
suffer for his truth, and love his appearing: which is the unshaken constant
faith, hope, expectation of thine, our Churches, Religions, Ministers,
Countries unmercenary faithful Friend and Servant,

Swainswick 2 Sep. 1653. William Prynne.

A GOSPEL PLEA, FOR THE Lawfullness and Continuance of the Ancient settled
Maintenance and Tithes of the Ministers of the GOSPEL,
THE ancient, necessary, competent maintenance of our Ministers of the Gospel
settled on them by the Piety, Bounty of our religious Christian Kings and
Ancestors, See Spelmanni Council. Tom. 1. p. 308, 348.350.
almost from the very first preaching and embracing of the Gospel in this
Island, constantly enjoyed ever since, without any public opposition, being in
these times of a long-expected glorious reformation, and real propagation of
the Gospel, more audaciously oppugned, more impiously decried, declaimed,
petitioned publicly against, and more sacrilegiously invaded, detained,
subtracted, than in the very worst, profanest of former ages; and that, not
only by professed enemies of the Ministers and Ministry of the Gospel, but by
such who pretend themselves their friends, and the most precious Saints; who
not yet satisfied with the late spoils, sales of all our Archbishops, Bishops,
Cathedrals, Deanes, Chapters Lands and Revenues, (the fattest morsels of the
English Clergy, tending rather to support their Lordly Power, Pride, Pomp,
Luxury, than their true Gospel Ministry) engrossed into Sword-mens and
Laymens hands; do now industriously, yea violently endeavor speedily to
deprive all our painful, godly preaching Ministers, of all their remaining,
inconsiderable, scarce competent Maintenance by Tithes, Glebes, Oblations and
other duties, (formerly settled on them, by long prescription, by sundry
successive Laws, Canons, and Acts of Parliaments, as well as late Ordinances,
with sufficient warrant even from Gods Word, Gospel) and to leave them no other
subsistence, encouragement, reward for all their labors in Gods harvest, but
the mere arbitrarie uncoercive Benevolence of the people, (who being generally
profane, covetous, vicious, Sectarian, if not open enemies to all godly
Ministers, will not voluntarily contribute one farthing toward them, desiring
rather their room, ruin, than their company or subsistence) and what they
shall otherwise earn by their own labor, industry in some other callings: It
is high time for all sincere Patrons, Friends of the Ministers and Ministry of
the Gospel (now dangerously assaulted) publicly to appear in their behalf, and
openly to vindicate, secure as well the Divine as Civil right of their yet
remaining ancient, necessary, established maintenance, against the clamorous
cavils, petitions, and false absurd Allegations of Sacrilegious, Covetous,
Impious, Violent, 2 These. 3.2
Unreasonable, Ezekiel. 21.31. Psalm. 92 6. Psalm. 94.8.
Brutish men; to convince them of their error and impiety herein; or else to
shame, silence them for the future, and preserve our present Ministers,
Ministry (and by consequence our very Religion it self, now more endangered
than in any age since its first establishment.) from impendent ruin. For which
end, having not long since had some private discourses with Soldiers
concerning the lawfullness of our Ministers Tithes and settled maintenance,
during my late strict causeless restraints under their armed Guards, and
perusing some short Prison notes, notions, upon that occasion, of that subject
lying by me, I thought fit to enlarge and reduce them to these ensuing
Propositions, (wherein the whole controversy, now publicly agitated touching
our Ministers Tithes and Livelihood, is comprised) to make them public, for
the common good and satisfaction of those who shall peruse them, especially
Swordmen, whom I find most violent against Tithes and Ministers forced
maintenance, trusting more (as I apprehend) to the length of their swords, than
strength of their Arguments against them; which how weak they are, let all
rational perusers hereof resolve.

The Propositions I shall here (through Gods assistance) make good, from the
very Law, Word, and Gospel of God, with all possible brevitie, (I trust beyond
all contradiction) are these,

1. That there is a just, competent, and comfortable Maintenance, due to all
lawful, painful Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel from the people, even
by Divine right, institution, and express Texts, Precepts of the Gospel.

2. That the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel (and of Places, Houses
for Gods public worship) by Tithes, Glebes, Oblations (yea by spoils won in
battle by Generals, Colonels, Captains, Soldiers) is not only lawful,
expedient, but the most fiting, rational, convenient Maintenance of all others,
warranted by direct Presidents, Precepts, both before, under the Law, and
likewise by the Gospel, which does no ways abolish, condemn, but approve,
confirm this way of Maintenance.

3. That if Tithes and other Maintenance, formerly settled on our Ministers, be
either wilfully withheld, or subtracted from them by the people, in part or
in whole; the Civil Magistrates may, yea ought by coercive Laws and Penalties
to enforce the payment of them in due form and time, both by the Law of God,
and Rules of Justice, without any injury or oppression to the detainers.

4. That our Ministers Tithes are really no burden, grievance, oppression to
the people; but a charge, debt, duty, as well as their Landlords Rents, or
Merchants poundage. That the abolishing of them will be no real ease, gain,
advantage to Farmers, L^ssees, and the poorer sort of people, as is falsely
pretended, but only to rich Landlords, and landed men; and a loss, detriment
to all others.

5. That the present Opposition and endeavored Abolition of Tithes and all
other coercive Maintenance for Ministers, proceeds not from any real grounds of
Piety, Conscience, or any consideble, real inconveniences, mischiefs arising
from them, but merely from base, covetous, carnal hearts, want of Christian
love, charity to, and professed enmity, hatred against the Ministers of the
Gospel; yea from a Jesuitical, Papistical, Anabaptistical design to subvert,
ruin our Ministers, Church, Religion; the probable, if not necessary
consequence of this infernal Project, if it should take effect; which would
prove the eternal shame, infamy, ruin of our Nation, not its glory and
benefit.

CHAP. I.
THe first of these Propositions being the foundation and cornerstone whereon
all the rest depend, and into which it has a prevailing influence; I shall be
more copious in its Probation, and in the Refutation of the Objections which
are, or may be raised against it.

Proposition 1.
That there is See Huldrici Zuinglii Explanatio Artic. 63. Operu^ Tom. 1. f.
106. Benedicti Aretii Problemata, Locus 142. De Stipendiis Ministrorum.
a just, competent and comfortable Maintenance due to all lawful, painful
Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel, from the people, even by Divine right,
institution, and express Texts, Precepts of the Gospel; is as clear as the
noonday Sun, by these irrefragable Gospel Testimonies.

I. By Matthew. 10.5, 6, 9, 10, 11. where when our Lord and Savior Christ
himself first sent forth, authorized, commanded his 12. Apostles to preach the
Gospel, he gave them these instructions among other: Provide neither gold, nor
silver, nor brass in your purses, nor scrip, (nor bread adds Mark 6.8.) for
your journey, neither two coats, nor shoes, nor yet staves: (adding this as
the reason thereof) For the Labourer is worthy of his meat; or, his Reward,
Hire, Wages, Maintenance, as the Greek word will bear, and other following
Scriptures render it.

II. By Luke 10.1, 6, 10. recording, that when our Savior Christ (not long
after his former Commission to the 12. Apostles) sent forth the 70. Disciples
by two and two, to preach in every City and place, whither himself would come;
he gave them almost the self-same instructions: Carry neither purse, nor scrip,
nor shoes; and into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this
house, etc. And in the same house remain eating and drinking such things as
they give: (subjoyning this reason for it.) For the Labourer is worthy of his
Hire: Go not from house to house (as Beggars use to do for alms) And into what
City you enter, and hey receive you, eat such things as are set before you, etc.

III. By John 6.35, 36, 37, 38. where our Lord Jesus Christ, (soon after the
former Commissions) used these words to his Disciples; Behold, I say unto you,
Lift up your eyes, and look on the fields, for they are white already to
harvest, And He that reapeth receives Wages, and gathers fruit unto eternal
life, etc. I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor, etc. Which
may be aptly paralleld with, and interpreted by Matthew. 9.37, 38. Then said he
(our Savior) unto his Disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but the
Laborers are few; pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send
forth Laborers into his harvest: Which when he did, he agreed with them all for
a certain stipend by the day, and when the evening was come, he said unto his
Steward, Call the Laborers, and give them their hire, beginning from the last
unto the first, Mat. 20.1, to 15. as is there parabolically expressed.

From which Texts, words of our Lord and Savior Christ himself, it is most
apparent,

1. That the Apostles, Preachers, Ministers of the Gospel are and ought to be
diligent, painful Laborers in Christ's spiritual harvest, not idle loiterers.

2. That they were not obliged, but expressly prohibited to provide gold,
silver, brass, scrips, shoes, clothes, bread, meat; drink, lodging, and other
necessaries at their own free cost, when they were commissioned and sent forth
to preach the Gospel, (as some now would enforce them to) for this very reason,
That being Laborers in the Lords own harvest, for the eternal salvation of
men's souls, they were worthy to receive them, as hire, or wages, from those to
whom they preached.

3. That our Savior Christ himself at the very original institution and first
mission of his 12. Apostles, and after of his 70 Disciples to preach the
Gospel; thrice one after another, expresl;y resolves in positive terms; That
they are worthy of their meat, hire, wages, for their Labor in the Gospel; and
so by consequence, all other lawful Laboring Ministers, who diligently preach
the Gospel, are worthy of the like at this day; and neither of them obliged to
preach the Gospel freely without any recompense, wages, reward, as some
Seducers now pretend.

4. That meat, drink, clothes, lodging, and a competent maintenance, are as
truly, justly due to the true Laboring Ministers of the Gospel from the
people, and that of pure common, natural, yea Gospel right, justice, not as
mere arbitrary Charity or Benevolence, but as merited HIRE, WAGES; as much, as
well as deserved hire, wages are due to any other hired servant or labourer
whatsoever, by common justice, and the law of God, Genesis 29. 15. Exodus 2.9.
Levit. 19.13. Deuteronomy. 24.14, 15. Mat. 20.1, to 16. Joh. 4.36. Or as well as pay,
wages are justly due to the best deserving Officers, soldiers, Luke 3.14. Ezekiel.
28.18, 19. and that by Christ's own trebled resolution, recorded by the
Evangelists for their greater evidence and conviction; who emphatically by way
of reason applies these words only to his Apostles and Ministers, For the
Labourer is worthy of his meat, hire, wages; they being the most divine,
excellent, useful, necessary Laborers of all others, and that in matters of
highest concernment in relation both to God and Men: Therefore of all other
laborers they are most worthy of a honorable, comfortable, certain hire,
salary, reward for their support and encouragement.

5. Hence it follows by necessary consequence, (and let those who are guilty
consider it seriously in the fear of God with trembling and astonishment) that
the opposing, oppressing, defrauding the Ministers of the Gospel in their
deserved settled hire, wages; or the detaining all, or any part of their
ancient, just, established, Dues, Tithes, Revenues from them (especially out of
covetousness, spite, obstinacy, or malice against their very callings) is as
great, as crying, as damnable a sin, oppression, unrighteousness; and will
bring down as grievous curses, plagues, judgments upon all those who are
culpable thereof; as the defrauding, oppressing of the hired servant or
labourer, of or in his hire, or detaining their wages from them, when due; as
will undeniably appear by Deuteronomy. 24.14, 15. Levit. 19, 13. Genesis 31.7. Mal. 3.5.
Jam. 4.1, to 5. compared with Mal. 3.8, 9.10, 11. Nehem. 13.10, 11. and is a
sin against all these Scriptures; which all detainers of Ministers Dues,
Tithes, may do well to read and ponder.

IV. The truth of this Proposition is ratifyed by the Apostle Paul's resolution,
who thus prosecutes our Saviors forecited words, and seconds his argument in 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double
honor, especially those that labor in the word and Doctrine: For the
Scripture says (Deuteronomy. 25.4) Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out
the Corn. And, the Labourer is worthy of his hire: relating to Mat. 10.10. and
Luke 10.7. forecited. In which words the Holy Ghost by the Apostle positively
asserts,

1. That the Elders, Ministers who rule well, especially such of them who
labor in the Word and Gospel, are really worthy of double honor from the
people, which double honor Interpreters generally resolve to be, 1. Due
reverence, love, countenance; 2. A competent liberal maintenance and reward: Or
(as some conceive) a double salary and allowance to what others receive, as a
just honorable reward for their labor, which is here intended by the words
double honor; extending as well to an honorable salary, reward, as to due
reverence and respect, as is clear by the two Texts here cited to prove it, by
the 3, and 16 verses of this very Chapter, and Romans 13.1, 6, 7. 1 Pet. 2.17.
Prove. 3.9. compared together.

2. That the people ought to count them worthy of this double honor, and to
render it unto them.

3. He proves and ratifies this, not only by his own Apostolical authority,
but likewise by two other Texts of Scripture, the one taken out of the Old
Testament, Deuteronomy. 25.4. (which proves, that the Texts, Precepts for the just
dues, maintenance of the Priests in the Old Testament are still in force, and
not abrogated, so far as they are moral or judicial; and therefore may be
still aptly urged for proof of our Ministers due maintenance under the Gospel;)
The other out of the New, Testament, Mat. 10.10. Luke 10.7. From both which the
force of the Apostles argument stands thus, The Elders who labor in the Word
and Gospel have as just, as natural, as moral, legal, equitable a right and
meritorious due to a liberal maintenance, salarie, reward, or double honor (as
he styles it) as the Ox that treads out the Corn has, to eat of the Corn,
straw he treads out; or, as any other hired labourer whatsoever has to his
hire; they being the best, eminentest of all other laborers; (which the
special application of Deuteronomy: 25.4. and of this very sentence here again to
them, The labourer is worthy of his hire, imports:) Therefore for any people
wittingly, wilfully to detain, or defraud them thereof, is as great an
injustice, cruelty, sin, unrighteousness, as to muzzle the Ox mouth that
treads out the Corn; to detain the Laborers wages, or defraud him thereof;
yea a sin against the express commandments of God, Deuteronomy. 25.4. chapter 24.14, 15.
Levit. 19.13. 1 Cor. 9.8, 9, 10. And so much the rather, because their hire,
wages, are their right, and their own (not the mere alms, charity of those who
pay it) as Christ himself resolves, Mat. 20.4, 7, 8, 13, 14.

V. By Gal: 6.6. where the Apostle lays down this geral Gospel percept for the
maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, from which there can be no evasion:
Let him that is taught in the Word Communicate unto him that teaches in all
good things. The word Communicate, signifies a free, liberal, (not base,
niggardly) allowance, as is evident by 1 Timothy 6.18. Heb. 13.16. 2 Cor. 9.5, 6,
7, 8. Deuteronomy. 15.8, 11. and that to be rendered to them, not as to mere Strangers,
but as to those who have a kind of coparnership, and tenancie in common with
them, not in one or two, but in all good things God has blessed them with; as
the primitive Christians had all things in common, and said not that any thing
was their own, but the Apostles and Brethrens as much as theirs, Acts 4.32, 34,
35. whence the Contents of our Bibles and Commentators on this Text infer and
conclude; That every Christian ought cheerfully to communicate a liberal share
and portion of all the fruits of the Earth, blessings and good things he
enjoyes, to his spiritual Pastor, Teacher, (and by consequence, Tithes of all
tithable things) and that not as Alms, Charity, or a free Benevolence, but as
a See Dr. Carltons Tithes proved to be by Divine Right, and Dr. Burges, Calvin
and others on this Text.
just debt, duty commanded by this sacred Canon.

VI. By Romans 13.6, 7, 8. For, for this cause pay you tribute also, For they are
Gods Ministers attending continually upon this very thing. Render therefore to
all their due, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to
whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor. Owe nothing to any man, but to love one
another. Which Scripture though particularly intended of the higher civil
Powers, Rulers and Magistrates ordained by God; yet it equally extends to all
Spiritual, Ecclesiastical Pastors and Rulers over us, as well as to them.

First, because they are Gods Ministers attending continually upon this very
thing, (to preach the Gospel, and discharge their Pastoral charge over their
flocks) as well as civil Magistrates; and therefore by way of excellency are
more frequently styled Ministers, yea Ministers of God and Christ in the new
Testament, than Magistrates, Romans 15.8, 16. 1 Chr. 4.1. 2 Cor. 3.6. chapter 6.4.
chapter 11.23. Ephesians. 3.7. Col. 1.23, 25. chapter 4.7. 1 Thessalonians. 3.2. 1 Timothy 4.6. whence
their very work and calling is styled, The Ministry, Rom: 12.7. Ephesians. 4.12.
Col. 4.17. 2 Timothy 4.5. 1 Timothy 1.12.

Secondly, because the Precept subjoyned is universal; Render therefore to all
their due: in the affirmative: Therefore to Ministers as well as Magistrates,
with the like care and conscience. And then the Inhibition in the close as
universal, Owe nothing to any man; Therefore not to Ministers, no more than to
Magistrates or other men.

Thirdly, because it expressly enjoins all Christians to render honor to whom
honor is due: now, not only honor, but double honor is due to Ministers that
rule well and preach the Gospel diligently, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. to wit, Reverence,
Obedience, Love, See Huldrici Zuinglii Explanatio Articuli 64.
Maintenance; all here prescribed to be rendered in this Text to whom they are
due. Therefore a liberal, honorable, comfortable Maintenance and reward is
both in justice and conscience DUE, as well to the Ministers of the Gospel, as
to the Magistrates and higher Powers; yea as duly, truly, justly to be rendered
unto, (not owed, denied, detained from) the Ministers, as to Kings,
Parliaments, or any other civil Rulers, even by this Evangelical precept, (from
which there is no evasion) and that for conscience sake; as well as for fear of
wrath and punishment: verse. 5. So as none can plead, pretend the least color
of conscience, for detaining, or not rendering their Tithes and Duties to our
Ministers of the Gospel, without giving the Holy Ghost himself, and this
Gospel Text the Lie, and incurring Ananias and Saphiraes sin, Act. 5.3, 4, 7,
8, 9, 10. for which they may justly expect and receive their fatal exemplary
punishment.

VII. The Apostle further clears this truth not only by way of Precept, but
Reason and Demonstration, Romans 15.26, 27. It has pleased them of Macedonia and
Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor Saints which are at
Jerusalem (Ministers and Apostles as well as other Saints that were poor.) It
has pleased them verily, and their Debtors they are: For if the Gentiles have
been made partakers of their Spiritual things, their duty is also to Minister
unto them in Carnal things. I confess, the Text is not meant properly of
Apostles, and Ministers of the Gospel, but of poor believing Saints that were
Jews; but the reason, argument here urged, extends much more to Apostles and
Ministers of the Gospel, than to poor believing Saints: and thus I argue from
it. If the Christian believing Gentiles in Macedonia and Achaia were strongly
obliged, not only in charity, but of debt, duty (as the Apostle here argues,
resolves) to make a certain contribution, for the poor Saints of God at
Jerusalem who were Jews, and to minister to them in their carnal things when
they were in want, upon this account, that God had made them partakers of their
Spiritual things (by the Apostles and other Ministers sent or repairing to them
from Jerusalem) then much more are they and all other converted Gentiles then
and now strongly obliged, not only in charity, but of just debt and duty to
make a certain contribution, maintenance for, and liberally to minister in
their carnal things, unto those faithful Ministers of the Gospel, who
actually preach the Gospel, to them, and of whose spiritual things, pains
they are made partakers. But the antecedent and supposition is an
unquestionable Gospel truth, by the Apostles resolution in this alleged Text,
and is, may be further ratifyed by Act. 11.29, 30. Act. 4.32, 33, 34, 35, 36.
Act. 5.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 8.1, to 16. and chapter 9.1, to 15. Gal.
2.10. Ephesians. 4.28. 1 John 3.17. Mat. 5.42. Deuteronomy. 15.7, to 12. Therefore the
consequent must be granted, being the Apostles express argument in the very
case of Ministers maintenance from the people, 1 Cor. 9.11. If we have sown
unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal
things? Now in this reasoning of the Apostle, and Gods Spirit in, by him, there
is a double emphatical enforcement to prove Ministers maintenance, both a just
debt and duty, which the people are bound to render to them, not as free
givers, but as debtors.

1. By the grounds of Commutative Justice, They are (or at leastwise may be if
they will themselves, the case only of obstinate Separatists) partakers of the
Ministers spiritual things and pains: therefore ought in justice, duty, to pay
and render them some proportionable recompense for what they receive from them;
even as all other Merchants, Tradesmen who barter or sell one commodity for
another, or for ready money, use to do.

2. From the nature, value of the things they receive from Ministers; and of
those things they render back to them by way of exchange, which will hold no
balance nor equal value with what they first receive: For the things the
people enjoy by Ministers, are spiritual, which concern their souls, spirits,
everlasting salvation, eternal happiness, and are the most excellent, precious
things of all other, far excelling Gold, Silver, Tithes, and all earthly
Treasures. Ephesians. 3.8, 18, 19. 2 Pet. 1.4. 2 Cor. 3.8, 9, 10. chapter 4.7. Phil.
3.8. Romans 2.18. Psalm. 19.10. and 119.72, 127. Prove. 8.18, 19. But the things
and recompense they return to Ministers for them, are only their carnal things,
for the necessary support of their bodies and families, which are no way
comparable in value, worth, benefit, use to what they receive from them, as the
last recited Texts and others resolve. The people therefore receiving from
their Ministers quid pro quo, and things of infinite more value, benefit, than
what they render to them; the carnal things they receive for their spiritual,
(though in a liberal proportion) must needs be a most just debt and duty; not
mere arbitrary alms or charity; and can neither in justice nor conscience be
detained from them, they being such infinite gainers by the bargain.

VIII. This Proposition is yet further professedly argued, debated at full by
the Apostle and Spirit of God against all sorts of callings and professions of
men, that now oppose it, with the greatest evidence of reason, justice, equity
that may be, backed with Divine Authority; as if he had purposely foreseen the
violent, impious, headie opposition, now made against Ministers Tithes and
maintenance in these days by soldiers, rusticks, tradesmen; and penned this
Scripture purposely to refute them. 1 Cor. 9.4. to 16. Have we not power to eat
and to drink? etc. Who goes a warfare any time at his own charges? Who
planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? Or, who feeds a
flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? Say I these things as a man? or
says not the Law the same also? For it is written in the Law of Moses, Deuteronomy.
25.4.
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn. Does
God take care for Oxen? Or says he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes,
no doubt, this is written, that he that ploweth should plow in hope, and he
that thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope. If we have sown unto
you spiritual things, is it a great thing, if we shall reap your carnal things?
If others be partakers of this power over you, are not we rather? Nevertheless,
we have not used this power; but suffer all things, l^st we should hinder the
Gospel of Christ. Do ye not know, that they which minister about holy things,
live (or feed) of the things of the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar
are partakers with the Altar? Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. But I have used none of these
things; neither have I written these things that it should be so done unto me,
etc.

In which Scripture the Apostle asserts the lawfulness and justness of
Ministers maintenance under the Gospel by sundry instances, arguments, against
all opponents. And because, perchance some soldiers then, as now, were the
chief opposers of Ministers maintenance, or rather, for that he foresaw (by a 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Prophetical Spirit) that they should prove such in our days, he first
refutes, and stops theirs, others mouths, with an argument drawn from the
wars, and their own Military practice: Who goes a warfare at any time at his
own charge? In which short interrogative argument, these particulars are both
included and tacitly asserted.

1. That Ministers of the Gospel are true spiritual Soldiers under Christ
their Heb. 2.10.
Captain; and their Ministry, a true spiritual warfare, against the world,
flesh, Devil, sins and vices of men, exposing them to many hardships, dangers,
and oft-times to loss of liberty, blood, limbs, yea life it self, as he
expressly resolves in other Texts, 2 Cor. 10.4. 1 Timothy 1.18. 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. and
4.7.

2. That being soldiers, it must needs be most unjust, unreasonable,
unconscionable, yea against the common rules of war, and practice of all
soldiers, that they should go a warfare ANY TIME at their own charge; since
no other soldiers else will, or use to do it, (nor any officers, soldiers of
the Army now) who will follow the wars no longer, than they may do it at free
cost, no not for a moment; and will fight no longer than they receive or expect
full pay. And therefore should not now, nor at any time else, press Ministers
to preach freely at their own cost, unless themselves first went a warfare on
their own purses, to ease the impoverished oppressed Country of their long
continued heavy Taxes.

3. That constant pay, wages are at all times as really and justly due to these
spiritual Soldiers for their spiritual warfare, as they are to any other
soldiers, warriers or officers whatsoever employed in actual service in other
wars. Luke 3.14. Therefore those Military Officers who oppugn our Ministers
pay and settled maintenance as unlawful, antichristian, unevangelical, must
first renounce their own pay, contributions as such, and war without pay on
their own charges for the future; (which many of them may well do, having
gained so much by the wars already, being now most of them out of actual
military service) or else henceforth permit our Ministers to enjoy their Tithes
and settled maintenance without opposition, or substraction, as they do their
pay: it being as great a robbery, injustice, fraud to deprive them of all or
any part thereof, as to defraud any Soldiers, now in actual service by Land or
Sea, of their lawful pay, Mal. 3.8, 9, 10.

4. It hence necessarily follows, that as Soldiers pay and other Military
expenses, are not left to the arbitrary pleasures and free benevolence of the
people, (who would contribute little or nothing at all toward them at this or
any other season, if left to their own free wills) whence the present
dissolution, destruction of the temporal Army, and Militia would ensue; but are
reduced to a certainty by a settled establishment, and imposed, levied on the
people by coercive Laws, Ordinances, Forfeitures, Distresses, Imprisonments,
strict penalties and illegal armed power, when wilfully refused, detained or
neglected to be paid in whole or part at the times appointed: So the wages,
stipends of these spiritual Soldiers the Ministers, and of their necessary
spiritual warfare are not to be wholly left in any settled Christian State, to
the arbitrary wills and voluntary Benevolences of the people (which would soon
necessitate them to disband, and frustrate their soul-saving warfare) but
reduced to some certainty by positive Laws, (as they have been time out of mind
with us, and elsewhere) and in case of wilful refusal, detention, substraction
in whole or in part, when due, to be levied by such coercive legal ways and
means, as our monthly Taxes, Contributions, and other just Debts, Duties are,
there being the self-same justice, reason, equity, necessity in both cases.
Those Army Officers and Soldiers then, who oppose, condemn our Ministers
settled maintenance, and the coercive laws, means to recover it when detained
from them, as an intolerable oppressing yoke, grievance, must first renounce,
suppress all monthly Taxes, Contributions, Excises, Customs, Impositions, and
the many new severe coercive ways, means to levy them, as such; being far more
grievous, burdensome, illegal, oppressive to the people, both in their value,
frequency, novelty, illegality, new way of imposing, levying, than Ministers
Tithes, Dues; and the saddest, heaviest pressures they now languish under; and
live wholly upon the peoples free unconstrained Benevolences, taking only what
they will freely give them of their own accords, without coercive Laws,
Ordinances, Forfeitures, Penalties, Distresses; or else recant their former
erroneous opinion, practice, and approve of our Ministers settled coercive
maintenance for the future, without opposition, being Soldiers as well, and
having as just a right to a settled enforced salary as they, as the Apostle here
argues and resolves.

2. The Apostle having thus routed, silenced our Captains and Soldiers, the
Ringleaders against Ministers settled coercive maintenance, encounters in the
next place, all Husbandmen, Sheep-masters, Shepherds, Ploughmen, Reapers,
Threshers, and other Rustical Oppugners of their Tithes and Livelihood, Verse.
7, 9, 10. Wherein he asserts, that Ministers of the Gospel have as just, as
equitable a Right to a competent maintenance from the people for preaching the
Gospel to them, and to partake of their temporal things; as he that planteth a
Vineyard has to eat of the fruit thereof; as he that keeps a Flock has to
eat of the milk thereof; as the Husbandman and Labourer who ploweth, reapeth or
thresheth corn, has to eat of the corn he sows, reapeth, ploweth: And that
it is as great injustice and unreasonable a wrong to deprive Ministers who sow
unto us spiritual things, of a competent share in our carnal things, as to
debar one that plants a Vienyard, of right, liberty to eat of the fruits
thereon; or one that feeds a Flock, to eat of the milk thereof; or those that
sow, reap, and thresh Corn, to enjoy any share or portion in it: Which all
Husbandmen, Farmers, Sheepmasters, Shepherds, Plowmen, Reapers, Threshers, and
other Laborers, who deny or begrudge our Ministers their settled long-enjoyed
Tithes, Dues, may do well advisedly to consider, to convince them of their
error, and reform their practice.

3. Verse. 8, 9. To convict all brutish men in these days, who are more
uncharitable to their Ministers, than men are or ought to be unto their very
beasts, in denying them so much as to eat of their Tithe Corn or straw; he
argues the justice of their maintenance (and that by the Tithes of their Corn,
Wine, etc. as the instances imply) from the very Law of God concerning beasts,
Deuteronomy. 25.4. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the
corn: which though literally meant of Oxen, to whom all righteous men are and
ought to be just and merciful, Prove. 12.10. Luke 13.15. and 14.5. Mat. 12.11.
yet it is principally written and intended altogether in its genuine sense of
the Priests of God under the Law, and Ministers under the Gospel, of whom God
takes far more care than he does of Oxen (of whom yet he has a general
providential care, as well as of all other beasts and sparrowes: Psalm. 104.25,
27. and 145.9, 15, 16. and 147.9. Luke 12.6, 7, 24. Mat. 6.26. and 10.28, 29.)
and are of more value than many Oxen, Sparrowes, and yet not one of these
sparrowes falls to the ground without Gods special Providence, though two of
them be sold for a farthing. The force of this argument stands thus; If God by
a special Law takes so much care of the very Ox that treads out the Corn, as
to prohibit the muzzling of his mouth, that he may not eat thereof; then
questionless he takes much more care of the Ministers of the Gospel, and much
more inhibits the muzzling their mouths, that they shall not so much as eat,
feed and live upon the Tithes, milk, wine, fruits of your vineyards, straw,
corn, and other carnal things; they being far better than Oxen; and this Law
purposely, yea altogether written for their sakes, not for Oxen. Therefore
those who deny, deprive them of this their right, transgress this very Law of
God, (still in force under the Gospel, as is here resolved, being founded upon
natural justice and equity) and are far more unrighteous, cruel, unmercifull
to their Ministers, than they are, yea ought of right to be to their very
beasts and Oxen, to whom they allow both corn, straw, and sufficient Genesis
24.25.32. c. 42.27. c 43.24. Jud. 19.21. Isay 30.24.
provender, for their very work. Verily our Ministers now were better to be
many men's Oxen, Horses, Asses, than their spiritual Pastors, for then they
would feed, keep them well, and allow them straw, hay, corn to live on, as they
do to their beasts; whereas now they will pay them neither Tithe-corn, nor hay,
nor straw. Such men, I fear, are worse and more Brutish than their Ps. 49.20.
Prove. 30.^*
beasts that perish, regarding neither Law nor Gospel, here jointly urged by
the Apostle against their Tithe-detaining practice.

4. Verse. 11. He encounters all Artificers, Merchants, Tradesmen, and others
who live by selling, buying, exchanging; who deny or detain their Ministers
Dues and Maintenance, by an argument drawn from their own practice, the rules
of commutative Justice, the nature and value of what they receive from
Ministers, and what they render, or should return them for it. If we have sown
unto you spiritual things (the most precious, excellent, useful, necessary of
all others) is it a great matter if we shall reap your carnal things? of far
less value, worth, use, than what you receive from us for them. Surely none of
these Traders, will give or sell away their wares without any money or
recompense for them; and if they sell or exchange them for less money, or
things of lesser value, moment than what they sell or exchange them for, they
may in all justice, equity expect and receive money or wares exchanged for them
from those who have so gainful a bargain, without the least shadow of
covetousness, injury, or oppression. Let then such and all others consider
their own daily practice, and the weight of this Apostolical Gospel argument
for our Ministers maintenance, Tithes, Dues, against which there can be no
exception, nor reply; and then it will convince, convert them, if they have not
abjured all principles of common justice and commerce.

5. Verse. 12. He argues from others precedents and examples. If others are
partakers of this power over you (to reap your carnal things for spiritual) are
not we rather? which may receive these various constructions agreeable to the
general scope of the place.

1. If others who are true Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel, are partakers
of this power, (amongst you or those to whom they preach) though they have not
been such to you, and did not convert you, nor labor so much in sowing
spiritual things to you; much more then I (and Barnabas) who have been the
instruments of your conversion, and doubtless are Apostles unto you, you being
the Seal of mine (and his) Apostleship in the Lord, Verse. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 12.11,
12. may likewise be partakers of this power.

2. If others, who are not true Apostles of Jesus Christ, but mere false
Apostles, Seducers, slanderers of me and the truth of the Gospel, yea broachers
of Heresies and Schisms, are partakers of such a power amongst you; then much
more I and Barnabas, who are true Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel,
preaching nothing but soul-saving Gospel truths: which seems to be the genuine
sense of the place, by comparing verse. 1, 2, 3. with 2 Cor. 11.1, to 16.

3. If your See 1 Cor. 8.1, 10. and 10.30, 21.
Idolatrous Pagan Priests before or since your conversion, be partakers of such
a power (as to receive a competent salary, maintenance out of your carnal
things) even for their idolatrous superstitious rites and ministry; or if your
Pagan Civil Magistrates receive a competent allowance from you for their care,
pains in civil government, Romans 13.6, 7* then much rather we who are true
Ministers and Apostles may do the like for the true spiritual things we sow
among you, and have the spiritual rule over your souls, Hebr. 13.17. The
argument holds strongly in each of these constructions, but specially in the
two first, which are most suitable to the Text

6. Verse. 13. He argues the justice of Ministers maintenance under the Gospel,
from the maintenance of the Priests by Gods appointment under the Law, both
before and after the Temple built. Do ye not know that they which minister
about holy things live of the things of the Temple, and they which wait at the
Altar, are partakers with the Altar? Numb. 18.18, 19, to 31. Deuteronomy. 12.6, 11,
17, 18, 19. chapter 14.22. to the end of the chapter, chapter 18.1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 31.2,
to 20. Nehem. 10.32, to the end. chapter 12.39, 47. and 13.5, to 15. (The Priests
and Levites by Gods own institution then receiving a liberal maintenance from
the people, by First fruits, Tithes, Oblations, Sacrifices, and likewise
Cities, Suburbs, Lands, Houses, Chambers for them, their Families, flocks of
Cattle and Goods, Numb. 35.2, to 9. Josh. 21.2, to 43. 1 Chronicles. 6.6,
throughout. 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14. Neh. 10.37, 38, 39. and 13.10. Ezekiel. 45.1, 2,
3, 4, 5. chapter 48.9, to 15. Lev. 25.32, 33, 34. compared with the former Texts:
and Lev. 37. throughout. Numb. 21.28, 29, 30, 37, 47, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54. Heb.
7.5.8. None of which might be alienated, sold or subtracted from them without
sin and sacrilege. Mal. 3. 8. Ezekiel: 49.14. Lev: 25.33, 34. Gen: 47.22, 26.) And
then to stop, silence all future objections and calumnies, he thus concludes
his argument with a Divine Ordinance and institution of Christ himself under
the Gospel for the like liberal maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel,
(whose ministration is much more glorious than that of the Law, 2 Cor. 3.7, 8,
9, 10.) Verse: 14. Even so has the Lord ordained that they which Preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel; to wit, as liberally, as plentifully, as
comfortably in all respects, (and that by Tithes and Oblations) as the Priests
and Levites under the Law, as the parallel, and the words Even so, import. Who
ever therefore oppose, resist, censure this their liberal settled maintenance,
oppose, resist, censure the very positive Ordinance of Christ himself under the
Gospel; and therefore may and shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13.2.
in case they do not repent thereof.

Finally, the Apostle to prevent all cavils that either false Apostles or
enemies to him and his Ministry, might then object against him for this
Doctrine, as if he were a self-seeker, a covetous wretch, an oppressor,
fleecer, spoiler of his flock, or a partial Judge in his own cause (as they now
calumniate our Ministers pleading for their just settled maintenance and Tithes)
because he thus strongly pleads, proves the lawfulness of the maintenance of
the Ministers of the Gospel; he concludes, v. 12, 15, 18, 19. Nevertheless we
have not used this power: But I have used none of these things; neither have I
written these things, that it should be so done unto me, etc. which he repeats
and amplifies in 2 Cor. 11.7, 8, 9, 10. and 12, 13, 14, 15, 17. But he did it
only in the behalf of the rest of the Ministers of the Gospel, to justify
their Gospel right to a liberal, just and fitting livelihood for preaching of
the Gospel. Wherefore his Testimony, resolution in this case is beyond all
exception, sufficient to convince, silence all gainsayers then and now.

IX. The verity of this Proposition is thus demonstrated from 1 Timothy 3.2.
Titus 1.8. 3 John: 9.10. which prescribe this as one special qualification of
every Evangelical Bishop and Minister of the Gospel, that he must be given to,
and a lover of Hospitality, a receiver of the Brethren, and reliever of
distressed Saints upon all occasions: And yet withal commands, requires, That
he must give himself WHOLLY to reading, fasting, prayer, meditation,
exhortation, doctrine, preaching the Word in season, out of season, giving
attendance on these and other Pastoral duties, not intangling himself with the
affairs of this life, being separated to the Gospel of Christ, Act. 6.4. 1 Timothy
4.13, 14, 15, 16. 2 Timothy 2.4, 15. and 4.2, 5. Romans 1.1. Tit. 1.9. and 2.1. 1
Cor. 4.17. Acts 20.28. Now this they cannot possibly do, without a liberal,
comfortable, constant, settled maintenance, unless they have good estates of
their own, which few of them have, who yet deserve a convenient reward for the
work of their Ministry from the people: therefore such a maintenance of right
belongs to them as Ministers of the Gospel, to enable them to be hospitable,
charitable to their Christian brethren, and the poor who need relief.

X. Ministers of the Gospel, are to speak, exhort, and rebuke with all
authority, and to let no man despise them, Tit. 2.15. 1 Timothy 4.11, 12. Mat.
7.29. Now this they can hardly do, if they be poor, beggarly, living upon mere
alms, or benevolences of the giddy-headed people, and stripped of a competent
settled maintenance independent of the vulgars or Superiors mere wills and
pleasures, which will render both their Persons, Words, Doctrine, Ministry
contemptible, and less Authoritative to the people: For the Scripture informs
us, That poor men are lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 18.23. and therefore David
couples these together, Ps. 119.141. I am poor (or small in estate) and
despised. And Solomon informs us, That the Poor uses entreaties (speaks not
with authority like the richer sort) but the rich answers roughly, Prove.
18.23. That the poor is hated even of his own neighbor, separated from him,
despised by him, and that all the brethren of the poor do hate him, how much
more do his friends go far from him? though he pursue them with words, yet are
they wanting to him. Prove. 14.20. and 19.4, 7. Yea he resolves Ecclesi. 9.15,
16. That a poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard; and that
no man remembered or regarded that poor wise man, who by his wisdom delivered
the small City that was besieged by a great King, because he was poor. Neither
is this old Testament, but Gospel truth likewise. Jam 2.2, 3, 5, 6. If there
come into your assembly a man with a gold ring, in goodly apparel, and there
come in also a poor man in vile raiment; ye have respect to him that wears
the gay clothing, and say to him, sit thou here in a good place; and say to the
poor, stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool. Hearken my beloved
Brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs
of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him? But ye have
despised the poor: a fault still common in the world. Poor indigent Ministers,
as well as Saints, though rich in faith, are always generally contemptible to
the greatest part of men, and their very poverty makes not only their persons,
but also their words, Doctrine to be slighted, despised, as these Scriptures
and experience manifest. Wherefore a competent, settled maintenance and revenue,
is not only just, but necessary, to add more reverence, esteem, authority to
their Exhortations, rebukes, words, and preserve their persons, callings,
Doctrine from contempt, scorn in the eyes and ears of men: Who though they
ought to know them which labor among them, and are over them in the Lord, and
admonish them, and to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. Yet by reason of their inbred pride and corruption, will be
very averse to do it, if they be very poor, indigent, living like beggars upon
alms and charity, as our new Reformadoes would now have them.

XI. Ministers of the Gospel must not seek to please men, but God; for if they
yet pleased men, they should not be the servants of Christ. Gal. 1.10. Neither
must they corrupt the Word (as many do; to humor the lusts, wills, or
countenance, and carry on the unrighteous, covetous, ambitious, oppressive,
bloody, or treacherous designs of wicked men) fasting (yea preaching, praying)
for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness^, Esa. 58.4.
But as of sincerity, but as of God in the sight of God, must they speak in
Christ, 2. Cor. 2.17. Now a just, competent, settled maintenance, independent on
the Governors, Magistrates or peoples wills and pleasures, (such as was the
Priests and Levits under the Law enjoyed by divine institution) is the best
means and preservative, to keep Ministers from being Men-pleasers, flatterers,
time-servers, and corrupters of the word of God, to humor men; a great
inducement to them to preach the word of God sincerely, and to rebuke, exhort
with all authority. Whereas a poor, beggarly, mean, dependent Ministry, whose
whole maintenance and subsistence must only rest upon the arbitrary wills of
persons in highest present power (who may out, or strip them both of their
Callings and Benefices, when and for what they please) or only upon the peoples
voluntary contributions, will certainly be a men-pleasing, time-serving,
flattering, unsincere, and word-corrupting Ministry, studying more to please,
favor those by and from whom they have their Livelihood, than to please God;
and fitting their preaching, praying, Doctrines, opinions, to their opinions,
tempers, factions, parties, design, holding always with the prevailing
strongest party, or those by whom they subsist, and wresting the Scriptures to
support their very errors, vices, sins, power, yea most unrighteous,
treacherous, perfidious, oppressing practices and bloody usurpations, not
daring to displease them, as See Nicephorus, Zonaras, and Grimston in the life
of Phocas: Platina and Bale in the life of Pope Gregory the 7.
Ecclesiastical Histories record, and our own experience can sufficiently
testify in these late whirling times and changes, as well as in King Fox Acts
and Monuments* vol 3 Hist. De vita et obitu M. Buce^i.
Edward the 6. Queen Mary's and Queen Elizabeth's reigns, when our Religion
suffered so many public alterations, and most Ministers, Scholars, and our
whole Universities then changed their Opinions, Professions and Religion with
the times. Hence the Scripture records this, as one of Jeroboams policies to
keep the People and Kingdom from returning to the right heir, 1 Kings 12.28,
29, 31, etc. chapter 13.33, 34. That he made Priests of the lowest (or poorest) of
the people, who were not of the Sons of Levi, and placed them in Bethel: who
being poor, mean and depending on him for their Salaries, readily sacrificed to
his golden Calves, offered upon the Altar which he had made in Bethel, and
observed his new prescribed Feasts: which the Priests and Levites that were in
all Israel, having Lands, Suburbs, and a settled maintenance, refused to do.
Whereupon Jeroboam and his Sons cast them out from executing the Priests
office unto the Lord, and substituted these base stipendiary Idol-Priests for
the Calves, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14, 15. Which became sin unto the house of
Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from the face of the earth. God
deliver us of this Nation from the like Atheistical Jeroboam-like policy and
practice now, which will certainly prove the ruin of them and their house, who
shall put it in execution, if not of our Religion and Nation, as it did of
Jeroboam his house, and the 2 Kings 17.16, 17, 18.
whole Kingdom of Israel.

XII. All Christians are commanded, Gal. 6.10. As they have opportunity, to do
good to all men (by relieving their wants) especially to the household of faith.
Therefore they are in an especial manner bound to do good to their Ministers
who instruct them, in maintaining and communicating to them in all good things,
as he resolves, v: 6. The rather, because we have this Precept thus seconded,
Heb: 13.16 But to do good and communicate forget not; for with such sacrifice
God is well pleased: (coupled with this injunction) Obey them that have the
rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they
that must give account, That they may do it with Joy, and not with Grief, for
that is unprofitable for you. Wherein these 3 Conclusions are positively
asserted.

1. That Christians must not only obey their Ministers, but likewise do good,
and communicate to them in all good things they want.

2. That this is so far from being unlawful, that it is a sacrifice well
pleasing unto God.

3. That Ministers deserve not only obedience but mainnance from the people.

1. Because they have the rule over them.

2. See Romans 13.4, 5, 6, 7. backing these Reasons.
Because they watch for their souls.

3. Because they must give an account to God for them.

4. Because it will be a great encouragement to them to discharge their duty
with joy, not with grief.

5. Because the not doing it, will both grieve the Ministers, and be
unprofitable to the people in regard of their souls and spiritual estate, and
also cause God to curse and blast them in their temporal estates, Mal: 3.8, 9,
10, 11, 12. where. as the doing thereof will be advantageous to them in
both-Powerfull reasons, motives to convince all of the justice of our Ministers
maintenance, and to induce them cheerfully to render it unto them, though it
were not due by humane Laws, as we know it is.

XIII. The very Gospel enjoins all Christians, Romans 12.20, 21. To distribute to
the necessity of the Saints, and to be hospitable (not only to those we know,
but) even to strangers. Heb: 13.2. And if our enemy hunger, it commands us to
feed him; if he thirst, to give him drink; and Not to be overcome with evil,
but to overcome evil with good; seconded with Mat: 5.44, 45, 46, 47, 48. Luke
6.32, to 37. Prove. 25.22. whence thus I argue: If Christians must distribute to
the necessities of, and be hospitable to Saints and others, who are mere
strangers to them, yea give meat, drink to their very enemies, and overcome
their evil with goodness; Then it necessarily follows, they must much more
distribute to the necessities of, be hospitable, liberal, give meat, drink,
maintenance to their own faithful preaching Ministers, and recompense their
good with good again, else they shall be worse than Publicans and sinners, who
do good to those that do good to and for them, Mat. 5.46, 47.

XIV. This is evident by the practice of the primitive Saints and Christians
recorded in the Gospel for our imitation; who though they paid all civil
Tributes, Customs, Duties to the civil Magistrates, and likewise Tithes and
other duties to the Jewish or Pagan Priests under whom they lived; yet they
likewise freely and liberally ministered, contributed of their substance and
temporal estates toward the maintenance of Christ and his Apostles, and the
Ministers of the Gospel. Hence we read, Luke 8.2, 3. That Mary Magdalen, Joanna
the wife of Cuza, Herod's Steward, Susanna and MAN, others (of our Saviors
auditors) ministered to him of their substance: put, it seems, into a common
purse for the maintenance of Christ and his Apostles, which Judas kept; who
provided bread, meat and other necessaries out of it; as is evident by John
4.8, 31. and 12.5, 6. and 13.29. and 6.5, 7. compared together. After our
Saviors resurrection, when the multitude of believers at Jerusalem were much
increased, it is expressly recorded, Acts 4.32, to the end, and 5.1, to 10. That
they were all of one heart and of one soul (and oh that we were so again!)
neither said any of them, that ought that he possessed was his own, but they
had all things common; neither was there any amongst them (whether Apostle,
Minister or Believer) that lacked; For as many as were possessors of Lands or
Houses Sold them (not purchased them, much less Glebes, Tithes, or
Church Lands, as many do now, who say they imitate the primitive Christians)
and brought the prices of the things that were sold, and laid them down at the
Apostles feet; and distribution was made unto every Man (therefore to every
Apostle and Minister of the Gospel, as well as others) accordding as they had
need. Amongst others, Joses a Levite of Cyprus, having Land sold it, and
brought the money and laid it at the Apostles feet: The like did Ananias with
Saphira his wife, but because they brought a certain part thereof, and laid it
at the Apostles feet, and kept back part of the price of the Land, (which is
less than to keep back Tithes, when due by sundry Laws and Ordinances,) and
thereby lied not unto Men (only) but to God, they both fell down dead suddenly
at the Apostles feet (in a miraculous manner) and were carried forth and
buried: And great fear came upon all the Church, and as many as heard thereof.
We find in 2 Cor. 11.7, 8, 9. That though Paul preached the Gospel at Corinth
freely, yet he took wages of other Churches (at the same time) to do them
service. And when he was present with them, and wanted, that which was wanting
unto him, the Brethren that came from Macedonia supplied; that in all things he
might keep himself from being burdensome to the Corinthians; (for reasons
expressed by him) In which respect, of not ministering to him of their
substance, he writes, they were inferior to other Churches, 2 Cor. 12, 13. How
bountiful the Church and Saints of Philippi were to Paul, not only whiles
present with them and preaching among them, but also absent from them,
preaching the Gospel in other places, and how pleasing this their liberality
was to God, he thus records; Phil: 4.10, to 21. But I rejoiced in the Lord
greatly, that at last your care of me is revived; wherein ye were also
Careful, but ye lacked opportunity: Not that I speak in respect of want, for I
have learned in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content, etc.
Notwithstanding ye have well done that ye did communicate with my affliction.
Now ye Philippians know also, that in the beginning of the Gospel, when I
departed from Macedonia, no Churches communicated with me as concerning Giving
and Receiving, but ye only: For even in Thessalonica Ye sent once and again to
my necessity. Not because I desire a gift, but I desire fruit that may abound
to your account. But I have received all, and abound and am full, having
received of Epaphroditus the things sent from you; an odor of a sweet smell, a
Sacrifice Acceptable, well-pleasing to God. But my God shall supply all your
needs, according to his riches in glory by Jesus Christ; Now unto God and our
Father, be glory for ever and ever Amen. And in 2. Tim. 1.16, 17, 18. He makes
this memorable Testimony of and prayer for Onesiphorus: The Lord give mercy
unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed
of my chain: But when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently and
found me: The Lord grant unto him, that he may find mercy of the Lord in that
day: And in how many things he Ministered unto me at Ephesus thou know very
well.

From all which precedents coupled together, these conclusions naturally, and
necessarily arise:

1. That it is not only the practice, but duty of the Saints and Christians
under the Gospel, cheerfully and liberally to contribute to the Apostles and
Ministers of the Gospel; and that not only whiles they are actually preaching
and resident amongst them, but whiles absent preaching, the Gospel in other
places, or suffering for the Gospel in bonds and prisons, if their necessities
so require.

2. That they ought not only barely to supply their necessities, when they are
in want; but in such a plentiful manner, that they may truly say, We abound and
are full, bless God for, rejoice in their peoples liberality, and pray to God
for a blessing upon them and theirs, with greater cheerfulness and zeal.

3. That in cases of necessity, when the wants of the Apostles, Ministers and
Saints of God require it, Christians are not only bound to pay them the Tithes
of their Lands and other settled Dues, but even to sell their very Lands,
Houses, Estates themselves and lay them down at the Apostles and Ministers feet
for their common supply; as the primitive Christians did; they being not real
proprietors, but mere Stewards of their worldly estates; which as they all
proceed from Gods hand, gift, blessing; so they are still, Gods own, not man's;
and therefore in such cases, to be cheerfully expended for the maintenance and
supply of the necessities of his Ministers, servants, worship: 1 Chronicles. 29.11,
12, 14, 15, 16, 17. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19.

4. That the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, is not mere pure
Alms, (as some have held) but wages; which though Paul (for some special
reasons) received not from the Corinthians, yet he did from other Churches,
under the name of wages.

5. That niggardliness, and not contributing toward the maintenance of
painful Ministers, is a shame, infamy, dishonor to a Church and people, making
them inferior to all other Churches.

6. That peoples liberal, bountiful contributing to the Apostles and Ministers
of the Gospel, is a great joy, comfort, encouragement to them, yea a means to
enlarge their hearts in prayers to God for spiritual and temporal blessings on
them and their households.

7. That bountiful and cheerful contributions to the Apostles and Ministers
of Christ, is not only a well doing, or good work, but an odor of a sweet
smell, a sacrifice acceptable and well pleasing unto God, though it stinks in
the nostrils of many covetous earth-wormes, sectaries and pretended godly
Saints now adays.

8. That Liberality to the Ministers of the Gospel, and paying them their just
deserved Tithes, Dues, is so far from impoverishing and hurting men's estates,
that it redounds to their spiritual and temporal account too; causes God to
supply all their wants, and to bless both them and their families with
spiritual, temporal, eternal mercies and rewards; as the several forecited
Scriptures, with Prove. 3.9, 10. Mal. 1.10, 11. Mat. 10.41, 42. Mar. 9.41. 2
Cor. 9.6, to 13. 2 Kings 4.8, to 38. 1 Kings 17.10, to 24. most abundantly
prove.

9. That the willful detaining, withdrawing of any thing solemnly devoted to
the necessary maintenance of the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel, brings
exemplary curses, judgments on those who are guilty thereof, as the examples
of Ananias and Saphira testify, compared with Mal. 3.8, 9, 11. Hag. 1.9, 10,
11, and 2.16, 17, 18, 19. further illustrating it: which all sacrilegious
invaders, plunderers, detainers, oppugners of our Ministers ancient established
Maintenance, Tithes, Dues, may do well now seriously to ruminate upon, and then
reform their practice, or else renounce their pretended Christianity and
Saintship, so much swarving from the recited precedents of the first and purest
Christians.

XV. This is further proved by Mat. 7.12. Luke 6.31. All things whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, do even so to them, for this is the Law and
the Prophets; yea and the Gospel too; thus twice enjoining it, from Christ's own
mouth. Whence thus I argue. All Estates, Callings, Professions of men
whatsoever; whether Kings, Princes, Rulers, Judges, Magistrates of all sorts,
Lawyers, Physicians, Surgeons, Merchants, Artificers, Traders, Husbandmen,
Laborers of all kinds, Seamen; yea all Generals, Commanders, Colonels,
Captains, Governors of Forts, and common Soldiers whatsoever, with all sorts
of civil Officers in their respective Offices, Employments, do and justly may
by the Law of God, Nature, Nations, expect and receive a just, certain
comfortable salary, reward, hire, maintenance, subsistence for their respective
pains, works, employments, exercises of their callings, talents from those
that do employ them, or for whose good they work and serve. Therefore by the
self-same Laws, Rules of common, natural, moral justice and equity, all
Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel may justly expect and receive the like,
from those to whom they preach; Else all others whatsoever must exercise their
respective Offices, Callings, Trades, Employments, Studies, Labors freely,
without expecting or receiving any stipend, wages, reward or maintenance, as
well as Ministers; which they will never do.

And great reason is there that the painful, faithful Ministers of the Gospel
should receive a liberal, comfortable, competent, settled maintenance and reward
for their Ministry, as well as any other Callings, or Professions of men, or
as any Officers or Soldiers in the Army, between whom alone and Ministers I
shall here only make the parallel, because they most violently oppugn our
Ministers maintenance (if not their Ministry too) of all others I have yet
conferred with.

First, all able, learned, judicious, pious Ministers, skillful in the Original
Tongues, and learned Languages, wherein the Scriptures were penned (very
necessary for them to understand) able soundly, judiciously, like workmen who
need not be ashamed, to defend the truth of the Gospel, to stop the mouths of
Blasphemers, Heretics, Seducers, that oppugn it; to divide and preach the,
Word of God aright as they ought. (Else they hardly merit the name of able
Ministers, 2 Cor. 3.6. 1 Timothy 1.7, 12. 2 Timothy 2.15. and 4.2, 3, 4, 5. Tit. 1.9,
10, 11. but rather of pratlers, wranglers, understanding neither what they say,
nor whereof they affirm, wresting the scriptures to their own and others
destruction through ignorance and want of learning, 2 Pet. 3.16. the case of
many unlearned usurpers of the office of Teachers now) All such before they can
be fit for the work of the Ministry, spend sixteen or twenty years time, in
hard studies day and night at their Books in Schools, Universities, double the
years, study, industry, that most other Artists (except Lawyers and
Physicians) spend in fitting themselves for, and in learning their mechanic
Trades and Professions: whereas all common Soldiers, yea many Officers and
Commanders of late times, rush just like their horses, into their work,
calling, without one years, weeks, days preparation, study, practice in the
Wars, learning their trade of Soldiers and Commanders, after they are listed,
as such, by practice and experience only without study.

2. Most Ministers, or their Parents, Friends are at very great expenses for
many years time in sitting them for the Ministry, both in Schools and in our
Universities, before they enter into, or are able for it: whereas all our
Soldiers and Army Officers were at no expense at all, receiving full pay, as
such, from the first day of their listing, yea many of them advance money to
boot, before any practice at all or study, judgment in their Art; learning
their Military skill, not at their own, but only at the peoples great costs.

3. Learned Ministers both before and after their admission into the Ministry,
are at great charges, expenses, to furnish themselves with Books, Libraries,
necessary for their Calling: whereas our Army Officers, Soldiers are and were
furnished with all sorts of Arms, Ammunition fitting for their calling out of
the public Treasury only, which continually recruits them when lost in Service.

4. The calling of the Ministry requires men of far more able parts and
eminency of gifts (whereby they might gain far more worldly wealth, riches,
honors in many other callings, than they do or can do by the Ministry, by
which they are commonly losers in respect of worldly gains and preferments, a
thing very considerable) than the calling of an ordinary Soldier, or most
warlike Officers do; as experience manifests, and I think most Soldiers,
Officers will acknowledge; and thereupon must admit them proportionable
allowance to their parts, work in the Ministry it self, and what they might
probably gain in other functions.

5. Ministers when once entered into their callings, are always day and night
upon constant duty, without intermission; their whole lives being so taken up
with study, preaching, catechizing, praying, fasting, exhorting, admonishing,
reproving, comforting, visiting the sick in body, troubled in mind, resolving
doubts of conscience, and other Ministerial duties as well Act. 2.46. c. 20.20.
2 Timothy 4.1, 2. Romans 15.19, 20. 1 Timothy 4.15, 16.
in private from house to house as publicly in the Church, that they have most
of them scarce one spare day or hour all the year to employ in other affairs,
for their own advantage in worldly things. Whereas many of our Army Officers
and Soldiers lie idle in their Quarters many months (if not years of late
together) without any actual service, yet receive their full constant pay; and
those in actual service, Garrisons, do that they call duty only by turns, once
or twice a week; and that but or two or three hours in a day, being then
successively relieved by others; having sufficient time every day and week, not
only to follow their private Trades, if they please, which are necessary,
useful, beneficial to them, but also to exercise Merchandise and other
gainful worldly employments, Offices, to which they were never trained up;
whereby most of them are grown richer than most of our Ministers in half the
space they were fitting themselves for their Ministry before they received one
penny profit by it. As for our Officers, they seldom do any duty; have all
their menservants listed under them, and paid by the people to do them service
only, being exempt from duty; and how seldom they have been of late times at
their Quarters upon their duty as Soldiers, but sitting other-where in
Counsel to advance their own power, estates, and pull down all above them, to
intrude themselves into their places, we all see by many late sad experiences,
contrary to the Apostles precept, 2 Timothy: 2.4. No man that warreth intangleth
himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please (not supplant, pull
down) him who has chosen him to be a Soldier: and to John the Baptists
injunction to Soldiers, Luke 3.14. Do violence to no man, neither accuse any
falsely, and be content with your wages. Which ungospel practices I wish they
would first reform, by conforming themselves unto this Precept, before they
reform our Ministers, their Tithes, or settled wages, or our Laws, things
beyond, if not against their calling; for which they were never raised nor
employed.

6. The calling of Ministers, as it is every way far more laborious, yea as
perilous and full of hardship as that of Soldiers, 2 Cor: 11.23, to 33. and
4.8, 9, 10, 11. 2 Timothy 2, 3, 9, 10, 12. and 3.10, 11, 12. and 4.5, 6, 7. So
questionless it is far more honorable, necessary, useful, beneficial to
others, than that of Soldiers and Commanders; for they are the very
Ambassadors of God himself, and Jesus Christ (the 1 Timothy 6.15* 16. Rev. 1.5.
and 17.14 and 1^.16. Ps. 9.10.
King and Lord of glory, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Prince of
the Kings of the earth, and only Potentate, to whom all other Powers and knees
must bow) beseeching men in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5:20.
The Ministers, servants, messengers of Jesus Christ, workers together with him,
Stewards of the mysteries of God and the glory of Christ, 1 Cor: 4.1, 2. 2 Cor:
6.1. and 8.23. 2 Timothy: 2.24. employed to preach to sinful men, the unsearchable
riches of Christ, to turn them from darkness unto light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, Ephesians: 3.8. Acts 26.18. to rescue their souls from the slavery
and power of sin, Satan, hell, death, everlasting damnation; and make them the
sons of God, heirs and coheirs with Christ of everlasting glory and felicity in
Gods heavenly Kingdom, through the power of Gods Grace and Spirit working in,
with, by and through their Ministry on their hearts. Now the calling of a
Soldier though it be honorable, and in Grotius de jure Belli, l. 1. c. 2, 3,
4, 5. l. 2. c. 1, 2. Gratian Causa 23. qu. 1.
some cases lawful and necessary, if rightly managed; yet it is for the most
part sinful, hurtful, pernicious, dangerous, unbeseeming the Gospel, in
respect of the cause, managing, abuses thereof; Grotius de jure Belli, l. 2. c.
23. sect. 10. p. 388. and elsewhere. Nulla fides, Pietasque viris qui castra
sequuntur. Lucan. Hen. Huntindon. Hist. l. 8. p. 390.
it being accompanied with murder, violence, rapine, treachery, perjury,
sacrilege, cruelty, inhumanity, profaneness, blasphemy, contempt of God, of all
sacred, civil Laws and Ordinances; ambition, treason, and the worst of sins;
tending usually (like an overflowing Deluge) to the subversion, desolation,
ruin of whole Families, Cities, Countries, Kingdoms, Churches; yea, Mankind
it self, Religion, Laws, Liberties, Properties; turning whole famous Cities
into ashes, and Kingdoms into Golgothaes, Acheldamaes, (fields of blood and
dead men's sculs) yea very wildernesses, as the Isa. 64.10, 11. Jer. 49.13, to
39. chapter 50. and 51 throughout. Ezekiel chapter 35. Joel 2.3. Isa. 1.7, 8. and 9.12,
20, 21, and 19.1, to 15.
Scripture, Histories and experience manifest. Hence God styles great Warriers
and Armies; The rod of his anger, the Battel-Axe with which he breaks in
pieces the Nations, destroys Kingdoms, and treads them down like the mire
in the streets; and then at last destroys them in his wrath, when they have
executed his judgments, for their rapines, violence and bloody cruelty, Isa.
10.5, etc. Jer. 50.1, to 48. c. 51.20, etc. They being really carried on from
one war to another, out of vainglory, ambition, covetousness, a mad humor of
false greatness; and nullus supra caeteros eminendi modus; in sua fata pariter,
ac publica; to their own and the public ruin; yet still under a pretext of
public good and safety; as Seneca excellently writes in his 94 Epistle (a
piece worth the reading) of Alexander the great, Caesar, Pompey, Marius, qui
cum omnia concuterent, concutiebantur; and cum multis fuerunt Authors mali,
pestiferam illam vim, qua plerosque nocuerunt, ipsi quoque sentiunt. Indeed the
Profession of a Soldier even in the best of men and wars, is so full of
danger, pollution, that it leaves some scarrs of sin, and tincture of pollution
on them, however they demean themselves. Whence we read, that though David were
1 Samuel 13.14. Acts 13.22.
a man after Gods own heart, and 1 Samuel 18.17. and 25.28.
fought the battles of the Lord against his professed enemies by his special
command, with constant success; yet God would by no means permit him to build
an house and Temple to him, for this very reason, Because he had been a man of
War, and made great Battles, and shed much Blood upon the Earth in his sight;
And the 12000. Israelites, who by Gods special command went up to war against
the Midianites, and slew them, returning with victory and great spoils, without
the loss of one man, though treble their number, when as they came back from
the war, were all of them, whosoever had killed any person, or touched any
slain, enjoined by God and Moses, to remain without the Camp seven days, and
to purify themselves on the third and seventh day, as unclean and polluted
persons, Numb. 31.1, 17, 19, 20. and all the Officers, and Captains of hundreds
and thousands in the host brought an oblation, what every man had gotten of
Jewels, of Gold, Chains, Bracelets, Rings, Earrings and Tablets, to make an
Oblation for their souls before the Lord, v. 48, 49, 50. Such a stain and guilt
was there adhering to their Warlike calling, in this best of Wars against
Gods professed idolatrous enemies. And may not all Officers, Soldiers
whatsoever then justly fear, find a deeper guilt of sin and stain of blood,
than was in David, or those Officers and Soldiers adhering to their persons,
profession in our unnatural, uncivil Wars, even with, and against their very
Christian, nearest, dearest Kings, Brethren, Friends, Kindred, Neighbors of
the self-same reformed Protestant Religion, and thereupon make the like or a
far richer oblation than they did, out of their spoils and gains by War, as an
atonement for their Souls, in stead of provoking God and increasing their
guilt, by seeking to spoil his faithful Ministers of their long enjoyed
maintenance? In all these 6. particulars wherein the calling of Ministers
excells in merit that of common Soldiers, Captains and Officers of War; both
in respect of time, study, costs, labor, diligence, parts, danger, honor,
excellency, use, profit, and necessity; (to which I might add, that the
Ministers frequent tears, prayers in times of War, and Judgments, are far 2 Chronicles. 13.9, 10, 11, 15. and 32.20, 21. and 20.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Jam. 1.16,
17, 18. Joel 2.17.18.
more prevalent, beneficial, victorious than the Soldiers Arms; besides their
constant use and benefit in days of peace, when Soldiers are needless,
useless:) I referr it to the unprejudiced judgments, consciences of all
rational Christian men and Soldiers themselves; whether our faithful
preaching Ministers be not worthy of as large, as liberal, as constant,
settled, honorable, coercive a maintenance from the people, as any Soldiers,
Officers, Captains, Colonels, Majors or Major Generals whatsoever, if not a
better, larger salarie and reward than they enjoy, for the premised reasons;
when as yet some ordinary Soldiers, Troopers receive as much or more pay by
the year, as many of our godly Ministers; and every Ancient, Sergeant,
Lieutenant, as much as the most and best beneficed Ministers; and most
Captains, Colonels, Majors, five or six times more than our ablest, best
deserving Ministers; and some general Army Officers have received, gained more
money, lands, wealth, in few months or years space at least, than hundreds of
our most meritorious Ministers put together can gain in all their lives by
their Ministry. How then can they tax them as covetous, oppressive, yea as
caterpillars of the people by their Tithes and Duties, for receiving only 30,
40, 50, 80, 100, 200, or 300 l. a year (and very few of them more, or so much)
from the people, by an ancient right paid once a year, when as they receive ten
times more from the impoverished people, and at least the tenth part or more of
all our poor Ministers livings by monthly enforced contributions, and yet will
neither give them the Tenthes of their pay and spoils of War (as Abraham and
others did, Gen: 14.10. Heb: 7.4, 6. 1 Chr. 26.26, 27, 28.) nor (many of them)
pay their own personal or predial Tithes, and endeavor to hinder others, though
willing, from paying them any Tithes or Dues, to which they have a juster right
than they have to their Soldiers pay and enforced contributions, against all
Magna Carta c. 29, 30. 25 E. 1. c. 5, 6. 28 E. 1. c. 5, 6. 34 E. 3. c. 1. 14 E
3. c. 21. 11 R. 2. c. 2. 23 H. 6. c. 18. 1 R. 3. c. 4. The petition of Right 3
Caroli.
ancient Laws and Statutes as now imposed, levied, especially on the Clergy,
who were never Taxed, Charged either by See Rastals Abridgement Tenths and
Taxes, and Statutes at large, Acts for the Clergies subsidies.
Lords or Commons in former ages, but only by themselves, by their own free
Grants in Parliament and Convocation by special Acts, as our Records and
Printed Statutes manifest? Or with what face, reason, conscience they can seek
to deprive them of all their Tithes, Glebes, and other legal settled coercive
Stipends, amounting to so small a value, as now they do; when as themselves
receive far more settled constant pay, levied with the greatest rigor and
extremity on the exhausted people every Month or Quarter; and some of them
have many Military, besides civil gainful Offices, employments, and that in
several Kingdoms, amounting to thousands, and ten thousands by the year,
when sew Ministers now enjoy one or two hundred pounds a year de claro, and
most not sixty, all Taxes deducted; and must hardly be suffered to hold two
adjoining petty Benefices, to make up 80. or 100. l. a year, without much
clamor, censure and danger of deprivation: when as they can hold so many
gainful, incompetible Pluralities in these necessitous times; and when as
Popish, Pagan, Mohammedan and Egyptian Priests enjoy far more than our best
deserving Clergy at this day, without their Officers, Soldiers Clamours or
opposition?

Having thus made good the proposition by these Scriptures and Reasons, to
which I could never yet hear the least colorable Answer given; I now proceed
to answer such Objections, The Objections answered.
as have been, or may be made against it.

The first Objection is from Mat. 10.8. Object. 1.
Where when Christ sent out his 12 Apostles to preach, he says unto them, Heal
the sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the Dead, cast out Devils; freely ye have
received, freely give. Whence some infer, that Ministers and Apostles of
Christ, are here enjoined by him, to preach the Gospel freely, without
receiving any wages, reward or recompense for it, because they freely received
their power and commission to preach the Gospel, without giving money or price
for it.

To which I answer.

Answ.
1. That this clause of Freely ye have received, freely give, relates not to
their preaching of the Gospel, but is annexed only to the precedent words; Heal
the sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the dead, cast out Devils; which they are
commanded to do freely without any wages, hire or reward; having freely
received this miraculous power of healing the sick, etc. from Christ, who did
it freely; and that to gain credit to the truth of the Gospel, which was
confirmed, credited, propagated by these free miraculous works. Mark 16.17,
18, 20. Act. 31.1, to 12. and 9.38, to 43. and 5.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. and 13.11,
12. which power of working miracles when Simon Magus would have bought for
money of Peter; he said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou have
thought, that the gift of God may be purchased with money. Thou have neither
part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right in the sight of God:
Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, etc. Acts 8.18, to 25.

2. He is so far from enjoining them to preach the Gospel freely without
recompense, that he allows them to take a recompense for it, closing it up
with a contrary clause, For the Labourer is worthy of his Meat and Hire, ver.
10. recited Luke 10.7. where the objected words are omited, as likewise Mark 3.

3. Our new Mechanic Predicants to separate Conventicles, who urge this Text
against Ministers maintenance, should receive no money, gift or recompense for
their speaking, prating from their Disciples, no more than our Ministers for
preaching, who yet gain far more from deluded blind followers of the blind,
than many of our Ministers get by their Ministry; yea more than ever they
earned by their Trades before, which makes them wholly to desert them and turn
Tub-preachers

4. This sentence can no ways be truly applied now to Ministers; For though
they receive their Ministry and Orders freely without purchase (which some
bought for money heretofore) yet their preparation for the Ministry costs them
many years study, pains, themselves or their Friends, Parents many a pound, as
I formerly proved; whereas the Apostles received the miraculous gift of
healing, preaching immediately by divine inspiration, without study or cost.

5. If those who receive any Office, Commission, place freely, must discharge
it freely without any Reward, Pay, as some Army Officers, Soldiers and others
hence conclude against our Ministers; then all our Soldiers, and other
Military Officers by Land and Sea, must henceforth at least (and should have
done heretofore) by the self-same Text, reason, serve their Country freely
without receiving any pay, reward; Contributions from the people; since (I
conceive) few or none of them ever actually bought their Offices, Places,
Commissions, or paid any money for their listing; yea then all other public
Officers (real or pretended) must serve their Country gratis, unless they
purchased their Offices from those in late or present power; and then they are
ipso facto void by the Statute of 5 E. 6. c. 16. against buying or selling of
Offices. Now upon this condition, that all Soldiers, all Military and Civil
Officers will henceforth serve their Country freely, without pay or
recompense, for the oppressed peoples future freedom from long unsupportable
monthly Taxes, Impositions, Excises; I dare presume all or most of our
Ministers will be content to preach the Gospel freely to the people likewise,
without Tithes or other Dues, for so long a time, as the Soldiers and other
Officers shall freely serve our Nation; and I suppose all Ministers in
Scotland, Ireland, will do the like; if the Officers, Soldiers there will
first really begin the Precedent. Which if they here and there refuse, they
must give Ministers leave to enjoy their ancient Tithes, Dues, Stipends for
preaching the Gospel, so long as they demand their former pay and salaries; and
renounce the objected Text, as fatal to their own wages, as the Ministers,
unless they dearly bought their Offices, Commands, and did not freely receive
them; which if true (as I presume it false) very few of them would publicly
acknowledge.

The second Objection (most urged to me by some Pendennis Soldiers, Object. 2.
whiles there a prisoner under their Gards) is the Example of the Apostle Paul,
who staying and preaching at Corinth a year and six months, because he would
not be burdensome, but preach the Gospel freely to them without charge or
reward; wrought with his own hands, and got his living by making tents; as is
recorded, Acts 18.1, 2, 3, etc. and 20.34. 1 Cor. 4.12. and 9.12, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19. 2 Cor. 11.8, 9. and 12.13, 16, 17, 18. The like he did among the
Thessalonians, laboring night and day, because he would not be chargeable to
any of them, when he preached unto them the Gospel of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.8, 9. 2 Thessalonians. 3.8. From whence they conclude, that all other Ministers ought to preach
the Gospel freely, and to labor with their hands day and night in some other
calling to supply their necessities and maintain themselves and families, that
they may not be chargeable to the people.

To which grand argument (requiring the fullest reply) I answer, Answ.
that this general inference from Paul's particular practice in these two
Churches, is very lame and unsound; For,

1. Paul expressly resolves, that all Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel have
a just right, power to receive a competent maintenance as wages from the
people, and most strongly proves it to be an ordinance of Christ himself, in
some of the objected Texts, as I have at large demonstrated.

2. He likewise declares (with a salvo jure, as Lawyers speak) that himself had
such a just right, power to receive wages and maintenance from the very
Corinthians and Thessalonians themselves, as well as others, though he made no
use of his power: witness, 1 Cor. 9.4, 11, 12. where thus he expostulates, Have
we not power to eat and to drink, and to reap your carnal things, for sowing
unto you spiritual things? If others be partakers of this power over you, Are
not we rather? Nevertheless we have not used this power. And 2 Thessalonians: 3.8, 9.
Neither did we eat any men's bread for naught, but wrought with labor and
travel night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any of you; Not
because we have not Power, but to make our selves an example for you to follow
us, etc. We have much talk and crying up of late, Have we not Power, Power, and
present Power? in most Grandees mouths and public Papers (especially
Soldiers who carry it by their sides) instead of our old Language, Have we
not Law, Liberty, Right, Freedom? the things they say they fought for on the
peoples behalf, who pay them: which words, things, the greater cry of Have we
not Power, etc. has made us not to have and quite swallowed up amongst us. I
wish all such Officers, Soldiers, Grandees who press these Texts against
Ministers Tithes, and most use these words Have we not Power, (if derived from
God, or the Apostle who thrice mentions it in these Texts) would only use and
speak them in the Apostles sense, language, (in not assuming, usurping, but
utterly disclaiming the real practice and abuses of their power in his
self-denying words, worthy to be written in Capitals, that all persons of, or
in Power may now read and practice it) Nevertheless we have not used this
power, but wrought with labor and travel Night and Day, that we might not be
chargeable to any of you, to make our selves an ensample for you (Ministers) to
follow us: Then we should be no longer overcharged with endless Taxes,
Excises, etc. by, for, or from any who have power, nor grieved with any fresh
changes of Laws, Civil or Church Government, or Ministers settled maintenance,
but be a Free State and Nation indeed, as some have long promised to make us,
but still the quite contrary way in direct opposition to the Apostles
Nevertheless we have used and will still use this armed, Army, tyrannical,
arbitrary power, that we might be chargeable (yea very chargeable) to every of
you: Therefore no wonder our Ministers (in their objected sense) do the like by
their example, in exacting their Tithes, Dues, (which they may justly do) till
they disclame the use of their Iron Power, in imposing, levying New Taxes,
Excises, on Ministers as well as people, in strange untrodden ways, to pay
their own and Soldiers salaries to support their self-created lawless Power in
the highest strain of Exercisse, which they condemn in Ministers in a far more
inferior degree; who questionless may as lawfully make use of it, as Paul
himself might have justly done, as he resolves, though he suspended its actual
exercise for a time.

3. Paul records 4. special reasons why he made no use of this his Evangelical
power amongst the Corinthians, but labored with his hands.

1. That he might not hinder the Gospel of Christ among the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
9.12. they being then most of them Pagans, the rest but newly converted to the
Gospel by his preaching, and all of them very worldly, covetous, as he
insinuates, 2 Cor. 4.12, 13, 14. chapter 7.30, 31, 32, c. 11.7, 8, 9. 2 Cor. 12.10,
to 21.

2. That he might not seem to abuse his power in the Gospel in the opinion of
these covetous worldlings, 1 Cor. 9.18.

3. That he might add to his glory, in undergoing necessities for Christ,
wherein he gloried; and add to his future reward, 1 Cor. 9.15, to 27. 2 Cor.
12.10, to 13.

4. And principally, To cut off occasion of slander and reproach from some
false Apostles, and deceitful workers and Ministers of Satan, transforming
themselves into Angels of Light, (who sought occasion to slander him)
accounting his preaching very contemptible, and him to be none of Christ's, but
a very reprobate, 2 Cor. 10.7, 10, 12. c. 13.6, 7. (as some now esteem our
Ministers) seeking a proof of Christ speaking in him, c. 13.3. (as they do now
in our Ministers) glorying (as some of the same Tribe do now) that they
preached the Gospel freely, and wrought with their own hands; whereupon he
adds, that wherein they gloried, they might be found even as he, 2 Cor.
11.12, 13, 14. Which false Apostles and dissembling Hypocrites for all their
braggs, did yet enslave, take of them, fleece and abuse them, more than any
faithful Ministers, and yet they patiently endured it; as he there affirms,
and insinuates, v. 20. For ye suffer if a man bring you into Bondage, if a man
devour you, if a man take of you, if a man exalt himself, if a Man smite you on
the Face; taxing their wisdom and pusillanimitie for this their Asinine sottish
stupiditie; when as neither Paul himself, nor Titus, nor any other of those
Ministers he sent unto them, did either burden, or catch them with guile, or
make a gain of them, as these false Apostles, domineering Hypocrites, and
Ministers of Satan did; 2 Cor. 12.16, 17, 18. These were the reasons expressed
by him, why he took no wages of the Corinthians, and supported himself with his
own labor, But this is not our Ministers case, after our so long enjoyment of
the Gospel, and their enjoying of a settled maintenance by Tithes and Glebes
Spelman.
above 800 years space, so long since settled on them by our devout Saxon Kings,
and continued ever since. When our Ministers have the self-same reasons as Paul
had amongst the Corinthians, to move them to pursue his objected practice; I
doubt not but they will cheerfully imitate it, for the advancement of the
Gospel, and winning souls to Christ.

4ly. The reason why Paul exercised not this power among the Thessalonians,
laboring amongst them night and day to support himself, was much different
from the former; thus recorded by him; 2 Thessalonians. 3.7, to 15. When he was among
them he heard, that there were some who walked disorderly, Working not at all,
but were busybodies, (just such as our new preaching Weavers, Ginger-bread
makers, Smiths, Soldiers, Citizens, and other Jesuitical disguised Mechanics
are, who give over their Trades, work, to busy themselves only in gathering
new Conventicles, in new moulding our Church, State, in Preaching openly and in
corners every where to carry on their own worldly and Jesuitical designs:
Whereupon he then commanded them That if any (such busybodies) would not work
(but forsake his calling) neither should he eat: (A very good Gospel-law, if
duly executed, to quell all such busybodies) and upon this occasion, not
because he had not power, but to make himself an Example for them to follow,
(and encourage these busybodies, with all other loiterers to labor) he
refused to eat any man's bread freely, but wrought with labor and travel night
and day, that he might not be chargeable to any of them. Yet because this his
example did not reform all whiles he was present, but some such idle
busybodies still continued their practice notwithstanding; he gives them this
new Precept in and by this Epistle, verse. 14. Now them that are such We
Command, and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ (and O that our prating
busybodies who step out of their own callings into other men's and into the
Ministers too, would hearken and obey him!) that they with quietness work,
(or, do their own work, as some Translators render it, not other men's) and eat
their own bread: (not live upon other men's trenchers, sweat, labors, as many
thousands do now) And, if any obey not our word, signify (or note) that man
by an Epistle, and have no company with him (then he will be a Separatist in
good earnest) that he may be ashamed; yet count him not as an enemy, but
admonish him as a Brother. If our Ministers working with their own hands at our
preaching Mechanics Trades, would reduce them to follow their Trades, and give
over busying themselves in Ministers and other men's public callings and
State Affairs, I presume many of them would fall a working for a time for such
a good end: But since Paul's own example in this kind did not reclame such
busybodies then; whereupon he prescribed another more effectual remedy, if
duly put in execution by Ecclesiastical and Civil Magistrates: Our Ministers
(who have lesser hopes to reclame them now by such a practice, which would give
scandal unto many, and make them neglect their proper function) have neither
reason, nor precept to follow this his singular voluntary Precedent upon this
ground of his, which is no ways binding to them.

5. Though Paul himself then labored among the Corinthians and took no wages
from them; yet he received wages from other Churches at the same time, to
supply their lack of Service unto him: 2 Cor. 11.8, 9. Which by way of Sarcasme
(to upbraide their covetousness, tenacity and ingratitude toward him) he
calls, Robbing of other Churches; because it was to do them service, not those
Churches: Not that it was robbery indeed (as some ignorant asses judge it, who
understand not Rhetoric and Eloquence) for in the next verse he styles it, A
supply; and Phil. 4.10, 15, 18. a Communicating to his Necessities; a
well-doing, a fruit abounding to their account, as well as to his rejoicing, an
odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and well-pleasing unto God; and
wages in the self-same Text; Therefore no unlawful robbery.

6. Though the niggardly Corinthians saved their purses by Paul's labor and
free preaching, yet they gained no honor, but disgrace and sharp censures from
him for it: witness 1 Cor. 4.11, 12, 14. Even unto this present hour we both
hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain
dwelling place; and labor working with our own hands, etc. I write not these
things to shame you but, as my beloved sons I admonish you: (of your harsh,
ingrate, despitefull carriage toward me, which makes my condition so
uncomfortable:) which he thus seconds, 2 Cor. 11.7, 8. Have I committed an
offense in abasing my self, that you might be exalted, because I have preached
the Gospel of God freely? I robbed other Churches, taking wages of them to do
you service. And chapter 12.12, 13 14, 15. Truly the signs of an Apostle were
wrought among you in all patience, in signs and wonders, and mighty deeds; For
what was it wherein ye were inferior to other Churches, except it be, that I my
self was not burdensome to you? forgive me this wrong: Behold, the third time I
am ready to come to you, and I will not be burdensome to you, for I seek not
yours but you, etc. And I will very gladly spend and be spent for you, though
the more abundantly I love you, the less I be Loved. Whence all may learn,
that it is a great disparagement, stain, and certain sign of want of love both
to the Ministers and Ministry of the Gospel, for any Church, people to suffer
or enforce their Minister to hunger, thirst, be naked, to have no certain
dwelling place, and to labor working with his own hands, that he may preach
the Gospel freely to them: and such kind of ungrateful, ungodly people, who
cause Ministers thus to spend and be spent for them, will be so far from loving
or respecting them for it, that the more they love them in this kind, the less
they will probably love them again, as the Corinthians did Paul: who traduced,
slandered him, as no true Apostle, a weak contemptible Preacher, and a very
Reprobate, in stead of commending him for his extraordinary pains and cost, in
preaching freely to them, 2 Cor. 10.10. and 12.11, 12. and 13.6, 7, 9. Who then
would hearken to, or gratify such perverse Beasts, and such unthankful
Hypocrites, though appearing in the shapes of Saints, and notion of the godly
party, (or rather ungodly faction) against our Ministers and their maintenance?

7. Though Paul thus labored night and day with his own hands to maintain
himself and preach the Gospel freely, yet it follows not hence, that all other
Ministers now should do it.

1. Because he being an inspired Apostle, able to preach by immediate
inspiration and revelation from God without study or premeditation (as is
probable,) his labor in this kind, was no hindrance to his diligent, constant,
powerful preaching. But no Ministers now, (being thus immediately inspired)
they must study, meditate day and night for what they preach, and examine their
Doctrines seriously by Gods word before they vent them: whence Paul enjoynes
even Timothy himself, 2 Timothy 3.13, 15, 16. To give attendance to reading, to
exhortation, to doctrine, to meditate upon these things, and give himself
wholly to them, that his profiting might appear to all men: and to take heed
unto his doctrine: which he could not do, if he should labor night and day
with his hands as Paul did, to support himself and preach gratis: wherefore he
tells him, 2 Timothy 2.4. That no man that warreth (a spiritual warfare as he and
other Ministers do) intangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he
may please or serve him who has chosen him to be a Soldier. A direct
inhibition to Ministers to follow Paul's Precedent; who cannot serve and please
God in their Ministry, if they labor day and night in Mechanic trades for
their living. And upon this ground (which is very observable) the very Apostles
themselves, Act. 6.3, 4, 5, 6. Calling the multitude to them, said, it is not
reason (pray mark it) that we should leave the Word of God and serve Tables
(much less work day and night at a Mechanic Trade:) wherefore brethren look
ye out seven men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost and wisdom, whom ye
may appoint over this business: but we will give our selves continually to
Prayer, and to the Ministry of the word: And the saying pleased the whole
multitude. From which Texts it is clear,

1. That the Apostles themselves resolve, that they could not exercise the very
ancient office of a Deacon in serving Tables, attending on Widows and other
poor, aged, impotent Saints, without neglecting, or giving over preaching of
the Word: much less then can Ministers labor day and night with their hands
at some Trade or other, to maintain themselves and their Families, without
neglecting and desisting from the Ministry.

2. That Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel, ought to give themselves wholly
and continually to prayer, preaching, meditation, reading, and other
Ministerial duties; and therefore must not undertake or intermeddle with
secular Employments and Callings.

3. That the Apostles themselves have punctually resolved, and that all the
primitive Christians unanimously assented to it; that it is not reason, that
they should leave preaching the word of God, so much as to wait upon Widows
and poor people at their tables: whereupon they elected seven Deacons to
discharge that office. Therefore it is far less reason, (and they are most
wicked and unreasonable men without faith or charity, from which the Apostle
prays God deliver him and all his Ministers, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. who now urge it) to
enforce all our Ministers to neglect, forsake their Ministry, Preaching,
Studies now, to follow handicraft Trades to get their livelihood, that so they
might preach freely to the people without any recompense, or reward at all.

2. All godly Ministers, people in all ages, and the very Objectors themselves
of late years have extremely condemned, censured our Bishops and Prelatical
Clergy, together with Popes, Popish Prelates and Clergy men, for intermedling
with, and executing civil Offices, Employments and worldly affairs, which
necessitated them to neglect the preaching of the Gospel, and their Ministerial
duties; whereupon not only many ancient and late Councils, Synods, but Acts of
Parliament, have specially prohibited them, to be Privy Counselors of State,
Judges, Justices of the Peace, Lord Chancellors, Treasurers, Keepers of the
Privy Seal, Stewards of Courts, Commissioners; and our very 17 Car. c. 11.
last Parliament by several late Acts disabled all Bishops from sitting as
Peers in Parliament, and them with all other Clergy men, to execute any
temporal Offices, or Commissions, as See Antiqu. Ecclesiae Brit. p. 138, to
142. Hoveden Annal. pars posterior. p 767, 768, 769.
incompatible with their spiritual Function and an impediment to their
Ministry: according to the old proverbial verse, Pluribus intentus minor est ad
singula sensus. Which I have proved at large by testimonies in all ages, in my
Breviate of the Prelates intolerable Usurpation; printed Anno. 1637. My
Vnbishoping of Timothy and Titus; and Antipathy of the English Prelacy to
Monarchy and Unity, Anno 1641. Therefore to force our Ministers to become
Mechanics, and give themselves wholly to worldly callings, employments
incompatible with their professions, must needs be an irrational, unchristian
Project, unworthy the profession or professors of the Gospel, not justifiable
from Paul's example in them that would enforce it.

3. If this Precedent of Paul be a sufficient argument to prove, that our
Ministers ought to work for their living, and to preach the Gospel freely
without any reward or coercive Maintenance; I shall then by the self-same
reason prove, that all Officers and Soldiers of the Army who make this
Objection, and all our public civil Officers approving it, ought likewise to
fight and discharge their Offices without pay or salary, and to work with their
own hands to get their livings, without oppressing the people with any
Contributions of Excises to maintain them.

1. Because Ministers and they are both of one profession in several senses, to
wit, Soldiers, 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. as I have formerly proved: Therefore to fare
both a like in respect of pay or hire.

2. Because God records in Scripture, Ezech. 29.18. That Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babylon (even by Gods appointment) caused his Army to serve a great service
against Tyrus; every head was made bald, and every shoulder was ^eeled. Yet had
he no wages nor his Army for Tyrus for the s^rvice that he served against it.
If Nebuchadnezzer and his Army served God freely against Tire without wages
many years; Should not our present Army and Officers much more serve God and
their Country freely without wages? True it is, God gave them (after their
service fully ended) not any Taxes or Contributions from their own Countrymen
or Nation, but the Land and spoil of Egypt for their wages, because they
wrought for him, verses 19, 20. And if our Officers and Soldiers will have
such wages, it must only be the Lands and spoils of foreign Egyptian enemies,
not our Churches, or Crown Lands, or Revenues (formerly easing the peoples
Taxes, and defraying all Garrisons, and ordinary public expenses) which they
now claim and enjoy for Arrears of pay.

3. Nehemiah, both a godly Soldier, General and Governor of his people,
records this for his own honor, and others imitation, Neh. 5.14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19. Moreover from the time that I was appointed to be their Governor in
the Land of Judah from the 20. even to the 32. year of Artaxerxes the King,
Even twelve years, I and my Brethren have not eaten the bread of the Governor.
But the former Governors that had been before me were Chargeable and had taken
of them Bread and Wine, besides forty Shekels of Silver; yea even their
Servants bare rule over the people; but so did not I (mark the reason) because
of the fear of God. Yea, also I continued in the work of this wall, neither
bought we any Land (as many Officers and Soldiers do now) and all my servants
were gathered thither unto the work. Moreover there were at my Table an 150 of
the Jews and Rulers, besides those that came unto us from among the heathen
that were about us. Now that which was prepared for me daily was an Ox, and
six choice sheep; also Fowls were prepared for me, and once in ten days store
of all sorts of Wine; yea for all this required not I the breed (that is, the
allowance, salary, revenue) of the Governor, (observe the ground) because the
Bondage was Heavy on this people (and has it not been for 17. years space, or
more, and still is as Heavy or Heavier upon us?) Think upon me my God for good
according to all I have done for this people. Here was a worthy Governor,
General, Magistrate, Soldier, really fearing God, and tendering the ease,
liberty, welfare of the people, in good earnest, who with all his Officers and
Soldiers for 12. years space together, though he and they labored constantly
in building the wall of Jerusalem, and he was at so great expense each day for
his own Table, as Governor, yet took no Free Quarter, Bread, Wine, Money,
Wages or Salary from the people, as other Governors, Officers before them had
done; and that because of the fear of God, because the bondage was great upon
the people; expecting only a reward from God. I may safer argue from this
Scripture Precedent; Ergo, all our Governors, Generals, Officers, Soldiers
fearing God, during all our 17 years Wars, and as long as they and our bondage
shall yet continue, are bound to serve their Country freely, without taking
Free Quarter, Corn, Wine, Money, wages, contributions or Excises from the
people; and ought not to purchase any Lands; and by consequence are thereupon
obliged in conscience to make restitution of all the Free Quarter, Pay, Lands,
Woods, Rents, Rewards and public Revenues they have received for their pay,
arrears, or rewards of service, expecting their reward only from God hereafter:
Than they can from Paul's example conclude, that Ministers ought to preach the
Gospel freely without wages. And so much the rather, because See a vindication
of Sir Will. Jews. A justification of the XI impeached Members, and their
answer to their Charge, printed 647.
Sir William Jews, Mr. Denzill Holles, and Col. Walter Long, 3. of the XI.
Members falsely impeached by the Officers and Army, An: 1647. for engrossing
much of the public Treasure, and giving no account of what they had received;
were so generous and truly Noble, as in their accounts (long before passed and
allowed by the Commons house) to demand no pay at all; the first, as Governor
of Portsmouth; the other as Colonels in the Army under the Earl of Essex; Mr.
Holles refusing to accept of the thousands voted him out of the Kings revenue
for recompense of his former wrongful imprisonment by the King for his
Countries good service in Parliament. Whose Precedents their accusers (at
least) are as far bound to imitate in this kind, as our Ministers are St.
Paul's. Upon which considerations, I now refer the verity, solidity of this
argument from Paul's example to the judgments, consciences of all Officers,
Soldiers and others formerly triumphing in it, who upon second thoughts must
needs disclaim their own Pay, and Salaries for the future, or else renounce
this grand objection as ridiculous and irrational.

The third Objection is from the 3 Epistle of John verse. 5, 6, 7. Object. 3.
Where John writes to Gaius; Beloved, thou do faithfully whatsoever thou
do, both to the Brethren and to strangers: which have born witness of thy
Charity (or Liberality) before the Church, whom if thou bring on forward on
their journey thou shall do well, because that for his name sake they went
forth, taking nothing of the Gentiles. Whence some may infer, (though I hear
not this Text urged by any) That Ministers ought now to preach the Gospel
freely to the people, and to take nothing of them; because John mentions some
such that in his time preached to the Gentiles taking nothing of them. To which
I Answer,

1. That this Text questionless was meant of Paul (the Apostle of the Gentiles,
and his companions Timothy and Titus, Answ:
who took nothing of the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.) seeing
Gaius was not only St. Paul's companion sometimes, being converted, baptized by
him, Act. 19.29. and 20.4. 1 Cor. 1.14. but expressly styled by him, Romans 16.23.
Gaius mine Host, and of all the Churches; living then at Corinth, where Paul
preached freely; to whose Precedent I have given a full satisfactory answer
already.

2. It is evident, that this Gaius (for some time at least) lodged Paul and
other Brethren; being not only faithful, but charitable and liberal toward
them, though the other Corinthians were not so.

3. St. John adds, verse. 8. We therefore ought to receive such, that we might
be fellow helpers to the truth: wherein he concludes it to be a duty incumbent
upon all Christians, to receive, encourage, accompany, be charitable and
liberal to the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel, thereby to be
fellow-helpers to the truth, which otherwise they shall much hinder. So as this
Scripture fully warrants my Proposition, not oppugnes it.

The fourth Objection, Object. 4.
is the opinion of our famous English Apostle, John Wickliff, who held Tithes
and Ministers maintenance to be mere alms, See Mr. Seldens History of Tithes,
c. 7. sect. 4.
whose opinion is largely defended by eminent John Hus, in Mr. Fox his Acts and
Monuments; Edit. 1640. vol. 1. fol. 602, to 605. Therefore not due to
Ministers, but detainable or payable only at the mere wills of the people, as
mere alms to beggars are, which are arbitrary. Whereto I Answer,

1. That Tithes and Ministers maintenance, Answ:
are not pure alms, nor so styled by Wickliff, Hus, Augustine or Chrysostom
(whom Hus cites) as if Ministers had no right unto them for their pains, as a
just debt, hire, wages; or, as if men might detain them at their pleasure;
since we are expressly not only exhorted, but commanded, both in the Law and
Gospel, to give alms to those that want them, and that as Debtors to them so
far as our Abilities and their Necessities require, Romans 12.10, 13, 20. and
15.27. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. 2 Cor. 8. and 9. throughout, Heb. 13.16. 1 Timothy 6.17,
18, 19. Ephesians. 4.28. Luke 18.22, 23. and 19.8. Gal. 2.10. compared with Deuteronomy.
15.4, to 12. Exodus 23.11. Levit. 19. Deuteronomy. 24.19 Prove. 19.19. and 22.9. and
28.27. and 31.20. Eccles. 11.1. Dan. 4.27. Yea the Laws and Statutes of our
Land, expressly enforce and compel men to contribute to the Poor as they shall
be ^ss^ssed; as well as to pay Tithes or Taxes; as you may read in Rastals
Abridgement, and Daltons Justice of Peace; Title Poor. But they are styled by
them Pure Alms in three other respects.

1. Because they were originally given by people to the Ministers that were
needy, out of charity and compassion, for Gods sake^, as well as for their
work sake.

2. Because Ministers after their own wants supplied, did use to distribute
part of them to the poor and needy, as alms, and are obliged still to do it;
(as See Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, chapter 5.7.10.11. and Littleton, Tit.
Frank-almoign.
Abbots, Bishops and others did, to whom lands were given in pure and perpetual
Frank-almoign.)

3. Because they are pure alms in respect of God, as all other goods of fortune
are; which we both beg and receive from God; And in this respect they write,
every man as well Kings and Emperors, as Ministers, Priests people, are
beggars of God.

2. As they styled Tithes Alms in these respects: so they likewise granted Alms
to poor people, and Tithes to be See Rastals Abridgement, Tit. Poor, and Tithes.
a Debt; for every man duly giving alms, does as he ought to do; and so he that
gives Tithes. They are their express words.

3. Whereas they allege, That neither does debt utterly exclude the purity of
Alms before God: and that it is no argument, that if the Curate do perform his
corporal Ministry, that he ought therefore to challenge Tithes by any civil
title: Because that as well on the behalf of him that gives the Tithes, as
also in the behalf of the Curate, every such Ministry ought freely to be given,
and not by any civil exchange. I conceive it both a fallacy and error in them,
being a just debt which may be demanded by a Divine and Civil right too, when
and where settled by a civil law, though freely to be given to the Minister,
without coercion or suit of Law both in point of conscience, and by way of
civil exchange too, out of a civil compact or contract.

4. This opinion, that Tithes were pure alms, and not due To Ministers by a
divine right JVRE JVSTITIAE; was first introduced by the Friars MENDICANTS, to
gain them to themselves, and to exempt themselves and their Lands from payment
of them; as History of Tithes chapter 7. p. 166, 167.
Mr. Seldom proves. Therefore to be rejected as Antichristian.

And thus much in confirmation of the first Proposition, and refutation of all
Arguments I yet know made against it.

CHAP. II.
I Now proceed to the proof of the 2. Proposition, wherein the Hinge and Marrow
of the Controversy concerning Tithes is included.

That the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel (and of Places, Houses for
Gods public worship) by Tithes, Glebes, Oblations, Proposition 2.
( yea by spoils won in battle by Generals, Colonels, Captains, Soldiers,) is
not only lawful, expedient, but the most fitting, rational, convenient
Maintenance of all other, warranted by direct Precepts, Precedents, both before
and under the Law, which does no ways abolish, condemn, but approve and
confirm this way of Maintenance.

Before ever the Levitical or Ceremonial Law was instituted; as the godly
Patriarchs built Altars and Houses for public worship unto God, Genesis 4.3, 4.
c. 8.20. c. 12.7, 8. c. 13.4, 18. c. 22.9: c. 26.25. c. 28.20, 21, 22. c.
33.20: and 35.1, 3, 7. So they likewise gave Tithes to the Priests of God. The
very law of Nature, Romans 2.14, 15.
engraven in their hearts, before any written Moral or Ceremonial law,
dictating thus much to them, That, as there was a God who created them, in whom
they lived, moved, and had their being; so likewise this God was to be solemnly
worshipped by them, as well in public as private; by way of homage, gratitude,
and bounden duty, Psalm. 95.1, to 8. Ps: 100.1, 2, 3, 4. Isa. 17.7, 8. Acts
17.26, 27, 28. Which worship of his (especially when men multiplied into great
and many Families, Villages, Cities, Kingdoms, Republics) could not be
decently, orderly, constantly performed in public, without appointing some
certain Times and Places of worship; Heb. 5.1.
some certain holy persons and Priests to discharge the public duties,
solemnities of their worship; and some convenient certain portion out of their
Estates for the maintenance, encouragement of those Priests in the execution of
their Office, on which they were to give attendance. Upon which grounds, as the
Patriarchs before the Law from the very Creation; (as Dr. Bound, Dr. Twisse,
Mr. Sprint, Mr. Bernard, Mr. Palmer, Mr. Caudry and others of the Sabbath. Mr.
Dod, Clever, and others on the 4 Commandment.
many Divines infer from Gen: 2.2, 3. Exodus: 16.22, to 27. and 20.11. and 31.17.
Deuteronomy. 5.14. Heb. 4.4.) dedicated every seventh day to Gods peculiar worship, by
his example and prescription; so they likewise offered a certain portion of the
fruits of their ground, Fields, Flocks to God in Sacrifice, as a Tribute due to
him, by and from whom they received, enjoyed all the rest they had. Whence the
Scripure expressly records of Cain and Abel (the two firstborn of the world)
Gen: 4.2, 3, 4, 5. That Cain being a tiller of the ground, brought of the
fruits of the ground an offering to God; and that Abel being a feeder of sheep,
he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and the fat thereof for an
Offering to the Lord; as most conceive their father Adam did before them: by
whose precept and example they did it: After them we read, that Noah built an
Altar unto the Lord, and took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl,
and offered burnt-offerings on the Altar, when he went out of the Ark, Genesis
8.20. (which he and his ancestors from the Creation in all probability usually
practiced, though not specially recorded by Moses, no more than many other
memorable accidents, actions, for brevity sake.) Now these clean Beasts and
Fowls which he sacrificed entering into the Ark by sevens: that is, seven of
every sort: Gen: 7.2, 3. he offered one of each kind at least (and so one of
seven) unto God, who consecrated, reserved one day of seven from the Creation
to himself. What proportion of their goods, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob offered
on their erected altars in sacrifice to God, is not expressed, though probably
it was such as God afterward prescribed the Israelites, their posterity, not
long after by his written law in Moses time, augmented upon any extraordinary
emergent occasion, though never diminished from its usual rate. And for the
Priests encouragement (directed by the very dictate of Nature, Reason informing
them, That every Labourer was worthy of some competent hire, as Christ resolves
Mat. 10.10. Luke 10.17.) they pitched upon Genesis 14.20. and 28.21, 22. Heb. 7.2,
4.
the tenth of their increase and gains of every kind, as a competent fitting
allowance, guided therein by divine inspiration (as is most probable, if not
infallible) it being the self-same proportion God himself afterward
prescribed, ratified by his own written Law in the Old Testament, and approved
in the New, as I shall manifest by these ensuing Scriptures.

1. That Tithes were paid and vowed to God by the religious Patriarchs before
the Aaronical Priesthood instituted, or Levitical Law given, is undeniable by
two Scripture instances: the first of them is thus recorded, Gen: 14.17, 18,
19, 20. That Abraham returning victoriously from the slaughter of Chederlaomer
and the Kings that were with him; Melchisedec King of Salem met him, and
brought forth bread and wine, and he was The Priest of the most High God: and
he blessed him and said, Blessed be Abraham of the most high God, poss^ssor of
heaven and earth; and bl^ssed be the most high God, which has delivered thy
Enemies into thy hand. And he gave him Tenths of all. This History is thus
recited and amplified in the New Testament, Heb. 6.20. and 7.1, etc. Jesus,
made an high Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec King of Salem,
Priest of the most High God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of
the Kings and blessed him: to whom Abraham gave a Tenth part of all; first
being by interpretation, King of righteousness, and after that also King of
Salem, which is King of peace: without Father, without Mother, without descent,
having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but made like unto the Son
of God, abides a Priest continually. Now consider how great this man was, unto
whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils. And verily, they
that are of the Sons of Levi, who receive the office of the Priesthood, have a
Commandment to take Tithes of the People, according to the Law, that is, of
their brethren, though they come out of the loins of Abraham: But he whose
descent is not counted from them, received Tithes of Abraham, and blessed him
that had the Promises. And without all contradiction the lisse is blessed of
the better. And here Men that die receive Tithes, but there he [ received them]
of whom it is witnessed that he lives. And, as I may so say, Levi also who
receives Tithes paid Tithes in Abraham. For he was yet in the loins of his
Father, when Melchisedec met him. If therefore perfection were by the Levitical
Priesthood, (for under it the people received the Law) what further need was
there, that another Priesthood should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and
not be called after the order of Aaron? For the Priesthood being changed, there
is of necessity a change also of Law, etc.

I shall draw my Observations, Arguments concerning Tithes from both these
Scriptures here recited, and then answer the main (if not sole) Scripture
objected against Tithes, drawn from the cloze of the Apostles words.

1. It is undeniable from these Texts, that Abraham the Father of the
Faithful, is the first person we precisely read of who gave and paid Tithes,
recorded both in the Old Testament and New, for his greater honor, and the
imitation of all the faithful under both Testaments.

2. That he gave and paid Tithes to Melchisedec, the first Priest of the most
high God, mentioned in sacred writ. Who this Melchisedec should be, there is
great controversy among the Learned; some affirming him, to be See Mr. Seldens
Review of his History, chapter 1. Sixtus Senensis Bibl. Sanctae, l. 5. Annot. 90,
91.
Sem; others a Canaanitish King and Priest of that Name, and Dr. Griffith
Williams of the Incarnation of Christ, in his works in fol. p. 807, to 813.
Petrus Cunaeus de Repub. Jud. l. 3. c: 3.
Dr. Griffith Williams very probably and strongly arguing him to be CHRIST
himself then appearing to Abraham in his humane shape: As Petrus Cunaeus held
before him. I shall not decide the Controversy: certain it is, he was either
Christ himself, or a real Type of Christ's and his eternal Priesthood; as the
Apostle often resolves.

3. That he was a Priest of a far antienter, better and more excellent order,
than the Levitical Priesthood; and that this payment of Tithes was long before
the Law given by Moses for payment of Tithes to the Levitical Priests; and
before their order instituted. Therefore Tithes are not merely nor originally
in their own nature Jewish or Levitical, (as some rashly now a verr) nor
eternally abolished as such by Christ's incarnation, and Priesthood, they being
originally paid and given, not to the Levitical Priests, but to M^lchisedec,
who was either Christ himself, or a Type of him and his Priesthood, not of
Aarons.

4. That this Melchisedec, as he had neither beginning of days, so he had no
end of life, but was made like the Son of God, and abides a Priest continually
(in See Hemingiu^ on the place.
respect of the truth he typified) as Christ himself does, of whom he was a
Type, who has an endless life; and because he continues ever, has an
unchangeable Priesthood; and is by the very oath of God, made a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedec, Heb. 6.20. and 7.3, 8, 13, 15, 16, 17, 21,
24, 25. Psalm. 110.4. Therefore Tithes being first paid to such an everliving,
everlasting, unchangeable Priest and Priesthood, for the execution thereof;
may and ought to continue and abide for ever, as long as the Priest and
Priesthood last: and if so, then Tithes are still due, payable to the
Ministers of Christ under the Gospel by all the Romans 4.4, 16, 17. and 9.8. Gal.
4.7, 8, 9.29,
Spiritual seed of faithful Abraham, as well as they were by all his Sons
after the flesh to the Levitical or Aaronical Priesthood whiles in being, and
that in the right of Christ; they being Ambassadors representing his person,
beseeching men in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20, 21.
Forgiving men in tho person of Christ, 2 Cor. 2.10. and in whose persons Christ
himself still speaks unto men, 2 Cor. 13.3. Whence Christ himself a verres,
Verily, verily I say unto you, he that receives whosoever I send, receives
me; and he that receives me, receives him that sent me: He that hears you,
hears me; and he that despises you, despises me; and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me, Mat. 10.40. Luke 10.16. John 13.20. That whatever
is given or paid to them for their Ministry is given and paid to himself, Mat.
10.42. and 25.35, to 41. and is a Sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing unto God,
Philip. 4.18.

5. That Abraham gave Tithes to Melchisedec for the execution of his Priestly
office; and that not in offering any carnal or Levitical Sacrifices to God for
him upon an Altar, but only for blessing him, and rendering thanks and blessing
to the most high God for his victory; which being one chief part of the
Ministers of the Gospels duty still continuing, even to bless the people, to
praise and bless God for them, and their successes in spiritual and temporal
things, Romans 1.7, 8, 9. and 10.24. 1 Cor. 1.3, 4, 5. and 16.23. 2 Cor. 1.1, 2,
3. and 9.10, 11. and 13.14. Gal. 1.2. and 6.18. Ephesians. 1.1, 2, 3, 16, 17, 18.
and 3.14. to the end, and 6.23, 24. Phil. 1.2, 3, 4. and 4.20, 23. Col. 1.2, 3,
9, to 14. and 4.18. 1 Thessalonians. 1.1, 2, 3. and 2.13. and 5:23, 28.2 These. 1.2, 3,
11, 12. and 2.13, 16, 17. and 3.18. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Heb. 13.25. 1 Pet. 1.2, 3,
4. and 5.14. 2 Pet. 1.2. Revel. 5.12, 13. as likewise to bless the Sacramental
bread and wine for their use, 1 Cor. 10.16. Mat. 26.26. typifyed, as most hold,
by the bread and wine Melchisedec brought forth to Abraham: is a convincing
Argument to me, that Tithes are no way Levitical or Jewish in their primitive
institution, or intrinsecal nature, but rather Evangelical; and are as justly
due and payable by all believing sons and children of faithful Abraham, to the
Ministers of the Gospel for blessing them, and praying, blessing, praising God
for them, and other Ministerial duties, as they were by Abraham to Melchisedec,
for performing the self-same Priestly duties toward him.

6. That the scope of the Apostle in the Hebrews, being to prove the Honor,
Dignity, Excellency of the order of Melchisedecs (and by consequence of our
Saviors) Priesthood above Aarons; he uses this as one demonstration thereof:

1. That he received Tithes of the Patriarch Abraham himself, Heb. 7.2, 4, to
11. whereas the Levitical Priests received Tithes only of their Brethren, that
came out of the loins of Abraham.

2. That even Levi himself who received Tithes of his Brethren, paid Tithes in
Abraham, ( being then in his Fathers loins) to Melchisedec, as his superior,
yea even as the Levits under the Law paid the tenth of their Tithes to the
Priests, as their superiors, Numb: 18.26, 27, 28. And this payment of Tithes
to Melchisedec, he recites in the Gospel no less than five several times one
after another, insisting longer on it then on any other Argument, to prove the
preeminency of Melchisedecs Priesthood above Aarons. Whence it undeniably
follows,

1. That Tithes are not originally Jewish and Levitical.

2. That the receiving of Tithes by faithful Ministers now, is no
disparagement, but an honor to their Ministry and function, as well as to
Melchisedecs heretofore.

3. That Ministers receiving Tithes now, does no more prove their Ministry to
be Judaical or Levitical, than it proved Melchisedecs Priesthood to be such,
which is put in contradistinction to it, and exalted above it by the Apostle,
even by the very receiving of Tithes from Abraham. Therefore those Jesuitical
and Anabaptistical furies against Tithes, who rail against our Ministers and
their Ministry as Jewish and Aaronical because they receive Tithes, and urge
this as a disparagement to their Persons, Ministry, rejecting Tith-receiving
Ministers, as Jewish, Antichristian, unlawful, do herein argue point blank
against the Apostle, and thereby conclude Melchisedecs (and by consequence our
Saviors own Priesthood after the order of Melchise dec) to be Jewish,
Antichristian, dishonorable and unlawful, (because Melchisedec himself
received Tithes,) which to do is the highest blasphemy.

7. That the Apostle informs us, that God had never but two orders of Priests
in the world.

The first, after the order of M^lchisedec, in Abraham's days; discontinued
under the Law for a time, but revived again in our Savior Christ, and
continuing now and for ever in him; compared here to Melchisedec, especially in
his Nature, the seat of his Kingdom, the perpetuity of his life, his Sacerdotal
blessing, and IN THE RIGHT OF RECEIVING TITHES (as Hemingius on the place
observes.)

The second, after the order of Levi and Aaron, abolished and changed by
Christ; that Tithes were paid and belonged of right to both these orders of
Priests, for the exercise of their function by Gods own approbation and
appointment; as a just, fitting, righteous maintenance and reward; which since
they cannot now be paid to Christ himself in person, being ascended into
heaven, and there sitting at Gods right hand, a great high Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedec; there is great Justice, Reason, they should be
still paid to, and received by his Ministers, whom we have always with us (as
well as the poor) who are his Vicegerents and 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. Tit. 1.7.
Stewards, with whom he has promised to be always present to the end of the
World, Mat: 28.20. and that as the properest, justest, best, fittest
maintenance of all other, appointed, prescribed by God, paid by Abraham and all
the faithful by Gods direction and approbation, both before and under the Law,
and is recited, justified, allowed, but no ways condemned or abrogated by the
Apostle and Gods Spirit under the Gospel. Wherefore those who inconsiderately
revile and declaim against Tithes as See the late Petitions against Tithes.
heavy Yokes, Jewish Burdens, an unequal, unrighteous, wrangling, troublesome
maintenance, etc. do herein blasphemously traduce, censure the very wisdom,
justice, discretion not only of Abraham, and all the faithful servants of God,
approving and paying Tithes in former ages, but of God himself who prescribed
them, and of the Apostle pleading for them, as appertaining to both these
orders of Gods Priests for their perpetual maintenance.

8. Here is one notable observation for all the Officers and Soldiers of the
Army seriously to consider (and O that God would fix it effectually on their
Spirits!) That Abraham the Father of the faithful (as the Gospel styles him,
Rom: 4.16.) returning victoriously from the first Wars we read of in the
world, gave the Sea Mr. John Seldens History of Tithes, c. 1, 3. and his
Review, c. 1. with the Authors there cited.
TENTH OF THE SPOILS taken from the Enemy in the wars, to Melchisedec, the
first Priest of the most high God we find in the Word or World, and an express
type of Christ, our only high Priest, if not Christ himself, as some affirm: To
teach all Generals, Officers, Soldiers, who profess themselves the Sons or
Children of Abraham after the faith, to do the like: And (which is very
considerable) though this victorious General and Soldier was urged by the King
of Sodom, to take all the Spoil and goods he had taken and rescued from the
Enemy to himself, and to give him only the persons rescued; which he
magnanimously refused; saying, I have lift up my hand unto the Lord, the most
high God, possessor of heaven and earth, that I will not take from a thread
even to a shoe-latchet, and that I will not take any thing that was thine, lest
thou should say, I have made Abraham rich, Gen: 14.21, 22, 23. (And O that
all Commanders, Soldiers now, were as conscionable and just in performing
their Oaths, Covenants, Vows, made with hands lifted up unto the Lord, as
faithful Abraham was!) yet he would not renounce, nor give away Gods and the
Priests portion upon any condition; but GAVE THE TENTH OF ALL THE SPOIL TO
THEM, restoring only the Surplusage. And should not our Generals, Officers,
Soldiers, in these days (who profess and style themselves, the Eminentest,
most precious Saints, and spiritual seed of faithful Abraham) more really
prove themselves such indeed, to God, the World, and their own Consciences, by
giving the Tenth of all their spoils and gains of Wars to God and his
faithful Ministers (which I never heard one of them yet did) and making good
all their solemn Oaths and Covenants to God, (whereof this was one clause; The
words of the solemn League and Covenant.
That they shall sincerely, really, and constantly endeavor in their several
places and callings, the preservation of the reformed Religion, from utter
ruin and destruction, against all the treacheries and bloody Plots,
Conspiracies, Attempts and practices of the Enemies thereof; whereof this in
present agitation to deprive our Ministers of all Tithes and settled
maintenance, is one of the principal, which will ruin our Ministers, Ministry
and Religion with them) as faithful Abraham really did; rather than by
endeavoring what they can (as too many of them do) TO SPOIL THEM OF ALL THEIR
TITHES, both predial, mixed and personal, which they have so long enjoyed, not
only by a just, civil right and title, confirmed by Prescription, the great
Charter, all sorts of Laws, Statutes, Ordinances in ancient and late times,
but likewise by a divine Warrant, from this Precedent of Abraham, instead of
giving them THE TENTH OF THEIR SPOILS? Which practice, if pursued, as it will
insallibly demonstrate them to be no real Saints. or Children of faithful
Abraham (our Savior resolving, Joh. 8.39. If ye were Abraham's children, ye
would do the works of Abraham, in paying Tithes as he did) so it will probably
exclude both them, and others guilty of it, out of Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22.
who will never own nor receive those as his friends or children into his
bosom, who are such virulent Enemies to his most commendable Practice, of
paying Tithes even of the very spoils he took in War. With this Argument I
have so routed some Officers and Soldiers, that they blushed for shame; had
not one word to reply, and gave over further railing discourses against Tithes,
as men quite confounded, and I hope it will have the self-same effect in all
others, when they have well advised on it.

That they may have no Evasion from the dint thereof, I shall answer all Cavils
I know of to elude it.

Object. 1.
The 1. Evasion is this, That this Precedent of Abraham in giving the tenth of
the spoils of War is singular and voluntary, not obliging other Soldiers to
do the like, or to devote any of their spoils to God and his service.

To this I answer,

Answ.
1. That this practice and Precedent of Abraham, so transcendently eminent for
his faith in the old and new Testament, in both which it is recorded; was
undoubtedly written for our imitation and instruction, to do the like, as may
be evidenced from Job. 8.39. 1 Cor. 10.11. Romans 15.4. 2 Thessalonians. 3.7, 9. Heb.
13.7. 1 Thessalonians. 2.14. the rather, because the Apostle Heb. 6.12. commands us, To
be followers of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises; and
then presently after instanceth in Abraham, and falls upon his practice of
paying Tithes of the spoil to Melchisedec. Therefore all Christian, Generals,
Officers, Soldiers must follow him in paying Tithes of all their spoils, as
well as in faith and patience; his Precedent, having been the original
impulsive ground of all Tithes vowed or paid to Gods Priests or Ministers ever
since, and of Gods subsequent commands to Abraham's posterity, to pay Tithes to
the Priests and Levites under the Law, as the Apostle insinuates, Heb. 7.4, 5,
6, 8. compared together; and of all Laws, Canons since enacted by Christian
Kings and Councils for due payment of Tithes to Ministers of the Gospel in
Christian Realms and Republics.

2. I answer, That this practice of his was frequently pursued by Generals,
Officers and Soldiers, in succeeding ages, of which we have very memorable
Precedents in Scripture, wherewith I have shamed and confounded Soldiers in
discourses with them about Tithes. It is specially recorded Number. 31. that when
the 12000. Officers and Soldiers of the Israelites under the conduct of
Phinehas, returned from the slaughter of the Midianites with an extraordinary
great booty of all sorts; God gave a special charge, to levy a Tribute unto the
Lord of the men of War that went out to Battle, and to give it to Eleazar the
Priest for an heave offering of the Lord (which kind of offerings was Aarons
and his Sons for ever, from the children of Israel, as a due wages for their
service, Exodus 29.27, 28. Levit. 7.32, 33, 34. Numb. 18.24, 27, 29. Deuteronomy.
12.11. and is coupled with Tithes as being of the same Nature, in the two last
of these Scriptures) which tribute was accordingly levied: And because the prey
was first equally divided between them who took the War upon them, and went
out to Battle; and between all the Congregation, which had the other moity of
it; God out of the Soldiers moity (the prey being very great) reserved only
one of five hundred out of the Captives, Beeves, Asses and Sheep, for the
Priests, which were but few; and one of every fifty for the Levites, of the
peoples moity; the Priests share amounting to 675. Sheep, 78. Oxen, 64. Asses,
32. Captives; and the Levites share to ten times so many. After which tribute
levied, v. 48, 49. the Officers which were over thousands of the Host, the
Captains of Thousands and Captains of Hundreds brought an oblation, to the
Lord, what every man had gotten of Jewels of Gold, Chains and Bracelets,
Kings, Earrings and Tablets to make an atonement for their souls before the
Lord, amounting to sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels, (every
Purchase pilgrimage p. 132 Gerundensis and Godwins Jewish Antiquities
shekel weighing half an ounce) Which Eleazer the Priest took of the Captains
of thousands, and of hundreds, and brought it into the Tabernacle of the
Congregation for a Memorial of the children of Israel before the Lord, Numb.
31.48, to the end. Here were self-denying saint-like Officers, Colonels and
Captains indeed, after all the former deductions and tributes out of their
spoil, to bring to the Priest, and offer up to God all their Jewels of Gold,
Chains, Bracelets, Rings, Earrings, Tablets and richest plunder they had
gotten in the Wars, for the maintenance of his worship; when our Officers,
Colonels, Captains, Soldiers shall do the like, and pay a tribute of the best
of their spoils to our Ministers, as these by Gods command did to the Priests
and Levites, not purchasing Church Lands and Revenues with them, See the
ordinances for Augmentations
devoted to the augmentation of our Ministers small Stipends; we shall cry them
up for self-denying Saints and Soldiers indeed; and say, they are no
self-seekers. If this Scripture Precedent be not enough, behold a whole cloud
of Precedents, imitating them and faithful Abraham, recorded, united in one
memorable Text seldom read or taken notice of, 1 Chronicles. 26.26, 27, 28. Which
Shelomith and his Brethren, were over all the Treasures of the dedicated
things, which David the King, and the chief Fathers, the Captains over
Thousands and Hundreds, and the Captains of the Host, had dedicated: out of the
Spoils won in Battles did they dedicate to maintain the House of the Lord (mark
and imitate it O ye Army Officers, Captains, Soldiers!) And all that SAMUEL
the seer, and SAUL the Son of Kish, and ABNER the Son of Ner, and JOAB the Son
of Zerviah had dedicated, was under the hand of Shelomith and his Brethren.
Here we have examples of all sorts and sizes for our Army Officers and
Soldiers imitation.

1. We have David, a victorious Warrier, General, King, and Act. 13.21. Neh.
12.24.
man of God, after Gods own heart, dedicating the Treasures and Spoils he took
from his enemies in Battles, to the House and service of God; thus more
specially recorded for his honor and others practice; 2 Samuel 8.11, 12. And Tol
sent Joram his Son to King David to salute him, and to bless him, because he
had fought against Hadadezer and smitten him, and brought with him vessels of
Gold, and vessels of Silver, and vessels of Brass, which also King David did
dedicate to the Lord, with the Silver and Gold that he had dedicate of all
Nations which he subdued: Of Syria, and of Moab, and of the children of Ammon,
and of the Philistines, and of Amalek, and OF THE SPOILS OF HADADEZER Son of
Rehob King of Zobah. Recorded again in 1 Chronicles. 18.2, to 12. with this
addition. And David took the shields of gold which were on the Servants of
Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem. Likewise from Tibhath and from Chun
Cities of Hadadezer brought David very much brass, wherewith Solomon made the
Brazen sea, and the pillars of the vessels of Brass. What the value of the
spoils which he dedicated to God and his service amounted to, himself records,
1 Chronicles: 22.14. Now behold in my trouble I have prepared for the house of the
Lord an hundred thousand Talents of Gold, and a thousand Talents of Silver, and
of Brass and Iron in abundance without weight: Besides what he dedicated out
of his own proper estate, registered in 1 Chronicles. 29.13, 14.

2. We have Joab 2 Samuel 8.16. 1 Chronicles. 11.6.
David's Captain General, the Captains over Thousands and Hundreds, and the
Captains of the Army, dedicating out of the spoils won in Battles to the
service of the House of the Lord: (and that in a liberal proportion) even five
thousand Talents of gold, and ten thousand drams; and of silver ten thousand
Talents, and of brass 18000 Talents, and one hundred thousand Talents of Iron,
besides precious stones, all which they offered willingly with a perfect heart
unto the Lord, rejoicing with great joy they had done it, 1 Chronicles. 29.6, 7, 8,
9. When our Generals, Officers, Colonels, Captains and Soldiers of the Army
shall imitate King David and his Generals, Colonels, Captains, Officers,
Soldiers in such a liberal contribution of the Jewels, Gold, Silver, Brass,
Iron and Spoils they have won in Battles, at home and from other Nations, to
repair or build houses for Gods public worship, and maintain the Ministers of
the Gospel, in stead of seeking to demolish and spoil those stately Edifices
which our pious Ancestors have erected for that purpose, and breaking down the
Carved work thereof with axes and hammers; of which David much complains,
Psalm. 74.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and in lieu of endeavoring to divest our
Ministers of their remaining Lands, Tithes, Glebes not yet devoured; all the
World will proclaim them, Men after Gods own heart, and Men of God in truth,
like David, and give over censuring them for Sacrilegious Harpyes, as yet more
like to Zeba and Zalmunna, who said, Let us take to our selves the Houses of
God in possession, (as David himself objects against them, Psalm. 83.11, 12.)
than to David, or his Officers, Captains, Soldiers.

3. Here is Samuel the seer, doing the like, out of his spoils won in Battle: A
precedent for all those Soldiers who will be Seers, Speakers, and New-lights,
to imitate.

4. If these good men's examples be neglected, yet let the Precedents of bad men
annexed to them shame and excite others to this duty: Here is Saul the son of
Kish, much talked of and reviled now by many for a Tyrant, the very first King
given to Gods people in anger, and taken from them in wrath, as these object,
from Hos. 13.11. (which I conceive rather to be meant of Jeroboam the
Idolatrous usurper, who made Israel to sin; as judicious Interpreters prove, by
the 2 Chronicles. 13.20. compared with 2 Kings 17.10, to 24. and the context
likewise, which makes mention of the Israelites Idolatry in kissing the Calves
erected by Jeroboam; and speaks only of the Kingdom of Israel, as divided from
that of Juhah after Saul's, David's, and Solomon's death) yet he as bad as they
make him, together with Abner 1 Samuel 14.50.
his chief Captain (none of the best of men, as 1 Samuel 3.7, 8. discovers) had
so much Piety, Zeal, Religion in them, as likewise to dedicate part of their
richest spoils of War to the maintenance of Gods house and worship. And will
it not be a great dishonor to those Generals, Officers, Colonels, Captains,
who now pretend themselves the holiest, justest, zealousest Saints, not to be
as bountiful toward the maintenance of Gods house and worship, out of their
spoils, as Saul, or Abner, whom they brand for Tyrants and ungodly wicked men?
If these Precedents be ineffectual to work upon any Covetous or Sacrilegious
Swordmen, let them reflect upon others, who were Idolaters, how near they
came, in their way, to imitate Abraham, David and these forecited Warriers.
When Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon had taken Jerusalem, ransacked and burnt
the glorious Temple there, toward which David and his Captains contributed so
largely out of their spoils, he had so much Piety and natural Religion in him;
as to dedicate all the Vessels of Silver and Gold, which he took out of the
house of God, to the honor and service of his Idol-gods, and put them in the
Temple at Babylon, in the House of his GODS, not converting them to his private
or public Treasury, 2 Chronicles. 36.7, 18. 2 King. 24.13. Ezra. 1.7. Which Vessels
afterward being brought forth thence, and profanely caroused in by Belshazzar
and his Princes, at his great feast, wherein he praised the gods of Gold, and
Silver, of Brass, of Iron, of Wood, and of Stone; you may read what fatal
judgment presently befell him, to the loss of his life and Kingdom, Dan. 5.
These Vessels though a just and lawful spoil won by wars, Cyrus King of Persia
brought forth out of the house of his Gods, where Nebuchadnezzar had put them,
by the hand of Mithredah his Treasurer, and numbered them unto Sheshbazzar the
Prince of Judah, when he proclaimed liberty, and gave order to the Israelites
to rebuild the house of the Lord God of Israel in Jerusalem; and this is the
number of them, thirty Chargers of Gold, a thousand Chargers of Silver, nine
and twenty Knives, thirty Basins of Gold, Silver Basins of a second sort four
hundred and ten, and other Vessels a thousand: all the Vessels of Gold and
Silver were five thousand and four hundred: all these did Sheshbazzar bring
with him from Babylon to Jerusalem for the use and service of God in the Temple
there: all these did Cyrus a Heathen King freely and cheerfully restore,
dedicate to God and his Temple by a Decree, Ezra 1.4. to the end. O when will
our Army-Saints part with so many Gold and Silver Vessels to Gods house out of
their spoils and plunders? This Decree was afterward confirmed by King Darius
and Artaxerxes his successors, Ezra 1.4. ch 7.15, 16, 17. and 8.24, to 31.
these Kings with their Princes and chief Officers also, freely offered,
dedicated Silver and Gold, besides these Vessels, amounting to a great value,
toward the re-edifying of the Temple, and maintenance of the worship, Priests
of God therein. Moreover, King Artaxerxes made this Decree concerning these
Vessels; The Vessels also that are given thee for the service of the house of
thy God, those deliver thou before the God of Jerusalem; and whatsoever more
shall be needful for the house of thy God bestow it out of the Kings
Treasure-house: Adding this further Decree; To all the Treasurers beyond the
river; Whatsoever Ezra the Priest shall require of you, let it be done
speedily; unto an hundred Talents of Silver, and to an hundred measures of
Wheat, and to an hundred bathes of Wine, and to an hundred bathes of Oil, Salt
without prescribing measure: Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let
it be diligently done for the house of the God of heaven; for why should there
be wrath against the Realm of the King and his Sons? Also we certify you,
that touching any of the Priests and Levites, Singers, Porters, Nethinims or
Ministers of this house of God it shall not be lawful to impose Toll, Tribute
or custom upon them: and whosoever will not do the Law of God and the Law of
the King, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto
death, or unto banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment;
Ezra 7.11, to 27. The Decree of Cyrus and Darius, concerning the building of
the Temple, and restitution of these Vessels, is very remarkable, and thus
recorded, Ezra 6.3, to 13. Let the house be builded, the place where they
offered Sacrifices, and let the foundation thereof be strongly laid, the height
thereof threescore Cubits, and the breadth thereof threescore Cubits; with
three rows of great stones, and a row of new Tamber; and let the expenses be
given out of the Kings house And also, let the Golden and Silver Vessels of the
house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took forth out of the Temple which is at
Jerusalem, and brought unto Babylon, he restored and brought again into the
Temple which is at Jerusalem, every one to his place, and place them in the
house of God. Now therefore Tatnai governor beyond the river, Shetharboznai
and your companions the Apharsachites which are beyond the river, be ye far
from thence: Let the work of the house of God alone, let the Governors and the
Elders of the Jews, build the house of God in his place. Moreover, I make a
Decree, what ye shall do to the Elders of these Jews, for the building of this
house of God; that of the Kings goods even of the tribute beyond the river,
forthwith expenses be given unto these men, that they be not hindered. And that
which they shall have need of both young Bullocks, and Rams, and Lambs, for the
burnt offerings of the God of heaven, Wheat, Salt, Wine, Oil, according to the
appointment of the Priests which are at Jerusalem, let it be given from day to
day without fail; that they may offer Sacrifices of sweet savor unto the God
of heaven, and pray for the life of the King and his Sons. Also I have made a
Decree, that whosoever shall alter this word, let timber be pulled down from
his house, and being set up, let him be hanged thereon, and let his house be
made a dunghill for this. And the God that has caused his name to dwell there,
destroy all Kings and people that shall put to their Hand to alter and destroy
the house of God, which is at Jerusalem: I Darius have made a Decree, let it be
done with speed. If these three Heathen Kings and Conquerors were so zealous to
restore all the Vessels of Gold and Silver, taken by their predecessors in
their wars, amounting to so great a number, value, to the House of God at
Jerusalem; to contribute so liberally toward the re-edifying of it out of
their own Tributes, Treasures, Revenues won by War and Conquest; to allow them
Bullocks, Rams, Lambs, Wheat, Wine, Oil, Salt, and all other necessaries for
daily Sacrifices; to furnish the Priests and Levites with all Necessaries; yea
particularly to exempt them and all the Officers of the Temple from paying any
Toll, Tribute, Tax or Custom, which it was not lawful for any Officer to lay
upon them, under the severest penalties, and to enact such severe Laws, to
pass such bitter imprecations against all such as should oppose or hinder the
work, or seek to destroy or deface the Temple of God: Oh how should this
inflame all our Generals, Officers, Soldiers, who profess themselves the
choysest Christians, and eminentest Saints, to imitate and equal them in all
these particulars now? Elsehow will they shame, confound and rise up in
judgment at last against all such of them and all other Plunderers who in
stead of restoring all the Gold, Silver Vessels, Lead, Iron, Timber, Stones,
they have taken from the Temples of God, of repairing those Churches they have
demolished, defaced, of providing necessaries for Gods worship, and exempting
his Ministers from Toll, Tribute, Taxes, Custom, endeavor to make a prey and
spoil of all our Churches, Chapels, Church-Vessels, Ornaments, Glebes, yet
remaining, and oppress our Ministers with endless Taxes, Tributes imposed on
them without their consents against all former Laws, and Precedents to their
utter ruin; and in stead of paying them the tenths of their own Lands and
spoils of War, endeavor to spoil them of those Tithes which all others owe or
pay them? Of whom Hemingius thus complains in his Commentary on Gal. 6.6. p.
375. Quid dicemus de illis, qui Ministros Evangelii necessario victu spoliant?
Quid de illis qui Immoderatis Eractionibus tantum non eos interficiunt, ut
multi honesti mariti cum si is uxoribus et liberis cogantur quodammodo
mendicare? Horam sane factum nihil differ arbitror a Sacrilegio and
Latrocinio, cujus poenas olim cluent Architecti et fabri hujus mali.

To these Scripture Precedents of Heathen Warriers, I might add the practice
of many Idolatrous Pagan Nations (as the Romans, Graecians, Crotonians,
Phocians, Athenians, Carthaginians) who by the very Law, dictate of Nature, and
example of Abraham, gave the tenth of their warlike spoils to their Idol-Gods
and Priests; which because Mr. Seldom recites at large in his History of
Tithes, chapter 1.3. and Review, c. 1. 3. and Alexander ab Alexandro Gen Dierum, l.
3. c. 22. where all may peruse them, I shall only give you the sum of them in
learned Grotius his words, in his Book De jure Belli and Pacis, l. 3. c. 4.
sect: 1. p. 454. By this Law of Nature Abraham, out of the spoils which he had
taken from the five Kings, gave a Tenth to God, as the Divine Author to the
Hebrews, c. 7.4. explains the History extant in Genesis 14. By which custom the
Grecians also, with the Carthaginians and Romans, Diis suis Decimam de Praeda
sacraverunt, consecrated a Tenth of the prey, or spoil, to their Gods, as to
Apollo, Hercules, Jove. And should not Christian Generals, Officers, Captains,
Soldiers then much more do it now, to God and his Ministers, from this
Precedent of Father Abraham, instead of robbing them of their Tithes? If any
should object, that these were old Testament, and Heathen Practices; Let them
remember, that Abraham's is more particularly related and frequently mentioned
in the new Testament than old; the old relating in general, that he gave Tithes
of all; (which relates to all his substance, as well as spoils) and the new
Testament applying this general to the TENTH OF THE SPOILS, Heb. 7.4. as
History of Tithes, and Survey thereof, chapter 1.3.
Mr. Seldom, Grotius, and others observe. But to hedge up this starting-hole so
as none may creep out of it; we have one memorable Precedent in the new
Testament, coming very near to this of Abraham, Luke 7.2, to 11. Where we read
of a certain Centurion (or Colonel) a man of no small authority, who had
Soldiers under him; and said unto one Go, and he goes; and to another, Come,
and he comes; and to his servant, Do this, and he does it: This Centurions
servant, who was dear unto him, being sick and ready to die, when he heard of
the fame of Jesus, he sent unto him the Elders of the Jews, beseeching him that
he would come and heal his Servant: and when they came to Jesus they besought
him instantly, saying, That he was worthy for whom he should do this: (And why
so?) For he loves our Nation, and has built us a Synagogue: Whereupon Jesus
went with them, and healed his servant; marvelling at the Centurions words, and
turning about, and saying unto the people that followed him, I have not found
so great Faith, no not in Israel. This great Centurion and Commander was no
Jew, but a Gentile, one who but newly heard of Christ's name and same; yet he
had so much Piety and Bounty, as out of his very Spoils and Gains of War (for
we read of no other Lands or Gains he had) to build a Synagogue for Gods
worship; which the Elders of the Jews, and Christ too, approved as a worthy
act, and a sufficient inducement for our Savior to go with him and cure his
servant. O that all our Centurions who have Soldiers under them, and exceed or
equal him in command, would imitate and equal this Gospel Centurion, in his
pious munificence in building, in stead of contriving how to deface Temples,
Churches, Synagogues, to abolish Tithes, ingrosse Church Lands and Livings into
their own hands; then should they receive as large Encomiums of the reality and
transcendency of their Faith, Piety, Charity from men, as he did from our
Savior, and the Elders of the Jews, for building this new Synagogue.

I shall only add, for our Soldiers, Officers better Information; that from
this example of Abraham, approved in the new Testament, both Divines, Councils,
Canonists, and Casuists, have unanimously resolved, That Soldiers ought to pay
personal Tithes to Ministers out of their very Militia, pay, and spoils of
War. This was De Tempore Sermon. 219. Tom. 9
St. Augustines Doctrine, DE MILITIA, de negotio, de artificio read Decimas:
recited, practiced, and long prescribed here in England, in the excerptions of
Egbert Archbishop of York Spelman. Council. p. 268.
about the year of our Lord, 750. repeated, confirmed by Gratian in his
Decrees, Causa 16. qu. 1. f. 381, 382; By all the Canonists, Glossers on his
Text: by Angelus de Clavasio, in his Summa Angelica, Tit. Decima: by
Hostiensis, Summa Rosella, and other Summists, Casuists, in their Titles of
Tithes, and ratifyed by the Synod of Lingon, An. 1404. apud Bochellum, Decret:
Ecclesiae Gallicanae, lib. 6. Tit. 8. c. 31. p. 967. This many excellent
Christian Commanders, Officers, Soldiers have in several ages performed, as
Histories record. I shall (for brevity) instance but in one domestic example,
and that a memorable one, King William the first (whom we usually style the
Conqueror, though he never claimed the Crown by Conquest, but Ingulphi Hist. p.
899, 900, 901. Will. Malmsb. de Gestis Regum Angl. l. 2. p. 93. Hen. Huntindon
Hist. l. 8 p. 307 Hoveden Annal. pars prior. p. 448, 449. and pars posterior,
p. 608, 609, 610. Verstegan Restitutio^ of decayed Antiquities, accord herein,
and Mat. Westminster. Ann. 1059. p. 426.
only by the last Will, Testament and Donation of King Edward the Confessor in
his lifetime, with the assent of his Nobles (who was educated with, preserved
by him, during his exile and seclusion from the Crown by the Danish usurpers)
and as COUSIN and HEIR to Edward the Confessor, as he styled himself in the
very Spelman. Council p. 619.
Title of his Laws: He having vanquished and slain the perjured Usurper Harold
(who set the Crown upon his own head, and made himself King without any Title
or due Election, against his solemn Oath to Duke William, made to him in
Normandy, which he pretended to be forced;) in Mr. Cambdens Britannia, p. 317.
Mr. Seldens notes to Eadmerus, p. 165. where the Charter is recorded: and most
of our Historians in the life of K. William. Speeds History, p. 451.
thankfulness to God for this his victory, whereby he gained possession of the
Crown; out of the Spoils and Gains of his War, erected a Magnificent Church
and Abbey, to the glory of God and St. Martin (which he called de Bello, or
Battle Abbey) in that very place where Harold was slain, and this battle
fought; which likewise he endowed with large possessions, Tithes and most ample
Privileges by his Charter, and therein offered up to God HIS SWORD, and the
royal robe which he ware the day of his Coronation, there reserved as a
Monument as well of his Piety as Victory.

After which this pretended Conqueror Hoveden Annalium pars posterior p.
601.608. Mr Seldom ad Eadmerum Notae, p. 171, 172, 173. Spelman. Council. Tom.
1. p. 619. Ingulphi Hist. p. 914.
in the fourth year of his reign by the Counsel of his Barons, through all the
Counties of England caused 12. men of the most Noble, wise and skilfullest in
the Law, to be summoned out of every shire, that he might learn their Laws and
Customs from them; and gave them this Oath, That proceeding in a right path,
without declining to the right hand or the left, to the best of their power,
they should make known to him the Customs and Sanctions of their Laws,
pretermitting nothing, adding nothing, and altering nothing in them by
prevarication: which they accordingly performing; and King William intending to
alter the Law only in one particular according to the Laws of Norway, from
whence he and his Normans descended; all the Barons and Grand English Enquest
who presented him their Laws on Oath, being much grieved at it, unanimously
besought him, that he would permit them to enjoy their proper Laws and ancient
Customs under which their Fathers lived, and themselves had been born and
educated, because they deemed it very hard for them to receive unknown Laws,
and to judge of those things they knew not, importunately beseeching him for
the soul of K. Edward (WHO HAD GRANTED TO HIM THE CROWN and KINGDOM AFTER HIS
DEATH, and whose Laws they were) that he would not compel them to persevere
under the Laws of any Foreiners, but their own Country Laws alone. Wherefore
the King taking advice, consented to the request of his Barons, confirming all
their Laws and Customs in Parliament without any alteration or diminution, as
they presented them. Whereof this is the very first Law concerning the
preservation of the Churches rights, and Scholars from rapine.

Hoveden, ib. p. 601 Seldeni ad Eadmerum Notae, p. 173.
Every Clergyman, and likewise all Scholars, and all their Goods and
Possessions, wheresoever they are, shall enjoy the Peace of God and of holy
Church, free from all forfeiture, and seizure; and if any shall lay hands on
that which Mother Church shall require, LET HIM RESTORE THAT WHICH HE SHALL
TAKE AWAY, and likewise one hundred shillings in the name of a forfeiture, if
it be from an Abbey, or Church of Religion; and twenty shillings if it be from
a Mother Parish Church; and ten shillings if it be from a Chapel. After Hoveden
ib. p. 601, 602. Spelman Council. p. 619, 620. Lambardi Archaion.
which follow 6. other Laws concerning the Churches peace and privileges; and
then these two Laws concerning TITHES.

Of the TITHES of the Church.
Of all Corn the tenth Sheaf is given to God, and therefore to be paid. If any
shall have a herd of Mares, let him pay the tenth colt; he who shall have only
one or two, let him pay a penny for every colt. Likewise he who shall have many
Kine, let him pay the tenth calf; he who shall have but one or two, let him pay
a penny for every calf: and he who shall make cheese, let him give the tenth to
God, and if he shall make none, the milk every tenth day: Likewise the tenth
Lamb, the tenth Fleece, the tenth Butter, the tenth Pig.

Of BEES and all lesser TITHES.
In like manner also of Bees, the tenth of the profit, and also of Wood, of
Meadows, Waters and Mills, and Ponds, and Fishings, and Copses, and Orchards,
and Gardens, and Negotiations; (wherein Soldiery and all other Professions are
included) and all things which the Lord shall give the Tenth part is to be
tendered to him who gives the Nine parts together with the Tenth: And he who
shall detain it shall be compelled to render it by the Justice of the Bishop,
and of the King if need be: For these things St. Augustine has preached and
taught, and these things are granted by the Kings and Barons and People. But
afterward (let our Tith-oppugners, and detainers mark who is their original
Tutor) By the instinct of the Devil, many have detained Tithes; and rich
negligent Priests do not care to prosecute them, because they had sufficient
necessaries for their life; for in many places now there are three or four
Churches, where at that time was only one, and so they began to be diminished.

This is that William the Conqueror, whom our Officers, Soldiers (with the
Levellers and Anabaptists) most virulently reproach and rail against in their
Discourses, and silly ignorant scurrilous Royal Tyranny discovered: A defiance
against Arbitrary usurpation. Englands Birthright; and many late Pamphlets else.
Pamphlets, for an Invader, Usurper, ROBBER, TYRANT and subverter of our native
Laws and Liberties, etc. when as he claimed the Crown only by Gist and Title,
confirmed all our ancient Laws, Liberties, Civil and Ecclesiastical, without
any alteration or diminution; put never a Noble man but one, or other person to
death who rebelled or took up Arms against him all his reign, but such who
were actually slain in Battle; was the gallantest Soldier, and best Justiciary
of any in his age (as some Will. Malmesbury De Gestis Regum Angl. l. 2. p. 93.
etc. and Naucl. Speeds History p. 451. Daniel in his Life.
Historians then living attest) and not only much devoted to Religion, daily
frequenting the Church both morning and evening, but likewise very industrious
and bountiful to promote it; honoring and richly endowing the Clergy that
lived according to their rule and profession, but being very rough and
hard-hearted to the licentious and scandalous, degrading his own Uncle
Malgerius Archbishop of Rhoan, and many English Bishops for their dissolute
lives; founding no less then three Churches and Abbeys of chief note (whereof
that of Battle. was one) endowing them with large Poss^ssions and Privileges
(according to the piety of those times) out of his Conquests, and confirming
all the Clergies Tithes, Rights, Privileges by the recited Laws. If those
Officers, Soldiers, who now pretend themselves Conquerors, and us a Conquered
(or rather cousened) Nation, will really imitate his Justice, Piety, Bounty, in
these recited particulars; no man will thenceforth bestow on them such
reproachful terms, of Invaders, Usurpers, Robbers, Tyrants, Subverters of our
Laws, Liberties, etc. as they do usually on this first Norman King; but repute
them real Saints, Patrons of Religion, Ministers and the Church, yea Sons of
faithful Abraham, who gave the tenth of the spoils of war to God; whose
example, with all the rest here recited, in justice, conscience rather oblige
them to imitate his and their footsteps (as the premises; evidence) than to
spoil our Ministers, Churches of their Tithes and Materials. And so much in
Answer of the first Evasion, respecting our Army Officers and Soldiers only.

Object.
The second Evasion of Abraham's Precedent, is made by Country Farmers,
Tradesmen, and their Advocates: who allege, That Abraham gave the tenth only of
his spoils gained in War to M^lchisedec, but not of his Corn, Wine, Cattle and
other Goods; therefore this example binds only Soldiers to pay personal, but
not them or any others to pay any such predial, mixed or personal Tithes, as now
they do by coercive Laws and Ordinances, against Law and Gospel, as they
pretend.

To which I answer,

Answ.
1. That the express words of Moses, Genesis 14.20. are: And he gave him Tithes OF
ALL. Which being universal, not confined by him to the spoils taken in war,
must be taken and intended in the Sea Calvin and others on the place.
largest sense, that is, of all his Substance, or Increase, as well as of the
spoils then won: as the Syriack and Arabic translations, Solomon Jarchi and
others interpret it.

2. The Apostle reciting the History Heb. 7.2. uses the self-same general
expression: To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part OF ALL, without restraining
it to the Spoils of War: which must be intended in the best and liberalest
sense, for Tithes of all his Substance and gain, being mentioned both to
express his Piety and Bounty. True it is, the Apostle in the 4. verse uses
this expression, Unto whom the Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils;
which Mr. Seldens History of Tithes and Survey, chapter 1.
some oppugners of Tithes, would have to be the Interpretation of the two
former universal phrases; Tithes of all: But the Spoils being not Abraham's all,
nor in truth any part thereof, he refusing so much as to take a thread or
shoe-latchet thereof to his own use, Genesis 14.23, 24. and the word all, being
not so much as once used in the latter clause, which recites, he gave the tenth
of the (not all the) Spoils; and the two first general expressions, necessarily
including in them the tenth of the spoils; I conceive the latter expression is
rather a particular specification of one memorable thing he paid Tithes of in a
new case not formerly happening, even of the Spoils taken in this first Battle
he ever waged, or any other that we read of (included in the general) rather
than a full comprehensive exposition of all that is or was intended, by the
Tenth, or Tithes of all, in the two precedent Texts.

3. It is most probable, that Abraham paid Tithes of all his own substance to
Melchisedec, as well as of the spoils; there being the self-same, if not a
stronger ground, for him to pay Tithes of all his other goods, increase, as of
these casual spoils, out of which no constant maintenance could be raised for
any Pastor, or Minister, as there might be out of the Tithes of his Cattle and
Substance increasing every year. Now Tithes being intended for the Priests and
Ministers constant maintenance by God and Man, and this Precedent of Abraham,
recorded for that end; we cannot without an absurdity, restrain his paying
Tithes of all, only to the spoils then, and then only unexpectedly gained from
the enemy by Abraham, and restored by him to the right owners, the tenths of
them only excepted; but, of the Tithes of all his Substance principally, whence
a constant livelihood for the Priest could only arise, and of the spoils of
War only by reason of his occasional meeting of Abraham then returning from
the Wars, and blessing him at that time.

4. This president of his, was in all probability, the ground of Gods
appointing Tithes, by a special Law, for all the Priests and Levites
MAINTENANCE amongst the Israelites, Abraham's Posterity, and the Apostle
intimates as much, Heb. 7.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc. that they receive Tithes of their
Brethren in the same manner by the Law, as Melchisedec did of their Father
Abraham. Now they received Tithes of Corn, Wine, Oil, Cattle, all sorts of
herbs and fruits, for their standing maintenance and Inheritance too; Number.
18.20, to the end, Levit. 27.30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Deuteronomy. 14.22, 28. Therefore it
is most probable, if not infallible, that Abraham paid Tithes to Melchisedec of
all those things which the Levites and Priests afterward received from their
brethren, not of the spoils alone, out of which no certain Maintenance could be
raised, not specified therefore in those general precepts concerning Tithes.

5. The Apostle arguing the natural justice of Ministers maintenance, Romans
15.27. and 1 Cor. 9.11. uses this expression. If we have sown unto you
spiritual things (in the plural number) is it a great matter if we shall reap
your CARNAL THINGS, in the plural number too; and such things as seem commonly
to grow and multiply; as the word reap imports. And Gal. 6.6. he uses this
general precept, Let him that is taught in the word, communicate to him that
teaches IN ALL GOOD THINGS: Therefore to restrain Abraham's giving Tithes of
all, only to the spoils, and not to all his carnal and good things, is a very
improper exposition, dissonant from the scope and sense of these parallel
Texts, which seem aptly to interpret it.

6. The very Pharisee in the Gospel, boasting of his Justice and Piety, used
this expression, parallel with that of Abraham, Luke 18.12. I GIVE TITHES OF
ALL THAT I POSSESS; and to confine Abraham's giving Tithes of all, to the
Tithes only of the spoils, and not to extend it, with the Pharisee, to all that
he poss^ssed besides, is to make this Father of the Faithful, less righteous,
liberal, devout than this hypocritical Pharisie.

7. That which seems to put all our of question, is the parallel Text of Genesis
28.20, 21, 22. Where Jacob after his traveling vision, makes this vow to God,
even before the Levitical Law for Tithes; If God will be with me, so that I
come again to my Fathers house in peace; Then shall the Lord be my God, and
this stone which I have set up for a pillar, shall be Gods house: and of all
that thou shall give me, I will surely (without diminution, substraction, or
failing) give the Tenth unto thee: Whence should godly Jacob take his pattern
of surely giving the Tenth of all (not of spoils alone) that God should give
him, unto God, but from the practice of his Grandfather Abraham, who gave
M^lchisedec the Tenth of all God gave him, as well as of the Spoils? Honoring
God with all his Substance and increase: according to that precept of Solomon
(having relation to his practice and this Vow of Jacobs) Prove. 3.9. Honor the
Lord with thy Substance, and with the first fruits of all thy increase. And so
much in refutation of this second Evasion, which some armed men much urge.

The third Objection, Object: 3.
which some would make fatal to all Tithes under the Gospel, is from the close
of the Apostles forecited words: Heb. 7.12. For the Priesthood being changed,
there is also a necessity of a change of the Law, etc. From whence William
Thorp, (one of our Martyrs) thus reasoned against Tithes, and others now, Fox
Acts and Monuments vol. 1. p. 700.
Saint Paul says, That Tithes were given in the old Law to Levites and to
Priests, that came of the lineage of Levi; but our Priests come not of the
lineage of Levi, but of Juda, to which Juda no Tithes were promised to be given:
And therefore Paul says, since the Priesthood is changed from the generation
of Levi to Juda, its necessary that changing also be made of the Law: So that
Priests must live now without Tithes and other Dues that they claim, following
Christ and his Apostles in wilful poverty, as they have given them example.

I Answer 1. Answer.
That the Apostle in this, and the three following Chapters, concludes and
proves by sundry Arguments, That the Levitical Priesthood and the Ceremonial
Law, given the people under Moses (the sea Hemingius and others on this place.
Covenant of this Priesthood) were both changed and abolished by Christ, and
his everlasting Priesthood, shadowed to us by them; and by consequence the
maintenance of the Levitical Priests by Sacrifices offered by them at the
Altar, by first fruits and Tithes themselves, so far as they were Ceremonial,
prescribed by the Ceremonial Law, for the maintenance only of these abolished
Levitical Priests and Levites; which is all this Scripture proves, when pressed
to the uttermost. But can any rational man hence conclude, The Levitical
Priesthood, the Ceremonial law, and all the tithes, maintenance due to the
Jewish Priests and Levites by this Law are abolished by Christ, a Priest for
ever after after the order of Melchisedec, to whom Tithes were due and paid by
Abraham, before this law and Priesthood instituted: Therefore all Tithes,
maintenance due and paid to Melchisedec, (and in him to Christ, and the
Ministers of the Gospel under him) are eternally abolished as Jewish and
Levitical? Surely this is a mad inference, both besides and against this Text;
from which all Orthodox Protestant Commentators, as well as Papist and
Jesuits, conclude the quite contrary, and learned Nicholas Hemingius in his
Commentary on it, p. 805. thus determines, It is subjoyned, that Melchisedec
received Tithes from Abraham, which Tithes Abraham verily gave of his own
accord, following without doubt the custom of Conquerors (Let our Conquering
Officers, Soldiers observe and do the like) who were wont to consecrate the
tenths of their Spoils to their Gods, or to give them to their Priests. But
this collation of Tithes, See Walafridi Strabi de Rebus Eccles. c. 27.
multo meliori Jure Christo Sacerdoti debetur; is due by much better Right to
Christ our Priest; who as he gives all things to us out of mere bounty; ita
vicissim illi non solum Decimas, verum etiam omnia nostra debemus; so we owe to
him again, not only Tithes* but likewise all we have. Whether the Objectors or
Hemingius speak most Gospel Divinity and Reason from this Text, let every
Christians conscience judge.

2. The Apostles words concerning the change and abrogation of the Ceremonial
Law, have no coherence with or relation to the precedent discourse, concerning
payment of Tithes to Melchisedec and the Levites; recited only to prove the
dignity and excellency of Melchisedecs Priesthood above Aarons; and of the
Levitical Priests and Levites above their Brethren, from whom they received
Tithes. The force of the Argument, reduced into a Logical form, being thus. He
who receives Tithes for the execution of his Priestly Office, is better and
greater tha^ he who pays Tithes; But the Patriarch Abraham himself, the very
Father of the Faithful, and Prince of the Fathers, paid Tithes to Melchisedec;
and likewise the Levitical Priests (then in his loins) in and by him; who yet
receive Tithe of their Brethren, but not of their Father Abraham or
Melchisedec: Therefore Melchisedec is better and greater than Abraham and them,
and they than their Brethren who paid them Tithes. And by consequence, Christ
being a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec, who was but a type of
him, must be better and greater than Abraham, ( Joh. 8.55, 56.) or the
Levitical Priests, or than Melchisdec himself, who did but typifie him. This
excellency and precedence of Christ's Priesthood before Aarons, he proves by
other Arguments drawn from Melchisedec, not pertinent to our present business;
after which he largely argues the change and abolition of the Levitical Law and
Priesthood by Christ, (a theme of a different nature from the former) to which
the objected words refer; therefore the total and final abolishing of all
Tithes, to which these words have no relation, can never be enforced from them;
being ratifyed by the former clause, as appurtenances to Christ's everlasting
Priesthood, as well as to Melchisedecs; Therefore as due to his Ministers under
the Gospel, as to any Priests and Levites under the Law, which were likewise
Types of Christ, the true high Priest, expiring at and by his death.

3. The Priests and Levites under the Law had Cities, Glebes, Houses settled on
them for their habitation, families, Cattle, as well as Tithes, by the
Ceremonial Law, for their better maintenance, accommodation; and that in a
large proportion, Lev. 25.32, 33, 34. Number. 35.1, to 12. Josh. 21.1, to 43. 1
Chr. 6.54, to the end, chapter 9.10, to 35. 2 Chr. 11.13, 14. Ezra 2.70. Neh.
11.26. chapter 13.10. Ezec. 45.1, to 6. chapter 4.8, 9, to 15. If then this Text proves
the Total Abolition of all our Ministers Tithes, root and branch, as Jewish and
Antichristian; as some impudent Scriblers and Petitioners against them, now
affirm: It likewise proves the abolition of all their Rectories, Glebes, Houses
likewise, as well as of their Tithes, as Jewish and Antichristian: And so
Ministers of the Gospel now shall neither have Tithes nor Glebes to support and
feed them, their families and Cattle; nor yet so much as an House wherein to
lodge and put their heads; and be enforced to complain as our Savior once did
of his forlorn condition, Mat. 8.20. and Luke 9.58. the Foxes have holes, and
the Birds of the air have Nests, but the Son of Man has not where to lay his
head. A condition to which some Jesuitical, Anabaptistical, Athiestical,
uncharitable beasts of Prey, worse than any Foxes or Harpies, would now gladly
reduce all our faithful Ministers and their Families, whiles some of them Lord
it, and lodge themselves in our Kings, Princes, Bishops, Deans and Chapters new
acquired royal Palaces, and not content therewith, would spoil all our
Ministers of their more contemptible Glebes, Rectories, Tithes, to enrich
themselves and their Posterities, and make our Ministers like our Savior in
his voluntary Poverty, both Houseless and Harborless. They may with as much
Justice (like the hard-hearted bloody Jews, Soldiers) even Mat. 27.35. Luke
23.32, to 46. Joh. 19.18.
crucify them on crosses, between such thieves as themselves, to make them
like our Savior, even in his voluntary sufferings; as part their Glebes,
Lands, Rectories, Tithes among them, and cast Lots upon their vestures, even
before their death, when as the Soldiers who crucified our Savior, did not
part his raiment amongst them, nor cast Lots on his vesture till after his
crucifixion by them, John 19.23, 24. Mat. 27.35, 36.
there being as much Authority, Conscience, Law, Justice, Reason for the one,
as other: seeing none by any Laws can lose or forfeit their Lands, Livelihood,
but such who first forfeit their Lives to public Justice.

4. The Israelites were enjoined by the Levitical Law, Deuteronomy. 12.17, 18, 19. chapter
14.26, 27, 28, 29. to harbor, entertain the Priests, and Levites within their
gates, and not to forsake them so long as they should live upon the earth, but
freely to permit and invite them to come, eat, drink, feast, rejoice, and be
satisfied with them and their Families before the Lord; as well as to pay them
Tithes. But this Law (as they argue) is now abolished by Christ with the
Priesthood; Therefore when our Ministers are stripped of all their Tithes,
Glebes, Rectories, Houses, maintenance by our new Reformadoes; it must be
Jewish and Antichristian for them or any others so much as to lodge, entertain,
or give them any thing to eat or drink within their gates, or so much as to
admit, invite them to a Feast, or meal within their Houses; and then they, with
all theirs and other poor widows and orphans, must all presently starve, perish
by See his voice from the Temple p. 2.
John Cannes and these uncharitable men's new Gospel Light and Charity, because
Hospitality and Alms to such, are Levitical and Jewish, abolished with the
Levitical Law and Priesthood; which abrogated all Charity and Humanity out of
the world, as well as out of these Tithe-Oppugners hearts, if this their
Objection be Orthodox Gospel truth.

5. Mere Freewill Offerings and voluntary unconstrained Contributions were
prescribed by the Levitical and Judicial law, both for and toward the
maintenance of Gods Priests, and worship; for the building, and repairing of
the Tabernacle, and of the Temple afterward, toward which the godly Kings,
Princes, Generals, Captains, Officers, Soldiers, and all the pious people of
God contributed most joyfully, liberally, and in such abundance upon all
occasions, that they gave far more than was sufficient; and thereupon were
prohibited by special Proclamation to give or bring any more (as in the case of
Materials of all sorts, for the building and furniture of the Tabernacle of the
congregation) and of the Temple, toward which many Heathen Kings, and their
Officers contributed freely, and the very captive Jews, Exodus 35.20, to 30.
chap. 36.2, to 9. Levit. 22.18, 21, 23. chap. 23.38. Number. 15.3. chap. 29.39.
chap. 31.48, to the end, 1 Chronicles. 26.26, 27, 28. chap. 22.1, to 17. chap. 29.1,
to 17. 2 Chronicles. 24.4, to 15. chap. 27.3. chap. 29.3, to 20.31. chap. 34.8, to
15. Ezra 1. throughout, chap. 3.5. chap. 7.16. chap. 8.28, 29. Therefore
Ministers under the Gospel must not be maintained, nor Churches, Houses for
public Assemblies built or repaired by Free Will offerings, and voluntary
contributions, being Levitical, Jewish, and so abandoned; and if not by Tithes
nor forced Rates as they allege, then the Ministers must utterly starve, and
all our Churches fall to sudden ruin, as many now do. And is this Gospel
Saintship and Christianity?

6. The Priests and Levites by the Levitical Law, were prescribed what wives
they should marry, and what not, Levit. 21.7, to the 14. will it therefore
follow (as the Papist Votaries conclude) Therefore Ministers of the Gospel must
not marry? and must all now be divorced from their wives, as well as from their
Tithes and Benefices, because the Levitical law is abolished, and Priests wives
Jewish, as well as their Tithes? Our beastly Ranters then may seize upon
Ministers wives, as well as the brutish Anabaptists, Quakers, Swordmen on their
Tithes and Glebes.

7. The seventh day Sabbath it self, though prescribed by a Exodus 20.8, 9, 10.
Deuteronomy. 5.19.
Moral law, was in some sense ceremonial, and enjoined by Exodus 31.14, 15, 16.
c. 35.2, 3. Lev. 24.8. Number. 28.9, 10. Deuteronomy 5.14, 15. Levit. 23.3.
Ceremonial laws too; therefore (as Dr. Bound, Dr. Twisse, Dr. White, and
others, of the Sabbath. Bishop Andrews, Mr. Downham Mr. Cleaver, Mr. Dod on the
fourth Commandment, and all other Commentators on it.
most affirm) abrogated by Christ's death as Jewish, as to the precise seventh
day from the Creation, and the Jewish rigidities, Sacrifices on it; will it
therefore follow, that it is Jewish and unlawful for Christians under the
Gospel, to observe the Lords day every week, and render unto God the same
weekly proportion of time for public worship, as the Jews did, or to keep any
public Fasts, or Feasts to God at all, as the Jews by the Levitical law were
bound to do? If so, then farewell all Lords-dayes, Fasts, Feasts, public
Assemblies for Gods worship, all Ministers, Churches, (and God himself together
with them) as well as Tithes; let Gain, Money be the only Deities henceforth
adored among us, as the Motto stamped upon our new State-coyn, God with us, and
most men's practices sadly proclaim, to Gods dishonor, and Religions
intolerable defamation. These Answers, I presume, will for ever satisfy or
silence these Objectors, with His second voice from the Temple.
John Can, their new Champion, who may now discern their gross mistake; and
learn this for a general certain truth: That whatever is not in its own nature
and Original, merely Jewish and ceremonial, but has a kind of natural justice,
equity, convenience, morality or necessity in it, and had a divine original,
institution before the ceremonial Law given, or the Levitical Priesthood
instituted; That thing, though afterward given, limited, prescribed to the
Levitical Priests or Israelites by a general or special Levitical Law abrogated
by Christ, does neither cease its being, nor become unlawful in its primitive,
or proper use unto Christian Ministers or Believers under the Gospel, by the
abolishing of the Levitical Law and Priesthood; but may, and must necessarily
be continued, practiced, perpetuated among them without the least sin, scandal,
or Judaism, according to its own primitive institution, or natural, necessary,
divine, moral or civil use; else Bread, meat, drink, wives, clothes, religious
Sabbaths, Fasts, Feasts, Edifices and Assemblies for Gods public worship,
Houses for Hospitality, Charity to Ministers, to poor distressed Saints,
People, (yea reading, prayer, preaching of the word of God, Magistracy and
Government it self) should be utterly unlawful unto Christian Ministers and
People, as well as Tithes; because given, prescribed to be used by the
Levitical Priests and Jews, by the Levitical Law. Therefore seeing meat, drink,
food, raiment, Lands, Houses, and a competent proportion of all worldly
necessaries, are as simply needful for the preservation, subsistence of the
Ministers of the Gospel and their Families now under the Gospel, as for the
Priests, Levites before and under the Law, or all other sorts of men in the
world, who cannot live without them: And seeing Tithes, Lands, Houses, both
before and under the Law, were originally given to and settled by God and Men
upon Priests and Levites first, and Ministers since, not as mere Types,
Shadows, Ceremonies, but as a just, fitting, convenient recompense of their
Labor, necessary maintenance, Livelihood, habitation, residence for them and
their Families, to provide them meat, drink, Books, clothes, and other
necessaries to live by: Why our Ministers under the Gospel should not still
enjoy them in this kind and Nature, without the least shadow of Judaism, as
well as Melchisedec before the Law, or the Jewish Priests and Levites under it,
or their Predecessors before them, even from the first settlement of the Gospel
amongst us, or as well as any other Men, or the Objectors do enjoy their Lands,
Goods, Houses, and the other nine parts of their Tithes increase, for their
Livelihood and subsistence, as well as the Jews without any sin or Judaism,
transcends my capacity to apprehend, and the ability of all armed or unarmed
Enemies of Tithes or Glebes to demonstrate from Scripture, Law, Reason, or the
objected abused Text, overlong insisted on, to clear it from all ignorant or
wilful wrestings. And so much for the payment of Tithes by Decimas Deo and
sacerdotibus Dei dandas, Abraham factis, Jacob promissis insinuat; deinde Lex
Statuit, and Omnes Doctores sancti commemorant walafridi Strabi De Rebus
Ecclesiasticus. c. 27.
Abraham, and vowing them by Jacob, before the Law, to justify the lawfulness
and continuance of them under the Gospel, against all cavilling Exceptions.

Secondly, I shall make good the Proposition from the Maintenance of the
Priests and Levites by Glebes, Tithes, and Oblations under the Law, urged as
the strongest, if not only Reason against them: and thus form my Argument.

That which God himself, who is infinitely and only wife, just, holy, did by
his special Laws, Edicts institute, prescribe, as the most expedient, equal,
fit, just, rational, convenient maintenance of all other for his own Priests
and Levites to receive and take from his own People (when once settled in the
promised Land) for the execution of their function; must questionless be, not
only a lawful, but the most expedient, equal, fit, just, rational, convenient
maintenance of all other for his Ministers of the Gospel to receive, and take
from all believing Christians in any settled Christian Kingdom, State, Church
under the Gospel; especially, if he has neither positively prohibited this
kind and way of maintenance, nor specially prescribed any other way or kind of
settled maintenance for them in and by the Gospel.

But God himself, who is infinitely and Romans 16.27. Psalm. 147.5. Isa. 45.21.
Zeph. 3.5. Acts 3.14. Josh. 24.19. Isa. 6.3. Romans 4.3. chap. 15.4.
only wise, just, holy, did by his special Laws, Edicts institute, prescribe
Houses, Lands, Glebes, T^thes, and Oblations, as the most expedient, equal,
fitting, just, rational, convenient maintenance of all other for his own
Priests and Levites to receive and take from his own people, when once settled
in the promised Land, for the execution of their Functions; and has neither
positively prohibited this kind or way of maintenance, nor specially prescribed
any other way or kind of settled maintenance for them in and by the Gospel.

Ergo, It must questionless be, not only a lawful, but the most expedient,
equal, fit, just, rational, convenient maintenance of all other for his
Ministers of the Gospel from all believing Christians in any settled Kingdom,
State, Church under the Gospel.

The Major, I suppose no rational Christian can or will deny, except he thinks
himself (as King Alphonso, the proud Atheistical self-conceited Astronomer did)
more wise, just, holy than God himself; and abler to carve out a more
expedient, equal, just, fitting, rational, convenient maintenance for Gods
Priests, Levites, Ministers, than God himself has done; and dare bid defiance
to this Gospel precept, Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear
children: The Minor I shall thus confirm in order.

1. That God did by special Laws, Edicts institute and prescribe Cities,
Suburbs, Lands, Houses, Glebes, for the Priests and Levites habitation, and the
better maintenance of them and their Cattle, and that in a liberal proportion,
is apparent by Number. 35. from v. 1, to 12. where we find recorded; That the Lord
spoke unto Moses in the plain of Moab, by Jordan near Jericho, saying; command
the Children of Israel that they give unto the Levites of the Inheritances of
their possession, Cities to Dwell in; and ye shall give also unto the Levites
Suburbs for their Cities round about them. And the Cities they shall have to
Dwell in, and the suburbs of them, shall be for their Cattle, and for their
Goods, and for all their Beasts. And the suburbs of the Cities which ye shall
give unto the Levites, shall reach from the wall of the City and outward, a
thousand Cubits round about. And ye shall measure from without the City on the
East side two thousand Cubits, and on the South side two thousand Cubits, and
on the West side two thousand Cubits, and on the North side two thousand
Cubits, and the City shall be in the midst; this shall be to them the suburbs
of the Cities. And among the Cities which ye shall give unto the Levites, there
shall be six Cities for refuge, which ye shall appoint for the Manslayer, that
he may fly thither; and to them ye shall add forty and two Cities. So all the
Cities which ye shall give to the Levites shall be forty and eight Cities, them
shall ye give with their Suburbs. And the Cities which ye shall give shall be
of the possession of the Children of Israel: from them that have many, ye shall
give many; and from them that have few, ye shall give few: Everyone shall give
of his Cities, according to his inheritance which he inheriteth. This positive
just command of God was given before the Israelites entrance into, and conquest
of the land of Canaan: And this further positive law then likewise made against
the sale and alienation of these Glebes and Possessions. Levit. 25.32, 33, 34.
Notwithstanding the Cities of the Levites, and the Houses of the Cities of
their possession, may the Levites redeem at any time, which others could not
do, v. 30, 31. And if a man purchase of the Levites, then the House that was
sold and the City of his possession shall go out in the year of Jubilee; for the
houses of the Levites are their possession among the children of Israel: but
the field of the Suburbs of their City may not be sold, for it is their
perpetual Possession. After this, when the land of Canaan was fully conquered
by the Israelites and divided amongst the Tribes by bounds and limits, we read,
Josh. 21.1, to 43. Then came near the heads of the Fathers of the Levites unto
Eleazer the Priest, and unto Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the heads of the
tribes of the Children of Israel; and they spoke unto them at Shilo in the land
of Canaan, saying, The Lord commanded by the hand of Moses (in the text
forecited) To give us Cities to dwell in with the Suburbs thereof for our
cattle. And the children of Israel gave unto the Levites, at the commandment of
the Lord (mark it all enemies of our Ministers, Rectories, Lands, Glebes,
Maintenance) these Cities and their Suburbs. Then follow the Names and Places
of the Cities allotted to the Levites proportionably out of every tribe, and
how they were divided by lot amongst them: which you may read in the text it
self, over large to transcribe. After which ensues this cloze of the story, v.
8.41, 42. And the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these Cities
and their Suburbs, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses, all the Cities
of the Levites within the possession of the children of Israel, were forty and
eight Cities, with their Suburbs: These Cities were every one with their
Suburbs round about them: Thus were all the Cities. In 1 Chronicles: 6: We have a
recital of the Sons and Families of Levi, and the Office of the Priests and
Levites, with the names of all the Cities and Suburbs alloted to them out of
every Tribe, agreeing with this of Joshua, where those who please may read them
at their leisure. These forty eight Cities and their Suburbs (as some
conceive) amounted to the tenth, or at least twelfth Part of the Cities and
Land of Canaan; the Priests and Levites according to their number, enjoying in
proportion as large a share of the promised Land, as any of the other Tribes,
for their Habitation and Glebes: besides their Tithes, First Fruits, Offerings
and other Dues.

All which (as In his Sermon, April 17, 1608. in defense of the Honorable
Function of Bishops.
Dr. George Downham, and In his Pilgrimage, l. 2. c. 7. p. 133. the first
Edition.
Mr. Samuel Purchase observe) amounted to a far greater proportion for the
maintenance of that small Tribe, than all the Bishoprics, Deaneries,
Benefices, Cathedral and College lands, Revenues, Glebes, Tithes, and
whatsoever Ecclesiastical Profits, endowments of the Clergy, and Scholars in
our whole Kingdom and Nation. After this, when the Temple of Jerusalem was
built, where the Priests and Levites were to wait in their several Courses
successively, by David's appointment (1 Chronicles. chap. 23, to chap. 27. 2 Chronicles.
8.14, 15. chap. 23.8. and chapter 13 10, 11. chapter 29.4. chap. 31.2. chap. 35. 2.
Levit. 1.5, 8, 9.) they had Houses, Chambers, lodgings provided for them at
Jerusalem, near the Temple, (where some of them constantly dwelt and attended,)
and likewise for the Tithes, first fruits and oblations brought thither to
them, 1 Chronicles. 9.10, to 35. chap. 23.28. chap. 28.11, 12, 13. 2 Chronicles. 2, to
13. Ezra 8.29. Neh. 10.37, 38, 39. chap. 12.44, 45, 47. chap. 13.4, to 15.
Ezech: 40.4, to 45. chap. 42.1, to 19. chap. 44.19. chap. 46.19. These Cities,
Suburbs, Habitations, Chambers, the Priests and Levits constantly enjoyed
without interruption til the revolt of the ten tribes from Rehoboam: when
Jeroboam the usurper erected two Golden Calves in Dan and Bethel, to keep the
people from going up to Jerusalem to worship God there, out of carnal fear and
suspicion; saying in his heart, Now shall the Kingdom return to the house of
David, if the people go up to Jerusalem to do Sacrifice in the House of the
Lord there, then shall the heart of this people turn back again to their Lord,
even unto Rehoboam King of Judah, and they shall kill me, and go again to
Rehoboam King of Judah, 1 Kings 12.26, to 33. and then we read 2 Chronicles. 11.13,
14, 15, 16. The Priests and the Levites that were in all Israel resorted to
Rehoboam out of all their Coasts; For the Levites left their Suburbs and their
Possessions, and came to Judah and Jerusalem; for Jeroboam and his sons had
cast them out from executing the Priests Office unto the Lord; and he ordained
him Priests for the High Places, 1 Kings 13:33. 2 Kings 17.32.
of the lowest of the People, and for the Devils, and the Calves which he had
made: which King Abijah warring with him after his Fathers death, (when he
claimed the right of his usurped Crown,) thus objected against him, and the
revolted Tribes, 2 Chr: 13.4, to 14. Hear me thou Jeroboam and all Israel:
Ought ye not to know that the Lord God of Israel gave the Kingdom over Israel
to David for ever, even to him and to his Sons by a Covenant of Salt? Yet
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon, the Son of David, is risen
up, and has rebelled against his Lord. And there are gathered unto him vain
men, the children of Belial, and have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam
the Son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not
withstand him. And now ye think to withstand the Kingdom of the Lord, in the
hand of the sons of David, and ye be a great multitude, and there be with you
Golden Calves, which Jeroboam made you for Gods. Have ye not cast out the
Priests of the Lord, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you
Priests after the manner of the Nations of other lands; so that whosoever
comes to Consecrate himself, with a young Bullock and seven Rams, the same may
be a Priest of them that are no Gods? But as for us the Lord is our God, and we
have not forsaken him; and the Priests which minister unto the Lord are the
Sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business: etc. For we keep the
Charge of the Lord our God; but ye have forsaken him: And behold God himself is
with us for our Captain, and his Priests with sounding Trumpets, to cry allarum
against you. The issue of this Atheistical State Policy, and Sacrilegious
deprivation, spoliation of Gods Priests and Levites of their Suburbs,
Possessions, Ministry by Jeroboam and his Sons, is very remarkable.

1 It brought ruin upon his whole Army, though double the number of Abijah his
host, of whom they had a great advantage by an ambushment; God himself smiting
him and his host, so that they fled before Judah; and Abijah and his people
sl^w them with a great slaughter, so that there fell down slain of Israel five
hundred thousand chosen men, 2 Chronicles. 13.13, to 20. The greatest slaughter in
one battle, that ever we read of in Sacred or profane Stories before or since.

2. It brought Captivity on his Adherents and people, who were brought under at
that time, pursued, and had their Cities taken and plundered, v. 18, 19.

3. It drew down this misery and fatal Judgment on himself, v. 20. Neither did
Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah; and the Lord struck him
and he died.

4. It became sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy
it from the face of the earth, 1 Kings 13.33, 34.

5. It made all the succeeding Kings of Israel professed Idolaters, and most of
them bloody Murderers, Usurpers, Persecutors, and produced perpetual
successive civil wars between Judah and Israel, 1 Kings 14.30. chap. 15.6, 7,
16, 32. 2 Chronicles. 28.4, to 12.

6. It brought final captivity, ruin and desolation in conclusion to the whole
kingdom of Israel, and the ten revolting Tribes, 2 Kings 17.20, 21, 22, 23.
where this sad story is recorded. And the Lord rejected all the seed of Israel,
and afflicted them, and delivered them into the hand of spoilers, until he had
cast them out of his sight. For he rent Israel from the house of David. And
they made Jeroboam the Son of Nebat King, (of which God thus complains, Hos.
8.4. They have set up Kings, but not by me, they have made Princes and I knew
it not) and Jeroboam drove Israel from following the Lord, and made them sin a
great sin: for the children of Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam which
he did, they departed not from them, until the Lord removed Israel out of his
sight, as he had said by all his servants the Prophets: So was Israel carried
away out of their own Land to Assyria, till this Day; when as the Kingdom of
Judah Dr. Usher. annals Eccles. veteris Testamenti. p. 132.
continued above 134. years after in David's royal posterity, enjoying Gods
Priests, Levites, Prophets and Ordinances, till their captivity for their sins,
in mocking, abusing his Messengers, Prophets, and despising his words, 2 Chronicles.
36.16, 17. And then See the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah.
after 70. years captivity, they were restored again to their Country,
re-edified Jerusalem and the Temple; and with them, the Priests, and Levites
returning from bondage, were restored likewise to their Cities and Glebes (of
which the Kings of Judah never deprived them, as Jeroboam and his Sons, and the
Kings of Israel, who were all Idolaters did) whence thus we read Ezra. 2.70. So
the Priests and the Levites, and the Singers, and the Porters, the Nethinims
dwelt in their Cities, and all Israel in their Cities; Thus seconded, Neh.
11.18, 20. All the Levites in the holy City were 284. and the residue of
Israel, of the Priests and Levites, were in all the Cities of Judah, every Man
in his Inheritance; and Neh. 13.10. The Levites and Singers that did the work,
were fled every one to his field. In the Prophecy of Ezechiel (written during
the Jews Captivity, in the Land of the Chaldeans, Ezech. 1.1, 2, 3.)
prophesying of the re-edifiing of the Temple, the dimensions and whole fabric
thereof, chapter 40.1, to 45. we find frequent mention of holy Chambers therein,
provided for the Priests, and their vestments. And chapter 45.1, to 5. God enjoins
the Israelites by this Prophet upon their restitution to their own Land, when
they should divide it by Lot for an Inheritance; That they should offer an holy
portion of the Land, an oblation unto the Lord: the length thereof twenty five
thousand reeds; and the breadth ten thousand; This shall be holy in all the
borders thereof round about. Of this there shall be for the Sanctuary 500 reeds
in length, with 500 in breadth square round about; and fifty Cubits round about
for the Suburbs thereof. Then he adds: The holy Portion of the land shall be
for the Priests, the Ministers of the sanctuary; which shall come near to
minister unto the Lord, and it shall be a place for their Houses, and an holy
place for the Sanctuary. And the 25000. of length, and 10000. of breadth, Shall
also the Levites, the Ministers of the House have for themselves, for a
possession for twenty Chambers. In the 47. Chapter verse 13. to the end of the
Prophecy, he writes of the bounds and division of the land of Canaan (after
their restitution) according to their several tribes, in relation to and
imitation of the bounds and division of it formerly made and recited by Joshua:
out of which there was a special portion reserved for the Priests and Levites,
as there was in Joshua's division forecited: Thus expressed, Ezeck. 48.8, to
15. And by the border of Judah, from the East side unto the West side, shall be
the offering, which they shall offer of 25000. reeds in breadth, and in length
as one of the other parts, from the East side unto the West side; and the
sanctuary shall be in the midst of it: The oblation ye shall offer unto the
Lord, shall be of 25000. in length, and 10000 in breadth: And for them, even
for the Priests shall be this holy Oblation; toward the North 25000. in length,
and toward the West 10000. in breadth; and toward the East 10000 in breadth,
and toward the South 25000 in length, and the sanctuary of the Lord shall be in
the midst thereof. It shall be for the Priests, that are sanctified, of the
sons of Zadock, which have kept my charge, which went not astray, when the
children of Israel went astray (after Jeroboam and his calves) as the Levites
went astray. And this oblation of the land that is offered, shall be unto them
a thing most holy by the border of the Levites. And over against the border of
the Priests, the Levites shall have 25000. in length, and 10000. in breadth:
all the length shall be 25000, and the breadth 10000. reeds. And they shall not
sell of it, neither exchange, nor alienate the first fruits of the land, for it
is holy unto the Lord.

From all these Scriptures (here recited at large for the Readers fuller
satisfaction, conviction, and ease in turning to them) these conclusions
undeniably arise,

1. That the Priests and Levits had by Gods special command, precept (often
repeated) both Cities, Houses, Suburbs, Lands, Glebes designed to and settled on
them by their brethren out of all the other tribes of Israel, for their
habitation, and the keeping, feeding of their Cattle, Goods, Beasts, and that
in a very large and bountiful proportion. And likewise necessary, convenient
houses, chambers, lodgings near the Temple, when first built, and when
re-edified afterward; which refutes the common error of those ignorant
Simpletons and illiterate New-lights, who from Numb. 18.20. Deuteronomy. 10.9. chap.
18.1, 2. The Priests, the Levites, and all the tribe of Levi shall have no part
nor inheritance with Israel: they shall eat the offerings of the Lord made by
fire, and his inheritance: Therefore shall they have no inheritance among their
brethren, the Lord is their inheritance, as he has said unto them; Conclude:
That the Priests and Levites amongst the Israelites, had no Cities, houses,
lands, suburbs or possessions of their own belonging to their Office, and were
expressly forbidden by God to receive or enjoy any among their brethren: And
hence infer; That Ministers of the Gospel ought not to enjoy any Rectories,
Houses, Lands or Glebes: Whereas all the forecited Scriptures directly record
the contrary; and the meaning of these seeming repugnant texts, is only this;
Heylins Cosmography, p. 564.
That they should have no inheritance amongst their Brethren in such sort and
manner as they had; set out altogether in one parcel by Joshua and the rest who
divided the land amongst the tribes by lot (which would have hindered them from
their duties) but only a subsequent assignment of certain Cities, houses and
suburbs seattered and divided one from another, in and out of every tribes
inheritance; that so they might perform their offices with more ease, and be
always ready at hand in every tribe, to teach and instruct the people upon all
occasions.

2. That the inheritance of the Cities, houses and suburbs, which they enjoyed,
were not reputed their own proper inheritance, though they enjoyed the
possession and profits thereof, but Gods inheritance, as a thing devoted and
dedicated unto God himself; and therefore styled by Ezekiel, an Oblation unto
God, and an holy portion; as See Spelman. Council Ingulphi Historia: Mat. Westminster.
Antiq. Eccles. Brit. M. Seldens History of Tithes, chapter 1. and our Kings and
others ancient Charters of Donations to Abbeys and Churches.
Histories, Divines, Common, Civil and Canon Lawyers style all our Rectories,
Church Lands, and Glebes, with the Charters that first settled them, being given
and consecrated, Deo et Ecclesiae, an oblation unto God, and the Church.

3. That these endowments and Glebes of theirs, were called, reputed Gods own
Portion and Inheritance.

1. Because given by his special command and appointment by all the tribes.

2. Because originally consecrated, devoted to God and to his Priests and
Ministers only in Gods right, for his sake.

3. Because given to promote Gods worship, service, glory, and for an
habitation, support to Gods own Priests and Levites, employed wholly in his
immediate service.

4. That they were expressly prohibited to be sold, exchanged, or alienated by
the Priests, Levites, or any others; because they were reserved by and given
unto God himself, as an holy Portion and Oblation, and to the Priests and
Levites for a perpetual possession, in regard of the perception of the profits,
the inheritance of them residing only in God himself: Therefore not possible to
be justly and lawfully sold, exchanged, or alienated by, the Priests, Levites,
or any other mortal Powers whatsoever, who could claim no power, right,
property, or disposing interest in or over them against Gods own Sovereign and
sacred title.

5. That these Cities, Suburbs, Glebes, were ratably set out in and by every
tribe in an equal proportion, according to the multitude or paucity of their
Cities, as a Tenth of their Cities and lands, to which their 48 Cities and
Suburbs amounted as some probably conceive. And yet besides these 48 Cities,
there were Houses and Schools of Prophets, and Prophets children (in nature of
our Universities) in Bethel and in Jericho, 2 Kings 2.3, 4, 5, 7, to 24. chap.
6.1, 2, 3, 4. which were none of these 48 Cities.

6. That none of the Kings and Princes of Judah, (though many of them were
Idolatrous, wicked, and put to great extremities to raise moneys to pay their
Armies, and Tributes to foreign Invaders and Conquerors) did yet ever attempt to
sell or alienate the Cities, Suburbs, or revenues of the Priests and Levites to
maintain their wars, or pay public Debts or tributes, though King Asa,
Jehoash, Hezekiah (by way of loan) made bold with the Silver and Gold in the
treasure of the Lords house, in cases of public extremity (which might be, and
was afterward re-paid,) 1 Kings 15.18. cap. 18.15. 2 Chronicles. 16.2. Yea, the
Scripture expressly records, that in the great famine in Egypt, when all others
sold their lands, to buy bread, to King Pharaoh, only the Lands of the Priests
bought he not: For the Priests had a Portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did
eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them; wherefore they sold not their Lands
Genesis 47.20, to 27.

7. That the Idolatrous usurper Jeroboam, out of a carnal fear and policy to
keep the people from returning to their rightful Sovereign, and establish the
crown on himself and his Posterity, was the first man we read of, and his
Idolatrous sons and successors after him, who cast out Gods Priests and Levites
out of their offices, and then, out of their Cities, Suburbs and Possessions,
which he enforced them to desert, (though we read not, that they sold them to
maintain their Wars or pay Soldiers arrears;) who thereupon repaired to
Jerusalem, to Rehoboam the right heir, and after them out of all the tribes of
Israel, such as set their hearts to seek the Lord God of Israel, came to
Jerusalem to enjoy Gods Ordinances, and strengthened Rehoboam and his kingdom,
against this persecuting usurper, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, to 18.

8. That this his casting out of the Priests and Levites from their Offices and
P^ss^ssions, making Priests of the lowest of the People, and suffering every
one that would to consecrate himself a Priest without a lawful call, is
objected against Jeroboam by Abijah as a very high crime, and provocation
against God; and the maintaining, encouraging of Gods lawful Priests and
Levites in their Offices and settled possessions, alleged by him as a certain
argument of Gods presence with him, and so with any other King and people, and
of victory, success in conclusion, against sacrilegious Usurpers.

9. That when Gods lawful Priests and Levites are deprived of their Glebes and
Possessions, we must presently expect, a base, contemptible, time-serving,
Idolatrous, ignorant Priestood, Jeroboams Golden Calves, with their new Feasts
and Sacrifices, and a universal inundation of Idolatry, wickedness, prophanness
to ensue, with all the forementioned calamities, which befell Ieroboams Army,
adherents, subjects, Person, Family, Kingdom: which the Lord now set home on
all our hearts, that we may never be guilty of such a sacrilegious, ruinating,
God-provoking, Realm-destroying, Church-subverting practice in the least
degree, as some would now persuade us to, in stripping our Ministers of all
their Glebes, Rectories, Tithes and settled maintenance at one blow, (which even
Pharaoh himself, and godly Joseph refused to do toward the very Idolatrous
Priests of Egypt, allowing them an extraordinary daily portion to preserve
their lands from sale in time of famine, Genesis 47.22, 26.) whereto they have as
lawful, as just, as Divine a right, as these Priests and Levites had to their
Cities, Suburbs, Houses and Possessions, as I shall prove anon.

2. That God only wise did by special Laws and Edicts institute and prescribe
Tithes, as the most expedient, equitable, fitting, just, rational, convenient
Maintenance and Reward of all other for his own Priests and Levites, is
undeniably proved by Levit: 27.30, 31, 32. Deuteronomy: 12.17, 18, 19, 31. chapter 14.22.
to the end, chapter 26.7, 12, 13, 14, 15. Number: 18.21, to 32. Neh: 10.37, 38, 39.
chapter 12.44. chapter 13.5, 11, 12, 13, 14 Prove: 3.9. 2 Chronicles: 31.3, to 15. Mal: 3.8,
9, 10. Luke 18.12. Heb: 7.5, 8, 9. which Texts all may read at leisure, and are
needless to transcribe at large, this truth being confessed by all Opposites
to Tithes, who hence condemn them as Jewish and Ceremonial Rites now abolished.
That which I shall observe from them, is briefly this.

1. That the payment of Tithes to the Priests and Levites, was positively
prescribed by Gods special Precepts and Commands, frequently recited,
inculcated.

2. That Gods own People were specially commanded by him to pay Walafridi
Strabi De Rebus Eccles. ch, 27.
Tithes of the seed and increase of all their Land; of all Corn, Wine, Oil,
Fruits, yea, of Garden-Herbs, Seeds, Matthew. 23.3. Luke 11.42. and likewise of
the increase of all their Cattle, Herds, Flocks.

3. That God gave these Tithes, and all the tenth in Israel, to the Priests and
Levites for an Inheritance, as a due Reward for their Service which they serve,
even the Service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; which all Israelites
else were prohibited to come into, or do Service in; Lest they bear their Sin
and dye; And this was to be a Statute for ever throughout their Generations.
Nam. 18.21, 22, 23, 26, 31. Heb. 7.5.

4. That All the Tithes of the Land, Seed, Fruit, Herbs, Flocks, and of
whatsoever Annually increased, or passed under the Rod, are expressly said to
be the Lords, to be holy unto the Lord, consecrated unto the Lord, and an
Heave Offering unto the Lord, which he gave unto the Priests and Levites, for
an inheritance, Levit. 27.28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. Number. 18.24. 2 Chronicles. 31.6.

5. That God enjoined all the Israelites, Truly to tithe all the Tithes of
their Increase, and not to eat or embesle, detain or exchange any of it,
especially for the worse, Deuteronomy. 14.21. chapter 12.17. Levit. 27.33. Mal. 3.8. And
if any man would redeem his Tithes, he was to give the full price, and add a
fifth part over to it. Levit. 27.31.

6. That all these Tithes were to be brought by the people to the places and
Treasuries appointed for them, (the Corn ready threshed, winnowed, and the
Wine, Oil, Fruits in Vessels) at the peoples own costs, without any trouble to
the Priests or Levites; and if the place, whither they were to be brought, was
too far off, then, that they called the second Tithe, ought to be turned into
money by the Owner, and the money paid to the Priests and Levites in lieu
thereof. Deuteronomy. 12.17, 18, 19. chapter 14.22, to 28. chapter 26.12, 13, 14. 2 Chronicles.
31.6, 12, 13, 14. Neh. 10.38, 39. chapter 12.44. chapter 13.5, to 12. Amos 4.4. Mal.
3.10.

7. That the detaining of these Tithes from the Priests and Levites, was a
great sin and Sacrilegious robbing of God himself, accompanied with his Curse,
and punished with Si non dederis mihi decimam, auferam novem, Walafridi Strabi
De Rebus Eccles. c. 27. See Calvin in Mal. 3. Augustine de Tempore Sermo 219.
Bochellus Decret. Ecclesiae Gal. l. 7. Tit. 8. c. 28, 31.
scarcity, barrenness, devouring locusts, blasting of the fruits of the earth,
etc. Mal. 3.8, 9, 10. (a place worthy the saddest consideration of all
Tithe-Oppugners and Substracters) Will a man rob God, yet ye have robbed me:
But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings: (Here is the
Sacrilegious Sin; pray mark the just deserved punishment:) Ye are cursed with a
Curse: For ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation (what this Curse was,
follows) THE DEVOURER, (that is, devouring Creatures, as Locusts, Caterpillars,
Palmer-worms, Canker-worms, and the like) did destroy the fruits of their
Ground, their Vines did cast their Fruit before their Times in the Field; And
God blasted and destroyed all their Corn and fruits with blasting and Mildew,
and Hail; Amos 4.9. Joel 1.4. yea, They sowed much and brought in little; they
did eat, but had not enough; they did drink, but yet were not satisfied with
drink: they did cloth themselves, but there was no warmth: and he that earneth
wages, earneth it to put it into a bag with holes. They looked for much, and lo
it came to little, and when they brought it home, God did blow upon it; yea,
the heaven over them was stayed from Dew, and the earth was stayed from her
fruits, and God called for a drought upon the Land, and upon the Mountains, and
upon the Corn, and upon the new Wine, and upon the Oil, and upon that the
ground brought forth, and upon Men and Cattle, and upon all the labor of their
hands: when one came to an heap of 20. measures, there were but ten; when one
came to the Presse-fat for to draw out fifty Vessels, there were but twenty;
and the Wine, and the figs, and Pomegranate tree, and the Olive tree, did not
bring forth, Hag. 1.6, 9, to 11. chapter 2.16, 17, 19. O that all hard-hearted,
covetous, hypocritical, atheistical detainers of, and Declaimers against
Tithes, and Ministers Just settled Maintenance, would lay these Judgments and
curses of God close unto their hearts, that so they might thereby be reclaimed
from their robbery and Sacrilege against God, and prevent, divert these
Judgments, Curses from themselves, and our whole Nation, which they have cause
to fear, and will doubtless feell them to their smart and loss, if they rob
God and our Ministers of their Tithes, and maintenance in such sort as many now
strenuously endeavor!

8. That God himself annexed many gracious Aug, Sermon. 219. Walafridi Strabi de
Rebus Eccles. c. 27. Synodus Lingon. 1404. Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l.
6. Tit. 8. c. 31.
Promises of giving abundance of all earthly and spiritual blessings, to the
cheerful, conscientious due payment of Tithes to his Priests and Levites for
their Maintenance; which I shall recite, to excite men cheerfully to this
practice now, Deuteronomy. 14.22, 23, 28, 29. Thou shall Truly Tithe all the increase
of thy seed, corn, wine, oil, herds, flocks; that thou may learn to fear the
Lord thy God always; And that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all the work
of thy Hand, which thou do, Deuteronomy. 26.12, 13, 14, 15. When thou have made an
end of tithing all the Tithes of thine increase, the third year, which is the
year of Tithing, and have given it unto the Levite, etc. Then thou shall say
before the Lord thy God, I have brought away the Hallowed things out of mine
House, and also have given them unto the Levite, etc. According to all thy
Commandments which thou have commanded me, I have not transgressed thy
Commandments, neither have I forgotten them. I have not eaten thereof in my
mourning, neither have I taken away ought thereof for my Unclean Use, nor given
ought thereof for the dead, but I have hearkened to the Voice of the Lord my
God, And have done according to all that thou have commmanded me: Look down
from thy Holy Habitation from Heaven, And bless thy people Israel, and the Land
which thou have given us, a Land that flows with milk and honey. Such a
conscientious true payment of Tithes as this, according to all Gods
Commandments, without the least Substraction or embezlement, emboldens,
enables every particular man to make such a Prayer to God, as this, not only
for himself, but for the whole Land; brings a blessing upon himself and all the
Realm, yea makes it a Land flowing with milk and honey, and abundance of all
rich blessings. Besides, we read in 2 Chr. 31.1, to 15. That when godly King
Hezekiah had destroyed Idolatry, and appointed the Courses of the Priests, and
Levites after their Courses, every man according to his service, he brought
^urings, and Peace Offerings, to minister and to give thanks, and to praise in
all the Gates of the Tents of the Lord: He appointed also the Kings portion of
his Substance for the burnt-offerings, for the morning and evening; for the
Sabbaths, the new Moons, and set Feasts; moreover he commanded the people that
dwelt in Jerusalem, To give the Portion of the Priests and the Levites, that
they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord. And as soon as the
Commandment came abroad, the children of Israel brought in abundance, the
first Fruits of Corn, Wine, Oil and Honey, and of all the increase of the
field, and the Tithes of all things brought they in abundance. And concerning
the children of Israel and Judah, that dwelt in the Cities of Judah, They also
brought in the Tithes of Oxen, and Sheep, and the Tithe of holy things, which
were dedicated unto the Lord their God, and laid them by heaps. In the third
month they began to lay the foundation of the heaps, and finished them in the
seventh month, and when Hezekiah and the Princes came and saw the heaps, they
blessed the Lord and his People Israel. Then Hezekiah questioned with the
Priests and Levites concerning the heaps; And Azariah the chief Priest of the
House of Zadok, answered him, and said; Since the People began to bring the
Offerings into the house of the Lord; We have had enough to eat, and have left
Plenty: (But did the people grow poor thereby? no, but much richer than before)
for the Lord has blessed his people, and that which is left, is this great
store. Then Hezekiah commanded to prepare Chambers (or storehouses) in the
house of the Lord, and they prepared them, and brought in the Offerings and the
Tithes, and the dedicate things faithfully; over which Cononiah the Levite was
Ruler. How different was this practice of all the people and godly Saints in
those days, in a cheerful bringing in their Tithes and Oblations to the
Priests and Levites in abundance for their encouragement; which caused King
Hezekiah, his Princes, the Priests, Levites, and God himself to bless them;
from the sacrilegious practice of Tith-detaining Hypocritical Saints,
Anabaptists, Quakers, Sectaries and Christians in our days: who shall never
receive such a blessing as this from God or good men, but their curses? If
these Texts and Presidents will not move such hard-hearted men, let them
consider both this ^^^cept and promise of God, Prove. 3.9, 10. Honor the Lord
with thy Substance, and with the first fruits of thine increase: So shall thy
Barns be filled with Plenty, and thy Press shall burst out with new Wine: And
Mal: 3.7, 10, 11, 12. Return unto me, and I will return unto you, says the
Lord of hosts, but ye said Wherein shall we return? Bring ye all the Tithes
into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now
herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, If I will not open you the windows of
heaven, and Si dederis mihi Decimas. multiplicabo novem: Ideo ergo dandae sunt
Decimae, ut hac devotione Deus placatus, largius praestet quae necessaria sunt
Walafridi Strabi de Rebus Eccles. c. 27. Augustine. Sermo. 219.
power you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it;
And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the
fruits of your ground, neither shall your Vine cast her fruit, before her time
in the field, says the Lord of Hosts: And all nations shall call you blessed,
for ye shall be a delight some land, says the Lord of Hosts. What Christians
heart (though never so covetous and worldly) should not these sacred promises
of God, (the last of them recorded in the last of all the Books and Prophets in
the Old Testament, they being not merely Levitical and Judaical, but of eternal
verity, use, and evangelical too) excite and engage, most cheerfully to pay and
bring in all their Tithes and Dues to Gods Ministers now, as well as to the
Priests and Levites heretofore; Christ himself having made like parallel
promises of blessings and rewards for relieving and maintaining his Ministers
in the Gospel, Mat. 10.40, 41, 42. Mark 9.41. Phil. 4.18, 19?

9. That the due payment of Tithes to Gods Priests and Levites, was a great
encouragement to them in the law of the Lord, and in the diligent execution of
their duties, 2 Chronicles. 31.3, 4, 5, 10. And on the contrary, The withholding of
them from them, a great discouragement, necessitating them to desert their
duties and functions: witness that memorable Text, Neh. 13.10, 11, 12. And I
perceived that the portions of the Levites had not been given them (mark the
consequence) For the Levites and the Singers, that did the work were fled every
one to his field. Then contended I with the Rulers, and said; Why is the house
of God forsaken? and I gathered them together, and set them in their place.
Then brought all Judah the Tithes of the Corn, and the new Wine, and the Oil
unto their treasuries; And I made treasurers over the treasuries, Shelemiah the
Priest, and Zadock the Scribe, and of the Levites Pedajah, etc. for they were
counted faithful; and their office was to distribute unto their Brethren.
Which reason still continuing under the Gospel in relation to the Ministers and
Preachers thereof ( Heb: 13.16, 17. Phil. 4.10, to 21.) is a strong argument to
engage all true Christians desiring the propagation of the Gospel, and a
painful able Ministry duly to pay their tithes and portions to them.

10. That it was the bounden duty, care of See Gulielmus Stuckius Antiqu.
convivalium l. 1. c. 19.
Religious Kings and Governors amongst Gods own people, when the people were
backwards to pay and bring their Tithes and duties to the Priests and Levites,
to command, and enforce them to do it by special Covenants and Oaths, sealed,
subscribed by the Princes and people (Neh. 9.38. cap. 10.1, to the end) and
likewise by positive Ordinances, Injunctions, and to be earnest and zealous in
it, as the two last recited examples of King Hezekiah and Nehemiah evidence;
And this was so far from being an unjust, oppressive action and grievance to
the people, as some now term it; that it is recorded by God himself for their
Honor, and others imitation, yea so well-pleasing unto God, that Nehemiah
clozeth up the history of his acting in this kind, with this memorable address
and prayer to God himself, Neh. 13.14 Remember me, O my God, concerning this,
and wipe not out the good deeds that I have done for the House of my God, and
for the Offices thereof. And will not God remember their ill Deeds in wrath and
vengeance, who shall do the contrary to what he and King Hezekiah acted, in
robbing God and his Ministers of their Tithes and settled dues?

Hieron Super Ezech. Josephus Scaliger Diatriba de Decimis. Drusius Pro. ad
Mat. 13. Purchase Pilgrimage, l, 2. c. 7. M. Seldens History of Tithes Gulielmus
Stuckius Antiqu. Convivalium l. 1. c. 19.
St. Hierom with others affirm: That the Israelites had four sorts of Tithes.

1. That which the people paid to the Levites, being the Tenth of every thing
that was food for man, not so much as Herbs excepted, and whatever received
increase from the earth.

2. That which the Levites paid to the Priests, being the full tenth of their
Tithes.

3. That which they received for expenses in their solemn feasts, when they
went to the Tabernacle or Temple, whereof the Owner and his family were to eat
in those Feasts as well as the Levite, Deuteronomy. 4.26, 27. chapter 12.17, 18.

4. The third years Tithes, which were then laid up for the Levites, and
likewise for the stranger, the fatherless, the poor widow within their gates,
in the Husbandmans own Barns and Storehouses, and not then carried to
Jerusalem, as the other Tithes were. Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29. chapter 26.12, 13. Their
first and second Tithes every year (as they affirm) amounted to 19. in the
hundred; So as the Husbandmans clear Lay-Chattel, the Tithes first deducted,
came but to eighty one bushels of Corn, or eighty one Pipes or Tuns of Wine, or
Oil, in every hundred; which considering the costs the Husbandman was at in
threshing and fanning the Corn, barrelling up the Wine and Oil, and carrying
them to Jerusalem, and the Priests treasuries at their own costs, amounted to
double the Tithes we pay now and more; besides the first fruits paid out of
them in kind before the Tithes; their Free Will Offerings, Sacrifices,
Oblations and other charges of Gods worship prescribed by the Levitical law,
together with half a shekel every poll for the service of the Tabernacle, Exodus
30.12, 13, 14. yet the Israelites were obliged by God to pay all these Tithes,
which all the godly amongst them cheerfully did without murmuring,
notwithstanding every seventh year amongst them was Sabbatical, and free from
tillage, and the voluntary fruits of the earth then growing were to be for the
poor, and the beasts of the field were to eat the rest, Exodus 23.10, 11. Lev.
25.3, etc. What would our Anabaptists, Quakers and tithe-oppugners have said
and done, had they been born Israelites, under the law, and clogged with so
many Tithes and expenses, who now grumble at and refuse to pay half so much
Tithes as they constantly did, though they pay no first fruits, Sacrifices, and
other costly Oblations of several sorts to God, as the Israelites did, besides
all these Tithes? I fear their covetous, Sacrilegious hard hearts would have
induced them to cast off, not only Gods Priests and Levites (as now many of
them do our Ministers) as superfluous creatures, but even all Gods chargeable
Ordinances and Levitical forms of worship, as intolerable grievances,
oppressions, yea renounced God himself to save their purses, and turned
Atheists outright: Let them therefore reform this their Sacrilegious
tithe-detaining practices and opinions, lest whiles they pretend to avoid
Judaism, they prove worse than the very Jews themselves; yea worse than the
very Jewish Pharisees, (the worst of Jews) who paid tithes even of Rue, Annis,
Mint, Cumin, all other Herbs, and of all they had. Mat. 23.23. Luke 11.42. cap.
18.12. Whose righteousness all Christians righteousness must exceed by Christ's
own verdict, else they shall never enter into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5.20.
Nay worse than the very Idolatrous Jews under Jeroboam and his successors, who
paid their Tithes duly even to the base Idolatrous Priests at Bethel and
Gilgal, who waited on the Service of the golden Calves, and brought all the
Oblations to their very Calves, which God reserved to his Priests, Levites, and
himself, as is evident by Amos 4.4, 5. Come ye to Bethel and transgress, at
Gilgal multiply transgression; and bring your Sacrifices every morning and your
Tithes after three years, and offer a Sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven,
and proclaim and publish the free offerings, for this likes you, O ye children
of Israel, says the Lord of Hosts. Let those Pharisees, idolatrous Jews and
Israelites practice then shame all our Anabaptists, Quakers, Soldiers,
Sectaries, and other Tith-oppugners now, lest they rise up in judgment and
condemn them, at the last day.

These forementioned Cities, Suburbs, Houses, Glebes, Tithes, thus settled on
the Priests and Levites for their Habitation, maintenance and reward of their
Ministerial Function, had nothing properly typical or Ceremonial in them; and
being assigned to them by God himself only, for their necessary Habitation and
competent Livelihood, may and ought to be continued, and imitated in a fitting
proportion under the Gospel, for the Habitation, maintenance, livelihood,
reward of the Preachers of the Gospel, who are to live by the Gospel, as well
as they did by the Temple and Altar, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.

3. There was another supplemental maintenance, besides these Glebes and
Tithes, prescribed by God in the Levitical law for the Priests, which was
properly Ceremonial, Levitical, and quite abolished with that Priesthood by
Christ's death; and that was the Priests share out of every Meat Offering, made
of fine flower, oil and frankincense, unto the Lord by the people; a small part
whereof the Priests were to offer up to God upon the Altar, and the remnant
which was left, was to be Aarons and his sons, with the breast and right
shoulder of every Peace Offering, offered by the people, called the
Wave-breast, and the heave-shoulder, given by God to the Priest, who offered
the blood and fat of the Peace Offering at the Altar, together with the skin of
every burnt-offering, Levit: 2.3, 10. chap. 7.6, to 11. and 28, to 38. Exodus:
29.26, 27, 28. chap. 9.21. Numb. 6.19, 20. And from them that offered a
Sacrifice, whether it were Ox or Sheep, this was the Priests DVE likewise from
the people; they were to give unto the Priest the shoulder and the two cheeks
and the maw, by Gods special appointment, Deuteronomy: 18.3. Ezech: 44.29, 30. which
Fee Eli the high Priests Sons exceeding, and exacting more than was due by
violence, it exceedingly provoked God, made men to abhor the Sacrifice, of the
Lord, and proved the ruin of Eli and his Family, 1 Samuel: 2.12, to the end.
These Dues and Fees of the Priests serving only at the Altar, had no affinity
with the forementioned Glebes and Tenths, belonging as well to the Levites as
Priests, and therefore are distinctly prescribed by themselves. Now for any to
argue that Tithes and Glebes, which were no ways properly Ceremonial,
Levitical or Typical, are quite abolished by Christ, and incompatible with the
Gospel, because those meat offerings, Peace Offerings and Sacrifices, (which
were merely Ceremonial and Typical, and by consequence the Fees due unto
Priests out of them) are quite abolished by Christ, the only true Hebr. c 9.
and 10. throughout. Ephesians. 2.14, 15. 1 Cor. 5.7.
meat offering, peace offering and Sacrifice for us unto God; is a mere Non
sequitur, they being things of a different nature; the one eternally abolished
by Christ, as the whole Epistle to the Hebrews testifies, but the other not, as
the said very Epistle attests, Hebrews 7.1, to 9. compared with 1 Cor: 9.4, to
16. 1 Timothy: 5.17, 18. Gal: 6.6. And here I shall beat our Swordmen and other
Tithe-oppugners with their own weapon. They tell us for an unquestionable
Gospel Truth; That Ministers of the Gospel ought to have no certain or coercive
Maintenance, but only voluntary Free-will-Offerings, such as the people shall
willingly give them without any Law or constraint (though their own unordained
Chaplains in the Army and Garrisons have constant pay each month out of the
peoples Purses, to whom they do not speak, and are not maintained by the
Soldiers free, but the peoples enforced Monthly Contributions; which practice
they should first reform, if repugnant to the Gospel:) Now such Maintenance as
this, is more properly and purely Levitical and Ceremonial than Tithes; since
all Meat Offerings, Peace Offerings and Sacrifices, out of which the Levitical
Priests were to have their Share and Maintenance, were only Free-Will-Offerings
voluntarily offered to God, without any coercion, when they pleased, Levit.
2.1. chapter 3.1. chapter 22.81, 19, 22, 23. Numb. 19.3. chapter 29.39. Deuteronomy. 12.6, 17. chapter
16.10. chapter 23.23. Psalm. 54.6. Ezra 3.5. chapter 7.16. 2 Chronicles. 31.14. If then
Tithes, Glebes, and all coercive, settled Maintenance for Ministers be abolished
and unlawful under the Gospel, though not primarily, and purely Levitical, but
of divine, Moral, and natural Right, by the Dictate of natural reason; as
Tyndarus, Rebuffus, and many others affirm in their Treatises of Tithes; then
much more must their maintenance by Levitical Free-will-Offerings, Oblations,
and Sacrifices be such; being more purely Levitical and Ceremonial that Tithes,
as these Instances manifest, and 1 Cor. 9.13. Heb. 7.12, 13. And if Ministers
of the Gospel must have neither a settled nor enforced Maintenance, by Glebes,
Tithes or otherwise, as some now plead, nor yet an uncertain one by voluntary
Free-will-Offerings and Contributions, they shall have no maintenance at all
allowed them under the Gospel; whereas the Priests of God under the Law had
both a certain settled Maintenance, reward by Glebes and Tithes; and likewise an
arbitrary and uncertain, by their Fees, Dues out of the peoples
Free-will-Offerings, and Sacrifices; And why Ministers of the Gospel may not
have a like settled, coercive Maintenance, both by Glebes and Tithes, and
likewise an honorary super-additional reward according to their pains and
merits, by the voluntary benevolences, and Free-will-Offerings of the People,
as well as the Priests under the Law, or as well as Servants and all public
Officers, Military or Civil; Let their Opposites render me a reason, when they
are able; the Apostle resolving thus of Ministers of the Gospel in opposition
to the Priests under the Law, Heb. 13.10. We have an Altar, whereof they have
no right to eat which serve the Tabernacle; which text compared with 1 Cor:
9.13, 14. Do ye not know, that they which minister about holy things, live of
the things of the Temple; and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with
the Altar? Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel; and with Phil. 4.18. But I have all, and abound, and
am full, having received from Epaphroditus the things (or voluntary
Contribution) sent from you, an odor of a most sweet smell, a Sacrifice
acceptable well pleasing to God: will warrant this Conclusion; that as the
Gospel in these Texts retains the old legal Terms of Altar and Sacrifice, in a
real Evangelical sense, in relation both to the Office and Maintenance of the
Ministers of the Gospel; So Christians under the Gospel in the self same sense,
may and ought to allow them the like settled Maintenance by Glebes, Tithes, and
likewise an Additional Reward by voluntary Evangelical Sacrifices and Oblations
for attending on the new Gospel-Altar, Jesus Christ, and preaching of his
Gospel, administering his sacraments to them, as the Priests under the Law
received from the people, by Gods own institution.

4. There was another Additional way of Maintenance for the Priests under the
Law, both certain and considerable by Gods special appointment; even the
firstborn of Man and unclean beasts, which were to be redeemed, at a set value
given by God to the Priests; the firstlings of all their herds, beasts, flocks
that were clean, payable in kind; the first fruits also of their Ground, Corn,
Wine, Oil, of all manner of Trees, fruits, and likewise of their dough: which
God peculiarly reserving and consecrating to himself as his own, and holy to
himself; did yet transfer them to his Priests, and enjoins the People to give
and bring unto the Priests, That they may cause the Blessing of God to rest in
the Peoples Houses; as you may read at leisure, Exodus 13.12, 13. chapter 22.29, 30.
chapter 23.16, 19. chapter 34.19, 20, 22, 26. Levit. 2.12, 14. chapter 23.10, 20. chapter
27.26, 27, 28. N^m. 28.26. Deuteronomy. 12.6. chapter 14.23. chapter 15.19. chapter 26.2, 16.
compared with Number. 18.11, to 20, 2 Kings 4.22. 2 Chronicles. 31.5. and Neh. 10.35,
36. chapter 12.44. chapter 13.12. Prove. 3.9. Ezech. 20.40. chapter 44.30. chapter 48.14. These
first fruits most hold to be merely Ceremonial and Types of Christ, the
firstborn of God, Heb. 1.6. Psalm. 89.27. The first fruits from the dead, 1
Cor. 15.20, 23. and Types of Christians under the Gospel, who are called a kind
of first fruits of his creatures, Jam. 1.18. yea the first fruits unto God, and
to the Lamb, Rev. 14.4. Therefore abolished by Christ as Ceremonial and
Levitical. But yet notwithstanding, seeing all true Christians are and ought
still to be even Spiritual first fruits unto God under the Gospel; To present
themselves, their souls and bodies a living Sacrifice, and Oblation, holy,
acceptable unto God through Jesus Christ; in the first place, Romans 12.1. 2 Cor.
8.2, 3, 4, 5. To seek first the Kingdom of God, Mat. 6.33. and then afterward
to be ready to consecrate not only themselves but all their Goods and Estates
to God and his Service, so far forth as there is occasion or necessity, Acts
4.32, 33, 34, 35. I cannot yet discern, but that all Christians by a
proportionable kind of Gospel and natural Equity, are still obliged to render a
kind of first fruits out of their Estates, besides their Tithes, for the
maintenance and propagation of the Gospel when and where there is occasion;
there being far more Equity and Gospel-justice for it, than that our Ministers,
out of their small, scarce competent, and many very incompetent livings, should
pay the first fruits and first years profits of their livings to the King or
State (as formerly they did unto the Pope through Papal Usurpation only) by
the Statutes of 26 H. 8. c. 3.27 H. 8. c. 8.1. and 1 Eliz. c. 4. and almost or
above the tenth of all their livings to the Soldiers (amounting to treble
their Tenths to the King or Pope) without any Grant at all by them or their
Proxies in the usual, legal, just, Parliamental way, Cl. 9. E. 2. m. 17. Exact
Abridgement p. 18, 189. A Brief Register, Calendar, and Survey of Parliamentary
Writs. p. 3, 4, 7, 8, 34, 35, 40, 54, 61, 70, 72, 73, 120, 154. Rastals Taxes,
and Tenths.
against all their Rights, Privileges and our Laws: The Jewish Priests and
Levites under the Law being never burdened with such first fruits or taxes, by
their Sovereigns, and exempted from them even by a heathen Conqueror, Ezra
7.24. Which those, who now endeavor to deprive them of their Tithes, Glebes,
and yet exact both first fruits, Tenths and Contributions from them, may do
well to consider.

Having thus related at large, what a liberal, various, full, and competent
maintenance God settled on his Priests and Levites under the law, by Glebes,
Tithes, Oblations, Sacrifices, Poll-money, first fruits, besides the Tenth and
Tribute out of the very spoils of war formerly insisted on, I shall now apply
it home to the Ministers of, and Christians under the Gospel, in these short
Aphorisms.

1. Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel inwardly qualified with sufficient
Gifts, Graces, and lawfully called, ordained, are Gods and Christ's own
institution, and Ministers, as well as Priests and Levites under the Law. Mat.
10.5, 6, 7. chapter 28.19, 20. Luke 10.1, 2, etc. chapter 24.47, 49, 53. Mark 6.7, 8,
etc. chapter 16.15, 20. Acts 11.2, 3, 4, etc. chapter 14.23. chapter 19.1, 6, 7. chapter 26.17,
18, 28. Romans 12.6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12.4, 8, 9, 28, 29, 30. chapter 14.29, 30, 31, 32,
40. Ephesians. 4.8, to 17. Col. 4.17. 1 Timothy 3.1, 2. chapter 4.14, 15, 16. chapter 5.21,
22. Tit. 1.5, 6, 7. Heb. 13.17. Jam. 5.14, 15. 1 These. 5.13. 1 Cor. 4.1. 2 Cor.
3.6. chapter 11.23.

2. That their Ministry and Calling is far more Honorable, Glorious, necessary,
beneficial to men's souls, than that of the Priests and Levites, under the Law.
2 Cor. 3.6, to 12. Heb. 7.1, to 14.

3. That it is far more painful, laborious, than the Ministry of the Priests
and Levites under the Law. Acts 8.4. 2 Cor. 11.23, to 30. 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15.
2 Timothy 4.1. 1 These. 5.2. 2 Pet. 1.12. Romans 15.19, 20. chapter 12.7, 8.

4. That therefore there is as just, as competent, as full, as honorable and
settled a maintenance, and as much honor, reverence, obedience, love, as great
recompense due unto them, for their very work and calling sake from all
Christians under the Gospel, as there was from Gods people to the Priests and
Levites under the Law; as I have already proved in the first Proposition; and
that by divine institution, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. 1 Timothy 5.17, 18, 21. From whence
Comment. in 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. p. 547.
Hemingius (with most Orthodox Protestant Divines, I have seen besides, as well
as Papists and Jesuits) concludes thus. Admoniantur igitur Pii, quod Iure
Divino Ecclesiae Ministris debeant Stipendia; That all the godly are to be
admonished, that by Divine Right they owe wages to the Ministers of the Gospel.
And if so, then

5. It follows inevitably, that there being no other settled way of maintenance
particularly prescribed for them in or by the Gospel; and convenient Houses,
Glebes for them, their families, and necessary Cattle; with Tithes of the
increase of the fruits of the earth, and Cattle of all sorts, being as
necessary, as requisite for the habitation, food, clothing, support of them,
their families, Ministry, and supply of all their necessaries with as little
charge, trouble, Walafridi Strabi De Rebus Eccles. chapter 27.
diversion from their studies, functions as may be, as for the Priests and
Levites under the Law: that Godly Christians, Kings, States, Parliaments,
cannot pitch upon any equaller, fitter, juster, better, wiser, rationaller,
convenienter, diviner way of maintenance for them, than that of necessary
Houses, Rectories, Glebes in every Parish and Tithes and Oblations of all
things needful for food, raiment, hospitality, it being the constant standing
settled maintenance which the most wise, just, and holy God himself invented,
prescribed for his own Priests and Levites maintenance amongst his own people,
when settled by him in the land of Promise, and that which all settled Christian
Empires, Kingdoms, States, Churches generally through the Christian world have
in all ages pitched upon, as most agreeable to Gods will and word, under the
Gospel, which no ways repeals nor contradicts his own former prescriptions of
this kind in the old Testament.

6. That the Glebes, Tithes of the Priests and Levites under the Law, were
reserved by God himself ( the Supreme Landlord of all Kingdoms, Countries,
Nations, Churches, People in the world, and the special God, Lord, King,
Father, Savior, Preserver of his own people) as Augustine. de Temp. Sermon. 210.
Walafridi Strabi de Rebus Eccles. c. 27. Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 6.
Tit. 8. c. 4.31.
a Sacred, Holy Tribute, Rent, Portion, and Homage due unto Himself from poor
Creatures, Servants, Vassals (who are no true Proprietors, but only Stewards
and Tenants at will of all the lands, goods, earthly blessings and poss^ssions
they enjoy; The earth being the Lords, and the fullness thereof, and the Corn,
Wine, Cattle, fruits and earthly creatures we possess, not really ours, but
Gods own, 1 Chr: 29.11, to 17. Psalm. 24.1. Psalm. 97.5. Psalm. 50.9, 10, 11, 12.
Ezech: 16.18, 19, 20. Hos. 2.8, 9. Dan. 4.32, 35. Mat: 6.10, 11.) The use and
possession of which tribute, He allotted to the Priests and Levites under the
Law for their maintenance, salary and reward of their labor in his service,
for the advancement of his worship, glory, honor, and his peoples spiritual
good: reserving the inheritance and right thereof always to himself; as the
premises sufficiently evidence: Now God himself to whom alone Tithes and Glebes
were originally impropriated; (not to the Levitical Priesthood) being
unchangeable, without any variableness or shadow of turning, Jam: 1.17. Psalm:
102.26, 27. Mal: 3.6. and Jesus Christ (to whom Tithes were first paid by
Abraham in the person of Melchisedeck) having an unchangeable Priesthood, and
being a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck, the same yesterday and
to day and for ever, Heb: 7.8, 16, 11, 24. c. 13.8. And all Christians
whatsoever under the Gospel, being as much his absolute Creatures, Vassals,
Servants, Stewards and Tenants at will, as the Israelites under the Law; and
all their Lands, Goods, Earthly blessings, Corn, Wine, Cattle, wealth,
employments, his in right, and not their own, as well as theirs too; why they
should not all render to him the self-same sacred Tribute, holy Portion, Rent,
Homage of Glebes and Tithes of all they have, as well as they (though the
Levitical Priesthood be abolished) they being so specially reserved and
consecrated to himself, for the support, maintenance, reward, encouragement of
his faithful Ministers under the Gospel, employed in his Service for his
honor, glory, and their everlasting salvation; Let John Can, and all
presumptuous peremptory Tith-oppugners, answer me; yea, this their Sovereign
Landlord and Creator, if they can; who will one day call them to a st^ict
account, for detaining this due Rent, Tribute, Homage from him, and may justly
dispossess and strip them naked of all they have for this their ingrate,
contemptuous carriage toward him, as he has done many of late, by fearful
fires, blasts, droughts, and other judgments, as well as heretofore, Mal. 3.8,
9, 11.

7. That as the Gospel it self succeeded the Levitical law, Baptism and the
Lords Supper, Circumcision and the Passover: So the Bochellus Decret. Eccles.
Gal. l. 6. It Is. 8. c. 42.
Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel, succeed the Priests and Levites under
the Law in their Ministerial function in the Church of Christ, by Gods
appointment: their Ministry and Office being both the same in substance (even
to worship, praise, serve, honor God according to his revealed word, will, and
instruct, exhort, direct, guide his people in the way of salvation, and bring
them to eternal glory) though differing in some circumstances of lesser moment,
abolished by Christ's death. It is therefore most reasonable, just, equitable,
convenient, they shall receive, enjoy the like settled maintenance by Glebes,
Tithes, Oblations as their predecessors did, God having prescribed none other
kind of reward or subsistence for them in the Gospel that any can show me. It
is usual in all Kingdoms, States, Nations, where there are any public settled
offices and Officers, for any persons who succeed others in those Offices, to
enjoy the self-same Salaries, Houses, Lands, Fees, Revenues as their
predecessors lawfully received, unless there be some special Laws to alter
their Stipends: This we see verified in all Civil, Military and Ecclesiastical
Officers; yea, in the times of greatest public changes, revolutions that ever
befell the Nation, those whom most yet call Judges, Sheriffs, Majors, Generals,
Colonels, Captains, Governors of Forts, Registers, etc. though their
Commissions be altered in some things, and themselves in more, do yet receive
the self-same Salaries, pays, Fees, maintenance annexed to their Offices, as
their lawful Predecessors did; yea, to come closer home, All our Protestant
Ministers, since the reformation of Religion, have generally enjoyed the Glebes
and Tithes (as the Parishioners enjoy, frequent the Churches, possess the
Houses, Inheritances,) which their Popish predecessors did before them; though
the one of them (just like the Levitical abolished Priests) made it their
chiefest business and part of their calling to say Mass, and offer an
unbloody Sacrifice (as they falsely termed it) on their Altars both for the
quick and dead; and the other, who succeed them, make it their principal work
to preach the Gospel, and administer the Sacrament according to Christ's
institution. Since then the Ministers of the Gospel succeed the Levitical, as
well as the popish Priests, as the Gospel does the Law, and the Christian
Sacraments the Jewish; and we, with all converted Gentiles engraffed into Jesus
Christ and the Church of God, succeed the Jews, who were broken off from their
own Olive Tree, that we might be ingraffed in their places, who now partake of
the root and fatness of their Olive Tree; as the Apostle resolves, Romans 11.16,
to 25. Why the Ministers of the Gospel should not likewise succeed the
Levitical Priests (as well as the popish) in the enjoyment of their settled
Maintenance by Glebes, Tithes, (being not merely ceremonial, as I have proved,
nor yet so papal as Bishops, Deans, and Churches Lands, in which our
Anabaptists, Army Officers, and Tithe-oppugners will yet succeed them without
any scruple) and all believing Gentiles, who succeed the believing Israelites
in Gods Church, succeed them likewise in the due and just maintenance of their
Ministers by Tithes and Glebes, reserved to and prescribed by that true, holy,
just and righteous God, who is not only the God of the Jews, but of the
Gentiles also, Romans 3.19. Let any rational Christian now resolve his own
Conscience and mine, from grounds of Scripture, Reason or Equity, if he can;
God having given us a Land flowing with milk and honey, as fit, as able to
render Glebes and Tithes of all things in kind to his Ministers, as he did
unto the Jews. It is a received maxim in our Law, Quod venit in loco alterius
est de natura Prioris. If this be Gospel, as it has been ever held both Law
and reason under the Gospel; I need add no more to this Aphorism, to prove the
lawfullnesse and equity of our Ministers Glebes and Tithes (and their
continuance as well for the future as heretofore) by a divine Right.

8. That all Christian Churches, and pious Christians generally throughout the
world, from the Apostles days till now, have unanimously resolved, both in
point of Piety, Justice, Conscience, and right Reason, that they are bound to
consecrate and Render unto God the self-same weekly portion of time for his
public worship, as the Israelites and Jews under the Law were obliged to do;
to wit, one day in seven: though they differ in the circumstance only of the
day, they observing the seventh day from the Creation every week (in memory of
the Creation, and Gods rest thereon) for their Sabbath, prescribed by special
Laws; and we the first day of every week in memorial of our Saviors
Resurection thereon, by the General, Moral Equity of these Laws warranted by
Apostolical practice only, without any special Gospel-precept. Let then the
whole Army of Tithe-Oppugners render me one dram of Reason, or shadow of
answer, if they Can, why all Christian Realms, Churches, Nations in the
world, may not, should not by the self-same rule of Piety, Justice, Equity,
proportion continue and render the like proportion of Glebes, Tithes to God and
his Ministers under the Gospel, as the Jews did to him, his Priests, and
Levites under the Law; as well as they render to him the self-same Proportion
of time for his Weekly, public Service, and why payment of Tithes, Oblations
under the Gospel to God, (who gives us both them and the residue of our
Estates, and increase out of his own mere free grace) for the maintenance of
the Ministers of the Gospel, and support of his public Worship on the Lords
Day, should be more Judaical, Unchristian, Antichristian, Superstitious (as
Can and others style it) than the dedicating, appropriating of the Lords Day
to Gods public Worship, and Honor, who has given and allowed us the other
six for our employments; when as he might have justly reserved the nine parts
of our Lands and goods to himself, had he pleased, instead only of the Tenth,
as well as the six days in lieu of the seventh, wherewith he is content; which
Dr. Bound, Mr. Dod, Cleaver, Dr. Twisse, Downham, Practice of Piety and others
Divines usually urge to induce men to the more cheerful Sanctification of the
Lords Day, and some Scriblers against Tithes as well as others.

See Gratian. Cans. 16. qu. 1. Walafridi Strabi de Rebus Eccles. c. 27.
St. Augustine in his 229. Sermon de Tempors, thus enforces this very argument;
and let Can, and all his confederates, reply to it if they can. Hear O
indevout mortality: know, that all things thou possessest, receivest, are Gods,
and will thou not render to the Creator of all things, that which is his own?
The Lord God does not want; he requires not a reward, but honor, he exacts not
any thing of thine, which thou should reserve fund: He vouchsafes to demand,
only the First Fruits, and Tithe of things: (which are his) and do thou, O
covetous wretch, deny him? What would thou do, if reserving the Nine parts
to himself, he had left only the Tenth to thee? This he has already done, when
as thy harvest for want of rain, mildew, and thy vintage through hayl or frost
is diminished into a Ninth part: O covetous Varlet, how do thou reckon? The
Nine parts are withdrawn from thee, because thou would not give the Tenth.
It is most apparent, that thou have not given them; but yet God has exacted
them. For this is the most just custom of the Lord, that if thou will not give
the Tenth to him, he will recall the Nine, and leave only a Tenth part to thee.
What if God should say unto thee: Man is mine whom I have made; the earth is
mine which thou tillest; the seeds are mine which thou sowest; the cattle are
mine which thou weariest; the showrs, and the rain, and the gales of wind are
mine; the heat of the Sun is also mine. And seeing all the Elements by which
the seed, fruits do live and grow are mine, and thou only lendest thy hand,
thou deservest only a Tenth. But because Almighty God feeds, deals most
liberally with us, he has given a most ample gift and reward to him that
labors, challenging the Tenth only to himself, and pardoning all the rest to
us. And will thou then ungratefully and perfideously deprive him of it, when
the year is ended, and the crop reaped? If any shall presume to do so, let
them read what follows in that Sermon, and then sleep quietly if they can.

9. That all Christians under the Gospel are bound in Justice, Equity,
Con^cience to give their hired Servants and Laborers their due and deserved
Wages, and not to detain it from them, even under the Gospel, and that by
virtue of Gods command recorded in the Levitical and Judicial Law: Levit:
19.13. Deuteronomy. 14.14, 15. approved in the Gospel, Col. 4.1. and to allow their
Beasts, Oxen that plow and tread out their Corn, Straw and Provender, without
muzling up their mouths, by virtue of a like precept recorded, Deuteronomy: 25.4.
(twice repeated and urged by the Apostle in the New Testament, to prove the
lawfullnesse of Ministers maintenance under the Gospel: 1 Cor: 9.8, 9, 10. 1 Timothy: 5.18.) and that without the least suspicion of Judaism or
Antichristianism; Therefore they may, and are also bound in Justice, Equity,
Conscience, not only to settle Glebes upon, but likewise to pay Tithes to the
Ministers of the Gospel, as a due Wages, Hire, Reward for their Labor in the
Ministry, as well as the Jews did to their Priests and Levite^, without the
least tincture of Judaism or Antichristianism: since Christ himself in the
Gospel expressly resolvs, Mat. 10.10. Luke 10.7. and 1 Timothy 5.18. That Ministers
being Laborers are worthy of their M^at, Hire, and a competent Maintenance
suitable to their pains and function; as well as any other hired Servants or
Laborers in the fields, or as our laboring Oxen or Horses are of Straw and
Provender.

10. We read it recorded, 1 Samuel 8.11, 15, 17. That this would be the manner of
the King that should reign over the J^ws, that amongst other things, He will
take the Tenth of your Seed, and of your Vineyards; and the Tenth of your
Sheep, and give them to his Officers and Servants; In imitation whereof, the
Kings of England in ancient Parliaments, and of late times have usually
demanded and received by Grant in Parliament, a D^cime or Tenth of the Goods
and Estates of their Subjects for their Supplies, and likewise a Tenth of their
Merchandise exported and imported for Tonnage and Poundage, as our Parliament
Records, Histories, and Rastal in his Abridgement of Statutes, Tithes, Taxes
and Tenths, attest. If then our lawful Kings, Princes and Governors under the
Gospel, may justly demand and receive by Grant in Parliament, the Tenth of all
our Goods, Corn, Wool, Sheep, Estates, Merchandise, for their necessary
supplies, and the defense of the Kingdom; and some who are no Kings, and have
engaged against Kingship as Tyrannical, do the like, without a Parliament,
taking (beyond the presidents of the worst of all our Kings) not only a Tenth
of all our Estates, but a double or treble Tenth of all men's yearly Revenues,
Estates, and of Ministers Tithes besides, for the Maintenance of themselves and
the Army, without the guilt of Judaism, Antichristian Tyranny, Oppression* or
Superstition; Why our faithful Ministers may not likewise demand, receive,
enjoy their Glebes and Tithes, not only granted, but confirmed to them by our
Ancestors in successive Parliaments, from the first planting of the Gospel in
this Nation till the Reformation, by all our Protestant Parliaments since the
Reformation, and by sundry Ordinances in the very last Parliament, (to which
some now in highest Power gave their cordial Votes) for the Preaching,
propagating of the Gospel, and saving of men's Souls, without the like Brand of
Judaism and Anti-christianism, let In his second Voice from the Temple to the
Higher Powers, p. 1, 2, 7, 11. and elsewhere.
John Can resolve me when he can; who most falsely, scandalously,
unchristianly brands both the last and all Protestant Parliaments confirming
Tithes, for Popish, Idolatrous Parliaments, acting against the Lord Jesus, and
our Ministry, for an Antichristian Ministry; Who certainly was in his Cannes or
Cups, when he writ and published such palpable, scandalous untruths, to the
dishonor of our Church, Parliaments, Nation, Religion: But such Cretians are
always Liars, Evil Beasts, Slow Bellies: wherefore they need a sharp rebuke,
that they may be sound in the says, Tit: 1.12, 13. He might have done better
to excite those to whom he dedicates his Pamphlet against those Popish Priest,
Monks, Friars, Jesuits, sent from the Pope and Rome into England of late, to
root out our Ministry, and their Maintenance, as most opposite to
Antichristianism, his Papal Sovereignty and Errors, under the Notion of
Anabaptists, dipped Jews, Gifted Brethren, New Lights, Seekers. But against
these he has not one word; and why so? Because the Dominican and Franciscan
Freers, (as ch 7. p. 166, 167, 170, 171, 172, 173.
Mr. Seldom relates in his History of Tithes) were the first, who made it a
gainful doctrine to teach Laymen, that they were not bound to pay their Tithes
to their Ministers, as to whom by any Law of God that portion belonged,
teaching them to be due only as Alms, or as what ex debito charitatis, not ex
debito justitiae was to be dispensed; By this doctrine The Mendicams especially
often got them to themselves (like the old Vide Zonar. in Council. Gangr. Can. 7.
Eustathians) as Alms to be arbitrarily disposed of to such as took any
spiritual Labor, as also made their own detaining of them in lands, out of
which they were parochially due, to seem less wrongful. They possessing the
people with an opinion; ( to gain them from the Secular Priests to themselves)
That the Command of Tithes was not Moral but Ceremonial, and not to be
performed by constraint of Conscience, to the Minister: and that out of
whatsoever (Lands) at least was given to any of the four Orders of Freers
Mendicants (as now to Anabaptists and Quakers their disciples) no Tithe was in
conscience to be deduced for the Minister; as he proves out of the Clement in
Tit. de Decimis, c. 1. Religiosi.
Council of Vienna held An. 1340. Ad Extrav. Tit. de Paroch. c. ult.
significavit.
Pope Innocent the 4th, and Richard Archbishop of Armagh in Defens. Curatorum:
Alex. l. 4. Consil. 60. and William R^ssel a Franciscan Freer his Doctrine
condemned in the Convocation of the Clergy Anno 5 H. 6. as Haeretical, and
publicly recanted by him at Paul's Cross as such; That Tithes (especially
personal) fall not under divine precept, at least that they should be paid to
the Parochial Curate as a due unto him of right, unless there were a Custom to
the contrary; but that every one might lawfully give them to pious uses at
their pleasure; Whereupon these N^w Masters and Preaching Freers, preaching and
teaching thus against the Old and N^w Testament; were enjoined by Bochellus
Decret Eccles. Gall. l. 6. Tit. 8. c. 7, 8, 12, 14, 19, 30.
several Councils and Synods in their Sermons to exhort, inform, and instruct
the people without any fraud, to pay their Tithes faithfully to their
Ministers, as DVE by the Laws of God and the Church, under pain of being
deprived of the power of absolving the people from their sins. Therefore John
Cannes, with his confederate Anabaptists and Quakers new Doctrines, Invectives,
Petitions against our Ministers Tithes, derived from these old and new
Franciscan Mendicant Freers now swarming amongst them, is far more truly,
really Antichristian, than our Ministers and their Tithes, of which more in its
due place.

11. That God in the Levitical and Judicial Law prescribed Laws for War, and
Soldiers in the Wars, Deuteronomy. 20. throughout, and amongst others, v. 2, 3, 4. It
shall be, when ye come nigh unto the Battle, that the Priest shall approach and
speak unto the people, and shall say unto them (for their encouragement) Hear O
Israel, you approach this day unto battle against your enemies; let not your
hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified because of
them, for the Lord your God is he that goes with you against your Enemies to
save you. After which, v. 8. etc. The Officers are commanded to make
Proclamation, that every man, who was fearful and faint-hearted should go and
return to his house, lest they should discourage their brethren; that they
should proclaim Peace to every City they came nigh, before they besieged or
stormed it; and if they won it by force, the Soldiers should take the spoil
thereof unto themselves, and eat the spoil of their enemies, which the Lord
their God had given them. And by another Levitical Law the Priests were thus
enjoined by God, to pray for, and bless his people, Number: 6.23, 24. etc. On this
wise ye shall bless the children of Israel, saying to them; the Lord bless
thee and keep thee; the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious
unto thee; the Lord lift up his Countenance upon thee, and give thee Peace: and
they shall put my name upon the Children of Israel, and I will bless them. If
then it be neither Jewish nor Antichristian, nor superstitious, nor unlawful
for Ministers of the Gospel to encourage Christian Soldiers going to battle in
the self same manner and form, or to bless them and the people in these very
Levitical words, as Chaplain to Sir Arthur Haslerigs Regiment and Garrison
heretofore.
John Can, and all Anabaptistical, Independent Chaplains of the Army (and Mr.
Peter's especially) will grant, who have frequently used the self same or like
encouragements and exhortations to the Army, receiving good, constant pay for
their pains. And if it be neither Jewish nor Antichristian, nor unchristian for
our Saintlike Officers and Soldiers under the Gospel, to make like Proclamation
to cowardly persons, or to proclaim peace to Cities, and garrisons, ere they
besiege or storm them, and if obstinat and won by force to take the Spoil and
Plunder of such Cities, Enemies to themselves, and eat thereof, which I am
certain all our Officers, Soldiers, and their Anabaptistical Tithe-oppugning
Chaplains will grant and subscribe to, though thus prescribed by the Levitical
law, abolished (as they say) by Jesus Christ: Then questionless our Ministers
of the Gospel may still receive and enjoy their Glebes, Tithes, Oblations, by
like reason, without the least guilt or reproach of Judaism or
Antichristianism, though prescribed to the Levitical Priests and Levites, by
the Levitical law; else John Can and others of his fraternity (professing
themselves the only Ministers of the Gospel, and rejecting all others as
Antichristian) must give over their Chaplains places in the Army, Navy,
Garrisons, and no more encourage nor accompany any Soldiers in the wars, or
bless the people as aforesaid; because it was a part of the Levitical Priests
Office (who were also to blow the Trumpets in the wars, Number. 6.1, to 10. Josh.
6.4. etc.) prescribed by an abolished Levitical law.

12. That all Israelites, Jews, both Priests and people, were by the Levitical
law frequently commanded inviolably to perform, keep, pay, execute the solemn
Oaths, Vows, Covenants they made to God or men, and no ways to infringe them,
or prevaricate in them, Levit. 19.12. Number. 21.2, 3. cap. 30.2, to 16. Deuteronomy.
12.11 cap. 23.21, 22, 23. Josh. 2.11, 12, 13. cap. 6.22, to 26. cap. 9.15, to
the end. And among other things, we find their Tithes ( vowed to God by Jacob,
Genesis 28.20, 21, 22.) coupled with their Vows, as things devoted by them to God
by See Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, and Review, chapter 3.
Vow, as well as reserved by Law: Deuteronomy. 12.11. Yea, all the Jews were obliged
by a Solemn Covenant to bring, pay their first fruits and Tithes to God, his
Priests and L^vites, Nen. 10.31, to 39. Will or dare John Can then, or any
other Tithe-leniers averr, that it is both J^wish, Antichristian, unlawful for
Ministers and Christians under the Gospel, in^iolably to observe and perform
all those just, lawful Oaths, Vows, Covenants they have solemnly made to God
and men, with hands listed up to heaven (as some of their persidious horrid
violations of them without blush or check of late seems to proclaim before God
and all the world) and to pay those Tithes, Dues to our Ministers, which our
Ancestors and we by Solemn Vows and Covenants too, have dedicated unto God and
his Ministers, and never intended by our Covenant to abolish or diminish in the
least degree, (as Can perjuriously and absurdly asserts) but to establish and
perpetuate, as the late Ordinances for Tithes and A^gmentations made by the
very Prescribers and Subscribers of the late Solemn League and Covenant (which
it seems John Can never took, though he presses it on others, as his words
Many have sworn, who I hope will now observe it, import) both at the time, and
since the making, taking of the Solemn League and Covenant, with the Assemblies
Exhortation for the better taking thereof, authorized by the late Parliament,
infallibly evidence? If so; John Can with his perfidious
Oath-Vow-Covenant-breaking, Tithe-abjuring disciples must renounce that true
and only God, they say they worship in greatest truth and sincerity; as a
Jewish, unchristian, antichristian God likewise (I speak it with reverence and
horror too, for their fuller conviction) because he always has been, now is,
and will be, a most true, faithful, Oath-observing, Covenant-keeping,
Vow-performing God, who reputes his Oaths, Vows, Covenants, Heb. 5.17, 18.
Immutable things, and will never violate, falsify, forget, or neglect them in
the least degree, though made to sinful, treacherous and perfidious men, Psalm.
89.3, 4, 28, to 38. Psalm. 120.4. Neh. 1.5. cap. 9.32. Psalm. 111.5, 9. Isa.
54.10. cap. 55.3. Jer. 33.20, 21. Luke 1.72, 73. and 2 Chronicles. 21.6, 7. (a
memorable Text) 2 Cor. 1.18. whom all those, who own or challenge him to be
their God, are peremptorily obliged to imitate herein, else they shall never
enter into his holy hill, or dwell with him in his Tabernacle, Ps. 15.1, 2, 14.
Psalm. 24.3, 4. Romans 1.31, 32. 1 Timothy 1.10. Rev. 22.15. and that in this very
case of Tithes. If not, then why should not Tithes, Glebes, Oblations which our
ancestors and we have vowed and devoted to God, continue and still be paid
under the Gospel without superstition, sin, antichristianism or Judaism, as
well as other Vows, Oaths, and the religious observation of them?

Upon these Considerations all or most Christian Kingdoms, States, Churches
upon the very first preaching and embracing of the Gospel amongst them, not
only edified Churches, Chapels for Gods worship and public Assemblies, but
likewise endowed the Ministers thereof with convenient Glebes, Tithes,
Oblations, as E^sebius, Socrates, Scholasticus, Theodoret, Nicephorus,
Calistus, the C^ntury Writers, Baronius, Spondanus, with other Ecclesiastical
Historians, and Hospinian De Origin Templorum, prove at large for foreign
Parts; and our own antientest Annalists, with Antiqu. Ecclesiae Britanicae, Sir
Henry Spelman Conciliorum Angl. Tom. 1. and learned Dr. Usher, in his
Britanicarum Ecclesiarum Antiquitates, manifest for our own Nations and Realms.

Now because John Can, out of his learned ignorance, has newly published in
his Page 13, 14.
Second Voice from the Temple (or Alehouse rather, for which Cannes are more
proper) That Pope Gregory the tenth was the first that ordained Tithes to be
paid to Priests, in the year 1214. and that the Customs for paying Tithes at
this day, were settled upon the Kingdom by the Popes Legates in Provincial and
Synodal Constitutions about the time of Henry the third, and Henry the fifth;
Vouching Thorp and Ridley the Civilian to prove it; I shall give you a brief
touch concerning the Original of Churches, Glebes, Tithes in this our Island.

About the year of our Lord 48. (as our Joan. Capgrave in vita Josephi: Chr.
Glastoniens. Vincentius Spec. Hist. lib. 23. c. 147. with sundry others, cited
by Dr. Usher Britan. Ecclesiarum Antiquitates. c. 2. p. 973, 974 Spelman
Council. p. 12, etc. with the Authors quoted by them.
Historians record) Joseph of Arimathea, who interred our Savior, with XI.
more Disciples, were sent into Britain to preach the Gospel by Philip the
Apostle, in the reign of Arviragus; who arriving here were courteously
entertained by this Pagan King, and preached the Gospel to him, and his people;
he perceiving the purity of their Doctrine, and the holin^ss^ of their
Conversation, gave them twelve Hides of land in the Isle of Avalon (since
called Glastenbury) for to build a Church and to support them, (till this day
called and known by the name of the twelve Hides of Glastenbury) where they
built the first Church, erected for Gods worship in this Isl^, made of Wattle
and Reed, and there continued together preaching the Gospel, living upon this
their Glebe (now of great value) which was afterward confirmed to them, and
the Ministers of the Gospel the^e succeeding them, both by King Marius and
Coilus, next successors to Arviragus, whom they instructed in the Christian
Religion, to which they were well aff^cted, albeit neither of them, nor
Arviragus himself proceeded so far as to be baptized, for fear of displeasing
their Pagan subjects; though Harding in his Chronicle, chapter 48. (against the
stream of our other Historians) writes, that King Arviragus himself was
Baptized by Joseph of Arimathea. After this Dr. Usher Brit. Eccles. Antiq.
Spelmanni Council. p. 12. etc. with the Authors quoted by them.
Lucius King of Britain being converted to the Christian faith and Baptized
with his Subjects and many other petty British Kings by his Example about the
year of our Lord 176. by Faganus and Damianus, sent to him at his earnest
request by Elutherius then Bishop of Rome (long before Pope or Popery were
there erected, or known in the world) he upon the reception of the faith built
and endowed Churches throughout his Dominions with Glebes and Tithes, to
support the Ministry, whence our ancient Poets thus write of him, Lucius in
Christum credit, Christoque dicatas
Ecclesias dotat, distinctas ordinat Vrbes.
Many of our ancient Historians add, that in his time there were 28 Flamins,
and 3 Arch-Flamins in Britain endowed with great Revenues for the service of
their Idol gods, to whom they had erected so many fair Temples; and that Lucius
after his conversion, Turned these into 28 Bishoprics, and three
Arch-Bishopricks, and purging these polluted Temples from their Idols and
heathenish poll^tions, dedicated them to the service of the true God; which Sir
Henry Spelman, Bp. Usher, Godwin, and the most judicious of our later
Antiquaries, justly reject as fabulous. After Lucius, Churches were here and in
other places endowed with Glebes, and Bishops with rich Lordly possessions by
Constantine the great: And about the year of Christ 312. the Christians being
here and elsewhere restored to peace, and freed from persecution by Constantine,
Gildas, Ep. Usher, Brit. Eccles. Antiq. p. 193. Spelmanni Council. p. 36.45.
began to build and repair those Churches which Dioclesian and other
persecutors had rased to the ground, and to endow them with maintenance for the
Ministry. In succeeding times, the English Saxons, who at their first arival
(being bloody Pagans) cruelly wasted the British Churches, and butchered their
Ministers, Scholars, Saints, being converted to the Christian Faith by
Augustine, sent hither for that purpose by Pope Gregory the first, (who
disclaimed that Papal Supremacy his Successors since challenged) Aethelbert
King of Kent, and his Saxons being baptized by Augustine about the year of
Christ 603. thereupon they began to repair the old ruinated Churches, and to
build new throughout his Dominions; this Spelman. ib. p. 112, 113. de
antiquitatibus Eccles. Brit. Dr. Usher.
King turning his Royal Palace at Canterbury, into the Church of Christ, and
that City, the seat of his Kingdom into a Bishops See, and bestowing them on
Augustine who converted him and his subjects to Christianity, whom he made
Archbishop of Canterbury, and endowed wiih large Possessions: Not long after
diverse other Saxon Kings and their subjects being converted and baptized, built
and endowed sundry other Churches, both with Glebes and Possessions of good
value, and likewise with Tithes. And in Anno 854. Malmsbury de Gestis Regum
Angl. l. 2. c. 2. Mat. West. Anno 854. Florent. Wigorniensis, An. 855.
Spelmanni Council. p. 348, 353.
Aethelwolf King of the West Saxons, considering the perilous times then
fallen upon him and his Realm, by reason of the burnings of the Wars, the
Plunders of the Goods, the devastations of the Territories of his Kingdom by
the most cruel depredations of barbarous Enemies, and Pagan Nations, and the
manifold Tribulations afflicting him and his people, even to their destruction;
he thereupon summoning a General Council or Parliament at Winchester, in which
himself, Beorredus King of Mercia, and Edmund King of East Angles, with all the
Prelates and Nobles of England, were present, did by their wholesome Counsel,
for redress of these evils, by his Charter (ratified in and by this Council)
give the Tenth part of all his own Lands in perpetuity to God and his
Servants, free and exempt from all Secular services, and also from all Royal
Tributes, and Taxes, Great and Small, and from all Military Expedition,
Building of Bridges, and guarding of Castles; that so they might the more
diligently power forth their prayers unto God for him without ceasing, who had
in some part thus eased them of their servitude: from which Grant of his, Sir
Henry Spelman conceives, the Parsonage-House, Rectory and Glebes in every
Parish of his Realm, had their Original, though afterward increased by the
munificence of the Patrons. And this shall suffice touching the true Original
and progress of our Churches, Rectories and Glebes, in the beginning of
Christianity, both amongst the Britains and Saxons of this Realm.

The first Law I find yet extant amongst us, for the due payment of all kind of
Tithes (in use and being as the Law imports, before its promulgation) was made
in the Spelmanni Council. p. 292.293, 298, to 302. Cent. Magd. 7. cap. 9.
National Council, (or Parliament) at Calchuth in the year of our Lord 785. in
the Reigns of King Oswald and King Offa, who by the unanimous consent of all
their Princes, Nobles, and Senators, (as well as Prelates,) present therein,
made this memorable Decree, touching the payment of Tithes, as a Right and
Duty, which they were bound to render to God himself, by his own Sacred Law,
originally given to the Israelites, which they deemed Obligatory likewise unto
them: Cap. 17. ut Decimae just solvantur, usura, iniqua Pondera and Mensurae
prohibeantur: Thou shall bring the Tenth part of all thy Corn (or increase)
into the House of the Lord thy God, as it is written in the Law, (viz. Levit.
27.30. Numb. 12.17, 18, etc. Deuteronomy. 12.17, 18. chap. 14.22, 23. Neh. 10.38. not
in the Popish Canons.) Again by the PROPHET (not Pope) (Mal. 3.10. etc.) Bring,
says he, all the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in my
House, and prove me now therewith, if I will not open the Doors of Heaven, and
power you out a Blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it. And
I will rebuke the Devourer for you, which eats and corrupts the fruit of your
grounds, and the Vine shall be no more barren in the field, says the Lord. As
the Wiseman says in the Book of Wisdom, (not the Pope) No man can give any
just Alms of those things which he possesses, unless he shall first separate
to the Lord that which from the beginning himself has appointed to be rendered
to him. And by this for the most part it happens, See Augustine de Temp. Sermon.
219.
that he who pays not Tithes is reduced (by Gods Justice) to the Tenth part of
his former Estate; whereupon (not by any Command from the Pope, or by his
Authority) We Command, even with an Obtestation, that all be studious to give
Tithes of all things they poss^sse, quia speciale Domini Dei est, Because it is
the peculiar portion of the LORD GOD: and let him live himself, and give Alms,
of the Nine parts; and we persuade him rather to do it in secret, because it
is written, When thou give Alms do not blow a Trumpet before thee, Matt. 6.2.
After which follow Laws against Usury, False Weights and Measures; for the
faithful performance of Vows; and abolishing the very Relics of all Pagan
Rites; warranted by the very words and Presidents of the sacred Scripture.
Which Decrees being recited in a public Council before these Kings, and all
their Prelates, Dukes, Senators, and the People of the Land: Illi, cum omni
devotione mentis, juxta possibilitatem virium suarum, adjuvante superna
clementia, se in omnibus custodire devoverunt: they with all Devotion of mind,
according to the uttermost of their power, by the assistance of Gods Grace,
vowed that they would observe them in all things; which they all did with an
unanimous Voice, a cheerful mind, and most ready Will, ratifying this Council
with the Subscriptions of their Names, and the Sign of the Cr^ss^ (the usual
form of those times, before Seals were in use.) This is the first Law I find
(extant in our Realm,) for the due payment of Tithes, grounded only on Divine
precepts, cited in it, not on the Popes Decree^. True it is, that Gregory
Bishop of Ostia, Legate to Pope Adrian, an Englishman born, was President in
this Council, and had a chiefhand in making these Laws, by this Popes
direction, to whom he returned them: but are they therefore Popish and
Antichristian Laws, which ought to be now abolished (to gratify the present
Pope and his Emissaries the Jesuits) as made against Jesus Christ, as In his
second Voice from the Temple.
John Can most Magisterially determines? if so, then these and our other Laws
then made against Usury, false Weights, Measures (which too many cheating
Anabaptists use) Heathenish, Pagan Cusstoms, must be Popish and Antichristian
too, with the Law for performing our Vows, Covenants to God and men, with the
very Scriptures cited in them, whereon they are grounded, which Impudency and
Atheism it self dares not affirm: If he say they are Jewish Laws, then the
Scriptures cited in them must be Jewish too; yea, the very Title, and every
page of hi^ new Pamphlet, must be rejected as Jewish, as well as Jesuitish;
being Entitled, and Superscribed in every page, A Second Voice from the
Temple: The Temple being Jewish, and abolished as well as Tithes, 1 Cor. 9.13.
John 4.20, 21. Which I wonder this blind Zealot against Judaism and Tithes, had
not Eyes to see, or Brains to consider. Now these our Predecessors, and many
others since, obliging themselves both by Vows, Laws, and Covenants, to pay
Tithes of all to God and his Ministers, as Gods peculiar Right, and God himself
not only enjoining men in the Old Testament, not to remove the ancient
Landmarks their Fathers have (duly) set, Prove. 22.8. and to make good their
Ancestors Oaths and Vows, (which oblige their Posterity, as Genesis 50.24, 25.
Exodus 13.19. Josh. 24.32. chapter 2.12, to 22. chap. 6.21, to 26. chap. 9.15, to
27. chap. 10.1, to 12. 2 Samuel 21.1, to 15. 1 Samuel 20.14, 15, 16, 17, 23, 42.
chap. 23.8. chap. 24.21. 2 Chronicles. 16.3. compared together resolve) but likewise
informing them in the new, as a Gospel Truth, Gal. 3.15. That if it be but a
man's Covenant, if it be confirmed (by many successive Laws, Statutes, Curses,
Excommunications denounced against the infringers thereof in all succeeding
ages, as this of Tithes, and the Churches Rights and Liberties have been) no
man disannulleth it: By what Authority, Right, Law, Reason, Justice, Conscience
or power from God or Men, any presuming Mortals, at the solicitations of
Anabaptists, Jesuits, Quakers, or Atheistical wretches, can sacrilegiously
attempt to rob God himself, and plunder his faithful Ministers of this their
ancient, just, hereditary, sacred, settled Maintenance (to which our Ministers
have a far ancienter, better Right, Title, by all Laws of God and Man, than
they have to their new acquired Purchases and Powers,) established, settled on
them by particular Donors and Benefactors out of their own private Inheritances
and Estates, not the Republics, which neither the Patrons themselves, nor any
others, nor yet the Ministers themselves can alienate from the Church, (as
their own consciences, judgments must acknowledge, unless strangely
cauterized:) Let them and Can answer to that Genesis 18.25.
Sovereign Judge of all the Earth; who will probably judge them here, and shall
certainly judge them eternally hereafter for all such detestable Robberies, and
violent Rapines, if wilfully perpetrated and persevered in without repentance
after timely admonition, who can quickly strip both them and theirs naked of
all their temporal Powers, Honors, Possessions, Enjoyments, as he did Jeroboam
and his Sons for their turning the Priests and Levites out of their
Possessions; and King Ahab with his Family for seizing upon Naboths Vineyard,
in a violent and unrighteous manner, though colored over, to delude the
people, with an hypocritical Fast, and feigned, legal proceedings, 1 Kings 21.
We read it recorded of our Savior, Luke 12.13, 14. that when one of the
company said unto him; Master, speak to my brother that he divide the
Inheritance with me: He returned him this answer, Man, who made me a Judge or
Divider over you? Let every person now solicited by croaking Anabaptists,
Jesuits, Quakers, Soldiers, or others, not only to judge and divide, but
utterly to abolish and take away our Ministers necessary Maintenance, (not
unnecessary Abbots, or Prelates, Lordly superfluities long since dissipated) by
Glebes and Tithes, return them the self-same answer; lest Christ himself at the
last day condemn them for over-bold intruders into such a Supreme Jurisdiction
over his, and his Ministers, Rights and Callings too, as neither God nor Man
ever yet conferred on them. God himself prohibiting the sale, alienation,
substraction of his Priests and Levites necessary Glebes, Tithes, and by
consequence of our Ministers (as I have formerly observed) and further
informing all his, that it is a snare to a man to devour holy things, and after
Vows to make enquiry, Prove. 20.25. But of this second Argument enough, the
Negative part whereof I shall prove more fully hereafter by way of answer to an
Objection.

13. I shall make good the Proposition by arguments drawn from the New
Testament it self, which no ways contradicts, but confirms the lawfullness of
Tithes. This I have already proved from Heb. 7.1, to 12. to which I shall refer
the Reader, and proceed to other Texts. I shall begin with Mat. 23.23, 24. and
Luke 11.42. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, for ye pay Tithes of
Mint, and Annise, and Cummin, and all manner of Herbs, and have omitted the
weightier things of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, and the love of God:
These ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone: Ye blind
Guides, which strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel. In which words our Savior
himself, though he denounces a Woe against the Hypocritical Pharisees, in
being just and careful in paying Tithes, even of Herbs and Seeds of all
sorts, of meanest value, and yet in the mean time neglecting works of
Righteousness in matters of greater worth, of Charity toward man, and of Faith
and Love toward God himself, straining at a Gnat, and swallowing a Camel: yet
he positively resolves, that they ought not to omit the due and conscientious
payment even of these lesser Tithes of smallest value, much less then of their
Corn, Wine, Oil, Flocks, Herds, which were of greater worth. And if the Scribes
and Pharisees were no Saints, but Hypocrites for omitting these weightier
duties, though they paid these smallest Tithes; what are these Anabaptistical
and other Sectarian Scribes and Pharisees, who, not only against all Rules of
Justice and Charity toward men, but of Faith and Love to God (which they even
renounce) rob God and his Ministers, not only of all their own Tithes, small
as well as great, but of those Tithes which others would willingly pay them,
and endeavor totally to deprive them of those small Rectories, Glebes they yet
enjoy, and of their Ministry too; and when they have John Can, His Second
Voice from the Temple, p. 2.
stripped them stark naked of all they have, would eat their very flesh, and burn
them with fire? Certainly such are worser and greater Hypocrites, than the
Scribes and Pharisees, pretending Conscience it self, for their most
unconscionable dealing in this kind. Such men's throats are so wide, that they
can swallow not only Camels, but whole Rectories, Churches, Steeples, with
their Lead, Timber, Bells, Stone, (to say no more) for a Breakfast; all Tithes
in two or three Parishes and throughout the Land for a Dinner, and the public
Lands, Revenues of the Crown (which should defray all ordinary public charges
for the peoples ease) for a Supper, that they may be Supreme, and every one of
them like our Savior Christ himself, both a Priest, Prophet, and a King,
executing a Plurality of these three and other Offices, and their Callings too
all at once, to enrich themselves faster than all other men. This Text was much
insisted on by Fox Acts and Monuments Vol. 1. f. 602, 603, 604.
John Hus to prove Tithes under the Gospel to be pure Alms, coupling it with
the former verse, Luke 11.41. But rather give Alms of such things as you have,
and behold all things are clean unto you; But certainly the Text it self
proves, that this referrs only to the washing mentioned in the precedent
verses; not to this subsequent clause concerning their payment of Tithes, never
styled Alms in any Text; and recorded by Matthew, as a distinct Woe, and
Sentence of it self; without any mention of Alms, in the Antecedent or
Subsequent verses: and John Hus himself, together with Augustine, Chrysostom,
Hierom, and Aquinas, (there cited by him) from hence conclude; That Tithes are
lawful under the Gospel, as well as alms, for so much as the Gift thereof unto
the Priest, did not cease in the time of Christ: and Saint Augustine in his 219
Sermon, of Paying Tithes, presses the payment of them under the Gospel, as a
Duty, by many enforcing arguments, before any Popes Decretals for payment of
them, or that we now call Popery, was known in the world. Saint Ambrose before
him doing the like, In Serm^ne Quadragesimae, cited by Gratian, Causa 16. qu.
7. and St. Cyprian before them both. Which had John Can either known or
considered, he would not, with so much mistaken Ignorance and Impudence, have
damned Tithes as POPISH, etc. And the pleading for them, as a pleading for
Babylon, and for BAAL: in his New Second Voice from the Temple of Babylon, or
Baal, which he pleases, not of Old or New Jerusalem.

The next Gospel Text, I shall cite, is that of Gal. 6.6. Let him that is
taught in the word, communicate to him that teaches him in all good things; To
which I shall subjoyn, 1 Cor. 9.11. If we have sowed unto you spiritual things,
is it a great matter, if we shall reap your carnal things? Romans 15.25. And
their Debtors they are: for if the Gentiles have been made partakers of their
spiritual things, their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things.
All these three Gospel Texts resolve, That Ministers of the Gospel, have a just
due and right to a competent, comfortable share in all the goods things,
Temporal blessings and necessaries for the support of this life, which the
people instructed by them, and receiving spiritual things from them, enjoy. And
that the people are bound both by express precepts in the Gospel, and by the
rules of common, moral equity and justice, cheerfully to communicate and
minister such a fitting share of all their good things, and temporal blessings,
as a debt and due, unto them, for their ministering to them in spiritual things:
which I fully proved in the first Proposition; and Impudency it self cannot
deny. The sole question then is, what this share or portion ought to be, and
who shall determine it in point of difference? I confess the Apostle does not
decide either of these in terminis, these Texts being general, all in the
plural number; All good things; your carnal things; comprising all such things
out of which Tithes, predial, mixed or personal (as See Augustine de Temp. Ser.
219. Gratian Cause. 16. qu. 1.
Canonists and Lawyers distinguish them) are or may be paid: Wherefore every
faithful Christian, every spiritual son of God, and of faithful Abraham,
(whose footsteps, presidents they are to follow, in all doubtful cases, admit
this one) to satisfy his conscience and judgment in this case, must and will
resort to the presidents of the Eminentest Saints in former ages, and Gods own
prescripts in other express Texts; Where finding the very Father of the
faithful, Abraham himself giving, his Grandson Jacob vowing, and God himself
specially reserving, prescribing the payment of a Tenth of all good things from
and by his own people, for the maintenance of his Priests and Levites, under
the Law; which they cheerfully rendered until and in Christ's own time; that the
very Pharisees and Scribes (though Hypocrites) were so just, as to pay Tithes
of all; that Christ resolved they ought to do it, and not leave it undone; and
that none before the Apostles days ever gave less than a Tenth part: (as the
premises largely evidence) he must and will necessarily conclude from all these
sacred Directories, precepts, presidents; that the ordinary constant standing
portion and proportion of all his goods and carnal things here prescribed, and
intended by Gods Spirit, is the tenth part: and in extraordinary cases more,
when Gods glory, the Ministers necessities, the Defense or Propagation of the
Gospel require it: And when he shall further read in the Gospel it self, that
speech of Zacheus, the converted Publican, Luke 19.8. Behold, Lord, the Half of
my Goods I give to the poor: And how the first converted Christians and Jews in
the Apostles days, sold their Lands, Houses, and brought and laid the money at
the Apostles feet, Acts 4.5. His conscience (which must not guide the Word and
Spirit of God, as most men's consciences do now, but the Word and Spirit it and
him too) will and must from thence conclude, that he must not give his faithful
Minister less than a Tenth part of all; and in cases of extraordinary
necessity, share even half his goods, yea, the price of all his Lands and
Houses, between the Ministers and poor Saints of God, specially in times of
persecution, when as he ought to hide, and feed them too, as godly Obadiah did
an hundred of the Lords Prophets in the days of Jezebel, at his own charge,
with the hazard of hi^ Office and Life, 1 Kings 18.4.13. If any man's conscience
in a settled Christian Realm, State, be so obstinate or froward, as not to
submit to the lowest proportion of a Tenth, which all ages, and most, or all
settled Christian Realms have unanimously agreed upon, and confirmed by public
Edicts, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical, whereof there are near thousands in
print; the Christian Kings and Magistrates are to determine all controversies
of this nature, and state the just proportion of this Debt and Duty between the
Minister and people, where it is not publicly decided, and may justly enforce
the due payment of it (when and where it is determined by positive public
Laws) as a just Debt, as they do in all other civil Debts, Duties, Accounts in
controversy before them, (as I shall prove in due place) even by these very
Texts, though John Can denies it, in his VOX praeterea NIHIL, p. 14.

To these I shall subjoyn that noted Text in the 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. (which John
Can cites by piecemeal, as the Devil did Scripture, leaving out the
principal branch, Mat. 4.6.) Do ye not know, that they which minister about
holy things, live of the things of the Temple, and they that wait at the altar,
are partakers with the altar? Even so has the Lord ordained (this Can omits)
that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. I have urged this
Text before for proof of the first; I shall here apply it only to the second
Propositions confirmation, as to Tithes.

1. Then we have here A Divine Gospel Ordinance made by the Lord of Hosts
himself, (not repealable by any Army or Powers on Earth) as well as
Parliamentary Ordinances, for the Maintenance of the Preachers of the Gospel:
and let Can (the poorest Preacher of the Gospel I ever yet knew in England,
(except one of his fraternity,) who heard him once preach an Assize and Fast
Sermon too at Chard) deny our Ministers to be able Preachers of the Gospel, at
the peril of his Soul, though he denies them to be lawful Ministers of Christ,
and censures them as Antichristian and Popish: But why so? Because (forsooth)
they had their Ordination from Rome; and by consequence are TRAITORS and FELONS
too, by the Statute of 27 Eliz. c. 2. for which they might be legally executed
for Treason and Felony, if the State were not pleased to interpret the Statute
contrary, as he conceives, to the Letter and form of it: (the words whereof he
both curtals and misrecites, just as he did this Text) p. 5. To do him and his
best friends a kindness, vindicate the lawfulness of our Ministers calling
against this ordinary slander, and convince him of his gross mistake, I shall
truly recite the Statute, Thus entitled: JESUITS and PRIESTS, in England
shall depart, and NONE SHALL COME INTO THIS REALM. If so, then many Dippers,
Speakers, Administrators, Members in Anabaptistical Congregations; many
New-lights and Gifted-brethren in separate Congregations; many Shakers,
Quakers, Ranters, Broachers of new Notions, Errors, Blasphemies, throughout
the Realm; many new Politicians, Levellers, Agitators, Soldiers in the Army, if
not some Officers; all the late converted pretended See the false Jew
discovered at Newcastle for a cheat and Jesuit p. 4, 5, 10, 11, 12, 13. dipped
by M. Tillam at Hexam, a like Priest, now Administrator of the Anabaptists
there. And Eliazer Bar Israel, his Vindication of the Messiah, a pretended
converted Jew, but sprinkled and baptized by the Jesuits, dipped by our
Anabaptists, and a Jesuit in truth.
Jews, dipped in Anabaptistical Congregations (discovered and known to be
disguised Jesuits, purposely sent from Rome, and the greatest sticklers
against our Ministers Tithes and Calling) must presently depart, and none of
them return into the Kingdom (as many have lately done) or else be executed for
Traitors; But why so? what is their crime, work, employment here; and by what
marks or fruits shall we know, discover both them and their confederates? Let
the words of the Statute (compared with all our late troubles, changes) resolve
the ignorant and incredulous, that there are many such amongst us, and of John
Cannes fraternity. Whereas diverse persons called or professed JESUITS (these
Can wittingly conceals, though the first in the Bead-roll, and therefore is a
Felon by the law) Seminary Priests and other Priests, which have been, and from
time to time are made in parts beyond the Sea; by, or according to the Order
and Rites of the Church of ROME, (and when Can can prove that all or any of
our Ministers were thus made, as he has confidently averred in print to those,
he calls, the Higher Powers and Supreme Authority of the Nation, Let them be
hanged for Traitors and Antichristian Ministers in good earnest, else let him
be hanged in their stead, for this his impudent slander of them all, as well
Independents as Presbyterians:) Have of late years come and been sent into this
Realm of England (and were any of our Ministers such, and not rather Can
himself, coming hither from Amsterdam for the purposes following) and other the
Queens Dominions OF PURPOSE (AS IT HAS APPEARED, as well by some of their own
examinations (now out of date) as by diverse other Manifest means and proofs
(more visible of late years than ever) not only to withdraw her Highness
subjects from their due obedience to her Majesty, but also to stir up and move
Sedition, R^bellion, and open Hostility within the same her Highness Realms and
Dominions, to the great endangering of the safety of her most Royal Person, and
to the utter ruin, desolation and overthrow of the whole Realm (now effected
as a Realm) if the same be not the sooner (and now pray God it be not overlate)
by some good means foreseen and prevented. For reformation whereof, be it
ordained, etc. That All Priests and Jesuits (Can cannot spy such good friends
within the Act, but deletes them out of it) Seminary Priests, and other Priests
whatsoever, made and ordained out of the Realm of England, etc. shall depart
the Realm under the penalties therein mentioned. Had Can pressed this Statute
to those he dedicates his Pamphlet, for the speedy execution of it against
those many Jesuits and Seminary Priests now in England, for their traitorous
Practices and Designs therein mentioned, of late, and now driven on and almost
completed by them, it had been a commendable zeal; but not to write one word
or syllable against these Romish Vermin, Arch-Engineers and Janissaries of the
Romish See, now swarming among us, to ruin our Protestant Kings, Kingdoms,
Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Church, Ministers, Ministry, Religion, and
foreign Protestant Kingdoms, States, Churches now engaged by them in bloody
Wars, both by Land and Sea; and to omit the very name of the Jesuits (the
first Popish Agents mentioned and chiefly intended in this Act) and press it
only against our Ministers Calling, Ministry, Tithes, Maintenance, of purpose
to ruin them and theirs, and by consequence our Church and Religion (the
Design and scope of his whole Pamphlet) is such a malicious, unchristian,
Antichristian Practice, as proclaims him to all the world, either a new
converted Jesuit, or Romish Factor, under the Garb of an old Anabaptist, or an
overgrown cankered Anabaptist, void of Piety, Honesty, inspired by the very
John 8.44.
Father of Lies. For not one of our English Ministers I know or hear of (except
two or three Jesuits, and Popish Priests crept into livings in Staffordshire
and elsewhere very lately, I know not by whose favor or negligence) was ever
ordained by any such Jurisdiction or authority, as is here mentioned; which all
our Ministers (and their Ordainers too, whether Prelates or Presbyters)
particularly and publicly abjured, both at the time of their respective
Ordinations and admissions to their Benefices, and likewise when they took any
Degree of learning in our Universities, by the two known famous Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, purposly made and ratified by 1 Eliz. c. 2. 5 Eliz. c
1. 3 Jac. c. 4, 5. 7 Jac. c. 6. 17 Car. The Act for Triennial Parliaments.
sundry, zealous, Protestant Parliaments against the usurped Papal Jurisdiction
and authority of the Sea of Rome, and the Popes, Jesuits, Papists practices, to
blow up, destroy our Protestant Kings, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Religion,
and subvert our Kingly Government, whole State and Commonwealth, and for the
better discovering of them; yet lately suspended, abrogated, as dangerous
unlawful Oaths, by some of Cannes good friends, who would be reputed Zealots
against the Popes Jurisdiction and his Creatures too: Now how those Ministers
of our Church, who thus abjure the Jurisdiction of Rome, at the time of their
very Ordination, (and their Ordainers too, before them) and since have done the
like in their Solemn League and Covenant, can without the highest slander be
said to derive their Ministry from it; (and that by Can and his Iesuitical,
Anabaptistical Fraternity, who never took one of these Oaths, or the Covenant;
and revile, repeal them as unlawful out of love to the Popes Jurisdiction,
Jesuits, Priests, their Jesuitical, Treasonable Conspiracies, Treasons,
Practices, or for want of zeal against them,) Let the world and this slanderers
own Conscience (if he have any left) now determine. Besides, who knows not (but
this Ignoramus) that the Rites and Ceremonies of Ordination in the Church of
Rome, recorded at large in Ceremoniale, and Pontificiale Pontificum Romanorum,
and the ends of Ordination likewise ( viz. to say Mass, create their Creator,
offer up Christ in Sacrifice at the altar to his Father, Invocate Saints, adore
Images, yield Canonical obedience to the Pope and his Supremacy, etc.) are far
different from the form and ends of our Ministers Ordination in the Church of
England, prescribed by the Parl. of 5. and 6. Ed. 6. c. 1. ratified by the
Statutes of 1 Eliz. c. 1, 2. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 8 Eliz. c. 1. and 39 Eliz. c. 8.
(made only by Protestant Parliaments) which as they particularly condemn,
renounce the Popes Power and Jurisdiction; so they declare and resolve, our
Ministers Ordination to be lawful; and them 8 Eliz. c. 1: and Book of
Ordination.
in very deed to be Ministers, and rightly made, ordained and consecrated,
according to Gods word, without any derivative power or Ordination from the
Church of Rome? Therefore for this New old pander for the Whore of Rome to
aver, they receive their Ministry and ordination thence, is a Notorious Ly.
Yea, but says he, Francis Mason of Consecration, and Mr. Yates in his Model
of Divinity prove and confess, That the Ministry of the Church of England (
established by the Law of the Land) is derived from the Pope and Rome. True,
but in what sense? only by way of Succession, as his own Ministry and Faith
(if he has any) were derived from John of Leyden: or just as our Bibles,
Religion, Baptism, Churches were derived thence, and all now living with Can
himself, derived from Popish Ancestors, (many even from Popes, Popish Priests,
Prelates, Friars,) by natural generation, as their surnames discover. God used
the Sea Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. Spelmanni Council. Bp. Usher Eccles. Brit. Antiqu.
c. 1, 2, 3. etc. Beda Eccles. Hist.
Popes of Rome and their Instruments to convert the Britains and Saxons from
their Paganism to the Christian (not Papal or Roman) Faith; which through Gods
mercy has continued amongst us ever since; yet mixed of later times with
manifold Popish Errors and Superstitions. These Errors, Superstitions, our
godly Martyrs, and by them our Kings and Parliaments discovering, did thereupon
by special Acts of Parliament abolish, as derived from the Church of Rome,
together with the Sea Rastals Abridgment, Tit. Provision, Praemunire, Rome,
Crown, Service and Sacraments, Mr. Fox Acts and Monuments. Bishop Jewels
Apology.
Popes usurped power, and Gain, which they served only to support; retaining
only the Scriptures, Sacraments, Soul-saving Doctrines, thence derived by
succession only (but authoritatively, originally from God and Christ himself)
with such Godly, Orthodox Bishops and Ministers, who though first ordained in
the Church of England when Popish, did yet renounce all her Popish Errors,
Corruptions, with the Popes Supremacy, and all Popish additional Rites to the
form of their Ordination and Baptism: (which made neither of them void in
Substance, no more than their annexing of the Apocrypha to the Canonical
Scriptures, made them uncanonical.) These afterward ordained other Bishops,
Ministers without any Popish Rites, in such manner as the Gospel prescribes:
which Mr. Mason, Mr. Yates and others prove against the Papists, to be a lawful
Ordination, though not made by the Popes Authority, nor according to former
Popish Ceremonies. In this Sense only, they write the bare Succession, not the
Office and Calling of our Ministers (as this wooden Can mistakes) was
derived from the Church of Rome; but their Ministry it self from Christ's own
Institution. And if this makes them Popish and Antichristian, then all our
Protestant Kings, Parliaments, Magistrates, Judges, Officers of all sorts must
be Popish too, if not Paganish, because their Predecessors were such: and all
Officers, Soldiers of the Army, and Anabaptistical Saints too, who have
purchased any Lands, Rents, Revenues of Abbeys, Priories, Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Chapters, Archdeacons, must likewise be both Antichristian and Popish;
because their Predecessors, who first enjoyed, and from whom they do derive
them, were such, at least in their and Cannes repute. I hope therefore, they
will all now renounce these their Purchases to avoid the Guilt and high scandal
of Popery and Antichristianism; or disclaim this Second, Loud-lying Voice
against our Ministers and their Ministry, as a Voice only from a profane empty
Can; not from a Sacred Temple, or Gods holy Spirit.

But to return from this necessary digression, touching the Lawfulness of our
Ministers Calling, unto their Tithes; We have secondly in this Text, 1 Cor.
9.13, 14. a Gospel Ordinance for their very Tithes, confirmed by the old
Levitical Law, and grounded on its Equity. But how does this appear? By these
emphatical words; Even so has the Lord Ordained (in the Preterperfect Tense)
That they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel; But where has
the Lord ordained this? The Apostle thrice resolves expressly, that he has done
it in the Levitical Law, v. 9. For it is written in the Laws of Moses (Deuteronomy.
25.4.) Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn;
does God take care for Oxen? Or says he it altogether for our sakes? For our
sakes no doubt this is written: that he that ploweth should plow in hope, and
he that thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope; Which he again
recites, 1 Timothy 5.18. If this Precept concerning the meat and maintenance of
Oxen only in the Letter, though part of the Levitical Law, was doubtless
written for, and really intended of the Ministers of the Gospels food and
maintenance, and in full force under the Gospel, as the Apostle clearly
resolves; then a fortiori, the Precepts of the Law concerning the food and
livelihood of Gods Priests, and Levites under the Law, by Glebes and Tithes,
not purely Ceremonial (as I have already proved) must doubtless be intended of
them, and be in full force likewise in their natural, equitable Sense and
Proportion, in relation to their Livelihood for preaching of the Gospel; there
being a greater Analogy, Proportion between them and Preachers of the Gospel,
than betwixt them and Oxen. To put it out of doubt, he subjoyns; Do not ye
know, that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the
Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? To wit,
by Gods express Ordinance in the Levitical Law, which ye know, and therefore I
need not particularly cite the words, as I did the other, of not muzzling the
Ox, etc. which were more obscure, and needed my former Paraphrase on them; but
thus mind you of them in the general: And then he inferrs and subjoyns: Even so
has the Lord ordained (to wit, by the very natural, moral Equity of the Laws,
Ordinances he made for the Priests and Levites Maintenance by Tithes, Glebes,
and Free-will-offerings, for officiating in the Temple, and at the Altar under
the Law) that the Preachers of the Gospel (who now succeed, and supply their
places, though in different services in the Churches of Christ under the
Gospel) should live of the Gospel; even so fully, comfortably, and in such
sort, as they did under the Law: Or at least by this Gospel text, superadded to
them by Gods Spirit. To make this out more fully, and clear it from the censure
of Judaism, take notice of these four particulars.

1. That in the Holy Ghosts Gospel phrase and language, there is a Temple among
and for Christians under the Gospel, as well as among and for the Jews under
the Law, (else Cannes Voice from the Temple, if there be no such place, must be
thus amended in his next Edition: A Voice from the Can or Alehouse) and that
this Temple is nothing else, but the Church and Saints of Christ, 2 Cor. 6.16.
1 Cor. 3.16, 17. chap. 6.19. Ephesians. 2.21. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Rev. 3 12. chap. 7.15.
chap. 11.1, 2, 19. chap. 14, 15. chap. 15.5, 6, 8. chap. 16.1, 17. compared
together.

2. That Christians under the Gospel, have likewise an Altar as well as the
Jews, though different from theirs, Heb. 13.14. We have an Altar whereof they
have no right to eat which serve the Tabernacle; often mentioned, Rev. 6.9. chap.
8.3, 5. chap. 9.13. chapter 14.18. yea coupled with the Temple, Rev. 11.1. Rise,
measure the Temple of God and the Altar.

3. We have Sacrifices to be offered in this Temple on the Altar, as well as
the Jews in theirs. 1. The Sacrifice of Prayer, Rev. 8.3, 4, 5. 2. The
Sacrifice of Praise, Heb. 13.15. 3. The Sacrifice of Charity, alms and good
works, Heb. 13.16. 4. Our own bodies, which we must present as a living
Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, by serving him according to his word, as
rational men, not beasts, that were both slain and sacrificed under the Law,
Romans 12.1.

4. We have Priests likewise to offer up these spiritual Sacrifices, 1 Pet.
2.9. Rev. 1.6. chap. 5.10. chap. 20.6. And these are three. 1. Every sanctified
Christian, who must offer up the Sacrifices of Prayer, Praise, alms, and his
own body to God, in his private Closet and Family. 2. The Ministers of the
Gospel, who must continually offer up these Sacrifices in the peoples behalf,
in public here on earth, in the Temple, for which we are to render them, not
only Tithes and Glebes, but a Free-will-offering of bounty and charity besides,
a sacrifice acceptable and well-pleasing to God, Phil. 4.16.3. Christ Jesus
himself, our Altar and High Priest too, now sitting in heaven, Heb. 13.15. cap.
2.17. c. 4.14, 15. c. 5.10. c. 6.20. c. 7.17, 20, 21, 22, 27, 28. c. 8.1. c.
10.21. And if Christians have thus even under the Gospel a Temple, an Altar,
spiritual Sacrifices, Priests to officiate in, at them, and offer up these
Sacrifices to God in public, as well as the Jews; Why the Priests, who
minister about holy things in this Evangelical Temple, wait continually at this
spiritual Altar, offer these spiritual sacrifices publicly unto God thereon,
administer the Sacraments, bless the people, and preach the Gospel likewise to
them (as the Jewish Priests and Levites did teach, instruct and bless the
people in the Law, and kill the Passover, 2 Chronicles. 27.7, 8, 9. c. 30.15, 16,
17. cap. 35.2, 3. cap. 15.3. Ezra 7.25. Neh. 8.5, to 12. Numb. 6.23, 24, 25.)
should not receive both Glebes, Tithes, and voluntary Oblations from the
people, as well as the Priests and Levites did under the Law, by virtue of the
self-same Levitical law of God, by which they claimed them (they being both the
Priests of the self-same God, and both executing the self-same Priestly office
in a different manner, and that by the Apostles own Argument, intention, and
positive resolution in this Gospel text) let Can and all other oppugners of
their Tithes resolve me and others, from as clear Gospel texts as these I have
here alleged, and others formerly insisted on in the first Proposition, or else
yield their cause for ever lost.

I shall cloze up all with two other Gospel texts, most urged and abused by
those now in power in their own cases, who most of all forgot, transgressed,
oppugned them heretofore in other men's. The first is, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit
your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the
King as Supreme, or unto Governors, etc.

The Second, Romans 13.1, 2. Let every soul be subject unto the Higher powers,
for there is no Power but of God: The powers that are, are ordained of God;
whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God; and
they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation. That these two
Scriptures extend only to lawful hereditary, or elective Kings, Governors,
Higher powers, and that in their lawful commands, alone; not to Usurpers,
Tyrants, Invaders of the peoples Rights, Laws, Liberties, Properties, Lives,
(who may and ought to be resisted, as well as any other Thieves, Robbers,
Invaders, Murderers whatsoever) I have largely proved in My Second Part of my
Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms (Authorized by the Commons House of
Parliament) p. 102, to 131. to which I shall referr the Reader for
satisfaction, not being the point in issue, to which alone I shall apply them.
In the former Text last insisted on, we had an Ordinance of God himself for the
Maintenance and Tithes of the Preachers of the Gospel: here we have, two Gospel
commandments to submit to every Ordinance of our lawful Governors, and
Higher Powers (agreeable to Gods Ordinances, or not repugnant to them) for the
Lords sake, and not to resist them: for though the Ordinances themselves be
made but by men, and in that sense styled, every ordinance of man; yet the
Powers that make them, are ordained of God; therefore those who resist them in
their humane ordinances, though but in humane things, do therein resist the
very Ordinance of God, especially in things divine, commanded by and approved
in Gods own sacred Word. Now the Maintenance of Gods Ministers by Tithes, is an
express Ordinance of God himself, both before and during the law, and under
the Gospel too, prescribed, warranted by all the forecited Texts: And there are
infinite See Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, c. 5, 6, 7, 8, 10. Bochellus Decr.
Eccles. Gal. l.6. Tit. 8. de Decimis.
Laws, Statutes, Decrees, Canons, Ordinances of just and lawful Christian
Emperors, Kings, Governors, Parliaments, States, Councils, Synods, and all
higher Powers, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical, in all Christian Kingdoms,
States, Churches, especially in our own, for the establishment and due payment
of them to the Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel: Therefore they are duly,
constantly, cheerfully to be paid unto them by all Christians and Professors of
the very Gospel, and cannot, may not be oppugned, detained, subtracted,
resisted by John Can or any of his Confederates, nor abrogated by any
pretending to Power Ordained by God, without resisting the Ordinance of God
himself, yea fighting against him; as these Texts and Acts 5.39. resolve. For
which they shall receive to themselves damnation, though they dream (as many
now do) they should merit heaven and salvation too, by substracting, subverting
both Tithes and Ministers, even by open armed violence, if they cannot
accomplish it by Jesuitical Policy, and pious frauds. And thus much for the
confirmation of the Second Proposition by Scripture Texts and Presidents.

For humane Authorities, that Tithes are lawful and due to Ministers by a
Divine Right even under the Gospel, I could cite very many, were I This was
penned at Swainswick in the long Vacation 1653.
near my Library and Books as heretofore, but being far distant from them, I
shall trouble you only with a Catalogue of such as I have by me, or remember:
See Dr. Tillessee his Animadversions on Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, where
most of the Fathers and ancients are cited at large.
Fathers of this Judgment and opinion you may peruse Origin Homil. in Numeros,
c. 18. St. Ambrose in Sermon Quadragesimae, cited by Gratian Causa 16. qu. 7.
St. Hierome on Mal. 3. and St. Augustine De Tempore Sermon. 219. De Reddendis
Decimis Tom. 9. both cited by Gratian Causa 16. qu. 1. For Councils, you may
peruse Concilium Rothomagense and Magotiense in Gratian Causa 16. qu. 7.
Concilium Matisconense 2. Anno 588. Concilium apud Solemanum Anno 1266. Synodus
Rothingue Anno 1581. Concilium Trecense Anno 1427. (which resolves, Decimae
fuerunt a DEO primitus Institutae; and Praecipiuntur solvi tam de veteri, quam
de Novo Testamento) Synodus Lingonensis Anno 1404. Synodus Turonensis Anno
1588. Concilium Tridentinum and Tholosanum, Anno 1591. which decree, That the
payment of Tithes, Divino jure cautum est, sacrisque utriusque Testamenti
libris confirmatum. All these Collected together by Bochellus Decreto Ecclesiae
Galicanae l. 6. Tit. 8. De Decimis, Concilium Tridentinum, sessio. 25. c. 12.
The Council of Orenth An. 1549. with many more recorded in Binius, Surius,
Crab, Caranza, Merlin, Syrmond, and other Collectors of the Decrees of
Councils, resolve, Tithes to be due to the Ministers of the Gospel by Divine
Right, ratified both by the Old and New Testament. For foreign popish Bochellus
Decret. Eccles. Gal. 6. Tit. 8. c. 8. p. 904.
Authors, Aimericus Bishop of Poitiers in France in a Synod there held, Anno
1367. Enjoined all Chaplains on Lords-dayes and Holy Days diligently to
declare to the people in time of Mass, and likewise in their Sermons under
pain of Excomunication, Qualiter Ex praecepto Divinae Legis, quilibet
Catholicus tenetur solvere Ecclesiae decimas de omnibus licite acquisitis:
Gratian the Canonist Causa 16. qu. 1. and 7. with John Thiery, and other
Glossers on his Text; The Clergy of the Diocese of Edicts and Ordenances,
Tom. 4. p. 493.
Paris and Troyes in France, mentioned in an Edict of H. the 2. of France, An.
1542. and of the Clergy of Poissy, recited in an Edict of Charles the 9. An.
1562. for payment of Tithes, as introduced and instituted by divine right.
Hostiensis in his Summa Aurea, Angelus de Clavasio in his Summa Angelica:
Baptista Tuvomala, in his Summa Rossella, Tit. Decimae; Innocentius, Res. de
Decimis, Albertus Pius Carpensis, Rebuffus de Decimis, Tyndarus in his special
Tract de Decimis, printed at Colen Anno 1590. and generally all other
Canonists. Alexander Alensis Summa Theol. part 4. qu. 2, 3, 4. Richardus de
Media villa in lib. 4. Sentent. Distinct. 17. and most other Thomas Waldensis
Doctr^nalis Fidei l. 2. Artic. 3. c. 64, 65.
Schoolmen on that place. Aquinas 2.2. quaest. 87. with most Commentators on
him, there assert, That Tithes are even at this day due to Ministers, Iure
Divino, in quantum sunt a jure Naturali and Morali, but not as they were
Ceremonial. Popish old and New Expositors, Commentators on Genesis 14. and 28.
Levit. 27. 2 Chronicles. 31. Neh. 10. and 13. Mal. 3. Mat. 10. Luke 10. Romans 16. 1
Cor. 9. Gal. 6.6. 1 These. 5. Heb. 7. 1 Timothy 5. are all of the same opinion, and
most Protestant Expositors likewise. Yea St. Briget in her Revelationes
Extravagantes, cap. 83, 84. will resolve our female Quakers (who now pretend to
immediate Extravagant Revelations as well as she) That those do spoil Christ
himself of his Right, who do not pay Tithes to him and his Ministers; and that
by a revelation from Christ's own mouth. Therefore the Jesuits, popish Priests,
Papists activity, business now in declaiming against English Protestant
Ministers Tithes as popish and antichristian, against the Decrees, Resolutions
of all their own Councils, Canonists, Casuists, Schoolmen, Expositors, Popes,
can proceed from no other ground but a malicious design to subvert, starve,
ruin our Protestant Ministers for want of maintenance, and thereby to
extirpate our Religion to advance their own in its place, and then they will
cry and set up Tithes again as much as ever. The judgment of Foreign Protestant
Divines concerning the Divine right of Ministers maintenance, and that by
Tithes where settled, and the Sacrilegious impiety of those, who would rob them
of it, you may read in their Commentaries and Expositions on the Texts
forecited. Let learned Nicholas Hemingius speak for them all in his words
already cited; and in his Exposition on Gal. 6.6. p. 175. Dicit Scriptura, Bovi
trituranti non obligabis os. Et dignus est Operarius mercede sua: Indignissimus
igitur Christiano nomine censendus est, qui Ministros Evangelii totius
Ecclesiae curam gerentes negligit. Bestia quavis immanior est (Let Can and
his Confederates remember it) qui eos odio prosequitur and proscindit, quorum
Ministerio ad salutem, and immortalitatem invitatur. Sed proh dolor! bona pars
mundi (and never so much as now) huc incumbit, ut potius aliquid adimat
Ministerio, quam addat, tanta est ingratitudo and perversitas, etiam illorum,
qui sacrilege audeat gloriari de Christiano nomine. Horum sane factum, nihil
differ arbitror a sacrilegio and latrocinio, cujus poenas olim luent
architecti et fabri hujus mali. Non est quod quisquam quaerat subterfugia,
quibus se excuset, cur minus sit Liberalis erga Ministros Evangelii: Oculos
quidem hominum fallere potest; sed Deus non fallitur, in cujus contemptum alia
atque alia praetexunt ingrati. Hic tres Loci observantur: Primus, Quod victus
et alia Officia debeantur oeconomis mysteriorum Dei, seu Catechesis. Secundus,
Quod perniciosus error fit, non prudentia, defraudare ministros sua debita
mercede. Tertius, Quod Spiritus Sanctus in Paulo interpretetur, Derisionem
Majestatis divinae esse negare victum et alia officia verbi doctoribus.

I shall subjoyn to him these memorable seasonable Passages of Operum Tom. 1.
Tiguri. 1581. f. 273.
Huldricus Zuinglius, in his Brevis Pastorum Isagoge; where he resolves thus.
Quotquot ergo hac tempestate nostra divini verbi patrocinio, et falso praetextu
confisi debitos Census et Decimas, et alia hujusmodi quae justis Legibus
solvere jubentur, negare instituunt, omnes hi hujus praecepti sententia
damnantur, quo monemur, Ne quis furtum faciat: quin hoc ipso Reliquis furibus
pejores sunt, quod furto suo praetextum quendam et patrocinium ex Christi
doctrina adducere conantur. Quod si eo res redigatur, ut debita singulis impune
negare liceat, et nulla legitimi Magistratus cura sit et ratio, nullus denique
honestarum legum respectus, quis non videt quanto tutius fuerit cum immanissima
Turcarum Gente, quam cum hujusmodi Hominibus omnis aequitatis et justitiae
negligentibus conversari? Nec enim ulla potest in Deum dici Blasphemia
atrocior, nulla enim re magis ipsius nomen infamari, quam si hujusmodi Frauds
et Imposturas nequissimas, nominis illius praetextu, et Religionis Titulo
Defendere conemur. Let our Anabaptists, Quakers, Tith-detainers, consider and
tremble at it. In his Book Operum Tom. 1. f. 319. b.
De Duplici Justitia, Divina and Humana: treating of Tithes and their diverse
kinds, he concludes thus. De istis vero Decimis, quae Spiritualium vel
Clericorum (ut vocant) sunt, vel illorum aere redemptae, constanter affirmo,
eas omnino reddendas esse, quamdiu Magistratus has solvere jubet. Quin et illud
Magistratui licere dicimus, ut si inobedientes, et has solvere nolint, justo
Imperio ad harum solutionem cogat. Decimarum enim translatio communi
Magistratuum consensu instituta est, et juxta Decimam aestimationem omnes
fundi, agri et praedia vel vilius vel carius quoque divendita et empta sunt.
Quisquis vero contra communem illum legitimi Magistratus consensum ex proprio
animi sui arbitrio et consilio privato Decimas negaverit, Magistratui resistit
quisquis talis est, qui vero Magistratui sese inobedientem exhibet, Deo quoque
resistit, ut superius abunde satis demonstratum est. He concludes thus,
Singulorum Officium est decimas juxta Magistratus Sententiam et Decretum
exolvere; nec enim quisquam hominum privato et violento consilio quicquam hic
tentabit nisi furum et raptorum Iudicium subire cupiat.

Learned Gulielmus Stuckius, Antiquitatum Convivalium l. 1. c. 19. De Decimis,
Stipendiis, atque Salariis eorum qui Ecclesiis praesunt; proves from the
example of Abraham and vow of Jacob, Consuetudinem Decimas dandi etiam ante
legem fuisse usitatam. Veresimile etiam est Ethnicos ab illis commemoratis
exemplis tritum illud suum et usitatum praedae, spoliarum, et quicquid ab
hostibus captum est, Decimam Jovi caeterisque Diis vovendi solvendique morem
traxisse, cujus multa sane illustria exempla extant apud Alexand. ab Alex. l.
3. Genial. c. 22. Then he shows how God prescribed them to the Levites and
Priests, that the payment of them continued in Christ's time, and was revived by
Christian Emperors and Magistrates, as Constantine, Charles the Great.
Concluding thus. Ut ergo impie agunt illi Magistratus, qui bona Ecclesiae
dicata ad se rapiunt, vel ad alios usus transferunt: ita Impii et Sacrilegi
sunt privati Homines, qui non modo nihil pro suis facultatibus conferunt ad
Ministri Ecclesiastici et Scholarum conservationem, sed Decimas et Census
devitos, jam antea Ecclesiae dicatos, vel omnino non solvunt, vel non ea, qua
par est fide, etc. Itaque mirum non est multa quotidie cum privata, tum publica
mala, annonae praesertim caritatem ingruere, Cum Decime ali^que Census ad
Ecclesiarum Scholarumque conservationem pertinentes, vel negantur, vel malign
persolvantur.

For our own Domestic Councils, Parliaments and Writers Judgments herein;
Spelman. Conc tom. 1. p. 259, 268, 396, 347, 402, 418, 554, 620. Gulielmi
Lambardi Archalon.
Egbert Archbishop of York in his Excerptions about the year of Christ, An:
750. c. 4.99, 100. The National Council of Calchuth under King Oswald and Offa,
ann. 787. c. 17. forecited. The famous Council of Grateley, under King
Athelstan, ann. 928. cap. 1. De Decimis solicit reddendis. Odo Archbishop of
Canterbury in his Constitutions, ann. 943. c. 10. De Decimis reddendis. The
Canons under King Edgar, about the year 967. Can. 54. The Ecclesiastical laws
of King Aethelred, ann. 1012. cap. 4. The Ecclesiastical laws of Edward the
Confessor, c. 8. confirmed by William the Conqueror. The Popish Schoolmen,
Canonists, and Commentators on the Texts forecited, (whose names I pretermit)
the Seldens History of Tithes c. 7. p. 171
Convocation of England, an. 5 H. 6. and the Petition of the English Clergy in
Parliament, 50 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 199. resolve in positive terms, That Tithes
are due to God and his Ministers under the Gospel, by Divine Right. The same is
asserted by diverse of our Protestant Divines, particularly by Dr. George
Carleton, in his Treatise entitled, Tithes proved to be due by a Divine Right,
printed at London 1606. By Dr. William Sclater his Ministers Portion. By
Richard Eburne his Maintenance of the Ministry, London 1609. By Richard
Mountague, in his Diatribe on the first part of the History of Tithes, London
1628. by Robert Tileslee his Animadversions on Mr. Seldens History of Tithes,
London 1619. Mr. Samuel Purchase in his Pilgrimage, l. 2. c. 7. with sundry
others. And though one or two English Writers are of a different opinion, yet
they all accord, that being settled by our laws, they are duly to be paid, even
in point of justice and conscience; that they are not simply unlawful; but a
just and fitting maintenance under the Gospel, which Mr. Seldom in his History
of Tithes and Review thereof does affirm, and no ways oppose: Seeing then all
these, with the laws of sundry other Kings, Nations, and Authorities of all
sorts, conclude them to be of Divine Right, and conclude it both a grievous
Sin and Sacrilege against God to substract or abolish them; and those who
oppugn their Divine Right under the Gospel, do affirm, it is no sin, but a
bounden Debt and Duty to pay them, as settled by humane Grants, Donations,
Vows, Laws, Canons, Constitutions, Prescriptions time out of mind; how any
bearing the name of Christians, can or dare with open face oppugn, detain, or
attempt their total abrogation now, as Jewish or Antichristian, I refer it to
their own consciences, and others resolutions to determine.

I shall answer one grand Objection against Ministers Tithes under the Gospel;
and so cloze up this Chapter. Object.
Neither Jesus Christ himself, nor his Apostles, nor the Ministers of the
Primitive Church for two or three hundred years after them, received Tithes for
preaching the Gospel, but lived only upon the peoples alms and voluntary
contributions. Therefore the Ministers of the Gospel likewise after them ought
to receive no Tithes of the people for preaching the Gospel, but to live upon
Alms and voluntary contributions, as they did. This was William Thorps chief
Argument against Tithes, Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 699, 700. who
adds, That those Priests, who will challenge or take Tithes, deny that Christ
is come in the flesh, and do the Priests Office of the Old Law, for whom Tithes
were granted, for else Priests take now Tithes wrongfully; citing this, not as
his own, but a Doctors opinion, whose name he remembered not, but thought it was
St. Jerome; (or rather St. Can) in his New Voice, p. 13, 14, 15. who delivers
this for Orthodox Doctrine; which St. See Gratian Cause. 16. qu. 1.
Jerome directly contradicts, with all other ancient Doctors I have read.

Answ. Answ.
To this I reply, 1. That Christ and his Apostles lived amongst the Jews, who
at that time were obliged by Gods own Law to pay their Tithes only to such
Priests and Levites as were of the Tribe of Levi, of which Tribe Christ and his
Apostles were not; therefore they challenged not Tithes from them, Heb. 7.5. to
15.

2. They then paid their Tithes duly to their Priests and Levites (mentioned
John 1.19.) for which Christ commended them, resolving they ought not to omit
it, Mat. 23.23. Luke 11.42. chapter 18.12. Therefore it was no reason they should
pay them over again to Christ or his Apostles (no more than Papists, who pay
Tithes in kind against their wills unto our Ministers, though not to their own
Priests, but only voluntary Contributions) whiles their Priesthood stood in
force, which they generally submitted to.

3. The total abrogation of the Levitical Priesthood and Ceremonies by the
death of Christ, was not certainly known to, nor resolved by the Apostles and
believing Jews or Gentiles, till some years space after our Saviors Ascension,
as is evident by Acts 15. in the great case of Circumcision, about which there
was a Synod assembled; by Paul's circumcising Timothy after this, because of the
Jews, Acts 16.3. his purifying himself, and shaving his head after the Jewish
manner, many years afterward, Acts 21.20, to 28. which he being a Jew, was
obliged even then to observe to avoid scandal, but not the Gentiles. Therefore
Tithes amongst the Jews upon this account, were then still paid to their
Levitical Priests, not to the Apostles.

4. Though Christ whiles on earth, received no Tithes from the Jews, yet he
had a just Right, Title to Tithes from Abraham and all his Posterity, yea from
the Levitical Priests themselves (especially after their abolition) as he was a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck, to whom Abraham himself and
the Levites then in his loins paid Tithes of all, Heb. 7.1, to 15. (of which at
large before:) Therefore he had a just Right to receive Tithes from them, both
before the institution, and after the abolition of the Levitical Priesthood,
which he might have lawfully claimed, exercised, and his Apostles likewise in
his Right, though they did it not. We read that Christ had a just Right, Title
by Inheritance, and lineal descent from his Father King David, to the Temporal
Crown and Kingdom of Judah; being therefore said by the Wise men, Mat. 2.2. to
be born King of the Jews (an unanswerable Argument for the lawfullnesse,
Excellency of Hereditary Titles to Crowns and Kingdoms, before that of
Election only, wherewith I frequently silenced vapouring Soldiers against
Hereditary Kingship, being the very Title of Christ himself, both to his Luke
1.32, 33. Rev. 22.16. Isa. 9.6, 7. Jer. 25.5. c. 30.9. c. 33.17, 21, 26. Ezech.
37.24, 26.
Spiritual and Temporal Kingdom, and that which Genesis 49.10. Deuteronomy. 17.20. 2 Samuel 7.12, to 24. 1 Kings 2.4. c 8.20. c. 9.5. c. 15.3, 4. Ps. 89.3, 4, 28, to
39. Ps. 132.11, 12, 13. 2 Chro. 6.10, 16, 17. c. 2.11. c. 13.5. c. 7.18. c.
21.7. c. 23.3. Jer. 17.24, 25, 26. c. 22.3, 4. c. 33.17, 22.
God instituted amongst his Church, people, as the best, surest of all other, 2 Samuel 10.1. 1 Chro. 19.1. 2 Kings 3.26, 27. c. 13.24. c. 14.37. Isa. 19.11. c.
37.38.
taken up by most Heathen Nations;) Now though Christ neither claimed nor
exercised this his Temporal Right, but avoided it, when the people would have
made him King by force, John 6.15. who yet after cried him up for the King of
Israel, John 12.13, 15. which even Pilate himself acknowledged, when he said
unto the Jews Behold your King: demanded of them, Shall I crucify your King?
and wrote, fixed this Title on his Cross, Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews,
John 19.14, 15, 19. will, or can John Can, or any other of his
antimonarchical confederates, hence justly infer; that it was unlawful for
Christ himself, Right Heir by Descent to his Hereditary Temporal Kingdom, kept
and thrust out thereof by usurping Herod (who murdered all the infants in
Bethlehem, and the Coasts thereof that were two years old and under, and would
have murdered our Savior himself to secure his own usurped Power, Mat. 2.13,
16. such is the bloody cruelty, Jealousy of Usurpers,) to have claimed or
exercised this his just, Hereditary Right to the Crown? or unlawful for the
people to have thrust out this bloody Intruder Herod, by force from his usurped
Authority, and made Christ King as they intended? or because Christ did then
voluntarily forbear, relinquish his Temporal Right to Herod, will it thence
necessarily follow, that it is therefore unlawful, for any other Hereditary
Christian King, or Right Heir to a Crown, kept from, or thrust out of his
Throne, Kingdom by armed violence, against the generality of his peoples
desires, by any aspiring, usurping Herod, to lay claim to his Crown, Kingdom,
or for the faithful, natural born Subjects, according to their duty, Oaths,
Allegiance, to endeavor by all lawful means, and open force to expel,
dethrone such Herod's, and Crown, set up their lawful Sovereign on the Throne
of the Kingdom? Doubtless they cannot be so absurdly stupid, to affirm it;
seeing Jehoiadah the high Priest, the Captains of Hundreds, Levites, Soldiers
and people too, thrust out and slew with the sword Athaliah (the bloody Usurper
of the Kingdom and Throne of Judah) in the second year of her Usurpation,
crowned Joash the Kings Son, King, as the Lord had said of the Sons of David,
and set him upon the Throne of the Kingdom: whereupon all the people of the
Land rejoiced, and the City was quiet: as is recorded at large to their eternal
Honor by God himself, and for others imitation in the like case, 2 Chronicles. 23.
and 2 Kings 11. The rather, because all other men by our Laws may justly lay
claim to, and repossesse themselves of such Lands, Houses, Goods, as others
forcibly detain or take from them against all Law, Right, notwithstanding
Christ's Non-claim to his Rightful Crown: Therefore by the self-same Reason our
Ministers of the Gospel now may lawfully challenge and take Tithes from the
people, though Christ and his Apostles did it not, albeit they had a just Right
and Title to them, which they might have exercised had they pleased without
Sin, or Judaism, as our Ministers do now, as Paul resolves in 1 Cor. 9.4, 5, 6,
15, 18. To clear which Right from Judaism and all other cavils beyond all
contradiction, I shall cite only two Prophecies, relating jointly to Christ's
Kingdom, and Ministers under the Gospel. The first is Jer. 33.15. to the end.
In those days and at that time will I cause the Branch of Righteousness to
grow up unto David, and he shall execute Righteousness and Judgment in the
Land. In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely, and
this is the name wherewith he shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness. For
thus says the Lord, David shall never want a man to sit upon the Throne of the
house of Israel: Neither shall the Priests, the Levites, want a man before me
to offer Burnt-Offerings, and to kindle Meat Offerings, and to do Sacrifices
continually. Thus says the Lord, if you can break my Covenant of the day, and
my Covenant of the night, so that there should not be day and night in their
season: then may also my Covenant be broken with David my Servant, that he
should not have a Son to reign upon his Throne, (therefore our Covenants, Oaths
to our Kings, their Heirs and Successors, should be as stable, as inviolable,
and strictly observed, as Gods to David and his Posterity, Ps. 89.3, 4, 34. Ps.
132.11, 12. Hebr. 6.17, 18. Ps. 15.4. Eccles. 8.2. Gal. 3.15, 17.) and with the
Levites the Priests my Ministers. As the host of heaven cannot be numbered,
neither the sand of the Sea measured, so will I multiply the seed of David my
Servant, and the Levites that minister unto me, etc. The second is Isa. 66.18,
to 20. I will gather all nations and tongues, and they shall come and see my
Glory, and I will set a Sign among them, and I will send those that escape of
them unto the Nations, and to Tarshish, etc. and to the Isles afar off (whereof
England is chief and principally intended) And they shall bring all your
Brethren for an See Romans 12.1.
Offering unto the Lord out of all Nations, upon Horses and in Chariots, and in
Litters, and upon Mules, and upon swift Beasts, to my holy Mountain in
Jerusalem, says the Lord, as the Children of Israel bring an Offering in a
clean Vessel unto the House of the Lord, And I will also take of them for
Priests and for Levits, says the Lord: From which Texts I shall observe;

1. That as Christ's Title to his everlasting Spiritual Kingdom under the
Gospel, over all the converted Gentiles as well as Jews, is expressly set forth
to be neither elective, nor by conquest, but by DESCENT, HEIRSHIP and lineal
succession after the flesh from King David; Whence he is styled Heir of all
things, Heb. 1.12. And the Lord shall give unto him THE THRONE OF HIS FATHER
DAVID, and HE shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever, etc. Luke 1.32, 33.
Ezech: 27.22, 24. Jer: 23.4, 5. c. 33.14, 15, 16. even as all the regenerated
Sons of God are by their Right of Sonship, and new birth, in like sort
entitled to the Kingdom of heaven (whence they are styled HEIRS and INHERITORS
OF THE KINGDOM, Jam: 2.5. Gal: 3.27. Rom: 8.17. Titus 3.17. Heb: 1.14. chap:
6.17. 1 Pet: 3.7. Mat: 25.34. and this Kingdom THE INHERITANCE OF THE SAINTS,
Col: 1.12. Ephesians. 1.11, 14, 18. 1 Pet: 1.4. Acts 20.32. an unanswerable
argument, that Heirship and Birthright is the Best, Surest, Justest,
Honorablest, Lawfullest Title of all other to Crowns, Kingdoms, and Possessions
on earth, being the very Title of Christ himself to his everlasting Kingship,
Kingdom, and of the Saints in and by Christ, to the Kingdom of heaven it self,
and Crown of Glory;) so the Seat, Throne of this his Kingdom, is said to be in
Zion and Jerusalem: (most emphatically expressed, Isa: 24.23. The Lord of Hosts
shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, before his Ancients gloriously) A
type of the Church of God under the Gospel, first planted in Jerusalem, and
propagated from thence throughout the world, according to the Prophecies, Isa.
2.3. Micah 4.2. Whence the Church under the Gospel is called the New Jerusalem,
etc. Rev. 3.12. chap. 21.2, 10. Gal: 4.26. Heb: 12.22.

2. That the Ministers of, and under the Gospel, are expressly styled in these
Prophecies Priests and Levites, several times.

3. That their Office under the Gospel in a mystical sense, is to offer
Burnt-offerings, to bake or kindle Meat Offerings, to do Sacrifices
continually, and to Minister unto God.

4. That these Priests and Levites, should be taken out of the converted
Gentiles, and Isles afar off, whereof our Isle was chief.

5. That these Priests and Levites should never fail, cease, nor want a man
under the Gospel, and that God would multiply them as the Host of Heaven, as
well as the Seed of David.

6. That they should convert and bring their brethren for an offering out of
all Nations, and the Isles afar off, to Gods Mountain and House in Jerusalem,
as the children of Israel used to bring their offerings thither. Since
therefore the Ministers of the Gospel in these prophecies are thus expressly
styled Priests and Levites, and are to offer Burnt-Offerings, Meat Offerings,
Sacrifices and Oblations to God in his Mountain and House at Jerusalem, etc.
under David their King, in an Evangelical sense, without any Judaism or denying
of Christ's coming in the flesh; they may undoubtedly in the self-same sense and
Right, receive all Glebes, Tithes, Oblations, and other dues from Christians,
and converted Jews under the Gospel, which the Priests and Levites did at
Jerusalem under King David and his Successors; seeing they succeed them in
their Office in an Evangelical sense, according to these prophecies, which as
strongly confirm the Maintenance of their Priestly Function, and their Tithes,
as their Evangelical Priesthood.

7. Although Christ, his Apostles, and the Ministers of the Gospel in the
Primitive times, whiles the Church was in the Rev. 12.14, 15.
Wilderness under grievous, bloody, Antichristian Kings, Magistrates,
Persecutors, by reason of the present persecution, neither did nor could
receive Tithes and Glebes for their Maintenances from the persecuted
Christians, and therefore were necessitated to live by private Contribution,
and extraordinary wages in that case of extremity; yet it no way follows, that
therefore all Ministers of the Gospel afterward shall and must do so in settled
Kingdoms, States, Nations converted to the faith; where Kings, Magistrates,
People do all generally embrace, profess the Gospel, where Churches are
established, and Ministers Glebes, Tithes are or may be confirmed by settled
Laws: which I shall irrefragably prove by these instances.

1 The Priests and Levites under the Law, had no Glebes nor Tithes at all,
whiles the Israelites wandered 40 years together in the wilderness, though they
had then Levit. 27.30, 31, 32. Numb. 35.2, 3, 4.
a Law, and right to receive them. Will the Objectors thence infer, Therefore
they ought to have no Tithes nor Glebes when the Israelites were possessors of
and settled in the land of Canaan in peace; when they enjoyed both without
dispute?

2. The Priests and Levites had no Tithes nor Glebes in the Realm of Israel
under the Usurper Jeroboam, and his Idolatrous successors, who deprived them of
their possessions, Cities, Suburbs, Tithes and Priests Office too, 2 Chronicles.
11.13, 14. c. 13.9. Therefore the Priests and Levites in the Kingdom of Judah,
might not lawfully claim nor enjoy any Glebes or Tithes, nor Ministers under
the Gospel, nor yet those in Israel, under David and Solomon, who were no
Persecutors but Patrons of them.

3. When both these Kingdoms with their Priests and Levites were carried away
captives into Assyria and Babylon, the Priests and Levites during the 70 years
capivity enjoyed neither Glebes nor Tithes: Will it thence follow, Therefore
they might lawfully enjoy neither, after their restitution to their Country,
and execution of their Priestly Function, and the re-edifying of the Temple? as
we read they did, Neh: 10.38. c. 12.44. c. 13.1, to 13. Whence the people were
charged with robbing of God, when they neglected to pay Tithes and Oblations to
them, Mal. 3.7, 8, 9, 10.

4. Christ himself, so soon as born, was forced to fly out of his Country into
Egypt, by bloody Herod, and to remain there till after his death, Mat: 2.13,
14, 15. After which he complained, That Foxes had holes, and Birds of the air
nests; yet he had not where to lay his head, Mat: 8.20. Luke 9.58. And at last,
he was apprehended, mocked, reviled, crowned with thorns, crucified by the
malicious Jews and SOLDIERS, who parted his Garments among them, and cast Lots
upon his Vesture: The Evangelists closing up the Tragedy of his Passion with
this perpetual brand upon the Domineering cruel soldiers, These things
therefore the Soldiers did, John 19.24. For which, and for reporting a Lie to
smother the truth of Christ's Resurrection, the High Priest Gave large money to
the Soldiers, Matt. 28.12, 15. Will Can therefore hence conclude; Therefore
our Soldiers now must force our Ministers to fly into Egypt till Herod's death;
leave them neither Rectory, Personage house, nor Vicarige, nor yet so much as a
Bed, Bolster, Tithe-Hay or Straw, whereon to lay their heads; then nail them to
the Cross, pierce their sides with their spears-points, revile, deride them,
and at last part not only all their Glebes, Tithes, Goods, but their very
Garments and Gowns between them? to make them like our Savior. Surely if they
must and shall do so; let them beware of another perpetual memento, like the
former. These things therefore, the Soldiers did: So the Soldiers took the
money, and did as they were taught, by Can and Popish Priests and Jesuits.

5. The Apostles who succeeded our Savior in those days of persecution, were
thus handled, by Paul's own relation, 1 Cor. 4.9, etc. We are made a spectacle
unto the world, unto Angles and to men: we are fools for Christ's sake, we are
weak, we are despised: even to this present hour, we are hungry and thirst, and
are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place, we are
reviled, persecuted, defamed; we are as the filth of the world, and the
offscouring of all things unto this day. If all Ministers in times of peace
and settlement must be like the Apostles, in not receiving Tithes; then they
must be like them too even in settled Christian Kingdoms, States, Churches, in
all these their particular sufferings; and have no certain dwelling place, etc.
And if so; Let Can and his new Ministers of the Gospel (as they style
themselves) begin the president; of whom our Ministers may now say, as Paul did
of the Corinthians in the precedent verse of this chapter, v. 8. Now ye are
full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as Kings, without us: (when as most of
them were very poor, and far enough from reigning as Kings, or so much as Petty
Constables before these unhappy Wars, and in days of former persecution, when
Can himself durst not show his face in England for fear of a Bishops power,
or High commission Pursuivant; nor durst reproach our Orthodox protestant pious
Ministers, and Parliaments as Antichristian, Popish; and compare their Laws for
Ministers Tithes, with the very Idolatrous Statutes of Omri and Ahab, as he
does now p. 3.) for which he might have taken a turn at Tyburn, in steed of
walking freely in Westminster Hall, without being questioned for this his
impudent high Slanders both of our Laws and Parliaments, as well as Ministry.

6. If the Ministers of the Gospel be bound to imitate the Apostles in all
things; then they must not have Gold nor Silver, nor Brass in their purses,
neither Scrip, nor two Coats, nor yet Shoes, nor so much as two Staves, but
Sandals only on their feet, Mat. 10.9, 10. Mark 6.8, 9. as the Capuchin-Fryars
Mendicants hence conclude: this being a positive Precept, the objected examples
of the Apostles, etc. only a President. And if so, not only all our Ministers,
but Can and all his Administrators, must turn Friars Mendicants too in good
earnest (who ground their Vow of Voluntary poverty on this Text; and the
objected Presidents of Christ and his Apostles) and so become no Ministers of
Christ, but Antichrist, and as truly Antichristian as these Friars are, the Sea
My Quakers Unmasked, and New Discovery of Romish Emissaries
Heads, Ringleaders of our last sect of Quakers.

7. If our Ministers must all now be like those of the Primitive times, whiles
under persecuting Heathen Emperors, Kings, Magistrates, then all Saints and
Christians too in our days, times, must imitate and be like the Saints,
Christians in those days: They must sell all their old and new purchased
Lands, Houses, Lordships, Palaces, lay all the money down at the Ministers feet,
and have all things in common like the real Saints and Christians in the
Apostles times, Acts 4.34. to the end; and instead of Lording, feasting it in
their new acquired Royal, Episcopal Palaces, and Manor Houses, they must
wander about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, in D^sarts, Mountains, Dens and
Caves of the earth, being d^stitute and afflicted, like the Saints of old; yea,
and like them they must be tortured, tormented, not accepting deliverance, have
trials of cruel mockings, scourgings, bonds and imprisonments, be stoned, sawn
asunder, slain with the Sword, instead of slaying, plundering, imprisoning and
sawing others asunder with the Sword, Heb. 11.35, to 39. And when our
Army-Saints, Officers, Soldiers, Anabaptists, Quakers, with other
Tithe-Oppugners, who press this Objection against Ministers Tithes, shall lay
down all their Arms, Commands, Power, Lands, and sell all they have, to become
like to all these Primitive Saints and Martyrs of Christ in their sufferings,
in times of Persecution, I doubt not, but our Ministers will joyfully part both
with their Glebes, Rectories, Tithes, and settled Maintenance to sympathize with
them in their Persecutions, Sufferings. But till such hard times of
Persecutions come, and they begin to follow this President of the self-denying
Primitive Saints, I hope they will not make all our Ministers present Martyrs
in their Tithes and settled Maintenance, nor enjoin them alone (but not
themselves) to follow the Primitive Ministers of the Gospel in those times of
persecution; and prove greater persecutors to them in these pretended times of
Christian Liberty, Law, Justice, than the late Oppressing Prelates and High
Commissioners, who suffered many of them (though Non-Conformists) to enjoy
their Tithes, Glebes, Offerings, and not eject, disinherit them and their
Successors for ever, of their ancient Glebes, Tithes, and other settled
Maintenance, without any Legal Trial by their Peers, or Conviction of any
Treasonable crimes against our known Laws, for which they deserve to forfeit
them; and all under the false petence, that Tithes are Jewish and Antichristian
under the Gospel; Which I hope I have sufficiently refuted (being established
on them by Christian Kings, States, Parliaments, immediately after the
Primitive persecutions, generally throughout Christendom, as the fittest
Maintenance of all other, and particularly in our Realm) when as the abolishing
of them will be really such in the Judgment of all Godly Protestants, Patrons
of Religion, both at home and throughout the World.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 68. l. 11. r. luent, p. 141. l. 31. Solemanum, r. Salmurum, Rothingue, r.
Rothomag. p. 142. l. 20. Trovomala.

The REMAINDER, or SECOND PART of A GOSPEL PLEA (Interwoven with a RATIONAL and
LEGAL) FOR THE LAWFULNESS and CONTINUANCE Of the Ancient Settled MAINTENANCE and
TITHES Of the Ministers of the Gospel: WHEREIN The DIVINE RIGHT OF OUR
MINISTERS TITHES is further asserted: The Magistrates Inforcement of the DUE
PAYMENT OF THEM BY COERCIVE PENAL LAWS, when subtracted or detained,
vindicated: That they are no REAL BURDEN, or GRIEVANCE to the People; the
abolishing them no Ease, Benefit to Farmers, Tenants or Poor-People; but a
Prejudice rather; and a gain to None but Rich Landlords, cleared: That the
present Opposition against them, proceeds not from any true Grounds of
Conscience, or Real Inconveniences in Tithes themselves, but only from base
Covetousness, carnal Policy, want of Christian Love, Charity to, and professed
Enmity against the Ministers of the Gospel; Yea, from a JESUITICAL and
ANABAPTISTICAL DESIGN to subvert, ruin our Church, Ministry, Religion; and
bring a Perpetual Infamy on our Nation, and the Reformed Religion here
professed. By William Prynne of Swainswick Esquire a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

1 Cor. 9 14. Even so has THE LORD ORDAINED, that those who preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel. Cyprian, de unitate Ecclesiae. Domos tunc and Fundos
venundabant, thesauros sibi in Coelo reponentes: at nunc de Patrimonio nec
Decimas damus; and cum Vendere jubeat Dominus, Emimus potius and augemus.
Petrus Blesensis, Epist: 82. Per Prophetam praecepit Dominus Decimas inferri in
horreum suum; vos ab ejus horreo jubetis auferri, etc. Quid interest Equos
rapiatis an Decimas? Nisi quia Decima res spiritualis est, and ideo enormius
SACRILEGIVM in Decimis committitur quam in Equis. Cum Dominus praecipit Decimas
solvi, quis contra ejus praeceptum potuit dispensare? London Printed by T.
Child and L. Parry for Edward Thomas, and are to be sold at the Adam and Eve
in Little Britain, 1659.

THE REMAINDER OR SECOND PART OF A GOSPEL PLEA, FOR THE Lawfullness and
Continuance of the ancient settled Maintenance and TITHES of the Ministers of
the GOSPEL.
KIng David a holy Zealot Acts 13.22
after Gods own heart, who fulfilled all his will, records this to Posterity in
sacred Writ, as the most transplendent Character of his own real Saintship, in
a Divine Appeal to God himself, Psalm. 69.9. The zeal of THINE HOUSE has eaten
me up. And when our Savior Christ, Matthew. 1.6. c. 9.27. c. 15.22. c. 22.42,
43, 45. Romans 1.3. Rev 22.16.
the Son of David according to the flesh, out of an enflamed zeal against the
Sacrilegious Profanation of Gods Temple in Jerusalem, made a scourge of small
Cords, wherewith he drove all that sold Sheep and Oxen, with their Cattle, out
of the Temple; powered out the Changers Money, overthrew their Tables, and said
unto those that sold Doves, Take these things hence, Make not my Fathers House
an House of Merchandise: His Disciples upon this occasion remembered and applied
this very Scripture to him, The zeal. of thine House has eaten me up, John
2.15, 16, 17. But the preposterous zeal of many Iesuited Anabaptistical quaking
pretended Saints, Soldiers, Zealots in our degenerated days, is diametrically
contrary to this of David, and our Savior Christ, even to devour and eat up
Gods House it self, with all his faithful Ministers remaining Tithes,
Rectories, Glebes, Maintenance at one meal, which of late years, and now again
they have prosecuted with such eager Appetites and hungry Stomachs, that they
make it their very prime, main, only Business, endeavoring to effect it, with
such See John Cannes Epistle, before his second voice (nor) from (but against)
the Temple, and many late Petitions against Tithes, from Kent, Somersetshire,
Wiltshite, and other places.
Post-hast, as might anticipate all new printed Pleas for their just defense,
and fore-judge most Ministers, Patrons, Peoples Rights, throughout our Nation,
(even out of Term in a long Vacation, as in August 1653. and now again) without
any Legal Summons, Process, Trial by their Peers before competent lawful
Judges, meet to decide such a universal Right, Title, public Interest, which
more or less concerns every particular County, City, Parish, Minister, Patron,
Person throughout the Realm; and therefore ought not to be drawn into Question,
much less Decision, without their General consent, desire, petition, and a
full deliberate hearing of all Parties interessed before a full Legal
Parliamentary Tribunal, duly elected, entrusted by all the People, according to
3 E. 1. c. 5. (See Cook ibidem) 7 H. 4. c. 14. 1 H. 5. c. 1. 1 H. 6. c. 7.10 H.
6. c. 2.23 H. 6. c. 11.32 H. 6. c. 15.9 H. 8. c. 16.27 H 8. c. 26.35 H. 8. c.
11. Cook 4 Instit. c. 1.
our Laws; This being an undoubted principle of Nature, Law, Equity, common
Justice, and Reason, 2 Samuel 16.18, c. 19. cl. 33 E. 1. m. 4. dors. 43. Brook
Parliament, 101, Customs 6. and 32. Grotius De Jure Belli, and Pacis, l. 2. c.
15. sect. 3. c. 6 sect. 1 to 7. c. 13. sect. 14. 33 H. 8. c. 17.
Quod tangit omnes, ab omnibus debet approbari: Et Populi minor pars, Populum
non obligit. This their preproperous speed, and preposterous proceeding,
necessitated my Stationer (at the importunity of some Ministers in September
1653.) to thrust out and publish to the World, an imperfect Piece, and
beginning only of my Gospel-Plea, for the Lawfulness and Continuance of the
Ancient settled Maintenance and Tithes of the Ministers of the Gospel, without
this Remaining part, (then sent up together with it) or any Errata to it, or
Notice given to the Reader if its incompleatnesse, some few days before the
great Debate of our New Legifers (September. 1653.) concerning the future
standing or downfall of Tithes; which would have been finished, and quite past
before the whole could possibly be printed; and so have rendered the entire
Plea less seasonable, serviceable, beneficial to our Church and Ministers,
than the publishing of a Fragment of it in that nick of time proved to them,
through Gods blessing on it. This unexpected sudden publication thereof upon
that inevitable occasion, as it caused an Omission of some part of the second
Chapter in confirmation of the second Proposition, touching the Divine Right of
Ministers Tithes, and of the 3. ensuing Chapters: So it has necessitated me to
publish this Subsequent Appendix to that Chapter by way of Supplement, as a
necessary Introduction to the Remaining Part, here printed with it, for the
Readers better satisfaction in this public Controversy, and stopping the
clamorous Mouths of all Gainsayers. Which had been published, soon after the
former, in the year 1653. had not my former Stationers long Infirmity,
Sickness, Death, retarded its progress at the Press, and enforced me to seek
out another Midwife to bring it into the world, at this instant time, I hope
not as an Abortive, out of Season, the former Opposites to our Ministers and
their Tithes, being ever since and now again as Malicious against them as ever,
waiting only for a fresh opportunity to suppress them, ever since their then
sudden defeat in this their Impious Sacrilegious Design, when almost ripened
to accomplishment in their Hopes and Votes, unexpectedly dashed in a moment.
There being since this their disappointment, a new disguised Antichristian sect
of Quakers (introduced by Jesuits and Franciscan friars, as I have In my
Quakers Unmasked, 1655. and New dscovery of Romish-Emissaries 1656.
elsewhere evidenced) sprung up amongst us, more virulently opposite to our
Ministers and their Maintenance by TITHES, than any other, which they not only
decry in all their Pamphlets, but totally substract and detain from them with
such wilful obstinacy, that many of them choose rather to lie in prison, upon
mean Process, or Executions, than set out or pay their TITHES, or appear to
Actions brought for their recovery; and now combine with the Anabaptists, and
other sectaries in fresh Petitions and Prosecutions both against TITHES, and
Ministers, endeavoring their total and final Extirpation, by the power of their
Confederates, in the Army and Westminster Juncto, suddenly called in again, and
owned by them as a Parliament (after their former six years seclusion) to See
my true and perfect Narrative, p. 14.20.41.49.60, 61, 62, 63^
accomplish this their design, and root out Law and Gospel, Lawyers and
Ministers together, as their fresh From Somersetshire Wilshire and other places.
Petitions, Addresses to them for that purpose clearly demonstrate, beyond
contradiction. Which occasioned this publication, after so long a suspension
thereof.

An Appendix to the Second Chapter, further clearing the Divine Right of
Ministers Tithes.
THe Divine Right of Ministers Maintenance by TITHES, asserted in the former
Printed Part of my Gospel-Plea, etc. for the Lawfulness and continuance of the
ancient settled Maintenance and TITHES of the Ministers of the Gospel, may be
thus further evinced, demonstrated, confirmed.

1. It is the Opinion of Learned De Republica Hebraeorum l. 3. c. 3.
Petrus Cunaeus, and Of the Incarnation of the Word. Part. 1. Branch. 2. chapter 1.
in his Works in folio. London. 1636. p. 807. to 817.
Dr. Griffith Williams (his transcriber) That Melchisedec, Priest of the most
high God, to whom Abraham (the father of the Faithful) GAVE TITHES OF ALL, Genesis
14.20. Hebr. 7.1. to 15. was in truth none other, but Jesus Christ, the Son
of God, then personally meeting him in the form of a man, which he then
assumed; though not that very body or flesh begotten and born of the Virgin
Mary, which he long after took upon him when he was incarnate and conversed
upon Earth. That Abraham then gave him TITHES OF ALL, as perceiving under that
visible form an invisible Deity and everlasting Priesthood to subsist, to whom
Tithes (originally) are only due and eternally due; because he is and continues
for ever an everlasting Priest. That our Saviors own words, John. 8.58.
Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, (as well with the eyes of his
body, by this special apparition of Christ then meeting and blessing him, as a
Priest of the most high God, at that time, as with the eye of his faith) and
was glad: do warrant this their opinion, That Melchisedec was no other than
Jesus Christ himself: which they fortify with 7. strong, unanswerable Arguments
in the opinions of many; from whence (if granted) it will inevitably follow;
That TITHES are more truly and properly Evangelical, than Ceremonial or
Judaical, because thus originally given and paid to Christ himself, (the Ephesians.
1.22, 23. c. 4.6.15, 16. c. 5.23. Col. 1.18. c. 2.10.19. Hebr. 7.1. to 15.
Psalm. 110.1.4. Isa. 9.6, 7. Rev. 1.5, 6.
everlasting Head, King, High Priest of the Church) by Abraham Romans 4.1. to 24.
Mat. 3.9. Luke. 16.22, 24, 30. Acts. 7.1. Romans 9.7, 8. Gal. 3.6. to the end.
the Common Head and Father of all the Faithful (as well Gentiles as Jews)
out of the prevision of his Incarnation, in reference to his Everlasting
Priesthood, as an honorary Portion, Tribute, Salary, See Dr. Solaters Ministers
Portions p. 18. to 40.
of right belonging and annexed to his Priesthood: Hebr. 7.1. to 15. Genesis
14.18, 19, 20. which Priestly office was See Hebr. c. 5. to c. 11. 1 John 2.1,
2. Ps. 110.4. Dr. Jones, and others on the Hebrews; Dr. Reynolds on Psalm.
110.4.
principally to be executed, completed upon Earth, and in Heaven, by Christ's
subsequent Incarnation, Passion, Sacrifice of himself upon the Cross,
Resurrection, Ascension into Heaven, and perpetual Intercession at Gods right
hand for all his elect, both as God and Man; especially in relation to the
Gentiles, Acts 9.15. c. 11.1 to 19. c. 13.46, 47, 48. c. 15.7. to 20 c. 21.19.
c. 28^ 28. Romans 1.13. c. 11.11, 12, 13.25. c. 15.9. to 19. c. 16.4. Ephesians. 3.5,
6, 7, 8. Col. 1.27. 2 Timothy 4.17; compared with Mat. 10 4. Luke. 2.31. Isay.
54.3. c. 60.3. to 17. c. 61.6.9. c. 62.2. c. 66.12.19, etc. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
not generally called, converted to the faith, till after his Incarnation and
Ascension. Therefore by necessary consequence, all Christians and believing
Gentiles under the Gospel, have altogether, if not far greater, yet at
leastwise as great, as strong a reason, ground, obligation, enforcement,
cheerfully, thankfully, conscientiously, to render TITHES of all they have to
Christ (for the use of his Ministers instruction, edification of his Church,
and completing of his body) since his Incarnation and investiture in his
everlasting Priesthood for their eternal welfare; as Abraham or the Israelites
had, to render him (or the Levitical Priests who typified him and attended on
his service) so long before his Incarnation, and Priesthood fully completed in
all its parts and Offices: Jesus Christ being THE SAME YESTERDAY AND TO DAY,
AND FOR EVER; Hebr. 13.8. and as much (if not far more in some respects) a
Priest of the most high God, to all believing Gentiles, Christians since his
Incarnation, Passion, Ascension, as he was to Abraham and the Jews before them;
God since his Resurrection, sending him to bless us in turning every of us
from our Iniquities, as well as them. Acts. 3.25, 26. compared with Acts 10.42,
45, 47. chapter 11.1. to 20. Wherefore those ingrate, avaritious, unconscionable
Christians of this degenerous age, who obstinately, or maliciously refuse to
render unto Christ their only High Priest ( 1 Cor. 5.17. Ephesians. 5.2. Hebr. 5. to
chapter 11. 1 John 2.1, 2.1, 2.
who sacrificed himself to God, and shed his most precious blood for them on
the Cross to redeem their Souls from everlasting Damnation, and purchase an
eternal Crown of glory for them in Heaven, where he continually makes
intercession for them, executing his Priestly Office for their Salvation) the
tithes of all their increase, as a just Appurtenance to his everlasting
Priesthood; condemning them as The Kentish Petition, John Cannes Voice, Mt.
Speed and many late Quakers railing Pamphlets.
Jewish, Antichristian, unfit, or too much for him as the High Priest and
Prophet of his Church to enjoy, or for the faithful Ministers of the Gospel in
his Name or Right to receive, who 2 Cor. 12.15. Acts 6.3, to 7. 1 Timothy 4.13,
15, 16. Heb. 13, 17. 1 Cor. 1.23. c. 2.2. Gal. 3.1.
spend all their studies, labors, lives in Christ's service, in the
Declaration, Publication, Application, of the benefits of Christ's Priesthood,
Passion, Gospel to them, and others, for the eternal salvation of their souls,
are certainly none of the spiritual Sons or seed of faithful Abraham, who gave
him Tithes of all; and do either repute Christ's everlasting Priesthood, a mere
Fable; or set a far lower rate upon it, the Ministry of the Gospel and their
own most precious Souls, than they do upon their detained Tithes: and so can
expect little benefit from Christ's Person or Priesthood, which they so much
undervalue, and sacrilegiously defraud of so ancient a duty.

2ly. There is one Notable considerable circumstance of time in Abraham's
payment of Tithes of all to Christ, the true Melchisedec, not formerly observed
or pressed by any I have seen; which (in my opinion) unanswerably proves, that
this President of his most principally respected, related to the believing
Gentiles and Christians, under the Gospel, and as strongly obliges them (his
true spiritual seed) to the due payment of Tithes to Christ and his Ministers,
now, as ever it did the Jews, his natural Posterity, to pay Tithes to their
Priests and Levites under the Law, if not more firmly: Namely, that he thus
paid Tithes to Christ, some good space before Circumcision instituted, whiles
he was yet uncircumcised; as is most evident by comparing, Genesis 14.18, 19, 20.
with Genesis 17.1, 10, to 15. Now as the Apostle thus firmly and Evangelically
argues from this very circumstance of time, in the point of Abraham's
justification by Faith, whiles he was yet uncircumcised, as presidential,
exemplary, obligatory to all believing Gentiles, and spiritual Sons of Abraham
under the Gospel, who are not circumcised, as well as to the natural believing
children of Abraham under the Law, who were circumcised. Romans 4.9, to 13.
Comes this blessedness then, upon the Circumcision only, or upon the
Uncircumcision also? for we say, that Faith was reckoned to Abraham for
Righteousness. How was it then reckoned, when he was in Circumcision, or in
Uncircumcision? Not in Circumcision, but in Uncircumcision. And he received
Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, which he had yet being
Uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of them that believe (under the
Gospel) though they be not Circumcised, that Righteousness might be imputed unto
them also. And the Father of Circumcision, to them who are not of the
Circumcision only, but also walk in the steps of the Faith of our Father
Abraham, which he had yet being uncircumcised. So I, by parity of Reason, from
this very Text, compared with the same Apostles relation, of Abraham's paying
Tithes of all to Melchisedec, Hebr. 7.1, to 15. and the inferences thence
formerly insisted on, may as firmly, as convincingly conclude, That his payment
of Tithes to Christ the true Melchisedec, not after his Circumcision, but
whiles yet uncircumcised, and before Circumcision instituted; and that, as the
Common-Father, Head of all the justified, faithful, believing uncircumcised
Gentiles before the Law, and under the Gospel, (as well as of the circumcised
believing Jews) walking in the steps of his Faith, which he had yet being
uncircumcised; does as strongly oblige all believing Gentiles and Christians,
though uncircumcised, to pay Tithes of all to Christ and his Ministers under
the Gospel, as it did his believing circumcised Posterity to render the^ to
Christ himself originally, and his Priests and Levites secondarily under the
Law; if not much more; since Abraham paid them to Christ before he was
circumcised, Genesis 14.17, 18, 19. John 8.58. Heb. 7.1, to 15. compared with John
8.39, 40.
as a fruit and evidence of his Faith, which then he had during his
uncircumcision, and a standing President for all Believers to imitate.

3ly. From this famous President of Abraham's paying Tithes of all to
Melchisedec, Saint Ambrose, Sermo 34. In feria post primam Dominicam
Quadragesimae. Gregory Nazianzen, Oration 5. Contra Judaeos. Chrysostom, Hom.
35. in Genes. Isiodor Hispalensis, in Glossa ordinaria Super Genesis 16. Rabanus
Maurus, l. 2. c. 16. in Genesin. Anastatius Abbas, contra Judaeos. Elias
Cretensis, in Orat. 5 Walafridus Strabo, De Rebus Ecclesiasticis, c. 27.
Stephanus Tornacensis, Epist. 171. with other Ancients, conclude, Tithes to be
due to Ministers of the Gospel by Divine Right: whom the Sea Gratian Cause. 16.
qu. 7. and Surius, Binius, Crab, Merlin, in their Council^.
Councils of Mentz, Anno 813, 846, 887. Concilium Aquense, Anno 837. cap. 18.
with the Council of London, under Archbishop Hubert, Anno Dom. 1200. (recorded
by Roger de Hoveden) Annalium pars posterior, p. 806, 808. thus second. Decimas
DEO and Sacerdotibus Dei Dandas, Abraham factis, Jacobus promissis insinuat;
deinde Lex Statuit, et omnes Doctores sancti commemorant: et auctoritas veteris
et novi Testamenti, necnon and sanctorum Patrum Statuta declarant. Decreeing
thereupon, Decimas de omnibus quae per annum renovantur, etc. Praestare Deo
omnino non negligatur, Quas Deus sibi dari constituit: quia timendum est, ut
quisquis Deo debitum suum abstrahit, ne forte Deus per peccatum suum auferat ei
necessaria sua, etc. From his example, seconded with Divine Precepts, Hermoldus
Hist, Slarorum, l. 1. c 92. Edit. Franc. 1581. p. 76.
Gerold Bishop of Oldenburg, about An. Dom. 1100. writ thus to the Holzati and
Inhabitants of the Deserts of Wagira, (then newly converted to the Christian
Faith, and beginning to build Churches, for Gods public worship) that they
should likewise pay Tithes to their Ministers, without which all the rest of
their Devotion would be nothing worth. Dei enim Praeceptum est, Decimas ex
omnibus dabis mihi, ut been sit tibi, and longo vivas tempore: cui obedierunt
Patriarchae, Abraham scilicet Isaac and Jacob, and omnes qui secundum fidem
facti sunt filii Abrahae, per quod laudem etiam, and praemia aeterna consecuti
sunt. Apostoli quoque et Apostolici viri ex ore Dei hoc ipsum mandaverunt. and
sub Anathematis vinculo posteris servandum tradiderunt. Cum ergo Dei
omnipotentis proculdubio hoc constat esse Praeceptum, and sanctorum Patrum sit
Auctoritate firmatum, nobis id incumbit negotii, ut quod vestrae saluti deest,
nostro in vobis opere per Dei gratiam suppleatur. Monemus ergo and obsecramus
omnes vos in domino, etc. ut decimas, prout Deus instituit, and Apostolica
banno firmavit autoritas, ad ampliandum dei cultum Ecclesiae detis: Ne si Deo
quae ipsi debentur substraxeritis, and substantiam simul and animam in
interitum mittatis aeternam; Valete. Upon reading which Letter the rude people
cried out and raged, just as the Anabaptists do now. His auditis tumultuosa
gens infremuit, dixeruntque se huic conditioni servili nunquam collum
submissuros, per quam omne pene Christicolarum genus Pontificum pressurae
subjaceat, etc. whereupon Henry the first Duke of Holzatia commanding them, as
they would obtain his favor, Ut solverent Episcopo Decimas cum omni
integritate, sicut faciunt in terra Polaborum and Obotritorum: Ad hoc
Praeceptum Holzati obstinatis animis dixerunt, Nunquam se daturos Decimas, quas
patres sui non dedissent; malle se potius succenfis aedibus propriis egredi
terram, quam tantae servitutis jugum subire; Praeterea Pontificem cum Comite
and omni advenarum genere quod Decimarum solvit legitima, interficere
cogitabant, and terra inflammata, transfugere in terram Danorum. Neither
obeying the Presidents of Abraham and the Patriarchs, nor the Laws of God, the
Apostles, or their Prince, in paying their Tithes to their Bishop and Pastor,
as they ought; whose practice our Anabaptists and Quakers now obstinately
pursue. What strong convincing Arguments, to prove the divine, moral, perpetual
right of Tithes to the Ministers of the Gospel, learned Protestant Divines (to
omit Papists) have deduced from this Original direct President of Abraham's
Tith-paying, those who desire further satisfaction herein, may read at leisure,
in Mr. Calvin, Junius, Hemingius, and others on Hebr. 7. Zepperus, Legum
Mosaicarum Explanatio, l. 4. c. 40. Dr. George Carlton his Tithes due by a
Divine Right, Richard Montague his Diatribae on the first part of Mr. Seldens
History of Tithes, cap. 1. Stephen Nettles his Answer to the first part of the
History of Tithes, Dr. Robert Tillesley his Animadversions on Mr. Seldens
History of Tithes, Dr. Edward Reynolds his explication on Psalm 110.2, 4. Mr
Francis Roberts his Revenue of the Gospel is Tithes, etc. Cambridge 1619.
Richard Eburn his Maintenance of the Ministry, London, 1603. The truth of
Tithes discovered by R. G. London 1618. Dr. John Prideaux Oration 5. de Decimis,
Anno 1620. p. 90. Sir James Semple his Sacrilege sacredly handled, London 1619.
John Swan his Red Debitum, London 1640. p. 181, to 240. Tithes are due Jure
Divino, and Dr. William Sclater his Question of Tithes revived, or Ministers
Portion, London 1623. (an acute piece) wherein all evasions and cavils to elude
the force of this example, are sufficiently answered.

4ly. From this example of Abraham's, seconded with the Israelites practice,
History of Tithes, p. 34.
Mr. Seldom conjectures, or rather from the Law of Nature written by God
himself in men's hearts (as Hugo de Sancto victore, de Sacramentis, l. 2. part
9. c. 10. and l. 1. part 12. c. 4. Mr. Mountague in his Diatribae, chapter 3. Dr.
Tillesly in his Animadversions, p. 34, 35. and others determine;) the old
Heathen Grecians, Romans, Carthaginians, Arabians, with other Pagan Nations,
[as the Sea Purchase Pilgrimage, Edit. 2. p. 304, 616, 621, 630. Joan. Leo
Africae descript. l. 3.
Mohammedan, Turks, Moors, and other Infidels since] by an ancient constant
custom and usual practice, generally received amongst them, dedicated and paid
Tithes to their Idol-Gods and Priests, of the increase of all their substance,
merchandise, gains; and more particularly of all their spoils and plunders
gained in the Wars; wherein they were very careful and devout. Which Mr.
Seldom in his History of Tithes, chapter 3. and Review thereof, and Richard
Mountague, in his Diatribae, chapter 3. evince at large, by many Presidents,
Testimonies, Passages out of Herodotus, Demosthenes, Xenophon, Thucidides,
Dionysius Hallicarnasseus, Plutarch, Pausanias, Aristotle, Aristophanes,
Suidas, Callimachus, Cassius, Trogus, Macrobius, Plautus, Festus, Justin,
Pliny, Servius, Cicero, Tertullian, Arnobius, Jac. Gruterus, with others; and
that they paid no other determinate part else we read of, but a Tenth only, to
their Gods and Priests. Now from whence (write Hugo, Tillesly, and Mountague)
should this custom and practice proceed, but only from the Law of Nature? Ad
quam non docti, sed facti, non instituti fuerunt, sed imbuti, and that by God
himself.

Amongst these Presidents of Pagans, there are 7. of special note, which I
shall here remember, to shame the Tith-Oppugners of our Age, who would be
reputed the most precious Christians, though their Actions prove them worse
than Infidels.

The first is, that of the old Pagan Romans, Arnobius adversus Gentes, l. 7.
Cato de Re Rustica, c. 152. Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, p. 457, 458.
Mountagues Diatribae, chapter 3.
who esteemed all their Corn and Wine (sent them annually by the bounty of God)
so sacred, that (by a constant custom and law used amongst them) they might
not lawfully eat, drink, sell, meddle with, or dispose of any part thereof
after their harvest and vintage, till they had first sacrificed and tythed the
first fruits and tenths thereof to their Gods; who (as they supposed) gave them
the whole crop; such was their Piety and Gratitude.

The second is, that of the ancient Pliny Not. Hist. l. 12. c. 15. Seldens
History of Tithes, p. 33, 34. Mountagues Diatribae, p. 551, 552.
Heathen Arabians, who by the Law and Custom of their Country, were bound to
carry all their Frankincense (the chief commodity of their Country) every year
to Sabota, ( the chief City of Arabia Felix) and there to offer the Tenth
thereof to their God SABIS, which his Priests received. Neither might they make
sale of any part thereof, till the Owner there paid the Tenthes by Measure, not
by weight. These very Pagans holding all to be Gods, (the supreme Landlord who
gave it them) till by paying him the Tenth for a quotient, they redeemed the
rest for their own common use.

The third is that of the Dionysius Hallicarn: Antiqu. Romans l. 1. Seldens
Review, p. 459.
Pelasgi in Vmbria, who being oppressed with a great dearth and scarcity of all
things, conceived it proceeded from their neglect of paying Tithes to their
Gods. Whereupon they vowed the Tithe of all their increase to Jupiter, Apollo,
and the Cabiri. After which Vow they receiving a plentiful crop of all things,
paid the tenth of all their increase to their Idol-Gods. And being admonished
by Apolloes Oracle, that their Vow was not performed, till they had sacrificed
the Tenth of their Children, as well as of all their other increase, they
thereupon sacrificed the Tenth of them to the Idols likewise. Such conscience
made they of all their Vows and Tithes.

The fourth is that of the Carthaginians (thus recorded by Bibliotheca Hist. l.
5. Justin. l. 18. Mountagues Diatribae, p. 448, 449.
Diodorus Siculus, a Pagan Historian) very remarkable. The Carthaginians being
descended from Tyrus, were accustomed in former times to send unto Tyrus the
Tenth of all their Revenues and increase any ways renewing, issuing, or growing,
for Hercules (the Idol-God there worshipped:) But in process of time becoming
very wealthy, and having exceeding great incomes, they sent very seldom their
Tithe unto Tyrus, and that but small and refuse, in neglect and dis-regard of
the Deity. Hereupon many disasters in war, crosses in Affairs of State, with
great losses and streights befell them; especially by Agathocles the Sicilian.
Upon which, coming home to themselves, and repenting of their irreligion, they
betook themselves to all manner of Supplication and Devotion, conceiving these
losses and disasters were sent unto them of God. And for so much as they
supposed Hercules especially to be angry with them, who was chiefly worshipped
at Tyrus, from whence they were originally extracted, they sent exceeding great
gifts and rich presents thither to him, and all the Gods that were worshipped
at Tyrus, and brought unto them the tenth of all their increase, as formerly
they accustomed.

The fifth is that of See his Orations against them: and Mountagues Diatribae,
p. 576, 577.
Demosthenes (that eminent Pagan Greek Orator) who is very bitter against
Androsion and Timocrates, for bearing with some sacrilegious Desrauders of the
Gods in their Dues; and much more for defrauding of themselves, and
sacrilegiously robbing Minerva of her Tenths, and the other Gods of their
Fifteenths. And he specially observes, (let our Soldiers remember it) That
those who purloyned and robbed the Gods of their Tenths and chiefest of their
spoils of War, came to naught, being destroyed by themselves at last and
undone.

The sixth is that of Xenophon (that Noble Heathen Philosopher and General) and
his Soldiers, thus recorded at large to Posterity by his own pen, worthy our
observation. Xenophon de expedit. Cyri, lib. 5. p. 349.350, 351. Richard
Mountague his Diatribae, c. 3. p. 500, 501.
Xenophon, after his memorable retreat with ten thousand men out of upper Asia,
where they had gained great spoils from the Enemy, arriving safely at
Cerasunt, mustred 8600 men, the rest being lost, partly by the incursions of
the enemies, partly by the snows, and partly by sickness, here they divided the
money they had gained from the enemies: (...), etc. Atque etiam Decumam, quam
Apolloni and Ephesiae Dianae exemerant, ita Duces distribuunt, ut quilibet
ipsorum bisce diis aliquam partem ejus adservaret; One part of this Tenth
separated to these two Deities was delivered to Neon. That part which Xenophon
collected for Apollo, he laid up as consecrated in the Treasury of the
Athenians at Delphos. But that which was dedicated to Diana he left with
Megabyzus the Churchwarden of Diana, upon this condition (being about to fight
with Agesilaus at Coronea,) That if he escaped safe out of the Battle, he
should restore the sacred money to him: but if he received any disaster therein,
that then Megabyzus himself should dedicate it to Diana, confecto donario, quod
Deae gratissimu^fore arbitraretur. Afterward Xenophon being in exile at
Scilunte, built for Olympia, Megab. coming thither to behold Olympia, restored
the money to Xenophon: who receiving it, bought therewith a field (having woods
and Mountains in it, stored with trees, swine, goats, sheep, wildbeasts, and
Horses,) for the Goddess in that place, which was showed unto him by the Oracle
of Apollo; he likewise built a Temple, and an Altar, out of that sacred money:
Ac post id temporis, semper consecratis fructuum agri decumis, Sacrum Deae
faciebat. And after that time he sacrificed to the Goddess, for ever
consecrating the Tenths of the field to her service. Near the Temple there was
a garden set with all sorts of Fruit Trees good to eat. Before the Temple were
pillars erected with this Inscription on them, Fundus Dianae Sacer. Hoc qui
poss^ssor fruitur, quotannis Consecrato Decumam; de reliquo Fanum sartum tectum
conservato. Si quis non fecerit, Dea vindex esto. In which memorable History
we have six things considerable: 1. Tithes of spoils consecrated by the Heathen
Grecian Generals, Captains and Soldiers, to Apollo and Diana, as Xenophon,
Hist. Grae^* l. 3. p. 493.
Agis after the end of the wars between the Elei and the Lacedaemonians, going
to Delphos offered a TENTH (of the spoils) to Apollo. And Agesilaus took the
fruits of his Enemies fields, ut intra biennium Decumam Delphico Deo
consecraret C. Talentis ampliorem: as the same Oration de Ag^silao Rege. p. 657.
Xenophon records. 2ly. Lands purchased with the spoils, and appropriated,
consecrated for ever to the worship and service of Diana. 3ly. A Temple, and
Altar built with part of the spoils, for her worship and honor. 4ly. Tithes
annually consecrated and to be paid for ever to this Temple, by Xenophon and
the possessors of these lands, out of the profits, venison and game thereof,
for the maintenance of her worship and Feastivals; as the former words, and
this passage farther evidenceth: Earum feriarum, and municipes, and finitimi,
tam viri, quam faeminae participes erant: and sumministrat eis Dea, qui agitant
convivia, farinas cum panibus, vino, pecunia, bellariis. 5ly. Repairs of this
Temple from time to time, out of the residue of the profits of these Lands.
6ly. An imprecation of divine revenge, upon the Neglecters, or refusers of the
due payment of these annual Tithes to Diana, and of the residue of the profits,
toward the reparation of her Temple.

The seventh is the memorable domestic President of Cedwalla, one of our
West Saxon Kings; who though a Pagan and great Plunderer, even before he became
a Christian, or was baptized, was so pious, that he gave the Tenth of all his
Spoils of War and Plunders unto God, about the year of our Lord, 686. Which De
Gestis Regum Anglorum, l. 1. c. 2. p. 14.
William of Malmesbury thus records. Arduum memoratu est, quantum etiam ante
Baptismum inserviret; ut omnes manubias, quas jure praedatorio in usus suos
transcripserat, Deo decimaret. In quo etsi approbamus affectum (in paying
Tithes) improbamus exemplum, in regard of his plundering. Yea, our Ecclesiast.
Hist. Gentis Angiorum, l. 4. c. 16.
venerable Beda records; that such was his transcendent liberality and bounty
to Gods Church and Ministers, that after his Conquest of the Isle of Weight, he
gave to Walfred and his Clerks for the Lords use, the fourth part of the Island
(to wit, 300 Plowlands of 1200.) and the fourth part of the Spoil thereof, in
performance of his Vow made before his regeneration in Christ, that if he
conquered the Isle, Quartam ejus partem fimul et praedae Deo daret.

Let John Can, with all the several irreligious Sects, and Sacrilegious
Regiments of our present Tith-Oppugners, Detainers, Substracters, seriously
consider these Pagan Presidents, to inform their Judgments, and reform their
practices, lest they rise up in judgment against them here to their temporal,
and hereafter to their eternal condemnation. And if after due meditation on
them, their Consciences shall not secretly check, censure, condemn them, for
substracting their Tithes from God himself, and his faithful Ministers, as
well as some of these Pagans Consciences did them, for detaining their Tithes
from their Idol-Gods and Priests, against the Law of Natures dictate engraven
in their hearts; but still pretend Conscience against the due payment of them,
and that out of their Gains or Spoils of War, as well as their other increase;
they have just cause to fear, and others to suspect, that their Consciences are
most desperately cauterized, and the Law of Nature more dangerously obliterated
out of their hearts, than out of these Idolatrous Pagans.

5ly. Agobardus, who flourished Anno 830. lib. de Dispensatione, etc. Rei
Ecclesiasticae contra Sacrilegos, p. 266. Hugo de Sancto victore Erud. Theol.
de Sacramentis, l. 1. part 12. c. 4. lib. 2. part. 9. c. 10. part. 10. c. 5.
and Annot. Eluc. in Genes c. 4. Petrus Commestor, Hist. Scholast. in Genes. c.
26 Petrus Blesensis, Epist. 82. Gerold, Bishop of Oldenburge, in his Epistle to
the Inhabitants of Wagria; Helmoldus, Hist. Solavorum, p. 92. positively
affirm; and since them Sir James Semple, in his Sacrilege sacredly handled,
Stephen Nettles, in his Answer to the Jewish part of Mr. Seldom, and Mr.
Richard Mountague in his Diatribae, p. 211. to 250. largely argue and assert;
That from the beginning of Mankind, Tithes were instituted and appoin- to be
paid, by God, who instructed Adam himself; and he his two Sons Kain and Abel;
and they their Posterity, to pay Tithes and First Fruits to God, of all their
Increase. That the First Fruits Abel offered unto God, were no other but his
Tithes, or the Tenth of his Flocks increase. That the sin of Cain, causing God
to reject his Offering, was this, That he offered to God the worst, and less
than the Tenth of the Fruits of the Ground; giving him not the full proportion
of the TENTH and best of his Increase, as Abel did: which they ground on, Genesis
4.7. (thus translated by the Septuagint, whom Philo the Jew, and the Greek
Fathers generally follow:) If thou offer Rightly, and DIVIDE NOT UPRIGHTLY (in
giving me my TENTH) thou have sinned; hold thy peace; and on Hebr. 11.4. by
Faith Abel offered unto God (...) (which the Vulgar Latin renders, Plurimam
Hostiam; other Translators, Vberius Sacrificium; and the English, A better or
more excellent Sacrifice; (and that for quantity, as well as quality,) than
Kain: This I thought fit to mention, as a probable conjecture, not an
infallible verity. To back this opinion, Robert Grosted our learned Bishop of
Lincoln, in his Book, De Cessatione Legalium, (written about the year 1240.) p.
95, 96. determines, Lex naturalis exigit, ut Benefactori, de Bonis quae gratis
dederit, gratis rependatur honor and veneratio, unde and Decimarum oblatio de
Lege est naturali: quia de bonis acceptis cum debeatur lege naturali repensio
honoris, minus quam pars minima, id est Decima, ( quia ultra Denarium numerus
non est) rependi non potest. Master Mountague, in his Diatribae, Chapter 3.
page 245, 246, 247, etc. Doctor Sclater, Dr. Tillesty, and others observe, That
God only wise, being 1 Cor. 14.33, 40.
a God of Order, not of Confusion, doing all things in order, number, and due
proportion, has amongst all other Numbers, specially fixed upon a TENTH. And
thereupon the Ancients heretofore, both Natural, Legal, Pagan, and Christian,
(led by a natural and divine instinct thereunto) have ever principally insisted
on a TENTH in all their divine sacred Rites, Mysteries, Dues, reserved by, or
rendered of them to their Gods; and in all their public civil Taxes, Tributes,
Customs, Duties, imposed by, or paid to their Emperors, Kings, Princes, and
Supreme Magistrates. Hence God says expressly, All Tithes are the Lords, Levit.
27.30, etc. And how his? Not by Cou^tesie or Tolleration, not by Purchase or
Stipulation, not by Compensation or Annexation, not by Benevolence or men's free
Donation; but by original Right of Creation, in producing every thing in its
kind; and of absolute Sovereign Dominion (expressed in the word Psalm. 24.1.
Psalm. 89.11. Psalm. 97.5. 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12, 15, 16.
LORDS) as a universal Rent service or acknowledgement, reserved by God
himself, the Supreme Landlord of all the Earth, from Adam and all his
Posterity to the end of the world, Psalm 115.16 Genesis 2.15, 16, 17. c. 3.17.
when he gave them the Earth to inhabit and manure, as mere Tenants at will
under him. He that is Exodus 3.14.
I AM himself: Qui cepit nunquam, desinet numquam: b^ing vitae and essentiae
interminabilis, tota simul and perfecta possessio, in aeterno suo consummato,
EVER POSSESSED TITHES (as well as the seventh day, which he says, is, Exodus
20.10. Levit. 23 8.
HIS SABBATH) SINCE THEY HAD BEING, which are indeed his ab aeterno suo
inchoato. In this Tithes were Gods, not only at the time when he first
challenged them by an express written Law and Reservation, Levit. 27.30, 31,
32, etc. but long before; even when Abraham paid them: and before that, ever
since the time of the Creation, that God made any thing tithable to increase
out of the earth for the use of man. The time never was that Tithes were not
Gods, nor shall ever be that they shall cease to be his, and his Priests and
Ministers in and by him, by his special Donation and Institution (not man's) for
the constant support of his continual public worship; and that by a Divine
Right; God in those things which are direct points of Piety and necessary
appurtenances for his solemn worship, (such as are Tithes for his Priests and
Ministers competent standing maintenance in all Ages, places, and weekly times
for his worship) never leaving men free to their own wills, inventions, or
arbitrary pleasures (no more than Landlords their Tenants, or Kings their
Subjects) but confining them to a certainty himself by his word, as well as he
does it in all parts and duties of his worship. That Abraham knew this Divine
Right of God to Tithes, when he paid Tithes of all to Melchisedec, not
arbitrarily, but of due right, by virtue of some Divine Precept, (else See
Doctor Sclaters Ministers Portion, p. 23, etc.
Melchisedec had been inferior to Levi who received Tithes from his Brethren,
by a Divine Law and Command, Hebr. 7.4, 5, 6, etc.) he receiving this Precept
of paying Tithes by Tradition from Heber, who learned it of Sem, who was so
taught of his Father Noah: he by succession RECEIVING IT FROM ADAM; who as he
was wrought and fashioned by God, so was he herein taught and instructed by
God. And therefore not only amongst the Sons of God, such as called rightly
upon the name of the Lord, but even amongst the Giants of the Daughters of Men,
worshipping invented Gods by themselves, and dedicating their TITHES unto them
(as the Premises evidence) THERE NEVER WAS NUMBER THAT DID INTRUDE UPON THE
TENTH, MUCH LESS SHOULDER IT OUT OF DOORS. This Number of TEN (writes Philo
the learned Jew) that most sacred Writer Moses has not a little commended,
because the best Duties of Man are by him couched under that number, as God:
TEN COMMANDMENTS, Vows, Prayers, First Fruits, perpetual Offerings, pardoning
Debts, and reducing all things unto their First estate, every Fiftieth year of
Jubilee, (made up of Tenths) the Fur niture of the Tabernacle, with a thousand
such like in the old Testament (besides other things of like nature expressed
under this Number of TEN in the Luke 17.12, 17. c. 19.13, 16, 17. Mat. 25.1, 2.
Rev. 2.10. c 5.11. c 13.1. c. 17.3, 1^, 16. Mat. 18.24. 1 Cor. 4.15. Heb. 7.3,
4.
New) by which we may know, that TEN IS THE NVMBER OF PERFECTION (as ^ivers
style it) and has near affinity with God in sacred things. That from Gods own
Original Reservation of TENTHS to himself and his Ministers, this number became
sacred and universal afterward in all public civil Taxes, Dues, reserved to
Kings and Supreme Magistrates. For the Firstborn and chief of the Family, from
Adam, till the Levitical Priesthood instituted, being for the most part King as
well as Priest thereof, (as Melchisedec who received Tithes of Abraham was,
Genesis 14.18. Heb. 7.1, 2.) when these two Offices came afterward to be centred
and settled in two distinct persons, thereupon the ancient TENTHS (reserved by
God, and assigned to his Priests and Ministers in perpetuity, for their
subsistence and maintenance of his public worship, from the Creation to the
end of the world, by a Divine Law, which no humane powers could repeal) both
amongst Gods own people, and most Heathens Nations; were appropriated to, and
received only by the Priests and Ministers, though divested of the Royal
dignity; and a NEW TENTH, by way of Tribute, Tax, Custom, or Subsidy
(amounting commonly to the Tenth part of the peoples tithed increase and
estates, in all Kingdoms and Republiks) was by Common consent imposed on and
reserved, received by Emperors, Kings Princes, and Supreme Magistrates from the
people, for their support, defraying the charges of the Government, and their
peoples necessary defense upon all occasions. Hence Tributes, Taxes, Customs
and public impositions, were usually called TENTHS (as well as Ministers
Tithes) both amongst Gods own people, 1 Samuel 8.15, 17. (amounting To the tenth
of their estates and increase; as also amongst the ancient Romans, Grecians,
and most other Pagan Nations of old, (as Mr. Mountague proves at large in his
Diatribae, c. 3. by sundry Authors) as they were anciently and at this day so
styled, both Purchase Pilgrimage, p. 304.616.621.630. The writers of these
several Nations, Realms and Republikes, printed in 16.
amongst the Turks, Moors, Spaniards, Germans, Italians, French, Danes, Swedes,
Poles, Scots, Irish, and most other Pagan and Christian Nations at this day;
especially in England, as you may read at large in Rastals Abridgments of
Statutes, Title Taxes and Tenthes; Brooks Abridgement, and Ashes Tables, Title
Quinzime, Disme, Tax and Tallage, and our Parliament Records. And from this
number of Ten their Officers as well of State as Religion, were usually styled,
Decemviri, Decuriones, Decumani, Decani, Decadarchae, Decatutae, Decatologi,
Decatorii, and the like; our Names of Offices of Deans, Tithingmen, Collectors
of Tenths, etc. proceeding from the self-same Number; Sacred every way even
amongst Pagan Nations, both in their Duties of Piety and Policy, by constant
tradition, they knew not why nor wherefore, and likewise amongst Gods people,
upon the premised grounds. Hence Doctor Tillesley thus concludes in his Epistle
to King James, before his Animadversions on Mr. Seldens History. Surely the
Number Tenth or Tithe is Sacred and very Mystical, and communicated only to
consecrated or Sacred persons That are Gods Vicars upon earth; that is, Kings
and Priests: Decima Regis et Decima Sacerdotis; who both stand in Gods place,
and receive this Portion as Gods upon earth. From all which premises, Mr.
Mountague, Dr. Carlton, Dr. Tillesley, Dr. Sclater and others conclude (and let
our Army Officers, New Legifers, and all Tithe-oppugners consider it) That the
Ministers of the Gospel now, as well as Gods Priests heretofore, have an
eternal Right to Ecclesiastical Tithes, by Gods own unalterable Institution;
and none else any Right at all unto them but they; From which Right no man, nor
all men can deprive or debar them; by any pretended Right, Prescription, Modus
Decimandi, Custom, Usage, Law, Statute or appointment of any other maintenance
in lieu thereof, as more just, equal and convenient.

6. Tithes being originally due and paid to Jesus Christ himself, Romans 9.^^
God over all blessed for ever; yea specially, reserved by, appropriated,
consecrated to our Lord God, as his peculiar Holy Portion, Tribute, Rent,
Right, Inheritance, Homage, from the sons of men, for the constant
maintenance of his public Worship, and support of his Priests and Ministers
attending thereon, to the end of the world. Lev. 27.30, 32. Numb. 18.24, 26,
28, 29. Mal 3.8, 9. Heb 7 2, to 10. 1 Cor. 9.4, to 15. and thereupon being
usually styled, both by Origin, Hom in Number. c 18. Ambrose, Sermon. 5. Fer. 2 and
Augustine, Sermon. 219. Jerome, in Mal. 3.
Fathers, Matiscon: 2. Can. 5. Moguntiense. An. 813. and 846. and 847. Council.
Lateran. c. 54. Ticmense sub Leone 4. Londinense: 2. Joan: in Gratian. Surius,
Hoveden.
Councils, Extravag. de Decimis. c. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Popes Decretals, See Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, c. 5, 6, 7, 8. Bochellus,
Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 6. Tit. 8. Dr. Tillesleys Animadversions, p. 4. to 30.
Princes Edicts, and Christian Writers in all Ages, Dominica substantia, Res
Dominicae, Dei census, Dei debitum, etc. Non ab hominibus, sed ab ipso Deo
institutae: quas Deus in Signum universalis Dominii Sibi reddi praecepit, suas
esse Decimas asseverans, etc. The constant payment of them to Ministers under
the Gospel, is not only warranted, commanded by the equity and words of the 1,
2, 4, 5, and 8. Commandments of the Decalogue, (therefore far from being a Sin
against the 2 d. Commandment, as In his voice.
John Can most absurdly and impudently asserts; as if Gods Precepts were
repugnant to each other:) but likewise expressly, positively, eternally,
prescribed by our Savior Christ himself, in this peremptory Gospel-Precept,
recorded by three Evangelists, Matthew. 22. 21. Mar. 12.17. Luke 20.25. RENDER
therefore to CAESAR the things that are CAESAR'S; and UNTO GOD THE THINGS THAT
ARE GODS. Thus seconded by the Apostle Paul, Romans 13.7, 8. RENDER THEREFORE TO
ALL THEIR DUES, etc. Tithes (as the premises evidence beyond contradiction)
have Gods own Image, Impresse, Superscription, as visibly, as legibly engraven
on them by himself, as any Tribute-money then shew^d our Savior, had Caesar's,
by the Mint-Masters* yea, they were Gods own ancient, standing, constant, known
Tribute, at that very season when Christ uttered this precept, and some
thousands of years before, specially reserved by, and duly rendered unto God
and his Priests, by all Gods faithful people, many hundred years before we
read of any Tributemony paid to Caesar, or any other King or Prince. Upon which
ground, as they were then, (by this direct Gospel-Commandement of Christ
himself) enjoined to be as constantly, duly, truly paid to God and his
Ministers, as any Tribute, Tax or Customs are unto Caesar, or other
Higher-Powers whatsoever: So they have since our Saviors days (except only in
times of greatest persecution under Pagan Emperors, during which some Tithes
were rendered to Gods Ministers in some places, or things of greater value, as
I shall prove anon) been still continued and universally paid to God in his
Ministers, in all or most Christian Churches, Realms, Republics, from the
first public imbracement of the Gospel amongst them, to this present, and more
especially in this our Realm, as Mr. John Seldom in his History of Tithes,
Doctor Tillesley, Tyndarus, Rebuffus, with others prove at large; and the
Author of Respublica, sive Status Regni Poloniae (Lugduni Bat. 1627. p. 177.)
thus attest, for the Church and Clergy of Poland, Habent etiam Decimam omnium
segitum, Publico Principum ac totius Poloniae consensu Iam inde ab initio
susceptae Religionis Christianae attributas, and aliis quibusdam Pensionibus
cumulatas. Habent and luculentos fundos, Praedia, Pagos, Oppida, arces, and
territoria; partim priscorum ibidem Principum and Regum; partim privatorum
munificentia adjectas (as they likewise had in See spelmanni Council: Antiqu.
Eccles. Brit. Dr. Usher De Rerum Britanicarum Primordiis.
ours, and other Christian Realms) yet he afterward subjoynes and complains,
as we may justly do, Nunc passim in alienas Donationes ac Decimas invaditur,
long majore avariciae rapacitatisque infamia, quam egestatis relevatione.
Therefore Gods and our Ministers Tithes, being by our Lord Jesus Christ's own
Gospel precept thus positively commanded to be constantly and duly rendered
unto them, as well as tribute unto Caesar; no conscientious Loyal Christians,
but professed Atheists, Antiscripturists, Rebels unto God and Christ, can
justly, or by any pretext of Conscience, refuse the due, constant payment of
them, no more than of lawful Tributes and Taxes legally imposed on them by
common consent See 25 E. 1. c. 5.34 E. 1. c. 1. Cooks 2. Instit. p. 529, 532,
533, etc. and the Petition of Right 3. Car.
in free and lawful Parliaments; nor any Caesar's, Kings, Princes, Magistrates,
or Supreme Powers, deny, defraud or deprive them of their Tithes and Dues,
upon any pretext, without impairing, impeaching, subverting their own Rights
and Titles to those civil Tenths, Tributes, which they challenge and receive
from the people as their due, by this very Precept of our Savior, which
couples Gods Dues and his Ministers together with their own; the inviolable
preservation whereof, is the best and readiest means to secure their own Tenths
and civil Dues. Whereas these Princes, Potentates, Powers, Grandees, Legifers,
who are so sacrilegiouslie injurious as to invade, impair, diminish, substract
or abolish, Gods and his Ministers Tithes, Duties, or divert them to pay their
Soldiers, or any other public or private use, will thereby but undermine
their own interests, and teach the people how to defraud, substract, deny their
own ancient Civil Tenths, Customs, Duties, Taxes, Rents, and New Impositions,
Excises of all sorts, by way of retaliation; most of the Anabaptistical and
levelling present Petitioners against Tithes and Glebes, petitioning,
declaiming likewise against all Customs, Imposts, Taxes old or new, as See
Lucas Osiander, Enchirid. Contr. cum Anabaptistis. Harmony of Confessions,
Sect. 19. of the Civil Magistrate. My Swo^d of Christian Magistracy supported.
intolerable Grievances and hindrances to free Trade; and many of them
asserting, all civil Supreme Powers and Magistrates whatsoever, as
antichristian and unlawfall, as Tithes and Ministers are in their false account.

Lastly, all Opposites to our Ministers Tithes do, and must of necessity
acknowledge (from the Scriptures insisted on in the first Proposition, and
Reasons there alleged) That some competent Maintenance, Salary, Recompense,
Reward, or other (arbitrary as they hold, certain and settled as we assert)
belongs to the Ministers of the Gospel by a divine, moral, natural Right,
Justice, and Equity; as all grant a Sabbath (and Government) in general to be
of divine Authority, Institution, and morally due to God. Now the whole Church
of God from the creation to this present, (though under various dispensations
in the times of the Patriarchs, Law and Gospel) being but John 10.16. c. 11.51,
52. Ephesians. 1.22, 23. c. 2.13. to the end, c. 4.4 to 17. c. 5.23, to 33. John.
17.20. to 25. Cant. 6.9. Ezech. 37.16, to 24. Romans 12.4, 5. Ephesians. 1.10. 1 Cor.
10.17. c. 12.12, 13. Col. 3.15. Hebr. 12.22, 23. Isay 66.18, to 24.
one entire Corporation or spiritual Body-Politique, whereof Jesus Christ
himself is the only head, King, Lord, Lawgiver, High Priest, Chief Pastor,
Minister, Advocate, Savior, Foundation, Cornerstone; and the successive
Priests, Ministers and Members thereof from the beginning to the end of the
World, serving, worshipping, adoring, only one and the self-same true, Mal.
3.6. Iam. 1.17. Hebr. 7.24. c. 13.8. 1 Timothy 5.15, 16. Psalm. 22.26, 27.
immutable, invisible, eternal Lord God, according to his prescribed will and
word: and Jesus Christ himself (the only High priest of this Church for ever)
receiving, and God his Father prescribing Tithes for the Maintenance of his
Priests and Levites, both before and under the Law; and no ways abolishing,
but ratifying them in and by the Gospel, as I have already proved. There
neither is, nor can be any other particular kind of competent, fitting,
standing, settled Maintenance, Reward or Recompense for all the Ministers of the
Gospel evinced, demonstrated out of Gods word, which may be truly reputed
moral, natural, divine, universal, perpetual and unarbitrary; nor any other
duly rendered from all Christians in all Ages, places, Romans 14.23.
in Faith, Conscience, and sincere obedience toward God, as such a
maintenance, but this of Tithes alone, independent on the lusts and wills of
men: It being that which the Patriarchs, (no doubt by Gods prescription being
paid in Faith) both vowed and paid to God before the Law; which God himself
afterward specially reserved, prescribed, and all his people duly rendered
under the Law; annexing many promised blessings to the true payment, denouncing
many threats, curses to the sacrilegious Substraction or detaining of them;
that which Christ himself and his Apostles most specially pointed at,
commended, ratified in the Gospel; that which all Christian Kings, States,
Magistrates, Churches, Christians under the Gospel in all Ages, places have
generally fixed upon, approved, asserted, prescribed, ratified, as not only
sacred and divine, but as such a most j^^t, wise, equal, excellent,
incomparable way of maintenance (invented by the most wise God) which cannot be
matched, much less amended, exceeded by all the policy, wit, or wisdom of
men: being a most certain, standing, unvariable, convenient Allowance in all
Ages, places, seasons, alterations, how ever things rise or fall, continuing
unalterable like the we^kly Sabbath) as to the porportion or quota pars, in all
vicissitudes of war, peace, plenty, scarcity, famine; and causing all
Ministers to sympathize, fare, share alike with their people every where, be
the times and seasons good or bad, wet or dry, plentiful or barren; and giving
them a competent share in Gal. 6.6. Genesis 14.12. Hebr. 7.2.
all their Temporal Blessings, without such toil or labor as might interrupt
them in their Ministry, Studyes, and furnishing them with a tenth part of every
tythable Thing their respective Parishes yield for the food, clothing, support
of themselves, Families, Cattle, or vendibles of some kind or other, sufficient
to buy what else they want. This way of Maintenance therefore so sacred,
divine, ancient, moral, universal, convenient, equal; unalterable, and so long
continuance in Gods Church in all Revolutions, may not, must not, cannot be
either totally abrogated, subtracted, detained, diminished, nor changed into
any other newfangled pretended more equal, just, certain, convenient, less
troublesome Stipendiary, Salary, by any pragmatical, Jesuitical,
Anabaptistical, Atheistical Politicians, Statists, Powers or Legislators
whatsoever, without the highest Antichristian Pride, Presumption, Insolency,
and 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4.
Exaltation of themselves above and against God himself, whose special sacred
Institution, portion, rent, inheritance, right, and due they are; particularly
(both by name and kind) reserved, prescribed by, appropriated, devoted to
himself, by his own command; which all Emperors, Kings, Princes, Potentates,
Powers, Generals, Armies, Nations in the world have no Power or Jurisdiction to
repeal, disobey, change, alter; no more than Tenants their Landlords ancient
Quitrents, Services, Tenures, or Subjects, Servants, their Kings or Masters
Laws, Orders, Mandates, yea no more than they can change Gods weekly Sabbath
into another different proportion of time, or any other sacred Institution,
into a new superstitious humane Invention, as learned Keckerman, in his System.
Polit. l. 1. c. 21. Polanus in Ezech. 48. v. 14. Dr. Carlton, and Dr. Scalter,
in their Treatises of Tithes, assert and prove at large.

This divine Right of Tithes even under the Gospel, which I have pleaded for,
has been constantly asserted in all Ages, since the Apostles times till now,
by Fathers, Councils, the Laws, Edicts of Christian Emperors, Kings,
Parliaments, Canonists, Casuists, Schoolmen, Historians, Lawyers, Popish,
Protestant Divines of all sorts and Nations. Dr. Richard Tillesly in his
Animadversions upon Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, printed London 1619. p. 3,
to 30, has colected a Catalogue of no less than 72. such Authorities (in a
Chronological method) before the year of our Lord 1215. as have asserted their
Ius Divinum, in all Ages before that; whereof Irenaeus (flourishing in the year
of Christ 180.) is the first, and the Constitutions of Fredericus the second,
the last, where those who please may peruse them. Mr. Seldens laborious History
of Tithes, and Review, especially chapter 5.6, 7, 8, 9. supplies us with many more
Authorities of this kind, in suceeding times, especially with our own
Domestique Laws and Councils, to whom I refer the impartial Reader, and to Dr.
Tillesly, Dr. Sclater, Mr. Mountague, Mr. Nettles, and Sir James Semple their
Animadversions on and Answers to his History: If any desire further
satisfaction in this point, let them peruse Andr. Hispanus, De Decimis
Tractatus. Petrus Rebuffus, and Tyndarus De Decimis, printed Colo. 1590. Gaspar
Boethius, De Deciman Tutori Hispanico JURE praestanda: Grav. 1565. Ignatius
Laserte and Molina, De Decimis Venditionis, and Permutationis. Joan. Giffordus,
Moderata Dissertatio de Ratione alendi Ministros Evangelicos: Hanov. 1619.
Gulielmus Redoanus, De Rebus Ecclesiae non aliendis: Ven. 1589. and De Spoliis
Ecclesiae Romae. 1585. Alexander Stiaticus, Repet. in Extrav. Ambitiosae: De
Rebus Ecclesiae non aliendis. Alph. Villagus, De Rebus Ecclesiae non rite
alienatis, recuperandis: Bon. 1606. (a Treatise of hard digestion in these
sacrilegious times:) Sir Henry Spelman, De non temerandis Ecclesiis: Dr. John
Prideaux, Orat. 5. De Decimis: Dr. Edward Reynolds, Explanation on Psalm. 110.
v. 4. Gul. Zepperus, Legum Mosaicarum Explanatio, l. 4. c. 40. And learned Hugo
Grotius, who thus concludes in his Book De jure Belli and Pacis, l. 1. c. 1.
^ect. 17. p. 9. (deservedly magnified by all Scholars, Lawyers, Politicians,
Soldiers, and therefore I close with it, to stop all their mouths at once.)
Lex vetus de Sabbato, and altera De Decimis, monstrant Christianos obligari,
nec minus Septima temporis part ad culium divinum; Nec minus fructuum Decima
in alimentum eorum qui in sacris Rebus occupantur, aut similes pios usus
seponant. Resolving the tenth part of men's increase at least, and no smaller
proportion, to be See Sclaters Ministers Porportion, p. 214, 225, 226, where he
proves this by their parallel.
as justly, morally, perpetually due to God and his Ministers under the Gospel
from all Christians, as the weekly Sabbath, and seventh part of their time, and
no less, is due still by them to God and his public worship.

Thus much for the divine Right of our Ministers to their Tithes, omitted in
the former part, but here supplied, for the Readers fuller satisfaction in
these Sacrilegious times, which so violently and impiously decry it without
Scripture, Reason, Antiquity, Authority, out of malice and design. The
succeeding Chapters more concern their Legal, Rational Right and Equity
depending on their Divine.

CHAPT. III.
HAving dispatched the two principal Propositions of greatest concernment,
(wherein I have been larger than I at first intended) to satisfy all men's
Consciences, and stop the mouths of all Gainsayers, I now proceed to the third
Proposition.

That if Tithes and other maintenance by Glebes, Oblations, Pensions, formerly
settled on our Ministers, be either wilfully withheld, or subtracted from them
by the people, in part or in whole, the Civil Magistrates may and ought by
coercive Laws, Penalties to enforce the payment of them in due form and time,
both by the Law of God, and Rules of Justice, without any Injury or Oppression
to the people.

This Proposition necessarily follows from the former two: for if there be a
just, competent, comfortable Maintenance due to all lawful painful Preachers,
and Ministers of the Gospel, even by divine Right, institution, express
Precepts, both of the Gospel and Law of God; and that as a just Debt, hire,
wages, salary, right, not as a mere voluntary Gift, Alms, Benevolence; and the
settled maintenance of our Ministers by Tithes, Glebes, Oblations, Pensions, and
other Duties, be such; as I have already demonstrated: then the Civil
Magistrates may and ought by coercive Laws and Penalties to enforce the payment
of them in due form and time (as our very Officers by such means enforce their
Soldiers, Parents their Children and Servants, Schoolmasters their Scholars,
yea our Troopers their very Horses, held in with Bits and Bridles when unruly,
and quickened with Spurs when lazy: and Shepherds their very Sheep, with their
Dogs and hooks, when there is cause, to do their duties, and reform their
Errors) without the least guilt or color of Injury or Oppression to the
wilful, obstinate, or negligent detainers of them; and that by the self-same
Laws, rules of Justice, Reason, Conscience, as all Tith-Opponents yet grant,
they may enforce obstinate or negligent Tenants, Creditors, Masters, Public or
private Accomptants, Trespassers, Disseisors, and the like, to pay their just
Rents and Services to their Landlords, their due Debts to their Creditors,
their contracted wages to their hired Laborers or menial Servants, their
audited Arrears to the public Treasury, or others to whom they are indebted
upon Account, their ascertained damages to such as they have injured, and to
restore the Goods or Lands unjustly taken or detained, to those they have
plundered or disseised of them, yea as justly as they may by any coercive Laws
and means enforce and constrain any obstinate Persons or Merchants, to pay all
Tenths, Fifteens, Subsidies, Aid, Cu^toms, Tonnage, Poundage, for defense of
the Realm ^y ^and or sea when publicly and legally granted in and by a full,
free, and lawful Parliament, duly summoned and elected by the people,
according to the 3 R. 1. c. 1.^ R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 4. 12 R. 2 c. 12. 7 H 4. c.
14. 11 H. 4. c. 1. 1 H. 5 c. 1. 6 H. 6. c. 4. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 10 H. 6. c. 2. 23 H
6. c. 11. 32 H. 6. c. 15. 9 H. 8. c. 10. 27 H. 8. c. 26. 35 H 8. c. 11. 17 Car.
The Act for Triennial Parliaments, Cooks 2 Instit. p. 168, 169. and 4 Instit.
p. 1. 45, 46, 47, 48, 49.
manifold Laws and Statutes enacted for that purpose: the want of which
indubital Ingredients only, how fatal they have been to Parliaments in former
Ages, to make them and all their Acts, Judgments, Orders, Ordinances, mere
Nullities, and what a prejudice they have been to the People and Republic too,
those who please may read at leisure in the Statutes of 39 H. 6. c. 1. and Rot.
parl. n. 3.17. c. 7. And the Act for repealing the Parliament of 21 R. 2. in
the Parliament of 1 H. 4. c. 3. The reason of which Repeal, is thus recorded by
Mr. Oliver Saint John in his Declaration in Parliament against the Shipmony
Judges, Anno 1640. (printed by the Commons command) p. 33. That Parliament of
21 R. 2. of Revocation, was held by force, as is declared in the Parliament
Roll of 1 H. 4. n. 21, 22. That it was held Viris armatis, et Sagitariis
immensis. The Knights of Parliaments were not elected by the Commons Prout mos
exegit, Sed per Regiam voluntatem: And so the Lords Rex omnes Dominos Sibi
adhaerentes summonare fecit. Whereupon Nu. 48. These judgments of Revocation
(and that of the whole Parliaments proceedings too) are declared to be Erronea,
Iniqua, et omni juri et rationi repugnantia, Erroneous, wicked, and contrary to
all Right and Reason: So Mr: Saint John, Numb. 37. This was one grand Article
of Impeachment of King Richard the 2 l. for which he was then deposed from his
Government by a forced Resignation. Heu licet quod eo Statuto and Consuetudine
Regni sui, in Convocatione cujuslibet Parliamenti sui, populus suus in singulis
Comitatilus Regni DEBEAT ESSE LIBER ad eligend: and deputa^d: Milites pro
hujusm^di Comitatibus, ad interessend. Parliamento, and ad exponend. eorum
gravamina, and ad prosequend. pro remediis superinde, preu^ eis videbatur
expedire; Tamen praefatus Rex ut in Parliamentis suis ut liberius consequi
valeat suae temerariae voluntatis effectare direxit mandata sua frequentius
Vicecomitibas suis ut certas Personas per ipsum Regem nominatas ut Milites
Comitatus venire faciat ad Parliamenta sua: Quos quidem Milites eidem Regi
faventes indulgere poterat prout frequenter fecit quandoque per minas varias et
terrores, quandoque per munera ad consentiend. illis quae Regno praejudicialia
fuerant et Populo quamplumum onerosa, et specialiter ad concedendum eidem Regi
Subsidium ad certos Annos suum Populum nimium opprimendo. Which I leave to John
Can to English for those who understand not Latin, or our Laws, and would
strip our learned Ministers of their Tithes and settled maintenance by color of
an extraordinary call (as he terms it) to such an extraordinary Sacrilegious
work as this.

Quest. But what ground is there in Scripture (may some demand) for compelling
People to pay their Tithes and other Duties to their Ministers?

Answ I answer 1. We have the President, Law, and Commandment of Godly
Hezekiah, recorded in the 2 Chronicles. 31.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. with the good effect it
wrought, already recited. 2ly. The Examples of zealous Nehemiah, and the
Religious Nobles and People under him; who entered into a solemn Covenant,
curse, oath, and made Ordinances to charge themselves yearly with the third
part of a Shekle for the service of the House of God: and that they would bring
in all their First Fruits and Offerings, and the Tithes of their ground unto
the Levites, that the same Levites might have their Tithes in all the Cities of
their Tillage, Neh. 9.38 c. 10.1. throughout, specially v. 29, 32, 37, 38, 39.
chapter 12.44, 45. which when afterward neglected, by the people, Nehemiah
contended with the Rulers (for their negligence in not enforcing the people to
pay them) whereupon this effect ensued, Then brought all Judah the Tithes of
the Corn, and the new Wine, and the Oil unto the Treasurers, etc. And Nehemiah
was so far from deeming this Injustice or Oppression, as some now maliciously
term it; that he prays, Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not
out my good Deeds, that I have done for the House of my God, and for the
offices thereof, Neh. 13.10, to 15. From which President Nicholas Hemingius (a
far better Divine and Scholar than John Can and all his Associates against
Tithes) thus resolves in his Commentary on 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. Therefore the
Godly are to be admonished. That by Divine Right they owe Stipends unto the
Ministers of the Church. But that nothing may be here neglected to the damage
of the Ministry, This care belongs to the Superious. For if Kings be nursing
Fathers to the Church (as Isaiah admonishes) Possunt et debent jure divino
ministris Ecclesiae stipendia ordinare, they may and ought by Divine Right (or
Gods Law) to ordain Stipends to the Ministers of the Church, by the example of
the most godly King Hezechiah, 2 Chronicles. 31. That they may wholly addict
themselves to the Law of God. And if the people detain these Salaries, and
settled Dues from them, they may enforce them by Fines, penalties, and Actions
to pay them.

3ly. If these Examples prevail not, we have the President of a zealous Heathen
Prince (who shall rise up in judgment against many pretended Magistrates,
refusing to assist complaining Ministers to recover their just Tith^s and Dues
from their refractory ingrate people) to wit, King Attaxerxes, who making a
Decree for furnishing Ezra the Priest with whatsoever he should require for the
maintenance of Gods worship and House, Ezra 7.11, etc. concludes it thus; v.
26. And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King
(which confirm our Ministers Tithes and Dues) Let Judgment be executed
speedily upon him, whether it be unto Death, or unto Banishment, or to
Confiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment. And lest any should deem this a
Tyrannical, Oppressing Edict; Ezra himself subjoyns in the very next words, v.
27. Blessed be the Lord of our Fathers, who has put such a thing as this is in
the Kings heart. Which Law if now put into due execution, would send Can and
most of his Confederates here packing back again to Amsterdam, or some Gibbet,
or Prison, and strip them of the Goods they have got by the wars and troubles
of the time.

4ly. We have King Darius his Decree for repairing Gods House, and furnishing
the Priests there with all necessaries they required, which thus concludes with
a most severe penalty against the wilful Disobeyers of it, Ezra 6.11. Also I
have made a D^cree. That whosoever shall alter this word, ^et Timber be pulled
down from his House, and being set up, Let him be hanged thereon, and his House
be made a Dunghill for this. H^w many now Gi^be^s should we now have throughout
England, and how many new-purchased Houses by those who had no^e of l^te, would
be made Dungheaps, if this rigid Law were now put in are? Which may stop the
clamorous mouths of such who cry out against Laws and Ordinances for Tithes,
prescribing more moderate penalties.

Object. But all this is but Old Testament will many now object: what can you
allege for your Propositions p^^^f out of the Gospel?

Answ. To stop their mouths, I answer,

1. That the Gospel expressly commands all living under it, To render to all
their Dues: Therefore to Ministers (to whom I have proved Tithes and other
settled maintenance to be a just Due and Debt) to owe nothing to any Man, Romans
13.7, 8. Therefore not to Ministers. But what if bold, atheistical, obstinate
or covetous Wretches will not pay these Dues to their Ministers, does the
Gospel allow Magistrates and higher Powers to compel them to it? Yes, in the
very antecedent words, v. 4, 5. If thou do that which is evil, (as the
defrauding, denying, detaining of the Ministers, as well as the Magistrates, or
any others Due Debts and Salaries, is a doing of evil, prohibited by the
forecited words, and many other Texts elsewhere insisted on) be afraid, for he
bears not the Sword in vain; (as he should do, might he compel none by it to
their duties) For he is the Minister of God, even a revenger to execute wrath
upon him that does evil: Wherefore ye must needs be subject (in yielding to
their commanding Laws and Ordinances for Tithes and Ministers Dues, as well as
others, edged with coercive Penalties) not only for wrath (that is, for fear of
the Penalties which else fall upon you for your disobedience, exasperate the
Higher Powers and Civil Magistrate to execute wrath upon you) but even for
conscience sake; which should more prevail with men than wrath and Penalties;
though our Tithe-detainers now are grown so atheistically impudent, as to
allege conscience for not rendering them, and robbing God himself of them, Mal.
3.8. as well as his Ministers.

2ly. The Holy Ghost by the Apostle Peter thus seconds his former precept, by
Paul, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether to the King, as Supreme, or unto Governors: who have made
many Laws and Ordinances for payment of our Ministers Tithes and Duties. Yea,
but say our sturdy armed, and unarmed Tithe-detainers now; What if we will not
do it, as we are resolved, notwithstanding all such Laws and Ordinances? What?
Are you resolved to disobey and contemn Gods Gospel, Laws and Ordinances as
well as Man's? Where is your Religion, your Saintship you so much boast of? Will
you 1 Cor. 10.12.
provoke the Lord himself to wrath, are you stronger than he? I presume, not:
Therefore the Apostle subjoins, That these Kings and Governors are sent by him
for the Punishment of Evil doers: And such are all those who detain the
Ministers established Dues, who are not only Thieves and Robbers of God in the
Old Testaments language, Mal. 3 8. but committers of Sacrilege, Romans 2.20. Thou
that abhorrest Idols (as many Tithe-oppugners pretend they do) Do thou commit
Sacrilege and Church Robbery? Acts 19.37. in the New Testaments and mere
Heathens Dialect; who fall under the just punishment of Kings and Governors,
whom God will bear out in the just punishment of such evil doers, or else
punish them himself in a more severe manner, if the Armed sons of 2 Samuel 3.39.
Zerviah be too hard for David, and Heb. 10.31.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, who even under
the Gospel is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. and has proved so to many
Tithe-oppugners very lately, both in consuming their Houses and personal
Estate, as well by real fire, as by inflicting Spiritual judgments on their
souls.

3ly. Our Saviors own words recorded in the Gospel, are direct in point. Luke
12.57, 58, 59. Mat. 5.25. And why, even of your selves judge ye not what is
right? (in paying your just Dues and Debts to all you owe them without suit or
coercion, as the next words literally import:) When thou go with thine
adversary to the Magistrate, as thou art in the way give diligence that thou
may be delivered from him, lest he hale thee to the judge, and the Judge
deliver thee to the Officer, and the Officer cast thee into prison Verily I say
unto thee, thou shall by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the
uttermost farthing; or very last mite. Here is a Gospel resolution of our
Savior in two Evangelists, ratified with a verily I say unto thee; That all
those who will not pay their Ministers Tithes and Dues, as well as other men's
Debts, may be lawfully brought and haled perforce before the Magistrate, and by
the Magistrate and Judge, condemned in double Damages, cast into Prison, and
not suffered to come out thence, till he have paid the utmost farthing, not
only of his detained Tithes and Dues, but of his sine, forfeiture, and costs of
suit, prescribed by our Laws. And let all our Swordmen and other oppugners of
our coercive Laws against detainers of Ministers Tithes and Dues, give our
Savior himself the Title of a Tyrant, and Oppressor, a Liar, if they dare, and
that such proceedings are not sufferable under the Gospel.

4ly. There is nothing so free and voluntary in the world, that I know, as
Alms and Charity to poor distressed Saints and Christians; Yet the Gospel
accounts this a due Debt; and all able to give them, Debtors, Romans 15.27. And
if any refuse to render them, out of their Hard-heartedness, and want of
Charity; the Christian Magistrates under the Gospel may, not only rate and
assesse them according to their Estates toward the Poors relief; (as they do
in all Christian Republics and Realms) but by Distresses, sale of Goods and
other coercive ways compel them to render them; and that both by the Common
law of England, and the Statutes of 22 H. 8. c. 12. 27 H. 8. c. 25. 1 Edw. 6.
c. 3. 5 E. 6 c 2. 7 E. 6. c. 11.1 Phil. and Mar. c. 6.5 Eliz. c. 3.14 Eliz. c.
3.18 Eliz c. 3.22 Eliz. c. 11.23 Eliz. c. 3.31 Eliz. c. 10.35 Eliz. c. 7. 43
Eliz. c. 2. as Dalton and other Justices of Peace, Tit. Poor, Maimed Soldiers.
Therefore admit Tithes mere Alms (as some would have them) yet when and where
detained, they may be as justly levied and recovered by coercive Laws and
Statutes as Alms to the Poor, and those who condemn coercive Laws for Tithes as
unbeseeming the Gospel, must Tax and Repeal all Laws for the Poor, and for
Maimed Soldiers too, as such; which I presume they will not do.

5ly. I suppose neither Can himself (who receives pay as a Chaplain to the
Army out of public Contributions from the people, not from voluntary
contributions of the Soldiers) and all other Officers and Swordmen oppugning
the coercive Maintenance of our Ministers by Tither or otherwise, will maintain
even unto death; that the People (even against their wills and Consciences too)
may be enforced to pay Monthly Taxes and Excises (amounting to twenty times
more each year than all the Ministers Tithes in England) by coercive Orders and
Ordinances, (though not made in a full, free, or old English Parliament, nor
warranted by so many indisputable Acts of Parliament as Ministers Tithes and
Dues) and levied by Imprisonments, Distresses, Forfeitures, armed violence, and
free quartering of Soldiers on the people, (though adjudged High Treason in
Straffords Case in full Parliament, for which he lost his Head;) our Ministers
therefore being real Spiritual Soldiers of Jesus Christ, even by the Gospels
Resolution; and not to go a warfare at any time on their own free cost, but
upon the Peoples pay and wages, as due to them, as any Soldiers (which I have
formerly proved) they must by the self same reason acknowledge the levying and
enforcing of the payment of their less Burdensome, and more legal, necessary
Tithes for the defense and preservation of the very Gospel, Religion, Gods
Glory and Man's Salvation once a year, by penalties, forfeitures, imprisonments,
or distresses when obstinately detained: or else disclaim their own coercive
Contributions first, to maintain unchristian bloody wars between Christians of
the same Religion, in firm unity, and amity with us, which are not so
necessary, or commendable amongst Christians, who should Romans 12.18.
live peaceably with all men (not make a last Trade of war) Cor. 13.11. 2 Gal.
5.13. Ephesians. 4.2. 1 Pet. 3.2.
Love as Brethren, 1 John 3.16.
Lay down their Lives one for another, Yea Matthew. 5.44. Romans 12.20.
love and pray for their Enemies (not murder or destroy them) and Isay 2.4.
Micha. 4.3.
beat all their Swords into Plowshares and their spears into Pruning Hooks, not
lifting up Sword Nation against Nation (as now they do to the peril of the
Gospel, reproach and slander) and learn war no more) as is the Spiritual
warfare of our Ministers against the World, Flesh, Sin, Devil, and all Errors,
Blasphemies, Corruptions, for the eternal Salvation (not Destruction) of men's
Souls and Bodies too.

6ly. We find it long since prophesied in the Old Testament, in relation to the
calling to the Gentiles by and under the Gospel, Isay 49.23. That the KINGS of
the Gentiles should become Nursing-Fathers, and their Queens Nursing-Mothers to
the Church, Isay 60.9, 10. Surely the Isles shall wait for me, and the Ships of
Tarshish first, to bring my Sons from far, their Silver and their Gold with
them: And the Sons of Strangers shall build up the walls, and their Kings shall
minister unto thee, Psalm. 72.10, 11. The Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles
shall bring Presents, the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer Gifts, yea all
Kings shall down before him (and then) all Nations shall serve him. Thus
seconded in the New Testament, Rev 21.24. where it is prophesied of the
Heavenly Jerusalem (the Church of Christ) the Kings of the Earth do bring their
Glory unto it. Which Prophecies concerning Kings, and likewise Kings of Isles
in particular (and no other sorts of Governors, which is observable) have been
most eminently verified of the Kings and Queens of this Isle and Realm of
Britain, beyond all the Kings, Queens, Regions, Isles and Kingdoms in the world
besides, to the eternal Honor of that late rejected, abjured form of Kingly
Government (derived from Gods own form of Psalm 47.2, 6, 7. 1 Timothy 1.17.
Kingly Government over the whole world, and of Psalm. 2.6. Ps. 48.2. Rev. 15.
3. John 1.44. Zech. 9.9.
Christ's Royal Government over his Church both Militant and Triumphant) and of
this our Isle: where God blessed our Church and Kingdom, 1. with three such
worthy Heathen Kings in Succession, ( Capgrave in vita Iosephi, Will.
Malmesbury De Antiqu. Glastoniensis Ecclesiae, Spelman. Council. Epist.
Dedicatoria, and p. 1. to 12. Dr. Usher Ecclesiae Brit. Antiquitates: c. 1.
Godwin, Matthew Parker, Speed, and sundry others.
Arviragus, Marius, and Coylus) who though they embraced not the Christian
Faith here preached soon after our Saviors Ascension by James the Son of
Zebedee, Simon Zelotes, Peter, Paul, Aristobulus, and Philips twelve Disciples,
whereof Joseph of Aramathaea (who honorably interred our Savior) was chief,
Yet they courteously entertained them, permitted them freely to preach the
Gospel to their people, gave public entertainment to the persecuted Christians
resorting hither as to a safe and peaceable Sanctuary, when they were forcibly
expelled out of all other Kingdoms and Countries throughout the world, and
Roman Empire, by bloody Persecutors, bestowed Lands and a comfortable
Maintenance on the Preachers of the Gospel at Glastonbury, where they built the
first Christian Church in the world; and were the first Kings and Kingdoms in
the world who gave public Reception, Protection, Countenance, Maintenance to
the Preachers and Professors of the Gospel; as not only our own Historians, but
two foreign Writers, namely Polydore Virgil: Hist. Angl. l. 2. and Cardinal
Baronius himself. Annal. Tom. 1. An. 95. n. 5. with Spondanus in his Epitome of
him, records. 2ly. With the first Christian King we read of, publicly
baptized, professing and establishing the Christian Faith, builded, endowed
Churches and Ministers with Glebes and other Maintenance; to wit our famous
King Lucius, who about the year 187. (as Antiqu. Ecclesiae, Brit. Fox Acts and
Monuments, Spelman. Council. p. 12. etc. Dr. Usher Eccles. Brit. Antiqu. c. 4,
5, 6.
Matthew Paris, Matthew Westminster, the History of Rochester and others
record) Possessiones et Territoria Ecclesiis et viris Ecclesiasticis abundanter
conferens Chartis and Munimentis omnia communivit: Ad An. 187. Roger Wendever
ad An. 184. Dr. Usher Eccles Brit. Antiqu. p 125, 126, 1078. Galfridus
Monmuniensis, l. 5. c. 1. Edit. Hidelberg.
Ecclesias vero cum suis Coemiteriis ita constituit esse Liberas, ut quicunque
Malefactor ad illa confugeret, illaesus ab omnibus remaneret: (a good Policy at
that time to draw Pagans to frequent the Church, and hear the word, to convert
them both from their Paganism and evil Lives;) He not only giving all the Lands
and Possessions belonging to the Pagan Temples and Priests to the Churches and
Ministers of the Christians; Sed quia majorem honorem illis impendere debuerat,
augmentavit illas amplioribus agris et mansis, omnique liberate sublimavit, as
Galfridus Monmuniensis, and Gervasius Tilburiensis affirm: Here was a true
Nursing Father indeed to Gods Church and Ministers.

3ly. With the first Christian Queen we read of in all the world, to wit, Queen
Helena, Matthew. Westminster. Graston^ Holinshed, Fox and Speed.
Daughter and Heir to King Coel, and Mother to Constantine the Great, who was a
careful Nursing Mother, and Bountiful Benefactor to the Church and Ministers
of Christ, as Eusebius in the life of Constantine, Ambrose Oration in Obitum
Theodosii, Baronius in his Annals, and Speed in his History of Great Britain,
p. 156. record. Whence she was styled in ancient Inscriptions, Venerabilis ET
PIISSIMA AUGUSTA; both for her extraordinary Piety, and her converting of
Constantius her Husband to the love and protection of the Christian Religion,
and the Professors of it, who by her means creeping out of the Dens and Caves
wherein they were hid, began to exercise their Devotions publicly, and TO
RE-EDIFIE THE OLD RUINATE CHURCHES (which Dioclesian the persecuting Emperor
had levelled to the very ground in all places,) and TO ERECT NEW; Matthew. Westminster.
An. 307. Dr. Usher Eccles. Brit. Antiqu. c. 8. Speeds History p. 156, etc.
Baronius, An. 306. n. 16.
She herself at her own cost, erecting a Stately Church over our Saviors
Sepulcher at Jerusalem, famous till this very day.

4ly. With the first Christian Emperor in the world, even that famous
Constantine the Great, born and elected Emperor in this Island, educated in
the Christian Faith by his pious Mother, the best, the Greatest Nursing Father
the Church of God ever yet enjoyed in the world.

Eusebius, Eutropius, Zonaras, Grimston, Speed, and others in his Life, Fox
Acts and Monuments, vol. 1.
For first, He destroyed the two Grand Persecutors of the Christian Religion,
Maxentius and Licinius, with their Adherents, and demolished all the Idol-Gods
and Monuments of Idolatry throughout his Dominions.

2ly. He reduced all the exiled Christians driven out of their Countries into
desolate Islands, Caves, Dens, Deserts, restored them their lost Possessions,
established Christian Magistrates throughout his Empire, encouraged, protected
the Christians in all places, in the public Profession of their Religion, and
suppressed the Heresies and Schisms that sprung up amongst them, by Councils
and public Edicts.

3ly. He caused all the Churches in this Isle and elsewhere, which by the
Decrees of Dioclesian were levelled in all places to the very ground (which
some Atheistial Anabaptists, Eusebius de vita Constantini, Gildas, Matthew.
Westminster. An. 318, to 351. Speeds History, p. 159, 161. Spelman. Council. p. 45.
Dr. usher Eccles. Brit. Antiqu. c. 8. throughout,
and Jesuitical Incendiaries even in these pretended glorious times of Piety
and Reformation endeavor to do again) to be re-edified, and new ones to be
founded throughout his Dominions; himself erecting most Magnificent Temples to
Gods honor, (as King David did out of holy zeal, and love to God, not Popish
superstition, as some now censure it, 2 Chronicles. 22 5. c. 29.1, 2, 3.) both in
Rome it self, Jerusalem, Hostia, Neapolis, Hirapolis, Constantinople, and other
Cities, endowing them with ample possessions, and all other Churches with
convenient Glebes, Mansions and Revenues.

4ly. He encouraged, protected, advanced Godly Ministers, Learning and
Religion, by settling a competent maintenance on them, both for their livelihood
and encouragement, most preferring, esteeming, rewarding the best deserving of
them. And by this means so laid the foundation of the Christians security, and
the Churches maintenance, that the same has stood under the Protection of
Christian Kings and Princes ever since. And albeit many Caesar's his Successors,
have often attempted to shake it by their Authorities, and the sharp
Instruments of Heretics have dangerously undermined it, yet has it born out
the storms of all their boisterous assayes, and stood in the strength that this
Emperor first laid it, (as Speed and others observe.) And for these blessed
fruits of this prime Nursing Father of Gods Church, he had then, and ever
after, these most Glorious Titles conferred on him by the Christians, and
Ecclesiastical Writers, Most Blessed Emperor, most Pious, Sacred, Divine; Most
happy Redeemer and Restorer of Romes City, and the whole World from Paganism,
Tyranny, Persecution, and founder of the Churches Peace. Which those shall
never enjoy, who labor to demolish and extirpate what he thus founded and
established.

5ly. God has blessed our Church and Isle (as Io. Capgrave in his Prologue,
Sir Hen. Spelman in his Epist. Dedicatory to his Councils, and the Author of
Fasciculus Temporum record) with more Kings and Queens, who for their
extraordinary Piety, incredible Zeal, liberal Alms, manifold works of Mercy,
incomparable Humility and contempt of the World, their munificent, magnificent
and admirable Bounty to the Ministers and Saints of God, and in building,
adorning, endowing Churches with Tithes and Glebes, and some of them for
suffering Martyrdom for defense of Religion by Pagan Invaders, were justly
Reputed and Kalendred in the Church of God, for Saints (though infected with
some superstititions of those blinder times, which the age wherein they lived
may excuse, and their other virtues overbalance and delete,) than any other
Isle, Region or Kingdom throughout the world, how Great or Populous soeber.
There being no less than Twelve of our ancient Saxon Kings Crowned with
Martyrdom by Infidels; and Ten of them Canonized for Saints for their
transcendent Holiness; and no less than thirty Kings and Queens within 200
years space, who laying down the Height of their worldly Power, Crowns and
Glory, that they might gain heaven by force, betook themselves to a devout,
retired religious Life, (according to the devotion of those times) in some
private Monasteries (for the most part builded and endowed by themselves) or
else went as Pilgrims to Rome, then reputed famous for Her Piety. Besides
multitudes of the Royal Progeny who followed their examples both in their
Piety, Charity and Bounty to the Church. And amongst others of our ancient
Kings, King Ethelwolfe gave not only the Tenth out of all his goods and
Chattels, but likewise of all the Lands and Houses of his whole Realm to the
Church. His Son, incomparable Asser and others in his life. Spelman in his
Epistle Ded. to his Councils.
King Alfred (founder, or at least Cambd^ns Britannia, Oxfordshire.
Restorer and Enlarger of our famous University of Oxford) though he was for
the most part taken up with Wars and Military affairs by reason of the Danes
invasions, fighting no less than 52. set battles with them (for the most part
with glorious success) yet out of an Ardent zeal to God, in emulation of
Zacheus, he gave no less than half of his annual Rents (and spoils of war
besides) in pious uses; to wit, for relieving the poor both at home and abroad,
for maintaining, rewarding Scholars, Ministers, building schools of Learning,
maintaining professors of diverse Arts and Sciences in them, especially in
Oxford, and devoted no less than the third part of his time (to wit, eight
hours every natural day) to his sacred studies and devotions; Besides the time
he spent in his Military employments, Civil Government, and enacting Laws of
most excellent use by advise of the wisest men, which have continued ever
since. So as Asser Menevensis, (in Egercituesse) in his life, Spelman and
others give this Brief Character and Encomium of his Excellencies, O Stuporem
omnium aetatum Aluredum! cujus dum Religionem intuemur, nunquam exiisse
videatur Monasterio: Dum Bella and Militiam, nullibi versatus fuisse unquam
nisi in Castris: dum Scripta ejus and Lucubrationes, vitam transiisse in
Academia: and dum Regni Populique sui administrationem, nihilo unquam
studuisse, nisi in Foro and Senatu, Justitiae promovendae, Legibusque bonis
Sanciendis. Of which good Laws of his (extracted out of the Old and New
Testament for most part) Spelmanni Council. p 360.
this for the due payment of Tithes and Oblations to Ministers was one, cap.
38. DECIMAS Primigenia and adulta tua DEO DATO. O that all those Military
victorious Commanders who boast of like victories as he obtained, would imitate
him in these his Virtues, Bounty, Liberality, both to our Universities,
Scholars, Ministers, and promulging Edicts for the due payment of their
detained Tithes and Dues! and then they should be Chronicled for SAINTS INDEED,
as well as the forenamed Kings, of which there was not one in three in former
Ages (as Sir Henry Spelman observes) WHO DID NOT ADORN, AUGMENT and ENRICH THE
CHURCH IN SOME THINGS, even during their very wars, instead of making a mere
prey and spoil of her (as some late SAINTS have done) to maintain the wars
and enrich themselves. In which Sacrilegious Rapines, if any shall persevere to
the utter ruin of the remaining Glebes, Tithes, Maintenance of all our
Ministers and Churches too (the prime Honor of our Nation, Cambdens Brit. and
Heylins Microcosm, p. 458.
ECCLESIA, Faemina, Lana) as some have designed, and would engage them to do,
to render our Religion, Nation, and those who shall give their Votes thereto
for ever execrable; Let them take heed, that instead of inducing the Ministers
and godly people really fearing God, throughout our three Nations, to forget
Monarchy, and be in love with their New Military Government, they do not
necessitate them, and most others too thereby, (by comparing their Irreligious
Church-Robberies, and Sacrilegious Rapines against the very Laws even of War
and Conquest it self in an Enemies Country, and detestable to very Heathens, as
de Jure Belli, l. 3. c. 12. Sect. 5, 6, 7. and Annotata.
Grotius proves at large) to love and honor Kings and Monarchs more than ever,
as the only Nursing-Fathers to Gods Ministers, Church, People, under the
Gospel; and to esteem others not coming in by the Door into the Sheepfold,
but climbing up by Storm some other way, to be but Thieves and Robbers; who
come not but to Steal, Kill, and to Destroy, whatever the Bounty, Piety, and
Munificence of these and other our Kings, have built and settled on the Clergy
for Gods Honor, and maintenance of his worship, and thereby engage them so to
act, speak, and peremptorily resolve, as all the Israelites and Godly Levites,
Priests, People, twice did in a like case, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and
1 Samuel 8.3, 5, 19, 20.

If any here object, these Kings and Queens were more Popish, Superstitious,
than really Religious: Admit they were in some things, (as too much doting upon
Monkery, not Monarchy, or worldly wealth or Power, which some condemn in
others, when most guilty of and applauding it in themselves) yet their very
Bounty and profuse munificent Building Monasteries and Nunneries, (whereof
Capgrave in Prologo ad vitas Sanctorum, Spelmanni Council. in Epist. Ded. and p.
433.
King Edgar alone built no less than 47. endowed them with large Revenues, and
intended to make them up 50. had he lived,) besides what they bestowed in
building, adorning, endowing, maintaining all Cathedral and Parish Churches and
Chapels, for the support and honor of their superstitious Religion, should
eternally shame all those pretended Saints, who will be at no cost at all to
maintain and propagate what they now call the True Religion and the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel, but instead thereof, will by mere Force and Rapine
against all Rules of Law, Justice, Piety, Equity, and war it self, plunder (if
they can) the remaining Materials and Fabrics of our Churches, which those
Kings or their Successors, and other ancient Benefactors built for Gods Honor,
and the small surviving Lands, Rectories, Glebes, Tithes, Pensions, Dues, which
our Ministers yet enjoy, by their sole Bounty, Piety, Gift, Laws, without any
real charge, injury, oppression, or obligation to any Mortals now surviving
them. But to take off the stain of Popery wholly from our Kings, which was no
disparagement to their commendable Charity and Bounty; Consider in the sixth
place, that God has honored us with the first Christian King in the Universe
Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. in the life of Cranmer, Fox, Speed, Hall, Grimston in H
8. and Statut. Rastal Manassenas, Rome.
Henry the 8 th. who durst not only question, but by Public Laws and Statutes
abolish and renounce the Popish usurped Antichristian Power, and with it all
Popish Shavelings, Abbots, Priors, Monks, Nuns, and many Popish Doctrines,
Ceremonies; and restored the People to the use of the Holy Scriptures in their
own Native Language: Whose example encouraged other Kings, Princes, Churches to
do the like. Who though he seized upon Abbey Lands, as given to mere
Superstitious Persons, Orders, Uses, repugnant to Gods word, and the Popes mere
Creatures, and Supporters; yet he continued the Lands, Glebes, Mr. Cambdens
Britania, spelman and others.
Tithes, and Maintenance of the Bishops and other Ministers, and augmented it
and our Universities Revenues also out of the Abbeys Spoils, which yet could
not exempt him from the public censure of some Protestants, for selling or
rteaining most of their Lands and Impropriations for his own use, which (say
they) he should have rather converted to other lawful sacred uses, according
to the will of the first Donors: And Mr. Pilgrimage, l. 1. c. 7. p. 133.
Purchase writes, That the Monks unrighteous coveting, and the Popes
appropriating of the Tithes of some Thousands of our best Benefices unto Abbeys
and Monasteries, and robbing the Ministers of them to whom only they were given
by God himself, and the first Donors for their Maintenance, to the great
prejudice both of the Ministers and People, was one principal cause, that by a
Divine Judgment and Providence (beyond all men's expectation) the Pope and they
were both suppressed together on a sudden, even by him who not long before had
justified his usurped Supremacy against Luther, and for which he had received
this ominous Title from the Pope DEFENDER OF THE FAITH: God grant our New
Defenders of the Faith, do not as ill requite those Persons, Powers, who first
commissioned them, with their Arms to defend our Faith, Church, Religion,
against Jesuits, Papists, and their Confederates in the Field, as King Henry
did the Pope after this new Motto. 7ly. That our God blessed, honored us with
the first Fox Acts and Monuments, and others in his Life, and the Statutes in
his Reign.
incomparable Protestant King in the world, (no Papist, but a REAL SAINT,
beyond any of his years in this or former Age^) even young KING EDWARD THE
SIXTH: the first King I read of, who by public Laws and Statutes suppressed,
banished all Popish Pictures, Ceremonies, Superstitious Monuments, Practices,
Abuses throughout his Dominions, and established the true worship, Service,
Sacraments, Ministers and Ministry, and Gospel of Christ throughout his
Dominions: for which all Ages shall call him blessed: no ways embesselling, or
diminishing the Churches Glebes, Tithes or Revenues, and enacting a New
excellent Law 2 E. 6. c. 13.
for Tithes recovery when detained. But God taking him suddenly from hence to a
better Kingdom, and his Successor Queen Mary, defacing, deforming his blessed
Reformation, and restoring both the Pope and Popery again, almost to its former
height, except in point of Monkery, which the defacing of the Monasteries
prevented, 8ly. God then blessed our Church and Kingdom with an unparalled
Protestant Princess, Queen Speed, How, Baker, Cambden in her life, and the
printed Statutes in her reign: Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. in the life of Matthew
Parker, Godwins Catalogue of Bishops in her time.
Elizabeth, a Nursing Mother to the Church, who demolished the whole Body of
Popery, with the Popes revived usurpations again by public Acts; established
the reformed Religion again in greater beauty and purity than at first;
banishing all Jesuits and Seminary Priests as Traitors, restored the exiled
Ministers of the Gospel suffering for Religion, rewarding them with the richest
Bishoprics and Church-Preferments, and planting a faithful, painful,
preaching Ministry by degrees in most dark corners of her Dominions, endowed
them with a settled competent maintenance, which our subsequent Protestant Kings
continued to them and their Successors without diminution. All which
considered, we of this Isle may with much thankfulness to God, and honor to
our Princes, without flattery averr before all the world, That the forecited
Prophecies of Kings being Nursing-Fathers, and Queens Nursing-Mothers to the
Church (and specially Kings and Queens of this Isle) have been more really
accomplished in the Kings and Queens of this our Island, than in the Kings and
Queens of any other Isle, Kingdom, or Nation whatsoever throughout the world,
and God grant that those who shall succeed them in any other New-modelled-form
of Government may not prove such Step-Fathers and Step-Mothers to our Churches
and Ministers, as to demolish the one, and strip the other quite naked of all
that former Livelihood, and remaining small Revenues, which they yet enjoy by
our Princes Grants, Gifts, Charters, Laws and Favors only; and thereby give
all Godly Ministers, and people too in our Nation, just cause to cry out with
wringed hands, weeping eyes, and bleeding hearts, in the Prophets words, Hosea
10.3, 4. For now they shall say, We have no King, because we feared not the
Lord, What then should a King do to us? (or amongst us,) They have spoken
words, Swearing falsely in making a Covenant: Thus Judgment springs up as
Hemlock (one of the deadliest Poisons to destroy men) in the fields. Or else to
speak in Solomon's language, to the same effect, Prove. 28.2. For the
transgression of a Land many are the Princes thereof (as our Land had never so
many Transgressions and Princes too as now,) But by a Man of Understanding and
Knowledge (and where is such a one to be found, to Ezech. 22, 30.
stand up in a Gap?) the state thereof shall be prolonged: Now the Lord raise
up such a Man, or Men; lest God say to our Nation and all Grandees in Power, as
he did once to the profane wicked Prince of Israel, whose day was come, Ezech.
21.25, 26, 27. Remove the Diadem, and take off the Crown; this shall not be the
same: Exalt him that is Low, and abase him that is High: I will overturn,
overturn, overturn, (Church, State, Laws,) and it shall be no more, until he
come whose Right it is, and I will give it him.

To prevent these treble, fatal over-turnings, with the wiping and turning of
our Jerusalem UPSIDE DOWN like a Dish (a certain Forerunner of a Churches,
Nations ruin, 2 Kings 21.13. Psalm. 146.9.)

I shall now in the last place present the whole Nation with a brief Catalogue
of those manifold Laws, Statutes, which our Kings have successively made in
their Great Councils and Parliaments, almost from the very first establishment
of Religion in our Island, for the due payment of Ministers Tithes by coercive
Means, Forfeitures, Penalties, in case of wilful detaining, or neglect in
paying all or any part of them at the times appointed; which those who please,
may Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, chapter 8.
peruse in Chronicon Johannis Brompton, Mr. Lambards Archaion, Sir Henry
Spelmans Councils, Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments, John Bridges his Defense of
the Government of the Church of England, Book 16. p. 1350. Our Statutes at
large, and Mr. Rastals Abridgement of Statutes, Title Tithes; which Laws being
well known to most learned men, are therefore needless fully to transcribe.
The first of them is the forecited Law, Decree of the Council of Calcuth, under
King Oswald and Offa, An. 787. of famous King Alfred, Anno 887. of King Alfred
and Gutburn the Dane, cap. 9. De Decimis Deo Debitis, about the year 890. of
King Edward the elder and Guthurn: Anno 905. (or 906. as some) Cap. 6. (in some
c. 9.) DE DECIMIS ET CENSU ECCLESIAE RETENTIS: of King Aethelstan; made in the
famous Council of Gratelean: An. 928. cap. 1. DE DECIMIS REDDENDIS, tam ex
Animalibus quam de fructibus terrae; which this King himself duly paid, and
then enjoined all his great Officers and People duly to render: of King Edmond:
An. 944. c. 2. concluding, Qui non solverit, ANATHEMA ESTO. Of famous King
Edgar, Anno 967. c. 3. DE DECIMIS, and Canon 54. of the Kings and Presbyters of
Northumberland, made a little after that time: Lex 51. of King Aethelred, An.
1012. c. 1, and 4. of King Knute the Dane, An. 1032. c. 8. (but 15. in some
Copies) De Decimis reddendis, etc. 11, and 17. and a Statute law against
obstinate Detainers of Tithes, there styled JURA ET DEBITIONES DIVINAE: of King
Edward the Confessor, about the year 1060, confirmed verbatim by William the
Conqueror, in the fourth year of his Reign, c. 8, 9. (forecited) To which may
be added the Great Charters of King Henry the first, and King John recorded in
Hist. Angliae Tiguri, 1589. p. 52, 53, 246, 247, etc.
Matthew Paris, ratified by King Henry the 3d. in his Magna Charta, c. 11. made
in the 9th. year of his Reign, See Sir Edward Cooks Preface to his 2. Instit.
on Magna Charta.
confirmed by above 37 Acts of Parliament since, in many successive
Parliaments. That the Church of England shall be free (now in greater Bondage
than ever) and shall have all her whole Rights and Liberties inviolable, (never
so much violated, diminished as now, notwithstanding all Laws, Covenants,
Declarations, Protestations lately, and all See Matthew. Paris, Hist. Angl. p
421, 505, 506, 621, 624.838, 839. The Statutes at large, An. 25 E. 1. after
Confirmatio Chart^rum.
ancient Solemn Curses and Excommunications annually made against the
Infringers thereof, 13 E. 1. 17 E. 3. and 14. 2 H. 4. c. 4. Enacting the
Cistertian Monks to pay Tithes to Ministers and Evangelists notwithstanding any
Bulls of Exemption from the Pope, which the King and Parliament declared to be
void, and that the Promovers or Executors of any such Bulls shall be attainted
in a Praemunire. It appears by the Parliament Roll of 2 H. 4. nu. 40. This Act
was made upon the Petition of all the Commons; which, because not extant in
print, pertinent to the present business of Tithes, and unknown to most, I
shall here transcribe at large.

May it please our most gracious Lord the King, to consider, That whereas time
out of wind the Religious men of the Order of the Cistercians, of your Realm of
England, have paid all manner of Tithes of their lands, tenements, possessions,
let to farm, or manured and occupied by other persons besides themselves, and
of manner of things tithable being and growing upon the same lands, tenements
and possessions, in the same manner as your other Lieges of the said Realm; Yet
so it is, that of late the said Religious have purchased a Bull from our Holy
Father the Pope, by the which our said Holy Father has granted to the said
Religious, That they shall pay no Tithes of their Lands, Tenements,
Possessions, Woods, Cattle, or any thing whatsoever, although they are or shall
be leased or farmed, notwithstanding any Title of Prescription or Right
acquired, or which hereafter may be had or acquired to the contrary. The which
Pursuit and Grant is apparently against the Laws and Customs of your Realm, by
reason that diverse Compositions real, and Indentures are made between many of
the said Religious, and others your Lieges of the prise of such Tithes, and
also by reason that in diverse Parishes, the Tithes demanded by the said
Religious by color of the said Bull, exceed the fourth part of the value of
the Benefices, within whose limits and bounds they are; and so if the said Bull
should be executed ( much more the late Petions against all Tithes and coercive
Maintenance for Ministers condescended to) as well your dreadful Majesty, as
your Liege^ Patrons of the said Benefices, shall receive great losses in their
Advowsons of the said Benefices, and the Conusance which in this behalf
appertains, and in all times has belonged to your Regality, shall be discussed
in Court Christian, against the said Laws and Customs: besides (pray mark the
prevailing reason) the Troubles and Commotions which may arise among your
people by the motion and execution of such Novelties within your Realm. N. B.
That hereupon by assent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament,
you would be pleased to ordain, that if the said religious, or any other, put
or shall put the said Bull in execution, shall be put out of your Protection,
by due Process made in this behalf; and their goods forfeited to You, lost, and
that as a work of Charity. Which Petition being read and considered, was
answered in the words following. It is accorded by the King and Lords in
Parliament, That the Order of the Cistertians shall be in the state they were
before the time of the Bull purchased, comprised in this Petition, and that as
well those of the said Order, as all others Religious and Secular of what
estate or condition soever they be, who shall put the said Bull in execution,
or shall hereafter take advantage in any manner of any such Bulls already
purchased, or to be purchased, shall have Process made against them and either
of them by sommoning them within a month by a Writ of Praemunire Facias. And if
they make default or shall be attainted, that they shallbe put out of the Kings
Protection, and incur the peines and forfeitures comprised in the Statute of
Provisors, made in the 13. year of King Richard. And moreover, for to eschew
many probable mischiefs, likely to arise in time to come, that our said Lord
the King shall send to our Holy Father the Pope, for to repeal and annul the
said Bulls purchased, and to abstain to make any such Grant hereafter. To which
Answer the Commons well agreed, and that it should be made into a Statute.

From which memorable Record, I shall desire John Can, and all his ignorant
deluded Disciples, who cry out against Tithes, and the payment of them as
Popish, to observe,

1. That all the Commons of England in this Parliament, even in times of
Popery, together with the King and Lords, resolve the quite contrary: That the
exemption of any order of men from payment of their due and accustomed Tithes
is Popish, and that the Pope was the first and only man, who presumed by his
Bulls to exempt men from payment of due and accustomed Tithes to their
Ministers.

2ly. That Popish Friars of the Cistercian Order (not Godly Saints abhorring
Monkerie and Popery) were the first men who sued for, procured and executed
such Exemptions from the Pope; (and that merely out of Covetousness, against
the express word and Law of God, as our John Salisbury de Nugis Curialium, l.
7. c. 21. and our Archdeacon of Bathe Epist. 82. and Bochellus Decret. Eccles.
Gal. p. 966. Bibl. Patrum, Tom. 12. Pars. 2. p. 7667, 67.
Petrus Blesensis observe, who tax them for it.) And therefore the petitioning,
writing, endeavoring to procure a like exemption from the payment of ancient
and accustomed Tithes to our Ministers, must be Popish and Monkish likewise,
infused into our New-lighted Saints by some Popish Monks and Jesuits disguised
under the notion of New-lights, Seekers, Anabaptists, etc.

3ly. That they declare this Bull, though granted by their Holy-Father the Pope
(whose Authority and esteem was then very great) to be against the Laws and
Customs of the Realm; and thereupon repeal, null it for the present, and
provide against the grant of any such Bulls for Non-payment of Tithes for the
future, and make the Procurers and Executioners of them subject to a
Praemunire: Such a transcendent Crime and Grievance did they then adjudge it,
to seek or procure the least exemption from payment of Tithes from any earthly
Powers, yea from their very Holy Father the Pope himself, then in his highest
Power.

4ly. That they resolve, the exemption from Tithes though amounting but to a
fourth part in every Parish, would prove a great prejudice to the King and all
other Patrons in their Advowsons; to the Lessors and Farmers of Tithes, to the
incumbents and people; and that the moving of such Novelties might occasion
great Troubles and Commotions within the Realm. And will not then the
abolishing of all Tithes in every Parish, to the prejudice of the Patrons,
Ministers, (yea and people too, as I shall prove anon) the scandal of most
godly men, undoing of thousands of families, and confounding all Parishes, and
order in them, now much more do it, in these dangerous generally discontented
times, instead of settling Unity, Amity, Peace, and propagating the Gospel, as
some pretend? Let those whom it most concerns consider it at their leisure,
lest they repent too late.

The next printed Statute for the payment of Tithes, is 27 H. 8. c. 20. which
in the preface gives this true Character of, and fixes this brand of infamy
upon Tithe-detainers, Forasmuch as many evil disposed Persons, (such are they
justly branded for by this Act of Parliament) have attempted to withhold their
Tenths, as well predial, as personal, and have also contemned and disobeyed the
Decrees of Ecclesiastical Courts of this Realm, etc. Therefore it enacts, the
Civil Magistrate and Justices shall imprison such till they pay their Tithes.
After which follows a special Statute for payment of Tithes in London, 27 H.
8. c. 21. confirmed, enlarged by a Statute and Decree too, 37 H. 8 c. 7. thus
prefaced, as if purposely penned for these times; Whereas diverse and many
persons inhabiting in sundry Counties, and Places of this Realm, and other the
Kings Dominions, not regarding their duties to Almighty God, or to the King our
Sovereign Lord, but in some years past more contemptuously and commonly
Presuming to infringe the good and wholesome Laws of this Realm and Gracious
Commandments of our said Sovereign Lord, than in times past have been seen or
known: have not let to substract and withdraw the lawful and accustomed
Tithes of Corn, Hay, Pasturage and other sort of Tithes and Oblations commonly
due, etc. After which it provides a remedy by coercive means against the
detainers, refusers of Ministers Tithes.

The last and fullest Statute for payment of Tithes of all sorts, and setting
out Predial Tithes, truly, justly, and without fraud or guile, as has of right
been yielded and paid, made not by Papists, but our most religious first
Protestant Parliament, and King upon the beginning of Reformation, and when
Popery was ejected, is, 2 E. 6. c. 13. entitled, AN ACT FOR THE TRUE PAYMENT
OF TITHES, under pain of forfeiting the treble value, etc. recoverable by an
ACTION OF DEBT, etc. at the Common law. What judgments have been given upon
these Statutes in our Kings Courts from time to time, you may read in Brook,
Fitzherbert, and the Year-books in Ashes Tables, Title DISMES; and in Sir
Edward Cooks 2 Institutes, p. 639, to 662. To these I might subjoyn the late
Ordinances of the last Parliament of 17 Caroli, concerning Tithes and
Augmentations of Ministers Livings, like to end not only in the Diminution, but
total Annihilation and Substraction both of their Augmentations, ancient
Glebes, Tithes, Dues. The Constitutions of our Clergy in their Convocations
under our Kings, recorded in Lindwood, John de Aton, Willielmus de Burgo, and
others, prescribing the due payment of Tithes under pain of Excommunication,
and other Ecclesiastical censures; as likewise the Resolution of our Judges
concerning the Right of Tithes, and Cooks 2 Report. The Bishop of Winchesters
case.
that no Layman by our Laws can prescribe to be exempted from payment of
Tithes, or lay any original claim unto them: with the Laws of foreign Kingdoms,
as well Civil as Ecclesiastical, for the due payment of Tithes; whereof you may
find store in Fredericus Lindebrogus: Codex Legum Antiquarum, p. 674, 675, 703,
etc. Capitularia Caroli Magni and Ludovici; in Brochellus, Decret. Ecclesiae
Gallicanae, l. 6. tit. 8. De Decimis: in Binius, Surius, and others in their
Collections of Councils: But for brevity sake I shall cite only the
Constitution of the Emperor Frederick for the payment of Tithes in the Kingdom
of Sicilia, which is short and very pertinent, Fredericus Lindebrogus Codex
Legum Antiqu. p. 703.
Constitutionum Sicularum, l. 1. tit. 7. Lex 1. which runs thus,

Quanto caeteris terrae Principibus munifica dextra Salvatoris in Temporalibus
Nos praefecit, tanto saltem Iuris naturalis instinctu ad antedicta strictius
obligamur; cum etiam veritate dicente, cui amplius creditur, amplius exigatur.
Quod in nostrae mentis intrinseca meditatione solicita revolventes, and illud
etiam attendentes, Quod divino Decimarum, quarum Debitum ex utriusque
Testamenti Tabulis confirmatur, (Let all Tith-Oppugners observe it,) tanti in
Ecclesia Dei petidatior redditur, quanio Decimalis obligatio de bonis hominum,
A DAMNO REPUTATUR: Officialibus nostris universis and singulis praesentis
Legis, auctoritate Mandamus, ut DECIMAS INTEGRAS, prout Regis Gulielmi tempore,
praedecessoris nostri, vel ab Antecessoribus Officialibus and Bavilis exolutae
fuerint, locorum Praelatis exolvere, absque omni difficultate procurent. Nos
enim, qui favente Domino inter homines sumus in praeminenti culmine constituti,
quantum sine injuria Regalium possumus tollerare ECCLESIARUM JURA, and
praesertim earum quae in Regno consistum, Quas sub Protectione nostra
accepimus, et habemus, in nullo diminuere volumus, sed augere. Subjectis etiam
nostris indicimus ut Decimas quas de bladis et donis suis Antecessores eorum
praedicti Regis Gulielmi tempore praestituerunt, venerabilibus locis, Quibus
Decimae istae debentur cum integritate persolvant.

To which I shall only add, That Rerum Vngaricatum Scriptores Bonfinius, and
Nicholas Isthuansis in vita sancti Stephani.

Sancti Stephani Regis Decretum secundum, c. 52. Status Regni Hungariae, p. 190.


Stephen King of Hungaria, under whom that Kingdom was first totally converted
to the Christian Faith, as he built and endowed many magnificent Churches for
Gods worship at his own cost, so he enacted this good Law for the payment of
Tithes, That he who refused to pay his Tithes should forfeit the 9. parts to
the Minister, and he who should steal the Tithes should be reputed a Thief. Si
cui Deus December dederit in Anno, DECIMAM DEO DET. Et si quis Decimam suam
abscondit NOVEM SOLVAT. Et si quis DECIMATIONEM Episcopo separatam furatus
fuerit, DIJUDICETUR UT FUR; ac hujusmodi compositio tota pertineat ad
Episcopum. And. c. 1. De Statu Ecclesiastico, and veneratione Domus Dei: He
enacted this good Law against the Invasion and Alienation of the Churches
possessions (about the year of Christ 1000.) Quisquis fastu superbiae elatus,
Domum Dei ducit contemptibilem, and possessiones Deo consecratas, atque ad
honorem Dei sub Regia immunitatis defensione constitutas, inhoneste tractarit,
vel infringere praesumpserit, Quast invasor et violator Domus Dei
excommunicetur. Decet enim, ut indignationem ipsius Dom. Regis sentiat, cujus
benevolentiae contemptor, and constitutionis praevaricator existit: Nihilominus
tamen Rex suae concessionis immunitatem, ab hominibus ditioni suae subjectis
illaesam conservari praecipiat, assensum vero non praebeat improvide
affirmantibus, non ^ebere esse res Dominicas, id est, Domino Dominantium
traditas; Itaque sub defensione Regis sit, et sicuti suae propriae haereditati,
magisque advertat. Quia quanio Deus excellentior est hominibus, tanto
praestantior est Divina causa mortalium possessione. Quocirca decipitur,
quisquis plus in propriis quam in Dominicis rebus gloriatur: Quarum Defensor et
Custos divinitatis Constitutiones diligenti cura non solum eas servare, sed
etiam multiplicare debet. Si quis igitur insanus importunitate illa quae
diximus praestantiora quam sua defendere oportet and augmentare. Si quis igitur
insanus importunitate improbitateque sua, Regem a recto proposito pervertere
tentaverit, nullisque remediis mitigari posse visus fuerit, licet obsequiis
aliquibus and transitoriis sit necessarius, abscindendus ab eo projiciendusque
est, juxta illud Evangelium, Si pes, manus aut occulus tuus scandili^at^te,
erue eum and projice abs te.

Since then Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes in Foreign parts, and our own
Kings and Parliaments in and by all the forecited Laws and Statutes yet in
force, have established Tithes and other Duties on our Clergy and Ministers of
the Gospel, and thus publicly branded the negligent or wilful detainer^,
sustractors of this just Debt and Duty (prescribed by our Laws, with Warrant
from the Old and New Testament) for evil disposed persons, not regarding their
duty to Almighty God (which therefore none who claim their Power from, or for
God, should now regard or countenance in the least degree) enforcing them by
actions at Law, Imprisonment, payment of treble Damages, excommunications, and
the like coercive ways to render to them Tithes at last to their loss; Why
Christian Magistrates should not still enforce the obstinate detainers of
Ministers Tithes, and defrauders of them in their just Dues, and merited
rewards for their Ministry, as has been formerly practiced in all ages and
places too; Let all Anti-tithers (who would be Lawless, as well as Titheless
and Godless) resolve me when they can: and if they deem themselves above all
humane Laws and Penalties (so long as they wear their swords by their sides)
for defrauding our Ministers of their lawful Tithes and Dues, let them then
chew the cudd upon this Evangelical Precept, backed with the strongest coercive
power both in Heaven and Earth, 1 These. 4.6. Let no man go beyond, or defraud
his brother (much less then his Minister) in any thing (therefore not in Tithes
due by Divine and humane Right) mark the reason: Because that the Lord is the
avenger of all such things, as we have forewarned and testified. And what
vengeance God will take of such who defraud their Brethen and Ministers of
their debts, and necessitate them to sue them at the Law, to recover their
Rights: he resolves, in the 1 Cor. 6, 7, to 11. Now therefore there is utterly
a fault among you, because you go to Law (to wit before Heathen Judges, or
without just cause) one with another, (the greatest if not only fault being in
the Defrauder and Detainer) why do ye not rather take wrong? why do ye not
rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? Nay why do you wrong and defraud, 1
Cor. 6.8.
and that your Brethren? and which is more, rob your Ministers; yea, but what
harm or punishment will follow on it? Mark it, O all ye Saint-seeming
Hypocrites, who are guilty of it! Know ye not, That the unrighteous (who thus
wrong and defraud their Brethren and Ministers, which is worse) shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither Thieves, nor covetous (and
such are all those who rob and defraud their Ministers of their Tithes and
Duties) shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: no more than Fornicators,
Idolaters, etc. with whom they are here coupled. Let all those then who are
guilty of this damning sin, which disinherits them of Gods Kingdom, now
seriously repent and reform it, with all such, who have abetted or confederated
with them herein, that so I may add with the Apostle in the next words, And
such were some (nay all) of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but
ye are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

And now to cloze up this Chapter, I shall desire all Anti-Tithers who have
already in their heady Resolutions, resolved to abolish, not only all our
Ministers Tithes, and ancient Dues established by the Lord himself in the Old
and New Testament, with all the forecited Laws, Statutes, Ordinances for the
true and due payment of them, but all other coercive maintenance for their
future subsistence, if not their very Rectories, Glebes, and Fabrics of our
Churches (devoted for a prey by diverse) sadly and seriously to consider these
ensuing particulars.

1. That herein, they shall show themselves, not only worse by thousands of
Degrees than our forementioned Kings and Queens, who built and endowed our
Churches with Glebes, Tithes, and a liberal Maintenance; and worse than the
most of all their Ancestors, Protestants or Papists, who have hitherto
continued, confirmed, established them by successive Laws; but even worse than
the worst of Turks and Infidels; who always heretofore, and at this very day,
have and do allow their Mohammedan and Pagan Idolatrous Priests in all places, a
liberal, competent settled Salarie, and erect magnificent Temples to Mahomet and
their Idols, exceeding most of our fairest Christian Churches both for beauty
and number, as you may read at large in See page 56, 58, 59, 65, 68, 75, 79,
83, 84, 85, 89, 90, 241, 243, 268, 297, 298, 584.
Pulchas Pilgrimage, Alexander ab Alexandro, Hospinian De Origin Templorum,
and others. And to give you one instance for all, There are no less than 700
Moschees or Saracinical Temples in Fesse, ( a Mohammedan City in Barbary) the
chief whereof is Carven, being a full mile and an half in compass. It has 31
Gates, great and high: the Roof is 150 yards long, and 80 broad: the Steeple
very high: the Ornaments rich and stately: Round about it are diverse Porches,
containing 40 yards in length, and 30. in breadth: About the Walls are Pulpits
of diverse sorts, wherein the Masters and Priests of their Law, read to the
People such things as they think pertain to their Salvation: The Revenue of
this Temple alone, Anno 1526. was no less than 200. Ducats a day, of old
rents. The chief Church in Morocco is bigger, though not altogether so fair as
that of Fesse, and has a Tower so high, that the Hills of Az^fi being 120.
miles distance may be seen from thence, (as Joan. Leo. Geographical Description
of Africa, l. 3.
Leo Pilgrimage, l. 6. c. 10. p. 614.
Purchase, and Microcosm, p. 710, 711, 712.
Heylin write) These Temples and others are adorned with marble Pillars, and
curious Mosaicks, carved works of all sorts: Their Priests and Readers of the
Law have a liberal Stipend, with Books and lands likewise allowed them, and are
had in very high estimation and Reverence, both with their Kings, Magistrates,
People; the Califfs there receiving likewise the tenth Measure of Corn yearly
from the People: Besides which Tenths they have many Colleges and Schools of
Learning very Majestically built and richly endowed. Those therefore who
pretend themselves Saints of the highest New-form, and yet would deface the
beautiful Churches our pious Ancestors erected for Gods worship, and strip our
Ministers naked of all Glebes, Tithes, settled Maintenance, so as they shall not
be able to live comfortably, and provide for their Families have in truth
denied the Faith, and are worse than these Turks and Infidels, 1 Timothy 5.8.

2ly. That hereby they shall make both our Religion and Nation to stink in the
Nostrils of all foreign Protestant Churches, Papists, Turks, Infidels; who by
the very light of Nature have condemned Sacrilege and Church Robbers: Acts
19.37. Give extraordinary advantage to Jesuits, Papists and other Atheistical
Seducers, to reduce the People either to Popery or mere Atheism: Give all the
Enemies of God and our Religion occasion both to rejoice and blaspheme; and
extraordinarily scandalize and grieve the hearts of all true Godly Ministers,
and Protestants really affected to our Religion, throughout our three Nations.

3ly. That they will herein exceed all our late suppressed Prelates and their
High Commission Courts in Tyranny, Cruelty, Injustice, by undoing all or most
of our Godly Ministers and their Families at one fatal blow; instead of
relieving them in their present Necessities under which many of them sadly
groan, by depriving them of their Livelihood, without any legal Conviction of
the least crime, but only that they are Ministers of the Gospel, and receive
Tithes; and thereby draw upon their Heads, not only the cries and clamours of
these oppressed ones here, with all the formentioned Curses and judgments
denounced against Tith-Detainers, but also that sad irrevocable sentence of
Condemnation before Christ's Tribunal at the last day, Matthew. 25.41. Depart from
me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; for I
was hungry and ye gave me no Meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me no Drink, I was
(not) a Stranger, (but your Minister) and ye took me not in, (but cast me and
mine out of those Rectories and Benefices your Ancestors gave and settled on
me,) naked, and ye clothed me not, nay stripped me naked of all my clothing
and Livelihood, and would neither relieve, nor maintain me your selves, nor
permit others to do it, in an ancient legal way; And then what can you answer,
or to whom can you resort for protection, from this inevitable just Charge and
Doom of Damnation for all eternity?

4ly. Consider seriously the exemplarie punishment executed upon Ananias and
Saphyra, Acts 5.1, etc. with that fearful judgment of retaliation denounced
against all plundering Enemies of the Church of Christ, Isay 33.1. Woe unto thee
that spoylest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and they
dealt not treacherously with thee; when thou ceasest to spoil, thou shall be
spoiled; and when thou shall make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal
treacherously with thee: Seconded by Obadiah 15. As thou have done it shall be
done unto thee, thy reward shall return upon thine own head. And if any fondly
conceit, (as many do) that the Swords and Power of an Army shall bear them out
against the Lord of Hosts himself: let them consider that of Psalm. 33.16. There
is no King saved by the multitude of an Host, (themselves have seen it by late
experience) neither is any mighty man delivered by great strength. Jeroboam the
Idolatrous Usurper had an Army of no less than eight hundred thousand chosen
men, to make good his usurped Title against Abijah David's right Heir, yet when
he had cast out the Priests of the Lord from their Suburbs and Possessions, and
made him Priests for his Calves of the lowest of the people; he was vanquished
by a far smaller Army, and no less than five hundred thousand of his forces
slain in one days battle, and the Lord soon after smote him that be dyed, 2 Chronicles. 13 Oreb, Zeba, and Salmunna the Princes and Generals of the Midianites,
when they entered into the Land of Israel to destroy it, had an Army like unto
Grasshoppers for multitude, and they and their Camels were without number,
Judges 6.5, 6. Yet when they said, Let us take to our selves the Houses of God
in possession, they were totally routed by Gideon, and his 300. men having only
Trumpets and Lamps; and perished at Endor, and became as dung for the earth,
Judge. 7. and 8. Psalm. 83.9, 10, 11, 12. Senacherib invaded Judah with a
victorious and numerous Army, above treble the Number to any Army in our days;
Yet when he trusted to the strength of his Army, and bid defiance to the God of
Heaven (as those do now who oppugn and spoil his Ministers of their
inheritance) God sent his avenging Angel, which cut off all the mighty men of
valor, and the Leaders, and the Captains and one hundred fourscore and five
thousand of his soldiers in one night, and when they arose early in the
morning, behold they were all dead corpse: so he returned with shame of face
into his own land, and when he was come into the house of his God, his own
Sons that came out of his own bowels, slew him there with the sword. 2 Kings
19.35, 36, 37. 2 Chronicles. 32.21. The two proud surly Captains with the fifty
armed troopers at their heels, who came in a violent manner but to fetch down
Elijah the man of God from an hill to King Ahaziah, were destroyed with fire
from Heaven, and the third Captain only saved, who fell on his knees before
him, and besought him for his own and his fifties lives, and used him like a
man of God, without any rudeness or plunder, 2 Kings 1.9, 10, etc. To lesson
all soldiers and Captains now, to reverence Gods Ministers, and Ps. 105.14, 15.
do his Prophets no harm in their Persons, Callings or Estates: Else he who
rebuked Kings, and miraculously slew those Captains and their Troopers for
their sakes, will avenge their quarrel now as well as in former ages. And if
former victories and successes have and do puff them so far up with pride or
security, as to think they may now reduce our Ministers like Conquered vassals
to such poverty, as to enforce and make them eat the very crumbs under their
Tables, instead of feeding at their own; let them remember that one memorable
President (wherewith I have quelled many usurping soldiers) of the greatest
Conqueror and Abuser of Kings, I ever yet read off in the world, and Gods
retaliation upon him for his Tyranny and inhumanity after the Conquest of no
less then 70. Kings (and who now living has conquered the tenth part of that
number?) thus recorded to all Posterity, Judge. 1.5, 6, 7. And Judah fought
against Adonibezeck, in Bezeck, and they slew the Canaanites and Perazites. And
Adonibezeck fled, and they pursued after him, and caught him, and cut off his
Thumbs and great Toes. And Adonibezeck said, threescore and ten Kings, having
their thumbs and great toes cut off, have gathered their meat under my Table:
As I have done, so God has requited me; and they brought him to Jerusalem and
there he died. It is very dangerous for any Conquerers to make ill Presidents
of Tyranny or Rapine, because they have power in their hands to do it. Mark
what a Woe and judgment God denounces against such, Mich. 2.1, 2, 3, 4 Woe to
them that devise iniquity upon their beds, when the morning is come they
practice it, Because it is in the power of their hand. And they covet fields,
and they take them by violence, and houses, and take them away: So they oppress
a man and his house, even a man and his heritage (Nay Ministers now and their
Heritage, as well as other men's) But mark what follows immediately. Therefore
thus says the Lord, Behold, against this family do I devise an evil, from
whence they shall not remove their necks, neither shall they be hauty, for this
time is evil. In that day shall one take up a Parable against you, and lament
with a doleful lamentation, and say, we be utterly spoiled; He has changed
the portion of my people (as some now would change our Ministers) How has he
removed it from me? turning away He has divided our fields, therefore he shall
have none that shall cast by lot in the Congregation of the Lord. It is most
perilous for any by mere Arbitrary Votes, will and violence to seiz on, change,
divide any other men's lands, houses, inheritances, especially Gods Ministers;
it will prove as bad as a cup of poison to them, they shall vomit them up again
with a vengeance; And though their excellency mount up to the Heavens and their
Head unto the Clouds; yet their triumphing shall be but short, and their joy
but for a moment: They shall perish for ever as their own dung: They which have
seen them shall say, Where are they? They shall fly away as a dream and shall
not be found: The eyes which saw them shall see them no more, neither thall
their place any more behold them, (mark the reason) because they have oppressed
and violently taken away an House which they builded not. Job 20.4. to 20. How
much more the Houses, Glebes, Tithes of God and his Ministers? Let this sad
consideration then, persuade all turbulent, greedy, sacrilegious spirits to
follow Dr. Gamaliels advice, (which many of them have much pressed for a
public Toleration of all Religions, though now they would As appears by their
late Petitions, and John Cannes Voice.
extirpate all Ministers and their Tithes root and branch) recorded Acts 5.48,
49. Refrain from these Men (and their Tithes too) and let them alone; for if
they (and their tithes) be o^ God (as I have proved them) ye cannot overthrow
them, lest happily ye be found to be fighters against God.

5ly. Let every of the chiefest now in Power, remember those many reiterated
solemn Declarations, Protestations, Votes and Ordinances they have formerly
made for the due payment and preservation of our Ministers Tithes and
Augmentation of their incompetent Livings out of the Bishops and Delinquents
Impropriations, and Deans and Chapters Lands; (for the most part other ways
disposed notwithstanding) And what an high violation of public Faith, Trust,
Promises, Solemn Engagements, and an eternal Infamy and Dishonor it will
procure to their Persons, Memories (in after Annals) and Posterities, if all
these should now conclude in a general armed Depredation, Abolition,
Dissolution or Substraction of all their old Rectories, Glebes, Tithes, Dues,
instead of new settled Augmentations out of other dissipated Church Revenues
formerly Voted for them.

6ly. Let all Changers and Innovators of our Fundamental Laws and Ministers
Maintenance, consider what prohibitions, Comminations and Judgments God has
proclaimed against, and inflicted upon such innovators and changers in his
Word. Eccles. 10.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. There is an evil which I have seen under the
Sun, As an error which proceeds from the Ruler: folly is set in great
Dignity, and the Rich in low Place; I have seen Servants upon Horses, and
Princes walking as Servants on the earth (but mark the issue) He that diggeth a
pit shall fall into it: and who so breaks an bedge, a Serpent shall bite him:
who so removes st^nes shall be hurt thereby, and he that cleaves Wood shall
be endangered thereby. The meaning of which Parabolical expressions is thus
more clearly explained, Prove. 24.21, 22. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the
King, and meddle not with those who are given to change, for their calamity
shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both? That is, of the
Changers and their Adherents joining with them, by the revenging Justice both
of God and the King. My deceased Brother Burtons Sermons on this Text, Nov. 5.
1636. are worth all our Innovators reading. For which Sermon he and I jointly
suffered in the Star Chamber through our Innovating all-ruling Prelates malice,
for discovering, oppugning those several Changes and Innovations they had made
in the Ceremonies, Doctrine of our Church, and High Commission arbitrary
proceedings, contrary to our Laws. Little did those Prelates think in that time
of their domineering Power and Greatness, that these changes of theirs, and
unrighteous censures upon us for discovering and opposing them, would have so
soon proved the very causes of their unexpected sudden calamity and ruin,
according to this Text and censured Sermons; and of their High Commission and
Starchamber Court too, wherein they prosecuted us; yet they really found they
did so. What proved the calamity, and ruin of Strafford, Canterbury, and the
old Council Table, but their unrighteous exorbitant Innovations and New
Projects against our Laws, and old forms of Parliamentary Proceedings? What
brought sudden unexpected calamity and ruin on the late King and Parliament
too, (even by those who were raised, commissioned, engaged by Oaths,
Protestations, and Solemn Covenants to defend and preserve them) but Gods
Justice for some exorbitant Changes, and Fundamental, violent, illegal
Innovations, whereof both were guilty? especially in the Militia; whereof the
Houses endeavoring totally to divest the King, without admitting him any share
therein (which Exact Collection, p. 59. etc.
bred the first fresh quarrel between them) as their only security and the
Kings too: And now God has made that very Militia the ruin of them both, and
to assume both the Regal and Parliamental, Military and Civil Supreme Authority
and Government of the Nation and united Kingdoms too, wholly to themselves, and
to dash in pieces that new minted Mock Parliament Power and Government
themselves at first created; for those many notorious injurious Changes,
Oppressions, Innovations of all sorts whereof they were deeply guilty: And what
other fatal Changes God may yet suddenly effect to the Calamity and Ruin of
those who have been chief Instruments in all these Changes, if they ring THE
CHANGES still, till they Isay 29.16.
have turned all things upside down, as the Potter does his clay, and our very
Ministers settled maintenance, with all Fundamental laws for the establishment
of their and all others just Rights and Liberties, I leave to their own saddest
Meditations, these Gospel Texts of Romans 2.1, 2, 3. and c. 12.20, 21. (which I
hope neither will nor can offend any Professors of the Gospel) Therefore thou
art inexcusable O man whosoever thou art that judge, for wherein thou judge
another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge do the same things.
But we know that the judgment of God is according to truth against them who
commit such things: And think thou this O man, that judge them who do such
things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the Judgment of God? Be not
High-minded but fear: For if God spared not the Natural Branches take heed lest
he also spare not thee, being a Wild Olive Tree. And when they have meditated
on these Texts, I shall further importune all such of them who like the little
Horn in Daniel 7.24, 25, 26. that should be diverse from the FIRST, and subdue
THREE KINGS; and being elevated with that success, should speak great words
against the most High, and wear out his Saints, and think to change Times and
Laws, advisedly to consider what there next follows. That though the Laws and
Times should be given into his hand, yet it will be until a time and times and
the dividing of times. And the Judgment shall sit, and they shall take away
his Dominion to consume and destroy it unto the end. And then our Ministers
need not fear their Ministry, Tithes, Glebes, nor the People their Just Rights
and Liberties, which otherwise are like to be lost, subverted, destroyed in the
long, bloody, costly Contests and Wars for their Defense and Preservation.

Now lest any should pretend matter of Conscience or Reason against the
Christian Magistrates enforcing of Tithes true payment, by coercive Means and
Laws, in these Tith-detaining sacrilegious times; or for the speedy Repeal of
all our fore-specified Laws and Ordinances yet in force to compel all Detainers
of them to pay them duly under the several penalties therein prescribed; I shall
endeavor to give a full satisfactory Answer to all Arguments and Cavils of
moment usually made against them, which are reducible to these four Heads.

Object. First, That there is no express Precept in the Gospel, nor any such
penal Laws, enforcing the payment of Tithes to be found in the Primitive and
purest times for 500. years after Christ; Therefore they are unlawful,
oppressive, un-evangelical, tyrannical, antichristian; as Can terms them, in
his thundering empty voice.

Answ. To this I answer, first, That there is no express Precept or President
in the New Testament, for any strange High Courts of Justice, Martial, or other
Courts of that Nature, for any Articles of War or penal Laws to put Soldiers
or any others to death, or inflict punishments for any New High-Treasons, or
Offenses whatsoever. No Precept nor President that John Can (a late
Excise-man as diverse report) can produce for the imposing or levying of any
Excise, Impositions, Taxes, Customs, Crown-Rents, Tonnage, Poundage,
Contributions, by any Distresses, Forfeitures, Imprisonments, sale of Goods,
billetting of Soldiers on the People, and armed violence now used by
Soldiers, Excisemen, Collectors and other Publicans sitting at the Receipt of
Custom, (whereof I hear John Can is one, perhaps to Excise the Alehouses and
Cannes there used for names-sake) all puny to and less warrantable by Gods Law
and Gospel, than our Ministers Tithes. The Objectors therefore must find
express Gospel-Texts for all and every of these public Duties, and the present
ways of levying and enforcing them, or else disclaim them, or their Objection
against Tithes.

2ly. I have produced express Gospel-Texts warranting in the general coercive
Laws, Suits, Actions to recover Ministers Tithes, as well as any other just,
legal, public or private Dues, Debts, Rents, Lands, Possessions whatsoever.
Therefore the Objectors must either disclaim their Objection, or renounce all
penal Laws, Suits, and coercive Means whatsoever to levy or recover any other
civil Rights, Debts or Duties whatsoever, and introduce a lawless Anarchy and
Confusion amongst us, for every one to cheat, defraud, rob, oppress, disseise,
spoil, defame, wound, murder one another, without any penalty or redress,
except only by Club-law, instead of a peaceable, just and righteous Government.

3ly. The reason why there were no coercive Laws for the payment of Tithes or
Ministers dues in the Primitive Church for above 500 years was this, because
Christians then were so zealous, ready, forwards to render them with an
overplus, and to sell their very Houses, Lands, Possessions, Estates, and lay
them down at the Apostles and Ministers feet to maintain them, and relieve
their poor Christian Brethren, witness Acts 2.44, 45. c 4.34, 35, 37. c. 5.1,
2. 2 Cor. 11.9. Phil. 4.15, 16, 17, 18. Romans 15.26. and that memorable place, 2
Cor. 8.1, to 5. where Paul records of the first Churches and Converts in
Macedonia, how that in a great Trial of Affliction (in times of heavy
persecution) their deep Poverty abounded to the riches of their Liberality, for
to their power (I bear them record) yea and beyond their power they were
willing of themselves, praying us with much entreaty, that we would receive the
Gift, and take upon us the Fellowship of the Ministering to the Saints, etc. The
Matthew. 22.23, 24. Luke 11.42. c. 18.12.
New Testament records, the exceeding readiness of the Pharisees to pay Tithes
of all they did possess, and of the smallest Seeds and Garden-Herbs of all
kinds, to their Priests or Levites; which Christ himself approved, commended,
with a these things ought ye not to have left undone; And (...). Mr. Seldens
Review, p. 453.
Philo a learned Jew, who lived under Claudius, in the Apostles days, records
as an Eyewitness on his own knowledge, That the Jews were so forward in paying
their First Fruits and other Dues to their Priests, That they prevented the
Officers demanding them, paid them before they were due by Law, as if they had
rather received a benefit, than rendered any, both Sexes of their own
readiness, bringing them in with such courtesy and thanksgiving, as is beyond
all expression (they are his very words:) And were they then less forwards
think you, to render due Maintenance, (if not Tithes and First Fruits,) to the
Apostles when they turned Christians? Surely no, for the forecited Texts in the
Acts declare, they were far more bountiful than before, both to the Apostles
and poor Saints, selling all they had to support them. The like zeal (even in
the heat of persecution, under bloody Pagan Persecutors) continued in all the
Primitive Christians next after the Apostles, who though persecuted, driven
into Corners, imprisoned, banished, and spoiled of their Goods, Lands, by
plundering Officers, Sequestrators, Soldiers, as Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 26. l.
6. c. 41, 42. l. 7. c. 12. Fox Acts and Monuments. vol. 1.
Eusebius, and others record, yet every one of them out of his deep Poverty
contributed every Month, or when he would or could some small stipend for the
maintenance of the Ministers and Poor (when they had no Lands to pay Tithes out
of) of his own accord without any coercion: witness ( Apologet. c. 39.
Tertullian (who flourished but 200. years after Christ) Modicum unusquisque
stipem Menstrua die, vel cum velit, et si modo volit, and si modo possit
apponit, nam nemo compellitur, (there was no need when they were so free of
their own accord) sed sponte consert. Haec quasi deposita pietatis sunt. And
though their Monthly stipends in regard of their great Poverty were thus termed
small comparatively to what they were before the Persecution, yet indeed they
were very large, considered in themselves, as by the same Authors following
words in this Apology, c. 42. appears, Plus nostra misericordia insumit
vicatim, quam vestra Religio templatim: they bestowing more in a Liberal free
way of Christian Charity in every Village toward their Ministers and Poor,
than the wealthy Pagan Romans did in their Temples and Sacrifices for the
Maintenance of their Paganism. In the 9th. general Persecution of the
Christians about 273 years after Christ, or before, The Ambrose Offic. l. 1. c.
41. Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 92, 93.
Governor of Rome told Saint Lawrence the Martyr (Archdeacon to Pope Xistus
the 2d. and Treasurer of the Christians Oblations for the Ministers Maintenance
and Poors relief) that the common Report then was, bow the Christians did
frequently sell their Lands, and disinherit their Children (like those in the
Acts) to enrich the Ministers, and relieve the Poor, bringing thousands of
Sestertii at a time to St. Lawrence, out of the sale of their Lands, so as
their Treasury was so great that he thought to seize on it for a prey: Which
their bountiful Liberality Pr. Steph. Him. 2.
Prudentius thus poetically expresses, Offerre fundis venditis
Sistertiorum Millia,
Addicta Avorum praedia
Faedis sub auctionibus,
Successor exhaeres gemit
Sanctis egens Parentibus,
Et summa pietasli creditur
Nudare dulces heroes.
What need then any Law to compel the Christians to pay Tithes or Ministers
dues, when in the heat of Persecution, they were so bountiful to them and the
Poor as thus voluntarily to contribute their whole Estates for their support?
Whose President if the Cavillers against our present penal Laws, Ordinances for
Tithes would imitate, no Minister nor other voluntary Tith-payers would oppose
their repeal. And though in these Primitive times of Persecution, the
Christians being spoiled of their Lands and Possessions, could not pay Tithes
in kind in most places, but were necessitated to such voluntary Contributions
as these, yet without all peradventure they held the payment of Tithes to
Ministers in kind, a Divine Moral Duty, and in some places, and at some times
(when and where they could) did voluntarily pay Tithes as a Duty for their
Maintenance without any coercive Laws or Canons, upon the bare demand or
exhortation of their Ministers, by virtue of Gods own Divine Laws, as is
undeniable by Irenaeus, l. 4. c. 34. who records, That the Christians in his
time (being but 180. years after Christ) did not give less to their Ministers
than the Jews did to their Priests by the Law of Moses, who received the
consecrated TITHES of their people, but more, Designing omnia quae sunt
ipsorum, all they had to the Lords use, Hilariter ac liberaliter ea quae non
sunt minera: Giving cheerfully and freely those things which were not less
than Tithes, as having greater hope than they. And further confirmed by Origin,
Homil. 11 in Numeros: Saint Cyprian, lib. 1. Epist. 9. De unitate Ecclesiae,
the words of Saint Augustine, Hom. 48. Majores nostri ideo copiis abundabant,
quia Deo Decimas dabant; And the second Council of Mascin, An. 586. Can. 5.
Leges Divinae Consulentes Sacerdotibus ac Ministris Ecclesiarum, pro
Haereditaria portione omni populo praeceperunt, Decimas fructuum suorum locis
sacris praestare, ut nullo labor impediti per res illegitimas possint vacare
Ministeriis, Quas leges Christianorum Congeries legis temporibus custodivit
iutemerata. Which prove a long continued Custom and Practice of paying Tithes
to Ministers as a Divine Right and Duty, used amongst Christians long before
St. Augustins days and this ancient Council. And no sooner were the times of
Persecution past, but the Divine Right of Tithes was asserted, pressed, and the
due payment of them inculcated by St. Hilary, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Hierom,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Eusebius, Cassian, Cyril of Jerusalem, Isiodore
Pelusiota, and Caesarius Arelatensis, all flourishing within 500. years after
Christ, as Dr. Tillesly proves at large; And the people during that space
paying their Tithes freely, without any compulsion in all places, there needed
neither Laws nor Canons to enforce their payment: whence Operum, p. 278.
Agobardus writes thus (about the year of our Lord 820. when Laws and Canons
began to be made for their payment) of the precedent times: Nulla compulit
necessitas fervente ubique religiosa devotione, and amore illustrandi Ecclesiae
ultro aestuante. That there was no need of Canons or Laws to compel the payment
of Tithes, whiles fervent religious Devotion, and love of illustrating Churches
every where abounded. But in succeeding degenerating times, when (according to
Christ's prediction) the Matthew. 24.12.
love and zeal of many Christians to God, Religion, and Ministers began to grow
lukewarm, and colder than before, so as they began to detain their Tithes and
Ministers dues, then presently Christian Kings and Bishops in Ecclesiastical
and Temporal Synods and Councils, began generally in all places, to make Laws
and Canons for the due payment of them; declaring in them only the Divine
Right, Laws and Precepts of God to the People both in the Old and New
Testament, as a sufficient obligation (seconded by their bare Canons and
Edicts) without any coercion or penalty to oblige them to their due payment.
The first unquestionable Canon for the payment of Tithes I find extant, is that
of the second Council of Mascin forecited, An. 586. cap. 5. The first Law
extant made by any General Council or Parliament for the payment of Tithes, is
that of the Council of Calcuth in England, under Offa and Alfred, An. 786:
declaring their Divine Right, and enjoining their payment without any Penalty;
After which Charles the Emperor, about the year of our Lord 813. by Canons
made in sundry Councils, and in his Capitulars or Laws, enjoined the payment of
Tithes, under pain of being enforced to render them by distress, upon
complaint, and some small penalties. Since which time many Laws and Canons were
made in our own and foreign Realms till our present times, for the due payment
of Tithes under sundry penalties, which because collected by Sir Henry Spelman
in his Councils, Mr. Seldom in his History of Tithes, Bochellus Decret. Eccles.
Gal. l. 6. Tit. 8. De Decimis, Fridericus Lindebrogus Codex Legum Antiquarum,
Surius, Binius, Crab, Lindwood in their Collections of Councils, and sundry
others; I have therefore only given the Reader a brief Catalogue of the
principal Civil laws both at home and abroad, for the due payment of them;
reciting more at large but what others for the most part have omitted, and are
not vulgarly known, giving only brief hints upon some of the rest in my third
Chapter. Whither I refer the Reader for further satisfaction in this Objection;
and shall conclude of penal Laws as Seneca does of Fates: Fata volentes ducunt,
Nolentes trahunt: those who will not willingly pay their Tiths must and ought
to be compelled thereunto by penal Statutes:

The second Objection is, Object. 2.
That the payment of Tithes is against many men's Judgments and Consciences:
Therefore it is both Unchristian, Tyrannical, and Unjust, to enforce them
thereunto.

I answer, Answ.
1. That the payment of Tithes being not only warranted but commanded in and by
the Old and New Testament, and the constant practice of Christians in all Ages,
Churches, there neither is, nor can be the least pretense of Conscience, for
the non-payment of them. Therefore this pretext of Conscience is in truth
naught else, but most desperate Vnconscionableness, Malice, Obstinacy,
Peevishness, Covetousness, Impiety, or secret Atheism, worthy to be reformed by
the severest Laws and penalties.

2ly. All that Conscience can pretend against their payment as Tithes, is only
this Anabaptistical Devise, and loud Lie of Can and others; That the payment
of a precise Tenth part of men's increase to their Ministers is Jewish or
Antichristian, and so unlawful: both which I have unanswerably refelled.
Therefore this can be no ground or Conscience for any to detain them. But if
any scrupulous Consciences be not satisfied in this point, let them either pay
their Ministers the Moitie or 9. parts, or the 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9. part of their
annual increase, neither of which is Jewish or Antichristian; or else let them
sell all their old or new purchased Lands, Houses, Possessions, Goods they
have, and bestow them on the Ministers and Poor, as the forecited Primitive
Christians did, whom they pretend to imitate, and then they may satisfy both
their Consciences and Ministers too, without the least difference, coercion,
suit or penalty of our Laws.

3ly. Many of these very Objectors, pretending Conscience, as Soldiers or
Sequestrators, have made no Conscience to enforce thousands of Parishioners of
late years throughout the Nation to pay their Ministers Tithes to themselves
for pretended Arrears or sequestered Goods, and exacted Monthly contributions
out of Ministers Tithes to pay the Army, without any scruple of Conscience,
levying them by distress and armed violence, when detained. If then they can
enforce others thus to pay Tithes to themselves, and those to whom they were
never due by any known Law of God or Man: With what Conscience can they detain
them from our Ministers, to whom they are due by all divine and human laws, or
condemn the enforced payment of them from themselves, who have so violently
extorted them from others?

4ly. If any Ministers or others plead the payment of our late heavy monthly
Taxes, Excises, Impositions, Ship-mony, far exceeding the old, to be against
their Conscience, as being imposed by no lawful Parliamental Authority,
repugnant to all our Laws, Statutes, Liberties, Privileges, Protestations,
Covenants, Records, Votes of Parliament, employed to shed Seas of innocent
precious Christian blood, to maintain unchristian bloody wars against our late
Protestant Brethren in Covenant and Amity, they know not upon what lawful
Quarrel, to support an arbitrary Army Government, Power to domineer over them,
to subvert our old Fundamental laws, Parliaments, Governors, Liberties, Peace,
Elections, Trials, the Great Charters of England, foment Heresies, Sects,
Schisms, and carry on the Plots of the Pope, Jesuits, Spaniard, French, to
ruin our Realms, Church, Religion, and pay many disguised Jesuits and Popish
Priests secretly lurking in all places under the Mask of listed Soldiers (as
most wise men conceive) to perpetuate our wars, destroy our Ministers and
Nation by endless wars and Taxes. All these, with other such weighty grounds of
Conscience, Law, Prudence, (which See my Legal Vindication against illegal
Taxes, and Humble Remonstrance against Ship-mony.
some have insisted on and pleaded) can no ways exempt them from violent
Distresses, Quarterings, Penalties, Forfeitures, Levies, by armed Soldiers,
who regard these Pleas of Conscience no more than Common High-way-men who take
men's Purses by force, and deem all public Enemies, who dare plead Law or
Conscience in this case; though the Plea be true and undeniable even in their
own Judgments and Consciences, as some of them will acknowledge to those they
thus oppress. Why then should they or any others esteem this mere pretense of
Conscience only against Penal Laws for Tithes, enforced in a less rigorous
manner, which they may with as much reason and Justice allege against the
payment of their just Debts, Land Lords Rents, and all other dues from them to
God or Men?

The 3d. Objection is, Object. 3.
That Tithes are pure Alms; Therefore not to be enforced by any Law. For which
the Opinions of John Wickliff, Husse, Thorp, are produced by the Anabaptists,
and Erasmus urged by some, but without sufficient ground.

Answ.
I have answered this Objection elsewhere, and shall here only declare, whence,
I conceive, this Error (that Tithes are mere Alms) originally proceeded, to
rectify mistakes of the meaning of some ancient Authors, and clear two Texts
of Scripture which some Scholars and ignorant People misapprehend.

First, I conceive this Error sprang originally from the misunderstanding of
that Text of Deutr. 14.28, 29. At the end of three years thou shall bring forth
all the Tith of thine increase THE SAME YEAR, and shall lay it up within thy
Gates. And the Levite (because he has no place, no Inheritance with thee) and
the Stranger, and the Fatherless and the Widow, which are within thy Gates
shall come, and shall eat (thereof) and be satisfied; That the Lord may bless
thee in all the work of thine hands which thou do; compared with Deutr.
26.12, 13, 14. When thou have made an end of tithing all the Tithes of thine
Increase, the third year, which is the year of Tithing, and have given unto the
Levite, the Stranger, the Fatherless and Widow, that they may eat within thy
Gates, and be filled; Then thou shall say before the Lord thy God, I have
brought away the hallowed Thing out of mine House, and also have given them
unto the Levite, and unto the Stranger, to the Fatherless and to the Widow;
according to all thy Commandments which thou have commanded me; I have not
transgressed thy Commandments, neither have I forgotten them; I have not eaten
thereof in my mourning, neither have I taken away ought thereof for any
uncleaness, nor given ought thereof for the Dead, but have hearkened unto the
voice of the Lord my God, and done according all thou have commanded me: To
which that of Amos may be referred. From which Texts some have conceived, That
the Israelites paid Tithes only every third year. 2ly. That they paid them then
not to the Levites only, but to the Stranger, Fatherless, Widows and Poor
amongst them, who had a right and share in them as well as the Levites. 3ly.
That these Texts use the phrase not of paying Tithes, as a Debt or Duty, but of
GIVING them as an Alms; and seeing they are given thus to the Stranger,
Fatherless, Widow as Alms; therefore to the Levites likewise, here coupled with
them. This doubtless was the true ground that Tithes were reputed mere Alms by
some, and not a Divine Right peculiar to Ministers.

To disperse these Mists of Error. First take notice, That neither these, nor
any other Texts in Scripture style Tithes Alms, much less pure Alms, which
men may give or retain at their pleasures. 2ly. That they expressly resolve
the contrary that they are no Alms at all in the objected sense, but a most
certain positive commanded Debt and Duty, no ways arbitrarie in the least
degree. For 1. By express positive Laws and Commandments of God often repeated,
all the particulars of this Duty are defined. 1. The Quota pars or quantity:
All the Tithe of thine Increase the same year. 2ly. The time of it: every third
year, which is the year of Tithing, at the end of three years. 3ly. The place
of Stowage: Thou shall lay it up within thy gates. 4ly. The persons who must
receive it: The Levite, Stranger, Fatherless, Widow. 5ly. The place of their
receiving it: Within thy gates. 6ly. The manner of receiing it: They shall come
and eat thereof and be filled. Secondly, which is most considerable, the Owners
and Tithe-payers had no disposing power over it for their own uses upon any
occasion or necessity. For, 1. They must bring all of it out of their Houses
as an hallowed thing. 2ly. They must make a solemn Protestation before the
Lord, that they had given it all to the Levite, Stranger, Fatherless, Widow,
and that not of their own free voluntary bounty, but as a bounden debt and
duty, according to all Gods Commandments which he had commanded them. 2ly.
That they had neither wilfully transgressed, nor negligentlie forgotten his
Commandments herein. 3. That they had neither eaten thereof in their mourning
(in times of want and distress) neither had they taken away ought thereof for
any unclean use, etc. but have hearkened to the voice of the Lord their God,
and done according to all that he commanded them: The reason of which
Protestation was, because God committed the custody and dispencing of these
three years Tithes to the Owners themselves, who might be apt to purloin and
pervert part of them to their own private uses. I appeal now to all men's
consciences, whether these very Texts do not unanswerably prove Tithes to be no
Alms or arbitrary Benevolence at all, but a most precise, positive, certain
Debt and Duty, most punctually limited in each particular? and whether that we
now usually call Alms to the Poor, be not a Debt and Duty, as Romans 15.27. with
other Texts resolve it, not a mere Freewill Gift, which we may neglect or
dispense with as we please.

Having cleared the Text as to Alms, I shall next vindicate them from the other
mistakes concerning the time of Tithing, and Persons receiving Tithes. For
which end we must know, that the Jews had four sorts of Tithes, as the
Scriptures and Hierom. super Ezech. l. 14. ad cap. 44. Josephus Antiqu. Jud. l.
4. c. 8. Chrysostom Hom. 4. in Ephesians. Sermon. 103. Sir James Semple sacrilege
sacredly handled. Joseph Scaliger Diatr. de Decimis. Mr. Seldens History of
Tithes, and Review, c. 2. Purchase Pilgrimage, l. 2. c. 7. Richard Mountague
Diatribae on Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, c. 2. and Dr. Tillesley and Mr.
Nettles Ibidem. Dr. Solaters Ministers portion, p. 17.
Marglnal Authors prove, besides their First fruits, amounting to any
proportion from the 40th. to the 60th. part amongst the Pharisees who exceeded
others in bounty,

1. Such Tithes as every of the Laity in every Tribe of Israel, who had any
comings in, or increase at all, paid unto the Levites, out of their Annual
increase that was eatable or useful for them, as a sacred inheritance,
possession and reward for their service at the Tabernacle; being the full Tenth
part of their increase, after the first fruits deducted: which Tithes they
received in kind at their respective Cities and places of abode: and if any
Tithe-payer would redeem or compound for them, he was to add a fifth part more
than they were valued at; because the Levites should not be cheated by any
undervalues, and those who redeemed them did it only for their own advantage
for the most part, not the Levites; and then they should pay for it. These are
the Tithes prescribed Levit. 27.30, 31, 32, 33. Numb. 18.20, to 32. Which the
Levites and their Households were to eat in every place, where they resided, as
their peculiar Portion and Inheritance; Wherein the Stranger, Fatherless and
Widow had no share, neither were they brought up to Jerusalem, nor put into any
common Treasury; and paid constantly every year. And these are the Tithes
which our Ministers now challenge and receive by a Divine Right, as their
standing inheritance, and the Churches Patrimony: and the Tithes intended Heb.
7.2, 5, 8, 9.

2ly. Such Tithes as the Levites paid to all the Priests, as most affirm: Or to
the High Priest only (as Lyra, Tostatus, and some other Popish Authors assert,
to justify the Popes Right to Tenths, which he challenges and receives for
the rest of the Popish Clergy in all places) for their better maintenance and
support besides their First Fruits, fees of Sacrifices, Oblations and other
Duties, being the full tenth part of the Tithes they receive from the people
(due to the whole body of the Tribe of Levi) Numb. 18.20. to 31.

3ly. A second Tenth, which the Lay Israelites were obliged by God, to pay
every year out of their nine parts remaining after separation of the first
Tenth here mentioned; and this was likewise of all their annual increase of
Corn, Wine, Oil, Cattle, Sheep, Honey, and things eatable; This Tithe was by
Gods special appointment to be carried up to the place which God should choose,
and to Jerusalem in kind, by the places that were near; and the full value
thereof in money by places more remote. Which Tithes and money were designed
for the maintenance of their public solemn standing Feasts every year, wherein
the Owners, Priests, Levites and all the people feasted together before the
Lord. The residue was laid up in Storehouses, Treasuries and Chambers together
with the First Fruits and Offerings for the maintenance of the Priests and
Levites dwelling in Jerusalem, having no abiding elsewhere in the Country, and
for those who came up thither in their Courses and served in and about the
Temple; of which some selected Priests and Levites who were faithful had the
Oversight and Distribution; not any Lay Treasurers, Officers or Sequestrators
who would be singering all our Ministers Tithes now, and reduce them to a
public Treasury, to fill their private purses with them. These are the Tithes
commanded, specified, and principally intended: Deuteronomy. 12.6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 17,
18, 19. c. 14.22, to 28. 2 Chronicles. 31.6, to 16. Neh. 10.37, 38, 39. c. 12.44. c.
13.9, to 14. Mal. 3.10. Which Tithes were abolished with the Jewish Feasts and
Temple: Yet the shadow and footsteps of them continued many years after in the
primitive Christians Love Feasts, as Mr. Mountague proves at large.

4ly. The fourth sort of Tithes which the lay Israelites paid, was that for the
Levite, Stranger, Fatherless and Widow, payable only every third year out of
all that years increase; after the separation of the forementioned Tithes for
the Levites, Priests and Annual feasts; which the Owners kept in their own
barns, and were to be eaten by the Levite, Stranger, Fatherless, and Widow,
within their gates and houses, Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29. c. 26.11, to 17.

Now in allusion to the last kind of Tithes, St. Ambrose Sermon in die
Ascentionis, St. Jerome in Mal. 3. St. Augustine, Sermo: 219. De Tempore, and
ad Fratres in Eremo, Sermon. 64. Caesarius Arelatensis, De Eleemosyna, Hom. 2.
Eutropius in the Life of St. Steven, c. 17, 18. The Exhortation written about
An. 700. Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 10. Agilardus Contra insulsam vulgi
opinionem de Grandine, etc. p. 155. Ivo Carnotensis, Epist. 102. The Synod of
York under Hubert, An. 1194. and some others, press the payment of Tithes to
Ministers, and giving Alms, or some part of their goods to the poor, jointly
together; and some few of them style Tithes, Tributa refectorium Animarum: The
Tribute (not Alms) of the poor souls; and tell us of Tithes which God himself
has commanded to be given to the poor. But this they intend not, of the first
sort of Tithes due to the Ministers of God; but of a Tenth of their remaining
Annual increase after the Ministers Tithes first paid; as most of them expressly
declare. viz. Hierom. on Mal. Saltem Judaeorum imitemur exordia, ut pauperibus
partem demus ex toto: and Sacerdotibus and Levitis Honorem debitum et decimas
referamus, De sua particula (not the Ministers) Pauperibus ministrare; And the
English Synod of Calchuth, An. 786. with Capitularia Caroli Magni, l. 6. c. 29.
most distinctly; Decimas ex omnibus fructibus and pecoribus terrae annis
singulis ad Ecclesias reddant Et De novem partibus que remanserint eleemosynas
facient. So as there is nothing in Scripture or Antiquity rightly understood to
prove Tithes to be pure Alms, as some have erroniously fancied.

The second ground of this Opinion, that Tithes were Free and pure Alms, was
the frequent Grants, Donations and Consecrations of Tithes and Portions of
Tithes by several Lords of Manors and Lands by special Charters yet extant,
recited in Mr. P. 299, 304, 306, 312, 314, 315, 316, 317, 331, 333, 336, 337,
341, 345, 346, 371. and elsewhere. Dr. Tillesley his Animadversions on Mr.
Seldom, c. 11, 12, 13. Littleton, chap. 6. F^ankalmoign and Cooks Institutes
thereon: Petrus Damianus, l. 2. Epist. 14. Vt copiosiora in paupere^ alimenta
perficiant, dantur in Monasteriis and Eremitis DECIMAE Quorumcumque proventuum,
etc.
Seldens History of Tithes between the year of our Lord 1060. and 1250. (in the
darkest times of Popish Superstition) to Abbeys, Monks, Friars, Nuns, and
Religious Houses in eleemosynam pauperum; in liberam puram et perpetuam
eleemosynam; to be distributed by these Monks, or their Almoners to the use of
the Poor Pilgrims, Strangers, Widows, and Orphans, in general, at their
discretion, or particularly of such and such Parishes; and they supposing the
Monks to be most charitable to distribute them to the Poor; most of which
Grants or all were made by the consents of the Bishops of the Diocese and
confirmed by them, and many of them with the Assents of the Patrons and
Encumbents of the Churches. And sometimes whole Churches with their Tithes were
thus granted and impropriated to Monasteries and Monks, In jure perpetual
Frankalmoigne, to the starving of the peoples Souls, to pray for their Patrons
when deceased, and seed the Bodies of the Poor without their Souls; whence all
or most of our Appropriations and Impropriations really sprang, to the great
prejudice of Ministers maintenance, and Parishioners Souls. Upon this ground
See Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, c. 7. sect. 4. p. 165, 166, etc,
many Monks and Mendicant Friars who were no part of the ordained Ministry,
(just like our vagrant Anabaptistical and unordained Sectarian Predicants now)
to rob the Ministers and most Priests of all their Tithes, engross them into
their own hands and disposal to enrich themselves and their Monasteries, every
where cried up tithes to be Pure Alms, which every man might bestow where he
pleased, and that themselves (having renounced the world, and vowed Poverty)
were fitter to receive and dispense them than the Secular Parish Priests; and
made this Doctrine a very gainful Trade, whereby they got most of the best
Benefices of England, and a Innocent 3. Epist. Decret. l. 1. p. 203. l. 2. p.
410. Extrav. Tit. De Decimis, c. 3. Ex multis.
great part of the Tithes into their own Possession, to the great prejudice of
the Church. And not content herewith, the Premonstratenses and other Orders
procured a Bull from Pope Innocent the 3 d. about the year 1210. to exempt all
their Lands which themselves manured, and all their Meadows, Woods, Fish Ponds,
from paying any Tithes at all to Parish Priests or others; That they might
bestow them in Alms, or on the poor of their Monasteries, as they had requested
them from the Pope; as the words of the Bull attest: After which they invented
other Bulls (condemned in our Parliament by a special Act) to exempt their
Tenants likewise from paying Tithes, under the same pretext. And this is the
true ground and original of that Monkish opinion, That Tithes were pure Alms,
and that men might give them to whom they pleased: Which grant of tithes to
Monasteries, Monks, and exemptions of their Lands from paying them, upon
pretext of giving them in Alms, to the great prejudice of the Ministers (
perdenda Basilica sine plebibus, Plebes sine Sacerdotibus, Sacerdotes sine
reverentia, and sine Christo denique Christiani, Bernard Epist. 240.) was
severely censured and sharply declaimed against by St. Bernard and Hugo
Partimacensis, Epist. ad Abbatum and Conventum Nantire Monasterii after Ivo.
his Epistles, p. 245. (a most excellent Epistle against this practice) The
Council of Vienna, An. 1340. Joannis Sarisburiencis, De Nugis Curialium, l. 7.
c. 21. Petrus Blesensis, Epist. 82. Petrus Clamianensis, Epist. l. 1. Epist.
33. And the Monkish Assertors of this Doctrine, that Tithes were pure Alms, and
disposable to whom the people would; were by Ad Extr. Ti^. de Parach. c. ult.
Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, p. 166, 168.
Pope Innocent the 4 th. styled and censured in these terms, Isti Novi
Magistrique dicent and praedicant contra Novum et Vetus Testamentum: yea
Richard Archbishop of Armaugh complained much against these greedy
unconscionable Monks in his Defensorium Curatorum, for possessing the people
with this opinion, That the command of Tithes was not moral, but only
ceremonial, and not to be performed by constraint of Consciences to the
Ministers and Curates, and that what Lands or Goods soever were given by any of
the four orders of Mendicants ought to be exempted from paying Tithes to
Ministers in point of Conscience; which he refutes; from these Monks John
Wickliff, Walter Brute, and William Thorp (living in that blind Age) took up
their opinion: That Tithes were pure Alms, and that the people might give them
to whom they please, if they were Godly Preachers; and their Parish Priest,
lazy, proud, and wicked, which opinion of Wickliff was refuted by Doctrinal.
Fidei Tom. 1. l. 2. Artic. 3. c. 64, 65.
Thomas Waldensis as erroneous, and condemned in the Council of Constance. This
I have the longer insisted on, to show how Can and the rest of our
Anabaptistical Tithe-Oppugners, revive only these old greedy Monks, Friars
Tenants and practices for their own private ends and lucre; to wrest our
Ministers Tithes from them into their own hands or disposing, and exempt their
own Lands and Estates from paying Tithes, that so we may have Churches without
people, People without Ministers, Ministers without due reverence, and finally
Christians without Christ; as Epist. 240.
Bernard writes they then had by this Monkish Sacrilegious Doctrine and
practice.

The fourth Objection (much insisted on as I hear) against our coercive Laws
and Ordinances for Ministers Tithes, Object 4.
is this common Mistake, That the payment of Tithes to Ministers as a Parochial
Right and Due, was first settled by the Popish Council of Lateran, under Pope
Innocent the 3 d. An. 1215. before which every man might freely give his
Tithes, to what Persons or Churches he pleased; Therefore it is most unjust,
unreasonable to deprive men of this liberty, and enforce them to pay Tithes to
their Ministers now by ^uch Laws and Ordinances.

I answer, That this is a most gross Mistake of some ignorant 7 E. 3. f. 5. 44
E. 3. f. 5. 10 H. 7. f. 18.7. 6 Dyer 84.8. Cook 2 Report, f. 44. b.
Lawyers, and John Voice, p. 13.
Can; For in the Canons of this Council, there is not one syllable tending to
this purpose, as I noted above 20 years since out of Binius and Surius in the
Margin of Sir Edward Cooks 2. Reports, fol. 446. where it is asserted; which
error he expressly retracts in his 2d. Institutes on Magna Charta, Surius
Council. Tom. 3. p. 751.
f. 641. The words of the Council, Can. 56. Plerique (scut excipimus Regulares,
and Clerici Seculares interdum) dum Domos locant vel Feuda concedum in
Prejudicium Parochialium Ecclesiarum, pactum adjiciunt; ut Conductores and
Feudatorii Decimas eis solvant, and apud eosdem elegant Supremam: Cum autem id
ex avaritie radice procedat, pactum hujusmodi penitus reprobamus: Statuentes,
ut quicquid fuerit ratione hujusmodi pacti praeceptum, Ecclesiae Parochiali
reddatur.

By which Constitution it is apparent, First, that Parish Priests and Churches,
had a just Parochial Right to the Parishioners Tithes within their Precincts
before this Council, else they would not have awarded restitution to them of
the Tithes received; and that they had so ordered and decreed it by sundry
Councils and Civil laws some hundreds of years before, is apparent by the 2.
Council of Cavailon under Charles the Great, An. 813. Can. 19. Synodus
Ticimensis under Lewis the 2d. An. 855. The Council of Mentz under the Emperor
Arnulph, An. 894. Can. 3. The Council of Fliburg, An. 895. Can. 14. The Decree
of Pope Leo the 4th. (attributed to Gelasius by some) about the year 850. The
Council of Worms and Mentz (about that time or before) cited by Gratian, Cause.
16. qu. 1. The Council of Claremont under Pope Urban, An. 1095. (these abroad)
and at home in England, The Ecclesiastical Laws of King Edgar, An. 967. c. 1,
2. The Council of Eauham under King Edgar, An. 1010. and his Laws near that
time, c. 14. and the Council of London under Archbishop Hubert, An. 1200. (15
years before this of Lateran.) All which enjoin the people to pay their Tithes
to their own Mother-Churches where they heard divine Service, and received the
Sacraments, and not to other Churches or Chapels at their pleasures, unless by
consent of the Mother-Churches. Hence Petrus Blesensis Archdeacon of Bath,
about the year 1170. (45. years before the Council of Lateran) in his 62.
Epistle writes thus to the Praemonstraticatian Monks, who procured an Exemption
from paying Tithes out of their Lands, That their Lands were obnoxious to
Tithes, before they became theirs, and were paid hitherto, not with respect of
Persons, sed ratione Territorii: but by reason of the Territory and Parish
Precincts. And Pope Innocent the 3d. his Decree dated from Lateran, An. 1200.
(mistaken for the Council of Lateran) cited in Cooks 2 Instit. p. 641. was but
in confirmation of these precedent Authorities.

2ly. The abuses complained against and reformed by this Council, was not the
lay Parishioners giving away of their Tithes from their own Ministers and
Parish-Churches at their pleasures (not a word of this) but a New minted
practice of most covetous Monks, Religious Houses, and some secular Clerks, to
rob the Parish-Churches and Ministers of all the Tithes of the lands held of
them, by compelling their Tenants and Lessees by special covenants in their
Leases and Bonds, to pay their Tithes arising out of their Lands, only to
themselves and their Monasteries: not to their Parish Churches as formerly;
which the Pope and this great General Council resolve, to proceed merely from
the root of Covetousness, (let Can and his Comrades observe it, who pretend
Conscience to be the ground) whereupon they condemn, reform, this practice,
null the Covenants, Bonds, Deformations, and decreed Restitution of all profits
by these Frauds to the Parish-Churches. And was not this a just, righteous and
conscionable Decree, rather than an Antichristian and Papal, as Can
Magisterially censures it?

3ly. Admit the Parochial Right of Tithes first settled in and by this Council
(which is false) yet being a right established at 438. years since, confirmed
by constant use, Custom, Practice ever since allowed by the Common law of
England, ratified by the Great Charter of England, chapter 1. with sundry other See
Rastals Abridgement, Title Tithes, and the Ordinances for Tithes. Lindwood,
provinc. Constit. l. 3. Tit. De Decimis. Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, chapter 8.
S^atutes, Acts of Parliament, Canons of our Councils and Convocations; and
approved by all our Parliaments ever since, as most just, expedient, necessary:
Yea settled on our Parish Churches by See Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, p. 320,
322, 338, 346, 350.
original Grants of our Ancestors for them, their Heirs and Assigns for ever,
with general warranties against all men, with special Execrations and
Anathemaes denounced against all such who should detain or substract them from
God and the Church, to whom they consecrated them for ever; and that as sacred
Tribute reserved, commanded by God himself, in the Old and New Testament as a
badge of his Universal Dominion over them and their Possessions, held of him as
Supreme Landlord; as the Hoveden Annal. pars posterior, p. 828. Lindwood,
Provinc. Constit. l. 3. Tit. De Decimis.
Council of London under Archbishop Hubert, in the 2d. year of King John, with
another Council under Archbishop Replain, 3 E. 3. The Council under Archbishop
Stratford with others resolve. There neither is nor can be the least pretext of
Justice, Reason, Prudence, Law or Conscience for any Grandets in present Power,
by force or fraud, to Null, Repeal, Alter this Ancient Right and unquestionable
Title of our Ministers to them now; and set every man loose to pay no Tithes at
all, or to dispose of them how and to whom they will at their pleasure, to
destroy our Churches, Ministers, Parishes, and breed nothing but Quarrels and
Confusions in every place and Parish at this present, when all had now need to
1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
study to be quiet, and to do their own Business; and not to disturb all our
Ministers and others Rights without any lawful call from God or the Nation.
Which unparalleld incroachment on our Ministers and Parish-Churches Rights, if
once admitted, countenanced, all the people in the Nation by better right and
reason may pull down all the Fences and Enclosures of Fields, Forests, or
Commons made since this Council; deny, substract all Customs, Impositions,
Duties, Rents, Payments public or private imposed on, or reserved from them
since that time by public Laws, or special Contracts, and pay all their Rents,
Customs, and Tenure-Services, to whom and when they please; which our Grandy
late Army-Purchasors of Kings, Queens, Princes, Bishops, Deans and Chapters
Lands, with other Opposers of Tithes may do well to consider for their own
Advantage and Security, their Titles to them being very puny, crazy,
disputable, in comparison of our Ministers to their Tithes.

Now whereas Hist. Angl. p. 4.
Thomas Walsingham, Randal Higden a Monk of Chester in his Polichronicon, and
Henry Abbot of Leycester write; that the general Council of Lions (in France)
under Pope Gregory the tenth, An. 1274. Decreed; (what others ignorantly
attribute to the Council of Lateran aforesaid, An, 1215.) Vt nulli homini
deinceps liceat decimas suas ad libitum, ut antea, liceat assignare, sed
matrici ecclesiae omnes decimas persolverent: Which seems to imply, that before
this Council every man might give his Tithes from the Mother Church to whom he
pleased, notwithstanding the Council of Lateran and Innocents Decrees.

I answer, 1. That there was no such Canon made in this Council, as these
ignorant Monks mistake, which is undeniable by the Acts and Canons of this
Council, printed at large in Binius, Surius, and other Collectors of Councils;
but only one Canon, against Clergy-mens alienation of the Revenues of the
Church; and another against the Usurpation of the Churches Revenues by Patrons
in time of their vacancy: which have no affinity with that they mention; which
if true, then that which Can and others object, that the Council of Lateran
made this Inhibition, and took away this Liberty of disposing Tithes at
pleasure from the Parishioners, is false, as I have proved it.

Secondly, That from this mistake of these Monks it was (as Mr. History of
Tithes, chapter 7. p. 147, 148.
Seldom probably conjectures) that William Thorp ignorantly affirmed, that one
Pope Gregory the tenth first ordained new Tithes first to be given to Priests
now in the new Law. John Can to manifest his great Ignorance both in History
and Chronology, in his Second Voice from the Temple, p. 13, 14. Writes thus.
Before the Council of Lateran, which was under Innocent the third, any man
might have paid his Tithes to any Ecclesiastical person he pleased; but by that
Council it was decreed, That Tithes should be paid to the Parochial Priest:
(which I have proved a gross Forgerie) and then he adds, William Thorp says,
That Pope Gregory the tenth, was the first, that ordained Tithes to be paid to
Priests, in the year 1211. Fox, p. 494. Wherein, 1. He mis-recites Thorps
words, who speaks not of Tithes in general, but only of New Tithes: not
anciently paid by the Jews, nor prescribed to them by God. And is this square
dealing? 2ly. He subjoyns the time (which Thorp and Master Fox do not,)
referring this Decree of Gregory the tenth, to the year 1211. which was four
years before the Council of Lateran, by his own Confession and falls within the
Popedom of Innocent the third, and is no less than 63. years before the Council
of Lions under Gregory the Xth. and his Papacy; there being no less than seven
Popes intervening between this Innocent and Gregory, as Platina, Onuphrius, in
their Histories of Popes lives, and Binius, Spondanus, Oxenetius, Matthew
Westminster, the Centuries of Magdenburg, Mr. Fox himself and Heylin affirm.
And most certain it is, that neither this Pope Gregory, nor the Council of
Lions under him, nor of Lateran under Innocent, made any such Decrees
concerning Tithes, as Can here boldly asserts; and with these two Forgeries,
he most impudently concludes, The payment of Tithes is Popish, nothing more
certain, (when as nothing is more false or fabulous) and so within the 2d.
Article of the Covenant of the two Nations (nothing more untrue, both in the
intentions and explanations of the Makers and Takers of that Covenant, as their
several Ordinances for Tithes both before and after it demonstrate) which many
have sworn (not he nor his Consederates, or else perjured with a Witness, if
they have done it, in every clause thereof) to endeavor the extirpation of
Superstition and all kind of Popery, (therefore of all Monkish, Popish
Substractions of, and exemptions from payment of Tithes to their Parochial
Ministers fore-recited, invented, granted by Popes, and real Popery) And
therefore as it is a case of Conscience (for those who have taken the Covenant
to pay Tithes, not for any man whatsoever, especially Covenanters to retain
them) so men ought to be careful either how they press it, or practice it. So
this Father of Lies and Forgeries concludes against all Truth and Conscience,
and dares aver to those he styles, (let himself determine QUO JURE) The Supreme
Authority of the Nation, The Parliament of the Commonwealth wealth of England,
to engage them sacrilegiously to rob all our Ministers both of their Rectories,
Tithes, Ministry at once; to starve and famish (they are his own uncharitable
Anabaptistical words, p. 1, 2.) These Antichristian Idols, which if they
neglect speedily to do, he more than intimates (in his Epistle to them, and let
them and all others observe it) the Lord (you may guess whom he means) shall
lay them aside, as despised broken Idols and Vessels in whom his Soul has no
pleasure: like those who sat there before them: just John of Leydens Doctrine
and practice.

It is storied of Sacrilegious Philip of Macedon (by Hist. l. 16, 17. Dr. Usher
Annals Eccles. Veteris Testam p. 516, 525.
Polybius and others) In aras et templa saeviit, ipsos etiam Lapides
infringens, ne destructas aedes posthac restitui possint, and that to raise
moneys to pay his all-devouring Army; and of Dicaearchus (his Atheistical
General, as impious as his Sovereign) that returning victoriously from Sea, he
built two Altars, one to Impiety, the other to Iniquity, and sacrificed to them
as to Gods. Certainly Voice from the Temple, Epist. Ded. and p. 23. If they
were razed to the Ground IT WOULD DO WELL.
John Can, who would have all our Churches razed to the ground, and not a
stone of them left upon a stone unthrown down, that they might never be built
again, (the true Voice of a Son of Edom and Psalm. 137.7, 8.
Babylon) and all our Ministers Rectories, Tithes, Food and Maintenance,
whereby they are fed and kept alive, taken away by the Magistrates, (and that
to maintain the Army and Soldiers, as some design) would be a very fit
Chaplain for such a Sacrilegious King and General; and a fit Priest or Minister
for these two infernal Deities of Impiety and Iniquity, the only Gods, which
too many pretended Saints and Anabaptists really serve, worship in their
practice. But let Can with all his impious, unrighteous, seduced Disciples,
Patrons, remember that Blessing which dying Moses, that man of God, (a better
President, General for Christians to follow, than these Pagan Atheists)
bestowed on the tribe of Levi ( As is evident by compa^ing it with Isay 56.6,
7, 8. c. 61.1, to 11. c. 66.18, to 24. Jer. 33.15, to the end.
extending to all true Ministers of the Gospel now) with his bitter imprecation
against all who invaded their Substance, Function, or rise up against their
Office, recorded thus for their shame and terror, Deuter. 33.1, 8, 9, 10, 11.
This is the Blessing wherewith Moses the MAN OF GOD blessed the Children of
Israel before his death. And of Levi he said, Let thy Vrim and thy Thummim be
with thy holy one: for they have observed thy word, and kept thy Covenant. They
shall ( or let them) teach Jacob thy Judgments, and Israel thy Law: They shall
put Incense before thee, and whole burnt Sacrifice upon thine Altar. Bless O
Lord his Substance, and accept the Work of his hands: Smite through the Loins
of them that rise up against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not
again. Which I shall recommend to John Can for his next Text, when he
preaches before his Fraternity of Anabaptistical Tithe-Oppugners, and
Church-Robbers; to all injurious Substracters of their Ministers Tithes, and
professed Enemies to their Calling. And so much for the third Proposition.

CHAP. IV.
I Now march to the 4th. Proposition, Proposition 4.
That our Ministers Tithes are really no Burden, Grievance or Oppression to
the People; but a just ancient charge, debt, annuity or duty, as well as their
Landlords rents, or Merchants poundage. That the abolishing of them, will be no
real Ease, Gain, or advantage to Farmers, Lessees, and the poorer sort of
People (as is falsely pretended) but only to rich Landlords and Landed-men, and
a loss and detriment to all others.

There have been diverse clamorous Petitions of late against Tithes, subscribed
by many poor People, Laborers, Servants, Apprentises, who never were capable
in their Estates to pay any (not by the Nobility, Gentry, and Freeholders of
the Nation, or the generality of those whose Estates are most charged with
them, who repute them no Burden nor Grievance, and desire their continuance) as
if they were the very Bonds of Wickedness, the heavy Burdens and Yoke, which
God himself The Kentish Petition against Tithes, John Can, Voice from the
Temple, and others.
by an extraordinary Call, has called forth some in present Power speedily to
loose, undo and break, Isay 58.6, 7. to which they allude, and much insist on,
when as it is most clear, That this perverted Text was never once intended of
Tithes, which God himself imposed on his people, as a just reserved Rent and
Tribute due unto himself and his Ministers, and adjudgeth it plain Mal. 3.8, 9.
ROBBING OF GOD to substract, much more then to abolish, and those who press
the abolishing of Tithes from this Text, may with much more color urge it
against all Landlords Rents, Annuities, Tonnage, Poundage, the ancient Customs
of Wool, Woolfels, Leather, Tin, Lead, which they and their Ancestors by
their Tenures and our known Laws have paid time out of mind: and press those
in power to expunge these Texts out of the very Gospel, as Apochryphal and
burdensome, Mat. 22.21. Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and unto
God the things that are Gods (a clear Gospel-Text for the payment of Tithes,
which are Gods own Tribute and Portion, Levit. 27.30, 32. Mal. 3.8, 9.) and
Romans 13.7 Render therefore to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due,
Custom to whom Custom, etc. against both which they directly Petition, as the
premises demonstrate. This calumny and wresting of Scripture being removed, I
shall thus make good the first Branch of the Proposition.

I have already manifested by undeniable Antiquities, Laws, Records, That
Tithes were freely given to and settled on our Church and Ministers, by our
pious Kings Munificence, Charters, Laws, with the general applause and consent
of all the Nobility and People, upon the very first setlement of Religion in
this Island, many hundred years before we read of any public Taxes for Defense
of the Realm, or maintenance of the Wars by Land or Sea, the first whereof
was Matthew Westminster. and Florentius Wigorniensis. An. 983. See my Humble
Remonstrance against shipmoney p. 19, 20, 21.
Dane-gelt (first imposed by common consent of the Lords in Parliament, An.
983.) or before the antientest yet continued Custom on Wool Woolfels and Skins
exported, first granted by Parliament in 3 E. 1. Anno Dom. 1276. at least 500.
years after the first extant grant, Law and setlement of Tithes in perpetuity,
as a Divine Duty, Rent and Service for the necessary maintenance of Gods
Ministers and public Worship. This most ancient, annual Rent, Charge or
Tribute unto God, has inviolably continued in all public Changes and
Revolutions of Church and State; Britons, Saxons, Danes, Normans, English,
Papists, Protestants, Conquerors, Invadors, Right Heirs, and Lawful
Purchasers, Intruders, Disseisers, Lessees of all sorts, whether Public
Persons or Private, maintaining, confirming, rendering their Tithes
successively, as a Divine and Sacred Quit-Rent due to God, wherewith they came
charged into the world, till they departed out of it; laying down this for a
Principle of Divinity, Law, Equity; Spelman. Council. 610.
That God alone has given to every Man the Lands and all he holds and
possesses, whereby he gains his food and living; and therefore out of the Land
and Trade, whereby every one gets necessary supply for his body, he ought to
contribute a Tenth and Tribute toward the Service of God, and Salvation of his
Soul, much better than his Body; as Augustine in his 229. Sermon. Tom. 10. and
the Ancient Saxon Canons of an uncertain time and Author resolve. There was no
Purchaser, Heir, Inheritor, Farmer, Tenant, or Lessee of Lands in our whole
Nation, that paid Tithes out of it, since Tithes first settled in this Kingdom;
but he inherited, purchased, took and held his Lands charged with Tithes;
Whence our Cooks 2d. Report, The Bishop of Winchesters case. Summa Angelica.
Tit. Decima.
Law Books resolve, That no Layman can by the very Common Law of England,
allege any Custom or Prescription, for not paying Tithes; but only a Modus
Decimandi in recompense of his Tithes; which he may in some cases plead,
because grounded on some ancient Contract and a valuable consideration in Lieu
of Tithes. Moreover, as all Men took their Purchases, Farms, Leases or
Inheritances, by Descent thus charged; so this charge was universally known to
all Purchasers, Lesees, and the full annual value of the Predial Tithes they
pay out of their Lands, or Leases, abated them in their Purchases, Rents,
Fines, by the Venders and Lessers, of purpose to defray the public necessary
annual Charge; which if the Lands had been Tithe-Free, had been proportionably
raised, to the common value of the Tithes, in the Purchase-Moneys, Fines, or
Rents; and will be so by every Seller of Lands, and Landlord, when ever Tithes
be suppressed. This being a clear undeniable Truth, which every rational man
must subscribe to; it is certain, no person this day living, complaining or not
complaining against Tithes, can in Verity, Equity, Justice, Reason, repute or
call them, either an unjust or oppressing Yoke, Bond, Burden (as many
Ignoramusses do, without sense or reason) nor any burden or charge at all to
him, since he had, or rather has the full annual value of them allowed him in
his Purchase, Fine, or Rent, by him that sold or leased his Lands unto him. And
although it be true, that in such Tithes as the Earth does not naturally
produce without labor (as it does Grass, Wood, Fruits,) viz. Corn, Hops,
Saffron, Woad, and the like, the Minister enjoyes the Tenth of the Husbandmans
increase, seed, labor and costs in tillage and improvement (the great
Objection against Tithes as an Heavy Burden, and Oppression) yet all this
pretended great cost and charge (except only in Cases of Improvements) was
altogether, or for the most part allowed and defalked in the Purchase, Rent, or
Fine; which if Tithe-free would have For which there is suffient Allowance
given in case of mere Heath and Baren grounds by the Stat. or 2 E. 6. c. 13.
been, (and when made Tithe-free, will be) raised to the full value of the
Tithes, even one years purchase more in ten sales, and 28. Rent more in every
pound each year upon Leaser, as all understanding men knowing what belongs to
Purchases, Sales of Lands or Leases must acknowledge. And that Farmer,
Purchaser, or Improver of Lands, who deems not his faithful Ministers Prayers,
Preaching, Pains, and Gods blessing on his Seed, Crop, Estate, Soul, Family,
See Augustine, Sermon. 219. Mal. 3.8, 9, 10, 11.
promised and entayled to the true payment of Tithes, and are only procured by
his Ministers prayers, without which his seed, crop, and all his estate would
be blasted with a Curse, and amount not to a tenth part, of what he now enjoys
by Gods promise and blessing by paying Tithes, and his Ministers prayers;
deserves not the name of a rational man, much less of a Christian; and can
expect nothing but Gods curse upon all he sowes, plants, enjoyes, instead of a
blessed Crop or Harvest. All which considered, I appeal to any Christian, or
rational man's Conscience, whether Tithes be any such heavy, oppressing,
intolerable, discouraging Yoke, Bondage, Burden, Oppression as some now
declaim them, which Gods chiefest Saints before the Law voluntarily rendered
without murmuring, and cheerfully vowed, paid unto God without a Law, and his
ancient people rendered without murmuring (though double to our Tithes now) by
an express Law, during all the Levitical Priesthood, and all our own Ancestors,
as well Protestants as Papists, have for so many hundred of years cheerfully
rendered without dispute, and all now living came charged with into the world,
and were thus allowed the value of them in their Purchases, Fines, and Leases.
And whether all Tithe payers have not far more cause to Petition against all
Old and New Rent-Services, Rent Charges, Annuities, Quit-Rents, Statutes,
Debts, wherewith they were charged by their Ancestors Grants or Contracts, and
of all the ancient Customs for Merchandise for defense of the Seas or Realm, as
intolerable oppressing Burdens, Yoaks, Grievances (as the Levellers and
Anabaptists in some late printed papers style all Customs, Tonnage, Poundage,
Impositions whatsoever, as well as Tithes, our Excises, or monthly Taxes, of
new illegal formation, as well as Imposition) than thus to murmur, complain,
Petition against their predial Tithes, our Ministers chiefest Livelihood,
except in Cities which have no Tillage, Woods, or Meadows? And so much brieflly
for proof, That Tithes are no real Grievance, Burden, Oppression, to Gods
people; especially since orignally granted and commanded by God himself, whose
Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3. and whose heaviest Yoke is easy,
and Burden light, Matthew. 11.30. And those New-Saints, who shall think otherwise
of this Divine Commandment, Yoke, and Burden of Tithes, under the Gospel, give
the Gospel it self and Christ the lie herein.

For the 2d. Branch, That the abolishing of Tithes will be no real Ease, Gain,
or Advantage to Farmors, Lessees, and the poorer sort of People, liable to pay
Tithes (other poor being not concerned in the Controversy, whose poverty it
self ex-exempts them from this surmised Grievance) but a Gain and Benefit, only
to rich Landlords and Landed-men, is apparent by the premises. For no sooner
shall Tithes be abrogated, but every Landlord will raise the full annual value
of them in his annual Rents, or Fines, and exact more for them from his poor
Tenants, Farmers, Lessees, than they might have compounded for with their
Ministers: and where then is their expected Gain, or Ease, wherewith they are
deluded by Impostors? As for the rich Landlords, they complain not of Tithes as
a Burden, and need no exemption from them: and as all predial Tithes now really
issue out of their Inheritances charged with them in perpetuity, who therefore
abate, allow the full value of them to their Farmers and Tenants in their Fees
and Rents, by way of Defalcation, they being in truth the greatest and most
considerable Tithe-payers, not the poor Farmers, or under Tenants: So their
Inheritances only will be much improved, augmented by Tithes abolishing at
least one part in ten; whiles the poor Ministers and Families shall be starved,
and the Tenants then more racked by the Landlords than by the Ministers now.
And this is the Godly goodly Ease this Saint-like Project will effect, if put
into execution, by which none will be real Gainers, in their Temporal Estate,
but those who have Inheritances; and all losers in their Spiritual Estate, by
the loss or great discouragements of their Ministers, Hebr. 13.17. This will
appear by the practice of some greedy Landlords of old, thus recited,
condemned in this Decree of the Council of Lateran under Pope Innocent the 3d
Anno 1215. In aliquibus Regionibus, etc. (I will English it, that our Country
Farmers may the better understand it,) In some Countries there are a stupid (or
mungrel) sort of people who living according to their Custom, although they
have the name of Christians (I doubt Can will say they were Anabaptists, and
his godly Predecessors) some Lords of Farms (or Lands) let them out to these
men to manure ( ut Decimis defraudentes Ecclesias, majores inde redditus
assequantur) That by defrauding the Church of Tithes, they may gain the greater
Rents from their Tenants (equivalent no doubt to their Tithes, where then is
the tenants gain by any hoped exemptions from Tithes?) Being willing therefore
to provide remedy for these prejudices, for the Indemnity of Churches, we
ordain that the Landlords themselves shall commit their Farms to be leased to
and tilled by such Persons, and in such sort, That without contradiction they
may pay Tithes to Churches with Integrity (or their entire Tithes without any
Deduction:) and if there shall be need, let them be thereto compelled by
Ecclesiastical censure, for these Tithes are necessarily to be paid, which are
due by Divine law, or approved by the Custom of the place (though not within
the Letter of the Divine law, is the Councils meaning, not any Modus decimandi
of ought within Gods law, against which no Custom can or must prescribe) Let
all Countrymen learn from hence, what they will get by abolishing Tithes, if
voted quite down. Nay let them consider well, whether the real designs now on
foot, prosecuted by some Army- Officers and Soldiers, be not to vote down
Tithes, just as they did the Crown lands (formerly Cottoni ^osthuma, p. 174,
179. The Acts of Resumption, 6 H. 3.5, 9.10 E. 2.1. 2 R. 2.6. 6 H. 4 1.2 H.
5.28, 29. 33 H. 6.2.1 H. 7.4, 5.12 E. 4.
reputed sacred, and incapable of any sale, because the common standing
Inheritance of the whole Realm to defray all ordinary public expenses in times
of peace and war, to case them of all Subsidies and Taxes whatsoever, except
one in three or four years upon extraordinary occasions, granted in full
Parliament for their safety) even to vote them only from the Ministers, and get
them into their own hands, to help pay themselves and the Army, under pretext
to ease the People in their Taxes; and yet continue their Taxes still upon them
in the same extreme (or an higher) proportion as heretofore, though they take
their Tithes to boot, without easing them one farthing in their Contributions,
as in case of the Kings, Princes, Bishops, Deans and Chaptets lands. Surely
these Officers and Soldiers who pretend so much liberty and ease to the people
in words, and still so oppress them in deeds, as not to ease them one penny in
their former unsupportable Taxes, Excises (which their Ancestors never knew nor
paid) under which they have for some years groaned, though all Ireland be now
reduced, England in peace within it self, and Scotland under Contribution, and
take upon them to impose such illegal Taxes now without any Parliament by their
own Super-Regal Authority, transcending all Presidents of our Kings and their
Councils out of Parliament, can never be presumed, to tender their Ease and
Gain so much, as to permit them or their Landlords, to put up into their own
private Purses so great and constant an Annual Revenue as their Tithes amount
to, unto which they have neither legal Right nor Title, but will appropriate it
to themselves (as they have done Church-Land and Crown-Land too) for their
future pay, or past A^rears; and some of them have confessed so much. And which
then think you will prove the better Tithe Lords, Ministers or Soldiers?

For the third Branch: That the abolishing of Tithes, will be a loss and
detriment to all others, excepting Landlords, and Landed men; I shall thus
demonstrate. 1. It will be so to all our Ministers and their families, Tithes
being their principal livelihood. 2ly. To all such Colleges, Hospitals,
Corporations, Schools, all or part of whose Revenues depend on appropriated
Tithes and Rectories, and to all their Farmers and Families. 3ly. To all
impropriators and their Lessees, which are very many; there being by Britan. p.
161, 162. Purchase Pilgrimage, p. 133.
Mr. Cambdens and others Computation, 9284. Parishes in England, whereof 3845.
(of the best value, for the most part) are impropriated or appropriated. And
the abrogation of Tithes without giving competent recompense to all
Impropriators, as well body Politics as natural and their Lessees, (which how
it can be done now Bishops, Deans and Chapters Lands devoted and voted once for
their satisfaction, are sold to pay the Soldiers, I cannot yet discern) will
ruin many Colleges, Hospitals, Schools, with other Corporations, and thousands
of families depending on them. 4ly. All Tenants and Farmers will be losers by
it, in their estates, as well as souls; For then the Landlords will raise the
full improved value of their abolished Tithes in their Fines and Rents; and if
they have a godly able Minister to instruct them for their Salvation, and
spiritual Weal, they must hire and pay him out of their own private purses
only, while their Landlords or others purse up their Tithes whereon now their
Ministers live without further charge unto them; and which is more chargable,
they must pay their Ministers share of Taxes and other public Payments to boot
out of their own purses and estates, which now are defrayed wholly by Ministers
themselves: And so instead of hoped Ease, by Abolishing Tithes, they shall but
draw a causless perpetual Charge on themselves and their Posterities, as our
New Projectors have done, by the sale of all the Crown Lands and Revenues to
themselves, and their Friends and Soldiers at easy rates, to enrich
themselves, which should have defrayed all public Ordinary Charges as they
ever have done, which now must be raised out of the peoples private purses
only, whiles these New Statesmen and Soldiers purse up and enjoy the public
Revenues which should defray them; and Tax the impoverished Nation at what
extraordinary uncessant Rates they please, and then dispose of them at their
pleasures, when levied to themselves and their Creatures; the only way to make
our Taxes both Easeless and Endless, to the peoples utter ruin, and their own
extraordinary enriching by their spoils. 5ly. The poor people in every Parish
will lose the charitable relief they receive from their Ministers, who in many
places were and still are a grest relief to the poor and impotent by their
liberal Charity and 1 Timothy 3.2.
Hospitality; now much decayed by heavy and endless Taxes, and unconscionable
Substractions of their Tithes, by Sectaries, Soldiers and lawless Covetous
Earth-wormes. 6ly. I must truly inform and tell all such Farmers, Tenants and
other deluded Countrymen, who think to gain much ease and profit, by the
abolishing of Tithes for the future, they shall soon repent of, and be doubly
burdened hereafter to the uttermost improved value of them in the augmentation
of their Taxes to the Soldiers, who will be harder new Iron Landlords,
Tithe-lords to them, than their Ministers now are. This was St. Sermo. 219.
Tom. 10.
Augustines observation long ago, recorded by Causa 16. qu. 7.
Gratian, Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 6. T^^ 3. c. 19.3^*
Bochellus with many others, and made good by many practical Experiments in
former and latter ages: His words are these. Our Ancestors did therefore abound
with plenty of all things, Because they gave Tithes to God, and rendered Tribute
to Caesar. Modo autem quia decesserit Devotio Dei, accessit Indictio Fisci.
Nolumus partire cum Deo Decimas, modo tollitur totum. Hoc tollit fiscus quod
non accepit Christus. That is, But now because our devotion to God (in paying
Tithes) is departed, the Sequestration of the Exchequer is come, (both on
Tithes and Lands) We would not pay our Tithes unto God, now the whole is taken
away (in Taxes and Sequestrations) The Exchequer sweeps away that which Christ
does not receive. And how many have found this true in our days, by
Sequestrators and Swordmen, who have sequestr^d all the Profits of their Lands,
as well as their Tithes, and the Ministers Tithes and Glebes to boot? He adds.
This is a most just Custom, that if thou will not give God his Tenth, thou
shall be reduced to a Tenth of thy Estate, Et dabis impio militi, quod non vis
dare Deo et sacerdoti; and thou shall be forced to give that to a wicked
Soldier, which thou will not give to God and thy Pious Minister. This the
whole Synod. of Lingon in France, Anno 1404. declared for, and observed as a
truth in those days. And Angelus de Clavasio in his Summa Angelica Tit. Decima
sect. 20. in his time. Petrus Blesensis, Archdeacon of Bath (who flourished
about the year of our Lord 1160.) writes thus to the Cistertian Monks, who had
then procured from the Pope, a Bull of Exemption from paying Tithes out of the
Lands and Possessions of their Order, Epist. 82. ad Cistercienses. You know
that Covetousness is the root of all Evil: yet it is said, and we relate it
with tears, that this Mother of Transgression, this Mistress of Ambition, this
Captain (or Ringleader) of Iniquity, this Wagoner of Mischief, this Cutthroat
of Virtues, this Original of Sedition, this Sink of Scandals, has dared to
break in even to your Congregation; the Votes and Tongues of all men would be
loosened into the commendation of your Sanctity, if you did not forcibly snatch
away that which is another; If you did not take away Tithes from Clergymen.
This is a Convectio (or Rapine) little enough, but that which does not a little
dishonest your life. By the Testimony of the Scriptures, they are the Tributes
of needy Souls. And what is this injurious Immunity that you should be exempted
from the payment of Tithes to which the Lands were subject, before they were
yours, and which are hitherto rendered to Churches, not out of respect of
Persons, but by consent of the Territory (mark now the just punishment upon
them, for this their Covetousness and exemption from Tithe-paying) Milites
Galliarum sibi jus Decimarum usurpant, etc. The Soldiers of France usurp to
themselves the Right of Tithes, and have no regard of your Privileges: Eas a
vobis potenter extorquent: They extort them from you by the Power of the Sword.
Adversus eos debetis insurgere, non adversus Clericos, aut Ecclesiasticos
Clericos. You ought to rise up against them, but not against Clergymen, Or the
Churches of Clergymen. Laurentius Bochellus recites and inserts it into his
Decret. Eccles. Gall. l 6. Tit. 8. c. 19. p. 966. printed An. 1609. From which
Authorities, I must tell all Country Farmers and others, now busling to exempt
themselves by the power of the Soldiers from paying their ancient due settled
Tithes to their Ministers, that they shall at last but only change the hand,
and be enforced to pay Tithes with a Witness to the Soldiers, even by
obtaining their desires. Whiles I was a late close Prisoner in Pendennys Castle
in Cornwall under Soldiers (I never yet knew why) I heard some Officers there
(who had purchased Crown Lands in Cornwall, not for Money, but Arrears of pay)
amongst other their New Projects often times peremptorily saying, We will have
all Tithes put down; Whereupon I told them, they should have done well to have
added Saint James his advise to their peremptory words and wills; which he much
censures; by saying, as they ought to do: If the Lord will, we will do this or
that, James 4.13, 14, 15, 16. Which I thought they durst or could not subjoyn
to their former words, because it was both against the will and command of God,
that Ministers Tithes should be put down, especially by Soldiers, who received
far above the tenth part of them in Monthly Taxes for their pay; and from whose
practice of receiving constant pay for their Military service, the Apostle
proves the lawfulness of Ministers Tithes and Salaries under the Gospel, 1 Cor.
9.7. After which discoursing merrily with them, I told them, I conceived the
true reason, why they and other Officers formerly for Tithes and Ministers,
were now so eager against both, was, because most of them had lately purchased
so much Crown, Bishops, Deans, and Chapters Lands charged with Tithes, that now
out of mere covetousness they would pull down Tithes, to hook them into their
own Purses from the Ministers, and though they were never purchased by them in
their particulars to improve their over cheap Purchases, to the highest
Advantage; and because others should not blame them for it, they turned
Preachers themselves, that they might claim some seeming Right to their own and
others Tithes, and save the charges of a Minister. At which they gave a silent
blushing Smile, without a Reply. Not long after, about the beginning of January
last there came a Petition ready drawn to the Castle, from the General Council
of the Army Officers, sitting at St. James's (as the Soldiers themselves
informed me) directed to those, who then were styled, The Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, and Supreme Authority of the Nation: though those who
sent it knew the contrary, the Supreme Power lay in others hands; The effect of
which Petition was, For the total Abolition of Tithes of all sorts, as a Jewish
and Antichristian Bondage and Burden on the Estates and Consciences of the
Godly; and that for the future they and the People might not be ensnared or
oppressed with Tithes, or any forced Maintenance to the Ministers, or any thing
like it in the stead thereof. This Petition all the Officers and Soldiers in
the Garrison by beat of Drum, upon the change of the Gards, were summoned three
several Mornings, (just before my Chamber window) to subscribe, together with a
Printed Letter sent from the said Council of Officers, to all the Garrisons and
Soldiers in England. Scotland, and Ireland, concerning the heads of their
Intentions and Designs then on foot (and since executed) desiring their
opinions of, and concurrence with them therein by their Subscriptions. This
Letter with the Petition against Tithes, were both read together to the
Soldiers three several mornings, who at the close every morning, gave two or
three great shouts; and afterward subscribed both the Letter and Petition. One
Ensign and two common Soldiers (who had formerly read the Worcester Petition
for Tithes, which this was to countermine) though they readily subscribed the
Letter, yet refused to sign the Petition; because they thought it very
unreasonable to take away Ministers Tithes altogether, and provide no other
maintenance in lieu of them; for which they were threatened to be turned out of
the Garrison and cashiered ere long (as I was informed by other Soldiers) all
the rest subscribed it, and diverse of them against their Consciences (as they
confessed to me) because they durst not displease their Officers, nor those who
sent it to them. Some Officers and Soldiers of the Castle (who were most
against all public Ordinances and Ministers, never resorting even to their own
meetings, and unordained speaking Chaplains in the Castle) were sent and
employed into the Country to get Country-mens Subscriptions to the Petition
against Tithes, in the name of the Well-affected Godly people in the County of
Cornwall; as if it proceeded from the Countrymen, not the Officers and
Soldiers. In which service, these active stirring Spirits were very
industrious in all parts to procure hands to this Petition, seducing diverse to
subscribe it, by misinforming them, That it was only against Impropriators
Tithes; which some honest Religious Gentlemen, substantial Freeholders, and
Grand Jurymen of the Country being informed of, drew up a Petition (in the
name of the Gentry, Freeholders, and others of the County, for the continuance
of Tithes and Ministers settled Maintenance, subscribed with many hands, and
presented by the grand Jury men to the Justices at their General Quarter
Sessions, to send up to those then in power, as the desire of the Gentlemen,
Freeholders, and the Generality of the County) which Petition (as I have been
informed) was presented accordingly by one of the Justices, by Order from the
Bench, though one of his Companions when it was delivered by the Grand Jury to
him to present to the Bench, had the impudence to tear the Petition in pieces
in open Court, before he acquainted his Associates with it; for which he
received a public check. After the Soldiers Subscription of the foresaid
Petition against Tithes in the Castle, the like whereunto (as some Soldiers
acquainted me) was sent to most other Garrisons and Counties to subscribe, (by
which we see whence such and other Petitions originally spring) I demanding the
reason (of two or three Soldiers who were ingenuous) why they were so eager
against Ministers Tithes, since they were (Spiritual) Soldiers as well as
they, and themselves received above the Tithes of their Tithes in Taxes for
their pay? Who returned me this blunt clamorous Answer, That they conceived the
true reason of it was, that their Officers intended to have the Tithes
themselves, or at least the full value of them IN TAXES for their pay; that so
the people much impoverished and complaining of their heavy Taxes, might be
able to hold out the longer to pay them, being seemingly eased by the Soldiers
in their Tithes, though they took them all out again in their increased Monthly
Contributions; and that this was the private talk and opinion they had of this
Petition amongst themselves, but they must not speak of it in public to any. I
am not apt to be suspicious of any men's Actions or Designs, unless I see some
probable grounds of Inducement; but if this be one principal Design of the
Officers and Soldiers present stickling against Ministers Tithes, to get them
into their own hands in kind, (as they have done much of the Bishops, Deans,
Chapters and Crown Lands, and the rest in moneys in their Sales for their
Arrears and pay) or at least to fetch them out of the Peoples Purses in doubled
or augmented Taxes, equivalent to their Tithes in value, or exceeding them, (as
the premises persuade me to incline to) the Ease and Gain either promised to,
or expected by the People upon the abolishing of Tithes, will prove but a mere
Delusion and Cheat at last; and instead of easing them, will only double,
treble and augment their heavy intolerable Taxes (now imposed and disposed too
by the Soldiers themselves alone, beyond all Presidents of former Ages, or
Kings of the worst edition) and continue them the longer on their broken
Estates and drained Purses. Which will be but a most just, deserved Divine
punishment on them, for detaining their Ministers Tithes, as the forecited
Authors resolve. Whereas if these Saint-seeming Officers and Soldiers, so much
pretending the peoples ease and weal, would cast off the veil of Dissimulati^n,
and really ease the people in good earnest out of Conscience and Justice, they
should do it, as I told them, by disbanding all unnecessary Garrisons (mere
useless Toys to secure the Country either from an invading or pillaging Enemy
by Sea or Land, as I have made many Garrison-Souldiers acknowledge by
unanswerable Demonstrations) disband their long-continued Army and Forces, kept
up on the peoples drained Purses to their undoing (for what ends the very
blindest men now see) put the peoples necessary defense when there is occasion
into their own hands and elected Militia, and abolish all these heavy incessant
Monthly Contributions, Taxes, Excises so long continued on them, to maintain
the Army and enrich the Officers; being the Peoples sorest Grievance (not
Ministers Tithes, which few count a Burden, and then upon mere Mistakes) which
late created Monsters, (unknown to our Forefathers, who knew none but Tenths,
Fifteenths, and Subsidies duly granted, one or two in several years) will in
short time eat out not only our Ministers and Peoples Tithes, but the remaining
Nine parts too, and leave them most miserable Beggars in conclusion, without
any Food or Provision for their Souls or Bodies: and no other Magistracy,
Ministry, Government, Laws, Liberties, Privileges, but what the Army Officers
and Soldiers, (their late pretended humble Servants, but now their Supreme
Lords and Masters) shall out of their mere Grace and Favor allow them, as
their conquered Vassals, as many of them are not ashamed even publicly in my
hearing, as well as others, for to style our own enslaved Nation, as well as
Scots and Irish. And then they shall all lament their folly when too late, in
concurring with these Swordmen to abolish their Ministers Tithes, in the old
Poets Elegy, in a like ease as ours, Impius haec tam culta novalia Miles
habebit?
Barbarus has Segetes? En quo discordia Cives
Perdurit miseros! En queis consevimus Agros!


Suidas in Leone.
Suidas records of Leo the Emperor, that when on a time he commanded Eulogius
a learned Philosopher should have a Liberal Princely Reward bestowed on him* A
great Officer and Courtier standing by said, That money would be better bestowed
for the maintenance of Soldiers. To which the Emperor replied, Nay, I would
rather it might be brought to pass in my time, That the Riches now bestowed
upon Soldiers, might be given to maintain Philosophers. And I suppose all
rational wise men now will be of the same mind concerning Ministers, and rather
they should enjoy their Tithes and Glebes, than Soldiers and Buff-Preachers.
All which out of true Affection to our Ministry and my Native Country, without
any private design to scandalize the Soldiers, I submit to all prudent men's
consideration, who by this will be able to judge of the truth of this
Proposition, without further proof.

In the A thing formerly proposed by them in their Agreement of the People,
presented to the Commons House, Jan. 20. 1649. p. 24.
Officers printed Proposals, August 13. 1652. to those they then styled, the
Supreme Power of the Nation; I found the first of all to be, The abolishing of
all Tithes, as an unequal, troublesome and contentious way of Maintenance,
respect being had therein to others Rights, but not to the Ministers: who have
the only true, proper, legal Right unto them; and this to propagate the
preaching of the Gospel. I profess when I read it in the Diurnal, I told some
Soldiers who brought it me to read in Pendennys, 1. I could not possibly
conceive, that the putting down of Ministers Tithes, should be a means to
propagate the preaching of the Gospel, but rather to suppress it, the very
Scripture resolving the contrary, Neh. 13.10, 11, 12. and 2 Chronicles. 31.3, etc.
and the Heathen Poet concluding, Quis enim virtutem amplectitur ipsam, Praemia
si tollas? 2ly. That I wondered men professing Conscience, Justice and Religion,
should have more regard to Impropriators and others Rights to Tithes, who had
no original right at all unto them, but only by Popes Bulls and Dispensations,
and did no service for them, without any special regard to Ministers Rights,
who had only a due and true Divine and human Right to them, and received them
as due wages for their Ministry: I doubted, the only cause was, because they or
some of their Friends were owners of Lessees of some Impropriations, which they
were loath to part with for the Peoples ease, or give in to the Church, without
a considerable Recompense. 3ly. That the suggestion of the unequal, troublesome
and contentious way of Tithes, was a very strange and daring Objection against
the very wisdom and Justice of God, who instituted and prescribed them to his
own chosen people: against the wisdom, justice, prudence of our own, and all
other Christian Kings, States, Parliaments, Churches, that have at first
pitched upon, and so long continued, established by successive Laws and Edicts
this way of Maintenance as most equal; rich and poor paying a Tenth alike
according to the greatness or smallness of their Estates, and the poor Farmer
and Tenant paying them out of his Landlords Estate, as allowed in his Rent or
Fine, not out of his own private purse alone, being more equal than any Taxes
or Excises for the Armies pay. As least troublesome to the Ministers at least,
who were only at the cost and trouble to carry in their Tithes at Harvest, when
cut and severed from the Crop to their hands, to prevent the trouble of
plowing, sowing, weeding, mowing, reaping, gathering, which might divert them
from their Studies and Ministry: And as little troublesome, or not
overtroublesom at least, it is to the Husbandman, who sows, cuts and makes it
up together with his own, and then only severs it out, and is not now bound to
carry it into his Ministers Barn, much less to thresh, cleanse and sever his
Corn, Wine or Oil, and other Tithes, and carry it to Hierusalem^, and the
Treasuries of the Priests and Levites at his own cost; as the Deuteronomy. 12.17, 18.
Neh. 13.12, 19. 2 Chro. 31.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Purchase Pilgrimage. l. 2. c. 7. p.
130, 131.
Israelites were obliged by God to do: which these Officers (had they lived
amongst them, and paid a second Tenth, as well as a first, and first fruits
besides) would have petitioned God himself to abolish, as a troublesome way of
Maintenance, which they could not brook, though the godly Israelites and Jews
repined not against it, but cheerfully brought up their Tithes to the Priests
Treasuries as they were enjoined. And as no ways contentious or litigious in
it self, were people as just and conscionable to pay their Tithes, there being
many Parishes in England, (and that wherein I live one) wherein I never heard
of any suit or quarrel betwixt the Ministers and Parishioners for Tithes, there
being far more suits and contentions for just Rents, Annuities and Debts
throughout the Nation than for Tithes (at least ten for one in proportion)
before these late contentious Lawless times, when many unconscionable,
unrighteous Wretches (pretending Religion, to cover their fraud, covetousness
and oppression) will pretend Conscience for not paying their very Rents, and
Debts, as well as Tithes: And such who have so little grace or fear of God as
to contend with their Ministers for their just Tithes, will be altogether
Litigious toward them, for any other Annuity, or settled way of Maintenance
that can be devised in lieu of Tithes, seeing nothing will content such
perverse and contentious Wretches, but a Liberty to pay their Ministers only
what they please, and that in conclusion shall be just nothing, as their
subsequent Petitions and present Practices now manifest to God, Angels and men.
And I doubt the Change of this ancient, known, long approved certain
Maintenance by Tithes, to any other certain or uncertain way, will create more
suits and troubles among people, than ever our Tithes did since their first
institution. This was my subitan opinion of their Proposition, when I first
read it; and shall serve for a public answer to it now, if any insist upon it
to prove Tithes inconvenient and burdensome to the People, and therefore sit to
be totally abolished.

The main Objection, Object.
I ever yet This Objection I find recited in the Council of Lingon Anno 1404.
and there Answered. Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. p. 963.
read or heard against Tithes, is this, That Tithes are a great discouragement
and hindrance to Husbandmens industry and improvements; since Ministers must
have not only the Tenths of their Lands, as they found them, but likewise of
their Crop, Labor, Industry and Improvements, which is now (writes Can and
others more largely) one of the sorest Burdens and greatest Oppressions and
Tyranny that lies upon them, and discourages many from improving the Lands to
the public prejudice.

I answer, Answ.
1. That this Objection no ways concerns Soldiers, Weavers, Tailors,
Tradesmen, Townsmen and other Mechanics, who are the most and greatest
Sticklers and Petitioners against Tithes; but only Husbandmen and Country
Gentlemen and Farmers living upon Tillage, very few of which (not one of a
thousand) ever yet petitioned against Tithes, as such a grievous Oppression (at
leastwise as a Farmer) for the burdensomness of Tithes, but only as an
Anabaptist, or other Sectary, out of hatred and opposition to our Ministers
Callings or Persons. And till the Generality or Major part of the Gentry,
Yeomanry and Country Farmers in each County Petition and declare against their
Predial Tithes as such an intolerable Grievance, no Officers, Soldiers,
Citizens, Anabaptistical Mechanics, and busybodies in other men's Callings
and Grievances which concern them not, are no ways to be heard, countenanced
or credited in this particular, by any Powers whatsoever in point of Justice or
Prudence. 2ly. The payment of Tithes, never yet discouraged any Person, either
in the Land of Canaan, England, or other Countries, (at least not any
considerable number of men, or any that had either true Wisdom, grace,
honesty, or love to God and the Ministrey) from any sort of Tillage or
improvement whatsoever out of which Tithes are paid, the gain by the good
husbandry and improvement being abundantly recompensed in the nine Parts, over
and above the Tithes. And therefore till the Objectors can make good their
allegation, by presidents of considerable number of wise, godly men and others,
discouraged from Tillage and Improvements merely by the payment of Predial
Tithes out of them, in all former ages, or of late years, to the real prejudice
of the Public, (which they can never do) this grand Objection against Tithes
must be decried, both as Fabulous and Ridiculous, yea as Scandalous: The late
Petition of the Cornish Gentlemen, Farmers and Yeomen (where such improvements
are most made to their great Charge) for the continuance of Tithes, being a
sufficient Evidence to prove it such. 3ly. It is observable, that the
Petitioners against Tithes upon this ground, are as eager See the Levelers New
Printed paper entitled, Englands Fundamental Laws and Liberties claimed, etc.
and many Petitions of late.
Writers and Petitioners against all ancient Customs, Tonnage, Poundage, and
usual moderate Impositions upon Merchandise imported or exported, for the
necessary defense of the Sea and Trading (amounting to as much upon every pound
of Merchandise, as Tithes do upon Husbandmens Tillage and Improvements, the
charges of the Freight, Transportation and Customs in foreign parts considered,
and to far more and that as a very great discouragement to Merchandise and
Trading. Which as all wise men know to be a mere fabulous untruth, contrary to
the experience of all States, Kingdoms, Republics in the World, and of Holland
it self, subsisting by Merchandise, where they pay as high Customs or higher,
than See all Acts for Tonnage Poundage and Impositions, Mr. Hackwels argument
against Impositions, Cooks 2. Instit. p. 58, 59, to 64.
our ancient Legal Merchants Duties to the State amount to, which never made
any Merchants to give over trading; (So if, when, and where rightly imposed,
managed, they are the greatest encouragements of Trade and Merchandise, by
Guarding the Seas, and securing Traders against Enemies and Pirates, the only
encouragement to Merchant-Adventurers; who must and will all give over trading,
when they cannot safely put to Sea without apparent loss of all they trade
for, by Enemies or Pirates. And therefore this clamourous Objection against
Tithes should have no more weight with Wisemen to suppress them; than their
idle clamor against all old Legal Customs, Rates and Duties for the necessary
defense of the Sea and Trade, to abrogate them altogether, to the ruin both of
our Traffic, Navy, and Merchants too that pay them. 4ly. This Objection is
directly made against the providence, wisdom, and policy of God himself, who
prescribed Tithes amongst his own people out of all their Tillage and
Improvements; and knew it would be no impediment to them, his Mal. 3.5, 10, 11,
12. See Augustine Sermo. 219.
Blessing promised to their payment of Tithes, being a greater improvement to
them in their Crops, than all their extraordinary cost and pains amounted to:
Wherefore it can be no impediment or discouragement to any real Saints good
Husbandry or Improvement now; who deserves to reap no benefit by his Labor or
Improvements, if God himself shall have no share or portion out of them for the
maintenance of his public worship and Ministers. 5ly. If there were any truth
or strength in this Objection, yet it extends not unto all tithes, but only to
such as are paid out of extraordinary chargeable Improvements; as to make mere
barren Heath, Ling and Sands, out of which no former profits naturally grew,
manurable for Corn or Pasture, Tillage and Meadows, Woods, out of which most
predial Tithes arise; So there is a sufficient remedy against this pretended
Mischief already provided in the best and strictest Statute made by the best of
our Protestant Kings, for the true payment of Tithes, at the beginning our
Reformation, when Popery was banished in the Parliament of 2 E. 6. c. 13. which
provides, That all such barren Heath, or waste Grounds, which before that time
have lain barren, and paid no Tithes by reason of the said barronness, and now
be, or hereafter shall be improved or converted into arable Ground or Meadow,
shall from henceforth after the term and end of seven years, next after such
Improvement fully ended and determined, pay Tithe of the Corn and Hay growing
on the same, and be discharged in the interim, as the words import, and our
Judges have expounded it. All which considered, this Objection must be
henceforth exploded and LEVELLED to the ground.

Now because I find a clear Design and Endeavor in sundry Anabaptists,
Officers, Soldiers, if they cannot prevail to put down Tithes upon other
pretexts, yet to rob the Ministers of them at present, if not in perpetuity,
upon this pretense, to sequester and convert them to the use of the Army, for
the pretended ease of the people in their future taxes. I shall for the cloze of
this Proposition, and prevention of this detestable impious Sacrilegious plot
against our Ministers and Religion too, propound and answer all such specious
Arguments, Pretenses, as may be produced by them to delude the people, veil
over the execrable Impiety, and take off the odium of this prodigious Villainy.

First, they may and will suggest, that they have some ancient punctual
Presidents to warrant, countenance, justify this their Project. As namely, the
practical example of Charles Martel King of France, who (about the year of our
Lord, 730. as the Marginal Gul. Malmesburiensis, De Gestis Regum Angl. l. 1. c.
4. Juocus Chron. in Carolo Simplici. Cent. Magd. 8. c. 7. and 9. Dr. Tillesly
in his Animadversions on Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, p. 64, to 69.
Authors report) having perpetual wars, and seldom or never peace in his
Kingdom, Ideo res Ecclesiarum suis Militibus in stipendium contulit maxima ex
part; did thereupon bestow the Lands, Revenues, Rents, and Tithes too (as the
Act of Restitution with others prove) of Parish-Churches, Monasteries, Bishops,
Deans and Chapters upon his Soldiers for their Pay and Arrears; for the
greatest part: And surely upon a very Godly and just reason (as John Can, and
some Army Officers will swear) thus expressed in his Decree recorded in Tom. 3.
p. 648.
Goldastus and Mr. Review, p. 466.
Seldom: ut subveniatur necessitatibus Publicis, et Salariis Militum, pro Dei
Ecclesiae and bono statu Reipublicae, and uniuscujusque propria pace
pugnantium: That he might relieve the Public Necessities, and pay and reward
the Soldiers fighting for the Church of God, and the good of the State of the
Commonwealth, and the proper peace of every one: as our Officers and Soldiers
now say they do. And is it not then most just they should have all the Lands,
Glebes, and Tithes of the Church, King, Commonwealth, and of every particular
Person too, who have fought all this while for them and their defense? To this
they may chance to add, the President of the Extravag. De Decimis, c. 10.
Joannes Sarisbur. De Nugis Curialium, l. 7. c. 21. Mr. Seldens History of
Tithes, c. 6. p. 120, 121.
Templers and Hospitalers, who being no part of the Clergy, but Religious
Soldiers, employed only to fight in the defense of the Church, were by special
Bulls and Grants of several Popes exempted from paying any Tithes at all to any
Ministers out of the Lands belonging to their several Orders, Because they
fought for the Church against her Enemies, as Turks, Saracens, and other
Infidels. Therefore there is great reason, equity all our Officers and
Soldiers who have lately fought, or are now or hereafter fighting for the
Church against her Enemies and Malignants, should be totally and finally
discharged from paying any Tithes at all out of their Old or New Purchased
Lands, Leases, Cattle, Estates, Spoils, Pay or other increase. Besides, most of
our Army Officers, and very many of the Soldiers, are extraordinarily gifted,
inspired from Heaven, and constant Speakers or Preachers Cannes 2d. voice from
the Temple, p. 24, etc.
transcending all Black-coated Ministers, yea the undoubted new Ministers and
Priests of Jesus Christ, as many deem them; So as they may be truly styled 1
Pet. 2.5, 9.
a chosen Generation, a Roy^^ Priesthood, yea Army of Priests, being Rev. 1.5.
made Kings and Priests by Christ himself to God the Father: as John Can has
published in his Voice, p. 24, 27, 28, 29. Therefore they may not only enter
into our Ministers Churches, Pulpits, and dispossess them of them (as he there
asserts and presses them to put in execution;) but be capable in right,
equity, justice, to receive all their Tithes to their own use: Nay one step
more, John Can in his Voice, p. 27. thus peremptorily concludes, I will
affirm, and abide by it; since it has pleased the Lord to draw out the hearts
of some Soldiers and others, (who were never brought up at Universities to
learning) publicly to preach, (which is not above 10, or 12. years) the People
of this Commonwealth have had more true Light and glorious Discoveries of
Christ and his Kingdom, than all the Nations Ministers ever before made known
to them, since first they took their calling from the Sea of Rome, till this
Day. On the contrary, the greatest Heresies and Blasphemies which have been in
the world have been broached by Ministers (and Scholars) whereas Laymen at the
same time have been sound in the Faith, and zealously earnest against such
abominable Doctrines. Therefore there is just ground that both our
Universities, and all Colleges for Advancement of Learning, should be
suppressed as the very poison, bane, subversion of Religion, Church and
Commonwealths, (as some Soldiers and the Anabaptists generally deem them) and
their Lands (as well as Bishops, Deans, Chapters, and Ministers Glebes and
Tithes) sold or conferred on the Officers and Soldiers, of the Army for their
better encouragement, reward and supportation, to propagate defend Religion and
the Common wealth: A design now eagerly prosecuted by some.

To which let them receive this Answer before hand, since I intend not any
future Treatise of this nature, 1. That I never read of any pious Generals,
Armies, Officers, or Soldiers in Scripture (the Gal. 6.16. 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3.
rule of Faith and Manners) that spoiled the Church or Ministers of their Lands
and Tithes to maintain their wars, or enrich, reward themselves; but we find it
expressly recorded of Genesis 14.20. Hebr. 7.2, 4, etc.
Abraham, the Father of all the Faithful, that he paid Tithes even of the
Spoils of the first Wars, to the first P^^^st we find in Scripture, unto Christ
himself, both in the Old and New Testament, for other Christian Soldiers
imitation. The like we read of 1 Chronicles. 26.26, 27, 28.
David, and all his Officers, Captains of the Army, with sundry others
forecited; whose Presidents are more obliging and commendable than Charles
Martels. 2ly. That it was the Custom, use and pious practice of many Pagan
Warlike Nations, as the Romans, Graecians, Carthaginians, Tyrians, Saxons to do
the like, who consecrated the Tenths of all their Spoils to their Idol-Gods and
Priests, as we may read at large in Mr. Seldens History of Tithes and Review,
c. 3. and in Mr. Richard Mountague his Diatribe thereon, chapter 3. Therefore they
are worse than Pagans who neglect not only to pay their Ministers the Tenth of
their Spoils, but will even spoil them of their Glebes and Tithes besides. 3ly.
It is very observable (and let our Soldiers and Officers consider it in good
earnest) That God himself specially consecrated and devoted the future Spoils,
a Sacrifice for and to himself, and all the Spoils, City of Jericho (the very
first City taken by the Israelites in the Land of Canaan) as a sacred
First Fruits and kind of Tenth for the use of his Sanctuary and Priests, in
these memorable words, Josh. 6.17, 18, 19. And the City shall be devoted, even
it and all that is therein (except Rahab and her Family and House) to the Lord,
and you in any wise keep your selves from the devoted thing, lest you make your
selves accursed, when ye take of the devoted thing, and make the Camp of Israel
a curse and trouble it. But all the Silver and Gold and Vessels of Brass and
Iron are consecrated unto the Lord, they shall come into the Treasury of the
House of the Lord. Whereupon when the City was taken, they burnt it and all
that was in it (as a Sacrifice to the Lord) But the Silver and Gold and the
Vessels of Brass and of Iron, they put into the Treasury of the House of the
Lord, v. 24. But Acban (a covetous plundring Soldier) seeing among the rich
Spoils of the City a goodly Babylonish Garment, and two hundred Shekels of
Silver, and a wedge of Gold, coveted, took and hid them in the midst of his
Tent; which so much kindled the Anger of God against the Children of Israel for
this his Trespass in these devoted things; That they were presently smitten
before their Enemies of Ai, and fled before them. Whereupon Joshua their
General and chief Governor humbling himself before God, and requiring the
cause of this ill success; God returned him this Answer, Israel has sinned,
and they also have transgressed my Covenant which I commanded them; for they
have taken of the devoted thing, and have also stolen and dissembled also, and
they have also put it among their own stuff. Therefore the children of Israel
could not stand before their Enemies, but turned their backs before Enemies,
Because they were accursed, neither will I go with you any more. O Israel thou
can not stand before thine Enemies, until thou have taken away the accursed
devoted thing from among you. Whereupon this Sacrilegious Robbery of Achan
being discovered by Lot and his own Confession; and hid stolen Plunder devoted
to God taken forth of his Tent, and powered out before the Lord in the presence
of Joshua, and all the Children of Israel: Joshua passed this Judgment against
him for his Sacrilege, Why have thou troubled Israel? the Lord shall trouble
thee this day: and all Israel stoned him with Stones, and they burned them with
fire (as a devoted Sacrifice to God) after they had stoned him with stones. And
they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. So the Lord turned
from the fierceness of his Anger. Wherefore the place is called the Valley of
Achor (that is Trouble) to this day. And when Hiel, many hundred years after in
Idolatrous Ahabs days, would needs seize upon the devoted Spoil of Jericho,
and build it again for his own habitation; he laid the Foundation thereof in
his firstborn Abiram, and set up the Gates thereof in his youngest Son Segub,
(that is, God destroyed, and cut off all his Posterity before the Gates were
set up, and the Building finished) according to the word of the Lord, which he
spoke by Joshua the Son of Nun; as we read at large, Josh. 7. throughout, 1
Kings 16.34. and Josh. 6.16. I read of Herodotus, l. 5. c. 25. Valerius
Maximus, l. 5. c. 3. Diodorus, An. 4. Olymp. 98. Dr. Usher Annals Veteris
Testamenti, p. 260.
Ataxerxes, that (in imitation of Cambyses before him) he caused some Judges
(betraying their Trusts, like See Holinshed, Speed, and others. 10, and 11 R.
2. Mr. St. John's Speech against the Shipmony-Judges.
Tresylian of old, and too many of late) to be excoriated alive, and their
Skins to be hanged up round about the Tribunals, that the other Judges sitting
upon them might have an example hanging before their eyes, what punishment the
pravity of Judges did demerit. I desire all Soldiers, Officers, and
Sacrilegious Anabaptists, would hang up these Skins and Examples of Achan and
Hiel before their eyes, recorded in sacred Writ: and then make this use and
application to themselves of them. If Achan for stealing away only a Babylonish
Garment and a few Shekles of Silver and Gold of the very Spoils of Jericho
devoted to the service or Treasury of the House of the Lord, brought so much
wrath, misery upon the whole Nation, and Camps of Israel, and such a fatal
death and exemplary punishment upon himself; and Hiel only for building upon
the ruins of the Soil of this devoted City drew down sudden Death and
Destruction upon all his Sons and Posterity; O what strange exemplary wrath,
vengeance, and judgments shall we then draw upon the whole Nation, Army, our
Souls, Bodies and Posterities to their utter extirpation, if instead of
rendering unto God and his Ministers the Tenth of our warlike Spoils belonging
of right unto them; we shall sacrilegiously rob them not only of these Tenthes,
and all other issuing out of our Lands and Estates, but even of all their other
Glebes, Rectories, Tithes, Revenues; demolish the very Churches, Houses,
dedicated to Gods worship, or turn them into Houses for us and our Posterities
to inhabit: and obstinately, yea atheistically refuse to take warning by their,
and other sacrilegious Persons tragical examples? 4ly. Let those who will
imitate Charles Martels President, remember 1. his punishment: Gul. Malmesburi.
De Gestis Regum, l. 1. c. 4. Vita Eucherii apud Surium, Tom. 1.10. F. Gratian,
Cause. 16. qu. 1. Edit. Gregoriana. Flodourdus Rhem. Hist. l. 2. c. 12. Juonis
Chron. Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, p. 51.465. Dr. Tillesley, p. 67.
Historians record, That for this his Sacrilege, he was smitten with a long and
terrible Convulsion of all his Members whereof he died in great anguish: that
Eucherius Bishop. of Orleans in a Vision SAW HIM DAMNED FOR IT; and that upon
search made in his Tomb (by an Angels Admonition) it was also confirmed for
truth, no relic of his Corpse being found therein, but only a dreadful
Serpent. Mat. (...) Flores (...) An. 853. ^. 306.
Apud Frances Carolus Martellus insignis vir fortitudinis, exactis vitae sue
diebus in Ecclesia beati Dionysii legitur esse Sepultus, sed quia Patrimonia
cum Decimis omnium fere Ecclesiarum Galliae, pro stipendio commilitonum suorum
mutilaverat, miserabiliter a malignis Spiritibus de Sepulchro corporaliter
avulsus, usque in hodiernum diem nusquam comparuit; as Matthew Westminster
stories of him. 2ly. The censure passed against him for this Sacrilegious
Robbery, by the Marginal Authors and others: especially by Agobardus Bishop of
Lions, An. 828. in his Book Bibliotheca Patrum, Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 600, 601.
De Dispensatione, and Rei Ecclesiasticae contra Sacrilegos, worthy the
reading, who thus complains, p. 269. Nunc non solum possessiones
Ecclesiasticae, sed ipsae etiam Ecclesiae cum possessionibus venundantur, etc.
Which he condemns as detestable Sacrilege execrable to God and men: By Petrus
Damianus, Anno 1060. l. 1. Epist. 11. where he gives this censure of his
practice, and others: Inter omnia vero hic mala, Illud excedit, et Diabolicam
fere modum videtur aequare nequittam. Quia pradiis in Militem profligatis, etc.
Moreover among all wicked Acts, this exceeds, and seems almost to equal the
very wickedness of the Devil, That all the Farms and Possessions of the Church
being prodigally spent upon Soldiers, insuper etiam et Decimae and plebes
adduntur in Beneficium Secularibus: Moreover Tithes and people are likewise
added and conferred on (these) Secular men for a reward: which in his lib. 4.
Epist. 12. and lib. 5. Epist. 9. he styles a great Sin, Sacrilege, and
Profanation of holy things; concluding, What is it to turn Tithes to the use
of Soldiers and Secular men, nisi mortiferum iis virus, quo pereant, exhibere?
but to give them deadly Poison whereby they may perith? Petrus Blesensis
Archdeacon of Bath: Epist. 82. and Joannis de Belith De Divinorum Officiorum
Explicatione, c. 5. write much to the same effect; making it a greater Robbery
and Sacrilege to take away Ministers Tithes, though it be by the Popes own
Bulls, than violently to take away and plunder Men's Horses as they are riding
or carting in the High way, and convert them to their proper use; as Soldiers
use to do. 3ly. Let them remember, That Charles Martels immediate Successors so
much detested both his practice and Sacrilege, that by Aventinus, Annal.
Boyorum, l. 3. p. 179. Centur. Magd. 8. c. 7, and 9. Goldastus Constit. Imp.
Tom. 1. p. 15. Dr. Tillesley Animadversions on Mr. Seldom, p. 64, to 75.
public Edicts they decreed in these terms, That the Tithes and Ecclesiastical
Lands and Goods seized upon by profane Persons, (so they styled the Soldiers
possessing them) should be all restored: and so they were accordingly, and
those Harpyes robbed of their Sacrilegious prey. Let the late Purchasers of
such Tithes and Lands remember it, and think of a possible, if not probable Act
of Resumption, in case they make no voluntary restitution.

4ly. Let them consider the large Revenues the Popish Clergy at this day enjoy
in France, amounting to above 12. Millions of Annual Rents, at a moderate
value, besides money and oblations; as Bodine, Thuanus, Hist. l. 28. Ioannes de
Laety Descriptio Galliae, c. 17, 18. record. To which I might add the
extraordinary great Revenues of the Popish Clergy in Spain, recorded by Lucius
Marineus, Siculus, Ioannes de Laet, in his Hispaniae Descriptis, cap. 20. and
Jo. Boterus in his Hist. Universalis, and of the Popish Clergy in the Kingdom
of Naples in Italy, registered by Thomas Segethus, De Principibus Italiae, p.
121. Which they still enjoy, notwithstanding their manifold Wars, without sale
or Diminution for their Soldiers pay. And will it not be an intolerable
Impiety, Sacrilege, dishonor for Protestant Soldiers, and our new Republic,
not to allow our Ministers so much as their inconsiderable remaining Rectories,
Glebes, Tithes, to support our Religion, and instruct and save the Peoples
Souls?

5ly. The reason rendered by Martel and others, That the Officers and Soldiers
deserve the Lands and Tithes of the Church and Ministers, because they fight
for the defense of the Church, is very strange, and just the self-seeking Plea
and Practice of sundry of our Officers and Soldiers at this day, scarce to be
paralleled in any Age, 1. They were raised for the Exact Collection. p. 340,
342, 376, 572, 631, 632, 641, 743. A Collection, p. 428, 8, 13, 41, 43, 44, 49,
51, 61, 64, 96, 99, 623, 696, 879. Appendix p. 15. and elsewhere.
Defense and Preservation of the late Kings Person, Posterity, and just Rights
of his Crown: Ergo in discharge of this Trust they have most justly sentenced,
beheaded the King; outed, dis-inherited his Posterity; and seized upon all the
Crown Lands and Revenues in his three Kingdoms for their own use, pay, support,
reward and inheritance. 2ly. They were raised and fought for the preservatirn
and defense of the Kingdom, Parliament, and Members Privileges, and Laws and
Liberties of England: Therefore they have justly by armed violence invaded,
subverted them all, disposed of all the Common wealth and Revenue of the Nation
to themselves and their Instruments to support themselves and their usurped
Arbitrary Power and Government over us; and may null and pull down not only our
Old, but their own New-created Parliaments, and State-Councils (as they style
them) and change both Government and Governors at their pleasure. 3ly. They
fought for the particular Defense, Peace, Safety of every man's Person and
Estate in our three Kingdoms: Therefore they may seize upon and dispose of all
their Persons, Lands, Estates at their pleasures, and impose what Taxes,
Excises, Imposts they list, and exercise a legislative absolute Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Power over them, without a lawful Parliament, to eat them quite out
of all, Lastly, They fought for our Church, Ministers, Religion: Ergo they may
subvert them all, and seize upon all Church Lands, Revenues, Rectories, Glebes,
Tithes, yea Churches and Churchyards too, for to reward, support and pay the
Army; and possess themselves of what ever our Ancestors settled on the Church
and Ministers to instruct and save the Peoples Souls, as a just Salary for
killing their Christian Brethrens Bodies, and destroying the peoples Souls and
Bodies too. Certainly the worst Enemies they fought against, would not, could
not have done worse than this, nor yet so bad. This certainly is a Devastation,
Destruction, not a Defense or Preservation, of what they were raised and paid
to protect, an Invasion and Depredation, not a Patronage and Protection: a
Remedy more destructive than the worst Disease, War, Enemy, who could but have
stripped us of no more had they conquered us, than these our new armed Defenders
of the Faith, Church, King, Parliament, Laws and Liberties have done or intend
to do, as many fear. It was John Baptists Evangelical Precept to all Soldiers
whatsoever, Luke 3.14.
Do violence to none, (in Person, Lands, or Estate; much less to Ministers
privileged by the Law of War from Violence:) and to be content with their
Wages: without seizing, sequestring, invading the Lands, Estates, Glebes,
Tithes, Persons of Ministers, King and Members or any others they fought for,
who never raised, nor waged Soldiers to deprive them of their Patrimonies,
Estates, Callings, Rights, Laws, Liberties, Privileges of Parliament,
Government, Governors, but only to secure them in the full possession of them
all. This new Martial law and practice then, is both irrational and
unevangelical, fitter for professed Thieves, Turks, and Pirates, than Christian
Soldiers; and far different from the foresaid Christian Soldiers practice in
former Ages; who as they would by no means be engaged by their Ambros. Orat. in
Julianum, and Grotius de Jure Belli, p. 35, 88.
Pagan Emperors or Generals commands to fight against any of their Christian
Brethren, choosing rather to obey God their Supreme Emperor than Men: So the
famous Grotius de Jure Belli, l. 1. c. 2. sect. 3. p. 35, 36, 88. Crantzius
Saxonitorum, l. 7. c. 16.
Thebean Legion of Christian Soldiers and their Officers under Julian the
Apostate, when he commanded them to bring forth their Arms against the
Christians, returned him this most Heroic Answer, worthy to be written in
Golden Letters, briefly, fully and elegantly expressing the Duty of every true
Christian Soldier in all Ages and Cases; Offerimus nostras in quemlibet hostem
manus, quas sanguine innocentium cruentare nefas ducimus. Dexterae ipsae
pugnare adversus Impios and Inimicos sciunt, laniare, pios et Cives nesciunt.
Meminerimus nos (and O that our Army Officers and Soldiers would remember it
likewise) Pro Civibus potius quam adversus Cives arma sumpsisse. Pugnabimus
semper pro Iustitia, pro pietate pro innocentium salute (not for Kings,
Bishops, Deans, Chapters, Ministers Lands, Revenues, Tithes, Estates, the
things now fought for:) Haec fuerunt hactenus pretia periculorum. Pugnavimus
pro fide, quam quo pacto conservemus tibi (Imperatori) Si hanc Deo nostro non
exhibemus? O that this Resolution were now engraven in every Army Officers and
Soldiers heart! our Ministers then needed not to fear the loss of their
Tithes, Rectories, Churches, nor our Universities, Colleges, Corporations, or
any other the disinheris on of their Lands, Laws, Liberties, Powers, by
Military Rapines, violences, and usurpations.

6ly. The Exemptions of the Hospitalers and Templers Lands from paying of
Tithes, was a Exttavag. De Decimis, c. 10 Mr. Seldens History p. 120, 121.
mere Papal Innovation and Devise, which Can, who pleads so much against
Tithes upon this mistake that they are Popish, and all his Confederates should
be ashamed to own and imitate: The Israelites Gods own people during their
possession of Canaan, had many foreign and Civil wars in most of their Judges,
See the Book of Judges, Kings, Chron. Maccabes, Josephus, Paul Eber and others.
Kings and High Priests successive Reigns, and Roman Governors over them: yet
we never read, that any of their Generals, Officers or Soldiers, fighting for
their Churches, Priests and Religions Defense against foreign or Domestique
idolatrous Enemies, pretended the least Exemption of their Lands or Estates
from paying all their ancient forementioned accustomed Tithes to the Levites,
Priests and Poor: nor any Christian Soldiers else but the Popish Templers and
Hospitalers for the Lands conferred on their Orders, not for their private
Inhabitances. And if Soldiers be obliged to pay Tithes of all their Spoils and
Gains of war (as I have abundantly proved) much more then of their real and
personal Estates, as well as any others not in arms: especially where they are
well paid and war not on their own expenses, but other men's purses: Amongst the
Jews we never read of any Taxes, Tributes or Contributions imposed on the
Cities, Houses, Lands or Tithes of the People and Levites for the maintenance
of wars, or pay of Soldiers, from which even Artaxerxes (a heathen Conqueror)
exempted them by an express Decree, Ezra 7.24. Yet they received Tithes of all
their Kings, Generals, Captains, Soldiers, as well as Peoples Lands and
increase both in times of war and peace. But our Army Officers and Soldiers
now receive above the Tithes of all our Ministers Tithes, Glebes in Monthly
Taxes and Contributions by arbitrary, illegal Impositions without their or
Consents in Parliament, contrary to their Antiqu. Ecclesiae Brit. p. 209, to
220, 282, 284, 299, 300. Thomas Walsingham. Hist Angl p. 348. See the Acts for
the Clergies Subsidies in all our Kings reigns, granted only by themselves in
Convocation.
ancient Privileges, all former Presidents and our Laws. Therefore there is all
Equity and Justice they should receive the Tenths both of their Lands, Goods
and Gains of war too, and that no Officers or Soldiers should be exempted from
Tithes as the Templers and Hospitalers were, who had no other Pay or Salaries
but their Lands, and received no constant Contributions from the Clergy.
Xenophon Helien l. 4. Mountague Diatriba p. 500, 501.
Xenophon, that famous learned Greek Heathen Commander, having made the most
Noble retreat we ever read of in Story, out of the upper part of Asia with ten
thousand men through mountains, frost and snow, in memory of his thankfullness
to the Gods for this safe return, separated the Tenth of all the Spoils that
his Army had gained in the wars, and by general consent, committed them to the
Captains to be dedicated to Apollo and Diana; That for Apollo, was laid up at
Delphos in the Athenean Treasury; but with that other Tenth Dianas share,
Xenophon himself purchased a Piece of Land, and built thereon a Temple and an
Altar to Diana, and appointed the Tenth of the yearly increase forever unto it.
This Pagan Commander and his Captains and Soldiers were so far from exempting
their Lands from Tithes to their Idol- Deities, that they Tithed the very
Spoils of their wars to them, and built and endowed a Temple to Diana with
Lands, and Tithes out of their own Lands and Estates for ever. Which shall for
ever silence and shame those Christian Army Officers, Soldiers, Templers and
Hospitalers, who would exempt not only their Spoils, but their Lands and
Estates from all Tithes to God and his Ministers because they are Soldiers,
and pretend to fight for their Defense.

7ly. This Reason, that they should enjoy not only their own but our Ministers
Tithes, because they are an Army of Preachers and Priests, and more Officers,
Soldiers in the present Army Preachers or Speakers (as they phrase them) than
ever in any Army in the world before, has frequently minded me of that saying
of Lib. 4. Epist. 38.
Pope Gregory the first (which famous In his Exposition on 2 Thessalonians. 2. p. 116.
Bishop Jewel much insisted on) concerning Antichrist. The King of Pride
(Antichrist) is at hand, and which is an horrible Thing to be spoken,
Sacerdotum est praeparatus Exercitus, an Army of Priests is prepared to guard
and usher him in. Certainly I never heard nor read of such an Army of Priests
(as our Army now is, before; wherein there are not only some hundreds of
disguised Popish Antichristian Priests and Jesuits (as most wisemen conceive)
under the disguise of Soldiers) preaching, venting, many notorious Errors,
Blasphemies and Antichristian Tenants, to infect the Army and Nation too, but
many preaching Colonels, Captains, Officers, Soldiers of all sorts, not a
preaching General (as some say) too; And among others, one of these
Army-Preachers not long since published a Book with this Title: Antichrist with
us; by John Spittle-house, a member of the Army: printed at London, 1648. which
intimated to me at first sight, that Antichrist was in the Army: and truly if
they proceed (as Can would have them) to usurp our Ministers Office,
Rectories, Glebes, Tithes, Churches to themselves, and Suppress our Ministers,
Churches, Parishes, as Antichristian; I shall then justly suspect, and others
will confidently conclude, they are the very Army of Priests prophesied of by
Pope Gregory, who shall forcibly usher and bring in Antichrist the King of
Pride (who 2 Thessalonians. 2.4
exalts himself above all that is called God or Worshipped, that is, above
Kings, Lords, Parliaments, and all Civil and Ecclesiastical Powers whatsoever,
as See Dr. Abbot, Dr. Beard, Dr. Squire of Antichrist, and Dr. Sclater on that
place.
Expositors resolve) into our Church, and re-establish him in his Throne.

8ly. I never read in the Old Testament or New, that Christ Authorized,
Commissioned or sent out any Captains, or Soldiers to preach the Gospel, or
made choice of such to be his Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel: Surely had
this been a part of their duty as Christian Officers and Soldiers, John
Baptist Christ's forerunner would have instructed those Luke 3.14.
Soldiers who came purposely to and demanded of him: what shall we do? in
another manner than he did; and said unto them; Go and preach the Gospel, and
instruct the ignorant Soldiers and people publicly where ever you quarter: in
the first place; and then, Do violence to no man, and accuse no man falsely, and
be content with your wages: The only precepts he gave them; Which our
Army Officers and Soldiers since they turned Preachers have much forgotten and
neglected: I read of 2. devout Centurions in the New Testament eminent for
their faith, piety, Charity, and of one devout Soldier; yet neither of them a
public Preacher: The first of these Colonels or Centurions Luke 7.2, to 11.
built a Synagogue for the Jews and others to meet and preach in who were
Priests and Ministers; but I read not he ever preached in it publicly himself.
The latter ( Centurion) is thus characterized, Acts 10.1, 2. That he was a
devout man, and one that feared God with all his House, which gave much Alms to
the people, and prayed to God continually: but doubtless he never preached,
for then it would have been there recorded, that he preached continually as
well as prayed: Yea, he was so far from this, that when the Angel of God came
to him in a vision; he said, Thy Pr^yers and thine Alms (not thy preaching,
therefore he preached not at all, or if he did God accepted it not, but
disliked it as against his word and will) are come into remembrance before God:
And now send men to Joppa and call for Simon Peter, he shall tell thee what
thou ought to do. Whereupon he presently sent two of his Servants, and a
devout Soldier continually waiting on him (but not on preaching) for the
Apostle Peter to preach to him, his Friends and Family; who repairing to him,
Cornelius goes forth to meet him, falls down at his feet, worshippeth him,
talks with him, brings him into his House, where many were come together;
relates his vision to Peter (mentioning again his Prayers and Alms, but not his
preaching) concluding thus: Now therefore are we all here present before God TO
HEAR (not preach) all things that are COMMANDED THEE of God; Whereas some
Centurions, Colonels, Captains and Soldiers of this Age, if Peter himself
should come to their Assemblies or Quarters, would be readier to teach and
preach to him, than to hear him, and apter to be his Teachers than Auditors, as
these only were: After which Peter preached to him and his company; I find
another sort of Captains and Soldiers in the New Testament Matthew. c. 26, and
27, and 28. Mar. 14, and 15. Luke 22, 22. John 18, and 19.
Who went out and apprehended our Savior Jesus Christ, mocked him, derided,
crowned his Head with Thorns, stripped him of his Raiment, put him on a purple
Robe, bowed their Knees before him in scorn, saying, Hayl King of the Jews,
blind folded, and then struck him with their hands, and bade him prophecy who
smote him: guarded him to his Trial, carried and nailed him to his Cross,
crucified him between two Thieves, pierced his side with a Spear, gave him Gall
and Vinegar to drink, parted his Garments amongst them, cast lots upon his
Vesture, and would have broke his Legs but that he was dead. After which they
watched and guarded his Sepulcher; took large Money of the Priests to smother
the truth of Christ's Resurrection by reporting a Lie, that his Disciples came
and stole him away whiles they were asleep; who TOOK the money and did as they
were taught; and are branded for ever with this Epiphomena, These things
therefore the Soldiers did. After which some of this rank of Officers and
Soldiers by Acts 12.1, to 12.
Herod's command killed James the Brother of John with the Sword, apprehended,
imprisoned, chained, and most strictly guarded the Apostle Peter, in order to
put him to death the next day; but that the Angel of God miraculously delivered
him. Others of them Acts 21.31, 32, 33, etc. c. 22.24, etc. c. 23.23, etc. to
35. c. 27, and 28.
apprehended, bound, and would have scourged Paul; guarded and carried him from
prison to prison; and when he was sent Prisoner to Rome; when the ship was
wracked, and their lives saved only for Paul's sake, they gave the Centurion
counsel to kill Paul, and all the other Prisoners, lest they should escape from
them by that wrack. These Soldiers no doubt were truly Antichristian; and if
the Matthew. 12.33. Luke 6 43, 44.
Tree may be judged and known by its Fruits, and Soldiers by their Actions and
Intentions, I doubt there are far more of this later sort than of the first in
this Age, and if John Cannes Voice from the Temple be embraced for Gospel in
every point by the whole Army, no doubt they will then be all of this later
rank, not the Ministers and 2 Timothy 2.3.
Soldiers of Jesus Christ, but of Antichrist alone; and the Hebr. 6.6.
Crucifiers of Christ again in his faithful Ministers and Members; which I
desire them all sadly to consider.

9ly. Admit them to be made Kings and Priests to God the Father by Christ, in a
spiritual sense, as Rev. 1.5. 1 Pet. 2.5, 9.
all the Elect Saints of God are; will it thereupon follow, that they may all
lawfully preach in public, administer Sacraments, and exercise the proper
Function of Priests and Ministers? If so, then by the self-same reason, they
may all lawfully exercise the office and power of Kings, as well as of Priests
(as some of them do in the highest degree beyond all Presidents of any our
Kings before them) and so under pretext of suppressing our Monarchy, and one
sole King as dangerous and pernicious; we shall have now no less than an whole
Army of Kings to rule and reign over us, and to engross not only all the old
Kings Lands and Revenues, but the greatest part of the Peoples far surmounting
of a Million or two each year in Contributions and Excise to support their new
Royal State and Dignity; as well as an Army of Priests, who have and would
swallow up our whole Churches Revenues, Glebes, Tithes, Patrimony, and our
Ministry too, for to support their new Evangelical Priesthood; that so they may
resemble both Christ and Melchisedec in their Kingly and Priestly Offices
united in one Person; though not in the Title of their Kingdom as the Apostle
interprets it, Hebr. 7.2. being by Interpretation KING OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, and
after that also, King of SALEM, which is KING OF PEACE; which Soldiers who
make a gainful Trade of War and Rapine delight not in.

10ly. I do affirm, and will abide by it, that since the time some disguised
Popish Priests, Jesuits, Sectaries, Heretics, Anabaptists and other Seducers
(rather than the Lord) drew out the heart of some Soldiers and other
Mechanics (in truth or disguise) publicly to preach, the People of this
Commonwealth, have had more abominable, false, damnable, atheistical,
Antichristian Heresies, Errors, Blasphemies, New Opinions, and old exploded
Heterodox Heresies and Tenants of all sorts whatsoever against the very
Essence, Nature, Attributes of God himself, the three sacred Persons in the
Trinity, the Old and New Testament, Law, Gospel, all the fundamental Articles
of Faith and Salvation, the Sacraments, Ministers, Ordinances of God; and
practical public, private Duties of Piety and Christianity, under the Names
and specious Titles of New Lights, and glorious Discoveries of Christ's Kingdom,
broached by Soldiers and Lay-Preachers, than in all the times since the Gospel
was first preached in this Island, and more than ever any one Age, Church,
Nation, or all our Ministers put together since the Creation till now were
guilty of, and these publicly averred both in Press and Pulpit, and the
Authors of them exempted from any corporal or pecuniary punishments, by the
Civil Magistrates, by the avowed See Col. Prides Beacon quenched.
printed Positions and Proposals of the General Council of Army Officers and
Soldiers in sundry Papers. For full and infallible proof whereof, I shall
remit the Reader to Mr. Edwards Gangrenaes, the Catalogues of the Heresies,
Blasphemies, Errors, collected by the London and Devonshire Ministers, the
Stationers Beacon fired, and New Law, p. 78, 97. Which styles Heaven, Hell, the
resurrection of the Flesh, a Dream of our Preachers; The History of the
Scripture an Idol, etc. And all this by the malice of Satan, the underhand
practices of Jesuits and our Popish Adversaries to defame, ruin our Church,
Ministers, Religion, seduce thee to Popery, Atheism, and reduce us back to the
Antichristian Tyranny of the Sea of Rome, as I have largely manifested in the
fifth Chapter. Whereas Can cannot charge our Parochial Ministers and
Presbyterians with any such Blasphemies, Heresies, Errors, as those he pleads
for are guilty of in the highest degree, nor with those Jesuitical,
treacherous, perfidious, sacrilegious, unclean, beastly ranting, unrighteous,
profane, atheistical Innovations, Practices, Rapines, Usurpations, as they
have plunged themselves into over head and ears without any Conscience or dread
of God or Man.

11ly. What, that more true Light and glorious Discoveries of Christ and his
Kingdom made known to the people of this Commonwealth within these 10, or 12.
years by the public preaching of some Soldiers and Laymen, exceeding all the
Nations Ministers ever made known unto them before, are, is concealed by Can,
and unknown to me or others, unless it be the flat atheistical denial of God,
of Christ and all his Offices, of the Holy Ghost, Scriptures, Sacraments, all
public Ordinances in the Church, of all Kings, Princes, Parliaments, lawful
Magistrates, Laws, Oaths, Vows, Covenants, Protestations, Engagements, by many
of them in their words, writings, and most of them in Titus, 1.16.
their works, with their Jesuitical positions, plots, practices, recited in the
fifth Chapter. And if these be not true 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. Acts 26.13.
infernal Darkness, and clear inglorious Discoveries of 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Antichrist and his Kingdom in the highest Degree, that ever yet appeared
amongst the people of this Commonwealth, let the fifth Chapter, with the
positions and practices themselves, compared with the Old and New Testament,
determine.

12ly. The decrying of our Universities, Colleges, Schools of human Learning,
Innes of Court, and some men's endeavoring to seize upon their Lands and
Revenues for the Armies use, is no doubt a Jesuitical Papal plot, to extinguish
the light of our Knowledge both Divine and humane, by putting out the Eyes of
our Nation, that so Jesuitical Popish darkness might overspread our Church and
State; and so the Mat. 15.14.
blind leading the blind in both, they must fall into the Pit of Destruction in
a moment. It is storied of Eutropius, Grimston in his Life, Theodoret,
Nicephorus, l. 10. c. 3, 4, 5, 24, 25, 32, 33. Mr. Fox, Baronius, Spondanus,
and others. Centur. Magd. 4. c. 3, 14. Col. 114, to 120, 1438, 1439. Nazianzen
Orat. 2. in Julianum, Ambros. Epist. l. 5. Ep. 29. zozomen l. 5. c. 22.
Rushamus, l. 1. c. 28.
Julian (that blasphemous Apostate, and professed Enemy of Christ and
Christian Religion) That he suppressed all the Schools of Christians,
prohibiting by general Laws and Decrees, that any should profess, practice or
study any Arts or Sciences in any Schools, that so they might become and remain
Idiots, without learning, and so be insufficient and unable to preach the
Christian Faith, oppose or refute any Pagan or other Errors, Blasphemies
against the true God and his worship, devising by all means possible (whereof
this was one of the Principal) TO MAKE WAR AGAINST JESUS CHRIST, and extirpate
Christianity, without shedding any Christian blood; finding by experience, that
the Christian Faith and Christians were greatly increased by the torments and
blood of the Martyrs: So that bloody Apostate from and Persecutor of the
Christian Faith Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. l. 8. c. 13. l. 10. c. 8. Eutropius,
and Grimston in his Life. Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 113. Bishop Jewels
Sermons, p.
Lucius the Emperor, as he ruined the Churches, Temples he commanded to be
built for Christ, cast out of his House, Service and all Offices and place of
Command whatsoever he that was a Christian, commanded all those Christians to
be slain who would not adore his Idols, prohibited all Assemblies of Christians
either for worship or consultation; so he was such an Enemy to Learning, that
he named the same (as some do now) A Poison and common Pestilence and the
Overthrow of Commonwealths; and especially the knowledge of the Laws: And
thought no vice worse became a Prince than Learning, because he himself was
unlearned; and thereupon prohibited Schools and Meetings for Instruction:
Whereas on the contrary See Eusebius in vita Constantini: Bacons Advancement of
Learning: Mr. Edward Waterhouse his Apology for Learning and Learned men.
Constantine the Great, and all other Godly prudent Christian Emperors, Kings
and Princes, founded Schools of Learning and Universities in all places,
encouraged and advanced learned men of all Arts and Professions, especially
Divines, Lawyers, and Philosophers;well knowing that Learning was the principle
means to promote Religion, and the glory, honor, wealth and greatness of any
Nation, more necessary than any Arms or Soldiers, and the chief means to
preserve them from Idolatry, Superstition, Confusion, ruin. We may therefore
clearly discern whence the present Outcries against our Universities, Inns of
Court, Schools of Learning, and all human learning proceed, even from desperate
Apostates from true Religion and Gods Church, and those who would erect a New
Babel of Confusion amongst us in Church, State, and thereby build up the
demolished walls of the Romish Jericho within all our Dominions: For proof
whereof, I shall transcribe this notable passage of our famous learned Bishop
Jewel in his Sermon on Joshua 6. in his works in Folio, p. 167, 168. which is
very pithy, learned and satisfactory, omitting all others.

Now to stay the restoring of Jericho, many good ways may be devised. The 1.
maintenance of Schools and Learning. That Learning and Knowledge is able to
hinder the Building of Jericho is so plain that it needs no speech. In the
time of Moses Law, Aaron the great Bishop and High Priest had written in a
Tablet before his Breast, Doctrine and Truth; not only Learning, but also Truth;
whereby was meant, that neither ought to be without the other For, as Learning
is dangerous and hurtful (in some cases) without Religion: So is Religion
unable to defend it self, and to convince the Gainsayers without Learning. For
this cause the Heathen when they erected Temples in honor of their Gods, they
did also build Libraries, that is, places to keep Books, that by such means
their Priests might grow in Knowledge, and be better able to persuade others to
their Religion. Strabo of the Sinprincians, that they built a Temple in honor
of Homer, and joined thereto a Library. Augustus the Emperor built a Temple,
and also a Library in the honor of Apollo. Trajanus in like manner built a
Library, and called it Vlpia, after his own name. At Rome in the Capitol, where
all the Gods had a Solemn place for to be worshipped in, there was also placed
a Library. Athens was a famous Universitie, and had many Colleges and Schools
of Learning, Academia, Stoa, Lycaeum, Canopus, Prytanneum, Tempe, Cynosura: in
which places were diverse Sects of Philosophers. Such were in Persia, the
Wisemen, whom they called Magi: in Babylon the Chaldees, in India Brachmanes,
in Aethiopia Gymnosophistae: in France and England Druides: and others in other
Countries. In all times the Kings and Princes which did set forth Religion,
were also Builders of Schools and Colleges, and Advancers of Learning. The
people of Israel were never in better state, (as P. Phagius a learned man
notes out of their Story) than when they had in every Town and Village Bathe
chenesioth, and Bathe medraschoth, that is, Synogogues wherein they assembled
together, and places to preach in. The same Phagius, relates of Jerusalem,
that there were in it more than four hundred common Schools and Synagogues
wherein the Law of God was taught. The Patriarch Jacob was called A Minister of
the House of Learning, because he applied himself to the knowledge of the Law
of God, and to Godliness. The Prophets of God had their Schools to breed up
under them such as might after their death draw the people from Idolatry, and
resist the false Prophets. They which were so taught by them were called the
Sons of the Prophets. Samuel taught in such sort at Rama: Elias and Elizeus the
Prophets, taught the Law of God besides Jericho. St. John the Evangelist taught
at Ephesus, and Eusebius reports out of Philo, that St. Mark had at
Alexandria sundry Scholars which gave themselves to reading, and reasoning and
expounding of the Scriptures. Others did the like at Antioch, and at other
places. Out of such Schools it pleased God to take many excellent men, and
place them in his Church, as Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius, Arnobius,
Basilius, Nazianzenus, Chrysostomus, Hieronimus, Ambrosius, Augustinus, etc.
who were brought up in all kind of Learning, and became shining Stars, and
brought Lights in the House of God, notable Defenders of Religion,
Over-throwers of Idols, and Confounders of Heretics. Christian Princes herein
have witnessed their Zeal in setting forth the Glory of God. After Charles the
Great had, made his notable Conquests (let our Conquerors remember it) he
erected five famous Universities, one at Paris, another at Tolouse, another at
Papia, another at Padua, and another at Prague: (to which our King Asser
Menevensis in his life, Camdens Britannia: Oxford Universitie and Cambridge.
Alfred founder of out famous Universitie of Oxford with the founders of all
the Colleges therein, and of the Universities of Cambridge, Dublin, and those
in Scotland, to omit those Universities in Germany, Spain, Portugal, Poland,
Denmark, Sweden, Hungary, and other Parts of Italy and France, mentioned by
Heylen and others, might be added:) Suidas in Leone.
Suidas reports of Leo the Emperor, That when Leo on a time commanded
Eulogius a Philosopher should have his Princely reward; a Noble man of the
Court, said: (as some do now of our Universities and Colleges Lands and
Revenues) that that money would be better employed for the maintenance of
Soldiers. Nay, (says he, and so all wise men now) I would rather it might be
brought to pass in my time, that the wages which are now bestowed upon
Soldiers might be given to maintain Philosophers. Charion. Chron. l. 3.
Alexander Severus.
Alexander Severus, so highly esteemed that notable famous Lawyer, Vlpian, that
when certain of his Soldiers ran feircely upon Vlpian to slay him, the Emperor
stepped forth, and set himself between the body of Vlpian, and the fury of his
Soldiers, and covered him with his own Robes, that the Soldiers might know
how careful he was for the good estate of Vlpian: (Let our Soldiers who hate
and study to suppress Philosophers, Scholars, Lawyers, consider these two last
Stories:) And also for the contrary; such as have practiced cruelty upon
learned men, and have hated knowledge were worthily discommended in the Stories
of all ages; He instanceth in the wicked Apostates, Julian and Licinius,
forecited examples. The like is reported of Caligula, Caracalla and Domitianus,
that either they utterly hated all manner of Learning, Note
or had some special malice against the writings of some one notable man, and
therefore sought to destroy them. Such was the policy of Satan, so thought he
to get the upper hand, and to restore again his wicked Jericho. And were these
the Practices of Heathen Princes only? may not we remember the like attempts
wrought in our days? who will call to mind the time that is not far past,
shall find that this ignorant Jericho had many friends: (and has it not now as
many and the same?) who by all means drew men from knowledge; they gave Liberty
rather to do any thing, than to seek understanding; and yet suffered rather the
use and reading of fabulous and unclean writers than of the Holy Scripture, and
Books which carried fruitful instruction. Good Letters to increase knowledge
are not to be neglected. Such as presume of Gods Spirit over-boldly, that
without endeavor to use the wholesome means which God has left unto his
Church, they shall and do by special inspiration, understand his will, do
tempt God. He adds much more.

In brief, learning, knowledge in Arts, Tongues, Histories of all sorts, and in
the Laws, Governments of former ages, are so absolutely necessary for the right
understanding and interpretation of the Scriptures, and good Government of all
Commonwealths and Kingdoms, that without them there neither will nor can be
any true Religion, sound Knowledge of God, his word, or works, nor orderly
Government, Humanity, Civility, Navigation, or Commerce almost in the world;
and men deprived of it will be little different from Beasts, as appears by the
brutish Sottishness, Barbarousnesse, Savagenesse, ignorance of the illiterate
Indians in America, and of some other African and Northern Nations, void both
of Religion, Government and Humanity it self, because destitute of Learning, as
Purchase his Pilgrimage, Mr. Hackluits voyages, Peter Martyrs Indian History,
Mercator, and others record. Hereupon our ancient Ancestors were so careful of
Learning, Religion, Ministers, Scholars, Lands, Estates, Tithes, that they
placed them in the very front of all those ancient Laws, Liberties, Customs
which they claimed, enjoyed, and presented to William the (pretended) Conqueror
upon Oath in the 4 th. Year of his Reign, who ratified them in Parliament,
without the least Alteration or Diminution, to his eternal Honor, and the
great contentment of the whole Nation, whose affections else he would have
lost, to the endangering of his new acquired Royalty, as I have proved in the
Hoveden, Annal. pars post. p. 601. Mr. Selde^, ad Eadmerum Notae, p. 173.
2 d. Chapter. Which our New pretended Conquerors, may do well to consider. And
so I proceed to my concluding Assertion.

CHAP. V.
I Am now arived at the fifth and last Proposition, That the present opposition
and endeavored abolition of Tithes and all other coercive maintenance for
Ministers, proceed not from any real grounds of Piety or Conscience, or any
considerable real Inconveniences or Mischiefs arising from them, but merely
from base, covetous, carnal Hearts, want of Christian Love and Charity to, and
professed enmity and hatred against the Ministers and Ministry of the Gospel;
and from a Jesuitical and Anabaptistical design to subvert and ruin our
Ministers, Church and Religion; the probable, if not necessary consequence of
this infernal Project, if it should take effect. Which would prove the Sea
Peter Martyr, in lib. 2. Regum Commen^. c. 5. p. 240.
eternal Shame, Infamy and Ruin of our Nation, not its Glory and Benefit.

The first part of the Proposition is sufficiently manifested by the premises,
wherein I have answered all Objections from pretended Grounds of Piety,
Conscience, and surmised Inconveniences or Mischiefs made against Tithes,
discovering them to be mere Impostures, and false Surmises, and the principal
Objections against them are, that they are Jewish, Popish: And John Can in
his Second Voice from the Alehouse (for surely it came from thence, not from
the Temple) to show his skill in Divinity most impudently asserts. That payment
of Tithes is a Sin two ways against the second Commandment, 1. In it self, as
being Jewish and Superstitious, giving honor to the ways and devises of
Antichrist. This way of Maintenance by Tithes being a Popish Custom, imposed by
the Popes Authority, etc. 2ly. As paid to an unlawful and Antichristian
Ministry, etc. Surely a Liar ought to have a good Memory; He confesses, p. 15.
That Tithes were paid by Abraham, vowed by Jacob, and prescribed by God himself
in the Ceremonial law. Therefore neither Jewish, nor Popish, nor Superstitions,
nor a Sin against the 2d. Commandment: else Abraham in paying, Jacob in
vowing, God in prescribing, the Israelites in paying them, should transgress
this Commandment, and commit a Sin against it, I would demand of this Can,
how he can reconcile these his palpable Lies and Contradictions unbecomming him
who professes himself a true Minister of the Gospel. 1. How Tithes can be
merely Jewish, since paid by Gods direction and approbation, by Abraham the
Father of the Faithful, and that to Christ himself, in the shape of
Melchisedec, and prescribed by Gods own special Precept? 2ly. How any thing
commanded by God, even when the 2d. Commandment was given, recorded in the
same Canonical Books of Scripture with it, practiced by Gods special command by
all his true Saints under the Law, and generally in all Christian Churches
under the Gospel, as I have proved; can possibly be, a Sin against the 2 d.
Commandment in it self? and whether it be not direct Blasphemy in him thus
confidently to aver it, in making Gods very Commandments to fight one against
another, and to command one thing as a Duty in some Texts, and condemn it as a
Sin and damnable Superstition in another? 3ly. How Tithes if truly and
orignally Jewish, can yet be truly and originally Antichristian, Popish, and
the Popes device, many thousand years after Tithes first Institution and
customary payment? Till he can satisfactorily reconcile these apparent
contradictory Assertions, or publicly recant them if he cannot, all the world
must account him for an Antichristian Minister and Lying Impostor, his Voice,
the Voice of him that reproacheth and blasphemeth both God and Men, Psalm.
44.16. and confess there is no ground at all in Piety or Conscience against
Tithes, or their payment, but grounds both of Piety and Conscience for them, as
I have proved; especially for our Godly Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel
(for whom I only plead) whose Calling being of unquestionable Divine
Institution, notwithstanding all Cannes Alehouse Arguments against them (not
worth a Can) and to continue in the world to the very end thereof, and the
consummation of all things, by Christ's own resolution, Matthew. 28.20 Ephesians.
4.10, 11, 12, 13. they may and ought by Divine and Human Laws, to enjoy their
Glebes and Tithes so long continued, maugre all the malice, power of their
violent Oppugners, and will do so when they and their Posterities shall not
have so much as a Name or Being upon Earth or in Heaven (unless they repent)
notwithstanding they were justly taken from Popish Friars, Abbots, Priors,
Lordly Prelates, (of mere popish Antichristian Institution, not Divine,) when
their very Orders were suppressed, as mere Usurpers, Encroachers of the
Ministers Rights, Rewards alone, for their pains in preaching, exercising their
Ministerial Function in their respective Parishes, not in Abbeys, Cathedrals,
(no Parish-Churches for the people to resort unto) to which by the Sea Mr.
Seldens History of Tithes.
Popes Bulls, they were unjustly appropriated heretofore.

To clear this Proposition more fully in all its branches, I have observed,
that there are five sorts of persons of late, very busy, active both against
our Ministers tiths and callings too.

The first are Soldiers: The 2d. Anabaptists, Dippers, Quakers, with other
late blasphemous Sectaries and Heretics: The 3d. profane, covetous
Earthworms, and Atheistical Wretches; who say in their Hearts, and sometimes
boldly profess, not only by their Lives, but with their Tongues in this lawless
Age, There is no GOD. The 4th. profane, ignorant, cheating Prognosticators and
Astronomers: The 5th. Jesuits, popish Priests and Romish Emissaries, sent from
all parts to ruin our Ministers and Religion.

For the first, they are either Officers and Common Soldiers, and those,
either such who have gained or purchased Lands since the Wars, liable to
Tithes; for such who have no Lands at all, and so not of present Ability,
Capacity to pay Tithes. Those who have any purchased Lands liable to Tithes,
are now so fierce against them, (for ought I can discern) not out of any
grounds of piety or Conscience; but, either out of an unworthy, covetous,
degenerous, sordid disposition, to ease themselves and their Heirs from this
just ancient Debt, yea a charge of Tithes upon their New cheap Purchases, and
gain them as an Overplus into their Bargains, to improve their Purchases to an
higher value; the case of such of them who approve of our Ministers, our
public Ordinances, and are no Speakers, Anabaptists, Sectaries. Or else a like
avaritious Disposition, mixed with and heightened by a professed Enmity,
Malignity against the very Persons, Calling of our Ministers, whom they usually
revile by the names of Baals Priests, Black Coats, Antichristian Locusts,
rotten, corrupt Clergymen, Seditious, Factious Varlets; and all other railing
Epithites, which Lilly in his late Almanacks and Scurrilous Pamphlets, has
furnished them with, which they much magnify. This is the Case of such Sword
men, who are above, or against all Ordinances, Duties public or private: or
Antiscripturists, Antitrinitarians, Anabaptists, Seekers, Quakers, Asserters of
the Souls mortality, as rising from and dying with the body; of all their
ordinary unordained Speakers, Preachers, infected with any other erroneous,
heretical, or blasphemous opinions; of all disguised Jesuits, Priests, Papists
under the Profession and Name of Soldiers. Those who have no Lands liable to
Tithes, petition and speak against them; either merely to please their Superior
Landed-Officers, See John Cannes Voice p. 27. Mr. Edwards Gangrenaes, and
Lillyes Ephemeris, 1650.
for fear of being cashiered by them; or because they are infected with
Anabaptism, Jesuitism, Errors, Blasphemy, Schism, Arianism, Atheism, contempt
of all public Ordinances, Duties, and a bitter Emnity against our Ministers
Persons, Callings, or Intruders into their Office (as well as into most other
Professions) without any Lawful call. These, in my Observation (and I appeal
to every of their own Consciences in the presence of the Searcher of all
hearts, for the truth of it) are the only true Grounds, Motives of any Officers
or Soldiers present stickling opposition against Tithes and Ministers, arising
from within them, as they are private persons. And these unchristian Grounds,
seconded with the open or underhand solicitations of their Anabaptistical,
Heretical, Schismatical, Jesuitical, Astromatical Friends and acquaintance out
of the Army; backed with a most impious, wretched, Sacrilegious Policy to
please the simple oppressed, deluded Country people in discharging them at
present from the payment of Tithes to their Ministers, that so they may augment
their Taxes to the full value of their abolished Tithes, to support themselves
and the Army the longer in a body, to uphold their Supreme enchroached Powers,
preserve, increase their New Purchases, Estates, depending wholly upon the New
Law and Title of the longest Sword, are in my apprehension the only true causes
why the General Council of Officers of the Army, with the Soldiers under them,
by their directions, as a New created All-swaying Military Corporation, have so
often appeared publicly against our Ministers Tithes to abolish them (and their
Ministry by necessary consequence with them) which all other Opponents (being
inconsiderable) were never able to effect, but by their armed power. These are
all the real principles of Piety, Conscience (if they deserve the Title) I
could ever yet find amongst them; engaging the Army Officers and Soldiers
against Tithes, which how inconsistent they are with the real profession, or
grounds of Christianity, Piety, Conscience, Justice, Saintship, let their own
Consciences and the world resolve; and what Censures, Execrations, Judgments
they may in Justice expect from God, for such a Sacrilegious Rapine, as they
intend upon these carnal, impious, atheistical grounds, policies,
hypocritically gilded over with the paint of Conscience, Reformation, Religion,
Propagation of the Gospel, etc. which makes the Design more detestable both to
God and all good men.

The second sort of Tithe-Oppugners are professed Anabaptists, Dippers,
Seekers, Quakers, and other blasphemous Sectaries and Heretics, lately sprung
up amongst us, many of which have crept into the Army for their greater
security, and the better accomplishment of their dangerous destructive Designs
against our established Government, Magistrates, Laws, but especially against
our Religion, Church, Ministers, Ministry, their Tithes and Glebes. Scarce one
of a thousand of these poor Sneaks were of ability to pay any Tithes of late;
and those of this prevailing Faction, who have crept into Sequestrations,
Offices, Employments of late, and thereby gained any Estates, for the most
part, have enriched themselves by sequestered Tithes, Glebes, Bishops, Deans,
Chapters Lands and Revenues, which these hungry Harpyes have most greedily
preyed upon, not out of any real grounds of Piety or Conscience (as they
pretend) which I could yet seldom or never find in any of them; but out of an
unsatiable greedy Quid nor Mortalia pec^ora cogit AURI SACRA. FAMES.
HOLY HUNGER OR THIRST (in the Poets sense) after Gold, Gain, Spoil, the
Revenues of our Church, and an implacable bitter Enmity against our Ministers
Persons, Callings; whether Presbyterians (the chief Butt against whom their
Malice is bent) or Independents of a more moderate strain; whose Ministry is
the main Fort they level all their present power against, to raze it even to
the very Foundation; now prosecuting the total abolition, not only of their
present Tithes, Glebes, but of all other future coercive maintenance in lieu of
them, only to subvert their Ministry, and quite starve (if they cannot
violently storm) them out of it. This is most perspicuous, not only by their
manifold former libellous Pamphlets against our Ministers Calling, and the late
Ordinances for Tithes, which I have In my fresh Discovery of New lights.
elsewhere collected, refuted, but by their fresh Petitions both against their
Tithes and Ministry too, as Antichristian, Jewish, Popish, etc. especially by
John Can the old Amsterdam Anabaptists Second Voice from the Temple (or Rev.
3.9.
Synagogue of Satan rather) newly dedicated to those he styles The Supreme
Authority of the Nation, wherein he exhorts and stimulates them, by all the
Art, Rhetoric, Motives, false Arguments he can muster up, to do execution, and
take vengeance upon Babylon (to wit, the National Ministry, Church-worship and
Government of England, as he explains it, p. 2.) till it be wholly desolate, not
a Stone left upon a Stone, till it be thrown down: To take a most effectual and
certain course to Is this Christian Gospel Charity consistent with Mat. 5.43,
to 48. c. 10.9, 10. Romans 12.9, 10, 13, 20, 21. c. 13.7, 8, 9, 10. Ephesians. 5.2. 1
Cor. 13.1, 2, 3, etc. 1 John 3.10, to 20. c. 2.9.10, 11. c. 4.20, 21.
starve and famish these Antichristian Idols, by taking away the Food and
Maintenance whereby hitherto (as at this present they are nourished, fed and
left alive) and more particularly their Tithes. To repeal all Laws and Statutes
formerly made, whereby the Whore has lived deliciously and proudly, and keeps
on to this Day her Whorish attire. To make the Whore desolate and naked by
making no Act or Law to stand in force which does yield any relief to her. To
set themselves in array against her (by the Armies power no doubt, which he
alludes to) bend their Bow, fan and empty her. To set upon this work speedily,
in good earnest (as it seems they do) whiles it is to day: And why so? Because
the Lord himself has by a Call more than ordinary, called them to this more
than ordinary Employment, (if he could have proved it by Scripture or Law, it
had been more worth than all his Pamphlet) put this fair (or rather foul)
opportunity into their hands; has commanded his sanctified ones, and called
his Mighty ones (the Army Officers) to fulfill his pleasure upon this great
Whore (the Church and Ministry of England) and SION is in travel and ready to
bring forth (this Monster of Desolation and Confusion:) which if they neglect
or delay, then mark how he briefly menaces them with the Fates of their late
Predecessors, I would think you should never be sitting in that House, but be
thinking still on those who sat there before you (and why not as well on Faux
and the Gunpowder Trayto^s, as those, since there seems another Powder Plot in
the Vault to blow them up, intended by Can and his Confederates if they fail
in accomplishing this their desired work?) whom the Lord has lade aside as
despised broken Idols and Vessels, wherein his Soul had no pleasure. And why?
As they knew not their Generation-work (which he excites them to) neither were
faithful to the interest of Jesus Christ. God is no respecter of Persons, as
men sow, so they shall reap. Ex ungue Leonem, ex cauda Draconem. You may see by
these passages, and his whole Pamphlet pursuing them, what these malicious,
inhuman, barbarous, irreligious, hypocritical Anabaptists aim at in their
present violent prosecutions against Tithes; even utterly to starve, famish,
subvert, extirpate our Ministers, Ministry, Church, Worship, Government, and
make our Land a mere Spoil, Desolation, as their Predecessors did Munster, and
some parts of Germany, whiles in their power. But let Can and his
Anabaptistical Confederates remember what tragical Sleiden^ Commentaries, l. 9,
and 10. See my sword of Christian Magistracy supported, p. 46, 47, etc.
ends their New King John, with all his Princes, Grandees, Officers, Prophets,
Followers came to in conclusion in Germany: And what fatal ruin befell See
Speeds History of Great Bri^ain, Stow, Holmshed, and the Survey of London.
Jack Cade, Jack Straw, Wat Tyler, Sharp and other levelling Companions, who
had the self-same Designs against our English Laws, Lawyers, Clergy, Tithes,
Glebes, as He and they have now, animated thereto by the new-dipped Jesuits,
and other Romish Emissaries lately crept into their Anabaptistcal Fraternity to
further this their Infernal Gunpowder-plot against our Church, Religion,
Ministers, Magistrates, Government, Laws, and let them thereupon repent of,
desist from, abominate this their Diabolical, wicked Design, lest they incur
the self same punishments in conclusion, by stirring up God and all the whole
Nation against them, as most accursed Rebels, Traitors, Instruments of Satan,
yea that very Antichrist and Whore of Rome, they pretend they are blindly
acting against, whose designs in truth they are but accomplishing in the
highest degree.

I must here observe (and desire all others to take notice of) three things.
First, that in Cannes Voice, and in all other late Pamphlets, Petitions of the
Anabaptists, wherein they seem to vent their most passionate zeal against
Antichrist, Babylon, the Whore of Babylon, their chief Instruments and
Supporters, I cannot find so much as one Clause or Syllable against Jesuits,
Popish Priests, Papists, Romish Emissaries; or exciting the execution of any
Laws or Statutes formerly made against them; but the whole stream, bent of them
all is only against the Godly Ministers, Ministry, worship of the Church of
England, the Presbyterian Government, and our present Church-worship, the only
Babylon, Whore, Antichrist, they intend and fight against, not the Pope and
Church of Rome. 2ly. That they are so far from pleading against the Pope,
Popish Priests, Jesuits, and urging the execution of the good Oaths, Laws,
made by late and former Protestant Parliaments against them and their
Treasonable practices, that they have frequently written, petitioned for their
Repeal, Abolition, as bloody Tyrannical Laws, unlawful Oaths, and procured
their Repeal or Suspension at least, in their favor from some late and present
Powers. 3ly. That when some conscientious pious Stationers late in their
Beacons fired, discovered to those then in Power, The many sorts, multitudes of
Jesuits, Popish Books printed in England within 3. years last past, in defense
of the Pope and Church of Rome, all Popish Doctrines, Ceremonies, and reviling
our Church, Religion, as Heretical; desiring them to take it into their timely
considerations, to suppress this growing Mischief, Design to corrupt the
People, and reduce them back to Popery, ere they were aware: Kiffin with other
Anabaptists in the Army, headed by Colonel Pride, taking an Alarm thereat,
subscribed and printed a Book entitled, The Beacons quenched, (penned they
know best by whom, not the Subscribers of it, not yet inspired with the gift of
all the Tongues therein contained) pleading for a free Tolleration of such
Popish Books printing, dispersing amongst us, of public Disputes by those of
that Religion, traducing, accusing the Presbyterians throughout that Pamphlet,
and those honest zealous Stationers in particular, of no less than a New
Gunpowder-plot, Mine, Train, (then ready to be sprung) to blow up those,
Colonel Pride and his Confederates first made, and then styled, The Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England, and the Army too; only for discovering these
Popish Books and Trains to blow up our Religion: Which Scandal, as the
Stationers then fully cleared by their satisfactory Reply to that impertinent
Pamphlet, so the Subscribers of it their Fellow Soldiers of the Army (better
versed by far in Mines and Fireworks to blow up Parliaments, and nearer related
to old Speeds History of Great Britain. The Arraignment of Traitors, 3 Jac. c.
1, 2, 3, 4.
Guy Faux, a Low Country Soldier, by reason of their Military profession, than
these Stationers and Presbyterians, they thus falsely slandered) have since
cleared before all the World, to be a malicious Calumny, of which themselves
only are guilty, and given just cause of Jealousy, Fear, to all Presbyterians,
old Protestants and P^ritans to apprehend, that they now really join their
Forces and Heads together with those thus pleaded for, to ruin our Church,
Religion, Ministry, under the Notion and Project of suppressing Tithes, and of
all future compulsory Maintenance for the Ministers of England, whom they
intend to starve and famish (such is their Charity) if they can but vote Tithes
down, before they provide any other Maintenance; which Vote once passed, the
next will be, to vote them both out of their Rectories, Glebes, Churches,
Ministry too, as Cannes Voice, and the Kentish Petition against Tithes root and
branch, sufficiently discover to all who are not wilfully blind: enough to make
all men now to look about them.

That the Dominican, Franciscan, and other Popish Friars, were the first
Broachers of this Opinion, That Laymen were not bound to pay Tithes to their
Ministers by any Divine law or right; on purpose to draw the Tithes of
Ministers and Curates to themselves, and exempt whatever Lands or Things were
given to them from payment of Tithes; I have elsewhere evidenced out of H^story
of Tithes, p. 14, 166, 167, 170, to 175, 1^7, 128.
Mr. Seldom and others; whe^eupon De Nugis Cu^ialium, l. 7. c. 21.
Johannes Sarisburiensis Bishop of Chartres thus censured them, Miror ut
fidelium pace loquar, quodnam sit ut Decimas and jura aliena usurpare non
erubescunt. Inquient sort Religiosi sumus. Plane Decimas solvere Religionis
pars est. Adding, that their Exemptions from payment of Tithes did derogare
constitutioni Divinae, derogate from Divine institution. And Petrus Blesensis,
Archdeacon of Bath, in his 82. Epistle inveighs very much against the
privileges of the Cistercian Monks exemption from payment of Tithes, as
injuriosa immunitas, contra Dei justiciam: seeing Justiciae Divinae manifest
resistit, qui Ministris Ecclesiae nititur jus Decimationis auserre: Which these
Friars not only persisted in, by substracting their own Tithes from the
Ministers by color of these Exemptions, but likewise the Tithes of their other
Parishioners, especially such who contemning and deserting their own Parish
Priests and Churches, resorted to these Friars Chapels, and acknowledged them
for their Ghostly Fathers and Confessors. This is most evident by the Petition
of the Parish Priests and Rectors of London to the Archbishop of Canterbury and
the rest of the Bishops in a Synod, (about the year of our Lord 1240.) against
the Dominicans and Franciscans, who much impaired their profit; wherein they
complained Ms. and Dr. Tillesley his Anmadversions upon Mr. Seldens Preface.
Animadv. 9.
That their Parishioners who at leastwise on Lords days and Festivals are
bound to frequent their Parish Churches, and to receive Sacraments and
Sacramentals in the same, and devoutly to hear Divine Service, as also to offer
at Solemn Masses due and accustomed Oblations; did repair to the places and
Houses of these Friars, and scorn and forsake their Parish Churches, and so
confer the due Rights of the Church wherewith the Churches were anciently
endowed, upon the Friars. Also they who confess themselves to these Friars, who
before were accustomed annually by the Canon Law to pay Tithes of their
Tradings to their Parish Churches, from the time since they submitted
themselves to the Confessions of these Friars, modo debito ac consueto
negociationes suas decimare non curant, Neglect to pay Tithes of their
Tradings, after the due and accustomed manner. And is not this the very present
Grievance, Complaint of most London and other Ministers throughout England,
that since these disguised Romish Friars and Jesuits swarming in all places
under the Masks and Titles of Anabaptists, Quakers, and other Sects, have in
imitation of these their Predecessors, in their Writings, Preachments, and
Conventicles declaimed against our Ministers Tithes, as not due unto them by
any Divine Right, to rob our Ministers of, and draw the value of them to
themselves; and since their Parishioners who are bound to resort to their
Parish Churches on Lords days and Feastivals to hear Divine Service, Sermons,
and receive the Sacraments in a devout manner have resorted to the Conventicles
and Meetings of these Friars and Jesuits, and submitted themselves to these
new Ghostly Fathers and Confessors, they have quite contemned, deserted their
own Parish Churches, neglected, refused to pay any personal or predial Tithes
or Oblations to their Ministers after the due, and formerly accustomed manner,
and bestowed the due Rights and ancient endowments of their parish Churches,
(in value or substance at least, though not in kind) upon these Friars and
Romish Loc^sts, whose very Doctrine, Practice in this particular of our
Ministers Tithes and Oblations, and their substraction of them (yea in most
other Tenants now broached by them for New light) are the very same in all
particulars which these Friars in former ages both at home and abroad, as I
have evidenced in my Quakers unmasked, my New Discovery of Romish Emissaries;
and our London, Lancashire, Newcastle and other Ministers, have plentifully
demonstrated in sundry publications, with Mr. Edwards in his Gangraenaes? We
may then most clearly Discover these Romish Mat. ^.15, to 15.
wolves now crept in amongst us in Sheeps-clothing, by these their Fruits, and
practices; whose Pleas against our Ministers Tithes, resolve into these
Atheistical, unchristian Conclusions. 1. That the Tithes of Christians increase
are too much for God himself who created them, and gives all to them. 2. Too
much for Christ who redeemed them, who gave himself to death for them, and is a
Priest for ever unto God the Father after the order of Melchisedec in their
behalf. 3. Too much for the Ministers of Christ, whose lives, studies, spirits
are wholly spent in ministerial incessant labors for their eternal welfare. 4.
Too much to be laid out for the Instruction, Salvation, of their own immortal
Souls; when as the other nine parts are consumed on their Bodies, Families, if
not Sins and Lusts. 5. Too much for an Orthodox Protestant Minister; but not
for a disguised, seducing Popish Jesuitical Priest or Friar. O brutish,
foolish, bewitched, infatuated Englishmen, now at last consider this your
desperate folly, delusion, before it be over late, in following these disguised
Seducers, to your own and our Religions ruin.

The 3d. sort of Tithe-Oppugners are profane, covetous Earthworms and
Atheistical wretches, who care not for God or Religion, saying unto God and his
faithful Ministers, like those Atheists, Job 21.14, 15. Depart from us, for we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways; what is the Almighty, that we should
serve him? and what profit should we have if we pray unto him? Yet because few
of such are now active Sticklers and Petitioners (as such) against Tithes, but
only mere Substractors, Detainers of them at present, they are less
blameworthy, and not so culpable as the two former, and subsequent Ranks, the
chief active Sticklers, Petitioners, Writers against them.

The 4th. Rank of Grand Opposites against our Ministers and their Tithes are
Profane, Ignorant, Cheating, Monthly Prognosticators and Astrologasters, as
John Booker, Nich. Culpepper, and above all others William Lilly, a most
bitter, railing Rabshekeh, whose late Almanacks, ever Since the Army Officers
in 1649. declared in print against Ministers Tithes; these Prognosticators
guided by these All-ruling Martial earthly Planets, not the heavenly stars,
have predicted their Downfall every year, but not before.
since 1648. and other idle Prophetic Pamphlets, are so fraught with
Scurrilous Invectives, Raylings, Predictions of our Ministers, Presbyterians
Downfalls, and their Tithes, the Soldiers, Peoples general Opposition,
Insurrection against them, etc. almost in every line, as if the Army Officers,
Soldiers, Anabaptists, Priests, Jesuits, had purposely hired him, to carry on
their Designs against our Ministers, their Tithes, Maintenance, to s^bvert our
Religion; and the Jesuits, Anabaptists, furnished him out of all their railing
Pasquils, Satyrs, with reproachful Terms, Invectives, Slanders against them,
which have swelled up his frothy, filthy Papers to an extraordinary Bulk,
beyond his Fellow- Prognosticators, and made them so much cried up, read,
studied both by Officers, Soldiers, Anabaptists, and other simple people,
incensing them against our Ministers and their Tithes, as things which the late
Constellations, Ecclipses of the Moon and Sun have specially designed to speedy
ruin. When I was close Prisoner in Dunster Castle in the year 1650. the
Officers and Soldiers there, sent me Lilies For the year 1651.
New Almanac to read, wherein I found, such a world of bitter, railing,
Jesuitical Epithites against our Ministers, and predictions of the sudden
Downfall of their Minist^y, Tithes, Maintenance, from pretended Malignant
Constellations, (which yet on the contrary at the same time did promise Acts of
Grace and Favor to Popish Recusants, who in their Zeal and Loyalty to the New
Republic exceeded most Presbyterians; and presoged some worthy Actions, in
creating New Cardinals, etc. to be done in Rome and Italy as he therein
predicted) as made me suspect him to be more than half a Jesuit, or at least
their Scholar, Confederate, Pensioner to promote their Designs against our
Ministers; and to acquaint Mr. Bradshaw (my Committer) with others at Whitehall
so much in my Letters to them: But our Tithes and Ministers not falling down
that year, as he falsely prognosticated, he still continued to predict their
Downfalls in his lying Since that in 1653, and 1654. he continues in the same
strain.
Prognostications, 1651, and 1652. much read and cried up by the Officers and
Soldiers at Pendennys Castle in Cornwall, who sent me them to read, wherein he
retained his former malicious Raylings against our Ministers and their Tithes,
to render them odious to the Soldiers, Army, People, and all originally,
because reverend Mr. Gataker, with the Assembly of Divines in their Annotations
to the Bible, on Jer. 10.2, 3. and other Texts, and others of them of late, had
censured the Art of Judicial Astrology, Astronomy, and the principles of it
(wherewith he and his Fellow-wizards cheat poor People of their money, by
calculating their Nativities, telling what Wives, Husbands, Fortunes they
should have, whether they should recover their Sicknesses, what good or bad
Voyages they should have, what was become of their lost or stolen Goods, or
where they should find them, foretelling what Weather, Sicknesses, public
Alterations in State, Church Affairs, and Churchmen too, should happen from the
Malign or Benign Aspects, Conjunction of the Stars, Planets, or the Ecclipses
of the Sun and Moon) as a mere cheating Imposture; a Heathenish, wicked,
unchristian Practice, Delusion, contrary to Scripture, Reason, Philosophy,
Theological Doctrine, Ecclesiastical Discipline; yea a mere impious Fraud and
villainy. The Sottishness, Falsity, Groundlesnesse whereof (built upon mere
ridiculous Figments, Forgeries, Absurdities, Dreams, imaginary Signs, Houses
built by them in the Heavens, and such Malignant Qualities as their fancies
have ascribed, not God infused into the 7 Planets) those who have been deluded
by such cheating Knaves and Pickpurses, the greatest Impostors of any (as
learned Henry Bullinger in his Commentary on Jer. 10.2. Sixtus Senensis Bibl.
l. 6. Annot. 10. and the subsequent Authors style them) may for their
satisfaction read at large in Bardesanis Syms (the best learned of all the
Chaldean Astrologers) quoted by Eusebius De Praepar. Evangel. l. 6. c. 8. in
Cicero De Divinatione, l. 2. in Picus Mirandula his 12. Books against
Astrology, in Joseph Scaliger his Preface before Manilius, in Dr. Chambers Book
against Judicial Astrology, London, 1601. in Sixtus ab Hemminga, Lib.
Astrologiae Refutatae, Antw. 1583. in Jo. Francus Offucius, in Larvatam
Astrologiam, An. 1570. in Cornelius Scepperus, contra Astrologos, Col. 1548. in
Georg. Trapezuntins, Libellus cur Astrologorum Judicia sint falsa. Alex. De
Angelis, in Astrologos Conjectores, Romae, 1615. in John Milton, his
Astrologaster, 1620. in Hieron. Savanorola, adversus Divinatricem Astronomiam,
Florentiae 1581. in Apologeticus Interpretis pro Tractatu Hieron, Savanorolae
adversus Astrologos, Flor. 1581. in Mr. Samuel Purchase his Pilgrimage, l. 1. c.
2. p. 12, 13. etc. 12. p. 64. in Ludovicus Vives de Corrupt. Artium, l. 5. who
censures it as a Fraud, not Art, in Mr. Thomas Gataker his vindication of his
Annotation on Jer. 2. against the Scurrilous Aspersions of that grand Impostor,
William Lilly; newly printed, 1653. and the Authors quoted by him, in Bochellus
Decret. Eccles Gallicanae lib. 1. Tit. 14. where the Decrees of many French
Councils are recited against this Diabolical cheating Profession, prohibiting
Christians to buy, read, keep, or credit such Books, in which many
unprofitable, Superstitious, false, yea impious and sacrilegious things are
contained, which Books ought to be suppressed, damned, and utterly abolished
(yea burnt like those Acts 19.19. as the Council of Bordeaux, An 1582. and
Johan. Charberius de Gersonio, in his Trilogio Astrologiae Theologizaiae,
proves at large. And those who will compare Culpeppers and Lillies wild
monstrous false Predictions concerning the several States, Kingdoms mentioned
in their Almanacks, Prognostications for this present year, and the great
Plagues, Mortality which should be both the last and this Summer in London
(though never freer from Pestilence than at these seasons) with their, and
others usual false Predictions every Month concerning the Weather, their
manifold Contradictions both to themselves and one another, will easily discern
them to be mere Liars, Impostors, and their Art a Cheat. Now let them all tell
me at their leisure, by what warrant from Scripture, Philosophy, reason, art,
sense, the Constellations of the Heavens, or Ecclipses of the Sun and Moon
these 2 last years only should certainly predict, portend, excite Soldiers,
Sectaries, or Country people by any Divine ordination, or real influence on
their disaffected Spirits, to pull down the Ministers of the Gospel, and their
Tithes, being both of Divine institution and establishment to Matthew. 28.20.
continue to the Worlds end: When no other Constellations, Ecclipses of like
nature in any former Ages of the World since the Creation, portended or
effected the like? Or how the Stars in Heaven should thus professedly fight
against, and pull down those Rev. 21.1. John 10.28, 29.
Stars (the Ministers of the Churches) which Christ himself holds in his right
hand (out of which none can pull them) and their Tithes too, being ancient,
perpetual appurtenant to Christ's own eternal Priesthood, Heb. 7.1, to 15? More
particularly, I shall desire this scurrilous Impostor Lilly to inform me, How
it comes to pass, That the Celestial Stars, Planets, (and Good Angels which he
often couples together in his Merlius) who in the year 1647. (as he Epistle to
the Reader, p. 4. and Astrological Discourse in it toward the end.
prints in his Ephemeris for it) by their good influence stirred up by Gods
providence the Parliament to take care, that preaching Ministers should be
placed in every County of this Kingdom, and a sufficient stipend allowed where
formerly none was; For which We (writes he, including himself in the Number)
must ever acknowledge our Thankfulness: And that the Figures he erects on the
X. of March, 1647. Astrologically predicting the State of our English Affairs
and Clergy, should by the Rules of Astrology, and his own Judgment thereon
(then printed, Venus being then found in the ninth House) import, That many of
the Clergy should trot and trudge, or change their habitation out of one County
into another, nay shall willingly travel long Journies; By which I conceive
(writes he) is meant, That our present Parliament shall this year place worthy
men into warm Benefices, and distribute the deserving Clergymen of England into
several quarters of this Kingdom, as in their wisedoms they think convenient.
Blessed be God, for his Creatures, the Stars, promise they may travel safe
without prejudice, or at least, they indicate so much, etc. And shall obtain
profit and good by their often changings, and remove of Habitations. And the
Godly Ministers so dispersed into several Counties, shall prevail with the
People to amend their Lives, and live more soberly, religiously, etc. As also,
that most of those itinerant Preachers, or Divines, shall leave behind them
lesser Livings, and go to enjoy better. To which he adds by way of Jeer this
passage against Mr. Geree for writing against Astrology, Now for that
ASTROLOGO-MASTIX is a Master of Arts, and capable of Preferment, I humbly
implore, he may be made Priest of Teuksbury, from which place ( per varios
casus) he once in haste trotted, etc. That but 3 years after this, the Heavenly
Stars, Planets, Angels in the year 1650. (as his In the Epistle, Astrological
Predictions, and Monthly Observations.
Ephemeris then prognosticates, very frequently) should threaten ill and
unwilling payment of Tithes, in many Counties to the Clergy: much heart-burning
of the People toward them. That after a small season, or a very few years, no
Tithes shall be paid them: For a plain people will arise, gifted by God with
such spiritual Knowledge, as the generality of the People will decline their
Sophistical School Doctrines, and wholly adhere unto those who preach God only,
and Jesus Christ his Son: And that they should be so implacable, as to continue
these and worse threatenings against all Presbyterian Ministers, Presbytery,
Rectories, TITHES, and the whole English Clergy, ever since this year, so far,
as to portend or ascertain, not only their general Opposition by Swordmen, the
generality of the Nation, and their Governors and people, but sudden downfall
and extirpation: Of which all his Merlins and Prognostications surfeit. Tantaene
Animis Caelestibus Irae? Doubtless, the heavenly Stars, Planets, and good
Angels are not so contradictory to themselves, or maliciously, irreconcileably
Malignant against our Ministers Persons, Callings, Tithes, Presbytery, as this
Arch-Cheat, would make poor Simpletons believe. But it is only the Language and
Malignity of his own malicious heart, tongue, Pen against them, because Enemies
to his absurd, Diabolical, lying, cheating, Artlesse Art of Astrology, witness
his own words; I hate Presbytery (and hatred and affection as himself writes,
cause often Errors and Mistakes in their Art and Predictions:) Art thou a
Presbyterian? Thou art an enemy to Astrology, and weariest thy auditory with
invectives against me. I desire thee to conform, lest a worse thing happen to
thee (than Deans and Chapters Lands) For if thou labourest to root up or pull
down this Fabric, which God has erected, then I say, in a small season, or
very few years, no Tithes will be paid thee, etc. with many such like Epistle
to the Reader in his Ephemeris, 1650, and 1649.
Passages since, wherein he reviles, vilifies, Mr. Calvin, Perkins, Geree,
Case, Calamy, Farmer, Gataker, Owen, with sundry other Divines by name, and all
of them in general, only because, they have preached or writ against the
vanity, falsity of his cheating Astrology, by which he gets his living; as much
as he reviles, jeers his Companion, Wharton, (Naworth, Naw^rth,) for
contradicting him in his own Science, whom yet elsewhere himself and Culpepper
too, extraordinarily applaud for his exact transcendent knowledge in Astrology,
though all 3. of them diametrically contradict each other in their Predictions
from the Stars, or different factions rather. This malice of theirs against our
Ministers and their Tithes (wherein they have proved lying Diviners hitherto,
and will do so to the Worlds end, if we credit Matthew. 28.20. Ephesians. 4.11, 12,
13) no doubt is elevated, augmented by Jesuits and Popish Spanish Agents, the
chief Promoters of this Study of Astrology amongst us, and very intimate with
these Lunatique, Star gazing Incendiaries and Time-servers; it being the
express advise and project of Thomas Campanella (a great Astrologer and
Jesuited Italian Friar, much magnified by Lilly in some of his Merlins,) in his
Treatise De Monarchia Hispaniae, wherein, as he shows the King of Spain the
readiest means to make himself Monarch of the whole world, and particularly of
Cap. 25, and 2^. worthy our most setious perusal.
England, Scotland, Ireland, Holland, (by dividing them one from and against
another by unnatural intestine Wars, turning our Monarchy into a Commonwealth;
dividing our three Kingdoms one from and against another, by making them
Republics or elective Kingdoms, breaking our naval Forces by the Dutch Fleet
and other Nothern Nations, fomenting perpetual Divisions and Schisms amongst
us: thereby to destroy our civil Government, Forces, and become a prey to the
Spaniards at last) so he prescribes this, as Ibid. p. 204, 185, 186, 234, 235,
236. which Art Lilly much promotes. See his Ephemeris, 1649, 1650.
the readiest way to undermine our Protestant Religion, and draw men from the
Study, Love, Practice thereof, to promote the Art, Study of Astrology and
Telesian Arts amongst us, to erect Schools of Astrology and Mathematics, and
encourage the Students of it with rewards. Which I wish all Lovers of our
Religion, vigilant Statesmen, and Lilly (with other Astrologasters, the chief
Promoters of this Design) to take special notice of, and thereupon to abandon,
suppress this impious, atheal, sottish, cheating Art, grounded upon no Rules of
Reason, Philosophy, Divinity, Experience, but mere imaginary Whimsies,
Figments, Chymeraes, Signs, Houses in the Air, of Lunatic cheats and
Impostors, as all rational, judicious Scholars who peruse their Scheams,
Astrological Conjectures, Judgments, Predictions, Treatises, must acknowledge;
and I by Gods assistance, may hereafter demonstrate to the world if there be
occasion, being not so pertinent to my present Theme.

The fifth and last Squadron of professed Enemies against our Ministers Tithes,
Glebes and settled Maintenance, are Jesuits and Jesuited Papists: and that not
out of any Malignity against Tithes themselves, which they all hold to be of
Divine Right and Institution, according to the definition of their idolized
Surius Council. Tom. 4. p. 992.
Council of Trent, Sess. 25. De Reformatione, c. 12. which thus determines
against their present practice and design: Non sunt ferendi qui variis artibus
Decimas Ecclesiis obvenientes, substrahere moliuntur, aut qui aliis solvendis
temere occupant, and in rem suam vertunt. Cum Decimarum solutio debila sit Deo.
Et qui eas dare noluerit, aut dantes impediunt, res alienas invadunt. Praecepit
ergo Sancta Synodus, omnibus cujuscunque gradus aut conditionis sint, ad quas
Decimarum solutio spectat, ut eas (ad quas de Iure tenentur) in posterum
Cathedrali, aut quibuscunque aliis Ecclesiis vel Personis quibus legitime
debentur, integre persolvant: Qui vero eas aut substrahunt, aut impediunt
excommunicentur; Nec ab hoc crimine nisi plena restitutione, secuta,
absolvantur: But merely out of malice and design against our Ministers and
their Ministry, of purpose to starve and ruin them, thereby to set up Popery,
and intrude themselves into their Rectories, yea into our Bishoprics and
Deaneries too, and then they will not only cry up Tithes again, with the due
payment of them to themselves from the People, according to the utmost rigor
of this Trent-Canon, and other Laws, for their due payment by Divine and Human
Right, but likewise resume all Bishops, Deans, Chapters Lands, (if not Abbey
Lands too) into their hands, as sacrilegiously alienated from the Church
without lawful power and Right, as Robert Parsons the Jesuits Memorial for
Reformation, (written at A Manifestation of the folly and bad Spirit of certain
in England calling themselves Secular Priests, p. 56.
) Sevil in Spain, Anno 1596.) William Watson in his Quodlibets, p. 93, 94, 144.
with the Rastals Abridgement of Statutes, Tit. Durham.
Statute of 1 Mariae, Parl. 2. c. 1. for reviving the Bishopric of Durham,
restoring all Ecclesiastical and Temporal Jurisdictions, Lands, Hereditaments
whatsoever thereunto heretofore belonging, though dissolved, settled in the
Crown and Town of Newcastle, by the Statutes of 7 E. 6. c. 10. and another Act
not printed, will inform the world, and Alfonsus de Vargas de Stratag.
Jesuitarum, p. 203.

Now that the Jesuits (many hundreds of which Society now lurk every where
amongst us under the Disguise of Anabaptists, Soldiers, Tradesmen, Seekers,
Dippers, converted Jews, Physicians, Gentlemen, Travelers, Merchants, and
other like, to work our ruin) have a hand in this Design to deprive our
Ministers of their Tithes and Rectories, to work their ruin, is most apparent.
First, by their former procedings even against their own Secular Priests in
England, where they seeking to work their utter ruin, subversion,
supplantation, to intrude themselves into their employments, by their
Machiavel, Atheal plots, about the year 1600, to 1605, did first by their
scandalous Books, Libels, Slanders against the^e Priests, bring their Persons
and Priesthood into scorn and contempt amongst the generality of the English
Papists, preferring every Lay Brother of their Society before them, executing
their Priestly Function without a lawful Call, or Ordination: and then
endeavored to substract all Maintenance and Contributions from them;
threatening to make them leap at a Crust, and to pine and starve them;
debarring, interrupting all their Maintenance from English Recusants, in such
sort, that many of them pined away through grief of Mind, want of Food, and
were so near perishing, that they were necessitated to petition Queen Elizabeth
and her Council, for some Allowance in their prisons to keep them from
starving. Yea they and their Jesuited Followers and Proselites derided their
Seminary Priests and Ghostly. Fathers in this manner, Ah, hah, hah; A
Seminary, and old Queen Mary Priest, a Secular, etc. You shall see them all
leap at a Crust ere it be long, etc. And having got Judas his Office (to carry
the Money bagg) into their own and Substitutes hands, they disposed of the
Wealth and Charity of Catholics (consisting of many thousand pounds) where,
how, and to whom they pleased, for their own enriching and advancement: which
made the Secular Priests write, that England was become wild, Priesthood and
Sacraments had in contempt, Religion made but a matter of Atheal policy; and
Priests through the Jesuits Falsehood, Calumniations and untrue Suggestions to
the Superiors and all Estates, brought into such high contempt, that their
very Ghostly Children, whom they had begotten, had forsasaken, houted,
shunned, despised them, as if they were none other but their Stepfathers, and
showed their Charity so coldly to them, as many of them were in extreme want,
and few or none of them scarce able to live; as we may read in Watsons
Quodlibets against Parsons and his Fellow Jesuits, p. 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 31,
37, 38, 42, 43, 45, 50, 51, 52, 62, 63, 70, 71, 80, 81, 92, 93. and elsewhere
throughout that Book: in Joan. Bogermanus Catechesis Jesuit. l. 3. c. 28.
Thuanus Hist. l. 126, Mercurius Jesuiticus, Tom. 1. p. 287. William Clark his
Reply to Father Parsons Libel, printed 1603. fol. 17, to 32, which being the
very condition and complaint of our Godly Protestant Ministers in most places
throughout the Nation at this day, is no doubt a storm of these Jesuits
raising, a very Plot and Design of their hatching, fomenting to ruin our
Ministers and their Ministry now, as they would have done their own Secular
Priests then in England, to advance their own power, profit, 2ly. It is evident
by See Watsons Quod^ibets, p. 93, 94, 281. Parsons his Manifestation, fol. 61.
William Watsons Reply to Parsons Libel, fol. 74.
Rob. Parsons and other Jesuits old Project for Reformation of England, when
they should get power in it: To take away all Lands, Manors, Benefices and
settled Maintenance of the Church from the English Clergy and Universities, and
make all Ministers, and Scholars mere Pensioners and Stipendiaries at their
pleasure^, set up Itinerary Preachers fixed to no particular Church, (like our
wandering Quakers, Anabaptists, Sectaries of late) instead of Parochial Pastors,
of which more anon. 3ly. Alfonsus de Vargas Toletanus: in his Relatio ad Reges
and Principes Christianos, De Stratagematis Politicis Societatis Jesu, ad
Monarchiam Orbis terrarum sibi conficiendam; printed 1641. cap. 40, to 51.
proves at large out of the Jesuits own printed Defense and other Writings;
That these new Doctors, of no Conscience, no Faith, no honesty or shame, have
persuaded the Emperor and other Kings, against their Oaths, Trusts, Duties,
Charters, the Law of Nations, and all Divine and Human Laws, that it was
lawful for them, upon a pretext of Necessity, for the ease of the people, and
Maintenance of their Wars, Soldiers, to alienate the Lands, Revenues,
Maintenance of Abbeys, Religious men and of the Church, upon Soldiers, for the
defense of their Bodies, and of the Church; that so themselves might gain a
share of them for the advantage of their own Societies, contrary to the wills,
intentions of the first Donors and Founders: Whereupon he thus justly jeers
them, cap. 46. p. 222. That the institution of the Jesuits Society peculiarly
tends to this, that their Colleges should be instituted and Society maintained
out of the ruins of the Church, and rapines of other men's Goods, a quibus
Societatis Institutor et Conditor Ignatius, cum etiamnum ad legionem bellator
esset, minime alienus fuisse, nec a solita Militum rapacitate quicquam
demutasse, sine ulla ejus contumelia creditur, etsi autem Militiam mutavit ac
simul cum Sociorum ne dicam furum manipulo Christo Imperatori Sacramentum
dixit, non propterea rapinam omnem ejerare necesse habuit, etc. he remaining a
PLUNDERER still, after he became a SAINT: Seeing the Prophet Isay seems thus
to prophecy both of his Rapine and Wound in his halting Leg, cap. 33. Tunc
dividentur Spolia multarum praedarum: Claudi diripient rapinam. Therefore no
wonder this Spirit of Rapine continues in his Disciples: who doubtless have
infused the self-same Spirit of Rapine into our Anabaptists and Soldiers, into
whose Societies they have secretly insinuated themselves; somenting and
intending to lengthen out our wars so long, of purpose to make a prey of our
remaining Church-Revenues, Rectories, Tithes, and College lands too at last,
(as they have done of other Church-Revenues already dissipated) out of a
pretext of Necessity, as is most transparant to all Intelligent peoples eyes,
thereby to destroy our Religion by devouring our Ministers, Churches
Patrimonies, the probable, if not inevitable consequence of this Jesuitical
project, if effected, as is most apparent by this notable passage of Roderyck
Mors formerly a Gray Friar, in his Complaint and Supplication to the Parliament
of England, about 37 H. 8. after the Dissolution of Monasteries, pertinent to
my purpose, and as worthy consideration now as then, Ye that be Lords and
Burgesses of the Parliament House, (writes he) I require of you in the name of
my poor Brethren that are Englishmen and Members of Christ's Body, that ye
consider well (as ye will answer before the face of Almighty God in the day of
judgment) this abuse, and see it amended. When Antichrist of Rome durst openly
without any visor walk up and down thorowout England, he had so great favor
there, and his Children had such crafty wits (for the Children of this World
are wiser in their Generation than the Children of Light) they had not only
almost gotten all the best Lands of England into their hands, but also most
part of the best Benefices both of Parsonages and Vicarages which were for the
most part The Impropriations held by them were much more than the 3d. part of
all the Parish Churches of England divided into 3 parts, and of greater value
than the other 2 parts in Priests and Ministers hands.
all improved to them. And when they had the gifts of any not improved, they
gave them unto their Friends, of the which always some were learned, for the
Monks found of their Friends Children at School. And though they were not
learned, yet they kept Hospitality and helped their poor Friends. And if the
Parsonages were impropred, the Monks were bound to deal Alms to the poor and
to keep Hospitality, as the writings of the Gifts of such Parsonages and Lands
do plainly declare in these words, In puram Eleemosynam. And as touching the
Alms that they dealt, and the Hospitality that they kept, every man knows,
that many thousands were well relieved of them, and might have been better, if
they had not had so many great Men's Horse to feed, and had not been
overcharged with such idle Gentlemen, as were never out of the Abbeys. And if
they had any Vicarage in their hands, they set in some time some sufficient
Vicar, (though it were but seldom) to preach and to teach. But now that all the
Abbeys, with their Lands, Goods and impropred Parsonages be in temporal men's
hands, I do not hear tell that one half penny worth of Alms, or any other profit
comes unto the people of those Parishes. Your pretense of putting down Abbeys,
was to amend that was amiss in them. It was far amiss, that a great part of the
Lands of the Abbeys (which were given to bring up learnned men that might be
Preachers, to keep Hospitality and give Alms to the poor) should be spent upon
a few Superstitious Monks, which gave not XL. pound in Alms, when they should
have given CC. It was amiss, that the Monks should have Parsonages in their
hands, and deal but the XX. part thereof to the poor, and preached but once in
a year to them that paid the Tithes of Parsonages. It was amiss, that they
scarcely among XX set not one sufficient Vicar to preach for the Tithes that
they received. But see now, how it that was amiss, is amended, for all the
Pretense. It is amended even as the Devil amended his Dams Leg (as it is in the
Proverb) when he should have set it right, he brake it quite in pieces. The
Monks gave too little Alms, and set unable Persons many times in their
Benefices. But now where xx. pound was yearly given to the poor, in more than
C. places in England is not one meals meat given. This is a fair Amendment.
Where they had always one or other Vicar, that either preached or hired some
to preach, Now is there no Vicar at all: but the Farmor is Vicar and Parson
altogether, and only an old cast away Monk or Friar which can scarcely say his
Mattins, is hired for xx. or xxx. shillings Meat and Drink, yea in some places
for Meat and Drink alone, without any wages. I know, and not I alone, but xx.
M. mo, know more than D. (we may now add 5000.) Vicarages and Parsonages thus
well Gospelly served, (yea not served at all, but the Church Doors quite shut
up) after the New Gospel of England. So he.

This doubtless will be the general sad condition of all England (as it is now
in most part of Wales) if Tithes and Rectories be quite voted down, abolished,
or disposed to the Soldiers, or brought into a common Treasury (which will
hardly leave Ministers the Tenth of their Tithes, as our late Sequestrators
left not the Tenth nor fifth part clear gains, and value, of all Sequestrations
generally throughout England, to the State, as I found by examination of their
Accounts upon Oath) which is now so violently prosecuted, endeavored by many.
And then we shall have a glorious blessed Reformation indeed, according to the
Popes and Jesuits hearts desires, who like ravening Wolves will make a prey of
all Flocks in the defect and absence of able Pastors, through want of
Maintenance and poverty, as they have done in many places throughout the Realm,
seduced by them to Jesuitism, Anabaptism, Atheism, through defect of able
Ministers, and ejection of former Incumbent Pastors under pretext of Scandal,
Insufficiency, or Malignity, by Arbitrary or Anabaptistical Committees,
Sequestrators, Prosecutors, without any legal Trial by their Peers, or any care
at all to place better, abler, or any Minister at all in diverse Parishes in
their places: Whereupon these active Jesuits, with other Romish Emissacries
under the Disguises of Anabaptists, Seekers, Dippers, inspired Brethren,
Quakers, Ranters, Soldiers, New Illuminates of extraordinary Endowments, and
Itinerary Predicants, who pretend to preach the Gospel freely, have seduced
thousands, divided the people into sundry Sects, and almost ruined our Church
and Religion in a short space, which they will soon accomplish to their hearts
content, can they now but vote down Tithes, Glebes, and set up New Committees
in all places of their own and the Anabaptistical party, (concurring in Design
and most principles with the Jesuits, as Page 26, to 31, 169, 186.
Watson in his Quodlibets, and others prove at large) to eject our remaining
Ministers at their pleasure, under pretext they are Antichristian, Scandalous,
and no Ministers of Jesus Christ (as John Can and others have already
prejudge^ them) that they and their Agents may step into their places; and at
last, when all their Designs against our State, Church, Governm. are produced
to maturity, reassume their Tithes, Rectories, with our Bishops, Deans,
Chapters and Abbey Lands too into their actual possession, according to the
Jesuit Parsons and his Companions long prosecuted project, at large related by
William Watson the Priest in his Quodlibets, p. 93, 94, 98, 288, ^89, 332, 333.
with other plots lately prosecuted ad unguem to subvert our Religion, Laws,
Government, Monarchy, and enslave us to the Jesuits, Popes, Spaniards Tyranny
and Vassalage in conclusion; first laid by Parsons and other pragmatical
Jesuits, then seconded by Thomas Campanella, in his Treatise De Monarchia
Hispanica c. 25.27. and elsewhere: prosecuted of late years by the Jesuits and
Spanish Agents on the one hand; and Cardinal Richilieu and his Instruments on
the other hand; who at his death in the beginning of our late Wars (which he
was very instrumental to raise) recommended the prosecution of them to the
French King and his Successor Cardinal Mazarin; as A Noble Italian Count, Conte
Galliazzo Gualdo Priorato, in his Historia, part 3. printed at Venice in 4to.
Anno 1648. (dedicated by him to the King of Poland, and written in Italian) p.
175, 176 records in these words, worthy all English Statesmens special notice:
where Writing of the affairs of the year 1642. and the death of Cardinal
Richelieu in particular, he records, That amongst other things he caused some
Papers to be delivered before his death to the King of France, full of Policies
and Maxims of State, directing him how to carry on his Business with all
Foreign States. His advice in relation to England was this. Che Sopra, etc. That
above all other things the King of France should endeavor to keep the
Government of Great Britain divided, by upholding the weakest party, that the
other might not make it self too powerful; Reducing the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland to be divided (by one of these two means or both) either
by nominating (new) Kings: or by reducting them to a Commonwealth. Yet with
this Caution, that when they are reduced to a Commonwealth, So to order it,
that it may not be entirely one, but divided: For Republiques ever enemies to
Potent Neighbors, and Jealous of their Liberties, ought to be Suspected by the
State of France. How punctually this advice has been pursued by the French (as
well as Parsons and Campanellaes Plots of like nature by the Spaniards) those
who please to peruse the Lord George Digbies Cabinet Letters (printed in the
Collection of all the Public Orders, Ordinances and Declarations of
Parliament in folio, by the Commons Order) 1646. p. 849, 858, 862, 863, 866,
867. and my Speech in Parliament p. 118. and 106, to 114. may read at leisure,
and every man's observing experience can sufficiently attest. The Lord now at
last give us hearts to be deeply sensible of it, and grace, zeal, courage to
make timely use of it for the Preservation of our Kingdoms, Nations, Churches,
Ministers, Religion from impendent ruin.

Having given the world this brief Account of the principal Promoters,
Prosecutors of the present Grand Plot against our Ministers, their Tithes and
Rectories, I cannot upon serious consideration of it but foresee and divine,
that if all or any of these Projectors (through Gods heavy Judgment on us for
our sins, and detestable violations of all Oaths, Vows, Covenants, Trusts,
Protestations, Promises, Declarations Divine and Human Laws) should by power,
fraud, policy, or armed force so far prevail with our present Legifers or
Swaying Grandees, as totally to take away and abolish the Rectories, Tithes and
present settled Maintenance of our Ministry, for the Soldiers pay, or other
ends; or else secretly to bring them all into a Common Treasury, and reduce all
our Ministers to set arbitrary Stipends out of them, to dispossess them of the
future actual possession of them, and make them wholly dependent on the
arbitrary discretions of new intruding Landlords into their Churches,
Patrimonies, Freeholds from whom they never received them at first; as it would
inevitably produce a world of mischiefs and Inconveniences both to all Patrons
and Parishioners throughout the Nation, without the least Ease or Benefit to
the People; so it would certainly either totally ruin our Ministers, making
them all poor Friars Mendicants, neglecting their Callings, Studies, to get
their living by begging from door to door, and as In. 2 lib. Regum c. 5. f. 240.
Peter Martyr observes, to be ventris potius quam Ecclesiae Ministros, ostiatim
valide Mendicare, and non Mendicantes, sed Manducantes appellari: and thereby
subvert our Church and Religion with them in very few years space, open such a
wide door for the Pope and whole body of Popery to flow in upon us again with
an impetuous irresistible Deluge, that we should no ways be able to resist
their progress till they were re-estated in their former Supremacy and
Prevalency amongst us. And then rhose very Romish Factors who are now so
violent against Tithes and Rectories, of purpose to starve our Ministers out of
them, and their Ministry for the present, will not only forthwith resume (as
they did in See 1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. c. 8. 1 Mar. Sess. 2. c. 3. Fox Acts
and Monuments vol. 3.
Queen Mary's days) their pristine abolished Pontifical Power, and set up
their Ecclesiastical Consistories, High Commissions, and bloody Inquisitions
amongst us, higher than ever they were in former ages, to the utter extirpation
of our Protestant Ministers and Professors too, but likewise presently resume
into their hands all those Rectories, Tithes and ancient Dues, whereof they now
endeavor to deprive our Ministers; with all our late Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Chapters, Cathedrals Lands and Revenues, as Sacrilegiously alienated
from the Church, against the Laws both of God and Man, as well as against
their Popish Gratian Cause. 16. qu. 1, and 7.
Canons, by those who had no right to dispose of them, if they proceed to
resume all Abbey Lands too in Protestant hands at least. And then all late or
ancient Purchasers of such Lands, now confederating with them out of
Covetousness, Ambition, Rapine, or other respects, will repent too late of
their inconsiderable, unrighteous, unchristian compliance with them against our
Ministers Glebes and Tithes, and have as ill a Bargain in conclusion, as diverse
old Projectors had in the purchase of our Crown Revenues, when resumed, or
settled in the Crown again, by many special See 1 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 148. 1 H.
4 n. 48, 100, 141. 6 H. 4. n, 14, 15. 8 H. 4. n. 52. 28 H. 6. n. 53. 33 H. 6.
n. 47. ^ Edw. 4. ^. n. 39.12 1.4. n. 6. 1 H. 5. c. 9. 31 H. 6. c. 7. with those
Resumptions in former Ages, recorded in Daniels History and others.
Acts of Resumption, for the public weal and ease of the people in their
Taxes, as being the constant, standing Revenue of the whole Kingdom to defray
its ordinary public Expenses, which none can or ought to Alien or purchase
from the Republic to enrich themselves by the public Loss. Wherefore I shall
now refer it to their saddest thoughts to consider, whether it will not be far
safer for all such Army Officers and others who have purchased Church Lands, to
join together with all such zealous Protestants who desire the continuance of
our Ministers ancient Tithes and Maintenance (more aimed at than Impropriators
Tithes) against these Jesuits and Romish Emissaries now oppugning them; and to
use their utmost endeavors to detect, apprehend, prosecute, execute all our
former good Laws against them, to prevent their mischievous present and future
Designs against our Ministry, Church, Religion, Nation; than ignorantly or
wittingly to confederate with and assist them to accomplish their present
Sacrilegious Projects, to ruin us (and themselves with their Posterities) in
conclusion; and thereby incur the self-same Crime, Charge of High Treason which
themselves and the whole Parliament of England so lately prosecuted against
Canterbury in the 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, and 14. See Canterburies Doom, n. 26,
27, etc.
Articles of his original Charge, for which he lost his head on Tower Hill.

To draw to a cloze of this Proposition, I shall desire all truly fearing God
throughout the Nation and Army too, sadly to consider these particulars.

1. That those who are the chiefest Sticklers against Tithes and our Ministers
settled coercive Maintenance (especially Jesuits and Anabaptists) are the
greatest professed open Adversaries to our Ministry, Church, Religion of all
others, desiring nothing but their utter ruin, as their late printed Pamphlets
and Petitions manifest: Therefore to gratify them in their Designs herein, is
to ruin all at once, for whose defense we have spent so much Christian Blood,
Treasure, pains of late years, against the Common Enemy and Jesuited Popish
Party.

2. That many of those who in their printed Papers, have decryed our Ministers
Tithes and coercive Maintenance as inconsistent with the Peoples Liberties, and
a great Bondage to them, have as The Levellers late printed Fundamental Laws
and Liberties. n. 15, 16, 25, 27.
earnestly declaimed against all Enclosures, Copy hold Tenures, Landlords old
Rents, Services, ancient Customs, Imposts* which being not so ancient, nor
ratified by so many Statutes, Charters, Muniments of all sorts as Tithes are,
will not be able to stand before their Opposition and Arguments against them,
if our Tithes and Ministers Glebes should once fall before them

3. That if our besotted Nation shall be so stupid as to admit or permit any
company of persons whatsoever a sufficient Legal Power or Jurisdiction without
any pretended Crime, Attainder, Legal Conviction, or Trial by their Peers, at
their mere wills and arbitrary discretions, to deprive all our godly Ministers
throughout the Nation of their Rectories, Tithes and ancient Dues, though
ratified by the Law yea Gospel of God himself, by an uninterrupted Title,
Prescription in their Predecessors from the very first planting of the Gospel
in our Nation, and more hundreds of years, than the antientest Families in the
Nation have enjoyed their Inheritances, by more Charters of our Kings, more
particular Laws, Statutes of our successive Parliaments in all ages, than all
the Nobility, Gentry, Corporations, Commons of the Realm are able to produce
for the Rights, Titles, Defense of their particular Lands and Inheritances,
against the Rapines, Intrusions, Claims, Seisures, Confiscations, Sales,
Alienations of any either claiming or usurping such a Power or Jurisdiction by
the Sword or otherwise: They will thereby both admit them and invest them in as
sufficient a Legal Power and Jurisdiction, without the least pretended Crime,
Attainder, Legal Conviction, or Trial by their Peers, at their mere arbitrary
wills and Discretions, to deprive, strip all the Nobility, Gentry,
Corporations, Commons of the Realm of all their Manors, Lands, Inheritances,
Estates, Chattels, Privileges, Franchises whatsoever; being not so well fenced
by the Laws of God and Men against their Rapines and Depredations as Tithes
are; and those who will make no conscience upon any grounds or pretenses to
invade the one, will make no Scruple to act the other, as the Histories of
Speeds Hist. p. 733, etc. 836, 849, 850, 851. Sleidens Comment. l. 7. c. 10.
Jack Cade and his Accomplices Practices, Designs at home, and the Anabaptists
abroad will sufficiently attest. Yea it will be but just with God to engage
such Arbitrary Powers to act the later, to the ruin of them and their
families, if they shall either assist, permit, encourage them by their silence
or cowardice, to perpetrate the other, to the disinheriting of the Church, the
ruin of their faithful Ministers themselves, and that very Religion which
they pretend to profess and practice.

4. That as Tithes are the fittest Maintenance for Ministers of all others, as
invented, appointed by the very Wisdom of God himself, and the best, the wisest
of his Saints in all ages; holding the self-same proportion in relation to the
Ministers and Parishioners in times of Plenty and Dearth, good years or bad,
fair harvests or foul, rising or the falling of the prices of Corn, Lands, and
other Commodities; affecting them both alike with the mercy and bounty of God
in times of Plenty, and the Judgments of God in times of Scarcity, or
unseasonable weather; more easily parted with by the Countryman in kind, by
several small parcels as they grow due, than in ready money in one or two
entire sums, which they are most loath to render and part from of any thing, as
that they 1 Timothy 6.10. Eccles. 5.10.
most affect: yea far less troublesome to, more convenient for our Ministers
Persons, families and necessary Cattle, than bare stipends, which must enforce
them to run to Markets to buy all their Corn and other provisions both for
their Household, Horses, Cattle at the dearest rates. So if this Maintenance by
Tithes be once abolished, either before any other competent Maintenance settled
in its steed, less grievous and inconvenient than Tithes, (which all wise men
in the world will never be able to invent, much less to establish as things
now are settled;) or Ministers left wholly to an arbitrary, unconstrained
Benevolence without any limited Proportion, or means to recover it if detained,
as some now petition: This expected proposed unconstrained Maintenance would in
verity and reality, signify just Nothing, and be no Maintenance at all, in the
Petitioners own sense and intention; as appears by John Cannes forecited
passages, and the very words of their Petitions; since they refuse to pay them
their very Tithes yet due by Law, and never freely contributed one penny to
them for their Ministry, which they revile, disclaim as Antichristian.
Wherefore if any Newfangled Politicians resolve to settle such a new
Maintenance only instead of the old, for the peoples pretended Ease; let them
first establish, settle an arbitrary Excise, Custom, uncoercive voluntary
Impost, and monthly Contribution as this on the people for Maintenance of the
Army and Navy, (not so simply necessary as the Ministry for our real welfare)
without any compulsory means to recover it if not freely rendered, till the next
harvest come, and see what a competent Maintenance that will be for the
Soldiers and Seamen; and provide that all Tenants for the year ensuing, shall
render only what Rents they please to the State, their Landlords, and Lessees,
who shall have no power to distrain, sue, or enter upon any of them in case
they deny to pay their Rents: and try what a certain Annual Revenue this
whimsy will produce to the States and Landlords purses: Or else give over this
Jesuitical Anabaptistical devised new Maintenance for our Ministers, as a
Stratagem only to starve their bodies, and their Peoples souls, without any
more Debates concerning Tithes, to gratify such malicious Projectors, and
offend all Godly people through the Nation, who deem this old way of
Maintenance, of Gods own Prescription, far better, less inconvenient in all
respects than this arbitrary or any other newfangled way of these or other
men's invention.

5ly. That although God by his divine Providence is able to support the
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, though totally stripped naked of all their
Glebes, Tithes, ancient Maintenance, through the unrighteousness or malice of
ungodly men, as he did the Apostles and his Ministers in all ages, in times of
Persecution; yet let all such who have, or shall have a hand in such a
Sacrilegious design consider,

1. That they shall be as bitter Enemies to and Persecutors of the Ministers of
Christ amongst us in and by this very Project, as See Nicephorus Eccles. Hist.
l. 10. Gent. Magd. 4. c. 3.14.
Julian the Apostate Christian was to Gods faithful Ministers in the primitive
Times, when he took away their Preferments, Glebes, and Church Revenues; as the
High Commissioners and Prelates were of late to all those godly Puritan
Ministers whom they deprived of their Benefices for Nonconformity to their
Ceremonies, and no real Crime deserving such an inhuman Censure, depriving them
of their Livelyhoods.

2ly. That they shall hereby draw a great Scandal upon our very Religion it
self, Church, Nation, render them odious, Sacrilegious to all foreign Churches,
Nations; gratify, rejoice the hearts of the Pope, Jesuits, Papists and other
professed Enemies of our Religion; accomplish their Designs against our Church
and Ministers; exceedingly sad the hearts, and grieve the righteous souls of
all Gods faithful Saints amongst us, of all Protestant Churches in Foreign
parts, and draw this just Censure on themselves. 2 Pet. 2.14, 15. An heart they
have exercised with covetous practices, cursed Children, which have forsaken
the right way, and are gone astray following the way of Balaam, the son of
Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness. These are wells without water,
Clouds carried with a Tempest, to whom is reserved the mist of darkness for
ever.

3ly. That although God should miraculously preserve a faithful able Ministry
and his true Religion still amongst us through the bounty and charity of other
well affected Christians, yet they have done their uttermost endeavors to
destroy them, and the peoples souls with them, both for the present and
succeeding ages.

4ly. That this unrighteous violent act will in all probability bring in a
world of Confusion, Atheism, Schisms, Heresies, Divisions, Contentions,
Blasphemies, disorders amongst us, in all places; a Amos 8.11.
famine of the sincere preaching of Gods word; a neglect and contempt of
Learning and Piety; a Ante haec s^c existimatum est, speciosa struere sapientum
esse, and civilis vitae scientium; structa demolire, stultorum and vecordis
animi signa ad posteros transmittere, non erubescentiam: Procopius Gothico^ii.
l. 3. Grotius de Jure Belli. p. 522.
dilapidation, Spoliation of all or most Parish Churches, Chapels; a confusion
of the bounds of all Parishes, and Parochial Congregations; and bring all those
Calamities on our Nation, as it did upon the Israelites when Jeroboam thrust
out the Priests and Levites from their Glebes, Suburbs, Ministry: thus
registered 2 Chronicles. 15.3, 5, 6. Now for a long season Israel was without the
true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without Law (as some would have us
now) And in those days (mark the consequence) there was no peace to him that
went out, nor to him that came in, but great veration upon all the Inhabitants
of the Country: And Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City, for God
did vex them withal Adversity.In which condition they continued, till King Asa
and the people renewed, repaired the decayed Altar, House and worship of the
Lord, Gathered all the people to Jerusalem to worship God, and enter into a
Solemn Covenant and Oath to serve the Lord God of their Fathers, with all their
hearts, and with all their soul: And that whosoever would not seek the Lord God
of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great, man or woman: Offered
Sacrifices to the Lord of the Spoil they had taken from the Enemy, 700. Oxen
and 7000. Sheep; and brought into the house of God, the things that his Father
had dedicated, and himself had dedicated, Silver and Gold and Vessels (formerly
taken thence) and then there was no more war in diverse years. v. 8. to the end
of the Chapter. And probably our Wars, Taxes, Vexations will never end, till we
give over our late irreligious, Sacrilegious Rapines, Church Robberies, and do
the like, as this pious King and his people here did.

5ly. That this discouraging, robbing, abusing, despising, mocking, misusing,
of Gods Messengers, Prophets sent amongst us, and of all his and their words
against our wicked Atheistical, Sacrilegious Rapines, is the High way to
provoke the wrath of God to rise against us till there be no remedy, yea to
bring in a powerful Foreign Nation upon us to pillage, waste, destroy, enslave
our whole Nation, extirpate us out of the Land of our Nativity, and carry us
Captives to a Foreign Nation, as it did Gods own people heretofore. 2 Chronicles.
36.15, to 22. Sufficient motives to deter us from such a dangerous practice.

6ly. I must inform our Army Officers and Soldiers, that it is expressly
against the very Laws and Rules of War even in a Foreign Enemies Country won by
Conquest, to rob, destroy, pillage Churches, Temples, or things devoted for the
Maintenance of Gods public Worship; which not only the best Christian
Generals, and Soldiers, but many Heathen and Mohammedan Generals, Princes,
Commanders made conscience not to plunder, deface, demolish or substract, as
Grotius proves at large by many instances in his Book De Jure Belli. l. 3. c.
2, 12. sect. 6, 7, 8. Annotata on them. How much more then is it against the
Law of War and Arms it self to make a prey, plunder of Churches, Rectories,
Glebes, Tithes in their own native Country, against their own Consciences,
Covenants, Commissions to defend them? Yea such Generals, Soldiers and whole
Armies who have made no Conscience to observe it, have been frequently
destroyed for their Sacrilege, as many Heathen Historians observe, as well as
Christian: Herodotus, in my Edition p. 7, 8, 44, 167, 168, 169, 170, 187, 349,
350, 460, 461, 568. Diodorus Siculus Bibl. Hist. p. 622, 781, 782. Dion Cassius
Romans Hist. p. 589. Justini Historia l. 8. p. 87. l. 24. p. 227, to 231, 269,
271, 308. Caelius Rhodiginus Ant. Lect. l. 18. c. 29 Eutropius Rer. Romans Hist.
p. 175, 228, 334. Paulus Diaconus p. 417. Nicetus Hist. p. 48, 50. Laurentius
Begerlink. Chronogra: p. 137, 189, 263. record sundry examples of this kind,
both among Pagans and Christians, to deter others from this dangerous
destructive sin: which if they neglect and scorn, I shall then desire them to
remember that saying of Euripedes an Heathen Poet in his Troadibus, that he
shall receive the like exemplary punishment.

Homo quisquis urbes vastat, and Dis Manibus
Seeds Sacratas, Templaque, haud recte sapit,
Nam similis ipsum Pestis Excidii manet
7ly. It is the Resolution of De Beneficiis p. 121.
Seneca the Philosopher. Quisquis id quod Deorum est, sustulerit and
consumpsit, atqu^ in usum suum vertit, sacrilegus est: and all Gratian Cause.
16. qu. 4. summa Angelica and Rosella, Tit. Sacrilegium.
Canonists, Casuists, Schoolmen, Divines whatsoever accord; That it is
Sacrilege for any Persons or Powers whatsoever to invade or take away any thing
which our Ancestors or any others have solemnly vowed, dedicated for the
necessary maintenance of Gods public worship and Ministers under what
specious pretext soever it be done. Therefore to take away or abolish our
Ministers Tithes, Glebes, Rectories and other Dues conferred on them by our
pious Ancestors, and make spoil, havoc of the Churches, Edifices erected by
them for Gods public worship, must questionless be Sacrilege; as God himself
expressly defines, Mal. 3.8, 9. With all commentators thereon, old and new; and
Gratian Cause. 16. qu. 1. This the famous Emperor, Soldier Charles the Great,
and Ludovicus surnamed the Godly and most Christian, jointly resolve, Capit.
Caroli and Ludovici l. 6. cap. 285, 295, 296, 115, 305. and l. 7. c. 104. where
they thus conclude. Scimus res Ecclesiae Deo esse sacratas; Scimus eas esse
vota Fidelium, and pretia peccatorum. Quapropter, si quis eas ab Ecclesiis
quibus a Fidelibus collatae Deoque Sacratae sunt, aufert, proculdubio
Sacrilegium committit. Caecus enim est qui ista non videt, etc. Si ergo amico
quippiam rapere furtum est, Ecclesiae vero fraudari, vel abstrahi indubitanter
Sacrilegium est Omnes enim contra Legem facientes Resque Ecclesiae dirimentes,
vel Ecclesias Sacerdotesque contra Divinas Sanctiones vexantes Sacrilegi
vocantur, atque Indubitanter infames Sacrilegique Habendi sunt, etc. What
Penalties have been inflicted upon such who were guilty of this sin by
Christian Princes in foreign parts: I shall briefly inform this Sacrilegious
age. Fredericus Lindebrogus Codex Legu^ Antiquarum. p. 257,
Theodoricus King of the Goths in his Edict. c. 125. enacted: That if any man
should violently take any thing from Churches, he should lose his head. And
Alaricus the Gothish King, though an Arrian, when he took Rome by force of
Arms, and his Soldiers had taken the Sacred Vessels out of St. Peter's Church
there, and brought them to him; commanded them to carry them back again to the
Church, with their own hands which took them thence, ut cupiditas quae
depraedationis ambitu admiserat scelus, devotione largissima deleret excessum:
as Cassiodor relates, l. 12. Epist. 20. Among the Fredericus Lindebrogus Codex
Legum Antiquarum p. 508, 702.
Friseans Laws made by their wisemen, Tit. 12. De Honor Templorum; this is
one; He who shall break a Church, and take away the holy things thence, let him
be carried to the Sea, and in the Sand which the Tide is wont to cover, let his
cares be slit, and he be gelt, and then let him be sacrificed to the Gods whose
Temples he has violated. The Neopolitan Laws l. 1. Tit. 5. enact; That
whosoever shall violently break open a Church, and take away any Gifts or
consecrated Vessels thence, shall be punished as a Capital Off^nder, and lose
his life. Fredericus Lindebrogus Ibid. p. 997, 998. Bochellus Decret. Eccles.
Gal. l. 8. Tit. 61. p. 1308.
Charles the Great and Jews the Godly, enacted; That if any person violently
took from any Church, Priest or Minister any thing belonging to them, and were
convicted thereof, or confessed the same, he should have sentence of death
given against him, as guilty of Sacrilege, and that it should be not only
lawful, but commendable, to prosecute and avenge this Sacrilege and Injury
done to the Church, Priests and Ministers, as a public Crime, deserving
punishment, and that if any did Sacrilegiously invade or molest the Possessions
and Lands of the Church, he should be perpetually banished for it. Capit.
Caroli and Ludovici l. 6. Tit. 113, 125. And Tit. 305. they thus determine. All
things that are offered to the Lord, are without all doubt consecrated to the
Lord, and not only the Sacrifices, which by the Priests are consecrated upon
the Altar to the Lord, are called the Oblations of the faithful, but what
things soever are offered to him by the faithful, whether in Sacrifices or in
Fields, Vineyards, Woods, Meadows, Waters, Water-streams, Artifices, Books,
Utensils, Stones, Buildings, Vestments, Wools, Garments, Cattle, Parchments,
Movables and Immoveables, or whatsoever, which of these things are made to the
praise of God, or the Supplement of the holy Church of God, and his Priests,
and which may give ornament unto them, whether they be freely offered by any
one to the Lord and his Church, are undoubtedly consecrated to the Lord, and
belong to the Priests Right. And because we truly acknowledge the Lord and his
Church to be one person; what ever things are the Churches are Christ's; and
whatsoever is offered to the Church, either in the aforesaid things, or in any
other Kinds, or by promises or pledges, or writings, or in corporal things are
offered unto Christ, and what thin^s by any devise are alienated or taken from
his Church, either by alienating, or by wasting, or invading, or by
diminishing, or by rapine, are taken from Christ. And if it be Robbery to take
any thing from a friend, it is Sacrilege to take away, alienate, substract, or
waste any thing especially from Christ, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords.
For all Robbers of the Church are most apparently Sacrilegious persons, and no
Sacrilegious person, unless by pure, approved and public Repentance, and by
satisfaction to the Church, and by imposition of the Bishops hands, and
reconciliation according to the Canonical Sanctions, shall Inherit the Kingdom
of God; and shall not only be secluded the Kingdom of God, but likewise be shut
out of the limits of the Church, especially of the Church he has ruined, and
shall be excommunicated thence, until the foresaid Satisfaction given. And the
perpetrators of such wickednesses, ought to have no Communion at all, either
with the living or dead, till after such Satisfaction given. Because who ever
violently takes away his Neighbors money, commits Iniquity, but Sacrilegious
persons are not only Thieves, but likewise Wolves and Man-slayers and Murderers
of the poor, and accursed, damned persons before God and his Saints.

And if so, as these two pious Emperors, by their Laws, with many Sr. James
Semple Sacrilege sacred^y handled. Sir Henry Spelman de non Temerandis
Ecclesiis. Mr. Seldens Review. Dr. Sclaters Ministers Portion. Summa Angelica,
Rosella and Tho. Zerula Tit. Sacrilegium: with many more.
Protestant Writers (as well as Papists) resolve; and all Sacrilegious Persons,
taking any Vessel or Vtensil out of a Church, though of small value by our See
We is Presidents, Indictments and Offenses. Sect 196, 197. p. 127, 128. 1 E. 6.
c. 12
own Laws too, as well as theirs, be Sacrilegious Persons worthy to suffer
pains of death, as Felons; those who shall openly Sacrilegiously Rob, or
attempt to Rob and spoil all the Godly painful Ministers of our Nation of all
their Tithes, Rectories, Glebes, Churches and Churchyards too at once, are
doubtless Sacrilegious Persons in the highest degree, deserving to suffer a
temporal infamous death and execution, (better than any Highway Thieves or
Robbers) at Tiburn, or to be eternally banished the Nation, Articuli Cleri. 9
E. 2. c. 12.
excommunicated all Christian Society, and had in perpetual execration, for
this Sacrilegious Rapine, both by God himself and all good men, unless they
repent and make full public Restitution, Satisfaction for this their
detestable Sacrilege.

Object.
Lastly, If any Officers or Soldiers pretend, we are now a Conquered Nation;
that Conquest makes all sacred things, profane and common to the Conquerors;
and that Churches may be justly spoiled of their Materials, Vessels, Glebes,
Tithes, in such a case for the pay and benefit of the Conquering Soldiers, as
Grotius De Jure Belli. l. 3. c. 5.
some affirm. Therefore they may now justly deprive our Ministers of their
Tithes, Glebes, Rectories, Churches, Churchyards, to pay, maintain themselves
and the Conquering Army, yea alter, change our Laws at present; as they now
attempt, and diverse of them openly profess they intend to do.

I Answer, Answ.
1. That the Lords and Commons, the very last Parliament, when they first
raised the Army, in Exact Collection p. 617.631.
their Petition to the late King, sent to his Excellency the Earl of Essex, to
the Army, and by him presented to his Majesty Sept. 24. 1642. or soon after,
used this expression. That the prevailing Popish party with his Majesty, who
by many wicked Plots and Conspiracies have attempted the Alteration of the true
Religion, and the ancient Government of the Kingdom, the introducing of Popish
Idolatry and Superstition into the Church, and tyranny and confusion into the
State, and by corrupting his Councels, abusing his Power, and sudden and
untimely dissolving of former Parliaments, had often hindered the Reformation
and Prevention of those Mischiefs. And in prosecution of those wicked Designs,
had ( as the most Mischievous and Bloody Design of all) drawn his Majesty to
make War against his Parliament and good Subjects of this Kingdom, and to lead
in person an Army against them; as if he intended by Conquest (mark the word)
to establish an absolute and unlimited power over them. And in their Exact
Collection p. 730.
Remonstrance Nov. 2. 1642. in Reply to his Majesty's Answer to their
Remonstrance of May 26. 1642. they charge this as the last Doctrine and Position
of the Contrivers of his Majesty's Answer; That the Representative body of the
whole Kingdom, is a Faction of Malignant, Schismatical, and ambitious persons,
whose designs is and always has been to alter the whole frame of Government
both of Church and State, and to subject both King and People to their own
lawless arbitrary Power and Government, and that they design the ruin of his
Majesty's Person and of Monarchy it self; and consequently that they are
Traitors, and all the Kingdom with them: (for their Act is the Act of the whole
Kingdom) And whether their Punishment and Ruin, may not also involve the whole
Kingdom in conclusion, and reduce it into the condition of a Conquered Nation
(mark the words) no man can tell: but experience shows us (as now it does in
good earnest more than ever) that Success often carries men not only beyond
their Profession, but also many times beyond their first Intentions. For an
Army, Officers then, professing themselves true born English men, eminent Godly
Saints, preservers of our Nations Liberties against Regal Tyranny and
Enchroachments, originally raised, Commissioned by both Houses to protect our
Laws, Liberties, Religion, Church, Government, Parliament, Nation, from an
intended Conquest by the late Kings Army; to establish an absolute unlimited
power over us, and from being reduced into the condition of a Conquered Nation,
after the total routing of the Kings Army, Power, now at last to plead, to
averr, we are now a conquered Nation; in respect of themselves, and thereupon
to endeavor to establish an absolute unlimited power over us, by altering the
whole frame of Government both in Church and State, changing the body of our
Laws yea ancient constitution of our Parliaments; abolishing our very
Ministers Rectories, Tithes, Dues, or diverting them to pay, maintain
themselves; yea now to act over the very self-same things, which both Houses
then charged upon the late beheaded King and his Malignant Popish Council;
thereby verifying these his Predictions of their forementioned designs in every
Punctilio, (then utterly disclaimed by both Houses as the Highest Scandal to
them, and their sincere loyal Intentions) and making him a truer Prophet, than
their new Merlin, Lilly; will not be only most scandalous, dishonorable to
them, but monstrous, treacherous, perfidious, if insisted on, or persisted in,
both in the Judgment of God, Angels, Men, and their own Consciences too.
Wherefore I presume on second thoughts, they will disclaim this Plea both in
words and Actions. 2ly. They were all raised, waged, Commissioned by the late
Parliament and well-affected People, not to fight against, conquer or subdue
themselves, but to preserve them, their Laws, Liberties, Privileges, Estates,
our Churches and Religion against the Common Enemies and Invaders of them.
Therefore they cannot style themselves Conquerors of those Persons, things they
never fought against, but only for, unless they will now declare their secret
intentions, were ever cross and contradictory to their open Commissions,
Vows, Covenants, Protestations, Words, and printed Declarations to God and
those that raised, waged them for their safety and defense alone; and thereby
proclaim themselves the Greatest Hypocrites under heaven, and therein as
treacherous to their own Native Country and those who trusted them, as the
Purchase Pilgrimage l. 6 c. 5, 6. Heylins Microcosm p. 146, 147, 613, 614, 756,
757.
Mamalukes of Egypt, the Pretorian Soldiers of Rome were to their Lords and
Masters of Old; which I hope they will disclaim. 3ly. It is a resolved case by
the Law of Nature, Nations and War it self, as Grotius proves at large, De Jure
Belli l. 3. c. 6. sect. 8, 9, 10, etc. That things gained by Conquest in a War,
ought to redound not to the Officers, Soldiers, Generals, who manage the War,
but to the Kingdom, Nation whose servants they are, and both Commission and pay
them their wages, as the Servants, Apprentices gains redound to their Masters
Coffers, not to them. Qui sentit Onus, sentire debet and Commodum: being both a
Principle in the Law of Nature, Reason, and in our Common Law too. Hence
Lipsius de Triumphis, Heylins Cosmography and others.
all the Roman Generals and Military Officers, brought all the Silver, Gold,
Treasures, Spoils of War into the public Treasury, putting none of it into
their private purses; and all the Lands, Countries they gat by Conquest were
the Republiques only, which bore the charges of the War, not the victorious
Conquering Generals or Soldiers. Therefore the Officers and Army being
Commissioned, raised only for, and constantly paid by the Parliament, people,
for the ends aforesaid, never warring on their own free cost; what ever
Treasures, Lands, Powers, Spoils they have gained by their victories,
Conquests, are of Right the Parliaments, Nations, Peoples only, not their own;
Therefore the Parliament, Nation, people cannot, must not be overawed, used,
reputed by them, as their mere Conquered Vassals, but as their Sovereign Lords,
and true Proprietors of all the Territories, Lands, Treasures, Powers they have
gained by their Conquests. 4ly. That Conquest is no just or Lawful Title, was
long since resolved by the greatest Conqueror ever England yet bred, even our
famous British Conquering King Arthur, in the greatest Parliamentary Council
ever yet held within this Isle, whereat were present no less then 12. Kings
besides King Arthur, and an innumerable company of Princes, Dukes, Nobles,
Prelates of the British, and most other Neighbor Nations; as Geoffry Monmouth,
Hist. Regum Brit. l. 9. c. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20. records. All these,
when Lucius Procurator of the Roman Republique, came to demand that ancient
Tribute reserved by Julius Caesar from this Isle of Britain when first
Conquered by him, then in arrear; and threatened to levy is by force of Arms, if
denied; Meeting together in a great Council or Parliament specially assembled
for that end: resolved, That the said Rent pretended to be due to the Romans
from the Britons, because Caesar by reason of the Britons divisions being
invited hither with his forces, enforced them (their Country being then shaken
with domestique troubles) to submit themselves to him by force and violence;
could not in Justice be demanded of them: because this Tribute being gained in
this manner was unjustly received. Nihil enim quod vi and violentia acquiritur,
Just ab ullo possidetur qui violentiam intulit. For nothing which is gained by
force and violence, is justly possessed by any who has offered and done the
violence. Irrationabilem igitur causam praetendit, qua nos Jure sibi
Tributarios esse arbitratur. Therefore he pretends an Irrational cause, whereby
he supposes we are of Right Tributaries unto him. And because he presumes to
exact from us id quod injustum est, that which is unjust, by the like reason
let us demand a Tribute of Rome from him; and he who shall prove the stronger,
let him carry away what he desires to have. For if because Julius Caesar and
other Roman Kings heretofore Conquered Britain, he determines Tribute is now
due unto him for this cause: I now also think, that Rome ought to render
Tribute unto me, because my Ancestors heretofore got it by Conquest: Whereupon
they all resolved to assist King Arthur with their Arms against this
unrighteous Tribute, and Title to it by Conquest; and professed they would
spend their lives in the quarrel. Ipsa enim mors dulcis erit, dum enim in
vindicando Patres nostros in tuendo libertatem nostrant, in exaltando Regem
nostrum perpessi fuerimus. Wherefore Conquest now can certainly be no Just, no
Lawful Plea, Title for any of our Officers or Soldiers, which this Greatest
Conqueror and this Great Council so long since damned as unjust and Irrational.
To which I shall annex the Resolution of our Hoveden Annal pars posterior p.
561, to 566. Math. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 127.
Noble King Henry the 2d. and of all the Bishops, Abbots, Peers, Earls, Barons
of England assembled in a Parliamentary General Council of the Realm at
Westminster, An. 1126. to determine a Controversy between Alfonso King of
Castile, and Sancho King of Navarre, concerning diverse Castles and Territories
in Spain, won by War and Conquest by Sancho King of Navarre from Alfonso,
whiles he was a Pupil and Orphan; which they both submitted to their final
determination, who having heard both parties, unanimously resolved; that these
Castles and Lands should be restored to Alfonso, by King Sancho, with all their
bounds and appurtenances: quia per Bellum violenter and injuste abstulisset:
because he had violently and unjustly taken them away by War: which resolution
was confirmed under the Kings Great Seal, and sent unto these Kings. Therefore
Conquest alone can be no just, no legal Saintlike Right, Title to any Lands,
Possessions, Powers* violently, unjustly gotten, claimed by Wars by our
Swordmen now, after these two ancient famous Parliamentary Resolutions in
point, even between foreign Conquering Princes, much less then between those
Native Englishmen, who raised, waged our Army and Officers to defend, not
conquer them in a mere intestine civil War. 5ly. See Sr. John Davis Reports f.
40, 41, 42.
William Duke of Normandy, Edward the 3 d, Henry the 4 th, Edward the 4 th, and
Henry the 7 th, though they all came to the Crown by the Sword and Conquest of
their Competitors, yet they never claimed the Crown nor Kingdom by Conquest,
but Title only; nor esteemed the English, Irish, or Welsh a conquered Nation,
nor altered our ancient Government, Laws, Liberties, Parliaments, or Ministers
Tithes and Maintenance, but confirmed them, as all our Histories manifest in
their Lives, and Statutes made by them in the beginning of their respective
reigns attest, and I have Page 75, 76. Hoveden Annal. pars posterior, p. 600,
601, etc.
formerly proved in the case of William commonly styled the Conqueror, who
ratified all our Liberties, Laws, Customs, Franchises presented to him upon
Oath, without the least alteration, diminution, or prevarication, to the
peoples Great content. Yea, King Henry the 4th. as Placita Coronae, rot. Parl.
1 H 4. n. 17. record; did in the first Parliament held by him after his
Conquest of Richard the 2d. make this memorable Declaration to his people,
entered in that Roll. That he claimed the Realm and Crown of England with all
their Members and Appurtenances as right heir thereto by Blood, by Descent, and
by the right God had given him, through the aid of his Parents and Friends for
to recover the said Realm, which Realm was upon the point to be undone for want
of Government and abrogating of the Laws and Customs of the Realm. And that it
was not his will, that any should think, that he would by way of Conquest
disinherit any one of his Heritage, Franchise or other Right which he ought to
have, nor to out (or deprive) any man of that he had or should have by the good
Laws or Customs of the Realm ( all which he confirmed by a special Act before
1 H. 4. c. 1.) but only those who were against his good purpose, and the common
profit of the Realm, and were guilty of all the evil come upon the Realm, and
were adjudged guilty thereof in that Parliament, as Sir William Le Scroop, Sir
Henry Green, and Sir John Bassy, whose Lands only he would have by Conquest, as
forfeited by their Treasons. Whereupon the Commons thanked the King, and
praised God that he had sent them such a King and Governor. Upon all which
Considerations, and the Resolution of learned De Jure Belli. l. 3. c. 14. sect.
10, 11, 12. and Annotata, p. 538, 539, 540.
Grotius, with others quoted by him; That by the very Laws of War even those
who are conquered by foreign Enemies, ought to enjoy by permission of the
Conquerors, their own Laws, Liberties, Magistrates, Religion, and a share in
their Government, (much more in such a Civil War as ours, where the Soldiers,
Generals can pretend no Conquest over those who raised, waged them for their
just defense against Conquest, and Invasion of their Laws, Liberties,
Government, Magistrates, Rights, Privileges) I hope those vaporing Officers,
Soldiers who have formerly cried up, pleaded, practiced this pretended Title
of Conquest amongst us, and used many of their former Masters, Raisers, and the
whole Nation, more like to conquered enslaved People, than their fellow
Christian Brethren and Freeborn Englishmen, who have paid them so well for all
those Services they employed them in; will henceforth totally renounce this
their false usurped Injurious Plea, Title; and no more persist under pretext
thereof, to deprive our Ministers, Church, Peers, Parliaments, Nation of their
very Native Freedoms, Liberties, Franchises, Rights, Laws, Government, Lands,
Possessions, which they were purposely commissioned, waged, and by all Sacred
all Civil Obligations, Trusts, Oaths, Vows, Protestations perpetually engaged
to defend against the least violation or Innovation, without their free and
full consents in a due and lawful Parliament freely elected by them, not
forcibly obtruded on them without their choice or privity. Yea I trust they
will be so just, so righteous toward me (so great a Sufferer by, under them
only for discharging my Conscience and bounden duty toward my God, our Church
and Native Country of England) as no ways to be angry with me, or Injurious
toward me for this my New Gospel Plea (interwoven with a Legal and Rational)
for the Lawfulness and Continuance of the ancient settled Maintenance and Tithes
of the Ministers of the Gospel, and the good old Fundamental Laws and Liberties
of the Nation; which their present busy Endeavors to abolish, alter, subvert,
beyond, yea against their Trusts, Commissions, Callings, have necessitated me
now to publish to the world, to preserve our Church, State, Ministry from new
Combustions and Impendent ruin: but rather found a Retreat from these their
Heady Proceedings (which I fear the Jesuits with their Confederates the
Anabaptists, have engaged them so deeply in, to work as well their own as the
public speedy ruin both of our Church, Religion, State, Ministry, Nation) and
excite them to use the self-same deportment, words to me (who have no private
design nor interest of my own or other men's in this my voluntary undertaking,
but only the public Safety and Weal as enraged David did once to Abigail,
when she diverted him from his rash, bloody resolution to destroy Nabal and his
family for a Churlish Answer returned to him for his Kindness, 1 Samuel 25.32,
33. Now blessed be the Lord God of Israel which sent thee this day to meet me;
and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou which have kept me this day from
coming to shed blood, and to avenge my self with my own hand: But if they shall
by Gods permission cast me again bound hand and foot into another fiery Furnace
for this my faithful Service, or not falling down and worshipping that Golden
(or rather Wooden) Image which they have or would now set up: I doubt not but
that Gracious God, who has so miraculously preserved me in, delivered me out
of so many 1 Pet. 4.12.
fiery Trials and Fornaces heretofore, will do the like again hereafter, and
that in such a visible eminent manner, as shall enforce them at last to use
those words unto me as Nebuchadnezzar did unto Shadrac, Meshac, and Abednego
after their miraculous preservation in the midst of the fiery Furnace into
which the most valiant men of his Army cast them bound by his unrighteous
Command, to their own immediate destruction by the flame, without the least hurt
to them. Dan. 3.28. Then Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said, Blessed be the God of
Shadrac, Meshac and Abednego, who has sent his Angel, and delivered his
Servants that trusted in him, and have changed the Kings word, and have yielded
their bodies that they might not serve nor worship any God (or Idol) except
their own God. This being an undoubted Truth, which I have ever hitherto found
experimentally true from and in my former causeless Oppressors, (whose
Erroneous Practices, vices I have reproved) recorded by God himself and the
wisest of all Mortals. Prove. 28.23. He that rebukes a man (for his faults
plainly) shall afterward find more favor, than he that flattereth (him in
them) with the Tongue. And that saying of the truth it self in such cases (of
difficulty and concernment to the reprover) will ever prove an experimental
verity, wherewith I shall conclude my Plea, which I desire may be deeply
engraven in the Hearts, Spirits of all timorous, base, unworthy Christians,
(who dare neither speak nor write their Consciences, nor Discharge their Duties
in these times of danger, and will wrong both their Consciences, Country,
Posterity, yea shame their God, Nation Religion to save their Estates, Lives as
they fondly conceit, when they will lose all with their souls to boot, by their
base carnal fears) Math. 16. 24, 25, 26. Luke 17.33. If any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me. For whosoever
will Save (or shall seek to Save his life, so Luke records it) shall Lose it;
(and his Tithes, Lands, Liberties with it) and whosoever will Lose his Life for
my sake shall find it. For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole
World and Lose his own Soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul?
I shall cloze up all with this notable Passage of our own learned Writer, John
Sarisbury against such Religious Hypocritical Cistersian Monks who in his age
sought exemption from payment of Tithes, and seized upon the Ministers Dues
about the year 1170. Joannis Sarisburiensis De Nugis Curialium l. 7. c. 21. De
Hypocritis, qui ambitionis labem falsae Religionis imagine nituntur occultare
-- Hi sunt qui potestatibus persuadentes ut propter vitia personarum, jure suo
priventur Ecclefiae. Decimationes et Primitias Ecclessis subtrahunt, et
Ecclesias ipsas accipiunt de manu Laicorum Episcopis inconsultis. Hi sunt qui
praedia avita subtrahentes indigenis vicos and pagos redigunt in solitudinem
and in suos usus vicina quaeque convertunt: Ecclesias diruunt and ut in usus
revocant seculares, Quae Domus Orationis fuerat, aut efficitur stabulum
pecoris, aut opilionis, aut Ianificli Officina. Et ut se possunt before
exhibere and charitatis implere manus ne decimas dent, Apostolico privilegio
muniuntur. Miror tamen ut Fidelium pace loquar, quidnam sit, quod Decimas et
Iura aliena usurpare non erubescunt: Inquient forte, Religiosi sumus: Plane
Decimas solvere Religionis pars est. Et eas a Deo populus duntaxat religionis
(solvere) exigitur. Hi adeo religiosi sunt quod in Decimis vandis derogare
possunt constitutioni Divinae, and in eo licenter minus grati sunt gratiae Dei
quo eam amplioribus beneficiis experiuntur.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT.
IT is storied of Descriptio Daniae, 1629. p. 141. Historia compendiosa Daniae
p. 185, 186. Saxogrammaticus, Pontanus and others in the life of Canutus and
Olavus.
Canutus the 4th. the 77 King of Denmark, (an eminent professor of Piety, and
Religion, and great lover of Justice) that perceiving his Subjects to stick at
many things pertaining to Christian Religion, and not to conform to other
Christians throughout the world in Laws and Ceremonies, specially in the due
payment of Tithes to their Ministers, he urged them out of religious Piety, at
ritu aliarum Nationum Christianam Religionem profitentium, Decimas Sacerdotibus
suis soluerent; that after the custom of other Nations professing Christian
Religion they would pay Tithes to their Priests: remitting to them a great fine
imposed on them for their Rebellion and contempt, in refusing to accompany him
in an Expedition against the English, to induce them thereunto. But they being
persuaded the contrary by his Brother Olaf, thereupon rose up in Rebellion
against him (specially the Northern Jutes, frequently perfidious, whom he could
never induce to pay Tithes) and pursuing him to Othense, cruelly murdered this
their just and pious King in the Church of St. Alban, Anno 1088. whom Olaf
succeeding, God presently sent such a great scarcity of Corn and provision in
Denmark for 7. years space together, (the intemperatenesse of the air blasting
all their Corn) that many families, not only of the poorer, but richer and
nobler sort died of famine, the people fighting with one another even for
grass to eat. At last the famine invading King Olaf his Court, he prayed to
God; that if he had conceived any anger against his Subjects (for not paying
Tithes and murdering their King) he would satisfy his wrath upon him, not
them; and the same night, Esurientem and parricidii paenitentem animam
efflavit: he died of hunger, repenting of his paricide. O that all English
Tithe-Oppugners, and Regicides would seriously meditate on this memorable
president of Divine Justice, upon such Delinquents, and be brought to timely
repentance thereby, to prevent the like National and Personal Judgments, upon
our Nation, themselves and their posterities.

ERRATA.
COurteous Reader correct these mistakes and omissions of the Press,
occasioned by the Authors absence in the Country.

Page 2. l. 34. if, r. of, p. 8. l. 24. r Wagria. p. 14. l. 20. r. inservierat
pietati, l. 26. r. Wilfrid, p. 21. l. 39. these, those, p. 25. l. 11. Decima,
l. 15.17. aliendis, alienandis, p. 27. l. 27. r. 17 E. 4. c 7. l. 37.
Parliament, l. 38. sommoneri, p. 28. l. 6. Heu licet quod eo, r. Quod licet de,
l. 13. dele, ut, l. 16. indulgere, r. inducere, l. 19. quamplurimum, p. 29. l.
19. superiors, p. 30. l. 3. Lord God, p. 34. l. 4. form, r. former, l. 6. last,
r. lasting, l. 11, 12. r. peril, reproach and slander of the Gospel, l. 18. to,
r. of, l. 27. bow down, p. 35. l. 25. who builded, l. 28. Paris, r. Parker, p.
39. l. 2. in Egercituisse, r. his Chaplain, p. 44. l. 34.11. r. 1. p. 46. l.
13. they shall, p. 50. l. 6. Balivis, l. 14 bonis, l. 15. praestiterunt, p. 51.
l. 9. dele Siquis igitur insanus importunitate, p. 63. l. 38. dele li, p. 66.
l. 11. more, r. none, l. 36. or, r. of, p. 71. l. 3. for, r. from, p. 74. l. 4.
jure, r. pure, p. 75. l. 2. Partimacensis, Portiniacensis Abbatem, Nautire, r.
Majoris, l. 6. Clamianensis, Cluniacensis, p. 76. l. 11. 6.8. l. 18. Elegant
supremam, r. Eligant sepulturam, l. 32. Iliburg, Friburg, p. 77. l. 8.
Praemonstratensian, l. 17. abuse, l. 31. Deformations, Reservations, l. 38. at
least, p. 78. l. 15. Replain, r. Mepham, l. 37. grand, p. 80. l. 14. Oxenetius,
Opmerus, p. 84. l. 23. r. charge of the cure, p. 85. l. 15. in sales, l. 23,
only, r. chiefly, p. 87. l. 4. fees, r. fines, l. 9. r. their families, p. 97.
l. 17. of, r. or, p. 98. l. 27. as litigious, p. 101. l. 20. our, r. of, p.
104. l. 8. or unto, recorded both, l. 25. spoils, r. soil, p. 105. l. 10.
requiring, r. inquiring, l. 33. spoils, r. soil, p. 107. l. 21. fere modum, r.
propemodum, p. 110. l. 27. pugnavimus, p. 111. l. 16. inhabitances, r.
inheritances, l. 23. people, r. priests, l. 31. dele or, p. 112. l. 39. if not,
p. 113. l. 2. within us, p. 115. l. 39. dele of, p. 117. l. 5. thee, r. men, p.
118. l. 21: Lucius, Licinius, p. 120. l. 35. brought, r. bright, p. 125. l. 27.
for, or, p. 133. l. 20. which, with, p. 136. l. 13. Syms, Syrus, p. 150. l. 3.
proceed not, p. 156. l. 28. Nicetas, l. 29. Beyerlink.

In the margin, p. 6. over against good space, l. 32. read, At least 14. years,
as is evident by Genesis 15.1. c. 16.3.16. c. 17.24, 25. p. 41. l. 8, 9.
Monasteries, p. 47. l. 7. r. 757. p. 102. l. 5. Ivonis, p. 110, l. 11.
Saxonicorum, p. 118. l. 22, 23. Ruffinus, p. 155. l. 15. am, um.

An Admonition to all Protestants, Ministers, Lawyers, and others of whatever
Quality, within our three Nations.
BE pleased to take notice, that as the new dissolved Anti-Parliamentary Juncto
at the beginning of their last Session, and a little before their sudden
dissolution; did by their Conscientious Speaker, give the hearty thanks of the
House and (mock) Parliament, to the Petitions of sundry Anabaptists, and other
Sectaries, (headed by Jesuits, and Popish Franciscan Freers) for their good
Affections, when they petitioned against Tithes; So the General Council of
Officers of the Army, usurping to themselves the Sovereign Legislative Power
and Authority of the Great Ge^eral Council and Parliament of England, to
evidence to the world, by whose Counsels they are steered, whose designs they
prosecute, and that they deserve to be canonized for Saints by the Pope of Rome
in his Roman Calendar; have voted down our Ministers Tithes, (and therewith our
Ministry too) and in their printed Declaration 27 October 1659. p. 18. (since
this Gospel Plea was finished at the Press) Declare to the world, that it is
upon their Spirits, and they earnestly desire, and shall endeavor, That a full
and through Reformation of the Law may be effected (by abolishing those Laws
they were raised, waged, commissioned to defend, and suppressing Lawyers and
Terms at Westminster, if not Innes of Court; as also, that a faithful, godly,
and painful Gospel-preaching Ministry, may be encouraged and provided for, by
some certain way, that may be less troublesem to them, and less vexations to
the people than Tithes* Ex cauda Draconem. What debates, Speeches many of our
Army-Saints have lately had concerning the total extirpation of Tithes,
Ministers, Law, Lawyers, Universities, Corporations, several others can inform
those whom it most concerns. Whether Saint John's description of the Army of
(Romish) Locusts, Rev. 9. coming out of the smoke of the bottomless pit, who
bad a KING, or GENERAL over them, whose name is Apollyon, that is to say, A
Destroyer; be not a true Character of our present Army of Saints, let all real
English Protestants judge, and what Good cause they have to continue and pay
them out of our quite exhausted bankrupt estates, to accomplish these good
endeavors, after all their Commissions nulled, expired, forfeited by their
Treacheries and Rebellions against their old and new Superiors; Faithfulness,
Loyalty, Obedience in the most inferior Degree, to their Old Parliament, new
Protector, and Anti-Parliamentary Juncto, ( Jude 12.
Trees whose fruit is withered, twice dead, plucked up by the roots by them)
after all old Protestations, Covenants, and new Commissions, Engagements,
Declarations, Addresses to be True. Faithful, Constant to them, and live and
die with them, being such a Capital crime in their General Councils eyes, even
in their own Colonels, Captains, Soldiers; as to demerit and incurr an
unpardonable Censure of utter cashiering out of the Army, as Traitors, Enemies
to, and Apostates from the Armies Interest; which is to be Faithless,
Perfidious, Treacherous to all Superiors whatsoever: wit^ in the Vindication of
167. Officers, come off from, and turned out of the Army, in March 1647, for
their obedience to the old Parl. the late cashiering of Col. Whaley,
Ingoldesby, Goffe, and others for their fidelity to Richard, Pr. and of Col.
Okey, Moss, Morley, and others, for their adhering to the dissolved Juncto,
though they drew not a sword, nor discharged one pistol in their defense; which
may be justly recompensed ere long by the Common Soldiers Disobedience,
Treachery, and Infidelity toward their present Commanders, when they stand
in most need of their assistance; Isa. 33.1, 2.

FINIS.

