A BRIEF MEMENTO To the present VN-PARLIAMENTARY IUNTO, Touching their present
Intentions and Proceedings, to Depose and Execute CHARLES STEWARD, their
lawful KING.

By William Prynne Esquire, a Member of the House of Commons, and Prisoner
under the Armies Tyranny; who, it seems, have Levied War against the Houses of
Parliament, their quandam-Mastersswhose Members they now forcibly take and
detain Captives, during their lawful Pleasur^.

PROVE. 24. 21, 23. My Son, Fear thou the Lord and the King, and m^ddle not
with those who are given to Change: For their calamity shall Rise Suddenly,
and who knows the ruin of them both?

GAL. 1. 10. If I yet pleased men, I should not be the Servant of Christ.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1648.

Die Veneris, 20. August. 1647.
An Ordinance for declaring all Votes, Orders, and Ordinances, passed in one or
both Houses, since the force on both Houses, July 26. until the sixth of this
present August, 1647. to be null and void.
Whereas there was a Visible, Horrid, Insolent, and Actual sorce upon the
Houses of Parliament, on Munda^ the 26. of July last, whereupon the Speakers,
and many Members of both Houses of Parliament were And yet never Member was
then forcibly imprisond orseclused the House as above 200. are now by the Army.
forced to absent themselves from the Service of the Parliament; and whereas
those Members of the House could not return to sit in safety before Friday the
sixth of August: It is therefore declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament
Assembled, That the Ordinance of Monday the said 26. of July, for the repealing
and making void of the Ordinance of the 23. of the said July, for the settling
of the (...) of the City of London, being gained by force and violence, And
all Votes, Orders, Ordinances, passed in either or both Houses of Parliament,
since the said Ordinance of the 26. of July, to the said sixth of August, are
null and void and were so at the making thereof, and are hereby declared so to
be the Parliament being under a force, and not free. Provided always, and be
it Ordained, That no person or persons shall be Impeached or punished for his
or their actions by, or upon, or according to the aforesaid Votes, Orders, or
Ordinances, unless he or they shall be found guilty of contriving, acting, or
abetting the aforefaid visible and actual force, or being present at, or
knowing of the said force, did afterward act upon the Votes so forced or were
guilty of entering into, or promoting the late Engagement for bringing the King
to the City, upon the ^armes and conditions expressed in his Majesty's Letter
of the 12. of May last.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum:

A brief Memento to the present Vnparliamentary Iunto, touching their present
intentions and proceedings to Depose and Execute CHARLES STEWARD, their law^ull
King of ENGLAND, etc.
Gentlem^,
IT is the observation of King Solomon, Pro. 25. 11. That a word spoken in due
season, is like Apples of Gold and Pictures of Silver. And seeing I (and above
two hundred Members more) being forcibly secluded from you by the Officers of
the Armies unparale^d violence upon our Persons and the House, cannot speak my
mind ^reely to you in, or as the House of Commons, I held it my duty freely to
write my thoughts unto you, only as private Persons under a force, consulting
in the House, without your Fellow Members advice or concurrence, about the
speedy deposing and execu^ing of KING CHARLES, your lawful Sovereign, to
please the General, Officers, and Grand Council of the Army^ (who have
unjustly usurped to them the supreme authority both of King and Parliament) or
rather the ^suits and Popish Priests among or near them, by whose Counsels
they and you are now wholly swayed, and whose traiterous designs you really
execute, in most of your late Votes and Actings. ^ Cook. 3. Institu. 4. ^.
Stam-for^d Plea of ^c Crown. 1. 1, c. 1. 2.


I have only a few words of consideration to impart unto you: Dictum sapienti
s^t est.

First, I shall mind you, that by the * Common Law of the Realm, the Statute
of 25. E. 3. and all other Act^ concerning Treason, it is no less then High
Treason, for any Man by over-Act, to compass or imagine the depositio^, or
death of the King, or of his eldest Son and Heir, though it be never executed;
much more if actuasly accomplished. That many have bin arraigned, condemned,
executed for such intended Treasons in former ages; as the Earl of Arundell
and others; by Judgment in Parliament, 21. R. 2. Plac. Coronae: N. 46. 7. and
the Gunpowder Traitors, 3. Iacobi to omit others, whose Examples should be
others admo^ions, the Heads and Quarters of some of them yet hanging on the
Houses, where now you meet and si^.

2ly. That in the Oath of Allegiance which you have all taken, immediately
before your admission into the House as Members; You do truly and sincerely
acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in your consciences, before God
and the World; That our Sovereign Lord King Charl^s, Is lawful an^ rightful
(...) of this (...)., and of all other His Majesty's Dominions and Countries:
And hat the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any authority of the Church or
See of Rome, or by any Other means. Nor any other has any power or ^thority
to depose the King, or to dispose of any of his Majesty's Kingdoms or
Dominions, or to discharge any of His Subjects of H^s Allegiance and obedience
to His (...), or to give leave to any of them, to offer any violence to His
(...) Person, State or Gover^ent. And that notwithstandiug any sentence or Note
this.
Declaration of Depri^ation made by the Pope, etc. or any absolution of the
said Subjects from their obedience, you will bear true Allegiance to His
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and him and them w^ll defend to the utmost
of your power. Against all attempts and (...) whatsoever, which shall be made
against his or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of
any such Sentence or Declaration, or otherwise. And do thereby further swear,
that you do from your hearts abhor, detest, and abjure as impious and
Herericall, that damnable doctrine and position that Princes which be
excommunicated or deprived by tht Pope. may be deposed or murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And that you do ^lieve, and in conscience
are resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any person whats^ever, has power to
(...) you of this Does or any part thereof; and that all these things you did
plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear according to these express words
and their plain and common sense, without any equivocation, or mental evasion
or secret reservation whatsoever. And that you did make this Recognition and
acknowledgement heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the true faith of a
Christian Now whether your present actings, and intentions against the King ^e
not diametrically repugnant to this so^emn Oath (which most of you have taken
(...) ^hese wars, and some of you since the Treaty, when (...) Serjea^ts at
(...), etc.) let God and the World before whom (...) (...) and (...) own
Consciences in which you then swore, determine you (...) (...) the Popes and
(...) desigues.

3dly. That you^ s^lves a^ng (...) Members, have in above one * Exact
Collections. p. 6. 19. ^1. 59. ^6. 6. 8^. 102. 103. 118. 123. 125. 141. 1^2.
1^3. 17. 1^0. 1^5. 219. 259. ^81. 30^. 3^0. 312. ^60. 376. 457. etc.
hundred Remonstrances, D^clarations, Peti^ions; Ordinances and Printed Papers,
pub^ished in the name, and by (...) authority of one or both Houses of
Parliament, professed, both to the King ^himselfe, Kingdom, World, and
foreign States, that you never intended the least hurt, injury, or violence
to the Kings Person, Crown, Dignity, or Posterity: but intend to him and his
Royal Posterity, more honor, Happiness, Glory and Greatness, then ever was
yet enjoyed by any of his Royal Predecessors: That you will ever make good to
the uttermost with your lives and fortunes, the Faith and Allegiance which in
truth and sincerity you have always borne to His Majesty. That you have
proposed no other ends to your selves, but the performance of all Duty and
Loyalty to His Majesty's Person. That all contributions and Loanes upon the
Public Faith should be employed only to maintain the Protestant Religion,
the Ki^gs Authority His Person, His Royal Dignity, the Laws of the Land,
Peace of the Kingdom, and privileges of Parliament, ^d not to be employed
against His Ma^esties Person or Authority. That the Armies and Forses raised by
the Honses, * A Collectson. etc. 18 ^. (...) (...). 49. (...). 61. (...). 96.
(...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...). 9. (...) (...).
were raised for the (...) and defense of the Kings Person, and of (...) Houses
of Parliament, etc. (...) His Majesty's personal (...), honeur, and greatness
are much dearer to you then your own lives and fortunes which you do^ most
heartily dedicate. and shall most willingly employ for the maintenance and
support thereof. Tha^ the Parliament will ev^r have a care ^o prevent a^y (...)
which (...) (...) may justly apprehend to His person. That both Houses are
resolved to (...) their lives and (...), ^or the (...) and (...) (...) the true
Religion. (...) (...) Person, (...), and State the power and privileges of
Parli^ment. (...) (...) (...) His (...) (...) againg (...) (...) an^ Army, as
(...) (...) to witness their constant and (...) Loyalty to His (...) both
Houses so solemnly declare; That upon his disbanding his forces, and return and
harkning to the advice of his Great Council, They will really endeavor to make
both him and his as much beloved at ^lome, and feared abroad as any Pr. that
ever swayed this Scepter: which is their (...) and constant Resolution: from
which they will not be diverted for any private or self-respects whatsoever:
That they will faithfully endeavor to secure his (...) Person and Crown srom
al dangers; inculcating the apparent danger to his (...) Pers^n among his
Popish and Malignants Armies and ill Counselors, and upon that reason,
persuading and inviting him to desert them, and close with his Parliament:
protesting, that the Parliament has bin, is, and ever will be more ready then
they, to secure and uphold the Authority, Prerogative, and Honor of the King,
and preserve the safety of his (...) Person, which they have often times (...) by
many humble Petitions and Declarations to Him, the World, and Kingdom; with
many other such like expressions. Which whether your present Actings and
Councels do not directly oppose, contradict, and give the lie unto, to your
eternal infamy and breach of public faith, as much as in you lies, let both
Houses, the world and all men judge, as they will do in due season.

Fourthly, Consider, that when the Exact Collection, p. 298. 695. 696. 657.
658, 991.
King and his party did tax the Houses for insinuating, That if they should
make the highest presidents of other Parliaments their pattern, there would be
no cause to complain of want of modesty or duty in them: That is, they may
(...) the King (...) they will, and are not to be blamed for so doing: and that
the Army raised by the Parliament, was to (...) (...) and (...) the King. Both
Houses by two solemn Declarations, did most professedly declare and protest
against it, as the falsest and most malicio^ accusation that could be imagined:
that the thoughts of it never (...), nor should enter into their loyal hearts,
That as God is witness of their thoughts, so shall their actions witness to
all the world, that to the honor of our Religion, and of those who are most
zealous in it, they shall suffer far more for and from their Sovereign then
they hoped God would ever permit the malice of his wicked Counselors, to put
them to, since the happiness of the Kingdom does so mainly depend upon His
Majesty and the Royal Authority of that root. That they hoped the contrivers
of these false and scandalous reports, or any that professed the name of a
Christian, could not have so little charity, as to raise such a scandal,
especially when they must needs know, the Protestation made by the Members of
both Houses, whereby they promise in the presence of Almighty God, to defend
and preserve his Majesty's Person, The promise and Protestation made by the
Members of both Houses, upon the Nomination of the Lord of Essex to be
General, and to live and dye with him, wherein is expressed, Which they often
profess both of the Army under the Earl of Essex, and S.. (...), (...) (...)
Collecton of all (...), etc. 8. 13. 41. 43. 44. 49. 51. 61. 64. 96, 99. 623.
696. 879. Appendix p. 15.
That this Army was raised for defense of the Kings Person. Their often,
earnest, and most humble addresses to his Majesty, to leave that desperate and
(...) Army wherewith he is now encompassed, raised and upheld, to the hazard of
his own, and the Kingdoms (...), and to come in Person to his Par^ment, where
he should be sure to remain in honor and safety; and their humble petition
directed to be presented to him by the hands of the Earl of Essex, before any
blow given, to remove his Royal Person from the Army: a request inconsistent
with any purpose to (...) the least violence to his Person: which has, and
ever shall be dear unto them. Now put it to your Souls and Consciences, whether
yours and the Armies present Counsels and Actions, do not really justify the
King and his parties former suggestions, and give the Lie to these Declarations
of both Heuses? who certainly, when ever restored to a condition of freedom
and liberty of meeting together again, will crave public reparations and
justice against you, if you violate both their honor, faith, and engagements
to the King, Kingdom, and foreign States, against these their Declarations
and Protestations too.

Fifthly, Remember, Exact Collections, p. 663 (...). 666. 687. 686. 907. 911.
that the Lord and Commons Assembled in Parliament, Octo. 22. 1642. did, in the
presence of Almighty God (which, the strongest obligation that any Christian,
and the most solemn public faith that any state, as a Parliament can give)
for the satisfaction of their own Consciences and discharge of that great trust
that lies upon them, make this Protestation and Declaration to all this
Kingdom and Nation, and to the whole world, That no private passion or
respect: No evil intention to his Majesty's Person. no design to prejudice
his just Honor and Authority, engaged them to raise forces or take up Arms.
That if he would return to his Parliament in peace, and by their counsels and
advise compose the distempers and confusions abounding in his Kingdoms; They
would receive him with all Honor, yield him all true obedience, subjection,
and faithfully endeavor to defend his Person and Estate from all danger, and
to the uttermost of their power establish him, in all the blessings of a
glorious and happy Reign. And that they had no intention or desire to hurt or
injure his Majesty, either in his Person or in h Power. Which they seconded by
many subsequent Declarations. Since which, both Houses and the three Kingdoms
of England, Scotland and Ireland have entered into A Collection, etc. ^. 327.
359 39^. 404. 4^6. 420. ^o ^28. 806. 887. 808. 878. 879. 889.
A solemn League and Covenant, For the Honor and happiness of the Kings
Majesty, and his Posterity, [among other ends therein specified;] That they
shall sincerely, really, and constantly endeavor, with their estates and lives,
to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty and Person and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the World may bear witness with their Consciences, of their Loyalty, and
that they have no thoughts, nor intention to (...) his Majesty's just power and
greatness, That they will with all faithfulness endeavor to discover all
evil Instruments and Incendiaries, Those who depose or divide his Head from
his shoulders must be most guilty of this dividing.
dividing the King from his people, that they may be brought to public Trial,
and receive condign punishment: And shall never suffer themselves diriectly or
indirectly, by whatsoever combination, persawasion or ^errour, to be withdrawn
from this blessed Union, etc. which so much con^erneth the glory of God, the
good of the Kingdoms, and the Hon^t of the ^ing, but shall all the days of
their lives zealously and constantly continue therein against all opposition.
And conclude; This Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God the
searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to observe the same, as we shall
answer at the great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall b^ diselosed.
This Covenant you have all taken your selves (some of you often) and A (...),
etc p. 4^0. etc.
i^posed it on all the three Kingdoms: And will it not stare in your (...),
your consciences, and engage God himself, and all three Kingdoms, as one man
against ^ou, if you should pr^eed to depose the King destroy his Person, or
dis-inherit his Posterity? yea, brin^ certain ruin upon you and yours as the
greatest 2 Timothy 3. 3, 4.
(...), and most perjured Creatures under Heaven^ O think, and (...) most
seriously upon it, before you proceed to further (...) (...). (...). (...).
(...). ^. 3. (...) in. dors. (...). Pat. (...) (...). (...). 1. m. (...).
(...). p. 14 (...).
(...). 24. E. 3. William Thrope, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, for for
^aking 80 l. bribes of several persons, was by special Commission, (...),
Convicted, and Condemned to be hanged, and to forfeit all his Lands, (...),
Goods, and Chattels to the King^ because thereby, Sacr^mentum Domini Regis quod
erg^ populum habuit custod^ndum fregit, (...), falso and rebelliter, qua^tum in
ipso suit: which Judgment was affirmed to be just and reasonable in full
Parliament where it was openly read by the Kings command, as is evident by 25.
E. 3. Rot. Parl. nu 10. If then this chief Justice: for breaking hi^ Oath to
the King and his people, as a Judge, only in taking two or three small bribes,
deserved to be hanged, and to forfeit all his Lands, Goods, and Life, by the
judgment of a full Parliament, then what will such Members deserve to suffer,
who shall violate, not only what Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to the King
and his heirs, but likewise the several Pro^stations, solemn League and
Covenant, and the multiplied public faith, engagements, Declarations,
Remonstrances, and promises of both houses of Parliament, made to God, the
King, the whole Kingdom and people of England, Scotland, and Ireland, the
States of the united Provinces, and all the world, and that maliciously,
falsely and Rebelliously, as much as in them lies, and their own private
Faith, Oaths, Vows, and Covenants involved in them, in deposing (...)
executing the King, (...) the Prince, violating the ^riviledges, usurping the
power of the Parliament to themselves, when most of the other members are
vrolently secluded by the Army, to the subvertion of the freedom and liberties
of al Parliaments^ thi^ being one Article against King Rich. the 2d. in 1 H. 4.
Rot. Parl. n. 25. 66. 70. when he was deposed, That in the Parliament held at
Salop intended to oppress his people, he did subtly procure and cause to he
granted, by consent of all the states of the Kingdom (which you have not) that
the power of the Parliament should remain with certain person [* Lords and
Commons] to determine certain Petitions 21 R. 2. ^. 16.
then delivered, but not dispatched, after the Parliament ended; by color
whereof? the said deputed persons proceeded by the Kings pleasure and wll, to
other things generally concerning the said Parliament, to the great derogation
of the State and privileges of ^he Parliament, and thegreat inconvenience and
pernicious example of the whole Realm, and to gain some color and authority
to their doings, the King caused the Parliament Rolls to be altered and
deleated according to his Vote, contrary to the effect of the foresaid
Concession; as you have presumed to null, repeal, and unvote diverse Votes,
Orders, and Ordinances of both Houses made in pursuance of the foresaid o^thes,
protestations, the solmne League and Covenant, Remoustrances, Declarations of
both houses, and the treaty, when the houses were full, and not under the
Armies force or violence: And if their proceedings and the whole Parliament of
21 R. 2. were declared 1 H. 4. c, 3.
null and void, and the King worthy to be deposed, for such proceedings then;
let Sergeant Throp, and other Lawyers not acting with you, consider and i^forme
you, what punishment you deserve for such breach of faith, privileges of
Parliament, and usurpation of a monopoly of Pa^liamentary power to your selves
now, whiles under the Armies force, and most Members sorced thence: in which
case you ought As the House did in the ease of the sive Members, Exact col
lection, p. 35. 10. 36.
not to Sit, Vote, or conclude any thing, but only to * adjourne till the force
removed and al members may freely meet in full parl. as is ^lear by that
memorable Record of 6. E. 3. Parl. apud Ebor. n. 1. 2. Dors. Claus. 6. E. 3. m.
4. 6. E. 3. apud West. parl. 2. n. 1. 13. E. 3. parl. 2. n. 4. 15 E. 3. n. 5.
17. E. 3. n. 2. 6. 18. E 3. n. 1. 2. 5. 20. E. 3. n. 5. 11. E. n. 4. 22. E. 3.
n. 1. 25. E. 3. n. 1. 29. E. 3. n. 4. 36. E. 3. n. 1. 37. E. 3. n. 1. 42. E. 3.
n. 1. 50. E. 3. n. 1. 51. E. 3. n. 3. 1 R. 2. n. 1. 2. R. 2. n. 1. 3. R. 2. n.
1. 4. R. 2. n. 1 5. R. 2. (...). (...). n. 1. (...). 2. n. 1. 6. R. 2, parl. 1.
n. 1. parl. 2. n. 1. 8. H. 4. n. 28 50. 149. H. 4. n. 1. 13. H. 4. n. 1. and
many more rolls: where the Parliament when any considerable number of the
Members of either House were absent, was constantly adjourned and refused to
sit or to do any thing (though not under any force,) till the houses were
full, much more then when under the Armies sword: it being against Magna
Charta, as the Matthew Paris, p. 882. 885. ^18. Dan. p. 172.
Barons declared in Parl. Anno Dom. 1257. in the reign of K. H. the 3 d. for a
few Members to sit, when the rest are absent.

6thly. Confider: that though many of the Kings of Judah and Israel were
extraordinary sinful and Idolators, bloody and tyrannical great oppressors of
their people, yea shedders of Priests, of Prophets, and other good men's
innocent blood, not only in the wars but in pe^ce: yet there is not one
president in the Old Testament of any one King ever juditially impeached,
arraigned, deposed, or put to death by the Congregation, Sanhedrin, or
Parliaments of Judah or Israel. That those who slew any of them in a tumultuous
or treacherous manner, were for the most part slain themselves, either in a
tumult, or 2 Kings 14. 6. ^. 15. 10. 14. 15. 30. ^. 21. 24.
else put to death by their Children who sueceded to the Crow^e, or people of
the Land: and that the Israelites after their revolt from Rehoboam, had never
any one good King, or good day almost among them, but were overrun with
Idolatry, profaneness tyranny, iuvaded by enemies, involved in perpetual
wars, Civil or Foreign, and at last all destroyed and carried away
Captives into Babylon: at the Books of Kings and Chronicles will inform you.
That the rule in the old Testament is, not to take any wicked Kings from their
Thrones and behead them: but, Romans 13 1, 2. etc. Tit. 3. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 3. 13,
14. 17. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3.
Take away the wicked (...). 21. 5.
from before the King, and his Throne shall be established in righteousness.
And the Rule in the New Testament: To be subject to Kings and the Higher
Powers, and to submit unto^ them, even for conscience and the Lords sake: and
to make Prayers, Supplications, and Intercessions for them, that under them we
may lead a peaceable and quiet life, in all godliness and honesty: for this is
good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior: not to depose or shed
their blood, for which there is no precept. And is not this plain way of God
the safest for you and the Army to follow, yea the only short cut to Peace and
settlement? Ruminate upon it, and then be wise, both for your souls good, and
the Kingdoms too.

7thly, Consider, that you now meet, and sit under the armed force and violence
of a mutinous Army, who have leavied War against the Houses to dissolve them,
imprisoned many of your Members, forbly secluded more, and driven away almost
all from the Houses; That till the removal of this horrid force, and
re-assembling of all your scattered Members with freedom and safety in the
Houses, all you Vote, Act, Order, or Ordain, by the Armies own Doctrine in
their Remonstrance of Aug. 18. and the Declaration and Ordinance of both Houses
(made at the Armies instance) Aug. 20. 1647. is null and void, even at and from
the time it was voted, acted, ordered, ordained, and so declared by your selves
even by this unrepealed Ordinance, and by former Parliaments to, as 21. R. 2.
c. 12. 1. H. 4. c. 3. 31, H. 6. c. 1. 39. H. ^. c. 1. And however you may take
upon you the name and power of the Houses of Parliament, and unvote, vote,
order, and ordain what you please; yet take it for an infallible truth, that
none of the Sea their Protestation. Dec. 11. 1648.
secluded and absent Members, none of the Counties, Cities, and Borroughs, for
which they serve, nor those for whom you serve and represent; nor yet the
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland (who have as great or greater a
share and interest in the person of the King, as their lawful Sovereign, and
are engaged by Oaths, Covenant, and all the forecited premises to protect his
person and Crown with their lives and estates, against all violence and danger)
with his Queen, Child^en and Allies in foreign pa^ts, of what Religion
soever, will never own you [in your present condition, and constitution] to be
a Parliament, but rather a Conventicle or Junto', nor any thing you vote,
order, or ordain to be See A Collection etc. p. 93. 221. 222. 225. 253.
valid. And therefore whatever you vote, order, or: ordain concerning the
Treaty, the deposing or executing the King, the dis-heriting or banishing the
Prince, dissolving the present Parliament, setting up a new confused
Representative, or new form of State Government, only to please the Office^
and Army, or rather those Jesuits and popish Priests, who have overreached,
and instigated them forcibly to prosecute these their treasonable designs, and
accomplish this their long expected desire and work; you must do only as
private men, not as a Parliament: And if so, what lesser offense then High:
Treason against the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, your present actings and
proceedings will prove in the conclusion, if you persevere and persist in them,
I leave to a free Parliament, the learned Judges, and all Lawyers now sitting
and voting among you, to consider and resolve. Which the Officers and Council
of the Army considering, would cast the Odium and danger of all upon you, the
better to exempt and acquit themselves if after reckonings should come, as
probably they may, and certainly will in Gods due time, if you and they repent
not. Give over, and crave pardon ere it be over late.

8Iy Remember, That no Protestant Kingdom or State ever yet defiled their
hands, or stained the purity and Honor of their Reformed Religion, with the
deposition, or blood of any of their Kings or Princes, much less of a
Protestant King or Prince, of a temperate and sober life as the King is; who
never immediately imbrued his own hands in any one man's blood, in any tyrannical
or bloody way before or since the wars, (for ought I can hear) but only in a
Military. And for a reforming Protest. Parl pretending the most of any to piety
and Religion, to stain their profession or honor by the deposition, or defile
their hands with the blood of a Protest. King, or for an army of Saints to do
it, or they to please a Saint^ seeming Army, and that against so many
forementioned Oaths, Protestations, Declarations, Remonstrances, Solemn
Leagues and Covenants one after another to the contrary, would be such an
unparalleld scandal to the Protest. Religion and all professors of it (who
have upbraided the Jesuits and Papists with this perfidious and treasonable
practice, of which they have bin deeply guilty, and themselves innocent) both
in our own 3. Kingdoms and the whole Christian world, as would give the
greatest occasion, advantage, and encouragement to the Jesuits, Papists, and
all licentious persons to join their hands, heads, purses, to suppress and
extirpate it, and all the professions of it, both at home and abroad, that ever
yet they had, and make Parliaments for ever hereafter execrable and detestable,
both to Kings and People.

9ly. Consider, that Scotland and Ireland are joyntenants, at least wise
Tenants in Common with us in the King, as their Lawful Sovereign and King, as
well as ours; and that the Scots delivered and left his person to our
Commissioners at New^Wstle, upon this express condition: That no violence
should be offered to his Person, etc. according to the Covenant. How then you
can un-King or depose him as to them, or take away his life upon pretext of
Justice, without their concurrent assents, is worthy your saddest thoughts. If
you do it without asking or receiving their consents, you engage both Kingdoms
to make a just War against you, to proclaim and to Crown the Prince of Wales
their King (though you should lay him aside) as being next Heir apparent. And
no Ordinance you can now make, will be any legal bar against him, to the
Crown of Engl. where he will find sen thousand persons for oue, who (...)
join with Scotland and Ireland to set him upon his Fathers Throne, as King of
England, and avenge his blood upon all who shall be ayding or assisting *
Walsingham Hist. Ang. p. 107, 1^8. 109. Polichron 1. c. 44. (...) Holinshed
Grafton in Ed. 2. and Rich. 2. Henry the 4th.
to its spilling, or his death owning. And what then will become of you and
your army, when thus deserted by most, opposed by all 3. Kingdoms, and all the
Kings, Qu^ens, and Princes Allies, united forces? Where will you, where will
your St. Cromwell, St. Ireton, St. Pride, St. Peter's, (that fast and loose
carnal prophet and Arch Jesuited Incendiary in these present tumults (with
other Grand Saints of the Army) who now force you, the General, Army and whole
Kingdom, upon such dangerous Councels as these, by the Jesuits principles and
practices) then appear, to save either themselves, or you, or your posterities
from exemplary justice without mercy, or hopes of pardon? Consider this then
seriously, if not as Christians, yet as (...) and selfe-ended men, and then
repent and be wise in time.

Tenthly, Remember, that you have neither Law nor direct president (...) what
you are going about: 1. H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 1. to 60. where the whole
proceedings are at large related.
Edward the 2d. and Richard the 2d. were forced by Mortimer, and Henry the 4th.
to resign their Crowns in a formal manner, the one to his Son, the other to
his conquering Suceessor, neither of them to the Parliament, and then deposed
by a subsequent sentence in Parliament, as unfit to Reign, without any formal
Iegall trial, or answer: and that not in an empty Parliament under a force, as
now, when most Members were forced away and secluded, but in a full Parliament,
wherein the Articles drawn up against them were never so much as rtad; and
their depositions made [upon their own voluntary concessions only] to
confirm, their precedent Resignation, Besides, neither of these Kings though
very bad, and Paptists, were ever condemned to loose their heads or lives, but
were to be well and Honorable treated: And those Proceedings were only by
Popish Parliaments in time, of ignorance, who had no such Oaths, Vows,
Covenants, protestations, and other forementioned considerations to tie their
hands, as you and we all have now. Yea this very (...). (...) solemnly and
parcularly protested, Exact Col. p. 69. 696.
that they did never suffer these Presidents to enter into their thoughts, and
they should never he their practice what ever they suffered from the King or
his, and that for the honor of our Rel gion, and the most (...) in it. B^t
that which is very observable, Roger Mortimer, the principle actor in deposing
King Edward the 2d. and Crowning his Son Edward the 3d, King in his stead,
(as you must now Crown the Prince Wales, in his Fathers sleed, if you depose
the King, else you pursue not this president as you should do) in the
Parliament of 1 Ed. 3. (in which I find no record concerning this deposall:)
was in * a full Parliament, within four years after, with some other of his
Confederates, E. 3. (...), Par. n. 1. 107.
impeached, condemned, and executed, as a Traitor and Enemy to the King and
Kingdom, by the Judgment of the Lords, and that by King Edward the third his
own assent, without any legal hearing or Trial, (just as he h^d there
deposed this King without it) for murdering King Edward in Berkley Castle
after his deposall: and Sir Thomas de Berkley, in whose Castle he was slain,
being indicted of Treason likewise for the same ^urther, * 4, E. 3. n. 16.
before the Lords in Parliament, pleaded not guilty thereunto and was tried at
the Lords Bar in a legal manner, by a Jury of twelve Knights, there sworn and
impanneled, and by them acquitted upon full evidence and trial? when as Sir
Simon de Bereford, was impeached, condemned and executed by a judgment given
against him by the Lords alone, without any trial, for murdering this deposed
King, and Thomas * 4. E. 3. n. 3. 5.
de Gurney and William Ocle, adjudged Traytort by them for the same offense
without any evidence appearing to record. These presidents then, will be of
very hard digestion, and not paralleld to our times, or the Kings case: Who,
having upon the late Treaty granted u^, for the speedy settlement and security
of our bleeding Kingdoms Churches and Religion, what ever we could in honor,
justice, or reason desire, and far greater advantages and security then any
of our ancestors, or any Kingdom under heaven from the Creation to this
present demanded, or enjoyed from any of their Princes (as I dare make goo^ to
you and all the woeld;) and that which the Commons house, aster two whole days
and one whole nights debate, thought and voted, a sufficient ground for them to
proceed with the King, to the speedy settling of the kingdoms peace, how you, or
the A^my; after such large Concessions, contrary to the votes of both houses
when full and free, can in h^nour, justice, reason, discr^tion, or conscience
proceed to depose or decapitate the King, as a violater of his faith, a Traitor
etc. without making your selves more perjured, treacherous and greater Traitors
in all kinds, then he, and incu^ring the same judgment and execution as you
shall pass and inflict upon him, I leave to your safest consultations to
advise off I have thus freely, faithfully, and plainly, discharged my mind and
conscience to you, without fear or flattery, for the Kings, Kingdoms,
Parliaments, protestant Religions, I am certain Ireland is (almost
inrecoverably lost) your own, and the Armies weal and safety too, if God in
mercy please to give you heads or hearts to make timely use of (...), and not
suffer your selves to be Jesuit-ridden any longer. Cons^er, you have most of
you Estates, all of you Heads, or lives, and souls to save, or loose, both
here and hereafter? If this, and all the precedent considerations will not
prevail with you, to take you off from you^ present desperate Counsels and
proceedings, for your own, the Kingdoms, Churches, Religions, Irelands,
Parliaments, your own posterities, and the Armies safety too, ride on
triumphantly still in Ignatius Loyola his fiery Chariot, like so many young
Pha^tons, till you fall and perish. It is sufficient for me, however you digest
this present friendly Memento to you, that I can truly say, liberavi animam
meam, whatever becomes of you or me. Who do here solemnly protest to all the
world against these your proceedings, as altogether null, void,
Vnparliamentary, illegal, unchristian: if not perfidious and Treasonable in
these respects.

I shall close up all with the Golden sentence of God himself? and the wiseft
of men, King Solomon, which is twice rrpeated verbatim that it might be the
better semembred and considered by you, and all others in such Exigences of
public affairs, as we are now fallen into, Prove. 22. 3. and 27, 12. A
prudent man soroseeth the evil and hides himself, but the simple pass on
and are punished. And with that which is parallel to it. Prove. 14. 14, 15, 16.
The s^mple believes every word, but the prudent m^n looks well to his
goings, A wise Man fears and departs from evil, but the fool rages and
is confident, and shall be filled with his own ways: which is thus
interpreted. Ptov. 1. 18. 38, 32, 33. They lie in wait for their own blood,
they lurk privily for their own lives, whose feet run to evil, and who make
have to shed others blood. Fot, the turning away of the simple shall slay them,
and the prosperity of fools shall (...) them. But who so hearkneth unto me
shall dwell safely, and shall he quiet from fear of Evil.

From the Kings Head in the Strand Jan. 1. 1648. Your affectionate friend and
servant, as far as you appear to be Gods; your Sovereigns the Kingdoms, the
Parliaments, Religions, theirs who have entrusted you, or your own true
friends. WILLIAM PRINNE.

Prove. 28. 23.
He that rebukes a man; afterward, shall find more favor, then he that
flatterreth him with his lips.

A POSTSCRIPT.
I Am confident, that if the Members now mee^ing at Westminster will but
persuade the General and his Pratestant Officers immediately. o tender the
Oaths of S^premacy and Alegience, the solemn League and (...), and the New
Oath of (...), ^or the bette^ discovery and speedier co^nviaction of (...),
Popish Priests and Papists consented to by the King in the (...) Treaty; to all
the Officers (...), and Soldiers in the Army, they will presently discover an
whole Conclave of (...), Papists, Priests, and Jesuited Papists amongst them,
who have instigated them, to disobey and (...) both Houses, imprison their
Members, to impeach, try, depose, execute the King, desolve the pre^ent
Parliament, subvert the present Government, and constitution of Parliament,
betray Ireland to the Rebels, and bring (...)(...) to present Confusion, the
practices, designs and stu^es of none but Jesuits and ^apists, which all true
Protestants cannot but abhor.

FINIS.

