The Privileges of Parliament which the Members, Army, and this Kingdom have
taken the Protestation and Covenant to maintain. Reprinted for Consideration
and Confirmation on the 5th. of January, 1659. the day appointed to remember
them.
Die Lunae 3 Ianuar. 1641.
IT is this day ordered upon the question by the Commons House of Parliament,
Exact Collection, p. 35.
that if any Persons whatsoever shall come to the Lodgings of any Member of the
House, The House of Commons were so far from countenancing or allowing force
upon their Members in 1641. when the Parliament was full and free, that they
made Orders for prevention of force when but suspected, and privileged their
Members very lodgings and goods, as well as Persons, and judged all persons
bound by the Protestation to assist in their defense, and to stand upon their
guard and make resistance.
and there do offer to seal the Trunks, Doors, or Papers of any Members of this
house, or seize upon their persons; That then such Members shall require the
aid of the Constable to keep such persons in safe Custody, till this House do
give further Order; and this House does further declare, that if any person
whatsoever shall offer to arrest or detain the person of any Member of this
House, without first acquainting this House therewith, and receiving further
Order from this House, That it is lawful for such Member, or any person to
assist him, and to stand upon his and their Guards of defense and to make
resistance according to the Protestation taken to defend the privileges of
Parliament.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Mercurii 5. Ian. 1641. Commons House of Parliament.
WHereas his Majesty in his Royal person yesterday Exact Collection, p. 36, 37.
being the 4th of January 1641. did come to the House of Commons attended with
a great Multitude of men armed in a warlike manner with Halberts, Swords and
Pistols, who came up to the very door of the House, and It was then accounted
unsuitable to the fit^ing or freedom of Parliament, to have armed men at the
House of Commons door, or in the passages near to the House.
placed themselves there, and in other places and passages near to the House,
to the great ter^or and disturbance of the Members thereof then sitting, and
according to their Duty in a peaceable and orderly manner, treating of the
great affairs of both Kingdoms of England and Ireland; And his Majesty having
placed himself in the Speakers Chair, did demand the persons of diverse Members
of the House to be delivered unto him; It is this day declared by the House of
Commons, If to demand the persons of five Members of the House after
impeachment, is a high breach of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and
inconsistent with the Liberty and Freedom thereof, so that the House did
conceive thereupon that they could not with safety of their persons or
indemnity of ^h^ rights and privileges of Parliaments (...) any l^ng^r, with
out a full vindication and a guard wherein they might confide: What is it to
imprison and seclude above 200. Members at once, without accusation or ground
of impeachment?
that the same is a high breach of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and
inconsistent with the Liberty and Freedom thereof: and therefore this House
does conceive, they cannot with the safety of their own persons, or the
indemnity of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, sit here any longer,
without a full vindication of so high a breach, and a sufficient Guard wherein
they may conside; for which both Houses jointly, and this House by it self,
have been humble suitors to his Majesty, and cannot as yet obtain:
Notwithstanding which thi^ House being very sensible of the great trust reposed
in them, and especially at this time of the manifold distraction^ of this
Kingdom, and the lamented and distressed Kingdom of Ireland, does order, that
this House shall be adjourned until Tuesday next, at one of the clock in the
Afternoon; and that a Committee be named by this House, and all that will come
shall have Voyce^, shall sit at the A good president for the Members of the
House of Commons to sit in London for vindication o^ their Privileges and
security of their Persons, when Westminster is unsafe or under force.
Guild Hall in the City of London, to Morrow morning at 9. of the clock, and
shall have power to Consider and Reason of all things that may concern the good
and safety of the City and Kingdom, and particularly how our Privileges may be
vindicated, and our Persons secured? And to consider of the Affairs and Relief
of Ireland, and shall have power to consult and advice with any Person or
Persons touching the premises^ and shall have power to send for parties,
witnesses, papers and Records, etc. Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Glynn,
If Mr. Whitlock be the only Member suffered to sit that was of this Committee,
no wonder the privil^ges of Parliament formerly so zealously vindicated, are
now so much broken and neglected.
Mr. Whitlock, Lord Faulkland, Sir Phil. Stapleton, Mr. Nath. Fines, Sir Ralph
Hopton, Sir John Ho^ham, Sir Walter Earl, Sir Robert Cook, Sir Thomas
Walsingham, Sir Samuel Roll, Mr. Perpoint, Mr. Walt. Long, Sir Richard Cave,
Sir Ed. Hungerford, Mr. Grimstone, Sir Christ. Wray, Sir BEn. R^dyard, Sir John
H^ppisley, Sir H^rbert Price, Sir John Wray, Sir Tho. Barrington, Mr. Wheeler,
Sir William L^tton. This is the 8. of them secluded and ^^cu^^d Members now
(...).
Committee appointed by the former Order, and are to pursue the Directions of
the former Order, and all that will come are to have Voices at this Committee.

A Declaration of the House of Common, touching a late Breach of their
Privilege, and for the Vindication thereof, and of diverse Members of the said
House.
Exact Collection p. 38, 39, 40.
Whereas the Chambers, Studies and Trunks of Mr. Denzill Hollis, Sir Arthur
Has^rigge, Mr. John Pym, Mr. John Hampden, and Mr. Will. Strode Esquire Members of
the House of Commons, upon Monday the third of this instant January, by color
of his Majesty's warrant, have been sealed up by Sir William Killigrew, and Sir
William Flemen, and others, which is not only against the Privilege of
Parliament, but the common Liberty of every Subject; which said Members
afterward the same day were under the same color by Sergeant Frances, one of
his Majesty's Sergeants at Arms, contrary to all former Presidents, demanded of
the Speaker sitting in the House of Commons, to be delivered unto him, that he
might arrest them of High Treason: and whereas afterward the next day His
Majesty in his Royal Person came into the said House, Armed Gards at the House
door, inconsistent with the freedom and privilege of Members.
attended with a great multitude of men armed in warlike manner with Halberts,
Swords and Pistols, who came up to the very door of the House and placed
themselves there, and in other places and passages near to the said House, to
the great terror and disturbance of the Members then sitting, and according to
their Duty in a peaceable and orderly manner treating of the great affairs of
England and Ireland; And His Majesty having placed himself in the Speakers
Chair, demanded of them the Persons of the said Members to be delivered unto
him, which is a High Breach of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and
inconsistent with the Liberties and Freedom thereof; By Law the King himself
could not give warrant to apprehend Members of the House.
And whereas afterward his Majesty did issue forth several Warrants to diverse
Officers under his own hand for the apprehension of the Persons of the said
Members which by Law he cannot do, there being not all this time any legal
Charge or Accusation, or due process of Law issued against them, nor any
pretense of Charge made known to that House: all which are against the
fundamental Liberties of the Subject, Then Mr. Hollis as a Member was as free
from arrest as Sir Arthur He^ilrig, but now Sir Arthur has the Privilege
alone, and Mr. Hollis, and the secluded Members are subject to arrest at
pleasure.
and the right of Parliament; whereupon we are necessitated according to our
Duty to declare, And we do hereby declare, that if any Person shall arrest Mr.
Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerigge, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hampden, and Mr. Strode, or any of
them, or any other Member of Parliament, by pretense or color of any Warrant
issuing out from the King only, is guilty of the breach of the Liberties of the
Subject, To arrest any Member by whatsoever warrant without a legal proceeding,
is against the Liberty of the Subject, and they that arrest any such are
declared public Enemies of the Common wealth.
and of the Privilege of Parliament, and a public Enemy to the Commonwealth.
And that the arresting of the said Members, or any of them, or any other Member
of Parliament by any Warrant whatsoever without a Legal Proceeding against
them, and without consent of that House whereof such Person is a Member, is
against the Liberty of the Subject, and a breach of Privilege of Parliament;
And the Person which shall arrest any of these Persons, or any other Member of
the Pa^liament is declared a Public Enemy of the Commonwealth.
Notwithstanding all which we think fit further to declare, that we are so far
from any endeavors to protect any of ou^ Members that shall be in due manner
prosecuted according to the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Rights and Privileges
of the Parliament, Its eleven years that above Two hundred Members have been
secluded, by their Fellow Members, and yet not one of the^ so much as accused
or brought to tryal^: Let but one week be allowed for a legal accusation and
trial of the 43. Members that sit, and if they be not all found guilty by the
weeks end, let them be privi^eged to sit as long as they live.
for Treason or any other Misdemeanors, that none shall be more ready and
willing than we our selves, to bring them to a speedy and due Trial; being
sensible that it equally imports us as well to see Justice done against them
that are criminous, as to defend the just Rights and Liberties of the Subject
and Parliament of England. And whereas upon several Examinations taken this
7th. day of this instant January, before the Committee appointed by the House
of Commons to sit in London, it did fully appear, that many Soldiers, Papists
and others, to the number of above five hundred, came with his Majesty on
Tuesday last to the said House of Commons, armed with Swo^ds, Pistols and other
weapons; And diverse of them pressed to the said door of the House, thrust away
the Door-keepers, and placed themselves between the said door, and the ordinary
Attendants of his Majesty, holding up their Swords, and some holding up their
Pistols ready cocked near the said door, and saying, I am a good Marksman, I
can hit right I warrant you; and they not suffering the said door according to
the Custom of Parliament to be shut, but said, they would have the door open;
And if any opposition were against them they made to question but they should
make their party good, and that they would maintain their party; And when
several of the House of Commons were coming into the House, their Attendants
defi^ing that room might be made for them; some of the said Soldiers answered,
A pox of God confound them, and others said, A pox take the House of Commons.
Let them come and be hanged, What ado is here with the House of Commons; and
some of the said Soldiers did likewise violently assault, and by force disarm
some of the Attendants and Servants of the Members of the House of Commons
waiting in the room next the said House: And upon the Kings return out of the
said House, many of them by wicked Oaths and otherwise, expressed much
discontent, that some Members of the said House, for whom they came, were not
there: and others of them said, When comes the word? and no word being given at
his Majesty's coming out, they cried, A lane, a lane: afterward some of them
being demanded, what they thought the said Company intended to have done?
Answered, That questionless in the posture they were set, if the word had been
given, they should have fallen upon the House of Commons and have cut all their
throats: Upon all which we are of opinion, that it is sufficiently proved, that
the coming of the said Soldiers, Papists and others with his Majesty to the
House of Commons on Tuesday last being the fourth of this instant January, in
the Manner aforesaid, was to take away some of the Members of the said House:
and if they should have found opposition or denial, then to have fallen upon the
said House, in a Hostile manner, and we do hereby declare, that the same was a
Was not the fo^ce Dec. 6.7. 1648. and May 7, 9. and Dec. 27. 1659. the like?
Treacherous design against the King and Parliament; And whereas the said Mr.
Hollis, Sr. Arthur Haslerigg, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hampden and Mr. Strode, upon report
of the coming of the said Soldiers, Papists and others, in the Warlike and
Hostile manner aforesaid, did with the approbation of the House, absent
themselves from the service of the House, for avoiding the great and many
inconveniences, which otherwise apparently might have happened; since which time
a Paper printed in the form of a Proclamation bearing date the 6th. day of this
Instant January, has issued out for the apprehending and imprisoning of them,
therein Suggesting, that through the conscience of their own Guilt, they were
absent and fled, not willing to submit themselves to Justice; We do further
declare, that the said printed paper, Then the House of Commons would not
suffer papers to be printed against 5 impeached Members now false, scandalous
and illegal papers are countenanced against the major part of the House.
is false, scandalous and illegal, and that notwithstanding the said printed
paper, or any warrant issued out, or any other matter yet appearing against
them, or any of them, they may and ought to attend the service of the said
House of Commons, and the several Committees now on foot. And that it is
lawful for all Persons whatsoever to Lodge, Harbor or converse with them, or
any of them; And whosoever shall be questioned for the same, shall be under the
protection and Privileges of Parliament; And we do further declare, that the
publishing of several Articles, purporting a form of a charge of high Treason,
Then it was adjudged a high breach of privilege, and a seditious Act, tending
to the subversion of the peace of the kingdom, and an injury and dishonor to
the Members, to publish articles in form of a charge against them, since it
has been usual without control in that kind to asperse them in their very
licensed Diurnals, especially by that insolent, malignant, lying mercinarie
writer for all parties, Mar. Needham.
against the Lord Kimbolton, one of the Members of the Lords House; And against
the said Mr. Hollis, Sr. Arthur Haslerigg, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hampden, and Mr.
Strode, by Sr. William Killigrew, Sr. William Flemen, and others in the Innes
of Court, and elsewhere in the Kings name, was a high Breach of the Privilege
of Parliament, a great scandal to his Majesty and his Government, a seditious
act manifestly tending to the subversion of the Peace of the Kingdom, and an
injury and dishonor to the said Members, there being no legal Charge or
Accusation against them: That the Privileges of Parliament, and the liberties
of the subject, so violated and broken, cannot be fully and ^ufficiently
vindicated, unless his Majesty will be graciously pleased to discover the
names of those Persons, who advised his Majesty to issue out warrants, for the
sealing of the Chambers and Studies of the said Members, to send a Serjant at
Arms to the House of Commons, to demand their said Members, to issue out
warrants under h^s Majesty's own hand, to apprehend the said Members; His
Majesty's coming thither in his own Royal Person; the publishing of the said
Articles, and printed paper, in the form of a Proclamation against the said
Members, in ^uch manner as is before declared; to the end that such Persons may
receive condign Punishment. And thi^ House does further declare, that all such
Persons as have given any counsel, or endeavored to set or maintain division
or dislike, Such breakers of privileges of Parliament are declared Public
Enemies of the State and Peace of the Kingdom, and are to be proceeded against
accordingly.
between the King and Parliament, or have listed their names, or otherwise
entered into any Combination or Agreement, to be aiding or assisting to any such
Counsel or Endeavor, or have persuaded any other so to do; or that shall do
any the things above mentioned, and shall not forthwith discover the same, to
either House of Parliament, or the Speaker of either the said Houses
respectively, and disclaim it, are declared public Enemies of the State and
Peace of this Kingdom, and shall be enquired of, and proceeded against
accordingly.

Die Lunae 17th. Ianuarii 1641. It is this day O^dered by the Commons assembled
in Parliament, that this Declaration shall be forthwith published in print.
Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl Do. Com.

The Kings Message to both Houses Ianuarii 12. 1641.
Exact Collection p. 40, etc. The late King very desirous to give satisfaction
to all men in point of Privilege, but the Rump not o^
His Majesty taking notice that some conceive it disputable, whether his
proceedings against my Lord Kimbolton, Mr. Hollis, Sr. Arthur Haslerigg, Mr.
Pym, Mr. Hampden and Mr. Strode, be Legal and agreeable to the Privileges of
Parliament, and being very desirous to give satisfaction to all men in all
matters that may seem to have relation to Privilege; is pleased to wave his
former proceedings, and all doubts, by this means being settled, when the minds
of men are composed, His Majesty will proceed thereupon in an unquestionable
way, and assures his Parliament, that, upon all occasions we will be as
careful of their Privileges, as of his life or of his Crown.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty, The Humble Petition of the Inhabitants of
the County of Buckingham shire
Exact Collection p. 50. The Petition of the County of Buckingham in behalf of
Mr. Hambden, good president for the several Counties, Cities. and places. all
or any of whose Knights, Members, are illegally secluded for their faithfulness
to their Country.
Shows,

THat your Petitioners having by virtue of your Highness Writ, chosen John
Hampden, Knight for our shire, in whose Loyalty we his Countrymen and
Neighbors, have ever had good ca^se to confi^e: however of late to our no
less amazement than grief, we find him with other Members of Parliament now
accused of Treason: and having taken into our serious Consideration, the manner
of their impeachment, we cannot but (under your Majesty's favor) conceive,
that it does so oppugn the Rights of Parliament, to the maintenance whereof
our Protestation binds us; that we believe it is the malice, which their Zeal
to your Majesty's service, and the State, has contracted in the Enemies to
your Majesty, the Church and Commonwealth, has occasioned this foul
accusation, rather than any deserts of theirs, who do likewise through their
sides, wound the Judgment and care of us your Petitioners, and others, by
whose choice they were presented to the House. Your Petitioners therefore most
Humbly pray, Mr. Hampden and the rest that lie under the burdain of that
accusation, may enjoy the just Privileges of Parliament: and your Petitioners
shall ever pray, etc.

Windsor, The late King by many degrees more tender of the privileges of
Parliament, than those who have us^^ped his regal power.
13. January 1641. His Majesty being graciously pleased to let all his
Subjects understand his care, not knowingly to violate in the least degree, any
of the Privileges of Parliament, has therefore lately by a Message sent by the
Lord Keeper, signified, that he is pleased because of the doubt that has been
raised of the manner, to wave his former proceedings against Mr. Hampden and
the rest mentioned in this petition, concerning whom his Majesty intends to
proceed in an unquestionable way and then his Majesty says it will appear,
that he had sufficient grounds to question them, as he might not in justice to
the Kingdom, and honor to himself, ^ave forborne: and yet his Majesty had much
rather, that the said persons should prove innocent than be found guilty:
however he cannot conceive that their Crimes can in any sort reflect upon these
his good Subjects, who elected them to serve in Parliament.

His Majesty's Profession and Addition to his last Message to the Parliament,
Jan. 4. 1641.
The late King offers to assert and vindicate the privileges of Parliament in
any reasonable way the Parliament should desire.
HIs Majesty being no less tender of the Privileges of Parliament, and thinking
himself no less concerned, That they be not broken, and that they be asserted
and vindicated whenever they are so, than the Parliament it self; has
thought fit to add to his last Message this Profession, that in all his
proceedings against the Lord Kymbolton, Mr. Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerigge, Mr.
Pym, Mr. Hampden, and Mr. Strode, He had never the least intention of violating
the least Privilege of parliament; And in case any doubt of breach of
Privileges remain, will be willing to clear that, and assert these by any
reasonable way that his Parliament shall advise him to; upon confidence of
which, He no ways doubts His Parliament will forthwith lay by all Jealousies,
and apply themselves to the public and p^essing Affairs, and especially to
those of Ireland, wherein the good of the Kingdom, and the true Religion (which
shall ever be His Majesty's first care) are so highly and so nearly concerned.
And his Majesty assures himself, that his care of their Privileges will
increase the tenderness of his Lawful Prerogative, which are so necessary to
the mutual defense of each other, and both which will be the Foundation of a
perpetual Intelligence between his Majesty and Parliaments, and of the
Happiness and Prosperity of his People.

Exact Collection, p. 45, 46.
The like Petition in substance, was made by the City of London to his Majesty,
and the like Answer, touching the impeached Members, and this breach of
Privilege.

Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have forsaken thy
first love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do
the first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. Rev. 2.4, 5. Every City (...)
House divided against it self shall not stand. Mat. 12.25. FINIS.

