THE POPISH ROYAL FAVOVRITE: OR, A full Discovery of His Majesty's
Extraordinary Favors to, and Protections of notorious Papists, Priests,
Jesuits, against all prosecutions and penalties of the Laws enacted against
them; notwithstanding his many Royal Proclamations, Declarations, and
Protestations to the contrary: As likewise of a most desperate long prosecuted
Design to set up Popery, and extirpate the Protestant Religion by degrees, in
this our ^ealm of England, and all His Majesty's Dominions. Manifested by
sundry Letters of Grace, Warrants, Writings under the Kings own Signe-Manuall,
Privy-Signet, His Privy-Councels, and Secretary Windebanks hands and Seals, by
diverse Orders and Proceedings in open Sessions at Newgate, in the Kings Bench,
and elsewhere (all extant on Record in the Sessions-Books, Goal-Books,
Crown-Office, where all who scruple their indubitable verity or reality, may
peruse them for their better satisfaction;) As likewise by the Kings Letter to
the Pope, His marriage Articles, Oaths, and other pregnant Testimonies, worthy
public knowledge and Consideration.

Collected and published by Authority of Parliament: By WILLIAM PRYNNE, of
Lincolns Inn, Esquire.

2 CHRONICLES. 19. 2. An^ John the son of Hanani the Seer went out to meet him, and
said to King (...), Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate
the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from the Lord.

ESAIAS 29. 15. to 20. Woe unto them, that seek deep to hide their counsel from
the Lord and their works are in the dark, and they say, who sees us? and who
knows us? Surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the
potters clay. And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and
the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out of darkness, the meek
also shall increase their joy in the Lord; and the poor among men shall rejoice
in the holy One of Israel. For the terrible one shall be brought to naught, and
the scorne^ shall be consumed, and all that watch for iniquity shall be cut off.

Imprinted at London for MICHAEL SPARK Senior, and are to be sold at the
Blue-Bible in Green Arbor. 1643.

IT is this seventeenth day of November. 1643. ordered by the Committee of the
House of Commons concerning Printing, that this Book entitled, THE POPISH
ROYAL FAVORITE, etc. be Printed by MICHAEL SPARK Senior.

JOHN WHITE.
A matetiall Observation.
The Sea their Remonstrance, and Dr. Jones, his book.
Rebels in Ireland, declared the Parliaments proceedings and intendments
against Papists, the only ground of their Rebellion.

The Queen soon after, for to aid them and the English Romanists, departs the
Realm with the Kings Jewels, to raise Moneys, Men, provide Arms, Ammunition,
the which she strenuously performed.

The King immediately upon her departure deserts the Parliament altogether,
notwithstanding all Petitions, Messages to reduce him: raises an Army first of
English Malignants, then of Papists, to divert all supplies from hence against
the Popish Rebels in Ireland, and secure the Catholic party in England and
Scotland.

Upon the Queens return, the Irish Rebels are first supplied with Arms and
Ammunition from the Queen, then after some negotiation, received into the Kings
Royal favor as his good Catholic Subjects, by Articles of pacification,
under the great Seal, contrary to two express Acts passed by him this
Parliament, to the undoing of the English Adventurers and Protestant party
there: And finally, they are sent for hither to aid the King and English
Catholics against the Parliament. Judge then whether the Kings departure from,
and taking up Arms against the Parliament, be not only and wholly to maintain
his Roman Catholics and their Religion, according to the tenor of his ensuing
marriage Oaths and Articles, what ever be pretended, protested to the contrary.

The King besides the general and special Articles of the Spanish match
hereafter mentioned, took this further Royal Oath Ex abundanti; (as the Page
48, 49. where this passage should have been inserted.
French Mercury records;) To permit at all times that any one should freely
propose unto him the Arguments of the Roman Catholic Religion, without giving
any impeachment thereunto: and that he would never permit, neither directly nor
indirectly, Tom^. 9. An. 1624. p. 9.
that any one should speak to the Infanta against it; taking since the like
Oath, with reference to the Queen^ by which he has irresistably exposed
himself to all temptations, seducements to the Antichristian Religion, and
bound himself, neither by word nor deed, to make the least opposition against
it, but to give it all the protection and encouragements that may be, and to
the professors of it, as appears by the Articles ensuing, p. 48, 49, etc.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY ROBRT Earl of ESSEX, etc. Lord General of the Forces
raised by the Parliament^ for the defense of the Kingdom, King, Religion,
Laws, Liberties, against the Popish and Malignant Party, who by force of Arms
invade them, and intend their utter ruin.
Right Honorable,
THe Alberius Gentiles, and Hug^. Grotius de Jure belli. lib. 1. Hen. Bocerus
de Jure pugnae, l. 1. c. 5. Georgius Obrectus de Belli Principiis theses 50. to
82. Hen. Ranzo. Bellici. Commentarii, l. 1. c. 4.
goodness of the Cause for which Arms are taken up, is the Generals,
Soldiers, greatest encouragement: where Religion and Justice are the real
Causes, Victory and Success will certainly be the effects of War. That these
are the true unfeigned grounds of the Parliaments and your Excellencies
defensive Arms, is sufficiently manifested to the world by sundry late Printed
Discourses; but by none more perspicuously cleared then by these Collections,
which upon this consideration especially I humbly recommend to your Honorable
Patronage.

The extraordinary presence and admirable Protection of God, with that
victorious success, which has accompanied your Excellency in two Signal
Battles, at Edge hill and Newbery, wherein the Enemy (by reason of their many
advantages) assured themselves of a full and total Conquest, are an
undubitable evidence, that you are the General of the Lord of Hosts, and the
Cause you fight for His. Therefore Isa. 54. 17.
No Weapon that is formed against your Excellency in this quarrel shall
prosper; and every malicious tongue that shall rise against you in judgment
(for fighting in this just cause) you shall condemn. Acts 5. 38, 39.
This work is not of men, but of God; therefore the very gates of hell, the
Antichristian adverse power of the Romish Malignant Party, Mat. 16. 18.
shall never prevail against it, can never overthrow it.

Your Lordship and our Reformed Church ( now really Militant) resting upon this
Rock of assurance, may, in expectation of future successes, confidently take up
these triumphant speeches of the Heroic Psalmist: Thou art Psalm. 44. 4, 5.
our King, O God, Command deliverances for Jacob: Psalm. 46^ 11.
through thee we will push down our Enemies, through thy Name shall we tread
them under that rise up against us. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of
Jacob is our refuge. Psalm. 37. 20.
But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord ( now in Arms
against our Church, Parliament, Religion, Laws, Liberties, Properties, Lives,
Estates) shall be as the fat of lambs, they shall consume, into smoke shall they
consume away. Yea (...) 83^. 3. (...)
though they have taken crafty counsel together against Gods people, and
consulted against his hidden ones: and have said, Come and let us cut them off
from being a Nation, that the Name of Israel ( of Puritans and Protestants) may
be no more in remembrance: through the tabernacles of Edom and Ishmaelites,
Moa^ and the Hagarens, Gebal, Ammon, Amaleck, the Philistines, Tire and Assure,
be now all confederated and joined together to destroy them; yet God shall do
unto them as to Sisera and Iabin at the brook of ^ison, which perished at
Endor, and became as dung for the earth: he shall make them like a wheel, as
the stubble before the wind: he shall persecute them with his tempest, and make
them afraid with his storm. They shall be troubled and confounded for ever;
yea they shall be put to shame and perish, that men may know, that he whose
Name alone is JEHOVAH, is the most High over all the earth. And in regard of
the former Victories achieved by your Excellencies incomparable valor and
prowess, we may all sing this gratulatory Song of Moses and the Israelies,
after the overthrow of Pharaoh and his host at the red Sea. Exodus ^5. 6, 7, 9,
10, 11.
Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power, thy right hand, O Lord,
has dashed in pieces the enemy. And in the greatness of thy excellency thou
have overthrown them that rose up against thee; thou sentest forth thy wrath,
which consumed them as stubble. The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake,
I will divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my
sword, my hand shall destroy them. Thou did blow with thy wind, the sea
covered them, they sank as lead in the mighty waters. Who is like unto thee, O
Lord, amongst the gods? who is like the^, glorious in holiness, fearful in
praises, doing wonders! To this great Lord of hosts, and Exodus 15. 3.
man of war ( of whose omnipotent Protection Our present Parliament and your
Excellency have had many adorable experiments) I shall in my daily Prayers
recommend your Honors Person, Forces, and Military proceedings, till through
his blessing on them, Isa. 2. 2, 3, 4.
the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and
exalted above the hills; the Kingdom and power of Romish Babylon (
notwithstanding all the confederated domestic, foreign, Popish Forces now
united to support it) utterly subverting throughout our Dominions; and
thereupon our swords be beaten into plowshares, our spears into pruning ^ooks:
And one part of our Nation, Kingdom, shall not have any cause to lift up a
sword against the other, nor to learn nor exercise a civil destructive war any
more, but Romans 16. 16. 1 Pet. 5. 14.
mutually embrace each other with an holy kiss of Charity and Peace. Which
that your Excellency, by your successful Arms, may speedily accomplish to
your eternal Honor, shall be the prayer,

Of Your Excellencies devoted servant, W. PRYNNE.

TO All who love their God, Religion, Country, in SINCERITY.
Dearest Brethren:
YOu might justly repute me (especially since the late solemn Covenant) a
perfidious Traitor to God, Religion, and my now bleeding, dying native
Country, should I wittingly conceal the underhand attempts of any mortal
whatsoever, against them. I have therefore by authority of Parliament published
these ensuing Letters, Warrants, Papers, extant under His Majesty's own, His
Counsels, Secretaries, Hands and Signets, with sundry Orders made in open
Court by Royal direction, for protection of Popish Recusants, Priests,
Jesuits, against the many good Laws enacted to suppress them; by means
whereof, and of his Marriage Articles, that dangerous Traitorous Faction has
grown so powerfully great by degrees, and insinuated so far into the Kings
affections, that they now threaten a sudden extirpation of the Protestant Party
and Religion, out of his Majesty's Dominions; a speedy subvertion of our Laws,
Liberties, the present Parliament, by open force of Arms; having already fully
possessed themselves of His Majesty's Royal Person, Issue, Forces, Forts,
Affections, bearing chiefest sway in all his late Councels, Proceedings, as we
may now clearly discern, to our greatest grief, by many woeful experiences and
visible Demonstrations, written in red Capital Characters of our own English
Protestant blood; especially by the late sending for and landing of Irish
Rebels to destroy us.

It seems a strange mystery of Iniquity to me; First, that from the beginning
of His Majesty's reign till this present Parliament, the most zealous,
conscientious, pious Protestants have been continually persecuted under the
Title of Puritans (the better to color the design) with extraordinary rigor
by the Prelatical and Popish faction, against the express Laws of the Realm,
both in the High Commission, Prelates Consistories, Councell-Chamber, and
Star Chamber, to the loss of their Estates, Benefices, Liberties, Ears,
Limbs, Many of them dying in prison.
Lives. Yea, thousands of them have been expelled the Realm, or forced to fly
into foreign desolate American Plantations for security: And yet not one
Royal Letter (for ought appears to me) could ever be produced all that time to
any Courts of Justice in the lawful favor of any of them; but many Royal
Orders, See a new ^^^scovery of ^he Prelates tyranny.
Expresses from his Majesty, have been procured, rigourously to proceed against
them; Notwithstanding His Majesty's many Printed Before the ^7. Articles, and
upon the dissolutions of the two last ^abortive Parliaments.
Declarations to His Subjects, r^ally to maintain and defend the Protestant
Religion, and professors of it, to the utmost of His power. Secondly, that
since our late unhappy, civil, bloody wars, till this present, the best and
most zealous Protestants (Ministers, people,) both in Ireland and England, have
been every where most cruelly Massacred, plundered, tortured, imprisoned,
ruined, aimed at, by blood-thirsty Popish Cavaliers; many of their houses, and
almost some whole Towns of them (as Banbury, Malborough, Bromingham, O^kingham,
and others) fired, sacked, by his Majesty's special Commission, (as the
Incendiaries reported,) or at least by his Royal See Prince Ruperts his late
Warrant.
Permission, notwithstanding his many late solemn Declarations, Protestations,
Remonstrances, Oaths to maintain the Protestant Religion, the Subjects
Liberties, Properties, Laws, and that he took up Arms to no other end but
this. Thirdly, that on the other side sundry Popish Recusants and Seminary
Priests have, during all his Majesty's reign, obtained innumerable Letters of
Grace, Protection, from His Majesty, contrary to Law, and Orders of Session in
their favor, to stay all manner of proceedings or executions of the Laws in
force against them, contrary to the Judges and Justices Oaths, till this
Parliament, in all Counties of the Realm; and that since this unhappy civil
War, the Papists, both in England and Ireland, have been armed against the
Parliament by His Majesty's special Commission, yea put into places of great
command, trust, admitted free access to his Camp, Court, where they are now
most in favor, and preserved from all violence, injury, plunder of His Forces;
notwithstanding His many Royal printed Declarations, Proclamations,
Protestations, Vows against Popery and Papists, to blind or delude the over-
credulous Vulgar: who now begin to be so well acquainted with these
hypocritical Court-stratagems (execrable both to God and men) that they will
no longer be circumvented by them. And is this that brave, real, royal,
Defense of the Protestant Religion so often protested, proclaimed to the world in
Print of late, with deepest Oaths and Imprecations of Divine vengeance, if not
cordially intended? Jer. 2. 12.
Be astonished Oye Heavens, and horribly afraid at this most gross hypocrisy,
most apparent dissimulation, most palpable contradiction of regal
Protestations and Actions, which the great Rev. 17. 14.
King of Kings, and Genesis 18. 25.
righteous judge of all the earth will not suffer long to go unrevenged, if not
speedily repeuted, reformed.

Far is it from my heart to wish or imprecate the least evil to his Majesty,
his Royal Consort, or Posterity, for whose real happiness and prosperity I
shall ever be a daily 1 Timothy 1. 2, 3.
Orator to the Throne of Grace; yet this I cannot but in loyalty fear, if not
inform them, that if they persevere to dissemble thus with God and men, to
oppose Papists in words, yet cherish, protect them all they may in deeds,
openly siding with Irish, English Popish Rebels against the Parliament and
their Protestant Subjects; and professedly arming them, with other Outlandish
Papists, to waste, spoil, ruin, destroy their Protestant Kingdoms, Subjects,
with Fire, Sword, as hitherto they have cruelly done, Psalm. 83. 4.
taking counsel against the Lord, and his Anointed Son, Servants, Psalm. 2. 1,
2, 3, 4, 9.
to cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in
remembrance; though Earth be silent, or Men patient at this Scarlet impiety,
yet Heaven, God will not be so: but he that sits in the Heavens will speak
unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure: he will break
them with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel. Psa.
76. ^ Psalm. 110. 5^^ Psalm. 107. 4. ^ ^ob 12. 21.
He who pours out contempt upon Princes, who is terrible to the Kings of the
Earth; who cuts off the Spirit of Princes, yea striks through Kings in the day
of his wrath ( as he smote, Psalm 135. ^ 9. to 13. Psalm. 136. 10. to 23. Judges
3. Dan. 3. 5. Acts 12. 23.
King Pharaoh, Sehon King of the Amorits, Og King of Bashan, all the Kings of
Canaan, Eglon, Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, Herod, with infinite other
Monarchs.) He Job 34 19. Romans 2. 6.
who accepts not the person of Princes, nor regards the rich more then the
poor, for they are all the work of his hands; but without respect of persons
renders to every man according to his works; will Luke 18. 7, 8. Revel. 16. 6.
c. 19. 2.
most certainly avenge this detestable hypocrisy, with all the blood of his
Saints which has been spilt, and the injuries done to his Elect, who cry unto
him day and night; Yea, he will avenge them speedily. For if he, by his Prophet
Esaias, thus threatened to cut off the King of Babylon and his posterity, only
for destroying his own Land, and slaying his Idolatrous Pagan Subjects that
knew not God, Isa. 14. 19. to 23. But thou art cast out of thy grave as an
abominable branch, as a carcass trodden under feet: thou shall not be joined
with them in burial, BECAUSE THOU HAVE DESTROYED THYLAND, AND SLAIN THY
PEOPLE. Prepare ye slaughter for his children for the iniquity of their
fathers, that they do not rise and possess the Land; for I will rise up
against them says the Lord of Hosts, and cut off from Babylon the name and
remembrance, the Sons and Nephews, says the Lord. Then what severe judgment
may such Christian Kings expect from the God of Heaven, who contrary to their
own frequently reiterated solemn public Vows, Protestations, Imprecations,
most inhumanely destroy their own flourishing Christian Realms, with fire and
sword; plunder, pillage, captivate, slay, murder, their most pious Protestant
Subjects every where without pity or remorse? If 1 King. 21. 2 King. 9.
Ahab, Jezabel, with all their royal Posterity, were utterly cut off,
extirpated in a moment, for countenancing Idolaters, and putting Naboth
unjustly to death, only for a pretended blasphemy against God and the King, of
purpose to gain his single Vineyard; then what will become of those Kings,
Jezabels, and their posterities, who not only cherish and protect many Romish
Idolaters, Priests, Jesuits; but likewise use their armed power to murder,
plunder, ruin many thousands of innocent Protestant Naboths, yea, seize upon
their whole estates as forfeited, under a pretense of Treason or Rebellion, and
John 16. 2.
think they do God good service in it? Certainly, if they impenitently
persevere in this their tyrannical violence, they cannot but expect the
self-same judgment which these under went, from that Sovereign God, Dan. 2.
21. c. 4. 17. 27. c. 5. 20. 28.
who removes Kings, and sets up Kings, and rules over the Kingdoms of
men, giving them to whomsoever he will: at lest they may justly fear the
undergoing of that exemplary sentence given against proud, tyrannical
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 32. to 37. c. 5. 20. 21, 22. who when his heart was
lifted up, and his mind hardened to deal proudly, he was deposed from his Kingly
Thron, and they took his glory from him: and he was driven from the sons of
men, and his heart was made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild
Asses; they fed him with grass like Oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of
Heaven, till he knew that the most high God ruled in the Kingdom of men; and
appoints over it whomsoever he will: Not like Butchers to slay, but as Psalm.
78. 70, 71, 72.
Shepherds to feed and protect his people; not to be a Romans 13. 2. to 5. 1
Pet. 2. 13, 14.
terror to good works, but evil, to render punishment to evil doers,
especially to Popish Idolaters; and praise or honor to those that do well; and
to be tender Isa. 49. 23 ^^
nursing fathers to the Church of God: which God grant all those whom it now
concerns, may seasonably and effectually consider. In the mean time it behooves
all those who have any sparks of love to God or Religion in their breasts, to
have their Eccl. 2. 14.
eyes in their heads, not heels; to be as Mat. 10. 16.
wise as Serpents, though as innocent as Doves. To take heed, that they walk
Ephesians. 5. 15. ^ Col. 4. 5. (...)
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise; ( weighing all men's actions, not
their Protestations) redeeming the time because the days are very evil,
deceitful beyond all former ages; yea far more dangerous than most men
apprehend them. Let the consideration therefore of the ensuing Papers, together
with Romes Masterpiece, the English Pope, the Parliaments late Declaration of
the rise and progress of the Irish rebellion, the Articles of the Irish
pacification, (to the ruin of the Protestant Party there,) with the
Parliaments Remonstrances concerning it, the many ships lately^ sent from
Bristo^, besides those from other parts, with Commissions to transport Irish
Popish rebels into England to cut all our throats; with other daily (...) See
the Mystery of iniquity.
fresh experiments of the Papists great power, proceedings, treacheries, to
re-erect their own, and root out our Religion throughout His Majesty's
Dominions, now at last awake, and rouse us all out of our overlong desperate
senseless security; yea, fully open our eyes to behold the extreme imminent
dangers, our Church, Religion, Laws, Liberties, Estates, Lives, Parliament,
Kingdom, Nation, are now actually threarned with from the prevailing
blood-thirsty Popish party, in highest authority and favor with His Majesty,
now wholly captivated, possessed, swayed by them, at their wills; and then
speedily engage us all, ere it be over-late, with one unanimous consent
(according to our late solemn Protestations, Covenants,) to put forth our
utmost strength of body, mind, estate, prayers, to prevent that inundation of
Popery, that extermination of our Protestant Religion, Laws, Liberties,
Parliaments, that utter destruction now menaced to our three united Christian
Kingdoms, against which the great Roman Pontif, with all his Antichristian
bloody generation of Foreign and Domestic Popelings, have a long time
conspired, and now united all their polices, purses, forces, to accomplish
their final devastation, as the ensuing papers will in part descry; which I
shall recommend to your most serious perusal, and Gods blessing; the reality
of them being so unquestionable, and these Transcrips so consonant to the
Originalls, by which they have been diligently examined, that I should but
waste time and Paper to trouble you with any other arguments or attestations of
their verity, (so well known to the Papists, and all Officers of justice) then
such as you shall find annexed to them in the following pages, by the
Collector of them.

Your most affectionate friend, and real Servant of our Church and Republique,
to his power, WILLIAM PRYNNE.

The Popish Royal Favorite. CONTAINING Sundry Letters of Grace, Protection,
and Warrants of discharge, granted by His Majesty to notorious Popish
Recusants, Priests and Jesuits, to exempt them from all Prosecutions and penal
Laws against them; signed with the Kings own hand, etc. The Originals whereof
are in the custody of Mr. John Glynne Esquire, Recorder of London, Mr. Graves
Clerk of the Peace for Middlesex, and others.
CHARLES REX,

WHereas we have received good testimony of the loyalty, and duty of our trusty
and welbeloved, William Keeley, in the county of Worcester; and because he may
be subject to the penalties of the laws for Recusancy, these are to signify
that we are graciously pleased to extend our special grace toward him, and
do hereby will and command, that no indictment, presentment, information, or
suit in our name, or in the name of any other, be henceforth commenced,
prosecuted, or attempted against him by any Officers or Subjects whatsoever,
for, or concerning Recusancy. And if any such shall happen to be, then our will
and pleasure is, that upon sight thereof the same shall be discharged and made
void, or otherwise not prejudicial to him. Given under our Signet at our Court
at White Hall, the six and twentieth day of March, in the tenth year of our
Reign.

To all and singular our Judges of Assize, Justices of peace, Mai^rs, Sheriffs,
Clerks of Assize and peace, Bailiffs, Constables, Informers, and to all other
our Officers, and Ministers, whom it may or does concern, and to every of them.

CHARLES REX.

WHereas we are well satisfied of the loyalty, duty and affection of our trusty
and wellbeloved William Cobbe of Sa^dringham in the County of Norfolk
Gentleman; and because he may be subject to the penalties of the laws made
against recusants, by way of Indictment or otherwise: these are to signify,
that we are graciously pleased to extend our special grace toward him, and
do hereby will and command, that no Indictment, presentment, Information, or
Suite in Our name, or in the name of any other, be henceforth prosecuted, or
accepted against him the said William Cobbe by any of our Officers or Subjects
whatsoever, for or concerning recusancy, till We shall signify Our pleasure to
the contrary; and if any such shall happen to be, then Our will and pleasure
is, that upon sight hereof the same shall be discharged and made void, or
otherwise not prejudicial to him. Given under our Signet at Our Palace at
Westminster, the fourteenth of March, in the tenth year of our reign.

To all and Singular our Judges of Assize and Barons of our Exchequer, Justices
of Peace, Majors, Baliffes, Clerks of Assize and of the peace, Constables,
Headboroughs, Messengers, Pursivants, Informers, and to all every our Officers
whom it may or does concern, and to every of them.

CHARLES REX,

Whereas ou^ trusty and wellbeloved Sir Francis Eaglesfield Knight and Baronet
being a recusant, is thereby subject to our laws and statutes in that case
provided. These are to signify our royal will and pleasure, that no person or
persons shall at any time hereafter, sue, prosecute, implead, either by way of
Indictment, Information, or otherwise, against the said Sir Francis
Eaglesfield, for being a recusant, or cause or procure him to be Indicted or
convicted by virtue of any of our Laws, or Statutes against Popish recusants,
till we shall signify Our pleasure to the contrary. Given under our signet at
our Palace of Westminster the sixth day of December, in the tenth year of our
reign.

To all our Judges of Assize, Justices of Peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes,
Constables, Headboroughs, Pursivant^, and to all other our Officers and
Min^sters, whom it may or does concern, and to every of them.

CHARLES REX.

Whereas we are well satisfied of the loyalty, duty, and affection of our
trusty and wellbeloved Sir John Shelly Knight and Baronet, and the Lady Jane
his wife, and because they may be subject to the penalty of the laws made
against recusants, by way of Indictment or otherwise: These are to signify,
that we are graciously pleased to extend Our special grace toward them, and
do hereby will and command that no Indictment, Presentment, Information, or
suit in our name, or in the name of any other be henceforth commenced,
prosecured or accepted against them or either of them, by any of our Officers
or Subjects whatsoever, for or concerning recusancy, till we shall signify Our
pleasure to the contrary. And if any such shall happen to be, then our will and
pleasure is, that upon sight hereof the same shall be discharged and made void,
or otherwise not prejudicial to them or either of them, Given under our Signet
at our Court at Greenwich the ninth day of June, in the eleventh year of our
Reign.

To all and singular the Barons of the Exchequer, Judges of Assize, Justices of
peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Clerks of Assize, and Petty Constables,
Headboroughs, Messengers, Pursivants, Informers, and to all other our Officers
and Ministers whom it may or does concern, and to every of them. ^

CHARLES REX.

Whereas we have received very good testimony of the loyalty, duty, and
affection of our trusty and wellbeloved Sir John Wintour of Lydney in our
County of Glo^cester Knight, and the Lady Mary his Wife, and because they may
be subject to the penalty of the Laws made against Recusancie; These are to
signify, that we are pleased to extend Our special grace toward them, and
do hereby command, that no Indictment, Presentment, Information, or Suit,
either in Our name or in the name of any other, be hereafter commenced,
prosecuted, or accepted against them, or either of them, by any of our Officers
or Ministers whatsoever for matter of Recusancy, till we shall signify our
pleasure to the contrary. And if any such be already, or shall happen to be at
any time hereafter, then our will and pleasure is, the same shall be forth with
made void, or otherwise not prejudicial to them, or either of them. Given
under our Signet at our Court at Oatlands the seventh day of August in the
thirteenth year of our Reign.

To the most Reverend Father in God, our right trusty and right entirely el^ved
Counselor, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; to the Treasurer, Under
treasurer, and Barons of the Exchequer for the time being, to our Commissioners
for Recusancy for the time being, and to all the Judges of Assize, Justices of
peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Clerks of Assize, Petty Constables,
Headboroughs, Messengers, Pursivants and Informers, and to all other our
Officers and Ministers as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, whom it does or
may concern, and to every of them.

CHARLES REX.

Whereas we are well satisfied of the loyalty, duty, and affection of our
trusty and wellbeloved Sir Francis Mannecke, of Stock in our County of
Suffolk Baronet, and Dame Mary his Wife; and because they are or may be
subject to the penalty of our laws made against Recusancy by way of Indictment
or otherwise. These are to signify, that we are pleased to extend our special
grace and fovour toward them, and do therefore here by command that no
Indictment, Presentment, Information, or Suite either in our name, or in the
name of any other, be from henceforth framed preferred, commenced, prosecuted,
or accepted against them or either of them, by any our Officers or Ministers
whatsoever, Ecclesiastical or Temporal, for or concerning Recusancy, till we
shall signify our pleasure to the contrary. And if any such be, or shall
happen to be hereafter, then our pleasure is, that presently upon sight hereof,
the same be cancelled and made void, or otherwise not prejudicial to them or
either of them, and these our Letters shall be to all our said Officers and
Ministers whatsoever, sufficient warrant and discharge in this behalf. Given
under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster the one and twentieth day of
April in the fourteenth year of our Reign.

To all, etc.

CHARLES REX.

WHereas we are well satisfied of the loyalty, duty, affection, and good
service of our trusty and welbeloved Thomas lennings of London, Merchant; and
because he is or may be subject to the Penalty of our Laws made against
Recusancy, by way of Indictment or otherwise, by reason of his Wives Recusancy,
although he himself be every way conformable: These are to signify, that we
are pleased to extend our special grace toward him and her, and do therefore
hereby command that no Indictment, Presentment, Information, or Suit, either in
our name, or in the name of any other, be from henceforth framed, preferred,
prosecuted or accepted against them or either of them, by any of our Officers
or Ministers whatsoever for or concerning her Recusancy, till we shall signify
our pleasure to the contrary. And if any such be, or shall happen to be
hereafter, then our will and pleasure is, that forthwith upon sight hereof the
same shall be cancelled and made void, or otherwise not prejudicial to them or
either of them, and this our letter shall be unto all and every our officers
and Ministers, whom it does or may concern sufficient warrant and discharge in
this behalf. Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the seven and
twentieth day of March, in the fifteenth Year of our Reign.

To the most reverend Father in God, our right trusty and right entirely
beloved Counselor, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and
Metrapolitane of all England, and to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury for the
time being, to the Tresurer and Vnder-treasurers, and Barons of our Exchequer
for the time being, to our Commissioners for Recusants for the time being, to
all and singular our Iudges^ Justices of Assize, and Jail-delivery, Justices of
Peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Clerks of Assize and peace, Baliffs, Constables,
Messengers, Pursivants and Informers, and to all other our Officers and
Ministers, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal now and for the time being,
whom it does or may concern, and to every of them,

CHARLES REX.

WHereas Sir Chr^les Smith of Walton VVavers in the County of Warwick Knight,
is or may be subject to the danger of our Laws for his Recusancy by way of
Indictment or otherwise; These are to signify, that we are graciously pleased
to extend our special grace and favor toward him, and do hereby will and
command that no Indictment, Presentment, Information, or Suit in our name, or
in the name of any other, be henceforth preferred or accepted against him by
reason of his said Recusancy, by any of our Officers or Subjects whomsoeever,
and if any such shall happen to be, then our will and pleasure is, upon sight
hereof, that the same shall be discharged and made void. Given under our Signet
at our Court at Greenwich the nine and twentieth day of June, in the tenth
year of our Reign.

To all and singular our Judges of Assize, Justices of peace, Majors, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, Clerks of Assize and Peace, Constables, and to all other our
Officers, and Ministers wh^^ it does or may concern, and to every of them.

CHARLES REX.

TRusty and well beloved, we greet you well, we have been often and earnestly
moved by our dear Mother the Queen Mother of France, to extend our favor to
Sir Henry Bedingfield Knight, his Wife and Family, who are Popish Recusants,
and we are very willing that for her sake they should receive our favor, when
they shall stand in need thereof for that cause; yet we must so perform it,
that it may not be of Wh^^ then (...) so ma^^ Letter this na^^ grante others
(...)
ill example to others, who are or shall be in the like kind obnoxious to our
Laws for Recusancy, nor be scandalous to our Government, whereof we are and
must be tender; therefore our will and command to you is, that you take
knowledge of our pleasure herein, and take special care to preserve the said
Sir Henry Bedingfield and his Wife from the danger of the laws made against
Popish Recusarits, that Sir Henry himself shall not be impeached any way for
any of his Family for being Popish Recusants; for the doing whereof from time
to time, by such ways you shall think fittest, this shall be your warrant.
Dated this twentieth of November 1634.

To our tructy and wellbeloved, John Banks Knight, Attorney General and his
successors.

CHARLES REX.

WHereas we are well satisfied of the loyalty, duty, and affection of our
trusty and wellbeloved Clement Paston of Thrope, in our County of Norfolk
Esquire, and because he may be subject to the penalty of our Laws made against
Recusants by way of Indictment or otherwise; These are to signify that we are
graciously pleased to extend our special grace toward him, and do hereby
will and command that no Indictment, Presentment, Information or suit in our
name, or in the name of any other, be from henceforth Commenced, prosecuted, or
accepted against him by any of our Officers or Subjects whatsoever, for or
concerning Recusancy, till we shall signify our pleasure to the contrary; and
if any such shall happen to be, then our will and pleasure is, that upon sight
hereof the same shall be discharged and made void, or otherwise not
prejudicial to him. Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the
four and twentieth day of March, in the tenth year of our Reign.

To all Judges of Assize, Barons of Exchequer, Justices of peace, Majors,
Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, Headboroughs, Messengers, Pursivants,
Informers; and to all other our Officers and Ministers whom it does or may
concern, and to every of them.

CHARLES REX.

WHereas our wellbeloved Subject William Peter's of Landford-rivers in the
County of Essex, has particular employments in Our service, which he cannot so
well discharge and execute if he be troubled for his Religion; these are
therefore to signify our gracious pleasure, that we are so well informed and
satisfied of his loyalty toward us, that from henceforward he be not any ways
questioned for the same, unless our pleasure be especially delivered to the
contrary. And this to be sufficient warrant to any whom that may concern.
Given under our Signet at our Court at Whitehall, the six and twentieth day of
March in the fourteenth year of our Reign.

To the Treasurer, Undertreasurer, Chancellours, Barons, and other the
Officers of our Court of Exchequer for the time being. To all our Judges of
either Bench, Judges of Assize, and Peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes,
Clerks of Assize and Peace, Constables, Headboroughs, and to all other our
Officers and Ministers whom it may or does concern, and to every of them.

CHARLES REX.

WHereas the Lady Elizabeth Stoner of Blounts-court widow, stands indicted for
Recusancy in the County of Oxon, she being a weak and sickly woman, as we are
informed. Our Royal pleasure is, that you henceforth forbear to proceed, and
suffer not any farther proceeding against her, nor upon her lands and goods,
upon the said indictment to Conviction, or upon any other the foresaid
Indictment in the the said County of Oxon or Wilts, until you know our further
pleasure to be signified by us expressly touching the same. And this shall be
your warrant in that behalf.

To all our Judges of Assize and Justices of peace for the County of Oxon and
Wilts, To our Clerks of Assize and peace for the said Counties, and to all
other our Officers and Ministers else where, whom it does or may concern.

CHARLES REX.

WHereas we have received very good testimony of the loyalty, duty, and
affection of Sir William Pearsall Knight. And because he may be subject to the
penalty of the laws made against recusants, by way of indictment or otherwise:
These are to signify that we are graciously pleased to extend our special
grace toward him; And do hereby will and command that no Indictments,
Presentiments, Informations, or suit in our Name, or in the name of any other,
be henceforth commenced, prosecuted or accepted against him by any other
officers or subjects whatsoever, for or concerning his recusancy, till we shall
signify our pleasure especially to the contrary. And if any such be already,
or shall happen to be hereafter, then our will and pleasure is, that upon sight
hereof the same shall be discharged and void, or otherwise not prejudicial to
him. Given under our Signet at our Court of Oatelands the five and twentieth
day of November, in the tenth year of Our reign.

To our Treasurer and Chancellor of the Exchequer for the time being, and to
all and singular our Commissioners for Recusants; to all Judges of Assize,
Justices of the peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Clerks of the Assize and
of the peace, Constables, M^ssengers, Pursivants, Informers; and to all other
Officers and Ministers whom it does or may concern, and to every of them.

CHARLES REX.

WHeareas John Carrill of Harting in the County of Sussex Esquier, sone and
heir of Sir John Carrill of Harting aforesaid Knight, is or may be subject to
the danger of our laws for his recusancy, by way of indictment, information or
otherwise: and whereas we understand that the said John Carrill has componnded
with us for his whole Estate by the Commission of grace which we have been
pleased to grant for that purpose and the like, and has duly hitherto paid the
rent reserved to us thereupon, his whole Estate having been granted and
released by us to him under our great Scale of England. And whereas we are
informed that the said John Carrill Esquire has no Lands at all to live upon
but only some in the manor of Warnham in the County of Sussex, which his
Father allowed him for his maintenance, and which is part and parcel of the
Lands aforesaid so compounded for with us by our Commissioners, and for which
the Father hitherto has duly paid the rent reserved. And whereas the said John
Carrill the Son h^mbly offers, that if God call his Father before him, he
will pay us the same rent to which his father is subject now for the same
favors and immunities which the said father now enioyes, so as we are not to
be damnified at all in our Revenue by this our act of grace to the Son. These
are therefore to signify, that we are graciously pleased to extend our
special favor toward the said John Carrill the Son, and do hereby will
and command that no indictment, presentment, Information, or any Suite of any
kind, in our name, or in the name of any other, be henceforth preferred or
accepted against him by reason of his said Recusancy by any of our Officers or
subjects whatsoever. And if any shall happen to be commenced or brought, then
our express will and pleasure is, that upon sight hereof the same shall be
discharged and made void, and this ou^ Warrant shall continue in force until
we shall signify our pleasure to the contrary^ Given under our Signet at our
Court at Whitehall, the last day of February, in the twelfth year of Our
Reign.

To all and singular our Judges of Assize, our Attorney General and
Solliciter, Justices of peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Clerks of Assize
and of the peace, Constables, and all other our Officers and Ministers whom it
does, or may concern and to every of them.

CHRALES REX.
WHereas we have received a good Testimoney of the loyalty, duty, and good
affection of our trusty and wellbeloved servant, Edward Cotton of Shelwood in
the County of Surry Esquire and of Mary his wife; and because they may be
subject to the penalties of the laws made against Recusants, by way of
Indictment, or otherwise: These are to signify, that we are graciously pleased
to extend our special grace toward them; and do hereby will and command,
that no Indictmen, Presentment, Information, or suit in our name, or in the
name of any other, be henceforth commenced, prosecuted, or accepted against
them, or either of them, by any of our Officers or servants whatsoever, for or
concerning Recusancy, till we shall signify our pleasure to the contrary. Or
if any be, or shall happen to be, then our will and pleasure is, that upon
sight here of the same shall be discharged and made void, or otherwise not
prejudicial to them, or either of them. Given under our signet, at our Palace
of Westminster, the fifteenth day of June, in the thirteenth year of our
Reign.

To the most reverend father in God the Lord archbishop of Canterbury; to our
Lord-treasurer and Chancellor, and Barons of the exchequer for the time being;
to all and singular our Commissioners for Recusants for the time being; to all
our Judges of assize, Justices of peace, majors, Sheriffs, Clerks of Assize
and peace, Bayliffes, Constables, Headboroughs, Messengers, Pursivants, and
Informers, and to all other Officers and Ministers whatsoever, to whom it does
or may appertain, and to every of them, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal.

CHARLES REX.

WHereas we have received very good testimony of the loyalty, duty, and
affection of our right trusty and wellbeloved Thomas Lord Arundell of Wardor,
and the Lady Anne his wife, and because they may be subject to the penalty of
our Laws made against Recusants, by way of Indictment or otherwise: these are
to signify that we are graciously pleased to extend our special grace toward
them, and do hereby will and command, that no Indictment, presentment,
information, or suite in our name or^ in the name of any other, be henceforth
commenced, prosecuted, or accepted against them or either of them, by any of
our Officers or Subjects whatsoever, for, or concerning Recusancy, till we
shall signify our pleasure to the Contrary; And if any such be already, or
shall happen to be hereafter, then Our will and pleasure is, that upon sight
hereof the same shall be discharged and made void, or otherwise not
prejudicial to them, or either of them. Given under our signet at our palace
at Westminster; the one and twentieth day of June, in the thirteenth Year of
Our Reign.

To our Lord Treasurer and Chancellor of our Exchequer for the time being: to
all and singular our Commissioners for Recusants for the time being: to all our
Judges of Assize, Justices of peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Clerks of Assize and
Peace, Bailiffes, Constables, Headboroughs, Messengers, Pursivants, and
Informers, and to all other our Officers and Ministers whatsoever, to whom it
does, or may appertain, and to every of them.

CHARLES REX.

WHereas we are well satisfied of the loialty, duty and affection of our trusty
and welbeloved William Therold of Arberfield in the County of Berks Esquire,
and Francis his wife, and because they are or may be subject to the penalty of
our Laws for their Recusancy, by way of Indictment, or otherwise: These are
therefore to signify, that We are pleased to extend our special grace toward
them; and do hereby will and command, that no Indictment, Presentment
Information, Citation or other Suit whatsoever in our name, or in the name of
any other, be from henceforth framed, preferred, prosecuted, or accepted,
against them, or either of them, by any our officers or subjects whatsoever,
for or concerning their Recusancy, till we shall signify our pleasure to the
contrary. And if any such already be, or shall happen to be hereafter, then our
will and pleasure is, that upon sight hereof the same shall be discharged and
made void, or otherwise not prejudicial to them. Given under our
Signe-Manuall this fourth day of September 1639.

To the most Reverend Father in God, our right trusty and right entirely
beloved Counselor, William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; Primate and
Metropolitan of all England, and to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, for the
time being, the Treasurer and Undertreasurer, Chamberlains, and Barons of our
Exchequer for the time being, to all and singular our Commissioners for
Recusants, for the time being; to all our Judges of Assize, Justices of peace,
Majors, Sheriffs, Clerks of Assize and peace, Bailiffs and to all other our
Officers and Ministers Ecclesiastical and temporal for the time being, and to
all others whom it shall or may concern.

The like letters of grace under the Kings own sign manual, I find granted
to the Lady Elizateth Dormer, dated the 19 of June 1629 to Captain John Read,
13 of July Anno 10 Car. to Anthony Metcalf Her Majestyes servant produced at
the open Sessions of Goale-delivery made for Middlesex the 28 of March 15th
Car. to Anne Lady Sands Dowager, Elisabeth Stukely her only daughter, and
Elisabeth Hitchcock her servant, produced at the Sessions of Jail delivery for
the same County the 8 of July Anno 15to Car. to John Chamberlain of Lindhurst.
Produced at the same place the 9 of May 14to Car. to Sir Henry Audley Knight,
and Dame Anne his wife, dated 15 Ianuarii Anno 13 Car. to the Lady Katharine
Windsor, wife of Thomas Lord Windsor, dated 7 Febr. Anno 15 Car. all these
Letters of Grace under the Kings signe-manuall, and privy Signet, for
protection of these Arch-popish Recusants against all Laws and prosecutions,
are registered, and the true copies of them entered by the Recusants themselves
or their agents in the Clerk of the Peace his books for London and Middlesex,
or in the Crowne-Office, besides sundry others left with the Clerks of the
Peace in other Counties of England.

What effects these Letters of Grace and protection produced in Courts of
Justice contrary to Law and to the Kings and Justices own Oaths, will appear
by these few ensuing Orders, made at the open Sessions of Jail delivery for
the County of Middlesex.

UPon special directions given by his Majesty, and signified by a Letter from
Master Secretary VVindebank to the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Richardson
Knight Lord chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, 17 April. 10
car. p. 157 Of the Sessions Book.
bearing date the sixteenth day of April 1634 and showed now to this Court. It
is ordered by this Court' that the Recognisance taken in Court at the Sessions
of Gaole-delivery holden for the County of Middlesex at Justice Hall in the
Oldbaily the fourth day of October last past, wherein Alexander Baker of the
Parish of Saint Andrews in Holborn in the County of Middlesex Gentleman, was
bound to his Majesty with two sureties for his appearance at the Sessions of
Goal delivery then next following, At which Sessions he made default, shall
not be estreated but all further proceedings thereupon shall be forthwith
stayed.

Per Cur.

UPon the reading of His Majesty's Letters Parents under the Great Seal of
England, Maii. 4. Car. p. 274.
bearing date the third day of January, in the 3 year of his Majesty's reign
of England, etc. and enrolled in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer. It appeared
unto this Court, that His Majesty was graciously pleased to signify His Royal
pleasure that John Chamberlain of Lindhurst in the County of Southampton Esq^^
should not at any time hereafter Nota.
during the term of LX years be indicted of or for Recusancy, or for not
repairing to Church, Chapel or usual place of Common prayer, contrary to the
Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom in that behalf had and provided. And that
if any indictment be, that then upon such indictment or indictments no process
or other proceedings by Proclamation or Proclamations, Utlary or Utlaries, or^
otherwise, shall be had against the said John Chamberlain, and thereupon it is
ordered by this Court that His Majesty's royal pleasure, signified as
aforesaid would be obeyed, and that all proceedings against the said John
Chamberlain should be stayed accordingly.

Per Cur.

WHereas this court has this Sessions received command from his Majesty under
his Sign Manual, 28 March. 15. Car. p. 304.
on the behalf of Anthony Metcalfe servant to the Queens Majesty, for the
staying of any indictment or any further proceeding upon any indictment against
the said Anthony for matters of Recusancy. It is therefore by this Court
ordered, that all proceedings in this Court against the said Anthony for the
said cause, shall cease until His Majesty's pleasure be signified to the
contrary.

Per Cur.

ACcording to a letter under the hand of Master Secretary Windebank signifiing
his Majesty's pleasure therein. 29 Maii. 15 Car. p. 312.
It is ordered by this Court, that the estreating of the Convictions upon the
indictments of the recusancy against^ these persons here undernamed, shall be
stayed until his Majesty's pleasure be further known to the Contrary.

Viz.

Sir John Symonds Knight. Elizabeth Good Widow. William Cape, and M^rs Forman
Widow.
ACcording to his Majesty's pleasure and grace extended toward Anne Lady Sands
Dowager, and Elizabeth Stukely her only daughter, 8 Iunii. 15 Car. p. 316.
and Elizabeth Hitchcock her servant, and signified to this Court under his
Highness sign manual; It is ordered and commanded by this Court, that no
further process or proceeding be made or had against them upon their
indictments or Recusancy, until his majesty's pleasure be signified to the
contrary.

Per Cur.

WHereas the Kings Majesty under his Sign manual, signified to this Court
some three years since, that it was his Highness pleasure that no Indictment
of Recusancy should be received against Sir Charles Smith of Wotton-mavers in
the County of Warwick, Knight; or if any such shall happen to be, that then it
should be discharged and made void. And whereas at the last Sessions an
Indictment of recusancy was preferred against the said Sir Charles, unknown to
this Court. It is now ordered by this Court, that no further proceedings shall
be made against the said Sir Charles upon the said indictment, but utterly to
cease, until his Majesty's pleasure be signified to the contrary.

Per Cur

At the Sessions of Goale-delivery for London, held 16 Ianu. 10 Car. Regis.
William Stamford of Perry-barre in the County of Stafford Esquire, was indicted
for recusancy, and after convicted 16 Feb. 10 Car. Regis, And afterward at the
Goale-delivery held 10 Apr. 11 Car. Regis, it was ordered. That according to
his Majesty's express will and pleasure signified under his Privy Signet,
dated 9 Ianuar 10 Car. Regis, to stay all proceedings, etc. That the conviction
of the said William Stamford, should not be estreated at the Exchequer.

The like stay was made of all process and proceedings in the Exchequer, Kings
bench, and Sessions of peace in other Counties upon all the forementioned
letters of Grace and Protection, and in sundry others of that nature; as the
Order made in Court upon them attest beyond all Contradiction.

A Note of the Names of those Recusants, against whom Process has been stayed
by his Majesty's Letters under His Privy Signet, in the Crown Office.
AGainst William Arundell Esquire second son to the Lord Arundell of Wardour,
and the Lady Mary Saint John his wife, by letter bearing date the 25 of April
Anno. 11 Caroli Regis. Against Captain John Read, by a letter dated the 13th
of July 10 Caroli, Against Sir Francis Mannocks of Stoke, in the County of
Suffolk, and Dame Mary his Wife, by a letter dated the 20 of April 14. Caroli.
Against Sir Henry Brown of Kidington in the County of Oxford and Dame Elizabeth
his Wife by a letter the fifth of January 12 Caroli. Against William Bradshaw
of Saint Clements Danes in the County of Middlesex Esquire and Margaret his
wife; by a letter dated 4th of July 11 Caroli. Against Robert Hewet of Amptill
Grange in the County of Bedford, and Mary his wife, by a letter bearing date
the second of July 13. Caroli. Against Sir Henry Audley Knight and Dame Ann^
his wife; by a letter of the 15 of January 13. Caroli. Against Thomas Lord
Arundell of Wardour, and the lady Anne his wife; by a letter dated the 20 of
June 13 Caroli. Against the Lady Katherine Windsor, wife of Thomas Lord
Windsor; by a letter 7 of February 15 Caroli, in the same Court of Kings Bench,
process was stayed against Gorge Cope, Francis Simmons, Benjamin Gill, and
others indicted of Recusancy by a warrant from William Noy, the Kings Attorney
General, dated the 21 of May, 1633. And against Henry Constable Knight, Lord
Constable, Viscount Dumbarre, by warrant from Sir John Banks the Kings Attorney
General, dated the 23 of June 1635. with sundry others.

So process out of the Court of Exchequer, and Crown Office against Robert
Courtese and others, was stayed upon this Petition.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty.
The humble petition of Robert Courtese, Matthew Reynolds and John Fitzwilliam,
in the behalf of themselves and diverse others.
MOst humbly showing, That whereas the Petitioners have lately exhibited a
petition unto your Majesty, declaring, that for being Recusants there are writs
out of your Highness Court of Exchequer, directed to the Sheriff^ of London
and Middlesex, to self their Goods to your Majesty's use; albeit they have
been always and now are ready to compound according to Your Majesty's most
gracious favor, and their mean ability (being poor Tradesmen) which by
reason of this contagious time, and other the weighty affairs of Your
Majesty's most Honorable Commission, they have not yet done, and so stand in
danger to perish, unless your Majesty of your accustomed clemency do extend
your gracious favor toward them, in giving order that the said writs may be
stayed, which they most humbly pray. Since which time they humbly show there
are other writs come out of the Crown Office to arrest their persons.

Therefore they do most humbly beseech Your Majesty to take compassion of
them, and their poor Estates, and to give order that the said writs may be
stayed, and that they may not be molested neither in their persons or goods,
whilst they are upon composition with your Majesty, which they will endeavor
to hasten with as much speed as may be, And, as by duty bound, your poor
petitioners shall daily pray for Your Majesty long to Reign most happily over
us.

At the Court at Oatelands 7. August 1637.
HIS Majesty's pleasure is, that the writs shall be stayed according to the
desire of the petitioners, till the first sitting of the Commission for
Recusants, at which time the petitioners are to make their appearance, and
submit themselves to a composition according to the usual course, and hereof
the Commission of Recusancy are to take notice, and give order accordingly.

Francis Windebanke.


And as the Course of Justice and proceedings against particular Popish
Recusants were thus obstructed by these warrants and letters, so when
Commissions issued out to the Sheriffs of the Southern Counties of England,
and Wales, for finding, and seizing their Lands, Goods, and Chattels in the
year of our Lord 1639. They were forthwith Countermaunded by Letters sent to
the Sheriffs to Secretary Windebank in his Majesty's name. Witness this
following Letter of his to the Sheriff of Somersetshire.

AFter my very hearty commendations, Whereas there did lately issue forth to
your self and others, a Commission for the finding of the Lands, Goods and
Chattells of certain Recusants, which said proceedings being only intendded
for the enabling of them that are already convicted, and mentioned in a
Schedule annexed unto the Commission, to make composition for the several
sums of money due from them unto his Majesty, upon the Statutes for their
Recusancy according to his Majesty's most Gracious Instructions in that behalf,
which otherwise they would not do. Now forasmuch as the said Commission of
enquiry has been by diverse misunderstood, as an unlawful violent prosecution
against Recusants, which is not his Majesty's intention. These are therefore to
signify unto you His Majesty's said Gracious pleasure therein. And that no
seizure be made of any the Lands, Goods, or Chattells, of those who shall at
the execution of the afforesaid Commssion enter their names, that they will
within three mon^thes after prosecute their Composition in LONDON with his
Majesty's Commissioners for their Recusancy as aforesaid. And that you be
careful in the execution of your Commission, that all further or unusual
prosecution against Recusants be forborne, by those that shall be therein
employed, and that if any seizure of any of the Lands or goods of any Recusant
as aforesaid be already made by you or your Deputies contrary to these His
Majesty's gracious intentions, that the same by you or them be forthwith
restored, such being His Majesty's Gracious clemency toward them at this time,
at the instance of HER MAJESTY. And so with my most hearty commendations I bid
you farewell:

Your very loving friend, Fran. Windebanke.
From the Court at Whitehall, the fifth of October. 1639 To my very loving
friend, the High-Sheriffe of the County of Somerset, now, and for the time
being.

The like Letters verbatim were sent to the Sheriffs of Oxford, Hampshire,
Sussex, and other Counties, the Originalls whereof are yet extant in Mr. Glyns
custody now recorder of London.

The like Letters were sent into Wales, the copy of one of them sent into
Flintshire, with the Commissioners certificate of their stay of proceedings
against Recusants thereupon, I shall here subjoyn.

AFter my hearty commendations, whereas I understand that there is a Commission
lately issued out of the Court of Exchequer, and sent into your County to
enquire of the estates of the Recusants there; you are therefore forthwith
upon sight hereof to cause stay to be made of all proceedings upon that
commission till His Majesty's pleasure shall be further known: for which this
shall be your Warrant, and so I rest,

To my very loving friend the High Sheriff of the County of Flint. Your very
loving friend, Fran. Windebanke.
11 Julii 1639. Copia vera exam. per. Io Evans. sub vic.

WE the Commissioners whose names are underwritten having received His
Majesty's Commission under the Exchequer Seal dated 3^ die Iulii in the
fi^t^enth year of his Majesty's reign, to us and others directed to enquire
what Lands, Goods, and hereditaments, certain Recusants convicted, whose names
were in a Schedule thereunto annexed, written; for the execution whereof we
having met at the Town of Mould in the said County of Flint, the twentieth day
of September, 1639 The Deputy Sheriff of the said County produced a Letter to
the High Sheriff directed, whereof this is a true Copy; whereupon we did not
proceed in that service.

Richard Grosvenor. John Eyton. Tho. Perton


How many Recusants were convicted from the first till the sixteenth year of
His Majesty's reign, only in the Southern parts of England (besides Wales and
the Northern Counties, where they most abounded) many of them being persons of
great estates, will appear by this Certificate of Mr. John Pulford, specially
employed in their prosecution by His Majesty.

Convictions of Recusants from ^mo Caroli, in the 29 English Counties within
the Southern Division.
Anno Car. about IN Bedford, until 14 90 Berks 14 360 Buck. 14 310 Cambridge.
13 40 Cornwall. 13 160 Devon. 13 200 Dorset. 14 210 Essex. 12 190 Glouc. 12 80
Hartford, 4 20 Huntington. 14 50 Hampshire. 14 960 Hereford. 15 760 Kent. 13
290 Leicester. 16 420 Middlesex. 16 1060 Monmouth. 14 1400 Norfolk. 14 490
Northamp. 9 230 Oxford. 14 440 Salop. 12 560 Somerset. 14 330 Sussex. 12 950
Suffolk. 13 460 Surry. 12 160 Wilts. 14 160 Warwic. 12 1000 Worcester. 13 540
q. Rutland. 11970

For the 12 Welsh Counties, the Convictions remain in the custody of the
Prothonotaries of Wales, who by Order from the Commissioners were to return
them 6 months ago; but yet they are not come in.

How little benefit his Majesty made of their Lands and Estates upon their
convictions, by reason of the forecited Letters of Grace, for staying process
and proceeding against them, is manifest by this following Certificate of the
payment of all the revenues of Recusants in the Southern parts, by the
Sheriffs of the several Counties from the year 1627 to 1460.

An abstract of all such sums of money as have been paid to His Majesty's
particular Receiver of the Recusants Revenue for the Southern parts of this
Kingdom of England, by any of the Sheriffs of the several Counties on this
side Trent, since the third year of his Majesty's reign that now is, viz.
An. Dom. An. R. Car. l. s. d. 1628 4 287 11 0 1629 5 482 5 6 1630 6 563 18 6
1631 7 363 12 0 1632 8 462 7 8 1633 9 337 14 8 1634 10 231 1 1635 11 251 15 4
1636 12 231 13 02/4 1637 13 198 1 1 1638 14 261 5 8 1639 15 250 9 9 1640 16 161
3 10 4083 0 4

Rob. Long:

A very inconsiderable sum, if the multitude of the convicted Recusants
forementioned be considered, and the great yearly revenues of sundry of them.

I shall close up this branch of his Maiestes extraordinary favor to popish
Recusants, with the Petition and Diclaration of Master John Pulford, and his
Majesty's answer thereunto in the margent, written with his own royal Hand
(by which the Papists contributions toward the Scottish wars are confessed,
and made the ground of staying Process against them) the original whereof is
remaining in the custody of Miles Corbet Esquire, Chaireman for the Committee
of Examinatione.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The most humble Declaration of John Pulford. Your Majesty's servant, touching
the proceedings as special Agent for advancing Your Majesty's Revenue arising
by the Forfeitures or Compositions with Popish Recusants in the Southern parts
of this Your Majesty's Kingdom, and the lets and oppositions which hindered him
in effecting the service; the which be humbly conceives (both in discharge of
his duty and trust reposed in him) be ought to present unto your Majesty.
THe 19. of January in the 14. year of Your Majesty's reign, Your Majesty
conferred the said employment upon me.

The 28. of February following, diverse of Your Majesty's Commissioners at my
request, and for the better ^nabling me to proceed in the service, did sign
letters (which I then presented unto them ready written) directed to the
Justices of Peace within all the several Counties for convicting of all
Recusants, as by the said Letters may appear. The reason of both these stais
of proceedings was, because the Papists should not be diverted from their
contribution which they were then making for me.
But about two or three days after, one of the Commissioners did advertise me,
That it was your Majesty's pleasure those letters should not be sent, which I
obeyed.

The eleventh of July after, I sent Comissions into ten several Counties for
enquiries to be made of the Estates of Recusants already convicted: But
presently after letters were sent to the several Sheriffs of the said
Counties, requiring them to stay all proceedings upon the said commissions
until your Majesty's pleasure were further known, upon sight whereof the
Commissioners desisted, whereby I lost 114 li. which I had disbursed to
Substitutes and Messengers to defray the charges of executing the said
Commissions. And albeit in October following, Letters were sent to the said
Sheriffs for proceedings to be had upon the said Commissions, yet in regard of
the afforesaid stay, the Service was so disparaged, and the commissioners were
so discouraged, that they have since neglected to execute the like Commissions
directed unto them; and some Sheriffs have likewise neglected to provide Juries
for finding and returning Inquisitions of Recusants Estates.

In February following, I acquainted Your Majesty's Commissioners here with the
stay of the said Commissions, This was merely to make a distinction betwixt the
Nobility and persons of meaner quality.
and backwardness of the commissioners in the County to proceed in the like
service, and entreated them that therefore they would be pleased to sign
Letters once again to the Justices of peace, and therein Your Majesty's
pleasure might be signified, as well for the Indicting and Convicting of all
Recusants, as also that the Commissioners hereafter appointed should give
better attendance in executing Commissions of equity: To which purpose I did
then present unto them a draught of a Letter, which being read over unto them,
they desired the Lord Treasurer to show it Your Majesty, in regard Your
Majesty's pleasure was to be declared therein, upon intimation whereof by his
Lordship they would sign such Letters, the which his Lordship about two or
three days after having signified, bid me prepare the Letters. But within a
few days after one of the Commissioners advertised me in the presence of the
Lord Treasurer, That it was Your Majesty's pleasure the said Letters should not
be sent, for that were diverse of the Nobility, and other persons of quality,
Recusants whom Your Majesty was pleased to favor, and would not have
convicted. Nevertheless Letters should be sent for the certifying of all
Recusants names unto the Justices, which Recusants names they should return up
unto the Commissioners here, the which being accordingly written and signed by
some of the Commissioners, were notwithstanding afterward not sent, in regard
^ome of the Commissioners conceived, such Letters, being only for the
certifying of Recusants names, without direction of further proceedings against
them, would rather hinder then further the service.

In April and May following, I was informed that this was an illegal and undue
proceeding, by as good Lawyers as any are in the Kingdom.
I caused some Messenges I had formerly employed into diverse Counties at my
own Charges for the discovery of Recusants unconvicted, to Indict such as they
had discovered at the Sessions then held for Middlesex, which they acco^dingly
did: whereupon diverse of those Recusants petitioned Your Majesty against me,
alleging, That indicting of Recusants in a foreign County, was contrary to
the intent of the Law, and a Declaration made by Your Majesty's Royal Father
of blessed memory; and thereupon Your Majesty appointed the Lord Treasurer,
Lord Dorset, Lord Cottington, Master Treasurer, and the Lord chief Justice
Littleton, to take due information thereof^ and deliver their opinions to your
Majesty, who in July following, met and heard the Recusants by their Council,
at which time I showed Presidents for the like foreign Indictments, and
necessity for proceeding in that course, in regard many Recusants had for many
years escaped Convictions in their proper Counties through fear or favor,
and perhaps would so continue all their lives: howbeit I^ was advertised
afterward that it was your Majesty's pleasure such manner of Indicting should
be suspended.

Besides all this I have met with another main hinderance in effecting the said
service, Particular favors must not make a president or rule for others.
viz. Letters granted by your Majesty to diverse of the more eminent and
wealthiest of the Recusants, commanding no legal proceedings to be had against
them by reason of their Recusancy. Whereby Your Majesty not only loses the
Penalties, and Forfeitures due unto Your Majesty from them, but also under
color of those Letters they priviledge^ and protect the estates of other
Recusants convicted, as their own, so as the same cannot be found by
inquisition, by which Your Majesty is defeated of your just interest in their
particular estates. For discovery whereof Your Majesty's Attorney General has
(at my instance) preferred Bills in the Exchequer chamber against diverse of
them.

In all which proceedings, my care, travel, and charges, have been
extraordinary, for I have expended above 600. li. without one penny recompense
from the Commissioners. It is good reason that your pains and charges should be
considered in this business.


I therefore most humbly beseech your sacred Majesty to take into your royal
consideration the aforesaid Letters and interruptions of the service, and to
declare your Princely resolution concerning my proceedings for the time to
come, as may be most for Your Majesty's Honor and increase of Your said
Revenue. And as in duty bound, I shall daily pray for Your Majesty's long and
prosperous reign.

Discharges of Priests and Jesuits under the King, Councels, and Secretary
Windebanks hands.
AS I have given you a brief Discovery of his Majesty's extraordinary Letters
of Grace and Protection to Popish Recusants for stay of all legal proceedings
against them hitherto, so I shall in the next place present you a summary List
of His own, His Councels and Secretary Windebanks (most likely by His Royal
direction) favors to, and discharges of Seminary Priests and Jesuits from all
legal prosecutions, and imprisonments, in or near London only, all extant on
record in the several Prison Books to which they were committed, or in the
Kings Bench, most of the Originalls of them being now in the Recorder of
Londons hands, appointed long since to draw up Secretary Windebanks charge.

I shall begin with His Majesty's discharges under his own Signe-manuall.

Charles R.

WHereas on the 24 of March last, our pleasure was declared to the Lords of our
Privy Council, that AT THE INSTANCE OF OUR DEAREST CONSORT THE QUEEN, and in
regard of the peace between the two Crowns, we were graciously pleased that
THESE PRIESTS and Recusants here undernamed, who were then in several Prisons,
should be released and delivered to the Marquess De Chasteauneu^, Ambassador
extraordinary to Us from the French King, NOTWITHSTANDING ANY FORMER ORDER
AGAINST SUCH RELEASES AND DELIVERIES, with this further Declaration, That if
any of them shall remain in, or return into the Kingdom, that our express
will and pleasure is, That Which was never executed in any point.
the Law should pass on every such Person without further favor, all which
was ordered accordingly, and all the said persons or diverse of them were
brought unto you by several Warrants, these are therefore TO WILL AND COMMAND
YOU FORTHWITH TO DELIVER to the said Ambassador, or to such persons as he
shall appoint in that behalf, all such of the said persons, as are already come
into Your charge and custody, and ALL SUCH AS SHALL COME TO YOUR CHARGE
HEREAFTER by virtue of the aforesaid Order, and this shall be your SUFFICIENT
WARRANT: So as you do not deliver any other but the persons hereafter named,
and that you return a List of such as you shall deliver to the Lords of Our
Privy Council, Given under OUR SIGN MANUAL at Denmark house the eleventh
day of April, in the sixth year of our reign.

John Dally Corn^lius Crawley John Southw^rth Reynault Mac. Donnell Palmer
Gilbert Brodin Roger Clay Thomas Gant alias Thornbrough Middleton Stevens James
Willandson. Richard Salvin. The. Ridale Brian Medcalf John Seargin William
Biddle.


To our keeper of the Clinke, or to his Deputy.

Here we have no less then sixteen Priests released out of one prison by one
Warrant under his Majesty's own hand at one time, at the Queens own instance,
when not altogether so powerful, nor Popery grown to that head and power as
now. I doubt, no such Warrant can be produced to discharge any Puritans (as the
most zealous Protestants were nicknamed) our of prison all his reign.

Not long after there were six more priests taken, and committed to the Clink,
all of them this same year released at once by this ensuing royal Warrant
under his Majesty's hand.

Charles R.

WHereas since our last Warrant unto you, bearing date the eleventh day of
April last, there have been brought unto Your custody these hereafter mentioned
PRIESTS or Recufants, the which according to our pleasure signified on the 24.
of March last, AT THE INSTANCE OF OUR DEAREST CONSORT THE QUEEN, are to be
transported beyond the Seas, by such persons as the Marquess of Casteauneu^
late Ambassador extraordinary from our dear brother the French King, has
appointed. These are therefore to will and require you forthwith to deliver to
the said persons or person by the said French Ambassador so appointed, THE SIX
PERSONS hereafter named, to be presently transported into the parts beyond the
Seas, whereof DO YOU NOT FAIL, and this shall be your SUFFICIENT WARRANT for
the same. Given under our Signe-Manuall at our Palace at Westminster, the 25
day of June, in the sixth year of our reign.

Thomas Holmes Robert Widdrington Thomas Readman Thomas Berry Thomas Sheephard
Gilbert Shelton.


To our keeper of the Clink or to his Deputy.

After these liberal discharges of so many priests together, it seems, the
Officers of Justice were much dismayed in their bootlesse apprehensions of
them, whereupon there were seldom many of them together in prison at once in
succeeding years; and if any single priest were casually apprehended by any
deligent Officers, they soon procured their several discharges, many of them
under the Kings own hand, of which there are sundry presidents, almost in all
the prisons and Goales of England and Wales, overtedious to ennumerate or
transcribe; I shall instance only in three or four to the Clinke, whch
together with Newgate, the Gatehouse, and Newprison, could furnish us almost
with a whole volume of the like examples.

Charles Rex.

Whereas Richard Salvin was heretofore committed to your charge to be kept
prisoner there until further order; these shall be now to will and require you
to enlarge the said Richard Salvin, and to deliver him unto Du. Moulin a French
Gentlemam, to be by him transported into the parts beyond the seas, for which
this shall be your warrant. Given under our Sign Manual at our Palace of
Westminster the eighteenth of November, in the seventh year of our reign.

To our trusty and welbeloved, the Keeper of the prison of the Clinke.

This Salvin was one of the 16 Priests formerly discharged, and staying here
apprehended, and now again discharged, contrary to the purport of the former
warrant.

Charles Rex.

WHereas request has been made unto Us by Mounsieur Biscaret, in the name of
our dear Mother in Law, the Queen Dowager of France, in the behalf of
Matthew Wilson, a ROMISH PRIEST, now a prisoner in your custody, that he may be
released out of prison, to depart immediately out of the Kingdom in the
company of the said Mounsieur Biscaret: We being^ willing to give our dear
Mother contentment in this particular, do hereby will and command you
forthwith to deliver the person of the said Matthew Wilson unto the bearer
hereof Edmund Barker, one of the Messengers of our Chamber, to be by him
conveyed unto the Sea side, and there shipped in such sort as We have directed
by our warrant unto him in that behalf: and for so doing, these our Letters
shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge. Given under our sign Manual
at Our Palace of Westminster this four and twentieth day of January, in the
seventh year of Our Reign.

To the keeper of the prison of the Clink within our Borough of Southwark.

This Priest released by this warrant, under pretense of being sent beyond the
Seas, continued either still in the Kingdom, or returned hither soon after,
being here very lately, as diverse credible witnesses have attested; and no
doubt most of the other Priests released on this pretext, either remained here
still after their enlargement, (as Salvin and John Southworth did, as you will
see anon) or returned back in short time after, See Summa Angelica and Rosella:
Til. Obedientia Maffaeus Vegius, and Riba deniera, in vita Ignatii Loyalae,
Xavior: and auters bien Heureux Peers de la Compagnie de Jesus.
unless by the Generals of their several orders, others were sent to supply
their places; it being contrary to their Oath of Obedience to their Superiors,
who give them their missions, to return from any place whither they are sent,
without their special License, and an unpardonable sin; the true reason, why
so many Priests and Jesuits choose rather to suffer death then depart the
Realm without the License of their Superiors first obtained, which mandates
their Discipline and Doctrine, constrein them absolutely to obey, under pain of
eternal damnation, and the severest Ecclesiastical and Temporal Censures
they can inflict.

There is another Warrant under the Kings signe-Manuall directed to the Keeper
of the prison, called The New prison, within the City of London, for the
release of Ion Plansford A ROMISH PRIEST, at the request of the same Mounsier
Biscaret, in the name of Queen Mother Dowager of France, dated the same 24 day
of January the same year as the last recited Warrant and agreeing verbatim
therewith, therefore needless to recite: only I shall add this one Warrant
more of the Kings, running in a more legal form.

CHarles by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To the Keeper of the prison of Clinke in the Borough of Southwarke in the
County of Surry, and to all Majors, Sheriffs, and Justices of Peace, and to all
others to whom it shall or may appertain, Greeting.
Whereas intercesion has been made unto us by the Marshall of Bassampire,
Ambassador extraordinary from the Christian King our dear Brother, that out
of our grace and goodness we would be pleased to release from imprisonment the
body of Joseph Pater a Romish Catholic, remaining in the said prison of the
Clinke: know you, that we being willing to gratify the said Marshall De
Bassam, pire, in granting unto him this his request on the behalf of the said
prisoner have given and granted, and by these presents do give and grant unto
the said Keeper of the prison of the Clinke, and to you the said Mayor,
Sheriffs, and Justices of peace foresaid, whom it may concern, full power,
warrant, and authority to enlarge and discharge the body of the said Joseph
Pater of his imprisonment out of the said prison before mentioned, if for
Recusancy only, and for no other cause he stand committed: And this presents,
or the inrolment thereof shall be as well unto you the Keeper of the said
prison of the Clinke for discharging and enlarging of the said prisoner, as
unto you the said Majors, Sheriffs, and Justices of Peace, for suffering him to
walk abroad at large, a sufficient warrant and discharge in that behalf.

Given under our Signet at our palace of Westminster the eight day of January
in the second year of our Reign. Exa. per To. Heath.

May it please your most Excellent Majesty:
This contains a Warrant for the enlarging of Joseph Pater, a Romish
Catholic, now prisoner in the Clinke, at the intercession of Marshall De
Bassampire Ambassador extraordinary from the French King.

Signified to be your Majesty's Pleasure by the Lord Conway. Rob. Heath.


For releasments of Priests by the Privy Councels Warrants, take these three
presidents in stead of many; The very original Warrants under the Seal of the
Privy Council, being now in the Recorders of Londons hands.

WHereas Jasper Loberi^ was formerly committed to your custody, to remain
prisoner under your charge till further order: these are to will and require
you forthwith to discharge and set at liberty the aforesaid Jasper Loberie,
from his imprisonment; for which this, together with a certificate under the
clerk of the Councels hand, that the said Loberie has given security,
according to an Order of this Board, shall be your sufficient Warrant. Dated at
Whitehall the 15. of June, 132.

Thomas Coventry C. S. Arundell and Surry Rich. Ebor. Manchester. Wentworth. I.
Coke. Wimbleton. Francis Windebank,


To the Keeper of the Clink, or his Deputy.

At Whitehall, the 18 of December, 1633. present
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Archbishop of York. Lord Privy Seal. Lord
High-chamberlain. Earl of Salisbury. Earl of Kelly. Lord Viscount Wimbleton.
Lord Cottington. Lord Newburgh. Mr, Treasurer. Mr. Secretary Coke. Mr.
Secretary Windebanke.
Whereas a petition was this day presented to the Board, by Robert Hais,
prisoner in the New-prison, showing, that the petitioner is much impoverished
in his Estate, by his long imprisonment, and is now grwne so weak through
infirmities that unless by their Lordships favor he may enjoy the benefit of
fresh air for the recovery of his health, his life is in great danger. And
therefore made humble suite to be discharged from prison (for preservation of
his li^e as aforesaid) upon good security to attend the Board within ten days
after notice in that behalf. Forasmuch as his petition was recommended to the
Board BY THE QUEENS MAJESTY; their Lordships do think fit, and order that
the said Hais (first giving good security to attend the Board within ten days
after notice given as aforesaid) shall be discharged from his imprisonment, and
enjoy his liberty without molestation or trouble of any Messengers, or other
his Majesty's Officers whatsoever. Where of the Keeper of the said prison and
all other whom it may concern are to take notice.

Ex. Will. Becher.

THese are to will and command you to set at fulliberty the person of William
Waglrave formerly committed to your custody; and for your so doing this shall
be your warrant.

Dated at Star Chamber the last of lanuary, 1643. Will. Cant. Thomas Coventry,
C.S. Arundel and Surry Salisbury. R. Ebor: H. Manchester, Pembrooke and
Montgomery.

To the Keeper of the Clinke and Newprison, or his Deputy.

These three persons were committed for Priests, and discharged as such, though
not expressed in these Warrants, the better to color the business. Note that
the Archbishops hands of Canterbury and York, are first subscribed to the two
latter of them; but Yorkes to the first in Canterburies absence; whose hands I
dare say, are to no Warrant for such a discharge of any Puritan or Orthodox
Protestant

Many more Warrants of this nature from the Privy-Counsell might be produced,
which for brevity I omit.

Secretary Windebankes Warrants for releasing of Priests are almost infinite. I
shall touch only upon some few now remaining in the Recorder of Londons hands,
who was to draw up his impeachment before he fled into France.

Whereas William Waller was committed unto your charge for Recusancy, and for
suspi^ion of being a Priest: these are strictly to charge and command you in
His Majesty's name upon the sight hereof, forthwith to set him at liberty: and
I do likewise hereby require you to deliver unto him his apparel and other
necessaries left in his Chamber when you gave Nota^
him leave to go abroad, at THE QUEENS MAJESTY'S DESIRE, he paying unto you
only the ordinary Fees due by Law for the release of any prisoner from your
charge and custody. And this shall be your sufficient discharge in this behalf.

Dated the ninth day of October. 1632. Fran. Windebank.
To Robert Davison keeper of the Clink in Southwark, or to his Deputy there.

THese are to Will and require you forthwith upon sight hereof to enlarge and
set at liberty the body of Henry Moore now prisoner in your custody, for which
this shall be your warrant.

Dated at Westminster 1 December. 1633. Fran. Windebank.
To Robert Davison keeper of the new prison in Maiden-lane, London.

This Moore was committed for a Priest. The King himself by this Warrant under
his own hand committed one Edward Moore a Priest, to the Clink, for a notable
misdemeanour done in his Court.

Charles R.

WE will and command you to receive into your custody the body of Edward Moore,
and him to keep and detain in safe and sure custody, until you receive our
further pleasure concerning him; for which this shall be your Warrant; Given at
our Honor at Hampton Court, this 19th day of December. 1629. in the 15 year of
Our reign.

To the keeper of Our prison of the Clink.


Secretary Windebank by his own ensuing Warrant, without any expressed
directions from the King, undertakes to release this Priest, committed by the
K. himself.

THese are to will and require you, forthwith to enlarge and set at liberty the
body of Edward moore, now prisoner in your charge upon suspicion of being a
Priest, and hereof you are not to fail.

Dated at Whitehall, 14. Mar. 1634. Fran. Windebank.
To the keeper of the Clink, and to his Deputy.

The like Warrants of release and discharge are under the said Secretary
Windebanks hand to the keeper of the Clink, for William Drury, a popish Priest
24 mar. 16: 4. for Thomas Holmes a Priest 9 May 1634. for Humfrey Turbervill, a
Priest, 1 December. 1634. for John Fisher alis Percy a popish priest, committed
by warrant from the Lords of the Council to the Gate House 12 December. 1634.
and released by the said Secretaries warrant to the keeper of the Gate House 12
August 1635. for Thomas Rainolds a Priest, (to the keeper of the Gate House) 17
April 1635. for John Goodman, a noted priest (to the keeper of the Gate House)
17 Sept. 1639. with infinite others, whom I now omi^.

It was the usual practice of this See Romes Masterpiece. p. 23. 24, 29.
Iesuited Secretary) who had a pension from the Papists, and was a Lay-Iesuite
brought up by the Archbishop of Canterbury, whose scholar he was, and made
Secretary of State at his suite, as the memorialls of his life attest) First,
if any Priests were brought before him by the Officers, if he could not
discharge them without commitment, to commit them to prison for 4 or 5 days,
for a show, and then to discharge them. I shall give you one late instance in
stead of many, out of his own Warrants in the case of Arnold Gerard.

THese are to will and require you forthwith to receive into your custody the
body of Arnold Gerard A ROMISH PRIEST herewith sent you, and him to keep till
you shall have further order. And hereof you may not fail.

Dated at my house in Drury Lane, 25 may, 1640. Fran. Windebank.
To the keeper of the Gate House in Westminster or, his Deputy.

within five days after he discharged him again by this warrant, under the
Secretaries Seal.

THese are to will and require you forthwith to set at Liberty the body of
Arnold Gerard, whom I LATELY COMMITTED to your custody. And hereof you may not
fail.

Dated at my house the 30th of May 1640. Fran. Windebank.
To the keeper of the Gate House in Westminster, or his Deputy.

So Thomas Reinolds a Priest committed by this Secretary to the Gate House the
tenth of April 1635. was absolutely discharged by him thence, on the
seventeenth day of the some month, as appears by the Warrants.

John Southworth, one of the 16 Priests released by the Kings forecited Warrant
of April 11 sexto Car. to be sent beyond the Seas as was pretended; continuing
a dangerous seducer after his release, was afterward committed again to the
Clink prison by the Lords of the Privy-Councels warrant; but yet for all that
had free liberty to walk abroad at his pleasure (as most Priests during their
imprisonment, had, the more safely to seduce His Majesty's good subjects, and
open masses in their prisons to boot; whereupon being apprehended and brought
before some of the High-Commissioners, and refusing to give bond to appear
before them (though the good men never did such Romish-vermin any harm in their
terrible Court, a Spanish inquisition only to torture Puritanes, and no other
persons, (he was sent to the Clink by their warrant under the Seal of the
Court, dated the 24 of June, An. Dom. 1640 (to which they found him to be
formerly committed by the Lords, and to be then a vagrant prisoner) to be there
detained under the Keepers custody until other order should be given for his
enlargement all, which is expressed in the warrant for his commitment. But
within few days after this Priest was absolutely released by this warrant.

THese are to will and require you forthwith upon the sight here of, to enlarge
and set at liberty the body of John Southworth lately committed to your
custody. For which this shall be your Warrant.

Dated at my house in Drury Lane, 16 July 1640. Fran. Windebank.
To the keeper of the Clink, or to his Deputy, or Deputies.

How dangerous a seducer this Southworth, alias Southwell was, appears by this
Petition of Robert White, Sub-Curate of St. Margarets Parish in Westminster
to the Archbishop of Canterbury, the last great sickness, 1636.

MOst humbly shows, That the Petitioner ever since the beginning of this
grievous visitation in Westminster, has used all the pains and diligence that
possibly he could, to serve the Cure in the absence of Dr. VVimberley; and bein
gimployd by diverse charitably disposed people to distribute their alms among
the most indigent and distressed sort of people, he has observed TWO POPISH
PRIESTS to frequent Westminster, one of which is called Southwell, who is, and
long has been a prisoner in the Gatehouse, but These Priests had liberty to
go and live abroad even whiles they were prisoners, the more safely to seduce
the people.
lies about Clerkenwel, This Southwell, under a pretense of distributing Alms,
sent FROM SOME OF THE PRIESTS IN SOMERSET HOUSE, or OTHER PAPISTS, does take
occasion to go into diverse visited Houses in Westminster, and namely to the
house of one William Baldwin, and William Styles in the Kemp-yard in
Westminster, and there finding Baldwin near the point of death, did set upon
him by all means to make him change his religion, whereunto by his subtle
persuasions Baldwin easily consented, and received the Sacrament from him
according to the Church of Rome, and so died a Romish-catholique. And in the
same manner he perverted William Styles, who also died a Romish-catholique. And
South-well to color and hide these wicked practices, does see the Watchmen and
other poor people thereabouts, that they should affirm he comes only to give
Alms. And thus under a pretense of relieving the bodies of poor people, he
comes only to poisons their souls.

Now may it please your Grace, the Petitioner having no means to apprehend
these Priests, or to stop this danger and dishonor to our Religion, does
humbly implore your Graces favor and zeal, that some speedy course may be
taken to hinder the progress thereof; and that not only for the confirming
and settling of poor people in our Religion, but also to prevent a great danger
which may ensue to the Queens Majesty at her coming to Denmarke-house, for
that diverse poor people newly turned Romish-Catholiques, do commonly frequent
the Mass at Denmarke-house; And three of those poor people watched all night
with William Styles immediately before he died, and the next day went thither
to Mass. A most wicked course if it should not be remedied.

Upon this, Southwell soon after was apprehended, indicted, arraigned, and the
premises fully proved against him by sundry witnesses; and yet by the Queens
and VVindebanks powerful means, his final trial was put off, to the great
discontent of the people, and he not long after released, even near the very
time that D. Bastwicke, Mr. Burton, and Mr. Prynne, were most grievously
censured in the Star Chamber, and most barbarously pillored, deprived of their
ears, stigmatized, yea sent away Close-prisoners and exiles into foreign
Islands, and there shut up so strait, that not so much as their Wives of
Friends might have access by person or letter to them, nor set footing in the
Islands where they were cloistered up, under pain of imprisonment and the
severest censures; and all for opposing the Popish Doctrines and Innovations
brought into our Church by the Prelaticall and Popish Confederates, who
conspired to undermine our Religion, and boldly discovering this their
conspiracy spiracie in printed books, to the incredulous secure world, who
never dreamed of such an imminent danger to our religion, which is since more
palpably and experimentally discovered. To such an exorbitant power and
prevalency had the Priests and Popish faction then attained.

Secondly, if any Priests or Jesuits were committed in the Country, then it
was this Secretaries ordinary practice to send for them up to London, by his
own Warrant and Messengers, under pretense of proceeding against them here, and
so to release them: to give you one late instance (most Counties having made
experiences of this practice.)

Patricke Clerye, a dangerous Priest, was committed by the Earl of Salisbury
to Hortford-Gaole by this Warrant.

YOu shall receive herewith the body of Patricke Clerye, who BY HIS OWN
CONFESSION made before me IS A SEMINARY PRIEST. Wherefore these are to will and
require you to take into your custody the body of the said Patricke Clerye,
and him to keep in durance, till he shall be delivered by sufficient Warrant
for that behalf. And herein you may not fail, at your peril.

Dated at Hertford this 26. of June, 1643. Salisbury.
To the Keeper of his Majesty's Jail of Hertford, or his Deputies there.

Within few days after this Priest was removed and released by Windebanke, by
color of this juggling Warrant.

BY virtue of HIS MAJESTY'S COMMAND to me given, These are to will and require
you forth with upon sight hereof, to deliver the body of Patricke Clerye, now
prisoner in your custody, into the hands of this bearer, one of the Messengers
of His Majesty's Chamber, sent purposely for him, who is to bring him hither,
to be That is to be released.
proceeded with, as his Majesty shall please further to direct; and hereof you
may not fail at your peril.

Dated at Whitehall, 21. July, 1640. Fran: Windebanke.
To the Keeper of His Majesty's Jail of Hertford, and to all others whom it
does or may concern.

By such a Warrant as this, Captain Read, that active Lay-Iesuite, mentioned
in Page 20, 21, 22.
Romes-Master-piece, the common Host and Agent of the Jesuits Society in
England, and chief Agent in the late Irish rebellion, was freed from the Jail
in Devonshire where he was imprisoned, and then enlarged, and especially
protected by the King, in manner following; by the King himself, and this
Letter of Grace.

By the King.
Whereas we have received good testimony of the loyalty and duty of Our O
that the King should trust and style such a Traitor wel-beloved, and grant him
such special grace, and protection.
trusty and wel-beloved Captain John Read, and because the may be subject to
the penalties of the Laws against RECVSANCY, These are to signify, That We
are GRACIOVSLY PLEASED to extend OVER SPECIAL GRACE toward him; and do
hereby will and command, that no Indictment, Presentment, Information, or Suit
in our Name, or in the name OF ANY OTHER BE HENCEFORTH commenced, prosecuted,
or accepted against him by ANY OF OVER OFFICERS AND SVBJECTS WHATSOEVER for or
concerning RECVSANCIE. And if any such shall happen, then Our will and pleasure
is, that upon sight hereof the same shall be discharged and made void, or
otherwise not prejudicial unto him. Given under Our Signet, the 13. day of
July, in the tenth year of Our Reign.

To all and singular Our Judges of Assize, Justices of Peace, Majors, Sheriffs,
Clerks of Assize, Basiliffs, Constables, Informers, and all other Our Officers
and Ministers, whom it does or may concern, and to every of them.

This Letter of extraordinary grace and protection to this Arch-Traitor,
Conspirator and Rebel, is entered of Record in the Sessions-booke of the Clerk
of the Peace of Middlesex at the Sessions held 6. Oct. 13. Caroli, page 261.
and in the Crown Office too, where those who please, or doubt of it, may peruse
it at their pleasure.

3. This Secretary committed some, and much blamed other Officers only for
apprehending and molesting Popish Priests; and released James a Priest taken in
Execution for a debt, by commanding an Officer to bring him out of prison to
his chamber to examine him, and there by collusion permitted him to escape; for
which escape thus fraudulently procured, the Jailor and Officer were enforced
to pay the debt.

The Warrants to free Priests and Jesuits out of prison before and without
Indictments, to prohibit them from Indictments, to reprieve and release them
after they have been arraigned and condemned, are almost numberless.

The Jesuits apprehended by Justice Long in their new erected College of
Clerkenwell, in the third year of the Kings Reign, were all bailed and
released before they were Indicted and tried, by special directions from the
King; which abuse was much complained of, and examined in the Parliament held
that year: and how many scores of Priests have been since released without any
prosecution and Indictment, when apprehended, the premised Warrants and the
Goal-books thorowout England will at test; Windebanke releasing above 80. as
was proved in November. 11 12. 1640. See the Iournall Book.
Parliament.

4. Iunii 1633. A privy Seal reciting that one John Broughton was indicted
for a Priest, was directed by the King to the Judges of the Kings Bench to stay
proceedings against him, which is recorded in the Crown Office; whereupon this
Warrant was made under the Lord chief Justice Richardsons hand.

WHereas there is an Indictment remaining upon Record in the Kings Majesty's
Court of his Bench at Westminster, against John Broughton of London Clerk,
otherwise John Crowder of London Clerk. And whereas His Majesty has directed
his privy Seal to me, and to the rest of the Judges of the said Court, for
staying of prosecution of the said Indictment against the said John Broughton,
by the name of John Broughton of Ruerdeane in the County of Gloucester, the
said John Broughton being one and the self-same person, though diversely styled
in the Privy Seal, and in the Indictment. Therefore let the Clerk of the
Crown keep the said Privy Seal and stay Process upon the said Indictment
until Further order be taken, and this shall be your Warrant.

4 Iunii 1633. Thomas Richardson Chapter J.


This Broughton, at the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer for the City of London,
22. Febr. 7. Car. R. was indicted for a Priest, which Indictment was afterward
removed into the Kings Bench returnable immediately, and there stayed by this
former Order.

Anno 1643. Henry Rivers, Francis Foster, William Atkins, Francis Cotes, and
George Parret, Priests and Jesuits, were all indicted in the Kings Bench of
high Treason for being Priests. Upon this, George Parret presented this ensuing
Petition to the King in the behalf of himself and his fellows (recorded in
the Crown Office, with the proceedings on it) being the boldest piece, and most
presumptuous saucy affront to the proceedings of Justice against Priests and
Papists, that I have met with; and yet receiving such a gracious answer from
his Majesty which most would have thought he would have rejected with highest
indignation) as may well amaze his Protestant Subjects.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of George Parret Gentleman.
IN all humility shows, That whereas your Petitioner, with other four ROMAN
CATHOLICS, by EVIL EVIDENCE was in his and their absence indicted the 25. of
June last, in your Majesty's Court of Kings Bench for high Treason, for having
taken Orders OF PRIESTHOOD beyond Seas, and returning to England, contrary to
the Statutes of this your Highness Realm in this case provided.

Now for as much as your Petitioner, together with the rest, are See how holdly
they asperse the prosecutors and witnesses that dare appear against them.
PROSECUTED UNJUSTLY by SOME MALICIOUS ADVERSARY, in hope to ruin him, or them
upon no ground or occasion, but merely upon surmises, venturing even to swear,
WHATSOEVER THEIR MALICE CAN INVENT, or what they can find to be for their own
gain or advantage, being persons easily to be gained with any small sum of
money from prosecuting whatsoever they pretend BOLDLY to concern the State and
good service to the Crown, as a particular information is ready to be given of
such persons ordinary practices, AND DAILY VEXATIONS OF ROMAN CATHOLICS,
ALTHOUGH Nota.
CERTAINLY KNOWN AND DESERVED TO BE OF THE NVMBER OF YOUR MAJESTY'S MOST LOYAL
AND OBEDIENT SVBJCTS, if it may please your Majesty to appoint either that the
Secretaries of State, or any of your Justices of Peace to hear the same.

Further shows, That the Petitioner and the rest, until six days after the
said Indictment, had Many who obscure themselves, are and may be lawfully
indicted without notice, in cases of Treason or Felony, and thereupon outlawed
to being them in
no notice of the said proceedings, nor to his knowledge ever saw him that gave
such evidence against him: which course as it is Most ordinary, he should have
said.
most extraordinary, having neither been nor practiced neither in the time of
Queen Elizabeth, nor of your Majesty's Royal Father of blessed memory in a
case of this nature, without special order of their Majesty's, or of the Lords
of their Majesty's privy Council, and the parties so to be indicted, to be
actually held, and present; so may it this way happen to any of your Majesty's
subjects whatsoever, to be in danger of conviction of a Priest by outlary, by
means of any malicious adversary, without any notice at all, to their utter
ruin, and without all due consideration and respect OF THE WORTHY ESTEEM WHICH
YOUR HIGHNESS MOST GRACIOUS CLEMENCY TOWARD YOUR He means Roman Priests and
Catholics, now abundantly varified in England and Ireland.
LOYAL SUBJECTS HAS JUSTLY GAINED EVERY WHERE.

The premises considered, and the present danger whereunto your Petitioner,
together with your Majest es LOYAL AND OBEDIENT SUBJECTS, are liable by such
indirect and unaccustomed means: They most humbly beseech your Highness would
be graciously pleased to give present order, That the proceedings upon the said
Indictment may be stopped or superseded. AND NO SUCH COURSE HEREAFTER TAKEN
AGAINST THEM OR OTHERS, Without express Order from your Majesty, or the Lords
of your Majesty's most honorable privy Council, as the custom has formerly
been:

And your Petitioner, together with the rest, as in duty bound, will daily pray
for your Majesty's long and happy Reign.

To this insolent Petition, extending to all Roman Priests and Catholics, and
prescribing what proceedings shall be hereafter used against them, this Answer
was returned to my Lord Richardson, then chief Justice, by Windebanck.

My Lord,
I Send your Lordship herewith a Petition presented to His Majesty by George
Parret Gentleman, which His Majesty's pleasure is, That your Lordship shall
take into consideration: and if you find undue practice against the Petitioner
and the rest, as is suggested in the Petition, then your Lordship is to
certify His Majesty thereof; and howsoever, in the mean time, to stay the
Indictment, and any proceedings against the Petitioner and the rest; which is
all I have to your Lordship at this time.

To my honored friend, Sir Thomas Richardson, Knight, Chief Justice of His
Majesty's Court of King-Bench, Westminster. 20. July 1634. Your Lordships loving
friend, Fran. Windebank.


Hereupon those Indictments were stayed, contrary to Law, Justice, and the
Judges Oaths.

Henry Morse, a Romish Priest, was committed prisoner to Newgate, by a Warrant
from the Lords of the privy Council, dated March 26. 1637. June 20. following
he was released by virtue of this Royal Warrant, after two Indictments
preferred against him, he being a most dangerous seducer, who perverted no
less then 560. persons in and about Saint Giles parish, as appeared by a
Certificat read in Court.

Charles R.

WHereas at the instance of Our dearest Consort the Queen, We have been pleased
to grant, that Henry Morse, lately indicted upon suspicion of being a Priest,
and still prisoner in our Goal of Newgate, shall be enlarged, upon sufficient
security given to appear before the Lords of Our privy Council when he shall
be thereto called. And for as much as We understand that he has given
sufficient security for that purpose, We do therefore will and command
forthwith to enlarge and set at liberty the body of the said Henry Morse, for
which this shall be your sufficient Warrant.

Greenwitch the 20, day of June, in the thirteenth year of Our reign. To the
Keeper of the Goal of Newgate, and to his Deputy.

Before which, Secretary Windebanke granted this Warrant for him to put in his
security.

WHereas His Majesty has been pleased to command, that Henry Morse, prisoner
in Newgate, shall be discharged from his imprisonment, giving sufficient
security to appear before the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable privy
Council, upon 20. days warning given him to that purpose. These are therefore
to will and require you, to bring the body of the said Henry Morse to my house
in Westminster to morrow, being Saturday at eight of the clock in the morning,
to enter security accordingly. And so for doing this shall be your warrant.

Dated at Westminster, 16. June 1637. Fr. Windebancke.
To the keeper of the prison of Newgate, and his Deputy.

What favor and protection the Priests and Jesuits found from Secretary
Windebanke, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, who brought him into this place;
and what discouragement, injuries the prosecutors of them sustained, only to
take off all prosecutions of them, will appear by this subsequent attestation
of Mr. Newton and others, both before the whole See the Iournal Book Nov. 11,
12. 1640.
house of Commons, and a Committee; and now put in writing under their own
hands, who are and will be ready to avow it in all particulars.

FRancis Newton Gentleman, about thirteen years last past, obtained a
general Warrant from the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, for the
apprehending of Jesuits, Seminary-Priests, transporters of children etc.

By virtue of which Warrant he the said Newton, together with his servant John
Cook, did apprehend at several times diverse Jesuits and Priests, to the
number of 36. at his great charge and hazard of life; who were brought before
Secretary Cook, and others, and by them committed to several prisons:
Whereupon the late Secretary Windebanke discharged the said Jesuits and
Priests, and committed Newton and Cook several times to prison for performing
their service, to their great charges and hazard of life.

The said Windebanke sending for Newton, took from him at several times eight
Watches (formerly taken from Priests, and given to him by the Lords,) to the
value of 70. pound.

Moreover, the said Windebanke took from Newton two rich units of popish
Vestments, formerly given him by the Lords of the Privy Counceil; The said
Windebanke engaging his Honor to Newton, that he should receive from the
Queen 200. pounds or the Vestments again; Newton often demanded the same of
Windebanke, yet could never get them, nor the value of them, but only
threatening words.

Diverse Jesuits and Priests constantly frequently the said Windebankes house;
and amongst the rest one Henry Lloyd, alias Francis Smith, alias Francis
Ryvers, alias Francis Simons, a grand Jesuit, a great seducer, and chief
agent in the great and damnable plot of the Gun-powder-treason, who by the
counsel of Windebanke and some of his adherents, gave a judgment of 300.
pound to be a prisoner to the Fleet, that the State nor Messengers should take
no notice of his Jesuitical Plot.

The said Newton, together with one Thomas Mayo, about August in the tenth
year of the King, searching the house of one Bartholmen Frumman Esquire, of
Cheame, in the County of Surrey, found the said Lloyd, alias Ryvers the Jesuit
there; who going to carry him away, the said Jesuit showed him and two high
Constables the said Windebankes Warrant, that no Messenger or any other person
should molest him, whereupon they left him there.

Moreover the said Jesuit then said to Newton and Mayo and the high
Constables, these words: Are you angry with me for being here? if you will stay
till to morrow being Monday, you shall see seven more Priests of us here; this
he spoke in a vaunting way, having a protection from Windebanke.

The said Newton and Mayo the Michaelmas-Terme following indicted the said
Jesuit and Frumman the harbourer in the King's Bench, and proceeded to the
Vtlary: whereupon Windebanke sent a Warrant and apprehended Newton and Mayo,
and threatened them, that if they did not forthwith forbear prosecuting the
said Jesuit and harbourer, he would immediately lay them by the heels; but the
said Newton and Mayo proceeded to the Vtlary against them both,
notwithstanding: which Windebanke perceiving, caused Justice, Bartlet to stay
the proceedings thereupon.

This Francis Smith the Jesuit said to M. Waddesworth and M. Taxley these words
(in Norfolk) some years since, That it is not now a time nor way to bring in
their Religion by disputing or books of Controversy, BUT IT MVST BE DONE BY AN
ARMY, AND BY FIRE AND SWORD. Nota.


The said Jesuit usually frequented the now Archbishop of Canterbury, and was
very seldom from him: which Jesuit persuading Cook, Newtons servant, to go
with Sir Kenelm Digby into France, that so Cook might give no more information
against Priests; and promising him great preferments there, he did about
Christmas was four years, carry Cook one morning to Sir Kenelms bedside at M.
Burgesses in S. Martins in the Fields, where after some discourse, Smith taking
his leave of Sir Kenelm, prayed him in Cooks hearing, to excuse him to my Lord
of Canterbury, that he could not dine that day with his Lordship; and prayed
him to desire my Lord of Canterbury, to remember the business that he last
spoke with him about. To which Sir Kenelm replied, that he would not fail him
to do it, for he was to dine with my Lord of Canterbury that day.

John Gray, a Messenger, took one Fisher a grand Jesuit, who having been
several times examined before the Lords of the Council, the said Canterbury
came from the King, and delivered this sentence against him: viz. Mr. Fisher,
fall down upon your knees, and pray for the King, that he is so merciful unto
you to save your life. It is the Kings pleasure that you must be banished the
Kingdom; and be committed to the Gate House, there to remain, until you put
in good security never to return again.

Yet suddenly after the said Fisher his imprisonment, Windebanke released him,
and gave him a protection, That no Messenger, nor any other person should
molest him, upon pain of his displeasure.

The said Gray and Cook afterward (not knowing of his Protection) apprehended
Fisher; whereupon he showed him his Protection from Windebanke, and was
thereupon discharged. Upon which Gray and Cook went to Secretary Cook and told
him that Fisher was discharged by Windebanke. Whereupon Master Secretary
commanded Gray to go to my L. of Canterbury, and tell him of Fishers discharge.
Upon this Gray and Cook went accordingly to speak with Canterbury, yet could
not have any admittance to him; but spoke with M. Dell his Secretary, and
demanded a Warrant of him under Canterburies hand to apprehend Fisher the
Jesuit: who replied and said to Gray, that he was an idle fellow to come for a
Warrant from my Lord, for he would meddle with no such matter as that was; but
bid Gray, if he would have a Warrant, he should repair to the Councell-board;
Upon which Gray answered and said, I see how the game goes now; is not my Lord
Metropolitan of England, and ought not he to grant me a Warrant? but I hope
eye it be long to see better days. Upon this the next day following Canterbury
complained of Gray, and brought him before the Council, and committed him to
the Fleet, where he remained 14. weeks. After which Canterbury seeing the Lords
would discharge Gray, who often petitioned them by his wife, caused Windebank to
lay his Warrant upon him; whereupon he there remained prisoner 7. weeks more.
And upon often petitioning by Grayes wife, Windebanke was at last contented to
discharge Gray, so that Gray would put in good security unto him THAT HE WOULD
NOT HEREAFTER APPREHEND ANY MORE PRIESTS.

The said Newton apprehended Henry Gifford, a dangerous Jesuit, and brought him
before Justice Griffith, where he was tendered the Oath of Supremacy and
Allegiance; whereupon the said Jesuit replied and said these words: I wish to
God, that all those who made the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, that
their tongues were seered in their mouths, and all those that gave consent
thereto. Whereupon the said Justice told him, that the King, the Lords, and
Commons had made these Oaths, and committed him to prison. The next day
following, the Justice and Newton were entreated to come to Secretary Windebank
to speak with him concerning the Jesuit; Which they doing, Windebank said to
Newton, Is this a Priest or a Jesuit? Newton answered and said, If he be not a
Priest, he is worse than a Priest; and told him the aforesaid dangerous words.
Then said Windebanke to the Jesuit (be being brought before him by Windebankes
direction) I will not bail you for a world; and sent him to prison. But
notwithstanding, that night or the next day, he set him at liberty, without
giving Newton his Fees.

Newton and Cook apprehended one Fit-Iames, an Arch-spie for Rome, and brought
him before Windebank; yet Drew Lovet an Arch-Papist wrought so with him, that
he took Lovets word for his appearance before him, and discharged Newton of
him. About four days after Windebank told Newton that James had given him
good satisfaction concerning him. Afterward James being arrested upon a Bill
of Middlesex, at the suit of one Lincoln, upon a debt of 200. l. and put into
the Gatehouse, Windebanke thereupon hearing of his arrest (and solicited by
Lloyd alias Smith, the forenamed grand Jesuit, and Lovet the Papist) sent for
Newton, and gave him a warrant to take the plaintiff Lincoln and the Bailiffe,
for arresting James; who did apprehend and bring them before Windebanke. He
thereupon sent for the prisoner James to be brought before him, who being
brought, he delivered him to Newton, and said, This is your prisoner, for the
King shall be served before you, Meaning the plaintiff. Newton answered, May it
please your Honor, you have discharged him from me these 6. days agone, and I
have nothing to do with him. Windebanke replied and said, That is all one, you
shall take him. And if the plaintiff be not contented therewith, I will lay him
by the heels. Whereupon he was delivered to Newton. But immediately upon the
plaintifs going away, Windebanke caused Newton to deliver him the prisoner, and
then Windebanke delivered the prisoner to Lovet, and bid him shift for
himself. Upon which the plaintiff lost his debt, and lay in prison for the
moneys.

Moreover, the said Windebanke at sundry times threatened Cook, that if ever he
did go with Newton or any other to show them any Priests, he would lay Cook in
prison; and that he would take a course that he should never come out. And also
said, that he would have Cook whipped about the streets; and caused Cook to fall
down upon his knees to ask forgiveness for what he had done formerly against
Jesuits and Priests, having made a Mittinius to send him to the Gate House,
which he would not revoke, unless he would make such submission.

Witnessed by Us

Fran. Newton. Thomas Mayo. James Wadsworth. John Cook.
To this I shall add two relations more. During my imprisonment in the Tower
of London, Captain Francis Conesby Surveyer of the Ordnance, went one morning
about the year 1633. to the New prison to visit one William Drury a Priest
(who had formerly brought him a letter from a special friend in the Low
Countries being then a prisoner there; coming into the prison and inquiring
for his Chamber, he was brought into a large Hall, with sundry partitions on
one side (like drinking rooms in an Alchouse or Tavern) and a curtain drawn
before each of them; where he saw some walking, others sitting in the Hall; who
informed him that Drury in one of those Rooms: and going in order from one of
them to the other, he found a Priest and a woman privately together at
confession in every one of them, and Drury with a very handsome Chambermaide
well clad in the uppermost of them. With whom having some conference about
half an hour in his Chamber, as he was returning back through the Hall, he
found a Priest there saying Mass, and the Iaylor himself with a Censor
persuming the room, and censing the same, (at they use in Popish Masses) and
so many people, men and women, kneeling down in the Hall, that he could
hardly pass by. At which strange sight he was much amazed, and not long after
being in my company, upon a discourse concerning the increase of Popery, and
favor showed to Priests, he related this story to me with much regrect,
avouching the truth thereof upon his credit.

Since the sitting of this Parliament, by the houses special direction there
were several Priests arraigned and condemned at Newgate much against his
Majesty's will, who notwithstanding both Houses earnest request to the contrary
reprieved them from execution; and after many messages was hardly drawn to
condescend to revoke this reprive, and yield them up to public justice: which
being granted, the Parliament out of their lenity spared the lives of some of
them, who remain still prisoners in Newgate; where they have gained so much
favor and so far corrupted the Keepers, that even since the Covenant and
Protestation taken, they have had Masses publicly in their chambers, of which
information being given, and a warrant made to Master Newton to search their
chambers, during the very last Sessions but one at Newgate, who searching Peter
Milfords chamber (being the most active dangerous seducer of all the rest)
found about Mass time an Altar ready furnished in his Chamber, four several
suites of Massing Vestments, with sundry Crucifixes, Agnus Deies, Relics,
Masse-bookes, and other such Romish trinkets, (all delivered to the late Lord
Mayors custody) with no less then eleven persons at Mass, five of them
Prisoners in the House, and the other six strangers; of which gross abuse and
intolerable connivance at condemned Traitors (under the very Parliaments and
Courts of Sessions Noses, in these dangerous times, even since the Covenant and
Protestation taken) information was given, and complaint made in open Court, at
the Sessions in the Old Bailey, by Master Newton in my hearing, and thereupon
order given (if observed) to prevent such licentious abuses for the future,
deserving the severast censures for the present.

I shall add one most remarkable occurrent more, done in one of the highest
Courts of public Justice, in the Kings own Name, by his special Command, in
favor of a great convicted Popish Recusant (now in Arms against the
Parliament) in derogation of his own royal Justice and interest.

Hill. 130 Caroli B. R. A Writ of Error was brought by the Kings Attorney, in
the Kings own name, to quashan Indictment of Recufancie against the Marquess
of Winchester, (whiles Lord Seint John in the life of his Father) upon the
Statute of 3. Iacobi. cap. 4. For not repairing to Church, etc. which
Indictment was found before the Justices of Assise, almost 20. years before
this Writ was brought. Now because this Statu^e expressly enacts; That the
Indictment shall not be reversed, avoided or discharged by reason of any
default, inform, or for lack of form, or other defect whatsoever, other then
by direct Traverse to the point of not coming to Church, or not receiving the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but shall stand in force and be proceeded upon,
any such default inform, or other ^efect what soever notwithstanding; unless
the party indicted first conform; himself: Hereupon (to evade this wholesome
Law, and do this grand Recusant an extraordinary Royal favor, transcending
all Parallels whatsoever) the King himself (the Recusant Marquess being thus
disabled by this Law) brought a Writ of Error in the Kings Bench to reverse
this ancient Indictment (upon which the Marquess was outlawed) and his
Attorney General (Sir John Banks) assigned several Errors to reverse the
Kings own suite and proceedings against this Grand Papist, who had no means
to avoid it. And because that learned, stout, upright Judge; Sir George Crook,
did often declare his opinion in Court; That the King could not bring a Writ of
Error to reverse his own Judgment given for him; that it was both a damage
and dishonor to the King, and a mere deluding of this Statute to admit of
such an unheard of Writ as this: The Attorney General, averred in open Court;
THAT THE WRIT WAS BROVGHT BY SPECIAL WARRANT AND COMMAND OF THE KING.
Whereupon afterward in Trin^ty Term 14 Carol^; the Indictment was quashed by
Judge Bramston, Jones and Berkely upon this Writ, much against the good will
and opinion of Judge Crook: and that upon these two ^rivolous Errors. First,
because the Judgment was that the Marquess, forisfiat 20^. where it ought to
be forisfaciat. Secondly, because that in the entry of the Judgment this word,
Capiatur, was omitted. And Judge Ioanes said; that for want of Addition or
other error in sait the King shall not reverse an Indictment on this Act, but
otherwise it was of an Error in Law. But I fear the greatest Error in this
Case, was in the King and these Judges in opening such an illegal gap for
Popish Recusants wholly to evade this Law, penned with as much care and
judgment as possible upon the horrid Popish plot of the Gunpowder Treason,
which would have blown up this Parliament. The record of this notorious case,
and the Judgment given upon it, is extant in the Crown Office.

In few words: the Papists have lately gained such an high opinion in his
Majesty's judgment and affections; that he not only ^tiles them, his Loyal,
dutiful, trusty and wel-beloved Subjects, in all his forementioned letters of
Grace; but even now principally relies upon their forces and contributions;
(...) Master John Whites first Century of scandalous malignant Priests, p. 29.
25.
as his best and faithfullest Subjects and Guard; insomuch that diverse of our
Prelaticall Clergy have cried them up in their Pulpits (as well at the King and
others in Court) for his Majesty's best and most bountiful Leiges, witness
the speech of John Wells Parson or Shimplin in Suffolk, sequestered by the
Parliament, who affirmed, THAT THE PAPISTS WERE THE KINGS BEST SVBIECTS. And of
John Squire Vicar of Shorditch; (who in his last Printed Sermons styles himself
John Squire Priest) sequestered, for that he has publicly Preached in his
Sermons That the Papists are the kings best Subjects, for their lo^alty and for
their liberality, many of them like Arauna, having given like Kings to the
King: and for their patience, that enduring very many grievances under his
Majesty; they had buried them all in oblivion: exhorting that none should come
to the Sacrament, unless they were so affected to his Majesty as the Papists
were. And comparing his Majesty to the man that went from Jerusalem to
Ieriche, who fell among thieves, that wounded him in his Honor, robbed him of
his Castles, and hearts of his people: he said, that the Priest passing by was
the Protestant: the forward Professor, the Levite; but, the Papist was the good
Samaritan: Especially the Irish Papist: and that the Subjects and all they have
are at the Kings Command.

From all these Premises; compared with the Plot and conspiracy of the Pop^.
Jesuits, Papists of all sorts against our Religion, discovered in Romes
Masterpeece: the Rise and Progress of the Irish Rebellion: The Articles of
Pacification made with the Irish Rebels there, styled neither Rebels nor
Traitors, but his Majesty's In the Coppie printed at Shrewsbury.
Good Roman Catholic Subjects; authorized by Commissions from his Majesty
under the great Seal, now at last (if not at first) to take up Arms against
all Protestants who shall not submit to this strange Pacification there, after
the bloody slaughter, and butchery of above an hundred and forty thousand
Innocent Protestant (whose blood must pass altogether unrevenged by the hands
of Royal public justice;) and by special Commissions (as we are most
certainly informed, a very probable argument they had not only pretended but
real Commissions from the King at first for what they acted against the
Protestants in Ireland) are now sent for over into England (where thousands of
them are lately arrived and more daily expected) to sight against the
Parliament, and Massacre English Protestants in their own Country, as freely
as they did in Ireland: his Majesty making base Irish moneys current in
England by special Proclamation, in favor of the Irish rebels, to be
transported and made current good Subjects here, to murder us: the late
intercepted Bull, with other Papers and Commissions newly intercepted, and
ordered to be forthwith published in Print. By all these our whole 3. Kingdoms
if not the very blindest, and most incredulous Malignants (unless given over
to a reprobate sense) must of necessity now see and acknowledge that there is
and has bin all his Majesty's Reign till this instant, a most strong cunning
desperate confederacy prosecuted, (wherein the Queens Majesty has bin chief)
to set up Popery in perfection and extirpate the Protestant party and Religion
in all his Majesty's Dominions, which plot now visibly appears above ground,
and is almost ripened to perfection, unless Gods own Almighty Power, and our
unanimous, vigilant, strenu^us opposition, prevent its final accomplishment.

For my own particular, I many years since through Gods goodness to me) by
many infallible Symptoms clearly discovered, and to my power publicly
detected, oppugned this prevalent growing confederacy in sundry Printed
Books; especially in my Perpetuity of a Regenerate Man's estate,
Anti-Arminianisme, Dr. Cosens his Cozening Devotions; Lame Giles his ^altings;
The Vubishoping of Timothy and Titus; The Antipathy of the English Prelacy to
unity and Minarchy; A Looking-glass for Lordly Prelates; but especially in my
Quench Coal, written in the Tower of London; for which good public service
what a strange ingrate requital I received, from the pretended Fathers of our
Church, and defendors of our faith, is too well known to the world. During my
Imprisonment in the Tower, I met with some more special passages in Popish
writers, which much confirmed me in the reality of this Conspiracy against our
Religion, and to re-establish Popery; which because then unobvious and unknown
to most, I had an intention to have published, as I could gain opportunity; but
my close Imprisonment there, and Exile into Wales and Iersie, prevented this
design. Wherefore I shall for a close of this Narration; present you now, with
what I then intended. The first was these ensuing letters of the Pope to the
King (when Prince of Wales and in Spain) and of the King to the Pope, in
answer thereof, recorded by Andrew de Chesue, Chronographer to the King of
France, in his History of England, Scotland, and Ireland, l. 22. f. 1162.
Printed at Paris Cum Privilegio, the last Edition, p. 509. 510, etc. And in the
French Mercury, Tom. 9: Which Letters and Articles of the Spanish Match, laid
the foundation stone of all his Majesty's ensuing favors to Romish Recusants,
Priests, Jesuits, and most punctually discover his good affection and
inclination to the Roman Party, if not to that Religion, ever since manifested
toward them, and abundantly detected by the premises, I shall here insert the
same as I find them lately printed in French and English, by others.

The Popes Letter to the King, when Prince of Wales and in Spain.
MOst Noble Prince, Salutation and light of the divine grace:
Forasmuch as great Britain, has always been fruitful in Virtues, and in
men of great worth, having filled the one and the other world with the glory of
her renoune; She does also very often draw the thoughts of the holy
Apostolical Chair, to the consideration of her praises. And indeed the
Church was but then in her infancy, when the King of Kings did choose her for
his inheritance, and so affectionately, that we believe, the Roman Eagles have
hardly outpassed the Banner of the Cross. Besides that many of her kings
instructed in the knowledge of the true salvation, have preferred the Cross
before the Royal Scepter and the Discipline of Religion before covetcousnesse,
leaving examples of Piety to other Nations, and to the ages yet ^o come. So
that having merited the Principalities and first places of blessedness in
Heaven, they have obtained on Earth the Triumphant ornaments of true holiness.
And although now the State of the English Church is altered, we see
nevertheless the Court of Great Britain, adorned and furnished with moral
Virtues which might serve to support the Charity that we bear unto her, and be
an Ornament to the name of Christianity, if withal she could have for her
defense and protection the Orthodox and Catholic truth. Therefore by how much
the more the Glory of your most noble Father, and the apprehension of your
Royal inclination, delights us, with so much more zeal, we desire that the
gates of the Kingdom of Heaven might be opened unto you, and that you might
purchase to your self the love of the universal Church. Moreover it being
certain that Gregory the great, of most blessed memory, has introduced to the
English people, and taught to their Kings the law of the Gospel, and the
respect of Apostolical Authority: We, as inferior to him, in holiness and
virtue, but equal in name and degree of dignity, it is very reasonable that we
following his blessed footesteps, should endeavor the salvation of those
Provinces, especially at this time, when your design (Most noble Prince)
elevates us to the hope of an extraordinary advantage: Therefore as you have
directed your journey to Spain, toward the Catholic King, with desire to
allie your self to the house of Austria, We do much commend your design, and
indeed do testify openly in this present business, that you are he that
takes the principal care of our Prelacy. For seeing that you desire to take in
marriage the daughter of Spain: from thence we may easily conjecture that the
ancient seeds of Christian Piety, which have so happily flourished in the
hearts of the Kings of great Britain may (God prospering them) revive again
in your soul. And indeed it is not to be believed that the same man should
love such an alliance, that hates the Catholic Religion, and should take
delight to oppress the holy Chair. To that purpose we have commanded to make
continually most humble prayers to the father of lights, that he would be
pleased to put you as a fair Flower of Christendom, and the only hope of
Great Britain, in possession of that most noble heritage, that your Ancestors
have purchased for you, to defend the Authority of the Sovereign High Priest;
and to fight against the Monsters of Heresy. Remember the days of old,
enquire of your Fathers, and they will tell you the way that leads to heaven;
and what way the temporal Princes have taken to attain to the everlasting
Kingdom. Behold the ga^es of Heaven opened, the most holy Kings of England,
who came from England to Rome accompanied with Angels did come to honor and
do homage to the Lord of Lords, and to the Prince of the Apostles in the
Apostolical Chair: their actions and their examples being as so many voices
of God, speaking and exhorting you to follow the course of the lives of those
to whose Empire you shall one day attain. Is it possible that you can suffer
that the Heretics should hold them for impious, and condemn those that the
^aith of the Church restifies to reign in the heavens with Jesus Christ, and
have Command and Authority over all Principallities and Empires of the earth?
Behold how they tender you the hand of this truly happy inheritance, to
conduct you safe and sound to the Court of the Catholic King, and who desire
to bring you back again into the lap of the Roman Church: Beseeching with
unpeakeable sighs and groares the God of all mercy for your Salvation, and do
stretch out to you the Arms of the Apostolical Charity, to embrace you with
all Christian affection You that are her desired Son, in showing you the
happy hope of the Kingdom of Heaven. And indeed you cannot give a greater
consolation to all the people of the Christian Estates, then to put the Prince
of the Apostles in possession of your most Noble Island, whose authority has
bin held so long in the Kingdom of Britain, for the defense of Kingdoms, and
for a devine Oracle; which will easily arrive, and that without difficulty, if
you open your heart to the Lord that knocks, upon which depends at the
happiness of that Kingdom. It is of our great Charity that we cherish the
praises of the Royal Name; and that which makes us desire that you and your
Royal Father might be styled with the names of Deliverers, and Restorers of
the ancient and paternall Religion of Great Britain, which we hope for,
trusting in the goodness of God, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings, and
who causes the people of the Earth to receive healing, to whom we will always
labor with all our power to render you gracious and favorable; In the interim
take notice by these Letters of the care of our Charity, which is none other
than to procure your happiness; and it will never grieveus to have written
them, if the reading of them stir but the least spark of the Catholic Faith,
in the heart of so great a Prince, whom we wish to be filled with long
continuance of joy, and flourishing in the glory of all virtues.

Given at Rome in the Palace of S. Peter the 20. of April, 1623. in the Third
year of our Popedom.
TRes-Noble Prince, salut and lumiere de la grace divine:
Com^e ainsi soit que la grand' Bretagne ait tousiours este abondante en
vertus, and en personna^ ges de grand merit and ait remply l' un and l' autre
monde de lo gloire de sa renomme, elle attrire aussi tres souentles pensees du
Saint Siege Apostolic a la consideration de ses louanges. Et de fait l'
Eglise ue faisoit encore que naistre, quand le Roy des Roys la v^^lut chosir
pour son heritage, and si affectionnement, qu' on tient qu' a peine les Aigles
Romoins yont plustost pass que l' ostendart de la Croix. Joint que plusieurs
de ses Roys instruits en la cognoisance du vray salut ont prefere la Croix au
Scepter Royal, and la discipline de la Religion a la conuotise: laissants des
exemples de piete aux nations estrangeres and aux siceles futurs. Si bien qu
ayans merit dans le Cie'les Principa^tez, and preeminences de la Beat it
udine, ils ont obtenu en terre d^s ^rnaments triomphaux de vraye Saintete. Et
ores qu a^iourd huyl Estat de l' Eglise Anglicane soit alters, nous voyons
neant, m^ins la Count de la grand BRETAGNE estre ornee and munle de vertus
Morales, qui servir^ient de consolation a la charity que nous luy portous and
a^ ornement au nom Chrestien, si con^oinct ement elle pouuost aucir pour sa
defense and protection la verit^ orthodoxe and vniuerselle. C^est pourquoyd'
autast plus quels Gloire de vostre S^reniss^me Pere, and le ressentiment de
vostre Royal naturel, nous delectent, de tant plus grande ardeur resirons nos
que les ports du Roiaume Celestes vous soyent ouuertes, and que vous veus
acqueriez l' a^our de l' Eglise Vniverselle. D' ailleurs estant vray que
Gregoire le grand de tres-sainte memoire a introduit aux puples d' Angleterre,
and enseigne a leurs Rois la Loy de l' Euangile, and le respect de l' auctorit^
Apostolic: Nous comme inferieurs, a luy en saint te and virtue, and pareils
en nom and degree de dignite, il est bien raisonnable, que suiuans ses Saints
vestiges nous procurions le salut de ces Povinces, ^ommement aujourd' huy que
vostre heureux dessein ( tres noble Prince) nous eslue a l' esperance ^ un
bonheur extra ordinaire. Partant, comme vous vous estes achemine el Espagne
versla person du Roy Catholic, auec desir de vous allier a la Maison d'
Austriche, Nous auons bien voululouer vestre dessein, voire mesme tesmoigner
ouuertement en l' affair qui se present, que vous estes celuy que regard le
principal soin de nostre Prelature. Car ainsi estant que vous desirez prendre
en marriage vne Fille d' Espagne, de la pouuors-nous aisement conjecturer, que
ces auciennes sem^nces de la Piete Chris^ienne, lesquelles ont sy heureusement
fleury dans les coeurs des Rois de la grand Bretagne, peuvent (Dieu leur
donnant accroissement) reuerdir en vostre ame, Et de fait il ne seroit pas
croyable que celuy-la aimast vne tell alliance, lequel hayroit la Religion
Catholic, and se plaroit a opprimer de Saint Siege. Nous auons en suitte de
ce command de fair continuellement de tres-humbles prieres au Pere des
lumieres, a ce qu'il luy plaise de vous mettre comme une belle fleurdis
Christia^isme, and unique esperance ae la grand' Bretagne, en possession de ce
tres noble heritage, que vos ancestres vous ont acquis a deffendre l' ancterite
du souuerain Pontife, and a combattre les monstres de l' heresy. Sounenezvous
des iours anciens, enquerezvous de vos Peers, and ils vous diront par quille
voye l' on va an Ciel, and quel chemin ont tenu les Princes temporels pour per
paruenir au Royaume eternel. Voyez les ports du Ciel ouuertes, ces tres
Saints Roys d' Angleterre, qui partans d' Angleterre pour ventr a Rome
accompagnez d^s Anges sont venus honerer and fair hommage au Se^gneur des
Seigneurs, and a^ prince des Apostris en la Chair Apostolic Leurs oeuures
and leurs exemples sont a^tant ae voix de Dieu qui parlent; and qui uous
exhortent a ce qu^ ayez a su^ure la facon de viure de eux a l' Empire des quels
vous parviendrez n^iour.

Est-^l possibile que vous puissiez souffrir, que les Herestiques tiennent pour
impies, and condamnent ceux que la soy ^e l' Eglise tesmoigne regner dant le
Ciel auec Jesus. Christ, and avoir commandment and anctorite sur toutes les
Principautsz and Empires de la terre voila qu' ^^s vous tendent la main d^
ceste bi^nheu^euse Patrie, pour vous conduire sai^ and sauf a la Cour du Roy
Catholic, and quide siront vous (...) given de l' Eglise Roman: laquelle
suppliant auec gemissements inenarrables le Dieu de toute Misericorde pour
vostre salut, vous tend les bras de la Charity Apostolic pour veus embrasser
anec toute affection Christienne, vous qui estes son desire fills, en vous
monstrant l' esperance bien houre^se d^ (...) des (...). Pour uray vous ne
(...) donner plu^ grande consolation a tous les Peuples de l' Estat Chrestien
que de mettre en possession de uestre tres-noble Ist^le Prince des Apostres, l'
Auctorite duq^^la este (...) long temps en vostre Royaume de la gran^ Bretagne
pour la defense des Roya^mes, and por oracle de la Divinite. Ce qui arrivera
sans difficulte, si vous ouurez vostre eoeur au Sergneur qui frappe, (...) gift
toutle bon-heur de ce Royaume.

C'est de ceste si grand chari^e, que (...) fauorisous les louanges du nom
Royal, and qui nous fait desirer que vous and ^ostre Serinissime pere soyez
qualifiez du (...) de Liberateurs and Restaurateurs de l' ancienne and
paternelle Religion de la grand Bretagne. Ce quenous esperors, nons cenfians en
labonte de Dieu es mains duquel sont les ceurs des Roys, and qui f^it que les
Peuples de la t^rr^ puissent (...) guarison, lequell nous tascherons tonsiours
de tout nostre ponuoir non (...) and favorable. Cependant recognoissez ces
lettres le soing nostre charity qui ^est autre chose que pour procurer uostre
honhour: and iamais il ne nou^ fe^a mal de les ^^^^escrites s^ la lecture
d'^icelles vient au moins a exciter quelque petite flamniesche de la Foy
Catholic dans le coeurd' unsi grand Prince, l^quel nous desirons estre camble
a une joy de longue duree, and flerissant en la gloire de toutes nertus.

Done a Rome au Palais de Saint Piere le xx. iour d' Aurill 1623. l' an
troisiesme de nostre Pontificat.
Pope Gregory the (...) having writ the foregoing Letter to the Prince of
Wales, it was presented to him by the Nuncio of his Holiness in Spain, he
being accompanied with the Italian Lords that then were in the Court.

The Prince of Wales having received this Letter, made this following Answer,
which was after published.
MOST Holy Father,
I received the dispatch from your Holiness with great content, and with that
respect which the piety and c^re wherewith your Holiness writes, does
require: It was an unspeakeable pleasure to me to read the generous exploits
of the Kings my Predecessors, in whose memory, posterity has not given those
praises and Elogies of honor, as were due to them: I do believe that your
Holiness has set their examples before my eyes, [ toth' end that I might
imitate them in all my actions, for in truth they have often exposed their
estates and lives for the exaltation of the Holy Chair;] And the courage with
which they have assaulted the enemies of the erosse of Jesus Christ, has not
been lesle than the care and thought which I have, to the end that the peace
and intelligence which has hitherto been wanting in Christendom, might be
bound with as true and strong c^n^ord: for as the common enemy of the peace,
watches always to put hatred and dissension amongst Christian Princes, so I
believe that the glory of God requires that we should endeavor to unite them;
And I do not esteem it a greater honor to be descended from so great Princes,
than to imitate them in the zeal of their piety. In which it helps me very
much to have known the mind and will, of our th^ce hououred Lord and Father,
and the holy intentions of his Catholic Majesty to give a happy concurrence
to ^o laudable a design: for it grieves him extremely to see the great evils
that grow from the devision of Christian Princes, which the wisdom of your
Holiness foresaw, when it judged the Marriage which you pleased to design,
between the Insanta of Spain and myself, to be necessary to procure so great a
good; for it is very certain, that I shall never be so extremely affectionate
to any thing in the world, as to endeavor alliance with a Prince that has the
same apprehension of the true Religion with myself: Therefore, I entreat your
Holiness to believe, that I have been always very far Our Religion deemed but
a Novelty or Faction, by the King.
from encouraging Novelties, or to be a partisan of any To wit the Roman
Catholic.
Faction against the Catholic, Apostolic Roman Religion: But on the contrary,
I have sought all occasions to take away the suspicion that might rest upon me,
and that I will employ my self for the time to come, to have but one Lo the
true cause of the Kings hazarding his Kingdoms state and life in these present
Wars against the Parliament to advance Popery.
Religion and one faith, seeing that we all believe in one Jesus Christ. Having
resolved in my self, to spare nothing that I have in the world, and to *
suffer all manner of discommodities, even to the hazarding of my estate and
life, for a thing so pleasing unto God: It rests only that I thank your
Holiness, for the permission you have been pleased to afford me, and I pray
God to give you a blessed health and his glory, after so much pains which your
Holiness takes in his Church,

Signed, CHARLES STEWARD.

Le Prince de Galls ayant receu cel Lettres, il fist la Responce suivante, quy
fut publiee un peu apres.
TRes-Saint Pere,
I ay receu la Deep sche de vostre Saintete auec un' grand contentment dans le
respect que demandent la Piete and la Bienueillance, auec lesquelles uostre
Santete l'a escrice. Ce quin' a este un plaisir indicible de lire les exploits
genereux des Roys mes Predecesseurs, a la memoire desquels la posterite n'a
point done les elogesd' honneur qui leur sont deubs. Ie veux croire que vostre
Saintete a mis leur exemple deuant m^s yeux, afin que is les imitasse en toutes
mes actions. Car a la uerite ils ont expose souuent leur Estat and leurs vies
pour l' exaltation du Saint Siege. De sort que le courage auec lequell ils ant
assailly les ennemis de la Croix de Jesus Christ, n'a pas este moindre que le
soucy and la penses que ^ay, afin que la Paix and l^ Intelligence, qui ont
manque iusques a present dans la Chrestiente soient estraintes (...) liend une
ueritabile concord. Car de mesme que l' ennemy common de la Paix ueille
tousiours pour mettre la h^yne and dissensi^n parmy les Princes Chrestiens,
aussi ie croy que la gloire de Dieu demand qu' or tasche de les unir. Et^ie ^
estime pas que in aye un plus grand houneur d' estre d^scendu de fi grands
Princes, que de les imiter da^s le zele de lour Piete. En quoy: (...) sert
grandement a auoir recognu^ la volonte de nostre tres honor Seigneur and pere.
and les saints intentions de sa Majeste Catholic, pour faire^ reussi
h^urensement ce ^^^able dessein, parce qu' elle a un extreme regret de uoir les
grands mal beurs qui naissent de la division des Princes Chresti^ns. Ce que la
prudence de vestre Sancte^e a preuein, lors qu' elle a juge que le marriage qu'
il luy plaist desseign^ enter l' Infant a' Espagne and may, est necessaire
pour procurer un si grand bien^ pur ce qu^ il est tout certain, que ie ne me
porteray iamais si passionement a chose de monde qu' a la recher^he de l'
alliance d' un Prince, qui aura le mesme sentiment de la vraye Religion auec
moy. C'est purquoy ie pry vostre Saintete decroire que in ay tousiours este
fort esloigne d' advantager les nouneautez, ni d' estre partisan d' aucune
faction contre la Religion Catholic Apostolic Roman: mais au contraire,
que in ay recherche les occasions, afin que le soupcon qui peut tomber sur moy
soit entierement oste, and que is m' employe de tout mon rest pour n' auoir
qu' vne Religion, and qu' vne Foy, puis que naus cryons tous ensemble en vne
Jesus Christ. Ayant resolu de ne m' espargner point en chose du monde, and de
souffrir toutes sorts d' incommoditez, mesme de hazarder m^n Estat and mavie,
pour vne occasion si agreeable a Dieu. Il rest seulement q^e ei remercie vostre
Saintete de la permission qu' illuy a pleu de m' accord, and que ie pry Dieu
qu il luy done une beureuse sante, and sa gloire, aprestant de trauaux quae
vostre Saintete prend dans son Eglise.

Sign, CHARLES STOVARD

This Letter printed in Spain in many Languages, discovers to us the very Root
of all our present wars, in which his Majesty has sustained many
incommodities, hazarded both his estate, life, and Realms; fully resolves us
what Protection of the Protestant Religion we must now expect from himself;
and that Armed Catholic party to which he adheares, and more, he here resolves
to suffer but one Religion, (to wit the Roman Catholic) only in his Realms
intimating our Reformed Religion, to be but Novelty and Faction, against the
Roman Catholic faith.

I have seen a Copy of these Letters in English, long since; the Kings letter
(who perchance writ two of this nature) being some what different from the
French in some expressions, though not in substance: Now that such Letters
really pasted between the King and Pope, during his abode in Spain, appears
not only by diverse ancient Printed Copies of it in sundry Languages, but is
also thus expressly attested by Master James Howell, (an attendant upon his
Majesty in that expedition) no friend to Parliaments, but a Malignant now in
custody, in his Vocal Forest, dedicated to the King himself, the Queen,
and Prince, Printed at London 1640. p. 128.

The Holy Sire (the Pope) who was so great a friend to the intended alliance (
who had formerly writ unto, and sent to visit Prince Rocalino ( Charles) was
taken away by the hand of Fate, etc. Moreover his book farther informs us p.
124. That Chenandra (Olivares) the chief Ingrosser of the Olives (the King of
Spaines) favors, welcomming the Prince into Spain, said; That he doubted not
but he came thither, to be of their Religion. And p. 134. The common voice
among those of Elaiana (Spain) was; that Prince Rocalino (Charles) came
thither to make himself a Christian. But that which is most observable is this
passage concerning the Articles in favor of Papists agreed on, and sworn to
by King James, and his Majesty, by the Popes solicitation upon the Spanish
Treaty: p. 125. 126. 127. when Rocalino (Prince Charles) arrived, matters were
brought to that perfection by the strenuous negotiation of Lord Digby who now
swayes in his Councels very much.
Sophronio, that there wanted nothing for the consummation of all things, but a
dispensation from Petropolis (Rome) which at last And after that another from
the succeeding Pope. p. 133.
came: and before that time Rocalino (Charl^s) was not admitted to speak with
the Lady Amira in quality of a suitor, but a Prince. Now the said Dispensation
came clogged with an unhappy unexpected clause, thrust in of purpose, as it
appears, to retard the proceedings of things; which was; Nota
That whereas there were certain Articles condescended unto by Druina's
Monarke (King James) in Favor of the Petropolitans (Papists) that were in that
Kingdom, and other Crowns under his Dominion; the great Arch-flamin (the
Pope) demanded caution for the performance of them. The Royal Oak answered,
that he could give no other caution then his Word and Oath: and Recalino
(Prince Charles) should do the like, which should be confirmed by his Council
of State and exemplified under Druinas (Englands) broad Seal: but this would
not satisfy, unless some Popish.
Petropolitan Sovereign Prince should engage himself for them. Hereupon all
matters were like to go off the hinges, and a buzze went abroad, that Rocalino
intended to get away covertly. In these traverses Chenandra steps forth and
said: there were three ways to conclude this business, two good and one bad:
the first good way was, That Prince Rocalino (Charles) Should become a
Petropolitan (Papist.) The second was, That as Elaiana (Spain) was obliged to
him for his free coming thither, so she might as freely deliver to him the
Lady Amira, trusting him without further condition. The ill way was, not to
trust Rocalino, at all with any thing, but bind him as fast as they could.
Whiles matters were thus a canvasing, and gathering ill blood; Elaianas
(Spaines) King stepped up, and proffered to engage himself by Oath, for the
satisfaction of the great Arch flamine, but with this proviso, that he must
first consult with his Ghostly Fathers, whether he might do it Salua
Conscientia or no. Hereupon the business was referred to a Commit of the
learned Yewes, (Bishops, Divines) and the State of the Question was.

Whether the King of Spain.
Olive might with safety of conscence take an Oath in behalf of The King of
England.
Druinas Monarke and Prince Charles.
Rocalino, for performance of such and such Articles that were agreed upon in
favor of the Pepotrolitans, throughout the Kingdoms of the Papists.
Royal Oak?

This Assembly long demurred and dwelt upon the Question, and after a long
pr^^raction of time they concluded at last, affirmatively: and in case the Oak
failed to execute what was stipulated, the Olive was to vindicate his Oath, and
right himself By the Sword. King James.


This difficulty being surmounted, there was exceeding great joy, and all the
Capitulations were interchangeably sworn unto, Both by the Oak and Olive: and
as Chenandra said in Elaiana; so the King James.
Royal Oak himself was so confident that he said; All the Devils in hell
could not now break the match: whereto a blunt facetious Knight being by,
answered; That there was never a Devil now left in hell, for they were all
gone to Spain to help make up the match.

By all these observable passages, dedicated so lately to the King himself, by
one of his own servants, who was privy to them; it is apparent, that not
only Letters passed between the King and Pope whilst he continued in Spain:
but likewise, That This Prince Charles expressed in the English Coppie of the
Letter to the Pope, though but implied in the French.
Articles in favor of Papists throughout England and all his Majesty's
Dominions, even such as the Pope himself approved, were at the Popes request
condescended unto by King James, and caution offered and given to the Pope for
the performance of them, even by King James, King Charles, and the King of
Spaines regal words, Seals, Oaths: That these Articles were to be confirmed
by the Privy Council of State, and exemplied under the Great Seal of
England, And that the maine end the Pope and Papists aimed at in this Spanish
match, was the seducing of the King and Realm to the Romish Religion, and
reducing of them to their ancient Vassallage to the Sea of Rome: which will be
more apparent if we add to this, that Hugh Simple, a Scottish Jesuit, being
in the Court of Spain when the King was there, gave up diverse Petitions and
Advertisements to the King and Council of Spain, that they should not
conclude any match with England, unless there should be erected in each
University under our Kings Dominions a College of Jesuits, for the training
up of youth in the Roman faith and Doctrine; which Advertisements he printed
with his Name subscribed, and delivered to his friends in Court; as James
Wadsworth, then present^ (whose father was Tutor to Donna Maria the Spanish
Lady, and taught her English,) has published in his English Spanish Pilgrim.
chapter 3. p. 30. 31.

It is very observable, how King James to make the better way for the Popish
Spanish Match, to comply with Spain, and express his favor and affection to
those of the Romish Religion, sent this ensuing Letter to the Lord Keeper
Williams, for the releasing of Imprisoned Recusants throughout England.

Trusty and welbeloved, We Greet you well;
Whereas we have given you a former warrant and direction for the making of two
several Writs for the enlargement of such Recusants as are in Prison at this
time, either for matters of Recusancie in General, or for denying the taking
the Oath of Supremacy, according to the Statute, by removing them from the
general Goales of this Kingdom, to be bailed before the Justices of our
Bench; finding by experience that this course will be very troublesome to the
poorer sort of Recusants, and very chargeable unto Us, who out of our Princely
Clemency, and by the mediation of Foreign Princes were desired to bear out
the same. We will and require you to make and issue forth two other Writs, in
nature and substance answerable with the former, to be directed to our Justices
of Assizes, enabling and requiring them and every of them to enlarge such
Recusants, as they shall find in their several Goales, upon such sureties and
recognisance, and other conditions, as they were enlarged by the Judges of our
Bench; and this shall be your Warrant so to do.

Dated at Westminster, July 25. 1622.

Hereupon this Lord Keeper (though a Bishop) not only issued out these Writs,
but likewise writ this letter to the Judges.

After my hearty Commendations to you: His Majesty having resolved out of
deep reasons of State, and in expectation of like correspondence from
foreign Princes to the Professors of our Religion) to grant some grace and
connivency to the Imprisoned Papists of this Kingdom, has commanded me to
pass some Writs under the Broad Seal for that purpose; Requiring the Judges
of ^uery Circuit to enlarge the said Prisoners according to the Tenor and
effect of the same.

I am to give you to understand (for his Majesty) how his Majesty's Royal
pleasure is, that upon receipt of these Writs you shall make no niceness nor
difficulty to extend this his Princely favor to all such Papists as you shall
find prisoners in the Goales of your Circuits, for any Church Recusancy
whatsoever, refusing the Oath of Supremacy, or dispersing Popish Books, or
hearing saying of Mass, or any other point of Recusancie, which does touch or
concern Religion only, and not matters of State, which shall appear unto you
to be Totally Civil and Political; And so Ibid you heartily farewell.

Your loving Friend John Lincoln.
Westminster College August 2. 1622.

By Virtue of these Writs and Letters all the Imprisoned Recusants, and most
Seminary Priests and Jesuits were every where released who thereupon grew very
bold, insolent, and had open Masses and Se^mons in diverse places, (whereof that
in Blackfriers on the 5. of their November, where so many of them were pressed
to death, and Drury his brains who then preached, beaten out with the sudden
miraculous fall of the Room where they assembled, is most memorable,) in hope
of the match with Spain, and of the public toleration promised and resolved
on; as appears by King James his ensuing speech at the Council Table, upon
his proposal of the Spanish Match to the Lords of his Privy Council.

Now because his Majesty's and his Royal Fathers intended Popish match with
Spain, and the proceedings thereupon, have been the Mercury Francois Tom. 9.
An. 1624. p. 28. 29.
Original Fountain, whence all the forementioned favors and suspentions of
our Laws against Papists Priests, Jesuits, together with the extraordinary
increase of them and Popery, if not our present wars, have proceeded, I shall
give you a further true and real account thereof, out of the French Mercury
Tome 9. Printed in French at Paris Anno 1624. with special privilege of King
Lewis the 13th. Where in all the particulars of the Kings voyage into, his
entertainment and proceedings in, and return from Spain, with all the
Articles and passages touching that marriage, are most punctually and truly
related. I shall present you only with some things in it which are most
considerable, and worthy our present public knowledge.

Mercury Francois Tom. 9. p. 470. etc. An. 1623.
Count Gondemar the King of Spaines Embassad or returning to his Master into
Spain in the year 1623. with Propositions of a marriage to be made between
Charles (now King) then Prince of Wales, and the Infanta Mary second sister to
the Catholic King of Spain, and the Lord Digby Earl of Bristol long before
sent extraordinary Ambassador into Spain to pursue this marriage Treaty; the
Prince soon after accompanied with the Duke of Buckingham, the Lord
Cottington, and Endymion Porter, departs unexpectedly and secretly (with King
James his consent) in disguised habits, from England, and posted through France
into Spain where he arrived at Madrit; and was there most royally entertained;
and all Arts^ used to engage him not only to favor, but Embrace the Romish
Religion. Among others Ibid p 533 to 539.
there was a most solemn Procession instituted, wherein the King of Spain,
and most of his Nobles bare a part; and the Prince with his followers being
placed in a Balconee where the Procession passed: they all made very great
humiliations and Genuflections when the holy Sacr^ment passed by. Pope Gregory
the 15. likewise writ a solemn Letter to the Prince (the same Verbatim with
that ^orecited, recorded likewise in this Ibid p. 509, 510 etc.
Mercury) which was brought and delivered to him by the Popes Nuncio with great
solemnity, accompanied with all the Italian Lords then about the Court, and
diverse Spanish Dons: whom the Prince received with grand courtesy, respect and
honor: To which Letter the Prince returned the forementioned answer. This
letter of the Pope written in Latin, together with the Princes answer to it,
was presently printed in diverse Languages, and the Articles propounded by the
King of England, were soon after sent by the King of Spain to the Pope to
receive his approbation of them ere they were accorded. The Pope hereupon
advises with the Cardinals of his conclave, for the propagation of the Roman
Catholic Religion, about these Articles; to some of which he entirely
condescended without any alteration; some of them he alters only in part, and
returns them back with his answers to, and alterations of every of them,
written under each particular Article; which alterations being sent to King
James he condescended to most of them in direct terms, to all of them in
substance; (which Articles, with the Popes own answers to, and emendations of
them, over tedious to insert, you may read in this Page 517. to 522.
French Mercury.) Most of the articles were in favor and advancement of Popery
and Papists; and the same almost Verbatim, with the ensuing Articles of the
French match, ratified likewise by the Pope. Ibid p. 522^ 523.
But the Cardinals of the Propagation of the Faith, not contented with these
general Articles, which tended principally for the assurance only of the
Religion of the Infanta and her family, persuaded the Pope to grant no
Dispensation for this marriage, Not^.
till they had proposed to the King of great Britain, certain Propositions for
the right, augmen^ation, and weal of the Roman Catholic Religion, to which
he must condescend; For the performance of both which Articles, the King of
Spain demanded not only the Kings and Princes Oaths, and confirmations under
the Great Seal of England, which were accordingly given, but an Act of
Parliament, and certain Cautionary Towns in England when the marriage was
accomplished; the first whereof (if not both) were promised. Whiles this match
was in agitation King James assembled his Privy Council together 25. of Febr.
1623. before the Princes departure into Spain, and there made a long Oration
to them, as the French Mercury (never controlled) attests, some passages
whereof are very observable.

That soon after he came to the crown of England, by the Popes exhortatory
Letters to the King of Spain, and Archduke Albertus in Flanders, there ensued
a peace between the Crowns of England and Spain. Tom. 9 Page (...).
That shortly after at the instance of many, he caused the Image of the Cross
to be redressed, and that men should not foul it under their seete. That when
he came first to the Crown of England he spoke among other points of the
Apostolic and Roman Religion; and although it were the true, yet then to
avoid all sorts of rumors, which might then have risen to the prejudice of
peace in the Re-publicke: I said, that in this Religion were many superfluous
ceremonies, the which deserved to be refused.

At the same time many Roman Catholics, our Subjects and members of our
Realm, presented us their requests, by which they ^arnestly beseeched us to
grant them the liberty of their Conscience, upon the hopes they had to be so
much the more comforted under our reign, as they had been Dppressed under the
reign of Queen Elizabeth. But as it often times happens, that those who
ardently desire any thing, imagine with themselves, that it is very easy to
do, or to be obtained, and oftentimes prove the contrary: so all the
Catholics who hoped to be releeved by us, and to be disingaged of great and
intolerable surcharges which have been imposed upon their Goods, Bodies and
Souls, during the reign of the said Elizabeth, requiring only of our Royal
benevolence to be remitted to the enjoyment of their Goods, Honors, and
Estates, and to be maintained in the Religion in which all our Predecessors
and Kings of Scotland have lived from Donaldus, until the time of our late
beloved Mother, who received Martyrdom in this Realm, For Confession of the
said Catholic Religion. A Religion which has been publicly professed so
many ages in this Realm of England, and which has been confirmed by so many
great and excellent Emperors, and has been so famous in all Ecclesiastical
Histories, by an infinite number of Nota.
Martyrs, who have sealed it with their own blood in their death,) were then
deceived of their hopes, by an apparent fear of certain commotions which then
might have ensued. So that in all our Realms, for the sole respect of my
person, and not by Reason of Religion it self, (so as many of the said
Catholics have very well known) there was no mutation or change at all had;
although they well k^ew There was in Us a Grand affection to the Catholic
Religion, in so much that they have believed at Rome, that We have Nota,
Dissembled for to obtain this Crown of England. But all this has been
nothing else but the opinions of men, the which one might have discerned in
almy comportments during my reign, in not committing any Offices, nor benefits
to others, than to those which have been formerly purveyed for, (or appointed
by the Laws,)

Now after that our bounty has opened the door to our Piety, and that we
have maturely considered all the penuries and calamities that the Roman
Catholics have suffered in the exercise of their Religion; seeing that they
are of the number of They were not such nor so esteemed when the Gunpowder plot
was discovered.
Our Faithful Subjects; We have for this cause resolved to releeve them, For
which reason after we have maturely consulted upon this business, we have
ordained and do Ordain, and have taken and do take from henceforth all R^man
Catholics being our Subjects into our Protection, permiting them the Liberty
and entire exercise of their Religion, without using in their behalf and ^^rt
of inquisition, process, or other criminal actions by which they may be
grieved or molested from this day forwards, permitting them moreover to
celebrate the Mass, and all other Divine Services concerning their said
Religion.

See 3 Iac. c. 1. to 6. and the Kings Procl^mations that year. and 6. Iac.
We will also that they shall be re^established and restored in all their
Estates, Lands, Fees and Seigniories; Commanding our Maiestrates and Justices
in this behalf to hold their hands, in such sort, that none of what quality or
condition soever he be, for what cause soever it be, shall not attempt
hereafter to Grieve or molest the said Catholics, neither in public nor in
secret, in that which touches the liberty of the exercise of the said
Religion, upon pain of being reputed guilty of Nota, the cause why the
Parliament are now proclaimed traitors by his Majesty.
High Treason, and a dissurber of the Peace, and of the repose of the Country:
such is our Will and Definitive sentence.

After which he justifies the lawfulness of the Spanish match, notwithstanding
the difference of Religion, and danger of feminine seduction; relates his
resolution to proceed in it, with the reasons of it, prohibiting any under
pain of severest censures, to speak against it.

Lo here (writes this Mercury) the causes which moved his Majesty of Great
Britain to seek after the alliance of Spain by marriages, the which many in
England, and especially the Puritans or reformed, and those of the English
confession adhearing to this Sect, were no ways well pleased with; and
cheifely, having understood, of the Prince of Wales his honorable
entertainment at Madrit, and of the Articles of the Marriage; which were to be
cxamined at Rome. So the French Mercury, which thus proceeds.

Hereupon two writings ran from hand to hand; the one entitled; A Discourse of
the Archbishop of Canterbury (Abbot) to the King of Great Britain, and the
other Vox Popul^: the latter produces many excellent reasons in point of
policy and Religion against the Popish match with Spain (which you may peruse
in the book it self, being Common.) The first condemns his Majesty's
toleration of the Roman Religion in his Realms, as being displeasing to God,
an anguish and grief to his best Subjects professing the true reformed
religion; a great dishonor to himself who had publickely Writ and disputed
often against that Religion, which he knew in his own conscience to be false
and superstitious. That his Edicts and Proclamations for the tolleration of it,
could not be confirmed without a Parliament (which would never condescend
thereunto) unless he would openly show to his Subjects, that he intended to
usurp an absolute liberty, to infringe and null all Laws of the Country: That
it would produce many dangerous consequences, and bring the just Judgments of
God both upon the whole Realm in general, and himself in particular. With
all, it censures the ill advise of those who sent the Prince into Spain
without the general consent of the Realm, which by law had more interest in
him, then the King his Father etc. (as you may read in Mercury.)

Notwithstanding all these and Dr. Hackwel and others writ against this Popish
match which diverse Bishops approved of as lawful.
other contrary advises, this match went on so far, that the general
Articles of the match, with the Popes alterations, were solemnly sealed and
sworn to by the Prince in Spain, and also by King James in the Chapel of
Whitehall July 20. 1624. the solemnity whereof you may read at large in the
Page 517. etc. An. 1623. and p. 19. to 30 An. 1624.
French Mercury, together with the articles. At the taking of this Oath in the
Chapel, there arose these two difficulties: The first about this Title of the
POPE, MOST HOLY, which King James refused to give to the Pope, in the Oath
which he ought to pronounce in the Chapel, alleging the repugnancie thereof
to his Religion, and that this would be a reproach, and by consequence
prejudicial to him for the future. But the Spanish Ambassadors refused to
pass it over, if his Majesty would not consent to give him the foresaid
Title; to which in the end he consented. The second difficulty was, that some
reported to the Ambassadors, that they should have such prayers in the Kings
Chapel when they came to see the Articles sealed and sworn to by the King,
and such singing of Psalms as were used in the Protestant Church and Kings
Chapel, at which prayers they could not be present since they came thither to
no other end but to assure maintain, and Warrant the Catholic Apostolical
and Roman Church. Whereupon the King commanded that nothing should be there
sung, but what was sung when the Constable of Castile took his oath there,
Nota.
to swear the peace between the two Crowns, which was an hymn of joy, in
praise of peace: and to out all scruple, the King caused the Register of his
Chapel to carry the Hymn to the Ambassadors to peruse, and so all
difficulties were removed: the King yielding to the Popish Ambassadors, to
gratify the Pope in his Antichristian Title; but they not yielding one hairs
breadth to him, in honor or approbation of our Prayers, Psalms, or Religion,
which must give place to their Catholic pleasures.

The Articles being solemnly sworn in the forenoone; the King made an
extraordinary feast to the Ambassadors; which ended, the King and they went to
the Councell-chamber, where all the Lords of the Council sealed and subscribed
the General articles of the marriage. Which done the Ambassadors came to the
King, who took this solemn Oath, and swore these private articles to them, in
favor of Papists and advancement of the Romish Religion: (enough to amaze all
Protestant Readers) which I have faithfully translated out of the Latin Copy
Printed in the French Mercury.

JAMES by the Grace of God of Great Britain, etc. King; Defender of the Faith,
etc. to all to whom this present writing shall come, Greeting: In as much as
among many other things, which are contained within the Treaty of Marriage
between our most dear son Charles Prince of Wales, and the most renoun^d
Lady Donna Maria, sister of the most renowned Prince, and our well beloved
Brother, Phillip the fourth King of Spain it is agreed, that WE BY OUR OATH
SHALL APPROVE AND RATIFY THE ARTICLES under expressed to a Word;

1 That PARTICVLAR LAWS MADE AGAINST ROMAN CATHOLICS, under which other
Vassals of our Realms are not compre^ended, and to whose observation all
generally are not obliged; and likewise general Laws under which all are
equally comprised, so as they are such which are repugnant to the Romish
religion, shall not at any time hereafter by any means whatsoever, or case
directly or indirectly, Be commanded to be put in execution against the said
Romish Catholics: And we will cause that our Council shall take the same
Oath, as far as it pertaines to them and belongs to the execution, which by the
hands of them or their Ministers is to be exercised.

2 That no other Laws shall hereafter be made anew against ^he said Romish
Cathlikes, Nota.
but that there shall be a perpetual soleration of the Romish Catholic
Religion within private houses, throughout all our Realms and Dominiens: which
we will have to be understood as well of our Kingdom of Scotland and Ireland,
as in England; which shall be granted to them in manner and form, as is
capitulated, decreed, and granted in the Articles of the Treaty concerning the
marriage.

3 That neither by Us, nor by any other interposed Persons whatsoever, Nota.
directly or indirectly, privately or publicly, will we treat (or attempt) any
thing with the most Renouned Lady Infanta, Donna Maria, which shall be
repugnant to the Catholic Romish Religion; neither will we by any means
persuade her, that she should ever renounce or relinguish the same in substance
or form; or that she should do any thing repugnant or contrary to those things
which are contained in the Treaty of Matrimony.

4 That we will interpose our Authority, and do as much as in Us shall lie,
that the Parliament shall approve, confirm, and ratify, all and singular
Articles in fabour of the Romish Catholics, Nota ben^.
caputilated between the most Renouncd Kings by reason of this Marriage; and
that the said Parliament shall reboke and abrogate the particular L^^ves made
against the said Romish Catholics, to whose observation also the rest of Our
Subjects and Vassals are not obliged, as also the General Laws, under which
all are equally comprehended, to wit, As to the Romish Catholics, if so be
they be such, as is aforesaid, which are rep^gnant to the Romish Catholic
Religion, And that hereafter We will not consent, that the said Parliament
should ever at any time, make or write any other new Laws against Romish
Catholics.

We accounting all and singular, the preceding Articles ratified and
acceptable, out of Our certain knowledge, as far as they concern Us, Our
Heirs or Successors, approve, ratify, applaud, and promise bona fide, and in
the Word of a king by these presents, inviolably, firmly, well and faithfully
to keep, observe and fulfill the same, and to causs them to be kept, observed
and fulfilled, without any exception or contradiction, and do confirm the
same by Our Oath upon the holy ^rangelists, notwithstanding any opinions,
sentences, or laws whatsoever to the contrary; In the presence of the most
illustrious Lords Don John de Mendoza, Marquess of Inojosa, and Don Charles
Coloma, Extraordinary Ambassadors of the Catholic King; of George Calvert
Knight, one of our chief Secretaries; of Edward Comvay Knight, another of our
chief Secretaries; of Francis Cottington Barronet, of the Privy Council to
our Son the Prince; of Francis de Corondelet Apostolical (or the Popes)
Prothonotary, and Archdeacon of Cambray; Dated at Our Palace at Westminster the
20 day of July, Anno Domini, 1623. in the English style.

IACOBVS REX.

A compared and true Copy.

George Calvert (then chief Secretary, who turned soon after, and died a
professed Papist.)

To these Articles the Prince of Wales likewise swear, and signed them with his
hand at Madrit, in the same manner, as King James did at Westminster, as this
Ibidem, p. 9.
Mercury assures us, and I presume, his Majesty's own conscience and followers
can attest.

Before I proceed further, I shall desire thee, kind Reader, whosoever thou
art, especially if an English, Scottish, or Irish Protestant, to pause a while,
and mo^^ seriously to ponder these premised Passages, Articles, Oaths, worthy
thy most serious consideration, if not thy admiration; and when thou have so
done, then let me propound these few Queres to thee from them, and to the
Honorable House of Parliament too.

First, Whether the heart of Kings (as well as of other persons) be not
unsearchable; yea, deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; So as
no man can truly know or discern it? as Prove. 23. 3. Ier. 17. 9. resolve past
all dispute.

Secondly, Whether King James were really so zealous a Protestant, and
Anti-Papist, as the ignorant world reputed him, especially in his declining age?

Thirdly, Whether those who have willingly without any compulsion, and (for
ought appears) cordially entered into such Romish Alliances, Articles,
Covenants, Oaths, can be ever sincerely affected to the Protestant Party or
Religion, or really opposite to Popery or Papists, notwithstanding all outward
Protestations, Proclamations or flourishes to the contrary, to blind the over
credulous vulgar; ignorant of the Premises?

Fourthly, Whether his Majesty having thus twice taken two solemn Oaths at
least, upon both his Treaties of Marriage with Spain and France, (of which
more anon) to protect and maintain to the utmost throughout his Dominions, the
Roman Catholics, Church and Religion yea, to suspend and abrogate all Laws
against them; and that before ever he made any Promise, or Declaration at all
to maintain the Protestant Religion; whether he be not thereby now far more
deeply engaged by virtue of these Oaths and Articles to protect, favor, and
defend the Romish Catholic Faith, then the Protestant; and his Romish
Catholic Subjects in all his Dominions, then his Protestant Lieges, having
never entered into any such Solemn Articles, Oaths and Covenants (unless
lately in Scotland much against his will, with which his Holiness of Rome will
easily dispense, being quite contrary to his primitive Articles) to defend and
propagate the Protestants, and Protestant Religion, as he has done to defend
Popery and his Popish Subjects?

Fifthly, Whether all the premised Letters of Grace, Protection, Indulgences to
Priests, Jesuits, and Popish Recusants, be not the real results and effects
of these Oaths and Articles, and of the ensuing Articles and match with
France? as the French Mercury, Tom. 9. An. 1624. p. 28. 29. expressly resolves.

Sixthly, Whether the true and real design of the Pope, the Realms of Spain
and France, and all Promoters of these matches, Articles, were not to
re-establish Popery in its perfection, and extirpate the Protestant Religion
throughout all his Majesty's Realms, by means and virtue of them, by degrees?

Seventhly, Whether his Majesty does not hold himself now bound in conscience
by virtue of these Oaths and Articles, (what ever his outward protestations
and pretenses be) to side with his Roman Catholic Subjects, both in England,
Ireland, Scotland, and Arm them against his Protestant Subjects and Parliaments
in all three Kingdoms, of purpose to make good these his Oaths and Articles;
and to protect them against the due execution of all ancient Laws already
enacted, and all other new Laws and prosecutions now really intended against
them in England, Scotland, contrary to these his Oaths and Articles? And
whether this be not the very true, and proper cause of all his former and
present Wars, Proclamations, Declarations, Remonstrances against the Scots, the
former, the present Parliament; yea, the very ground why he proclaims them
Traitors, Rebels, no Parliamment, but a faction? etc. Why he brake up all the
former Parliaments since his reign by discontinuances, and endeavors to
dissolve and cut off this by the sword of Papists and Atheists, against the
very Act of Parliament so lately assented to by himself? And whether upon this
ground, he would not rather his Parliament, his Protestant Subjects, Kingdoms
should now perish, then his Catholics Subjects, or their Religion suffer or
miscarry, as he descernes they are like to do if the Parliament should
prevail of continue?

Eighthly, Whether these Oaths and Articles be not the real ground of the
late horrid Irish conspiracy, massacre, Rebellion, Pacification. Toleration,
and his Majesty's connivance at, if not approbation of these horrid bloody
execrable practices? of the extraordinary favors lately indulged to those
cursed barbarous Rebels by his Majesty, and his most gracious entertainment of
them, not only into his Royal favor, but Court, Army, and Realm of England,
as his securest Lifeguard?

Ninthly, whether it be not then high time for the Parliament, and all the
Protestants throughout his Dominions to look about them, and enter into solemn
Protestations, Covenants, Engagements, mutually to defend themselves, their
Religion, Laws, Liberties, Lives, Estates, when they are thus endangered by
the Popish party, and the King himself (to omit the Queen) by Oath and
Articles, is thus confederated with, and engaged to protect them, and their
Religion to the uttermost?

Tenthly, Whether these Oaths and Articles considered, it can possibly be
believed, that his Majesty ever took up Arms and joined with Papists to
maintain the Protestant Religion? Or that if his Majesty by force of Arms
should prevail against the Parliament or Protestant party, there be, or can
be any probability or possibility (in humane reason) left us to believe or
conceive, that the Protestant Subjects should ever freely enjoy the Profession
of their reformed Religion, just Rights, Laws, Liberties, Estates, or Lives;
or Papists be prohibited the free public toleration and open practice of their
Antichristian-Religion? And whether then it will not inevitably follow by
virtue of these Oaths and Articles, that all Laws whatsoever now in force
against the Pope, Popery, Papists, shall and must be presently repealed, even
by a packed or forced Parliament; and a public toleration at least of Popery
(if not total suppression of the Protestant Religion) settled by Parliament;
and all attempts to draw the Queen, or any else from Popery, be prohibited by
Oath to all Protestants, under pain of High Treason, without any restraint at
all on Papists, not to endeavor to seduce the King and all his Subjects, by
all the ways and arts that may be? This being the very purport of the premised
Letter, the Spanish Oath, Articles, and of the French, here following.

If any after the perusal of all these Letters, Articles, Oaths, Queres, will
still be wilfully blind or secure, let them be so at their own utmost peril;
and if they suffer, perish through their folly, let them thank themselves: I
have freed my own soul, though theirs miscarry through their own sottishness
or incredulity.

This Spanish Match, after it had been in a manner fully concluded on all
hands, unexpectedly breaking off in a moment, to the The Vocal Forest,
Mercure Francois, Tom. 9. An. 1624^ p. 10. and
exceeding dejection of the Papists throughout all England: The Kings Marriage
with the Lady Mary of France, (of the same Romish Religion with the Spanish
Amira) was soon after concluded; and that (as is more then probable by the
Queens Bishops, Priests, Capuchines, with other such Roman Locusts, who
accompanied her Majesty hither, the entertainment of a Popes Nuncio from Rome,
and an Agent at Rome; Mercure Francois a Paris aves Privilege Anno 1625. f.
480. Tom. ^. and mentioned. Tom. 11. p. ^53. etc. Where the whole solemnity of
this Marriage is described.
and the subsequent favors, Protections which the Papists and Priests in
England, have ever since obtained from the King by Her most prevalent
mediation, as is manifest by the premised Letters, Warrants^) upon the
selfsame Articles in favor of the Papists, as were assented to in the
Spanish nuptial Treaty: But that which puts it out of question, are the
general and private Articles of agreement (long since published in some French
Mercuries, printed at Paris with Royal Privilege, and passing from hand to
hand in private English Manuscripts among the most intelligent men:) some of
which Articles I shall here annex, as I find them in English Manuscripts,
agreeing with the French Original.

^ THat the above named the Lords Ambassadors have promised, and do promise
for and on the behalf of his Majesty of great Britain, now reigning, that he
shall take to Marriage, for his dear Consort and Wife, the Lady Henretta Maria
Daughter of France, and Sister to his foresaid most Excellent Majesty, in
person, or otherwise by Proxy, so soon as conveniently the same may be done;
and that also the foresaid Lady at the good pleasure and consent of his
foresaid Christian Majesty, and of the Queen her Mother, after his FORES AID
MAJESTY HAS OBTAINED A (...) falloit envoyer a Rome, Mercure Francois, p. 479.
DISPENSATION FROM THE POPE, does promise to take for her dear Consort and
Husband, Charles the first, King of Great Britain, and according to the
foresaid reciprocal promise, he shall be affianced and contracted after the
manner accustomed in the CATHOLIC AND ROMISH CHVRCH. Nota.


7 It is likewise agreed upon, that the said Lady and all her Followers, as
also the Children which shall be borne to her Officers, shall have free
exercise of the Catholic Apostolical and Roman Religion; and to that end the
foresaid Lady shall have a Chapel in each of the Kings Palaces, or Houses, or
in any other place of his Majesty of Great Britain, where she shall chance to
come and continue; and that the foresaid Chapel shall be adorned and d^^ked
as it is fitting; and that the keeping thereof shall be committed to whom it
shall please the said Lady to appoint; in which the preaching of Gods Word, and
the Administration of the Sacraments, the MASS, and all other Offices shall be
freely and solemnly done, according to the use of the Romish Church; yea, all
Indulgences and Jubilees which the said Lady shall obtain or get from THE
POPE, may be done and executed there. There shall be also one Churchyard in
the City of London, given and appointed to interre and bury such of her said
Ladyships Followers, as shall chance to depart this life according to the
manner and form of the Church of Rome; and that shall be modestly done: the
which Churchyard shall be in such sort enclosed or walled about, that no
person shall come therein to profane the same.

8 It is also agreed upon, That the said LADY SHALL HAVE A BISHOP FOR HER GREAT
ALMONER, who shall have all Jurisdiction and necessary Authority for all
matters or causes concerning Religion, and who shall proceed against the
Ecclesiastical persons which shall be under his charge, according to the
Canons constituted and appointed.

9 And if it shall at any time happen that any Secular Court shall take any of
the foresaid Priests into their power, by reason of any crime or offense
against the State by him committed or done, Nota.
and do find him to be guilty thereof, yet shall the said Court send him back
to the said Bishop, with the informations which they find by him, because the
said Priest is privileged from their power; and the said Bishop when he shall
understand and know so much, shall degrade the said Priest, and afterward send
him back unto the foresaid Secular Court to do Justice upon him. And for all
kind of other faults, the aforesaid Priests shall be sent to the Bishop, to the
end that he may proceed against them according to the Canons in that case
provided, and in the absence or sickness of the said Bishop, the Priest which
is by him appointed to be his great Vicar, shall have the same power and
authority.

10 It is likewise agreed upon, that the said Lady shall have 28 PRIESTS, or
Ecclesiastical Persons in her House, comprehending therein her Almoner and
Chaplains, to serve and keep the foresaid Chapel according as they are
appointed, and if any of them be a Regular or Canonical person, living under
more prescript Rules then the rest, yet he may hold and keep his habit. Nota.


The French Copy in King James (...) time runs thus,
Also the KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, L^ R^y and le Prince, s' obligent pur
serment ^^e ne tasc^er pur quelque Voy que^^e puisse estre, fair Renoncer
Madame a la Religion Catholic, Apostolic and Roman, ny la po^ter a ascune
ch^se, qui^y soit contrary.
is by OATH BOUND NOT TO ENDEAVOR BY ANY MEANS AT ALL TO HAVE HIS SAID QVEENE
TO RENOVNCE THE CATHOLIC APOSTOLIC AND ROMISH RELIGION, NOR COMPEL HER TO
DO ANY THING WHATSOEVER THAT IS CONTRARY TO THE SAME RELIGION.

11 The said Queens House shall be maintained with so much Dignity, and with
so great a number of Officers as ever any had that was Queen of England; all
the household servants which the said Lady shall carry into England, shall be
Priests Catholics and French by birth, and chosen or appointed by his most
Christian Majesty; And if it happen that any of them die, or that the foresaid
Lady shall be willing to change her said Servants, then She will take in
their steeds other Papists Catholics, French or English, always provided that
his Majesty of Great Britain consent thereunto.

16 The children which shall by reason of the said inter-marriage, be born and
live, shall be nursed and brought up near unto the said Lady and Queen, from
the time of their Birth, until they come to the age of fourteen years.

These Articles with others, (agreeing with the Spanish and French printed
Copies) were subscribed and signed by the Earls of Carlisle and Holland, ^e
have little hopes the^ of ^er Coversion to our Religion.
Ambassadors and Commissioners for King Charles; and by other French
Commissioners, and afterward signed and sworn to by King James, the French
King, and Prince Charles the 10 of November, 1624. and after King James his
death, new signed, subscribed by these Ambassadors, and sworn unto by both
these Kings, Thurseday the eighth of May, 1625.

Besides these general Articles, there were (as the Mercury Francois, Tom.
10. p. 487. A Paris ave^ Privilege le R^y. An. 1625.
French Mercury informs us) these three particular ones condescended unto;
Outre ces Articles generalx, il y^ eu, ceux trois de particuliers; (the same
with those of Spain forementioned.)

Le Premier, touchant les Catholics, tant Ecclesiastiques que Seculiers,
Prisonniers depius le dit dernier Edict, lesquels serroient tous mis en liberte.

Le second, a ce que les Catholics Anglois ne serroint plus recherchez pour
leur Religion: Et le troisiesme; Que ce qui se trouveroit en nature des biens
saisis sur les Catholics tant Ecclesiastiques que seculiers, depuis le dit
dernier Edict publi^ contra eux, leur serroient restitues.

The first touching the Catholics, as well Ecclesiastics as Seculars,
Prisoners since the said last Edict, the which shall be all set at liberty.

The second to this effect, That the English Catholics shall be no more
searched after (or troubled) for their Relion: And the third, of this nature,
that the goods seized upon the Catholics, as well Ecclesiastiques as Seculars,
since the said Edict published against them, shall be restored.

Upon these Articles, Oaths, Proceedings of the King in these Treaties of
Marriage with Spain and France, and his enter-marriage with the Queen, (a most
sedulous Promoter of the Roman Catholic Religion;) these several effects
ensued.

First, an extraordinary great multitude of most dangerous seducing Seminary
Priests, Jesuits, Monks of all sorts, especially Benedictines. Nuns and
Iesuitesses came flocking over into England, and other his Majesty's Dominions,
without any restraint or inhibition whatsoever, there being no less then 261
Romish Priests, Monks, Jesuits, (besides Popish Physicians, Apothecaries, and
Chirurgions) constantly residing in and about London, in the year 1624. the
Catalogue of whose names you may read in John Gee, (a reclaimed English Priest,
by the fall of the Massing-Chamber in Blackfriars, where he hardly escaped) in
his I oot out of the snare, Edit. 4 London 1624. there being, as he then
manifested in this, Book, at least four times as many more Priests and Jesuits
in other parts of England, and well-nigh 300 to his knowledge in one single
County alone; and above 60 English Benedictine Monks from Doway, besides those
sent from other places.

Secondly, There were many new Colleges, Monasteries, and Seminaries erected
in Spain, and other foreign Parts for the training up of English, Irish, and
Scottish Priests, Monks, Jesuits. Nuns, to be sent over into his Majesty's
Dominions, to reduce England to the Popish faith, and obedience of the Sea of
Rome; (as you may read at large in John Gee his Foot out of the snare; Lewis
Owen, his Running Register; James Wadsworth, his English Spanish Pilgrim,
London 1629. Pudesindus Barlo, his ensuing letter; The French Mercury, Tom. 8.
9. and 10. Nich^le Maistre, Instauratio Antiqui Episcoporum Principatus, and
others,) and new Chapels built for Mass, and a Cell for Capuchins here.

Thirdly, There were many private Societies and Monasteries of Jesuits, Monks,
Nuns, secretly erected and maintained in England, but many more openly built,
stocked, and professedly supported in Ireland, as appears by the Remonstrance
and Petition of Grievances touching Religion, presented to the King by the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, 3. Caroli: The late Remonstrance of both
Houses, concerning the Rise and Progress of the late Irish Rebellion, Romes
Masterpiece; Romes Inquiry, etc. and other evidences here ensuing.

Fourthly, There was a new Popish Hierarchy erected, and Bishops, Archdeacons,
etc. created by the Pope, both in England and Ireland, to exercise all
Episcopal Jurisdiction therein; besides the Queens Bishop mentioned in the
former Articles; as is evident by Nich^ le Maistre his Instauratio Antiqui
Episcoporum Principatus, and Rudesindus Barlo his letter recorded in it, by
Henry Flood his letter from Rome, to F. Colleton Archpriest, alias Archdeacon
of London, March. 27. 1623. with other letters recorded by John Gee, in his
Foot out of the snare, p. 27. etc. The Popes Brief, and Romes Inquiry: and the
evidences hereafter cited.

Fifthly, All Laws and Proceedings against Popish Priests and Jesuits, were
suspended by general and special letters, warrants of Grace and Protection
forementioned; and before the Kings marriage by letters sent to all parts by
Bishop Williams Lord Keeper, in King James his Name, all Priests and Recusants
then imprisoned for their Religion were See Mercure Francois, Tom. 9. An. 1624.
p 28 to 31.
released, upon pretense of procu^ing like favor, and liberty of conscience
for the Protestants in France, and other foreign parts: Who soon after were
generally persecuted every where in Germany, France, and all their Towns,
Forts, demolished in France by force of Arms; yea, many thousands of them
massacred; and Rochel it self betrayed into their power, by our English ships,
and the treachery of the Popish and Court party here.

Sixthly, There was a special Society erected, not only in Rome, but likewise
here in England, entitled, The Congregation of Propagating the Faith,
consisting of four Orders of most desperate active English and Scottish
Jesuits, residing in London; of which Society, The Pope himself was the head,
and Cardinal Barbarino his chief substitute. And for the better advancement
of this Romish design, to undermine the Protestant Religion, and set up Popery
in all the Kings Dominions; there was an Agent sent from the King and Queen to
lie Leager at Rome (one Hamilton a Scottish Papist) and a special Nuncio sent
over into England from the Pope, to wit, one Seigneour Georgio Con, a Scot, who
kept his Residence here in London, and was President of this new erected
Congregation of Jesuits; which held a constant Council once or twice each
week, had weekly dispatches to and from Rome, yea, continual free access to
the King and his Court, to seduce both the King and his People; as you may read
more at large in Romes Masterpiece, the English Pope, and The Popes Brief.

Seventhly, All Informers against Priests, Jesuits, Papists, were
discountenanced, menaced, and many of them imprisoned, by Secretary Windebanke
their Pentioner, who not only released sundry Priests and Jesuits by his
Warrants, (as you heard before) but even by word of mouth^ prohibited the
Officers of Justice to apprehend them, and imprisoned one Robert Horward
Vnder-Sheriffe of Southampton, upon a pretense that he had proceeded against
some Popish Recusants upon the Kings Writ directed to him to seize their Lands,
and Goods, contrary to his Letters of Countermaund (though its true he
proceeded not) till he enforced him by his Popish Secretary Read, to enter into
a bond of one hundred pounds to Henry Lord, a Papist, Never to prosecute Popish
Recusants more, ere he would release him: All which was attested by Horward and
others in the Commons House this Parliament, as you may see in the Iournall
Book of the House 11, 12, 20. November. and in Mr. Glynnes Repo^^entred therein,
1 December. 1640. On the contrary, most of the painful Orthodox Protestant
Ministers, Gentlemen and others throughout the Realm were disgraced,
persecuted, silenced, fined, imprisoned, banished, and thousands of them
enforced to flee the Realm, by the tyrannical unjust proceedings against them
in the High Commission, Star Chamber, Councell-Chamber, Bishops Consistories,
and Visitation Courts: the Printing Presses were also shut up against all Books
in refutation of Popery, and opened to all Impressions in defense or
propagation thereof: Popish Doctrines, Superstitions openly maintained,
preached in Our Universities, Cathedrals, Diocesses, Churches, Chapels,
(especially at Court) Lectures suppressed, and none but such as were Popishly
affected, advanced to Bishoprikes, Deaneries, Ecclesiastical Preferments, or
admitted into the Ministry, by our Who would a^mit none ^^vings or the
Ministry, but such who must (...) subscribe, That the Church of Rome is a true
Church, That it is lawful to how to altars, That all baptized infants are
truly regenerated and certainly saved if they d^, That Bishops are Iu^re
Divino, That Ministers power to rem^ sins is not merely declarative.
Bishops.

Eighthly, In pursuance of this design, his Majesty's greatest Favorites, and
those in highest authority under him, were all either actual Papists in
profession, or well inclined to Popery in affection, and altogether swayed by
popish Councels: witness the first Grand Favorite, the Duke of Buckingham,
who laid the foundation of the Spanish and French Marriage-Treaties, Articles,
and was a chief Actor in both; swayed wholly by his Iesuited Mother, and
Duchess, professed Papists, and their Cabinet counsel of Jesuits; by whose
Treachery Rochel was lost. The great Lord Treasurer Weston steared by his
Popish Countess, kindred, Sir Toby Mathews, Sir Basil Brook, and other
Papists, whiles he lived, and reconciled to the Church of Rome, receiving
extreme Unction and Absolution from the Popish priests and Capuchins, when he
died. Besides these they had Windebank a popish Secretary of his Majesty's
Cabinet Council for their Intelligencer, Patron, Protector, Liberator,
Assistant; the Earl of Arundel, and other friends in his Privy Council,
Endymion Porter in his Bedchamber, with many other Agents of all sorts, all
Sexes in his Court, mentioned in Romes Masterpiece, to further their design in
the State: The Archbishop of Canterbury, Wren, Montague, Cozens, with many
other Prelates and See Master ^hites first Century.
Priests to introduce, establish their Popish Doctrines, Ceremonies,
Superstitions in the Church of England; the great Lord Strafford Lieutenant of
Ireland, with sundry others in that Realm, to countenance and protect them in
Ireland, where they had absolute toleration, yea, open profession of their
Religion: And which was instar omnium, they had Queen Mary her self in the
Kings own bed and bosom for their most powerful Mc^atrix, of whom they might
really affirm in reference to his Majesty, what some of their popish
Bernardi^us de Busti. Mar^al. Pars 3. Ser. 3. exce. 4. pars ^. ser. 2. Gabrid
Biel in C^no^e M^ss^e Lect. 8 c. (...) Gerson. Tract. 4. Super magnificat. ^ab.
deniera. Pleuers des vies des Saints. Feste de^' Assomption Nostre Dame
Anselm^s Cant. De Laud. Mariae, and others.
Doctors have most blasphemously written of the Virgin Mary in relation to God
and Christ, That all things are subject to the command of Mary, even God
himself: That she is the Empress and Queen of Heaven, and of greatest
Authority in the Kingdom of Heaven, where she may not only impetrate but
command what soever she pleases; That she sits as Chancellor in the
Court of Heaven, and gives Letters of Grace and Mercy to whom she pleases:
That she is the Fountain, Treasurer and Dispencer of all Gods Graces,
Favors; the very neck and conduit-pipe through which they are all conveyed:
That God has freely bestowed on her the better half of his Kingdom, to wit,
all his mercy, reserving only his Justice to himself, yet so subject to her
restaints: That if any (Roman Catholic) does find himself aggrieved in the
Court of Gods (or the Kings) Justice, (for being prosecuted for his Recusancy
or seducing the Kings people) he may safely appeal to Mary's Court of mercy
for relief, she being the Throne of Grace, of which the Apostle speaks,
Hebr. 4. 16. Let us go boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we (Catholics)
may receive (from her) grace to help us in time of need: And to further this
Catholic work more effectually, the Queen Mother must be sent over into
England, to contribute her assistance to the Catholic party here, which she
had so much assisted in France, and foreign parts. No wonder then if the
design succeeded, prevailed so much of late, since assisted, promoted by so
many powerful active agents.

9. By virtue of the former Articles and Oaths, all the Parliaments during his
Majesty's reign till now, urging the execution of old Laws against Recusants,
Priests, Jesuits, and endeavoring to make new stricter acts against them,
have (contrary to the practice of all former ages,) been broken up and
dissolved in discontent; And to cross their execution of Priests and Jesuits
in a politic Pleasing covert way, diverse Proclamations have been published
every Parliament, to banish them the Realm by a set day; after which, if they
departed not, they should be executed, which the common people, and plain
honest-minded Parliament men conceived, to be done out of rigor and justice
against them, and so rested satisfied with these Proclamations only, which in
truth, were mere policies to free the imprisoned Priests and Jesuits out of
prison, under pretext of sending them away, and to stay all proceedings against
them, whilst the Parliaments sat, by allowing them so many weeks respite to
depart the Realm, before which the Parliaments commonly were dissolved: and so
by this policy were secured, enlarged to do more mischief, and either departed
not all, or returned presently again into England as soon as the Parliaments
ended, as the premises and experience manifest.

10. By means of these Articles, proceedings of the Papists, Priest, and
Jesuits have grown so stupendiously powerful, as during the late Scottish
troubles, to hold a Parliament, and general Council of State among
themselves, even in London, wherein not the King, but the Popes own Nuntio sat
President: in which Parliament the chief Papists out of all parts of England
and Wales assembled, and made several Laws and Ordinances for imposing taxes,
and raising moneys upon all Roman Catholics, for maintenance of the Scottish
wars, which were seconded with the Queens own Letters and Instructions to the
Catholics, reciting, What great liberties and favors her Highness had
procured for them from his Majesty; and exciting them to a most liberal
contribution toward these wars, because the maintaining thereof, concerned them
not only as they were Subjects, BUT AS THEY WERE ROMAN CATHOLICS TOO. The
verity of which Popish Parliament, orders, instructions, taxes, was fully
proved and manifested before a special Committee of the Commons House
specially appointed for Recusants, and their Popish Nuncio, November. 9. 1640.
and at other days of meeting in that and the following months, both by the
orders, letters and instructions themselves, and the examinations of Sir Kenelm
Digby, and many other Popish Knights, chief actors in that Parliament, now
remaining in the safe custody of Master Raynolds then Chaire-man. And were not
the Papists then, think you, grown to an extraordinary exorbitant power, and
the Pope revested in his long exploded usurped supremacy in our Realm; when
they should thus be permitted to hold and keep a Parliament without
interruption, when the Protestants and Kingdom might hold none at all, or at
least one presently dissolved in discontent, and the Popes own Nuncio sit Lord
President to rule the roast, when they should be thus openly tolerated to hold a
Parliament, both to make and maintain a war against the religious Protestant
Subjects, even with the Kings own actual consent, as is clear by his
forementioned answer under his own hand to Master Pulfords Petition, where he
not only takes notice of these contributions granted him by the Papists, but
makes them the ground of his stay of all proceedings against them upon penal
Laws? And that these Scottish wars were then raised by them, to get the king
into their power, and extirpate the Protestant Religion, is evident, not only
by the plot detected in Romes Masterpiece, found in the Archbishops chamber,
and the observations on it, but likewise by a little English Book then
published in print by the Jesuits, entitled, The Iubilee of the Jesuits, one
copy whereof, Thomas Chaude receiving from a woman-papist in Redriffe,
delivered it to Sheriff Warner, which he attested in the House of Commons,
November. 14. 1640. as the journall records: in which book there was this
observable Passage: Nota,
That the Papists should fish in troubled waters, whilst the King was engaged
in the wars with the Scots; with some prayers for their good success; and for
THE HOLY MARTYRS THAT SUFFERED IN THE FLEET SENT AGAINST THE HERETICS OF
ENGLAND 1639. By which among other circumstances, it is evident, that not only
the Scottish war was plotted, maintained by the Papists, but that the Spanish
fleet then happily incountered and vanquished by the Hollanders on our coasts,
during these troubles, was directly designed against the Protestants in
England, by the Popish party here, with whom they were to join, to cut both
the English and Scottish Protestants throats, when all the powder of the
Realm, and the train bands arms in most Counties were engrossed into his
Majesty's hands, and they thus incountering one the other; which plot, the
unexpected pacification, with the Scots, and Holland fleet most happily
prevented. And in truth, the improbability of any other likely design; our
harbor and succor of them from the Dutch Fleet in the Downs, our supplying
of them with men, victuals, ammunition, our guarding them with our ships
against the Hollanders more then was meet, our hindering the Hollanders to
burn their ships, which ran upon our shore, the confession of an English man
in that Fleet upon his deathbed, out of remoise of conscience, (when he was
brought on shore wounded in the first encounter with the Hollanders) that this
Fleet was designed for England; the speeches of some Papists, that they
expected this Navy here about that time; the landing of many hundred Spanish
soldiers at Plimmouth in English Ships, but a week or two before this Fleet
arrived on our coasts, upon pretense to transport them thence by land toward
Flaunders, (designed, as some then feared, to surprise Plimmouth;) the Lord
Portlands sudden journey to the Isle of Wight, whereof he was Governor, with
the Lord Went worth, Col. Goring, and others, where they shot away all the
powder in the Castles, (and their clothes too) in drinking healths in a most
Bacchanalian f^^^ick manner, just when the Spanish Fleet was before that Isle,
to the end they might the easier surprise it, when they had no powder to resist
them, (as some wise men then conject^red,) are more then probable arguments,
that this Fleet was destinated for England, to extirpate the Protestant party;
and that by the desperate confederacy of the predominant Popish faction, and
their great Patriots here, who procured them so much favor and protection from
us against the Hollanders, and would never permit this mystery of iniquity to
be thoroughly examined. No wonder therefore, if we see the Popish Rebels brought
over into England, to murder Protestants now, since the Spaniards were thus
designed, (as is more then probable) for that purpose then: And whether we may
not fear the like design from France, I leave to the grand Council of the
Kingdom to consider.

11. Those Articles, I doubt, have been the true cause of the late rebellion
in Ireland, and the massacres there; of all his Majesty's favors to these
rebels, of the late pacification Articles granted to them; of his Majesty's
departing from, taking up arms, arming all English Papists, and sending for
Popish Irish rebels into England, to fight against the Parliament, and of his
siding with, relying on the Popish party, to whom he is obliged to adhere, and
so engaged against the Parliament, for fear they should execute all old, and
make new. Laws against Recusants, contrary to his premised Oaths, and Articles.

12. We may hence assure our selves, that we can never have any real
pacification with the King and his Popish party, without a toleration of their
religion, and a suspention, or repeal of all Laws against them, according to
the preceding Articles; and in case his Majesty should prevail against the
Parliament, we must expect an absolute establishing of Popery, and suppression
both of the Protestant party and Religion. Yea, seeing His Majesty is both by
Oath and Articles, not to endeavor by any means at all, to withdraw the Queen
from the profession of the Romish Religion; whereas she on the other side, is
left free, by all means and arts that may be, to withdraw the King from the
Protestant Religion to her own, and his children too: We have great cause to
fear (if Adams, Solomon's, or Ahabs seducements by their wives be duly
pondered) that his Majesty, (now wholly alienated from his Parliament, and best
Protestant Subjects, by the Queen and popish Counselors, and resigning
himself up to the Councels, Armies, Forces, Guard of his Roman Catholic
Subjects, who have the custody both of his person, and next heirs apparent to
his Crowns,) may ere long be seduced to their Religion, as well as to their
party; especially, since he has been informed, That they have a poisoned Fig
reserved for him, in case he should refuse it; as is more amply manifested in
Romes Masterpiece.

The next Authority of note, which I then intended to publish, was this notable
Passage of N. Le Maistre, a Sorbon Priest, in his Instauratio Antiqui
Episcoporum Principatus: Parisiis 1633. Cum privilegio Regis, and Approbatine
Doctorum. (dedicated to all Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests and
Clergy of the Church of France) Lib. 2. p. 273. to 83. cap. 15. Thus
entitled: Corolarium libri secundi; Vbi nonnulla de persecutione Episcoporum,
and de Illustrissimo Antistite Calcedonensi. For the clearer understanding of
which Passage, I must prefix this Prologue; After the death of William Bishop
of Calcedon in England, most of the English secular Priests, together with the
Benedictines, for the advancement of the Romish Catholic Religion, became
suitors to the Pope and his Conclave, to have one or more Popish Bishops,
created by the Popes to be sent over into England, to ordain Priests, give
confirmation, and exercise Episcopal jurisdiction there; The Regular Priests,
and some others here, did stiffly oppose this design; but the Episcopal Secular
and Benedictine party prevailing, Pope Urban by his special Bull, bearing
date, the 4. of August, An. 1625. (which I find printed in Censur a
propositionum quarundam, etc. per facultatem Theologiae Parisiensis factae,
Parisiis, 1635. p. 63. 64, 65.) created See the Popes Brief.
Richard Smith Bishop of Calcedon, and sent him over into England, to exercise
Episcopal jurisdiction, and to be superintendent over the Priests within the
English Dominions, according to the tenor of his Bull; hereupon See my
Catalogue of Testimonies in all Ages, to prove the Parity, and Identity of
Bishops and Presbyters. The 3. Squadron.
Nicholas Smith, Daniel a Jesus Herman Lomelius, and other Regular Priests, writ
diverse printed Treatises against Episcopacie, and the inconvenience of having a
Bishop in England; whose books were referred to the Examination of the faculty
of Paris, and there censured, An. 1630. in the forecited Censure, etc. the
Sponge of which Censure, written by Herman Lomelius, was answered by Le
Maistre; and withal, they raised up such a faction and persecution against
this their new Bishop of Calcedon in England, and Ireland among the Popish
party, that they chased and banished him out of England into France, where he
was entertained by Cardinal Richelleiu. Upon this occasion Le Maistre thus
writes in his Defense, and prints the ensuing Letter of Rudesindus Barlo,
President of the Benedictine English Monks, in these very terms:

Nunc vero Episcopum, etc. But now they see the Bishop of Calcedon, shining on
every side round about, with the splendour of Virtue, by whose amiable light and
prudence, if the tempest should become more hard, it might have been assuaged
and calmed; I say, the Bishop of Calcedon, greatly desired by the people,
coming FROM THE POPE, most humanely entertained by Christians, not grievous to
the enemies of our Faith, some enflamed with private hatreds and grudges, have
expelled, have suborned secret accusers and Sycophants, as if themselves would
urge and imitate an OVER MUCH REMITTED PERSECUTION, who cease not to complain
of the grievousnesse of persecution. You (will you that I should speak) have
made, you have raised a persecution; neither has Religion ever suffered under
a more grievous evil, then by impiety, cloaked under the colors of a
religious ^ruit: For what was there, that might provoke your gall against so
great a man, unless you purposed to execrate honesty, sanctity, modesty,
courtesy, wisdom, with the most filthy kinds of enmities? Unless, like the
Syberites, you scatter reproaches against the Sun, and endure not the light
of so great innocence, which no man ever ought to shun, but he who would not
imitate it?

Now all France is overslowed with greatest indignation against your madness,
from which, since so many mischiefs have proceeded, this one commodity accrues
to behold and embrace so great a man; so illustrious a Champion of the Gospel,
so acceptable and lovely to our most eminent Duke and Cardinal; But in the
mean time, the filthy patrocination of certain Writers, may cease to draw
clouds over your wickedness: Did not Bishops heretofore carry divine books
with them wheresoever they went, even whiles the persecution was vigorous, etc?
Did they not, when driven into caves, hold assemblies, reform Priests,
perform holy duties, dispense sacred mysteries? What then forbids the same
things, and others which are not of greater pomp to be performed in England;
especially, WHERE THIS HEAT OF PERSECUTIONS HAS CEASED, THROUGH THE DIGNITY OF
A MAGNANIMOUS KING; AND MOST INVINCIBLE PRINCE, BY THE BORBONIAN STAR WHICH
HANGS OVER THESE COUNTRIES IN A MOST DEAR WIFE: By which STARS, AS BY THE
DIOSCURI, PERADVENTURE THE TEMPEST OF PERSECUTION WILL IN TIME BE APPEASED, and
THE GENEROUS PRINCE MAY ACKNOWLEDGE THE SAME CHRIST, UNDER WHOM HIS ANCESTORS
HAVE SO GLORIOUSLY TRIUMPHED. But that it may appear, by how many Votes the
Bishop of Chalecdon came desired into that Province, I subjoyne a Copy of a
Letter, by which the most noble Society of Benedictines earnestly required
Doctor Smith to be given to them for their Bishop, by the Senate of the Church.
And hence (...) will appear, how deserved their pride may be condemned, who
being but few in number, have vexed the Bishop of Chalcedon, against the Votes
of so great a Fraternity; with whom alone I am angry, when as in this work, I
complain of the arrogancy of certain men, who call themselves Monks: For in
others I am always resolved to reverence Religion and Modesty.

The Letter of Father Rudesind, President of the English Benedictines, to the
sacred Congregation, consecrated to the PROPAGATION OF THE FAITH, 12 December.
1624.
MOst Illustrious, and most reverend Lords, of the most ancient Senate of the
Catholic Church;
peradventure we do a new thing, and hither to unaccustomed; yet (as we hope)
neither ungrateful, nor unpleasant to your piety, Monks endeavoring to
promote the cause of secular Priests; although truly howsoever the abusive
speech of the vulgar distinguishes the Clergy from the Regulars; as if the
Secular Priests only should constitute the Clergy; but the Regulars should by
no means belong to the Body of the Clergy; yet we Benedictines were always
of a far other opinion, esteeming even our selves to be some part of the
Clergy, although not a ruling part, yet an assisting part, out of the most
ancient privileges of the Sea Apostolic; we do not therefore a thing
different from our Profession, if we suffer together in the difficulties of
THE ENGLISH CLERGY, since we judge the same in part to extend unto our selves:
verily we should not deserve to be under Christ the head of the Clergy, if we
should not suffer together with the Body, especially with the Body of the
ENGLISH CLERGY, of which we remember the greatest-part by far in the Primitive
Church of the English, to have been of our Fathers the Monks of Saint Benedict.

For that conjunction and participation therefore, which our Body has always
had in England with the Secular Clergy, presuming (most illustrious men) of
your benignities to the assistance of the said troubled Clergy, we have
thought we ought to occur according to our several abilities; not as
ambitiously seeking any authority among them, but as those who judge, that even
our tranquillity does depend on their quietness. For we most truly judge, that
it is the only method of Peace and concord, that to every Order may be
attributed what is its own, that due honor and authority may be rendered to
the Clergy, and their Privileges may be preserved inviolable to the Regulars.
Hence is it, that under the best and most prudent old man of pious memory,
Doctor William Bishop, THE MOST REVEREND ORDINARY OF ENGLAND, and Bishop of
Calcedon, the pious foundations of an wholesome concord were laid between the
Seculars and Regulars, THE WORKE-MEN OF THE MISSION; we Benedictines agreeing,
(the Venerable Bishop himself exhorting and proposing) upon certain necessary
Articles of Ecclesiastical Discipline; whence without doubt it would have come
to pass, that the other Regulars following our example, would have consented
to the same Articles, and a most joyful face of mutual peace and love in the
whole Clergy of England would have shined forth; but by the death of the holy
Bishop intervening, (to him verily mature by reason of his long age, but to us
very unseasonable, by reason of the beginnings of peace not yet confirmed)
these our endeavors lie in a manner intercepted, and by means of the long
delay of granting a successor Bishop, almost quite dead.

For we have received (not without great dolor of mind) from two chief men,
Master Matthew Kellison, and Master Richard Smith, ancient Priests, and old
Doctors of Divinity, who among others were nominated to our most Holy Lord, to
undergo the Episcopal charge, that many things are objected by some, only
out of a show of the zeal of God, but in truth out of a hope of retarding that
business, then which there is none more necessary for the advancement of
Religion, and Piety in England, Wherefore I deemed it appertained to the office
of fraternall charity, and to the zeal which I owe to Gods glory, that I, who
unworthy preside over a great part of the Regular Priests in the ENGLISH
Mission. FOR WE RECKON ABOVE SIXTY BENEDICTINE MONKS IN ENGLAND, SVBIECT TO
OUR CONGREGATION (AND WE PREPARE FAR MORE IN OUR COVENTS TO THE FVNCTIONS OF
MISSION,) that I might give testimony to the Truth, and to the innocence and
credit of the said Priests. I therefore humbly and sincerely signify to your
most Illustrious Lordships, that the said Venerable Priests, Dr. Matthew
Kelison, and Doctor Richard Smith, have been now very familiar known both to
me, and to the other brethren of our congregation, by the conversation and
experience of many years, and that their manners are very well discerned by
us. Therefore, before God I testify, that they, both by us, and ALMOST BY ALL
THE CATHOLICS IN ENGLAND are had in so great veneration; whether we respect
their integrity of life, or excellency of learning, that we suppose there
cannot easily be found their Peers, much less their superiors in all the
Clergy of England, whether Regular, or secular. And truly the glory of both
their learning is sufficiently known to the Catholic world, by the most
learned Books, set forth by both of them against Heretics, in Latin and
English, but to us it is more specially known, who have known both of them to
have a long time governed the Chair with great praise of learning, as well in
Philosophy as in Theology; and we know that Dr. Kellion was chief Professor of
Divinity for many years in the University of Rhemes, and that Doctor Richard
Smith was first conjoined in the society of Studies, to the most learned Bishop
of Lussion, now Cardinal of Richelieu. And concerning the integrity of both
their lives, we can say, (seeing both of them are familiar to us and our
Brethren by their almost daily conversation,) that we never yet knew any thing
in their manners, which might not beseem grave Bishops, yea that we have
always found so great gravity, meekness and devotion in them, as that we
may deservedly rejoice; we have been conjoined to them in a most firm amity
for many years. And this our testimony concerning them, is so much the more
worthy of acceptance, that whereas we are of that order of Monks, who had the
chiefest power heretofore in England, who had eleaven Bishoprics in their
power, and the Regiment of Cathedral Churches, computing also the
Arch-Bishopricke of Canterbury, if we would do after the manner of men, it is
more likely for the desire of ancient power, we would rather resist the secular
Clergy as emulous, than give assistance to them. But we emulating the humanity
and sincerity of our Fathers, and seeking the glory of Christ, not our own
honoar, desire the quiet, profit, and increase of the secular Clergy, as much
as our own tranquillity. Therefore we only affirm, that these things which
we have testified of the forenamed Doctors, are so manifestly known to all
good men in OUR ENGLAND, that verily they may suffer a great scandal,
whosoever shall dare irreverently to back-bite the said Priests of Christ
before your tribunal.

Therefore we Benedictines, your humble Servants and Sons, beseech you, that
rejecting their accusations (who denigrate the same of the best Priests, only
that themselves alone in a Clergy without an head, may shine as it were by an
Anteperistisis, that they may seem Hierarchicall, and by a division of minds
in the Clergy, may think that the best way to greatness lies open to them,)
you would be pleased TO GRANT A BISHOP TO OUR ENGLAND, seeing that no Province
of the Catholic world has more need of one, Whether we respect the necessity
of the Sacrament of confirmation, whose frequent ministration by the Reverend
Bishop of Calcedon, has wonderfully erected the minds of our Catholics, or
the concord and dignity of the Clergy, and the observance of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, whichseemes by no means to be able to be preserved without
Episcopal Authority: NEITHER IS IT TO BE DOVBTED (for we have already scene
the GOOD SVCCESSE UNDER THE FIRST BISHOP) that ANOTHER BISHOP BEING
CONSTITVTED, you WOULD BEHOLD MORE IOYFVLL FRVITES WITHIN ONE TWO YEARS IN THE
ENGLISH MISSION, THEN HITHER TO YOU HAVE BEHELD FOR SIXTY YEARS NOW ELAPSED
THERE BEING NO BISHOP IN THE SAME. Popish Bishops the greatest and speediest
means to promote Popery:
Neither ought the Religious to fear, least Episcopal Authority should be
burdensome to them, for the Authority instituted by Christ can hurt none who
is truly a Christian: and we see not why the Regula^s with their privileges,
given them by the Apostolic See for most just Reasons, may not as happily
agree with a Bishop and secular Clergy in the English Mission, as well as we
see they every where do out of England, especially seeing a form is already
affected, at least by us, who by the exhortation of the most Reverend Bishop of
Calcedon, conspire in the best concord with the secular Clergy, and in the
observance of a uniforme Discipline, saving our privileges: And whosoever at
last is to be Bishop, but especially if he shall be one of the two here named
(whom we know to be very friendly to the Regulars) we doubt not, but that the
same sweetness of concord, and conformity of Discipline will be continued, God
directing the endeavors of us all.

These things (most illustrious Cardinals, Patrons, to be especially observed)
I have, which in the name of my self, and of the whole congregation, I would
humbly profess in the cause, and for the cause of our secular Clergy of
England; it remains that I should earnestly request your most illustrious
Lordships, most gratefully to accept of this my service, and that you would
vouchsafe by your Authority to foster and corroborate our Congregation, ( which
neither yields, nor will ever yield to any Society or Congregation in true
observance toward the Sea Apostolic. Now the God of glory, and our Lord
Jesus, bless your Lordship with perpetual safety, to the comfort and honor
of his Church.

From the Covent of Saint Gregory of the Benedictines at Doway in Flanders, the
twelfth of December, 1624. The most humble Servant and unworthy Son of your
most illustrious Honors; F. Rudesindus Barlo, President of the ENGLISH
CONGREGATION of the Order of Saint Benedict.


By which passage and Letter it is most apparent: That the Kings match with the
Queen was both in design and event, the greatest means to advance Popery in
England, to suspend the Laws and proceeding against Popish Priests and Monks;
and to reduce both the King and Prince to the entertaining and professing of
the Roman Catholic Faith; as Le Maistre his words assure us: and this the
Articles of agreement made and sworn to by the King, upon the marriage with the
Queen, confirm. What power these Benedictine Monks have gained in England
since this letter, appears by the Popes new printed Brief directed to them,
and by this memorable story. Anno 1634. Jews Cook General of the
Benedictines dying without issue at Temple Cowly in Oxfordshire, where he had
Purchased diverse lands and goods; his brother a Civillian in Ireland hearing of
it, comes over and claims his lands as heir, his goods as Administrator to
him: the Benedictines withstood his claim to both, alleging, that he
purchased both goods and Lands with the money of the Order, and for their use
and maintenance only. And by Sir William Howard, and their Court friend there,
made such a strong party against the heir, that dispairing of his own right,
he made his addresses to Sir John Banks the Kings Attorney, and procures a
Commission of inquiry, with a Fiat under his hand, dated 2. January 1635. to
entitle the King to the Lands and goods, as a mortmain purchased to the use of
these Monks; whereupon they compounded with the heir, and gave him 300, l. as
I am credibly informed by Mr Bernard, who drew the commission, whereupon it
proceeded no further.

I shall conclude, with the testimony of two English Jesuits, which I fitted
for the Press, An. 1636. in this ensuing piece, sent lately to me by a friend,
who preserved it beyond my expectation, as if Gods providence had reserved it
to accompany the Premises.

The Jesuits Looking glass: OR, The testimony of two late Priests and Jesuits
touching the present condition of the Church of England, and the greatest
swaying Prelates thereof.
CHristian Reader, it is Aquinas his observation, that from the time Bishops
were endowed with worldly honors, In Genesis 6.
offices, riches, power, and great temporal possessions ( the very bane and
poison of the Church, as Marius de Schis^ate l. 4. Polychron. li. 4. c. 36.
Iammes de Parisiis c. 22. in vita Sylvestri.
Authors style them) EXTVNC ex^rti sunt in Ecclesia Gigantes, in magnis and
Mirabilibus supra se ambulantes, qui potius videntur Reges vel Marchiones, quam
Episcopi: what good fruits their Lordly Princely pomp and greatness produced,
the same Author presently subjoynes: Et ideo non mirum si per coserigatur
STATVA BABYLONIS, and terrena civitas dilatetur: And therefore (says he) it is
no wonder, if the image and tower of spiritual Babel be erected by them, and
the terrene City of Romish Babel enlarged. This being an experimental verity
in Aquinas his age, it makes me the less to wonder at the present industry and
practice of our Lordly Prelates, who following the footsteps of their
Pontifical Predecess^rs, bend all their force and power to re-erect the long
since demolished Tower of Romish Babel among us, and enlarge this earthly City,
though with the utter ruin of our established Religion (the thing that first
advanced them to their Lordly dignities) which they now most ungratefully
require. This disperate confused Babel-plot of theirs, long smothered from the
vulgars knowledge, is now palpably discovered to the public view of all men,
not only by the Towers, Statues, and walls of Babel (to wit, high Altars,
Crucifixes, Images, Altar-clothes, Tapers, Basins, etc.) lately erected in most
Churches (especially Cathedrals) by these Lordly Babel-builders, but likewise
by their fellow laborers, and confederates in this plot and structure, to wit,
Popish priests and Jesuits: who now over-joyed with the towardly forwardness
and maturity of this their cu^side, begin in printed Books to glory of it, for
the better encouragement and increase of their Roman Catholic faction; and
being privy both to their Lordships bosom counsels and secrets (which ordinary
poor Protestants are altogether ignorant of) think all now so cock sure on
their party; that they begin to divulge in print our Prelaetes secret aims and
popish designs; yea, to discover and magnify those Statues and walls of
Babel, which their Lordships have already set up in our Church.

Take but two late instance in stead of many, as a most bright Crystal
Locking-glasse, wherein you may exactly behold their Lordships Romish faces and
actions, without prejudice or partiality; no Puritans having more lively and
truly reflected their true pourtrait^^es or shadows, then these Romish Optick^
have done.

The first book I shall instance in, is entitled, A direction to be observed
by N.N. written by an English Priest or Jesuice (yea, printed here in England
in our mother tongue, to the end we might all take notice of it) since Midsomer
last. In the 14. page he highly applauds the now Archbishop of Canterbury, for
prohibiting and suppressing Books in defense of our Protestant Religion (which
he there terms, Socinianisme) in these words: Although I ought not to
diss^mble, by Do gladly acknowledge, and ^eserve^^^ publish on this occasion,
for a pattern for others in this Realm, the care of the highest Prelate in
England (in place, grace, favor and authority, not in stature) in prohibiting
the sale (much more then the printing and importing of books tending to
Socinian^sme, which page 16. he expressly defines and interprets to be naught
else, but Protestantism^. O happy Prelate, to merit so great Laud from a
Jesuits quill, as to be prescribed as a pattern of imitation to other Roman
Catholics and Bishops to follow! having now so far cut-stripped them in
their own Jesuitical practices and stratagems, to suppress and undermine our
Religion, that he even runs before them as a pattern worthy their imitation.
But stops this Jesuit here? No, for page 21^ 22. he thus proceeds. And to
speak the truth, what learned judicious man can after unpartial examination,
embrace Protestantisme, which now wareth weary of it self? Its Professors,
they especially of greatest worth, learning and authozity (and who are they but
our great Achbishops, Bishops, and their Heirs apparent?) declare themselves
(you may see now they are past fear, shame, and scorn to keep counsel any
longer) to love temper and moderation. Allow of many things which some years
ago were usually condemned as superstitious and Antichistian: and are at this
time (such strong steady pillars, and grounded Fathers of our Church, or rather
Romish brothers are their Lordships) more unresolved where to fasten (unless
with Rome) then in the instance of their Church. (For proof of which he gives
us this experimenta^l und^^able demonstra^ion.) For do not the Protestant
Churches begin to look with another face? their walls to speak (to wit, by
late erected Images, Crucifixes, Laymens Books) with another language? their
preachers to use a sw^e^er^tene? (that is, to applaud, not declaime against
popery and popish writers:) their annual public tenets in the University, to
be of another style and matter? (to wit, for, not against Popery:) Their Books
to appear with Titles and For example: The Pope not Antichrist. Prayer for the
dead: Limbus Patrum. Pictures: Crucifixes, Altars to be used and adored:
Auricular confession: Transubstantiation: Freewill; Predestination: universal
grace. that all our works are not sins: Merit of good works: inherent
Justice: Faith alone does not justify: Charity is to be preferred before
knowledge: Traditions: Councel^. The Law p^ssible to be kept, etc.
Arguments, as Shelfords, Reeves, Pocklingtons. A coal from the Altar, and
others) whichonce would have caused much scandal among the brethren? their
doctrine to be altered in many things, and even in those very points (mark it
well) for which their progenitors forsook the then visible Church of Christ?
(and is it any wonder then that many hundreds forsake and separate from our
Church now?) Their thirty nine Articles, the sum, the confession, and almost
the Creed of their faith are patient? Patient: that is they are ambitious of
some sense wherein they may seem to be Catholic: (that is, of that Romish
contradictory sense which Franciscus de Sancta Clara thrice printed, as they
say, in England, and presented by a great Prelate to his Majesty, has put upon
them.) To allege wife and children in these days, is but a weak plea for a
married Minister to compass a Benefice: Fiery, Calvinisme, once a darling in
England, is at length accounted Heresy, yea and a little less then Treason
(as the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other Prelates judged in their
sentence of Doctor Bastwicke, where they much railed upon worthy Calvin, whose
books they are unworthy to bear.) Men in word and writing (to wit, in their
Sermons and printed books) use willingly the once fearful names of Priests and
Altars: (I would Richard Shelford Priest, and John Squire Priest, with their
new fraternity of Priests, would consider this, and those that preach and write
for Altars.) Nay, if one do but mutter against the placing of the Altar after
the old fashion, for a warning, he shall be well warmed with A little book so
entitled, printed 1636.
A coal from the Altar. English Protestants are Sunday no Sabbath, printed
1636.
now put in mind, that for Exposition of Scripture, by Canon Canons, ^ 1571.
Can. 19.
they are bound to follow the ancient Fathers. And to conclude all in one maine
point. The Protestant Church in England (of whom the premises are spoken)
prosesseth so small antiquity and so weak subsistence in it self, that they
acknowledge no other visible being for many ages, but in the Church of Rome.
Thus and much more this Jesuit, from his own experimental observation and
reading.

Now welfare thy heart good honest plain-dealing Jesuit, for giving us such a
lively Character and representation of the present face of our Church, and
practices of our Lordly Prelates that are of Greatest Authority; and this thy
timely disvery of their Graces Romish designs, proceedings, Apostacies, for
which all England shall con thee thanks. Had any Puritan or Protestant writ or
muttered half so much, against these great Lordly Prelates (as appears by the
late handling of worthy M. Burton For his God and the King.
) he had been haled by head and ears out of his house, committed close
prisoner, suspended, persecuted with all violence, complained of to his Majesty
as a seditious, factious, rebellious person, pursivanted, pilloryed, condemned
for a Scandalum Magaatum long ere this, and made a public 1 Cor. 4. 9.
spectacle unto the world, unto men, and unto angels. But thou being a bird of
their own feather, one of their own fraternity, confederacy, applauding, not
condemning these their courses and proceedings, sha^t escape scotfree without
fear or danger, and perchance have a good boon for thy pains ere long: So
much safer and securer is it now, for any man to be a Seminary Priest or Jesuit
in England (though therein a 27 Eliz. c. 2.
Traitor by our Laws) then a faithful Minister or painful Preacher of the
Gospel, rightly discharging his duty to God and the King. O times! O Lordly
Prelates for the Popes own tooth!

The second Book I shall nominate, is inscribed. Paraphrasticall and divout
Discourses upon the Psalm, Miserere, composed by Chapter M. (an English Jesuit, as
it should seem, who has formerly written at So he writes p. 257.
large of the Mass and Transubstantiation, the Jesuits badge standing in the
front of the Epistle to the Reader) Anno 1635. approved by George Colvenerius
Chancellor of the University of Doway, and Censor of Books, Duaci 30, Martii
1636. In the Epistle to the Reader, this Jesuit has this remarkable passage: I
have lived long out of my Country, and so know not who are the greater, who the
lesser sinners; yet this I know in general, that there must needs be many and
great sinners in England, because where there are many believers ( as there are
in England) there are many ill believers (true faith and belief being but one)
and consequently many ill livers, true faith being the rule and square of good
life, etc. Whereupon these my para^^hrasticall Discourses, and pitiful
lamentations of King David, I intend for all sinners, as well Catholics as not
Catholics, and of whatsoever Religion; Romans 1.
I being a debtor to all, and because I would have them all peruse these
discourses, I abstain from controversies in Religion, lest I should avert any
from the reading of them: only in paraphrasing the two last verses of this
Psalm, occasion being offered, I speak of the unbloody and daily sacrifice of
the Altar, but so, that I rather touch it, the ^handle it; mention it, then
treat of it; suppose it, then prove it in that manner as I might; hoping that
this Doctrine now, will not be distasteful: (and why so? mark it, I be^eech
you) for seeing that now in England in very many Churches, Altars, which here
to fore were thrown down, are again erected (by whom, I pray, but by Lordly
over swaying Prelates and their Creatures?) according to the laudable example
and pious use and custom of the Catholic (to wit the Roman) and even A
falsehood: for the primitive Church had NO ALTARS, as is largely and freshly
proved: in the Quench Coal in The holy Table, Name, and Thing, more anciently,
properly, and literally used under the new Testament then that of an Altar.
Written in answer to Dr. COAL ( alias, A Coal from the Altar) printed for the
Diocese of Lincoln 1636.
primitive Church, to aberre a true sacrifice will not be ill taken (to wit, by
these Altar er^recting Prelates and Priests of ours) because to allow of Altars
(mark it) is to allow of a true sacrifice, which uses to be offered on them,
an Altar and a true proper sacrifice being Correlatives, of which the one
infers the other, and so the one cannot be averred without the other, nor
the one denied without the other. Thus this Jesuit, almost two years since,
who might have said much more had he written now, we having many new Altars and
Crucifixes since that erected in England, by those Prelates who bow down
devoutly to, if not adore them. See now at last what these great Prelates aim
at in erecting Altars in our Churches, in raising and railing in our Tables
Altarwise; this Jesuit plainly and truly informs us all, that their direct
intention is, To usher in the unbloudy daily sacrifice of the Altar, which to
aver a Sacrifice, will not be now ill taken in England, seeing that now in
England in very many Churches (then but now in far more) Altars, which
heretofore were thrown down, are again erected, according to the Laudable
One Knightly, a Popish Priest, directed how the new Altar ^t Coventry should be
erected, according to the pattern of the popish Altars.
example and pious use and custom of the Catholic Church of Rome; yea, and
many new Priests (as Richard Shelford Priest, with hundreds more who will now
be called by no other name but Priests; I may add Mass to it for distinction
sake) are already prepared for this true Sacrifice, there being no other end or
use of Priests and Altars but for Sacrifice; an Altar (Yea a Priest) and a true
and proper Sacrifice being correlatives, of which the one infers the other,
and so the one cannot be averred (as it is now in printed Books and Sermons)
without the other. This then being most apparent, let us be no longer deluded
with flattering words and fond pretenses; but assure our selves that these
Court Priests and Prelates who now write and daily preach (even in his
Majesty's royal presence, and elsewhere) for Altars, bowing to Altars,
Crucifixes, Auricular Confession, bowing to the Name Jesus and the like (the
ordinary theams of most Court Sermons) have combined together with Mass-
Priests and Jesuits, to bring in the unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass (the
Epitome and maine part of Popery) into our Churches, and that very speedily,
unless manfully resisted and exemplarily punished for this their execrable
con^ederacy against our established Religion; since Altars, Priests, and all
other appurtenances in most Cathedrals, Chapels, and Churches, are already
fitted for it, as this Jesuit truly informs us.

If we now compare these passages of the Jesuits with the late See Mr. B^rtons
For God and the King.
practices and Specches of some of our great swaying Lord prelates, as namely
their corrupting of the Common Prayer-booke for the fifth of November, to
acquit Popery from the blemish of Rebellion and Faction, and Papists from that
execrable treason: their purging of the late Fast-booke, contrary to His
Majesty's Proclamation; to free Popery from the just imputation of Superstition
and Idolatry; and justify Fasting of it self to be a good work and
meritorious, without regard to the end thereof, (which the Archbishop of
Canterbury, in his Speech in Starchamber avoucheth to be his own act by
special command from the King.) Their inhibiting all old English books to be
reprinted, by a late Decree made in Starchamber, unless reviewed, purged, from
all passages against popery) and new-licenced by them and their Chaplains.
Their purging of diverse passages against Mass, Altars, Masse^priests,
Sacrifices of the Altar etc. with other points of popery, out of diverse books
lately licensed for the Press. Their setting up Altars, Images, Crucifies,
railing in of Tables, and raising the ground under them Altar-wise, and then
adoring and bowing down unto them like Heathenish or Romish-Idolaters; with
other particulars specified by these Jesuits, mentioned at large by Mr. Henry
Burton in his new printed Appeal, and Sermon on the 5 of November. last, truly
entitled, For God and the King; to which I shall refer you) and justified by
Richard Sh^lford Priest, Edmund Reeve, Dr. John Pocklinton, A coal from the
Altar, Teddar, Dr. Laurence Brown, and others in their late printed books and
Sermons; together with their public Speeches in the High Commission in the
late censure of Dr. B^stwicke (wherein Cum capitalis sit inimicus, publicusqu^
hostis, tamen in propria cause actor, restis and judex est, id quod nec apud
Turcas, neque S^racenos, neque Samaias fieri solet. Eos qui fidem Caesari
servant and Christo servatori nostro praecipienti obtemperant, nec ullam aliam
ob causam haereseos no^ a inurit. Quicquid libet licitum judicas. Divine bumana
decreta juxta contemnit alque conturbat. Ius gentium violat. Leges naturae
prophanas, sacra polluit, indicta causa, nec dum, reos condeman, Aventinus.
Annal. Bejorum l. 7. p. 611.
against all Laws, they were both enemies, witnesses, accusers, Judges, as that
Court often is) for the divine authority of their Episcopal primacy; and in
derogation of the Scrirtures certainty, authority, related at large in his
Apologeticus; the Speeches of Bishop White now prelate of Ely, and his now
Archholinesse of Canterbury in the later censure of M. Samuel Ward of Ipswich,
where the first of them openly affirmed, That Christ was in the Sacrament more
then spiritually and by faith and the latter challenged all Divines to discover
the ^^^us or manner of his presence, and came up fully to Bishop Andrews his
words, for which Mr. Ward was questioned, saying, else it was impossible to
answer the Fathers; both of them in a manner maintaining a real
transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine, and determining pointblanke against
the 28 Article of our Church (which defines, that Transubstantiation cannot be
proved by holy Writ, but is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture
overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has given occasion to many
superstitions; The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper Here
is the modus defined which his Arch-grace challenged all Divines to determine.
Only after an heavenly and spiritual manner, and the mean whereby the body
of Christ is received, and eaten in the Supper, is faith.) With their
High Commission speeches likewise in the several censures of Mr. Smart, Mr.
Workman, and Mr. Chancey, in defense of Images, Crucifixes. Altars, Tapers,
Sanctum Sanctorums, bowing to Altars, and the like, point blank against our
Homilies against the peril of Idolatry, and others; and punishing them only
for preaching and maintaining the Doctrine of our Homilies, and Articles,
against all late Popish Innovations, (an insolency, a bold impiety not
sufferable in our Christian Church and State, deserving the severest exemplary
punishments:) All these, I say, compared with the Jesuits forecited passages,
are a most pregnant, palpable, visible, convincing Demonstration, to all but
such who will be wilfully blind; that these great Lordly Prelates resolved
purpose, practice, design, is speedily to set up the Pope and popery in our
Church, and reconcile us once more to Rome, (as the Sea Fox Acts and Monuments,
and Antiqui^ates Eccles. Brit. in his life.
Cardinal of Canterbury, Poole, with other popish Prelates did in Queen Mary's
days.) And therefore the Popes Holiness has given these his Vice-popes
instructions, Commissions thus to do; his Majesty and his Honorable council,
may at their best leisure enquire of Seigni^r Georgio Con, (lately come from
Rome, some say, as his Holiness Nuncie, and with a See Romes M^ster-piece, p.
16. 27.
Cardinals cap for Canterburies Grace) with whom our Prelates and court-clergie
are over-familiar, to the great scandal and offense of many.

To these I could add some two or three books more, of like nature, one of
them declaiming much against Puritans, as the only men that are enemies to
popery, and hindered the reconciliation of the Church of England to Rome,
relating the story of Dr, Theodor Price Subdeane of Westminster his dying a
Roman catholic, not long before recommended earnestly to His Majesty by his
Arch-grace for the Bishopric of ^angor, but rejected by his Majesty, as a man
altogether unworthy, both for his vicious Epicurean life, and unsoundnesse in
religion: together with the late speeches of Pierceson and Hodshan, two Papists
in Newcastle, brought into the High commission at Durham and there coldly
prosecuted, for saying and affirming publicly, that the Bish. Neale.
Archbishop of York, and Dr. John Consens, were both theirs, and of their
religion; which other Papists also have openly averred in England, and more
commonly report in foreign parts; how truly, I refer to themselves and
others to determine.

From all these we may now clearly discover our great swaying Prelates
concealed practices and intentions to set up Popery, and easily conjecture that
all their late Innovations, Altars, Images, bowing to Altars, raising and
railing in Lords Tables Altar-wise, Crucifixer, and new licenced popish
Pamphlets, tend only to this purpose, to bring in the whole body of popery
among us, by degrees; which they have well nigh effected, and almost quite
accomplished.

This therefore being their clear resolution, intention, confederacy, as most
men plainly discern, and generally complain of; let us all now at last,
before it be too late, ere our Religion be quite lost and betrayed beyond
recovery: begin to consider, view, and to the utmost of our powers, by all just
and lawful means resolve manfully to oppose, withstand these conspiratours
practices, designs, and cry aloud to God, and His Majesty for speedy justice
upon them, according to the greatness of their Offenses, that all others may
be terrified from the like perfidious disloyal attempts.

O therefore let us now awake out of our drowise security, and be no longer
cheated with their fair words or specious pretexts, which have hitherto
blinded the eyes of most. Look but upon their deeds, and these their accomplices
testimonies of them, and then their fained speeches and pretenses will vanish
into smoke; it being the Sea Mr. Tindals practice of popish Prelates. Dr. Barnes
his Supplication, and 28 H. 8. c. 10.
ancient policy of Lordly Prelates (the readiest men in all ages both to
maintain and set up popery, with the Popes universal authority.) to speak
most against popery, when they are busiest to bring it in; and to make the
fairest pretenses, when they are plotting and executing the foulest designs,
of purpose to delude the over-credulous multitude. I shall therefore close up
all with the words of old Father Latimer, in his fourth Sermon before King
Edward, p. 52, 53. where he writes thus of Lordly unpreaching Prelates, who
bore greatest sway in Church and State, but n^glected, suppressed preaching. It
is to be thought, that some of them would have it so, to bring in popery
again. This I fear me is their intent, and it shall be blown abroad to our
holy Father of Romes ears and he shall send forth his Thunder bolts upon these
bruits; and all this does come to pass through their un-preaching prelacy. Are
they not worthy double honor? nay, rather double dishonor, not to be
regarded, nor to be esteemed among the people, and to have no living at their
hands: For as good Preachers be worthy double honor, so unpreaching Prelates
be worthy double dishonor. They must be at their doublets. But now these two
dishonours, what be they? our Savior Christ does show, Si sal, etc. If the
Salt be unsavory, it is good for nothing but to be cast out, and trodden under
feet of men. Matthew. 5.
By this Salt is understood Preachers, and such as have cure of souls. What be
they worthy then? Wherefore serve they? For nothing else but to be cast out.
Make them Quondams, out with them, cast them out of their Office; what should
they do with a Cure that will not look to it? Another dishonor is this,
(...) conculcentur ab hominibus, to be trodden under men's feet, not to be
regarded, not to be esteemed. And well may they thus be served, who have trodden
both the Laws of God and the King; yea, King, Subjects, Religion, Justice,
Rights, Liberties, under foot, and being treacherous both to God himself, and
that Religion which they would seem to profess, can never be loyal,
faithful to his Majesty, or His people committed to their care and cure:
scarce one of our swaying Lord Prelates being able to say, that he ever
converted one Papist to our Religion, or one soul to God, either by life or
doctrine, though they have perverted, murdered, starved, destroyed thousands.
This was that I then intended for the Press.

If any English Protestant, after all these visible most apparent evidences of
the long prosecuted Court-designe, to set up popery, and ex^irpate the
Protestant Religion, and the present proceedings of the Papists in Ireland and
England by His Majesty's Commissions and authority, (who wholly sides with, and
relies upon them, as His best, trustiest, and loyallest Subjects, as they
formerly have styled many of them.) will be yet so wilfully blinded, as to
believe, that the Kings and Courts designs are really to maintain the
Protestant Religion, the privileges of Parliament, the laws and liberties of
the Subject; and still join with the (...) Royal party against his Religon,
Country, Liberties, Privileges, believing their specious promises and
pretenses, before their real contradictory actions, let him go on and perish
in his incredulity. However, I hope, all intelligent Protestants, who have
hitherto sided with his Majesty and that party, out of their overmuch credulity
of their upright intentions, and ignorance, of this their secret design, upon
the serious perusal of the premises, and His Majesty's late sending of at
least 30 sail of ships from Bristol, (a sad effect of its unhappy surrender)
besides other ships elsewhere, to bring over Irish rebels, to ruin our
Kingdom and cut our throats, (many of which are already arrived, and have
committed great murders and insolences at Bristol, elsewhere without restraint
or punishment) will now, upon consideration of all the premises, for ever
desert that A^tichristian party, and henceforth unite all their hearts, heads,
hands, purses, forces, endeavors to the Parliament, to preserve it, our
Church, Religion, Laws, Liberties, Kingdom, Nation, from that imminent ruin
threatened to them by the malignant popish saction.

I shall close up all with these few Queres to all English Protestants, who
have any sparks of zeal to the protestant Religion, or their own dear native
dying country, remaining in their breasts, and yet adhere in person or
affection to the Royal Popish party, now in open hostility against our
Religion, Laws, Liberties, Parliament, either out of mere ignorance and
simplicity, or overmuch credulity of his Majesty's and that prevailing
sactions sincere intentions to our Religion, and the Republique, published in
so many printed Declarations, protestations, of purpose to delude the world.

First, what certain or probable assurance they can receive from all his
Majesty's and his evil Councillors late Declarations and Protestations, not
to connive at Popery, but cordially to maintain the Protestant Religion in its
purity and liberty, to the utmost of his Regal power; when as his Majesty's
ancient engagements by the forecited Articles and Oaths to Spain and France,
his Letters to the Pope, his entertainment of professed Nuncios from the Roman
Pontise for sundry years in London, his maintaining of an Agent at Rome, his
forecited Letters, Protestations, Warrants, in favor, protection, discharge of
the most notorious Papists, Priests, Jesuits, his extraordinnry fresh
engagements to the Queen and Popish party, his arming of Papists both in
Ireland and England against the Parliament and Protestant party, his much
distasted Articles of pacification with the Irish Rebels, after their most
inhumane barbarous massacres of so many thousand innocent Protestants, without
any provocation, his extraordinary late favors toward Papists, now most
predominant in his Councels and Affections his toleration of open Popery in
Ireland, in all parts of England, his present war in their behalf, with his
entertaining of sundry Irish Rebels near him heretofore, and sending for See
the Popes Brief, p. 35, 36 37.
many thousands of them Yea, and French Papists too.
into England now, as his best and faithfullest Subjects, on whom the most
relies, to murder his Protestant Lieges in England as they have done in
Ireland, with other his Majesty's and his Counselors late proceedings,
infallibly proclaim a direct contrary intention, and quite cross long
agitated design to all the world!

Secondly, with what confidence at all can they expect; that his Majesty and
his evil Councillors, who have extraordinarily violated, invaded the
Subjects, Parliaments indubitable just Rights, Laws, Liberties, Privileges,
Properties, all his reign (as has been publicly acknowledged by the King
himself, and resolved by the Parliam^^^ then fullest) and since his departure
from this Parliament, practiced it in far higher degree then ever (contrary
to his own confirmation of the Petition of right, the very Acts passed by him
this present Parliament, his many ancient and late quoted Declarations,
Proclamations, Protestations, Speeches, Vows, Imprecations,) will after his
absolute conquest of the Parliament and their Protestant party by force of
Arms (in case he should prevail) inviolably maintain their Laws, Liberties,
Properties, Parliaments, Privileges, and Religion, which they have ever
heretofore so much infringed, and at this very instant more then ever, even in
an open hostile manner?

Thirdly, with what conscience, heart, or spirit they can either in point of
piety or policy confederate and join their forces, heads, or purses with the
popish party now in Arms to ruin this present Parliament, their own native
Country, Religion, Laws, Liberties, and promote the Papists most execrable
Jesuiticall designs to re-establish popery, and the Popes supramacy in
perfection throughout his Majesty's Dominions? and how they will be able to
answer this their detestable treachery, their desperate impiety before Gods or
Man's Tribunals, or their own self-condemning Consciences, at the last?

Fourthly, with what stupidity of heart of sottishness of spirit they can ever
patiently brook the late stupendous pacification of His Majesty with the
barbarous bloody popish Irish Rebels, after their treacherous massacring of
above one hundred and forty thousand innocent Protestants (most of them
English,) who in stead of taking exemplary vengeance of this their inhumane but
chery, has indulged them many favou^s, and termed them, So the Shrewsbury Copy
styles them.
HIS GOOD ROMAN CATHOLIC SUBJECTS. And how they can ever quietly suffer or
digest His Majesty's entertainment of thousands of them already in His Army;
His bringing over the Protestant English soldiers thence, sent over by the
Parliament, that the Papists there may take all the Forts and places of
strength; His proclaiming of their Irish embased money to be current here; but
especially His sending over ships, and licenses to land many thousand of the
popish Irish Rebels speedily on English ground, of purpose to fight against the
Parliament, and cut the Protestants throats in England, as they have done in
Ireland; Certainly, that English Protestant who can sit still and patiently
suffer such bloody, barba^ous, popish Irish villains to set foot on English
ground for such a purpose, and not rise up in Arms, siding with the
Parliament, and Protestant party, against them, to expulse or cut them off,
has lost both the spirit of an English man, and the zeal of a real
Protestant; yea, he deserves a brand of eternal infamy, and that he and his
posterity should be extirpated by these outrageous beastly monsters of men.

Fifthly, whether His Majesty's former arming of English Protestants first (with
exclusion of Papists) against the Parliament and their Protestant party, and
present sending for the Protestant English Soldiers out of Ireland (sent over
by the Parliament against the popish treacherous bloody Rebels there, to subdue
them) of purpose to fight against their fellow English Protestants, for to
secure the Irish popish Rebels; and his after arming of English Papists, and
present sending for popish Irish Rebels as his last and best refuge, to succeed
and second his protestant Forces; with the placing of his protestant
Commanders, Subjects, since their union with his popish Forces, always in the
front of the most dangerous desperate services, but in the rear of his pay,
preferments, and Royal favors, and the Papists always in the front of his
preferments, and in places, services of least danger (as some intellig^^^ men
of the Kings own party have truly observed, and now complain of;) be not a
most apparent Jesuiticall plot to engage the Protestants of either party to
weaken, kill, and ruin one and the other, that so the English, Irish, Scottish
confederated Papists (who are still kept furthest off from danger, being rather
Spectators then Actors in the hottest services) may by this their Romish
stratagem, speedily become the strongest or most predominant party, and so
easily conquer the Protestants (as well of the Kings as Parliaments side) and
utterly extirpate them, with their Religion, at the last, through this their
desperate folly, and most unnatural unchristian discord. Certainly, what ever
crafty Jesuited pates may suggest, or impoliticke childish Protestants adhering
to them, conceive to the contrary, yet those who have any skill in Politics or
Machiavilian projects, may most clearly discern this derestable design
against the Protestants (and our English Nation too, now devoted as a prey to
the barbarous Irish, and other foreign Popelings) without the help of a
perspective. And can, or dare any Protestants then after this discovery of this
plot upon them, be any longer be besotted, as from henceforth to fight for or
adhere to those mischievous, treacherous, popish Conspirators, who rejoice at
this their folly, and would thus make them the principal instruments of their
religions, Countries, yea, their own destruction? I shall humbly therefore
beseech all protestant Cavaliers, and Antiparliamenteers whatsoever, of the
contrary party, most seriously to lay this disperate plot to heart (as some of
the very common English Protestant soldiers (transported from Ireland hither,
to sight against their fellow Protestants and the Parliament) have already
done, and then they cannot but desert that A^^ich istian side, and for ever
ins^parably adhere to the Parliament, (...) some of these poor Soldiers have
done lately to their eternal honor.

Finally, in case the Irish Papists land, and their Faction prevail, what
security or probility can any English Protestants who join with them, expect
either for the safety or enjoyment of their Religion, Lives, Liberties, or
Estates when as those who devoted, designed See Dr. Jones Book of examinations.
all the Protestants in Ireland (though allied to them) to the Sword, had their
conspiracy taken its full effect, uniesse they would presently renounce their
Religion and turn Romish Catholics; and have long since plotted the Sea
Romes Masterpiece.
Kings own death, if He comply not with them; will doubtless spare no English
Protestants life, liberty, or estate, if they once obtain the upper hand,
unless they will become the Popes sworn vassals. And the rather may they and
we believe it, because some of the Irish Rebels lately landed at Bristol, where
they murdered two Vintners and a Tapster, beating out their brains, upon no
just occasion at all, and yet were suffered to go scotfree, and march up in
Sir Ralph Hoptons Army against the Parliament, as I am certainly informed by
some lately come from thence) have openly blamed the Cavaliers, for that when
Bristol was surrendered, they did not put man, woman, and child therein to the
Sword notwith standing their Articles; though punctually observed in no
particular, but violated in every thing, as were the Articles since made with
Exceter and Dartmouth; A sufficient evidence how little trust is to be reposed
either in the Oaths, Articles, Promises, or Protestations of the malignant
Popish party, whose very Religion instructs them, to keep no faith at all with
heretics, as they account all Protestants.

What security the Protestant party and Religion; what restraint, disallowance,
the Romish fact^^^, and their Roman Catholic Errors, Supersti^^ns,
Idolatries, shall receive, in case His Majesty and the Catholics prevail,
will appear by this observable passage in the French Mercury, upon the Kings
first Articles with Spain.

From this days (of King James and His Majesty's swearing the Spanish Articles)
(writes the Tom. 9 An. 1624. p. 27, 28, 29, 30. Two Acts pianted to the
^^^^^likes: the one in porting a pardon of the penalties which they might have
inquired by the Laws of Parliaments; and the other for the exercise of their
religion, every one by himself without scar. dall. Of the repose which the
Catholics received in England after that Don Carlo Coloma was there
extraordinary Ambassador of his Catholic Majesty.
French Mercury) the said Spanish Ambassadors, began to solicit the execution
and accomplishment of the promises of His Majesty in favor of Catholics; and
after many opinions debated for the form, and the better execution, it was in
the end Resolved, that His Majesty should be supplied, to give every Catholic
in particular, a pardon under the great Seal, for the penalties which they
might have incurred by the Laws of Parliament made against the Catholics.
And that for the time to come His Majesty should likewise by another act under
the great Seal also dispense and^permit them to exercise^ their Religion,
every one by himself, provided that it were without public scandal; and
that he should exempt them from all the Laws made against them, by what
Parliament soever it were. The said Acts were delivered to the said Ambassador
on the behalf of His Majesty, by the Lord Bishop of Lincoln Keeper of the
Seal, under promises, that they should not all publish them until that the
marriage was accomp^^ head.

See then ( writes Mercury) how all things were happily negotiated in England,
From this time forwards the Catholics there were at rest, without feeling any
persecution after the arriball of Dan Carlo Coloma; who with a great deal of
zeal and diligence obtained the Liberty of Catholics imprisoned throughout
all England, Ireland, and Scotland. He likewise obtained, that the Informers,
Pursivants established to seek out, accuse, and pursue the Catholics, were
prohibited to attempt any thing against them. The Ingresse and Egresse of the
Realm was left free to them without Obligation, or swearing the Dath of
Supremacy, having only his Pasport. They shall be no more obliged to take the
Oath of Supremacy.
They might go freely to hear Mass in his Chapel, in so great number and
so publicly, that sometimes there have been two or three thousand persons at
it. I note who durst to speak against the marriage have been punished, amongst
the most signal, the Earl of Oxford was sent prisoner to the Tower of London.
So as the Note this well.
Marquess of Buckingham writ unto Spain That the Informers, Pursivants
Prisons, shall serve no more but only for their own Ministers, and other
persons zealous of the Protestant Religion; ( which we have ever since
experimentally found to be true.) And by the aforesaid Acts, the King permitted
them in express words, the free exercise of their Religion.

Don Carlo Coloma has likewise land the first stone of the Chapel which
shall be built for the Infanta in the Princes palace, and the building
advances apace, to the regret, and to the contentment likewise of many, to see
the building of a Catholic Church in the Metropolitan City of the Realm by
public Authority, after that for an hundred years space before they had done
nothing else there but destroyed them:

I his and much more does Mercury truly relate, even in the year 1624. when
the restoration of Popery was but in the Cradle, before the full consummation
of the Spanish match; to what an altitude of Sovereign favor, power,
authority then will Popery and Papists now arrive unto, after all their
expenses, services, sufferings, engagements for their Majesty's? to what an
extraordinary low ebb and miserable condition will the Protestant party and
Religion be reduced thorowout his Majesty's Dominions, notwithstanding all his
Protestations (in case he should now obtain a conquest over the Parliament and
their adherents) now Popery and Papists are almost arrived to their manly
growth, vigor, and have both the King, Queen, and their malignant Council so
deeply engaged to them both by Oaths and Articles; I refer to all
Protestants foreign and ^^esticke, most seriously to determine.

These short Qu^eres, with the premises duly pondered, and digested, should
then (methinkes) induce every ingenious English Protestant yet adhering to the
Court Popish party, speedily to abandon, eternally to desert them, and now
cordially to unite themselves to the Parliament, and their Protestant English
brethren, to live or die together in the present defense of their endangered
Religion, Laws, Liberties, and dearest Country, which they cannot without
highest impiety desert, or inhumanely oppose in this time of most apparent
dangers, which threaten their subversion.

Wherefore, Obesotted Court-protestants, let me here entreat, advise you in
Gods own language. to 2 Cor. 6. 11. Number. 16. 21, 24, 26. Isay 52. 11. Rev. 18.
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc.
come out from among these Antichristian Babylonians, to separate your selves
sp^edily from the Congregation, and to depart from the tents of these wicked,
bloody men; that ye be not partakers of their sins, and that ye receive not
of their plagues: For their sins (in their most barbarous treacherous
butchering of Gods Saints both in Ireland and England) have now reached unto
Heaven, and God has remembered their iniquities. Reward Romish Babylon, and
them, as they have rewarded you, and your Protestant brethren in England, in
Ireland; and double unto them double according to their work; in the Cup which
they have filled, fill them double. How much they have lately glorified
themselves, so much sorrow give them: the rather, for that Romish Babylon now
says in heart, I sit as Queen (I would we could not truly complain, by the
underhand practices and conspiracies of Kings and Queens against Gods true
Religion, Saints;) and am no widow, I shall see no sorrow: Therefore shall her
plagues (now suddenly) come in one day, and mourning, and famine, and she shall
be utterly burnt with fire; at least thorowout his Majesty's Dominions, if not
the whole world) for strong is the Lord God who judges her; And the KINGS OF
THE EARTH who Revel. 17. 13, 14, etc.
have now given their strength and power to the beast, and make war with the
Lamb (who shall over come them, for that he is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, and they who are with him are called and chosen, and faithful:) and who
have committed fornication, and lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her
and lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning; standing
afar off, for the fear of her torment, saying, Alas, alas that great City
Babylon, that mighty City, for in one hours is thy judgment come etc. For by
her sorceries were all Nations deceived: and in her was found the blood of
Prophets and of Saints, and OF ALL THAT WERE SLAIN UPON THE EARTH: and
therefore all the late shed Protestant blood in Ireland, in England, was
originally shed by her procurement (as appears by the Popes own Brief freshly
published, For the inquiry after the death of such Catholics here in England
as shall suffer any kind of death in England for the Catholic Faith or Cause
during those wars, to the end they may be canonized for glorious Saints and
Martyrs at Rome, and by other evidences:) and finally, doubtless shall be
revenged in her everlasting punishment and subversion.

Matthew. 18. 26. Mar. 4. 22. Fear them not therefore: for there is nothing
covered that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known and come
abroad.

FINIS.

